THE Protestant Reconciler.

PART II.

Earnestly persuading the DISSENTING LAITY To join in FULL COMMUNION WITH THE
Church of England; And Answering all the Objections of the Non-Conformists
against the Lawfulness of their Submission unto the Rites and Constitutions of
that CHURCH.

By a Well-wisher to the Churches Peace, and a Lamenter of Her Sad Divisions.

Anglicanam Ego Ecclesiam exoticis, pravis, superflitiosis cultibus,
erroribusque aut impiis, aut periculosis egregie ex scripturarum coelestium
norma purgatam, tot tamque illustribus Martyriis probatam, pietate in Deum, in
homines Charitate, laudatissimisque bonorum operum exemplis abundantem,
laetissimo doctissimorum ac sapientissimor^m virorum preventu jam a
Reformationis principio ad hodierna usque tempora florentem, equidem es quo
debui loco habui hactenus, ac dum vivam, habebo; ejus nomen, honos, lauds
semper apud me manebunt. Dallaeus de cultibus Religiosis Latinorum, part. 2. l.
2. cap. 1. p. 97, 98. LONDON, Printed for Awnsham Churchil, at the Black-Swan
near Amen-Corner, 1683.

THE PREFACE TO THE Dissenting Laity.
The Contents of the PREFACE.
Six Arguments from the Book called the Protestant Reconciler, to persuade the
Dissenting Laity to submit to the conditions of Communion required of them by
the Church of England, viz. 1. That they stand bound to do what lawfully they
may in order to it, and that nothing unlawful is required of them,. 1.2.
Because they are to do to their Superiors as in like case they would be dealt
with,. 2.3. From the liberty they take of changing a Ceremony of Christ's own
institution,. 3.4. Because the mischiefs which will follow on their refusal to
submit, are greater than those which will ensue on their Conformity,. 4.5. From
the example of St. Paul,. 5.6. From the pernicious nature of Schism,. 6. Other
Arguments produced, 1. From that of the Apostle, If any man will be
contentious, we have no such custom, 1 Cor. 11.16.. 7. 2. From his command to
give no offense to the Church of God,. 8.3. Because God is not the Author of
Confusion, but of Peace,. 9.4. Because he requires the believing Wife not to
desert her unbelieving Husband, and vice versa; because God has called us to
Peace,. 10.5. Because, were all things left indifferent, the Minister must
impose in some cases,. 11.6. From the power committed to Church Governors, and
the necessity of submission to it,. 12.7. From the sad result of their refusing
this submission,. 13. Two propositions conducing to this end, 1. That no
prejudices or scruples of Dissenters can excuse them from the guilt of Schism
in separating from us, till they have done all that lawfully they can for the
removal of them,. 14.2. That their imagination that the Magistrate exceeds, or
else unduly does exert his power in commanding any thing, will not warrant
their refusal of Obedience to it,. 15. Requests to them who cannot fully comply
with us, viz. 1. To comply so far as they declare either by words or actions,
that they lawfully may do it,. 16.2. To refrain from censuring, reproaching, or
speaking evil of their Governors in Church or State,. 17.3. To abstain
carefully from all Rebellious Principles and Practices, and to confess
ingenuously, and heartily renounce what has been done by men of their
persuasions in that kind,. 18.

Brethren,
MY hearts desire, and prayer to God in your behalf, is this, That you may
fully be united to the Communion of the Church of England; And in pursuance of
this passionate desire, I have composed the following Treatise, containing a
full Answer to all the scruples obstructing your Communion with us, which I
could meet with in the writings of our Dissenting Brethren. And let me, O my
Friends, entreat you by the love of God, and your own souls, of the Church of
Christ, which is his body, and of her union, peace, edification; by your
concern for Christian Religion in the general, and for the Protestant Religion
in particular, which, I hope, is very great; by all the motives which
Christianity affords to love, peace, unity; by all the blessings it does
promise to the promoters, and all the dreadful evils it does threaten to the
disturbers of them; by the sad experience you have had already of the most
fatal consequences of our Divisions, and by your present fears of a more
dreadful issue of them: lastly, by all that you are like to suffer in your
souls and bodies, by refractory persisting in your Separation; let me, I say,
beseech you on my bended knees, by all these weighty motives, to lay to heart
what I have offered in this Book, and in this Preface shall farther offer to
engage you to conform, and seriously to consider of it, and act according to
the convictions it may minister unto you, as you will Answer your neglect to do
so, at the great and terrible day of the Lord. Now the considerations I would
humbly offer to you are either, 1. Such as are proper to induce you to the
desired Conformity; or, 2. Such as may tend to keep you peaceable and
conscientious, though you do not Conform; and may preserve you from doing any
thing, which may reflect on your Religion toward God, or Loyalty toward your
Sovereign.

be pleased seriously to consider what has been offered in a late Book, styled
The Protestant Reconciler, to that end. In which Book, as the Author pleads
warmly for an indulgence, or mitigation of some lesser things which do obstruct
your full Communion with us, (which nothing but a due sense of the great
danger, and unsafe condition of your present state, could have induced him to
do, and nothing but his fervent love to souls, and his sincere desire of their
Salvation can excuse;) so has he many passages which seem most strongly to
conclude for your desired submission to the injunctions of Superiors. For,

First, P. 34, 35.
He lays down this position, That you stand bound in Conscience to do
whatsoever lawfully you may, for the prevention, and removal of our Schisms,
and the occasions of them, and for the healing our Divisions. Which is a
proposition evident in it self, and there confirmed from plain Scripture
testimony, and the concern we ought to have for Christian Faith, the Protestant
Religion, the welfare of the Nation, and for the peace, the order, the
edification of the Church.

Secondly, He adds, That nothing can be unlawful which is not by God forbidden,
1 John 3.4.
sin being the transgression of a Law; and the Apostle having told us, Romans
4.15. P. 198.
that where there is no Law, there is no transgression; whence he infers, That
Dissenters cannot satisfy their Consciences in their refusal to obey the
commands of their Superiors, unless they can show some plain precept which
renders that unlawful to be done by them, which is commanded by Superiors. And
seeing God in Scripture has enjoined all persons to obey those that have the
rule over them; Heb. 13.17.
and submit themselves, Romans 13.1.5. 1 Pet. 2.13.
and to be subject to the higher powers, as to the ordinance of God, and that
for Conscience sake, and the Lords sake: He that can satisfy his Conscience in
his refusal so to do, must show some Law of God as evidently forbidding his
obedience to what Superious do enjoin, P. 197.
as do these Scriptures command obedience to them in all lawful things. I
having therefore in this Treatise answered all your pretenses for such a
prohibition of the Holy Scripture forbidding your submission to the Rites and
Constitutions of the Church of England enjoined by Superiors, have made it
manifest that you can never satisfy your Consciences in your refusal to submit
unto them; nor can you, or your Leaders, return a satisfactory Answer to the
Questions propounded by that Author to you in these words: P. 58.
Do they prefer mercy before Sacrifice, or comply with the forementioned
injunctions of Obedience to their Superiors, who will not submit to Rites or
Circumstances, or to the use of things no where forbidden in the word, to
prevent Schism, and all the dreadful consequences of it? but rather will give
cause to their Superiors to judge them scandalous Resisters of Authority, and
pertinacious Disturbers of the Churches Peace? 59.
Do not they scandalize, offend, and contribute unto the Ruin of Christ's little
stock, who do involve them in a wretched Schism on the account of things which
they may lawfully submit to? Do not they shut up the Kingdom of Heaven against
men, who forbid them to enter when they may? Do not they impose heavy burdens
also, who say to their Disciples, Hear not the Common Prayer, Receive not the
Sacrament Kneeling, suffer not your Children to be signed with the Cross,
Communicate not with that Minister who wears a Surplice, or with that Church
which imposes any Ceremonies or any Constitutions, but concerning the time and
place of performing Public Worship? If nothing does so scandalize Christ's
followers as to find their Teachers at discord and divided; can they act as
becomes his Disciples, who are not willing to procure Unity and Concord, and
to avoid this scandal by their submission to things indifferent in their own
nature, and not forbiden in the law of God?

Thirdly, He pleads for this submission from that great rule of equity which
calls upon you to do to others as you would be dealt with; putting the Question
to you thus, p. 187.
Do not you expect obedience from your Children, and Servants in like cases?
Should you command them to come at ten of the Clock into your Parlour to Family
Devotions, requiring them to come dressed, and to kneel at their Devotions;
would you permit them to refuse to come at the time, and to the place
appointed, because all times and places are indifferent to God? or in the garb
appointed by you, because God regards not habits? or to refuse to kneel,
because they may pray standing? Would you not rather judge them contemners of
your lawful authority, and needlessly, and sinfully scrupulous in those matters?
And must not you, by the same Rule, be guilty of contemning the lawful
Authority of your Civil and Spiritual Fathers, and of the Masters of Christ's
Family, by your refusal to submit unto their Constitutions, in matters of like
nature, upon the like accounts? or can those Principles derive from him who is
the God of order, not of confusion, 1 Cor. 15.33.
which would so evidently, should they obtain, fill Families as well as
Kingdoms and Churches with confusion, and destroy their order?

Fourthly, He argues ad hominem, thus. If notwithstanding the evidence
produced, p. 289.
that Baptism by immersion is suitable both to the institution of our Lord, and
his Apostles, and was by them ordained to represent our Burial with Christ, and
so our dying unto Sin, Romans 6.4. Coloss. 2.12.
and our conformity to his resurrection by newness of life, as the Apostle
clearly does explain the meaning of that Rite; I say, if notwithstanding this,
Dissenters do agree to sprinkle the baptized Infant, why may they not as well
submit to the significant ceremonies imposed by our Church? for since it is as
lawful to add unto Christ's institutions a significant ceremony, as to diminish
a significant ceremony, which he, or his Apostles instituted, and use another
in its stead which they did never institute? what reason can they have to do
the latter, and yet refuse submission to the former? and why should not the
peace and union of the Church be as prevailing with them to perform the one, as
is their mercy to the Infants body to neglect the other. And,

Fifthly, The said Author shows that our divisions do highly prejudice the
Christian Faith, Chap. 1.
that they gratify the Infidel and Sceptick, and scandalize the weak and
doubting Christian; that they minister to the advantage of the Papist, and to
the prejudice of the true Protestant Religion; that they are highly prejudicial
to the State; that they have a pernicious influence upon our selves, by
promoting strife, enmity, carnality, and all the evils consequent upon them, by
obstructing the love, peace, unity, order and edification of the Church, and
the benefit of our Prayers, by hindering the efficacy of the means of Grace, by
depriving us of all the blessings of love and peace, and by endangering our
eternal peace. And hence he strongly does infer, That if Dissenters do not
think it better, that all these evils should ensue, than that they should
comply, or bear with those few ceremonies, P. 22.
and scrupled expressions of our Liturgy, then must they in these matters
submit to the commands of their Superiors. And p. 29. he puts this serious
Question to Dissenters, Whether those ceremonies, and those expressions in our
Liturgy, which they at present scruple, be so plainly evil, and so
unquestionably forbidden, that for preventing all these dreadful evils, they
may not be complied with? adding, That if they be not so clearly and
indispensably evil, that these great ends of the promoting the salvation of
men's Souls, and the preventing of the forementioned evils, which do inevitably
ensue upon them, cannot hallow them; they cannot be excused from being
accessory to those evils which ensue upon their separating from, and their
dividing of the Church on these accounts.

Now that Dissenters cannot rationally judge these things to be thus clearly
and indispensably evil, or think it better that all these mischiefs should
ensue, than that they should submit unto them, he seems convincingly to prove
from these considerations:

1. Chap. 6.. 1. from p. 167. to p. 170.
That the duties of promoting Christian love, peace, unity, and the edification
of the Church, and the preventing of Division, Schism, and the disturbance of
the Civil Government, are moral and essential duties which will admit no
dispensation; so that it is the duty of all Christians to contend earnestly,
and strive together with one Soul for the promotion of these duties, and the
prevention of the contrary evils.

2ly, p. 176.
That the preserving of what is most essential unto the welfare of the Church,
and to the interests of piety, is more to be regarded than the omission of what
is only circumstantial to them; and that precepts which concern only Rituals,
p. 46.
are to give place to those which do concern the welfare of men's bodies, and
much more to those which do respect the welfare of our Brothers Soul; so that,
when both cannot together be observed, we must neglect or violate the former,
to observe the latter. Agreeably to which assertion, Divines do generally lay
down this, as a certain rule concerning positive commands, requiring things
which it is not intrinsecally evil to omit, viz. That all such things cease to
be duties, when they are inconsistent with others of a greater consequence,
there being greater reason and obligation, when we cannot do both, to do the
latter with the omission of the former. And this that Author does confirm,

1. From the example of God himself, who suffered his own ceremonial
institutions to be neglected upon accounts of lesser moment, p. 171.
viz. circumcision for the convenience of his peoples travels in the
wilderness, the celebration of the Passover in the 14th day of the first month,
when they were in a journey about their temporal concerns.

2ly, From the example and declarations of our Savior, who taught, that in all
such cases, p. 171, 172.
God would have mercy and not sacrifice, approved the action of David and his
Servants in eating the Shewbread, which was by Gods prescription to be eaten
only by Aaron and his Sons, and who commanded the impotent man to take up his
Bed and walk upon the Sabbath Day; whence he seems evidently to infer,

1. p. 173.
That if God was pleased to suffer his own institutions in matters ceremonial
to be neglected, when that neglect was needful to promote some higher end; if
to preserve the life of man and beast he would permit men to do that, which
otherwise would have been deemed a breach of his own institution, and a
profanation of his day, it is not to be doubted, but he will permit us to do
those things, which in their natures may be inconvenient, when it is necessary
to submit unto them, for the promotion of the great ends of love, peace, unity,
and the advantage of poor Souls; if our respect unto our Brothers life and
health, will warrant our neglect of many outward duties, then surely our
respect unto the Churches peace and unity, and to the good of Souls, may
warrant our submission to those things for these good ends, which God has
never plainly made it our duty to omit, and our Superiors, whom he most
plainly does command us to obey in lawful matters do enjoin.

2ly, p. 175.
That, if the duties mentioned, be of an higher nature than any outward
circumstance of worship, it cannot be so much our duty to endeavor that Gods
worship should be performed, without those rites or circumstances, as that
these higher duties should be practiced; or to contend for the omission of them
with loss or hazard of these more weighty matters, if in these moral duties
consists the life and substance of Religion, and the essentials of true Piety;
whereas the matters which our Dissenters do contend for, relate not to the
being of Religion; but, as they think, only unto the purer exercise of some
religious duties; certain it is they ought not so to contend for the omission
of these external circumstances, as to impair that charity and peace, that
unity and edification, wherein the substance of Religion, and the welfare of
the Church consists; which seems to be the very Argument St Paul insists on,
when he says, Romans 14.17, 19.
the kingdom of God is not meat and drink, but righteousness and peace;
wherefore let us follow after the things which make for peace: i. e. Let us not
by doing or omitting of these things, obstruct the Churches peace, or hinder
the promotion of those things, in which Gods Kingdom more especially consists.

3ly, p. 176.
He asks Whether Dissenters can with good conscience say that Gods glory is as
much concerned, in the administration of his worship, rather in some other way,
than in that mode which now obtains in the Church of England, as it is
certainly concerned in the performance of those moral duties, and in the honor
and success of Christian Faith, the salvation of Souls, the welfare of the
State, and of the Protestant Religion; and whether by joining with us in our
public Ordinances, such mischiefs would ensue? if not, it is certainly their
duty rather to comply with the commands of their Superiors, p. 177.
though they conceive them burdensome and inconvenient, than to administer, by
their refusal so to do, occasion to the greater dishonor of their God, and all
these dreadful evils both to Church and State, which do ensue on that refusal.

Sixthly, This Author strongly seems to argue for this submission in
prosecution of the ends forementioned from the example of St Paul, who though
he were free from all men, 1 Cor. 9.19, 20.
yet made himself servant to all that he might gain the more; to the Jew, p.
145.
becoming as a Jew, that he might gain the Jew, etc. For sure, says he, it
well becomes our Dissenters to imitate this great example of St. Paul by
conforming their wills, as servants do, unto the will of their Superiors, and
doing all that lawfully they can, to please and testify their due subjection to
them, without respect to their liberty, to do, in order to their being
serviceable to the Church in the promotion of the Gospel, and the salvation of
Souls, as the Apostle did when he submitted to the circumcision of Timothy,
when he undertook a legal purification of himself, and offered sacrifice;
against which actions, it is easy to produce more plausible exceptions, than
they can bring against our Ceremonies; especially if we consider, that the
Apostle did comply, Acts 21.21. (...). Acts 28.17.
not only with the Law of Moses for this end, but also with the traditions
imposed by the Elders, and so did yield unto the very thing which they are so
afraid to do.

Seventhly, This Author proves, That Schism is a most pernicious evil; Chap.
2.. 1.
this he makes good from Scripture, from the concurring suffrage of all the
Fathers of the Church, from the mischievous and dreadful consequences of it;
and from the opposition that it bears to the great duties of Charity, and
Peace, of Union, and Edification. Now certainly it highly must concern us in
reason and in Conscience, where our mistakes are like to prove of such a fatal
consequence to our immortal souls, and to expose us to such dreadful evils, to
be very wary, before we venture upon that which is, by most judicious persons
in this Age, and was by all the Primitive Fathers of the Church, pronounced
Schismatical; as were all Altars set up in opposition to the Bishop of the
Diocese, wherein they were; all Churches separating from, and independent on
his Government. This therefore cannot prudently be done by us; nor can we, when
we find it done by others, safely join in Communion with them, without plain
evidence, and full conviction of our freedom from that guilt. And surely he
must have a very good opinion of himself, who confidently dares to say, he has
plain evidence that what all Christians of former Ages, and the most able and
judicious persons of the present Age, pronounce a Schism, is indeed the duty of
all good and pious Christians. Now to confirm this motive, let me request you
to weigh these following Questions well.

Churches Peace by erecting opposite Communions, to the perpetuating Schism
through all succeeding generations, will not much aggravate the guilt of it,
and render it more dreadful to every peaceable and pious Christian? consider
therefore, I beseech you, that this, if any, is your Schism.

Christ's Church, the privileges of her Ordinances, rather than yield unto a
Constitution not directly sinful, is certainly a great imprudence. For seeing
in matters of practice the dangerousness, as well as the falsehood of an
Assertion is very fitly and conscientiously to be considered, especially when
the danger is of offending God, and ruining our souls: Can it be prudent to
venture upon that which, if performed without good ground, will certainly
expose us to that danger, where there appears no such evident conviction for
the doing of it, as can make amends for the danger of venturing on it?

Christ should lay down Rules for the government and preservation of his body,
proportionably plain unto the moment of them; and give us a full evidence, in
matters absolutely needful to be done, or lest undone? If then you only have
some probabilities and plausible pretenses for setting up, or joining with,
these separate Communions, or against joining in Communion with us, but have no
evident conviction of the necessity of the one, or the unlawfulness of the
other; may you not rationally conclude that neither of them can be needful to
be done in order to your everlasting welfare? when then our actions tend so
much unto the prejudice of our own souls, and to the damage of the Church of
Christ, as does our present Schism; it is Argument sufficient that God never
intended to oblige us to it, that he has given us no clear conviction of that
obligation.

Prudent Legislator think it convenient for the public, that his greatest, and
most important commands should be neglected, as often as there might appear
some little probable evidence for some lesser duty that were inconsistent with
them? would he not, think you, be much better pleased with him that, in such a
case, should stick to the greater duty, and neglect the less, than with him who
should extremely prejudice the public by his adherence to his scruples about
little matters? And if so, can it reflect dishonor upon God to presume him
also pleased with that which we have reason to believe would please a good and
prudent Governor, in regard of its good influence on the public, for which he
is especially concerned?



First, That St Paul seems clearly to insinuate, that a wilful departure from
ordinary practice, in such cases as these are, does argue a contentious
disposition; for when he treats of the dispute arising in the Church of
Corinth, whether their Women should be veiled, or covered in the Church, or
not; he argues for their being veiled, from decency, and the design of Nature
in giving hair unto them for a covering, and thus concludes his Argument, if
any man have a mind to be contentious (so (...) does import) it is sufficient
to let him know that he, contending for the appearance of Women in the Church
unveiled, contends against the custom of the Church; 1 Cor. 11.16.
for we at Jerusalem, and all the other Churches of God have no such custom;
and if by this he will not be concluded, he is (...), a lover of contention.
Why therefore may it not be said to you, if you are minded to contend for
sitting at the Sacrament, for Baptizing without the sign of the Cross, and
without Godfathers and Godmothers, for Praying without a stinted Liturgy in
public, and without a Surplice, and for separating on the account of all, or
any of these things imposed, we have no such custom, neither the Churches of
God? And if by this you will not be concluded in these matters, how will you
escape the charge of being lovers of Contention? And suitable to this
determination of St Paul, was both the practice, and advice of the most Holy
Fathers of the Church. St Austin truly says, Ep. 86. ad Casulanum presb.
That in those matters concerning which the Scripture has delivered nothing
certain, the customs of the people of God, and the Statutes of our Ancestors
are to be received as a Law. Epist. 118.
And again, All matters of this kind may freely be observed; nor can a grave
and prudent Christian observe a better discipline, Ad quam forte Ecclesiam
veneris, ejus morem serva, si cuiquam non vis esse scandalo, nec quenquam tibi.
Ibid.
than in these matters to act according to that custom which is observed by the
Church to which he comes. And thus St. Ambrose did himself practice, advising
others to whatsoever Church they came to observe its customs, if they would
neither give, nor take offense.

Secondly, Consider that the same Apostle commands all Christians to give no
offense to Jew, or Gentile, or the Church of God; that is, 1 Cor. 10.32.
as one well descants on the place, whatsoever, without prejudice to Christian
piety, you can perform, or leave undone, be careful, for the avoiding of
offense to Jew, or Gentile, and much more to the Church of God, to do or to
abstain from doing. Now do not you, my Friends, conceive your selves obliged to
abstain from doing of the things enjoined, though lawful in themselves, because
they minister unto the scandal of weak Brethren? why therefore should you not
much more conceive your selves obliged to do them on the like supposition, that
you may not transgress this precept of St. Paul, by giving scandal to the
Church of God, and to Superiors Civil and Sacred, as by omission of them you
must do? The wisdom which is from above is impartial. Yea do not many of you
submit unto them, when you find it necessary to avoid Civil and Church
censures, and to serve the interests of your party; and shall these low
concerns prevail more with you than the Churches Peace, the procuring all those
blessings which would ensue upon our unity, and the prevention of those
mischiefs which follow upon our divisions? Pudet haec opprobria vobis, etc.

Thirdly, Consider that the Apostle, to quell the Schisms, and Disorders
committed in the Church of Corinth, informs them, That God is not the God of
confusion, but of Peace, as in all Churches of the Saints, 1 Cor. 14.33. Now it
is fully proved here, and by others who have labored to convince you of the
mischief of your Separation; 1. That upon the same principles by which you do
excuse your Separation from us, and your erecting opposite Communions, you
consequentially do excuse many of the Ancient Schismatics condemned by the
Church, you give to others an Apology, not Answerable by you, to separate from
your selves: And lastly, you condemn the practice of the first, and purest Ages
of the Church, and must have separated from Communion with her in what Age,
following the Apostles, soever you had lived, and so have made disturbance
throughout all Churches of the world; and therefore you may rest assured, you
do not act agreeably to the good pleasure of that God, (...).
who is the God not of disturbance, but of Peace. And we may speak unto you in
the language of Theophylact, In locum.
(...), be you ashamed to contradict the customs of all Churches.

Fourthly, 1 Cor. 7.12, 15.
Consider that the same Apostle forbids the believing Brother to separate from
his Heathen Wife; and the believing Wife to desert her unbelieving Husband, for
this very reason, That God had called us to peace; and yet he elsewhere shows
how inconvenient it was to be thus yoked to unbelievers. 2 Cor. 6.14.
If then our being called to Peace will warrant, and even sanctify our
yielding to so great an inconvenience, and render it our duty to make no
separation in our Families on those accounts; will it not hallow our submission
to some things inconvenient in the Church, and render it our duty to make no
separation from it on the account of such things?

Fifthly, Consider that if all things indifferent be left so by your
Governors, the Minister who officiates must, and therefore may impose upon you
in many things relating to Gods Public Worship; for, as I have already showed,
he must choose some place, and time in which he will officiate; he must do it in
some habit; he must choose some Chapters to read, some Psalms to sing, some kind
of Bread and Wine to Consecrate, with many other things of a like nature, and
if they may do this, why not the Magistrate? If your Ministers may, as
Governors, impose these things upon you, why not the Bishops, as their
Governors, upon them? why not the Magistrate, as the Supreme Ecclesiastic
Governor, upon both? The seal of Government is finally resolved on them who
have the power of imposing; so that to deny the Ministers this power over the
people, or the Bishops over the Ministers, is to make neither the one nor the
other properly Governors.

Sixthly, That God who has established the Office Ministerial, and
Magistratical, must have consigned that power to them which is sufficient to
acquire all the ends for which it was designed; these ends are, among others,
the Peace, the Union, the Order, the Edification of the body or society of
Christians subject to them. God therefore must have given to these Officers
sufficient power for the acquiring of these ends, as far as they are needful
for the Church of God, but without a power of silencing disputes when they
arise, and do disturb the Church, and making Rules for Uniformity, and Order,
when differences do arise, and divisions multiply, and confusion is introduced
by variety of practice in indifferent matters, it is apparent they cannot
obtain these ends in Church or State, and therefore it is not to be doubted but
God has given them a power of making and imposing of such Rules in the
forementioned cases to those ends.

Seventhly, Consider that since it is for ever necessary that things should be
done decently and in order, and to edification; and what is decent, orderly,
and tending to edification, will be ever subject to variety, and to a relative
uncertainty, seeing that may be so in some place, age, and circumstances, which
may in others cease to be so; it is necessary that there should be perpetual
judges of these things, and they can be no other but the Rulers of the Church,
they therefore must have power to judge, and to determine in those cases.

Eighthly, Consider that it cannot reasonably be imagined, that the God of Love
and Peace, who questionless delights to see men converse peaceably together,
Ephesians. 4.3. Romans 14.19.12.18.
and with one heart and mouth to glorify him; and who so strictly does command
us to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of Peace; to pursue the things
which make for Peace, and do as much as in us lies in order to it; should
disapprove of what is so expedient, and visibly conducing to this end, if not
expressly, or by plain and immediate consequence forbidden by him, or should
approve of Separation and division upon trivial accounts. Now how can we be
said to do as much as in us lies in order to that end, if we will not comply,
in order to the Churches Peace, with constitutions of Superiors, which are not
evidently repugnant to his Law, or to the dictates of our natural reason?

Ninthly, Consider what is like to be the natural result of your refusal of
Communion with us, even no less than Excommunication; which though perhaps the
fault committed may not in it self deserve, yet can I see no reason, 1. Why you
should not dread the Sentence, seeing Pastoris sententia etiam injusta timenda
est, even the injust Sentence of Superiors may be dreaded when it does actually
deprive us of Church Privileges; and therefore we stand bound to do what
lawfully we can, even all that is not evidently sinful, to avoid it. 2. Nor can
I see even why the Sentence may not be valid before God, though not by reason
of the moment of the things themselves; yet for that disobedience to lawful
Governors, and violation of the Peace which is contained in our refusal to
submit unto them.

I confess there is an opinion much received in the world, that makes the
censures of the Church only declarative, which will excuse you from these
fears; for if the confirmation of these censures by God, be wholly resolved
into the merit of the cause for which they were inflicted, they can never be
feared, nor consequently prove coercive to their subjects, who are not
convinced of the badness of their own cause, which in the event will never make
them properly coercive at all: Besides, those censures which are supposed only
declarative, not operative, are not properly the acts of authorized, but
skilful persons, for it is skill, not authority, that is a prudent presumption
that any thing is such as it is declared; and therefore the opinions of
learned, though but private persons, would in this way of proceeding be more
formidable than the peremptory sentences of Ecclesiastical Governors,
considered only under that relation. And lastly, were the censures of the
Church only declarative, offenders would be as much bound in Heaven, when not
bound on Earth, as when they were so, since all Gods threats against them will
be verified, though they be never censured by the Church; and so Christ's
promise, whatsoever you shall bind, etc. will be wholly insignificant.

Tenthly, Consider, I beseech you, that no prejudices you have contracted, no
scruples which do hinder your Communion with the Church of England, can excuse
you from the guilt of Schism in separating from her, until you have done all
that lawfully you may, and honestly you can, for the removal of those
prejudices, and for the satisfaction of those scruples, it being all men's duty,
as much as in them lies, to promote the Churches peace, and to prevent her
Schisms; and therefore to do all that lawfully and honestly they can, in the
pursuit of those good ends. Now, 1. you may impartially examine the grounds on
which you do forsake Communion with us in all, or any of our public
Ordinances; you may diligently peruse and read those learned Tracts, which have
been written to prove the lawfulness of your Communion with her in those
Ordinances; you may confer with the most able and judicious of her lawful
Ministers, and propound all your scruples to them in order to your
satisfaction. And whosoever separates from Communion with us, without a
conscientious performance of these things, must certainly contract the guilt of
Schism, or criminal separation from us, because he separates before he has
done all that lawfully he may for the prevention of his separation. And surely,
my Dear Friends, it highly does concern you, first to perform these duties,
before you do proceed unto a fixed separation from our Church; for seeing what
is performed in our Assemblies, is the injunction of those higher powers, to
whom God does require us to be subject in all lawful matters, and that for
Conscience sake, Romans 13.1, 5. and of those spiritual Governors to whom the
Gospel does command obedience and submission, as far as lawfully we may, Heb.
13.7, 17. unless we first examine those injunctions of our Superiors Civil and
Sacred, not daring to refuse obedience to them, before we find that they are
contrary to the Law of God; we may oppose the will of God, whilst we seem
zealous for it, and transgress the command of God, by transgressing the
commands of our Superiors. And yet how few are those Dissenters, who first
confer with any able Pastors of the Church of England, read any of their
learned Tracts, or do impartially weigh the grounds on which they do proceed to
separation, it grieves me to consider. God grant this be not laid unto their
charge another day.

Magistrates Civil or Sacred do exceed their bounds in the imposing of these
things, or do impose things doubtful;

Consider, I entreat you, 1. that this will never warrant your refusal to obey
Superiors, that you conceive the Magistrate exceeds, or else unduly does exert
his power in commanding any thing, provided you may lawfully obey it. Because
it is not your business or duty to enquire into the reason of the commands of
your Superiors, to censure or pass judgment of the expedience of them, or the
inexpedience, but only to enquire whether you may lawfully obey what is
commanded. For as the Magistrate should lay upon the subject no unnecessary
burden; so neither ought the Master or the Parent, to lay such burdens on his
Child and Servant; and yet none will excuse a Child from his obedience to his
Father, a Servant from obedience to his Master upon this account, that they
conceived the injunctions of their Master or their Parents inexpedient or
unprofitable, provided they only did require that which might be lawfully
performed: much less can Subjects be excused from their obedience to their
Spiritual and Civil Parents upon these accounts. To such injunctions we are
obliged to submit, though not on the account of any immediate power they have
received from God to make them, the power they derive from him, being for
edification only; yet on the same account that Christ paid tribute, lest we
should offend them, and by our disobedience in lawful matters, should minister
Scandal both to them and others, and cause them to suspect that our Religion
did countennnce disobedience to Governors in those things, and tend to render
us unquiet and unpeaceable; so that although the thing enjoined may be a yoke,
and an unnecessary burden, and so unwarrantably be laid upon us; yet our
submission to it out of humility, and love to peace, and our respect to Gods
Vicegerents, may be acceptable to God, and be rewarded by him: And if St. Paul
himself, though free, did voluntarily submit unto such things for the promotion
of the Gospel, and the good of others; why may not we for the promotion of like
Christian ends submit unto them?

Lastly, If nothing I have offered can prevail with you to embrace Communion
with us, let me entreat you to do all you can to testify that you abstain from
our Communion, not out of humor, peevishness, or from a turbulent disposition,
and much less from a factious, and rebellious spirit, but purely out of
Conscience toward God. Do all that lawfully you can to show that you are of a
peaceable temper, desirous of Communion with us, so far as Conscience will
permit you; that you do truly reverence your Governors, and are desirous to
yield obedience to them in all lawful things, and nothing which may give them
just occasion to suspect that you do only Hypocritically pretend Conscience for
your disobedience, or that you still retain among you any Factious or Seditious
Principles.

Church of England, as far as you declare, either by words or actions, that it
is lawful so to do: for this you can do if you will, and therefore if you do
not do it, you demonstrate, against all pretenses to the contrary, that you are
not willing to comply with your Superiors as far as lawfully you may. As many
of you therefore as do think it lawful to Communicate with us in Prayer, and
hearing of the word, and in Receiving of the Sacrament upon occasion, stand
bound in Conscience so to do, as often as by the Magistrate you are required so
to do, and it can only be pretense of Conscience which does induce you to
forbear such Communion with us at these times; for seeing negative precepts do
bind always, and at all times, so that no man at any time may do what is
forbidden by God. It follows that there can be no prohibition against doing
that at other times, which we can sometimes do, and which cannot be more or
less lawful or unlawful for being done at one time than another, as clearly
seems to be the case with reference to your occasional Communion. It therefore
is to be suspected that men only pretend Conscience against that Communion with
us at all times, which they at sometimes can maintain. And yet I wish there
were no instances of men of your persuasions, who when they are presented, or
when they find it necessary to qualify them for an Office, or to give a vote
in which they may do service to their party; will attend upon the public
worship used in our Churches; and will receive the Sacrament according to the
order of the Church of England, who before never did, and afterward neglect to
do so. Now whilst men do thus vary in their practice according as their
interest, and as their circumstances vary, they tempt men shrewdly to suspect
that they act rather out of interest than Conscience in these matters; and that
they, notwithstanding all their pretense to Conscience, have either none at
all, or a bad Conscience; for if they thought Communion with us in those
Ordinances unlawful, by doing it in the forementioned circumstances, they only
must be doing evil that good may come, and making Conscience, and Religion,
stoop to interest; which is the proper character of Hypocrites: but if they did
conceive it lawful, their Separation and refusal of it cannot be excused from
Schism, or from transgression of the injunctions of St. Paul, If it be
possible, as much as in you lies live peaceably with all men; follow after the
things which make for peace; give no offense unto the Church of God; obey
Superiors, and submit your selves. Ah my Dear Brethren! by doing of these
things you have given greater scandal unto others, than your submission to the
Constitutions of the Church of England could have done; and therefore if you do
indeed abstain from our Commuon for fear of giving scandal to weak Brethren, do
you more carefully abstain from matters of this nature which carry with them
such a plain semblance of Hypocrisy that no pretense can hide, no Charity
excuse it.

Under this head I cannot pass by your violence in Petitioning His Sacred
Majesty against His Royal Proclamation to the contrary; for be it granted that
the Law did authorize, or give permission to you to Petition, sure I am it laid
upon you no necessity to do so; and so this might have been forborne in
compliance with the pleasure of his Majesty: And if you do Reply, That then you
may by Proclamations be abridged of that liberty the Law affords you. Consider,
I beseech you, what it is that you expect, and call for from Superiors, viz.
That for your sakes, and out of pity to your weakness, they would abate the
exercise of their own power; and with what equity and justice can you expect
they should do this, if you, at their request, will abate nothing of that
liberty and power which the Law allows you?

Church or State. For this undoubtedly you may do, and it does very much
concern you so to do. For they who, being Christians, do reproach, and do speak
evil of their Civil Governors, do that which the Wiseman would not permit the
Jew to think of; for his command runs thus, Eccles. 10.20.
Curse not the King in thy heart; or, Entertain not any light vain contemptuous
or dishonorable thoughts of him; Assemb. Annot.
wish thou no evil to his Person, Crown, or Dignity in thy most secret
retirements. They do what all good men should tremble to commit; for of such
men St. Peter gives this Character, Presumptuous are they, 2 Pet. 2.10.
self-willed, (...), they do not tremble when they speak evil of Dignities.
Such persons dare to offer that to Gods Vicegerents, to those who bear his
Name, or Character on Earth, which Michael the Archangel durst not offer to the
vilest, and the worst of Creatures; Jude 8, 9.
for he, contending with the Devil, durst not bring against him a railing
accusation; and yet it well deserves to be observed, that if this sin was
capable of pardon, or excuse in any case or circumstances, it must have been so
in the reproaching of the then present Governors, they being, by consent of
all Historians, the greatest monsters of mankind, and the most bloody
Persecutors of the Christian Faith.

Moreover, they who offend in the like kind against their Ecclesiastical
Superiors, do that which blessed Paul, when he had ignorantly done to a corrupt
High Priest, acknowledged as a crime condemned in the Law of God. I wist not
(says he) that he was the High Priest; Acts 23.5.
for it is written, thou shall not speak evil of the ruler of thy people: they
do that which the Conscience of a Jew could not let pass without just
indignation and reproof; for when St. Paul had said, God shall smite thee thou
whited wall; v. 3, 4.
they presently cry out, Revilest thou Gods High Priest. There lies indeed no
obligation on us to call evil good, or flatter our Superiors in their sins, or
judge well of them against the clearest evidence of Sense or Reason; but then
we are obliged not to cherish evil thoughts, or harbor groundless jealousies
of our Superiors; much less must we express our inward apprehensions of them by
opprobrious language, or disrespectful carriage toward them. And yet it is but
too evident that both the Writings and Discourses of Dissenters are too often
stuffed with these malevolent reflections, in which they take the liberty of
speaking evil of the Rulers of the people, and of blaspheming Dignities, and
representing the Reverend Bishops as Popish, Antichristian and Ithacian
Prelates.

Lord and Savior, and to the credit of the Protestant Religion, to abstain
carefully from all Seditious and Rebellious Principles and Practices, and to do
all you can to clear your selves from all suspicion of maintaining, or
approving of them. For to deal plainly with you, this is one great fault among
you, that you have many of you vented, and more of you have practiced sutably
to those Opinions which are Seditious and Rebellious; and these Opinions have
been asserted and been made public, not only in the times of the late Civil
Wars, but also since the happy Restoration of His Sacred Majesty, whom God
preserve. For this great scandal you have hereby ministered both to Religion in
the general, and to the Protestant Religion in particular, I verily believe you
by just judgment of Almighty God do suffer, and will smart severely. Wherefore
my counsel to you is,

1. No longer to defend, to countenance, or to extenuate those wicked
principles, and execrable practices which followed from them; but humbly to
confess, and take the shame due to your party for them, and patiently bear the
indignation of the Lord, because you have thus sinned against him: Be pleased, I
pray you, in order to this end, to ponder seriously these words of your admired
Mr. Defense of the principles of love, p. 14, 15, 16.
Baxter, who speaks thus unto you: I beseech you let us review the effects of
the late War, is it possible for any sober Christian in the world to take them
to be blameless, or to be little sins? What both the violating the person, and
the life of the King, and the change of the fundamental Government or
constitution? etc. Was all this lawful, and to do all this, as for God, with
dreadful appeals to him? Dare any man, not blinded, and hardened, justify all
this? If none of all this was Rebellion, or Treason, or Murder, is there any
such crime, think you, possible to be committed? Are Papists insulting over us
in our shame? are thousands hardened by these, and such like dealings, into a
scorn of all Religion? are our Rulers by all this exasperated to the severities
which we feel? are we made by it the byword and hissing of the Nations, and
the shame and pity of all our friends? and yet is all this to be justified or
silenced, and none of it at all to be openly repented of? I openly profess to
you, that I believe till this be done, we are never like to be healed or
restored? and that it is heinous gross impenitence, that keeps Ministers and
people under their distress; and I take it for the sad prognostic of our
future woe, and lengthened affliction, to hear so little open profession of
repentance, even for unquestionable heinous crimes, for the saving of those who
are undone by these scandals, and for the reparation of the honor of Religion,
which is most notoriously injured. Your Commissioners at the Savoy give this
account of their faith to his Majesty, whom God preserve, viz. that in things
no way against the Law of God, the commands of our Governors must be obeyed;
but if they command what God forbids, we must patiently submit to suffering,
and every soul must be subject to the higher powers for conscience sake, and
not resist; these are our principles. And these must be your principles, or you
can never reasonably expect the favor or protection of the Government. For
what their Subjects do at present, or may hereafter think forbidden by God in
these divided times, and contrariety of various sects, the Higher Powers cannot
know; and therefore if they cannot be secured of this (I mean by the ordinary
way of security given by oaths, subscriptions, declarations) that when their
subjects think God has forbidden, what the higher powers do command, they
patiently will submit to suffering, and not resist; they cannot be secured of
the peace and quiet of their Kingdom. I therefore cannot but conceive you are
obliged in Conscience, as you desire to avoid the truly odious name of Rebel,
and the just imputation of seditious persons, and to wipe off in some good
measure, the horrid scandal which lies upon your party for your former
practices. That you are bound in justice, as you desire to repair the credit of
the Protestant Religion; which has so deeply suffered by the past Rebellions
of men of your persuasions, and give security unto that Government, from which
both you and yours expect security. That you are bound in policy and prudence,
as you desire to abate the just suspicions which the Government at present
has, and will have of you, till you secure them of the contrary, and to wipe
off the manifold reproaches which are cast upon you, as you desire to remove
the Prejudices all loyal subjects have against you, from their experience of
your seditious principles and practices. I say, I cannot but conceive you
highly stand obliged on all these accounts, to publish your sincere repentance
for, and your abhorrence of, what men of your persuasion have already done; to
make now solemn declarations and protestations of your present loyal
principles; to show your readiness to give all satisfaction to the Government,
which can be reasonably desired from you; that you do not at present hold, nor
ever will maintain rebellious principles; to remonstrate, that if you cannot
yet obey in all things the commands of your Superiors, you in no cases will
resist the Government, but patiently will suffer under it; and lastly, that you
will permit no person to be of your communion, who will not make this
declaration heartily and sincerely. Bishop of Winton's Sermon before the King,
Nov. 5.67. p. 38.
For as a Reverend Prelate of our Church does truly say, The best and safest
way for Prince, State and People, is to protect, cherish and allow of that
Religion, and that only which allows of no rising up against, or resisting
sovereign power, no not in its own defense, nor upon any other account
whatsoever; which most Christian, and most Orthodox profession, if those of the
Romish, and those of other persuasions that live among us, but are not of us,
would make as frankly, and as ingenuously, and as sincerely as we do, though it
would not presently reconcile all other differences betwixt us and them; yet it
would perhaps be enough to make us live peaceably, and charitably, and securely
together without fear or jealousy of one another, which would be a good step
toward an accommodation of all other controversies betwixt us in time also.

Now to conclude this Preface with the Prayer of our own Church: Blessed Jesu,
our Savior and our Peace, who did shed thy precious Blood upon the Cross,
that thou might abolish and destroy all enmity among men, and reconcile them
in one body unto God, look down in much pity and compassion upon this
distressed Church and Nation, whose bleeding wounds, occasioned by the
lamentable Divisions that are among us, cry aloud for thy speedy help, and
saving relief; stir up we beseech thee every Soul of us carefully, as becomes
sincere Christians, to root out of our hearts all pride and vainglory, all
wrath and bitterness, all unjust prejudice and causless jealousy, all hatred
and malice, and desire of revenge, and whatsoever it is that may exasperate our
minds, or hinder us from discerning the things which belong unto our Peace, and
by the power of thy Holy Spirit of Peace, dispose all our hearts to such
meekness of wisdom, and lowliness of mind, such calm and deliberate long
suffering, and forbearance of one another in love, with such due esteem of
those whom thou have set over us to watch for our Souls, as may turn the hearts
of the Fathers to the Children, and the hearts of the Children to the Fathers,
that so we may become a ready People prepared to live in Peace, and the God of
Peace may be with us. Amen.

Advertisement.
THrough the neglect of the Bookseller and Printer, this Book has been
detained; otherwise, it might have come out six Months sooner.

CHAP. I. The CONTENTS.
The Design of this Treatise is to persuade our dissenting Laity that they
ought to maintain Communion with the Church of England. 1. Because she requires
nothing in her public Worship which is unlawful to be done. 2ly, Because they
cannot condemn her Communion without condemning the practice of the Universal
Church of Christ,. 1. 3ly, Because they cannot do it without contradicting the
Practice and Example of our Lord, who was a Member of the Jewish National
Church,. 2. 2ly, Observed the times of public Prayer,. 3. 3ly, Was a Member of
the Synagogue at Nazareth,. 4. 4ly, Observed the Customs which by the Jewish
Canons were prescribed to be observed by those who entered into the Temple,. 5.
5ly, Complied with the Rules prescribed by the Jewish Doctors to be observed by
the Readers and Preachers in their Synagogue,. 6. 6ly, Observed the Customs in
which the Jewish Doctors varied from, or added to the observation of the
Passover,. 7. 8ly, Admitted Judas both to the Passover, and to the Celebration
of the Sacrament, and so declared that Communion with the Professors of
Religion was not to be refused for their want of inward Piety,. 8. 9ly, Paid
Tribute when it was not due, and thereby taught us to submit unto those things
which were required by Superiors without sufficient grounds in Case of
Scandals,. 9. 10ly, Our Lords Commands were suitable to his Practice; For
(first) he commanded the Leper to show himself to the Priest, tho both the
Priesthood was degenerated, and many idle things required of him who was to be
pronounced clean. 2ly, He commands even his own Disciples to obey the Scribes
and Pharisees because they sat in Moses Chair,. 10. Corollaries, 1. That
corruptions allowed, taught, and practiced in a Church are no sufficient
grounds of separation from the Communion of that Church, provided that the
Members of it be not required, as a condition of Communion with them, to do,
teach, practice them, or to profess that they are not corruptions,. 11. 2ly,
That great Corruptions in the lives of our Church-Pastors will not warrant our
Separation from Communion with them, or our Refusal to attend upon their
Teaching, provided we be not enjoined to allow of, or to comply with them in
their Sins, 12. 3ly, That it is lawful to comply which such Churches as enjoin
some significant Ceremonies not mentioned in the Word of God, and for the sake
of Peace, Order, Unity, and the avoiding of Scandal, to submit unto them, when
by Authority they are enjoined,. 13. 4ly, That it is not unlawful to use a
public Form of Prayer, and that the using of such Forms can be no sinful
stinting of the Spirit,. 14. 5ly, That we stand not obliged in all Punctilios
of time, and place, and gesture, to follow the Example of the first Institution
of the Holy Sacrament of the Lords Supper,. 15. 6ly, That the presence of
wicked men should not deter us from joining with the Church in the
Participation of the Holy Sacrament,. 16. 7ly, That we stand not obliged to
refuse Communion with other Churches in their Sacraments, and other public
Offices because of some additions to the Institution,. 17. 7ly, That our
Dissenters have no just cause to fear, or plead for that Refusal of Submission
to the Constitutions of our Church, and of Communion with us, that by
Communicating municating they should approve of the imposing of these things
and should partake with them in that supposed Sin, or countenance them in the
imposing things which they do look upon as Grievous Burdens,. 18.

CHAP. I.
Dissenting Laity that lawfully they may, and therefore that they ought to hold
Communion with the Church of England in all her constant and solemn parts of
public Worship. To prove that lawfully they may, I might Insist on many
Topics: As 1. That which does throw the Burden of proving the unlawfulness of
holding Communion with us in the forementioned Worship, upon them, and of this
Nature, is the following Argument, Viz.

It is lawful to hold Communion with the Church in all her constant and solemn
parts of Public Worship, which in those parts of Public Worship requires
nothing which is unlawful to be done by those who shall communicate with her in
them; but the Church of England in all her constant and solemn parts of Public
Worship, requires nothing to be done which is unlawful to be done by those who
shall communicate with her in them. Ergo, it is lawful to communicate with the
Church of England in all her constant and solemn parts of Public Worship.
Where by the constant and solemn parts of Public Worship, I understand those
parts of Public Worship which she requires all Laymen to join with her in,
under the penalty of being liable to be presented, and to be subject to her
censures, if they do refuse them, that in these parts of Solemn Worship nothing
unlawful is required of them, I shall endeavor to make good by Answering the
Objections which they make against them. But I might do it more briefly by
calling on them to instance in any thing unlawful to be done, which is required
in any constant and solemn part of Public Worship, upon which they are by the
Constitutions of the Church obliged to attend under the penalty of being
subject to her Censures for their Neglect, or their Refusal so to do.

2ly, I might thus argue with them: That which the Church of Christ has in all
Ages, since the Apostles, required of her subjects, cannot be reasonably
conceived unlawful to be done, for otherwise we must condemn the universal
Church of Christ through all Ages, since the time of the Apostles, but the
Church of Christ throughout all Ages has required of her Subjects conditions
of Communion like unto those required by the Church of England, And therefore
these conditions of Communion cannot be reasonably deemed unlawful to be done.
In Confirmation of this Argument it would be very easy to instance in
multitudes of Ceremonies required of, and used by the members of the Universal
Church, throughout all Ages consequent to that of the Apostles, as liable to
the exceptions of Dissenters as are any Ceremonies imposed by the Church of
England, and also to evince that Liturgies, or Forms of Prayer were always used
by the Church from the 3d. Century at least, unto this present Age. And thence
to show that our Dissenters do by condemning these things in the Church of
England, in effect condemn the Church of Christ throughout all Ages, and all
Places; Def. of the principles of love. p. 55.
for as Mr. Baxter well observes, they who condemn our Church for reasons
common to all the Ages of the Church, must virtually condemn all the foregoing
Ages of the Churches. But because Laymen are ignorant of what was practiced by
Antiquity, and have been taught that Antichrist began to work in the Apostles
days, and therefore have but little Reverence for Arguments of this Nature, I
shall endeavor to convince them of the lawfulness of holding Communion with us
in these Ordinances, by the Example of our Blessed Lord and Savior, who in
like cases did yield Obedience and Submit to the Prescriptions of the Rulers of
the Jewish Church. And 2ly, I shall endeavor to return a full and a
perspicuous Answer to all the Arguments they urge from Scripture, or from
Reason, to prove that it is unlawful to submit unto the things required by the
Church of England in order to Communion with her. Beginning first with those
Arguments which do suppose the things required by the Church of England, as the
Conditions of Lay Communion, to be sinful in themselves, or things forbidden by
the Word of God. And 2ly, Proceeding to the Consideration of those Arguments
which do allow the things imposed to be lawful in themselves, but yet suppose
it is unlawful for them to submit unto them. 1. Because the Imposition of them
is a Violation of their Christian Liberty. 2ly, Because by their Submission to
them as they imagine, they shall be indirectly guilty of the sin of the
Imposers. 3ly, Because they have been abused to Idolatry, and Superstition, and
therefore are become unlawful to be used. And 4ly, Because by using of them
they may scandalize the Weak, which God having forbidden, no Precept of the
Magistrate can oblige them to do.

Lord is such a President as our Dissentors cannot reasonably except against,
nor can they justify their own Refusal to be Followers of Christ, or to submit
unto such Constitutions made by the Rulers of the Church of Christ, as our Dear
Lord submitted to, being appointed by the Rulers of the Jewish Church, or to
hold Communion with such a Church as he became a Member of. Now

1. Our Blessed Savior was a Member of the Jewish National Church, and of the
Synagogue at Nazareth, the Confirmation of this Assertion I shall deliver in
the Words of Doctor Leightfoot who speaks thus: Harm. part. 3. p. 124.
What did Christ all the while he lived at Nazareth a private Man? Did he never
go to the Synagogue upon Sabbath and Holy Days, and Synagogue-days? Whilst
others went to the Congregation, and to the public Service, did he stay at
home? did he not appear before the Lord at the appointed Seasons in the place
which he had chosen? We are assured he did so, for his Parents went to
Jerusalem every year at the Feast of the Passover, and when he was twelve years
old they went up to Jerusalem after the Custom of the Feast, and the Child went
with them, 2. Luke 41, 42, 43. That he went up unto the Feast of Tabernacles we
are informed, Joh. 7, 10. And being circumcised he became a Debtor to do the
whole Law, Gal. 5, 3. being made under the Law, Gal. 4.4. he was obliged to the
Performance of those things which were enjoined by it. Now the great Business
of these Feasts was to offer Sacrifice, to rejoice in the Assembly of Gods
People, to put up Prayers, and Praises for all the Blessings they did then
commemorate; at these times all Israel met together, Lam. 2, 22. they heard the
Reading of the Law, Deuteronomy. 31, 9, 10. and they sang Praises to God, Isai. 30,
29. Ye shall have a Song, as in the Night when a Holy Solemnity is kept; If
then our Savior did observe these Feasts, if he did celebrate the Passover,
then certainly he did communicate with the Jewish Church, for these Appearances
were Ordinances, and Symbols also of Communion.

Christ himself neglected not the times of public Prayer, that he declared it
not unlawful, nor did prohibit his Disciples to attend upon them, is evident
from this, that he still owned the Temple as his Fathers House, Joh. 2, 16.
the House of Prayer, that his Disciples after his Resurrection continued daily
in the Temple, and went up to it at the hours of Prayer, Act. 3, 1. And they
esteemed it a very commendable Action of the Widow Anna to serve God there
continually with Prayer and Fasting. Luke 2.37.
Whence we may certainly conclude, that Christ himself did not refuse, nor did
advise his own Disciples to refuse Communion with the Jewish Church in common
Prayer, but did approve Communion with them in that public Service. Now since
the Jews themselves observed no time for Prayer, no number of Prayers, seeing
no daily Forms of Prayer were appointed by the Law of Moses, Therefore? says
Dr. Leightfoot, Harm, part. 3. p. 217.
the Sanhedrin in several Generations made Canons, and Constitutions to decide
and determine upon all these particulars, as their own Reason, and Emergences
did lead them, and give occasion, as in one Generation they prescribed such and
such times for Morning and Evening Prayer, in process of time they found these
times allotted to be too strait, therefore the Sanhedrin of another Generation
did give Enlargement, as they thought good; and so concerning the number of
Prayers to be said daily, one Sanhedrin appointed so many, but time and
experience found afterward that these did not answer such and such occasions,
as it seems was not observed when they were first appointed, therefore the
Sanhedrin of another Generation thought good to add more and more still as
occasions, unobserved before, did emerge, and so the number of their daily
Prayers grew at last to be eighteen. To all which Additions to the Law of
Moses, our Lord and his Disciples did submit, attending the public Service of
the Temple and the Synagogues where they were used. And

Synagogue at Nazareth is proved from that Passage of St. Luke, Luke 4, 16.
who tells us that he came to Nazareth where he had been brought up, and as his
Custom was, he went into their Synagogue, on the Sabbath Day, and stood up for
to read, for Illustration of which place observe that there were Seven Readers
appointed in their Synagogues, who, Leightf. Harm. part. 3 p. 125.
when the Angel of the Church, or Minister of the Congregation, called them
out, did read. Now that our Savior was a Member of this Congregation may be
argued thus: ibid. p. 124.
You find not in the whole Gospel, tho Christ preached in every Synagogue where
he came, that he read in any of them but in this, and although strangers were
permitted sometimes to preach in Synagogues, yet none did publicly read there,
but he that was a Member of it, we find not any Instance to the contrary in all
the Jewish Records, says the Learned Leightfoot, who was a diligent Peruser of
them. Moreover the next Verse tells us, that there was delivered to him the
Book of Esaias, as was the manner of the Master of the Synagogue to do unto the
Reader, which is a farther Argument to show he was a Member of the Synagogue,
Ibid. p. 28.
for had Christ gone about to read beside, or contrary to the common Custom of
the place, it cannot reasonably be conceived that the Minister of the
Congregation would so far have complied with him, to give him the Book that he
might read irregularly, or besides the Custom, and lastly had Christ intended
only to rehearse the Passage of Esaiah to be the Ground of his Discourse, there
was no need of giving to him any Book, but only because he was the Reader of
the second Lesson that Day in the forementioned Congregation. And

Christ entered into the Temple both as a private Man, Joh. 18, 20.
and as a Public Minister, since he was daily teaching in the Temple, as he
himself informs us, it must hence follow that he observed the Customs which by
the Jewish Canons were prescribed, and in obedience to those Prescriptions,
were observed by all who did resort unto the Temple. Now as the Rulers of our
Church, by virtue of that Precept of doing all things decently and in order, do
impose their Ceremonies, as thinking they conduce to the more decent, and
orderly performance of Gods Service, so did the Rulers of the Jewish Church, by
virtue of that Precept, Thou shall reverence my Sanctuary, make diverse Canons,
and Constitutions which they supposed to conduce unto the greater Reverence of
God, or of that Temple where he dwelt, as v. g. That no man should go into the
Temple with a Staff, Vide Leightf. Temp. Serve. p. 115.
it being thought unfit that Instruments of striking should be brought into the
place of Peace, on which account, says Doctor Leightfoot, our Savior drove
not out the Merchandizers, and Money Changers with a Staff, Joh. 2, 15.
but with a Scourge of small Cords. 2. p. 116.
That none should come into the Temple with his Shoes on, that being Holy
Ground, and putting off the Shoes being with them, a sign of Reverence, like to
our putting off the Hat. 3ly, ibid.
That none who came to worship there should use a Scrip, or bag purse, or come
with Money tied up in a purse, or come into the Temple till they had wiped the
dust off from their Feet, to teach them to shake off all Worldly Thoughts, and
all Encumbrances when they came to worship. 4ly, p. 118. 119.
That none must spit in the Temple, nor use an irreverent Gesture there, but go
gravely to the place where they were to stand, and there continue, not sitting,
leaning, lying, but standing only, because that was a Praying Posture. Now had
not Christ submitted to these Customs we cannot rationally think he would have
found so free an entrance into the Temple, as he did, and they would have been
ready to retort upon him, when he censured their Irreverence toward this House
of Prayer, that he also, by his neglect of these Particulars, was guilty of as
great Irreverence, had he not put off his She Is, as even Kings were wont to do
when they came thither for to Worship; they would have made this an exception
against him, that he refused to do what even Kings, and Priests, and Prophets
did; for that this very Ceremony was used in our Saviors time, we learn from
that of the Poet, Exercent ubi festa mero pede Sabbatha Reges, and from that
appellation given to their Sacred Service, that they were Nudipedalia Sacra, or
Barefooted Solemnities. And it deserves to be observed that Christ not only did
not charge the Rulers of the Jewish Church with Superstition in these Matters,
but he himself, in Reverence to that Place of Worship, would not suffer that
any man should carry any vessel through the Temple. Mark 11.16.

Christ was a Reader in their Synagogue, and oftentimes a Preacher too, it may
deserve to be considered that he did readily comply with the Rules prescribed
by the Sanhedrin, or those who sat in Moses Chair, to be observed by those who
should perform the foresaid Offices, Leightf. Harm. part. 3. p. 125.
as v. g. the Reader by their Canons is bound to stand, in Honor of the Law.
Accordingly the Scripture does expressly say that as his Custom was, Luke 4, 16.
Christ went into the Synagogue on the Sabbath Day, and stood up for to read.
ibid. p. 138.
It also was the Custom of the Teacher to sit down when he instructed others,
and sutably the Scripture says that our Savior closed the Book and sat down,
v. 20. Yea throughout all the Gospel we never find that he taught the people
standing, but on the contrary that he continually used the sitting posture, as
v. g. in his Sermon on the Mount, seeing the multitude he went up into a
Mountain, and when he was set, Matt. 5, 1.2.
he opened his Mouth, and taught them; when he taught them out of a Ship, Matt.
13, 2.
he sat and spoke to them in Parables, says Matthew; he sat in the Sea and
taught them, says St. Mark; Mark. 4, 1.
he sat down and taught the people out of the Ship, says Luke; Luke 5, 1.
Joh. 8, 2.
when all the People came unto him in the Temple, he sat down and taught them;
this was his constant Custom in that place, as he takes care to let us know,
saying I sat daily with you teaching in the Temple; Matt. 26, 55.
so far was Christ from scrupling the observation of this Custom, and
Institution of the Rulers of the Jewish Church.

Lord thrice celebrated the Paschal Feast, with his Disciples, besides his
constant Celebration of it with his Parents whilst he continued with them; and
in this Celebration of it, it may deserve to be considered, 1. That our Lord
did not observe the Passover in all its Circumstances according to the
Primitive Institution of the Law of Moses. For 1. Exodus 12, 3.6.
Whereas the Institution expressly does require that every man should take up
the Paschal-Lamb on the 10th. day, and keep it up till the 14th. day of the
same month, the Jewish Doctors taught that this was not required of the future
Generations after, Leightf. Temp. Serve. p. 127.
nor was it done but at the Passover in Egypt only, at least it was not done
by the Masters of Families, but by the Priests in our Saviors time, who
provided Lambs for the people, taking them up in the Market four days before,
as Dr. Leightfoot does conjecture. Now albeit there is no evidence in the Text
that this Command was only to be observed at the First Passover, yet does our
Lord comply with the then current Custom, preparing not the Paschal-Lamb until
the 14th day, for as St. Luke expressly says, when the days of unleavened Bread
were come, Christ sent Peter and John, Luke 22, 7.8.
saying, Go and prepare us the Passover. 2ly, Whereas the Institution plainly
says, Thus shall you eat it with your Loins girded, Exodus 12, 11.
your Shoes on your Feet, and your Staff in your Hand, and ye shall eat it in
haste, the Hebrew Doctors teach that this manner of eating was peculiar to the
first Passover in Egypt, Ainsw. in locum.
nor were the Generations following bound to these Rites, when they were come
to their Rest in Canaan: And they appointed, in lieu of it, that they should
sit, or rather lie down, leaning on their left Elbow, in sign of their Rest and
Security. They used this leaning posture as Freemen do in Memorial of their
Freedom, Leightf. Temp. Serve. p. 143. 144.
and R. Levi said, because it is the manner of Servants to eat standing,
therefore now they eat sitting, and leaning, to show that they were got out of
Servitude into Freedom. And again, In every Generation a man is bound to behave
himself at the Passover as if he himself had been delivered out of the Bondage
of Egypt, and therefore at meat that night a man is bound, to eat, and to
drink, and to sit in a posture of Freedom; accordingly they laid their legs
under them, sitting upon them, and their feet lying out behind, removing, and
acquitting their legs and feet, as far as possible, from the least show of
standing to attend, or readiness to go upon any ones Employment which might
carry the least color of Servitude, or contrariety to Freedom with it; and yet
to this significant Ceremony added unto the Institution, and imposed as
necessary, our Lord and his Disciples did submit, ibid. p. 142.
For 1. says Ainsworth, They stood not girded with Staves in their Hands, but
sat or rather lay down, leaning one on another Breast as was then the Jewish
manner. (...).
For he lay down with the Twelve, says Matthew; Matt. 26, 20. (...). Luke
22.14. (...). Mark. 14, 18.
he fell down upon his legs, and the Twelve with him, says St. Luke; they lay
along and did eat, says Mark; so punctually do they all relate our Lords
compliance with this Ceremony. Moreover 2ly. our Lord complied with those
additions which they had made unto this Sacrament. And 1. they used, says
Ainsworth a thick Sauce, Exodus 12, 8.
like to Mustard, which they called Charoseth, in Memory of that thick Clay
they made in Egypt for their Bricks; and this is thought by some to be that in
which Christ dipped the sop he gave to Judas, And when our Savior said that
one of them who dipped with him in the dish should betray him, he spoke of the
unleavened Bread and bitter Herbs which they dipped in the thick Sauce, ibid. p.
150. p. 146.
called Charoseth, says Dr. Leightfoot, (2.) Together with the Paschal-Lamb,
they used to drink Wine; every one both Men and Women, says their tradition,
is bound to drink that night four cups of Wine without fail, and this they did
because it was a Feast of Joy, at which times it was usual to drink Wine, Numb.
15.5. and because they were then commanded to rejoice before the Lord, Deuteronomy.
16, 11, 14. Now albeit we find not in the Institution any Command for drinking
Wine at the Passover, yet did our Lord comply with this addition to the
Institution as is apparent from his saying, before the Institution of the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper, I will no more drink of the fruit of the Vine,
etc. Luke 22, 18.
Moreover of these four cups the third especially was called the Cup of
Blessing, because the Officiator gave thanks over it, and then gave it to be
drunk among them; accordingly our Savior took the Cup, that is, says
Leightfoot, this Cup of Blessing, and having given thanks he said, Take it and
divide it among you, Luke 22, 17.
And tho this drinking Wine, and the Breaking of the unleavened Cake, which was
another Ceremony they used at this time, were both of them things not
commanded, yet did our Lord translate these things into a Gospel Sacrament, and
thereby show his Approbation of them as things at least in their own Natures
innocent. Leightf. Temp. serve. p. 150. Matt. 26.30.
And as it was the Custom of the Jews to close this Supper with a Hymn, or
Hallel, so did our Blessed Lord and his Disciples. In a word that he complied
with the Customs then usual in Celebration of this Sacrament may very probably
be argued from this consideration that he did eat it with his Parents, who
doubtless did observe the Jewish Customs in preparing, and partaking of it, and
that he spoke to his Disciples to prepare the Passover; for Scripture does
inform us, that even after the Resurrection of our Lord, they still continued
zealous for the Customs, and the Traditions of their Nation, and would not vary
from them without his special Order.

Passover with his Disciples, and one of them was a Devil, it seems to follow
that he would not refuse Communion with those who did profess Religion, by
reason of their want of inward Piety. It well deserves to be observed that
Satan entered into Judas before the Passover, for so the Scripture does inform
us, saying, Luc. 22, 3. Then entered Satan into Judas, and he consulted with the
Chief, Priests, and Scribes, and after that it follows, v. 7. Then were the
days of unleavened Bread. Moreover St. John assures us that the Supper
mentioned John 13th. Joh. 13, 1.
in which the Devil entered into Judas was (...), before the Paschal Feast, and
when at his Departure our Savior said unto him, what thou do do quickly;
his Disciples thought that he had said unto him, make preparations for the
Feast, v. 29.
which is a certain evidence that then the Feast was not begun, much less
concluded.

Moreover our Savior did admit this Judas to the participation of the Holy
Sacrament; this is apparent from Luke 22. v. 20, 21. for when our Lord had
said, taking the Sacramental Cup, This Cup is the New Testament in my Blood,
immediately he adds, Behold the hand of him that betrayeth me is with me on the
Table, since therefore Judas was the person by whom he was betrayed, the Hand
of Judas must be with him on the Table, when he delivered that Cup of which he
also said, Drink ye all of this. St. Matthew also does inform us Matt. 26, 20.
that when the Evening was come, Christ sat down with the Twelve; and when
enquiry was made among these Twelve which of them should betray him, Judas
particularly asks, Master is it I? v. 25. Now as these Twelve were eating
Jesus took Bread and brake it, and gave it (...) to these Twelve Disciples, and
said to them, Take, eat, this is my Body, v. 26. He also took the Cup, and gave
it to the same Persons, saying, Drink ye all of this, he therefore said to
Judas, Eat, this is my Body, and bad him drink the Sacramental Cup.

It Is said indeed, Joh. 13, 30. that Judas having received the Sop, went
immediately out, but then, as I have showed, Christ did not celebrate the
Passover, but another ordinary Supper before the Passover, v. 1. Before their
preparation for the Passover. v. 29. which Dr. Leightfoot farther proves, In
locum.
because it was not lawful for any Person to depart from that Solemnity, before
the whole Solemnity was ended.

Matt. 17, 25.26. Where 1. observe, The Tribute here demanded was not the
Tribute paid to the R. Emperors, but the half Sickle yearly paid by the Jewish
Nation to repair the Temple, and buy things useful for the Service of it, as
the most skilful Commentators on the place conclude. vid. Leightf. in locum.
2ly, Observe, The Scandal which our Lord was here concerned to avoid, was not
a Scandal given by himself, but one that might be taken without ground by them,
who hence unduly might conclude, that Christ and his Disciples did contemn the
Temple, and so the Efficacy of his Doctrine might through that Scandal be
obstructed, he then by this Example does instruct us to submit unto those
things which our Superiors may require, or expect from us, even without
sufficient ground, when our Refusal of Submission to them may be cause of
Scandal, or make them think we are Contemners of Authority, or disobedient to
those God has enjoined us to obey, and much more must this be our duty when
our Divisions and Contests about such Matters do bring a Scandal on the
Christian Faith, and we thereby, in opposition to St. Paul's injunction, do give
Offense not only to the Jew, and Gentile, but to the Church of God. And this
Example seems also as effectually to prove that the Dispensors of the Gospel
should be careful not to do any thing, if it be in their power to avoid it,
which may give Scandal unto others, or cause them to judge evil of them.

9ly, Our Lords Commands were suitable to his Practice, and he enjoined to
others, what he himself performed. For (1.) our Savior enjoined the Leper that
was cleansed to show himself to the Priest, Matt. 8, 4. See Harm. part. 3. p.
205.
and offer the Gift that Moses had commanded. Where it deserves to be
considered that although the Priesthood was much degenerated, both from its
Institution, and its Office, yet Christ did not think fit on that account to
advise any to a Separation from them, or to renounce their Priesthood, but
would have all men to repair unto them for the Performance of those Offices
which by the Law of Moses were to be performed by the Priests, and to offer by
his hands their Gift. And yet it is observable that they to whom Christ sent
this Man, had added to the Institution many idle Customs to be performed by the
cleansed Leper, as you may see in Dr. Leightfoots Notes upon Matt. 8, 4.
Moreover in that very Chapter where our Lord gives such opprobrious Titles to
the Scribes and Pharisees, lest that should tempt the multitude, or any of his
own Disciples to neglect Communion with them in hearing of the Word, and other
Ordinances of like Nature, our Savior, in the Preface of that Chapter, speaks
thus unto the multitude, and to his own Disciples, Matt. 23.2, 3.
The Scribes and Pharisees sit in Moses Seat, all therefore whatsoever they bid
you observe, that observe and do. Where 1. observe who were these Scribes and
Pharisees, they were not always of the Order of the Priests and Levites, for
St. Paul tells us that he was a Pharisee, and the Son of a Pharisee. Act. 23.6.
Philip. 3, 5. In Matt. 2. v. 4. p. 29.
And yet that he was of the Tribe of Benjamin. And Matthew speaks of Scribes of
the People who were, says Dr. Leightfoot, Elders of the Sanhedrin, who were
not of the order either of Priests or Levites, but were of other Tribes, now
albeit none of these men did ever take upon them to be Instructers of the
People without an Ordination to that Office, Harm. part. 3. p. 122.
as is well noted by that Learned Man, yet may it seem that they could have no
just and proper call to be Instructors of the People, this being the peculiar
Office of the Priests. Mal. 2, 7.
For the Priests Lips should keep Knowledge, says the Prophet Malachi, and the
people should seek the Law at his Mouth, for he is the Messenger of the Lord of
Hosts. And yet these Scribes and Pharisees were Public Teachers in their
Schools, and Synagogues, and by this they obtained the Name of Rabbis and
Teachers of the Law. 2ly, Observe, that by the Law of Moses nothing is
determined touching the Office, the Authority, the manner of Admission of these
Scribes of the people, but their whole Function seems to depend upon the
Churches Constitutions made for Edification, or the Instruction of the People.
And thus it also was with those Ministers, and Rulers of their Synagogues who
were not of the Sacerdotal Order, or of the House of Levi, for of their Office
or Admission to it we can find nothing in the Books of Moses, or in the
Writings of the Prophets, and yet these Men received Admission to teach or
exercise their Function by Ordination, say Mr. Seldom, and Dr. Leightfoot, and
learned Men are of Opinion that Christ and his Disciples so far approved of
them as to institute the Governors of his Church according to the Platform of
the Synagogue. Leights. Harm. part. 3. p. 120.
3ly, Some think our Lord here speaks of the Scribes and Pharisees as being
then their Legal Magistrates, or signifying the whole Jewish Sanhedrin and
their Authority; so Dr. Leightfoot, In locum.
and so the Reverend and Learned Dr. Hammond, and so they make the import of
the Precept to be this: The Scribes and Pharisees, those that are of the
Sanhedrin, are by you to be looked on as your lawful Rulers, that have
Authority over you, succeeding Moses and the seventy Elders, and therefore do
you live in Obedience to all their lawful Commands, and in all Regular
Subjection to them. But I suspect this Exposition on these two accounts. 1.
Because our Savior makes mention only of the Scribes and Pharisees, whereas
the Sadduces were also Members of the Sanhedrin, and were then numerous and
powerful in that Assembly, as we may find, Act. 4.1.5.17. and so there is no
Reason to conceive the Scribes and Pharisees should signify that whole
Assembly. 2ly, Throughout the whole N. Testament, where ever this great
Assembly is spoken of, the Chief Priests, Elders, and Rulers are reckoned as a
part thereof, as you may see Matt. 2.4. 16.21. 21.23. 26.47, 59. 27.1, 12, 20,
41. Mark 11.18. Luke 24, 20. Joh. 7.32, 45. Act. 4.5, 6, 23.5.17, 24. here
therefore being not one word of Chief Priest, Elders or Rulers of the Jews, it
cannot rationally be conceived that Christ here speaks of the great Sanhedrin.

Wherefore the Scribes and Pharisees must signify the Doctors, or Public
Teachers, and Expounders of the Law of Moses to the people. Accordingly we, in
the following Verses find that they are called (...) Guides, v. 10. (...),
Teachers, v. 8. (...), Leaders, v. 16, 24. are said to have the Key of the
Kingdom of Heaven, and to shut it up against Men, v. 13. Luke 11, 52. to bind
heavy Burdens on others by their Teaching, v. 4, and misinterpret the Law of
Moses, v. 16, 22. Lastly we find them sitting in the Temple to resolve
Questions of the Law, Luke 2.46. Their sitting therefore in the Chair of Moses
must import their Teaching and Expounding of his Law.

3ly, Observe the thing commanded, viz. to observe and do all that they did
command, together with the reason of it, viz. because they were the Authorized
Teachers and Expounders of the Law of Moses, they sit in Moses Chair, (...),
therefore whatever they command observe and do. Where the Words, all things,
are not to be restrained to such things only as were contained clearly in the
Law of Moses, and taught the people from the clear Letter of that Law, for this
ascribes to them no more Authority then any other private Jew might challenge,
who sat not in the Chair of Moses, since what they clearly proved from this
Law, was to be done by all that owned the Jewish Faith; moreover there were
many things which by the Law were not sufficiently determined, as v. g. the
length of a Sabbath Days journey, the tything of their pot herbs, etc. and yet
these things were fit to be determined that the people might be at some
certainty concerning them, and therefore in such cases our Lord may rationally
be supposed to command obedience to their Constitutions. And 3ly, from the
fourth verse we may learn that even when their heavy Burdens, and Grievous to
be born, were bound upon inferiors, they were obliged, if they were not sinful,
to submit unto them, for they being in the number of the things commanded by
them what could exempt inferiors from doing and observing them according to our
Lords Command, if they were lawful to be done. Wherefore, in cases of like
Nature, all Christian people ought to observe and do what is commanded and
established by Ecclesiastical Superiors, to whom the Office of Teaching and
Interpreting the Laws of Christ is legally committed, tho their Commands prove
sometimes heavy Burdens, and Grievous to be born, provided that they be not
sinful, that is, forbidden by that Law which they are Authorized to expound and
teach. And thus I have produced the Practice and Injunctions of our Lord. Now
to apply them to my purpose, hence I infer,

That corruptions allowed, taught, I^^. 1.
and practiced in a Church, if are no sufficient grounds of Separation from the
Communion of that Church, provided that the Members of it be not required, as a
Condition of Communion with them, to do, teach, practice them, or to prosess
that they are not corruptions. Our Savior and his Disciples acted as Members
of the Jewish Church, albeit great, and manifold corruptions were allowed,
taught, and practiced by the Ruling Members of it; as v. g. they had made
false, imperfect, and corrupt Glosses on the Law, Matt. 5.
had made false Rules touching the observation of the Sabbath, and such as were
repugnant to that Precept or Declaration of the God of Heaven, I will have
Mercy and not Sacrifice, they taught false Doctrines about Oaths, Matt.
5.23.16.22.
which made them who did practice according to their teaching Guilty of evil
speaking, and false swearing. They transgressed, Matt. 15.3, 6.
and made the Commandments of God of none effect by their Tradition. They laid
aside the Commandments of God for their Traditions, Mark 7.8. they worshipped
God in vain, teaching for Doctrines the Commandments of Men, Ibid. v. 9.
and many things of a like Nature they held. They by their Merchandise had made
Gods House of Prayer a Den of Thieves, Matt. 21, 13.
And lastly among them their Rulers, and Church Officers were Sadduces, Matt.
16.11.
and upon these accounts, Christ cautioned his Disciples against the Doctrine
of the Sadduces and Pharisees, advised the people to beware of the Scribes and
Pharisees, Mark 13.35.
and to take good heed what they heard: But then both he, and his Disciples met
with these Scribes, Pharisees, and Sadduces in the same Temple, joined in the
same Prayers, (unless our Savior was daily in the Temple, but never went to
public Prayers) and in the same Solemnities, not separating themselves or
setting up any more pure Communion, nor calling the multitude to separate from
the Assemblies of these Men, or to come out from among them, and to renounce
Communion with them, on the account of their erroneous Doctrines, those
Grievous Burdens which they did impose, those many Rites and Ceremonies which
they had added to the Law of Moses. But on the contrary, he carefully commands
the Leper to repair unto them, and consequently to submit unto the Ceremonies,
concerning his Purification, which they had added to the Law in that
particular, and charge both the multitude, and his own Disciples to submit to
all their lawful Constitutions, and Injunctions. Moreover Christ was a Member
of the Synagogue at Nazareth, Matt. 13.56, 58 Luke 4.29.
as we have showed already, and yet what kind of men they were we may learn
from their stupendous Infidelity, their Proneness to take Offense at Christ,
and their attempt to cast him down a Precipice. I see not what in the World,
Harm. part. 3. p. 123.124.
says Dr. Leightfoot, our Separatists, who withdraw from the public Worship
in our Congregations, can say to these Examples. For, was not their public
Worship in the Temple, and in their Synagogues, as corrupt as ours is pretended
to be in our Congregations? was not the people of Nazareth as corrupt a people
as most Congregations now are? and yet, says he, in all the Scripture we find
not that either any that were Holy indeed, or any that took upon them to be
Holy, no nor he that was Holiness it self, did separate, or withdraw from the
Service of the Congregation, tho it is apparent that they had all the plausible
pretenses which have prevailed on our Dissenting Laity to make an Actual
Separation, to move them so to do. Inf. 2.. 12.


Hence it will also follow, that great Corruptions in the Lives of our
Church-Pastors will not warrant our separation from Communion with them, or our
Refusal to attend upon their Teaching, provided we be not enjoined to allow of,
or to comply with them in their sins. Our Savior sent the Leper to the Priest,
to offer by his Hands the accustomed Sacrifices, although the Priesthood then was
much degenerated both in its Office, and in the manners of those who ministered
at the Altar, we find that Christ himself was present at their solemn Feasts,
and therefore did not come empty, which the Law forbad, but brought his
Sacrifice, and by so doing owned their Priesthood, he was a Member of a
Synagogue, and so he joined in the Service of their Synagogues upon the
Sabbath, and upon other Solemn Days, and yet their own Josephus tells us, that
the whole Jewish Nation were then a very wicked people; they were, says truth
it self, an Evil, Wicked, and Adulterous Generation. The Teachers, and the
Rulers of the Church, whom Christ commands the multitude, and his Disciples to
obey in all things lawful, Matt. 2.7.12.34. Matt. 5.19. Matt. 6.23.7, 8. Matt.
12.14. v. 24.
were a Generation of Vipers, they were such whose Righteousness could not
qualify any Person for the Kingdom of God. They were Hypocritical, and
Vainglorious in their Prayers, Alms, and Fastings. They consulted how they
might destroy the Savior of the World. They were many of them guilty of
Blasphemy against the Holy Ghost. Matt. 23, 13. v. 14. v. 15. v. 23.
They shut up the Kingdom of Heaven against Men. They devoured Widows Houses
out of pretense of Piety. They made their Prosclytes ten times more the
Children of the Devil then themselves. They neglected the more weighty Matters
of the Law. They were full of Extortion, Covetousness, Excess. And yet from the
Communion of such Men our Lord himself and his Disciples did not separate in
matters which concerned Gods Public Worship, he called none to come out from
them and be separate, but rather countenanced their hearing of them with
Caution and Discretion, which shows how groundless, and unwarrantable a thing
it is to separate from our Legal Pastors upon these accounts.

Hence 3ly, Inf. 3.. 13.
we infer that it is lawful to comply with such Churches as enjoin some
significant Ceremonies not mentioned in the Word of God, and for the sake of
Peace, Order, Unity, and the avoiding of Scandal, to submit unto them, when by
Authority they are imposed, for this we find our Savior, and his Apostles did,
he ate the Passover prepared according to the Custom of the Jews, and so he did
partake of that thick Sauce, which signified the thick Clay which they in
Egypt formed into Brick, he ate the Passover in such a Posture as was used by
the Jews to signify their Rest, and their Security in the Good Land of Canaan;
He, when he went into the Temple, did put off his Shoes, although that Ceremony
was used to signify their Reverence toward the Temple, or to that God who dwelt
in it, he did not go into the Temple with a Staff or Scrip, but did comply with
all the Ceremonies enjoined by the Jewish Sanhedrin to those who daily came
unto it. He, when he read the Law, stood up, as was enjoined by the Jews in
honor of the Law, and when he taught the people, he constantly sat down
according to the Custom which had then obtained. The Imposition of hands in
their ordinary Benediction was a significant Ceremony, Mark 10.16.
it noted properly the Efficacy of the Divine Blessing; the Hand being the
instrument of Force and Vigor, it was done also in Testimony of Gods Favor to
them, and yet that Ceremony was by our Lord observed in his Benediction of the
little Children which were brought to him, tho it was not commanded in the Law
of Moses. Inf. 4.. 14.


Hence 4ly, we infer that it is not unlawful to use a public Form of Prayer,
and that the using of such Forms can be no sinful s^in^^^^g of the Spirit. For
our Lord scrupled not the Time, the Number, the Form, the Matter of the Jewish
Prayers; both he, and his Disciples were present at the 18 Prayers used in the
public Service of the Jews; And he himself prescribed a Form of Prayer to be
used by his Disciples; He therefore did not think that his own Spirit was
stinted by using of a Form, or that he stinted the Spirit of his own Disciples
by prescribing of it, and yet Christ, and his own Disciples when they attended
on these Prayers had a more plentiful Effusion of the Holy Spirit, then we can
pretend to.

Hence also we conclude that we stand not obliged in all Punctilios of Time,
Inf. 5.. 15.
or Place, or Gesture, to follow the Example of the first Institution of the H.
Sacrament of the Lords Supper; For albeit a standing Posture was prescribed at
the first Institution of the Passover, and every Master of a Family, by the
same Institution, was to keep up his Lamb four days before the Passover, yet
Christ complied with the Custom of the Jewish Church, which, for prudential
Reasons, laid aside, or changed these Customs. Even so, although Christ celebrated
the Sacrament after Supper, and albeit he did it in a posture of Recumbency, we
do not stand obliged to conform unto these Circumstances, they being done upon
such grounds as do not now remain, for we have now no Paschal Supper to be
eaten before the Sacrament, nor is it the Custom of our Nations to lie down on
Couches when we eat, nor have we any cause to do it in token of our Rest in
Canaan. And if we are obliged to use that very Gesture which our Savior did,
why are we not as much obliged to the same time; I mean not only after Supper,
but annually on the same Night in which our Savior was betrayed, why are we
not as much obliged to receive in the same place, viz. an Inn, or in an
Upper-chamber. And lastly tho it be unquestionable that in the Primitive
Institution Wine was mixed with Water, for so the Primitive Christians testify,
and so the Hebrew Custom and their Canons teach, and albeit this seems more fit
to represent that Water and that Blood which issued from our Saviors Side,
yet, because now it cease to be the Custom to drink Wine mixed with Water,
Laightf. Temp. Serve. p. 147.
few scruple to receive it without such a Mixture, and therefore, on like
grounds, and from our Saviors Aphorism, I will have Mercy and not Sacrifice, I
think we should not scruple to baptize by sprinkling, although our Lords Disciples
did baptize by dipping, and that more perfectly! does represent that Death of
Christ into which, says St. Paul, we are baptized, and the ensuing
Resurrection. Inf. 6.. 16.


Hence do we argue, That the Presence of wicked and ungodly Men should not
deter us from joining with the Church in the Participation of the Holy
Sacrament, because Christ did not scruple, as many Passovers as he participated
of, to eat with Judas, him he admitted to the Holy Sacrament, as being by
Profession one of his true Disciples, and one who had done nothing openly which
contradicted that Profession, although Christ knew that he was a covetous Wretch,
into whom Satan had already entered, and who would certainly betray him.

Hence also we infer, Inf. 7.. 17.
That we stand not obliged to refuse Communion with other Churches in their
Sacraments, and other public Offices, because of some additions to the
Institution which are imposed for the sake of Order, Uniformity, or Decency,
but are declared to be no parts, or necessary appendants to the Institution.
You see how many things the Jews had added to the Passover, the Wine, because
it was a Feast of Joy, the Benediction of the Cup before they drank it, the
Breaking the unleavened Cake, the Hymn, and yet our Savior did not scruple to
observe these things; And you may see in Dr. Leightfoots Service of the Temple,
how many Ceremonies they had added to the observance of the other Festivals, at
which our Lord and his Disciples were still present. And therefore on the same
account we need not scruple that ancient Ceremony of Crossing which we use in
Baptism, seeing our Church declares that she does not intend it as any part of
Baptism, or any necessary appendant of it, (on which account she does command
us to omit it in our private Baptisms) but only as a convenient Ceremony to
testify unto the Congregation that the baptized Person has Relation to the
Society of Christians, and stands obliged to maintain the Christian Faith. As
therefore, when the Children of Reuben and Gad had built themselves an Altar,
their Brethren were troubled at it, but when they understood it was not built
for Sacrifice, or in Rebellion, but to entitle themselves and their Posterity
to a Share in Gods public and solemn Worship; Josh. 22.16, 30, 31.
And to an Interest in his Tabernacle, and Altar, they were well pleased, and
declared their hearty Satisfaction; so would our Brethren consider that the
Cross in Baptism is enjoined not as a part, or necessary appendant of that
Ordinance, but only to be Ed, a Testimony to the Congregation that the baptized
Person had an Interest in the Society of Christians, and was obliged to
maintain, and own the Christian Faith, they would have equal reason to be well
pleased, and to declare their Satisfaction in the Matter.

Hence it is evident that our Dissenters have no just cause to fear, Inf. 8..
18.
or plead for the Refusal of Submission to the Constitutions of our Church, and
of Communion with us, that by Communicating they should approve of the imposing
of these things, and should partake with them in that supposed sin, or
countenance them in the imposing of those Grievous Burdens, as they do esteem
them; for our Dear Lord, you see, submitted to the Constitutions of the Jewish
Church, and enjoined others so to do, and yet, I hope, they will not say that
he approved or countenanced their heavy Burdens, or partook with them in their
sins; were then the Impositions of the Church of England such as they imagine
them to be, they could have no just cause to fear that their Submission to them
would derive this guilt upon them.

CHAP. II. The CONTENTS.
Corol. 1. That the Scriptures of the Old Testament cannot prohibit this
Submission: The Objections answered. Obj. 1. Thou shall not add unto the Word
that I command you, Deuteronomy. 4, 2. Deuteronomy. 12, 32. Answ. 1. That these Words do as
much prove that our Superiors may make no Laws about civil, as about Sacred
Matters. 2ly, That the Dissenters are as much condemned by them as the Church
of England, because they also do use many uncommanded Ceremonies. 3ly, The Jews
themselves never conceived that by these Precepts they were restrained from
Instituting, upon occasion, sacred rites, as is proved by many Instances. 4ly,
To add unto the Word of God is only to avouch such things as the Commandment or
Word of God which he has not commanded. 5ly, Hence it follows that the
Dissenters do transgress this Precept,. 1. Obj. the 2d. That God in Scripture
declares that he abhorrs that way of Worship, which he has not commanded.
Answ. 1. That this Objection is impertinent, as only proving what we deny not.
2ly, That it condemns the Dissenters. 3ly, Not to command is in the places
cited to forbid,. 2. Obj. 3d. That the 2d. Commandment forbids the likeness of
any thing to be made for religious use, and-so forbids the use of significant
Ceremonies of men's devising. Answ. The 2d. Commandment only forbids the making
any Likeness to be the Object of religious Worship or Veneration,. 3.

A 2d. Corol. From the Example of our Lord and his Apostles,. 4. Obj. 4th. From
Christ's Rejecting the Traditions of the Scribes and Pharisees. Answ. 1. That
our Savior only rejects such Traditions as were taught for Doctrines, or
held equal to the written Word of God: Particularly their holding these
Washings to be necessary to avoid that Defilement which would render them
displeasing or unacceptable unto God 3ly. This Text rather condemns them who
hold that indifferent Ceremonies may not be submitted to in obedience to
Superiors as teaching for Doctrins the Commandments of Men,. 4.

CHAP. II.
FRom what has been discoursed it clearly follows that all those Texts of
Scripture, Corol.
and all those Reasons which Dissenters offer from the Old Testament, to prove
it is a thing unlawful to use, or to submit unto the Ceremonies appointed by
our Church, and that they are forbidden by those Texts to use them, must be
mere fallacies and sophisms, seeing our Savior, who doubtless was acquainted
with the true Sense and Import of them, did submit unto the use of Ceremonies
of a like Nature to them, when by the Rulers of the Jewish Church they were
imposed and prescribed. And tho this instance is a sufficient Answer to all
that is, or can be urged from the Old Testament, against Submission to the
Ceremonies, imposed by the Church of England, yet, for the farther Satisfaction
of our Dissenting Brethren, I shall particularly answer all that they have
hitherto produced with any show of Reason to this purpose. Which was the second
head proposed to be spoken to. And

Scripture has commanded that nothing should be added to what he had enjoined
in his Worship; to this effect they cite these Words, Deuteronomy. 4.2. Ye shall not
add unto the Word which I command you, neither shall you diminish from it, that
you may keep the Commandments of your God which I command you. And Deuteronomy. 12,
32. What thing soever I command you observe to do it, thou shall not add
thereto, or diminish from it; Hence they infer that no humane Ceremonies, or
Circumstances of men's devising must be added to what God has commanded in his
Gospel Worship.

Superiors may add no Laws to the Laws made by God concerning Civil Matters,
as that they may make no Laws for Regulation of, or ordering any Circumstances
of Religious Worship, that is, they are as good Objections against our
Statute-Book, as against our Lyturgy. The reason is, because these words are
neither in the 4th, nor the 12th Chapter, restrained to Acts of Divine Worship,
but are expressly spoken of all the Statutes, and Judgments which the Lord had
taught them, v. 1. of whatsoever thing God had commanded, Deuteronomy. 12.32.

Ceremonies used in the Church of England are condemned, then also must the
Dissenters from the Church of England be condemned by them, for they do many
things, and they use many Ceremonies in Religious Worship, which are no where
commanded, they sing in stinted Meeter, for which they have no Precept or
Example in the Word of God, they have a Directory for public Worship
containing many precepts or directions no where prescribed in that Word, they,
when they take an Oath, do not refuse to lay their hands upon, and kiss the
Book; now all agree that Oaths are Solemn Acts of Divine Worship, and know that
God no where Commanded these Ceremonial additions to it. Moreover when they
imposed the Solemn league and Covenant, they ordered that it should be taken by
the whole Congregation, 1st. uncovered, 2ly, standing, Ordin. of the 2 of Febr.
1643.
and 3ly, with their right hand lift up and bare, now if they, notwithstanding
the Texts in the objection mentioned, might add three uncommanded Ceremonies
unto the taking of an Oath, which is a Solemn Act of Divine Worship, what
hinders but that Superiors may do the like in other parts of Divine Worship.

Jews themselves never conceived that by these precepts they were restrained
from instituting, upon occasion, sacred Rites, or doing many things which
circumstantially belonged to Gods Worship, for which they had no special
Warrant from the Word of God, and if we do offend against these Rules, by using
our Ceremonies in Gods Service, even the best and wisest of the Jews did
equally offend. For what command had Solomon to keep a Feast of Seven days for
Dedication of the Temple, 1 Kings 8.65. what Command had he for hallowing the
middle part of the Court that was before the House of the Lord, to offer Burnt
offerings, Meat offerings, and Peace offerings there, v. 64. Dr. Ames indeed
says that Solomon did this by Divine Authority, Fresh suit.. 17 etc. p 33^.
and instinct of the Holy Ghost; to which vain imagination I return the Answer
of Agar, add thou not unto his Words, lest thou be found a liar, Prove. 30.6.
The Holy Ghost has in two places given us a full relation of what King Solomon
did, but not one tittle of any instinct of the Holy Ghost commanding him to do
it, how then came Dr. Ames to know what no where is revealed, and what cannot
be known by any Man without a Revelation? Is it not wonderful that Men who will
believe nothing without express Scripture proof, and who so stiffly do contend
for the negative Argument from Scripture, should themselves thus add to
Scriptures. 2ly, What Warrant had good Hezekiah for continuing a Feast of
Unleavened Bread Seven days longer than the time appointed by the Law? 2 Chronicles.
30.23.
To this instance Dr. Ames Answers, that these Seven other days were not Holy
days at all of Institution properly so called, but an occasional continuation
of free will offerings for that time, Fr. Suit. p. 317.
which might be offered any day of the year without new Holy days. To this I
Answer:

1st. That were this so, it cannot be denied but that their observation of
other Seven days beside these which were appointed by the Law of Moses, was as
much adding to the Law of Moses, as the imposing of our Ceremonies can be
accounted adding to the Law of Christ.

2ly, When in the Text we read that they kept the Feast of Unleavened Bread
with greatgladness, v. 21, and v. 23. that the whole Assembly took Council, and
kept other Seven days with gladness, what reason can any person have to think
that the last Seven days, should not be Festival, or Holy days, as well as the
first Seven? and if they might take Council to keep those other Seven days, why
might they not have instituted the keeping of them, when they didobserve them?

And 3ly, What reason has Dr. Ames to affirm that they then only offered
Freewill offerings, rather than such which were accustomed to be offered at the
Feast of Unleavened Bread, and had been offered in the first Seven days of the
Solemnity? The descant of other Commentators on the place is this, viz. that
this was done not to change the ordinance of the Passover, but partly to
redeem their defect in not observing it for so many years, and partly to detain
the People of Israel the longer at Jerusalem, that, by the Preaching of the
Word, they might be the better informed, and confirmed in the true Religion,
whence the inference is plainly this, that upon such occasions, and for such
good ends it is commendable to do more than is required, provided nothing be
done against what is required.

3ly, Est. 9.20, 21, 22.
What Law had Mordecai and Esther for enjoining the yearly observation of the
Feast of Purim to stablish this among them, that they should keep the
fourteenth day of the month Adar, and the fifteenth day of the same yearly, as
the days wherein the Jews rested from their Enemies and the month which was
turned to them from sorrow to joy, and from mourning into a good day, that they
should make them days of Feasting and joy, and of sending portions one to
another, and gifts to the poor? Dr. Ames says here again that if any
significant ceremony was here instituted, it was by divine direction, p. 317.
tho neither Scripture, nor Josephus mention one tittle of the matter; and
adds, from Dr. Whitaker, that forasmuch as this Feast stands approved in
Scripture, there is no doubt but it was done by Divine Authority, tho we read
nothing of it in the Scripture. Which by the leave of that good Man is a plain
begging of the Question. 2ly, He adds that if Josephus may be believed, Joseph.
Antiq. Jud. l. XI. c. 6. p. 382.
the Heathen King Artaxerxes was the institutor of that Feast, and if so, I
hope Christian Kings may do as much; but this is a vile mistake, for in the
place cited by him it is expressly said, that Mordecai appointed it. p. 316.
3ly, He adds, that this was a political precept, and instituted no new
Religious thing, besides a circumstance of time. Answer, Then must our
Christian Festivals be so esteemed, and therefore ought not to be scrupled or
represented as Unlawful. 2ly, Was it not an addition to these Words of Moses,
These are the Feasts of the Lord even the Holy Convocations which ye shall
proclaim in their seasons. Lev. 23.4.
3ly. can any Man of reason think that a Command to Feast, and to Rejoice, give
Gifts unto the Poor, and to send portions one to another, is only an
institution of a circumstance of time, and that these were not ceremonies truly
significant of their internal joy, and their thanksgiving to the Author of this
great deliverance.

4ly, What Order or Command from God had Judas and his Brethren, 1 Maccab. 4.59.
with the whole Congregation of Israel, to ordain that the days of the
Dedication of the Altar should be kept in their season from year to year, for
the space of Eight days, from the Twenty fifth day of the Month Chisleu, with
Mirth and Gladness? And yet Josephus not only tells us that they did (...),
etc. Or make a Law that farther Generations should observe this Feast, but also
called it (...) or light, because such happiness shone forth upon them on that
day; Leight. Temple Service, p. 188.
and their own Rituals inform us that they did light up Candles in all their
Houses in signification of the same. And notwithstanding all these things our
Savior did not scruple to be present at this very Feast. Joh. 10.22.
Now to this instance Dr. Ames Answers as before, that they as Prophets were
led by extraordinary, and singular Revelation not to be exemplary therein to
us, p. 433.
not considering that Prophecy had ceased long before, and that neither
Josephus, nor the Book of Macchabees make any mention of this matter. 2ly. He
Answers that it has always been a Question, Ibid.
what Feast of Dedication this was? Whether that which was appointed by
Solomon, or in the time of Ezra, or that which was appointed by the Macchabees?
Answer, That it was that which by the Macchabees was instituted, is evident
beyond exception, 1. From the time when it was Celebrated, for the Text tells
us that it was then Winter; now the Feast of Dedication instituted by the
Macchabees was observed on the Twenty fifth day of the Month Chisleu, or
December, whereas that of Solomon was observed in Autumn in the Month Ethanim,
that of Ezra in the Spring on the Month Adar. 2. Esdr. 6.15.
We do not find in Scripture, or the Jewish Records, that there was any Annual
Feast appointed to Celebrate the first, or second Dedication of the Temple, but
for the Celebration of this third Dedication of it by the Macchabees, we find
express Command that it should still be kept from year to year. 3 He Answers
that we only read that Christ walked in Solomon's Porch at this Feast, p. 320.
which he might do without observing, or appoving of this Feast. Reply, (1.)
Christ knew this was the time when others did present themselves in that place
to observe this Feast, since then he also was present in the Temple at this
time, he did at least according to our Adversaries, give them occasion to think
he owned that Feast, and had Christ then come thither only to Preach, he did
more then Dissentors will do, who dare not Preach on Holy days to the People,
lest they should seem to countenance the observation of those days. 3ly, Our
Lord did not reprove them at that time for the observing of this Feast, whereas
had it been vain Worship, and teaching for Doctrines the Commandments of Men,
or had it been a violation of the Law of Moses, he who was Zealous for his
Fathers House, and did so round the Pharisees for these things, in this case
would not have neglected so to do. 4ly, He Answers, That after Christ had whipped
the Buyers and Sellers out of the Temple, they came in again, and continued
their Merchandise there, and yet in the mean space our Savior was often in the
Temple without allowance of that their Practice. Repl. (1.) It does not appear,
that Christ was present afterward when they used this trade, for it was
chiefly, if not only used at the Passover, that they who came up to that Feast
might be provided of Cattle without bringing them from home; now our Saviors
zeal against this Profanation of the Temple was showed at that time, John
2.13. Matt. leightf. in v. 5.
21.1. for he came to Jerusalem that very day that the Paschal Lamb was to be
taken up. 2ly, Christ might come into the Temple, and not come into that
separated place called (...) in which this Merchandise was kept, Leighef. ibid.
this being done in the Court of the Gentiles. 3ly, Christ having once declared
himself against this action at the beginning of his Office, his coming
afterward into the Temple where these things were done, could not be deemed an
allowance of them. Lastly, Our Savior expressed this Zeal again at the close
of his Office. Matt. 21.1.

5ly. The Altar of Witness built without Command, by the two Tribes and half,
when they went over Jordan to their own Possessions, Josh. 22.16, 31.
as a monumental profession of the true God, and of his Service, was approved
of. To this instance Dr. p. 327.
Ames Replies that he finds it not evident in the Text, that it was approved by
the High Priest, Princes, and all the Congregation of Israel. Repl. It is
expressly said, v. 30. that when Phinehas the Priest, and the Princes of the
Congregation, and heads of the thousands of Israel which were with him, heard
the Words that the Children of Reuben, and Gad, and of Manasseh had spoken, it
pleased them: or, as the Hebrew has it, it was good in their Eyes, and v. 31.
they say, This day we perceive that the Lord is amongst us, because ye have not
committed this trespass against the Lord, and he that cannot perceive in these
expressions an allowance of this fact, cannot see Wood for Trees. 2ly, We do
not find that God, who did continually quarrel with the Jews for Sacrificing in
the High Places, did ever show the least dislike of this Altar, or Command the
pulling of it down, which is sufficient evidence that God himself allowed of
it. 2ly, The Doctor adds that this Altar was not in state or use Religious as
the Cross is: Repl. p. 322.
As the Cross is used to testify to the Church, that the person signed with it
belongs to the Congregation of the Faithful, so was this Altar built to be a
Witness that they belonged to the Congregation of Israel, and had a portion in
the God of Israel, v. 27, 28. If then the Cross be in state and use Religious
upon that account, this Altar must be so. 3ly. p. 324.
The Doctor adds that it does not appear out of the Text, that there was
intended any use of this Altar for the present Age that then lived, and that
the contrary may be gathered out of the 24th and 25th verses. Which as it no
way does invalidate the Force of this Example, so is it very false, the Text
expressly declaring that the two Tribes made it to be a Witness betwixt them,
and those to whom they then spoke, as well as to the Generations after them, v.
28.

Lastly the wearing Sackcloth and Ashes in token of humiliation, Zech. 13.4.
Zech. 7.5.
the Prophets rough Garment, the Fast of the 5th month, because the Temple was
destroyed then; and of the 7th month, because then Gedaliah and many of the
Jews with him were slain, these things had no Appointment that we can find from
God, and yet were never scrupled by the Jews, or condemned by God, or by his
Holy Prophets. Moreover we find not in the Law of Moses any Direction that a
white Garment, or Linen Ephod should be made for any but the Priests, or used
by any others in Gods Worship, and that we find David dancing before the Lord
in a Linen Ephod, 2 Samuel 6.14.
and the Levites who carried the Ark clad in linen Roves, or in white Linen,
2 Chronicles. 5.12. Wherefore to answer positively to the Texts alleged;

Superiors, to whom obedience is due in lawful matters, they are at any time
prescribed, but it is to avouch such things as the Command and Word of God,
which he had not commanded, as the False Prophets did. This will be evident, 1.
If we consider, what it is to diminish from the Word; now that undoubtedly is
to neglect to do what God had in his Word commanded, under pretense that he
does not require it; We, In locum.
say the Assemblies Annotations, diminish from the Word by denying any part of
it to be of Divine Authority, or concealing any part of it either for Words or
Meaning, or by partial Belief of it, or Obedience to it; And therefore by the
Rule of Contraries, to add unto it must be to vouch that to be of Divine
Authority which is but humane, or to believe and yield obedience to that as the
Will of God which he has not enjoined. 2ly, This will be farther evident if we
compare these Passages with others of the like Nature in the Scripture, as v.
g. Add thou not to his Words, says Augur, Prove. 30.6.
lest thou be found a Liar, i. e. lest falsely pretending to deliver his Word,
when thou speak only thy own Inventions, thou be found guilty of a Lie,
whereas had men been guilty of adding to his Words by the Injunction of things
acknowledged to be indifferent in their own Nature, the Words should rather
have run thus, Add thou not to his Words, lest thou be found superstitious; And
Rev. 22, 18. to add unto these things, is v. 19. to add unto the Words of the
Book of that Prophecy. Obj. And whereas Mr. Disp. 5. of Cer. chap. 4.. 7.
Baxter says, That the Text does not say, Thou shall not add to my Command,
but, Thou shall not add to the thing that I command thee, and thence infers
that it is the Work, Worship, or Ordinances that we are forbidden to add to, or
to diminish from, and not the Word or Law is self only. Answ. 1. This is a
great mistake, for the Text plainly says, Thou shall not add unto the Word
that I command, Deuteronomy. 4.2. What I command thou shall observe to do, thou shall
not add unto it, Deuteronomy. 12.32. 2ly, From what is now discoursed it is evident
that we do not add to the Worship, or the Ordinances of God, by appointing
Ceremonies declared to be no parts of his Worship, or of his Ordinances, but
only by asserting and proposing such things as his Ordinances, and parts of his
Worship, which indeed are not so.

Cross, or joining in that Service which is performed by one that wears a
Supplice, etc. If they can show no Word of God which does forbid these things,
are themselves guilty of adding to the Word of God.

Old Testament, That God in Scripture declares, that he abominates that way of
Worship which he has not commanded, and, tho the thing performed in its own
Nature was abominable, God takes no notice of that, but chiefly reprehends it
because not commanded. To this effect they cite Lev. 10.1. where Nadab and
Abihu are condemned and punished for offering strange Fire which the Lord
commanded them not, Deuteronomy. 17.3. If there be found among you Manor Woman that
has wrought wickedness in the sight of the Lord thy God in transgressing his
Covenant, and has gone and served other Gods, and worshipped them, either the
Sun, or Moon, or any of the Host of Heaven which I have not commanded; -- Thou
shall stone them with stones, till they dye. Jer. 7.31. They have built the
High Places of Tophet to burn their Sons and their Daughters in the Fire, which
I commanded them not, neither came it into my Heart. Jer. 19.5. They have built
the High Places of Baal to burn their Sons with Fire for Burnt-offerings to
Baal, which I commanded not, nor spoke it, neither came it into my Mind. Now to
this weak Objection I answer,

Text, and Gloss upon it, or the Congregation to sing the Psalms of David in
Meter, where has he enjoined us to meet at ten of the Clock in the morning, or
two in the afternoon, for Public Worship on the Lords Days, to pray without a
Lyturgy or Form of Prayer? to pray before Sermon, to preach an hour, or in a
pulpit? etc. All these things therefore, and many more of the like Nature, by
this wild exposition of these Texts, must be abmination to the Lord. Hebrew
Phrase That I commanded them not, is only used in Scripture concerning things
which he forbad, or did command his people not to do, and upon that account by
good Interpreters is styled a Litotes, that is a Figure which in Words
diminishes the thing intended, as when a prohibition is intended by saying
such a thing is not commanded. This will appear from a perusal of the places
cited: For

1. The strange Fire which Nadab and Abihu offered was forbidden Fire, 'twas
Fire not taken from the Altar, to put into their Censers and burn Incense with,
Vid. Ainsw. in locum.
whereas God had commanded that Fire should be always burning on the Altar to
that very End. And if God had no where commanded whence they should take their
Fire to burn Incense, and offer Sacrifice withal, and yet would not allow them
to use that Fire which he had not commanded, it was not possible that they
should offer to him any Incense or Burnt-Offering which was not an abomination
to him. As for their Offering their Sons and Daughters unto Baal, or Moloch,
God most expressly did forbid it, saying, Lev. 18.21. Thou shall not let any of
thy Seed pass through the Fire to Moloch, that this was the abomination which
he hated, Deuteronomy. 12.31, 18, 10, 12. and that the Person guilty of it should be
stoned with stones, because he had defiled his Sanctuary, and profaned his Holy
Name, Levit. 20.2, 3. The Worship of other Gods, or of the Sun and Moon, and
Stars which God is said not to have commanded, is most expressly said to be
transgressing of his Covenant, Deuteronomy. 17.2, 3. And therefore it was doing that
which he forbid, so that the import of these Texts seems only to be this that
we must not perform in public Worship, or elsewhere, that which God has
forbidden, or has enjoined us not to do.

Which I commanded them not.

Heathen Nations, the Sun, Moon, Stars, and all the Host of Heaven, that is,
had left them to the Worship of them, Deuteronomy. 4, 19. winking at them in the times
of ignorance, he had taken the Jews to be a people of inheritance to himself,
v. 20. and therefore says unto them: I am the Lord your God, you shall have no
other Gods but me; wherefore for them to worship any of those Gods which he had
not commanded, or imparted to them, was virtually to renounce the true God, and
to transgress his Covenant, Deuteronomy. 29.25, 26.
and hence is that expression in the Book of Deuteronomy they have forsaken the
Covenant of the Lord God of their Fathers, which he made with them when he
brought them forth out of the Lord of Egypt, for they went and served other
Gods, and worshipped them, Gods which he had not given, or imparted to them.

Eccles. pol. l. 2.
Hooker has returned to this Objection, viz. That, because the Works of God
are perfect, and lack nothing for the performance of the thing to which they
tend, it follows that, the End being known to which God directs his Speech,
the Negative Argument is always strong and forcible concerning those things
that are apparently requisite to the same End; As v.g. The purpose of God was
to teach his people both to whom they should offer Sacrifice, and what
Sacrifice was to be offered; to burn their Sons in Fire to Baal, or Moloch, he
did not command them, he spoke no such thing, neither came it into his Mind,
therefore this they ought not to have done. For when the Lord had once set down
a precise Form of executing that in which we are to serve him, the Fault
appears greater to do that which we are not, than not to do that which we are
commanded; in this we seem to charge the Law of God with Hardness only, in that
with foolishness; in this we show our selves weak, and unapt to be Doers of his
Will, in that we take upon us to be Controulers of his Wisdom; in this we fail
to perform the thing which God sees Meet, Convenient, and Good, in that we
presume to see what is Meet and Convenient better than God himself; in those
actions therefore the whole Frame whereof God has on purpose set down to be
observed, we may not otherwise do than exactly as he has prescribed. Thus I
suppose the Force of this Objection is sufficiently assoiled.

Ames, and others, p. 298.299.
that the second Commandment forbids to make unto our selves the Likeness of
any thing whatsoever for religious use, and therefore forbids us to use
significant Ceremonies of man's devising.

Major of this Argument is false, for the second Commandment does only forbid
us to make any Likeness there mentioned, to be the Object of our Religious
Worship by bowing down unto, or worshipping it, the import of it being plainly
this: Thou shall not make any Resemblance, etc. by Picture, Sculpture or
Fusion, in Order to religious adoration, and yielding to them any such
signification of respect which the Custom or Consent of men has appropriated
to Religion, as bowing, falling down, lying prostrate before them, or the like.
That this is the true intent of this Precept is plain by the ground of this
prohibition delivered by Moses in these Words: Take ye therefore good heed to
your selves for you saw no manner of similitude on the day that the Lord spoke
to you in Horeb: Lest you corrupt, and make you a graven Image, Deuteronomy. 4.15, 16.
the similitude of any Figure, the Likeness of Male or Female, etc. 2ly, This
is apparent from the reason of the prohibition, I am a Jealous God, that is, a
God very tender of my Honor, and of my Right, who will by no means suffer any
Mate, or Competitor in respect to that outward Worship, which properly belongs
to me. I am the Lord, that is my Name, Esa. 42.8.
my Glory will I not give to another, neither my Praise to graven Images. For
who can, without blushing, say that God is robbed of the outward Worship due
unto him by our kneeling at the Sacrament, our using the surplice, or making
the sign of the Cross upon a Child's Forehead; whereas he himself tells us that
he is robbed of his Praise and Glory, by giving of Religious Worship unto
graven Images, it being only due unto that God to whom every Knee shall bow.
But, says Dr. Ames, p. 302.
The very Fantasies or Images of the mind not prescribed by God are by most
Interpreters held as well forbidden as outward Real Images. Answ. if so, the
most are not always the best Interpreters, there being nothing more absurd and
foolish than this Interpretation, never thought of by any of the Ancients, or
approved of by any but Dissenters. 2ly, If this be true I know not any thing
more forbidden by this Commandment than this Book of Dr. Ames, so full of
Fantasies of his own devising, that nothing can be more, all which undoubtedly
were intended by him for some religious use. Nay this very Interpretation is
forbidden here, it being certainly a Phantasy of the Mind without all ground
from the Commandment. Nay all our pious Books, our conceived Prayers, our
Method in composing Sermons, and an hundred things of like Nature will be here
prohibited. The Argument whereby the Dr. Labors to confirm this fond
intepretation is, p. 297.
that the Word likeness used in the second Commandment is General, and
comprehends under it all religious similitudes, because they are Homogeneal
to Images, they are expressly forbidden. Answ. The Foundation of this Argument
is a plain falsehood, for the Word Likeness is not General, but by the Text is
plainly, limited to Images, or Likenesses of Male or Female. Deuteronomy 4.16, 17, 18.
The Likeness of any Beast that is on the Earth; The Likeness of any winged
Fowl that flies in the Air; The Likeness of any thing that creeps on the
Ground; The Likeness of any Fish that is in the Waters. The Likeness which may
be seen is that which is forbidden, v. 15. It Is the Likeness of any thing in
Heaven above, or in the Earth beneath, or in the Waters under the Earth, Exodus
20.4. Dr. Ames goes on to Argue from the Affirmative part of the second
Commandment thus: p. 299.
This Commandment enjoins Obedience to all the Worship appointed by God, all
which was significative, for it served to the Example and Shadow of Heavenly
things, Heb. 8.5. Heb. 10.1. The Law having a Shadow of things to come:
Therefore it forbids any significative Ceremonies to be brought into the
Worship of God devised by man. Answ. to omit the Illogicalness of this
Argument, and the many terms in the conclusion which are not vertually
contained in the premises, which every fresh Man may perceive, I Answ. 1. That
it is falsely, or at least precariously affirmed that this Commandment enjoins
Obedience to all the Worship appointed by God. It is the first Commandment,
which commands us to have God for our God, that is, to give him all the
Internal Acts of Devotion, and the External Acts of Piety which are proper to
God, and are in Scripture signified by loving God with all our Hearts, by
fearing, worshipping, and serving him. The second Commandment does limit the
manner of exercising and expressing our Devotion to the true Object of it,
interdicting that mode which in the Practice of Ancient times had so generally
prevailed of representing the Deities, they apprehended to be such, in some
corporeal shape, and thereto yielding such expressions of respect as they
conceived suitable, and acceptable to such Deities. The Affirmative part of
this Precept seems therefore to be chiefly this: Thou shall give outward
Religious Worship by bowing, humbling of thy Body, or falling down to me. so
that our kneeling at the Sacrament, or bowing to the Lord Jesus, when we hear
his Sacred Name, which minds us of the great Blessings which he has procured
for us, and of the Honor due unto him for them, our bowing of the body to him
when we go into the place of Worship, is only doing what in the General is here
commanded, which if Dissenters well considered, they would see the vanity of
their Exceptions against those laudable Practices of the Church of England.
Farther the positive part of this Precept may imply that in our Devotions and
Religious Services of God we should raise our mind above gross Sense and
Fancy, that we should entertain high and worthy conceptions of God, that we
should apprehend him incomparably Superior to all things which we see and
know; in a word, that we should worship him in Spirit and in Truth; not as the
Samaritans, in the Image of a Dove, who therefore are said to worship they knew
not what, nor as the Jews by Types and Shadows of good things to come, and such
like Carnal Ordinances. In these two things seem fully to be comprised the
special positive Duty of this Commandment. Answ. 2. When Dr. Ames adds, that
all the worship appointed by God is here commanded, and that it was all
significative, and proves this from Hebr. 8.5. Hebr. 10.1. Which manifestly
speak only of Shadows of things to come, it clearly follows from his Argument
that all Worship of God is now abolished, and become unlawful, for all the
Worship spoken of, Hebr. 8.5. Hebr. 10.1. is clearly abolished, and rendered
unlawful to us by the appearance of the substance of which they were Types and
Shadows. 3ly, It Is certain that we owe Obedience to all the parts of Worship
appointed by God, significative, or not significative, but how does it hence
follow that significative Ceremonies which are declared to be no parts of Gods
Worship, but only accidental Circumstances, may not be required by men any more
than it will follow that because God has commanded Obedience to all the Honor
due to my Natural, Spiritual, and Civil Parents, and has commanded all the
Love I owe unto my Brother, that therefore I may use no expression of honor to
my Parents, or love unto my Christian Brother which he has not commanded? Thus
have I answered all that is considerable in Dr. Ames, on this Head, and all
that the Dissenters urge from the Old Testament against Submission to the
Ceremonies appointed to be used in the Church of England.

From this Example of our Lord and his Apostles it does also clearly follow,
Coroll. 2.
that those Texts of Scripture which our Dissenters urge from the New
Testament, and all those reasons which they plead from the fullness of
Scripture, the Office, and the Faithfulness of Christ in the discharge of that
his Office, can never prove that it is a thing unlawful to submit unto, or use
the Ceremonies appointed by our Church, seeing our Savior and his Disciples,
whose Practice certainly agreed with their Precepts, and who did nothing
repugnant to the fullness of the Scripture, etc. submitted to the use of
Ceremonies of a like nature to them, when by the Rulers of the Jewish Church
they were imposed, and they found it best conducing to the promotion of the
Gospel, to submit unto them. Nevertheless I also shall proceed to answer all
that they have produced hitherto with any show of reason from the N. Testament.

That Christ himself condemned and rejected the washings of the Scribes and
Pharisees, although they were but decent Ceremonies imposed by the Elders of the
Jewish Church, and not forbidden by the Law of Moses; And he not only does
refuse to conform to them, but also justifyes his own Disciples in their
Nonconformity, and does pronounce of all such things, that being plants which
his Heavenly Father had not planted, Matt. 15.13.
they should be rooted up; and therefore he has taught us to refuse Active
Obedience to the Traditions of our Elders in matters of like Nature, as humane
Constitutions seem to be, and to reject them as vain Worship, and as the
Doctrines of men. Answ. 1. our Heavenly Father, may be hence induced to
consider, that if they will not, he will root them up. For my part I am neither
for the planting, nor against the rooting of them up by a Legal Authority, but
only for a submission to them for the sake of Peace, Love, and Union, until
Authority think fit to do so. Oral Traditions, here styled the Traditions of
the Elders, Mark 7.3, 5. Matt. 15.2. The Traditions of Men, Mark 7.8. Matt.
15.3, 6. And their Interpretations of the Law of Moses, or their Determination
of things indifferent, not contained clearly, or expressly in that Law. These
Oral Traditions being esteemed by them as the unwritten Word of God, spoken to
Moses, as truly as the written Law, and so delivered from him to his immediate
Successors, and by them to their Successors, and so on to the very days of the
Messiah, our Savior might well quarrel with them, and reject them, they being
plain additions to the Word of God, the setting up another Word besides his
written Word, and so teaching for Doctrines of God the Commandments of men, for
so they truly were, tho they esteemed them as the Word of God delivered to
Moses, the planting what their Heavenly Father bad not planted. But their
Interpretations of the Ceremonial Law of Moses in matters of Dispute and
Controversy, and their determinations of things indifferent for the better
observation of that Law, and the preserving men from transgressing of it, which
they styled making an hedge unto the Law, seem to have more Authority, God
having said, according to the Sentence of the Law which they shall teach thee,
Deuteronomy. 17.9, 12.
and according to the Judgment which they shall tell thee, thou shall do. And
tho they might, and did abuse their Power under this pretense by binding heavy
Burdens and Grievous to be born, yet does our Savior speak thus unto the
multitude; and to his own Disciples, the Scribes and Pharisees sit in Moses
Chair, Matt. 23.1, 2, 3.
all therefore whatsoever they bid you observe, that observe and do. Savior
here is not barely their washing, or the prescription of it by the Scribes and
Pharisees, but their asserting it as a thing necessary to avoid that defilement
which would render them displeasing, or unacceptable to God. For, as the
Assemblies Annotations well observe, they thought it a high point of their
Religion to wash before Eating, lest they, by touching that which was unclean,
should defile themselves and their Meat, and so become abominable; Such Snares
had they imposed upon the Consciences of the ignorant people. Pollui cibum
mundum arbitrati sunt a cibis immundis, They thought their clean Meats were
polluted by what was thus unclean, says Dr. Leightf. This is apparent 1. From
the Doctrine which our Lord opposes to what he here condemns, which is not
this, that to obey the Precepts of Superiors in things indifferent, pertaining
to Gods Service, was vain and superstitious, which in all reason was the thing
chiefly to be taught, if, as Dr. Ames confidently says, p. 186.
They esteemed some defiling to follow upon the Eating of the Creature, not as
it was a Creature (eaten with unwashen hands) but as it was so used against the
Tradition of their Elders. But that which by our Savior is opposed to their
Practice, and the Exacting of it, is plainly this, that to eat with unwashen
hands defiles not a man, Matt. 15, 20. and v. 11. Hear and understand, not
that which goes into the mouth defiles a man. And Mark 7.15. Hearken to me
every one of you, and understand, there is nothing from without a man that
entering into him can defile him, but the things which come out of him, those
are they which defile the man. This is the Doctrine at which the Pharisees are
offended, Matt. 15.12. and which his own Disciples understood not, being
accustomed to the Traditions of their Elders, Mark. 7.18, 19.
and therefore Christ says to them, Are ye so without understanding also? do
ye not perceive that whatsoever thing from without enters into a man, cannot
defile him, because it enters not into his heart, but into his belly.
Moreover this was the Doctrine of the Pharisees, that to eat with unwashen
hands was blame worthy, not only because it was to act contrary to the
Traditions of the Elders, but because it was to eat with defiled hands, Mark
7.2. 2ly, This is apparent, because our Savior plainly intimates that hereby
they made the Commandments of men parts of Gods Worship, v. 9. Now the
Commandments of men are all those things which the Authority of man enjoyneth,
or forbids us to believe or do, tho God has not enjoined or sorbid them, and
these Commands are taught for Doctrines, when they are imposed on the Judgment
of men in point of Faith as things to be believed, or owned as portions of the
Will of God, or on the Consciences of men, as things to be observed as the
Commandments of God, or such religious actions as from their Nature are
required to please him. One therefore of these two Opinions must be held to
justify this charge of worshipping God in vain by teaching for Doctrines the
Traditions of men. This 3ly, Mr. Calvin Argues from this consideration, that
Christ reproved not the Water pots set after the manner of the purification of
the Jews, but wrought a miracle upon the Water poured into them; Therefore,
says he, it was not barely the Command, but the superstitious Opinion, annexed
to it which was reproved by our Savior. And 4ly, This is evident from the
Traditions, which their Learned Rabbis had received, and the expressions which
they used about this matter. He, that eats Bread with unwashen hands, says
R. Ase, In Sota.
sins as grievously as if he lay with a whore. Now Fornication, we all know is
sinful in its own Nature, and not only because it is forbidden by Superiors.
Maimonides says, they looked upon it as a peculiar piece of Sanctity, and said
that whosoever disesteemed this Custom deserved not only Excommunication, but
death also; And therefore R. Akiba, being in Prison, E rub in fol. 21
said that he would rather perish with thirst than want Water to wash his
hands. Answ. 4th. This Text is so far from proving the Unlawfulness of using
indifferent Ceremonies in Obedience to the Commands of our Superiors, that it
condemns all those who teach they cannot lawfully be submitted to, as teaching
for Doctrines the Commandments of men. For these are the Commands of our
Dissenters to their Proselytes: Hear not a form of Prayer, join not with these
that use it, or with the Minister who wears a Surplice, kneel not at the
Receiving of the Sacrament, do not stand up at the rehearsal of the Creed,
bring not your Children to receive the sign of the Cross in Baptism; all these
they teach for Doctrines, asserting that they are actions which God has
forbidden, and therefore may not lawfully be used in his Worship, or by them be
submitted to, since therefore God has not forbidden any of these things, and
yet they teach he has forbidden them, they plainly must be guilty of adding to
his Word, and teaching for Doctrines the Commandments of men, which they who do
declare these things to be indifferent, and no where commanded in Gods Word,
cannot be guilty of.

CHAP. III. The CONTENTS.
Answering the Objections of Dissenters from reason grounded upon Scripture,
as, Obj 1. God would have for the Tabernacle, and the Temple, an exact pattern
how he would have all things done and that in writing, and therefore Christ,
being faithful in his House as Moses was, must have done as much in Scripture
toward the building of his Spiritual House. Answ. 1. This Argument holds as
well in Civil Matters as in Sacred, and by arguing from such similitudes many
false things may be concluded. Answ. 2. That it is falsely supposed that Moses
was so full in his Institutions that nothing afterward was to be added to
them, or ordained by the Rulers of the Church for the better Observation of
them. (3) It Is certain Christ has not done what this Objection says his
faithfulness obliged him to do. 4ly, There is a manifest disparity betwixt the
Christian and the Jewish State, and thence good reason may be given why, tho
all things were determined then, it should not be so now. 5ly, The fidelity of
Moses, consisted in this, that he concealed nothing of that which God
commanded, and sutably the fidelity of Christ in this that he declared to us
the whole Will of God. 1. Obj. 2. The Scripture is a Rule of Ceremonies, for it
prescribes Ceremonies respecting Baptism, and the Lords Supper, if therefore
it prescribe not all, it must be an imperfect Rule. Answ. 1. The absurdity of
this Argument is shown by instances of a like Nature. (2) The Doctrine of the
Church of England concerning the perfection of the H. Scriptures is this, viz.
that it does perfectly contain all that is necessary to believed or done in
Order to Salvation; Tho not all Ceremonies in particular, of Decency and Order:
That the Scripture is a Rule of all Ceremonies that are good works antecedently
to the Command of man. 2. That it is sufficiently perfect in reference to
uncommanded Ceremonies by giving general Directions to Superiors in the
imposing of them. And 2ly, By Commanding Obedience to their impositions in all
lawful matters. The Tenet of some Non-Conformists that no Church-Governors
ought to ordain, or introduce into the Service of God any other Rites or
Observations than such as God has in his Word commanded, or Christ and his
Apostles by their Examples, which they esteem as Precepts, has approved, and
that if they enjoin such things we must not yield Obedience to them, but must
reject them as humane Inventions, Superstition, and Will Worship. The
pernicious Consequence of this Tenet. 1. It casts a reproach upon Religion, and
gives just cause to Magistrates to scruple the Admission of the Christian
Faith. 2. It makes it necessary to disobey all Civil Laws concerning Charity
and Justice which are not contained in Scripture, 3ly, This Opinion will force
men to be troublesome in all the Churches of the World. 4. It gives a great
Advantage to Popery. Mr. Baxters solid Confutation of this Opinion by 8
Arguments. 5ly, They who assert this Tenet do many things in Contradiction to
it.. 2.

CHAP. III.
HAving thus dispatched the Scriptures produced in this cause, I proceed to
consider the Objections of Dissenters from reason grounded upon Scripture; and

That there was nothing appertaining in the least to the Worship of God, but
was fully set down, even to the pins of the Tabernacle, in the Law of Moses;
when Gods Material House was to be built, he gave to Moses for the Tabernacle,
and to David for the Temple, a Pattern according to which he would have every
thing made, or done; And of this Pattern which God gave to David for the
Temple, it is expressly said, God gave it him in Writing. 1 Chronicles. 28.19.
Nothing then might be done by Moses or by Solomon, tho they were two of the
wisest Men that ever lived, about the Tabernacle, or Temple, or about the whole
Service of God performed in them, but according to that Pattern, Exodus 25.9,
40, 39, 42, 40, 16.
and this charge the Lord repeats to Moses four times, to show the great
Importance of it, and the Author to the Hebrews Notes, that it was said unto
him, Hebr. 8.5.
see that thou make all things according unto the Pattern, that was showed thee
in the Mount. Hebr 3.6.
Since therefore Christ was faithful in his House as Moses was, he must, say
they, in building his Spiritual House have given us a Pattern according to
which he would have all his works done, and that pattern must be contained in
the H. Scriptures.

Moses as he prescribed those Laws whereby the Jewish Nation was to Act in
sacred matters, so did he from Gods mouth, prescribe them a Judicial Law, a Law
for Civil Government, and he moreover says of that as well as of those Laws
which did concern Gods Worship, you shall observe to do as the Lord your God
has Commanded you, you shall not turn aside to the right hand, or the left. If
then the Argument here holds from the fidelity of Moses to that of Christ, or
from Gods care of his Churches Service under the Old Testament, to his care of
it under the New. Christ must have given us a form of Civil Government as well
as Sacred, a Statute Law by which our Courts of Justice must be regulated, and
to which it is not in the Power of King and Parliament to add on Statute, or
else Christ must be thought less faithful in his House, then Moses was, and God
less careful of the Christian than the Jewish Church.

And indeed Arguments of this Nature taken from Similitudes may be used to
conclude things manifestly false, as V. G. God is not less kind to his
Ministers under the New Testament than under the Old, and therefore as in the
Law of Moses we are told punctually what they should receive from the People,
so must we be told also under the New Testament, under the Law there was on
Earth an High Priest over the Jews, therefore we must have an universal Bishop
over the Christians. Moses appointed a living Judge of Controversies to whom
all Jews stood bound to repair in doubtful cases, and according to whose word
and information they were obliged to Act, not declining from it to the right
hand or to the left, Deuteronomy. 17.9, 12. And therefore by this Rule of our
Dissenters, God must have left us Christians such a living Judge, or else his
care and kindness toward the Christian Church, will be less then was his care
and kindness to the Jewish Church.

Moses was so exact and full in all his institutions, that nothing afterward
was to be added to them, or ordained by the Rulers of the Church; for the
better observation of them, the Rulers of the Jewish Church did,
notwithstanding his exactness, do many things, Sacred and Civil, for which they
had no precept to direct them, nor any other Warrant but the use of reason and
prudential discourse, and they made many constitutions which were of things
very useful and necessary to be decided for the direction of the practice both
of Priests and People. The instances of this Nature are very numerous, and may
be seen in Dr. Leightfoots Temple Service, from whence I shall Collect these
few: The Law of Moses appoints no Substitute to the High Priest in case of his
uncleanness, or any other matter which might render him unfit to do his Office,
at the great day of expiation, or any other Solemnity. Provision therefore was
made for this, and other occasions of like Nature, by appointing with him a
Sagan, or a Substitute who might officiate for him in such cases. Leight. p.
34. p. 169. And of whose officiating for him in the great day of Expiation, we
find an instance in Josephus. l. 17. cap. 8. p. 597.
They had no Command for sounding their Trumpets every Morning at the opening
of the Court Gates, particularly at the opening of the Gate of Nicanor. But tho
this practice had no express and literal Command, yet was it grounded upon this
necessity and reason, because that the Levites and Stationary Men might have
notice to come to attend their Desks, and Service and that the People of
Jerusalem might hear, Temple Serve. p. 57, 58.
and take notice, and those that would come to the Temple; so that this
sounding was, as the Bells, to ring them in to the Service. Agreeable to this
was also the sounding, striking, or ringing of their great Bell Migrepha: Ibid.
p. 111. p. 59.
The constant Psalms sung by the Levites every day of the Week, with the
reasons why they made choice of them. The four and twenty courses of the
Israelites of the station, is no where mentioned, or appointed in the Law of
Moses, and yet it was an excellent constitution: p. 63.
For there were some sacrifices that were sacrifices of all Israel, and
particularly the daily Sacrifice; now it was impossible that all Israel should
be present at the Sacrifices that were to be Offered up for all Israel; and
therefore it was needful that some Representatives should be chosen, who
instead and behalf of all the People, should be present at every Sacrifice that
should be Offered up for the whole Congregation. Now because it would be too
heavy for one Company of Men to attend continually on this Work, as the daily
Sacrifice required, therefore they appointed twenty four Courses of these
stationary Men, as well as of the Priests, and Levites, that their attendance
in these vicissitudes might be the more easy, for which cause also was made
the like division of the Priests and Levites, p. 64.
There was Sacrificing in the Temple Service twice a day, and reading of the
Law at least twice, and Prayers four times, and it became them, and behoved
them, if it had been possible, to have been all attending there, but because
this could not possibly be done, they ordained these Courses of Stationary Men,
to be as the Deputies of all the People, and a Representative Congregation in
their behalf. It had been an open contempt of those ordinances, if being daily
Administered, none of the People had attended at them, and it would have been a
hazard that in time they might have been neglected by the People, if they had
been left to their own liberty to come, or not come to them as they saw good;
therefore to prevent this visible contempt that might have accrued, and to
provide that there might be always a Congregation of the People, These
Stationary Courses were ordained, that if Devotion brought no other of the
People to the Service, yet these, their Representatives might be sure to be
there. That the High Priest should confess over the Escape Goat all the
Iniquities of the Children of Israel, and all their Transgressions, in all
their Sins, we read Lev. 16.21. But in the Law of Moses we find no form of
Words which the High Priest was to use, and therefore the Rulers of the Church
appointed him to say: Ah Lord! thy People, the House of Israel have sinned, and
done perversely, p. 173.
and transgressed before thee, I beseech thee now Oh Lord, expiate the sins,
perversities and transgressions which the House of Israel thy People have
sinned, done perversely, and transgressed before thee, etc. in the same Chapter
the High Priest is Commanded to Offer a Bullock for a sin Offering for himself,
v. 6, 11.
to make an Atonement for himself and for his House. Atonement for sin could
not be made without confession of it; provided that the sin were known, it was
therefore necessary that he should make confession of his sin in order to this
Atonement, wherefore, no Words of confession being prescribed by the Law of
Moses, p. 171.
they ordered him to say: Ah Lord! I have sinned, done perversely and
transgressed before thee, I and my House, I beseech thee, oh Lord, expiate the
sins, perversities and transgressions whereby I have sinned, done perversely,
and transgressed, I and mine House, etc. Moreover by every sin and trespass
Offering Atonement was to be made, and so the sin of the offender was to be
confessed, but there being no form of confession mentioned in the Law of Moses,
the Rulers ordered the offender to confess in this wise, I have sinned, p. 69.
and done perversely, I have rebelled, and done thus and thus, but I return by
repentance before thee, and let this be my expiation. The Law of Moses in many
cases appointed a Meat Offering, but neither determined of the quantity of
Corn, or Oil to be brought for it, and therefore the Rulers determined that no
Meat Offering should consist of less than the tenth part of an Ephah of Corn,
p. 95.
and a Log of Oil. Moreover a Man that lived at a great distance from Jerusalem
was fallen under such an offense for which a Sacrifice was due by the Law, p.
99.
the enquiry hereupon was what must he do? must he away presently thither to
offer his Offering? must he neglect his Employment at home, and Travel up to
Jerusalem, at a charge double or treble to the charge of the Sacrifice which
was to be Offered, laying all other things aside till that be done? this being
not declared expressly in the Law of Moses, they determined in this case, that
he that became liable to any Offering might defer the paying of it till the
next Solemn Festival of the three came, when all must appear before the Lord at
Jerusalem. The Law had said, thou shall Reverence my Sanctuary, but had not
particularly declared in what Actions that Reverence should be expressed, they
therefore ordained, in the pursuance of that general Precept, that no Man
should go into the Temple to Worship with a Purse, a Staff, p. 116, 117, 118.
or his Shoes on, no Man was to spit, no Man to sit there during the time of
Divine Service, nor use any irreverent Gesture. To these we may add the
Gizbarin or the three common Treasurers and Overseers of the Temple stock, p.
39.
and all consecrated things, and the Catholikin, who were Head Treasurers over
them. The singing of the Levites Children with their Fathers, as our Choristers
now do. p. 36. p. 53. p. 83, 84. p. 96. p. 103, 105. p. 108. 119.
The suspensive Trespass Offering. The Cross upon the Wafer made in Oil. The
manner of their Lotteries for the Service of the Priests. Their Public and
private Prayers, and their Worshipping in time of Prayer. the way of
discovering the New Moon before their Feast, p. 122, 123. p. 138, 139. p. 174,
175. p. 180, 181. p. 189.
and giving notice of it. The manner of saying the Egyptian Hallel, and the
manner of conveying the Escape Goat, and giving notice of it, when done. The
Branches of Pome-Citron used at the Feast of Tabernacles, and the Psalms then
sung. Lastly the time, place and person for reading the Law at the Seventh year.

All these, to omit many more of the like Nature, were things needful, or at
least useful to be determined, and yet the Law of Moses, has said nothing of
them. If therefore notwithstanding any Precepts forbidding the addition to the
Law of Moses, or the exactness of the Prescriptions of that Law, the Rulers of
the Jews found cause, or at least thought themselves empowered to appoint, and
to determine of these things, why may not Christian Magistrates and Governors
use the same Power in the Church of Christ? If doing this was no derogation
from the fidelity of Moses, in writing of the Jewish Law, why should we think
that doing matters of like Nature is any derogation from the fidelity of Christ
in giving us that Gospel which is styled the Law of liberty?

viz. He has not in the Writings of the New Testament given us a perfect Rule
which clearly and expressly mentions all Ceremonies which are needful to be used
in his Service, or has determined all things indifferent in their own Nature,
but disjunctively necessary, or after which way or manner, we must Act
continually in the performance of his Worship. For instance: He has said
nothing of the time or place where, and when he would have us to Assemble for
his Worship, or of the Ornaments of the place, or the disposal of the Seats for
Priest, or People, or whether Men should Sit or Stand during the hearing the
Word Read or Preached, or of the Number which should Assemble at one place, or
be under the care or the inspection of one Pastor; nor how long we shall
continue so Assembled, and when the Solemnity shall be dismissed. And yet he who
commands us to Assemble for his Solemn Worship, must command some Number to
Assemble, with some Minister, in some place, and at some time. He has enjoined
Public Prayer, but he has not determined, whether we must Pray in a set form
of words, or only in words premeditated. Or 3ly, without Antecedent Meditation
what we shall say, or whether we shall Pray in words composed by our selves, or
prescribed by others. He has not told us who shall pronounce the Prayers,
whether the Minister alone, or whether the People may not bear a share in the
performance of that duty, by saying with, or after him, or by responses, or
alternate sentences, as was the Custom in the Jewish Church? He has not told
us how often we shall meet publicly for the performance of this duty, whether
every morning and evening, Wednesday, and Friday, or only on the Lords day: He
has appointed the Scriptures to be read in our Assemblies, but then he has
not told us who shall be appointed for that work, whether a person shall be
Ordained for that Office, as in the Latin, and the Eastern Churches, or a Clark
as it is usual in our Churches, whether Scripture alone may be read there, or
the Epistles and writings also of Pious Men, as in the Primitive Church they
did. He has not told us what Chapter, or what Book we are to read or in what
Method, or how much; whether in the Old or the New Testament, or what
Translation shall be approved by any Church. He has commanded that his word be
Preached in our Assemblies, but has not plainly told us who alone shall
Preach, whether ordained persons only, or also gifted Brethren, whether with
License, or without, nor in what Method, whether by Doctrine and use, or any
other way, whether with Study, or without, whether by choosing of a Text, or
only choosing of a Subject to discourse upon, whether with Notes, or only by the
help of Memory, whether in a place dedicated to that service, or not dedicated,
whether in a Church, or in the open Field, nor lastly has he told us how
often, nor how long we are to Preach.

He has Commanded us to sing Psalms, but then he has not told us whether all
should sing together, as is the Custom in our Parish Churches, or only some, as
in Cathedrals. Whether the Psalms we sing should be in Rythm, or Meeter, or
not, whether we should si^g with V^^al only, or with Instrumental Music also,
nor what (...), or what Translations of the Psalms should b^ app^oved or
allowed to be sung in Churche^, (...) we should sing before, or only after
Ser^^^^, or whether we should do it standing, or in the sitting Posture.

He has said, Go and Baptize all Nations, but has not clearly told us who
shall Baptize, and in what cases, whether the Priest alone, or any other
Christian, especially in cases of necessity, whether Baptism shall be
Administered to Infants is not expressly said in Scripture, but is left to be
collected thence by Analogy, and rational deductions, whether all Infants are
to be Baptized, or only those of Christian Parents, or of true Believers,
whether with stipulators, or without, whether we should Baptize in a River,
Pond, Spring, Font, or Basin, whether Infants should be Baptized at Eight days
old, within a Month, or only at Easter, and Penticost, as was the ancient
Custom of the Church of God: Whether Baptism should be Administered by Dipping,
or by Sprinkling only, whether by Dipping thrice, as was the Custom of some
Churches, or only once, as other Churches did, whether only Men, or Women only,
or both indifferently were to assist at the Baptizing of Adult persons.

He has said do this in remembrance of me, but has not told us on what days
the Lords Supper shall be Administered, or how often, whether it should be
received every day, or every Sunday, as in the Primitive Church the Custom was,
or every Month, as in Cathedrals it is, or thrice a year, as is required by the
Rubric. He has not told us in plain words whether consecration of the
Elements to be received be necessary, and what words must be used in
Consecration, nor has he told us who alone may Consecrate, whether a Deacon,
or a Priest only, or who alone shall be admitted to the Sacrament, whether all
visible Professors, or sincere Believers only, whether they must be first
examined by Church Officers, or only should examine their own Consciences. He
has not told us whether the Bread to be received shall be of Wheat, or of some
other Grain, whether one great Loaf, or more. Whether the Wine shall be mixed
with Water, or not, or whether it shall be Claret, Muskadine, or any other sort
of Wine, whether we shall receive after Supper, as Christ and his Apostles did,
or in the Morning, as the Christians under persecution did, whether we should
receive it Full, or Fasting, Sitting, Leaning, Standing, or Kneeling, whether
we should receive at a Communion Table, or in our Seats, and whether that Table
shall be of Wood, or Stone, whether it shall be Round, Long or Square, whether
it shall stand in the East or West end, or in the Middle of the Church, whether
it shall have Rails or no Rails. All, or many of these things (to omit many
other Circumstances respecting Ordination, and Church Discipline) are left by
Christ and his Apostles undetermined, and if this Argues in him a defect of
care and providence, or of fidelity toward his Church, as this objection does
Blasphemously suppose, what remains but that our Blessed Savior should be
charged with these neglects, it being certain from experience that he has left
us no particular injunctions for the determination of these matters. And if he
must be deemed less faithful in his House than Moses was, because he is not so
particular in the prescribing of such Rites, I know not how we can excuse him
from that guilt, so Blasphemous is the result of this Objection. And lastly
seeing these Acts of Worship cannot be performed without some of these
Circumstances which are thus left undetermined, if the determination of them by
Superiors be a sufficient cause for our Refusal to be present at, or to join
with them in these Ordinances, we must have cause sufficient to renounce all
Public Worship.

Gospel and the Jews state, and that good reason may be given why, tho all
punctilio's were determined then, it should not be so now. For the People of
the Jews lived all under one Civil Government, whereas we Christians live under
different forms of Government, and are dispersed throughout diverse Nations,
using diverse Customs, and therefore could not, if at all, conveniently practice
such an uniformity of Ceremonies as we must have done, if Christ had determined
every Circumstance of his Worship as Moses did. v. g. dipping in Baptism might
be subject to little inconvenience in hot Countries, but if this should have
been enjoined under the frozen Zone it might have hazarded the life of the
Baptized person. The Custom of some Countries does make that decent, and a sign
of Reverence, and therefore fit to be imposed, or observed in those Countries,
which is in other Countries, where no such Customs do obtain, neither decent,
nor a sign of Reverence, and so unfit to be required in those Countries. See
many other disparities in the Irenicum of Dr. Stillingfleet.

Moses here spoken of, is only this, that he did faithfully declare unto the
Jews what God had spoken to him, concealing nothing of what God had commanded
from them, he was faithful says the Text (...), for a Testimony of what was to
be spoken. Hebr. 3.5.
And therefore the fidelity of Christ compared with it, must not consist in
prescribing Ceremonies, but in declaring the whole Will of God discovered to
him, which that he punctually performed he himself assures us, saying: The Word
which I speak is not mine, Joh. 14.10. Joh. 12.49, 50.
but his that sent me. I speak not of my self, but the Father which sent me he
gave me a Commandment what I should say. As the Father has said to me, so I
speak.

The Scripture is a Rule of even Ceremonies in Gods Worship, for it gives
prescriptions and directions in the New Testament, concerning the Sacraments of
Baptism, and the Lords Supper. Now if it does not prescribe all Ceremonies
requisite and convenient; then it is only a partial, and imperfect Rule of
Cemonies in Gods Worship, whereas we cannot but hold it to be a perfect,
adequate, and total Rule of Ceremonial, as well as Moral Worship, (for) it is
able to perfect the man of God, and thoroughly to furnish him unto all good
works, Reply to Dr. Hammond. p. 85 Answ. 1.
and so unto all Ceremonies that are good works. So M. Jeans. Answ. To show the
Absurdity of this Argument take these few Instances of a like Nature. The
Scripture is a Rule of Justice, and of Charity betwixt Man and Man, and of
Temperance toward our selves, for it gives prescriptions and directions in the
New Testament concerning all those Matters. Now if it does not prescribe all
that is requisite and convenient to be prescribed in respect unto them, then it
is only a partial and imperfect Rule of Justice, Charity, and Temperance,
whereas we cannot but hold it to be a total, adequate, and perfect Rule of all
particulars respecting Justice, Charity, and Temperance; For it is able to
perfect the man of God, and thoroughly furnish him to all good Works, and so to
all particular Acts of Justice that are good Works, and so all Humane Laws
concerning any Act of Justice, Charity, or Temperance, which are not merely
penal, but directive, must be a Derogation from the Sufficiency of Scripture,
as well as the prescribing of a Ceremony. Scripture must have prescribed both
Time and Place, and all the things which I have mentioned in Answer to the last
Objection, or else no Time or Place, or any of those things which are left
undetermined by it, can be requisite or convenient to be used in the Worship of
God. So monstrously absurd is this way of Arguing. In farther Confutation of
this Argument, I shall first lay down plainly the Assertion or Doctrine of the
Church of England in reference to the Perfection of the Holy Scriptures, and
from it give a direct Answer to this Objection. 2ly, I shall lay down the
contrary Tenet of some Non-Conformists which is here asserted in this
Argugument. 3ly, I shall endeavor to show the Dangerousness of this Opinion,
and the Swarms of evil consequences which do naturally follow from it. And 4ly,
That they who hold it did, and do many things repugnant to it. And 5ly, That it
does necessarily make the Holy Scripture an imperfect Rule.

1. Then, when we assert that Scripture is a perfect Rule, we mean it thus,
that it does perfectly contain all that is necessary to be believed, or done,
in Order to our acceptance with God here, or to our happiness with him
hereafter, not that it does particularly prescribe what ever Circumstance of
Order, Decency or Convenience may be observed in the Service of God. And this
does seem to me to be the true Distinction in this matter betwixt the
Protestant of the Church of England, and the Rigid Puritan, that the Protestant
of the Church of England asserts the Holy Scripture to be a full and perfect
Rule of all the Articles of Christian Faith, and Christian Piety, but
notwithstanding he maintains that Holy Scripture has left it in the Power of
the Church Governors Sacred, and Civil, to appoint such Rites and Ceremonies to
be used in the Service of God, as they shall judge convenient, and conducing to
the ends of Unity, and Order, Peace, and Love, Decency, Uniformity, and the
Edification of the Church. And that by virtue of these General Rules, Follow
after the things, Romans 14.19. Phil. 3.16. 1 Cor. 14.40.
which make for Peace, and whereby we may edify one another, Let us walk by the
same Rule, let us mind the same thing, Let all things be done decently, and in
order, Let all be done to Edification, and to the Glory of God, Give no offense
to Jew or Gentile, or to the Church of God, etc. They in the General are
authorized to appoint such Rites and Ceremonies as they judge most conducing to
these ends, and that all Christian people who live under their Care and
Jurisdiction, are bound to yield obedience to them in matters of this Nature by
virtue of those Seriptures which command them to obey those that Rule over
them, and to submit to them. Hebr. 13.17, ^ Pet. 5.5. Romans 13.1. 1 Pet. 2.13.
To be subject to their Elders, and to the higher Powers, and to every
Ordinance of man for the Lords Sake. I say their Tenet is that by virtue of
these Scriptures they are bound to yield obedience to them in all lawful
things, that is, in all those things which God has not forbidden in his Word,
for where there is no Law of God forbidding, there can be no transgression, and
therefore to refuse obedience to our Superiors Civil, or Sacred, in those
matters, is to refuse obedience in things lawful, and therefore to offend
against the Precepts which call upon us to be subject and obedient to them. So
that we do assert in Answer unto this Objection,

1. That the Scripture is a perfect Rule of all Ceremonies that are good Works
antecedently to the Command of man, so that in Scripture some express for them
may be found, but that it is not such a Rule of indifferent Ceremonies. 2ly,
That it is as perfect a Rule as it needs to be in reference to Ceremonies
uncommanded in particular; (1) By giving us the general Rules which should
direct Superiors in the imposing of these things indifrent, but not in a
particular Prescription of them, as this Objection does suppose, it being a
plain contradiction that any thing should be to us indifferent, and yet
prescribed to us in the Word of God. Dissenters therefore must deny that there
is any circumstance of Worship, be it Time, Place, Gesture, or the Words in
which it is to be performed, left indifferent, or that being so, that
circumstance must not be used in Gods Worship, or else they must confess the
weakness of the Argument produced. And 2ly, Because it does command us to obey
Superiors Civil, and Sacred, in all lawful matters, and so instructs us to
submit to what is not forbidden by Gods Word, when by Superiors it is
commanded. This is our Tenet, and this is a direct, and a sufficient answer to
this Argument:

But on the other hand the Tenet of some Nonconformists, owned by this
Argument, is this: That no Church Governors ought to ordain, or introduce into
the Service of God any other Rites or Observations than such as God has in his
Word commanded, or Christ and his Apostles by their Examples, which they esteem
as Precepts has approved, and that if they enjoin such things we must not
yield obedience to them, but must reject them as humane inventions,
superstition, and will worship. This is that Doctrine in which the Mystery of
Puritanism does consist, and the pernicious consequences of it are so many that
any person, who does weigh them seriously, will, if he be indeed a Lover of
Christianity, abhor, and heartily renounce that Doctrine whence they so
naturally flow. And

1. This Doctrine casts a reproach upon Religion, it gives just cause to
Magistrates to scruple the admission of the Christian Faith, and to the
Atheist, and the Politician to represent it as the great instrument of
sedition, and disobedience. For this opinion obliges men to thwart the
Magistrate in all indifferent matters which he commands with a respect unto
Gods Worship: If he commands them to come to Church on the Lordsday at such a
time, in such a place, they must stand bound in conscience by this Rule to
refuse to do so, because in Scripture God has not determined how often, what
hour, or where they should assemble, if he commands them to be uncovered in the
House of God, to stand, or kneel whilst they are praying, to sit whilst
hearing, or the like, they must not do it, because God has not told them in
his Word that they should be uncovered in his presence, that they should kneel,
or stand whilst they do pray, or sit when they do hear. Now what a Scandal,
what a base impeachment is it to our peaceable Religion, to say that it
obliges us to disobey Authority in matters God has left us all to do or not
to do at pleasure, only because he does command us so to do them, as we might
have performed them, had he not commanded us, and that nothing does so much
engage us to be refractory to the higher Powers, as that perfect Law of Liberty
which Christ has left us?

2ly, Upon the same account it must be sinful to obey those Civil Laws which do
concern those Laws of Justice, Charity, and Mercy toward our Christian Brother
which cannot clearly be collected from the written Word. For it is plain from
Scripture that these are the more weighty matters of the Law, Matt. 23.23.
viz. Judgment and Mercy; Mark 12.33.
That to love God with all our hearts, and our Neighbor as our selves, is more
than all Burnt-offerings and Sacrifices. That to pray, hear, read the Word,
receive the Sacrament, to fast, are but the means which God has in his Word
ordained for the increase of Justice, Equity, Mercy, Love, Peace, Humility and
Temperance, and such like Christian Graces, and therefore these must be the
things in which God is concerned mostly that we should yield obedience. That
when the Scripture reckons the Graces of the Spirit, Gal. 5.22.
it tells us they are Love, Peace, Long-suffering, Gentleness, Goodness,
Righteousness, and Temperance, not prayer, fasting, hearing, receiving of the
Sacrament, etc. And lastly it is observable that we are called to imitate our
heavenly Father in acts of Love, and Mercy, our Lord and Savior in Meekness,
and Humility, Bowels of Mercy, Compassion, and Self-denial, but not in prayer,
and fasting, and in such like duties. Since therefore God is more concerned for
matters of this Nature, than for his outward worship, his Word must be more
perfect in prescribing of these duties, than any circumstances of his worship,
if then it be unlawful for us to submit to any Ceremonies commanded by man
which respect his worship, because Gods Word must be a perfect Rule, not only
of all parts, but of all modes of Worship; it must be more unlawful to submit
to any humane constitutions touching Equity, and Justice, Mercy, and
Compassion, Love, Charity, and Peace; because Gods Word must be supposed, in
these more weighty and substantial matters, to be a Rule more perfect; And
therefore all the Laws and Statutes respecting matters of this Nature, which
cannot be collected from the Words of Scripture, must, by this doctrine, be
cashiered as vain Inventions, and Christians must stand obliged to refuse
obedience to them. For instance, I am commanded to worship God in public, but
whether I must do it in a Church, or in the Field, in black, or white, or any
other garb, by stinted Words, or by Expressions of my own immediate Invention,
in this, or that, or a 3d posture, is not expressed in Holy Scripture; If
therefore in these cases I must not yield obedience to any power that will
command me to worship God in white, to pray in stinted Words, to do it
kneeling, or the like, because that Scripture, which is a Rule of Worship, has
not determined of these things, must I not do the like in other cases of an
higher Nature? and because Scripture has commanded that I should be
charitable, and give Alms, but has not said what portion I shall give, nor
when, nor in what place, or to what persons, nor in what manner, whether by my
self, or by the Overseers of the Poor, am I not bound as much to show my
disobedience to those Laws which rate me to the Poor, and which give power to
Officers to strein on my refusal to pay that rate. If I must not join with an
Assembly that does use a stinted Form of Words, that rises up at the rehearsal
of the Creed, or with a Pastor that does officiate in white, because these
things are not commanded in the perfect Rule of Worship, how dare I to commence
a suit of Law, to arrest a person for a debt, or to indite him for a trespass
without Scripture warrant, these things being no where commanded in that
perfect Rule of Equity and Justice? The Scripture having said: There is utterly
a fault among you that you go to Law one with another, 1 Cor. 6.7. Luke 6.35.
Matt. 5.40.
lend, hoping for nothing again, if any man take away thy Cloak let him have
thy Coat also, but never said, If any man officiate in white, or by a Form of
Words, do not join with him, is it not matter of just admiration that they who
never scruple to act contrary unto the letter of the Scripture in the former
cases, should be so very scrupulous in things no where forbidden in the Word?

3ly, This dangerous opinion will force men to be troublesome in all the
Churches of the World, and to refuse communion even with those Assemblies they
are joined with, nay had they lived in the Jewish Church, or any other Age of
Christendom, they must have been continual Separatists. For where I pray you
could they have found a Precept for all the Jewish Practices and Observations
which I have mentioned in the foregoing Arguments? If they had lived in the
next Age to the Apostles, with Polycarp and Ignatius, who did converse with the
Apostles, where would the Scripture have afforded any warrant for observation
of the Feast of Easter, which both the Churches of the East and West observed
in the days of Polycarp, L. 5. c. 24.
as is recorded by Eusebius; or any Precept for bowing to the East, Resp. ad
quest. 118.
which Pseudo-Justin mentions as a thing practiced in his days; or for the
Observation of the days on which their Glorious Martyrs died, Apud Eusebius. l. 4.
c. 15.
which yet the Church of Smyrna mentions as a thing practiced by the Christians
not long after the death of the Apostles; or for the Water mixed with the
Sacramental Wine, of which both Justin, and St. Cyprian speak; Apol. 2. Cypr.
Ep. 63. Just. M. ibid.
or for the portions of the Sacramental Bread sent to the Sick, and absent, to
signify, they were partakers of the same Sacrifice, and belonged to the same
Altar; or for their standing in their public worship, from Easter unto
Whitsunday, Resp. ad quest. ^15. Can. 19.
and every Lordsday to testify their belief of our Lords Resurrection, which
yet by the Great Nicene Council was required to be observed by all Christian
People, and which they did accordingly observe. Tertullian gives us a Catalogue
of many observations which the Church used in his days, and which she
vindicated not from the Scriptures, De Coron. Milit. c. 3 4.
but from the Patronage of Custom and Tradition. I will begin, says he, with
Baptism, where coming to the Water we testify before the President (or Bishop)
that we renounce the Devil, his Pomps, and his Angels, then are we thrice dipped,
answering something more than Christ commanded in his Gospel; The Sacrament of
the Eucharist which our Lord instituted after Supper, we partake of in our
Meetings before the day arise; we think it wickedness to fast, or to pray
kn^eling on the Lords day; we kneel not from Easter to Whitsunday; whenever
we go forth or come in, or whatsoever we are conversant about, we sign our
Foreheads with the sign of the Cross, and if you do require a Law of Scripture
for these Observations, you will find none; Tradition will be alleged as the
Author, and custom the Confirmer of them. For these are observations which we
defend not from Scripture, but from the title of Tradition, and the Patronage
of Custom. This was the Practice of the first Ages of the Church, and as it
grew more ancient its Constitutions grew more numerous, and so the men of this
opinion, had they lived then, (as they did not, none that we read of in those
times ever pretending separation from any Church on these accounts) they must
have been obliged to separate from all the Churches then in being. Come we to
all the Churches of this present Age, and we shall find that this opinion will
oblige the Authors of it to separate from them also. For the Church of Rome,
and all the Eastern Churches they must much more abominate on this account than
any others, because their Ceremonies are more numerous, and many of them
superstitious. The Lutheran Churches have not only Lyturgies, and other ancient
Ceremonies, which we observe, but they have also Images, and many other
observations, which these men style Superstitious, Popish, Antichristian
Ceremonies. In the Reformed Churches they will find Lyturgies of humane
invention, and change of Apparel for Divine Service, even at Geneva they will
find enjoined a Book of Common Prayer composed by Calvin, the Wafer Cake, the
use of Godfathers in Baptism, bidding of Prayer, with diverse other Coremonies,
no where commanded in the Holy Scripture; and so as Dr. Durel largely proves,
it is in all Reformed Churches of the West. I am not able, says Mr. Baxter, to
bear the thoughts of separating from almost all Christ's Churches upon Earth,
but he that separateth from one, or many, Def. of the Princip. of love, p. 55.
upon a Reason common to all, does virtually separate from all. Since then it
has been proved that separating on the Account of this principle is virtually
condemning and separating from all the Churches of this and all preceding Ages
of the Christian World, the Authors of it must renounce the principle, or bear
the blame both of condemning, and separating from the whole Church of Christ
throughout all Ages.

This Tenet gives a great advantage to Popery, for it asserts that nothing
circumstantial must be performed in Gods worship without particular direction
from the Word. Now it is certain that many circumstances of worship, which
concern Prayer, Preaching of the Word, Administration of the Sacraments, Church
Government, the Exercise of Church discipline, are not determined in the
written Word of God, and therefore it is needful, if this principle be true,
either to own Traditions touching matters of this Nature to be received as the
Word of God, or to confess he has appointed some infallible persons, whether
Pope, or Councils it is not much material, whose determinations in these
matters must be received as the Word of God. Now these two Tenets are the
fundamental parts of Popery, on which their other Doctrins, and Practices
depend, and which, if we admit, we cannot rationally reject whatsoever these
infallible Judges shall determine, or deliver as the unwritten Word of God. I
shall conclude this head with a large Passage out of Mr. Baxter, who, in his
defense of his principles of Love, speaks thus. There are men, otherwise very
honest and truly Godly, who think that the Scripture is intended by God not
only as a general Rule, but a particular Law for all the very circumstances of
worship, and that the second Commandment in particular condemns all that is
the product or invention of man in or about the Worship of God, and that to
deny this is to deny the perfection of the Scriptures; If this opinion prevail,
says he, what abundance of hurt will it do? For

1. It draws men into the dangerous guilt of adding to the Word of God, under
pretense of defending its perfection, and extent. For what is adding to the
Word of God, but making that to be commanded or forbidden by that Word, which
is not there commanded or forbidden? Since therefore evident it is that all
particular circumstances of worship are not by that Word prescribed, as I have
proved already, (whence it must necessarily follow that some necessary
circumstances not there prescribed cannot be forbidden) it is plain that this
opinion which says that all circumstances of worship are particularly
prescribed in Scripture, and that all not prescribed are forbidden there, must
add unto the Word of God.

2ly, It prepares men for Infidelity, and the denial of the Authority of Holy
Scripture; for when men are made to believe that Scripture, if it be a perfect
Rule, must be a Rule for those things which are not found in it at all, they
must be tempted, when they cannot find all Accidents of worship particularly
determined in it, to suspect it as a delusory, imperfect thing. The Divine Will
say, it tells me not sufficiently, and particularly what Books of Scripture are
Canonical, nor which of the various Readings are right, nor whether it be to be
divided into Chapters, and Verses, nor into how many, nor in what Meter and
Tune I must sing Psalms, nor what persons shall be Pastors of Churches, nor
what Text I shall choose next, nor what Words or Method I shall use in my next
Prayer or Sermon.

3ly, This opinion which seems to plead for the perfection of the Scripture
Rule, does plainly charge it with imperfection, and obscurity, for it asserts
that it is necessary in Order to the perfection of this Rule that it should
have prescribed every particular circumstance and mode of worship fit and
requisite to be used in Gods Service, and it is farther requisite that it
should do this clearly in all the instances forementioned, since otherwise we
cannot be assured, that we act in all these modes and circumstances according
unto its directions. Now seeing it is certain that it has not done so in all
the instances forementioned in answer to the former Arguments, since learned,
pious and judicious men can find no such determinations there, and therefore
judge, dispute, and act so variously in those matters, because they find
nothing delivered in those cases with so great clearness, and particularity as
may determine them in all these cases how to act; I say this being so, it must
be evident that Scripture cannot be according to this supposition a sufficient,
plain and perfect Rule.

4ly, This mistake tends to cast all rational worship out of the Church by
deterring men from inventing, or studying how to do Gods Work aright, for if
all that man inventeth or devises, without a particular direction from the
Holy Scripture, be forbidden by it, then must we not study to find out the true
Method of Praying or Preaching, nor must we study what to say till we are
speaking, nor what time, gesture, place or words to use, there being no
particular direction for these things, it being only said in general, Study to
show thy self a Workman that needs not be ashamed. Now banish Study, and you
banish Knowledge, and rational Religion from the World.

5ly, This opinion will bring in all confusion instead of pure reasonable
worship, whilst every man is left to find that in Scripture which never was
there, one will think that he finds one thing there, and another, another
thing. Yea every man will be apt to think he finds that there which his own
corrupt mind brings thither. It will bring confusion into Families, as well as
Churches, whilst every Child, and Servant will, by this principle, be tempted
to reject the Instructions of his Master, or Father who would teach him a
Catechisin, or form of Prayer for which the Scripture affords him no particular
direction.

6ly, And hereby all possibility of Union among Christians must perish, till
this opinion perish; for if we must unite only in that which Scripture does
particularly direct us to, we must not unite at all. If we must all in singing
Psalms agree in no Meter, or tune in the Church, but one that Scripture has
prescribed us, we must not sing at all; If we must pray in public only in
Words prescribed by Scripture to be used in public, we must not pray at all in
public; If we must receive the Sacrament only when it is consecrated in Words
prescribed by Scripture, we must not receive at all.

7ly, Hereby Christian love will be quenched, when every man must account his
Brother a Transgressor against the perfect Rule of Scripture that cannot show a
Text of Scripture for the hour, the place of worship, the bells, the
hour-glasses, the pulpit, the utensils which are used in the Service of God.
Hereby those pious Men, Calvin, Cartwright, Sibs, Perkins, Hildersham, who used
a form of Prayer, yea almost all the Christians in the World must be condemned.

8ly, This Doctrine will rack and perplex the Conscience of all Christians by
forcing them to think that they are guilty of sin by every Tune, Meter, Word,
Gesture, Time, Place, or any other Circumstance of worship which they use
without a Scripture warrant. On this account some dare not pray in their
Families, some dare not think what they shall pray, some dare not teach their
Children to pray, some dare not hear a studied Sermon, or read a printed Book.
To conclude, this Tenet will affright poor people from Scripture and Religion,
and make us, our doctrine and worship ridiculous in the sight of all the World.

Lastly, I add that they who do assert this Tenet, do many things repugnant to
it. As v. g. They introduce Lay Elders unordained, of whom there is no mention
in the Scriptures, or in the Church of the first Ages. They sing in stinted
Meter Hymns of their own devising, for which no Precept or Example can be
produced from the Book of God. Besides where has our Lord, or his Apostles
enjoined a Direrectory for public worship? and that which they imposed, what
Authority could it pretend to, but that of man? They when they take an Oath do
not refuse to lay their hands upon, and kiss the Holy Scriptures. Now all agree
that Oaths are solemn Acts of Divine Worship, for they are Invocations of God,
and thereby we acknowledge his Omniscience, and that he knows the uprightness
of our intentions, and that his Justice will avenge it self on the false
Swearer, and that his Power is able to inflict upon him the severest Judgments,
and that he by his promise stands bound to help, and to reward all those who do
believe, and act according to the Holy Scriptures. Here therefore is an outward
Ceremony of Humane Institution joined with many acts of religious worship.
Again when they enjoined the solemn League and Covenant they ordered that the
whole Congregation should take it 1. uncovered, 2 standing, 3. with their right
hand lift up and bare. Now let any man of reason say, if it be unlawful to
submit to our three Ceremonies of kneeling, crossing, and wearing a white
Garment in Gods Service, why it is less unlawful to use three other Ceremonies
in that more solemn act of worship, viz. the taking of an Oath, or if men may
appoint these Ceremonies to be used in taking of an Oath, what hinders but in
other acts of worship they may do the like?

CHAP. IV. The CONTENTS.
Obj. 3. It is unlawful to add unto the parts of Gods worship, but to add our
Ceremonies to Gods worship is to add to the parts of Gods worship, which they
endeavor to prove by 12 Arguments. To this Argument we answer 1. By showing
what outward worship in the general is, viz. The Acknowledgment of some
Excellency in the Person worshipped, by actions proper to express our Sense or
Apprehension of that Excellency. Whence it is concluded that our Ceremonies can
be no parts of worship, because not in themselves, or by their imposition
intended to express our Sense of any Divine Excellency: The Arguments to the
contrary are briefly, but fully answered,. 1. Obj. 4. To impose our Ceremonies
without license from Christ is to invade his Kingly Office, he being the sole
Lawgiver to his Church, and derogate from his Prophetic Office, which is the
only Teacher of his Church, and the Appointer of all means whereby we should be
taught. Answ. 1. That it falsely is supposed that the Rulers of our Church have
ordained any Ceremonies to teach Spiritual Duties by their Mystical
Signification, or to be Authentic means of Spiritual Teaching. (2) That it can
be no derogation from Christ's Prophetic, or his Kingly Office to stir up our
minds by things apt to stir them up to the performance of their duty, or to
express and signify our duty by things apt to express and signify it. 3ly, That
it is not true that Christ in Scripture has set down all things by which we
may be admonished of our duty. 4. That this Argument concludes with equal
strength against the imposition of all Ceremonies, even time and place. 5ly,
That the Injunction made by Rulers for Decency and Order, if they do truly
answer these ends, are made by virtual Commission from Christ, and therefore
can be no Entrenchment on his Legislative Power. Mr. Baxters Objection
answered,. 22.

CHAP. IV.
Repl. to Dr. Ham. p. 85.
therefore it is not lawful to add our Ceremonies to Gods worship. The Minor is
proved by Mr. Jeans thus: Because our Ceremonies are external worship, and
therefore parts of Gods worship. That our Ceremonies are external worship he
proves by these Arguments:

Ergo.

Ergo. Or thus: All mere and immediate actions of Religion are parts of Divine
worship; but our Ceremonies are mere and immediate acts of Religion. Another
argues in the like manner thus:



mystical signification are essential parts of worship: It being a part and
means of his worship, to teach his worship.

3. The public reading of the Scripture for the Edification of the Church is
acknowledged to be a part of Gods worship, so is the Preaching, Explaining, and
Applying of the Word, and if to teach by Word be a worship of God, to teach by
Sign, whether significative by the appointment of God, or declaratory by the
Invention of man, is worship also.



Jewish Ceremonies in the solemn worship of God was a part of his true and
immediate worship, and service, therefore others also must be a part of his
worship; for, agreeing with them in common nature and use, they must needs
consent in the common nature of worship, tho they differ in their adjuncts.

Add to these the Arguments of Mr. William Bradshaw in his Treatise of Divine
Worship.





must needs dishonor him, because all actions done in his worship which bring
no honor to him, are a profanation of the Name of God.

Civil Ceremonies tned to the honor of them to whom Civil Worship is due,
Religious Ceremonies tend to the honor of him to whom Religious Worship is
due, and is a part thereof, neither can any man imagine how any thing should be
Religious, whether a Substance, or a Ceremony, but it must needs respect him
whom Religion it self respects.

Ceremonies therefore in controversy being of this Nature, must be parts of
false worship, for else the bare ratifying of them could not make them true
worship.

Religious worship, which being done the vanity of these pretended Arguments
will be obvious to every discerning Eye.

Now outward worship in the general is the Acknowledgment of some Excellency in
the Person worshipped by actions proper to express our Sense or Apprehension of
that Excellency, so that three things concur unto the Constitution of it, viz.

1. An apprehension of that excellency in a person which deserves to be adored.

2ly, An Act of the will inclining us to do what we conceive is proper to
testify our apprehension of that excellency.

3ly, An outward Act, performed for the expression of our Conceptions of that
excellency.

Where therefore there is no intention to express our apprehension of any
excellency in another, Coroll.
by any Action we perform, nor is there in the Nature of the Action any
signification or expression of that excellency, there can be no worship, and
therefore no false Worship; it being therefore evident that in wearing of a
Surplice, or using the sign of a Cross, there is no Natural signification of
any excellency of that God we Worship, nor is there in us, who do use these
things, any intention to express our apprehension of any excellence in God,
it is certain they can be no Worship, and therefore no false Worship of God.

2. This being the Nature of Worship in the general, Religious Worship must be
an Act or Service in its own Nature, or the intention of the Worshipper
expressive of some excellency, or perfection in the object Worshipped. And
hence our knowledge, or conceptions of God, our disputations and disquisitions
touching his Nature, and his attributes are no parts of Worship, tho they be
terminated upon God, and he be the sole object of them, because they do express
no Honor, they are not designed as the expression of our apprehensions of his
excellency.

3. God being the only object of Religious Worship, all Worship that is truly
called Religious, must be either terminated on God, or such as does express
some excellency that properly belongs unto him, if it be terminated on God, and
does express no excellency belonging to him, and give him no real Honor, tho
it be designed to Honor him, it is then Superstitious Worship of God, if it
express some excellency proper to God, but terminated one the Creature, it is
then Idolatrous Worship. Those Ceremonies therefore which are not used with a
design to express any Honor which we owe to God, cannot be superstitious
Worship, and If they do not give that Honor to the Creature which is due to
God, they cannot be Idolatrous Worship.

4ly, Although those duties which are performed by Christians, relating to the
second Table, viz. obedience to Magistrates, love to our Neighbors, and all
the Acts of Charity, and Justice, are done for the Lords Sake, 1 Pet. 2.13. and
with respect unto Gods Glory, Matt. 1 Cor. 10.31.
5.16. and to this end they eat, and drink, and do all other Civil Actions; yet
are they not Religious Worship, because the immediate ends of those Actions is
not the expression of any excellence in God, but the pleasing of the
Magistrate, the doing good to our Neighbor, the refreshing of our Bodies, that
therefore any Act may properly be styled Religious, it must proceed from a
primary, direct, immediate tendance or intention to give Honor to God, or to
express our sense of some of his perfections, or his Holy Attributes, wherefore
the primary direct and the immediate intent of the Conformist in submitting to
the Ceremonies being the same, viz. Obedience to Superiors in lawful things,
he cannot rationally be said to perform Religious Worship by thus using them,
tho he submit to the injunction for the Lords sake, who has commanded that
obedience. And since the Magistrate commands them not as immediate expressions,
or acknowledgments of any excellency in, or Attribute of God, but partly for
distinction, partly for decency, and uniformity, and partly for their
Antiquity, and lastly as being apt to put us in mind of our duty, they cannot
be supposed by commanding of them to these ends to make them parts of Worship.

5ly, External and Bodily Worship is either Substantial, or Circumstantial, and
Ceremonial, the Substantial parts of Gods outward Worship are vocal Prayer,
Praises, hearing of the Word, not as the word of Man, but of God, receiving of
the Sacraments, as they import an entering into Covenant with God, and an
Eucharistical Oblation of our Souls and Bodies to him. Those Bodily Acts which
be performed by us in pursuance of these substantial parts of Worship, and
whereby we do signify either our Reverence of that God in whose presence we
are, or with whom we have to do, as standing, uncovering the head, kneeling at
Prayer, bowing of our Body at our entrance into the place of Gods Worship,
prostration, lifting up our Hands or Eyes to Heaven, or whereby we do make
profession of our Faith in God, as standing up at the Creed, to profession of
our Faith in a Crucified Savior, on which account the Ancients used the sign
of the Cross, or lastly whereby we enter into Covenant with God according to
his institution, as by receiving of the Sacramental signs. All these are
Ceremonial, or Circumstantial parts of Worship.

6ly, These Ceremonial parts of Worship are in the general commanded by God,
and they are natural signs of Reverence required by the second Commandment, for
that forbidding all outward Religious Worship to be given to that which is not
God, and that because it is that Worship which is due to God, the affirmative
part of that precept must be supposed to be this, Thou shall give unto me that
outward Worship; when therefore our Church Commands her subjects to Kneel at
their receiving of the Sacrament with Prayer; and does exhort, but not Command
them, to Worship God when they do enter into the place of Worship, or bow unto
the blessed Jesus, who is God blessed for evermore, when they are by his Name
put in Remembrance of that great Salvation which he has wrought for us, she
only does appoint that to be done at such a time, which God has in the general
Commanded to be done, and so does institute no uncommanded part of Worship.

7ly, When any thing is by God Commanded to be done in his own Worship which
does not primarily, directly, and immediately tend to express, or signify our
sense or apprehension of his excellency, or his Attributes, the doing of it in
its own Nature is no part of Worship, but only the doing of it in Obedience to
the Command of God, for all obedience is an acknowledgment of Gods Sovereign
Power, and the subjection which we owe unto it. Thus v. g. to receive the
person that is to be Baptized, to give the Bread and Wine to the Communicants,
are no parts of outward Worship, because they are not directly and immediately
designed to express any excellence of God, but only done in order to the
Baptising of the person to be received into the Church, or the convenience of
the Communicants receiving. Sitting at the receiving of the Sacrament can be no
part of Worship in those Churches which retain the gesture, because it is
retained only as a most fitting Table gesture, and all those things which God
enjoined to be done in his own Temple, the use of the Snuffers, and the Tongs,
the cleansing of the Candlesticks, the lighting up of the Candles, the bringing
in of the Wood for the Burnt offerings, with infinite things of a like Nature,
could be no parts of Worship, otherwise than as they were performed directly in
obedience to a Divine Command. Now hence it is easy to return an Answer to the
forementioned objections: For,

1st. Hence it appears, that the proper use of those Ceremonies of the Church
of England which are not Natural, or Instituted parts of Worship, is not the
Honoring of God by the acknowledgment of any of his excellencies, which is
sufficient refutation of the first Argument.

2ly, Hence it appears, that they are not mere and immediate Acts of Religion,
or formally elicited from Religion, as the second Argument supposes.

3ly, Hence it is evident, that all the means that God has appointed to teach
Obedience are not Acts of Divine Worship, as Preaching, Reading of the Word,
pious Discourse, good Advice, and good Example, which is sufficient Answer to
the third Argument, which also falsely does suggest that our Ceremonies are
devised to that end.

4ly, Hence it appears, that it is no part of Gods Worship to teach his
Worship, teaching being an Action directed not immediately to God, but Men: nor
are our Ceremonies devised to be means of Spiritual instruction by their
Mystical signification: nor are such signs necessarily essential parts of
Worship, (unless afflictions which are signs of Gods displeasure designed to be
means of Spiritual instruction, be also parts of Divine Worship) as the fourth
Argument supposes.

5ly, Hence it is manifest, that the teaching and reading of the Scriptures for
edification of the Church, is no part of Gods Worship, for the reason mentioned
before, on which false supposition does the fifth Argument proceed.

6ly, Nor are all Actions whereby Spiritual duties are taught in Gods Solemn
Worship, Acts whereby God is Worshipped, as is suggested in the sixth Argument.

7ly, Nor was the use of Jewish Ceremonies in the Solemn Worship of God, any
part of his true and immediate Worship, unless they were such Jewish Ceremonies
as did express, or signify some Divine Excellency, or the acknowledgment
thereof in those that used them, as the seventh Argument suggest, but does not
prove.

8ly, Nor are our uncommanded Ceremonies performed directly to God, as is
supposed Argument the eighth.

9ly, Nor are all special things done in the Service of God parts of his
Worship, as is asserted Argument the ninth.

10ly. Nor must all special Actions done in the Service of God bring special
Honor to him, viz. by the signification of any of his excellencies, not the
snuffing of the Candles, not the bringing of the Wood to the Temple, as the
tenth Argument supposes, such Actions are indeed performed in order to those
things which do bring Honor to God, even as submission to the Ceremonies
prescribed by the Church is done in order to the free Preaching of the Word,
and to the demonstration of our Obedience to Superiors, and to the preservation
of the Churches Peace, by which things God is highly Honored.

11ly, All Civil Ceremonies, or all the Circumstances of them, are not parts of
Civil Worship; not the taking of the Cup, by the Cupbearer, but the Kneeling
with it; not the filling out of the Wine, but the tendering it in that humble
posture. In a word, only those Ceremonies whereby we do express our sense of
some excellency in our Civil Superiors, or which by Nature, or by Custom
signify some excellency in the person to whom they are performed, are parts of
Civil Worship. And so also is the case with reference to Religious Worship: Nor
are our Ceremonies Religious, but only Ceremonies used in Religion.

12ly, Nor would the Command of God to use a Surplice, or sign with the Cross,
to signify to the Congregation the Reception of the Baptized Person into the
Society of Christians, make these Ceremonies parts of Divine Worship, any
otherwise than the doing of them would be an Act of Obedience to Gods Command,
and therefore the doing of them without that Command, can be no Worship, and
therefore no false Worship: Nor is all that God tieth in a particular manner to
his Worship, any part thereof.

To bring in any Ceremonies of Ordained and Mystical signification appropriated
to the Worship of God, without any License from Christ himself, is to Trespass
against his Kingly Office, for he is the only Lawgiver to his Church, and has
committed to her no Authority of appointing new things, but a Ministry to
observe and do such things as Christ has appointed with order and decency unto
Edification: It also is a derogation from the fullness of Christ's Prophetic
Office: For Christ is the only Teacher of his Church, and the Appointer of all
means whereby we should be taught and admonished of any holy Duty, and
whatsoever he has thought good to teach his Church, and the means whereby, he
has perfectly set down in Holy Scripture, so that to acknowledge any other
means of teaching and admonishing us of our Duty, than such as he has
appointed, is to receive another teacher into the Church besides him, and to
confess some imperfection in the means he has ordained to teach us by. This I
would learn, says Ames, how we can acknowledge and receive any means of
Religious teaching with Faith, except it appear to be appointed by an
Authentic Teacher and Lawgiver, and how our Prelates in appointing means of
Spiritual teaching, which Christ appointed not, can be accounted therein
Ministerial Teachers under him as their, and our only Authentic Teacher: As
also, if Christ be our Authentic Teacher in all good that we learn about
Religion; who taught our Prelates so good manners as to put Fescues of their
own making into his hand, and so appoint him after what manner and by what
means he shall Teach us? To this objection I Answer:

Rulers of our Church have instituted any Ceremonies to teach Spiritual Duties,
by their Mystical significations, or to be Authentic means of Spiritual
Teaching, whereas I know no Ceremonies appointed to be used to that end, so
that both the use of the Ceremony and the end, are matter of the Churches
Precept, and it were folly for her to make such Constitutions, for since the
Church cannot discern whether I have learnt that Spiritual Duty by using of her
Ceremonies, or not: She cannot punish the Offenders against such an Ordinance,
and so must vainly make it: She has indeed appointed such Ceremonies as she
conceives apt to stir up the dull mind of Man to the remembrance of his Duty,
Preface to the C. prayer of Cer. etc.
by some notable and special signification, and therefore has enjoined them,
because she so conceives of them; but she has no where said that she enjoins
them to Teach Spiritual Duties, or assigned any determinate signification of
them, v. g. she has enjoined her Ministers to wear a Surplice when they
Officiate, but has not said that she enjoins it to Teach them Innocence, or
Purity, or any other Spiritual Duty: Rubr. after the Communion.
She enjoins her People to Kneel at the Sacrament, and tells us that we should
signify thereby our humble and grateful acknowledgment of the benefits of
Christ; but then she does not say that she designs thereby to Teach us Humility
and Gratitude for those benefits, but only calls upon us to express that
humility and gratitude which she supposes we have learnt already. In a Word
these Ceremonies are not by her appointed to signify at all, much less to
signify what being used without her institution they would not signify, but
they are appointed to be used as being apt when used, to mind us of, or, bring
into our minds our Duty, or as fit to excite within us Pious meditations and
reflections.

2ly, I answer that if it be no derogation from Christ's Kingly or Prophetic
Office to stir up our minds to the performance of our duty by things apt to
stir them up unto it, or to express and signify our duty by things apt to
express and signify it, then can it be no encroachment on those Offices to
impose or require such things as have an aptness thus to signify and mind us of
our duties, for in it self it cannot be unlawful to require what may be
lawfully performed, tho it be not required; Now if it be a derogation from
Christ's Prophetic, or his Kingly Office to use such things as are apt to put
us in mind of our duty, it must be unlawful to toll a bell to put us in mind of
going to Prayers, to keep by us a skull or skeleton to mind us of our
Mortality, or a pare of Leathern Breeches, as Dr. Prideaux did, to mind us of
our former low Condition, to have our vaults or burying places ready fitted and
prepared, as the Eastern Nations had, and some great persons have, because
these things are apt to mind us of our latter ends, or to set apart a closet in
our Chambers for private devotions, that so our coming thither may mind us of
our duty. Moreover, then the ingenious Meditations of pious Mr. Boil, and
Quarles his Emblems, and all the History of the five Books of Moses graven in
Stone in the Chapter House of Sarum, and all things of like Nature which are
apt to bring to our Remembrance good things, and are not by our Lord in
Scripture appointed to be used to these ends, must be all Sacrilegious
usurpations upon Christ's Kingly and Prophetic Office. Again, then must that
pack of Cards which Contains the whole History of the Popish Plot, and our
deliverance from it be guilty of this Crime, because they were designed to stir
up our minds to an abhorrence of their wickedness, and a Thanksgiving to the
Author of our Deliverance, and we, with equal reason, may ask that profound
Question of Dr. Ames, who taught the Author of them, such good manners as to
put Fescues of his own making into our hands to mind us of these things?
Lastly, Upon the same account it must be a derogation from Christ's Prophetic
and his Kingly Office to require men to come gravely into the House of God, or
be uncovered there, or to kneel at their devotions, because these things are
apt to stir up the dull mind of man to the Remembrance of the Majesty, and
Greatness of that God with whom he has to do. By these, and many other
Instances of a like nature, it appears that, tho it may be doubted whether our
Ceremonies be indeed apt to stir up the dull mind of man to the Remembrance of
his duty to God, yet cannot it be rationally doubted but what is apt to do so
may be both practiced and imposed, without any derogation from the Kingly or
Prophetic Office of our Lord.

viz. That Christ in Scripture has set down all things by which we lawfully
may be admonished of our duty. If he has, then it is not possible, that any man
should have a good affection, or pious meditation stirred up within him by any
other means, or object, then such as is expressly contained in the Word of God:
Than which assertion nothing can be be more false. Who knows not that memorable
Story of the Cook who from consideration of the heat of his own Fire was moved
to reflect on the excessive torments of Hellfire, and thereby to abstain from
that iniquity which would expose him to them. Should a Dissenter in his
discourse with one of this calling, or in his writings, advise him to make this
reflection, would he usurp upon Christ's Regal or Prophetic Office?

Christ is the only Lawgiver to his Church; and therefore the Rulers of the
Church may make no Laws concerning Ceremonies of Mystical Signification, why is
not this as good, Christ is the only Lawgiver to his Church, and therefore they
may make no Laws touching the time and place of public worship? And if Christ
has committed to his Church no Authority of appointing new things, but only a
Ministry to observe and do such things which Christ has appointed, then either
Christ has appointed time and place, or she has no Authority to appoint them.
To this Dr. Ames answers, that time and place are no new things. But I hope to
appoint new time and place, is to appoint new things, and to make Laws
determining a time and place not determined before, is to make a new Law about
them. Again if this Argument be good, Christ is the only Lawgiver to his
Church, and therefore the Rulers of the Church may make no Laws concerning
Ceremonies, etc. why is not this as good, Christ is the only Lawgiver to his
Church, and therefore the Civil Magistrate may make no Laws concerning the
Payment of Tithes, or allowance of maintenance to Ministers, or of making
charitable Provisions for the Poor, or touching any other Christian duty. But
must leave every man to his Freedom in these matters, as Christ did.

1 Cor. 14.40, 10, 31, 32.
Christ having by his Apostles given Commandments which only primarily concern
the Rulers of the Church, viz. That all things in the Church be done decently
and orderly, to the Glory of God, Romans 14.19.
and so as to give none Offense, that Christians should follow after the
things, which make for Peace, and whereby they may edify one the other. I say
this being so, all the Injunctions made by the Rulers of the Church, pursuant
to the ends of Decency, and Order, the Glory of God, the avoiding Scandal, the
preservation of Peace, Unity, Edification, and for prevention of the Contrary,
are done by virtual Commission from this one Lawgiver, and therefore can be no
Entrenchment on his Legislative Power. And if Superiors should mistake in
Judging that such things did really conduce unto the decency, and orderly
performance of Gods Service, or to the other ends forementioned, when indeed
they do not so, yet would not their imposing of them for these ends be any
usurpation upon Christ's Legislative Power, any more than a Law made by Civil
Rulers which proves inexpedient, or burdensome to the people, tho by the
Makers of it it was intended for their good, usurps upon the Legislative Power
of the God of Heaven; For as it is judiciously said by Mr. Disp. 5. Chap. 2..
29.
Baxter, if just Authority shall injuriously, (he should have said mistakingly)
determine of such things, it may be the Subjects duty to obey, because these
are not matters alien to their Power, and without their line, but only this is
an imprudent overdoing in a work that belongs to them. When St. James says,
that there is one Lawgiver, he most plainly speaks of such a Lawgiver who is
able to save and to destroy, or pass the Sentence of Absolution, and
Condemnation upon others, whence he infers that they who take upon them to
censure and condemn their Brethren, usurp his Prerogative, but he speaks not
about the Laws of Decency and Order, and therefore cannot be supposed to
condemn them.

And whereas Mr. Answ. to the Commissioners p. 65.
Baxter does plausibly object against the Imposition of our Ceremonies, that
they are equally useful to the Church Universal in all Ages as to any
Particular Church or Age, and therefore should be the Matter of an Universal
Law, if of any, and so should be the Work of the Universal Lawgiver, if of
any. I answer, This, if granted, will only prove that there is no such positive
decency Expedience, or Edification in these Ceremonies, as is conceived by our
Rulers, that should render them fit to be imposed, but does not prove that they
usurp upon Christ's Legislative Power by imposing of them to these ends. But
2ly, This way of Arguing will necessarily condemn the Church of Christ
throughout all Ages, she having always used, and by her Canons and
Constitutions imposed such Ceremonies as were equally useful in all Ages, and
all Churches, as in any, as v.g. standing, upon the Lord's Day, at Prayer,
receiving of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper fasting, and all the Ceremonies
anciently annexed to baptism, to omit many others of like Nature before
mentioned. Now says he in another place: I dare not think or assert that for
truth which will condemn all the Christian Churches in the World throughout
most Ages of it. Disp. 5. Chap. 2. from. 7. to the 24.
3ly, The same Judicious Person gives us many instances of matters relating to
the Service of God, which Christ has not determined by Law; as v. g. What
utensils to employ about the Public Worship of God: whether we shall receive
the Lords Supper at a Table of Wood, or Stone, whether we shall sing in Rythm,
or Meter, or in Prose, what Order shall be observed in Reading of the
Scripture, or how much of it shall be read at a time, what Method we shall use
in Preaching, what Words in Prayer, or what Gesture, with many other things of
a like Nature which he most truly says are all left to humane Determination,
ibid.. 27.28.
and to humane Prudence. And yet according to his Argument, seeing no reason can
be given why the Determination of most of them would not be equally useful in
all Ages and all Churches, they must be the matter of an Universal Law, if of
any, and so of an Universal Lawgiver, and so cannot be left to humane Prudence
or Determination.

Again, when the same Person Argues against the Imposition of our Ceremonies
thus: Disp. 5. Chap. 4.. 3.
If these things are needful now, why not throughout all Ages, and all
Churches, if therefore Christ did neither by himself, nor his Apostles,
institute, and impose these Rites, then either the imposing of them is
needless, and consequently noxious, or else you must say that Christ has
omitted a needful part of his Law, which implies that he was either ignorant
what to do, or neglective of his Affairs. This Argument again condemns all the
Churches of Christ throughout all Ages, since the Apostles times, who have
always used some Ceremonies, which neither Christ nor his Apostles thought fit
to institute. And 2ly, It also renders it unlawful for humane Prudence to
determine any of those things, which, says he, Christ and his Apostles have
left undetermined, they being mostly such as are, or may be equally useful in
all Ages of the Church, and such of which it may be said whenever they are
determined by humane Prudence, if they are needful now, why not always? etc.

CHAP. V. The CONTENTS.
Obj. 5. Those Ceremonies which God himself appointed to teach his Church by
their signification may not now be used, much less may those which man has
devised,. 1. Answ. 1. That as St. Paul submitted to some Jewish Rites
unlawfully required by the Jewish Christians, that he might gain the Jew and
Minister to their Salvation, so may the Christian submit to Ceremonies unfitly
imposed by Superiors, for like good ends. Answ. the 2d. This Argument offers
nothing against signs Natural and Customary, such as are kneeling at the
Sacrament, the Cross in Baptism, standing up at the Creed. But only against
signs arbitrary from the imposing of which the Excellent Bishop Tailor does
excuse our Church,. 2. Obj. 6. The use of the Ceremonies is superstitious, and
therefore cannot be submitted to. Answ. By stating the true Notion of
Superstition, and showing, 1. That Superstition is a species of false Worship,
and therefore where no Worship is exhibited by the act done, or intended by the
Doer or Imposer of it, as in the case of our Ceremonies, there can be no
Superstition in that Act. 2ly, That Superstitious Worship undue as to the
manner of it can only be performed by offering that as acceptable and pleasing
to God, or as an Exercise of Religion, or an Acknowledgment of some of Gods
Perfections which is not so. 3ly, All Superstition consisting Fundamentally in
this mistake, and formally in the ensuing Practice; It follows that the
Forbearance of an Act upon the like mistake, viz. That we conceive it
well-pleasing to God, and tending to his Honor to forbear it when indeed it is
not so, is Superstition,. 3. Hence our Dissenters must be Superstitious,
provided that the Rites, that they refuse Submission to, be lawful in
themselves. 1. Because they do, and must esteem this their refusal as an Act of
special Honor done to God. 2ly, Because they must esteem themselves by this
forbearance Preservers of Gods Worship pure and spiritual. 3ly, Because they
must esteem themselves under a necessity of displeasing God by joining in
Communion with us,. 4.. 5. What is the true Import of Edification,. 6. Obj. 7.
We must not submit to the Institution or Introduction of New Sacraments; And
therefore not to the Institution of the Ceremonies of the Church of England,
they having the Nature of Sacraments,. 7. Answ. 1. That the Ceremonies of the
Church of England are not appointed to be signs of Spiritual Grace, or to
confirm Grace to us. 2ly, That the designing of these Ceremonies to express,
signify, or bring into our minds Spiritual Duties, cannot make them Sacraments:
With reasons, why the Representation of some Spiritual Duty by a mystical Rite,
cannot as properly pertain to the Nature of a Sacrament, as the sealing some
Spiritual Promise does,. 8. Many things required in Sacraments which are all
wanting in our Ceremonies,. 9. Mr. Baxters Arguments to prove the Cross, as
used in our Church a Sacrament are answered,. 10.

CHAP. V.
BUt say Dissenters: moral duties, and so as now, without great sin, none of
them can be continued in the Church, no not for signification, and therefore to
bring in others of like Nature, is to Judaize. To confirm this Argument they
add, that if men may impose such Ceremonies, because of their significancy,
they may reduce into the Church of Christ all the whole Mass of Jewish
Ceremonies, as v. g. 1. Those of moral signification, as the not eating of
Blood, to teach us to avoid cruelty toward the life of man and beast; the not
eating of unclean beasts, to denote our abhorrence of the impurities and
immoralities which by that abstinence the Jews were taught to refrain from; the
not touching any thing unclean, to mind us of avoiding all filthiness of Flesh
and Spirit, to omit infinite instances of like Nature. 2ly, By the like reason
many Jewish Rites which were Types, and Shadows of things to come may be
reduced into the Church upon other accounts, as v. g. Circumcision, to mind us
of the Circumcision of the Heart, the Paschal Lamb, to signify our Gratitude
for passing from Darkness unto Light, or from our Spiritual Thraldom unto sin,
into the Liberty of the Sons of God, all Sacrifices of Thanksgiving, and all
whereby they owned God to be the Author of Life and Death, and all their
temporal Mercies, and did Acknowledge that they deserved to die for sin, and
all the Jewish Garments importing Spiritual Duties to be performed by their
Priests, with many things of a like Nature. And indeed, says Bishop Tailor, If
the Church might add things, Duct. Dub. l. 3. c. 4. R. 20., 7.
or rituals of Signification, then the Walls might be covered with the Figures
of Doves, Sheep, Lambs, Serpents, Birds, and the Communion Table with Wine,
Herbs, Tapers, Pigeons, Raisins, Honey, Milk, and Lambs, and whatsoever else
the wit of man can invent. But the manner of teaching these truths, by
Symbolical things and actions, is too low, too suspicious, too dangerous, to be
mingled with Divine Lyturgies. Christ may, as he please, consign his own good
things that he gives us, but he consigns no good, and represents none but what
he also gives and effects in that Ministration, and under that Sign; but a
Symbolical Rite of humane Invention to signify what it does not effect, and
then introduced into the solemn Worship of God, is so like those vain
Imaginations, and Representments forbidden in the second Commandment, that the
very Suspicion is more against Edification, than their use can pretend to, and
it is also unbefitting the Gravity and Spirituality of our Religion.

Moreover it is certain that Christ did therefore break the Yoke of Moses and
cancel all the Ceremonial Rites contained in that Law, because they were in
themselves Burdensome, Acts 15.10. Unprofitable and weak, Hebr. 7.18.13.9.
because they were but weak and beggarly Elements, Gal. 4.9. The Rudiments of
the World, Col. 2.8, 20. Rudiments to which we were in bondage, Gal. 4.3, 9.
And were appointed only till the time of Reformation, whence it does seem to
follow, that to introduce like Rites, as burdensome, unprofitable, weak and
beggarly, is to reduce us in some measure to a state of Judaism. And that we
are not to be subject to such Rudiments is proved from Colos. 2.20. Where the
Apostle speaking partly of the Jewish Ordinances which were abolished, and
partly of the Insittutions of the Essens or Philosophers which others labored
to bring into the Christian Faith, said thus: If ye be dead with Christ from
the Rudiments of the World, Sermon. of Superst. p. 15.
wherefore, as living in the World are ye subject to Ordinances? i.e. says Dr.
Still. If ye are freed from the Yoke of the Law, what reason is there ye should
submit to another, which depends only on the Authority and Invention of men,
and Dr. In locum.
Hammond thus: If ye have received the Christian Faith as you ought to do, and
have made that use of the Death of Christ as to have forsaken all other
Doctrines, and Practices, to receive him, and so to look upon the Rights of the
Jews, and the Philosophy of the Gentiles to be abolished and out-dated, why do
you now subject your selves to such Abstinencies as either out of Heathen, or
Jewish Practices are brought in among you? And whereas it is answered, 1.
Still. 16. p. 16.
That the Apostle speaks not here of those who had Lawful Authority to impose
such things, but of Seducers: It may be thus replied: That this is not
material, seeing the Apostle does not reject these things, as being introduced
without just Authority, but as being Ordinances to which the Christian ought
not to be subject, they being Rudiments of the World, and things which did
insinuate that they who practiced them were not yet dead unto the World with
Christ. 2ly, Ibid.
Whereas it is answered that the Apostle speaks not of things appointed merely
for Decency and Order, but of such things as are supposed by the Imposers to
have more of true Perfection and Sanctity in them, more Humility and
Mortification, and consequently to be more pleasing to God than bare obedience
to the Precepts of Christ, and his Apostles, and that such only are here
censured, it is replied; That they who think these Rites fit to be imposed on
the account of their Edification, Decency, and Order, must think them more
pleasing to God, than bare obedience to Christ's Precepts in Celebration of his
Worship, and much more they who being importuned, out of pity to the Souls of
their weak Brethren, to abstain from the imposing of these things upon them
answer with our Commissioners, that the things they desire to be excused from,
a Real Goodness in them, a fitness and decency, tho Charity will move to pity
and relieve those that are truly perplexed and scrupulous, yet we must not
break Gods Command in Charity to them, and therefore we must not perform Gods
Public Services undecently or disorderly, for the Ease of tender Consciences.
For must not these men think that our Public Service is better and more
pleasing to God when performed with, than when performed without our
Ceremonies, even abstractly from their Institution, and that the using of these
Ceremonies does add some Real Goodness in the Service, which would be wanting
in it otherwise! Ductor Du^it. l. 3. c. 4. R. 20.
In a word, We are to remember, That Figures and Shadows were for the Old
Testament, but Light and Manifestation is in the New, and the Egyptians indeed
did teach Religion by Symbolical Figures, and in the Schools of Plato and
Pythagoras, they taught their Scholars by Numbers and Figures, but we that walk
in the Light of the Gospel, and rejoice in that Light, have received from
Christ and his Apostles an easier way of teaching the People, and are not
therefore to return to the Elements and Rituals of Jews, and Pagan Schools,
Christ left no sign but two, that did also effect as well as signify, and if
they had only signified, and done no other good, we have no reason to believe
that they would have been appointed. To this very weighty Argument, I think it
very difficult to give a full and Satisfactory Answer, tho unto others it seems
very slight. What I can honestly reply unto it is to this effect.

Paul submitted to some Jewish Rites unlawfully required by the Jewish
Christians as necessary to be observed by Jews, that he might gain the Jews,
and minister to their Salvation, so may the Christian submit to Ceremonies
imposed unduly by Superiors, when this is necessary for Preservation of the
Churches Peace, Unity, and Welfare, and to enable us to serve the Church of
Christ in ministering to the Salvation of the Souls committed to our Charge, or
to whose Service we are devoted by our Ordination; so that this Argument, tho
it seem strong against the Imposition of our Ceremonies, provided that they be
imposed as significant, and teaching Ceremonies, yet does it not conclude
against Submission to them on the foresaid accounts.

Signs natural, and customary, and Signs which are arbitrary, and tropological,
A natural Sign is that which naturally, and before any Institution, does
signify to others who perceive them, that which is intended by them, or which
they do import, as sighing, smiting of the Breast, imports Heaviness and
Sorrow, A customary Sign is that which custom, antecedently to any Institution,
has determined to this or that signification in the place where such a custom
does obtain; Thus pulling off the Hat with us is now, and pulling off the Shoe
among the Eastern Nations, was anciently with them a sign of Reverence; Now of
such signs it truly may be said, they rather are Expressions, than Documents of
what they do import. Such, v. g. were the ancient Love Feasts, and the Kiss of
Charity, approved, or required by the Apostles, viz. Expressions of that
sincere affection which they bore toward their Christian Brethren. And such is
kneeling, and prostration in prayer, embracing and shaking of hands; Such,
says the Apostle, was that covering of the Woman's Head in time of Public
Prayer, even that which Nature taught, 1 Cor. 11.14, 15. Such are the Festivals
of the Church, viz. Expressions of our Praises for the Mercies then received.
And the standing from Easter to Whitsunday, and on the Lords day, used in the
ancient Church, was not to teach by way of signification any duty, but to
express and testify their Belief of our Lords Resurrection, and for this end we
also stand up at the Creed; now that such signs may lawfully be used and
required, I know no cause of doubting from any thing which this Objection
offers, they being not instructive in, but only expressive of our Faith and
Duty, and under this head may be comprised, kneeling at the Sacrament, as an
Expression of our inward Reverence, and signing with the Cross, as an
Expression of our Faith in, and owning of the crucified Jesus.

Signs Arbitrary are such as neither of themselves, nor yet by any antecedent
Custom, do signify distincty and determinately to others, that which they are
instituted or imposed to teach or signify, such are the Elements of Bread and
Wine, for the breaking of Bread does no more naturally signify the breaking of
Christ's Body on the Cross, than the breaking of any other thing would do, and
such are all the moral significations of the Rites appointed by the Jewish Law
concerning clean Beasts for Sacrifice, and unclean forbidden to be sacrificed
or eaten, and such is the wearing of a Surplice to teach, or signify purity, it
being naturally, or by any antecedent Custom, no more proper determinately to
teach or signify to the Beholder, or our selves this Grace, than the putting of
it on upon black Garments to signify Hypocrisy, and a Pharisaical Temper, and
that we are like Scpulchres, white without, but black within. Against the
fitness of the Imposition therefore of such arbitrary signs to teach those
duties which are more plainly and determinately taught already in the Word of
God, I fear this Argument too strongly does conclude. But then the Excellent
Bishop Tailor does sufficiently excuse our Church from this supposed guilt by
saying that, There is reason to celebrate and honor the Wisdom and Prudence of
the the Church of England, Ibid.. 8. p. 327
which has in all her Offices retained but one Ceremony that is not of Divine
Ordinance, or Apostolical Practice, and that is the Cross in Baptism. Which tho
it be a significant Ceremony, and of no other use, yet as it is a compliance
with the Practice of all ancient Churches, so is it very innocent in it self,
and being one and alone, is in no regard troublesome or afflictive to those
that understand her Power, and her Liberty, and Reason. I said, she has one
only Ceremony of her own appointment, for the Ring in Marriage is the Symbol of
Civil, nor a religious Contract, it is a Pledge and Custom of the Nation, not
of the Religion, and those other Circumstances of her Worship are but
determinations of time and place, and manner of a duty: They serve to other
purposes besides signification, they were not made for that, but for Order and
Decency, for which there is an Apostolical Precept, and a Natural Reason, and
an Evident Necessity, or a great Convenience. Now if, besides these uses, they
can be construed to any good signification, or instruction, that is so far from
being a prejudice to them, that it is their Advantage, their Principal End
being different, and warranted, and not destroyed by their superinduced and
accidental use.

The use of the Ceremonies is superstitious, O^^. 6.
and therefore we, say they, cannot submit unto the Practice of them without
sin. That the use of the Ceremonies in Religious Worship is superstitious they
prove by Arguments already answered, viz. That it is super statutum or more
than God has in his Word required, and that they are imposed as parts of
Worship. Moreover these things, say they, cannot be used without Superstition
in the Service of God which have no necessary or profitable use in his Service,
for as vain Thoughts, and Words, are forbidden in the Holy Scripture, so is it
not to be doubted but that vain actions are forbidden, especially in the
Worship of God.

Superstition, that by applying it to our own Practice, and to the Practice of
Dissenters, we may judge who are most guilty of this vice.

1. Therefore Superstition being a species of false Worship, whereby we do
exhibit Worship to an Object to which it is not due, or to that Object which
deserves Worship, in an undue manner, it follows plainly that where no Worship
is exhibited by the act done, or intended by the Doer, or Imposer of the act,
there can be no Superstition in the Exercise of such an act; there may be
Vanity, and an abuse of Power in the imposing rites unprofitable, and
unnecessary, but there can be no Superstition, or Will Worship, where there is
neither any act of Worship, nor any Will to worship God by the Performance of
these Rites, nor designation of them unto such an end.

2ly, Superstitious Worship, undue as to the manner of it, can only be
performed by offering that as acceptable, and pleasing to God, or as an
Exercise of Religion, and honor to God, or an Acknowledgment of some of his
perfections, which is not acceptable, or well pleasing to him, which renders
him no honor, and does not tend to the Acknowledgment of any of his Attributes
or perfections, for by performing that which indeed is pleasing and acceptable
to God, or which does render honor to him, we cannot be superstitious, hence it
must follow that when men make those things a part of their Religion which God
has not commanded, or forbidden, and think God is pleased with their mere
doing, or abstaining from doing them, they in so doing must be superstitious.
Two things are therefore necessary to complete this species of false Worship,
viz.

1. That the matter about which it is conversant relate to the doing some
supposed Religious Act, that is, some Act of Service acceptable and well
pleasing to God, and which directly tends unto his honor.

2ly, That he who does it do really mistake in judging such an action to be
indeed Religious, and tending to his honor, and therefore acceptable to him.

3ly, All Superstition consisting fundamentally in this mistake, and formally
in the ensuing practice thereupon, it must with equal reason be concluded that
the forbearance of an act upon the like mistake, viz. that we conceive it well
pleasing to God, and tending to his honor to forbear it, when indeed it is not
so, is Superstition, because by that Forbearance we equally design to please
and honor God, and do it as unduly with respect unto the manner. And therefore
it is well observed by Dr. Stillingfleet That many Superstitions condemned in
Scripture chiefly consist in the forbearance of things lawful, Sermon. of
Superst. p. 37.
on supposition that the forbearance of them was well pleasing to God. The
Superstition condemned, Coloss. 2.22. lay in supposing God to be pleased with
their Forbearance of things lawful, with their not touching, tasting, handling
them, and therefore was a negative Superstition. And so it was in the dispute
between Christ, and the Pharisees, about healing on the Sabbath day, they
thought it unlawful, and therefore did abstain, Christ thought it lawful to do
good on the Sabbath day, and therefore did it, here was no positive observance
on the Pharisees part, yet here was Superstition in them, and therefore the
true Notion of Superstition does extend to the Forbearance of things in
themselves lawful, as displeasing to God.

Church of England, on supposition that they are lawful in themselves, and yet
are by Dissenters abstained from as unlawful, must be superstitious, will be
exceeding evident.

1. Because they do, and must according to their Principles esteem this their
refusal to submit unto them when imposed, as an act of special honor to God, it
being a declaration of their minds that they think God dishonored by such
acts, and therefore dare not comply with them, it can be only fear of sinning
against God which can engage them with the hazard of their Estates and Ease,
etc. thus to refuse obedience to the Commands of their Superiors. They then
must look on this refusal as a product of the fear of God, and as an act of
true obedience to him in opposition to the unjust Commands of men, or an
obeying God more than man, and consequently they must esteem themselves more
holy, acceptable, and well pleasing to God on the account of this Forbearance
than Conformists are.

2ly, Because they do, and must esteem Gods Worship corrupted by the use of
these our Rites, as to the Purity, and the Spirituality of it, and so they do
esteem themselves by this Forbearance, Preservers of his Worship pure and
spiritual, and free from that Idolatry and Superstition, with which they charge
it upon these accounts.

3ly, Because they do, and must according to their principles rather refuse to
join in the external Communion of our Church, and rather bound to set up
separate Communions, than to comply with these our Rites; now surely nothing
but a necessity of displeasing God by joining in Communion with us can warrant
their refusal of it, nothing but a necessity by God imposed on them of setting
up such separate Communions in Order to the acceptable Worship of God, can
justify their Separation, if therefore they mistake in Judging that such
necessity is laid upon them, as they must do, if it be lawful to submit unto
these Rites, and hold Communion with us notwithstanding the necessity which
lies upon them to submit unto them, they must be superstitious in that Practice
which follows from this grand mistake.

That these things edify by their Signification, and therefore must be good and
profitable, and so not like unto vain Words and Actions. To this it is replied
by Dissenters that many things of a like Nature, when they are used by devout
and thinking men, may edify by their Signification, and yet the imposition of
them upon that account would scarce exempt them from the appearance of vanity.
As v. g. Should a Church Governor command his Subjects to appear in Armor in
the Church to signify their Spiritual Warfare, or to put on an Helmet to
signify that they would manfully fight under Christ's Banner, or to drink Milk
in token of their desire to feed on the sincere Milk of the Word, or to use
Vinegar and Gall in token of their Resolution to undergo the greatest Hardships
for the Sake of Christ, or to put on a pair of Spectacles to signify we are dim
sighted in the things of Christ, tho the Signification of these things might
tend to edify, the things required could hardly be excused from vanity. 2ly,
They add that Edification in the Scripture Sense is quite another thing from
this obscure way of teaching by Signification. To edify our Brother in the
Scripture Sense is to build him up, and to confirm him, and help him forward in
the Christian Faith, 1 Timothy 1.4. Jud. 20. The things by which the Church is
said to receive Edification are of a better Nature, viz. Walking in the Fear of
God, and in the Comfort of the Holy Ghost, Act. 9, 31. The Preaching of the
Word, 1 Cor. 14.3, 4, 5. Christian admonition and discourse Administering Grace
unto the Hearer, Ephesians. 4.29. The Graces of the Holy Spirit descending on Christ's
Members, Ephesians. 4.16. Of the Edification of any indifferent and humane Ceremony
the Scripture speaks not one Word. We are then said in Scripture to edify our
Brother when we forbear indifferent and unnecessary things which through his
weakness do cooperate toward his ruin, Romans 14.19, 20. We do it by our
Charity toward him in these things, for Charity edifyeth, 1 Cor. 8.1. By our
Promotion of unity, and so by the removal of such unnecessary things as do
obstruct it, (...) Edify your selves into one, 1 These. 5.11.

Superiors Command may lawfully be done by you, and who Transgress your bounds
when you presume to judge, whether the things imposed be in their own Natures
profitable, edifying, or convenient to be imposed; for if they be as you
conceive, the fault supposed in the imposing of them is not yours but theirs,
whereas the fault in not submitting to them, if lawful, will most certainly be
yours.

2ly, Whatsoever they are in themselves, yet your submission to them in
obedience to the lawful Commands of your Superiors, for preservation of the
Churches Peace, for the prevention of Schism, and all its dreadful consequents,
for the obtaining freedom to join in the Communion of the Church, will
doubtless highly tend to your Edification and your Profit, as being a
Submission to them for such Pious Christian ends, as Christianity most
stirictly does oblige us to aim at, and pursue, and which are in themselves
sufficient to sanctify an action otherwise unprofitable, and render it a
Christian Duty. Lastly to Kneel at the receiving of the Sacrament, to express
our Reverence and Humility, to sign a Child with the Cross, in token to the
Congregation that he is listed among Christ's Members, or wear a Surplice for
decency or distinction, cannot be proved to be vain, by any of the Instances
forementioned.

We cannot, say Dissenters, lawfully submit to the institution, New Sacraments
into the Church of God, or use them being introduced without Divine
Institution: For a Sacrament, according to the Catechism of the Church of
England, being an outward visible sign of inward Spiritual grace, and both a
means thereof, and a pledge to assure us of it, he only can have power to
appoint a Sacramental sign, who has right to promise, and power to Minister
that grace; and therefore he alone who is the God of all grace can institute a
Sacrament; now that our Ceremonies, some at least of them, are Sacraments, they
endeavor to prove by these Arguments. 1. All Mystical Bodily rites and signs
of Spiritual grace administered to the Church of God in his Solemn Service, to
confirm grace, and that by him who represents the Person of Christ, are
Sacraments; but such are the greatest part of our Ceremonies, for they being
Administered to Edify the Soul and Conscience, must be Administered to confirm
grace, the Sacrament of the Lords Supper being for this cause alone a
Sacrament, because it is a Mystical Rite whereby the Soul Spiritually feeds
upon Christ, i. e. is Edified in Christ, these being Mystical Rites whereby the
Soul is Edified must be also Sacraments.

2ly, No reason, say they, can be given why the representation of some
Spiritual Duty by a Mystical Rite should not as properly pertain to the Nature
of a Sacrament, as the shadowing, or Sealing some Spiritual promise, and it
seems altogether as lawful for Man to devise signs for the confirmations of his
Faith, as to admonish of, and teach his Duty, for what difference is there
between an addition to the means of instruction appointed by God, and to the
means of our assurance prescribed by him, the Commandments and Promises being
so knit together that we cannot perform our Duty without assurance of some
benefit by it from God. Moreover, to be a teacher of the understanding, and
exciter of devotion, requires power supernatural no less than to be a
confirmer of the heart, and he who has Authority to ordain means effectual for
any of these ends, can bless them all, and Man has as much power to Seal what
he cannot bestow, as to teach by his own sign that which he cannot bless to
that end.

Church to introduce new Sacraments truly and properly so called, but then unto
the Arguments produced to prove our Ceremonies to have the Nature of true
Sacraments, I Reply: 1. That I know not any Ceremonies which by the Church of
England are appointed to be signs of Spiritual grace, or to confirm grace to
us, for it is one thing to appoint or use such Rites as in themselves are apt
to signify, or mind us of Spiritual things, or bring such things to our
remembrance, which the Church confessedly does, and it is another thing to
appoint such Rites to be used to that end, which the Church does not, by the
bare using of the thing appointed we comply with the institution in the first
sense, but only by using of these Rites to such an end, do we comply with it in
the Second; now where does the Church of England require us to use her
Ceremonies to such ends? Where does she say, you shall wear a Surplice to put
you in mind of that purity of Conversation which is required by the Ministers
of Christ, you shall Kneel to signify or mind you of that Reverence you owe to
God, you shall receive the sign of the Cross to put you in mind of your Duty to
confess and own a Crucified Savior: (no sure, that Ceremony is used to Persons
not capable of being put in mind of any Duty, only in token to the Congregation
that they are listed amongst them who are engaged so to confess.) What enquiry
does the Church of England make, whether any of her Members have used her
Ceremonies to these ends or not? When did she ever quarrel with, or punish any
for neglecting to use them to these ends? Wherefore the whole foundation of
this Argument is, in my judgment, false, and rather grounded upon some fanciful
expressions of some Writers of the Church of England, than upon any of her own
institutions, and decrees; she having no where said that she administers any of
the forementioned Rites to confirm grace, or does appoint them to be signs of
grace, but only that she does appoint them as being apt, and proper in
themselves to put good thoughts into us, or to express our Reverence, as
beating on the Breast, or sighing, is apt to signify, or to express our Godly
sorrow, and looking up to Heaven, to mind us of the wisdom, and the power of
the great Creator, and of that Majesty who dwells there.

kiss of Charity, and the love Feasts used, and approved in the Apostles time,
and all the Ancient Ceremonies of the Church designed to signify, or represent
Spiritual things, must also be esteemed Sacraments, they being all designed to
Edify the Soul, and consequently the whole Church of Christ, from the
beginning to this present day, must justly be obnoxious to this Sacrilegious
guilt of adding to the Sacraments of Christ. 2ly, Then must all visible
Creatures become Sacraments, they being all designed by God to Edify us by
instructing us in, and minding us of the Almighty power and Majesty of God.
Then 3ly, Every Crucifix, and Picture relating to Spiritual things, every piece
of Tapestry, or Turky-work which contains, any piece of sacred History, whereby
we may be Edified, Every good Ballad, Pious Book, and Frontispiece set before
it, and even that Pack of Cards which lately was contrived to mind us of the
Popish Plot, must be a Sacrament: If, as the first Objection says, all Rites
and Signs whereby the Soul is Edified, or which have been designed to that end,
are Sacraments, then all the Moral signs of the whole Jewish Law must be
reputed Sacraments: The Tabernacle, the Altar, the Sacrifices, the Golden
Candlestick, the Lamp, and Snuffers, the Priests Garments, the Phylacteries and
Fringes which God Commanded them to wear for a Memorial, the clean Beasts
appointed to be Eaten, and Offered, and the unclean to be abstained from, must
all be Sacraments according to this Rule, they being Rites appointed to
signify Spiritual things, or Duties, and so to Edify the Soul and Conscience,
yea every good word we speak, every instruction we deliver to our Child, or
Friend, or our Parishioners, every Public Prayer must be a Sacrament, for
words are signs, and these are words, and therefore signs designed to Edify
the Soul.

Lastly, If every thing designed to teach the understanding, or to excite
devotion only as objects, and as occasions which the mind of Man may use, or
may reflect on to that end, must be a Sacrament, then every Gibbet set up to
mind us of the Punishment of evil doers, and every person executed on them,
must be Sacraments, they being objects proper to Minister occasion to our minds
to reflect upon the shame and punishment of such offenses as bring Men to the
Gibbet, then all Gods judgments upon wicked Persons, and all the mercies he
vouchsafes unto his Servants, as Testimonies of his kindness to them, and the
examples of all Pious Men, must be accounted Sacraments, they being all
designed to teach our understanding, or excite devotion in us; and it will be
as much unlawful, when I wash my hands, to reflect upon my obligation to purity
of heart and life, or when I taste the sweetness of my food, or think upon my
care and labor to procure it, to reflect upon the sweetness of the bread of
life, and how much more I am concerned to labor after it, as to use the
imposed Ceremonies as the occasions of devout conceptions: And lastly, then to
smite upon my Breast to excite Godly sorrow, to Pray prostrate, to increase, or
to express my humility, or perform any other actions of like Nature, must be to
add unto the Sacraments of Christ's appointment.

And whereas the objection adds that no reason can be given why the
representation of some Spiritual Duty by a Mystical Rite should not as properly
pertain to the Nature of a Sacrament, as the shadowing or sealing some
Spiritual promise: I Answer, the disparity is very plain, for these Rites,
falsely styled Mystical, may of themselves be apt to express, or put me in mind
of my Duty, but cannot of themselves be apt, without Gods pleasure signified,
to seal his promise, or to assure me of his grace. I can by meditation, or by
reflection upon the meanest object, move my self to the performance of my Duty,
but cannot by the like reflections move the Author of every good and perfect
gift to give me what he never promised, or seal unto me any Spiritual blessing.

Lastly, If we may take an estimate of Sacraments from those recorded in the
Old, or the New Testament, we shall find many things required to Sacraments
which are all wanting in our Ceremonies, supposing that they were enjoined to
these very ends. For, 1. A Sacramental sign of Duty obliges us to the
performance of the Duty signified, the Sacrament of the Lords Supper to
thankfulness for the blessings represented by the Elements, and to walk as
becomes the Members of Christ's Body, whereas a Ceremony, tho apt to signify,
does not oblige us to the performance of the Duty signified, nor do I sin
against God, provided I live holily and purely, tho the consideration of a
Surplice do never move me so to do, or be by me improved to that end. 2ly, All
Sacraments import a Covenant established betwixt God and Man, a Stipulation on
each part, and by partaking of them we either enter into, or else renew our
Covenant with God, and make profession that we are in Covenant with him: And by
just consequence a Sacrament is Sacrae rei signum in quantum est significans, a
sacred sign which sanctifies, and separates the receiver from others who do not
receive, or own such Rites, thus by the Sacraments of Circumcision, and the
Passover the Jews were made a separate People from all other Nations, and the
neglect of either of these ordinances was Cutting off from Gods People, because
this was a breaking of Gods Covenant, Numb. 9.13. Genesis 17.14. likewise we
Christians are by Baptism received into Covenant with God, by eating at Gods
Table we make profession of our adherence to that Covenant, and also by
participating in the Blood of the New Covenant, and to exclude a Person from
the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, is to exclude him from the Communion of the
Body of Christ. 3ly, All Sacraments contain a promise on the part of God, and
Stipulation on the part of Man, and upon this account they do not only mind us
of our Duty, but also lay upon us fresh obligations to perform it, and also
they oblige our God to give us grace sufficient to perform that Duty to which
he does oblige us by these Sacraments: Now there is nothing of all this in our
three Ceremonies; we do not by them enter into Covenant with God, nor are we by
them Sanctified, or Separated from other Christians who use them not, nor does
God by them promise any Blessings to us, nor do we oblige our Souls to any
Duties toward him, nor do we enter into any Stipulations with him, or he with
us, they who do most, do only take occasion from them to reflect upon their
Duty, as Men of Fancy, and Devout affections may do from any other thing which
does occasionally present it self unto their minds: And whereas it is more
particularly excepted against the sign of the Cross, that as it is imposed it
has the Nature of a Sacrament, from this discourse we may return an easy
Answer to the objections made against it, as v. g.

Here is, says Mr. Baxter, the outward visible sign, the Cross: Di^p. 5. of
Cer. chap. 2.. 56.
Answ. Just such another as is made in the Air by Preaching, we may see the
Minister making a Cross, but who ever saw an Aerial Cross after it was made?
2ly, The inward and Spiritual Grace, says he, is a Holy resolution to fight
Manfully under the banner of Christ, and to persevere therein. Answ. An Holy
resolution in an Infant is a Spiritual grace indeed: Here is, says he, 1st. A
signification of grace to be wrought on the Soul, and given us by God. 2ly, An
engagement to perform the Duties of the Covenant our selves, on Gods part we
are to receive by this sign both qualitative, and actual grace, and relative
grace. Answ. All this is said without all ground from any thing delivered by
the Church of England, it is no sign assuring us of Gods grace, as all true
Sacraments are, it is no engaging sign either on Gods part, or on ours, but only
an Indicatory sign to the Congregation, that the Baptized Person is listed
among those who are to fight under Christ's Banner: The Cross, says he, is to
Teach our Understandings, and help our Memories, and quick^n our dull
Affections by minding us of a Crucified Christ, and the benefits of his Cross,
so that this, The Book of Common Prayer, says not they are appointed to teach,
but only that the things appointed are apt to stir up the dull mind, the
difference of which two Phrases I have showed already. And that this, says he,
is the way of working grace as Gods word, and Sacraments do, is undeniable.
Answ. We are discoursing here not of Gods Word, but of his Sacraments, and that
they only work grace Morally, and as things apt to stir up the dull mind of
Man, and by objective Teaching, is a false assertion, which renders the
Sacraments unnecessary, and no more operative than is a Meditation on the
things they represent, whereas indeed they seal grace, they have a promise of
grace annexed to them, and they confer it Physically on the due receiver: And
then, says he, for relative grace, it is plain, that by the sign of the Cross,
as well as by Baptism, we are entered into a state of Christianity, and so it is
an investing Sacramental sign, it lists us under the Banner of Christ
Crucified: And that is the very essential Nature of the Sacrament of Baptism it
self. Answ. It is not true that the Cross used by the Church of England is an
investing sign, or that we by the Cross are entered into a state of
Christianity, it being only a declarative sign to others that we have been
entered by Baptism: If, says he, you judge it essential to a Sacrament to be an
engaging sign in the very Covenant of grace it self, the Cross is instituted to
this end, it is to engage our selves to a Crucified Christ as our Captain and
Savior by his Cross, and to bind our selves to the Duty of Soldiers or
Christians to our lives end, and consequently to teach us to expect the
privileges of faithful Servants and Soldiers from a Crucified Christ; all this
he gathers from these words of the Common Prayer, we sign this Child with the
sign of the Cross, in token that hereafter he shall not be ashamed to confess
the Faith of Christ Crucified, etc. But these words, rightly Interpreted, give
him no Color for any of his inferences, the token there spoken of, relating
not to the Child, who is incapable of taking notice of it, but to the
Congregation into which he is received, so that it is as much as if it were
said, we receive this Child into the Congregation present, in token to them,
that he is now by Baptism become one of them who are Members of the Crucified
Jesus, and so hereafter shall not be ashamed to confess that Faith; this will
be evident from the subscription made by Dr. Burges in these words, where the
Book says, Defense of Dr. Morton p. 24, 25.
And do sign him with the sign of the Cross, in token, etc. I understand the
Book not to mean that the figure of the Cross has any virtue in it to effect,
or further this Duty, but only to intimate and express by that Ceremony, by
which the Ancients did avow their profession of Christ Crucified, what the
Congregation hops and expects hereafter from that Infant, viz. that he
shall not be ashamed to profess the Faith of Christ Crucified, into which he
was even now Baptized.

And therefore also when the 30th. Canon says, that the Infant is by that sign
Dedicated unto the Service of Christ, I understand that Dedication to import,
not a real consecration of the Child, which was done in Baptism it self, but
only a Ceremonial declaration of that Dedication; like as the Priest is said to
make clean the Leper, whose being clean he only declared.

These Interpretations King James accepted, p. 26.
and my Lords Grace of Canterbury affirmed them to be the true sense and
intention of the Church of England.

And again p. 477, 478. The Child, says he, must first be Baptized, and upon
that Baptism be acknowledged by the Minister, speaking then in the Name of the
whole Congregation in the Plural Number, we receive this Child, etc. to be now
made a visible Member of the Church of Christ by Baptism, before he may use
this Ceremony of the Cross: And, when he does use it, he is bound at that
instant to profess, and tell why it is done, namely, in token that hereafter he
shall not be ashamed, etc. that is, not be ashamed of that Covenant whereinto
he is by Baptism now entered: So as no Man can say that this is done to add
either virtue to the Sacrament, or capacity of grace to the Child, but only for
intimation to the whole Congregation for their instruction, what it is to which
Baptism once received, binds all Christians that come to age convenient; which
Ceremony the Church of England thought good to retain, because it had such an
use in the purer times. If any Man does yet stumble, as I confess my self to
have done, at those words of the 30th. Canon, that by this Lawful Ceremony, and
Honorable Badg, this Child is Dedicated to the Service of Christ; I pray such
a one to know, and I have good warrant to assure him, that the word Dedicated
does here import no more than declared by that Ceremony to be dedicated, like
as the Priest is said to have cleansed the Leper whom he only declared to be
clean, Levit. Disp. the 5. of Cer. chap. 3. ^. 18, 16.
14.11. Now to this end, says Mr. Baxter, and on these terms was the sign of
the Cross used heretofore by Christians, and therefore I durst not have
reproved any of the Ancient Christians that used the sign of the Cross merely
as a professing signal action, to show to the Heathen, and Jews about them,
that they believed in a Crucified Christ, and were not ashamed of his Cross.
The occasional indifferent use of this when it is merely to this end, I durst
not have condemned.

CHAP. VI. The CONTENTS.
The Arguments against the Rites established by the Church of England by which
Dissenters do endeavor to show, that tho they may be lawful in themselves, yet
are they not to be submitted to by reason of some Circumstances which attend
them, are reduced to their respective Heads, viz. 1. The supposed Violation of
Christian Liberty. 2ly, The abuse of them by others to Superstition and
Idolatry. 3ly The appearance of Evil that is in them. 4ly, The Scandal which
they minister to the Weak. And lastly, That by submitting to them they should
partake of the supposed sin of the Imposer,. 1. Objection the 1st. They violate
our Christian Liberty, because they render us subject to Ordinances, which is
the thing forbidden, 2 Coloss. 20. 2ly, The Servants of men, which is
forbidden, 1 Cor. 7.23. 3ly, Because they bind the Conscience. And 4ly, Because
they are urged on those who in their Consciences condemn them,. 2. In answer to
this Objection it is asserted that the determination of any thing indifferent
by our Superiors, provided they do not impose it as a thing necessary in its
own Nature, or as a part of our Religious Worship, can no ways violate our
Christian Liberty. And that 1. Because Scripture lays Restraints upon our
Liberty in matters of this Nature. 2ly, Then all our Vows and Promises
respecting things indifferent relating to the Service of God, would violate our
Christian Liberty. 3ly, Because what we may do, tho no Injunction of the
Magistrate required it, cannot be sin when done, because he does require it.
4ly, Then, should the Magistrate forbid the doing of the things enjoined, we
must not leave undone what he forbids. 5ly, Then is it in the Power of the
Magistrate to cut off all that Liberty we have in matters of this Nature, and
to oblige us not to do what ever we are left at Liberty by God to do. 6ly,
Because this pretended Liberty is the occasion of lamentable Mischiefs to the
Church of God, whereas the good which can accrue unto her Members by it, is but
little. 7ly, Because such a pretended Liberty is contrary to the Practice of
Church Governors laid down in Scripture, and to the Rules prescribed for their
Government,. 3. Corollaries: 1. Hence it is evident, that Christian Liberty
cannot be violated by these impositions, because Conscience is bound to yield
obedience to them, when they are imposed. Nor 2. By requiring Persons to do
that of which their Conscience being erroneous, doubts, or which it does
condemn. A direct Answer is returned. 1. To that Passage of St. Paul, ye are
bought with a price, be not ye the servants of men, 1 Cor. 7.23. 2ly, To that
of Coloss. 2.20. If ye be dead with Christ from the Rudiments of the World,
wherefore are ye subject to Ordinances?. 4. Obj. 2. Our Ceremonies have been
abused to Superstition and Idolatry, and therefore, being not of necessary use,
should be abolished; and cannot be submitted to without disobedience to many
Precepts of the Old and New Testament, requiring the abolition of things so
abused,. 5. Answ. 1. That these Commands were given only to the Jewish Nation,
and where no Natural Analogy, or moral reason can be showed for their perpetual
Obligation, cannot be binding to the Christian, and that the contrary Tenet
will be very mischievous to Christian Kingdoms and People. Ans. 2. That it
cannot rationally be supposed that God, by any of the Texts alleged, forbids
the doing of a lawful action merely because it has been, is, or may, by
others, be abused to Superstition or Idolatry, provided we do not continue to
be ensnared by it, nor is there any ground of fear that we should be so; 1.
Because this Interpretation of them would rob us of our Churches, and our
Bells, and many other things which the Dissenters do allow of. 2ly, Because
then many things which both Jews and Christians practiced would be unlawful.
3ly, Because neither the Jews nor our Lord Jesus, nor his Disciples, did
scruple such material Conformity with Heathens in indifferent matters as our
Dissenters do condemn. Ans. 3. That Superstition and Idolatry can cleave no
longer to such Actions than the mistake of men's opinions of them does remain.
Ans. 4. That tho it be not necessary to impose our Ceremonies, yet when they
are imposed by Authority, they become necessary in their use, and so are not to
be accounted things unnecessary in respect of us,. 6. A direct Answer is given
to the Text objected; 1. By showing that the things in which the Jewish Nation
are forbid to do after the manner of the Canaanites, or the Egyptians, are
either Idolatrous Actions or Ceremonies, or Actions tending to Idolatry, or
contrary to the Service of God. As in Exodus 23.24. Lev. 18.3. Deuteronomy. 12.4. Not
to Name their Gods, Exodus 23.13. is not to Worship, enter into covenant with,
or to swear by them. 3. The import of that Phrase thou shall call me no more
Baal. Hos. 2.16. 4. The reason why God commanded his own People to destroy the
Altars, and the Images of Heathens, and not to take unto themselves the Silver,
Gold, and other Furniture belonging to them was the prevention of their
erecting of them, and preserving them to give Idolatrous Worship to them, or
make them Instruments of Idolatry. As Exodus 34.13. Deuteronomy. 7.25. Esa. 30.22. 5.
Why the Jews were forbid to round the Corners of their Heads, or mar the
Corners of their Beards, Lev. 19.27, 28. 6ly, 2 Cor. 6.17. Touch not the
unclean thing,. And Jude. 23. Hate even the Garments spotted with the Flesh,
are impertinently produced against the using of our Ceremonies. 7ly, The eating
of things sacrificed to Idols condemned, Revel. 2.14.20. was only eating of
them in the Idol Temples, and at the Feasts of Idols so as to be Partakers of
the Table of Devils, or to commit Idolatry by the Participation of them,. 7.
Answer to the Examples objected, as 1. To that of Jacob causing his Family to
give him the Earrings which were in their Ears. 2ly, Of Daniel who would not
defile himself with the portion of the Kings Meat, Dan. 1.8. 3ly, Of Mordecai
refusing to bow to Haman. 4ly, Of Hezekiah who brake the Brazen Serpent when it
was abused to Idolatry,. 8. Obj. 3. We must abstain from all appearance of
evil, 1 Thessalonians. 5.22. Now the Ceremonies, at least have an appearance of evil in
them. Answ. 1. The Words may be well rendered thus, abstain from every sort or
kind of evil, or thus, from every appearance that is evil. A. 2. The Apostle
only advises us to abstain from that which after trial seems evil to our
selves, and not from that which only does appear to others to be evil. The
absurdity and mischief of the Exposition of these Words obtruded on us by
Dissenters. And the Argument retorted,. 9.

CHAP. VI.
Dissenters to endeavor to prove the Rites required by the Church of England,
as the Conditions of Communion, to be sinful in themselves, and by the Word of
God forbidden.

I proceed therefore in the last place to answer those Pretenses which do, and
must proceed on this Concession, That the things required are in themselves
indifferent, and not forbidden by the Word of God, and yet they who grant this
contend that they are rendered sinful, or such as they cannot with a good
Conscience do, by reason of some circumstances which attend the Rites imposed,
the imposition of them, or their Practice of them.

And 1. The imposition of these things indifferent is represented by them as a
Violation of their Christian Liberty, in which they are commanded to stand
fast, and consequently are obliged not to betray by their Submission to these
Impositions.

2ly, The Rites imposed, say they, tho lawful in themselves, have been abused
by others to Superstition and Idolatry,; now things indifferent and
unnecessary, having been thus abused, become unlawful to be used.

3ly, We are required, say they, to abstain not only from all kinds, but also
from all appearances of Evil; now the imposed Rites have in them an appearance
of Evil at the least, 1 Thessalonians. 5.22
and therefore are to be avoided.

4ly, We, say they, are commanded to forbear the Practice even of things
indifferent, when by the doing of them we minister occasion of Scandal to the
Weak; now by the Practice of the imposed Rites we shall be sure to minister
occasion of Scandal to our Weak dissenting Brethren, and therefore we conceive
our selves obliged in Conscience to forbear the Practice of them.

Lastly, We must not, say they, be partakers of the sins of others; now by
imposing of these Rites, as the Conditions of Communion, we cannot but conceive
that our Superiors do very grievously sin, and should we tamely yield
Submission to them, when imposed, we should encourage and harden them in that
iniquity. And therefore think our selves obliged to forbear the Practice of
them. Now unto these Pretenses I shall endeavor to return a full, plain, and I
hope, satisfactory Answer, beginning with the first.

Christian Liberty in reference to things indifferent,

1. Because it does restrain their Practice in matters wherein Christ has left
them free, and therefore, say they, The Apostle by saying if you be dead with
Christ to the Rudiments of the World, Coloss. 2.20.
wherefore are ye subject to Ordinances? Touch not, taste not, handle not,
after the Commandments and Doctrines of Men, condemns not only humane decrees
concerning Rites and Ceremonies, but also our Subjection to such Ordinances of
Men, as take from us Liberty of Practice in the use of things indifferent; for
otherwise not touching, not tasting, not handling, being things indifferent,
might have been submitted to: And whereas it is said, that Christian Liberty
consists only in Liberty of Judgment, but not of Practice, touching matters of
this Nature; We see, say they, that when the Apostle gives Instance of such
humane Ordinances as violate our Christian Liberty, he says not: You must not
think, you may not touch, but touch not, etc. Telling us, that when the
Practice is restrained from touching, tasting, handling, by the Ordinances of
Men, then is Christian Liberty violated, tho the Conscience be left free.

2ly, Because obedience to these Impositions renders us the Servants of Men,
which St. Paul will not permit, saying: 1 Cor. 7.23.
Ye are bought with a price, be not ye the Servants of Men? Where, say they,
the Apostle forbids the doing any thing for the Will and Pleasure of Men, when
our Conscience can find no other reason for the doing of it, what therefore is
pressed upon men by naked Will and Authority, without giving any reason to
satisfy the Conscience cannot by Christians be submitted to, because they must
not be the Servants of Men.

3ly, The Imposition of these Rites, say they, does take away our Christian
Liberty, because Conscience it self is bound thereby, at least in the Opinion
of the Imposers, for the obliging of the Conscience for the time to assent, is
the binding of it.

4ly, Because these Impositions are urged upon such as in their Conscience to
condemn them, and so they have not the Liberty preserved of abstaining from
doing that of the lawfulness whereof their Conscience doubts.



I say then, that it is most absurd to think and teach that the determining of
any thing indifferent relating to the Worship of God should be repugant to our
Christian Liberty.

For Explication of the terms of this Assertion, consider, that a thing
indifferent is such a thing or action which in it self is neither good nor
evil, neither commanded nor forbidden by God; And that to determine of such
actions, is to require us to do, or to omit the Practice of them.

2ly, Consider that there are many actions of this Nature which must be done in
Celebration of Gods Worship, tho God has no where given Rules touching the
circumstance, and manner of performance of them. As v. g. We must, if we will
meet for Public Worship, do it in some place, and in some hour of the day, but
at what place, or at what hour we should meet, God has not told us. The
Minister, who does officiate, must do it in some Habit, but in what Habit he
shall do it God has not determined. The Priest, who consecrates the Sacrament,
must consecrate some Kind of Wine and Bread, but whether he shall consecrate
Claret, or Tent, unleavened, or leavened Bread, round Wafers, or round Loaves,
or else flat Cakes, or Rowls, is not declared by the Word of God. The Sacrament
received by the Communicant must be received in some Posture, but whether
standing, sitting, or kneeling shall be the Posture, our Lord has not informed
us. To sing in Public is declared to be a duty, but whether we shall sing in
Meter, or in Prose; with Instruments of Music, or without, plain song, or
pricked, the Scripture gives us no directions. These therefore, with all
matters of like Nature, already mentioned, are things indifferent, that is,
neither commanded, nor forbidden, and they do all relate unto Gods Worship. And
our Assertion is this:

That the determination of any matters of this Nature by our Superiors, Civil,
or Sacred, provided they do not impose them as things in their own Nature
necessary, or parts of our Religious Worship, does no ways violate our
Christian Liberty. For

1. A Restraint is by the Scripture laid upon our Liberty in matters of this
Nature when by the Practice of it we may scandalize our weak Brother, 1 Cor.
8.9. Take heed lest by any means this Liberty of yours become a stumbling block
to the weak. And also when, by restraint of this our Liberty in things
indifferent, we serve the ends of Love and Charity, Gal. 5.13. Ye are called to
Liberty -- yet by Love serve one another. Why therefore may not the Authority
of Gods Vicegerents, or of Christ's Ambassadors, lay like restraints upon our
Liberty in matters of this Nature? Why may we not do that for Reverence and
Love to them, which Love unto our Neighbor requires us to perform? why should
we not be careful that our Superiors be not scandalized, as by our disobedience
to them in lawful matters they will be, as well as that we do not scandalize
our weaker Brother. Since by abstaining from any thing indifferent for fear of
giving scandal to, or out of Love to others, a restraint is put upon our
Liberty of Practicing these things, as well as by the Precepts of Superiors,
why should the one be deemed more inconsistent with our Christian Liberty, than
is the other?

2ly, Were this restraint in matters of indifferency relating to the Service of
God, a Violation of our Christian Liberty, than all our Vows and Promises
respecting things indifferent, relating to the Service of God, must be a
Violation of that Liberty, since by them we restrain our Freedom as to those
matters, as much as it is restrained by the Commands of our Superiors According
therefore unto this opinion, should I vow to keep a fast in Lent, to kneel at
the Receiving of the Sacrament, to set apart a Room in my own house for private
Devotion, or to do any other thing relating to the Service of God which he has
not determined, I could not be obliged to perform those Vows, as being
Violations of my Christian Liberty.

3ly, That which I may do, tho no Injunction of the Magistrate required it of
me, cannot be therefore sin when done, because he does require it, but any
thing indifferent relating to Gods Worship may be done by me, tho no Injunction
of the Magistrate required it, for if it be a thing indifferent, it cannot be
forbidden, and what is not forbidden, it cannot be unlawful to perform; now to
assert that what I lawfully may do, must be my sin, if done because the
Magistrate commands it, is in effect to say what is the plainest Contradiction,
viz. That it is unlawful to yield obedience to Gods Vicegerents in any lawful
matter. Moreover tho the Magistrate should not determine in matters of this
Nature, if we will practice any of these duties, we must our selves determine
of them; v. g. If we will meet for Public Worship, we must appoint some time,
and place in which to do it, if we will minister in Sacred Things, we must be
clothed with some Habit, a cloak, a gown, or surplice, which we do thus
minister. If we will consecrate the Sacrament, we must determine upon some kind
of Wine, and Bread in which to do it, and if we will receive the Sacrament, we
must pitch upon some Posture in which we will receive, if we will sing, it must
be done in Prose, or Meire, and the like. If therefore a necessity does lie
upon us to determine in matters of this Nature before we do perform them, how
can it be a Violation of our Christian Liberty, for the Superior Power to do
that which we must do our selves, and which when once the Minister determines
for himself, the Peoples Liberty is equally restrained, as it would be by the
Command of their Superior.

4ly, If by imposing of these things indifferent relating to Gods Service,
which we may leave undone, the Magistrate so violates our Christian Liberty
that we may not do them, because he thereby does restrain our Liberty of
leaving these things undone, then by like reason should the Magistrate forbid
the doing of the things enjoined, we must not leave undone what he forbids,
because he thereby does restrain our Liberty of doing of these things, for it
is easy to perceive that it is as great a Violation of our Liberty to have
indifferent things forbidden us, as to have them commanded, that it is no less
Encrochment on our Liberty to be tied up from what we antecedently to the
Command of our Superiors might do, as to be bound to the performance of what we
might omit. If then Dissenters think themselves obliged to refuse Submission to
these things indifferent because commanded by the Magistrate, it is but
forbidding them to yield obedience to them, and then, by their own Principle,
they must become exact Conformists. Now is not this a Foolish Liberty which
tends to make men humoursome and cross to their Superiors, so that what he
desires they should do he must forbid, what he desires they should leave
undone, he must command, if this be worthy of the name of Christian Liberty,
let any Reasonable Person judge.

5ly, If by imposing of a thing indifferent, relating to the Service of God,
the Magistrate does violate our Christian Liberty, and we stand bound not to
obey, or to perform the thing commanded, then is it in the power of the
Magistrate to cut off all that Liberty we have in matters of this Nature, and
to oblige us not to do what ever we are left at Liberty by God to do, as v. g.
If he commands us to meet for Public Worship at such a place, or time, we must
be bound to do it at another place and time. If he commands the Minister to
consecrate such Wine and Bread, he must be bound to consecrate some other kind
of Bread and Wine. If he require the people to stand, or sit, at the receiving
of the Sacrament, they must be bound to kneel, or use some other Posture, and
so in other cases of like Nature. So that this Doctrine puts it into the power
of the Magistrate to restrain both our Consciences, and Practices in matters of
this Nature, and to determine them to one, and so to take away that Liberty
which is so eagerly contended for. And

6ly, This pretended Liberty is the occasion of lamentable mischiefs to the
Church of God, whereas the good which can accrue unto her Members by it is but
little, the disadvantage they can suffer by the want thereof is inconsiderable.
We can receive but little good by such a Liberty from the Commands of our
Superiors in things indifferent, because they being such, if we do them we are
not the better, or more acceptable to God, and if we do them not we are not the
worse, or the less pleasing to him, for otherwise they could not rationally be
styled things indifferent; If then our Freedom from obedience in such matters
can only be a Freedom of doing or omitting that which, whether we omit or do,
we are neither worse, nor better, what good can we receive by such a Freedom?
what disadvantage by the want thereof? Is it not the whole design of the Gospel
to make us obedient to the Laws of Christ, to make us holy, and free from the
Dominion and the Power of sin? and may we not be therefore certain that those
actions which are neither good nor evil in themselves, neither commanded nor
forbidden by Christ, and therefore no way tend to the obstructing our obedience
to Christ, our Holiness of life, or to the depraving of our Souls, and bringing
them in bondage to sin, cannot be prejudicial to any interest or design of
Christian Doctrine, whether they be performed or omitted? Now is it not absurd
to think our Lord should purchase for his Church a Liberty to disobey Superiors
in matters wherein their obedience would bring no disadvantage to them, their
disobedience will do them no good? Moreover our obedience to our Superiors in
such matters, visibly does rend to the promoting Love, Peace, Unity, Humility,
Self denial, orderly Walking, and such like Christian Virtues, and therefore it
is most improbable Christ should have purchased our Freedom from it. Our
disobedience, as we by sad experience see, does tend to the promoting Schisms,
Dissentions, Uncharitableness, Calumnies, Wrath, Strife, Contention, it
procures Strokes for the Backs of Fools, exposes both the Persons, and Families
of disobedient Persons to temporal and spiritual Evils, it excludes them from
Sacred Ordinances, and the Communion of the Church, and therefore such a
Liberty from doing things not evil, or displeasing to God, must be so far from
being worthy of our Saviors purchase, that it does contradict his great
Design, that Love, Peace, Union might flourish in his Church, and that the
contrary fruits of the flesh, might be entirely banished from among his Members.

7ly, Such a pretended Liberty is contrary to the Practice of the Church
Governors laid down in Scripture, and to the Rules prescribed for their
Government; it is contrary to that Liberty the Rulers of the Jewish Church did
exercise, as I have showed already in many instances of things no where
determined by the Law of Moses, and yet enjoined by them, it is also contrary to
the Apostles Practice, who forbad the using of things strangled and blood, tho
they not only were things in themselves indifferent, but things required by
that Ceremonial Law from which our Lord had freed his Servants, and therefore
more might have been pleaded against submitting unto that Decree, than to the
Constitutions of the Church of England concerning other things indifferent.
Lastly, St. Paul requires that all things which relate unto Gods Public
Worship, of which he there discourses, should be done decently and orderly,
but how shall Rulers be able to order matters so, if it be an Infringement of
our Christian Liberty to have any thing imposed upon us by our Governors for
decency and orders sake? Particular Rules being not given us in Scripture about
this matter, which to be sure would have been done, were they not left to the
determination of the Rulers of the Church. Wherefore to give a brief, but a
sufficient Answer to the Objections mentioned,

Superiors to violate our Christian Liberty, Then 1. All the Commands of
Masters, Parents and Superiors respecting things indifferent, civil or sacred,
must be repugnant to that Liberty, because we are, if Servants, Children or
Subjects, obliged to obey them in all lawful matters, even for Conscience sake.
2ly, Then our own vows, and resolutions concerning any thing indifferent, must
violate our Christian Liberty, because we are obliged in Conscience to perform
them. 3ly, Then can we not abstain from any thing indifferent in case of
Scandal, as St. Paul Commands us, without infringing of our Christian Liberty,
because our Conscience is then bound, for fear of Scandal, to abstain from what
is in it self indifferent.

2ly, It also is exceeding evident that Christian Liberty cannot be violated by
requiring Persons to do that of which their Conscience, being erroneous,
doubts, or which it does Condemn, as is insinuated in the fourth Objection. For
were this so, Then 1. our Laws must violate true Christian Liberty when they
command the Quaker to pay Tithes, for he not only doubts the lawfulness
thereof, but peremptorily pronounces it unlawful so to do. Then 2ly, our Laws
Commanding all Papists to come to Church, to obey the King in opposition to the
Pope, to take the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, must violate his Christian
Liberty, because he doubts the lawfulness of yielding obedience to them. 3ly,
By the same Rule my Christian Liberty must be infringed much more, when
Magistrates Command me to abstain from what my Conscience tells me I should do;
now seeing an Erroneous Conscience may urge Men to the greatest wickedness,
since it may make them verily believe they ought to do many things contrary to
the Name of Jesus, Acts 26.9. and that by killing his Disciples, they would do
God Service, Joh. 16.2. no Laws according to this Doctrine, can be laid on Men
whose Conscience is Erroneous to, bind them not to do the worst of Evils.

3ly, In Answer to that passage of St. Paul, we are bought with a Price, 1 Cor.
7.23.
and therefore must not be the Servants of Men. I say,

1. That it is only an advice unto those Christians who being Slaves to
Heathens, had once bought their Liberty, or by the bounty of their Friends had
been redeemed from Slavery, not to sell themselves again, or to return to the
condition of their former Servitude, but to continue in that Liberty; it
therefore should be thus Translated, are ye bought with a Price? Be not ye the
Servants of Men: To make this clear, consider, that the Apostle is there
instructing Christians how to behave themselves in their particular stations
and callings, and not upon pretense of Christianity to think themselves obliged
to alter their condition, or to neglect those Duties their proper station did
require; thus from v. 12th. to the 16th. he requires the believing ^usband not
to desert the unbelieving Wife, and the believing Wife not to part from her
unbelieving Husband, but to abide in that condition in which the Lord had
called them: In the 18th. and 19th. verses he advises the Circumcised
Christian, not to desire to be Uncircumcised, and vice versa, but to abide as
they were; from v. 21. to v. 24. he gives advice to those who were believing
Servants, thus; Art thou called being a Servant? care not for it, think it not
a disparagement to Christianity that thou art still a Bondsman, but if thou
may be made Free, prefer Freedom before Bondage. Are you bought with a Price?
(as by the Charity of Christians many believers then were) be not then the
Servants of Men, return not any more to the condition of your former Slavery:
This without doubt is the true import of the words. But 2ly, according to the
ordinary reading, and interpretation of them, viz. ye are bought with a Price,
even with the Blood of Christ, be ye not the Servants of Men; it gives no
Commission to the Christian, to refuse obedience to his Superiors in lawful
matters, for to be the Servants of Men, which is the thing forbidden to Christ's
Servants, is only not to yield obedience to Men in any thing repugnant to that
Service which they owe to Christ, and therefore it is so far from being
prejudicial to that obedience we owe unto Superiors for the Lords sake, that
for this very reason we are required to obey them in all lawful things, because
it is part of that obedience which Christ requires from us as his Servants, and
which we are required to do for the Lords sake: So Col. 3.20. Children obey
your Parents in all things, for this is well pleasing to the Lord, and v. ^^
Servants obey your Masters in all things, and whatsoever you do, do it heartily
as to the Lord; for, in serving them, you serve the Lord Christ; it being his
ordinance that you obey in yielding to them in all lawful things. And again 1
Pet. 2.13, 16. Submit your selves to every Ordinance of Man for the Lords sake,
as the servants of God: So that you see our being bought with a Price being
that which makes us Christ's servants, even when we are free from Slavery to
Men, it must engage us the more strictly to Obedience to Masters, Parents, and
Superiors, this being that we owe unto them in all lawful matters, for the
Lords sake, and which we are obliged to perform as the servants of Christ.

Lastly, In Answer to that enquiry of St. Paul, If you be dead with Christ from
the rudiments of the World, Coloss. 2.20.
wherefore as living in the World are ye subject to Ordinances? Touch not,
taste not, handle not, etc. I say,

1. That the Apostle speaks not there of Rites, or Constitutions required by
Authority, and owned as things indifferent in their own Nature, but of
Doctrins, Dogma's, and Commands of Jews, and of Philosophers, and false
Apostles, who could have no Authority to require from them submission to these
Doctrines, and Commands, but on supposal of the goodness, and excellency of the
things Commanded: He therefore speaks of such things as the Colossians could
not be Subject to on any grounds but such as in themselves were Superstitious,
and were reproachful to the Gospel, and to Christ the Author of it, as
representing him deficient in wisdom by his neglecting to Command things so
exceeding good and excellent.

2ly, The things here mentioned are manifestly things which, in the judgment of
these Dogmatisers, were things by which God would be better Worshipped, and his
Religion be advanced, or the Professors of it would be rendered more Perfect and
Sublime, and for neglect of which they were to be Condemned, tho no Authority
of Man did interpose for their injunction, as will be evident.

1. From this consideration, that they were things for the neglect of which the
false Apostles did condemn the Christian, as is insinuated in these words, let
no Man judge, censure, or condemn, you in meats or in drinks, v. 16. yea they
were things for want of which Christianity it self was represented as
imperfect, and inferior in Wisdom to the Promoters of these institutions;
whence the Apostle, in opposition to these false Apostles, declares that in
Christ were hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge, v. 3. and adds, that
this I say, lest any Man should belie you with enticing words, v. 4. Hence he
exhorts them to beware lest any Man spoil them through Philosophy and vain
Deceit, v. 8, 9.
after the Traditions of Men, after the Rudiments of the World, and not after
Christ, and gives this reason of his caution, that in him did all fullness
dwell, and that we were complete in him. v. 23
2ly, Because these things are styled Will Worship, they therefore who did
introduce them must look upon them as things conducing to the more acceptable
service of God, or the advancement of his Worship. 3ly, Because they who
performed them did it out of pretense of that Humility, Mortification, and
Austerity which they conceived highly acceptable, and well pleasing to God, v.
23. wherefore the Church, which does acknowledge that the things enjoined by her
in their own Nature are indifferent, and such as in themselves do not conduce
to make our service more acceptable, and well pleasing to God, can be no ways
concerned in this prohibition.

All things, and Rites which have been notoriously abused to Idolatry, Cross,
Surplice, Kneeling in the act of receiving, are such Rites as have been thus
abused, and therefore, being not of necessary use, they ought, say they, to be
abolished. The Major they prove: 1. From many Texts of Scripture which enjoined
the Israelites not to do after the works of the Canaanites, Exodus 23.24. or of
the Egyptians, or to walk in their Ordinances, Levit. 18.3. not to do so unto
the Lord their God, as they did Deuteronomy. 12.4. and in particular not to Name their
Gods, Exodus 23.13. not to use the Name of Baal, because it had been given to
Idols, Hos. 2.16.
but to destroy their Altars, break their Images, and cut down their Groves,
Exodus 34.13. to burn the Graven Images of their Gods with fire, and not to take
unto themselves the Silver and Gold that is upon them, Deuteronomy. 7.15. to defile
the covering that is upon their Graven Images of Silver, and the ornaments of
their molten Images of Gold, to cast them away as menstruous Cloths, and say
unto them get ye hence, Isa. 30.22. and also from those places which Command
them not to round the corners of their Heads, nor mar the corners of their
Beards, not to make any cuttings in their Flesh for the dead, nor Print any
marks upon their Bodies, Levit. 19.27, 28. to which they add those Texts of the
New Testament which require us not to touch the unclean thing, 2 Cor. 6.17. but
to hate the Garments spotted with the Flesh, Jude 23.

2ly, Rov. 2.14, 20.
Because the Churches of Pergamus and Thyatira are by Christ reproved for
suffering Men to teach their Children to eat things offered unto Idols, which
in themselves were not unlawful to be eaten, but only did become unlawful
because they were abused to Idolatry. And,

3ly, From examples of good Men in Scripture, who abstained from things in
themselves lawful upon this account, v. g. the example of Jacob who abolished
the Earrings of his Family, as being Ensigns of Superstition, Genesis 35.4. of
Hezekiah who brake in pieces the Brazen Serpent, being abused to Idolatry; of
Mordecai, who would not bow to Haman, Esth. 3.2. of Daniel who would not eat of
the Kings meat, which was converted to an Idolatrous use, lest he should be
defiled, Dan. 1.8.

Now that our Ceremonies have been notoriously abused to Idolatry they prove,
because they have been consecrated to the service of Idols, and commonly
employed in Idolatrous Worship by the Papists: To this Objection I Answer,

Old Testament were given only to the Jewish Nation, where no Natural Analogy,
Moral reason can be showed for their perpetual obligation, I know not why they
should be binding to the Christian any more than other Laws of the like Nature,
which do not now oblige, by the confession of our Adversaries; as v. g. they
were to kindle no fire on the Sabbath day, Exodus 35.3. but must we therefore
kindle none on the Lords day; they were forbid to take Usury of their Brethren,
and yet Dissenters do not Scruple the taking usury one of the other. They were
to destroy the places wherein the Inhabitants of Canaan served their Gods,
Deuteronomy. 12.2. and yet Dissenters did not Scruple to use the Churches which the
Papists had abused to Idolatrous Worship: They were to make no Covenants with
the Idolaters of Canaan, Exodus 23.32.34.12. Deuteronomy. 7.2. may therefore Protestant
Princes make no Leagues with Papists? They were utterly to destroy them, Deuteronomy
7.2. and that lest they should teach them to do after their abominations. Deuteronomy.
20.16, 18. not to have mercy on them, ibid. may we therefore, without mercy,
destroy all Papists out of our Dominions, lest they should teach us to do after
their abominations, or might they, when they had the power in their hands, deal
so unmercifully with us whom they deem guilty also of Idolatry, and an
abominable Worship? Lastly, They were obliged to kill the Person who enticed
them to Idolatry, Deuteronomy. 13.9. and utterly to destroy all who did Sacrifice to
any other Gods, save to the Lord only, Exodus 22.20. If any of their Cities were
withdrawn from God unto Idolatry, they were obliged to smite it with the Edge
of the Sword, utterly destroying it, with the Infants and the Cattle thereof,
Deuteronomy. 13.15. and to burn the City, and the spoil thereof, and must we therefore
deal so unmercifully with any Parish or City that is seduced to Popery? Did our
Dissenting Rebels think it necessary to burn our Houses, and the Spoils they
took? wherefore we see what mischief will ensue upon applying of things
commanded to be observed by the Jews toward Idolaters, to Christian Kingdoms
and People.

Idolatry or Superstition, or any other sin, provided we do not continue to be
ensnared by it: Nor is there any ground of fear we should be so; for if so,

1. This Interpretation and Application of these places would robus of our
Churches and our Bells, and many other things which the most strict Dissenters
did allow of, for every Church in which Idolatrous Religion is performed, does
seem as much defiled thereby as any kind of action or gesture can be defiled by
this, that others do abuse them to Idolatry, and yet even the Directory says,
that Such places are not subject to such pollution by any Superstition formerly
used in them, and now laid aside, as may render them unlawful, or inconvenient:
It is well known that the Bells, Fonts, Pews and Desks of our Churches were
charmed by Popish Prayers in a superstitious manner, and yet our late Reformers
did not think it reasonable that they should be disused upon that account. Now,
Defense of Dr. Morton p. 569.
as the Reverend Doctor Burges puts the question; Did God ordain Bells to call
men to Church? or Churchyards to bury in? or a Font of Stone to baptize in? or
a Silver Cup to administer the Wine of the Supper in? or fitting upright at the
Communion Table in token of our familiarity with Christ? or one particular
place built on purpose for his people to meet in for his Worship, now under the
New Testament, and that separate only to sacred Uses, or this or that prescript
Form of Prayer, except the Lords Prayer, in calling on him? Speak man, are any
of these things in their particulars divine, and not humane? are all these such
as may not well be spared upon occasion? is there any of these which has not
been superstitiously abused by Papists, or other Idolaters? as the posture of
fitting by the Arians; flinch not, dally not, speak the truth, as in the sight
of him that shall judge you and us at the last day, and then you shall be
forced to confess that some of those Rites and Ceremonies which your selves
either practice, or allow, are as merely humane, have been as much abused as
those you impugn, and are not so necessary, but that all, or some of them might
well be spared, and yet you allow them.

2ly, If this were so, it must be unlawful to bow our knees and bodies to God,
2 Kings 5.18.
because the Heathens bowed their knees to Baal, and their bodies to Rimmon, 1
Kings 19.18.
or to prostrate the body to him, as the Heathens did to Idols, Exodus 23.24. or
to lift up our eyes to God, Ezekiel. 18.12.^^ 25.
or to stretch forth our hands unto him, because the Heathens lifted up their
eyes to Idols, and stretched forth their hands to a strange God, Psalm. 44.20.
or sit at the Lords Supper because the Heathens sat when they feasted on their
Sacrifices in the Idols Temples. I^^^ 32.6. 1 (...) ^^.19.
Whereas we find these signs of Reverence and Gestures still used both by Jews
and Christians who bowed their Knees and Bodies to God, 2 Chronicles. 6.13. Ezra
5.2. 2 Chronicles. 7.3. Act. 20.36. Ephesians. 3.14. prostrated their whole bodies to him,
Josh. 7.6. Exodus 4.31. Mat. 26.39. Lifted up their eyes, and stretched forth
their hands unto him, Psalm. 123.1. Mat. 6.11. and lay down at the Paschal
Supper, not fearing the transgression of the Precept, Thou shall not do so unto
the Lord thy God.

3ly, The Jews themselves, and that with approbation from God, used many things
like unto those which were observed in general by Heathens, and by the Nations
in particular, which the Objection mentions, and our Lord Jesus and his
Disciples did not scruple such a material conformity with Heathens in
indifferent matters, as our Dissenters do condemn. For v.g. the Jews placed the
Tabernacle on a great high place in Gibeon, 1 Kings 3.4. where God appeared to
Solomon, Verse 5. they placed the Ark in the house of Aminadab on the hill, 1 Samuel 7.1. their Synagogues are called the houses of God, Psalm. 74.8. and they
were always built upon the Hills, or higher ground of the Cities, although the
Heathens did superstitiously choose such places for the performance of their
Idolatrous Worship, and set up their Idols and Altars on every mountain and
hill, conceiving that they were then nearer to their Gods. And our dear Lord
went up unto a mountain to pray, and therefore did not think that all material
conformity with Heathens in such matters was forbidden in these Texts, nor did
that abuse of Gardens to Idolatry, which by the Prophet Isaiah is noted in
these words, Thou shall be ashamed of the oak, and thy gardens which thou have
chosen, Isai. 1.29. deter our Savior from praying in a Garden, Joh. 18.1, 26.
Mat. 26.39. Again, the Idolatrous Heathens at their Festivals did lie along, or
lean on their left sides, They laid themselves down on clothes by every altar,
Amos 2.8. They feasted (...), lying down in their Idol temples, 1 Cor. 8.10.
and yet the Jews, tho God no where commanded them to do so, did at the eating
of their Passover, lie down in token of the rest that God had given them in
that good Land, and Christ and his Apostles did conform themselves unto this
custom, as I have showed already, and thereby they demonstrated that none of
all these Texts forbad material conformity with any Heathen Rites which in
their nature were indifferent. Ainsw. in Deuteronomy. 7.5.
Nor were the Jews themselves so nice and scrupulous as our Dissenters in this
matter, for they declare, That if an House was built, or a Tree planted
purposely for an Idol, it must be destroyed, and may not be turned to common
use, but if the House was first built, or the Tree planted for common civil
use, and an Idol has after been placed in that House, or under that Tree,
these may revert unto their first intended use, the Idol being removed. Since
then our Ceremonies were used without any Superstition or Idolatry by the
Fathers of the Church, before they were abused by Papists to those ends, why
may they not return unto their former use, the Superstition and Idolatry
adhering to them, being first removed?

therefore the Imposers of our Ceremonies have purged them from all those
mistaken Doctrines and opinions of the Church of Rome; which made them
Superstitious and Idolatrous, they cannot be abused to those ends. Now when the
Idolatry and Superstition, or the abuse adhering to an action is totally
removed, there remains nothing which can make that action unlawful to be done,
and therefore nothing which can render it unlawful in it self to be required to
be done: Since then we are only commanded to depart from Babylon, Rev. 18.4.
that we partake not with her in her sins, and so no farther than is requisite
for the avoidance of Communion with her in sin; when we have purged these
actions from all those Superstitions and Idolatries which adhered to them as
they were exercised in that Church, we have done all that Christ and his good
Spirit thought needful to require of us in respect to our departure out of
Babylon.

Ceremonies, yet when they are imposed by Authority, they become necessary in
their use, and so are not to be accounted things unnecessary in respect of us:
For if Temples, Bells, Fonts, Desks, and other sacred Utensils shall be
preserved as necessary, because, as the Dissenter says, so much Money is
spared to other good uses; why are not our Ceremonies more necessary to us in
their use, seeing upon submission to them depends the maintenance of many
Ministers, and their Families, the obedience of the King, and his Laws, Civil,
and Ecclesiastilcal, the peace of the Church of Christ, and the free Preaching
of the Gospel, which sure are things more necessary, than the sparing of our
Purses. Wherefore to give a positive and a perspicuous Answer to the Objected
Texts, I say,

1. That the things in which the Jewish Nation are forbid to do after the
manner of the Canaanites, or the Egyptians, are either Idolatrous Actions and
Ceremonies, or actions contrary to the service of God, or else things tending
to Idolatry. Thus Exodus 23.24. thou shall not do after the works of the
Canaanites, is a command not to bow down to their Gods, and serve them, but to
overthrow them utterly, and quite break down their Images, and then it follows,
v. 25. ye shall serve the Lord your God; the works forbidden therefore by that
Phrase were contrary to the service of God. And v. 33. the reason of this
Prohibition is thus given, for if thou serve their Gods, it will surely be a
snare unto thee; So again, Levit. 18.3. After the doings of the Land of Egypt
wherein you dwell, shall you not do, neither shall you walk in their
ordinances. Why? Because, as Ainsworth well observes, Egypt was an Idolatrous
Land, and there Israel had been defiled. Ezekiel. 20.8. they Rebel'd, against me,
says God, they did not every Man cast away the abominations of his Eyes,
neither did they forsake the Idols of Egypt, Ezekiel. 23.8. and of the Land of
Canaan: God says unto them Levit. 20.23. Ye shall keep my Statutes and
Judgments to do them, ye shall not walk in the manners of the Nations which I
cast out before you, for they committed all these things, and therefore I
abhorred them: So that to do after the doings of the Land of Canaan, is to do
contrary to Gods Judgments and Statutes, and to commit the abominable things
which they did; and this is so evident through the whole Chapter that he who
runs may read it: For 1. The reason why God forbids them to do after the manner
of Egypt and Canaan, is this; I am the Lord your God, v. 2. 2ly, The opposite
command is this, v. 4, 5. Ye shall do my Judgments, and keep my Ordinances to
walk therein; I am the Lord your God, ye shall therefore keep my Statutes and
my Judgments, I am the Lord. And v. 26. Ye shall therefore keep my Statutes and
Judgments, and shall not commit any of these Abominations. And again, v. 30.
Therefore shall ye keep mine Ordinance, that ye commit not any of the
Abominable Customs which were committed before you, that you defile not your
selves therein; I am the Lord your God.

3ly, You shall not do so to the Lord your God, Deuteronomy. 12.4. is in effect, you
shall not Worship God by those Idolatrous Images by which the Canaanites
Worshipped their Gods, but you shall hew down the Graven Images of their Gods,
v. 3. you shall not Worship him on their Altars, or in their Groves, but you
shall overthrow their Altars, and break their Pillars, and burn their Groves
with fire, v. 3. and you shall Worship God in the place that he shall choose, v.
5. and this is very evident from v. 30.31. whe^^ God speaks thus unto them,
thou shall not enquire after their Gods, saying, how did these Nations serve
their Gods, even so will I do likewise; thou shall not do so unto the Lord thy
God, for every abomination to the Lord which he hates, have they done unto
their Gods. So that in all these places, to do after the manner of the
Heathens, which is the thing forbidden, is to do after their Idolatrous, or
their unnatural and unclean Rites in opposition to the Laws, Statutes and
Judgments of the Lord: And this is farther evident from 2 Kings 17.15. where
God Complains that his People rejected his Statutes, and his Covenant that he
made with their Fathers, and his Testimonies, and they followed vanities and
became vain, and went after the Heathen round about them, concerning whom the
Lord had charged them that they should not do like them. So that to do like
them, was to follow vanity, and become vain, that is, Idolaters, as that Phrase
plainly signifies in Holy Scripture, and so it is expounded in the following
verse by making Molten Images, and the two Calves, and Groves, and Worshipping
the Host of Heaven, and serving Baal.

4ly, To name the name of other Gods, which is forbidden Exodus 23.13. is only
not to own, to worship or enter into covenant with them, and in particular not
to swear by them, so that phrase seems to signify, Psalm. 16.4. their sorrows
shall be multiplied that hasten after another God, their drink offerings of
Blood will I not offer, nor take up their names upon my Lips. i.e. I will not
forsake thee by partaking with them in their abominable Sacrifices who serve
other Gods, nor by swearing by the name of their false Gods, so Dr. Hammond and
Dr. Patrick. So, to name the name of Christ 1. Tim. 2.19. is to own the true
Messiah, and profess the Christian faith, and that this is the certain import
of the words we learn from Josh. 23.7. where this Phrase is repeated, and by
the following words is thus explained, Be ye courageous to keep, and do all
that is written in the Law of Moses, that ye turn not aside therefrom, to the
right hand or to the left, that ye come not among these nations that remain
among you, neither make mention of the name of their Gods, nor swear by them,
nor serve them, nor bow your selves to them.

5ly, When God says, thou shall call me Jehi, Hos. 2.16.
and shall call me no more Baal, his meaning is not that they should never use
that word, because it was used by Idolaters, or was applied to Idols, for then
God was not to be called Jah, because the Heathens had their (...), nor (...)
or Lord, because they gave that name to Baal, nor King: because the Heathens
had their Milcom, nor would God have encouraged his people to use that name by
stiling himself Baal, as he does in the Prophet Isaiah Chap. 54.5.62.5. but God
by this expression signifies he would not be unto his people a hard imperious
Lord, as Baal was unto his Worshippers, but he would rather treat them with the
affections of an Husband, or that they should no more revolt from him to Baal
as hitherto they had done, but should cleave faithfully to their Covenant made
with him, as the Wife promises, forsaking other Lords, to cleave unto her
Husband.

6ly, The reason why God commanded his own people to destroy the Altars and the
Images of Heathens, and not to take unto themselves the Silver, Gold and other
Furniture belonging to them, was the prevention of their erecting of them, and
preserving them to give Idolatrous worship to them, as they were very prone to
do: Thus do the very Texts declare, ye shall destroy their Altars, break their
Images, cut down their Groves, Exodus 34.13. mark the reason v. 14. for thou
shall worship no other God, for the Lord whose name is Jealous, is a Jealous
God. And Deuteronomy. 7.25. Thou shall not take to thy self the Silver or Gold of
their Graven Images, left thou be snared therein. There being then no fear lest
we should be ensnared by the use of Ceremonies already purged from the
Foundations of all Romish Superstition and Idolatry, we cannot be concerned in
these Precepts, and much less in that passage of Isaiah, chap. 30.22. where
this only is foretold, that when the Jews did truly turn unto the Lord, they
should obey this Precept which commands them not to take unto themselves the
Silver, and the Gold, and other Furniture of Idols. And truly if these Precepts
did oblige the Christian, they would Condemn all our Reformed Churches, and the
Dissenters themselves, for turning into their private Purses, or their common
Treasuries, or any way retaining for their use, that Silver, and that Gold
which formerly made Romish Images, or which was dedicated to Romish Saints, or
offered at their Shrines, or using any of the Utensils, or Garments which have
been so abused, and if we are obliged punctually to follow these Prescriptions,
we must not only destroy Popish Images, but cast away the Silver, Gold, and
other Furniture belonging to them, since in these places all usage of such
things, Civil, or Sacred, is apparently forbid, and even the desire of them.

7ly, When the Jews are forbid to round the corners of their Heads, or mar the
corners of their Beards, they only are forbid that rounding of the corners of
their heads which was done in honor of Demons, and that marring of the corners
of their Beards, which Heathen Priests used in honor of their Idols, Baruch
6.31. Their Priests sit in their Temples having their Heads and their Beards
shaven. And therefore this making baldness upon their Heads, this shaving of
the Corners of their Beards, is forbidden as that whereby they would profane
the name of God, and as opposite to owning God to be their Lord, Levit.
21.6.19.25, 28. Moreover that cutting of the Flesh which God forbids in the
same place, for the same reasons, was the cutting of the Flesh for the dead,
which was by Heathens used partly from Superstition, Gratificari se aliquo modo
defunctis putantes, Thereby conceiving that they did some way gratify the
dead, and partly from Idolatry, to appease the Infernal Deities. And Lastly,
that printing marks upon their Flesh, which the same Text forbids, was such,
Qua se ad Idololatriam signabant, whereby they marked themselves for the
service of such or such an Idol, says Maimonides; so that the import of all
these passages is only this; Thou shall not by any of these ways make a
profession of Idolatry, or an acknowledgment of Heathen Deities, or use those
Customs which in their common use do signify the owning of them. And if the
naming of their Gods, the shaving of their Beards or Heads in such a manner,
had been absolutely forbidden, and not only as Testimonies of Idolatry, I know
not why they should concern us more than the Prohibition of a Linsey-Woolsey
Garment, or the sowing of their Fields with diverse Seeds, which no Man thinks
unlawful to be done by Christians. Now,

8ly, To the Objection from these words mentioned, 2 Cor. 6.17. viz. Touch not
the unclean thing, I Answer, that it cannot in the least concern our
Ceremonies; for, what in them, thus purged from Popish Superstition, and
Idolatry, can be esteemed the unclean thing? Is it the thing it self? What can
the abuse of other Men defile to our use the very Nature of things which God
has not made to us unclean? How then says Paul that to the clean all things
are clean? Tit. 1.15.
How durst he allow Men not only to touch, but to eat of meats offered before
to Idols without scruple of Conscience in that respect? 1 Cor. 10.23, 27.
But if they shall grant that the uncleanness is in the Superstitious abuse of
such things, then let them know that he who uses the same thing without the
same, or other Superstition, may be said to touch the thing, but not to touch
the unclean thing, as he that touched Naaman cleansed from his Leprosy,
touched the same Man, but not the same Leper. 2ly, The command to be separated,
and touch not the unclean thing, is made the condition of Gods receiving us, v.
17, 18.
and being unto us a Father, and owning us as Sons and Daughters, if therefore
Dissenters will assert our Ceremonies to be the unclean thing there intended,
or something parallel to them, they must fly into the Camp of the Brownists,
and say that God cannot receive, or own our Church, or be a Father to it, or
own any of its Members as his Sons or Daughters, till we have laid aside their
use. And 3ly, What is here, not to touch the unclean thing, is only to purge
our selves from all filthiness of Flesh and Spirit, as is evident from the
context of the words, for the Apostle having mentioned the promises God had
made to those who did separate themselves, and touch not the unclean thing,
viz. that God would receive them, and be a Father to them, he infers, wherefore
beloved let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness of Flesh and Spirit,
chap. 7.1. So that this Text cannot concern our Ceremonies, unless it be
asserted that whilst we use them we cannot cleanse our selves from all
filthiness of Flesh and Spirit. And 4ly, The unclean thing here spoken of is
plainly the Idolatry of the Heathens, as that expression intimates, what
conjunction has the Christian, who is the Temple of God, with Idols, to touch
this unclean thing, is to Communicate with them in their Idolatry, by eating of
their Idol Feasts in the Temple of their Idols; which is, says the Apostle, to
have Communion with Devils, 1 Cor. 10.20. to partake of the Table of Devils, v.
21. let us not therefore, says he, who have taken upon us the Yoke of
Christianity be (...), drawing in a contrary Yoke with the unfaithful; for that
the Apostle cannot by the unclean thing, mean Marriage with an Infidel, is
evident because he says, the unbelieving Husband is sanctified to the beliving
Wife; 1 Cor. 7.14.
if then these Ceremonies which we use cannot be proved to be Idols, they must
be unconcerned in this prohibition. To the Argument from the Apostle Judes
exhortation to hate the Garments spotted with the Flesh, Defense of Dr. Morton,
p. 437.
it is well Answered by Dr. Burges. That as a Garment spotted with the Flesh of
the unclean, was no longer to be hated than till it was washed, and being
washed might again be used; so is it with Ceremonies of indifferent nature
which have been defiled. 2ly, To hate, or fly the Garments spotted with the
Flesh, is only to hate every thing that does defile, tho in the least degree,
for so the Leprous and Unclean Garments did. Hate, says the Reverend Dr.
Hammond, all the beginnings, and the least degrees of impurity and uncleanness;
when therefore it can be proved that there is any degree of impurity or
uncleanness in the use of our Ceremonies, then only may this Text be urged
against them. And 3ly, The refusal to Submit unto them, tending to Disobedience
and Schism, and all the dreadful consequences which do follow from them, may
seem more likely to be forbidden by this Text, than our Submission to them in
Obedience to Authority.

Again whereas it is Objected, That Christ reproved the Church of Pergamus and
Thyatira for suffering Men to teach her Children to eat things Sacrificed to
Idols; Rev. 2.14, 20.
I Answer, 1. That St. Paul has taught us that it was not necessary in it self
to eat Flesh offered to Idols, for the Earth, says he, is the Lords, and the
fullness thereof, 1 Cor. 10.28. and so we may sufficiently be fed by other meat;
and yet he tells us, that this meat may lawfully be eaten by the Christian,
that it is clean to the clean, Tit. 1.15. and that it is only through weakness
that it can defile the Conscience, and only is unclean to him that thinks it
to be so, Romans 14.14. and he gives free commission to all Men to eat it, asking
no question for Conscience sake, 1 Cor. 10.27. and bids us, as it were in flat
contradiction to this Objection, not to enquire, or be follicitous whether the
meat we eat have been by others so abused to Idolatry, and if the offering of
Flesh to an Idol does not debar our freedom of using it to the sustaining of
our Bodies, why should the Superstitious use of a Ceremony make it unlawful to
be used by others without that Superstition; the eating therefore of things
Sacrificed to Idols, and teaching others so to do, which was the thing
condemned in those Churches by our Lord, was only eating of them in the Idol
Temples, and at the Feasts of Idols; so as to be partakers of the Table of
Devils, or to commit Idolatry by the participation of them which is so evident
from the Context that he who runs may read it. For 1. They are there also said
to teach their Children to commit Fornication, and to eat things offered to
Idols, Revel. 2.14, 20. Now all Men know that Fornication, in the spiritual
sense, imports Idolatry. 2ly, They of the Church of Pergamus who taught her
Children to eat things Sacrificed to Idols, are said to hold the Doctrine of
Balaam who taught Balak to cast a stumbling block before the Children of
Israel, that is, to Sacrifice to their Gods, to eat, and to bow down unto them,
or to entice them by the Daughters of Moab to this sin, Numb. 25.1, 2, 3.
Lastly, The Woman who seduced the Church of Thyatira to commit Fornication, and
to eat things Sacrificed to Idols, is called Jezabel, a Woman famous for her
promotion of Idolatry. Proceed we now to Answer the examples propounded in the
Objection. And,

1. Genesis 35.4.
To that of Jacob who caused his Family to give unto him the Earrings which
were in their Ears, I Answer, 1. That these Earrings were, say some
Interpreters, the Earrings which adorned their Gods, and so were parts of
their strange Gods; they were, say others, Earrings in which were graven the
effigies of their Gods after the manner of the Gentiles, and so they were plain
Idols, which ought to be abolished, they were, say others, dedicated to some
Numen according to the manner of the Syrians, and the Phaenicians, and so were
actual instruments of Idolatry. Now what does this concern the Ceremonies of
the Church of England, which, as she uses them, are neither Idols, nor
instruments of Idolatry?

2. Dan. 1.8.
To the example of Daniel who would not defile himself with the portion of the
Kings Meat, nor with the Wine which he drank. I Answer, that it is on many
accounts impertinent. 1. Because, according to the judgment of Mr. Calvin, the
pollution spoken of was not a Ceremonial pollution arising from the Idolatrous
use of the meats, but only Moral and occasional, by their being Bates and
Allurements to draw him to an irreligious forgetfulness of the service of God.
2ly, If the pollution was Ceremonial, it might arise from a mixture of Meats
forbidden by the Jewish Law with others lawful to be eaten, and which if he
refused, he would not have eaten the full portion allowed by the King.

3ly, Esth. 3.2.
To the example of Mordecai, refusing to bow to Haman. 1. If he himself may be
believed, he did not refuse what he conceived lawful in it self, because it was
by others abused to Idolatry, but because the Worship which by Haman was
required, was in it self Idolatrous, as being Worship proper to the God of
Heaven: For thus he speaks, Thou know Lord that it was neither out of Pride,
nor in contempt, nor for any desire of vain Glory that I did not bow down to
Proud Haman, but I did this that I might not prefer the Honor of Man above the
Glory of God, neither will I Worship any, but thee, O God, Esth. 13, 12, 14.
Josephus also tells us that, Antiq. l. XI. c. 6.
(...), He durst not give that Honor to Haman which he gave to God, and is
this a fit instance to prove that things indifferent may not be used in Gods
service, when they by others are abused to Superstition and Idolatry? If it
proves any thing, it proves we may not give Civil Worship to Princes and
Grandees when others give it to them.

Lastly, whereas to the same purpose is objected the example of good Hezekiah
who brake the Brazen Serpent, 2 Kings 18.4.
tho it was made by Gods appointment, when it was once abused to Idolatry; I
Answer,

1. That all that with any show of reason can be drawn from this example is
only this, That Magistrates may, and perhaps ought in diverse cases, to remove
those things which have been abused to Idolatry, but it can never rationally be
concluded hence, that Men may never use them any more, provided they do use
them without all abuse; as v. g. it will not follow that no private Jew, might
look upon the Brazen Serpent as a monument of Gods mercy to the Jews or a
Symbol or Representation of that Jesus, who freeth us, and was to free them
from the Sting of the Old Serpent, because others did then abuse it to Idolatry.

2ly, The reason which the Scripture renders why Hezekiah brake this Serpent
is, because even to those days the Children of Israel burnt Incense to it; v. 4.
let it be therefore proved that even in these days we use our Ceremonies to
Superstition and Idolatry, and then our Magistrates by this example may be
moved to abolish them: Dr. Ames tells us that the French, Spanish, English
Papists passing by the Cross, suppose at the Cheapside, do Worship, and do
reverence unto it; but what is that to our Ceremonies? What is it to the Aerial
Cross we make upon the Forehead of an Infant? Did ever any of them Worship
that? 2ly, Must we therefore pull down and deface all our Churches, because of
their Crosses, and Cross Isles, if a Papist will reverence them Superstitiously.

abstain from all appearance of evil; These. 5.22.

abstain from every sort or kind of Evil; for so the Syriack does render them;
so Chrysostom, St. Basil, Leontius and Theophylact, who descant thus upon them,
flee not from this or that only, but from every sin, and then submission to our
Ceremonies cannot be here forbid, till it be made evident that they are Evil in
themselves. Or 2ly, They may be rendered according to the vulgar, Tigurin, and
Beza thus, abstain from all appearance which is Evil; and so cannot concern
those Ceremonies which in their Nature are indifferent, and have no appearance
which is Evil. And 3ly, Should we grant that the Apostle here exhorts us to
abstain from all appearance of Evil, he may be well conceived to advise us to
abstain from that which, after trial, seems evil to our selves, or what we judge
to be so, and not from that which only does appear to others to be Evil, but
not unto our selves; for the Apostle makes these two precepts, the holding what
is good, and the abstaining from all appearance of Evil, the consequent of
trying all things, for to what end should Men try all things, but that they may
hold, what, upon trial, seems to them good, and abstain from that which to
them, after trial, seems evil? And wherefore does he bid them try all things
in order to these ends, if after all they must Act not by their own, but by the
judgment of another, and must abstain not only from what seems evil to
themselves who try, but from that which appears so to others? 4ly, It seems
most absurd that the Apostle should command all Christians to abstain from all
indifferent things which appear Evil unto others, even tho they be commanded by
a just Authority, because he would require a thing impossible, for it is
impossible for me to know what appears to another Evil, since I cannot know his
thoughts, and therefore cannot discern what appears to him Good or Evil, much
less can I know all that appears so to him; and yet the Apostle requires
Christians to abstain from all appearance of Evil, without distinction, or
exception of any Man.

2ly, This precept in this sense will lay upon us an intolerable Yoke, evacuate
our Liberty in things indifferent, and create in our minds continual
perplexities, there being scarcely any thing a Man can do, tho never so
indifferent, which unto some or other Infidel, or Christian, Weak, or Strong,
Ignorant, or Superstitious, may not be deemed evil, or appear to be so; the
Eating of our Meats, the Clothing of our Bodies, and all the recreations which
we customarily do use appearing Evil unto some or other, we must either do
nothing of this Nature, or else be filled with perplexing fears that what we do
appears to others Evil, and so makes us Transgressors of this Precept. And
Lastly, To retort this Argument; we are commanded to abstain from all
appearance of Evil, but the refusal of submission to the Rites enjoined has an
appearance of Evil, for it appears to be such, not only to Superiors, but to
all sober Conformists, Ergo, Dissenters are obliged to abstain from refusing
any longer to submit unto the Rites enjoined.

CHAP. VII. The CONTENTS.
Obj. 4th. That which does Minister Scandal to weak Brethren must not be done
at the Command of our Superiors, because God has forbidden it, but by
submitting to, and using the imposed Ceremonies, we Minister Scandal to weak
Brethren. Answ. In the following propositions; 1. That Scandal is an action
whereby occasion is Ministered to the sin, fall, or ruin of our weak Brother.
2ly, That this Scandal may be Ministered as well by doing of our Duty, as by
doing Evil, 3ly, That Scandal, sin, or fall of others which is occasioned
through their weakness, by doing of my Duty, cannot be my sin. Coroll. I cannot
therefore sin by obedience to the Lawful Commands of my Superiors, tho others
may be Scandalized at it. 4ly, The Objection from the case of Scandal must
proceed on this supposition, that the things imposed are in themselves
indifferent. 5. Our submission to things indifferent, enjoined by Superiors,
can only Minister Scandal, 1. By Ministering occasion to the rash censures of
weak Brethren: Or 2ly, By moving them, by our example, to conform with doubting
Consciences: Or 3ly, By grieving them: Or 4ly, By causing them to separate from
our Communion. 6ly, We are not to abstain from that indifferent action which
may Scandalize our Brother, when by forbearance of that action as great, if not
a greater Scandal is Administered to others; this proved to be the case in our
refusal to comply with the Commands of our Superiors in Lawful matters. 7ly,
The Scandal caused by the Dissenter, refusing to do what Lawfully he may, is
Scandal given, the scandal Ministered by the Conformist can be only Scandal
received.. 1.9. Objections of Amesius and Mr. Jeans Answered,. 2. Some
unsatisfactory Answers to the Objection from Scandal noted, as v. g. 1. That
the Scandal which the weak conceive at our Conformity is passive, whereas it is
only active Scandal which we are concerned to avoid. 2ly, That Scandal is an
action done with intent to ensnare Men in sin, since therefore none can judge
that by imposing or submitting to our Ceremonies this is intended, they cannot
truly be Scandalized. 3ly, That we can give no sinful Scandal by using of our
Ceremonies, because we give a reason of our action. 4ly, That they are to be
deemed obstinate who after a reason given are still Scandalized, and so their
Scandal is Pharisaical and not to be regarded. 3.

CHAP. VII.
THAT which does Minister Scandal to weak Brethren must not be done, Dissenter,
no not at the Command of our Superiors, but by submitting to, and using the
imposed Ceremonies, we minister Scandal to weak Brethren. And therefore we must
not submit unto them. To lay foundations of a full, and satisfactory Answer
unto this Objection; I lay down these ensuing Propositions.

1. That Scandal is an action whereby occasion is ministered to the sin, fall,
or ruin of our weak Brother; it is any thing says St. Paul, by which our
Brother stumbleth, or is offended, Romans 14.21. it is a stumbling block, or an
occasion to fall put in our Brothers way, v. 13. Where note 1. That under the
Word action, is comprehended: 1. words tending to the same effect: And 2ly,
omissions of actionswhich have the same consequence.

2ly, This Scandal may be Ministered as well by doing of our Duty, as by doing
Evil. So the Preaching of the Cross was to the Jews a stumbling block, 1 Cor.
1.23.
2 Cor. 2.16.
the Gospel Preached is to many a savor of death, and Christ himself is said
to be to many a Stone of stumbling, 1 Pet. 2.8.
and a Rock of offense, and the occasion of their fedling.

It therefore is erroneously said that our action, Coroll.
tho it may displease, yet cannot minister occasion of Scandal to both parties,
for tho it is true, I cannot give a just occasion of offense by doing, or
omitting the same action, for then I must lie under a necessity of sinning, it
being necessary for me either to do, or to omit the doing of it. It is as true
that some weak Persons may take offense at my performing, and others be as much
offended at my omitting the same action.

I must not do Evil, Romans 3.8.
as the neglect of Duty is, that good may come.

Hence it does clearly follow, Coroll.
that by obedience to the lawful commands of my Superiors, I cannot be guilty
of sinful Scandalizing of my Brother, because obedience, in such cases, is my
Duty.

No human ordinance can take away the condition of Scandal from that action
which would otherwise be Scandal, that is, which being not commanded would be
Scandal. Answ. It is sufficient if it can take away the sin of Scandal, and
that it does by making that become my Duty which Scandalizeth my weak Brother:
We do not say the sin of Scandal is avoided simply by the Lawfulness of the
action which we do, for tho all meats were lawful in the Apostles time, yet
this would not excuse the Gentile Christian from sin, in eating of those meats
which gave offense to his weak Brother; but then, say we, the sin of Scandal is
avoided when the action being lawful in it self, is necessary in obedience to
Superiors, and for the exercise of our Ministry, and for the peace of the
Church, and the prevention of Schisms and separations in, and from it, with all
their fatal consequences, it being all Men's Duty by all lawful means to
prosecute these good ends.

Topic, upon this supposition, that they are in themselves indifferent, and
that it is only the mistake of our weak Brother which can lay this restraint
upon our practice in such matters, because from matters in themselves evil, or
forbidden, we are obliged to abstain, tho no such Scandal should ensue upon the
practice of them.

Superiors, but either, 1st. By Ministering occasion to his rash judgment, and
censure of our action as an Evil deed: Or 2ly, By moving him, by our example,
to conform, even while he doubts the lawfulness thereof, and so to do it with a
doubting Conscience, and therefore to his own damnation, Romans 14.23. which
seems to be the Scandal mentioned, 1 Cor. 8.10, 11. Or 3ly, By grieving him to
see those things are practiced by us which he condemns in his Conscience,
which seems to be the Scandal spoken of, Romans 14.15. Or 4ly, By causing him to
separate from our Communion, upon these accounts, and by so doing to incur the
guilt of Schism.

We are not, says Mr. Jeans, obliged to abstain from that indifferent action
which may Scandalize our Brother, when by forbearance of that action, as great,
Scholast. dispute p. 102.
if not a greater Scandal is Administered to others, for as St. Bernard truly
says, Prudenter anim advertendum est Scandalum Scandalo non emendari, qualis
emendatio erit, si, ut aliis Scandalum tollas, alios Scandalizas. We are
prudently to mark that one Scandal is not mended by another, which kind of
emendation we should practice, if to take off offense from one party, we give
offense unto another; for in this case we must have as much reason, on the
account of Scandal, to do, as to forbear the action: Now it is certain that our
refusal to comply with our Superiors Command in lawful matters, does Minister
occasion of like Scandal in all particulars forementioned. For

1. The Magistrate, and they who think themselves obliged to submit to his
injunctions, are as much grieved to see Men stiffly to persist in disobedience
to his commands in lawful matters, as our weak Brethren can be to see us yield
obedience to him in such things.

2ly, Others will be as prone to censure our refusal of Obedience as Turbulent,
Sehismatical, as disobedience to the Higher Powers, and disorderly walking, as
the weak Brother is to censure our Conformity as Popish, Superstitious, and the
like. And 3ly, Why may not others be as well tempted by their refusal to
conform, to separate, and to do as they do with a doubting Conscience, as the
weak Brother may by our conformity be tempted likewise to conform with a
doubting Conscience: Moreover whosoever does consider the temper of the
Nonconformists will find occasion to believe that there is little fear of
drawing them, by our examples, to conform, but rather that they will be apt to
censure us for our Conformity, and could we do so, we should only tempt them to
perform their Duty, tho against their Conscience.

Dissenter on supposition that he refuses where he may lawfully obey, which is
the case in question, is Scandalum datum, i.e. Scandal arising from the
omission of his Duty, the Scandal ministered by the Conformist can be only
Scandalum acceptum, sed non datum; or Scandal arising not from the action of
him that does conform, but from the ignorance and weakness of him who is
offended at his doing so, for certainly by doing of my Duty, in things lawful,
I give to my weak Brother no just occasion to be grieved at what I do, or to
pass censure on me as an Evil doer, or to Separate from Communion with me, or
to do, with a doubting Conscience, what he sees me do, but by omission of my
Duty to Superiors, I shall give just occasion both to them, and all who
peaceably conform to grieve at my action, to pass their censures on me as a
disobedient Person. And if I do by my example, occasion the omission of my
Brothers Duty, and his separation, I shall be justly charged with his guilt, as
Ministering temptation to him, by that example, to neglect what lawfully he
might, and by God is Commanded to perform, and so I must offend him more, in
the Apostles sense, by tempting him to sin, or to continue in sin: The sum is
this, by refusing to conform, in such a lawful case, lest we should offend our
weak Brother, we seem directly to sin our selves, to avoid an occasion of sin
in him, we do, as far as I can judge, offend God, the King, the Law, the
Church, and Conscience too, by not doing our Duty, lest we should offend our
Brother by doing it. Now sure it must concern us more to avoid a Scandal given,
with these circumstances, then to avoid a Scandal which is only taken: Now from
these Propositions it is easy to return an Answer to all that is Objected by
Amesins, Scholast. disp. p. 42, 43.
and transcribed by Mr. Jeans, to prove the unreasonableness of this Assertion,
That Authority is to be obeyed in things Lawful, even tho Scandal should ensue;
against this Doctrine, which he ascribes to our Prelates, he disputes thus:

A Scandal in the nature of it is Spiritual murder; Superior should command a
thing in it self indifferent, whereupon Murder were like to follow, as to run
a Horse, or a Cart in a certain way, at a certain time, when, it may be
unwitting to the Commander, little Children were playing in the way, would any
Man's Conscience ferve him to do it?

which, as I have already showed, is the present case with reference to our
refusal of Obedience to the Commands of our Superiors concerning things
indifferent, and Lawful in themselves.

Avoiding of Scandal is a main Duty of Charity; may Superiors at their pleasure
appoint how far I shall show my Charity toward my Brother, then surely, an
Inferior Earthly Court may cross the determination of the High Court of Heaven.

Superiors, Civil and Sacred, is a main Duty of Christianity, and to avoid all
Schisms, and Divisions of the Church, which is Christ's Body, all disturbance of
her Peace, all needless Seperations from her Communion, are all important
Duties of Christianity; may then the ignorance, and consequential weakness of
my Brother, appoint how far I shall be obedient to Gods Vicegerent, or Christ's
Messengers, how far I shall avoid dividing and disturbing of the Churches
Peace, then surely may my Brothers ignorance and error, cross the
determinations of the High Court of Heaven: what if they be offended at my
paying Tribute in that Quotum which the Law of our Superiors prescribes; will
Charity oblige me to refuse to pay it? Or is it not as much my Duty to obey
Gods Vicegerents in all other Lawful matters, as in the ease of Tribute? Is
not the precept as express for the one as for the other? 2ly, This strongly
proves it our Duty in the present circumstances to conform, since by refusal
so to do we only exercise our Charity toward our weak Brother, but by
conforming we exercise like Charity, and care to avoid Scandal toward more,
and more deserving Persons, and also do avoid dividing and disturbing of the
Churches Peace. By our refusal to conform to lawful institutions of Superiors
that so we may avoid the Scandal of weak Brethren, we disobey them whom God
Commands us to obey; we harden our weak Brother in his Disobedience, and
Schism; we rob our selves of the benefit of the Public Ordinances, bring
Penalties and Excommunications on our selves; we rob the Church of her Unity,
Peace, and Love, and if we be Ministers, we deprive our selves of opportunity
to exercise our calling to the good of Souls; now to avoid the Scandal of a
weak Brother by incurring all this guilt, is so far from being a main Duty of
Charity, that it does flatly contradict the ground and measure of all Charity,
Self-Love, and seems to be only doing many Evils, that one good may come.

Superiors have no power given them for destruction, but for Edification, if
therefore they Command Scandals, they go beyond their Commission, neither are
we tied therein to do as they bid, but as they should bid.

Superior bids, but not if they Command what only, through the sin or ignorance
of others, proves to them a Scandal, especially when our refusal to obey them
will Minister an equal Scandal which is apparently the present case.

2ly, I Answer, That it belongs not to private persons to enquire whether their
Superiors do go beyond their Commission in Commanding of these things, but
only, whether what they do Command, tho it should exceed the power given them
by God, may without sin be done, and if they find it may, they cannot without
sin refuse obedience, no not in case of accidental Scandal.

If determination of Superiors were sufficient to take away the sin of Scandal,
then they do very ill that they do not (so far as is possble) determine all
things indifferent, that so no danger may be left of giving of offense by the
use of them. Then the Church of Rome is to be praised in that she has
determined so many indifferents, then Paul, with the other Apostles, might have
spared a great deal of Labor in admonishing the Churches how they should avoid
offenses about some indifferent things, a far shorter way had been either to
determine the matter fully, or else to have given order that the Churches should
among themselves determine it at home,

Superiors will always take away the sin of Scandal, but that it certainly will
do it when upon that determination an equal Scandal follows on the other hand.

2ly, It will not follow hence, that they do ill in not determining all things
indifferent that so no danger may be left of giving of offense by the use of
them. Because the remedy may be much worse than the Disease, as being 1. To
bring a Yoke of bondage on the necks of Christians which they could hardly
bear, for if the Council at Jerusalem thought fit to style their Imposition of
a few necessary things, a Burden, how well might the determination of all
things indifferent deserve that appellation. And 2ly, As tending to distract
Men's devotions by their attendance to such a multitude of Ceremonies as must be
then imposed, and as are actually imposed by the Church of Rome. 3ly, As
tending to Minister occasion to endless divisions in the Church, and scruples
in the minds of her weak Members, for if three Ceremonies determined by the
Church are so much scrupled, if by occasion of their Imposition such Divisions
and Separations have so long continued, as we by sad experience see, what might
be then expected should all indifferent circumstances be determined by her; and
for these reasons it by no means will follow that the Church of Rome is to be
praised in that she has determined so many matters of this Nature. Nor 3ly,
Will it follow that the Apostles might have spared a great deal of Labor in
admonishing the Churches how they should avoid offense about some things
indifferent, even by determining them fully, or by giving order that the
Churches should among themselves determine them; for this which he here styles a
shorter way, might have been far more dangerous, by Ministering to great
contentions in the Church, and causing the weak Jews to fly off from the
profession of the Gospel, or from Communion with their fellow Christians, and
so that course would not have hindered the perishing of the weak Brother, but
rather would have tended to the promotion of his ruin.

But say that the Archbishop of Corinth, for now I suppose such a one, had
called his Congregation, and with consent of his Clergy had determined that Men
might, and for testifying of Liberty should at a certain time eat of such and
such meats which Men formerly doubted of, would not yet the Apostle have given
the same direction he did? Would not good Christians still have had care of
their Brothers Consciences? Can the determination of a Superior be a sufficient
Plea at the Bar of Gods Judgment seat for a Man that, by virtue or force
thereof alone, has done any action that his Conscience tells him will
Scandalize his Brother? I Answer,

1. That no Man's Conscience can tell him certainly that he will, but only that
he may Scandalize his Brother by conforming to the Commands of his Superiors,
and it may also tell him that he is in danger to Scandalize them more by not
conforming, and in this Case the Plea holds good, the Scandal being equal on
both sides; I durst not disobey Superiors against a plain Command, and to the
manifest dividing and disturbing of the Church, to avoid the Scandal of a weak
Brother, arising not from my action, but his ignorance. And 2ly, Hence I return
an Answer to the Questions contained in the Objection to the first; viz. Would
not St. Paul in case of the determination of the Archbishop of Corinth, that
all Meats should indifferently be eaten have given the same direction as he
did? Answ. Had he so done there would have been no obligation on the
Corinthians to obey their Archbishop in opposition to St. Paul, because the
power Apostolical was much Superior to that of Bishops, and Archbishops, they
must have therefore in this case obeyed St. Paul by virtue of the general
Command to obey Superiors, but whether in this case St. Paul would have
delivered the same direction is uncertain; but this is certain, and a
sufficient Answer to the Question, that St. Paul would have considered where
the Scandal would have been greatest, both with respect unto the number of
Persons offended, and the destructive Nature and consequences of the offense,
and would accordingly have given his directions, and and so accordingly do we.
To the second Question, Would not good Christians still had care of their
Brothers Consciences? Answer, They would have showed their care both of their
Brothers Conscience, and their own, by giving him by their example no occasion
to disobey those that Ruled over them in Lawful matters, to the dividing and
the disturbing of the Churches Peace. To the third Question, Can the
determination of Superiors be a sufficient Plea at the Bar of Gods judgment
seat, for doing, any action that his Conscience tells him will Scandalize his
Brother? I Answer, Why not? if doing of his Duty will be a Plea sufficient? But
on the other hand, can the pretense of Scandalizing a weak Brother be a
sufficient Plea for disobedience to Gods Vicegerents in a Lawful matter, and
for dividing and disturbing of the Churches Peace, and thereby ministering a
greater Scandal both to Superiors and to all peaceable Conformists?

I would fain know whether those Superiors do not give a great Scandal which
take upon them to impose unnecessary Rites which they know many good Men will
be Scandalized by.

Doctor it concerns you more to know, and practice your own Duty, then to be
censuring, and curiously searching into the actions of Superiors; for which not
you, but they must Answer if they do offend.

It seems then in case the Magistrate Command it, we may wound the weak
Conscience of our Brother, and destroy with our indifferences the work of God,
and him for whom Christ died.

v. g. suppose the Nonconformists are grieved at our Preaching, and submission
to Superiors, and our continuance in our Ministerial function, and thereupon do
judge of us as of Time-Servers, and Separate from our Communion, and become
guilty of that Schism which accidentally procures their ruin, must we not
therefore submit to Authority, Obey them that have the Rule over us, or feed
our Flocks? When therefore things indifferent in their own Nature become
necessary to these ends, we may perform them, tho accidentally they tend unto
the ruin of our Brother. 1. Because disobedience to our Superiors in Lawful
matters is a sin, and we must not do evil that good may come. 2ly, Because the
Scandals following from our refusal to obey will in this case be greater, and
more destructive to Souls then are the Scandals which are ministered by our
obedience.

It is good, says Paul, neither to eat Flesh nor drink Wine, nor to do any
thing whereby thy Brother stumbleth, or is offended, or is made weak, Romans
14.22. But our Prelatists determine quite otherwise, if Authority enjoin, it is
good, say they, to eat Bread, drink Wine, wear a Surplice, use the sign of the
Cross in Baptism, tho never so many Brethren stumble, or are offended, or made
weak thereby.

Prelatists; they do not say that the determination of Superiors will always
take away the sin of Scandal in these matters, but that it will then do it,
when upon that Determination an equal, or a greater Scandal follows on the
other hand, and where the thing is Lawful, and the Scandal equal, what reason
can there be on the account of Scandal for our refusal to obey.

Superiors be greater then the Law of Charity which is Gods Law? Answer, Is not
the Law of Obedience to our Rulers equally Gods Law? Put the case that after
the Decrees of the Synod of Jerusalem, some particular Persons should have been
offended that their Brethren refused to eat meats offered to Idols, pleading
that was Superstition in them, or a betraying of their Christian Liberty or
that the things enjoined by that decree were not Commanded of the Lord, and so
were Human inventions, Will Worship, and addition to Gods Word, would
Christians then have been obliged to suspend their obedience to this Decree
lest they should offend such Scrupulous Persons? I trow not.

v. g.

1. It is said, the Scandal which the weak conceive at our Conformity is
passive, and not active, that is, the nature of our action does not give
occasion to it, but they are only Scandalized through ignorance or weakness:
Now say they, it is only Scandal given which we are Concerned to Avoid; in
opposition to this Plea, I say,

That it is not sufficient to excuse us from being Guilty of sinful
Scandalizing our weak Brother, that what we do is Lawful in it self, and
therefore ministers no just occasion to the sin, full or ruin of our Brother.
For the Apostle does declare that he was taught by the Lord Jesus that no meats
were of themselves Romans 14.14.
unclean, and therefore that the eating of them could minister no just occasion
of offense to the weak Jew, 1 Cor. 8.7.
and that it was for want of knowledge, and through the weakness of his
conscience, that the weak Brother was offended at it, and yet he does as
positively declare that it was evil to eat them with offense, that the strong
by thus eating of them, did walk uncharitably, and sin against Christ; Romans
14.15, 20. 1 Cor. 8.12. Matt. 17.27.
moreover our Lord himself paid tribute, though he might Lawfully not have
done it, lest he should Scandalize, where, Even Maldonate observes, that
Christ, in paying tribute to avoid Scandal, shunned a Scandal which was merely
passive, because the exactors of Tribute ought not to have been Ignorant that
Christ was free from any obligation to the payment of it; whence he concludes,
that this is no sure Rule, that Scandal only given, and not Scandal taken is to
be avoided. 3ly, The keeping of the Brazen Serpent, as a monument of Divine
mercy, was a thing Lawful in it self and yet when Scandal arose out of it,
'twas necessary to remove it, as being in it self a thing unnecessary. Lastly,
If Scandal passive tends to Gods dishonor by ministering unto my Brothers sin,
if his Soul suffers by a passive, as well as by an active Scandal, surely the
Love of God, and of my Neighbors Soul, should be sufficient motive to engage
me to do all that Lawfully I can for the prevention of it, provided that I
know, or have good reason to suspect that it will follow from my action, tho
through my Brothers fault. For are we not obliged to preserve a Drunken Man
from falling down a Precipice, or into a River, because he is made Drunk by his
own fault? Why therefore are we not obliged, if Lawfully we can, to preserve
our Brothers Soul from perishing by his own fault? I fear this will be found at
the last day too true, that he does Criminally Scandalize, who does, or who
enjoyneth that which is unnecessary and which he knows will through the
weakness of his Brother Minister occasion of his sin and ruin, having no
benefit from what he does require or do, equal unto the mischief which it does
to others.

2ly, It is said by Dr. Womack, that Scandal is an action done with intent to
ensnare Men in sin, Melius Inquir. p. 106.
or set up as a Mouse-Trap on purpose to entrap them; whence it will follow
that no Man in the judgment of Charity can say that by the Ceremonies, we
Scandalize our weak Brother, because they cannot Charitably judge that these
Ceremonies are imposed with an intent to draw Men to sin. But with submission
to better judgments, I humbly conceive, that it will not excuse us from the
guilt of Scandal, that we do not designedly and actually intend to make our
Brother sin, provided that the action does, through our Brothers weakness,
Admister occasion to his sin and ruin, and we do either by experience find it
to be so, or may, if we be careful, see that this is like to be the issue of
it, and yet, when no necessity is laid upon us, will proceed to do it. For
although Peter did not intend to cause the Gentiles to sin, or to compel them
to judaize by his withdrawing from them at the coming of the Jews from
Jerusalem, for the Text tells us he did it for another reason, viz. Gal. 2.11.
fearing those of the Circumcision, yet was he to be blamed, says St. Paul
Gal. 2.11. he was a Transgressor v. 18. and that because by his Authority and
example, tho not by his intention, he compelled the Gentiles to live as did the
Jews, v. 14.

2ly, He who does venture on that action whence he either does or may know such
offense will follow, as truly may be guilty of the Scandal following, as if he
had intended it, because by doing of it without necessity, and with such
knowledge, he may be virtually said to intend it, tho actually he does not so.
3ly, The secret intention of the agent does not make the offended Person less
or more subject unto fall, sin, and ruin, and so it cannot hinder the
sinfulness of the offense which, he may easily foresee, will follow from it;
wherefore Spalato does determine well, De Rep. Eccles. l. 1. cap. XI. N. 18.
Est Scandalum, and cum peccato, quando quis, licet non intendat peccatum
alterius, facit tamen opus aut ex se malum, aut apparenter, ex quo scit, aut
scire debet consequuturum alterius peccatum, aut quodcunque malum, nam etiam
dicitur illud voluntarium interpretative.

3ly, Whereas it is affirmed that we can give no sinful Scandal by using or
imposing of the ceremonies, because we give a reason of our action, so that
they who are offended at them may know the lawfulness of our action, I humbly
conceive that this will not excuse us from the guilt of Scandal. For the
Apostle does not say, him that is weak receive, Romans 14.1.
till you have given him a reason of of your action, but receive him, without
disputing of the lawfulness, or the unlawfulness of what is done. He does not
say, If my Brother be offended I will eat no Meat, till I have given him a
reason why I eat, but I will eat no meat whilst the World stands. 2ly, After
your reason, he through weakness in not perceiving the strength of it, or
through the prejudice of plausible objections to the contrary, may still be
grieved, may stumble or offend, may perish and be ruined as much as ever, and
so all the Apostles Arguments for the forbearance of the weak on these
accounts, must be as strong as ever to engage us not to Scandalize him. In a
word if this be true, says Parker, Of the Cross part. 2. p. 57.
that they are blameless who Scandalize their Brethren, provided that they give
a reason of their Action, then see we an end of all the Duty of bearing with
the weak, of forbearing our own liberty, power, and Authority in things
indifferent, for their sakes, yea an end of all the care to prevent their
offense by giving them occasion either of condemning our action, or imitating
it against their Conscience, which we have so often, so seriously, with so many
reasons, obtestations, yea woes; and threatenings commanded to us throughout the
word; what needed St. Paul to write so much against the Scandal of meats; this
one Precept might have sufficed, let the strong give a reason of his eating.
But tho he had given many reasons to them of Corinth for the Lawfulness of
taking Wages, and for the lawfulness of all sorts of meat to them of Rome, yet
neither would he take wages himself, nor suffer others to eat all sorts of meat
when others were offended.

4ly, Whereas it is confidently said that they are to be deemed obstinate who
after a reason given are still Scandalized, and so their Scandal is
Pharisaical, and not to be regarded, This also I conceive will not hold Water.
For 1. It seems with equal reason to be said that they are obstinate in
Scandalizing who perceiving the Scandal to remain notwithstanding their reasons
given will not take away the Scandal, when it is in their power to do it, 2ly,
It seems hard, and uncharitable to judge them obstinate who solemnly profess
before God, that, notwithstanding all the reasons given, they cannot conform,
because they are not satisfied with them. 3ly, Then must we peremptorily
conclude there is not one Conformist who is not obstinate against the clear
convictions of his Conscience. 4ly, Then may we say that all who Anciently
contended about Ceremonies were obstinate, and so we must condemn, as
obstinate, all who contended about the time of Celebrating Easter, the Lent
Fast, the observation of the Sabbath, or the Baptizing of Heretics, because
reasons sufficient were also offered against their mistakes. And 5ly, Then the
weak Christians of whom St. Paul speaks, must be obstinate, and therefore not
to be regarded, because he gives them a sufficient reason against their
weakness, declaring by his Apostolic Authority, and the Authority of Christ
himself, that it was lawful to eat those meats at which they scrupled. 6ly, We
are obliged to abstain, where lawfully we may, as well from the Scandal of the
Malicious, as of the weak. For 1. A Scandal is of a Soul destroying Nature,
Romans 14.15. and who so wicked and malicious upon the face of the Earth whose
Soul a true Christian Charity will exclude from its care, mercy, and
compassion, or who so wicked as to add to his ruin? 2ly, The Apostles motive
reaches to the wicked and Malicious, viz. destroy not him with thy meat for
whom Christ died, for they may be in the number of those for whom Christ died,
who for their present state and condition are most Malicious and wicked. 3ly,
We are obliged to love all, even our most Malicious and persecuting Enemies,
Matt. 5.44. we are to do good to all, Gal. 6.10. we are to exercise patience,
and meekness even toward those that oppose themselves, 2 Timothy 2.14, 15. and
whom then may we Scandalize. 4ly, The Jews and Gentiles were the most Malicious
Enemies of Christians, yet says the Apostle give no offense to Jew or Gentile,
1 Cor. 10.32. 5ly, Does not our Savior forgo his Liberty to please the
Malicious, as when he paid Tibute, lest he should offend them, Matt. 17.27.
they were Malicious at Corinth, and seekers of occasion against Paul, that were
likely to be offended at his taking wages there, 2 Cor. 11.12. yet, the thing
being no necessary Duty, he thinks it his Duty to forbear his power therein.
And whereas against this it is objected, that our Lord did not regard the
Scandal of the Pharisees, but said let them alone, Matt. 15.12, 13, 14. this
Answer is returned by Parker: If this be all the Warrant we have not to forbear
in a thing indifferent for the Malicious, than have we no Warrant at all,
because the Scandal there not cared for, is when the Pharisees were offended at
his abstaining from their washings, and Preaching a true Doctrine, both of
which were necessary Duties for him to do, and when he defends his healing on
the Sabbath, and his disciples plucking of the Ears of Corn, upon this reason
that they were Duties of necessity and Charity, he plainly insinuates that
there is no defense for deeds unnecessary when the Malicious are offended.

CHAP. VIII. The CONTENTS.
Obj. 5. That their Submission to the imposed Rites will render them partakers
of the sin of others. 1. By countenancing Superiors in the imposing of these
unnecessary Burdens upon others, and doing of those things which tend to the
division of the Church. Answ. 1. By retorting the Argument, and showing that
their disobedience to the Commands of their Superiors in Lawful things, more
likely renders them partakers of the sin of others. 2ly, That our Submission to
Superiors in these matters cannot render us partakers of their supposed sin..
1. This farther proved from the consideration of all the ways which render us
partakers of the sins of others directly, or indirectly. Directly, 1. By
actually consenting to, willing or approving the sin of others. 2ly, By
commanding the doing of it. 3ly, By persuading, encouraging, warranting or
alluring others to the performance of sin, by applauding the action, or
rejoicing in the doing of it. 4ly, By teaching false Doctrins which do
encourage others to sin.. 2. Indirectly 1. When we do that which is a culpable
occasion of their sin. As 1. By neglecting of that Duty, or by committing of
that Evil action which does directly give occasion to the sin of others. 2ly,
When by our ill example we minister occasion to their sin. 3ly, When we do use
our Liberty in things indifferent to the offense or sin of our weak Brother..
3. That our submission to things Lawful in themselves, commanded by Superiors
can neither directly nor indirectly involve us in guilt.. 4. Jnst. 2. By
partaking with you in the Holy Sacrament, who do not separate the Precious from
the Vile, we should approve of your neglect of discipline, and by partaking
with them become partakers in their sins. Answered. 5.

CHAP. VII.
IN the last place it is objected that their Submission to the imposed Rites
will render them purtakers of the sin of others, and therefore ought not to be
done. This they endeavor to make good upon a double ground. And,

1. We dare not join with you, say they, in Public Worship, or the
participation of the Holy Sacraments: Because some things are by Superiors
required of all those who are permitted to join with you in those Ordinances,
which tho they are not evil in themselves, yet ought they not to be required as
the conditions of Communion, they being things unnecessary; now should we, say
they, yield obedience to them in these things, we should countenance them in
their imposing these unnecessary burdens upon others, and harden them in that
which we suppose to be their sin, and should encourage their persistance in it,
and so should be partakers in that Guilt: Moreover the Rigid imposition of
these things, say they, tends to divide the Church to make men Schismatics,
and so it ministers to the destruction of poor Souls; we dare not therefore
submit unto the practice of them, lest by so doing we approve of those
Unchristian practices. To this pretense I Answer,

1. By Retorting of the Argument; for the refusal of obedience to Superiors in
Lawful matters has the like and more pernicious consequences, and therefore,
they at least have equal cause to yield obedience to such constitutions of
Superiors on this account, lest by refusing that obedience they approve the
more Unchristian practices of those who rend the Church, desert Communion with
her, Schismatically separate themselves, disturb the Unity, the Peace, the
Charity, and the Edification of her Members, and cast a vile reproach upon
Christianity, by representing it as that which does forbid obedience to
Superiors in Lawful matters, and harden others in these sins; all which is
manifestly done by their refusal to obey the Constitutions of Superiors in
Lawful matters.

2. Did our Submission to any thing which our Superiors should not command,
make us partakers of their sin, then every Burdensome and Grievous Act of
Parliament which after it is made, tends more unto the prejudice, then to the
good of the Community, not only Lawfully might, but must be disobeyed for
Conscience sake, lest by submitting to it we should encourage our Superiors to
impose Grievous burdens on the Subject, so that this scruple will lead to
Faction in the State, as well as to Sedition in the Church. And 2ly, If this
were so that by submitting to any thing Commanded by Superiors which we do not
approve of, or they should not impose, we become Guilty of the Sin of the
Imposers, then must our Lord and his Apostles be Guilty of like sin, for they
did ordinarily join with the People of the Jews in their Public Service on the
Sabbath day, and at their other Festivals, as I have showed already, although
they, who then sat in Moses chair, imposed more Rites and Ceremonies to be
observed in those parts of Public Worship, then are imposed in our Church.
3ly. Then also must St. Paul be Guilty of approving those who did impose the
Jewish Ceremonies as necessary to be observed by the Jew converted to
Christianity, because, for peace sake, he himself submittedto them, and to the
Jew became as a Jew that he might gain the Jew: He also must himself approve,
and advise others to approve the judgment, and the practice of those Jews, who
thought the Meats forbidden by the Law of Moses unlawful to be eaten, the days
appointed by that Law, still necessary to be observed, because he did himself,
and he advised others to comply with them in their weakness, or to abstain from
eating of those meats when that would minister occasion of Offense to their
weak Brethren, and so, according to the Grounds of this objection, he himself
encouraged, and hardened other persons in their sin, and he advised others so
to do. But,



We therefore may become partakers of the sin of others either directly, when
we do actually consent unto, will, or approve the evil action which is done by
others, or indirectly, when tho we do not actually consent unto the sin of
others, yet do we that which is a culpable occasion of it.

1. Directly, when we do actually consent unto, will, or approve the sin of
others: Now this is done two ways, 1. Antecedently to the Evil action, as when
it is done by our command, direction, or persuasion, or consequently, when tho
we had no hand in doing of it, yet we do afterward censent unto, approve or do
rejoice in any Evil done by others.

2ly, Directly we partake with others in their sin, and Antecedently are guilty
of it, when having power over them, we do command the doing of it, for this
Command is a plain evidence that we do will the Evil action, and desire that it
may be done: Thus Absalom slew Amnon, because he commanded his servants,
saying, when I say unto you smite Amnon, then kill him, fear not, have not I
Commanded you? 2 Samuel 13.30.28. thus David numbered the People, 2 Samuel 24.10. by
commanding Joab so to do, v. 4. He killed Uriah the Hittite with the Sword, 2 Samuel 12.9. because at the command of David he was put into the front of the
Battle that he died.

3ly, We are directly partakers with another in his sin, and Antecedently are
guilty of it, when we persuade, encourage, warrant, allure, or set him on to
the performance of it, for by all these actions we show that we are willing and
desirous that the sin be done, which in the sight of God is to commit it: Thus
Jeroboam made Israel to sin by providing his two Golden Calves, and saying to
them, it is too much for you to go up to Jerusalem; behold thy Gods O Israel,
which brought thee up out of the Land of Egypt, 1 Kings 12.28, 30. and chap.
13.34. 1 Cor. 2.8.
thus the chief Rulers crucified the Lord of Glory, tho the Soldiers did it,
because they sought false witness against him, Matt. 26.59. they pronounced him
guilty of death, v. 66. they persuaded the multitude to ask Barabbas, and
destroy Jesus, Matt. 27, 20. Thus did the People kill the Prince of Peace, Act.
3.15. Because they, harkening to these persuasions of the chief Priests, cried
out to Pontius Pilate, let him be crucified: thus also are we guilty of the sin
of others upon the same account, by counselling, or by advising them to what is
Evil, by consenting to, or by approving it before it is done.

4ly, We are directly partakers with another in his sin, and become guilty of
it consequentially, when we consent unto, or do approve the Evil done, when we
applaud the action, or rejoice that it is done, because in all these cases we
show our willingness, that what is Evil should be done. Ep. 2. v. 10.
He says St. John, who bids the Heretic good speed is partaker of his Evil
deeds, for by this wish he shows his good liking to his Heresy, expressing
his desire that it may prosper and prevail, whence it must follow by like
reason, that whosoever does approve, or show good liking to, or does desire, or
wish that they may prosper, or prevail who are engaged in a wicked action,
become partakers of its guilt. Hence is he charged as one who hates instruction
and casts Gods Law behind his back, who when he sees a Thief consents to
him, Psalm. 50.18. and this is made an aggravation of the guilt of Heathens,
that knowing the judgment of God that they who did such things were worthy of
death, they not only did the same, but had pleasure in them that did them, Romans
1.32. The reason is, because he who does praise an Evil action, does approve it
as good, and worthy of his commendation, and therefore shows that he is willing
that it should be done, and so does also he who does rejoice at, or takes
pleasure in the commission of it.

5ly, They do, almost in all these ways, incur the guilt of others sins who
teach false Doctrines which do encourage others in a course of sin, who plead
for that as good, and Righteous, which is Wicked, and teach that to be innocent
and harmless, which indeed is sinful, and so incur the Woe denounced against
them who call evil good, and good evil, Esa. 5.20. for that by such erroneous
Doctrines Men may in all these ways contract the guilt of others sins, is
evident from this consideration, that if Men call evil good, they by so doing
must encourage, persuade, and warrant others to commit it, and justify them in
their wicked practices, and if they call good evil, they must deter them from
the performance of their Duty, and must encourage them to sin by the neglect of
that performance. And therefore they who do deter Men from joining with our
Congregations, as being guilty of Superstitious Worship, or doing things
forbidden by the word of God, if they prove guilty in this matter of false
accusation, as I think they are, must be partakers of that Schism which others,
resting on their judgments, are encouraged to make, for they must then Command
them not to do what it is their Duty, in obedience to their Superiors, and love
unto their Churches Peace, and Unity, to do, and must encourage them in and
praise them for that disobedience, and Separation which is indeed their sin.

2ly, We become indirectly guilty of the sin of others, when tho we do not
actually consent unto, or will their sin, nor have we any purpose or design to
tempt them to it, or ensnare them in it, yet do we that which is a culpable
occasion of their sin, and where it is through our fault that others sin, we
cannot be wholly excused from the guilt of their iniquity: Now thus we may be
charged with the sin of others.

1. By neglecting of that Duty, or by committing of that Evil action which does
directly give occasion to the sin of others, for most assuredly that sin which
does immediately happen through my neglect of Duty, or is the plain result of
my Transgression, must be mine offense. For even Heathens have declared, that
qui non vetat peccare cum potest, jubet, He that when he has Power to restrain
Men from committing Evil, and has Authority from God committed to him for that
end, neglects to do it, he becomes guilty of those sins which through neglect
of his Authority, and Duty, others do commit; thus, If the Watchman do not
warn the sinner, who dies in his iniquity, his Blood will be required at the
Watch-mans hands, Ezekiel. 33. v. 8. Thus the iniquity of Eli's Sons is charged
upon him, 1 Samuel 3.13.
because they made themselves vile, and he restrained them not. And since it is
the Christians Duty to admonish his offending Brother, and not to suffer sin
upon him, therefore he by neglecting of this Duty becomes guilty of his sin;
hence we thus Read, Levit. 19.17. Thou shall reprove thy Brother, and not bear
sin for him, or that thou be not punished for his iniquity. Now where the
Righteous judge does threaten to punish us for other Men's Transgressions, we may
be sure that we are truly guilty of them.

2ly, We become indirectly guilty of the sin of others, when by our ill example
we minister occasion to their sin, and by our freedom to commit an Evil action,
we encourage others, tho we do not intend it, to commit the like, for hereby
we, at least, if we be persons of Authority and credit, do put a stumbling
block, or an occasion to fall in our Brothers way, and therefore walk not
Charitably, nor sutably unto that Precept which Commands us to give none
offense to Jew or Gentile.

3ly, We become indirectly guilty of the sin of others, when we do use our
liberty in things indifferent to the offense, or sin of our weak Brother, i. e.
when, tho we know that our weak Brother is like to be offended, or tempted by
our practice of that indifferentaction to do evil, we will not, tho we have it
in our power so to do, abstain from the performance of it: Hence the Apostle
does exhort all Christians to take heed lest by using of their Liberty in
matters of this Nature, they become a stumbling block to those that are weak, 1
Cor. 8.9. That no Man put a stumbling block, or an occasion to fall in his
Brothers way, Romans 14.13. declaring it is good neither to eat Flesh, nor to
drink Wine, nor to do any other thing by which their Brother is offended, or
made weak, Romans 14.21. that tho all meats are pure, and lawful to be eaten, yet
is it evil for that Man who eats with offense, v. 20. that if our Brother be
grieved with our meat we walk not Charitably toward him, with many things of
the like import, whence it is evident that in all matters of indifferency, it
is the Christians Duty, as much as in him lies, to avoid the causing of his
Brothers sin by using of his Liberty in doing of them, and therefore that he
must incur the guilt of sin by the neglect of this his Duty. Superiors, cannot
involve us in the guilt of the Imposer, although he should offend in the impofing
them as the conditions of Communion; For,

1. By our submission to these Constitutions for the sake of Peace, and to
prevent the Schisms, and the Divisions of the Church of God, we cannot properly
be said to command the imposing of them. Nor 2ly, Can we be said to persuade,
encourage, warrant, allure, or set them on to the imposing of these things. Nor
3ly, can we be said to consent unto, or rejoice in, or praise the action of
Imposers, this only can be truly said that we consent unto the using of, or to
submission to them for the forementioned pious ends, tho not to the imposing of
them; all which is evident from this consideration, that many do, and have
consented to the using of them, who have remonstrated, and declared their
judgments against the imposition of them, and all have Liberty to do so, now
sure that action which may be done, tho we declare by word or writing against
the imposition of these things, can be no virtual consent unto, or approbation
of that imposition, or any encouragement to others to continue so to do.

2ly, We cannot be partakers of the supposed guilt of others in this matter
indirectly, by the neglecting of our Duty: Not by neglecting of our power to
restrain Superiors from thus imposing, for we have no such power over them, but
are commanded to be subject to them in all lawful matters, even for Conscience
sake; nor from neglect of any Duty incumbent on us to admonish our Superiors of
the supposed fault in continuing to impose these things, for they who do
conceive this is their Duty, may with all due submission to, and reverence of
their Superiors, discharge that Duty by humbly offering the reasons of their
judgment in that case, and notwithstanding may submit unto the things enjoined
for the ends forementioned. Nor 3ly, Can we be thus guilty by any ill example
or Evil action, which gives occasion to their sin, for our Conformity to the
Commands of our Superiors in lawful matters is not Evil, nor can we be obliged
to abstain from, but rather to perform that action.

Lastly, We cannot indirectly be partakers of the sin of others by using this
our Liberty in things indifferent to the offense of our weak Brother. For 1.
The action in which we are obliged not to minister to the offense of our weak
Brother must be indifferent, not only in its own Nature, but also in respect to
us, that is, there must be no command or obligation by Superiors laid upon us
to the practice of it: For, when the case stands thus, we are not to refrain
obedience to Authority to avoid the Scandal of our weak Brother, except in
cases wherein it may be rationally presumed that our Superiors would permit us
so to do. The reason is, because obedience to Authority in lawful matters is a
moral Duty, and the neglect thereof is sin, since therefore God cannot be
reasonably supposed to oblige us to neglect our Duty, or commit sin to gratify
our Brother in his weakness, he cannot rationally be supposed to command us to
refuse obedience to the injunctions of Superiors for that end. And this does
plainly follow from what St. Paul asserts, 1 Cor. 8.8. For therefore he
requires the Corinthians to abstain from eating of things offered to Idols,
when that would prove a Scandal to the weak, because by eating they were not
the better, or not more acceptable to God, and by abstaining from it, they were
not the worse, whence we may rationally infer that when the doing of an action
will commend us to God, as our obedience to Gods Vicegerents in all lawful
matters most certainly will do, and when the neglecting of an action will
render us the worse, as the neglect of that obedience which God in Scripture
has required will do, there we are not obliged to refrain the doing of that
action, tho it may minister unto the Scandal of our weaker Brother, because we
must not do evil that good may come.

Moreover in matters of this Nature we cannot disobey but we must minister
occasion of far greater Scandal by our disobedience than we can do by our
submission to the command of our Superiors; as I have showed already. For,

1. By disobedience to our Superiors in Lawful matters we give occasion to
others to traduce the Gospel, by representing it as that which teaches
Christians to refuse obedience to the commands of their Superiors in Lawful
matters.

2ly, We provoke Superiors to punish this our disobedience; now either we
deserve that punishment, or not; if we deserve it we must confess that we are
evil doers by not affording this Submission to the commands of our Superiors,
and therefore cannot truly Plead the Scandal of the weak for our justification
in so doing; if we deserve it not, then do we give occasion to the sin of
Magistrates in punishing us unjustly, and so have the same reason to avoid
their Scandal.

3ly, By disobedience to our Superiors in these matters we provoke others to
judge, censure, and condemn us as disobedient and seditious Persons. Now either
they do judge aright, when they do pass this sentence on us, and then we must
be truly disobedient, and therefore sinful in our refusal to submit to the
injunctions of Authority in Lawful matters, or they do judge amiss, and so we
give occasion to their sin, and therefore truly Scandalize them by our
disobedience. Thus have we by induction prov^^, that we by yielding such
Submission, as is required, to the commands of our Superiors touching the Rites
imposed, cannot be partakers with them in the guilt supposed to be in their
injunctions.

They dare not join with us in Celebration of the Holy Sacrament, separate the
Precious from the Vile, or we do not exclude unworthy Persons from the
Sacrament; and so by joining with us in this Ordinance, when they can join with
others who do keep up Discipline, they should approve of our neglect of
Discipline, and by partaking with such Persons, become partakers with them in
their sin.

Church, and that Sufficient care is seldom taken for the exclusion of unworthy
Persons from that Holy Ordinance, how is it, I beseech you, that you by your
participation of this Ordinance among us, become partakers of this guilt? Do
you by thus receiving either command, rejoice in, or take pleasure in this
supposed neglect? No, your objection shows it is your trouble; do you consent
to this neglect by joining with us in this ordinance? If so then our Lord
Christ, and his Apostles must be supposed to have consented to all neglects,
and all miscarriages in the whole Public Worship of the Jews, because they
joined with them in that Worship. Then must the Regular Members of the Church
of Corinth have approved the disorders of that Church touching the Sacrament,
and the abuse of their Spiritual Gifts by Communicating with those who were
then guilty of them and so they must have been obliged to Separate on that
account, whereas the Apostle never does exhort them so to do, but only does
advise the parties guilty to amend these disorders, and to do all things
decently and orderly. Then also are we guilty of all the imperfections both in
Prayer or preaching, of which that Minister is guilty with whom we join in the
performance of those duties. Lastly do we contract this guilt by the neglecting
of our duty in reforming these defects, Alas if there be reason to complain of
such defects, it must belong unto the Governors of Church and State, and not to
private Persons to reform them.

CHAP. IX. The CONTENTS.
The posture of Kneeling at the receiving of the Sacrament is lawful and
convenient, and Separation because it is imposed is Schismatical,. 1. To the
Objection from Christ's example, it is Answered. 1. That it concludes as much
against Sitting as Kneeling. 2ly, That we are not obliged to imitate it. 3ly,
That Christ himself consented to a like change of the Paschal Gesture ibid. to
the Objection that Kneeling before a Creature is Idolatrous, it is Answered 1.
That the foundation of it is false, it being not the sight of the Elements
which does induce us to Kneel. 2ly, That then the Dissenters are Idolaters.
3ly, That then the Jews must be Idolaters in Worshipping God before the Ark or
Mercy seat. 4ly, That in this action, no Worship being tendered to a Creature,
there can be no Idolatry.. 2. the difference betwixt us and the Church of Rome
consists in this, that we only make the Creature the occasion, they the object
of Worship; the Custom of our Church in bowing at our entrance into the Church
or Chancel, and at the Name of Jesus, cleared from all appearance of Idolatry.
ibid. To the Objection that we must not Communicate in this Ordinance with
Wicked Men, it is Answered 1. ad hominem that it is to be feared that they do
Communicate with Schismatics, with those that speak evil of dignities, and
Rebels who have not publicly repented of that sin. 2ly, That this Argument
will drive them as well from other Ordinances as the Sacrament. 3ly, That
private persons may unblameably Communicate in such Assemblies, the Precept to
exclude them being not directed to them, but to the Rulers of the Church. 4ly,
That private persons only are obliged to withdraw from such Persons in familiar
and unnecessary converse not in Public Duties.. 3. The great objection from
the neglect of Discipline proposed in these Propositions. 1. That the excluding
notorious wicked Persons from the Communion of the Church is the express
Ordinance of Christ. 2ly, That the exercise of this Discipline does highly tend
to the glory of God, and to the credit of Christianity. 3ly, That it is
necessary to preserve the Members of Christ's Body from the danger of pollution.
4ly, That probably this is requisite to preserve the Church Gods Temple, and to
continue the assistance of his Holy Spirit with her. 5ly, That the neglect of
this great Duty tends much unto the detriment of the Church by exposing her to
Gods judgments.. 4. To which objection it is Answered. 1. That in case Church
Officers do not perform their Duty with respect to this great Ordinance, yet is
it not the Peoples Duty to separate on that account. 2ly, That although
Excommunication be the Duty of Church Officers, yet is it not a Duty necessary
to be exercised at all times, on all offenders, in all circumstances. 3ly, That
tho it be the Christians Duty to withdraw from, and to avoid the Scandalous
Offender, yet is this only then a Duty when we can serve no higher ends of
Piety and Mercy in holding correspondence with them. 4ly, That it may be
doubted whether all Scandalous professors deserve immediately to be excluded
from Communion with us.. 5. 5ly, That our Church Officers cannot be truly said
to own, or to approve of this supposed neglect of discipline, and that if the
Rules of Discipline prescribed by them were duly practiced, this Objection
would vanish.. 6. That the continuance of Gods presence by his Spirit with his
Church cannot be proved entirely to depend upon the separation of wicked
Persons and Scandalous Offenders from her.. 7. The Objection against these
words used in confirmation that this is done to certify them by this sign of
Gods favor and gracious goodness to them, Answered,. 8. Other Ceremonies
defended from the ensuing Propositions. 1. That the laudable Customs of the
Catholic Church, which are of present observation, are fit to be observed by
all Christians; whence is justified, 1. The Custom of delivering the
Sacramental Elements into the hands of the Communicants, and speakto them
severally. 2ly, The retaining of Godfathers and Godmothers. 3ly, The
Answering of the sureties in Baptism. 4ly, The use of the Ring in Matrimony,.
9. Prop. 2. That it concerns not Inferiors to know the reason why Superiors
do Command one thing rather than another, but only whether, what they do
Command be not forbidden,. 10. Prop. 3. That bodily Worship is required both in
the Old and the New Testament, which is sufficient to justify, 1. Kneeling at
Prayer. 2. Bowing at the Name of Jesus. 3. Uncovering our heads in the House of
God. And 4ly, Standing up at the Gospel, the reason of that Custom,. 11. The
Churches Festivals considered, and the Lawfulness of some of them proved from
Propositions laid down by Mr. Baxter,. 12. Three other Arguments for the
expediency of them. 1. From the consideration of the end for which they have
been instituted by the Wisdom of the Church. 2. From the benefit which may
redound unto us by the observation of them. 3. From the continued Custom of The
whole Church of Christ.. 13. Five Arguments of Mr. Baxter against the Feasts of
Christmas, Easter, the Ascension, etc. Answered. 14. The Objection from Gal.
4.9, 10. Coloss. 2.16. Answered. 15.

CHAP. IX.
HAving thus Answered all the considerable Objections of Dissenters which they
plead in general against Submission to the Ceremonies appointed by the Church
of England to be used in her Solemnities; I proceed to a particular
consideration of those Ceremonies of which I have not had a fit occasion to
discourse in the foregoing Chapters; And they are those, viz. Kneeling at the
Receiving of the Sacrament. The Bishops imposition of hands at confirmation,
and standing up at the Creed, and at the reading of the Gospel, at the saying
Gloria patri, Kneeling at Prayer, etc. And,



1. That since some posture is then necessary, and none by God determined, it
cannot reasonably be doubted but that the Church has power to determine in
this matter as she conceives most proper and convenient.

2ly, I know no posture more convenient than that of Kneeling, it being a very
fit expression of our humility, and of the sense of our unworthiness of the
great blessings there received. And 2ly, A posture fit for Prayer which we do
use at the Receiving of the Sacrament

3ly, I add, That if it be lawful to receive in such a humble posture, then
must it be unlawful to refuse Communion with our Church in the participation of
this Ordinance, because she does require us to use this posture in receiving.
For on this supposition, we must refuse to hold communion with her in a lawful
matter, and so must separate from her communion in this Ordinance without
cause, which is the sin of Schism, Now that it is lawful to receive Kneeling
will appear by answering the Arguments produced by Dissenters against this
posture. And,

1. It is objected, That Kneeling at the Sacrament is contrary to the Practice
and Example of Christ, and his Apostles, for they received sitting.

Lord, and his Disciples at their Receiving is expressed, are translated so as
to seem to countenance their opinion who hold the sitting posture to be most
agreeable to the Example of our Lord, and his Disciples, but yet it is certain,
from the Original, that Christ, and his Disciples did neither sit, nor Kneel,
but did lie down on Couches at the Receiving of this Ordinance, for 'twas
administered (...), they lying down, Mark. 14.18. of Christ himself it is said
that (...), he lay down with the twelve. Matt. 26.20. (...), he fell down with
them, Luke 22.14. If therefore this Objection be of any force, it unavoidably
will prove, that we must neither sit, nor stand, nor Kneel, but must lie down
at the Receiving of this Sacrament, and so our Lords Example will be as strong
against sitting, which is the posture our Dissenters use, as against kneeling,
which is the posture they reject.

2ly, I Answer that in such things as these which accidentally were done by
Christ and his Apostles, and had no real goodness in them, we cannot be obliged
to imitate them. This men do generally acknowledge in things of a like nature
to this gesture, for they conceive that we are not obliged to receive this
Sacrament in a like place, viz an upper Room, or Inn, nor at the same time,
after the passover, or after supper, nor in the same habit, in Sandals, or a
seemless coat; why therefore should they think it necessary to be received in a
like Gesture, that being not commanded any more than is the time, or place, or
habit. Moreover St Paul, when he informs his Corinthians what he received
from the Lord to be delivered to them touching this holy Sacrament, 1 Cor.
11.23.
makes no mention of this Gesture, and thereby does assure us that it was not
necessary to be observed. And Bishop Jewel notes well, Repl. to Hard Artic. 2.
that our Lord said do this, but said not do it after supper, do it sitting, do
it with twelve Disciples, nor did the Apostles so understand him.

Passover, even by Gods Command, was celebrated at the first, was altered by
the Jewish Church, for in the first Passover they were Commanded to eat it with
their loins Girt, their shoes on their feet, Ex. 12.11.
and their staves in their hands, as men standing ready, and in have to be
gone, but being entered into their rest, the land of Canaan, they changed this
posture into lying down, and yet our Savior, and his Apostles did not scruple
to conform unto it, how much less should we scruple the varying from an
uncommanded Gesture used occasionally, and not of choice, by our Dear Lord.

2ly. It is objected that Kneeling at the Sacrament makes us Guilty of
Idolatry by worshipping God before, or by, or with Relation to a Creature, For
the Elements, say they, are the motive of your kneeling, for if they were not
there you would not kneel.

Lyturgy, Rubr. after the Commun.
for a signification of our humble acknowledgment of the benefits of Christ
there tendered, and because Kneeling is a proper posture to tender our devotion
in. The Elements do only bring these things to our remembrance, they do it to
our eyes, as the words used in a Sermon, Prayer Book, or by the Minister, do
bring them to remembrance by our hearing; if then it be Idolatry to worship God
when these things by the Symbols are brought to our remembrance, it must be so
to worship God when we do hear a Sermon, Prayer, or a discourse concerning
them. 2ly. If this be Idolatry, then our Dissenters must be Gross Idolaters,
for Surely inward worship, unduly tendered, is as Gross Idolatry as outward
worship by which it is expressed; now do not they, when they behold the bread
broken, and the wine poured out, put forth an act of inward worship, viz. an
act of praise, thanksgiving, love, affiance? do they not do this before a
creature as much as we? are not the Elements seen by them the motive of their
doing so as much as of our Kneeling? If then we are Idolaters for Kneeling to
God before them, why must not they be equally Idolaters by tendering all this
inward worship to him before, and on occasion of the same Elements. 3ly, Were
this Idolatry, the Jews must be Idolaters by worshipping the Lord before the
Ark or Mercy Seat, before the Temple at Jerusalem, and before the Tabernacle,
for by so doing they worshipped God before a creature, and would not have done
so, had they not been before these creatures, since the command runs thus to
worship him, Ps. 99.5, 9.
and to fall down before his footstool; moreover how often do we find them
falling down and worshipping at the appearance of that cloud, or fire which was
the Symbol of Gods presence? When they saw the fire fall and consume the burnt
offerings, they fell upon their faces. 1 Kings 18 38, 39. When they saw the
fire of God come down, and the Glory of the Lord upon the house, they bowed
themselves with their faces to the Ground, 2 Chronicles. 7.3. And yet because they
did this not to the cloud, or fire, but to God, there could be no Idolatry in
this their action. 4ly, It is a thing impossible that such an action as this is
should any ways be Guilty of Idolatry, for Idolatry is false worship of a
creature, now where there is no worship of the creature, as in this action
there is not, there can be no false worship of the creature. And to evidence to
every rational Capacity, that nothing used in the Service of our Church can
rationally be charged with any semblance of Idolatry, and manifest the great
and signal difference there is betwixt the actions of our Church which our
Dissenters call Idolatrous, and those which in the Church of Rome we do accuse
as such, I lay down this distinction, viz:

1. That we may Kneel, bow down, or may perform like acts of outward worship
before any creature, either so as to make that creature only the circumstance,
or the occasion of that worship, or else so as to make that creature the object
of those acts of worship. When any Creature is rendered the object of our
worship, the mind does actually, or virtually intend to worship, or pay an act
of Reverence to the Creature which is thus made the object of our worship, but
when the Creature is only made the Circumstance, or the occasion of the
worship, the mind intends to pay the act of worship only to another object, in
such a place, or upon intimation, or apprehension of the object which I
worship, which apprehension or intimation is caused by that Creature. Thus when
I come to Common Prayer read in the Church, the Church is the circumstance of
place, the hour, of time, for the performance of that worship, but God is the
sole object of it, when at the hearing of the Ave Mary Bell, the Roman
Catholic begins his Ave Mary, the Blessed Virgin is the object, the Bell is
only the occasion of it, and when they then Kneel down, and bow, they do not
Kneel unto the consecrated Bell, but to the Blessed Virgin.

2ly, This being so, it is ridiculous to say we worship any thing, because it
is before us when we direct our outward worship to another object. Since on the
same account the Wisemen of the East who worshipped Christ before the Manger,
must be supposed to pay their worship to the Manger, and they who meeting
Christ Riding upon an Ass, Saluted him with their Hosannas, and bowed toward
him, must also pay their worship to the Ass. And if upon appearance of the
Devil we should fall upon our Knees, and beg of God to be delivered from him,
we must be said to worship the very Devil by that action. Moreover when we lift
up our eyes, and voices to the Heavens, we also lift them up toward the
Clouds, and Stars, but will it follow thence that by so doing we do not only
worship God, but the Material Heavens, and those Glorious lights we see, as was
objected by the Pagans against the People of the Jews? Wherefore to say that
Protestants worship the Altar, or the Eucharistick Elements, because they
worship God before them, is to calumniate the Protestants as anciently the
Heathens did the Christians, affirming that they worshipped the Sun, because
they worshipped God toward the East, and so by consequence toward the Rising
Sun. Wherefore to give a clear and Satisfactory Answer to all the instances of
this nature, which are alleged by Dissenters to prove the Church of England
Guilty of this crime, I say,

1. That when we bow toward the Altar, as we enter into, or come out of the
Church, Chancel, or Chapel, where we worship God, the Altar is not the object
of our worship, but only an accidental circumstance of it, for we do not in the
least intend by this obeisance to do an act of worship to the Communion Table,
or any thing placed there, or elsewhere, but to God alone, for this the Church
of England has solemnly declared in these words: Constit. and Canons: A.D.
1640. Can. 7.
Whereas the Church is the house of God dedicated to his Holy worship, and
therefore ought to mind us both of the greatness and goodness of his Divine
Majesty, certain it is that the acknowledgment thereof, not only inwardly in
our hearts, but also outwardly with our bodies, must needs be pious in it self,
profitable to us, and Edifying to others; we therefore think it very meet and
behoveful, and heartily commend it to all good and well affected People,
Members of this Church, that they be ready to tender to the Lord the said
acknowledgment, by doing reverence and obeisance both at their coming in, and
going out of the said Churches, Chancels, or Chapels, according to the most
Ancient Custom of the Primitive Church in the purest times, and of this Church
also for many years in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth. The reviving therefore of
this Ancient and laudable Custom, we heartily commend to the serious
consideration of all good People, not with any intention to exhibit any
Religious Worship to the Communion Table, the East, or Church, or any thing
contained therein in so doing, or to perform the said gesture in Celebration of
the Holy Eucharist upon any opinion of a Corporal Presence of the Body of Jesus
Christ on the Holy Table, or in the Mystical Elements, but only for the
advancement of Gods Majesty, and to give him Alone that honor and glory which
is due unto him, and no otherwise. Which Canon as it declares this act of
Worship not to be given, or intended to the Altar, so does it give us the true
Reason why it is accidentally done toward the Altar; viz. Because it is
performed at our entrance into the immediate place of Worship, to which
entrance the Altar stands opposite.

2ly, When at the name of Jesus we are wont to bow, that bowing is not intended
by us to the very name, which is the occasion only of the Worship by putting us
in mind of him that is named, and of our highest obligation to him, as being
Jesus, a Savior, to whom therefore we address our selves, and recognize him as
our only Savior by that especial and peculiar act of devotion. So that the
adoration then performed is wholly and absolutely directed to the Lord Jesus,
as is declared by the Church in these words: Constit. and can. A. 1603. can. 18
When in time of divine service the Lord Jesus Christ shall be mentioned, due,
and lowly Reverence shall be done by all persons present, as it has been
accustomed, testifying by these outward Ceremonies and Gestures, their inward
Humility, Christian Resolution, and due Acknowledgment that the Lord Jesus
Christ, the true and Eternal Son of God, is the only Savior of the world, in
whom alone all the Mercies, Graces, and Promises of God to mankind for this
life, and the life to come, are fully and wholly comprised. And,

3ly, When we Kneel at the Reception of the Blessed Sacrament, Rubric after
the Communion
we do not pay that outward act of Worship to the Elements of Bread and Wine,
but to that Savior whom they represent; for the Church of England has declared
that thereby no adoration is intended, or ought to be done unto the Sacramental
Bread and Wine there bodily received. So that from the express declarations of
the Church of England it appears, that none of these things are by her made the
objects of Religious Worship, but only the occasions of tendering that Worship
which we owe to God, and therefore there is no appearance of Idolatry in the
performance of these things.

We are commanded to Separate from every Brother that walks disorderly, 2
Thessal. 3.6. keep Company with any man who being called a Brother is a
Fornicator, or Covetous, or an Idolater, or a Rayler, or a Drunkard, or an
Extortioner, with such a one we must not Eat, 1 Cor. 5.11. And if we may not
Eat with Such a Person at our own Table, may we Eat with him at the Holy Table
of the Lord? Now, through the want of Discipline, such Persons are admitted
amongst you, says the Dissenter, and therefore we dare nor join with you in
that Ordinance.

Apostle says of the Corinthian Schismatics, 1 Cor. 11.17.
not for the better, but the worse, For I much fear there may be found in those
Assemblys which you resort to as more pure, besides a crew of Schismatics,
with whom according to the Discipline observed in the purest Ages of the
Church, the Christian ought not to communicate, many who rail against
Superiors, and speak evil of Dignities, and many who have once been open
Rebels, and have not publicly repented of those crimes; and if you can
communicate with them, why not with such as usually do meet at our Communion
Tables? The wisdom which is from above is impartial.

Assemblies, and from our Prayers, as from our Communion Table, for you may as
well Argue thus; him that I may not keep company with at home, I may not keep
company with at Church; him that I must not join with in my Civil Converse, I
must not hold Communion with in Sacred; him that I may not Eat with, I may not
Pray with, as you do Argue thus, him that I may not Eat with at my own, I may
not Eat with at the Table of the Lord. This is apparent from the occasion of
the objected Precept, viz. The Incestuous Person, who was to be taken from
among them: v. 2.
To be delivered to Satan for the destruction of the Flesh, v. 5. To be purged
out from the new lump, v. 7. To be put away from among them, v. 13. If
therefore, after admonition, they continue obstinate, and Refractory Offenders,
they are to be excluded from all Christ's ordinances, and to be esteemed as
Publicans and Heathens, Matt. 18.17. Accordingly they, by the discipline
observed in the purest Ages of the Church, were actually excluded from
Communion with her in all her Offices; if then we may not join with them in
one, we may not join with them in other Ordinances, till they have satisfied
the Church, they being by this precept equally to be excluded from them all.
Scripture may also be as plausibly produced for the declining of Communion with
them in public Prayer, and family devotions, in hearing of a Sermon, and the
like, as in receiving of the Sacrament, for does not David make it the
Character of good and blessed men, that they stand not in the Congregation of
Sinners? Does he not say, Psalm. 1.1. Psalm. 101.4.
I will not know a wicked Person?

Scandalously, and Notoriously such, but make profession of Obedience to the
laws of Christ, and are not by the Church cast out for acting contrary to their
profession, may be unblameably communicated with, seems undeniable from the
Example of our Savior, by whom Judas was certainly admitted to that Passover,
which spiritually did signify, and represent Christ to them, 1 Cor. 10.3. And
by which rite they owned themselves the servants of the God of Israel, v. 18.
Whence none might eat thereof who were not Circumcised, Exodus 12.48. That he
was also present at the supper of our Lord I have fully proved already, If then
a person so unworthy, and so regardless of the Law of Moses, that he had
actually resolved to take a reward to betray Innocent-blood. If a Thief, Psalm.
15.5.
and a Covetous person, was by our Lord admitted to the Passover; If one who by
our Lord was known to be in heart a Murderer, and a Betrayer of his Master,
was yet admitted by him to his Sacrament, you see that sinners must be first
notorious before they ought to be excluded, and when they are so, our Rubric,
and our Canons give every Minister Authority to withold the Communion from
them, and therefore Authorize them to exercise the Discipline required in this
case. Hence also we may learn that to communicate with those, whom we know to
be wicked, in this duty, derives upon us no Communion in their Guilt, for
otherwise our Lord, and his Disciples, would not have joined in Communion with
that wicked one.

Church of Corinth in the General, as you may learn from v. 4. And therefore
hence it only follows, that it is the duty of Church Governors to exclude such
persons from Communion with her, but not that private persons should refrain
Communion with the Church, because they judge that they neglect their duty. And
therefore we do never read that Christ, or his Apostles refused Communion with
the Jewish Church, or did neglect to go unto the Temple, or the Synagogue,
because the Scribes and Pharisees neglected to perform their duty, and our
Apostle here does never call the members of the Church of Corinth to separate
from them who caused disorders in the Celebration of this Sacrament, but only
calls upon them to reform those disorderly proceedings. And I beseech you to
consider what a Gap would be laid open to perpetual Schisms, if private persons
were permitted to judge when their Superiors did neglect their duty in any part
of public worship, and were permitted to separate from them, and join in
opposite Communions, as often as they imagined that others better did acquit
themselves in Prayer, or Preaching, or in Administration of the Sacraments, or
any other duty which belongs unto the Ministerial Office.

Lastly this Text only engages Private Christians to separate from persons
Guilty of such crimes, as to familiar converse in things unnecessary, but never
to decline their presence so as to neglect the doing or receiving good to their
own souls or bodies. For 1. Divines agree in this, that Christ and his Apostles
do not in this, or other places, prescribe such separation as is injurious to
any, or takes off any duties which by the law of nature we do owe unto them, or
our Relation to them calls for. A Wife must not, by virtue of this Precept,
separate from her ungodly Husband, no, tho he be an unbeliever, let her not
leave him, says St. Paul. 1 Cor. 7.15. A child must not deny subjection to a
wicked Parent, nor a Servant to an evil Master, but must be subject with all
fear, not only to the good and gentle, but also to the Froward, 1 Pet. 2.18. If
then this Precept will not oblige us to perform what is injurious to another
temporals, it cannot lay upon us an obligation to do that which is prejudicial
to our own Spiritual concerns: Much less what prejudicieth the concernments of
the Church, our Spiritual Mother, and makes us disobedient to our Spiritual
Fathers. 2ly, This Precept does not bind in case of signal damage, for I am not
obliged to renounce his Company by whom my Trade is carried on, my goods go
off, because I judge him wicked or Profane, or to refuse a Customer because he
is no Saint, for then no Trade could lawfully be managed, and there would be no
living in the world. I do not mean, says Paul, to for bid your keeping
Company, as your occasions serve, with the Fornicators, Covetous, Idolaters of
the world, for then you must go out of the world, v. 9.10. If then, as far as
the concernments of our worldly callings warrant us, we may enjoy their
Company, much more when this is necessary to the concernments of our Souls, or
our Spiritual Callings. 3ly, When I am called as a Guest, where accidentally I
meet with such a one, I am not then obliged to depart, and leave the Company
because I find him there, for this can be no evidence of my familiarity with
him: Much less am I obliged to depart on his account, when I am graciously
invited to this heavenly banquet, and called to feast upon the Supper of the
Lamb. And 4ly, Our Lord did, notwithstanding this duty of avoiding the Company
of wicked men, familiarly converse with Publicans and Sinners, in order to
their reformation and spiritual advantage, Matt. 9 13.
and justified his so doing by this Rule, I will have mercy and not Sacrifice,
why therefore may not we by the same Reason justify our converse with them in
order to our own Spiritual Good?

But because this Objection of the want of Discipline is the great Scruple of
Dissenters, and some even among our selves seem to speak slighter of it, than
they ought to do, I will endeavor in some few Propositions to show how much it
does concern all Churches to endeavor to keep up their Discipline, by the
exclusion of notorious evil livers from the Church, and how far the neglect
thereof can be imputed to our Church, and whether any separation from her can
be justified on this account. And therefore I assert,

That the Secluding of profane and wicked Persons, who after admonition by the
Church, Prop. 1.
continue such, from the Communion of that Church of which they formerly were
Members, is the express Ordinance of Christ. For 1. Matt. 18.15, 16, 17.
Our Lord himself commanded that if by private admonition we cannot gain our
Brother, we should tell the Church, and if he did neglect to hear the Church,
he should by Christians be esteemed as a Publican and Heathen, adding, that
whatsoever ye (the Church Governors) shall bind on Earth, shall be bound in
Heaven. Whence it appears that as it is the Duty of the private Christian, who
cannot gain his Brother by the private admonitions prescribed by Christ, to
complain of him to the Church, so is it the Duty of the Church to admonish, and
reprove, and call him to repentance, and if he will not hearken unto her voice,
to bind him here on Earth, and that the Brother thus bound is afterward to be
looked upon, as to Communion in sacris, as a Heathen and a Publican. And although
no express could be produced from Christ to this effect, yet even the
constitution of Church Government must necessarily infer it, for Government, in
Church or State, there cannot be without a power of punishing unruly Members,
now the Government of the Church being Spiritual, her punishments can be only
such, even seclusion of her Members from spiritual things; moreover there can
be no Peace and Order under any Government without a Power of secluding, by
some means or other, such Persons from that Government as obstinately persist
in the disturbance of it, and violation of its fundamental Laws: On Luc. 6.22.
And therefore, as Grotius truly says, Christ having once constituted a Church
(and that to be a holy and undefiled Temple to himself) must be supposed to
command all those things without which this his Temple could not be kept pure.
But it is plain that a Power of censuring Offenders against this Pure and Holy
Institution, and of ejecting those who by their wicked conversations do defile
this Temple, is necessary for the preservation of the Church in purity.

And indeed I cannot understand how the Church should be a Society without
Union, or how she can have Union without some Rules of Government and Order, or
what those Rules can signify without a Power to punish, nor what Power of
punishing the Church, as such, can have, except it be by debarring of her
Members from some, or all of their Church Privileges; nor do I understand how
it should be the Duty of Christians to withdraw from every Brother that walks
disorderly, if the Church Officers have not a power to pronounce such persons
fit to be withdrawn from, especially seeing not hearing of the Church must go
before his being deemed, or treated as a Publican and Heathen. Nor Lastly, can
I understand St. Paul's discourse unless he Argue thus; Vide sclater. in locum.
The whole body of the Christian Assemblies ought to be a new Lump, and purged
from old Leaven, or from such Persons as notoriously commit such Crimes as
manifestly are repugnant to the profession of Christianity, and inconsistent
with true piety; he therefore who, being called a Brother, that is, making
profession of Christianity, is guilty of such Wickedness, should be cast out of
the Society of Christians; for as when the Paschal Lamb was offered among the
Jews, no Leaven was to be found among the People of Israel: So Christ our
Paschal Lamb being now Offered, no Leaven of Malice and Wickedness, and
consequently no such wicked Persons, ought to be left in the Church of the true
Israelites, but wholly purged out of it.

That the exercise of this Discipline does highly tend to the Glory of God,
Prop. 2.
and to the credit of Christianity. And surely this cannot be doubted by them
who know that this alone is that by which the Church can be preserved pure, and
like unto that God who will have no Communion with the works of Darkness, with
whom no Person can have fellowship who walks not in the light, as he is in the
light, 1 John 1.7.
That this alone can make the light of Christians to shine forth so as to
Glorify their Father which is in Heaven, Matt. 5.16.
and cause them to show forth the virtues of him that has called them from
darkness into his mavelous light; 1 Pet. 2.9.
and that this only can render us able to commend Christianity to others from
the prevailing topic of the Strict and Holy lives of the allowed professors of
it, by which it chiefly was promoted in the first and purest Ages of the
Church: In nobis Christus patitur opprobrium, l 4. p. 140. v. p. 139. 141.
That the Name and Doctrine of our Lord is Blasphemed among Heathens, Atheists,
Scepticks, and profane Persons by the ungodly lives of its Professors, as
Salvian sadly does complain, and by finding many who are owned as Christians,
and permitted to partake of the highest Ordinances, and Privileges of
Christians, who lead lives worse than Heathens, and who were constantly
rejected from the Communion of Christians in the best Ages of the Church. When
if at any time it was Objected by the Heathens that such persons bore the Name
of Christians, her Answer was, they went out from us but they are not of us,
nor owned, or Just. M. p. 70.253.306.308. vid. Tertull. ad Scap. cap. 4.
allowed of by us but are excluded by the Churches censures, or by their
voluntary separations; which may deserve to be considered.

The exercise of this Discipline is necessary to perserve the Members of
Christ's Body from the danger of pollution. Prop. 3.
This cannot easily be questioned, 1. By him who well considers that enquiry of
St. Paul, Know you not that a little Leaven leaveneth the whole lump; 1 Cor.
5.7.
purge therefore the Old Leaven from you, that you may be a new lump, (...),
for the neglected evil may defile the whole Body of the Church, say Oecumenius,
and Theophylact. 2. By him who knows how properly is the shame and punishment
inflicted upon others for confessed or palpable enormities, to restrain us from
the like practices, and how exceeding apt Men are to run into those vices
without fear, which by experience they find connived at by Superiors. As then
the Man who was defiled by Leprosy, or by an Issue, Numb. 5.2, 3.
or dead Body, was by Gods command to be removed out of the Camp of Israel,
that they defiled not the Camp in the midst of which God dwelt; so on the same
account should the Spiritual Leper, when the marks evidently do appear upon
him, be excluded from the Christian Camp that he desile not that Church in
which God dwells now as in his Temple.

It seems probable that the exercise of this Discipline is that which will
alone preserve the Church Gods Temple, Prop. 4.
and consequently will continue his presence with her Assemblies, by the
influences of his Holy Spirit on them in greater efficacy, and measure. And
that on these considerations:

1. That every Christian Church, or Assembly is in the Scripture represented as
Gods Temple, the place in which he dwells, as he of Old dwelt in Jerusalem,
for by inspection of the places where this Phrase, Gods Temple, is used in the
New Testament, it seems evident that it is not so much each private
Christian, as the Assemblies, and Churches of them, which are styled Gods
Temple. So the Apostle speaks to the Corinthians in the general, Know you not
that you are the Temple of God, and that the Spirit of God does dwell (...)
among you, 1 Cor. 3.16. and v. 17. The Temple of God is Holy, which Temple you
are. So also 2 Cor. 6.16. What Communion has the Temple of God with Idols? For
you are the Temple of the living God, as God has said, I will dwell, and walk
among them, and they shall be to me a People, and I will be their God. Which
words are manifestly taken from Lev. 26.11.12. and therefore they must speak of
Gods presence with his Christian Churches, the Israel of God, in such a manner
as he was present with the Jewish Church by placing of his Tabernacle among
them, and giving demonstrations of his gracious presence with them. Accordingly
we find this promise made, with respect unto the Gospel times, I will set my
Sanctuary in the midst of them for ever, my Tabernacle also shall be with them,
yea I will be their God, and they shall be my People, Ezekiel. 37.26, 27. Thus
also the Apostle speaks to the Church of Ephesus saying, You are fellow
Citizens of the the Saints, and of the Household of God, and are built upon the
foundations of the Apostles, and Prophets, Jesus Christ being the chief Corner
Stone, in whom all the building fitly framed together grows into an holy
Temple in the Lord, in whom also you are builded together for an habitation of
God through the Spirit, Ephesians. 2.19, 20, 21, 22. Hence Lastly, the Members of
Christ's Body, or the Community of Christians, seems to be styled Christ's house,
Heb. 3.6. his Spiritual house, 1 Pet. 2.5.

2ly, That the condition of Gods continuing to dwell in, or to abide with this
his Temple, as it was this of Old, that the Lords People should be Holy, that
is, be free from Ceremonial pollution, and from such sins as were committed
wilfully, and with an High hand, against the Law of Moses, and so deserved
cutting off; that they should be to him an Holy Nation, Exodus 19.6. a Holy
People, Deuteronomy. 7.6. an Elect peculiar People, Deuteronomy. 14.2.26.18. So it seems
plainly now under the New Testament to be the same. For Christians under the
New Testament are in like manner called the Elect of God, 1 Pet. 1.2. Col.
3.22. a chosen Generation, 1 Pet. 2.9. a Holy Nation, and Peculiar People,
ibid. And they are in like manner called to come out from the Sons of Belial,
the Children of Darkness, and Unrighteousness, with whom they can have no
Communion, and to be separate, that the Lord God may dwell among them, 2 Cor.
6.16, 17, 18. and consequently the continuance of Gods Spirit with his Church,
and his assistance in the Dispensation of its Ordinances, seems likewise to
depend on their continuance to be such a People, and therefore on the execution
of the censures of the Church on them who are notoriously otherwise, they are
Commanded to purge out the Old Leaven that they may be a new Lump, and to look
diligently that no root of bitterness spring up among them, Heb. 12.15.
whereby others may be in danger of defilement. And as to them who sinned with
an High hand, was threatened destruction by the hand of God, so the Apostle
says, that him who defiles the Temple of the Lord will God destroy, 1 Cor
3.17. And as God declared that he would not be with the Church of Israel when
it was defiled, except they did destroy the accursed thing from among them,
that is, the person who Transgressed his Covenant, Josh. 7.11, 12. So we may
also fear that he will not vouchsafe his presence with us, unless we also do
remove those from among us who defile his Temple, and openly transgress their
Christian Covenant. As then Jehojada set Porters at the Gates of the House of
the Lord, that none who was unclean in any thing should enter, 2 Chronicles. 23.19.
So also should the Rulers of Christ's Church, Act. 20.28. Jer. 15.19.
who are Commanded to take heed unto the Flock, and whose concern it is to
separate the precious from the vile.

That the neglect of this great Duty tends very much unto the detriment of the
Church, Prop. 5.
not only as it indangers the infection of her Members, and brings a Scandal on
her, but also as it does expose her to Gods judgments for the neglect of this
his Ordinance; this may be gathered 1. from the close of the 5th. Chapter of
the first Epistle to the Church of Corinth, where the discourse of the Apostle
on this subject concludes with these words, do not ye judge them that are
within, that is, says Dr. Hammond, you know it is the practice among you to
inflict censures on Church Members, and ye shall put away the evil from among
you: That is, by doing this you shall free your selves from those punishments
which the neglect of your Duty in permitting such offenders to go unpunished,
and unreformed, may bring upon you. 2ly, From Christ's reproof unto the Church
of Thyatira, because her Rulers suffered the Woman ealled Jezabel to teach,
Rev. 2.14, 15.
and to seduce his Servants to commit Fornication and to eat things Offered to
Idols, Rev. 2.20. and from his threatenings against the Church of Pergamos, that
he would come against her quickly, and fight against her with the Sword of his
Mouth. for suffering those among her who taught the Doctrine of Balaam, and the
Nicolaitans, if she did not repent, that is, says Dr. Hammond, There is gotten
among you, and permitted, and not punished by your Bishops, N. B. that unclean
Doctrine, and Practice of the Nicolaitans, which being odious to me, ought most
strictly to have been punished by you, and if this lenity be not speedily
mended, I will visit, and destroy you suddenly by judgments parallel to the
Sword that fell on the Israelites, that were corrupted by Balaams Counsel,
Numb. 25.5. And as when Magistrates neglect their Duty in punishing Offenders,
and bear the Sword in vain, God is provoked to take it into his own hand, and
punish such Offenders by his immediate power, so when Church Discipline is
neglected, it may be rationally expected God should immediately punish that
neglect.

Now on these propositions depends the great Objection of Dissenters against
Communion with, and for their Separation from our Church. For, say they, seeing
it is certain, that a Church in which this Duty is performed is better than a
Church which does neglect it, fince we have cause to hope Gods presence will be
more vouchsafed to such a Church, and his good Spirit will more powerfully
assist them, seeing in such a Church the danger from Gods judgments, and the
pollution of her Members, will be certainly the less, we think it reasonable to
prefer a Church in which this Discipline obtains in some good measure, as it
does in our Communions, before Communion with that Church in which it is
apparently, if not confessedly neglected, and therefore till the Church of
England will restore this Discipline, (...), we shall continue as we are.



That in case Church Officers do not perform their Duty with reference to this
great Ordinance of Chris, Prop. 6.
yet is it not the Praecidendae unitatis nulla est justa necessitas cum sibi
nequaquam nocituros malos ideo tolerent boni, ne spiritualiter sejungantur a
bonis, cum Disciplinae severitatem, consideratio cusiodiendae pacis refrenat
aut differt. August. contr. Epist. Parm. l. 2. c. 11. p. 39.
Peoples Duty to Separate from their Communion, except in the ensuing Cases: 1.
That they require those who Communicate with them to own, or to approve of this
defect, in which Case it is evident that our Communion with them must be
unlawful, because it cannot be obtained without sin. Or 2ly, When we, without
dividing of the Church, or disturbing of her Peace, or disobedience to, or
Separation from her Governors, or any other greater evil to our selves, or to
the Church of God, can Communicate with other Church Officers, legally called,
who conscientiously endeavor to perform that Duty, which others do neglect,
for, from the Reasons offered in the foregoing Propositions, and the confession
of our own Church that this is a Godly Disciplne, and that the Restoration of
it is much to be desired, it rationally seems to follow, that if this can be
done without a greater evil to our selves, or to the Church of God, we should
prefer a Church, Caeteris paribus, in which this Discipline of Christ obtains
in some good measure, before Communion with the Church in which it is
confessedly neglected. For proof of the proposition thus laid down, let us
consider,

1. That the Scribes and Pharisees rejected Christ's Doctrine, Luke 7.30.
and the Baptism of John, which was an Ordinance of God, and yet our Savior
bids both the People, and his own Disciples, Mat. 23.1.
hear them sitting in the Chair of Moses, which does imply Communion with those
Scribes and Pharisees. And tho both Priest and People were exceedingly
corrupted, tho he declares the Scribes and Pharisees to be a Generation of
Vipers, v. 33.
and the Generality of the People to be of their Father the Devil, Joh. 8.44.
and the Sadduces who joined in Public Worship with the rest, Mark 12.27.
to be greatly erroneous, yet neither did he Separate himself, nor command
others to Separate from the Communion of the Jewish Church, or Synagogues, on
those accounts.

2ly, St. Paul declares of the Church of Corinth, that it was their fault that
the incestuous Person was not separated from their Communion, 1 Cor. 5.1. and
commands them to separate him, v. 13. But he chides none for Communicating with
them whilst he was not Separated, which sure he would have done, had that
Communion been their sin. He tells them that the Supper of the Lord was
Celebrated so among them, that they came together for the worse, v. 17. that
some of them were drunk, v. 21. that they despised the Church of God, v. 22.
that they did eat judgment to themselves, v. 29.
not discerning the Lords Body, that (...) for this very cause many were sick
among them, many weak, and many fallen asleep, v. 30. yet did he not reprove
any for Communicating with them in that Ordinance, or counsel them to cease to
do so till these things were reformed, but rather does suppose it was their
Duty still to come to eat together, v. 33. He adds that they did so administer
the public ordinances of Prayer, and Praises, 1 Cor, 14.14. v. 33.
that they became unfruitful, and unedifying, but knowing that God was the God
of Order, and not of Confusion, he advises none to Separate for greater
Edification. Lastly, He speaks his fears, that at his coming he should sind
among them, envyings, zeal, commotions, contentions, evilspeaking, whisperings,
puffing up, and many who had lived a long time in Uncleanness, Fornication and
Lasciviousness, and had not yet repented of those sins, 2 Cor. 12.21, 22. such
he foretells he will not spare, 2 Cor. 13.2.
and thereby tacitly insinuates the fault of the Church Officers in sparing of
them, but never intimates that they Communicated with them in their guilt, who
joined in Communion with them; since then in all these cases we find not the
least intimation of the Duty, of the sound Members of the Church to separate on
these accounts, we may be sure that no such Duty was incumbent on them.

3. In his Epistle to the Church of the Galatians he intimates that some of
them were removed from him that called them to the grace of Christ, unto
another Gospel, Gal. 1.6. That among them was taught that Doctrine of
justification by the Law of Moses, and of the necessity of Circumcision, and
the observance of the Ceremonial Law by which the Gospel was perverted, v. 7.
the death of Christ made vain, Gal. 2.21. by embracing of which they were
fallen from grace, Gal. 5.5. and Christ was made of none effect unto them, and
would profit them nothing, v. 2. and by which they who had begun in the Spirit,
were made perfect in the Flesh. Gal. 3.3. That having run well, they were so
hindered and bewitched by their false Teachers as not to obey the truth, Gal.
3.1.5.7. that being known of God, they again returned to weak and beggarly
Elements, desiring to be in bondage to them, Gal. 4.9. that they observed
Months, and Times, and Years, v. 10. that upon this account he was afraid lest
he should have labored in vain among them, v. 11. he doubted of them, v. 20.
he again traveled with them till Christ should be formed in them, v. 19. He
therefore minds them of their danger from these perverters of the Gospel
saying, a little Leaven leaveneth the whole Lump, Gal, 5.9. of their Duty,
saying, cast out the Bondwoman and her Son, Gal. 4.30. of his desire that such
Men were excluded from them saying, I wish they were cut off that trouble you,
Gal. 5.12. But after all this he advises none of the sound Members of the
Church to desert the Public Assemblies, or separate, on the account of the
perverted, from them. But only does advise the spiritual Persons to restore
them in the spirit of meekness who were overtaken with a fault, and to bear one
another Burdens, Gal. 6.1, 2.

4. In his Epistle to the Colossians, he intimates there were among them Men
who being dead with Christ from the Elements of the World, did notwithstanding
dogmatize after the Commandments, and Doctrines of Men, Coloss. 2.20, 21, 22.
and thereby tacitly accused the Doctrine of Christ as insufficient, and
imperfect without the Doctrins which they superadded to it, and charge them
with Superstition, and Will Worship v. 23. which is the very charge that our
Dissenters do injuriously make against the Church of England. But do they find
one word of Counsel or advice to any to separate from the Assemblies at Coloss,
because these Superstitious Persons were crept in among them?

5. Our Savior in his Epistles to the Seven Churches does charge them with
great faults and the permission of most notorious corruptions crept in among
them, for which he threatens the severest of his Judgments, if they did not
repent, but yet the Communion of the sound Members of the Church with Men so
criminal in the Assemblies of the Saints, is never mentioned among the faults
of any of those Churches, nor does Christ thunder out one threat against them
upon that account. Rev. 2.14.
Of the Church of Pergamus he complains, that they had there them that held the
Doctrine of Balaam, who taught Balak to cast a stumbling block before the
Children of Israel, to eat things Sacrificed unto Idols, v. 15.
and to commit Fornication, and also them who held the Doctrine of the
Nicolaitans which he hated, and therefore he declares, v. 16.
if she repented not, that he would come against her quickly, and fight against
her with the Sword of his Mouth. To the Angel of the Church of Thyatira he
speaks thus: I have a few things against thee, because thou suffer the Woman
Jezebel, v. 20.
which calls her self a Prophetess, to teach, and to seduce my Servants to
commit Fornication, and to eat things Sacrificed unto Idols. To the Angel of
the Church of Sardis he writes thus: Chap. 3.1.
Thou have a Name that thou live and art dead; And that there were but a few
Names in Sardis which had not defiled their Garments, that therefore, if she
did not repent, and watch, v. 4.
he would come unto her as a thief in the night. To the Angel of the Church of
Laodicea he v. 3.
speaks thus: Because thou art neither cold nor hot, v. 16. v. 17.
I will spew thee out of my mouth, adding that tho they said, I am rich, and
increased with Goods, and have need of nothing, yet were they indeed wretched,
poor, miserable, blind, and naked. He also does commend the Church of Ephesus
because she could not bear them that were evil, Rev. 2.2. v. 6
and because she had tried them who said they were Apostles, and were not, and
had found them Liars: And Lastly, Because they hated the deeds of the
Nicolaitans. And he speaks kindly unto them of Thyatira who had not that
doctrine of Jezebel, for which the Rest were reprehended. But yet we find not
the least word of Reprehension of any in these Churches for joining in
Communion, or in the public Worship with men thus faulty, nor any Counsel, or
advice to separate from the Communion of these Churches upon those Accounts:
The neglect of the Angel of the Church of Pergamos, and Thyatira in suffering
such to be among them, is severely taxed, but the Neglect of others to separate
on that account, is never in the least insinuated, this therefore, Principles
of love. p, 44.
says Mr. Baxter to his dissenting Brethren, you may observe, that no one
Member is in these Scriptures, or any other commanded to come out, and separate
from any one of all these Churches, as if Communion with them in Worship were
unlawful, and therefore, before you separate from any, as judging Communion
with them unlawful, be sure that you bring greater reasons for it than any of
these recited were.

And, to confirm this Answer, it deserves to be considered that we find in the
New Testament express injunctions directed to the whole body of the Christian
Churches, requiring them to refuse Communion in their private conversations
with such persons, or to renounce familiarity with them, not to company with
them. 1 Cor. 5.9. Not to eat with them, v. 11. To mark them who cause
divisions, and scandals contrary to the Doctrine which they had received, and
avoid them. Romans 16.17. To withdraw from every Brother that walks disorderly,
These. 2.3, 6. To have no company with them, that they may be ashamed. v. 14.
We also find the Angels or Officers of the Church often blamed for this neglect
by Christ, and his Apostles, as in the case of the Incestuous Person, the case
of Pergamos, and Thyatira, where they were suffered who taught the Doctrins of
the Nicolaitans, of Balaam, and of Jezebel, that is both spiritual, and carnal
fornication. This I have against thee, O Thyatira, that thou permittest
Jezebel, Vid. Synops. in locum.
quod eam non coerces censuris Ecclesiae, that thou do not execute the
censures of the Church upon her; this against thee, O Pergamos, that thou have
those who teach the Doctrine of Balaam, whereas thou being the Angel of the
Church, should have fought against them with the Spiritual Sword, as did the
Angel who resisted Balaam, because his way, Numb. 22.22, 23. Hebr. 12.15.
was perverse before God. We find them called upon (...), to execute the Office
of a Bishop by looking diligently that no such persons be among them, and
warned of the great danger that the Whole lump might be exposed to by such
Sour Leaven: We lasty find our Savior praising the Angel of the Church of
Ephesus that he could not bear them, but never do we find our Lord, or his
Apostles calling the People to come out from them, or to be separate, but only
in such cases as did oblige them to touch the unclean thing, 2 Cor. 6.17.
that is, to join in their Idolatries, or partake with them in their Sins.

From which Considerations, Rev. 18.4.
it follows, as Estius well notes, that the Governors of the Church which
tolerate Such Persons in the Church offend, and that the People who use
familiar converse with them, do likewise offend, but it by no means follows
that they who do perform the public duties of Religion where they are present,
do offend, and as the Reverend and Learned Dr. Unreas. of Sep. p. 217.
Stillingfleet well notes; There be many Reasons to break off private
familiarity, which will not hold as to Public Communion, and which may render
it the Christians duty to do the first, and not the latter. For our Communion
in Public is a thing which Chiefly Respects God, and is a necessary duty of
his own appointing, the benefit whereof depends upon his promises, and all the
Communion we have with other men therein is only (that of Christ, and his
Apostles with Judas at the Paschal Supper) joining together for the performance
of a Common Religious duty. But private familiarity is a thing which wholly
respects the persons we converse with, it is a thing of mere choice, and of
much danger, it being hardly to be imagined without approbation, at least, if
not imitation of their wickedness.

And to this the concurrent judgment of the Old Nonconformists who did not
think this want of Discipline sufficient cause of separation from Communion
with us; for having laid this as a foundation, that no man ought to separate
from a true Church requiring nothing sinful of him, Grav. confut. p. 18.
in order to Communion with them, they add, that although it were Granted that we
wanted both the exercise of the Churches Censures, and some of those Officers
which Christ has appointed to exercise them by, yet might we be a true Church
notwithstanding, as there was a true Church in Judah all the days of Asa, and
Jehosaphat, yet was not the Discipline reformed there till the latter end of
Jehosaphats Reign. The Church of Corinth was a true Church even when the
Apostle blamed them for want of Discipline, the Congregation of Samaria is
called a Church before the Discipline was established there, and even in
Jerusalem there was a famous visible Church of Christ long before Sundry parts
of the Discipline (for want whereof they condemn us) were established there,
yea it is evident that by the Apostles themselves diverse Churches were
Gathered, some Good space of time before the Discipline was settled, or
exercised, by all which it is manifest that howsoever those parts of the
Discipline, which we want, be necessary to the beauty and well being, and
perservation of the Church, yet are they not necessary to the being thereof,
but a true Church may be without them.

2ly, They add, Ibid. p. 51.52.
That it does not belong to private persons to set up the Discipline of the
Church against the will and consent of the Christian Magistrate, and Governors
of the Church, yea, they declare that in so doing they should highly offend,
they are bound, says Giffard, P. 59, 95, 100, 101, 102.
by the bands of Conscience, and the fear of God, from presuming to take upon
them public Authority. And if so, it is evident that they cannot choose Pastors
for themselves, and set up other Churches, and Church Governors to exercise the
Churches Discipline because they do conceive it is neglected by the Christian
Magistrate, and other Governors of the Church.

Yea lastly let me ask our dissenting Brethren if on account of this supposed
neglect of Discipline they think themselves obliged to desert Communion with
the Church of England, whether will they go? The Church of Rome they know,
besides her other errors, is more Guilty of this crime than we, men may be any
thing in their Communion, provided that they be not Heretics, and still be
owned as Genuine Members of their Church. The rest of the Reformed Churches are
as loose as we, their Members Generally are as corrupt in manners as ours are;
the same may be affirmed of the Eastern Churches: they therefore must
acknowledge that they cannot lawfully maintain Communion with any other Church
on this account, and that there always was even since the reformation, a
necessity of separation from all Christian Churches in the world for this
neglect of Discipline, or that they, notwithstanding this supposed neglect, may
hold Communion with the Church of England; now have they not just reason to
suspect that opinion which will force them to deny Communion with all the
Churches of the world besides themselves, and that not on the score of any
Idolatrous Worship exercised by them, or of any false doctrine required to be
assented to as the condition of Communion, but barely on the account of some
supposed defect as to her Discipline? 2ly, Have they not reason to suspect the
truth of that opinion which will render Union and Communion with any of the
Reformed Churches beyond the Seas a thing unlawful, and as things do now stand,
impossible. For as the Reverend and Learned Dr. Vnreas. of separ p. 190, 191.
Still. does put the Question, Do we want Discipline? And do not they in other
Churches abroad? The Transylvanian Divines in their discourse of the Union of
Protestant Churches declared that little or none was observed among them;
Irenic. Tract. p. 55.
will they then separate from all Protestant Churches? Will they shut them out
from any possibility of Union with them? For what union can be justifyable with
those whose terms of Communion are unlawful, since Union supposes such a
Communion of Churches that the Members of one may Communicate in another; or if
they notwithstanding this defect can hold Communion with them, will they be so
unjust as not to allow the same favor and kindness to their own Church? 3ly,
Have they not reason to suspect that doctrine which is so like to some of the
old Heresies, or Schisms exploded by the Church of Christ that it is not easy
to perceive a difference betwixt the principles of our Dissenters, and those
which moved those condemned Schismatics to separate from the Communion of the
Church. Vide Petav. ad Haer. 59. Novat. p. 226. 227.
For tho I cannot exactly Parallel them with the Novatians who did not properly
desert the Church because she did not exercise the power of the Keys upon
Offenders, but because she afterward admitted them upon Repentance, and so
they did not separate on the pretense of the defect of Discipline, but on
pretense that the Church exercised a part of Discipline which did not properly
belong unto her, Meletiani nolentes orare cum conversis Schisma fecerunt. Aug.
de Haer. c. 48. Epiph. Haer. 68.. 2. Luciferiani poenitentiam clerici post
ordinem in Ecclesia, and gradum acceptum lapsis denegant, Dan. in Haer. 81. p.
2^9: (...). Eusebius. Eccles. Hist. l. 6. c. 45.
nor yet with the Meletians and Luciferians who did not separate from the
Church because Offenders were not censured by her, but because after Censures
executed, the lapsed Clerks were readmitted to their Stations in the Church,
and who with the Novatians did without cause pretend corruption in the Churches
Discipline, whereas I fear there may be too much cause to Charge our Churches
with defect of Discipline, yet will not these disparities excuse them wholly
from Communion with them in their Schism. For 1. it is certain that the
Novatians did separate out of zeal for the purity of Ecclesiastical Discipline,
and yet Dionysius of Alexandria tells the Author of that Schism, that he had
better have suffered any thing than thus to have made a rent in the Church, and
therefore he had better suffered a defect in the Purity of Discipline; now this
comes home unto the case of our Dissenters. 2ly, The Meletians would not pray
with the lapsed after their renovation by repentance, and therefore separated
from that Church which did so; they therefore must divide upon presumption that
the Church was polluted by Communion with them, and that her Discipline
required their separation, Com. in August. de Her. p. 161. Epiph. Haer. 68.. 3.
and therefore as Danaeus notes from Epiphanius, this Schism spread it self
among the Monks, Praetextu severioris cujusdam in (...) Disciplinae, and zeli
in Deum Majoris under pretense of zeal for God, and severity of Discipline
against those who denied him. Com. in August. Haer. 50 p. 169. Epiph. Haer.
70.. 1. p. 812. contr Epist. par. l. 2. c. 10.21.


3ly, As for the Audians, since as Danaeus says from Epiphanius, propter
hominum vitia caetum Orthodoxae Ecclesiae deserebant, they left the Church for
the vices of those that were in it; as for the Donatists, since, among others,
this was their peculiar tenet, that no wicked person was to be tolerated in the
Church, no tares continued with the wheat, and that those Churches were not to
be communicated with, which did not cast them out because they were defiled by
Communion with them, as appears fully by St. Austins disputations against the
Donatists, and more especially by his three Books against Parmenianus the
Donatist, I see not how our Brethren will be able to Escape their condemnation.

That although excommunication be the Duty of Church Officers, Prop. 7.
and they are by the Author to the Hebrews strictly required (...) to look
diligently that none among them fail of the Grace of God, Hebr. 12.15, 16
that there bo no root of bitterness springing up among them by which many may
be defiled, that there be among them no Fornicator, or profane person, yet is
not this a duty necessary to be exercised at all times, on all Offenders, in
all Conjunctures, but only when it is likely to do more Good than hurt, and
therefore is the exercise of the power which the Lord has given them for
edification, and not for destruction. For all Agree that Affirmative duties do
not bind ad semper, for tho that which is evil must never be done, yet that
which, generally considered, is good, may sometimes be omitted, especially when
it is only Matter of Discipline, and when the danger of exercising of it is
greater than the hope of doing good thereby. Upon the equity of which case it
is determined by the Canon Law, that a Kingdom, a Corporation, a Community, or
Body Politic, ought not to be excommunicated, nor in the whole New Testament
do we find any Rules, or Precepts for the Excommunication of such multitudes.
Now the harm our Church might suffer by the strict exercise of these her
Censures in this age of General looseness upon all Offenders, even those of
highest Rank, and quality among us, is threefold.

1. That hereby they may be exasperated against the Government, and Office
which inflicts these Censures, and be induced to use their power to undermine,
and overthrow it, and to set up her enemies upon the Ruins of it.

2ly, That they may, some of them, be tempted to fly off from her government to
one of the two potent factions now among us, and so may strengthen them, and
weaken us. Or

3ly, That being Sceptically, or Atheistically inclined, as practically we are
sure the wicked of our Nation are, and have great cause to fear too many of
them are in speculation also, they would but rally on the execution of these
censures, and we by executing of them only should rebuke the Scorner which the
Wiseman forbids. Prove. 9.8.
Here then our Saviors Rule seems to take place, Give not that which is Holy
unto Dogs, Matt. 7.6.
lest they turn again and rent you. Such persons ought therefore only to be
excluded from the Sacrament according to the Counsel and Direction of the
Church of England, but not entirely, and without exception, excommunicated from
the Church. Prim. Christian Part 3. p. 377.
To this effect it is observed by Dr. Cave, that the Primitive Church Relaxed
the severity of their Discipline when great multitudes were concerned, or such
persons as were like to draw great numbers after them; in this case, says He,
they thought it prudent and reasonable to deal with persons by somewhat milder
and gentler methods, lest by holding them to terms of Rigor and Austerity, they
should provoke them to fly off either to Heathenism or to Heresy. This Course
St. Cyprian and his Brethren took, for as the concord of his Colleagues, and the
benefit of uniting the Fraternity, and healing the wound in the Church
required, they (1) Necessitati temporum succubuisse, p. 52.. 3.
yielded to the necessity of the times, and admitted the lapsed to Communion
upon tolerable hopes of their true repentance, (2) Ad gentiles se vias and
saecularia opera convertat, vel ad Hereticos and Schismaticos rejectus ab
Eccle. transeat, ibid.. 10. v. 3, 9.
lest being excluded from the Church, they out of desperation should fly back
to the Worldy, or join with Heretics, or Schismatics. And in like manner,
says he, did our Brother (3) Cornelius yield to the necessity of the times;
Cornelius necessitati succubuit. ibid.. 6.
Admitting to Communion plebis maximam partem maximum Fratrum numerum, a great
part of the common people, or the Brethren which separated with him, upon the
satisfaction and repentance of Trophimus alone, with whom; as they first
separated, they returned.

Moreover to this accords the judgment of St. Austin who declares that (4)
Neque enim potest esse Salutaris. a multis correptio, nisi cum ille corripitur
qui non habet sociam multitudinem, cum autem idem morbus plurimos occupaverit,
nihil aliud bonis restat quam dolor and gemitus. Contr. Epist. Parmen. l. 3. p.
61. B.
Correption cannot be salutary, when the offender has many partners, and that
when the same disease has seized on many, there remains no other Remedy for
Good men to use but Prayers, and Sighs, and Sorrow. And again that when (5) Et
revera, si contagio peccandi multitudinem invaserit, Divinae Disciplinae severa
misericordia necessaria est, nam Consilia separationis and inania sunt, and
perniciosa, atque Sacrilega, quia and impia and superba fiunt, and plus
perturbant infirmos bonos; quam corrigunt animosos malos, ibid. lit. D.
the Contagion of sin has ceased the whole multitude, the severe mercy of
Divine Discipline is necessary, for then all Councils of separation are vain,
pernicious, wicked and Sacrilegious, because they will more disturb the pious
that are weak, then correct the wicked that are sturdy.

And to confirm the judgment of St Austin the (6) Synop Pur. Theol. disp. 48,.
30.
Authors of the Dutch Synopsis have observed that the Prophets; and pious
Priests among the Jews did never, in a general declension of the people, recur
to these severer Methods. And Neque enim duris remediis locus est ubi tota
Ecclesia in morbo cubat. Grot. 2 Cor. 12.6.
Grotius and Estius observe from these words of St Paul to the Corinthians,
that he was in a Readiness to revenge all disobedience, when their obedience
was fulfilled, that there was no place for severe Remedies, when the disease
had infected the whole Church.

And that the Apostle was forced to yield to this necessity, Esth. in locum.
because the Offenders in the Church of Corinth being many, Compan. to the
Temple part 4. p. 548.549.
they could not easily be excommunicated. I conclude therefore with the
judicious Dr. Cumber that till men be so humble as to be willing to suffer
shame, and undergo severities in this world, that their Souls may be saved in
the next, we may advise them to private and particular acts of mortification
and repentance, but it will be in vain to impose them on this untractable
generation, since by imposing them in these circumstances the Church would make
this holy means of Reformation rather despised, then obeyed.

Although it is the Christians duty to withdraw from, and to avoid the scandalous
Professor, and the disorderly Walker, yet is this only then a duty when we can
serve no Higher ends of piety or mercy in holding correspondence with them. For
he that does command us to withdraw from him that walks disorderly, does leave
it still our duty to admonish him as ae Brother, and therefore still to
maintain that correspondence with him which is necessary to that admonition, 2 Thessalonians. 3.14, 15.
and to all other good endeavors to reclaim and gain our Brother. And
therefore, tho our Lord knew well the obligation of this duty, and the great
scandal which the Scribes and Pharisees would take at his free converse with
Publicans and Sinners, he does not only justify the fact as being done in order
to their reformation and conversion, but also represents it as an higher duty,
and more incumbent on him, then the avoiding the familiarity of wicked men, and
bids those Pharisees who reckoned it their duty to renounce all familiarity
with such men, learn what that means, I will have mercy, and not Sacrifice.
And tho St. Paul permits not his Corinthians to have any fellowship with
Unbelievers, Matt. 9.13.
or go unto their Idol Temples, or their feasts, yet he allows the coming of
the unbeliever into their Assemblies, 1 Cor. 14.23.
as being that which might be instrumental to his conviction and conversion.
And, v. 24, 25.
which is more observable, St. Jude speaking of those impure Dreamers who
defiled the Flesh, etc. says thus, v. 8.
These are spots in your feasts of charity, when they feast with you; they
therefore did intrude into these feasts, and consequently joined with them at
the Table of the Lord, of which these feasts were an Appendix; and yet St. Jude
prescribes no separation of the Saints from these Assemblies on that account.

Lastly tho Eli's Sons were Sons of Belial, Sam. 1.2, 12.
and knew not the Lord, Although they caused the People to abhor the offering of
the Lord, v. 17.
and therefore to neglect to come to Shilo with them, v. 24.
yet are they also said to make the Lords People to transgress, viz. By this
neglect, it therefore was the Peoples duty still to attend upon these
Ordinances of the Lord, tho this could not be done, under these circumstances,
without Communion with these Sons of Belial, and Ministering, tho Accidentally,
and by Performing their own duty, occasion to the Sin of Eli's Sons. What
therefore I may do for the procuring the Spiritual Good of others from whom I
am commanded to withdraw, may be more certainly performed for the procuring of
my own Spiritual Good by my participation of the Ordinances of Christ from
Persons authorized by him, and his Vicegerents, to administer them, what may be
done in order to their welfare who are unworthy of Communion with us, that may
much more be done in order to the Churches Good, for the promotion of her Peace
and Unity, and the prevention of those Schisms by which she is so much
endangered, and if those words, I will have mercy and not sacrifice, will
warrant our Communion with wicked persons, with whom we are forbid to eat, when
it may be a means of their conversion, why then may it not warrant our
Communion with them in Sacred things, when this Communion is a means of our
salvation, and of the Churches Peace, which is one of the chiefest ends of
Discipline. If Christians were not called to separate on the account of those
impure Gnostics who did feast among them, and eat at the Lords Table with
them, why should they separate from the same Ordinances on the account of some
profane Professors who are mixed with our Assemblies? And lastly, If the People
did transgress who came not up to Shilo to offer their accustomed oblations
there, tho they to whom they were to be presented, and by whom they were to be
offered, were Sons of Belial, and they alone did sanctify, and offer the
Peace Offerings of which the People were afterward to eat, I fear they also
will transgress who upon less pretenses will not come unto our Shilo's, the
places of our public Worship.

It may be doubted whether all those men whose presence with us in our Church
Assemblies does so much offend Dissenters, Prop. 9.
deserve immediately to be secluded from Communion with us, seeing they seem
not to have been both privately and publicly admonished by the Church, for how
can it be said they will not hear the Church, when they have never been
admonished by her to reform, or threatened with her censures if they will not do
it, they therefore cannot be esteemed contumacious, or such as will not hear
the Church, and so they are not presently to be excluded by Excommunication
from Communion with her. Mr. Baxter, having cited, Principles of love, p.
87.88.89.
Matt. 18.15, 16. Tit. 3.10. Says thus Note here that no sin will warrant you
to cast out the sinner, unless it be seconded with impenitency, it is not
simply as a Drunkard, or a Fornicator, that any one is to be rejected, but as
an Impenitent Drunkard, or Fornicator. Note 2ly, That it is not all impenitency
which will warrant their rejection, but only impenitency after the Churches
admonition. Note 3ly, That no private person may expect that any Offender be
cast out, either because his sin is known to him, or because he is commonly
famed to to be guilty, till the thing be proved by sufficient witnesses. Note
4ly, That the admonition given him must be proved, as well as the fault which
he committed. Yea lastly, If all The town do know him to be guilty, and witness
prove that he has been privately admonished, he may not be rejected till he be
heard speak for himself, and till he refuse also the public admonition. This
is Christ's order, whose wisdom, mercy and authority are such as may well cause
us to take his way as best.

Now were this doctrine true without exception it would,

1. Answer the Objection by showing that Dissenters do unreasonably separate
for the Nonexecution of the Churches Censures upon them who at the present are
not the proper objects of them. And

2. It would in a great measure cast the blame of this neglect of Discipline on
the Complainants, for, if they know of any such, why do they not first
privately admonish them, and if they cannot by so doing gain their Brother, why
do they not then tell it to the Church? But if they do not know of any such,
nor ever told the Church of any such, that she might know, and knowing might
admonish them, and if they should refuse to Hear her, might proceed to censure
them, why do they then complain?

But to confess the truth ingenuously, this Doctrine contradicts, the general
practice of the Church of Christ whilst Discipline remained among them, more
especially the practice of the most Primitive, and Purest Ages of the Church,
when all Notorious Offenders, of what degree soever, were, without farther
admonition immediately censured, and separated from the faithful, See Dr. Cave
's prim. christian. part. 3. cap. 5. p. 367.
till by long and strict penances of fasting and mortification, by which they
evidenced their sorrow for, and their reformation of their crimes, they were
thought fit to be again admitted to the peace of God, and of his Church. This
doctrine therefore must admit of some restriction to make it consonant to truth.

1. Therefore if the crime be such as is consistent with Christianity, and does
not prove the Author of it to be Carnal, this admonition must precede the
censures of the Church, because in such a case, it is not so much the fact it
self, as the ensuing contumacy which deserves her censure.

2ly, If the crime committed be private, and brings no infamy to the Church,
and the offender show good signs of penitence, the crime being not committed
before many, it seems not reasonable that it should be punished before many,
unless where such a public censure may do good to many, in which case that of
the Apostle seems to take place, them that sin rebuke before all, that others
also may fear.

3ly, 1 Timothy 5.20.
If it be an act of injustice to some private person for which full
satisfaction may be made, and admonition may prevail upon him so to do, which
seems to be the case in which our Lord requires a threefold admonition: adding
that if our admonition do prevail our Brother is Gained, and so the Church has
no occasion to proceed to censures.

Or 4ly, If it be an offense of judgment and not of practice against judgment,
in which case the Apostles words are plain for a first and second admonition, I
say in all these cases this previous admonition seems reasonable.

But 2ly, If the Crimes committed be of an heinous nature, Tit. 3.10.
and Christians cannot well be ignorant that they are so, as in the cases of
Apostasy, Murder, Incest, Adultery, etc. Or if they be so publicly committed
as to give scandal to the Church, and the Crime be notorious or confessed, then
without farther admonition, I suppose, the Criminal should be excluded from the
Communion of the Church, till by repentance and mortification they have made
satisfaction to the Church, and have made reparation for the Scandal of their
sin.

These Propositions do fully Answer this Objection even upon supposition that
the Neglect is such as is suggested, and that the Church of England may be
charged with it: I now proceed by way of farther Answer to it, to consider of
that Charge, and therefore say,

That our Church Officers cannot be truly said to own, or to approve of this
supposed neglect of Discipline in suffering the notoriously profane and
Scandalous Offender to remain uncensured by the Church. For 1. The Rulers of
the Church do openly acknowledge and declare even in their Public Lyturgy,
Preface to Commin.
That the putting those to open Penance who stood convicted of notorious crimes
is both a Primitive and Godly Discipline, and that the restoring of the said
Discipline is much to be wished. 2ly, They call upon all sinners with the
greatest seriousness and affection to repent of those iniquities which render
them obnoxious to her censures, which call would they give ear unto, they would
be fit for her Communion, and so exempted from the severity of her Discipline;
this call we find both in the Commination Read upon Ash Wednesday, and in the
exhortation Read at the giving notice of a Sacrament, where she thus speaks, If
any of you be a Blasphemer of God, a Hinderer or Slanderer of his Word, an
Adulterer, or be in malice or envy, or in any other grievous crime, repent you
of your sins, or else come not to that Holy Table. 3ly, They make all Persons
whom they admit unto the Priestly Office, solemnly to promise to give faithful
diligence always so to minister the Doctrine and Sacraments, and the Discipline
of Christ, as the Lord has commanded. And 4ly, Can. 26.
They require every Minister in no wise to admit to the receiving of the Holy
Communion, any of his Cure or Flock which he openly knows to live in sin
notorious without repentance, and they moreover Authorize them, Rubr. before
the Commun.
To advertise all open and notorious evil livers, and all who have done any
wrong to their Neighbors by word or deed, so that the Congregation be thereby
offended, to call them, and to advertise them that by no means they presume to
come to the Lords Table, till they have openly declared themselves to have
truly repented and amended their former naughty life, that the Congregation may
be thereby satisfied, and say that he shall not suffer them to be partakers of
the Lords Table, betwixt whom he perceives malice and hatred to reign, until
he know them to be reconciled. Since then it is apparent from these
considerations, that our Church daily calls upon these persons to repent both
in the Public Preaching of the Word, and in the Office styled Commination, and
in her Homily upon repentance. And 2ly, that she does Authorize all her
Parochial Ministers to call, and advertise such Persons as they know privately
to be unworthy, not to presume to come unto the Holy Sacrament, and does
require them, when they give notice of a Sacrament, to read an exhortation to
that effect; seeing she also grants them power to put back any Scandalous
Offenders from the Sacrament, whose faults are so notorious as to give offense
to the Congregation, and does allow both them and the Churchwardens, or rather
charge them to prosecute such Men in order to their Amendment, or
Excommunication; seeing at their admission to their Sacred Function, she does
strictly charge them to give faithful diligence so to minister the Discipline
of Christ as he has commanded. Since Lastly, Private Persons in her Communion
may avoid familiar conversing with them, and withdraw from their company, and
so avoid being polluted by the corruption of their manners; I say seeing these
things are so, I see not but the Objections made against the Discipline of our
Church might be removed, if the things allowed, and required by the Rules of
it, were duly practiced.

Scriptures, and Reasons produced to confirm it were all true, and well
applied, whereas indeed the grounds of this Objection are uncertain, and
infirm, for to omit the uncertainty of the exposition of 1 Cor. 5.13. you shall
take away the evil from you, and not the evil Person, which sure (...) does
rather signify, and the uncertainty of Dr. Hammonds exposition of Rev. 2.20. I
say,

Tently, Prop. 10.
That the continuance of Gods presence by his Spirit with his Church, and her
Assemblies, cannot be proved to depend entirely upon the Separation of wicked
Persons, and scandalous offenders from her. The Place produced to this Effect
from 2 Cor. 6.16, 17. only concerns the Christians Separation from Communion
with Heathens in their Idolatrous Worship, or their Idol feasts, this is the
touching the unclean thing there spoken of, as I have fully proved in the
foregoing Chapters; it therefore is impertinently alleged to prove, that God
requires us to separate from the Communion of wicked Persons in celebrating of
his Public worship, that so we may enjoy the presence of his Spirit with us.
Moreover God may destroy the person who defiles this Temple as he threatens 1.
Cor. 3.17. and yet may not withdraw his Spirit from them that do assemble with
such Persons purely to serve God, and to enjoy Communion with him in his
Public Ordinances. And indeed were this so that the presence of a known wicked
Person would cause the Holy Spirit to depart from the Assemblies of pious
Persons, then Christ and his Disciples had not the presence of the holy Spirit
with them when they assembled with Judas to eat the passover, and to receive
the holy Sacrament. 2ly, Then seeing Covetous, malicious Persons, since secret
Hypocrites, and Atheists, are as odious to God as Persons otherwise notoriously
wicked and profane, they also must pollute the Church, and cause the holy
Spirit to depart from her Assemblies, and if so the Church can never be assured
of his presence with her. Then 3ly, much less would the holy Spirit be present
at those Public offices designed to conveigh this Spirit, when they were
celebrated by wicked Priests, and so we could have no assurance of his gracious
influence upon us at the preaching of the Word, the celebration of the
Sacrament of Baptism, and of the Supper of the Lord, because we can have no
assurance of the sincerity of him who does officiate. For if the presence of
wicked Persons who do only join with the Officiator, will cause the holy Spirit
to depart from that Assembly, much more the wickedness of the Officiator. And
4ly, then we must have cause to fear that this good Spirit has wholly left the
Church of Christ, and does no longer move upon the waters of the Sanctuary,
there being in these latter Ages of the Church such a neglect of Discipline, as
that scarce any one of her Assemblies can be supposed free from some mixture of
profane and even notorious wicked Persons, which yet seems plainly to
contradict Christ's promise to be with his Church unto the end.

The Bishop when he lays his hands on those who come to be confirmed,
declares, Office of confirm.
that he does it to certify them by this Sign of God's favor and gracious
goodness toward them, which, say Dissenters, we fear is more than he can
warrantably do. For as no Person by administering the Elements of Bread and
Wine, which are the Eucharistick Signs, or by Baptizing with water, could
certify the Communicant, or the Baptized Person of Remission of Sins, if God
had no where Promised Pardon to those who duly use those Signs, so can no
Person certify another of God's favor, and of his gracious goodness to them
by this Sign of laying on of hands, if God has no where promised this grace
and favor shall be annexed to the due use of that Sign. And as he who would
set my Sign or mark unto a Paper to certify another of any act of favor I
would do unto him, without commission from me so to do, would do that which he
could not justify, so unless some commission can be showed from God which
authorizeth Bishops thus to act, and certify by such a Sign, we know not, say
they, how the doing of it can be justified, or how it can be well excused from
being an humane Sacrament. Now if such a Divine Commission can be showed, why
is it by the Church declared that confirmation has not any visible Sign or
Ceremony ordained of God, Can. 25.
and therefore has not the like nature of a Sacrament with Baptism and the
Lords Supper, shrewdly intimating that had it such a Sign, there would be
nothing left to distinguish it from having the like nature of a Sacrament. 2.
If this be a divinely instituted Sign for the forementioned ends, how can any
Person promise to himself the favor of God who never has received this Sign,
or never was Confirmed, any more than he can promise to himself admission into
the Covenant of Grace, or Pardon of his Sins if he neglect to be partaker of
the Signs used in Baptism, and in the Supper of the Lord to which these
Blessings are annexed? So that as far as we are able to discern, this must be
either a very Necessary Ceremony, or else a Superstitious, or too much
magnified Ceremony.

Lay Communicant, that this concerns the Bishop only, it is no Part of the
Prayer to which the Person Confirmed is to say Amen, but only a Ceremony used
by the Bishop in the time of Prayer, and so can Minister no just occasion to
him to neglect this very ancient, excellent, and pious practice of solemn
owning our Baptismal Covenant.

2ly, The Judicious Mr. Lib. Eccles. p. 534.
Faulkner says in Answer to this Argument, 1. That to testify God's gracious
acceptance, either by our words or actions, of men's undertaking the exercise of
Christianity, is a thing greatly different from the tendering the Divine Grace
of God's covenant, as exhibited by any Sign, as a means to convey the same,
which is the Proper nature of a Sacrament, which is very true. But then it is
very difficult to apprehend how any Person can certify another of God's grace
and favor to him by such a Sign which is no means of tendering, or of
conveighing of the same, especially if God has no where said that such a Sign
shall signify or certify this favor to us.

2ly, This Imposition of hands, says he, Ibid.
is a Sign of Benediction in God's name from the Officer of the Church. For we
have an instance of this Rite in the Priestly Benediction, Lev. 9.22. In Jacobs
Blessing the Sons of Joseph, Genesis 48.14, 16. whence it was ever practiced by
the Jews in all Benedictions, and conferring of Offices. Thus Moses constituted
Joshua the son of Nun, the Governor over Israel, by laying of his hand upon
him, Numb. 27.18, 23. and that by virtue of this imposition of Hands Joshua
received the Holy Ghost, seems evident from these words, And Joshua the Son of
Nun, was full of the Spirit of Wisdom: For, Moses had laid his hands upon him,
Deuteronomy. 34.9. this Rite was also used in the Ordination of their Elders, and the
constant use thereof in particular Benedictions by men of Great eminency among
the Jews is reasonably esteemed the cause why the Jews brought little Children
to Christ, that he might put his hands on them and pray, Matt. 19.13. And our
Savior made use of the same Rite, when he Blessed his Apostles before his
Ascension Luke. 24.50. And his Apostles adopted it to be the Rite for the
Communicating of the Holy Ghost, Act. 8.17. which is the Reason why the Bishop
says this laying on of hands is done after the example of the Holy Apostles:
Biblioth Sacr. voc. manus.
Moreover the end and design of imposition of hands in Benediction was, says
Ravanellus, to be in testimony of the help, favor and grace of God to be given
to him who receives imposition of hands. Ainsworth upon these words Numb.
6.27. And they shall put my name upon the Children of Israel, and I will bless
them, writes thus, It seems to be meant of the Priests Gesture, that they
should lift their hands toward his People, as did Aaron, Levit. 9.22. for a
Sign that the name, and Blessing of God was imposed upon them, And Masius, out
of Junius, does Comment thus upon the Text. Duobus Signis solitis testatum
facient Populo gratiam meam, nominis mei invocatione, and manuum suarum
impositione publica and solenni: By two usual Signs they shall testify my
favor to the People, viz. By the Invocation of my name, and by solemn
imposition of hands.

Hence then I Argue thus: Either this Ceremony was used in vain, or had some
certain import and signification; if it were used in vain, then must our Lord
and his Apostles and all the Jews that used it be charged with using a vain
Ceremony in Gods solemn Worship, the invocation of God, and blessing others in
his name; if it were used by Gods appointment, and our Lords practice to
signify any thing, the hand being the Symbol of power and Efficacy, what can
it signify more naturally than the power of God in giving of the blessings
prayed for? why then may we not certify them whom we pray for by this Sign, if
they be duly qualified, of the engagement of Gods power to confer it? If Hands
were by Gods institution, the practice of our Lord, the Patriarchs, and
Apostles, imposed in testimony of Gods help, favor and grace to be given to
him, on whom they were imposed, why not to certify what they do testify? If
this were a Sign whereby they did testatum facere populo Gratiam Dei, why may
not our most Reverend Bishops, who are by Christ appointed to bless, use the
same Sign, testatum facere confirmato Gratiam Dei, to certify the confirmed
person of Gods Grace and favor to him. It being therefore certain that God will
give his Grace and Spiritual aid to all who do sincerely promise and engage to
live according to their Baptismal Vow, and this Sign being apt to signify that
aid and favor, and used throughout so many Ages to that end, I see not why the
Bishop may not certify the confirmed person of this truth by such a Sign. And
2. It being only an indicatory Sign, or Adumbration of this grace, not an
exhibitory Sign, cannot be properly a Sacrament.

Having thus Answered the Objections against those Ceremonies which have been
scrupled most, and with most color and pretense of Reason by Dissenters, it
will be easy to Answer, or to show the vanity of their remaining scruples by
attending to these following Propositions.

That the laudable Customs of the Catholic Church which are of present
observation, Prop. 1.
Bishop Tailor Duct. Dubit. l. 3. c. 4. R. 15.. 1.
are fit to be observed by all Christians. This we learn from St. Paul who
reproves the Contentiousness of those who, against the usages of Christians,
and of the Places where they lived, would wear long hair, with this, We have no
such Custom, 1 Cor. 11.16.14, 36.
and pleads for order, from the practice of all Churches of the Saints. And
also from the evidence of Reason, for in such cases where there is no law, the
manners of Christians introduce a Law, so far that we cannot recede from it
without some probable cause, i. e. we cannot do it without scandal, and indeed
it is an act of love to conform to the Customs of Christians with whom we do
converse, who either will think you blame their Customs, or despise their
persons, if you comply not. And that you look upon them as a company of
ignorant persons who know not what they should do or as wicked persons, who
inconsiderately will do what they should not. Besides it is a piece of
Singularity to thwart, and Cavil at, and to refuse compliance with the Customs
of the Churches where we are, which have in them no apparent evil, now
Singularity is only laudable in matters that are excellent, and pious, never in
matters of indifferency. And therefore,

This is sufficient reason for the Custom of our Church in delivering the
Sacramental Elements into the hand of the Communicant and Speaking to them
severally: (...). Ap. 2. p. 97. E.
For Justin Martyr declares that the (...) or Bishop having given thanks,
those who were called Deacons did distribute to every one that was present,
Bread and Wine mixed with Water, and Tertullian informs us that they received
the Eucharist non de aliorum manibus quam presidentium, De Cor. mil. c. 3.
from the hands of no other persons than those who presided in the Church.
Moreover it was the Custom of the Priest to say to every on of them, The Body
of our Lord Jesus Christ, etc. August. Resp. ad Ores. q. 49. Ambros. de sacram.
l. 4. c. 5.
And of the People severally to say Amen when they received it, this was said
every where says Austin, and so the Custom of distributing to all, and of
receiving severally by all, must be the constant custom of the Church of Christ.

2ly, This is sufficient Reason for the retaining of Godfathers and
Godmothers, Compan. part. 3 p. 400.
for in the Primitive Church the use of them was so early, says the Learned
Dr. Comber, that it is not easy to fix the time of their beginning the most
Ancient Fathers who speak of Baptism do mention them, under the name of
Offerers of them, (...), as Justin Martyr, (...) or Susceptores as Donysius
Areop. of Sponsores as Tertullian, of Fideijussores or Suretys, as St. Austin.

2ly, p. 399.
This Custom was derived from the Jews, as also was that of Infant Baptism, for
it is certain that the Rector of the house of judgment was to take care to
Baptize the Infants of Proselytes, and accordingly was to be called their
Father. And there was one appointed to hold the Child in Circumcision, called
the Master of the Covenant, and by the Modern Jews, who still retain this
custom, the Surety. And very learned men believe this custom to be as ancient
among the Jews as the times of Isaiah, it being highly probable that those
Witnesses mentioned, chap. 8.2. at the naming of his Son, were of the same
nature with those we call Godfathers and Godmothers.

And 3ly, Tho one of the Reasons which made them the more necessary in the
first Ages of the Church, (viz. those persecutions which cut off the Parents,
and so left the poor Infants incapable of Christian education without the help
of Sureties) has long since ceased, yet are they still continued for Good
ends. As

1. 'To convenant in behalf of those Infants who cannot enter into covenant by
themselves.

2ly, For the Security of the Church, that the Children may be brought to
Confirmation, and own their covenant hereafter, whence they are called Sureties.

3ly, That every Christian may have a Monitor, who was present and concerned in
his Vow, whence they are styled Witnesses.

And 4ly, Whereas some object that the use of Sureties is made a necessary
condition in our Lyturgy of administering Baptism to Infants, because it is
said, This Infant must also faithfully for his part promise by you that are his
Sureties: The contrary to this is evident, because no Sureties are required at
the administration of private Baptism, where our Baptismal Office declares the
child to be lawfully, and sufficiently Baptized, and so those words can only
intimate, that this which is in it self a thing expedient, must be practiced
according to the Order, and Constitution of the Church. And

5ly, Whereas it farther is objected that by these Sponsors the Parents are
excluded, and the Child is not admitted to Baptism in the Parents right.

To this it is judiciously Answered by the Excellent Dr. Still. Vnrens. of S^p^
p. 381.
That the Church by requiring Sponsors does not exclude any title to Baptism
which the child has by the right of his Parents, for the Sponsors may be
supposed to appear in a threefold Capacity. 1. As representing the Parents in
offering up the Child to Baptism, and so whatever right the Parents have, that
is challenged when the Child is brought to be Baptized. 2ly, As Representing
the Child in the Answers that are made in Baptism. And 3ly, In their own
Capacity when they promise to take care of the Good Education of the Child in
the Principles of the Christian faith.

3ly, Ibid p. 404.
This is sufficient Reason for the Answering of the Sureties, in Baptism. For
as it is judiciously observed by Dr. Comber, 'the Baptismal covenant was always
made by Question and Answer; which is taken notice of by many of the Ancients,
and seems to have been the Method in the Apostles days, because St. Peter calls
Baptism (...), the Answer, or, as the word rather signifies, the Asking of, or
concerning a good Conscience. 1 Pet. 3.21. For there were always Queries put to
the party baptized, which Adult persons did Answer themselves, and Children by
their Representatives. In St. Cyprians time, Ep. 705.765.
we twice find mention of them, and that they were observed even by those
Heretics, and Schismatics who separated from the Church. Tertullian also
expresses the Custom of using interrogatories concerning the Creed, De Pud. c.
9. De Bapt. c. 6. ^d ^art. c. 3. de spect c. 4. de Cor^mil. cap. 3. l. 7. c. 41.
the profession of Christian faith, the renouncing the Devil, and undertaking
the Christian Warfare. The Author of the Constitutions says the same, and the
fixed use of certain Interrogatories and Answers, Eusebius. Hist. Eccl. l. 7. c. 8.
is mentioned by Dionysius Alexandrinus as a thing observed in Baptism before
his time. And truly Baptism being in the nature of the thing a covenant to
renounce the Devil, and to embrace the Christian faith. And 2ly, Children being
capable of entering into covenant with God, as appears by Circumcision, and by
express Scripture, Deuteronomy. 29.11, 12. And 3ly, the Answers of the Sureties being
a solemn declaration of that covenant: And 4ly, they being of good use to mind
all present of their own engagement, and consequently of their obligation to
perform it, I judge the custom to be very expedient and prositable.

4ly, This is sufficient reason to retain the usage of the Ring in Matrimony.
For 1. It was of very early use in all the Churches of the East, and West. As
for the East, Clemens of Alexandria says, Paedag; l. 3. cap. 11. p. 245.
We give unto our Wives a Ring. And for the West, it is mentioned not only by
St. Ambrose, but by Tertullian also in the third Century, Neque annulus de
alicujus Idoli honor descendit de Idololatr. c. 16.
who also Answers the exception made against it as being a corrupt imitation of
an Heathen custom, by saying that the Wedding Ring did not arise from the Honor
given to any Idol.

2ly! It only is of Humane Institution, to be a token and pledge of the
covenant made betwixt them, which when they look upon may mind them of their
obligation to perform the same, and is like to the earnest, or pledge we give
in making of contract, Duct. Dub. l. 3. c. 4. R. 20. 8. p. 327.
and so is rather a a Political or Civil, than Religious Ceremony, as Bishop
Taylor-saith.

That it concerns not Inferiors to know the Reasons why Superiors do command
one thing rather than another, Prop. 2.. 10.
but only whether what they do command, be not forbidden. Because they are
obliged in all such cases to obey their Superiors without farther reason. These
therefore are impertinent, and unbecoming Questions, Why must we bow at the
name of Jesus rather than at the name of Christ, or Savior? Why must we stand
up at the reading of the Gospel, rather than at the reading of the Epistle? why
must we wear a Surplice, rather than a Gown in reading of the public Service?
For tho a General Answer may be given to all these Questions, viz that the one
has Customarily obtained in the Church, as for the other we have no such
Custom; in doing of the one we comply with the practice of the Church of God,
and do as in all Churches of the Saints, by doing of the other we should
innovate; yet is this more than we need Answer to these and such like
Questians, Inferiors being not concerned to know why these things be commanded,
but only whether they can lawfully obey what is commanded.

That bodily worship is a thing required both in the old, and the New
Testament. Prop. 3.
This outward Worship is enjoined by the second Commandment, which says of
Images and Idols, Thou shall not bow down to them, nor Worship them, forbidding
both these acts of outward Worship to be given to false Gods; if then this be
the Negative part of the Command, the Affirmative must be this, All Signs of
outward Reverence and Worship shall be given to me. 2ly, Why is it God forbids
the giving of these outward Signs of Worship to an Idol? Is it not because he
is a jealous God, and will admit no Rival, nor give his honor to another?
Whence it must follow, that all these Signs of outward Worship are due to him,
and that we rob him of his honor by our neglect to pay them to him, as well as
by our giving them to any thing besides him. And sutably to this Command our
Savior does inform us, that this Worship is still due to God, and to him only;
for being tempted by the Devil to fall down and Worship him, he gives this
reason why He could not do it, Mat. 4.10.
because it was said, Thou shall Worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall
thou serve. Rev. 19.10.
And when St. John fell down before the Angel, the Angel says unto him, See
thou do it not, Worship God: and St. Paul lets us know that he did bow the knee
to God the Father. 1 Cor. 6.20.
3ly, We are enjoined in the New Testament to Glorify God with our Souls and
Bodies; now, as to Glorify him with our Soul is to perform such actions of our
Souls whereby we do acknowledge and express our sense of some of those most
Glorious Attributes which render him exceeding excellent, and therefore worthy
to be glorified, even so to Glorify him with our Bodies must be to do those
bodily actions whereby we testify our apprehensions of his Majesty, and of his
absolute dominion, and that we do conceive him worthy of all adoration, one to
whom every knee should bow. 4ly, This was the practice of Gods servants
throughout all Ages. Even before the Law the Patriarchs did from the light of
nature tender this Worship to God: When Lot beheld the Angel who represented
God, Genesis 19.2. Genesis 24.26.
he bowed his knee to the Ground, and so did Abraham, Genesis 18.2. Thus did his
servant Worship God, and when the Children of Israel had heard that the Lord
had looked upon their affliction, they bowed their heads, Exodus 4.31.
and Worshipped; this was a thing so constantly performed by them, that to bow
down, is in the Hebrew phrase, to Worship: We will go yonder and bow down, that
is, will Worship, Genesis 22.5. Moreover, that we might not think that this was
any part of Ceremonial Worship, it is enjoined upon eternal Grounds of Reason,
Let us bow down before his footstool, Psalm. 99.5, 9.
for the Lord our God is Holy. And does not Reason tell us that God is more
worthy to be reverenced and honored than the chiefest of his creatures, and
that we have far greater reason, because of the vast distance that there is
betwixt us and him, to come into his presence in an humble manner. Since then we
do perform these outward acts of reverence to our Superiors on earth in token
of the honor which we owe to them, much more ought we to do so to the Majesty
of Heaven.

Hence then it naturally follows, Coroll.
that whatsoever is a proper act of outward Worship, and fitly does express our
inward Reverence of God by any outward gesture of the body, may very laudably
be required by Superiors, seeing by these injunctions they only do require us
to do in this or that particular what is in general our duty. And therefore,

1. To require us to Kneel at Prayer, and at the Absolution which concludes
with Prayer, and at the Commandments, and Imposition of hands, and at the
Receiving of the Sacrament, is only to require us to pay to God the Worship due
unto him, to use that posture in our Devotions which our Savior used at
Prayer, Luke 22.41. and which does properly express our Reverence to him to
whom we pray, and which was, says Eusebius (...), Eusebius. Eccl. Hist. l. 5. c.
5.
the Common Custom of the Christian, from whence their Prayers had the name of
Ingeniculations.

2. To require us to bow at the name of Jesus is only to require us to pay that
Service in that instance to him to whom God has declared that all knees shall
bow, Romans 10.11.
and to whom, on account of his Divinity, Worship is due by virtue of our
obligation to Glorify him with our Bodies, which are his.

To require us to do this at the name of Jesus rather than at the name of
Christ, or Savior, when we design to recognize him as our only Savior by that
act of worship, seems also reasonable, seeing the name of Christ does rather
signify his unction to his office than the blesings which accrue unto us by
the execution of it. The name of Savior is also, common to him with the
Father, whereas the Name of Jesus is appropriated to our Lord.

3ly, To require us to uncover our Heads in the House of God, and whilst we
wait upon him in his presence, is only to require us to pay that Reverence unto
the Majesty of Heaven which we yield to his Vicegerents here on Earth.

4. Since it is a part of Christian duty, by which our God is glorified, to make
public Profession of our Faith, and this is done as well by other signs, as
Vocal, by the sign of the Cross, as well as by the Tongue proclaiming our
belief of Christ crucified, by standing up at the Rehearsal of the Creed, as
well as by saying these words, I believe, the standing Gesture is very suitable
at such a solemn declaration of the Articles of Christian Faith, in token of
our Cordial assent, and Resolution to stand firm unto it: And indeed this is so
properly signified (says Mr. Lab. Eccles. p. 459.
Faulkner,) by the standing Gesture according to the general apprehensions of
the World, that both (...) in Hebrew and (...) in Greek, which words express
the standing Gesture, are used in Scripture to signify an asserting with
resolution, Deuteronomy. 25.8. 1 Chronicles. 34, 32. 1 Cor. 16.13. 2 Thessalonians. 2.15. And the
like Idioms of Speech are in some other Languages as well as our own, whence
stare dictis in the Latin, to stand to our words in our Dialect.

Lastly, To give you hence some rational account why standing up at the Gospel
is required, rather than at the Epistle, I must proceed by these degrees. 1.
That in the devouter times both of the Jewish, and the Christian Church, the
People, to manifest their Reverence unto the Word of God, the Message sent from
God unto them, did hear it standing; thus when Ezra opened the Book of the Law
all the People stood up, Nehem. 8.5. and the Children of Israel stood up in
their places to read the Law of the Lord, Neh. 9.3. 2ly. When the Gospel was
read in the Assemblies of the Christian Church, the People were required, to
stand up. (...), When the Gospel is read, let all the Presbyters, and Deacons,
L. 2. C. 57. L. 7. C. 19.
and all the People stand, say the Constitutions of St. Clement. And Sozomen
speaks of it as a peculiar usage of the Bishop of Alexandria, the like to which
he had not seen, or heard of, that he stood not up at the Reading of the
Gospel, See to this purpose, Philostorgius, l. 3. Cap. 5. Chrysostom. de Circo.
Isid. Pelusiota, l. 1. Ep. 136. Niceph. l. 9, 18, 12, 34.

If you have the curiosity to ask why at the Gospel rather than the Epistle? I
answer, that this custom was used out of an especial respect to our Lord and
Savior, whose words are ordinarily rehearsed in the Gospel, to express, I say,
an higher respect to Christ himself speaking there, than to his Apostles who
were sent by him: on which account Ignatius says the Gospel has this
excellency in it, viz. the Presence of our Savior Jesus Christ, Epist. ad
Philadelph.
and his Suffering, and Resurrection. (...), all very good: In Joh Tom. 1 P. 4.
C.
And Origin, that the Epistles were not, (...), of equal esteem among
Christians with those Writings of which it was said, (...), this says the
Lord. If you ask further, Why then do we not stand up at the Second Lesson, as
well as at the Gospel in the Second Service? I answer, That out of tenderness
unto the weakness and infirmity of many Christians, v. Mr. Faulkner 's, Lib.
Eccles. p. 146. 462.
liberty was granted to them to hear the longer Lessons, sitting, provided they
would show the Reverence when a less portion of it was read at second Service.

Lastly, Whereas some doubt the lawfulness of our observing the Festivals
appointed by the Church of England; I shall endeavor to give them satisfaction
in the point in some few Propositions laid down by Mr. Divine appoint, of the
Lord's Day. C. 13.
Baxter in that case, and then proceed to Answer the Objections which he, and
others make against them. And,

1. p. 148.
Few, says He, question but that whole days of Humiliation and of Thanksgiving
may, and must be kept upon great and extraordinary occasions of Judgments, and
of Mercies, and that many Churches may agree in these; and I know no just
Reason why the Magistrate may not (with Charity and Moderation to the weak)
impose them, and command such an Agreement among his Subjects.

2ly, Few, says he, doubt but the Commemoration of Great Mercies or Judgments
may be made Anniversary and of long continuation, p. 149.
as the observation of the Fifth of November is made annual among us, to
preserve the Memorial of the deliverance from the Powder Plot, the Second of
September for the Anniversary humbling Remembrance of the Firing of London, the
Thirtieth of January a Day of Humiliation for the Execrable Murder of our R.
Martyr, Charles the First. And that none can have just cause to doubt, if they
consider, Est. 9.28. 1 Macch. 4.59. Zech. 7.5.
that the Feasts of Purim and of Dedication were lawfully appointed by the Jews
for an Ordinance for ever; and that they had their stated Fasts of the Fifth,
and the Seventh Month, to humble themselves at the remembrance of the Judgments
God then brought upon them.

3. He adds, that the Great Blessings of an Apostolic Ministry, and of the
stability of the Martyrs in their Sufferings for Christ, being so rare, and
notable a Mercy to the Church, I confess I know no reason why the Churches of
all succeeding Ages may not keep an Anniversary Day of Thanksgiving to God for
Peter, or Paul, or Stephen, as well as for the Powder Plot deliverance; I know
not where God has forbidden it directly or indirectly; if his instituting the
Lord's Day were a virtual Prohibition for Man to separate any more, or if the
Prohibition of adding to God's Word were against it, they would be against
other Days of Humiliation or Thanksgiving, especially Anniversary Days, which
we confess they are not, if the Reason be Scandal, lest men should have the
Honor instead of God; I answer, 1. An honor is due to Apostles and Martyrs in
their places in due subordination to God. 2ly. Where the Case of Scandal is
notorious, it may become by that accident unlawful, Constable. and Can. An. 1640.
Can. 7.
and yet not be so in other times and places. 3ly, Our Church expressly has
declared that she gives Religious Worship unto God alone, and does observe
these Days to God, and in them celebrate his Praises for his Apostles, and for
the assistance of his Grace and Spirit vouchsafed to them, and the Great things
done through that assistance by them, for the good of men, and so can Minister
no Ground for such a Scandal.

4ly. p. 150.
He says that in the lawful Observation of Days, it is most orderly to do as
the Churches do which we live among, and are to join with. Especially if they
do only that which has been done by all the Churches of Christ about Twelve
hundred years and upward, as we do in the Observation of all our public
Festivals, or that which has been done from the beginning, as in the
Observation of the Easter Festival.

5ly. p. 151.
He says, That it is long ago decided by the Holy Ghost, Romans 14.15. That we
must not be contentious, contemptuous, nor censorious against one another about
things of no Greater Moment than the Jewish Days were, though some observed
them without just cause, because the Kingdom of God consists not in Meats,
and Drinks, and Days, but in Righteousness, and Peace, and Joy in the Holy
Ghost, and he that in these things serves Christ is acceptable to God, and
approved of men; we must follow therefore after the things which make for
Peace, and wherewith one may edify another, which by submitting to the
Constitutions of our Church concerning Festivals, Dissenters certainly would
do, if they are capable of Edification by hearing and joining in Good Prayers,
and Praises, by reading of the Word, by hearing of good Sermons, and by
commemoration of the Mercies we then celebrate.

Baxter adds, that the Controversy, whether it be lawful to keep Days as Holy
in celebrating the Memorial of Christ's Nativity, Circumcision, Ascension, etc.
p. 151, 152. Disp. 5. of Cer. Cap. 2. 46.
is the hardest part of this Question, which he is not sufficient to determine:
I shall first lay down some few Arguments to justify the Observation of these,
and other Holy Days prescribed by the Church of England: And consider the
Scruples he, and others have against them. And,

1. I argue for the expedience of these Holydays from the consideration of the
end for which they have been instituted by the Wisdom of the Church, for those
things, says St. Austin, are celebrated by the Churches Anniversaries, which
were very excelelnt when done, Contra Faustum Manichau^, Lib. 32. Cap. 12.
and by their excellency have signalized certain Days, that so the celebration
of the Festival may preserve the whole some remembrance of them in our Hearts.
Now even Reason teaches, that the Day on which these things were done, tends
to excite the mind to more intent consideration of, and so to effectual
remembrance of the Mercies which we have received upon that Day: Whence God
himself requires his People to Remember that day in which they came out from
Egypt, out of the Land of Bondage, Exodus 13.3. And of that very Night he says,
It is a Night to be much observed unto the Lord, for bringing them out of
Egypt, this is that Night to be observed of all the Children of Israel in their
Generations, Exodus 12.42. Now if for the Remembrance of that Mercy, God did not
only order his People Israel to be continually meditating and discoursing of
it, Exodus 12.26, 13, 14. but also to observe the very Day for a Memorial, Exodus
12.14 if he appointed the Feast of Pentecost to be observed in Memory of the
Law then given from Mount Sinai to them, the Feast of Tabernacles in
remembrance of their sustentation Forty years in the Wilderness, why may not
Christians, though obliged daily to have these things in their remembrance,
observean Annual Festivity for the more full Commemoration of the Mercies they
enjoy by virtue of our Lord's Nativity, Ascension, etc. Again, these Feasts
have been instituted and observed by the Wisdom of the Church, to give thanks
to God for the benefits vouchsafed to us at those times, and by such Persons:
now public benefits are publicly to be acknowledged and celebrated with
public thanks, which cannot better be performed than by prescribing stated
Days for publicly Assembling to these ends. And as St. Paul declares, that the
great liberality of the Corinthians would Glorify God by causing many
thanksgivings to him for that Grace, 2 Cor. 9.12.
so will the Institution of such Festivals tend to his Glory by causing many
thanksgivings for the Grace vouchsafed to us upon these Days, both to us and to
those Martyrs and Apostles, whose Memories we celebrate. Moreover, no Man can
deny bu^ the benefits flowing from the great actions of ou^ Savior, and the
advantages accruing to us from the Apostles, and Evangelists by their faithful
preaching the Gospel of Christ, and giving testimony by their Sufferings to the
Truth of the sam^ Doctrine, is to us more valuable, and advantageous than any
temporal benefit whatsoever. If then (...) be esteemed highly convenient to
celebrate o^^ deliverance from the Gun-powder-Plot, the happy Restoration of
our Prince, our Laws, an^ Liberties, with constant Anniversaries, have w^ not
equal reason to celebrate the Memory o^ those great Spiritual Mercies by like
Anniversaries.

2ly. This may be further argued from the utility and benefit which may redound
unto us from the Observation of these Festivals unto the ends for which they
are appointed by the Church; now she appoints them to be employed in hearing
of God's Word read and taught, in public Prayers, Can. 13. and Injunct. Q
Eliz. 1559. N. 20.
in acknowledging our offenses to God, and amendment of the same, in being
reconciled to our Neighbors, where there has been displeasure, in often
receiving the Communion, in visiting the Poor and Sick, and using all sober and
Godly conversation. Which Christian fruits of Piety, were they more plentifully
brought forth, they would sufficiently recommend those times and seasons which
gave occasion to them. And surely the benefit of such Holy Exercises is so
great, that the use of particular times appointed for that purpose ought not to
be rejected, though some men do abuse them to far other ends. And if Dissenters
have thought fit to appoint weekly Lectures for some of these good ends, Why
may not our Church Governors appoint these Anniversaries for the promotion of
them all? Especially if we consider, that they are so exceeding profitable unto
the weaker sort of Christians who are instructed by them in many Articles of
Christian Faith, and caused to reflect on many signal Mercies which they might
entirely forget, did not these Days return to strengthen and rub up their
Memories. The common sort of those who seem to be Believers want these
Remembrances, says Origin, Contra Celsum, l. 8. p. 393.
That such things may not slip out of their Minds, and so these Festivals must
needs be useful to them for this end. And since the Wisdom of the Church
prescribes Days to be observed for the Commemoration of the chief things that
either were performed by, or happened to our Savior: if the plain Man, says
Bishop Hall, would but ply well his Almanac, that alone would teach him so
much Gospel as to show him the History of his Savior; Remains. Sermon. on 1 John
15.
for there upon the Feast of the Annuntiation might he see his Saviors
conception declared by an Angel, upon the Feast of (...) Nativity, he might
understand that he was bo^^ of the Virgin Mary, and at last, after infin^^ and
beneficial Miracles, he would see him c^^^cified on Good Friday, rising from
the dead (...) Easter, and ascending to Heaven on Holy Thu^^day, and might be
well instructed in these thi^^^ by coming to the Church, which has excellen^^^
fitted these Solemnities with Services which (...) explain their meaning, and
the use we are to m^^^ of them. If then we are to follow after the thi^^
whereby we may edify one another, Romans 14.19.
we must ^^^tinue the Observation of these Festivals.

3ly. That it is expedient to observe these (...) is evident from the continued
custom of the w^^^^ Church of Christ, it being laudable and de^^^^ to observe
the Customs of the whole Church (...) Christ, and to conform to her Example
(...) in things no where forbidden by the Word of (...) and being reasonable to
judge she had good (...) to do what was so universally performed; who^^ St. 1
Cor. 14.33. and 11.16.
Paul does admonish his Corinthians to do as (...) all Churches of the Saints
was done, and does pronounce him a Contentious Person who (...) thwart her
customs. Now all these Festivals of Christ's Nativity, his Passion,
Resurrection cension, and of the Advent of the Holy Ghost are by Illa autem
quae non scripta, sed tradita custodimus, quae quidem toto terrarum orb
observantur, dantur intelligi vel ab ipsis Apostolis, vel plenariis conciliis
-- (...) atque statuta retineri, slucti quod Domini passio and Resurrectio and
(...) in Caelum, and adventus de Caelo Spiritsis Sancti anniversaria sole^^^^e
celbrantur, and st quid aliud cale occurrerit quod servatur ab universa
quacunque se diffundit Ecclesia. Epist. 1.18. Cap. 1. vid. Epist. 119. Cap. 1.
St. Austin reckoned among those things which were observed ab universa
quacunque se diffundit Ecclesia, by the whole Universal Church, and which he
therefore does conjecture, that the Observation of them derived it self from
the Apostles or the Decrees of General Councils. Since therefore it is evident
unto all learned men, that all the Holy Days prescribed by the Church of
England, from the Fourth Century at least, were universally observed by the
Church of Christ, it must be fit and laudable to conform to her Example by
observing of them as she did.

Now to return an answer to the Objections of Mr. Disp. 5. of Cer. cap. 2.. 46.
Baxter against the Holy Days forementioned of which the First is:

That the occasion of these Holydays was existent in the Apostles days, if
therefore God would have had such days observed, he could as easily and fitly
have done it by his Apostles in Scripture, as he did other the like things.

Festivals of the Holy Martyrs, and Apostles might lawfully be observed; For of
the Protomartyr St. Stephen, and of James the Brother of John, Killed by the
Sword, Act. 12.2.
the Scripture makes mention, and yet says nothing of the observation of
their Festivals, nor does the Beloved Disciple, tho He survived the rest of
Christ's Apostles, mention in his Epistles, or his Revelations any thing
touching the observation of them which notwithstanding Mr. Baxter, and which is
more considerable, (...) (...)
the Universal Church of God even from the second Century approved of,
observing Martyrum Natalitia, the Birth days of the Martyrs, that is, the days
when they were crowned with Martyrdom, with Great Solemnity, witness the *
Epistle of the Church of Smyrna touching the Martyrdom of Polycarp. 2ly, By
this Argument no places may be set apart for Celebration of Gods public
Worship, no Churches, and no Tabernacles may be erected for that end, no time
appointed for that Worship. No Synods may convene, no Presbyterian Classes may
assemble to determine any matter, or make any Rules for the due Government of
Christians, no forms of Prayer, excepting the Lords Prayer may be used in
Publck, no words in Celebration of the Lords Supper, or the Sacrament of
Baptism, (to omit many other things of a like nature) but what by the Apostles
were prescribed in Scripture, for if God would have had such things done, the
occasion of them was existent in the Apostles days, and he could as easily and
fitly by his Apostles have given command concerning them as touching other the
like things. 3ly, This Argument condemns the Decrees of the great Nicene
Council for praying standing on the Lords day, the occasion of it being as old
as our Lords Resurrection, and it condemns the whole Church of Christ in the
exercise of her Discipline concerning Penitents, her Stationary days, and
almost all her other rites, the occasions of which were as well existent in the
Apostles days as in succeeding Ages, and which must therefore be unlawful
according to this Argument, because prescribed by no Apostle in the Holy
Scriptures.

This is a business which if it were necessary would be equally necessary to
all Ages, Ob. 2. Ibid.
and parts of the Catholic Church, and therefore it cannot be necessary, but
it must be the matter of an universal law; now God has made no such law in
Scripture, and so Scripture sufficiency as the Catholic Rule of faith, and
universal obedience is utterly overthrown.

Festivities of the Apostles, and first Martyrs of the Church, as of the feast
of Christmas, the Ascension, of our Lord, etc. That, If they are necessary to
be observed, they must be necessary to all Ages, that God in Scripture has
made no law concerning them, etc. May it not as well be said that if Public
Assemblies are necessary to be set apart now, that if any unprescribed forms of
Prayer are necessary to be used now, or any words, in Scripture not prescribed,
in consecration, or celebration of the Sacraments, that if standing on the
Lords day in time of Prayer, if Stationary days, if the Penitential Discipline
observed in the Primitive Church were necessary in any Age or part of the
Church, they must be necessary in all Ages and parts of the Catholic Church,
and that God has in Scripture made, no laws concerning them, and so Scripture
sufficiency is, and was by the observation of them, overthrown.

2ly, Tho we do judge the observation of these Festivals expedient, yet we by
no means hold it necessary; not by necessity of precept, for we pretend not to
any precept of this kind; not as a necessary means, for we acknowledge God may
be duly praised and Worshipped and magnified for the mercies we then celebrate,
on other days, and therefore we confess that, Non putandum Ecclesiam
Christianam aliquancessitate astringi ad obser vationem immotam festorum
dierum, sed statuendum dies hosee humana authoritateconstitutos eddem posse
tolli and mutari, etc. Dav. in Coloss. 2. v. 16.
if the Church thinks fit, she may leave all men to their liberty in the
observing, or not observing of these days; only we add, that sure the General
Rule of doing all things for edification will warrant her appointment of them
for the forementioned ends, as well as the appointment of a Lecture-day, or of
a Sermon before the Assizes.

God himself has appointed a day for the same purposes as these are pretended
for, Ob. 3. Ibid.
for the Lords day is to commemorate the Resurrection, as the great triumphant
act of the Redeemer, implying all the Rest of his works, so that tho it be
principally for the resurrection above any single work of Christ, yet also for
all the work of Redemption, and the whole is on that day to be commemorated
with Holy joy and praise, now when God himself has set apart one day in every
week to commemorate the whole work of Redemption, it seems an accusing of his
Institutions of insufficiency, to come after him to mend them, and say we must
have an Anniversary day for this or that part of the work.

Lords day for the particular Commemoration of the whole work of the Redemption
is Gratis dictum; what Scripture, or what declaration of Any, Father of the
Church says so? 2ly, This Argument makes it unlawful to set up a lecture upon
any day but the Lords day, for that day being appointed for public reading and
hearing of Gods Holy word, for men to set up another day for that end is to
accuse his institutions of insufficiency. 3ly, This Argument condemns the
universal Church of Christ from the Apostles days, for they did then observe
the feast of Easter, and so, tho God had set apart a weekly Commemoration of
the resurrection of our Lord, they did come after him, and observe an
Anniversary day for the same thing, and so according to this way of Arguing did
more apparently accuse his institutions of insufficiency. 4ly, This objection
seems to accuse the wisdom of Gods own institutions, for tho the Jewish Sabbath
was instituted with a peculiar respect to their deliverance out of Egypt,
Deuteronomy. 5.15. (yet for that mercy which was far inferior to those which
Christians do enjoy by our Lords Birth, his Death, his Resurrection, and
Ascension) he required other solemnities to be observed yearly, viz. The great
feast of the Passover; why therefore may not the wisdom of the Church, in
imitation of this pattern, besides the Lords day weekly set apart for
celebrating the work of our Redemption, require other solemnities to be
observed yearly for a peculiar Commemoration of the most Signal parts of that
Redemption?

The fourth Commandment being one of the Decalogue seems to be of so High a
nature that man must not presume to make the like, Ibid.
but it seems a doing the same, or of like nature to what God has done in the
fourth Commandment, if any man will make a necessary stated Holy day to the
universal Church.

a Necessary stated Holy day to the Universal Church, sure none besides the
Church of Rome pretends to give laws unto her. But what the Universal Church
has thought fit to observe, I hope our Church may prudently comply with, and
call upon her Children so to do. 2ly, Is not this done as much by the stated
Festivals which you allow of, as by those you do condemn; was it not done as
much by appointing the feast of Purim to be observed yearly, and by ordaining
that these days should be remembered and kept throughout every Generation, Esth.
9.27, 28.
every Family, every Province, and every City, and that these days of Purim
should not fail from among the Jews, nor the memorial of them perish from their
seed? was it not done as much by the whole Congregation of Israel when they
ordained that the days of the Dedication of the Altar should be observed from
year to year by the space of eight days. And yet neither our Lord, 1 Macc. 4.59.
nor any of the Prophets, charged them with violation of the 4th Commandment on
that account, or with presuming to do the like to that which God had done in
the institution of it.

Where there is no law, sure we are, there is no transgression, but there is no
law of God Commanding Christmas, or other Holy Days, therefore there is no
trangression in not keeping them: But then it is not sure that there is no
transgression in keeping them, therefore the surer side is to be taken.



2ly, That this Argument may be retorted thus: Where there is no law
forbidding, sure we are, there is no transgression, but there is no law
forbidding the observation of Christmas, and other Festivals of our Church, and
therefore there is no transgression in observing them, and if our assurance
that there is no transgression in not observing of these days depends on this,
that no law does command their observation, why are we not as sure that we
transgress not in observing them being as sure that no law does forbid their
observation; wherefore we being sure of this that there is a law commanding us
to yield obedience to the guidance and appointment of our Superiors in all
lawful things; and sure, from what has been discoursed, that the Religious
observation of these days for the forementioned ends, is not only lawful, but
expedient, let any Reasonable person judge which is the surer side, the
observation of these days, as by Authority we are required, or the Refusal so
to do.

Paul condemns his Galatians for observing Months and Times and Years, Gal.
4.9, 10. And says to his Colossians, let no man judge you on the account of a
Feast or a New Moon, or a Sabbath Day, Coloss. 2.16.

Jewish Festivals which were commanded by the Law of Moses, by Gentile Converts
to Christianity. For 1. the Apostle in the beginning of the fourth Chapter to
the Galatians says, Gal. 4.3, 5.
that Christ came to redeem those from the Law who were in bondage to its
beggarly Elements that they might receive the adoption of sons, and then puts
the Question to his Galatians thus, how therefore turn you again unto those
weak and beggarly Elements to which you desire again to be in bondage? v. 9.
v. 10.
And as an instance of their relapsing to that bondage he adds, You observe
Days and Months, and Times and Years, viz. Those Months and Days and Yearly
Festivals which were prescribed by the Law of Moses, and therefore says, I am
afraid of you lest I may have labored among you in vain. v. 11.
And farther says, tell me, you that desire to be under the Law, v. 12.
do you not hear the law? Plainly demonstrating that he reprehends them for
their desire to join the observation of the Law of Moses to Christianity. In
the 2d. Chapter to the Colossians he speaks expressly of New Moons, and Sabbaths
which were proper to the Jewish Pedagogy, v. 16, 17.
and of such Festivals as were Shadows of things to come, and such were
properly the Jewish Festivals, and they only. 2ly, That he speaks only of the
observation of them by the Gentile Convert to Christianity, is evident from the
severity of his reprehension of them, as being a reducing them to bondage, and
that which made his labor vain among them, whereas he being an Hebrew of the
Hebrews did himself observe the feast of Pentecost, and did permit the
observation of them for a season to the weaker Jew, Romans 14.5, 6. Hence also
3ly, Act. 18.21.20.16.
It is evident that he speaks only against the observation of these days from
the opinion of their necessity to the justification of the Gentile Christian,
or from an opinion of their obligation to observe the Law of Moses, as his
whole disputation in his Epistle to the Galatians does plainly show, wherefore
our Festivals being not Jewish, nor such as were commanded by the Ceremonial
Law, nor Shadows of things future, nor observed by us out of opinion of any
such necessity as has been mentioned, they cannot be concerned in those words
of the Apostle, nor can they with any color be esteemed Yokes of bondage, or
weak and beggarly Elements; as were these Jewish Feasts, any more then weekly
Lectures, or stated fasts for public judgments, or stated Festivals for the
remembrance of public mercies can be so accounted. But tho this Exposition of
these places be so evident that he who runs may read it, yet do dissenters thus
object against it:

If the Apostle speak only of Judaical days, either he condemns the
observation of the same feasts materialiter that is, the observing of the same
days the Jews observed, or formaliter, that is, he condemns the observing of
them with such a meaning, after such a manner, and to such an end as the Jews
did; if the former, then, say they, their own feasts of Easter and Whitsunday
will be condemned, because they were observed by the Jews, if they assert the
latter, this cannot be true, for the Apostle condemns, that observation of
these days which was done by those Galatians who believed that Christ was
already come, and therefore could not keep them as figures of his coming, as
the Jews did, but rather as memorials, says Cartwright, Disp. p. 48. 49.
that he was already come; so Gillespy.

Apostle plainly condemns the observation of these days by Gentile Converts,
whether Colossians, or Galatians, upon account of any obligation lying on them
from the Law of Moses so to do; now I hope Mr. Gillespy will grant that the
Galatian Christians might think themselves obliged to observe the Law of Moses
by being circumcised, and keeping of the Festivals prescribed by it. 2ly, He
also condemns the observation of them by Gentiles to the same end, the Passover
in memory of their deliverance from Egypt, the feast of Pentecost in memory of
Gods kindness in giving his Law to them at that time, the feast of Tabernacles
in memory of their Divine protection in the wilderness, their weekly Sabbaths
in memory of their deliverance from Egyptian Thraldom, and to these ends the
Judaizing Gentile Converts might observe them. 3ly, The Judaizing Christians,
believed that the Messiah was already come, and yet conceived themselves
obliged to observe these Festivals, not as Shadows of things to come, but as
Festivals commanded by the Law of Moses, and so might also those Gentile
Converts whom they had perverted.

CHAP. X. The Contents.
The Proposition that a prescribed Form of Liturgy may lawfully be used in
public Worship, 1. Because such a Form is not forbidden, either directly or
indirectly in the word of God. Not, 1. by the command to pray always in the
Spirit, Ephesians. 5.18. and in the Holy Ghost, Jude 20.2. Not by our Lords command
to his Disciples, when they were brought before Kings and Rulers for his sake,
not to meditate what they should say, Matt. 10.19. Nor, 3. by the promise of
the Spirit to help our infirmities, Romans 8.26, 27. Nor, 4. by the commands not
to neglect our Gifts, 1 Timothy 4.14. but as we have received the Gift, so to
minister, 1 Pet. 4.10. Romans 12.6. Nor, 5. from Gods Promise to pour out upon
his People the Spirit of Supplication.. 1. To pray in the Spirit, 1 Cor. 14.15.
is, 1. to pray by the immediate Assistance and Operations of the Holy Spirit. 2
To use the gift of Tongues in Prayer, and pray in words not understood by him
that prayed.. 2. To the Objection that forms of Prayer do stint the Spirit, it
is answered, 1. That if this be meant of the Spirit of the Minister, it may,
and in some cases must be stinted by Precept Apostolical. 2. That Christ did
stint the Spirit of his Disciples by prescribing them a form of Prayer. 3. That
the Directory does the same by prescribing the matter of Prayer, if the
Objectors mean that a Form of Prayer does stint the Holy Spirit. 1. That it
cannot be proved that the Spirit is injured by prescribing a Form. 2. That the
Directory and all premeditated Prayers do the same thing.. 2. Secondly, Because
our Blessed Lord has commanded, and approved of a Form of Prayer.. 3. Four
Corollaries thence, ibid. Thirdly, Because Forms of Prayers have constantly
been used in the Church of God from the third Century.. 4. Fourthly, Because
all premeditated Prayer is in effect a form, so that we must either pray
without consideration, or by form.. 5. Six advantages of Praying by a
prescribed Liturgy in the public service of God.. 6.

THE Ceremonies required by the Church being owned as lawful, and her Festivals
approved as such, no Exceptions can be farther made against Communion with her,
besides those which do concern her Liturgy, and those I shall consider in
handling these two Propositions,

1. That a prescribed Liturgy is lawful.

2ly, That there is nothing in the prescribed Liturgy of the Church of England,
to which her Lay Members may not yield obedience, or which can render their
Communion with her sinful, or unlawful to them.

That a stinted Liturgy, containing a prescribed Form of words is lawful; This
I prove

Liturgy is not forbidden in the Word of God; now Sin being the transgression
of the Law, there can be no transgression in doing that which is forbidden by
no Law. Moreover, where there is no command, there is no duty, and therefore no
transgression by neglect of Duty, but holy Scripture does afford no Precept
commanding us to Pray without a Form, and therefore we cannot transgress by the
neglect of Duty, though we do not so Pray.

Now that a stinted Liturgy is not forbidden, needs no other proof than this,
that no such prohibition can be showed from Scripture; but yet, ex abundanti, I
thus argue, that which is not sorbidden in general, by virtue of the Precept
which commands us, not to add unto the word of God, nor in particular by any
Precept which in words direct, or consequential, forbid us, when we Pray, to
use a form, is not at all forbid. But thus it is with reference to a stinted
Liturgy, Ergo.

And 1. That the use of stinted Forms of Prayer, not prescribed in Scripture,
is not forbidden by virtue of this Precept, which commands us not to add unto
the word of God, is evident,

1. From the exposition I have already given of those words.

2ly, Because no reason can be given, why praying by a Form should be esteemed
adding to the word of God, rather than Praying without a Form; God having in
the Old Testament commanded Prayer by Form, but never Prayer without it.

3ly, The Jews to whom this prohibition of adding to the Word was given, did,
as I have observed from Dr. Leightfoot, and as the Learned Mr. Seldom has
informed us, Not. in E^tych. p. 43. p. 41, 42.
use eighteen Prayers or Benedictions called in the Gemara, composed or
appointed Prayers, that these were instituted by Ezra and his consistory, to be
used by every one daily by Law, or received custom; and that this remedy was
applied by the men of the great Synagogue, Ezra and his hundred and twenty
Colleagues after the Babylonish Captivity, that they might not recede, either in
the matter of their Prayers, or their expressions, from the Form of Piety
commanded them by God. They also prescribed a Form of Confession to be used by
the People when they offered their Trespass-Offerings, Leight. Temple-Service,
p. 69. p. 173.
and by the High Priest, when he confessed over the live Goat the Iniquities of
the Children of Israel: And lastly, it was ordinary for their Teachers to
compose Forms for their Disciples, as is observed by Dr. Leightfoot; In Mat.
6.9.
by all which considerations, it is evident that they conceived not such Forms
forbidden by the prohibition, to add unto the word of God. And,

4ly, John taught his Disciples a Form of Prayer, and Christ, not only joined
with the Forms which were appointed to be used in the Jewish Church, but did
himself prescribe a Form of Prayer for his Disciples; by all which instances,
it is demonstratively evident that Forms of Prayer were not forbidden by virtue
of the Precepts commanding the Jews not to add unto the Word of God.

2ly, That there is no especial Precept in the Old, or the New Testament, which
does in words direct or consequential forbid the Christian, when he prays, to
use a Form, will be apparent from an impartial consideration of what is offered
from Scripture, by way of objection against the use of Forms, viz. that they
are contrary to Scripture, Precept, Promise and Example.

1. To Scripture Precept, for that, say they, Jude 20.
commands us to pray always in the Spirit, Ephesians. 6.18. and in the Holy Ghost,
which in the Scripture Language is Praying by the Gift, and the immediate
assistance of the Holy Ghost, and so is not consistent with Praying by
prescribed Forms.

to pray in the Spirit, are in the foregoing Chapter exhorted to be filled with
the Spirit, speaking to themselves in Psalms, and Hymns, Ephesians. 5.18, 19.
and spiritual Songs: And yet Dissenters dare not hence conclude that they must
sing ex tempore, and not in stinted Meter; why therefore do they plead from the
like words in the forecited places, that they are bound to Pray ex tempore, and
not in stinted words? do they not sing the Psalms of David as they have been
translated into English Meter, and other Hymns composed by Pious Men? do not
these Psalms and Hymns contain Prayers and Petitions, as well as thanksgivings?
yea, is not thanksgiving it self in Scripture reckoned as one part of Prayer,
as is apparent from these words, the Pharisee prayed thus, God I thank thee
that I am not as other men are, Luke 18.11. I will pray with the understanding,
else how shall he that occupies the room of the unlearned, say Amen at thy
giving of thanks? 1 Cor. 14.15, 16. Now I would gladly know why,
notwithstanding these Scriptures, it should be lawful to use a Form of Prayer
in Verse, and not in Prose; whether the Spirit be not as able to assist them in
the first as in the latter? or by what passage in these Texts the latter is
forbid more than the former?

in the Spirit, and in the Holy Ghost, then must the use of the Lords Prayer be
so, and consequently we cannot use it in our Public Worship without
transgressing of these Precepts.

by the Spirit, and in the Holy Ghost, in the forementioned places, may only
signify praying for such things, and in such a manner as God has by his
Spirit taught us in the Holy Scripture; and with such Spiritual Fervency, and
Constancy, and other Christian Graces as he exciteth in us: that this most
likely is the import of the words in both these places, may be argued from this
consideration, that in both places all good Christians are exhorted to pray in
the Spirit, and in the Holy Ghost; now praying by the Spirit, as it imports
praying by the immediate assistance of the Holy Spirit, or the Spiritual Gift
mentioned in Scripture, is praying with the Gift of Tongues, to which all
Christians could not be exhorted, because says the Apostle, all could not
speak with Tongues, 1 Cor. 12.30. 2ly. Because Tongues being for a sign not to
believers, but to unbelievers, v. 22. It cannot rationally be supposed this
Gift should be vouchsafed to Believers in their private Prayers, of which here
the Apostles seem to speak. 3ly. The Apostle here exhorts the Ephesians to
pray (...), always in the Spirit; whereas the miraculous assistance of the
Spirit in this duty being free, what assurance could the Ephesians have of
praying always by it. Moreover he prescribes the matter of their Prayer,
exhorting them to pray for him that utterance might be given him, V. 19.
that he might open his mouth boldly, to make known the mystery of the Gospel,
which he would scarce have done, had he conceived that they were still to pray
by the immediate assistance of that Spirit, who needed no directions what he
should suggest.

In the Epistle of St. Jude, praying with the Holy Ghost, is joined with
building up themselves in their most holy faith, and keeping themselves in the
love of God; these being therefore duties put into our power, and to be
improved by our industry, not to be given by the miraculous assistance of the
Holy Ghost without our industry; why should we think otherwise of that praying
by the Holy Ghost, to which we here are equally exhorted? if then this be the
import of praying by the Spirit, certain it is that we may pray thus by the
Spirit though we use a Form; for the matter of the Form may contain only what
is good, and acceptable in the sight of God; and he that uses it, and they who
do join with him, may do it in Faith and Fervency, and with all other
requisites unto an acceptable Prayer. But,

2ly, If by praying in the Spirit, and in the Holy Ghost, we are to understand
praying by that Spiritual Gift, which was vouchsased to some Christians in the
Apostles days, by which they were enabled by the immediate, and the miraculous
assistance of the Holy Spirit, to indite, or use such Prayers as suited to the
wants of the Christians of those times, as Grotius and Dr. Hammond think: Let
it be then observed, that these miraculous Gifts being now ceased, we are no
more concerned in these Precepts, than we are to anoint the sick with oil, when
we pray over them according to the prescription of St. James. James 5.14.
Now that these Gifts are ceased, and that no man can now pretend to the
miraculous, extraordinary, immediate infusions of the Gift of Prayer; and
therefore that the Holy Ghost does only now assist us by those ordinary and
external means, which do improve our understanding, and instruct us what we
ought to do; and therefore to desire Grace to do, is evident from these
considerations:

1. That were this otherwise, our Prayers would be of Divine Inspiration, and
therefore as Canonical as Holy Scripture, and as fit to be preserved as a Guide
or Rule of Faith, or at the least, of Prayer; which yet Dissenters have not the
confidence to say.

2ly, Then also the same Persons may pretend to sing, and Prophecy, and Preach
by the miraculous, and the immediate assistance of the Holy Ghost; for where
the Apostle makes mention of praying by this Gift of the Good Spirit, he also
speaks of Singing and Prophesying by the Spirit, whereas Dissenters have not
the considence to pretend unto the latter, and therefore have no reason to lay
claim unto the former. Now hence it follows,

That diligent perusal of the Holy Scriptures, and meditation of those things
which we do chiefly want, and it does most concern us to desire, is the best
way to purchase the assistance of the Holy Spirit, and to obtain that which is
called the Gift of Prayer; and therefore that to Pray by a premeditated Form,
must be more properly to Pray by the assistance of the Holy Spirit, than to
pray ex tempore.

Our Savior forbids his Disciples, when they shall be brought before Kings
and Princes, to take thought, Matt. 10.19.
or meditate, how or what to speak, Mark 13.11.
because it shall be given them in that hour what they shall speak, and because
it is not they that speak, but the Spirit of his Father that speaks in them.
Now hence they argue a fortiori thus, would God assist them to plead at an
Heathen Tribunal, and not at the Throne of Grace?

Directory, p. 14.
the Minister is to call upon God to this effect; now both these are as much
against this promise, as is the using of a Form, for the Text says, do not ye
meditate, take you no thought (...), how or what you shall speak; and the
promise is peculiar for the (...), it shall be given what you shall speak: it
therefore is unreasonably urged against Forms, by them who do allow of
meditation, and of prescribing the materials of Prayer.

Primitive Martyrs and Confessors of Christianity before the Heathen World, who
were to be converted to it; and then there is no reason to extend it to other
cases, for otherwise it may as plausibly be urged thus for an immediate
assistance in preaching of the Word, would God assist men in speaking for
themselves, and not for him? in speaking for the preservation of their Bodies
from temporal, and not in speaking for the preservation of the Souls of others
from external destruction; and so we must not only Pray, but Preach also ex
tempore, and from immediate assistance of the Holy Spirit.

were not their own, but were the dictates of the Holy Ghost, and therefore
their Apologies were of Divine Authority, and many of them are to this day
received as parts of Scripture, or the Word of God; but will any man in his
wits admit or urge this consequence, our Lord promised to assist his Apostles
when arraigned before Heathen Judges for his sake, by miraculous inspiration;
therefore in every ordinary case of Prayer, he will assist all the faithful by
the same inspiration; or will these very Persons arrogate thus much to
themselves, or their own Prayers, that they proceed from the same special and
divine assistance?

God, say they, has promised his good Spirit to help our infirmities, Romans
8.26, 27.
when we know not how to Pray as we ought; and therefore by tying of our selves
to a prescribed Form, we prejudice the assistance of this Holy Spirit, and do
not suffer him to help our infirmities by teaching us to Pray, when we our
selves do not know how to do it.

with sighs and groans unutterable, and therefore cannot be a spirit of
utterance: yea, it is farther intimated, v. 27.
that he alone who is the searcher of the heart does understand the meaning of
the spirit: the Person therefore whom he thus assists, is one who does not
understand his meaning; and therefore neither can, nor should thus Pray in
public, where he is obliged to Pray, not only with the spirit, 1 Cor. 14.15.
but with the understanding also; this therefore certainly can be no promise or
example of the assistance of the Spirit, in pouring forth extemporary Prayers
in public. 2ly. The assistance of the Spirit promised here, is only in the
time of great temptations and afflictions, and when we know not what to Pray
for, and therefore can with no show of reason be extended to the continual
assistance of the Spirit at all times. 3ly. Chap. 5.. 6. from p. 218. to 230.
That excellent Person who has writ with great accuracy of Judgment, touching
the operations of the Holy Ghost, has made it evident beyond all possible
exception, that this Text makes nothing for the pretense of uttering the
suggestions of the Spirit in extemporary Prayer; but that, if by the
intercession of the Spirit we understand his interceding for us in the proper
sense, the import of the Words is this, viz.

The Gospel of Christ affords us this relief against impatience under
afflictions, that whereas we know not whether afflictions, or deliverance and
ease be best for us at present, and consequently as to these respects know not
what to pray for in particular, the Spirit of Christ intercedes for us with
unuttered groans, i. e. earnestly and powerfully (for by an inexpressible
desire we commonly understand one that is vehement) and God who searches our
hearts, and understands that we do sometimes desire such things as tend not to
our advantage, knows also what the Spirit intercedeth for, and that he
requests in our behalf better things for us than we do our selves; for we are
ever ready to desire (...), such things as seem best to man, but he asks (...),
what God knows to be best for us.

But if the Holy Ghost is only said to intercede for us, by enabling us to do
so, then will the words admit this Paraphrase, Whereas, when we pray for
deliverance from afflictions, we know not whether it be best for us to have our
desires granted; the Holy Spirit enclines us to an entire submission of our
selves to the Divine Will, and together with our most earnest prayers of that
kind, there is all along mingled that secret and more vehement desire of what
God sees best for us, which is a Grace of the Holy Spirit, whereby the
forwardness of our appetites after the ease and comforts of this World is
corrected and governed: Now though this earnest request be not uttered, the
particular matter of it being not yet known, since we are ignorant what will be
most profitable for us; yet he that searches the heart, understands it
perfectly, and knows that we vehemently desire not so much that deliverance or
worldly advantage, which is the matter of our uttered groans and prayers, as
that good which the Spirit moves us to pray for, and which we cannot
particularly utter, that namely which God sees best for us. This indeed is a
desire of the heart, which proceeds from a Divine cause, and God is so pleased
with it, that he will not fail to grant it; so that if afflictions continue, we
know they shall work together for good, and thus the Holy Spirit relieveth us
under our infirmities and distresses, by bringing all our worldly appetites
under submission to the pleasure of Divine Wisdom and Goodness.

Moreover it is objected, that we are required to use the Gifts vouchsafed to
us 1 Pet. 4.10. not to neglect our Gifts, 1 Timothy 4.14. Romans 12.6.
Having Gifts different vouchsafed to us according to the different Grace of
God, to employ them for the public good. Having therefore, say Dissenters,
such a Gift of prayer, we are engaged to employ it in the public Worship for
the benefit of others, and therefore cannot submit unto those Forms which lay
upon us a necessity of neglecting this our Gift.

v. g. the (...) or Gift of Timothy is, say Interpreters, munus public
docendi, the gift of public teaching; and this does the connection of the words
most fairly plead for, viz. V. 13.
give attendance to reading, exhortation and doctrine, neglect not the gift,
etc. The Speaker in St. Peter is, say the Commentators on that place, the
instructor and teacher of the People, is, qui praedicat verbum Dei in Ecclesia,
he that preaches the word of God in the Church. The gifts in the 12th of the
Romans, are prophesying, teaching, V. 6.
exhortation; since then Dissenters think not themselves obliged to perform
these things ex tempore, by virtue of these precepts, but choose to do them in a
Form of words, why should they think themselves obliged to pray ex tempore by
virtue of these words? for that prophesying, preaching and exhortation are
(...) or spiritual gifts, these Texts inform us more plainly than any other do,
that prayer is so; quis tum discrevit? who therefore made the difference, that
the one should be performed ex tempore, the other not?

invention and elocution, but of the extraordinary gifts vouchsafed then unto
the Church; for in all the forecited places the word is (...), which does most
properly import such gifts. Such also was undoubtedly the gift vouchsafed to
Timothy; such were prophecy, teaching, exhortation, 1 Cor. 12.10, 29.14.3. such
also was (...), ministry, for the Deacons were to be men full of the Holy Ghost
and Wisdom. Acts 6.3. and they most likely are the (...), helps mentioned among
spiritual gifts, 1 Cor 12.28. and if so, all these places must be impertinently
alleged to prove that ordinary gifts may not be stinted.

order and edification, the peace and union of the Church, and with subjection
to the Prophets; and then they cannot so enjoin their exercise as to disturb
her order, peace and union, and to oppose our selves to the prescriptions of
her Prophets, especially considering that the Church does not wholly lay
restraint upon the use of this supposed gift; no, not in public, but does
permit us to exercise it in our Prayers before and after Sermon.

That God promised under the Gospel times to pour out upon his people the
Spirit of grace and supplication; Zech. 12.10.
and such a Spirit being given, as are all the gifts of God, for the
edification of the Church, must not be hindered.

render supplication, is by diverse Interpreters, the Chaldee Paraphrast, the
Septuagint, the Syriack and Arabic Versions, agreeably to the derivation of
the word, rendered mercies and compassions; by others, the spirit of lamentation.

Holy Spirit; for the effect of what is promised here, is not Spiritual Hymns
or Prayers, not that they shall fluently express themselves in prayer, but that
they shall look on him whom they have pierced, and shall mourn; so that men may
with equal reason argue hence for extemporary sorrow, and against such
considerations as serve to work this sorrow in us, as for extemporary prayer,
and against such considerations as may prepare us to put up our addresses duly
to the God of Heaven.

Joel, Joel. 2.28.
that in the latter days God would pour out his spirit upon all flesh, etc.
that we may now expect Prophetic Visions, Dreams and Prophesyings, as from
this promise of the Prophet Zechary, that we may now expect the miraculous
assistance of Gods Spirit in prayer.

Cor. 14, 15. I will pray with the spirit; Dissenters to observe,

1. That there was, when this Epistle was endited, a spiritual gift of prayer
which Christians exercised in their Assemblies, by the immediate assistance and
operation of the Holy Spirit. For the Apostle in the 12th Chapter of this
Epistle, propounds to treat touching spiritual gifts, beginning of his treatise
thus, concerning spiritual gifts, 1 Cor. 12.1.
Brethren, I would not have you ignorant; and this discourse he carries on to
the end of the 14th Chapter, where in the 15th v. we read these words, I will
pray with the spirit, I will pray with the understanding also; to pray then
with the spirit, is to pray with this spiritual gift, for of those Gifts the
Apostle speaks in the whole discourse; and forasmuch as he applies this
spiritual gift to prayer, saying, I will pray with the spirit, it is certain he
affirms that there was then a spiritual gift in the Church enabling them, to
whom it was given, to pray in words suggested by the holy spirit; or to make
and utter upon the sudden, a new prayer suiting the condition of the then
present Church of God.

2ly, It is extremely evident, that praying with the spirit then, was using of
the gift of tongues in prayer, as is apparent from these words; if I pray with
an unknown tongue, my spirit prays, v. 14. i. e. my spiritual gift is
exercised. And 2ly, because the Idiot could not say Amen to him that prayed by
the spirit, because he understood not what he said, v. 16. 3ly, From these
words of the Apostle, I speak with tongues more than you all, and yet had
rather speak five words in the Church with my understanding, that I might teach
others, than ten thousand words in an unknown tongue, v. 18, 19. Moreover, that
it was also praying what he understood not, is evident, 1. Because praying with
the understanding is opposed to it. 2. Because the mind of him who prayed by
the Spirit was unfruitful, v. 14. 3. V. 13.
Because he is bid to pray that he may interpret; if then Dissenters desire
thus to pray, let them do it, let us hear them pray in unknown tongues, and
when they do so, they will only pray after the Roman manner disapproved of by
St Paul, who commands such persons to be silent in the Church, verse. 28.

3ly, When this Spiritual Gift was exercised, the Apostle plainly says, that
it was better to pray with the understanding, i. e. with words that might be
understood by others, than to pray with this spiritual Gift, V. 19.28.
where there was no Interpreter, and in that case commands them who enjoined
this Gift to keep silence in the Church. And hence it follows unavoidably, that
in some cases it was not only lawful, but even necessary, in order to
edification, that they should stint this Gift; if therefore the immediate
operations of the Holy Spirit may be stinted in the Church, much more the Gift
of Elocution. Moreover these Gifts were to be stinted by a Revelation made to
another person, verse. 30 by subjection to the Prophets, verse. 32. by the Rules
of order, verse. 33, 40. and they were to give place to Charity, and the
edification of the Church, verse. 1, 4, 12. if therefore Charity, Edification,
Order, were to be preferred before these Gifts of the Good Spirit, much more
should Charity, the Peace, the Union, the Order of the Church prevail to cut
off our pretenses to the exercising of this meanest of all Gifts; if blessed
Paul so undervalued that Praying by the Spirit which was the fruit of his
immediate assistance, that he preferred Edifying the Church a thousand degrees
beyond it, I suppose he would have preferred the edification of the Church
before that Praying by the Spirit which men usually learn, and do obtain to by
the help of Dr. Wilkins's Discourse upon the Gift of Prayer. Now sure it is
matter of concern toward the Edification of the Church to obey Superiors, to
preserve Peace, Order, Union in the Church, as much as may be, to consent
together in our Petitions, and with one mouth to glorify God, to secure the
public Service from dark, extravagant, erroneous Petitions, too often put up by
the contenders for, and practisers of this Extemporary Devotion. If therefore
care ought to be taken that our public Sacrifice should be, as near as can be,
without blemish, and that we do not offer unto God the lame and the blind, Mal.
1.13, 14.
I think this cannot be done better than by prescribing of a well composed form
of prayer to be daily offered up unto God as our Morning and our Evening
Sacrifice.

Lastly, Whereas it is objected, That in set Forms of prayer we restrain and
confine the Spirit, and in conceived prayers the Spirit is free, unlimited, and
unconstrained. I Answer, That by restraining of the Spirit, the Objectors mean
the restraining of their own Spirits, or of the blessed Spirit: If by
restraining of the Spirit they mean restraining the spirit of the Minister, I
ask,

1. Why his Spirit may not be restrained by the wisdom of his Superiors, as
well as the spirit of the people by his conceived prayer? And tell me, Is not
their spirit restrained when the whole Congregation is confined to the form of
this one man's composing, or unto words which on a sudden he does utter?

2. Did not Christ restrain the Spirit of his own Disciples when he taught them
to pray the Lords Prayer? if he had only said pray thus, after this manner, and
given only a Directory for the matter of prayer, this was a restraint: but if
he said, pray this, or pray these words, as I shall prove he did, he then
prescribed both the matter and words too; and therefore did restrain the Spirit
of his Disciples as truly as any other form could do.

3. The Spirit of the Minister must in some cases be restrained, and that by
precept Apostolical, for otherwise what means St Paul, by saying, 1 Cor. 14.32.
the Spirit of the Prophets must be subject to the Prophets; what greater
restraint than subjection? for if subjected, then they must be ruled; if ruled,
then limited or prescribed unto, and as much under restraint as the Spirit of
the superior Prophets shall judge convenient.

In fine, when the Assembly of Divines appointed the matter of prayers to all
particular Ministers, was that appointment by the Spirit or no? if no, then,
for ought appears, the Directory, not being made by Gods Spirit, may be an
enemy to it. But if this appointment were by the Spirit, then the
determination, and limitation of the Spirit in either sense is by the Spirit
himself, and such indeed is every pious and prudent constitution of the Church
in matters spiritual; such was that of St Paul to the Corinthians when he
prescribed orders for public Prophesying, and Interpretation, and speaking
with Tongues. All these are Answers to this Objection transcribed from the
excellent Bishop Tailors Discourse concerning Prayer ex tempore. And it seems
reasonable to suppose with him, that after all these Answers, this Objection
should trouble us no more.

If by the Spirit, they mean the Holy Spirit, I enquire,

1. By what Argument shall any man make it so much as probable, that the Holy
Ghost is injured, if every private Ministers Spirit shall be guided, and so by
necessary consequence limited by the Authority of the Church? What prohibition,
what Law, what Reason, or Revelation is against it, what inconvenience in the
nature of the thing? for can any man be so weak as to imagine a despite is done
to the Spirit of Grace, when men pray by such well composed Forms as the whole
Church approves of, and does not, in opposition to them, use his private Gift?
2. Is not the Holy Spirit as much restrained by premeditated prayers, since the
design of that premeditation is only to consider after what form, or manner,
they should pray, for what, and in what words, so that the Holy Spirits
assistance is restrained to their conceptions and meditations; men therefore
must be bound to pray they know not what, or else, according to this Objection,
must lay restraints upon the Holy Spirit. 3. Does not the Directory that thing
which is here called restraining of the Spirit? Does it not appoint every thing
but the words, and after this, is it not a goodly Palladium which is contended
for, and a princely liberty they leave unto the Spirit, to be free only in
supplying the place of a Vocabulary, or a Copia Verborum, for as for the matter
it is all there described and appointed, and to these determinate senses the
Spirit must assist, or not at all, only for the words he shall take his choice.
Now I enquire, which is the most considerable of the two, Sense or Language,
matter or words? if the former, is it not a greater injury to the Spirit to
restrain his matter, than to appoint his words; so that in the greater of the
two the Spirit is restrained when his matter is appointed, and to make him
amends for not trusting him with the matter without our directions and
limitations, we trust him to say what he pleases, so it be to our sense. 4. Is
it not as much a restraint of the Spirit to sing a Psalm in Meter by
appointment, as to use a Form of Prayer and Thanksgiving by appointment? and
yet this is done daily by Dissenters without any scruple made, which seems to
argue great partiality, or want of judgment.

There being then no Scripture precept, no evidence of reason against Forms of
prayer, we may hence rationally conclude that they are lawful; For had it been
the will of God that public prayers should be performed by Christians in an
extemporary manner, and not by forms, we may rationally conceive the Holy
Spirit, who is the Spirit of supplication, would somewhere have admonished us
to pray ex tempore, and to beware of Book-prayers and the use of Forms, as well
as of neglecting this duty altogether, or performing it in a careless and undue
manner; and this the rather because Forms of Prayer and Thanksgiving were used
in the Jewish Church, and because the modesty of many good Christians, and the
inabilities of many more would naturally prompt them to the use of so ready a
help to Devotion as pious and useful Forms of prayer are, but so far are we
from finding any command in Scripture to pray upon sudden invention, that we
find no preference given to this way in Scripture above the use of Forms, but
rather the contrary, for when our Savior taught his Disciples to pray, he
enjoined them the use of a form. As for all other vices by which this duty is
corrupted, or rendered less acceptable to God, the Holy Ghost has fully
cautioned us against them, Matt. 6.7. v. 5. Matt. 15.8. Luke 18.10. 1 Cor. 14.
James 1.6. 1 Timothy 2.8. John 9.31.
putting in caveats against Battology, or much speaking, against performing of
this duty for ostentation, against honoring God with our lips, when our hearts
are far from him; against vainglorious and Pharisaical addresses, against
prayers used in an unknown tongue, or not put up in Faith, or put up in wrath;
against the prayer of him who lifts not up pure hands, or who continues in his
sin; but the whole Scripture affords us not one caution against Forms of prayer
either in public or in private, and therefore we may rationally suppose that
they are not displeasing to him, or unacceptable at the throne of Grace.

blessed Lord has both commanded, and approved a Form of prayer, and therefore
it unquestionably must be lawful. His command to use a Form is evident, 1. From
those positive words, Luke 11.2.
when you pray, say, Our Father, etc. and though St Matthew varies the words of
the command, informing us that our Lord said (...) pray so; yet may that please
be very well consistent with the other, and may import that those words should
be used in our prayers; for in the form of the Aaronical Benediction the
command runs thus, (...), on this wise shall ye bless, Numb. 6.23. whereas the
blessing was pronounced in the very form of words prescribed there. And when
God put the words into the mouth of Balaam which he was to speak, he says unto
him (...), and in the Prophets, Numb. 23.5.
Thus says the Lord, thus shall you say unto the house of Israel, always
imports these words shall you say, or the Lord says. 2. The request of Christ's
Disciples was, that He would teach them to pray as John had taught his
Disciples: Vid. Leight in Matt. 6.9.
Now it being ordinary for the Jewish Doctors to compose Forms of prayer for
their Scholars; it is not to be doubted but that St John did so, and
consequently that our Lord did so for his Disciples. And, Thirdly, This is
farther evident from the words of the Lords Prayer, they being not directed to
man, but God, for it is not said, pray to your Father in Heaven that his Name
may be hallowed, but Our Father -- hallowed be thy Name. And as such did the
Ancient Church of Christ receive and use it. Christ, says Tertullian, De Orat.
c. 1.
Novam orandi formulam determinavit, appointed a new form of prayer, and this
we Christians do begin with: In the Apostolic constitutions it is required to
be used thrice a day; and Austin says, l. 7. c. 25. Ep. 59. ad Paul. Qu. 5.
that almost the whole Church concluded the Communion Service with it. So that
if our Dissenters be not men of greater abilities than the Apostles were, at
least before Christ's Resurrection, and than the greatest Worthies of the Church
after the Resurrection, they cannot look upon it as a thing below them to
observe this Form of Prayer. Again our Lord approved of a Form of prayer, by
his using the Hymn called the Hallel with his Disciples at the Passover, Matt.
26.30.
by his presence at the Forms used in the Jewish Service, V. 44.
and by his thrice repeating the same words, even when He used the greatest
fervency in prayer. Now hence do naturally flow such Corollaries as evidently
show the falsehood of the reasonings of the Dissenters against the lawfulness
of Forms; as v. g.

1. Hence it follows that such Forms cannot be unlawful worship, forbidden by
the Second Commandment, unless our Lord did both prescribe, and by his practice
did approve unlawful worship.

2. Hence it must follow that the using of a Form can be no hindrance to our
Devotion, attention, fervency in prayer, unless our Lord can be supposed to
have prescribed that which was thus prejudicial to his Service.

3. Hence it will also follow that the using of a Form cannot be prejudicial to
the duty of using our own Gifts: for had our Lord intended it to be the duty of
all Ministers of the Gospel to use their own abilities in public prayer, in
opposition to a Form, sure He himself would not have given them such a Form to
be used in their public addresses to God; De Orat. Dom. p. 141.
wherein says Cyprian, we say, Our Father, because publica nobis est and
communis oration, it is our Common Prayer.

4. Hence it is evident, that praying by a Form is well consistent with praying
by the Spirit; for otherwise our use of the Lords Prayer would be repugnant to
prayer by the Spirit: Moreover the Saints of the Old Testament, and Christ
himself and his Disciples prayed, as I have showed, by Forms; and yet dare any
say they prayed not by the Spirit? yea all the Churches of Christ from the
third Century, and the devoutest persons of all the following ages, have ever
used Forms in public; and dare we say that none of all these Churches or
persons ever prayed in public by the Spirit! yea do not France, Geneva,
Holland, and almost all Reformed Churches pray by Forms; and when the Minister
conceives a Prayer, is not that prayer a Form unto the people who are confined
to pray according to the words he utters, as much as by the words prescribed by
the Common Prayer? and yet dares any one affirm that all these pray without the
Spirit of God?

Church of Christ from the Third Century, that is above 1300 years, and are
retained and approved by almost all Reformed Churches; and therefore to condemn
them as unlawful, forbidden by the Second Commandment, or by plain precept in
the New Testament, as impediments to attention, and fervency in prayer, and to
the exercise of the Gifts vouchsafed to the Ministers of Christ to fit them for
the work; and lastly, as false and unacceptable worship, is to cast all these
reproaches on the whole Church of Christ for so long time at least, and to
charge all her eminent and pious Clergy as persons guilty, through their whole
lives, of tendering to God a false, forbidden worship, and being always guilty,
in their public service of him, of all the crimes forementioned; which, Nam
hoc quin ita faciendum sit, disputare, insolentissimae insaniae est. Ep. 118.
p. 558. D.
as St Austin truly says, is such a charge as will pronounce the Authors of it
guilty of the most insolent madness. The confessions of Dissenters to this
effect may be seen in Smectymnuus Answ. to the Remonstr. p. 7. p. 11. These.
Salm. part 3. loc. com. 47. N. 49.
, and the grand debate, and the Assertion of Capellus, that the use of public
forms obtained in the Universal Church through the whole world for above 1300
years, will be made good from these considerations:

1. That even Pliny Epist. l. 10. ep. 97. apud Eusebius. l. 7. c. 30. p. 281.
(...).
does inform us that the Christians in his time did sing an Hymn to Christ as
God. That Dionysius of Alexandria makes mention of the Hymns used by the
Christians in his time; now these were Forms of Prayer or Praises. De Orat.
Dom. p. 152.
That Cyprian does sufficiently intimate the use of some Forms in the
Carthaginian Church, by describing the entrance, or beginning thereof, saying,
Sursum corda, Lift up your hearts; and the people Answering, Habemus ad
Dominum, We lift them up unto the Lord. That Eusebius informs us concerning
Constantine, that he would take Books in his hands for the expressing with his
Court (...), De vita Constant. l. 4. c. 17.
the appointed Prayers; and that he by so doing ordered his Court (...),
according to the manner of the Church of God. That the Council of Laodicea
decreed, that there should be always the very same Service of Prayers Morning
and Evening; i. e. that there should be the same Morning Service, Can. 18.
and the same Evening Service continually, And to assure us that the Council
had a particular respect to FOrms of Prayer then in use in the next Canon, Can.
19.
it gives an account of some part of the order of that Service, viz. that after
the Sermon, or Homily they had first the Prayer for the Catechumeni, then the
Prayer for the Penitents, then three Prayers for the Faithful. And that this
Canon was received into the Code of Canons of the universal Church, which was
cited, confirmed, and established in the General Council of Chalcedon, A. D.
451. Can. 1.
That the (...), the three prayers of the faithful were then so well known, L.
2. cap. 59.
that in the constitutions of the Apostles they are represented, as saying the
three Prayers standing every Lords Day, without reciting what they were. That
when Paulus Samosatenus, about the year 262. Eusebius. ubi supra.
took away the Psalms and Hymns which had been used to be sung in the Church,
pretending they were new and made by men of later date, by a numerous Council
called at Antioch, he was censured for it, and cast out of the Church of God.
Lastly, that whereas the Constitutions Apostolical were first composed, says
our incomparably Learned Bishop Pearson, from the (...), Vindic. Ignat. p. 60,
61, 62.
or (...), the instructions, orders and constitutions made by Apostles, and
Apostolic men, much changed indeed and interpolated; in the seventh and eighth
Books of those Constitutions, we find Forms of prayers under their names, for
all Church Offices, for the Catechumeni, the Baptized, the Penitents, the
Faithful, the Ordination of Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, the Celebration of
the Lords Supper: So that unless this whole eighth Book be wholly spurious, and
not only interpolated, Haer. 45. n. 5.11, 12.80. n. 7.
we must have evidence of Forms of prayer like ours, still used in the Church,
not only from the Fourth Century, when Epiphanius cites these constitutions,
but even from the days of the Apostles; and happily these were the Liturgies of
the Apostles so much spoken of, and since so much increased.

will be needful to advertise them.

1. That all premeditated Prayer in which we do consider what to say, and in
what words we should express our thoughts to God, is in effect a stinted
prayer; for it is not the Writing, or the Printing, but the ordering and
composing of the words which makes the Prayer a Form: if therefore this be be
done before we pray, our prayer must be a Form.

2. This being so, the true state of the Question can be only this, whether in
our addresses to the most immense, infinite, eternal God, we should use
consideration, or pray and praise him inconsiderately? Whether we should
deliberate, and take good heed that we offend not with our tongues, or speak
without deliberation whatsoever comes first into our thoughts? Hos. 14.2.
Whether we should take unto our selves words, and speak unto him, as the
Prophet Hoseah does advise; or should present our selves before him not knowing
what to say? And for our better satisfaction the Wise man does advise us,
Eccles. 5.2.
not to be rash with our mouths, nor let our hearts be hasty to utter any thing
before God; and that for an eternal reason, viz. because God is in Heaven and
we are on Earth. Now what man in the world is hasty to offer any thing before
God, if he be not, who prays ex tempore, or who speaks rashly with his mouth,
if he does not who speaks without deliberation or consideration what to say?
Secondly, our own experience will inform us how natural it is to all mankind to
take such good advice before hand, when they present their thanks, or their
petitions to an Earthly Prince, as may secure them that they deliver their
requests in grave and decent Forms of words; and can it therefore stand with
the reverence we owe to the most Glorious Majesty of Heaven and Earth, to use
to him what we durst not present unto a Prince or prudent Governor, in such a
serious matter as ought to be the subject of our Prayers? This is the Argument
by which God pleads against the lame and the imperfect sacrifices of his
people, saying, if ye offer the blind for sacrifice, is it not evil? and if you
offer the lame and sick, is it not evil? Mal. 1.8.
offer it now unto thy Governor, will he be pleased with thee, or accept thy
person? implying that the great King of Heaven and Earth must be served with
the best sacrifices we can tender to him, and therefore with the best prayers
and praises which we can conceive; and that what earthly Princes may slight as
beneath them, must be unworthy to be offered to the King of Kings. Moreover, if
we compare together both these kinds of prayer by Form, and by extemporary
effusions, we shall find the former to be more expedient in our public
Worship, for several momentous reasons concerning both our selves and others.
For

1. The Apostle does require us, 1 Cor. 14.15.
and even reason does inform us, that we should pray with the understanding,
and that we cannot say Amen to that Prayer we understand not; now what
assurance can the people have in joining with a Minister who prays ex tempore,
and often in mystical expressions of the Old Testament, that he shall understand
the meaning of his words? whereas, if constant Liturgies be used, we may be
well assured, by our own reading, or by the information of others, of the
meaning of them.

2ly, The Apostle intimates, that it is the duty of the hearer to say Amen to
the Prayers offered up in public, and indeed otherwise we cannot well be said
to join with the Minister in Prayer; now this we cannot do sincerely, unless we
do approve the matter of the Prayer; now what assurance can the people have, in
that great difference of judgments and opinions that there is among us, and
that great liberty men take to vent their private sentiments in Prayer, when
they are not restrained, that they shall honestly be able to say Amen to a
conceived Prayer; whereas in a set Form of Liturgy this inconvenience is
avoided, seeing we know before hand, to what we are to say Amen; and therefore
if we do not like it, may absent our selves.

3ly, How can we solicit any persons, or persuade any strangers to come to
our Churches, or join in Communion with us, where we cannot promise them that
the Devotions to be used there shall be innocent; we cannot show them how we
worship God, and thereby put them in a condition to judge for themselves, or
promise them, as in the Primitive Church they might, whilst prayer by the
Spirit lasted, that all our prayers shall be agreeable unto the mind of God; or
how can this be done without producing some prescribed Form by which we pray.
This seems to be one reason why all the Churches of the World have had their
public Forms of prayer, that they might let everybody know how God is served
by them. And why the best men in the Reformed Churches have wished those happy
days might come, These. Salm. de Liturg. part 3. n. 46.
in which the same Form of Divine Worship might be observed in the Church, and
all her members with one heart and mouth might glorify God, that so the unity
of the spirit, and charity among Believers, might be preserved as far as may be.

4ly, By set Forms many mischiefs are prevented, to which conceived prayer does
stand obnoxious; for hereby care is taken, that nothing, through the ignorance
of some, or the negligence of others, should be offered up to God, which is
contrary to the Faith, or unworthy of his Divine Majesty; on which account, it
was long since resolved by the Milevitan Council, Cap. 12.
that no prayers should be used in the Church, but those which had been weighed
by the most prudent, or approved in a Synod. And this the wisdom of the
Heathens saw, whence Plato advises, De. Legibus l. 7.
that whatsoever prayers or Hymns, the Poets composed to the Gods, they should
first show them to the Priests before they published them, lest they should ask
evil things instead of good. L. 4. c. 17.
And Alexander ab Alexandro says, that the Gentiles read their prayers out of
a book before their sacrifices; ne quid prepostere dicatur, that nothing might
be spoken preposterously, which two may pass for Christian Reasons, as
seasonable with us as they were among them, these times being very subject to
these infirmities, as our experience has too sadly found.

5ly. Our Savior says, Matt. 18.19, 20.
where two or three were (...), agreeing in the same voice, to request any
thing, it should be granted; and the Apostle prays, Romans 15.6.
that with one mouth as well as heart we may glorify God: now sure there is
more Symphony in a good Form of prayer, jointly put up by a whole Nation, than
there would be in men's extemporary effusions, and in it we may be better said
to glorify God with one mouth, than by the great variety of prayers conceived;
and so the use of well composed Forms in public Worship, are upon this account
to be preferred before extemporary effusions. And,

Lastly, To confess my own infirmities, I find one great advantage in a form of
prayer, that being naturally thoughtful and apt to make deductions from what I
read or hear, I very often make some observations from the Psalms, and Lessons
of the day, as I attend unto them, and my thoughts eagerly pursuing them, my
Devotions are too often interrupted with wandering thoughts, which though they
may be pious in themselves, yet must be my infirmities, as far as they withdraw
my heart from diligent attention to the prayers then put up to God: Now when
this happens to me, whilst others are using their conceived prayers, I know not
what are the desires I have neglected, and so I cannot, when I recall my self,
offer up those desires to God, begging his pardon for my wanderings; but when I
find my thoughts thus wandering in any part of the Church Service, I presently
recollect where they began to wander, what the petitions were which thus
escaped me; and either presently, if I have any opportunity, or when I make up
my accounts with God in my retirements, I humbly offer them up to God,
beseeching his forgiveness of my wandering thoughts. This to me seems a kind of
satisfaction made to my good God, and is a satisfaction to my mind; and
therefore whatsoever others may think of it, it seems to me no small advantage
of a Form above a new conceived prayer, though no man that I know of has taken
any notice of it; since therefore by the use of Forms we may best pray with
understanding, and more securely and assuredly may join with him that does
officiate, and say Amen to his petitions; since hereby others may be assured
beforehand, that they can join sincerely with us in the public service, and
may particularly prepare their hearts beforehand so to do. Seeing hereby the
benefit which is promised to the Church, from the Symphony of her petitions is
best acquired, and both people and Ministers may be relieved best against their
various distractions; and seeing hereby all unbecoming scandalous expressions,
which disturb the most devout, and minister occasion of derision to the looser
Christian, are, in the most considerable and solemn parts of Divine Worship
best prevented; seeing a Form may be used, no probability of any prohibition of
them being made apparent, and Christians stand bound to yield obedience to
their Superiors in lawful matters; seeing a Form must be used in our public
Prayers, by virtue of our Lords command, to say Our Father, and in our public
Hymns and Psalmody, by reason of our inability to conceive them suddenly; and
lastly, seeing the whole Church of God, has constantly used Forms in the
performance of her public service, for thirteen hundred Years; upon all these
accounts, I think it is highy convenient, that they should be retained in the
Church of God, especially if we consider that our Church does not wholly
exclude the use of any Ministers pretended gift in this kind, but gives him
liberty to use it both before, Dr. Whitnal of Gifts in public; Worship, p. 48.
and after Sermon, provided we acknowledge this habit to be what it is, and use
it according to the Laws of God, with reverence to the Divine Majesty; and care
we speak not unadvisedly of him, or to him, according to the Laws of the
Church, with sobriety, modesty, peaceableness and order, so as not to disturb
or divide the Church, by bringing thereby the public and stated order into
disesteem; and finally, with justice to our selves, and the common
Christianity, so as not to make this the sole way of praying in a due or
Christian sort, and by a disuse of any other, to incapacitate our own and our
admirers devotions for the other, and make both our selves and them
uncharitably censorious of all Forms of Prayer, and those who use them, that is
of the whole Catholic Church, except a new and inconsiderable party.

CHAP. XI. The Contents.
The Proposition, That there is nothing in the Liturgy prescribed by the Church
of England, to which her Lay Communicants may not yield obedience. The general
Objections against it Answered, are 1. That the phrase throughout the several
Offices is such, as presumes all persons in the Communion of the Church to be
regenerate, and in an actual state of Grace,. 1. The falseness of which
suggestion is showed in ten instances, and the phrase of the Liturgy is
justified from like expressions of the Holy Scripture. ibid. 2. Obj. That the
people do not only say, Amen, but bear a part in the Prayers. Answ. This is
justified from the practice of the Jews, and Primitive Christians, and the
benefit of so doing,. 2. 3. That the same Prayers are often repeated, which seems
to be the vain Repetition forbidden by Christ, Matthew. 6.7, 8. Answ. These
Repetitions are justified from Scripture-Examples, and the practice of Christ,.
3. Objections against several parts or expressions of the Liturgy Answered; As
1. That in several parts of the Liturgy all profess to put their trust in God;
whereas it is to be feared that many in our Congregations do not so,. 4. 2.
That we all profess to Repent and be heartily sorry for our sins. We all say on
Sexagesima Sunday, that God sees that we put no trust in any thing that we do;
after the Communion we all give thanks to God that he has assured us of his
favor and goodness to us: And in the Third Collect after Trinity we all
profess that God has given us an hearty desire to pray; which professions
cannot be thus generally made in truth,. 5.3. That we pray that God would give
to all Nations Unity, Peace, and Concord; that he would save among the remnant
of true Israelites, all Jews, Turks, Infidels, and Heretics; that he would
have mercy upon all men: which petitions cannot be put up in Faith, there being
no promise of so large extent in Scripture,. 6.4. That we pray to God to
succor, help, and comfort all that are in danger, necessity, and tribulation;
to preserve all that travail by land, or by water, all Women laboring of
child, all Prisoners and Captives; and so we pray for Robbers, Pirates, Whores,
etc.. 7. Some passages in the Liturgy which seem obscure, or Metaphorical,
explained: As 1. There is no health in us. 2. Give peace in our time, O Lord:
Because there is no other that fights for us but only thou, O God. 3. Lighten
our darkness. 4. From Fornication, and all other deadly sins. 5. From sudden
Death, Good Lord deliver us. 6. By the Mystery of thy Holy Incarnation, by thy
Holy Nativity and Circumcision, and by the coming of the Holy Ghost: Good Lord
deliver us. 7. That our bodies may be made clean by his Body, and our souls
washed by his most precious blood. 8. That God by the Baptism of his
Well-beloved Son, did sanctify water to the mystical washing away of Sin. 9.
The Prayer after the Fourth Commandment, Lord have mercy upon us, and incline
our hearts to keep this Law. 10. With this Ring I the Wed, with my body I thee
worship, and with all my worldly Goods I thee endow,. 8. The Conclusion.

THAT there is nothing in the stinted Liturgy prescribed by the Church of
England, to which her Lay Communicants may not yield obedience, or which can
render their Communion with her sinful, or unlawful to them. As will be evident
by answering the scruples Dissenters do suggest against the whole, or any
portion of that Service in which they are obliged to join with us. And to begin
with the Objections which respect the whole body of the Liturgy,

That in the whole Common Prayer there is not any Petition or Confession which
imports any doubt, Dr. Chambers paper of unaffected scruples.
or fear that any of those who join in that Service are in a state of
unregeneration, or enmity to God; whereas there are many in our Congregations,
of whom the Lord has cause to complain, as of the Jews, that they hold fast
deceit, and refuse to return, Jer. 3.5.11.15. To this effect runs the Objection
of the Commissioners at the Savoy, viz. P. 7.
That throughout the several Offices, the phrase is such, as presumes all
persons within the Communion of the Church to be regenerated, converted, and in
an actual state of Grace: which had Ecclesiastical discipline been truly and
vigorously executed, in the exclusion of scandalous and obstinate sinners,
might be better supposed; but there having been, and still being a confessed
want of that, as in the Liturgy is acknowledged, it cannot rationally be
admitted in the outmost latitude of Charity.

Liturgy. For,

1. The Sentences of Scripture appointed to be read at the beginning of Morning
and Evening Prayer, are fitted to the state of unregenerate and wicked persons,
and call upon them to turn from their wickedness that they have committed,
Ezekiel. 18.27.
and do that which is lawful and right; that they may save their souls alive.
To rent their hearts, Joel 2.13. Dan. 9.9, 10.
and turn unto the Lord their God: To acknowledge that they have rebelled
against the Lord their God: And have not obeyed the voice of the Lord, to walk
in his ways which he set before them. Luke 15, 18, 19.
And that they have sinned against their heavenly Father, so as to be no more
worthy to be called his servants.

2. The Exhortation calls upon them to confess their manifold sins and
wickednesses; and not to dissemble or cloak them -- but confess them with an
humble, lowly, penitent, and obedient heart; to the end, that they may obtain
forgiveness of the same, through Gods infinite goodness and mercy; and so it
manifestly does suppose, that many of them who are thus exhorted, have not yet
obtained forgiveness of their sins.

3. The General Confession does acknowledge that we are miserable offenders,
and that there is no health in us; and prays that God would restore them that
are penitent, according to his promises declared to mankind in Christ Jesus our
Lord; and so suggests that they have need of Repentance to interest them in
those promises.

4. The Absolution begins with a declaration that God desires not the death of
a sinner, but rather that he may turn from his wickedness and live: adding that
God will pardon and absolve all those that truly repent; and therefore calls
upon us to beseech him to grant us true repentance, and his Holy Spirit, and
does suppose that many present want the grace of true Repentance, and the
sanctifying operations of the Spirit.

5. The Venite, or Psalm first read unto the people, exhorts them not to harden
their hearts -- lest God should swear in his wrath that they should not enter
into his rest.

6. The Litany prays for mercy upon us miserable sinners; for deliverance from
Hypocrisy, and all other deadly sins, from hardness of heart, and contempt of
Gods word and Commandments; and begs that God would give us true Repentance.

7. There is a Prayer appointed to be used before the two final Prayers of
Morning and Evening Service, desiring that though we be tied and bound with the
chain of our sins, we may be loosed from them by Gods mercy.

8. The Prayer to be said during the time of Advent, is, that we may cast away
the works of darkness, and put upon us the armor of light: the Prayer to be
said every day in Lent, begs, that God would create and make in us new and
contrite hearts.

9. The Exhortation to the Communion supposes, that many of the Congregation
to which it is read, are grievous sinners who have need to repent and amend
before they come unto the table; that many of them may be Blasphemers of God,
or hinderers and slanderers of his word, Adulterers, or such as live in malice,
envy, or other grievous sins. And therefore they are charged not to come unto
that Table, till they have repented of them.

Lastly, The Church has appointed her Office of Commination on purpose to
awaken such notorious Sinners to Repentance. Let therefore any reasonable
person judge whether there be no Petition or Confession in the Common Prayer,
which imports any doubt, or fear, that any who join in our Service may be
unregenerate? whether there be no Prayer made to the Lord with special relation
to such persons? or whether the whole phrase of all our Offices be such as
presumes all persons within the Communion of the Church to be regenerate, as is
suggested? and whether it be not matter of just admiration, that such
exceptions as are so grossly, and manifoldly false, should with such confidence
be made against our Liturgy.

Add to this that all our Congregations being mixed of good and bad, it seems
to have been great wisdom in our Church, that she has so composed her
Confessions and Petitions, as that they may be applicable in some good sense to
both; and therefore they betray their ignorance and folly, who upon this
account do blame her.

2. N. 15.
To this Objection it is Answered by our Commissioners, That the Church in her
Prayers uses no more offensive phrase than St. Paul uses when he writes, Romans
1.7.
to all that are in Rome, beloved of God, Saints called. Giving thanks to God
for them all, verse. 8. telling them that they were grafted into the good Olive
tree; 17.
and were partakers of its root and fatness; that they stood by Faith, Romans
11.17.
verse. 20. that they had obtained mercy, verse. 30. To the Church of God in
Corinth, the sanctified in Christ Jesus, 1 Cor. 1.2.
the Saints called, giving thanks to God who had enriched them in all wisdom
and knowledge. So that they came behind in no gift, V. 5, 7:
waiting for the revelation of Jesus Christ; and says unto them, all are
yours, and you are Christ's; Chap. 3.22, 23. V. 16. Chap. 6.15. 1 Cor. 3.13.
Chap. 4.6. Chap. 6.8.
that they were the Temple of God, and that the spirit of God dwelled in them;
that their bodies were the members of Christ, of some of whom he,
notwithstanding, says, that they were carnal; that they were puffed up one
against another; that they did wrong and defrauded even their brethren; that
they walked not charitably, chap. 8. that some of them were guilty of Idolatry,
and partaking of the table of Devils, chap. 10. that they came together to the
Lords Table for the worse, not for the better; that some of them were drunken,
did eat and drink unworthily, not discerning the Lords Body, and that for this
cause many were weak, and many sick among them, and many fallen asleep, chap.
11. 1 Cor. 15.12.
that some of them said there was no resurrection of the dead; that some of
them did look on the Apostles as men who walked after the flesh; that he was
afraid of them, 2 Cor. 10.2.
lest that as the serpent had deceived Eve, so their minds should be corrupted
from the simplicity of Christ; Chap. 11.3. Chap. 12.20, 21.
that he was afraid, lest when he came unto them, he should find them such as
he would not; lest there should be among them wrath, contentions, etc.

To the Saints in Ephesus, Ephesians. 1.1, 4, 5.13.
and the faithful in Christ Jesus elected before the world, predetermined to
sonship, sealed with the spirit of promise, with many other things of a like
nature, which he, without distinction, speaks of them.

To the Saints in Coloss, Coloss. 1.2, 5, 8.3. -- 12.
and to the faithful brethren in Christ Jesus; And notwithstanding there were
many, who by their known sins declared themselves to be otherwise, yet he gives
the denomination to the whole from the greater part, to whom in charity it was
due, and puts the rest in mind what they have by their Baptism undertaken to
be, and what they profess themselves to be; and our Prayers, and the phrase of
them surely suppose no more, than that they are Saints by calling, sanctified
in Christ Jesus, by their Baptism admitted into Christ's congregation, and so to
be reckoned members of that society, till either they shall separate themselves
by wilful schism, or be separated by legal excommunication. Now to this it is
replied,

That there is a great difference between the titles given to the whole Church
from the better part, Reply. Reply to the Comiss. p. 45.
and the titles given to individual members, where there is no such reason,
that a field may be called a corn-field, though there be tares in it, but none
of these tares may be called by the name of corn; that they will not persuade
the people, that every notorious drunkard, fornicator, worldling, etc. that is
buried, is a Brother, of whose resurrection to life eternal, we have sure and
certain hope.

individual member of our Church, Dr. Combers Comp. part. 4. p. 474, 475.
who is notoriously wicked, is represented as a Saint, or a regenerate person;
We bury those who do depart this life, in sure and certain hope of the
resurrection in the general, not of the resurrection of the deceased person in
particular, to life eternal; and though the common use of the word eternal
life, apply it to the better part, yet the word strictly considered, signifies
both the state of the good and evil after the Resurrection; and so it is
expounded by those who consider it in the Creed, and therefore may be used here
in same latitude.

3ly, If any large expressions were used in our Liturgy concerning wicked men,
they might be justified by our Lords Parable, which calls the man who had not
on his wedding garment, friend, Matt. 22.12.
because by coming to the wedding supper he professed himself a Friend; by his
saying to the Traitor Judas, Matt. 26.50.
friend wherefore art thou come? when he professed friendship to him by a Kiss;
by St. Paul's saying to the Church of Corinth, 1 Cor. 12.27.
that they were the body of Christ, and members in particular; and to the
Galatians, Gal. 3.26, 27, 28.
ye are all the sons of God by faith in Christ Jesus; for as many as are
baptized into Christ, have put on Christ, you are all one in Christ Jesus: and
many other like expressions.

the Apostle Paul setting out a meet Form of Congregational Praises, and by
proportion of Prayers also, shows that it is the will of the God of Order,
that for orders sake one should be as the mouth of the Congregation to speak
for them, and from them to the Lord, and the rest give their assent by yielding
their Amen to what is spoken by him; but the Common Prayer Book proceeding much
in another Form, orders all the people syllabically to repeat many petitions
after the Minister, as if they did not acknowledge him to be their mouth to
God. Thus also do the Presbyterian Commissioners except, P. 4.
desiring that the repetitions and responsals of the Clerk and People may be
omitted, the Minister being appointed for the people in all public services
appertaining to God, and the Holy Scriptures of the Old and New Testament,
intimating the peoples part in public prayers, to be only with silence and
reverence to attend thereunto, and to declare their consent in the close by
saying Amen.

Apostle shows that it is the will of God, that one should so be the mouth of
the Congregation in her Prayers and Praises, as that the rest should only say
Amen, cannot be proved; for in the place referred to, viz. 1 Cor. 14.16. the
Apostle only intimates, that at least the Idiot should say Amen, not that he
may never say more. 2ly, He speaks there not of the ordinary service to be
continued always in the Church, but of extraordinary Prayers and Blessings
performed by the gift of tongues, to which indeed it was impossible, the
people, who were not inspired as the speaker was, should do more than say Amen,
as in prescribed Forms they may. 3ly, that this was not the only Form for
Congregational Praises, is evident because they had their Tehillim, or Psalms
of Praises, which they sang together (...), Ephesians. 5.19.
says Paul; sibi invicem canentes, says Pliny, singing one to, and with
another.

Liturgy which are employed in benediction, consecration, or administration of
the Sacraments, or in the exercise of the power of the Keys, it is reasonable
that the people should not bear a share, because all these are acts
appropriated to the Ministerial Office; yet do I see no reason, why they who
are to join with the Minister in Prayer, and who are a spiritual Priesthood, 1
Pet. 2.5, 9.
to offer such spiritual Sacrifices to God, should bear no share in uttering
any part thereof, to signify the joint consent and union of their Spirits with
him in that duty, but rather much to plead in favor of the custom of our
Church,

1. From examples of such Responsals and Petitions occasionally used in the
Jewish Church: for as the Psalmist in the general does call upon all men to
exalt Gods name together; so, Psalm. 34.3.
though the Levites were appointed to sing in the Public Service, yet did the
people also praise the Lord, and say, For his mercy endures for ever, 2 Chronicles.
7.3. Moreover, De vita Mosis l. 3.
Philo Judaeus does inform us that the Song of Miriam was uttered (...) with
alternate melodies; and the words in the Seventy plead fairly for the same; for
thus they run, (...), Exodus 15.21.
and Miriam began unto them, saying, Let us sing: and of the Essenes, he says,
Eusebius. Hist. Eccles. l. 2. c. 17. p. 57. vid. Philon. de vit. contempl. non
procul a fine.
That the President of them standing up, sung an Hymn composed in praise of
God, and after him did others, (...), in their orders, in convenient manner;
and when they come unto the close of the Hymns, (...), then all both Men and
Women sing together. So of Judith it is said, Judith 16.1.
That she began her Confession to all Israel, (...), and all the people sang
after her the same Song.

2. Because this practice has obtained from the purest Ages of the Church,
this custom being introduced, says Socrates, L. 6. c. 8.
by the great Ignatius, did universally obtain; on which account Eusebius
concludes of the Essenes, Ibid.
that they must be Christians because they sang by turns, answering one
another: (...). Orat. 3. p. 107.
And Gregory Nazianzen says, That Julian the Apostate, in imitation of the
Christians, did appoint among the Heathens, (...), a Form of Prayer to be said
in parts. Moreover in the Constitutions, styled Apostolical, we find this
injunction, (...). l. 2. c. 57. l. 8. c. 5.
that one should sing the Psalms of David, and that the people should sing
after the ends of the verses; that they should all answer, and with thy Spirit;
that they should servently pray for those that are baptized thus, Lord have
mercy upon them; Cap. 8.
Save them, O God, and lift them up by thy mercy, that when the Priest has
said, Cap. 12.
lift up your hearts, they should Answer, We lift them up unto the Lord; when
he says, Let us give thanks unto the Lord, they should Answer, Adding that
(...). Ep. 63. ad Cler. Neocaes.
It is meet and right so to do, that they should all say, Holy, Holy, Holy,
Lord God of hosts, Heaven and Earth is full of thy Glory; that when the Bishop
said, Holy things to holy persons, they should all Answer, There is one Holy,
one Lord, one Jesus Christ to the Glory of God the Father blessed for evermore,
Amen. St. Basil tells us, That in his time they did (...), sing alternately;
and then permitting one to begin the melody, (...), the rest sing after him.
Athanasius, Apol. de suga, p. 717.
that he commanded the Deacon to read the Psalm, and the people to Answer, For
his mercy endures for ever. Sozomen says, that they who were skilful, l. 5.
c. 19.
were Praecentors, (...), and that the multitude answered by consent. And
lastly, Chrysostom says, (...). Hom. 36. in. 1 Ep. ad. Cor. p. 487. l. 3.24.
484. l. 5.
that one may be said to sing (...), though all sing after him, so that the
voice comes as it were from one mouth; all which testimonies sufficiently
convince us that what we do in this particular, is suitable to the practice of
the whole Church of God in Ancient times.

3. This custom does commend it self unto us from the consideration of the
benefit which may accrue unto us by it: For,

1. We hereby show that Symphony which Christ requires in our prayers, Matt.
18.19.
that they may be prevailing, and that we fully do agree to the Petitions that
are made in our behalf, Romans 15.6.
and praise God with the Minister, not only with one heart but with one mouth.

2. Our attention is hereby both quickened and engaged, which might be apt to
stray the more, if we should bear no part in the whole Service; for when the
people bear a share in the performance of this duty; Combers Comp. part. 1. p.
177.
They must expect before it come, that they may be ready; when it is come, they
must observe that they may be right; and after, take heed to prepare against
the next Answer they are to give. How pious therefore and prudent is this order
of the Church, thus to intermix the peoples duty, that they may be always
exercised in it, or preparing for it, and never have leisure to entertain those
vain thoughts which will set upon us especially in the house of God, if we have
nothing to do.

Savior reprehends the vain Repetitions of the Heathens in these words, When
you pray, Matt. 6.7, 8. Now of these vain repetitions the Common Prayer seems
to be guilty, say Dissenters, 1. In the frequent use of the Lords Prayer, that
being there appointed to be used four times in the Morning Service, viz. after
the Absolution, the Creed, the Litany, and in the beginning of the Communion
Service. 2. In those words used in the close of the Litany, O Christ hear us;
Lord have mercy upon us; Christ have mercy upon us; Lord have mercy upon us;
and in the frequent repetitions of the Gloria Patri. To this Objection I Answer,

Savior cannot be supposed to reprehend such repetitions as these are,
proceeding from a fervency of Spirit: 1. Because he himself used the like
expressions when He prayed most fervently; for the Evangelist St. Luke informs
us, That being in an Agony, he prayed more earnestly, Luke 22.44. And Matthew
does assure us that He repeated thrice the same Petition, for he (says
Matthew) prayed the third time, saying the same words, Chap. 26. verse. 44. This
therefore cannot be vain Repetition, unless our Lord himself did practice it in
contradiction to his own command. Moreover our Savior sung an Hymn with his
Disciples at the conclusion of the Sacrament according as the Jews were wont to
do at their Paschal Supper, Censent viri eruditi cantatos a Christo hymnos qui
paschate cani solerent, a Psalm. 113. ad Psalm. 118. inclusive. Synopsi. Cum in
plurali dicitur (...), inde colligi ipsos una hymnum omnibus notum cecinisse,
and quomodo Christo accinere potuissent discipuli si ille novum and insuetum
hymnum cecinisset? Buxt. de coen. Dom.. 84.
which Hymn began at Psalm. 113. and ended with the 118 Psalm: This, says the
Learned Buxtorf, was a very Ancient custom mentioned in the Jewish Talmud, and
there delared to be prescribed by the Prophets. Now that our Savior sung this
very Hymn is highly probable, say the Learned, because he did in other things
comply with the Rites used by the Jews in celebrating of the Paschal Supper,
and therefore may be well supposed to have done so also in this Case. Now in
this Hymn Psalm. 118. we find the same words in the four first Verses, viz. for
his mercy endures for ever, parallel to those in the end of our Litany, and in
the last Verse, we find the same words again, and indeed the whole Psalm is
full of Repetitions, as you may see v. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. as also Psalm. 115.9,
10, 11, 12.

The sweet Singer of Israel affords us many like Examples, so, Psalm. 119. we
have this Prayer, teach me thy statutes, v. 26, 64, 68, 124, 135. teach me the
way of thy statutes, v. 33. teach me thy judgments, v. 108. O that my ways were
directed to keep thy statutes, v. 5. make me to go in the path of thy
commandments, v. 35. let my heart be sound in thy statutes, v. 80. so that upon
the matter we find him ten times repeating the same thing. Six times, in the
same Psalm, he prays that God would quicken him according to his word, and
loving kindness, viz. v. 37. 88. 107. 149. 156. 159. And he professes his love
of, and delight in Gods Law in the same Psalm as often as there be Letters in the
Alphabet. In Psalm 42, 43. which are assuredly twins, their matter being alike,
and they having no title to distinguish them, we find the same thing thrice
repeated, viz. why art thou cast down O my soul, etc. Psalm 42.5, 11.43.5. In
Psalm. 107. we find this Prayer four times repeated, Oh that men would therefore
praise the Lord for his goodness, viz. v. 8, 15, 21, 31. and lastly in Psalm
136. we find these words, O Give thanks unto the Lord, for his mercy endures
for ever, four times repeated, and that Clause, for his mercy endures for
ever, twenty six times.

To these Examples it is Answered, Reply. Presb. Commission, p. 85.
that there is a great difference betwixt what is unusual, and what is our
daily course of worship.

Assemblies Annotations tell us that some of these were common constant forms
as well for ordinary daily praises in divine service, as for extraordinary
occasions, and this appears from 1 Chronicles. 16.34. where it is said that Heman
and Jeduthun, and other men were chosen to give thanks to the Lord, because his
mercy endures for ever. So also 2 Chronicles. 5.13. they praised the Lord saying,
Psalm 136. for he is good, for his mercy endures for ever. So Ezr. 3.1. they
sang together in course, praising, and giving thanks to God because he is good,
for his mercy endures for ever. And Jer. 33.11. is mention made of them that
should say praise ye the Lord, for the Lord is good, for his mercy endures for
ever, from all which places it seems evident that Psalm 136. as well as the
Paschal Hymn was part of their usual devotions. 3. Whereas Dissenters say there
is great difference betwixt a Psalm of praises, (...) ^ 15.
and our ordinary Prayers, and that more liberty may be taken in Psalms and be
an Ornament. (1.) This is said without proof, no reason being given why I may
not say four times, Glory be to the Father, as well as, Oh that men would
praise the Lord for his goodness. 2. Some of the instances here given are of
perfect Prayers, as those from Psalm 119. and our Divines acknowledge that
thanksgiving is a part of Prayer: and 3. in the Prayer of Daniel we have the
same thing four times repeated in three Verses, O our God hear the prayer of
thy servant, chapter 9.17. O my God incline thine ear and hear, v. 18. O Lord hear,
v. 19. whence this Conclusion will arise that the Repetitions used in our
Churches Liturgy, cannot be charged as vain Repetitions, without reflecting
upon the practice of our Lord and of the Royal Psalmist. Wherefore the thing
reproved by our Lord under the name of vain repetition, and much speaking, is
not all length of Prayer, or repetition of the same words from such a fervency
of spirit as quickens and inflames devotion, but it is a lengthening out the
time with tautologies, out of a vain Opinion, that we shall be heard for our
much speaking, our frequent using the same words, and crying out from Morning
unto Noon, O Baal hear us; 1 Kings 18.26.
or for the multiplicity of words, the time, and labor which we spend in
Prayer, though it be only the labor of the lip.

The scruples which concern our Liturgy in general being thus dispatched, I
proceed to the consideration of the Objections made against the several
Portions of it, and of those more especially which do concern the daily or the
weekly service of our Church, against which it is thus objected, viz.

Christians are obliged to pray in Faith, Liturgy which cannot be put up to him
in faith and truth, as v. g.

In the Te Deum it is said, O Lord in thee have I trusted; in the close of the
Litany, Dr. Chambers.
Let thy mercy O Lord be showed upon us, like as we put our trust in thee. In
the form of the solemnization of Matrimony, of Visitation of the sick, of
Churching of Women, and in the Commination is appointed to be said, O Lord save
thy servant, who puts his trust in thee. Now, say Dissenters, putting trust
in the Lord is one discriminating Character of Gods truly holy people, Psalm.
34.8. Psalm. 121.1. Nah. 1.7. in which number no man of understanding can
conceive that all Married Persons, all Women delivered from Childbirth, all
sick persons, yea all that join in our Congregational Worship, are to be
ranked, who yet are plainly, and with personal particularity of times avouched
to be persons trusting in the Lord; no Charity, say they, will justify these
professions made with respect to particular persons, many of which persist in
such ignorance and wickedness, as testifyeth to their faces that they neither
truly know, nor trust in the Lord their God.

that in public Prayers, made in a mixed Congregation, Dr. Chambers.
it suffices that the words, though uttered in general forms, be suited to the
state of some particulars in such Congregations, and indeed otherwise there
could be no public professions of our sense of our sin and misery, our shame
and sorrow for them, our repentance for our past sins; no professions of our
good desires, no promises of amendment, or of a thankful remembrance of Gods
mercies, if he be pleased to vouchsafe them to us; no public thanks returned
for spiritual mercies, for regenerating and sanctifying Grace; and no
expressions of our hope, our faith, our trust in God: Whereas we find
expressions of this nature frequent in the Holy Scriptures. As for instance,

1. By way of Confession and acknowledgment, our transgressions are with us,
and as for our iniquities we know them, Esa. 59.12. We acknowledge, O Lord, our
wickedness, and the iniquity of our Fathers, Jer. 14.20.

2. By way of promise of amendment, and that they will return no more to folly,
Return we beseech thee O Lord God of Hosts, look down from heaven, behold and
visit this Vine, Ps. 80.14. So will not we go back from thee, quicken us and we
will call upon thy Name, v. 18. thus does the Prophet Hoseah counsel all Israel
to say, take away all iniquity and receive us graciously, so will we render
thee the calves of our lips, Hos. 14.2. We will not say any more to the works
of our hands, you are our Gods, v. 3. Help us O God of our salvation for the
glory of thy name, Ps. 79.9. So we thy people, and sheep of thy pasture, will
give thee thanks for ever, we will show forth thy praise to all Generations,
Verse. 13.

3. By way of profession of their waiting upon him for mercy, Psalm. 123.2.
Behold as the eyes of servants look unto the hand of their Masters, and as the
eyes of a Maiden to the hand of her Mistress, so our eyes wait upon the Lord
our God until that he have mercy upon us: where note that this is one of those
Psalms of degrees which were sung before the people upon some Ascent or Desk,
Vid. Hamm. in Psalm. 120.
and it is a profession that they all thus diligently waited upon God,
therefore will we wait upon thee, for thou have done all these things, says
Jeremiah, in the name of all Israel, Jer. 14.22. by profession of their
stedfastness in Gods service notwithstanding all the Calamities they suffered,
thus the Psalmist, having complained that God had cast them off, caused their
Enemies to triumph over them, given them to be eaten up, that he had given them
up for a reproach and spoil unto the Heathens, and scattered them among them,
etc. Psalm. 44.9.16. He says, all this is come upon us, yet have not we
forgotten thee, nor have we dealt falsely in thy Covenant, our heart is not
turned back, neither are our steps declined out of thy way, v. 17, 18. if then,
according to these instances, the Jews in general might make profession of
their diligent waiting upon God, of their stedfastness in his service under all
Calamities, and of the undeclining streightness of their steps, if they might
generally promise that they would not go back from God, that they would call
upon his name (to the performance of which duty a promise of salvation is
annexed Romans 10.13. Act. 2.21.) that they will render him the calves of their
lips, and will show forth his praise, though these things actually were done,
these promises performed only by some, why may not we profess in general our
trust in God, though some who do present themselves before him are defective in
that Grace? why may not we say of our people, as David does of his, let thy
mercy O Lord be showed upon us, like as we put our trust in thee. Psalm 33.22.

Secondly, I Answer that as there is a fear and a faith which in some is only
temporary, and in others permanent. Exodus 14.31. Exodus 15 14. a joy which in
some is only for a season, ^n others lasting, Luke 8.13, 16. a remembrance of
God, and turning to him, and enquiring early after him, by men whose hearts are
not right with him, nor are they steadfast to his Covenant, Psalm. 78.34, 35, 37.
as well as by those persons who perform these duties in sincerity, so is their
a trust in God which is a discriminating mark of Gods upright Servants, and a
trust proper to such persons as have only some desires wrought within them to
forsake their evil ways, and turn unto the Lord. Wherefore we say it is
sufficient to justify the use of these Petitions that we in charity stand bound
to judge that they who do present themselves to be partakers of these
Ordinances, or call upon us to perform them, do indeed trust in God according
to the exigency of their present state, viz. that wicked persons trust God will
be merciful to them upon their repentance, and pious persons, that God will
still continue his favor and his goodness to them.

appointed to be used by all, v. g. Dr. Chamber^.
in the Communion Service it is said of all that do participate, we do
earnestly repent, and are heartily sorry for these our misdoings, the
remembrance of them is grievous to us, the burden of them is intolerable, and
after the receiving of the Holy Sacrament, is this Prayer used, we most
heartily thank thee for that thou do vouchsafe to feed US, who have duly
received these holy mysteries with the spiritual food of the most precious body
and blood of thy son, and do assure us thereby of thy favor and goodness
toward us, and that we are very members incorporate into the mystical body of
thy son, which is the blessed company of all faithful people, and are also
Heirs, through hope of thine everlasting Kingdom. Now, say Dissenters, how few
there be of Communicants who do earnestly repent, and are heartily sorry for
their misdoings, to whom the remembrance of them is grievous, the burden is
intolerable; it is matter of lamentation to all men to consider, who behold the
little amendment that is in their lives after the participation of the Holy
Sacrament; nor can we apprehend how all Communicants can be warrantably
directed to speak of themselves in Gods presence as persons who have duly
received the Holy Mysteries at Gods Table, and are thereby assured of Gods
favor and goodness to them, etc. whereas it is a known Scripture truth that
Men and Women may eat and drink at the Lords Table unworthily, and that they
who do so, drink damnation to themselves, and that there are no such unworthy
Receivers in our Congregations, no Charity should, or does persuade any
considerate person, betwixt God and his own Soul, to believe, as we ought to
think charitably of others, so also to speak truly of our selves, and not
vainly to boast our selves beyond our measure in the presence of the Lord.

Moreover in the Prayer for Sexagesima Sunday, all present are directed to say,
Lord God who see that we put no trust in any thing that we do, whereas, say
they, what roots and fruits of self dependence are in multitudes of our people
the Lord sees, and Ministers cannot but see great cause sadly to bewail,
rather than to profess before the Lord that it is otherwise with them.

In the Collect for the third Sunday after Trinity, all are directed to say,
Grant that we to whom thou have given an hearty desire to pray may by thy
mighty aid be defended, whereas an hearty desire to pray is a special
disposition of the renewed Children of God, Romans 8.15. Act. 9.11. humbly to be
prayed for, rather than boldly professed by many in our Congregations.

Holy Mysteries, the Objector seems to be mistaken in putting an unnecessary
sense upon them. For they are no profession that all present have this hearty
desire, no intimation that all Communicants have duly received; but the first
is only a Petition that as many as God has given this hearty desire to, he
would vouchsafe his aid, the other is only an intimation, with thanksgiving,
that as many as duly receive may rest assured of Gods favor and goodness
toward them, etc. Moreover there are Prayers in Scripture so like these two,
that the objections here produced against them seem as strongly to conclude
against those Scripture Prayers. Thus Nehemiah says, O Lord I beseech thee let
thine ear be attentive to the prayer of thy servants who desire to fear thy
name, Neh. 1.11. which is as much as this, to whom thou have given a hearty
desire to pray. And Daniel prays thus, concerning a people as prone to trust
in their own righteousness as others are, we do not present our supplications
before thee for our righteousness, but for thy great mercies, Dan. 9.18. It
therefore may not be denied but that in mixed Congregations men may be said to
do what they do outwardly profess, and inwardly stand bound to do, and many of
them truly in some good measure do. Thus Solomon declares, that it is better to
go to the house of mourning than of feasting, for this is the end of all men,
Eccles. 7.2.
and the living will lay it to heart; and yet alas how few do so indeed? And
God does by his own Example teach us to judge thus charitably, for having sent
his Son unto the Jews, Matt. 21.37.
he says, they will reverence my son, whereas these Murderers of the Lord of
Life, did very scurvily express their reverence unto him.

Saviors Precept by saying the Lords Prayer in public Congregations, in which
too many cannot say Our Father, they being of their Father the Devil, too many
cannot truly say that they forgive them that trespass against them; much less
can they say it as St. Luke records it, (...), for we forgive every one that is
indebted to us, Luke 11.2. nor must we, if these niceties prevail, use in a
mixed Assembly any expressions of our desires to repent, or to amend, or of our
sorrow for our past offenses, there being many, all too many, in them who are
not truly sorry for them, nor do desire to reform them.

Hallel was sung over at the Passover from Ps. 113. to Psalm. 118. inclusive;
and yet it cannot reasonably be thought that all the Jews could truly say all
that those Psalms contained. Could they all say, I love the Lord because he
has heard my prayer, because he has inclined his ear unto me, therefore will
I call upon him as long as I live, v. 1, 2. return unto thy rest O my soul, for
the Lord has dealt bountifully with thee. Psalm. 116.7. I will pay my vows unto
the Lord, v. 14. O Lord truly I am thy Servant, verse. 16. Could they all truly
join in those expressions of the 118 Psalm, I called upon the Lord in distress;
the Lord answered me and set me in a large place, verse. 5. The Lord is on my
side, I will not fear what man can do unto me, verse. 6. The Lord is my
strength, my song, and is become my salvavation, verse. 14. I will praise thee,
for thou have heard me; and art become my salvation, verse. 21. Thou art my God,
and I will praise thee; thou art my God, I will exalt thee, verse. 28. If all
these expressions would not suit with many of the Jews, who were all bound to
celebrate the Passover, Leight. Temp. serve. p. 139. Buxt. exercit, de coen.
Dom.. 84.
and so to join in singing of this Hymn; which by their Constitutions was not
to be omitted; if lastly, Christ himself with Judas sung this Hymn, as most
Interpreters conceive; then doubtless may such Hymns and Prayers be offered in
a mixed Assembly, which do not properly agree to all who meet in that Assembly.
Moreover the 92 Psalm was the Psalm used in the solemn Service of the Jews upon
the Sabbath Day, as by the Title we may learn; and yet perhaps all of them
could not truly say, the Lord is my rock, verse. 15. nor with good ground cry
out, My horn shall thou exalt like the horn of an Unicorn: I shall be anointed
with fresh Oil. Mine eye also shall see my desire on mine Enemies, etc. verse.
10, 11. The 94 Psalm was sung, says Dr. Lightfoot, every Wednesday; Temp.
serve. p. 59.
and yet it may be doubted whether all the Stationary men, and all that came
unto the Temple Service, could say, When I said my foot slippeth, thy mercy, O
Lord, held me up. In the multitude of my thoughts within me, thy comforts
delight my soul, verse. 18, 19. much less, The Lord is my defense, and my God is
the rock of my refuge, verse. 22. And therefore this can be no good exception
against the Service of our Church, that every passage in it will not suit with
the condition of all that hear it, or join in it.

That some petitions in the Common Prayer seem to be without any promise in the
word, Dr. Chambers.
upon which to bottom them; That they may be put up in Faith, as when we are
directed to pray that God would give unto all Nations Unity, Peace, and
Concord; for the word gives us no hope of any such state in the world, but
teaches us to expect the contrary, Genesis 3.15. Matt. 24.7. And when in the
Collect on Good Friday we are directed to pray, that God would have mercy on
all Jews, Turks, Infidels, and Heretics; and take from them all ignorances,
hardness of heart, and contempt of his word; and so fetch them home to his
flock, that they may be saved among the remnant of true Israelites. Whereas the
word, say they, gives us no hope of any such universal conversion to be
obtained from the Lord; but assures us of multitudes of obstinate Jews, Turks,
Infidels, and Heretics among whom are such as sin against the Holy Ghost,
Matt. 12.32. that they shall never be brought unto the fold of Christ, and be
saved among the remnant of true Israelites; but that the Lord will be glorified
in their justly deserved destruction; as may be seen Romans 9.27. 2 Thessalonians. 2.10,
11, 12. Rev. 13.16. compared with Revel. 14.9, 10.

Such also, say they, is that petition that the Lord would have mercy upon all
men, there being no promise in the word on which to found such a Petition, That
the Lord would have mercy upon all men to Salvation. And since the Lord has
plainly declared in his word, That he will leave multitudes of the world to
perish in their own ways and wickedness, to the glory of his justice; we see
not, say they, how any, except the Origenists, can pray either in Faith or
Hope, that the Lord would have mercy upon all men, when they know assuredly
from his own mouth that he will not have mercy upon all men; but will make some
the vessels of his wrath. We know from Scripture, that he will have mercy on
whom he will have mercy, and the rest he hardneth, Romans 9.15, 18. by giving
them up to their own hearts lusts, and leaving them to walk in their own
Counsels, Psalm 81.2. Romans 1.24. The Prophet David in Faith and Charity, no
doubt, made his Prayer in direct contradiction to this general Prayer of our
Liturgy, Psalm. 59.4. And therefore we can look on this no otherwise than as a
groundless Petition, which has some shadow of Charity, but no substance of
Faith or Hope in it; without which Prayer is weak and worthless before God,
Jam. 1.6. Now to the first instance in this Objection, I Answer,

Liturgy of St. James runs thus, See Dr. Combers Compan. p. 126, 127, 128.
we beg of thee, ut totus mundus pace fruatur, That the whole world may have
Peace and Concord. The Liturgy of St Chrysostom, and Basil thus, We pray unto
thee (...), for the Peace and Unity of the whole world. Secondly, It is
prophesied of our Lord Jesus, That he should rule among the Nations, and cause
them to beat their Swords into Plow-shares, and their Spears into
Pruning Hooks; so that Nation should not rise up against Nation, neither should
they learn War any more, Isa. 2.4. But shall sit every man under his own Vine,
and under his own Figtree; and none should make them afraid, for the mouth of
the Lord has spoken it, Mich. 4.3, 4. For the accomplishment of which
predictions surely we may pray in Faith, because the mouth of him that cannot
lie has spoken them. Again, the Lord has promised, that none shall hurt in
all his Holy Mountain; and that because the knowledge of the Lord shall cover
the Earth, as the Waters cover the Sea, Isa. 11.9.65.25. Hab. 2.14. and
therefore we may pray that this may be accomplished in all Christian Nations. 1 Timothy 2.1.
Thirdly, Christianity was to be planted in all the Nations of the world by
promise; and being planted so, all Christians are obliged by precept to pray
for Kings and all that are in Authority; that under them they might live
peaceable and quiet lives: Which could not be, if Peace and Concord could not
obtain amongst those Nations where they dwell. That precept therefore does in
effect oblige us, to put up that Prayer which our Dissenters do except against.
It Is true indeed so long as Satan and evil Men do sow the seeds of discord,
this is an happiness scarcely to be expected; yet because it is an happiness to
be wished for, and because God alone is able to procure it, we ought to beg it
of him. In this distracted State of Christendom we have but slender
expectations that she should be a City wholly at unity within her self; but yet
I hope we may pray with our dear Lord, that they may be one, John 17.11, 21.
that they may be made perfect in one, v. 23. and with blessed Paul, that they
may be like minded one toward another according to Christ Jesus; Romans 15.6.
that they may with one mind and mouth glorify God. As to the second instance
of the Good Friday Collect, I answer,

Ancient Church of Christ, See Comber, p. 139, 140.
which put up their petitions for those that were without, and were deceived,
that God would convert them; says the Liturgy of Clemens, Sacram. p. 104.
For Pagans, and the calling of the Gentiles; says S. Ambrose and Gregory,
Praesules tota secum congemiscente Ecclesia postulant, and precantur, ut
infidelibus donetur fides, ut Idololatrae ab impietatis suae liberentur
erroribus, ut Judaeis, ablato cordis velamine, lux veritatis appareat, ut
Haeretici Catholicae fidei perceptione resipiscant, ut schismatici spiritum
redivivae charitatis accipiant. Gennad. de dogmat. Eccles. c. 30.
For Heretics and Schismatics: so that to quarrel with this Form of Prayer,
is to reproach the universal practice of the Church of Christ.

Secondly, Since Scripture clearly says, that blindness in part is happened to
Israel, until the fullness of the Gentiles be come in; and so all Israel shall
be saved, Romans 11.25, 26. And that God has concluded them all in unbelief,
that he might have mercy upon all, v. 32. seeing the Psalmist prays, Psalm. 67.2.
that Gods way may be known upon Earth, his saving health among all Nations.
Seeing the Prophet Isaiah does foretell, that all the ends of the Earth shall
see the salvation of God, Isai. 52.10. and the Divine, that all the kingdoms of
the world, should become the kingdoms of the Lord, and of his Christ, Rev.
11.15. since God has promised to give unto his Son the Heathen for his
inheritance, Psalm. 2.8.
and the outmost part of the Earth for his possession, and sent this great
diffusive light into the world, to enlighten every one that comes into the
world, John 1.9. even those that sit in darkness, and in the shadow of death,
Luke 1.79.
and to guide their feet into the way of peace. I say, seeing these things are
so, I know not how we can scruple the praying for all Jews, Turks, Infidels,
without disputing the veracity of these Divine Predictions, or the propriety of
these Prayers. And yet if there were any need of a distinction, it is wonderful
that they who do relieve themselves, when pressed hard with the evidence of
Scripture, by the well known distinction of singula generum, and genera
singulorum, will not allow the Church the benefit of that distinction, and
suffer her to mean in this most charitable collect, All the Tribes or the
dispersions of the Jews, all sorts of Infidels, all Nations professing
themselves Servants of the great Prophet Mahomet, all Sects of Heretics, and
then their little scruples will have no shadow of appearance left. To the third
scruple, the Prayer continued in the Litany, that it may please God to have
mercy upon all men,

First, L. 4. p. 152.
That this also was the Prayer of the whole Church of Christ, in which pax
cunctis and venia postulatur, says Arnobius, whose Litany ran thus, pour out
the riches of thy mercy upon all men and women; so the Liturgies of St. Basil,
Quam legem supplicationis (sc. qua preces fiunt pro omnibus hominibus) ita
omnium sacerdotum, and omnium fidelium devotio concorditer tenet, ut nulla pars
mundi sit in qua hujusmodi orationes non celebrentur a populis Christianis, de
vocat. Gent. l. 1. c. 12. p. 798. Siquidem Apostolus cujus ista sententia est
(ut omnes homines salvi fiant, Deum velle) sollicitissime praecepti, quod in
omnibus Ecclesiis piissime custoditur, ut Deo pro omnibus hominibus
supplicetur, Idem ad Object. Vincent. Ob. 2. p. 336.
Chrysostom, St. James. This rule of supplication, says Prosper, the devotion
of all Priests, and all the faithful, do so unanimously observe, that there is
no part of the world, wherein such prayers are not celebrated by Christian
people; and therefore they cannot be scrupled or pronounced disagreeable to the
mind of God in Scripture, without accusing the whole Church of Christ, as being
guilty of that crime.

Secondly, Seeing the Royal Psalmist says, that God is good to every man, and
that his tender mercies are over all his works, Psalm. 145.9. and the Apostle,
that he is the Savior of all men, 1 Timothy 4.10. I rather think with the
Apostle, that it is very sit, that prayers, intercessions, 1 Timothy 2.1.
and giving of thanks be made for all men; and that this, notwithstanding the
exceptions of Dissenters, is good and acceptable in the sight of God our
Savior, who will have all men to be saved, v. 3, 4. Moreover, must not all
faithful Pastors pray that God would bless their labors, and render them
successful to the salvation of them that hear them; and if this may be done
acceptably, why may they not then pray thus for all the members of other
Congregations? does not God peremptorily command all men in all places to
repent? Acts 17.30. and may we not then pray that all may do what he
commands? yea, does not God himself thus wish concerning them, whose carcases
fell in the wilderness through unbelief; O that there were such an heart in
them, that they would fear me and keep all my commandments always, that it
might be well with them, and their Children for ever, Deuteronomy. 5.29. and of them
who walked after their own lusts: O that they were wise, that they would
consider this; that they would understand their latter end, Deuteronomy. 32.29. And
may not Christians comply with the example of their God, and wish what he does
wish? or can such wishes be contrary to his dispensations of hardening obstinate
and stubborn sinners? Dr. Comber.
Having then so good Authority, so great Examples, and so excellent Reason for
this Universal Charity, we ought not to be moved at the trifling objections of
those men who scruple this Petition, because it will not suit their systems of
absolute Election and Reprobation. And truly it is no wonder if they who
believe the greatest part of mankind condemned from all Eternity by absolute
decrees, cannot heartily pray for the conversion of all men; since this is to
desire God to reverse what he has absolutely determined. Wherefore to Answer
their Objection,

Psalmist prays in direct contradiction to this general Prayer of our Liturgy,
that God would not be merciful to them that offend of malicious wickedness.
Psalm. 59.4.


Old Testament are no Rule for us under the New: Witness that saying of our
Lord, you have heard that it has been said, Thou shall love thy Neighbor,
Matt. 5.43, 44.
and shall hate thine Enemies; but I say unto you, love your Enemies, bless
them that curse you, and pray for them that despitefully use you, etc. 2.
Theodoret upon the place, says, that the Psalmist does (...), foretell, not
pray; and so the Septuagint, agreeably enough unto the Hebrew, translate the
words (...), thou will not be merciful to them that offend of malicious
wickedness. And the phrase thus interpreted has no appearance of contradiction
to our Liturgy.

Some Petitions in the Common Prayer seem to exceed the bounds of Christian
Charity, Dr. Chambers.
as when we are directed to pray that it may please God to succor, help, and
comfort all that are in danger, necessity, or tribulation; whereas many
notorious malefactors are in danger, necessity, and tribulation: For whom it
were more necessary to pray in Christian Charity, that the Lord would turn
their laughter into mourning, and their joy into heaviness, and one way or
other cause their wickedness to come to an end, rather than that he would be
pleased to succor, help, and comfort them. Again we are, say they, directed to
pray, That it may please God to preserve all that travail by land or by water;
all Women laboring with Child; all sick persons, and young Children; and to
show his pity upon all prisoners and captives: Whereas it is evident that there
be many travailing by Land and Water, as Robbers, and Pirates, for whose
preservation no Christian Charity binds us to pray; but rather for the
suppression, and overthrow of them and all their wicked machinations; and there
be many bloody Harlots laboring of Child, for whose repentance and restraint
from their murtherous intentions Christian Charity does call us to pray, rather
than for their preservation in common with the honest Matrons in that
condition; and there are many Prisoners for heinous crimes, and who continue
hardened and impenitent in them, for whom we cannot in any other sense pray in
Christian Charity that God would show pity on them, than that he would smite
their souls with terror, and make them sensible of their wickedness, and give
them penitently to accept the punishment of their iniquity; which if it does
lie within the compass of this Petition of the Liturgy, it seems to be too
obscurely, seeing the Petition in express words does equally respect, and wrap
up together all Prisoners, whether for vice or virtue, and is offered up
indefinitely for mercy to be extended to them all; which Petition therefore
seems to be dark and confused at the best, if Charity can make, and take that
excuse for it.

to succor, help, and comfort all that are in danger, necessity, and
tribulation; we follow the example of the whole Eastern Church, which in the
Liturgy of St Basil prays thus, Be mindful, O God, of all that are in any
affliction, necessity, or tribulation. And in the Liturgy of St. James, For all
afflicted and miserable Christians who need the mercy, and the help of God. And
what, I pray you, is more proper than to make this request unto that God who
knows every man's desires and necessities? whose tender mercies are over all
his works; who is kind even to the wicked and unthankful, Luke 6.35.
and is long suffering toward them; not being willing they should perish. 2
Pet. 3.9.
Sure I am the Holy Ghost in Scripture shows no such niceness; but does in
general style this gracious God, that God who comfort those that are cast
down; who raises up the poor out of the dust, 1 Cor. 7.6.
and lifts up the needy out of the Dunghill. Psalm. 113.7. Psalm. 145.14.
Who upholdeth all that fall, and raises up all that are cast down. Why
therefore may not we, without exception, pray unto him so to do?

preserve all that travail by Land or by Water, etc. we also use the Prayer of
the whole Christian Church, even from the purest Ages of it; for in the
Liturgies of St. Mark, St. Clemens, St. Basil, Ambrose, Chrysostom, they pray
(...), for all that travail by land or by water. They also prayed (...), for
all afflicted with sickness, maladies, and diseases, for the aged, weak, infirm
and sick; so the Liturgy of St. James, Chrysostom, and Ambrose: For young
Children, in the Liturgy of St. Basil: For Prisoners and Captives, in the
Liturgy of Basil, Clemens, Chrysostom, and in the Constitutions Apostolical.
And whereas this Objector condemns all Antiquity, together with our Church; as
if they and we prayed for Thieves and Pirates, because the words run generally
for all that travail, etc. This is a false Comment on a good Text; For do not
all men by Travelers understand honest Travelers? Dr. Comber.
or who can properly call a Thief a Traveller? Though therefore it is evident
that we mean here no other but just and honest persons: Yet, Secondly, should
we desire God to preserve a Thief, a Pirate, etc. the meaning would be, not to
prosper them in their Robberies; but to prevent them, to keep them from
executing their wicked purposes, to convert them, and so preserve them from the
death which man's Law appoints for them on Earth, and from that Damnation which
God himself threatens to them in Hellfire: And what harm were it, if we did
in plain words ask, or secretly intend all this. To conclude, This Petition is
suitable to the example of the Psalmist, Psalm. 79.11.
who prays thus, Let the sighing of the prisoner come before thee, according to
the greatness of thy power; preserve thou those that are appointed to dye: And
to the injunction of St. Paul, to remember those that are in bonds, as bound
with them; and those that are in adversity, as being also in the body, Hebr.
13.3. And whether wicked Women who travail with a Bastard-Child, are not in a
condition most unfit to dye, and therefore for whose preservation we have cause
to pray, I leave it even to Dissenters, after mature consideration, to
determine.

pray with underderstanding; now there be many phrases in the Common Prayer
Book which we understand not, or at the least we understand not how they can be
said with any certainty of truth. And,

What, say they, is the meaning of that Metaphor in the Confession, There is no
health in us?

we have no power to help, or save our selves out of the misery which by our
sins we have deserved; that there is nothing in our selves which can preserve
us from perishing under the guilt of our iniquities; this is the frequent
import of the word health in Scripture. So Psalm. 42.11.43.1. God is the health
of my countenance, i. e. the help of my countenance, Psalm. 42.5. Salvation is
far from the wicked, Psalm. 119.155. N. Transl. Health is far from them, says
the Old. And again, Trust not in Princes, or in any sons of men; for there is
no help in them, Psalm. 146.3. (...), there is no health, or no Salvation, in
them, say the Seventy.

What is the meaning, or at least the appositeness of that Respons. Give Peace
in our time, O Lord. Resp. Because there is none other that fights for us but
only thou, O God?

Question, consider, 1. Vide Comber, part 1. p. 363, 364. 1 Chronicles. 22.9. Isai.
39.8.
That it was one of Gods gracious Promises to his pious Servants of old, that
he would give peace in their days; and so this is fit matter of our Prayer. 2.
Consider, That God is in the Scripture styled the God of Peace, that it is He
who makes peace in our borders, and by his providence preserves peace among
Nations, Psalm. 46.9.
breaking the Bow, and knapping the Spear asunder. Consider, 3. That this God
is our only sure defense against our Enemies, and that our Armies and Navies
will be unsuccessful to defend us without his good providence, or to procure
peace for us: And therefore it behooves us to apply our selves unto him for
these mercies. Conlider, 4. That the end of all just War is Peace; men
therefore sighting in their own defense that they may oblige their neighbors
to live peaceably by them: This being so, what is more proper than this Prayer,
Give peace in our time, O Lord, thou God of Peace, (either by keeping us from
War, or rendering our Arms so happy and successful, that they may procure us a
lasting peace.) This do we beg of thee, because there is none other who can
keep us from War, or save us in it, or make our fighting tend unto our lasting
future peace, but only thou, O Lord.

What is the meaning of that Metaphor, Lighten our darkness, O Lord?

Psalm. 18.28. Job 29.3. importing our desire, that by the goodness of our God
we may be kept in a joyful, comfortable, prosperous state; (which state in
Scripture is usually signified by the word light) being preserved still from
all calamities and miseries, if we at present are free from them; or else
delivered from them by his power and mercy, if we labor under any kinds or
degrees of them; and the ensuing clause is but an explication and application
of it to the then present night.

What mean you by your Prayer for deliverance from Fornication, and all other
deadly sins? Do you not by it seem to approve that Popish Doctrine, which holds
that some sins in their nature are venial? that is, do not deserve Eternal
Death.

Church, whose Doctrine it is, That all sin is in its own nature deadly, though
all in the event do not, and according to the tenor of the Covenant of Grace,
will not prove deadly to the Christian. For that New Covenant declares God will
accept of our sincere obedience; that is, of such obedience as is consistent
with sins of ignorance and weakness, and that such sins will not exclude us
from Gods favor; but will be pardoned upon our general Repentance, and our
desire to be cleansed from our secret sins. The import therefore of this phrase
is this, That God would graciously deliver us from-all those sins which are
therefore deadly: 1. Because they do declare him who commits them to be
unregenerate, or dead in trespasses and sins: And thus it is declared
concerning Fornicators, Ephesians. 5.5.
For no Fornicator has any inheritance in the Kingdom of Christ, but is a son
of disobedience, verse. 6. He is yoked with the profane, Heb. 12.16. and does
commit that sin which is contrary to his cleaving to Christ; and which
permiteth not his body to be the Temple of the Holy Ghost. And, 2. 1 Cor. 6.16,
19.
Because they leave us under the sentence of death, so that whosoever dies
without particular Repentance for, and reformation of them, will be obnoxious
to Eternal Death; they being sins for which the wrath of God comes upon the
Children of disobedience: So is it said of Fornication, Coloss. 3.6. and to all
Fornicators it is threatened, That they shall have their portion in the lake of
fire and brimstone, which is the second death, Rev. 21.8. and St Paul plainly
says, Fornicators and Adulterers God will damn, Heb. 13.4. And, 3. Because
they usually end in death, few ever escaping from them, or being renewed to
Repentance; such is too frequently the fate of him who goes to the Harlots
House. For none that goes to her house, says Solomon, Prove. 2.19.
returns again, or takes hold of the paths of life. The mouth of a strange
Woman being a deep pit, Prove. 22.14.
into which he that is abhorred of the Lord does fall. Now these sins being too
many to be named particularly, and being difficult to be exactly stated and
enumerated, are comprehended under this general appellation, To humble the bold
committers of them by minding them that if they be not speedily repented of,
which is but rarely done, they will end in their Damnation, or Eternal Death.

Why pray you for deliverance from sudden death, which, if it happen to the
prepared Christian, seems to be no evil.

(...) -- (...). Euchol. p. 776.
who it seems, think that they are always sit to dye, do inconsiderately blame
this petition of our Liturgy, as unbecoming Christians, and thereby blame the
Church of God, which for a long time has made use of this petition; yet I
suppose that none of them would wish, or if they well considered, be as much
contented to dye by the immediate sudden hand of God, as to have time to
recollect themselves before death, to dye as did Jobs children, or they on whom
the Tower of Siloam fell, but rather would conceive it were a mercy worthy of
their thanks to be delivered from such a death: And that,

1. Comber, part 2. p. 61, 62.
Because this sudden death affords no time to settle our Estates, but leaves
our temporal concerns entangled, and involves our Relations in Lawsuits and
contests.

2. Because these kinds of Death are more uncomfortable to our surviving
Friends, who in these cases have no time allowed by their consideration to wean
themselves from our enjoyment, and do receive no benefit from our latter ends,
as from our dying counsels and meditations they might do.

3. Because they who dye thus, want their viaticum, which is provided by the
word of God, and the compassion of the Church, to fit them for their journey to
the great Tribunal; and doubtless it is no small comfort to the dying
Christian, to enjoy an opportunity to confess his sins, unburthen his Soul of
them, to hear the Prayers, and to receive the absolution of the Ambassadors of
Christ, and to partake of that most comfortable Sacrament, which seals the
love of God unto him, and does assure him who faithfully does eat this Bread,
and drink this Blood of Christ, that he will raise him up at the last day.

4. No man is so prepared to appear at Gods Tribunal, but he both may, and
ought to be prepared better, and therefore may desire to have time for further
preparation. O spare me a little before I go hence, says the man after Gods
own heart; and who will not join with him in that Prayer? we ought indeed to be
always prepared for death, and it is our wisdom so to be; but who is so well
fitted as he ought, or he desires to be? and who cannot be better fitted by a
more leisurely summons for his change? If we observe how ardently the dying
person prays, how humbly he confesses his forepast offenses, how heartily he
does bewail his former sins, what resolutions he does make of living more unto
the glory of God, if providence shall raise him up again; we cannot reasonably
doubt but that it is desirable to have these opportunities vouchsafed of doing
good to our own souls, before we go hence and be no more seen.

What is the meaning of those words in the Litany, by the mystery of thy holy
Incarnation, by thy holy Nativity and Circumcision, by thy Baptism, Fasting and
Temptation, by thy Agony and bloody Sweat, by thy Cross and Passion, by thy
precious Death and Burial, by thy glorious Resurrection and Ascension, and by
the coming of the Holy Ghost, Good Lord deliver us: Do not you seem to conjure
here?

These expressions may have two very plain and obvious meanings. 1. By applying
them so as to make them a request, that by means of all these meritorious or
beneficial acts of our Lord Jesus, we may be delivered from all the aforesaid
miseries, Temporal, Spiritual and Eternal; that he who took our nature on him,
Heb. 2.14, 18.4.15, 11.
that he might be in all things like us, and so a more compassionate High
Priest to us under our natural infirmities, and that by death he might destroy
him who had the power of death, viz. the Devil; that he who came into the
world, that we might live through him; he who was circumcised and became
obedient to the Law, to save us from the curse of it; that he who was baptized,
Gal. 3.13. Matt. 3.15.
that by his own example he might teach us to fulfill all righteousness, and who
was tempted, that he might be a merciful High Priest to succor us when
tempted; that he who suffered such Agonies for our iniquities, as caused in him
a bloody sweat, and a most ignominious Death upon the Cross for our Redemption;
that he who was raised again for our justification, Romans 4.25.
and is ascended to the right hand of God, Heb. 7.25.
there to intercede for ever for us; and being thus ascended, sent his Holy
Spirit to be our comforter and sanctifyer; that he would by the merit,
efficacy, and beneficial influences of all these gracious acts, deliver us
(...) all those dreadful evils mentioned in the foregoing words.

2. All these considerations may be here urged, as so many motives to our dear
Redeemer, taken from the consideration of his former goodness and loving
kindness to us, to work deliverance for us now; and so the import of them will
be this, by the endearing love which thou have showed unto us in all these
gracious dispensations, we beseech thee to deliver us from all the
forementioned evils both of sin and punishment.

What mean you by those words in the Communion Service, viz. that our bodies
may be made clean by Christ's body, and our souls washed by his most precious
blood; do you not hereby seem to ascribe a greater efficacy to the blood, than
to the body of Christ, and to restrain the virtue of the latter only unto the
cleansing of the Body?

the body of our Lord Jesus Christ, which was given for to preserve thy body
and soul to everlasting life; and the like concerning his blood, are a manifest
evidence that the Church intended no such thing, but that we heartily believe
that the benefits both of the body and blood of Christ, do redound to the
Salvation, and consequently to the Sanctification both of our Souls and Bodies.
He who desires to see more to this effect, may consult Dr. Womacks Letter, from
p. 66. to p. 74.

Why do you say, That God by the Baptism of his Well-beloved Son in the River
Jordan, did sanctify water to the Mystical washing away of sin? was not this
rather done by Gods own institution of that ordinance to such an end, than by
the Baptism of his Son who knew no Sin, and therefore upon whom Baptism could
have no such effect?

Tertullian, 1 Adv. Jud. c. 8. 2 (...). p. 153. 3 Orat. 38, 39.
Epiphanius, Nazianzen, St. Jerome, and allowed by the Assemblys Annotations Iu.
Matt. 3.
, where one end of Christ's Baptism is assigned to be this, viz. To sanctify
the flood Jordan, and all other waters to the mystical washing away of sin: Now
for explication of the phrase, consider, that to sanctfie in Scripture
signifies first to declare any thing to be holy, to own, and to acknowledge it
as such: Sanctificetur nomen tuum, hallowed be thy name, that is, say
Interpreters, Sanctum declaretur, Sancte praedicetur, let it be declared and
agnized as holy. So when God says, (...), I will sanctify my Great name,
Ezekiel. 36.23. (...), I will be sanctified before the Heathens, Ezekiel. 38.23.39,
27. the meaning is, He will declare his Holy Name to them, and they shall
acknowledge it. And in this sense God by ordering the Baptism of his Son in the
River Jordan, that so he might fulfill all righteousness, (submit as well unto
the Christians Baptism, as to the Circumcision of the Jews) declared that
Baptism was sacred, or set apart by him unto this use, and Christ by his
submission to it, owned it as sacred; and whereas, if a thing be sanctified
already, or set apart unto a sacred use, to sanctify it then is only usurpare
prout sanctitatem ejus decet, to use it sutably unto its holiness; in which
sense we are said to sanctify the Sabbath day, etc. Christ by thus using the
Baptism of John appointed for the remission of sin, did in this sense also
sanctify it, and by thus making use of it, he did encourage, says Epiphanius,
(...). p. 153.
and provoke others to use it to that end.

Why do you say after the Repetition of the Fourth Commandment, Lord have mercy
upon us; and incline our hearts to keep this Law. Are you turned Sabbatarians?

Liturgy, is not to beseech him to incline our hearts to keep this Law,
according to the special form and circumstance of time there spoken of, viz.
the seventh day from the Creation, but in such a manner as is agreeable to the
state of the Gospel. 1. By duly considering of, and bringing to our remembrance
the great and glorious works of God performed for the good of men, viz. of
creation, redemption, the passion, resurrection and exaltation of our Lord,
which are actions no less considerable to us both in respect of glory due to
God, and benefit accruing to us, than was the creation formerly to the Jews. 2.
That upon the Lords Day, and all other days appointed for public Assemblies to
worship God and Christ, and to hear his holy word, and receive his Sacraments,
we may by the assistance of Divine Grace be enabled devoutly, reverently and
holily to engage in those duties, to the Glory of God, and the edification of
our selves in faith and true obedience.

What mean you by these words in the office of Matrimony, with this Ring I thee
wed? were they not man and wise, and therefore wedded before? what by this
phrase, with my body I thee worship? is not the man the head of the woman, and
so not to use any sign, which may import subjection to her as that of worship
does? what lastly by those words, with all my worldly goods I thee endow? will
you leave nothing for their Children?

with this Ring I thee wed, does not import that they were not man and wife
before, but only is a declaration of the fact, as is apparent from the
following words, Forasmuch as N. and N. have consented together in holy
wedlock, and have declared the same by giving and receiving a Ring, etc.

2ly, That phrase, with my body I thee worship, may have these three senses: 1.
I give unto thee honor according as Gods Law requires in these words, husbands
live with your wives according to knowledge, giving honor to the wife, 1 Pet.
3.7. Or, 2ly, I vouchsafe thee the honor of my Body, i. e. I deem thee worthy
of the honor belonging to my person, as Mr. Seldom does explain the words.
Uxor Hebr. l. 2. c. 27.
Or, 3ly, I promise to thee due benevolence, as H. L'Estrauge says this old
word imports, and so it is only a promise to obey St Paul's command, 1 Cor. 7.2.

3ly, This phrase, with all my worldly goods I thee endow, bears this sense, I
promise thee a share in all my wealth, and give thee right and liberty to use
it as there is occasion. But then the Husband being dead, the Wife according to
the common Law of England cannot lay claim unto the whole, but only to the
thirds of her deceased Husbands estate, if he leave any Children or others who
have right to any part of his inheritance.

Other things have been scrupled in the office for the visitation of the sick,
the form of burial, and of commination; but since the Churches constitutions,
do not oblige the Laity to use, or to be present at them, I wave the
consideration of them, and beseeching God to give a blessing to what I have
written, and make it successful to the desired end, and to pardon the errors I
may unwittingly have committed in it, I humbly submit it to my ever honored
Superiors, and so conclude.

FINIS.

