A LETTER TO A PERSON of HONOR: WRITTEN By Mr. THOMAS WHITE, In Vindication of
Himself and his Doctrine.

MDCLIX.

TO THE READER.
THough I confess our Nation is easily affected with the modes of France, yet
by no means would I have thee mistake this Paper for an English PROVINCIAL
LETTER, such keen-edg'd tools may possibly hereafter come in fashion even among
us too, and for my part I never shall blame the sharpness of the knife, if the
branch it cuts off be fruitless and the season fit. But here I would have thee
expect a milder, yet manly proceeding. A person who knows himself clearly
innocent, whom his Friends and acquaintance know highly deserving, whom all the
world knows eminently learned; a person whose writings every unenvious Reader
admires, and every judicious approver incomparably esteems, finding himself, by
glad experience in the perusal of his works, grow still more solidly and
understandingly virtuous: This person, most injuriously accused (and as yet no
more then accused) after a long patience, comes now abroad, seriously to demand
a proof of their Charge. If they convince, he promises satisfaction; if not, he
expects it from them. A long while they have railed against him, and every day
their clamours still grow louder, especially, since his removal to a farther
distance has left them free to their own full cry. At last the noise has waked
again this little child of his, that else might have still slept quietly in its
private closet. It had indeed before been particularly shown to diverse of of
the opposers, modestly inviting their courage to encounter it; but its
unhappiness is, that none as yet appears to justify their calumny, and yet
tbey still go on to calumniate. It therefore now resolves to come forth in
public, and earnestly conjure every one into this justice, that they neither
raise themselves any ungrounded scandal, nor give regard to such as shall be
raised by others, till this so just, so necessary, a Challenge be fairly and
rationally answered; desiring them in the mean while to rest securely on this
safe Dilemma: Either his Adversaries can maintain their accusation, and then
they are uncharitable not to do it; or they cannot, and then they are
uncharitable to accuse. From both which, that thou may be free, is the
endeavor of this paper* and

Thy faithful Servant T. K.

HONORED SIR,
WHilst my Adversaries were content to whisper up and down their grave, but
empty, censures of me, amongst confiding, and credulously zealous devotes
(their proper Auditory) or, at most, amongst unlearned men, whose busy
commerce, though it direct them now and then to a large and indulgent Casuist,
yet does it afford them little leisure to consult with true Divinity; I
contented my self likewise to leave them to the applause of such admirers,
looking upon it as lost time to prepare any Apology. But their confidence being
now raised to that height as to presume to pour their Calumnies into your ears
whom God has blessed with a judgment singularly capable to discern truth, and an
authority fit to bear sway amongst prudent persons; I can no longer decline the
task, but humbly offer what I conceive may suffice to justify me in your
candid thoughts. If this short discourse serve to dispel the mist which has
lately been cast before your eyes, I shall rejoice for both our sakes; if
otherwise, for my own; hoping your charity will make me see my failings, and
acknowledge them:

In the first place, my Doctrine is accused of Heresy, nor is my person more
favorably treated; but we have heard of old, that it were impossible in the
world to be innocent, if it were all one to be accused and to be guilty; That
nature has furnished us with an ear for the defendant, as well as plaintiff.
This Justice then I beg of such as are competent judges in so great a cause;
for, in truth, it belongs to the supremest courts of Theology to censure
dogmatical Tenets; which office notwithstanding, now-a-daies, the most ignorant
amongst us are the most ready to usurp.

To this Calumny then I answer, That if any Doctrine of mine be found to
contradict any authority constantly acknowledged for infallible in the
Catholic Church, I am ready to disown, and renounce it; If this profession
render not a man Catholic, or Orthodox, I should be glad to learn what does.
To speak more plainly, if we regard the testimonies of Holy Scriptures, or
consent of Fathers, unless I abound therewith more then my opposers; if
perusing the decrees of Counsels, and Popes, we find therein any thing expressly
repugnant to what I have taught; Lastly, if, in any one point, I have thwarted
the universal Practice of the Church, let me be esteemed to have lost the
cause. But withal let me beg this favor, that where the clear Text condemns
me not, the gloss of private Expositors may not pronounce me guilty. I know no
reason why any Divine should forfeit the right his degree and quality gives him
of interpretation, because others of the same Profession dissent from him.

Secondly, The Practice of the Church is urged against me, and that with louder
noise, and greater confidence of victory. But let them reflect, how many such
Eclesiastical Practices have been laid aside, and obliterated. Who now a days
administers the Eucharist in Baptism to Infants? What is become of the three
immersions? Where shall we see those so much anciently reverenced solemnities
during the whole Octaves of Easter and Pentecost? Is the sacred Host now
received into our hands? Is it brought home; or carried about us in our
travails? Are both the kinds or species given to the Laity in public
Festivities? Of all the Penitential Canons what elss remains but a faint
shadow? Prayer for the Saints departed is long since laid aside. The decrees
of the Apostolical Synod concerning blood and suffocated meats are no where
observed. What alterations may we not find in the election of Prelates, and
Ecclesiastical Courts? Finally, in our Fasts and Vigils? Did they thoroughly
weigh all this, they would not so violently presume, and confidently proclaim
the Practice of the Church to be an argument of Faith: They would perceive that
these Practices are mutable, and consequently can yield no firm foundation of
Doctrine.

But what is this to my particular case, who oppose, or control no one modern
Ecclesiastical Practice; for we are not to think whatever is generally done by
all Christians must therefore immediately become an Ecclesiastical custom, no
more then we are to conclude that an opinion, or truth, assented to by all
individual Catholics must needs become an Article of their Faith; For so the
earth's standing still, and even Columbus his discovery of the new world might
claim a place in their Creed. Such customs then alone are to be styled
Ecclesiastical as are grounded on Ecclesiastical constitutions, on the Canon
Laws, on the Rituals, or Ceremonials used by the whole Church, not on the
Zeal, or fervor of the multitude: But of any of these we hear no mention. The
very name of Practice imports Custom and prescription, and custom has the
force of a law. But none that I know of, forgets himself so far as to affirm
that the Practice, whose denial he obtrudes on me, induces a necessity upon
any one of putting it in execution. To conclude, they asperse not only me, but
the Church her self, which professes these concessions to be Privileges, that
is, grants contrary to the general Rule or Custom. Our supreme Pastors call
them Graces, or Indulgences which my opposers either proclaim for customs, and
Practices, or else speak nothing to the purpose. Thus whilst they seek to
calumniate me, they unawars attaque the Church, esteeming nothing so sacred as
the satisfaction of their precipitate passions.

Thirdly, Those, who are not altogether so fierce against me, will have my
Doctrine not indeed Heretical, but yet nearly allied to Heresy: I conjure
these men to tell me what it is to be near to Heresy, and not to blast my
reputation with specious, but insignificant censures. For, Truths and falsehoods
are indivisible, and not, like quantity, more or less approaching. Yea the
sublimest Truths (if not all) are on each side closely confind with falsities.
The mystery of the Sacred Trinity has; on this, the precipice of the Tritheit,
on that, of the Sabellian Heresy: you no sooner step out of the Orthodox
limits of the Incarnation, but you are plunged in the profane blasphemies of
Eutiches or Nestorius; Besides if to be of Faith signifies to be revealed, to
be almost of Faith will signify to be almost revealed, and to be near Heresy
will import the contrary truth to have narrowly escaped Revelation, which for
my part let him understand that can, I shall clear my self when I comprehend
their accusation.

A fourth Engine, wherewith they labor to possess and prejudice weak
capacities, is, that Philosophical controversies admit what latitude of liberty
you please, but Theological ones not so. I cannot sufficiently admire their
forgetfulness: Was there ever Divine whose very Profession engaged him not in
disputes of Divinity? Is there an university in the world wherein such
questions are not treated? What else do Schoolmen propose to themseves but
the discussing, and clearing against Infidels and Heretics, the mysteries of
our Faith by Principles of Nature, and Philosophy, and the illustrating that
obscurity which overshadows them, by the light and conformity of Reason, to the
unspeakable confort of the Faithful? How then comes that to be unlawful for me
which in all others is not only allowed, but highly commended?

It were well (say they) provided you containd your self within the bounds of
opinions generally received, and presumed not to transgress the dictates of
more ancient Schoolmen. I am at a loss again, do they conceive the Dictates of
their so much magnified Masters in Divinity infallible? If they are not, for as
much as yet appears, error may happen to be on both sides, since though truth
can be but one, the mistakes of such as seek it may be manifold. But according
to this Principle, though both sides go astray, yet must no charitable hand
hang out a lanthorn to enlighten so noble a portion of the Church as is the
School. Surely Molina had other thoughts when he glori'd in the first discovery
of Scientia media, or Gods conditional foresight of our actions, boasting that
St. Augustine, and all the rest of the ancient Fathers were ignorant thereof;
which bold fancy of his, how eagerly it has been since embraced
(notwithstanding the brand of Heresy stigmatized thereon by the Fathers of St.
Dominick) the yet fresh, and uncomposed tumults of the School suffer us not to
forget.

But they will have us at least to confess, that where ever the whole Authority
of the School is engaged in any one Opinion, it must of necessity be true and
beyond all opposition. The same discourse returns again upon them. That
Authority is either fallible, or infallible; if fallible, then cannot any
multitude of Patrons whatsoever secure it from lyableness to error, and it will
appear impiety to deny the Church a means of clearing her sight therein? If it
be pretended infallible, I ask whence are we assured thereof? If by any other
authority than their own; let us beg the favor to see it produced; if by their
own only, we shall then submit when they shall have extricated themselves out
of the maze, or circle, in which they dance. But, to proceed; by what means can
we imagine this (...) multitude on a sudden immured with the prerogative of
(...) certitude? Philosophers, besides that of Faith, acknowledge no other then
such as springs from Demonstration; of which kind it has not been my fortune
to encounter any; when they offer at it, I shall most willingly listen. It is a
received Maxim, that a Doctors Authority reaches no further than the force of
the reason he brings, can carry it. If this be verified of each particular, how
come they to deserve more collectively? Look upon their own assertions, do they
not define that the Judgment of three grave Divines in any opinion begets a
probability? Yet if I have any reason left me, three compared to many thousands
nothing prejudice the universality of the contrary part; Nay, many of them have
thought and maintained that the Judgment even of one, who has thoroughly looked
into a difficult point, may be sufficient to establish a probability against
the opposite multitude. What then have I or any other offended, if, after mature
inspection, we have preferred the substance of reason before the shadow of
popularity? Add to this, the very boast of universal consent of Doctors is
altogether vain; who has examined the hundredth part of them? who can dive into
the sentiments of such as have not written, whose number notwithstanding and
authority is far greater then theirs who covet to appear in print? So that, if
you scan the expression, under the notion of all Doctors, you will find to be
understood a few only, who bear sway in the Universities; a handful, God knows,
out of a plentiful Harvest.

They rest not yet satisfied, but accuse me at least of Indiscretion, that, in
a Kingdom averse, and separated from the Communion of the Cath. Church, I have
printed a book or two, from which they conceive Heretics may take occasion to
reproach us with intestine dissentions in Religion. Though I am not one who
challenge the reputation of Prudent, or go about to clear my self wholly from
all lyableness to the opposite imbecility; yet in in this place I see no ground
for their crimination: do they not daily hear the Heterodox party exprobrating
the wars which in Catholic Countries are waged upon the subject of Efficacious
Grace, and Jansenisme? whatsoever falls once under the press, it little imports
whether it first see light here, or in any adjacent Catholic Country: Take for
proofs the French Provincial Letters; not only vulgarly known, but rendered
also into our vulgar tongue; and truly if I mistake not, the publishing such
truths is more expedient here then in any part of the world; nothing being more
importantly conducible to the reduction of our separatists, then the discarding
superfluous controversies, and contesting with them only necessary Doctrines;
without engaging for the uncertain and wavering opinions of Doctors as for the
Faith delivered us by Christ and his Apostles. We find by experience, that
great Wits, which overruled the weaker capacities, if an assent be crudely
required from them upon the account of sole Authority and command; without
reason, either for the truth of the thing it self, or at least for the
necessity of believing it, they reject it with scorn, and conceive thence an
extreme aversion: To these the milk of reason, that is, the conformity of Faith
with inferior Sciences, must, as much as is possible, be prepared; which task
has hitherto been the aim of all my endeavors. We may observe every day that
disputes undertaken without these grounds, are doubtful; and either depend upon
the acuteness, and dexterity of the manager, or perhaps on pure chance; and
most commonly conclude in wordish and endless perplexities. All which I would
not have so understood as though I confessed my writings had found no
acceptance or approbation in Catholic Countries, for even thence I have
received not a few congratulations. In fine, what needs there more to justify
my printing here, then barely to say, I must perforce do it where I live and
find supplies sufficient for such expenses as are necessary.

They have a quarrel likewise with the time of my writing, in affirming, that,
in this unhappy conjuncture when we are already perplexed with several
dissensions, new ones ought, by no means, to be set on foot. I should take this
reprehension in very good part, if they went about to compose those other
disorders; but from the time that an attempt was made in Wisbich Castle to
usurp authority over the Clergy, they have never ceased to contrive and
practice against the known rights of our Church, nor can any sight how
quicksoever foresee the end of those commotions: so that these truths were now,
or never to be advanced.

When all these arguments are spent in vain, at last, they cry out, that all
Heretics took the very same method I do, in propagating their pestilent
errors; but they do not particularise in what precisely this method consists,
and how far it differs from the practice of Catholic Divines; whence it is
most impertinent to conclude that what both Catholics, and Heticks
indifferently do, should be ill because Heretics do it. But besides, in my
case, it is absolutely false. What Heretic ever before he began to innovate,
put forth a body, or course of Philosophy and Divinity, thereby to circumscribe
himself within certaind limits, and at once to declare his sense concerning all
points of Faith? This is a quite different method from that of Heretics; they
go not thus to work, but fasten first upon some particular Article, and thence,
by degrees, are driven, by the inevitable necessity of a bad cause, to
maintaind that with the violation of others. Besides, Heretics craftily pick
out what the unlearned and ignorant are apt to applaud, they pursue the easiest
things, making conventicles their Schools, women and Laymen their Judges, which
Character whether it be more appliable to my adversaries, or me, let those
judge who are best acquainted with our proceedings.

Thus much, Honored Sir, I could not but take the liberty to say in my own
behalf: Nature, and Equity requiring, that every one be presumed good, till he
be proved otherwise. Let my opposers then either demonstrate this my Apology
insufficient, or from henceforth cease to vent their calumnies amongst men of
so great prudence and Authority.

FINIS.

