THE MIDDLE STATE OF SOULS. From the hour of DEATH to the Day of JUDGMENT. BY
THOMAS WHITE of Essex, Gent.

Impetremus, si possumus, a Fratribus nostris, ne nos insuper appellent
Haereticos; quod eos talia disputantes nos appellare possimus forsitan si
vellemus, nec tamen appellamus. S. Aug. MDCLIX.

To the RIGHT HONORABLE, the LADY MARY TUCHET etc,
MADAM,
AS all Translations are, without farther address, consecrated to your sex, so
all that I do, in this, or any other kind, naturally and of it is own accord, is
dedicated to your Lap. especially this Piece, which makes, as it were, it is
proper appeal to the integrity of your un-biassed soul, singling you forth as
the most competent Patron, not only of your sex but Nation. You have often,
Madam, whilst his foreign language rendered him unfit for your conversation,
heard much discourse about this Treatise and it is Author (for what English man
is there, concerned never so little in the behalf of science, whose heart and
mouth is not filled either with Admiration or Censure of this great Countryman
of ours?) whom if none hitherto has presumed to vindicate to your Lap. he is
therein nothing the less happy, being now to speak for himself, a task scarce
manageable by any, but himself. Madam, If I may have the honor to be his
Introduce* into your noble acquaintance, I shall boldly pass my word, that you
will find the subject of his discourse truly grave and important, and such as
may enrich the mind, not with trifling and unprofitable curiosities, but
admirable and practical Truths. The middle state of Souls cannot rightly be
apprehended without a just measure of the other extremes; nor can we duly
reflect on them, without a knowledge of our present order to them, and the
inevitable influence which every thought, action, and affection here, has to
our state hereafter.

But, Madam, to enlarge herein, were not to advance, but retard your progress;
in which if your Lap. meet with some one passage, less promptly obeying your
first summons (I am confident there is none impervious to your resolute
attaque) be not discouraged; God and your eminent virtues have furnished you
with a noble and expert guide, whom, according to S. Paul's advice, you may at
home apply to, where you are at a loss, seeking no further then your own
Husband. To conclude (Madam) this small Treatise having served me for an
excellent Country-pastime, I could not but take the boldness to recommend it to
you both, at your entrance into the same state of Vacancy, assureing my self,
that, when you have maturely perused it, you will avow with me that they have
little reason, who tax the Author with requiring his readers assent, purely and
barely upon the account of his own credit; for, in my poor judgment, never any
assertions were better fortifyed; at least I heartily wish it were in my power
as solidly to demonstrate the truth of my being

MADAM, Your Laps most humble servant, and most affectionate Brother, T W.

THE TRANSLATOR TO THE READER.
READER,
I Shall entreat thee to believe, that, had I the ambition, or vanity, to
entertain thee with something of my own, I should not have taken this occasion,
when I am to present thee with an employment, so much more advantageous to thy
self, so disadvantagious to me. The Painter that has some petty design of his
own to put off, suffers it not to appear with a master piece of Raphael or
Titian. Nothing but necessity could have extorted these few lines, at least in
this place, which two dedicatory addresses already take up and overburthen; a
necessity I say, of giving the world some account of this my enterprise.

It is now about five years, since this small Treatise first came forth in the
Latin tongue. I was a witness of the manisold contradictions it then
encountered, and consequently ought in reason to foresee that it must now expect
far greater. If it were then a crime to treat somewhat severely (though as it
were behind the curtain, and in sight of few only, that is, the learned) a
certain luxuriant Devotion, what temerity may it not be thought, to unveil now
and expose it is nakedness to the weak and soon scandalized eyes of the vulgar?
They from whom I expect this reprehension, are persons, many of them, so
generally friends to virtue, so particularly to my self, that I am bound not
only to receive it with modesty, but thanks; and, in requital, commending their
zeal, to endeavor to lend some light to it is War^^^.

I beseech therefore both them and thee (gentle Reader) in the first place to
observe, how through the opposite means, they of suppressing, I of publishing,
this little Volume, we all pursue the same end, that is, labor to wipe off a
scandal from our common Mother the Cath. Church, led thereto by the same
motives, the welfare first of those within, secondly, of those without Her.

As to the first, they contend, that it savors of pride, not to submit our
private reasons upon pretense of never so much demonstrative evidence, to the
opinion of the Church; of Disobedience, to vary from Her common Practice:
consequently that it must needs inure Catholics to the neglect of their long
gloried-incaptivation of their understandings, and this by degrees, from
matters of opinion, to matters of Faith. As to the second, they urge, that all
discovery of divisions in the Catholic Church, more and more occasions, and
legitimates the common reproach of her adversaries, to wit, that no greater
union is to be found amongst Her children, then amongst those whom she styles
Heretics; consequently well may they be disheartened from expecting any secure
repose in her bosom. Both these charges I shall briefly, and, I hope clearly,
satisfy.

First, as to the disedification of Catholics from ill example, of pride and
disobedience, I answer, that an humble and obedient duty to the Church could
not decline this present task. Obedience consists in execution of her known
commands; her commands in this matter, are pronounced Con. Trid. Sess. 25. That
the sound Doctrine of Purgatory, DELIVERED BY HOLY FATHERS AND SACRED COUNCELS*
be believed, held, taught and Preached -- but that UNC^^ TAIN points, and such
as have APPEARANCE OF FALSEHOOD be not permitted to be divulged or treated.

I ask, are the material place of, or flames in Purgatory, with all the pious
revelations* relating thereto, the application of Indulgences to the souls
there detained, the magazine of Christ's merits and his Saints for that purpose
erected, the spontaneous delivery from time to time of souls before the day of
Judgment, or any part of them, delivered by Holy Fathers and sacred Councils?
Whereas neither any Council mentions such points, nor any Father, speaking as a
Father* that is, testifying the present Doctrine of the Church of his time,
avowes them. Again, has that Doctrine, which takes away all the extrinsecal
authority of the Fathers, interpreting places of Scripture which relate to
Purgatory; That which debars souls, granted to be perfect in charity, from the
sight of God: That which puts God to inflict punishment, not to better the
creature, but to revenge himself; That which violates all* Philosophy by
confounding the natures of Spirit and Body; That which makes the evil of pain
spring, not from the sinful defects of creatures, but from the all-good- Will
of God; That which is impossible to be maintained, but by legitimating
extrinsecal imputation, which is fundamentally opposite to Catholicism: That
which by making Purgatory not purge at all, destroys it is very notion and
nature, and makes even it is name breath contradiction; Has, I say, that
Doctrine, which is the ground of these, and innumerable other absurdities, no
appearance of falsehood? And lastly, as for their uncertainty, is there so much
as one Demonstration pretended on *their behalf by their Patrons? Or are they,
or any part of them of the substance of the Church's Doctrine? If unawares they
affirm it, let them, or, at least the whole world besides take notice, how a
passionate affection, to make good their credit, and the reputation of their
Authors, transports them to destroy, and violate at once the whole rule of
Christian Faith, and so become more fatal to the cause they own, then all the
enemies it ever had or can have; that Rule of Faith, I say, which admits
nothing, as such, into it is sacred li^t, but what universal tradition assures
us to have been unanimously delivered by our respective immediate forefathers,
as delivered by the Apostles, as revealed by Christ. But, God be thanked, they
do not, they cannot, they dare not. They confess, at last, that nothing of all
this is of Faith, that is, that all is but probable, that is, possible to be
otherwise, that is, uncertain, that is, expressly prohibited by the Church;
whose commands if Duty prompt them not to obey, I know no sweeter force then
that of Reason to compel them.

I come now to the second point, the advantage of those who are heterodox, and
their farther abalienation from the Catholic Communion; the reduction of whom
I conceive to have been the Author's, I am sure, is my principal intention. Can
any one lay a greater slumbling-block in their way, then is the confounding of
Faith with Opinion, certainty with uncertainty? Can, on the contrary, any thing
more invite a rational and well-meaning Protestant, then thoroughly to observe,
how the great latitude in opinion amongst Catholics establishes and confirms
the unity of their Faith? How impossible it is, that any new Tenet should creep
out of one Catalogue into the other, whilst every minute question is ventilated
with so much contention and scrutinie, whilst the Almighty Providence makes use
of the animosities of Thomist and Scotist, Jansenist and Jesuit, to
demonstrate, that what such dissenting Brethren perfectly agree in, must have a
higher principle then human invention? let all those, whom education, or
perhaps the indiscreet zeal of school men, has hitherto abused, understand in
Gods name, that the Church, as a Church, has no partiality, no adhesion to, no
obstinacy for any opinion whatsoever. She is the Guardian of says; she permits
none to add to, or detract from the Divine truths committed to he^ custody, but
admits all into her tuition who acknowledge them. Let them look to it who see
other bounds; for my part, I shall ever value that excellent Analysis of our
learned Patriot Dr. Holden (now, (as I hear) happily rendered into his native
language) wherein, that it may flourish more vigorously, he has lopped off and
segregated all circumstantial excrescencies from the stock of Faith, beyond all
the nice productions of the Schools.

Thus much I have thought good to say in my own vindication. One word more in
behalf of the book it self, and I have done. It has been wondered at by some,
and looked on as an argument of it is falling short of the evidence it
promises, that, in five years time, it has gained no greater applause, or
rather that in the way of Demonstration it has not been able, in that time, to
silence all opposition. I shall say nothing of the progress it has made, but
only desire thee, Reader, to reflect that the satisfaction of those who love
science is ever silent and within themselves, the opposition of those, that
seek it no^, for the most part clamorous, and disquieting others as well as
themselves. May it be thy fortune to farewell, and hold thy peace.

To the most Reverend F. in Christ, RICHARD, Ld. Bishop of Calcedon.
MY LORD,
I Was much perplexed when it was told me that some censure was past upon my
poor Works by your Lp, whose Ecclesiastical Government, for so many years, of
the Catholic part of England, has deservedly so much influence upon our
faith; whose most innocent life, exercised with continual fears at home, and
combats abroad, has begot in us a Veneration of your Dictates; but above all,
whose many and excellent writings in defense of Catholic Tradition, and near
fourscore years exhausted in perpetual study, render your Judgment to us
new-men of this Age, as it were an oracle of Antiquity. I was therefore about
to apologize, and beg pardon for my too much precipitation; But your Lord-ships
assurance by letter, dated Jul. 6. 1652. that you had passed no censure at all;
and in effect the nonappearance of any such thing, satisfied me of the
unnecessariness of that pains. It was a fiction, contrived by the envy of some
narrow Hearts, and propagated by the unwary credulity of such as took all for
Gospel which they said. You declared, that you had no other thoughts, then so
to dissent from my opinion, as Divines, without the least breach of Charity,
are laudably wont to do. But yet, even thus, the weight of so great an
Authority overburthen'd me, and forced me to seek some support for my
innocence. And I would to God you had been pleased to remark in your Letter
whatsoever you disliked of mine. I would have spared no pains to give your
Lord-ship satisfaction in every particular; now I have singled out one point,
but that which, being in every one's discourse, I thought I could least be
deceived in. Be you Judge, my Lord, whether without the suffrages of the ancient
Fathers, or against the sense of the sacred Scriptures, or unassisted by the
Maxims of true Theology, I have undertaken what may seem exotic to this Age
we live in. If I clear my self, that I have opposed none of these, as I am not
ambitious of Victory, so I despair not of Pardon. However it may succeed, you
have an ACCOUNT, by detail, as less subject to deceit, of my Stewardship.
Please you, cast it up, and if you find it Just, give your Blessing to him, who
prostrates himself at your knees, in quality of,

MY LORD, Your Lordships most humble and most obedient servant, THO. WHITE.

THE TABLE OF ACCOUNTS.
ACCOUNT I: The introduction, and state of the Question. Page 1 II. Two proofs
front the sacred Scripture, favoring the truth we advance. Page 7 III. Three
other Texts, and, by occasion of the third, an explication of the ancient
practice of the Church in praying for the Saints. Page 13 IV. That ( S. Pernard
only excepted) all the rest of the Fathers de^y'd not to the faithful departed
the Beatifical Vision, before the day of Judgment. Page 25 V. The fifth proof
from Scripture is again urged, and two others added. Page 34 VI. The eighth and
ninth Texts are considered. Page 42 VII. Some places of Scripture applied by
holy Fathers, to confirm the same truth. Page 51 VIII. Testimonies from all
antiquity maintaining the same truth. Page 55 IX. That the proofs of the
opposite opinion are modern, and betray their novelty. Page 69 X. The first
exception against the opposite Tenet, from pure revenge. Page 78 XI Two other
Exceptions, from the supposition of these pains to be involuntary and
corporeal. Page 92 XII. Four other exceptions, from those pains being to no
purpose, unproportioned to the sins, of an Indivisible duration, and endless.
Page 100 XIII. Two other exceptions, from the non-connexion of such pains with
the sins, and their being supposed to remain due after the fauls forgiven. Page
110 XIV. Of the punishments which we meet with in the sacred Scriptures, and of
the remission of sins. Page 120 XV. Three other exceptions, that they neither
truly take off the punishments, nor rightly make them due, nor in sine make any
real Purgatory. Page 136 XVI. The thirteenth exception, that their opinion, is
opposite to the expressions of Scriptures, of Fathers, of the Church, of the
Council of Florence, and Benedict XI. Page 144 XVII. That the ignorance of
spiritual natures beg^t this opinion. Page 151 XVIII. Objections from the holy
Fathers against our Doctrine answered. Page 158 XIX. Of the authority of
Apparitions and Visions. Page 166 XX. Of the authority of Visions compared with
that of History, together with a particular examination of some of them. Page
17S XXI. Whence wonderful events come to be foretold, without any supernatural
assistance. Page 38 XXII. What is the benefit of prayer for the dead. Page 197.
XXIII. That the Practice of the Church, as far as its words make known it is
sense, favors the ancient opinion. Page ^07 XXIV. That the Practice of the
Church, as it is visible in action, makes likewise for the same truth. Page 218
XXV. The nature and history of Indulgences. Page 225 XXVI. That Indulgences,
generally taken, make nothing against the ancient Doctrine. Page 234 XXVII.
That particular Indulgences granted for he dead argue not the universal
practice of the Church. Page 243 XXVIII. That the Vulgarity of the opposite
opinion ought not to prejudice the true one. Page 251
The First Account.
The Introduction, and state of the Question.

THough such be the beauty of reason, and such its sovereignty over humane
nature, when rightly disposed, that no force of authority can be capable to
weaken conclusions once demonstrated (for what can authority presume unless
reason pre-assures us of its veracity? or how can reason give it that testimony
having a demonstration against it?) yet is it not lawful for me to treat the
question I have now in hand; without first consulting the sentiments of
antiquity. I am endebted to the unwise as well as the wise; and see them far
more numerous who pin themselves upon authority; few being able to sustain the
esclat of discourse, evidently and rigorously connected. Besides, it well
becomes the dignity of the Church in which I live, and is requisite for the
satisfaction of those without her, to make it clear that our forefathers
generally do not dissent for me in this controversy.

This then shall be my aim in the following Treatise: First, to illustrate the
nature of Purgatory from the sacred Scriptures and monuments of holy Fathers;
next, immoveably to establish it by Faith, or Principles evident in Nature; but
before all, give me leave to sum up and state the whole controversy, as it
is on both sides asserted. For the Church her self has herein defined nothing
more, then that there is a Purgatory, and that the souls there detained are
relieved by the prayers and suffrages of the faithful.

The Vulgar modern Divines The Adversaries explication of Purgatory.
embrace in a manner generally this position, That the deficiences of men are
some mortal, and punishable with eternal misery, others venial and expiable by
temporary sufferings. Mortal lapses, if repented they absolve from eternal,
condemning them notwithstanding to time-limitted torments. So that suppose an
imperfect Christian departed, whose venial sins no satisfaction at all has
cancelled, whose mortal an imperfect one has diminished; these Doctors admit
him not to the beatifical vision, but provide for him a subterraneous cave,
filled with flames and horrid instruments of torture, which his there confined
and imprisoned soul must, till expiated, endure. And these pains they thus far
suppose like to those we here experience, that they are inflicted by
extrinsecal Agents, and against the will of the patient, conce^ving moreover
that they take their proportion from the measure and nature of the crimes
committed in the body, according to the estimate of Divine Justice. Nor can
these torments by any industry or force of the soul it self be evaded, though
by our prayers, who survive, they may be mitigated, and before the otherwise
due and prefixed time determined. The same relief they fancy from the
satisfaction or merits of the Saints, if by the Church to that intent applied.

Thus these later Divines; from The Authors Explication of the same.
whom in this discourse, I must for the most part, take leave to dissent. I
acknowledge in humane faylings a difference betwixt mortal and venial nor do I
deny an imperfect remission of mortal impurities. But I place not this
imperfection, in that the Sin is totally cancelled the pain only remaining, but
in the change of an Absolute into a conditional affection, as it were instead
of I will, substituting, I will not, bu^ Oh that I lawfully might. This sinner
therefore concludes that an eternal good is to be preferred before that which
he abandons, and in his life and actions preferrs it; but looks notwithstanding
back upon it, as amiable with a wishful glance; not unlike the Cowes which
bearing the Ark did bellow to their Calves shut up at home. The affection or
inclination he had to temporal good is restrained, not extinguished; of mortal
become venial; changed, not destroyed.

Being therefore by the operation of death, as it were new molded and minted
into a purely spiritual substance, he carries inseparably with him the matter
of his torment in the like manner as he also does who takes leave of the body
with his affections only venially disordered. Wehave no occasion here to employ
infernal Architects to invent strange racks and dungeons, since the innate, and
intimately inhering strife and fury of the affections te^t against reason,
perform alone that execution; which is therefore proportioned to the sins
because springing and resulting from them, nor ever otherwise possibly capable
to ^e^se and determine, unless the soul by a new conjunction with the body*
become again susceptible of contrary impressions. This in the resurrection is
performed by a twofold operation of fire; one corporeal, which aptly disposes
the matter of bodies for the ministry of Angels, and the reunion with their
spirits; the other spiritual, to wit, the judgment of Christ, that is, the
bodily and mental intuition of him, which transferrs the dispositi on of souls,
from the distortion acquired by the commerce of the body, into that state which
is the immediate aptitude for beatifical vision. In this we conceive to consist
the remission of pains, or (as the Scripture terms it) sins; for the procuring
whereof in due time, we acknowledge the efficacy of the prayers of Saints,
either such as are already glorified, or such as daily press on toward that
happiness. These, to my best apprehension, are the summary heads of both
opinions. Now to the work it self.

The Second Account.
Two Proofs from the sacred Scripture favoring the truth we Advance.

IN the very front whereof I fix The first Text from 2 Match.
two evident testimonies of the sacred Writ. The first from 2 Match. 12. where
the discourse is, that Judas Machabeus sent money to Jerusalem to procure
sacrifices for the sins of his Soldiers slain in battle; the holy Writer
testifying that he did this act, Well and religiously, thinking of the
resurrection; for unless (says he) he had hoped they should rise again, it
would have seemed superfluous and vain to pray for the dead. For vain the Greek
Text has (...), foolish or ridiculous. It appears that even then when this
book was written, the error of denying the resurrection had insinuated it self
amongst the Jews, by the commixtion of Gentiles; so that the Writer was obliged
to reprove it, by occasion of this signal action of Machabeus. His argument
runs thus; It Is certain (says he) that Prayers cannot avail the dead unless
there be a resurrection: But as by this illustrious Example of Machabeus we
learn, Prayers do avail them, Therefore there must be a resurrection.

We affirm that from this Text, it is easily convinced, that souls before the
resurrection are not delivered from their Purgatory-sufferings or State. For if
they are, our prayers working that haypy effect, it were great benefit and
great wisdom to pray for them though there were never to be any resurrection*
Either the sacred Writer therefore is mistaken, or they who free such souls
before the resurrection. Nor is their conjecture of any moment, who suppose it
may be therefore said, unless he had hoped they should rise again, because the
denial of the resurrection would have at once destroyed the belief of the
immortality of the soul, at least as to the Jews; first, because it is known
that the Heathens, by whose conversation the Jewish tenants were corrupted, did
many of *them admit souls to be immortal, notwithstanding they denied the
resurrection of bodies: and secondly, because this explication is too frank and
voluntary, engaging a Writer without the least ground, against an opinion,
which, whether it had at that time any assertors, is altogether unknown, and
that at the peril of making a frivolous consequence, and the assuming a
proposition in it self false. Nor does it advantage them to alledg that the
Sadduces (against whose Progenitors this disputation may be thought to be
levelled) denied spirits. The Stoics did the like, yet at the same time they
acknowledged the soul's supervivency and transanimation after the decay of the
body. Clearly therefore, if souls may be exempted from their suffering before
the resurrection, this proposition, It is superfluous and vain to pray for the
dead unless there be a resurrection, is both false, and to no purpose alleged.

Let the New Instrument keep The Second Text, 1 Cor. 15. examined.
time and harmony with the Old. Let S. Paul be heard preaching to the same
effect. 1 Cor. 15. 29. What shall they do (says he) who are baptized for the
dead, if the dead rise not again? to what end are they baptized for the dead?
Some understood by baptizing, affliction or mortification of the body; others a
certain ceremony of washing themselves for the dead: which way soever you take
it, his discourse is the same with that of the Writer of the Machabees. Where
that Writer affirms, it were superfluous to pray for the dead, the Apostle
cries out, What shall we do? what benefit shall they reap? how will they be
dejected seeing themselves deprived of the hopes of assisting their friends?
What the one calls vain or foolish, the other phrases, To what end are they
baptized? what do they mean? what do they aim at? nothing; they are fools or
mad men. It is therefore apparent that pious and wise persons used this custom
(whatever it were) of baptizing themselves, whose action and example the
Apostle commending it, urges as of sufficient authority again the Corinthians

Nor n^^d w^ further strain the nerves of this discourse, it being perfectly
the same with the first Text; to wit, that it were folly to be baptized for the
dead, if they were not to rise again. No benefit therefore is obtained by such
Baptism before the resurrection, nor by so doing can the souls till then be
released. So that from this argument it appears, that the solution offered to
the first was of no consequence; for no man that I know alleges that the
Doctor of the Gentiles disputes here against the Sadduces, with whom his
arguments would not have any force at all. For neither would they regard the
Example of those who baptized themselves in behalf of the dead, as being
Pharisees; neither would what the Apostle urges of Christ's resurrection, or
his own predication make any the least impression in them. Let these two Texts
therefore remain inviolabled, as first not to be resisted without manifest
violence, and secondly, as directly pointing at the very knot of the
controversy. That souls once engaged are not capable of that eminent good of
being delivered from their pains, before the resurrection.

The Third Account.
Three other Texts, and by occasion of the third, an explication of the ancient
practice of the Church in praying for the Saints.

LEt us from the same Epistle to The Third Text. 1 Cor. 5.
the Corinthians 5. 5. add a positive proof to two negative ones already
alleged. I (says the Apostle) have already judged to deliver such a one to
Satan, for the destruction of the flesh, that the spirit may be saved in the
day of our Lord. He speaks of excommunicating a notorious fornicator, that he
might be made penitent, and by repentance saved. But when? In the day of our
Lord Jesus Christ. His soul therefore was not to be saved till the last
Judgment day. But why not his as well as any others? No soul therefore
imperfectly, and as it were compulsively repenting shall be saved till the day
of Judgment.

Consonant and allied to this is The Fourth Text, Heb. 10.
that text, Heb. 10 27. Sinning voluntarily after knowledge received of the
truth; we have now no other host or oblation left for sins, but a certain
terrible expectation of judgment, in the interval of it, and rage of fire, when
it shall come, which shall consume the adversaries; the Greek text has it
(...), ready or about to eat those who are partly opposite; not to consume,
but feed upon or gnaw them; that is, to take off the depraved affections of
such as dye with an imperfect repentance. He that denies this to be the
Apostles meaning, let him side with Novatus in rejecting lapsed penitents, or
fancy an extrajudicial remission, contrary to the Apostle's design.

In the third place I cite the The Fifth Text, 2 Timothy 1.
2 Timothy 1. 8. Where the Apostle thus prays for Onisiphoris, Our Lord grant him
to find mercy from our Lord in that day. An Heretic may perhaps smile at the
allegation of this text to justify prayer for the dead, and pretend a great
difference between praying for those who are living that they may be saved
after their departure, and praying for their salvation who are already
departed. But I shall entreat him to reflect more advisedly on the expression.
Was it not said, that he may find mercy in that day? Is not that day confessed
to be the day of judgment? Let us consider Onisiphorus now dead; will you
affirm that he has already found that mercy, which the Apostle prays he may
find in the day of judgment? Why do you hesitate? If now he has received it,
how shall he then find it? If he have not yet received it, the wish of the
Apostle is not yet accomplished. It hangs therefore still in suspense, and if
so may be reiterated, and if it may be reiterated, then must it be lawful to
pray for the dead. For Prayer is ever seasonable till the effect be granted;
and consequently prayer for the dead is from hence also clearly proved.

But methinks I see our modern pretenders to Divinity full, and longing to be
delivered of this objection, That if effectually Ton. 2. lib. 3. lect. 4. par.
11. and lect. 5. par. 8. and lect. 3. p. 15. 16, 17.
this be so, we must pray for the Saints also, they being to obtain likewise a
great advantage by that day (as in our Sacred Institutions may appear) which
notwithstanding any one may perceive to differ from the common practice of the
whole Church. I am not of so weak a stomach as not to digest this morsel. What
do you expect I should reply? That S. Paul presumed Onisiphorus should not be
happy before the last day, whereas himself desired to be immediately dissolved
and dismissed to the enjoyments of Christ? I dare not. How then? Shall I say he
prayed not that Onisiphorus might find mercy, even after his soul was
beatify'd? The Text on all sides confessed forbids me. What then? will our
Adversaries say this was not to pray for the blessed? Common sense permits them
not. S. Paul did it; Antiquity did it.

Let S. James be our first witness, Proof, of prayer for the blessed from
ancient Liturgies.
in his Liturgy of the Hierosolymitan Church. Be mindful (says he) Lord God,
of the spirits and all their bodies whem we have commemorated, or not
commemorated, who were Orthodox, from the just Abel to this present day. Thou
grant them there to rest, in the region of the living in thy Kingdom, in the
delights of Paradise.

S. Basil's Liturgy. Be mindful also of all who have slept in the hope of a
resurrection to life everlasting.

S. Chrysostom's Liturgy. For the memory and remission of their fins who were
the founders of this habitation, worthy of eternal memory, and of all who have
slept in thy Communion, in the hope of resurrection and life eternal, our
Orthodox Fathers and Brethren.

The Liturgy of S. Mark, that is, of Alexandria: Give rest O Lord our God to
the souls of our Fathers and Brethren, who have slept in the faith of Christ,
mindful of our Ancestors from the beginning of the world: Fathers, Patriarchs,
Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, Confessors, Bishops, Saints and just men; all the
souls of those who departed in the faith of Christ. And moreover of those whose
memory this day we celebrate, and our holy Father Mark the Evangelist, who
taught us the way of salvation. To the souls of all these give rest, our
supr^me Lord and God, in the holy Tabernacles, in the Kingdom, bestowing on
them the good things thou have promised, etc. And he concludes, To their souls
I say grant rest, and admit them to the Kingdom of Heaven.

Lastly, The Roman, or Gregory the Great's Liturgy, from whom it seems at last
to have received its full perfection. Remember also, O Lord, thy servants who
have gone before us with the sign of faith, and now rest in the sleep of peace.
To them, O Lord, and all that rest in Christ, we beseech thee grant a place of
ease, and ligh^, and peace. The sense is plain and obvious, that he prays for
all who were baptized and departed in the Communion of the Church.

I am not ignorant, that Liturgies, from the bare consideration of antiquity,
have not that force which other writings of the same Authors have, since as
they are of public use, so can we not almost doubt, but somethings in them
might, by succeeding prelates of the same Churches, by additions or diminutions
be altered, as it were of course. But give me leave withal to observe, that
this defect is more then supplied by their being the public instruments of
Churches, the Doctrine, which in so many Liturgies is delivered, being justly
to be accounted as the constant tenet of all ages, unless so great an authority
can from elsewhere be undermined. Let us then argue thus. So many Patriarchal
Churches, continually in their public Liturgies, beseech God in general terms
to give salvation to all the faithful departed, assigning them a place of ease,
light, and peace; and where none are excepted, all are included; and in our
case eminent Saints particularly named, as it were by foresight and obviation
to this objection. We cannot therefore doubt but that prayer was anciently
offered for the Blessed.

But let us consider more particularly. The Hierosolymitan Church is by origin
the chief, she beginning from the just Abel, cannot certainly be supposed to
exclude any other; and Cyril, the heir of S. James in his fifth Catechesis,
will assure us she did not. Next (says he) for the holy Fathers and Bishops
departed, (...), and of all universally who are dead from amongst us. The
Church of Alexandria was second to the Roman; she prayed for the Patriarchs,
Prophets, Apostles, and Martyrs, and by name S. Mark. S. Chrysostom, or the
Constantinopolitan Church prayed for the Builders of the said Church, whether
by that appellation intending the Apostle of Constantinople, or the Fabricators
or endowers of the material Church; however we cannot reasonably doubt, but he
esteemed them Saints and enjoying God; and himself commends this Liturgy in
many of his Homilies. The expressions of other Churches, speaking in common,
may well, by the determinations of these, be understood literaily as they
sonnd, and not with restriction to any particulars; as also Diony sius
Areopagita, Clemens Romanus, Greg. Nazianzene, etc. in whom those universal
experssions are found.

But because the Roman Liturgy seems to speak less clearly then the rest, let
us examine her own best interpreters. S. Ambrose De ob. Valent. Prays day and
And Fathers.
night for him and Gratian. He commends the souls of Theodosius and his brother
to God, and begs rest for them; all whom notwithstanding he doubts not to be in
Bliss, in the receptacles of eternal tranquillity, in the Tabernacles of
Christ, in the supernal Jerusalem, in the company of Saints, in the Kingdom
of our Lord Jesus. S. Hierom in like manner affirms Paulina to be gone from
hence to her Lord, and to enjoy a sweet rest, for whose sake notwithstanding he
commends the giving of alms. S. Gregory himself in his book of Sacraments,
says, We have received, O Lord, the divine mysteries, which as they avail thy
Saints to the increase of glory, so we beseech thee they may benefit us for the
cure of our infirmities. The same may be likewise gathered from the Areopagite,
who teaches to pray for those who departed so holily, that be affirms them to
be presented to the Priest as to the distributor of their crowns. The same from
S Chrysostom, who describes at one and the same time, weeping and almsgiving,
rejoicing and triumphs for the dead; clearly declaring it to descend from the
Apostles Doctrine and command to offer sacrifices for the dead. It was
therefore anciently lawful and customary to pray for the Saints; nor is it in
our days less, the Church her self instructing thus to pray, Receive what we
offer to the honor of thy Saints, that to them it may be an increase of glory,
to us of safety. Nor is it infrequent amongst the more pious, when they name a
Saint or Martyr, to add, Whose glory God increase.

The Fourth Account.
That (St. Bernard only excepted) all the rest of the Fathers denied not to the
faithful departed, the Beatifical vision, before the day of Judgment.

FRom what has been said, a clear light seems to discover it self, though many
hands labor to draw a dark curtain before it, to the vindication, shall I say
of the Fathers of the Church, or of the Church it self, from a foul imputation
laid The importance of clearing Antiquity in this point.
upon them or her. For I ponder with my self, that if so great a multitude of
Saints be supposed to have erred in this one Article; we are almost at a loss
how to excuse the Church from the same crime. These calumniators muster up
Fathers neither few in number nor those inconsiderable in value, nor of one
Nation, nor of one age; and the nature of the Article is such that we may not
well exclude it from its concernment in order to piety, or necessity in order
to Faith. They affirm (not more unwarily then audaciously) That most of the
Ancient Fathers did promiscuously sequester from the face of God, the perfect
with the imperfect till the last day of judgment.

I dare not take upon me to justify them in all circumstances, but as to the
substance I avow, that (setting S. Bernard aside, and John the 22. if you
please to reckon him amongst the Fathers) not any one of them (for ought may be
gathered out of their writings) spoke even ambiguously in the case. It Is true
many of them did deliberately deny the Saints to be in Heaven, which by
inadvertency is become our vulgar phrase to signify Beatitude. But S. Bernard
reflecting on the How S Bernard came to be deceived therein.
difference, affirmed them to be in Heaven, as to their substance, but not so
as to enjoy the vision of the Deity. Whence it appears that he light upon this
singularity, whilst he wholly applied his speculation to the subtle reach of
the mistical speeches in the Apocalypse, not by the imitation of his
predecessors, so that unawares he let go the Churches sense, retaining only her
words.

We are to consider in the day Two effects of the Day of Judgment.
of Judgment two retributions to be made good to all mankind; the degree of
reward due to their merits, and the place designed for their eternity. Who
denies the first makes it no Judgment; for what kind of Judgment is that which
has no rewards or punishments attending it, but actually finds all beforehand
done for which it was intended? The latter carries too much evidence to find an
opposition, since we are speaking of men, and those who are never so little
spiritualized know that to be in place suites only with bodies. These two
things then those holy Fathers maintain, and by their testimonies What the
Fathers mean when they affirmed souls to be kept in certain receptacles till
the last Day.
foreprize our exceptions. When we hear them say that Saints or their souls are
detained in certain receptacles or storehouses till the day of Judgment;
conceive them to mean that they have not yet received their material places of
Beatitude, S. Bernard alone to opine that they are indeed already possessed of
their proper and material places, but so that the humanity only of Christ is
represented to them and made their object. For as we term that to be in
darkness which is not in the light, and in a manner always explicate
prevationsby in compossible positives; so those Doctors phrased the not being
locally in Heaven, by the being in other receptacles, either accommodating
their expressions to the vulgar capacity, though conscious of the Privation, or
by the force of fancy being themselves beguiled into that unwary perswation.

This reflection alone beats A particular vindication of most of them.
back most of the calumnies darted at those Saints. For Ireneus, Justin,
Tertullian, Clemens Romanus, Lactantius, Origin, Vistorinus, Prudentius,
Chrysostom, Theodoret, Arethus, Oecumenius, pronounce no more then that the
souls are detained out of Heaven, and expect at the last day their remuneration
and future glory. Yea, most of them follow those expressions with others, which
at least permissively insinuate that they enjoy God as to their souls. So
Ireneus explicating the complete resurrection to be that of bodies. So Justin
affirming them to enjoy Paradise with the sense of Intelligence, that is, those
joys of Paradise which pure Intelligences are capable of. So Tertullian
allowing them rest and joy. So Origin, declaring them to be as it were in a
School or Auditory, that they may make judgment of the future, that it may
sore-run, and mentally taste the joys they are awayting; saving moreover that
they expect those which can receive no further increase. So Victorinus,
confessing them to be in a state of repose, free from pains and flames, where
they attend in the last times, a perpetual, that is, not mutable or increasable
reward. Prudentius's words may well signify Heaven, unless the use and
acceptance of his Age otherwise determine them. The sentiments of S. S.
Chrysostom and Augustine are elsewhere sufficiently cleared. Arethus says,
they have a certain conjecture, that is, prescience, or pregustation of the
future.

Having so great an evidence of the thoughts of most of them, we are not to
doubt but that the rest, whose words are somewhat harsher, were yet of the same
judgment. S. Ambrose speaks ambiguously when he says that the soul after this
life is still in suspense of the future Judgment; but I conceive him to speak
indefinitely, not intending that any one in particular remains doubtful,
whether she shall be happy or otherwise, but that all are not to be happy, but
some happy, some miserable. The place is taken out of the 10. Chapter of his
Book, De bono mortis, where treating more at large of this Doctrine, he seems
to explain this part of his opinion in this sort. Therefore whilst the
plenitude of time is expected (says he) the souls wait their just
remuneration, some shall have punishment, some glory. Besides what he had
before affirmed of the soul of Valentinian, Gratian, Theodosius and his Brother
gives ample satisfaction concerning his Judgment. To which you may add if you
please, out of his 59. Epistle, de obit^ Acolij, he sees perpetual light
without a Sun, now face to face. And in Com. Ep. ad Philip. Thinking it better
to be present with God. And on 1 Cor. Ep. 13. The Saints going out of this
world shall behold him as he is.

Theophilact's speech is likewise somewhat difficult, maintaining the Saints to
have yet obtained nothing of the celestial promises. But S. Chrysostom's piety
(which he adheres to) relieves him, giving us occasion to understand by
Celestial those promises which are to be accomplished in Heaven, and which
Oecumenius calls the term or period of goods. S. Chrysostom himself declares
that the souls unless the body rise again shall remain excluded from the
Celestial Beatitude; that is, shall indeed have its happiness, but not that
which makes or follows it is place in Heaven. So that at last it appears to
have been not a famous Doctrine of the Fathers of the Church, but an infamous
calumny against them, to impose upon them the denial of the sight of God before
the universal resurrection. S. Bernard alone neither having nor seeking an
Example ventured to assert it; for as to John XXII. since his writings are not
extant, we cannot legally pas^ sentence upon him.

The Fifth Account
The Fifth proof from Scripture is again urged and two others added.

NOtwithstanding all which, I Why the rewards of the day of Judgment are so
much inculcated.
should think my pains well rewarded, if I could learn the reason, why the holy
Doctors with so much earnestness have inculcated to us the rewards and
punishments of the last judgment, since they well enough understood that pure
souls might have an immediate fruition of God. The first Motive may be that the
Beatifical First Reason.
Vision is more perfect with the body resumed, then without it; which S.
Chrysostom exceedingly favors. Yet I am not convinced by it; first, because
nothing of this reason appears amongst most of them, though the Thesis be
common to them all; and secondly, because no proof thereof is brought by him,
nor by S. Augustine himself, though he affirms it certain that the soul of man
divested of the body, cannot so behold the incommutable goodness as the Angels
do, and the said souls expect the redemption of their bodies, since in his
Retractations he seems to acknowledge the obscurity of the Consequence. The
reason we have given for it in our Theological Institution is singular, and by
few valued or comprehended.

The next Motive may be, because Second* Reason*
Corporeal goods, which are first attained by the Resurrection, are more
esteemed by the generality of Christians then spiritual, as being better
understood by them. But this reason is too disadvantageous to Christianity it
self; for it being the design of it is profession, and task of its Doctorin to
take off the minds of men, from terrene goods and place them on celestial, it is
altogether improper to permit corporeal advantage, to be preached and
inculcated more vehemently then spiritual; nor does it stand with those
encomiums of Beatitude, That eyes have not seen, ears not heard, etc. That the
passions of this time are not condign to the future glory; that there is good
measure heaped together, pressed down and overflowing, etc. Lastly, Because we
are taught, that they compared to spiritual pleasures, principally to the
Beatifical Vision, have the proportion of finite to infinite; so that it little
imports the satisfaction and contentment of the person whether he has then or
not.

The third reason then must Third and chief Reason.
take place. That therefore the Retributions of the last day are so inculcated,
because they are universal, whereas the rewards which before that are given,
are particular, and as it were privileges. I shall endeavor to explicate my
self. Mankind or humane nature is not integrated by a few wise or
extraordinarily religious persons, but by the commonalty and universality of
Christians. Them therefore God, and Christ in the predication and propagation
of the Gospel, has respect to. These things then in the bulk and body of
Catholic faith are to be promised which concern the generality of Mankind. And
truly whether we cast our eyes on the old or new Testament, we shall find our
Faith founded and The Resurrection is the basis of all Faith.
rooted in the resurrection. Let us examine the hopes of Job, the threats of
Ecclesiastes, the menaces or promises of the Prophets, the comfort of Toby, and
instructions given to his Son: Lastly, either the valor of the Machabees
fighting, or their patient suffering, every where we meet with the
Resurrection. Is the New style different? Do not all the exhortations,
parabies, promises, denuntiation of Christ our Lord sound forth the
Resurrection? S. Paul cries out that all Faith is at an end and frustrated, if
you take away, the Resurrection. S. S. Peter, Jude, James and John repeat the
same lesson. This is the Theme which both affrighted and allured all the world;
this made the proudest necks to bow, and both already has and shall subjugate
all Nations to the obedience and Laws of Christ.

And now behold us on a sudden revolved, I know not how, S. Pau's prayer for
Onesiphorus explicated.
to the solution of the difficulty which begat this discourse; for by this clue
we readily acquit our selves of all intricacy in the Apostles wish of mercy to
Onesiphorus, not simply in the next world, but expressly in the day of Judgment.
For though the virtues of the person permitted him to hope no less then that
his last breath would wafte him to the regious of Beatitude, yet he chose
rather to express his affection in terms sit to explicate to all the Brethren
and Faithful the common condition of retribution, least he might be thought to
have entertained too good an opinion of Onesiphorus's well-doing. And that this
was the form of prayer for the dead among the Jews, those that are conversant
in their rights do testify; and our selves have a manner of speech not much
unlike, when challenging our due, we threaten to demand it at the day of
Judgment, if it be not restored.

And if I mistake not, Christ The Sixth Text Mat. 5.
our Lord gave us the hint, advising us to agree with our adversary The Seventh
Text Luke 12.
in the way, least he deliver us to the Judge, and the Judge to the Executioner;
who shall with rigor exact the debt. You see then that both Matthew 5. 26. and
Luke 12. 58. we are taught that we must smart for our offenses in the last day
of Judgment, and then make satisfaction to those we have injured. Which
passages if they be urged will convince us, that there is a remission of sins,
and that not without fire and torments in the day of judgment. Especially
Catholics, who not believing punishment due for every the least breach of
neighbourly charity, are compelled to admit an expiation of such lighter
trespasses in the day of Judgment, when the adversary will be together with us,
and Christ sitting the common Judge, to whom he may deliver us. These two Texts
then conclude the same. But what stand I enumerating every particular Text? If
the whole face of the Scripture, if the universal Assembly of Saints and holy
Doctors, if the belief of all ages look upon the day of Judgment as the time of
general reward, certainly unless we avow that the greatest part of Mankind is
then admitted to Beatitude, the Majesty and utility of that grand day is
annihilated, and the ostentation of those great promises rendered inconsiderable
in respect of what was conceived of it. From the main stock therefore of
Christian Faith springs the certainty of this truth, That whoever are once in
Purgatory, that is, the greatest portion of the faithful can never be possessed
of the Kingdom prepared by the Father, till they have presented themselves at
the supreme and august Tribunal, that it may be fitly said to them all, what is
to take effect in the greatest part of them.

The Sixth Account.
The eight and ninth Texts are considered.

THe next Text which occurrs The Eighth Text 1 Cor. 3.
is so special an evidence, that I cannot omit it without the indignation of
the Reader. It is found, 1 Cor. 3. 13, 14. etc. If any one (says the Apostle)
builds upon this foundation (Christ or his Doctrine planted by the Apostle in
their hearts) gold, silver, precious stones, wood, hay, stubble, every man's
work shall be manifest, for the day of our Lord will declare it, because it
shall be revealed in fire, and the work of every one, of what kind it is, the
fire shall try. If any ones work shall abide which he built thereon, he shall
receive reward, if any ones work burn, he shall suffer detriment, but himself
shall be saved, yet so as by fire. Thus far the Apostle immediately before
which he had rebuked them for making comparisons among their preachers, to
which also he' afterward returns. From whence some are conjectured that these
speeches refer rather to the Doctrine of the Teachers, then works of the
Auditors. But the contrary appears; first in that the Builder comes after the
Apostle has done his work, whom we may well suppose to have delivered to the
faithful the whole and entire Law of Christ, as himself testifies, b^dding
adieu to the Asian Churches, that he had withdrawn nothing, that was profitable
from them. Secondly, what kind of trial can there be of Doctrines by the day of
our Lord, as the Latin Translation has it, or that day, as the Greek reads,
if the Article be taken emphatically, or simply D^ey, that is diuturnity or
length of time, wherein the builder may receive reward or detriment? Thirdly,
who shall be saved by suffering detriment? The Preacher or Hearer? There is no
work in the Preacher by conflagration whereof he may suffer detriment, and if
the Hearer suffer it, then is he also the Builder, and not only he, but whoever
destroys the Temple of God within himself, him will God overthrow, that is,
severely punish. But to return. The Apostle proceeds to enumerate three sorts
of good, that is perfect works, and as many which abide not the trial, and
adds, that of which of these kinds every ones works are, it shall be made
manifest. Why? Because the day of our Lord will declare it. How? By being
revealed in fire, a fit examiner of the several alloyes. After this he goes on,
If any ones work remain, he shall receive reward, that is, more good shall be
added to him. But if any man's work burn, he shall suffer loss, that is, he
shall be punished, and that which he seems to have shall be taken from him.
But because his foundation is solid, to wit, the lively faith of Christ in him,
he shall be saved, but as a brand snatched flaming, and charred, from the fire.

This is the literal sense of that place, in which it is evident that Which
must be understood of Venial sins and of the day of Judgment.
the discourse runs of Venial sins, it being plain that Mortal ones cannot be
built upon Christ, since by their very being in our souls they expel from
thence life and Christ. The next thing we are to reflect on, is, that according
to the interpretation we have given, the day of which the Apostle speaks, musts
be the day of Judgment, which appears partly because the Latin Text has the
day of our Lord, which shows there have been various lection in the Greek,
though now all copies agree; but more rationally from the context it self. For
if it be explicated thus, Every ones works shall be apparent, because the day
of trial will be revealed in fire, a fit instrument of bringing them to the
truth, the discourse proceeds fair and smoothly. But if it be brought to this,
Every ones work shall appear, for Day, that is, length of time will clear the
truth, because the work shall be revealed in fire, and the fire shall try every
ones work of what kind it is: the discourse is rendered obscure, interrupted
and with unnecessary repetition. Finally can the distribution of rewards and
sufferings be more properly referred to any other day then the Day of Judgment?
Or is salvation at least by fire given in any other? Though S. Augustine
sometimes otherwise extounds.


I am not ignorant. S. Augustine, and that several times explicates this
passage of the tribulations of this world. But if I deceive not my self, from
the literal, he falls to the moral sense, a thing not unusual to the Fathers.
For if the Text be understood primarily of temporal afflictions, it is too
obscure and allegorical; first, to call tribulation, the day of our Lord is an
unusual phrase, and though sometimes in the Prophets it may be so taken, yet
that is only when the glory and majesty of God, and the declaration of his
Justice in revenging wickedness is described. Next, this part of the Text,
because it shall be revealed in fire, must be understood of the works
themselves, and so that which follows. And of what quality every ones work is,
the fire shall try, becomes a mere tautology: and moreover there begins a new
allegory of fire, without any particle determining it. And again what signifies
this, He shall receive reward? That is properly called the reward which is
given in the end of the day, or accomplishment of the whole work, not in every
part or moment thereof, as particular tribulations are to be accounted. In like
manner, if any ones work burn, he shall suffer damage, what can it import? That
the pleasures which inveigled his affections are now taken away? They were not
his works but the matter upon and about which he did work. Again, he shall
suffer damage, must signify, he will be troubled or sorrowful; but that the
rather by impotency, to sin a new, and freshly, then to be amended. Lastly, He
shall be saved, yet so as by fire. Shall regret and sorrow for the loss of
things temporal save him? Or the loss it self by means of that sorrow? It must
be then understood that this tribulation must conect and reform him, which
though sometime it happens, yet not always, or indeed for the most part, which
nevertheless is requisite to make the truth of the Text apparent. Whosoever
having thoroughly contemplated this passage, and finding the interpretations
given it by others to be scarce reconcilable with the Letter, whereas ours in
every particular wonderfully agrees with it, shall notwithstanding profess
himself unsatisfi'd in what we have offered, I shall be much surpised if he
ever find conviction from any of the sacred writings.

My last Testimony shall be The ninth Text Mat. 12.
from S. Matthew. 12* where Christ our Lord declares, that the sin against the
holy Ghost shall neither be remitted in this world, nor in the next. Which S.
Mark, in like manner expressing* says, it shall not be remitted for ever. Holy
Fathers gather from hence, not impertinently, that there is a remission of sins
after this life, and some of our Moderns make use thereof to confirm the
Doctrine of Purgatory, as it is vulgarly described. But in truth, therein they
fail; for whatever venial stains the departed soul had contracted, those they
absolutely declare to be by a perfect conversion to God, in the very first
instant, cancelled. Purgatory therefore according to them does not remit, but
chastise sins; and consequently they have no right to alledg this place, since
remission of sins there is none according to them. But on the contrary, if the
affections to sin remain after death, and in the day of Judgment are rectified,
it is evident, there must be a remission of sins in the next world. And thus by
the whole series of this discourse it is made appear, that no one text of holy
writ is or can be urged for Purgatory, which by some circumstance or other,
does not at the same time prove, that it is no otherwise a part of Christian
belief, then as we have already explicated.

The seventh Account.
Some places of Scripture applied by holy Fat^^^s to confirm the same truth.

IT is now time to take the votes of antiquity, and observe whether the
suffrages of the holy Fathers are more numerous and propitious to our
adversaries or us. And first, let us interrogate those, who by application of
holy Writ, rather then by their own proper motion or design, declare this
Purgation to be made in the day of Judgment. S. Basil, Chapter 15. on Esaias, calls
the baptism of fire that probation which is made in the day of Judgment. S.
Hierome, upon the third of Matthem, says, In this world we are baptized with
the spirit, in the future with fire; the Apostle also giving testimony, that of
what sort every ones works are, the fire shall try. Theodoret, Ephrem and
Rufinus explicate the prophecy of Malachy, wherein Christ is said to purge the
sons of Levi, of the last judgment. S. Augustine, lib. 20. c. 25. de Civit.
Dei, conjoynes the place of Esaias and Malachy, and applies them both to the same
day; and lib. 16. c. 24. de Civ. Dei, he in like manner explicates the passage
of the fifteenth of Genesis, of the smoking furnace, and flashes of fire
passing through the midst of the divided carcases to be the fire of the last
day, which shall discriminate the carnal persons who are to be saved by fire,
from the carnal ones to be damned in fire.

From hence we may thus argue. The Fathers interpret those places of holy Writ
which speak clearly of the purgation of sins, and that by fire to be meant of
the day of Judgment, therefore they teach that the purging of souls from their
sins by fire, is performed in that day, and consequently that that is the
Purgatory fire. Whoever then confesses and acknowledges the purgation of souls
in the day of Judgment by the general conflagration, defends Purgatory in the
sense of the Holy Fathers, nor can any thing from their Testimonies be alleged
for the cessation of, or exemption from Purgatory before that day, when they
teach that souls are purged by fire.

And hence also are they easily silenced, who cry out that such like
Testimonies are to be understood of some few remaining alive to the very last
hour. For the maintainers of Purgatory, waving those passages which speak so in
general terms, will find it no small difficulty to make a Father or two speak
out for them, and so the whole extrinsecal authority fit to maintain Purgatory
will be lost, both the Scriptures themselves (as has been shown) being a verse
to that conceit, and absolutely respecting the day of Judgment, and the holy
Fathers refusing to own it. Besides most of the Patrons of this intermedial
fire conceive that all men shall be dead before the day of Judgment; so that
the same flames may serve to expiate them without the help of those of the
conflagration and Judgment; and whatever is otherwise affirmed by them, clearly
is not a consequence of their Doctrine, but an invention to elude the evidence
of the Fathers. Let as therefore dispel this mist also with the clear
attestation of such of them as speak plainly and positively in the case.

The Eighth Account.
Testimonies from all, Antiquity, maintaining the same truth.

St. Denis of Areopagus shall usher them in, who tells us that those Psalms
were wont to be sung for the Dead which make mention of the Resurrection, as
also such lessons as contain the promises thereof. And speaking of the secure
estate of good men departing, he says, they perfectly understand that all will
go well with them in the life everlasting, through their total resurrection.
From whence it is evident that the hope which they generally had for the dead,
and which was therefore fit to be expressed in the Office for the dead,
depended on the resurrection for its effect, and this in the very beginings of
Christianity.

Origin is yet more clear in his third Homily on the 36. Psalm. As I conceive,
says he, we must all be brought to that fire (it went a little before which is
prepared for sinners) though he be a Peter or a Paul, he must come to that
fire; but such as they shall hear it said, though you pass through it, the
flame shall not burn you. But when such a sinner as my self shall come to the
fire as Peter and Paul did, he shall not pass through it as Peter and Paul did.
In the end of the eighth book of his Commentaries on the Epistle to the Romans
he says, But he, who neglects to be purged by the word of God and Evangelical
Doctrines, is reserved for sad and penal purifications, that the flames of Hell
may cleanse him, whom the Apostolical Doctrine and Evangelical speeches could
not. And in his thirteenth Divine Homily upon Jeremy; But if any one be saved
in the second resurrection, he is a sinner who needs the baptism of fire, who
by burning is purged, that the fire may consume whatever he had of wood, hay,
or stubble.

I cannot but foresee that my adversaries will except against Origin, because
he is thought to have exempted all men from eternal punishments. But their
exceptions are unjust. For what do they aim at? Because elsewhere he exceeded
the truth, must he be thought never to have defendedi^? Because in some one
thing he departed from others, must he not be heard in those things wherein he
agrees with others? If this be so, let him deserve no place or credit in
antiquity, and let them likewise be denied any use or advantage by him.

But that Origin has in this particular, the rest of the Fathers not only for
his applauders but also followers, S. Ambrose is a sufficient witness, who in
his comments of the Psalms is esteemed to have borrowed this sentence from
Origin. Thou have examined us with fire, Says David; we shall all therefore be
examined with fire, -- With fire therefore shall the sons of Levi be purged,
with fire Ezckel, with fire Daniel. Wo^ be to me if my work burn, and I suffer
loss of this my labor. Though our Lord save his servants, we shall indeed be
saved through faith, but so as by fire; if we are not consumed, we shall at
least be burnt. How some remain in the fire, others pass through it, the
Divine Scripture tells us. And on the 118. Psalm. This Baptism shall be after
the consummation of the world, the Angels being sent to segregate the good from
the evil, when iniquity shall be burnt up by the furnace of fire, that the just
may shine as the Sun in the Kingdom of God. All must be tried by fire who
desire to arrive at Paradise; all must pass through flames, whether it be John
the Evangelist whom our Lord so loved, that he said of him to Peter, if I will
have him remain, what is it to thee? follow thou ^e. Of whose death some have
doubted; of his passage through that fi^^ none can doubt; or whether it be
Peter who received the keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, he must say we have
passed through fire. -- He will be examined as Silver, I shall be examined as
Lead, till my drosi^ Lead be consumed, I shall burn. -- He alone could not be
sensible of, or subject to that fire who is the justice of God, Christ.

Let Tertullian bear Origin company, who in the last Chapter of his Book de
Anima, explicates that Prison mentioned in the Gospel of some infernal
receptacle, and the last quadrant or farthing to be the punishment of every
small offense, by the delay of the Resurrection. What can be said more fully to
declare that no sin whatever can be remitted before the resurrection? The same
has S. Cyprian in his 32. Epistle, where speaking of sinners (in which number
he comprehends all except Martyrs) he pronounces that they are to be amended
with a long sufferance of griefs, to be a great while purged with fire, and in
the day of Judgment, to expect anxiously the sentence of our Lord.

Lactantius ( Constantine's Master) shall be next, who in his seventh book of
Institutions, Chap. 21. says, When God shall judge the just, even them shall he
examine with fire; whose fins shall exceed in gravity and number, they shall be
scorc^'d and fi^ged with the fire, but those whose justice is perfect, and
whose virtues thoroughly ripe and mature, shall not at all feel^ it.

Let Hilary succeed Lactantius. On the 118. Psalm. How (says he) can that
Judgment be desirable in which we must encounter with that indefatigable fire,
wherein those severe torments are to be undergone for the expiation of the
souls guilt? A sword passed through the soul of blessed Mary that the
cogitations of many hearts might be revealed. If then that Virgin, who was able
to contain God himself descend to the severity of that Judgment, who dares
covet to be judged by God?

St. Basil upon the 9th Chapter of Esaias. The Prophet declares that terrene
things shall become fuel for that chastising fire, to the advantage and benefit
of souls. For he threatens not ruin and total destruction, but rather
infinuates a Purgation, according to that of the Apostle, If any ones work
burn, he shall suffer damage, but himself be saved, yet so as by fire. But
nothing can be more clear then that place where he affirms, the same fire shall
both punish the guilty*, and illuminate those who are designed ^on eternal
joys. What else is this but that the just and unjust shall experience the same
fire, which to the one shall afford comfort, to the other torments?

I shall not think much to join N^ssen with his Brother, who in this point
stands somewhat in need of his brotherly assistance. For he discourses of
Purgatory fire, without distinguishing the times of purgation. But whereas some
Heretics traduce him for an Origenist, they do therein, like themselves,
impudently; so great a personage ought not for a few obscure words be suspected
of so great a madness. Let his relation to S. Basil afford him this fanctuary
and protection, that without evident proofs, he be not branded with impiety.

S. Chrysostom, on the first Epistle to Timothy, says, One siphorus shall
have his reward in that terrible and dreadful day when we shall stand in need
of much mercy.

Gregory Nazianzen, in his Sermon on the Epiphany, speaking of the Novatians,
who differed from the Catholics only in ill custom tells them, that perhaps,
if they retract it not, they shall be baptized with the last Baptism, which he
affirms to be more sharp and lasting, and to feed upon the matter as upon hay,
consuming all the levity of wickedness. Nor is Nicetus to be heard, who
interprets this passage of Hell, which is only punishment, and not Purgation:
As in like manner Oecumenius must excuse us who fancies the same in S. Basil,
that he may draw him to countenance a certain singular opinion of S.
Chrysostom.

S. Hierome, T. 3. upon Amos; The fire of the day of Judgment first d^vo^rs the
Abyss, that is, all kind of sins, wood, hay, stubble; and afterward eats
also the part, that is, reaches the Saints, who are r^puted the part and
propriety of our Lord.

S. Augustine, on the sixth Psalm: All that have not the foundation, which is
Christ, are condemned in the day of Judgment; but they are amended, that is,
purged, who build wood, hay, stubble upon this foundation. Again in the 16th
Book de Civit. Dei, cap. 24 already cited, speaking of the furnace and fire
passing though the divisions spoken of in the 15th of Genesis, he says, At the
setting of the S^n, that is, now at the very end, the day of Judgment is
signified by that fire which divides betwixt the carnal people, who are by fire
to be saved, and the carnal ones in fire to be damned. And elsewhere in the
Psalms, and his Sermons, de Tempore, he repeats the same explication. And that
you may see he speaks not of those only who are just then to dye, on the sixth
Psalm above ci^ed, he immediately adds; Make me such a one, O Lord, as that I
may not need the fire to mend me; or the correcting fire.

And that you may further perceive he was herein constant to himself, Lib. 20.
de Civi^. Dei, cap. 25. From what we have alleged, says he, it se^^es
evidently to appear, that in that Judgment there will be certain purging
punishments for some. And whereas lib. 21. c. 26. he seems to doubt, whether
such fire as consumes venial sins, may not be admitted betwixt the day of Death
and the day of Judgment; that intrenches not upon the certitude of what he had
already established, but rather begins a new Question, especially since he
explicates himself, not of material fire, but of the fire of tribulation. His
intentions may perhaps be more illustrated, if we add the negative place, De
Civit. Dei, l. 2. c. 24 As, says he, in the resurrection of the dead, there
will not want those, who, after the pains which the spirits of the dead suffer,
shall find mercy, that they be not precipitatid into eternal For it would not
have been with truth affirmed, that they should not be forgiven neither in this
world nor the next, unless there were some, who, though they foun^ it not here,
should notwithstanding obtain remission hereafter. And in the fifth Chapter of
the sixth book against Julian; If no sin, says he, were to be remitted in that
last Judgment, I suppose our Lord would not have said of a certain sin, that it
should neither be remitted in this world, nor the next. Finally, Confess. l. 9.
c. 3. Grant him [Verecundus] in the resurrection of the just, a recompensation
for the good Offices he did us, since th^^ have already made him one of thy
faithful. Nor is his 80th Epistle to Hesichius to be omitted; In what condition
every man's last day finds him, in the same shall worlds last day overtake him,
for such as in that day he departs, such in the last day shall he be judged.
What can more thoroughly discredit all pretense of intermedial change? Ru^^inus,
if he be the Author of that work on the Psalms which is ascribed to him, is to
be explicated conformably, when he says, By anger may be understood the trial
by purging fire, in which they shall be chastised, who now build things
unprofitable upon Christ their foundation; as meaning by that purging fire, the
fire of the last day of Judgment, and so he confirms our opinion.

To him we will join Eucherius Lugdun^nsis, if the Homilies, which carry the
name of Eusebius Emissenus, be his. They who have committed things worthy of
temporal punishment (says he) to whom belongs that speech of our Lord, that
they shall not go free till they have paid the last farthing, shall pass
through a fiery River (according to that of the Prophet, a swift River ran
before him) through horrid gulfs of flaming metal. And a good while after; The
just shall pass through them, as through pleasant and refreshing baths, the
flames loosing their propriety, and their untouched bodies shall be honored by
the very Instruments of pain, because they were not burdened with sin. The
description of the just passing through those flames with their bodies
untouched, and the fiery River running before the face of Christ, give us
sufficient light that the day of Judgment is here spoken of. Nor need it any
way trouble us, that he says, the slowness in passing through shall be
proportionable to the matter of sin; for there may well in the compass of one
day be diversity of torments, and of their duration; besides, delay may, not
improperly, signify difficulty in passing.

The Ninth Account.
That the Proofs of the opposite opinion are Modern, and betray their Novelty.

NOr has the hasty progress of this vulgar persuasion, concerning the
cessation of punishments before the day of Judgment, altogether Eclipsed the
contrary. For Venerable Bede himself does not admit to Heaven those whom he
supposes to be freed; and Alcuinus is positively against it. Both S. Anselme
and S. Thomas jointly confess, that the purging and saving fire mentioned by
the Apostle, may be understood of the fire of conflagration. And the most
eminent among our Modernes confess this to have been the sense of antiquity;
nor do themselves much labor to oppose or discredit it. But nothing can be
more clear then the Saxon Homilies (lately set forth in the By M. Whelock. 1644.
Annotations upon Bid) which having been purposely compiled that they might be
read throughout all the Churches in England, evidently declare the sense of the
English Church, till the beginning of the Schools. What shall I say of S.
Gregory, who first brought into the Church the contrary opinion, from certain
stories and relations of pious, but timorous persons? Not one word can be found
in him of admitting those, who were so pretended to be freed, to the Beatifical
Vision; but one, who had been excommunicated, is reported to have received the
Communion, others to have quitted their painful prisons. And here it may well
be noted, that our Modernists, who admit the fire spoken of by S. P^ul to be
the fire of the last day cannot from that Text (though none more clearly assert
Purgatory) draw the least advantage to the confirmation of theirs, but on the
contrary mere confusion and darkness.

And now let us cast up the total sum of this discourse, which consists of
these three constant asseverations of the holy Fathers; first, that some souls
already enjoy God; secondly, that none are yet locally in heaven (since to be
in place requires a body) thirdly, that all the faithful expect the day of
Judgment, that they may receive the reward of what they acted in their
lifetime, wherein all their works are to be tried by fire, and those who were
not perfectly holy, to be purged and suffer detriment. From whence we may with
the same constancy pronounce, that since those who dye in sin (provided their
foundation be on Christ) are in the last day to suffer purging flames, there
can be no other material ones after this li^e, but they. For if you substract
those testimonies of the Fathers, which either expressly speak of the day of
Judgment, or in such general terms, that it is evident they ought to be applied
to it, by consent, and in compliance with the rest, you must from them expect
no authority at all for the establishing of* Purgatory.

To which we may add, since all Christian belief or credulity Nothing can be a
part of our Belief but what is banded down to us by uninterrupted tradition
from the Apostles.
is finally resolved into, and totally depends on Christ and his Apostles
Doctrine, if any Tenet, concerning a subject not otherwise then by revelation
discoverable, appear not to have been, by un-interrupted succession, from them
derived unto us, it is most evident that originally it was new, and in respect
of Catholic Faith, can never cease to be new; and consequently may at all
times be segregated from it, and can never lay claim to antiquity, since the
contrary was, and ever will be more ancient. But nothing is more apparent then
that abstracting from Revelation, there remains no one ground in Christian
practice or Faith, whereon to establish real flames, or fire interceding
betwixt the hour of Death, and day of Judgment. If therefore that persuasion
can be known to have been introduced after the Apostles days, it is and ever
will be new, and inferior to the other, which teaches that in the last day
alone, those material flames are to act upon us.

But that this conceit was of a Proofs th^^ the Adversaries opinion came not to
us in that manner.
later date then the Apostles, S. Augustine to Dulcitius, quaest. 1. will
assure us. It Is not incredible also, says he, that some such thing may be
after this life, and whether it may be so or not, may be examined, and either
be discovered or continue hidden; to wit* that some of the faithful are, by a
certain Purgatory fire, so much sooner or later saved, by how much more or less
they set their affections upon transitory goods. Perceive you not that the
Purgatory flames we are now discoursing of, and their nature were such as in S.
Augustines time had not yet been searched into, and the search such, as perhaps
might admit of a discovery, perhaps not?

After S. Augustine, let S. Gregory himself be heard, a person beyond
exception, and the Father of the opinion it self. In the fourth Chapter of his
Dialogues, he brings in Peter demanding, why in those latter days so many
things come to light concerning the condition of souls, which were before
unknown? and this question is started immediately after the story of
Paschasius, freed from the Bathes; and his answer acknowledges and confirms the
truth of the demand.

Venerable Bede shall be our lib. 4. c. 22.
third witness, whose history imbued our Country with that opinion. He
sufficiently declares that England embraced it upon the credit of a miracle
wrought on a certain soldier, whose chains fell off, when Mass was said for
him, as supposed dead. We may therefore conclude that this opinion is to be
accounted new, and no ways comparable to the Doctrine of purgation of souls in
the day of Judgment, which extends it self to all Christian times and regions.

Lastly, the Council of Florence it self shall give us Testimony. For as in
other Articles then debated betwixt the Greeks and Latins, the devision being
made indifferent to either side, it remains confessedly safe and lawful for
Catholics to hold which they shall see good; so in this which was likewise
discussed, because (the Latins having first propounded it, and the Grecians
abstractedly explicated theirs) the Canon was at last framed abstractedly, the
Greeks were permitted to retain their own, which in a book, treating
particularly of this subject, they thus declare. We from our Teachers have not
received the Doctrine of Purgatory fire, and punishment by temporary and
ceasing flames, nor do we know that the Eastern Church has any such
persuasion. Which gave occasion to Fisher, that learned and holy Bishop of
Rochester, to think they denied Purgatory, whereas they denied it only in the
sense of the Schoolmen.

And now looking back upon what has been deduced, a kind of unexpected miracle
presents it self, to wit, That so many, and so familiar expressions of the
Saints, hitherto lying open and subject to censure, and esteemed, as it were
criminal, should on a sudden put on a new face, and come forth adorned with
truth and candor. These three Propositions I chiefly mention, That the Saints
may lawfully be prayed for; that they are yet detained in the Entry, or Porch,
or Avenues of Heaven: That they are all to pass through the fire of the last
Judgment, whereby themselves shall be approved, others suffer detriment, and
finally be saved, yet so as by fire. All which from our grounds are convinced
of manifest truth, and with a grateful return give no less Testimony to our
Doctrine, placing it under the protection of Christian discipline and defense,
and with their impenetrable files, securing it from all hostile attaques.

The Tenth Account.
The first exception against the opposite Tenet: From pure Revenge.

HAving thus from the Oracles of Holy Scripture and Fathers laid the foundation
of our Doctrine, we ought no longer to delay the Superstructure: But be at
length permitted to have recourse to Reason, which presupposes the basis of
Faith; and that she may have less of disguise, The Adversaries suppose all
venial sins to be remitted in the instant of dissolution by an act of
Contrition.
let us by our first exception in part divest her thereof. Those against whom
we are at present armed, maintain that all venial affections whatsoever, which
at the hour of death possess the soul, are by contrition, in the very first
moment of its dissolution, cancelled and erased; yet that the soul her self is
precipitated notwithstanding into Torments for her past offenses. We on the
other side, The Authors explication.
That parting from the body, she continnes in, and still pursues the same
affections which in this life she had contracted, and that those very self*
same affections become her torment till the last day of Judgment, when she is
again enabled to retract them. Our first exception then against our
Adversaries, is, that there can be no such pains, as they suppose, which thus
we prove.

If there be any such, they must So taat t^^ punish^ which remain (...) be
infli^ purely (...) of revenge for past offenses.
be purely vindicative; But it becomes not God to inflict torments upon
departed souls, through the sole Motive of Revenge, Therefore there are no such
torments in Purgatory as they fancy, due for the past offenses of holy souls.
The proof of the Major proposition is obvious, being our Adversaries own
concession; for they expect neither merit nor other advantage accrewing, either
to the souls themselves, or any other either single person, or community from
these pains, but purely a satisfaction to the Divine Justice; which that it can
have any other notion then of Revenge they go not about to show. According
therefore to their opinion (as far as I am able to apprehend it) these pains
are purely Vindicative.

I come then to the proof of Of Public Revenge.
the Minor, and observe that Revenge is twofold, public and private. In the
public, I observe the Magistrate to aim at the cutting off from the
Commonwealth an evil member, disturbing the general peace thereof, whether it
be by such chastisements as are apt to correct the sufferer, or by Death or
Banishment, which exterminate his person; with this farther design, to prevent
future evils in the Commonwealth, by deterring others, prone to the like
excesses, by the sense of their suffering^. From both these considerations a
Judge may fairly challenge all honest men's thanks for the penalties he inflicts.

I am not ignorant, that there Of Retaliation.
is also a third ground of inflicting punishment, to wit, the satisfaction or
comfort of him who received the injury, which seems chiefly to have had its
place in the law of Retaliation. But here it cannot well pretend to be
admitted, since neither God can suffer evil, nor even man (if I mistake not my
self) when fully master of Reason, demand his injurers chastisement merely
upon that account. For a rational man proposes some good to himself in every
action; but another mischief cannot be his good, unless accidentally it chance
to have some good annexed to it. Indeed in a passionate man, it is evident that
the allay of his anger is such a good, and so to him, from another evil
springs his good, but how a wise man, who regulates and governe^ his anger by
reason can esteem his own condition better precisely because another is
become worse, I cannot understand. For the evil of another not being, in it
self good, but on the contrary, against the nature of charity, and so,
considered in it self, bad even to him who was injured, it cannot be coveted,
but through some accidentally conjoined good.

It may be answered, that the equality and just proportion in An ebjection
answered.
the Commonwealth requires this amends. But it is soon replied, that
whatsoever is so challenged proceeds from Commutative, not Vindicative justice;
as when for a hurt or wound, a pecuniary mulct is leavy'd, the expenses of
Surgery, loss of time and profit, perhaps the grief and the like, are
considered. In diminution of reputation, such submission is made, before the
same or equivalent witnesses, as may restore the person injured to the same
esteem and integrity he had before the affront. These are the intercourses and
commerce of Commutative justice, nor do thy otherwise, then materially employ
the Revengeful part of it.

If we look into particular Revenges, their chief aim is, that Of priu^^^*
revenge.
their grief, that is passion and irrational appetite may be satisfied, in the
rest they differ not from the Public; and this very difference renders them
odious and impracticable to a wise man. I see no fruits of Revenge, besides
those we have explicated, which may beget or nourish a desire thereof. For
clearly, other harms, in themselves, as opposite to Charity, are to be
abhorred, unless they be corrected with some peculiar good to ourselves. But
our good is, either present, or future, in the prevention of evil; Restitution
cures o^^ present, caution our future* for these two reasons then alone may the
damage of others be justifiably sought.

To return now to the limits from whence this discourse has The wisdom of O^d
cannot permit him to in^^i^ such pains as neither a^^il the sufferer or any
other.
strayed. It being the practice of all Theology to transfer and apply the
notion of wisdom to the Divine attributes; and wisdom not permitting
punishments to be inflicted, where neither restitution nor Caution are
concerned, neither of which utilities can take place in these of Purgatory, a^
by them they are described; it remains apparent, that God never decreed such
punishments; for they would violate the Laws of Wisdom, since neither the
soulos themselves can thereby be amended, as having already cast off their ill
affections, nor their sufferings avail others by way of caution, being neither
authenticated by Faith, by Reason, nor the apprehension of our senses, deeply
imprinting the strokes of their objects. They must serve therefore only for
pure revenge, that is, for asswaging passion, from which God is absolutely free.

You will perhaps say, that God, Another objection from Gods attribut^ of
justice.
as he is styled goodness it self, so no less necessarily is he to be
accounted Justice it self. But Justice requires, that as no good without
remuneration, so no evil should go without punishment. It is therefore
necessary, since both sides agree, that a soul otherwise just, carries with it
some evils unpunished out of this world, that there should be time and place
elsewhere appointed for its chastisement. Since then this reason alone is
sufficient to evince a necessity of pains, they prudently may and ought, though
upon the only score of Revenge to be inflicted. To which I answer, answered*
denying this proposition assumed in the argument to be universally true, That
there is no good without remuneration, no evil without punishment, for neither
the highest Charity which is in the Blessed, nor the highest malice which is in
the damned have their proportionable compensations; there being in the next
world neither capacity to merit or demerit. Whence it is evident, that axiom
takes place only in this life, the reward of which we expect in the future; and
we grant, that the sins, which escape in this, are to be expiated in the other
world, but by such punishments as naturally spring from the sins themselves, as
delay of Beatitude till the day of Judgment, and the dissension and intestine
war of Appetites, which in our Theological Institutions are declared.

And it is to be noted, that this Vindicative Justice is not a thing simply and
of it self desirable, but in particular cases; and upon supposition of some
precedent evil, and consequently that it is not such as is illimited, nor such
whose object has no end or bound, as those things with are expetible for
themselves, but is terminated by some other virtue and therefore has the
object of that virtue for its extrinsecal end. It must therefore be subordinate
to goodness or charity, and is no farther or otherwise to be exercised then as
it conduces to the good of the person on whom it falls, or some other. Its
limits consequently are to be setch from the rules we have above laid down, of
Restitution and Caution. It Is not therefore a sufficient motive of punishing, to
satisfy justice; but its direction must be taken from a subalterne power, and
in the first place care must be had, that goodness may remain entire, and
unless respect of good All punishments which have no respect to some good, are
effects of cruelty no^ justice.
prescribe the punishment, that is, unless the punishment be profitable, it
becomes an exercise of cruelty not of justice.

The evidence hereof puts our adversaries to cast about for another means to
enervate our argument. They represent God injured A third objection from the
injury done to God by robbing him of his honor.
by our sins; we have robbed him of an Extrinsecal good, his Honor; we must
therefore make just amends, and since no restitution can be made out of our
other goods, which are all his, we must lie by it, our carcasses must pay for
it. Thus our angry opponents. We must Answer.
stop their carreer, and first, question that proposition which affirms God
has suffered injury by us. For how? did he suffer it willingly or against his
will? If against his will, he was not omnipotent, who had a desire to hinder
it, but could not. If willingly, it was no injury. Besides the Philosopher
denies justice to have place betwixt God and Men, betwixt Master and Servant;
but where no justice is, there can be no injustice. But of this more in our
Tom. 1. lib. 1. lect. 5
Theological Institutions.

Let us consider the other part of the charge. We have deprived God of some
measure of extrinsecal good or honor due to him. Let us, I say, examine
attentively what this means. Does our The diminution of Gods honor, what it
signifies.
adversary really think God enjoyes not now so much honor, as he would have
done if Peter had not sinned? Or only that from Peter himself he receives not
so much, though perhaps otherwise, or by some other means, he had as much, or
more? If the latter, I cannot perceive any diminution on Gods part, since he
has thereby as much or more honor, then if Peter had not sinned. For the
honor of God consists in this, that his work, that is, the universal fabric,
receive its ultimate perfection: So that, if that become more improved by
occasion of Peter's sin* then otherwise it had been, more honor redounds to God
from Peter's sinning, then from his well-doing, and this from Peter himself. But
if the universe, by this sin of Peter, be supposed to become less perfect, it
cannot be understood that God should do better in permitting then impeding his
sin, the laws of wisdom absolutely obliging him thereto*

But if the intent of the proposition be, that Peter, not simply, but as much
only as in him lay, did derogate from the Divine honor, then is there no
necessity of restitution, where, though there wanted not will, yet it took no
effect. You will urge, that though in truth and rigor, Peter took away no
honor from God, yet did he not effectually pay that honor to God which was
due, and consequently, by reserving it to himself, did in some sort deprive him
of it. I answer, The true ground of well doing.
that properly speaking, a sinner has no other obligation then to live well,
and that, because an evil life of its own nature, leads him to eternal misery;
other expressions are metaphorical. But to continue the metaphor however, if it
were true that the defect of Gods honor occasioned by Peter, were supplied and
repayr'd by some other, the argument would carry some shadow of strength. But
now that God from Peter himself, either by exemplar punishments in this world,
or such as spring from the sin it self in the next, or by drawing Peter, by
means of the said sin, to do for him greater things, has made himself amends,
it can no ways be thought that Peter is still tied to restitution of Gods
honor, or that God was injured by him, or can inflict any punishment on him,
upon the account of loss of honor. It is therefore concluded to be unworthily
and against all Theological evidence imposed on God, that he inflicts, or can
by his wisdom* and goodness be permitted to inflict pains purely vindicative,
that is, such as our adversaries assert in their Purgatory.

The Eleventh Account.
Two other exceptions, from the supposition of these pains to be unvoluntary
and corporeal.

OUr next consideration must be, whether pure spirits are truly capable of such
pains, as they stand committed to Purgatory there to undergo. For if they
really be found incapable thereof, all this intermedial fire vanishes instantly
into smoke. Let us therefore examine what pains signifies Of Pain, and
Punishment, and Torment.
to us here immersed in our bodies, and we shall presently discover that the
notion of punishment differs herein from that of pain or torment, that it does
not necessarily include grief, as pain and torment do. For we properly enough,
account it punishment, if any one for his offence-be taken away by the hand of
Justice, though sleeping or insensible of pain: But properly pain, at least
according to the Latin acceptance of the word, imports some dolorous
punishment inflicted on us against our wills, in which torment agrees with it,
though it differ from both in regard of demerit, or the hand of the inflicter.
For whatsoever grief befalls us against our wills, though it proceed not from
our merit, or the infliction of another, but from nature or accident, is still
a torment.

These are the native and genuine differences of the words, though they are often
by negligence confounded, as in this occasion we may perceive. For the nature
of that pain which here we search after has no respect *to merit, but consists
of these two notions, that it is dolorous, and inflicted from an external
Agent, on a repugning and unwilling sufferer. And from torment it either
differs not at all, or only in this; that it requires an extrinsecal Agent,
whereas torment may take its rise from within us. Contemplating then this sort
of pains, we find that by how much weaker and more obnoxious to grief the
minds of those that suffer them are, the higher and more vehement they become.
Not only History, but our own memory assures us, that some have expired in the
defense of secrets committed to them, without consenting to reveal them; others
endured the Gout, the Stone, the twisting of the gutts, without a sigh. And
Philosophy teaches us, that grief is heightened by thinking on it; the sharpest
torments, if there be constancy and manliness enough to employ the spirits upon
other objects, either vanishing or decreasing. So that pain, that is, such an
action as is No extrinsecal Agent can annoy us, but by our body.
apt to produce grief in us, no otherwise obtains that effect, then by our
unableness to busy and divert the spirits elsewhere. From the body then, and
the course of its spirits, it is that an extrinsecal Agent gets power to annoy
us. So that deliver but the soul from the body, and you have secured it from
outward passion; and consequently the spirits of the departed, which are to be
purged, are clearly exempt from all such pain as may be caused by any outward
Agent.

Again let us inform our selves even of these very men, who are the maintainers
of this opinion, whether the Will can, by any violence be drawn to consent?
they perfectly disclaim it, firmly building upon this fair ground, that, since
the will of its own nature, is a will, or spontaneous inclination, no act
thereof can be but Every act of will must needs be voluntary.
voluntary. We subsume; But in pure spirits grief or pain is an act of the
Will, therefore all the suffering of abstract'd spirits is voluntary, and
consequently not from without, seizing upon them against their wills, as they
use to imagine.

Again, the pain of souls that are purged, is either rational, and flowing from
the understanding, by connection of discourse, corresponding to our
syllogistical inferences; or a pure affection of the Will, by some other means
instilled. If the first, it is genuine, and the same which we assert, there
being a plenary knowledge in a separated soul, and its nature requiring, that
it is motion follow the understanding. If you maintain the second; first, you
defend an impossibility, because the Will clearly includes the understanding,
and volition, or an act of Will, an act of understanding, either formally, or
at least by consequence. Secondly, the entity of the soul being one, that is
including in her self both the said powers, it is manifest there cannot be in
the soul an act of the Will, without a preceding act of the understanding, into
which it is, as it were ingrafted, and without which it cannot be understood.
We have therefore evidently proved, that pains, extrinsecally inflicted, and
not as it were, spontaneously springing from within, cannot reach spirits,
divested of their bodies.

Our third exception against them is, that they affirm these purging pains to
be inflicted by fire, and corporeal instruments, which is a fiction vain and
altogether Corporeal Action, that is, Rarefaction and Condensation cannot reach
indivisible subjects.
impossible. For all corporeal action requiring space, can by no means be
exercised on an indivisible subject. Again, the quality of a Body extends not
it self beyond its own subject, whence no corporeal action is performed without
a sallying forth of parts, which touch and insinuate themselves into some other
body, which how it can be in relation to spiritual substances, is above humane
capacity. Further, the action of bodies is performed by division; and involves
Rarefaction and Condensation, from which the very Patrons of the opinion we
reject exempt and discharge No, not Instrumentally.
pure spirits. Nor is it any thing to the purpose, to cry out that the
corporeal action which they require is only instrumental; for all that
endeavor to speak intelligibly, make that to be the instrumental action, which
is the principal action of the instrument abstracted from the principal Agent,
which being directed by the principal Agent, or by the admixture of its action,
changed, acts otherwise then naturally it would have done. So that there being
no principal action of bodies upon spirits, neither can there be any
instrumental one.

Nor need we fear least they How man is notwithstanding subject thereto.
urge a ^^rity of the soul immured in the body. For Man being truly one
Entity, the soul cannot in this life, be actually divided from the body; for so
man would become two Entities, or Hypostases. And if Man be but one Entity, he
must be an Entity actually corporeal, and virtually only spiritual; so that
there is no inconvenience in its being changed by a corporeal Agent. And
because the subject in which the change is wrought is virtually spiritual, it
may be altered, as such, by the said change, because the whole is yet actually
corporeal. When Man therefore shall be resolved into Soul and Carcass, both
parts shall be found such, as virtually they were in the pre-existing Man,
after, and by the said immutation. Thus whilst the soul inhabits the body, it is
immutation from corporeal Agents, is not a change wrought by a body on a
substance actually spiritual, but actually corporeal, and virtually only
spiritual; in which there is not the least shadow of inconvenience. But those
who put the soul, whilst it is in the body, to be actually distinct from it,
both render it an Assisting Form, and are altogether at a loss, to explicate
how it is by the body changed.

The Twelfth Account.
Four other Exceptions, from these Pains being to no purpose, unproportioned to
the sins, of an indivisible duration, and endless.

IT is now time we should ask our Adversaries, to what end, or for what good,
they suppose God should inflict such torments on these souls as neither avail
them, nor are visible to us? Nay such as can have no effect upon them, since it
is evident by the loss of the things that were dear to them, by the delay of
their rewards, by the repentance of their past deviations, they really and
naturally suffer whatsoever by the Metaphors of fire, gnashing That fire is
taken Motaphorically as well as Darkness, gnashing of teeth, worm of
Conscience, etc.
of teeth, worm of Conscience, and darkness uses to be explicated to us; or to
speak more properly, being in its self inexplicable, is insinuated to us by the
severest punishments we are acquainted with, that so raising our thoughts above
them, we may endeavor to discover things more sublime and subtle. For that
darkness is a faint expression of the privation of the Beatifical Vision, it is
superfluous to observe. That fire and burning describe Love and Grief, Poets
and Surgeons can tell us; the one observing inflammation to be the companion
of pain, the other calling Love a consuming flame and devouring fire. The worm
of Conscience, and gnashing of teeth aptly betoken repentance, since we find in
our selves that collision of our teeth, when we are ashamed and confounded at
the foulness of some unhandsom action; and the gnawing worm of the conscience,
by the very phrase, represents the dictates and instinct of natural piety. It
being then apparent, from what has been said in Peripat. Institutions Book 5.
Lessons 3. and 4.
our Philosophy, that all this, from the very nature of the thing must needs be
verified in the souls that are purged, why presume we that fire alone is to be
taken truly and literally, all the rest Metaphorically? And what can less be
excused, why should God, since all this may be performed conformably to the
order and government of Nature her self, superadd to natural causes other
improper, That souls in Purgatory would endure all their Torments with extreme
pleasure.
unnecessary and disproportioned ones?

From whence a sudden and unexpected truth breaks forth, That all these pains
are purely pleasures. For the souls to be purged, being on the one side, truly
in Charity, and extremely thirsting after eternal Good, which they are certain
to attain; and on the other side, clearly understanding that corporeal
punishments are the only means to capacitate and adopt them to the fruition of
that Beatitude, it is evident, They look upon these pains, as a man of
invincible courage, highly inflamed, and passionately enamoured of some
achievement, would upon his adventurous actions or sufferings in the pursuit;
wherein reason and experience tells us, he would feel unspeakeable pleasure.

Our fifth charge takes its rise from a principle in Logic, though (if I well
remember) deduced by the Philosopher in the fifth book of his Physics. He
admonishes us, that some things there are which will by no means suffer
themselves to be compared each to other; to wit, such things as are ranked
under diverse kinds, or predicaments. For it is madness to say, a Horse runs as
much as a Swan is white: or, Rome is as far distance from London as an Elephant
is great. These are the comparisons of fools. But I beseech you, can any
corporeal thing so differ from another corporeal, as it does from a spiritual?
if then this be impossible, what rule of proportion can we invent betwixt
burning and willing, that is, sinning? And yet upon this comparison There can
be no proportion betwixt sin and fire.
stands all the fabric of their Doctrine; for, take away the proportion
betwixt the action of fire upon the soul, and it is assent to sin, and it is
impossible that pains should be assigned to and compensate sins, and such a
duration in flames correspond to so much heynousness in the offense. But on the
contrary, if voluntary griefs be understood to be the punishment of sin, they
being the very effects thereof, they must also of necessity keep exactest
proportion with it, the sins themselves measuring out their own punishment.

From the same root shoots forth another objection; that, in spiritual acts,
whether they concern Beatitude or Misery, there is no proportion to Time, so
Nor betwixt time and a spiritual Act.
as to make the pain which lasts longer to be greater, or that which ends
sooner, less. These are the proprieties of things corporeal, whereas among
spiritual substances, the whole difference of their duration consists in the
necessity of their ^eing or inexisting* For as, because spirits have no
dimensions, their substances cannot be compared to any quantitative bulk; as
this Angel to a Perch, that to an A^re, the third to a mile, but the very
lowest of them is more noble and eminent then the whole mass of Quantity; so
every act of a pure Spirit, reflected on it self, being of its own nature, out
of the reach of time, is not subject thereto, but greater then the whole
extension of time, as being to be estimated by the necessity of its
inexistence, not by the succession of its own or any other's parts.

Nor is it unworthy our observation, Length of time, augments corporeal grief
or pleasure, but has no affect on pure spirits.
that corporeal grief or pleasure is therefore greater, the longer it
continues, because it consists in motion; for motion is integrated of parts,
and the more parts there are which constitute it, the greater is the Whole. On
the contrary; let us consider, if, to a thing, which coexists with a longer
space of time, nothing be thereby added, or to that, whose duration is less,
nothing diminished, there can be no reason, why duration should affect that
more sensible, this less; there being in them no plurality of parts, by which
the excess of ones pain or pleasure above the others is measured. So that
whatsoever grief of a separated soul, is, by the quality and force of its
essence, greater, the same, let its coexistence with time be what it will, must
be more vehement, and that which is less, less intense; nothing being gained or
lost by the perpetuity or interruption of the motions of the Sun or other
celestial bodies. And hence again it is apparent, that this opinion totally
mistakes the propriety of spiritual nature.

From whence we may further infer, that the grief or any other act of a
separated soul, is no less indefectible, then the state of it is separation; and
consequently, that its pain beginning after death must continue till a new
conjunction No act of a separated soul can bechanged without a new Conjunction
with the body unless* miraculous^ly.
with the body, if the ordinary bounds and progress of Nature be observed. For
having no parts of succession or duration, of its own nature, it must either
continue but one moment, that is, not at all, or ever. For, as Points in
quantity, so instants in time, not being of the nature of the whole, but pure
terms and negations, it is evident, that a spiritual act, to which the duration
of one only instant is assigned, has no duration at all; but if an indivisible
duration be assigned it, equal to any part of time, the very supposition it
self constitutes it of a superior and more noble order, and exalts it above
the reach of all or any time assignable. For, the comparison between them being
to be made abstractedly from parts, what can be considered as common to them
both, but merely their necessity of existing? That is, that a spirit can have
no causes of its defect, a body more or fewer, but always some. So that we
must confess every spirit whatsoever outvyes the most solid and durable of
bodies, since evidently in this necessity of existing, every spirit transcends
all bodies, as in our Peripat. Inst. Book 5. l. 1. par. 2. and 3.
Philosophy is demonstrated. But imagine that one indivisible act should
out-last another, and this indivisibly, without addition of duration to
duration, is it intelligible in what this out lasting should consist, or how it
can be any thing extrinsecal? It is then irresistibly true, that every duration
of such an Act of its own nature, is eviternal.

To conclude, experience tells us, that Resolutions or Determinations Every Act
of a separated soul is made upon full view of all circumstances, and
consequently inalterable.
made upon the full view of circumstances, are, of their own nature, immutable;
for reason alone, or consideration can be the motive of change in Wills* and it
was supposed no new reason could present it self. It having therefore been
demonstrated Peripat. Just. book 5. Lesson. 2. 3, 4.
in Philosophy, that spirits, segregated from the dreggs of matter, break forth
into every act upon distinct knowledge and perfect consideration of all motives,
it is also convinced, that their acts are, of their own nature, inalterable.
Besides, we observe the cause of all changes to reside in things active,
communicating and participating the same matter, and, with opposition one to
the other, pertinaciously struggling to possess themselves of it and master it.
Of which kind of contention and rivalship, spirits, now infanchised, being
wholly void, nothing appears which may destroy or alter their acts.

The Thirteenth Account.
Two other Exceptions, from the non-connexion of such pains with the sins, and
their being supposed to remain due, after the fault forgiven.

BUt because the Philosopher has instructed us that for the utter eradication
of any Error, it is necessary we should retrive the causes of it, that is,
whence, and by what steps the assertors were led into its snare, we must not
desist our pursuit till we have obeyed his commands. In order whereunto, let us
first reflect, that God, in the Government God governs his World not as a
Prince but as a perfect Architect.
of humane things, may be considered either as a Monarch, with precepts and
punishments ruling his people, or as an Artificer or expert Engineer, so
contriving every part and movement of his machin, that of it self it may
perform and attain the end for which he designed it. The first way, though one
of the most eminent within our ken, yet by reason of the imperfection of the
subject (the weakest of all intellectual substances) Man, whose providence is
short-sighted, is also weak and imperfect. For Princes, amongst men ordain such
rewards, both for well and ill deserves of the Commonwealth, as of their own
nature, have no relation to the quality of merit or demerit, but are merely
connected with their Wills and commands, and which they are forced to execute
with their own, that is, their ministers strength. And besides, commands of
that nature suppose, in the subject, an ignorance of his Prince's reasons, and
an acceptance of what is to be done or suffered by him, from the sole motive
of his commanders power.

The latter proclaims the incomparable wisdom of that Architect, who could so
artificially frame at once his work, that it should of it self, perform all
operations without supplement, or future minute alterations in any of its
members or organs. His fabric is in all respects complete, rewards and
punishments therein being not only conformable to, but also originiz'd from
their merits; the precepts which are given, are directed to the promoting
nature, and increase of science, and are accepted through a sight and knowledge
of their causes and utilities.

Evident therefore it is, that, however the first way, which involves the truth
in Allegory, may be more adopted to those understandings, which being but
moderately enamored of truth, bend not their whole strengths to obtain it; yet
the latter is both necessary, and much more satisfactory to those, who rending
the parabolical veyl, fix their contemplations on the naked discovery of the
thing, as it is in it self. For they easily perceive, that God being the Author
of Nature, which flows from him as from its proper cause, must contradict
himself if he act any thing against it, and guide not every thing according to
its own nature, especially men to Beatitude. But it is clear, that voluntary
assign^tion of punishment bearing no connection with the fault, is not an action
of Nature, but of our imperfect reason not sufficiently qualified to govern and
steer nature in its right course it is therefore no less* indubitable, that it
mis*becomes God, and ought not to be attributed to him.

You will object, that the sacred An Objection from Examples in Scripture of
punishments which have no connection with the fact.
stories overflow with Examples of chastisements which have no coherence with
the crimes for which they are inflicted, or at least grow not immediately out
of them. That David's son died, because he had made others blaspheme the name
of the Lord; That the Boys who scoffed at Elizeus were torn in pieces by a
Bear: That a Lion destroyed the disobedient Prophet, and a Answer.
thousand such like. I answer, in Tom. 2. lib. 2. lect. ^. par. 2 3, 4, 5, 6.
the Theological Institutions it is sufficiently declared, that there is then a
necessity of a miracle, or work beyond the usual and connatural course of
causes, when our good requires it should by us be thought, that the order of
Nature is shaken and overpowered When this happens in order to punishments, the
connatural Government of men exacts, that the usual connection, which is found
in the ordinary series of things betwixt the fault and penalty, should be
omitted, least the Revenge which God in those cases intends to signalize,
should seem an effect of chance or Nature, not of the uncontrouleable power of
his Deity. But these Examples are not to be drawn to the condition of ordinary
punishments which are usual and customary in the common order of things.

The same humane frailty, in point of discourse, leads our Adversaries into
another incongruity, which it will not be amiss here to take notice of. They
affirm that God remits the guilt of sin, but not the pain. For, as they
experience in themselves, when injured or exasperated, a certain ^bullition or
quick motion of spirits about the heart, which though at the same time they
forbear any violence, yet can they not allay; so do they persuade themselves
that there is in God a certain aversion from a sinner, which though upon his
repentance it cease, yet do they conjecture, that an intention of punishing
him may still remain. From whence they infer, that all the guilt of the soul is
pardoned before it arrives at Purgatory, but the pain is there notwithstanding
to be endured. But it seems they never consider, that the passion or
impetuosity spoken of, is a corporeal motion, unworthy a wise man, much more
unfit to be trans^^^'d or applied to God. For anger in God, signifies no more
then an intention to punish. Whence necessarily it follows, The punishment of
soul cannot outl^st their guilt.
that as much as is remitted of the fault, so much must be remitted of the
punishment. Again, what can the sinner be guilty of, if not of sin? Of an
Offense, say you, to God. But that, if Punishment ensue not thereon, whom does
it prejudice? The Man? He is concerned only in the Pain. God against whom the
offense is? But God can receive no prejudice. And indeed in our common speech,
we do not use to say sin deserves guilt, but punishment; so that the guilt of
sin is the fault it self, and not a guilt or obnoxiousness to fault, but to
punishment. Impossible therefore it is, that Pains, purely upon the account of
sins already remitted, should be undergone in Purgatory.

Let them therefore consider, whether the passion, we experience in our selves,
be any thing else then a beginning or first motion of the Heart to Revenge,
that is, to annoy the Offender, that is, in a spiritual substance a will to
punish. But though a will to punish be a different thing from an aversion to
sin, yet is it subsequent thereto, and later then it, and consequently,
according to the nature of the thing, will first of the two cease. It is
therefore against Nature, that the aversion should be taken away, and yet the
will to punish remain, which is wholly grounded and originally dependent upon
that aversion. Whence those Divines are grossly mistaken, who affirm the effect,
that is, the Will to punish ceasing, the Cause, that is, the aversion from the
sinner is taken away; and deny that the cause, to wit, the aversion being taken
away, the effect, to wit, the Will to punish, ceases. Finally, if need were* we
could in our defense muster an army of Fathers, and appeal to the common sense
and Judgment of Mankind. You will Objection from the dissimilitude betwixt a
sinner and God.
say perhaps, at least it cannot be denied, but that there is a previous
dissimilitude betwixt God and the sinner, antecedently to his Will of punishing
him, and that therein consists the point of offense. It is answered, no man
explicates Answer.
the nature of offense, by dissimilitude, but by action, so that if the
dissimilitude act not upon the offended party, it is no offense at all. And
besides the dissimilitude it self is not so great, as that of irrational
creatures, for though it disfigure, yet does it not cancel the image of God
within us. But all other things, besides Man, deserve not the honor of being
called his image, but his foot-step. Lastly, this aversion is the cause of his
punishing, whence, without it, there can be no liableness to Pain in Man, no
appetence thereof in God.

The Fourteenth Account.
Of the Punishments which we meet with in the sacred Scriptures, and of the
remission of sins.

TO what we have here delivered, Examples out of Scriptures of sins punished
after remission s^ereof.
it may be objected, that nothing is more frequent in the sacred Scripture,
then the account of punishments inflicted after the undoubted remission of the
fault. We, his progeny, feel yet the effects of the sins of our first Father
Adam, whom we no ways doubt to reign with Christ, our savior in Heaven. We
read that the sins of M^ses and Aaron were punished with death, and yet at that
same time, that God familiarly conversed with them, after the offense. We read
of the people sin, which God threatens to remember in the day of Revenge, and
yet in the mean while acknowledge his great benificence to them, and
particularly his introduction of them into the Land of Promise.

Now Jeremiah tells us, chap. 2. that the translation of the Tribe of Judah was
that day of revenge. Is not this, says he, done unto thee, because thou did
forsake the Lord thy God at that time when he led thee by the way? And yet
betwixt those two times how often was God reconciled to them, especially in the
days of Sa^^uel, David and Solomon? Of the sin of David, we read, that his son
should dye, and the sword never cease* in his house, yet are we confident of
his being in favor with God, and the text assures us, that in the presence of
Nathan his sin was transferred. What then can be more evident than that
punishment remains due after the sin is cancelled? So that it may well be
concluded, that mortal sins, though remitted, still challenge their reward in
Purgatory; and venial ones, unrepented, are there, by those grudging flames, to
be expiated.

I answer, Almost in all things which fall under our consideration, How sins
are said to be remitted.
we are forced to distinguish, in the same propositions, there being predicated
sometimes simply, sometimes secundum quid, or according to some one respect or
notion. And so in our present case; treating of the remission of sins, we must
acknowledge an absolute and a respective remission; which I shall presently
descend to explicate. If first I be permitted to admonish the readder of a
danger he may easily incur of being drawn into error by the manner of our
conceptions or apprehensions of things. For, experiencing in our selves that we
then properly forgive an injury, when our exasp^rated minds return from their
commotion to an even and calm temper, we are apt to expect the same should
happen in the remission of our sins in Gods part: Which notwithstanding is
quite otherwise. For since there neither is, nor possibly can be any temporary
or indeed any relation at all in God to his creatures; it is evident, that as
well all relation, as all change, to which relation is subsequent, is on the
creature's side* A sin therefore to be or to have been remitted, signifies
nothing else then that the sinner himself is or was converted. From which
animadversion we may easily secure our selves against the error into which
many are un^arily precipitated, believing that sint are indivisibly remitted;
so that not by parts, and in process of time, but instantaneously, by a certain
conversion of the Divine disposition from malevolent to benign, the said
remission is effected. But if we look upon this remission as made on the
creatures side, then by how much, and, by what degrees the soul is perfected
and corrected, as to the object of sin, by so much and by the self-same degrees
will the remission of the sin be wrought.

And since we have already Simply and respectively.
said, that the remission of sin is twofold, simple, and according to some
respect; it follows evidently, that if sin be destroyed, as to that wherein
its essence consists, it is to be termed simply and perfectly destroyed. But if
it be only destroyed as to certain things which are accidental to the nature of
the sin, we must say, that it is in some respects remitted, but simply
remains; and contrariwise it may perhaps remain in some regards, though simply
destroyed; What sin prope^iy consists in
sin essentially consists in an affection opposite to and incompossible, or
inconsistent with the love of God, or Charity; that is, in such a disposition
toward a created good, as is apt to render it the ultimate end of that man; so
that during that affection he cannot have a will to relinquish it, or esteem
himself happy, if deprived of it for ever. All other affections toward the
said good, are not properly sin; as for example, the habitual inclination to
desire it for it self, and the conditional appetency by which we should be
actually carried toward it, unless it deprived us of our Beatitude; and
whatever other way a thing may be said to be a sin.

Now it is evident, that this sin It Is divisio^ into internal and external.
is divided into the internal affection and external operation; both which are
termed sin, but so, that, though the extern act more vulgarly, yet the intern,
more properly, has the nature of sin, that is, of evil; since its nature is
formally rooted in the mind, and by participation only is communicated to the
external action. And from hence again a new equivocation springs, which darkens
the subject we have in hand, unless we steadily fix our eye on the several
senses which overshadow one the other. We are then to enquire after the
remission both of the internal and external sin, and that both simply and
comparatively. It having therefore been said already, that according to the
well-ordere providence of God the punishments of sin signify the evils which
emerge from them; and again, that the guilt of sin consists in man's
obnoxiousness to those punishments, that is, evil consequences of the sin; it
remains concluded, that a sin is then remitted, when the sinner is no longer
liable to the evil fruits of his sin. But it is apparent, that upon every
actual, internal, mortal sin, an eternal privation of the Beatifical Vision
must of its own nature ensue, together with those griefs, which spring either
from the loss or impotence of obtaining the affected false goods, or the
consideration of the true ones neglected; and that in the obnoxiousness*
thereto consists the essential guilt of mortal sin, o^ of sin properly taken;
whenever therefore, by true repentance, the affections of the sinner are so
changed, that, for the love of God and Beatitude he is Internal mortal sin when
properly remitted*
ready to abandon the pleasures or profits which formerly he valued above all*
it is evident, (...) is no longer liable to the griefs and evils springing from
those affections* and consequently, his sin is substantially, that is, simply,
remitted.

Farther, it is manifest that every Inter^^^ venial (...) when remitted.
affection to a created Good, which, though weakly indeed, and so as not to
overthrow the soul's fixed and settled appetency of Beatitude* is yet carried
toward it not purely as toward a means, but in some sort for its own sake,
must need^ cause in the soul a privation of the Beatifical Vision, and the
griefs comitant therewith, till it be retracted, and consequently render the
sinner obnoxious to th^se sufferings, but not eternally, because the love of
preference of Beatitude above all things is a cause inexisting in the soul,
which in due circumstances is fit to rectify that lesser inordinate affection.
Which affection may either primarily and originally be thus conversant about
its object, or be the remains of a precedent mortal distemper. If the first, it
is not to be esteemed remitted, if the second, the sin may be said to be simply
remitted, but in some r^spect to remain. Of the remission of external sin.


Of external sin the same may be affirmed; that through the well regulated
providence of God, it is punished by the ill effect^ o^ consequences thereof,
and by degrees remitted, in the same proportion as by little and little those
ill effects cease to flow from it. And thus the sense of the holy Scriptures,
as to this point is ^lucidated, and the seeming contrariety opens it self into
a fair distinction. For when God professes, that in whatsoever hour the sinner
shall repent of his wickedness, in the self same he will remit and pardon him,
it is spoken of the internal sin, and its proper punishments. For the Church
acknowledges* that a perfect act of true contrition quits the scores of
punishment as well as guilt; I mean, if it arrive at that degree, that, as
demonstration chaseth away at once all doubtfulness, and staggering
incertitude, so the firmness of its resolutions cuts off all manner of tendency
toward the formerly beloved object. Such seems to have been that noble one
of holy St. Augustine, who after that sharp and violent conflict of the Flesh
against the Spirit, was suddenly translated into so perfect a quiet of mind,
that from thence forward he felt no attempts upon the superior part of his
soul.

But if the resolution be not so strong and generous, but that new assaults of
temptations shake it, and though they cannot overthrow, yet make the soul, as
it were, to reel or stagger, as most commonly it happens; then is the sin
simply remitted, but in part remains, and in this world it is punished by evils
following this debility of mind, either sins or conflicts, or whatsoever other
griefs proceeding from them; but in the future, by the fruit and offspring of
those evils, till in the last Judgment day, that tepidness, and, as it were,
rust, with which the soul by contagion of that sin was infected, be burnt off.
From whence you easily see, that, in a perfect repentance God remembers no
longer the sin, but, in an imperfect one accommodates and adopts the pains to
the state of the soul.

From what has been declared, How children are punished for their parents sins.
it likewise appears, how God revengeth the sins of parents, to wit, external
ones, upon their posterity, and this sometimes intri^secally, when the children
become themselves* wicked by example of their parents, but for the most part
extrinsecally. Which la^^er Sometimes suddenly o^ miraculously.
punishments are threefold, first, immediate, as when the son of David was
punished with death: secondly, as it were eternal, as Sometimes to the (...) de
(...) of their race or ^^tion.
when, for the same sin, it was threatened that the sword should never depart
from his house: and likewise for the adoration of the golden calfe, that they
should be punished in the day of visitation. For these expressions import that
those very sins should cause a total destruction of that people. Of which sort
is likewise that prediction of Christ our Lord, that all the innocent blood,
which had been spilt from the just Abel to his time should fall upon the But
most common (...) to the 3d. and 4th generation*
Jews. The third degree is betwixt these two, as a standing rule of the divine
chastisements, to wit, to the fourth generation. All this is evident in the
examples which we hinted at. For the punishments of Adam, Moses, Aaron, and
David also in the death of his son, belong to that rank which we have called
miraculous, in which it was requisite they should seem to proceed, not from the
order of causes, but the especial judgment of God. But for the posterity of
Adam, their punishments whether internal or external, are Tom. 1. lib. 1. lect
4.
clearly shown in our Theology, to flow from the order of causes; where it is
likewise evident, that that sin Tom. 2. lib. 3. lect. 10, p. 1. 2. etc.
can never be remitted till the Resurrection and last Judgment. The crime of
adoring the golden Calf became in like sort almost eternal, th^^ is, lasted
till the extirpation of the whole people, Which Ezekiel testifies, Chap. 20.
reproaching the Jews, that from their departure out of Egypt, they persisted,
by continual relapses, in the sins of their forefathers, who came from thence.
Whence it may be seen that the stiffness of neck, which Moses so often
exprobrated and complained of, continued in that people, till their utter
extermination, and that (as Christ our Lord assures us) all the just blood
spilt through the world was punished in that last generation.

The very same discovers it self in the sin of David, whose Love to Bersheba
preferred Solomon before the rest of his Children, to the succession of his
Crown, which was the apparent cause of emulation between Absalom and Adonia^,
and of both their deaths, and of all the crimes of Absalom. From the same
fountain, through Solomon's disorders, sprung the schism of the ten tribes, and
all the subsequent wars, with the defection of the house of Israel from God,
and the corruption and wickedness of the house of Judah, and consequently all
their mutual chastisements, and final overthrow; the sons still inheriting the
vices of their Parents. Lastly, from the same principles it appears, why for
the most part the sins of private persons cease in the third or fourth
Generation; to wit, because their memory and imitation is, for the most part,
lost; the respect of kindred growing weak, and the permixion of foreign blood,
in the several Mothers, rarely suffering the great Grandfathers blood to boil
with any notable vigor in the veins of his Great-grandchild.

From this explication, it is easily What the punishment of* sin is.
gathered, that, according to the natural series of Agents and Patients, the
punishment of sin, whether external or internal, is nothing else but the
increase and exaggeration of sins in those who are perverse, and the decrease
and diminution of them in those who amend. For both the internal sin, in the
wicked, is punished by greater sins, and their external punishments are the
extension and propagation of the sin, into new subjects, or into more parts of
the same subject, that is, increases it extensively or intensively. And on the
contrary, in those that are good, the strugglings and dolorous affections,
which wrestle with the affection to sin, are their punishments, as to the
internal; and their external ones are the dimintiuon of the dying sin weakly,
derived into other subjects.

The Fifteenth Account.
Three other Exceptions, That they neither truly take off the punishments, nor
rightly make them due, nor in fine make any real Purgatory.

FRom hence we may observe another mistake of our Divines in their model
Purgatory. For though they determine the sufferings there to be certain pains,
inflicted by torments, yet when these pains cease, they neither require nor
think of any pleasures, or at least good acts which may succeed them;
parallelled to which kind of Philosophy neither the whole variety of Nature nor
Grace, that I know of, affords one experiment. For, in vegetativ^ nature,
griefs are assuaged by a certain congruous and self cherishing disposition of
nature, and, in supernatural works, sin is not extinguished but by infusion of
grace and affections opposite to sin. To assert No grief can cease without the
admission of some pleasure.
therefore certain pains which must be determined and assuaged by a pure
cessations, and not by the entrance and subinter mission of any contrary,
wholly misbecomes a Philosopher, and is altogether repugnant to the ground work
of natural action, which requires an opposition of causes severally challenging
to themselves the common subject.

Our eleventh exception takes notice of another absurdity. They affirm, that in
the instant of death (whether in the body or out of the body I know not) by an
act of contrition, all guilt A perf^ct act of contrition discharges punishment
as well as guilt.
whatsoever, which during the whole life had been contracted, is immediately
washed off* I urge, since the efficacy of contrition is by both sides
acknowledged to be such that it not only abolishes the crime, but equalizes,
and consequently is, of its own nature, capable to extinguish also the
punishment, and the act of contrition we now treat of, must needs be strong and
perfect, why does it not by its equivalence supersede all punishment? Certainly
if it be made by the soul now discharged from the body, we cannot doubt but it
must be of the highest degree, and much more intense and vehement then any
contrition, which here with ardency of affections were able even to set the
very body on fire, as some pious Histories relate to have happened. But if it
be put to be made in the body, being endowed with so eminent a prerogative as
not to leave uncancelled any one slight stain, upon what grounds, or how shall
we deny it the power of discharging punishments also? But they will choose to
put this act of contrition to be made in the term of separation, where merit
and satisfaction have no longer place, and the inevitable necessity of
suffering only remains. And then I shall demand from whence they have learned
that blemishes can there be rectifyed, where penalties cannot be mitigated?

Nor is there more strength of The souls i^ Purgatory may as well merit for
themselves as for others.
reason in this, that the merits of the living may avail them, but their own
not so. For could their proper merits be regarded, all Purgatory, according
their own grounds were at an end; for the perfect charity and co^^^^ition of
separated souls, being exercised with the whole force of their substance would
in one moment set them free. Again, what Piety, what Justice has enacted this
Law, that the distressed souls may not pray for their own delivery? Can any
thing be more absurd? They make them such Favorites of God, that for us they
can obtain many graces, whilst for themselves they can procure none. I remember
to have heard a Divine (whom a printed course of all Divinity had already
raised above the lowest form) prescribing this advice or receipt, that
whosoever had lost any thing, should promise upon condition he received it, to
procure so many Masses for departed souls, and failing of his hopes, should
fail also in the performance, thereby to compel the souls to obtain of God the
recovery of what had miscarried. O pitiful and sordid Divinity! such a train of
absurdities follow the admission even of one unexamin'd Principle.

To make up the complete dozen. Let us reflect on the abuse of the name
itself, and observe, that, whilst they vainly labor to establish their own,
There can be no Purgation where there is no coinqui^^ion.
they destroy and annihitate all manner of Purgatory. For to purge, cleanse,
and the like expressions, clearly import a supposition of stain and blemish in
whatsoever is said to be purg^ed and cleansed; and in like sort, to amend and
rectify presupposes faults and imperfections; if you then take away their
stains, these imperfections, you take away all Purgatory. For certainly, to
smart and suffer, is not to be purged, but finally to be condemned, or undergo
the last sentence of Damnation. But the Patrons of this kind of Purgatory lay
this for the very foundation of their doctrine, That the imprisoned souls are
already holy and full of charity, and consequently incapable of being purged.

Much better therefore, and more solidly then they, did the Poet philosophise
in the sixth book of his Aeneids; who having after his manner, made a
description of ^ the torments of the damned, thus proceeds to that of
Purgatory, and its causes.

Nor when (p^or souls) they leave this wretched life
Do all their evils cease, all plagues, all strife,
Contracted in the Body: many a stain
Long time inured needs must, even then, remain,
For which sharp torments are to be endured*
That vice inveter are may, at last, be cu^'^,
Some empty souls are to the piercing winds
Exposed; whilst others, in their several kinds,
Are plunged in icy or Sulphurous lakes
Each has its doom, cach one its fortune takes,
From whence ^e to the Elisian fields is lead,
Where few, alas! the pleasant alleys tread.
What could any Philosopher meditate more sublime and noble? That corporeal
affections by depraved habits, penetrate into, and infect the soul; that they
are not by death extinguished, but carried along to the next world, whereby the
souls are punished, and their punishments become truly Purgatory, or expiating;
that their torments are proportionate and of several degrees, which degrees are
taken from the division of Elements, that is, corporeal Agents, from whence the
disordered affections themselves have their roots. The pursuers of Honor and
Vanity are tormented by the wind, that is, their being puffed up with Pride.
Those who delighted to wallow in sordid pleasures, by the fluidness and
momentariness of their fleeting enjoyments. Lastly, the Potent and ambitious
affectors of Tyranny, with their own ardent and truly enflamed desires. That
finally, after this state of Purgatory, they are made Denizons of Paradise: and
those (speaking of the times he lived in) but few; the multitude, whose sins
were mortal and irretractable, remaining engulf'd in eternal miseries.

The Sixteenth Account.
The thirteenth Exception, That their opinion is opposite to the expressions of
Scriptures, of Fathers, of the Church, of the Council of Florence, and Benedict
XI.

ANd I would to God the inconsequence Scripture and Fathers still inculcate a
Purgation, which the adversaries render impossible by cancelling all sin at the
instance of separation.
of discourse, and defect of right ratiocination were the only inconvenience,
and that their error stretched not it self to the violation of sacred truths,
and contradiction of the holy Scriptures. Machabeus offers sacrifice, that the
dead may be absolved from their sins; Christ affirms, that in the world to come
sins are remitted: The Apostle assures us that every ones works are to be tried
by fire, and some persons to suffer detriment; as though he should say, that
some thing should by fire be taken off from the party, as dross from the pure
metal.

Nor do the expressions of Holy Fathers, grounded on the Scripture, any ways
disagree. For whether they speak of Baptism by fire, of purging flames, of
fire correcting and amending, of passing through the flames of the last
Judgment, which shall burn the sinner, spare the Saint, of a suspension in the
day of Judgment, and a kind of uncertainty of the Judge's sentence, or
whatsoever other expressions, heretofore mentioned, they make use of, from
whence any thing can be gathered toward the explication of Purgatory, nothing
can be drawn to establish pure pains; but the whole discourse runs constantly
of sins, and of the purgations of sins, and depraved affections; so that
nothing can be more clear, then that these later Divines change the style of
the whole Church, a manifest token of their Novelty.

Let it therefore be acknowledged, that this vulgar conceit, as it is opposite
to the sense of the Church, really and effectually abolishing Purgatory, and in
lieu thereof presenting us a slaughterhouse of barbarous executions; destroying
the tender mercy of God, whose aim is always the utmost good of every
creature, and instead thereof offering us a barren apprehension of Pure
Justice, and unbenefical pains; so is it also dissonant, and in a manner
perfectly repugnant to the phrase, both of the holy Scripture* and of the
Fathers explicating either it, or the sense and belief The Greek Church had
good reason to reject their explication of Purgatory.
of the Church. Which if they are the marks of the ancient faith and
persuasion, then is this other new: And if proposed to the Greeks, under the
notion of a Tradition, and not only of an opinion, they certainly had ground to
object against the Latins, that they endeavored to superseminate tares* and
bring into the Church new Tenants, and such as were recommended by no ancient
Tradition.

The last, but not the least, of our exceptions against this vulgar Nothing but
wa^^ of Charity can debar separated soul from the Beatifical Vision*
opinion shall be, their putting another impediment to the Beatifical Vision of
souls freed from the body, besides the want of charity. For since the Church
neither knows, nor holds forth any other way of attaining Beatitude, but that
great and Royal highway of charity; since Christ our Lord, his Apostles, and
all other Fathers preach no other Doctrine, to introduce any obstacle of
Beatitude without their authority, were clearly to control the discipline of
all Christian institution, and put a bold exception to their general Rule.
Besides, true Theology assures us, that perfect charity is a disposition
necessitating A position acknowledged by all true Divines.
or determining Almighty God, to communicate himself to those that bring it; so
that he can no more deny himself to be the object of a soul in perfect charity,
then forbear the concreation of a Rational soul when the Embrio is fully
formed, or the infusion of existence, when the actions of inferior causes
requires it. But it is manifest, that those, who put the soul, in the first
instant of its separation, to be endowed with the same eminence of charity,
which it has or shall have when it is admitted to the fruition of God, and yet
notwithstanding, for sometime, debar it thereof, must needs suppose that
disposition of soul not sufficient and adequate, but require something else,
whereof neither the Scripture nor holy Fathers ^^ve us the least hint, who all
unanimously acknowledge no other partition wall betwixt God and us, but our Sins.

Finally the Florentine Council And ^^^^^ted by the Floren^i^^ Council and
Benedict 11th.
and Benedict the eleventh seem clearly enough to have condemned this their
Doctrine; the latter determining, that the souls of the Faithful, which have
nothing to be purged or expiated, do, immediately after their departure, and
before the General Day, see the face of God: the former adding thereto, that
the souls of such as dye presently after Baptism, or such as after death are
purged, are immediately received into Heaven. By both which expressions, this
may indubitably be concluded to be meant, That nothing but what may be purged,
that is, what stains and contaminates, that is sin, can deprive a soul from its
admission to Heaven, and the full sight of God. Let us subsume* But, according
to our Adversaries, all, who dye not in mortal sin, after the first moment in
which they are said to be perfectly converted to God, have nothing now
remaining to be expiated, but are already, after death, cleansed: Therefore
they are all immediately after the first moment received into Heaven. Is it not
evident, that the determination of this Pope and Council subverts their whole
fabric of Purgatory? For though they endeavor to equivocate, yet the proper
and dogmatical signification can be no other then that which we have given, and
the secondary explication of purging, for enduring pains which do not cleanse
the soul from any filth, is harsh and improper, and by themselves avoided, when
they come to explain themselves, though in familiar conversation, with those
especially who understand not the different senses, they make use of it, that
they may not seem to vary from the language of the Church and their
Forefathers.

The Seventeenth Account.
That the Ignorance of spiritual natures begat this Opinion.

FOr a conclusion at length of this part, I shall observe to the Reader, that
this mistake of the school men proceeds from a higher principle: Their not
adhering to a certain Doctrine delivered by Saint Thomas of Aquine, and by his
school received. Spirits know not by discourse but by simple apprehension or
intuition, in which there can be no error.
He teaches, that, in abstracted spirits, there is neither discourse nor any
manner of composition, but purely a simple apprehension; so that error and
falsity can have no place in them. That holy Doctor understood that all these
were originally in us, from the body, and therefore could not, in immaterial
substances, be expected. For we find, by experience, that composition and
discourse are begotten by the successive beatings of the memory on the
Fantasy, which intercourse if once you bar, it is impossible that
indivisibles should be capable of succession. It is therefore certain, that
pure spirits contemplate all things, as it were, with one sight or glance; and
since, with them, all that relates to science is transacted by naked
Definitions, which no wordish equivocation can obscure, it is evident, that
falsehood cannot reach them; there being no precipitation, where no delay is
required. Nither the principles then nor their connection can be concealed from
them, nor consequently the truths depending on them.

This may perhaps become more intelligible, if we reflect, that the Soul, when
first infused into the Body, is such, as the quality of the Matter it is united
unto, exacts and determines it to be, because a natural action, that is, which
does not exceed the rank and limits of causes, cannot but act according to the
existence of the subject, and do that which The thoughts and affections of the
soul in this life, point out it is future unchangeable state, no less perfectly
then the disposition of the Embrio in the womb determines the feature* and
complexion off the future* man*
is conformable thereto and apt to be produced thereof. But Death also is a
natural action; making that, which of a man, can be made, to wit, a spiritual
substance, which we call a soul* And as the disposition of the Embrio, or
seminal concreation, delineats the future man, so that man to have had, in the
course of his whole life, these and these thoughts and affections, designs and
points out, by the impressions left the future condition of his Soul. So that
death produces such an Entity, as, from the man so disposed, is naturally
producible; and the Entity, so made continues such, till it be, a^ it were,
new molded, which is the work of the Resurrection. For the spiritual being of
the soul is what the whole course of map's life has made it, and bears that
respect to the antecedent life, which the being at Rome has to the traveling
to Rome, or the being in health has to the cure* which was wrought by the
Physician's hand. Whence it appears, that in the next world, there can be no
more motion, since rest, and not motion, is the term and period of motion: So
that for the soul to know, to be joyful, or to be sad in the future world, is
nothing else but to remain in that act of knowledge, joy or sadness, into
which, by the force of Death and dissolution, it was translated.

And this is the very reason; why every resolution made is from thencesor^h
immutable; because there are no instruments, no diversity of parts, whereof
some may act on others; no distinction matter and Agent, all which are required
to effect a mutation. But some may wonder how the Why the soul cann^^ be
dispossessed of her depraved affections* as well as from her erro^eous
Judgments* in the st^^e^ of separa^^on*
soul can be disengaged from the false opinions with which she was here
possessed, and not have power to divest herself of the affections depending on
those erroneous judgments? To whom we must answer, that this happens not
through any discourse, but by the precise stroke of death. For it being
impossible to a spiritual nature, at one and the same time, to assent to two
contradictories, seeing and comprehending the contradiction, and nothing (as
has been said) being able to escape the knowledge of a separated soul, it is
evident, that truth must overcome fals^^y, and since one of them only can take
possession, truth must abide, and error give place, and this through the very
disposition of the soul it self, by Death. But the affections, on the other
side, being not contrary to each other, nor of contrary objects may at the same
time subsist in the soul, death framing its creature, according to the
predisposition of the subject it works on. And yet alas! these divines, with
whom this dispute engages us, choose rather to wander through all sorts of
absurdities, then yield to so imperious a truth.

First, they make the soul, in man, The Adversaries several mistakes in
explicating the nature of the soul.
to be an actual entity, which clearly renders it assistent, not informent and
constitutive of one only substance or thing. Then they assign it certain
Powers, against all the dictates of Metaphysics. For Power being perfected by
Act, how is it possible that a pure act should admit a Power, as it were, for
it is Act? If that Power be intellective, the soul being actually intelligible,
she her self will be the first Act of her Power, antecedently to Intellection.
So that to understand, will immediately be the first act of the substance of
the soul, and not of her intellectual Power. Thirdly, they make this
intellectual Power active on it self, against the first and most known
Principles in Nature, which conclude that the same indivisible Entity cannot at
once be actually and potentially. But others labor to avade these
inconveniences, by a distinction of Entities, more unfortunately pretending to
correct, then the others had ^rred. For either they stock the right notion of
Entity, concluding several beings or entities, under one existence, whereas an
Entity imports that which has an existence; or they multiply several solid
substances, each whereof have their proper existences, in the same individual
Entity. No wonder then if they are found guilty of profaning Divinity, who
commit so many outrages on Philosophy.

The Eighteenth Account.
Objections from the Holy Fathers against our Doctrine, answered.

IT now remains we conveniently solve the objections which may be brought
against us. From the holy Scriptures nothing is presented, as to this point of
the controversy, whether some are freed sooner, some latter; and whatsoever is
alleged to other purposes, as for the proof of pains, or fire, or satisfaction
to the Divine Justice* I conceive it will easily meet with it is solution from
what has been said heretofore. For if Worms, darkness, and gnashing of teeth
are taken metaphorically, why not fire also When the Scriptures speak of fire
they ar^ either to be understood metaphorically, or of the fire of
conflagration.
as well as they? Besides, they will be put to it, to show that that fire
cannot be meant of the fire of conflagration or last Judgment. In like manner,
in what relates to the satisfaction of the Divine Justice, we must consider
whether it may not as well be made good at the Resurrection, as at any other
time. Which cautions being premised, I presume little trouble will arise from
Scripture-proofs.

Amongst the Fathers, they cite A passage of S. Aug. cleared.
S. Augustine de Civitate Dei, lib. 21* cap. 24. speaking of those adult, who
have committed some lesser sins. Is is evident (says he) that such being
purged before the day of Judgment by temporal pains, which their spirits
suffer, shall not be delivered to the punishments of eternal fire. He speaks
(say they) of those who are departed this world, he expressy affirms, that
their spirits suffer, and that they are purged before the day of Judgment, and
lastly, that this is evident. But this evidence makes rather against our
Adversaries. For, since, in the very next chapter but one, he affirms, that it
may be true, and that he is not satisfied whether their spirits are purged both
here and there, or only there; or here only, that they may not be purged there;
it is manifest, that his evidence falls only upon this, that their souls are
somewhere purged, and not to be delivered over to eternal chastisements; and
that for all the rest S. Augustine was uncertain, save only that in the day of
Judgment at least they were to be purged, which assurance of his we have above
made good. The sense then of the place is this, That it is certain the souls of
such as dye in lesser sins, being purged by pains or repentance before the day
of Judgment, are not from thence cast into the everlasting fire. The difference
betwixt the two explications is this: I contend the Saint's meaning to be no
other, then that such souls are purged by pains preceding the day of Judgment,
and finished either before or in that very day; but the Adversaries will
necessarily have the purgation ended before the day of Judgment. But the
Authors incertitude thereof both in this book, as also in his book to
Dulcitius, and in the 69 ^^ chapter of his Enchiridion, and his constant
persuasion that sins are purged in the day of Judgment, compel the reception of
our explication, and convince any unbiased Judgment.

After S. Augustine, they bring Eucheri^^ Lugd. explicated.
forth Eucherius Lugdunensis, who supposes that the delay of purgatory pains is
greater or lesser according the quality of the sins. But he having there
clearly spoken of that purging fire, through which the Just also pass, that is,
of the fire of Conflagration, can make nothing at all against us, since the
whole though never so long cannot exceed that day. Besides, what hinders but
that the word, Mora in Latin, which they render, delay, may as well be taken
for the obstacle, difficulty, and labor of purgation, as for the length of
time? The sense is nothing less perfect if it be rendered, that, by how much
greater the sins are, by so much the more difficult, dolorous, and penal shall
the purgation be.

In the next place are advanced Gregory the Great, and Ve^. ^edes Authority
pondered; who advance nothing herein as Doctors but me^rly as Historians.
those two Lights of their Age, the Great S. Gregory and Venerable Bede,
followers of, or rather Leaders in this opinion; persons of such eminence, that
their testimonies can no more be undervalued than denied, though Melchior Canus
(one of the gravest writers amongst all those of the council of Tren^) seems a
little to wave their authorities. For, having premised in his 11th Book De
Lo^i^ Theol. Chap. 6. that all things which great Authors have delivered, are
not therefore presently in all respects perfect* he adds, They are great men
indeed, but still they are men. Which I may, perhaps not unjustly pronounce of
S. S. Bid and Gregory; the former whereof in his History of England, the
latter in his Dialogues, set down certain miracles vulgarly reported and
credited, which the Critics of our Age will believe to be uncertain. I presume
he chiefly points at those stories wherein the Deacon Paschasi^^ and another,
without name, are said, after their deaths, to have been condemned to the
service of the Bathes; which so displeased their followers, that I do not
remember any thing of the same nature ever afterward to have been reported,
unless it were in the beginning of the last Age, of a certain Nun, who
professed her self to have, by her prayers, set* free certain souls departed,
which were imprisoned in the Sands of the River Tagus: which fiction was both
opposed in Spain, and d^rided in France.

The other stories which we meet within S. Gregory and Venerable Bede, I know
not why he should conceive the Critics of his Age would go about to discredit,
unless he takes the descriptions he meets with in Bid for things actually
done, not for Visions, that is, corporal representations of spiritual pains, or
allegorical expressions of the intellectual state of those souls. My exception
against their dictates is no other then this, That the obedience which is to be
rendered to the same persons is different, when they are considered as pious
Historians, from that which is given them as holy Doctors. History cannot
challenge the same Authority which is due to Theological conclusions. But these
Saints do, of their own accord, profess that they receive this Doctrine from
Historical Narrations, and consequently it can have no stronger support then
History can lend it They cannot therefore in this Question challenge the name
and Authority of Doctors and Fathers, but of Historians only, whose credit
depends upon their Authors. But from these Historians, (as far as can be
conjectured) the whole strength and continuance of this opinion is derived. For
from that time forward reports and Visions of souls freed from Purgatory have
multiplied without end, especially since that Odilo Abbot of Clugny, a very
famous person, did, through all his Monasteries, by a special command of
commemorating all the souls departed on the second day of November, disperse
far and near this opinion.

The Nineteenth Account.
Of the Authority of Apparations and Visions.

THe next thing which occurres The difference betwixt the Visions pretended by
the Advers^ries and Prophetical ones.
is, to examine what persuasive power is to be attributed to Visions. And
immediately a vast discrepancy appears betwixt such Visions as these, and those
which are Prophetical; in that Prophetical ones, simply and by their proper
design, tend to the instruction of the people, that is, the Church. But these
(as far as can be gathered from their stories) seem only to be directed to the
benefit of the distressed souls, which is not a public, but private good* and
so unknown, that the Revealer only is conscious to it. From which consideration
I infer, that Prophetic Visions do not communicate any veneration at all to
these, but, on the contrary, that these compared to them, loose much of their
credit, by the disproportion; the end, for which generally they are supposed to
be, being ambiguou^ and undiscoverable.

And really, if we aim never so little above the level of sense, and demand
why this soul amongst a thousand has the favor allowed it of appearing to the
living, of begging their suffrages? Why it obtained it not immediately after
it is separation, but rather after some days, months, and sometimes years? Why
it should beg assistance from such certain persons and not from others? Why for
a limited time, and not till they are absolutely free? Lastly, why particular
prayers and satisfactions are required? What can with any shadow of reason be
answered? -- All is to be refer^'d to the secret judgment of God, to his good
pleasure, no ways from reason deducible, and so finally resolved into
obscurity.

The second thing, which in That the former are not attested by any miracles.
these Visions may be observed, is, they are not armed with the public
testimonials of Events and Miracles. For all that is pretended to be seen,
being acted by invisible substances, no event can confirm the truth of the
vision, nor is it proper any miracle should be wrought to that end: Nor for the
most part is there any occasion of demanding them, or any custom in history of
alleging them. And the vision is, of its own nature, such, that it admits no
witnesser, but passes wholly within the soul of the seer, and consequently
entirely depends on his veracity, who sometimes is a Peasant, sometimes a
Women, or at best one little capable of judging what passes with in our souls.
And if at any time it be a man of great sanctity, or famous for that prudence
which is esteemed in the world (although, to confess the truth, few such are
pretended) what miracle is it that a prudent man should be once deceived? And
for the pions man, it is so frequent, that no body wonders at it. To which we
may add this reflection, that when such Novelties are once received by the
itching ears of a multitude, they are magnified beyond measure; and the further
they are carried, the greater they appear. Yea the very memory of the first
deliverer is confounded with a multiplicity of interrogatories from such as are
curious and inquisitive into things of that nature, so that he begins not well
to know what it was that he saw, but to believe he saw truth; and when any
circumstance less favorable thwarts it, he easily applies himself to rectify
something, presuming he might in that particular be abused.

And the suspicion, which this That no Rules are giv^ Div^^^s b^w (...) examine
them.
sort of Revelations are obnoxious to, is more justifiable, in that Divines
cannot agree upon any Rules, by which false ones may be distinguished from
true. Which shows, that neither they themselves, in whom they are wrought, have
any clear tokens whereby to discern them, or if they have (as S. Augustine seems
to believe of his Mother) that the discrimination is not explicable to another.
So that, as we cannot doubt, but that private Revelations are communicated
sometimes to Gods favorites* so we must no less avow, that the whole complex of
them is subject to unspeakeable obscurities and ambiguities, and altogether
insufficient to administer any firm ground of argumentation, to those, at
least, who have not themselves received and experienced them.

And this exception becomes yet The quality of the Persons that see the^*
less unjust, by the consideration of the quality of the Persons, who are for
the most part Women, sometimes simple men, either melancholy or dozed with
assiduous musing and solitary pensiveness, sometimes by sickness indisposed, or
upon their deathbeds, or recovered from a Trance. Each of these has need
enough of some artificial help to secure them from lapsing in point of prudence
and wariness. And the more ancient the That the Danger of error is greater at
first then afterward*
Revelations are pretended to be, the more necessary is this care and
vigilance, all beginnings of such things being more supposed to mistakes, till
experience by degrees opens a window to the discovery and dispersion of the
mists of error.

But nothing so enervates and Of the force of Pantasy.
invalidates this sort of proofs as the power of Phantasy, whose prodigious
delusions, few, and those only who have experienced them, can perfectly avoid
and detest. The power I say of that faculty is such that it compells us to
believe diverse things to be acted without us, which have no other stage then
our own Brain. This our Dreams, and the extravagant delusions of feverish and
hypocondriacal persons sufficiently convince. I remember that ruminating long
since on an accident, which at that time I was very sensible of, and casting,
by chance my eye on a Beam in the House, the end thereof seemed to me perfect
to resemble a head cut off, insomuch that (though conscious of the illusion) I
was forced to turn away my eyes, horror seizing me as often as I fixed them
upon it. In the twilight of the evening, and not unfrequently in the day time,
men or beasts appear to me at a distance, which drawing nearer, I find to be
nothing else but certain parts of trees, or stones, or other things, which
striking, in a fit line, my eye, would persuade me that things were otherwise
then in tuth they are, unless experience did undeceive me. But all this is so
notorious to every one, that no man of common sense will oppose it.

Farther therefore I affirm, The impressions whereof are often more lively then
any which are caused by our senses*
that these deluding apparences are oftentimes more lively and penetrating than
the impressions themselves which are caused by our senses. When I was yet a
child, and had the small pox, I imagined I saw little birds picking up crumbs
about my bed, so distinct and strongly, that to this very day their shapes and
colors are fresh in my memory. A kinswoman of mine being ill of the same
disease, and by order of the Doctors, having slit pigeons clapped to her feet,
had so rooted and deep an apprehension that she was shod, like horses, with
iron shows, that, many days after her frenzy had totally left her, she did
conjure me to tell her, truly whether it were so or not. I was present at
another time, when a youth of fourteen years of age at least, waking out of his
sleep, had so fixed an imagination of a boy in white garments standing by him,
that notwithstanding the light which I brought in, and the presence of several
of his companions who lodged in the same chamber and all spoke to him, he
continued to sweat and fear, unable, through the fright, to close his eyes
again. The Philosopher saw the reason of these accidents, when he explicated to
us why little noises appear great to us when we are in sleep; which very thing
I have observed in my self, as likewise that the said noises caused in me
dreams. And it is from the difference of what happens to us waking. For our
senses being then busied and entertained about may objects, every object
striking them according The reason thereof from the ^^iding in of some one
object whilst all the rest, are by sleep, shut one of doors.
to the proportion of its strength, and that only being perceptible which
exceeds the rest, rendering the others confuse and insensible, it follows that
each must of necessity be taken notice of, in that degree in which it overcomes
and exceeds the rest. Now it is evident, that, by sleep, the gates are locked
against this busy troop without; so that if any one thing chance to slip in,
unaccompany'd, it strikes the Organ with a great force, totally filling and
possessing it, and immerging it self in it.

Whenever therefore through Which may happen also at other times.
sickness or any other disposition of the Body or Head, the same effect, that
is, the exclusion of all objects, but one, happens, it is impressions on the
Phantasy must needs be vehement, and exercise a plenary jurisdiction therein,
and consequently cause a very spightful motion, and impress a very distinct and
lively sensation. From whence may be inferred, that an extraordinary light in an
apparition does not argue an immediate influence from God, but only a free and
apt disposure of the Phantasy. So that being an argument only of corporeal
activity, it rather seems to justify a suspicion of fallacy, then an
expectation of truth.

The Visions then, which without What is required in Visions to give them some
credit.
forfeiture of prudence may be credited and relied on, must be such as carry
with them proofs beyond the reach of Phantasy. Such as are coherent and
somewhat long discourses, a discovery of some such new Truth, as either carries
with it its own evidence, built on the principles of clear reason, or is backed
with such special events, that they transcend the sphere of chance; such as was
that (if the fact be true) which happened to Ptolomy, to whom a Dragon seemed,
in his sleep, to present a leaf never before by him seen, which being
immediately sought for, and by its likeness to that he dreamed of,
acknowledged, cured him of the malady with which he was surprised. For by how
much the evidence is more abstracted and intellectual, by so much the more does
it surpass the force of Nature to effect it. Not that I question, but that an
unlooked for Demonstration, or an unexpected Verse or Poem may peradventure by
a dream or natural ecstasy, be composed which much study could not otherwise
arrive to, but that when any thing therein exceeds the reach of nature, it is a
stronger argument of a celestial origin.

The Twentietth Account.
Of the Authority of* Visions compared with that of History, together with a
particular examination of some of them.

HAving said above, that holy Of Historical c^r^ ^i^ty and it is degrees.
Doctors in the proposal of these Visions are to be considered as Historians,
let us examine the degrees of certitude which History can afford us. First
Historical certitude seems to be absolute when the thing related was done in
the presence and right of thousands, confirmed likewise by numerous, or, as it
were, universal testimonies. Such was the Pharsalian fight, in the view of the
world, and in an Age when so many noble writers flourished. But alas! how far
from this is the credit of any of our Visions.

The next degree of certainty Secondl*
in History may be the relation of a particular fact, confirmed by few
authorities; such as Tully's defense of Ligarius before Caesar. But even that
had sufficient witnesses, 'twas obvious to sense, the work was in every ones
hand, and is at this day extant. So that hitherto History makes good its ground.

The third step is, the delivery Thirdl*
of secret transactions and practices, from some wise and faithful eyewitness,
such as was Philip Comines declaring the thoughts and designs of Lewis X^ I of
France. And here the right which History claims over our assents begins to
expire though the known integrity of Comines, and the verisimilitude of the
narration it self, does a little cherish and fester it.

In the fourth degree are ranked, Fourth and last degree.
certain arcana or secrets communicatd from the third or fourth hand, yet so
that they were not unknown to some that had the management of affairs, nor are
in their circumstances improbable or incredible. There appears a disjoyntedness
in the middle nerves betwixt the thing done and the Historical publisher. And
this is the lowest floor that Historical belief can reside in.

But the Relations upon which Of all which, these pretended Visions fall short.
our Divines go to establish Ecclesiastical Doctrines are far beneath even
this. The thing it self is not evident so much as to the Seer, who is seldom
capable to discern whether it were from God or Nature; and again, being from an
undiscoverable hand, it can challenge no credulity, unless it can fasten
strong, and as it were, iron chains upon the understanding. Moreover mankind
being greedy both of knowing and delivering wonders, these stories are apt from
every hand to receive some supplement, polishing and perfection; so that when
it comes to the Writer, it is quite another thing, nor can he yet forbear to
add or detract some little matters, the better to accommodate it to his
purpose. What then shall we say to these Visions which are so infinitely short
of other Histories? And yet we must undergo the sharpest censure unless we pin
our faith upon them in a Theological point.

If thou have leisure, Reader, As appears by these related by* ^. Gregory.
let us more particularly take cognizance of some few. There are three
Revelations of this nature in S. Gregory, two of souls condemned to the Bathes,
the third of a Proprietary Monk. For the first, if we regard the Doctrine of
following Schoolmen, we must absolutely reject them. S. Thomas teaches us,
that separated souls are not active, because their proper and substantially
united body is the sphere of their activity, and the instrument by which they
move other things, and they were Angels, if they could work upon separated
bodies. Again, how should such services be penal unto them? Do we think the
Angel Raphael was designed to punishment, whilst he waited on T^bie? Moreover
how could these new auxiliaries in the Bath be concealed to their
fellow servants unknown to their Masters? Had they meat and wages with the
rest? Lastly, if these examples be received for Precedents, why may not all
Mettal-mines ^e full of departed Ghosts? What Romances, what old wives tales
may we not expect? Certainly such inventions were either designed, or, of their
own nature, tend to the vilifying the belief of all Purgatory pains.

The other example is of the Monk. He declares that it were well with him, he
had now received the Communion, though* formally tormented in fire. It seems he
was restored to the Church not to Heaven. But if his sin were absolved, why was
he denied Heaven, according to our modern definitions? Again, why was he not
admitted to receive the Communion after the first, as well as after the
thirteenth mass? Certainly the excommunication ceased* when liberty was given
to pray for him; and in other Revelations both of S. Gregory and Bid, the
celebration of the very first mass has power to loosen those bands. And indeed
the remission of sins after thirty days is neither agreeable to the ancient
nor modern style, this supposing it to be in the first moment, that in the day
of the last Judgment. Finally what an uncouth thing is an excommunication
reaching to the next world? would they have us believe that those, who died in
mortal sin, were snatched out of the jaws of Hell? No man doubts but the souls
in Purgatory are holy, and partakers of Ecclesiastical Communion, but these
fables, which lead to error, what sway can they bear with a true believer?

There is but one little sentence And V. Bid.
(as I remember) in Venerable Bede, ( l. 5. c. 13.) which makes for the
cessation of Purgatory pains before the day of Doom, and that so cast in by
the bye, into the Angel's discourse and explication of those sufferings, that
it seems rather, according to the persuasion of some following Age, thrust in
by some other, having no relation to any part of the Vision, which of it self
makes an excellent and neat allegory. But it is to be remarked, that though
they are said to be freed from their pains, yet are they not admitted to the
joys of Heaven; which notwithstanding somewhat varies from the modern opinion,
from the degrees of the Florentine Council, and Benedict XI. both which jointly
seem to pronounce nothing but sin, debars and secludes abstracted souls from
the Beatifical Vision. The same may be said of all other Revelations; for if
they are not merely frivolous and insignificant, they commonly in some
particular or other shock the purity of Ecclesiastical Doctrine. Some of them
will tell you of souls kept in Purgatory, for the payment of debts among the
living; others that a prefixed time was set them for begging and procuring
assistance. The great Odilo, and strong asserter of this opinion, is said, by
his own and the prayers of his Monks, to have freed Benedict the eighth out of
Purgatory, upon condition that a second alms should be given by his successor
John, because the first was out of treasure ill gotten. What can we make of
this? Are the prayers of Religious men frustrated, and in effectual if their
Alms come out of an Usurers purse? it is very hard to oblige them to search into
and discover this, unless perhaps it want not its convenience, if they be, in
like manner, permitted to retain the first, and demand the second benevolence
in case it be found to be so.

But to speak ingenuously, all this passage is inextricable. For what shall we
say? That the rich man shall in three days redeem his Purgatory, which must
cost the poor as many years. Without doubt a convenient motive for accumulating
riches; but such a one as I have not yet met with in all the Gospel, or
Christian directions. And yet what else do they seem to regard, who make it
either only care and business to accompany the Dead with a multittude of
Masses? some such conceits as these the Schools have already exibitated, and
immediately they have disappeared in all succeeding Visions and Revelations,
that you may see they wholly depend upon vulgar opinion. From whence it happens
that the Greeks, though otherwise more addicted to them then the Latins,
having nothing of this nature, though much more then we of refrigerating the
damned themselves, because this sort of Purgatory runs not in their fancies.

The one and twentieth Account.
Whence wonderful Events came to be foretold, without any supernatural
assistance.

BUt what am I doing? shall I charge so many grave and holy persons with
Forgery, or at least being deluded by the Devil? I cannot easily determine
which were more criminal, and therefore shall by no means be transported with
that arrogance. From whence then this plentiful And strange discourses of
Apparitions received, waking or sleeping
Harvest of Apparitions? The notion of Apparition must be divided. One kind
happens to those who are awake, and have their eyes about them, the other to
those whom sleep or extacy has oppressed. The first gives a jealousy of some
defective or vitiated organ, especially if the Phantasme appear to one only,
either alone or in company, and that in the night, when ill-disposed, or after
some misfortune or long continued grief; something is probably amiss in the
Brain, though it be not altogether impossible that a mere preoccupation of mind
may work that effect. The other is more obvious; and intelligible; the soul
contemplates many things as they were proposed from without (when the senses
are by sleep or ecstasy locked up) which not withstanding have no other being
than in the Phantasy.

But against this are very admirable examples, by which we are assured that in
these sleeps or ecstasies things future, secret, at a distance, in fine, such as
no sense could reach to, are often seen and foretold. All cannot rationally be
denied, nor all promiscuously admitted. I observe therefore that for the most
part, some falsity mingles with these revealed truths, which commonly gives the
occasion of their being imputed to the black Art. But we must examine how far
Nature How far they may be natural.
can herein play her part. It has been said, that the soul, lulled as it were
a sleep with dreams or ecstasy, finds the strokes or darts of memory and
Phantasy more sharp and penetrating, by the vacuity of its calls or
receptacles, into which other objects can at that time make no incursion. We
may add, that this cessation may well occasion a more calm discovery of truths;
their dependency being more orderly displayed, and consequences more
immediately and nimbly linking themselves together. From whence the History of
S. Thomas of Aquin's being three whole days in ecstasy, and at his return out
of it, professing he had, in that time, seen and learned more, then he had yet
written in his whole life, or, being now near his end, could have leisure to
write, seems to me no ways incredible, but altogether becoming and worthy so
great a Contemplator.

Nor do I think it impossible, Even to the sudden possessing of a science
before unknown.
that, in the like circumstances, a science (such as Ca^optrick^, etc.) may at
once be possessed; the principles by virtue of the said tranquillity discovering
themselves and of their own accord flowing into Theoremes. Was that Po^t and
Musician whom Venerable Bede tell us, in one night, to have been made both a
Scholar and a Master, thus instructed? I affirm nothing positively.

Well do I remember, when I was of an age more obnoxious to the operation and
power of Phantasy, to have seen in my sleep, an imaginary representation of
Christ coming to the last Judgment, and the Saints flying in the cloulds to
meet him, in colors so ravishingly pleasant, that those which we daily behold
can no ways equalize or imitate them; and withal, to have found such
conformable motions excited thereby in my sensitive appetite, that awaking, I
thought fit carefully to nourish them.

A certain youth I likewise knew, who, being reclaimed from a course of
debauchery with Drink and Tobacco (a thing not then so countenanced by custom
and general use) had no^ only (in an acute fever into which he fell) a lively
portraiture of the Devil drinking to him, and puffing Tobacco by his side, but
also a most distinct catalogue imprinted in his memory of all the misdeamenours
of his whole life. Such apprehensions as these I dare presume to account and
applaud as the sports of verdant Nature. When the effects happen to be more
intricate, I acknowledge the natural disposition to be made use of, but whether
it alone can perform all, I do not engage. Yet I have observed, in the
narrations of some holy women, no small agreement between the motions of their
Phantasy, and the wonders which are said to have past within their breasts. And
in the whole History of the Visions of a certain late pious Maid in Italy, that
they were almost all suitable to her apprehensions, and such as might freely
spring from the cogitations to which she was inured.

Nor can I dissemble, that among the innumerable stories, ancient and modern,
which pretend to foretell things future, or declare the state of things remote
and absent from them, I find not many which challenge the opinion of sanctity,
or the peculiar providence of God in them. Yet is it hard to determine what
stock they have in nature to produce them. I may think thus. It is confessed,
that those upon whom these wonders are fathered are for the most part persons
dictacted* obnoxious to some vehement passion, ^cstatick, dreaming, whose
Phantasy is either free, or strongly addicted to some one object. If free, then
does it prophecy at random of many things; if engaged, then of that only to
which it is affected. Women, who have an absolute and unlimited passion for
their husbands or children, are said to experience this, according to that of
the Poet. -- Who is it that can beguile the Lover? Madmen have in like sort
foreseen strange things, relating to that single object which their minds are
full of; whilst those who are subject to distraction, ecsta^y or dreams
discourse wonderfully and unconnectedly of several things. All these have no
constant byas; and the errors interlarded with the truths sufficiently convince
they are not special gifts of Gods benevolence.

Farther, then, I proceed to How passionate persons come to apprehend the
condition of their absent friends.
conclude, that the Fantasies of such persons are moved by weaker impulses
then the brains of wiser men, which being employed in various negotiations,
feel not those lesser outward incursions. As then certain Beasts receive the
first trembling hints of the change of air, and by their proper motions, give
notice of the future storm or serenity to men that are otherwise busied; So
Lovers, from their Beloved, receive and acknowledge certain influences which
others take no notice of. If a Dog after many hours can take the scent of a
Heart or Hare, and, pursuing it, retrive its origin; what miracle, that the like
emissions (as the chaste Lover terms them) falling from his beloved, and finding
him free from all others and fixed only upon this cogitation, should raise in
him such thoughts or dreams as were conformable to the temper and condition of
his Beloved, when that scent dispersed it self through the air, and
consequently, without any other messenger, inform him of her well or ill being.
The like may happen in others, whose attentions are not engaged in so many
trifles, a^ most men's are, about their own and others affairs. I am apt to
believe that most of our stories Whose transport has been the rise of most of
our stories concerning the souls in Purgatory.
of souls freed from their punishments (to give an account whereof, all that
hitherto has been said principally tends) if they were examined to the bottom*
would be found to proceed from the frequent cogitation, and passionate
affection of the living toward their departed Friends.

The two and twentieth Account.
What is the benefit of prayer for the Dead.

BUt alas! one abyss calls upon another, nor are we so happily disengaged from
one vexation, that our retreat leads us not into another. It is urged, The
Adversaries Objection, of the usefulness of our prayers if this be true.
that there can be no fruit of prayer for the dead if some at least are not
thereby exempted before the common delivery. Again, what efficacy have our
suffrages, if a multitude of them can do no more then a lesser number? If those
who have many assistances gain no more then those who have few, or perhaps none
at all? Lastly, the day of Judgment is by God predetermin'd* and will arrive in
its due time, And chiefly from the predetermination of the Day of Judgment
independently of our prayers.
independently of our prayers; and though it should have some respect to them,
as it only has to the predestination or will of God, that is not the thing
which sets the faithful awork to bestow or procure alms for their departed
friends; but they expect that this very soul should receive some advantage by
virtue of their prayers, which were not otherwise from its own merits due unto
it.

These are the Objections; among Which is first answered.
which I cannot but wonder to see Professors of Divinity alledg that prayers
are fruitless for such events as are decreed by Predestination. What Lethe have
they drunk of? Have they forgotten that whatsoever good befalls us was
predestined? What do they think of their own and others salvation? Does any
one doubt but they are the effects of predestination? We need not therefore
pray; and if we pray not, as little need we be sollicitous. Let prayers, let
good works from henceforth cease. Why so? Because all things are accomplished
by virtue of their being so decreed. This they confess; but they will not have
us pray for those things which we are certain will come to pass. We are still
where we were. For how ignorant soever we are, whether what we ask be
predestined or no, yet are we satisfied, that unless it be predestined, we
shall not obtain it. We know then, that only which is predestined shall come
to pass; and consequently it alone is worth our asking. So that the Apostle
does not vainly exhort us to endeavor, by good works, to render our Vocation
and election certain; that is, to take care to put By showing that the means
are predestined as well as the end.
it in execution. The error then of the Argument or Arguer consisted herein,
that he so looked upon the effect as predestined, that he saw not its cause^,
or the means, by which it should come to pass, were also predestined. So
that, pure Inadvertency begat this objection.

And from hence we may have In what manner and sense our Prayers benefit the
dead in general.
an easy step to the other part of the Argument. For when they urge, that
nothing ensues upon the account of their prayers for the Dead, we reply, all
depends upon them. For if their delivery from their pains, whenever it
happens, be a requital of their supplications, and that delivery be nothing
else then the communication of glory and celestial joys, all this, is, in the
day of Judgment, granted to their Prayers. What then? shall they have any thing
more then what their pious conversation in this life promerited? Not at all.
Behold the Riddle. A great Lord says to his servant, behave thy self
faithfully in my house seven years, and at the marriage of my son, I will make
thee steward of his family. The servant discharges his duty; is he therefore
Comptroler of his young Lord's house? No, unless his Master be first married He
then that shall procure a Match for the young Gallant shall do a good office
for the old servant, and deserve great thanks at his hands. So he that is
chastised in Purgatory, did in his life deserve to receive a reward at the
coming of Christ, but that Christ should come he did not deserve* For that, as
it is an universal good, so is it due to the merits and supplications of all,
and not of any one Particular.

For this reason it was answered to the souls of the slain, resting under the
Altar, and crying out to have that day hastened, that it depended upon the rest
who had not yet suffered, but were to complete the number. Whosoever then
desires and loves the coming of our Lord, either for his own sake or any
others* as every one does who prays for the retribution of the dead,
accelerates that day. And thus you see, that the time, which was said to be
predestined, will notwithstanding never arrive till the number of the elect
be perfected. From whence it follows, that whatsoever is predestined, so
obtains the stability of it is immutable arrest (the liberty and contingency of
second causes, by which it is brought about, not impeding) that if any one of
them should fail, that very thing, which we term predestined, could not come
to pass. And applying this assertion to our present purpose, if Prayer should
not be made for the Dead, they would never be delivered, notwithstanding the
irresistible force of predestination, through the imbecility of causes by
which their delivery is promoted. He that prays then supplies what was wanting
to the sufferings of the departed, without which supplement they could not be
saved.

They reply, this supposed, it And in particular.
is all one to this particular friend departed, whether fewer or more prayers
are said for him, since the last day will break as soon to one as to another. It
is answered, they cannot deny, but at least he who is the occasion that more
prayers are offered to that intent, has, as it were, a greater right to that
day then he for whom fewer are offered. Whence to him it will arrive more
grateful and honorable, then to the other who less contributed to its advance.
But besides, these pious offices and affections of others toward him, being
known by the person departed whom they concern, beget a disposition in his
soul, by which, when time shall serve, his love to God, and consequently, his
Beatitude shall be increased. Moreover* by way of impetration, they become
occasions to the Divine Providence, of so disposing many things, which
otherwise would be differently ordered, that in the day of Harvest, they may
enlarge his either essential or accidental happiness. If any thing of this
happens through the good deeds of the person himself departed, it is to be
accounted amongst his merits, or the rewards due to his merits; but if such
prayers spring not from any root which he himself did, whilst living, plant,
but purely from the charity of some propitious persons, they are an effect of
God's Providence, whose mercies are numberless.

One objection only remains That it imports not what particular fancy they may
have who pray for the dead, as to the relief given thereby.
unanswered, That this is not the thing which those who pray and are solicitous
for their dead, do look for. But neither ought we regard what they expect, but
what they ought to expect. The Apostle only admonishes us, not to be afflicted
as those who have no hopes, but to retain and cherish an expectation of
re-enjoying their society, and that in the resurrection. Yet if the
metaphorical explications of fire and other pains be found more proper to
excite affections then the truth metaphisically delivered, use them if you
please, so you keep your self within the bounds which the Councels and Fathers
have set; viz. that souls are punished, and by prayers relieved, but for the
time when this takes effect, leave it, as they do, undetermined. Are you still
unsatisfi'd and urge an immediate releasment? I am contented; let it be the
very next moment after your prayer. For whatsoever time intervenes betwixt it
and the restoration of the world, is to them but as one moment. If you still
repine and fret, I may with juster indignation protest, you are not only
ignorant, but envious of their sublime state and condition, which exalts them
above the Not whether this Doctrine become a means of lessening the number of
unworthy Priests.
reach of time.

In fine, if I be thought the occa sion of restraining the profuse abundance of
Alms in this particular* I shall withal have the satisfaction to have checked
the daily increasing swarms of unworthy Priests, who, qualified neither with
knowledge nor good manners, live like droans upon this stock, to the disgrace
and contempt of their function, to the abuse of souls, and the common scandal
both of those who live in and out of the Church. Catholic Faith shall from
henceforth be no longer the subject of the derision of externs, whilst her
children vainly labor to defend, against Heretics, those things which have
neither ground nor proof, but are introduced from the customary expressions of
Law-Courts and exchanges, not from the Language of Nature or Christian Tenets.
But of this enough.

The three and twentieth Account.
That the practice of the Church, as far as it is words make known it is sense,
favors the ancient opinion.

FOr the last attempt they reserve the Practice of the Church, which can
neither deceive nor be deceived. And this they drive on with great fury and
clamor, partly from the prayers which are said for the Dead, partly from the
concession and acceptance of Indulgences; wherein their valor gains so much
applause that it is worth our pains to give it a check. Our first encounter
shall be to demand of them, when they talk of the Ecclesiastical Practice,
which do they mean, an universal or a particular one? Again, if an universal
one, whether they intend only a present Universality, or an universality
including also the ancient practice? If they admit an universality of place (as
they needs must if they The Vulgar opinion can neither claim Universality of
place.
will conclude any thing; for otherwise, by their own confession, it will
amount but to a probable, that is, fallible argument) let them demonstrate to
me, that the practice they contend for, either anciently was, or at present is
in the Grecian Church. Sure I am, neither in the Florentine Council, nor in the
Union of the Armenians, nor in the Profession of Faith prescribed by Urban
VIII. to the Oriental Churches, any thing is expressed, from whence this
Doctrine may be deduced. In Nor time.
like manner, as to point of time, it is evident, that before S. S. Gregory and
Bid, there; was no such notorious Practice even in the Roman Church, and
consequently that it became not general, till after Odilo, about six hundred
years ago. But such a Practice no way deserves the title of Universal,
according to Time.

The question then is devolved to the Western Church, for the four or five last
ages, for the universality cannot be stretched higher, since the practice
appears to have taken it is rise from the Devotions of the Clugniac Monks, and
the effect of those Devotions, that is, Revelations springing from them,
whereas before it was rare, if not unknown. N^r do the present Churches words
or actions declare any suc; practice at this day, even in the western part of
it.
Our next quaere is, what they mean by practice? For my part, to avoid
ambiguity. I divide it into that of actions and of expressions; both which, if
they apparently favor what we have delivered, then is our adversaries last
effort as in-effectual as the former. The Church's expressions are visible in
her Missalls, Rituals, and Breviaries, As appears by her missalls Breviaries
and Rituals.
by which if I stand condemned, I willingly yield the cause. To begin with the
sequence of Dies irae, Dies illa, is it not throughout of the day of Judgment,
and the deliverance which is then to be made? What else has the Offertory?
Lord Jesus Christ, King of glory, free the souls of the faithful departed, from
the pains of Hell, and the profound L^ke, free them from the Lions jaws, that
H^ll may not devour them, nor they fall into darkness, but let the holy
Ensign-bearer, Michael, conduct them into that happy light which thou have
heretofore promised to Abraham and his seed. Thus far in general for all the
Dead: then in particular. We offer up to thee, O Lord, sacrifices and
thanksgiving prayers, receive them for those souls which we this day
commemorate, grant them, O Lord, to pass from Death to Life. These are the
Church's prayers, which, to a Catholic, what can they signify but the Which
unanimously respect the day of Judgment.
examination and sentence of the last Judgment? After the person is dead, and
that prayers begin to to be said for him, where is he in danger to perish but
in the last Day? If then the Church prays not for what is past, which seems to
be unprofitable, it prays not for any other delivery of the Dead, then what is
to be in that final Judgment.

I easily foresee it may be objected, that the Dead have in reality no
incertitude or hazard even in that Day, wherefore these Prayers must on both
sides be acknowledged to have their improprieties. My answer is twofold. First,
in our way, we coin not a new Metaphor, but prosecute that which Christ and
Holy Scriptures have furnished us with. For if they have styled it a Judgment,
not in order to an investigation or disquisition of things doubtful (for what
can be obscure when God himself is judge?) but merely to signifiy the effect of
the said Judgment, that is the respective destribution of rewards and
punishments to good and bad, which then is made, is it not evident that the
Ecclesiastical manner of speech (that it may be conformable to the sacred and
Traditionary expressions) must speak as it were of a dubious sentence, whilst
there is yet an affection to, or expectation of punishment, or reward? These
speeches then signify just the same, as if the Church should plainly say,
suffer them not to be cast into Hell, but grant them eternal happiness. And so
is that particle also to be understood, of passing from Death, of life.

Though there be also another way, in which the souls in Purgatory, when they
become partakers of the Beatifical Vision, may not improperly, be said to pass
from Death to Life: For those souls, having (according to what has been
explicated) an impediment in themselves, debarring them from true life, which
is perfect Beatitude, clearly, if death be opposite to life, they are truly
said to pass from death to life, when they are freed from their sins and that
impediment. I am not ignorant, that Divines, taking it from the Lawyers,
suppose in these souls a certain Right to Beatitude, by which they are rendered
partakers of life. But these expressions abuse us, when besides an allegory we
expect propriety in them. Nor indeed does right to a thing make a man owner of
it, but right in the thing; and in reality those holy souls have not right to
life, but seeds of it, to wit, the faith of Christ, which works by charity, and
which assuredly will (through the last judgment) fructify to life eternal. As
then s^ea is not yet reckoned among things living but dead, so these souls
also. But we must observe the word dead has a double sense, being propounded
abstractedly and privatively. The damned are privatively dead, because all
possibility or root of eternal life is extinguished in them; but those in
Purgatory are only dead because they have not yet obtained life.

My second answer is, that, speeches of this kind are altogether inexplicable,
according to the contrary opinion, which is a certain note that they mistake
the Churches sense. For proof hereof it were enough to charge them with it, and
put them to the trial. But I can produce the express confession of an Author,
voluminous enough to appear great amongst them, who, paraphrasing upon the
above* cited words, excuses their form, Because (says he) those who pray often
use expressions which they are altogether ignerant what they signify, or
whither they tend. But surely the Rituals sufficiently declare whither these
speeches tended. Make him worthy by the assistance of thy Grace, to escape the
Judgment of revenge, who, living, was signed with the seal of the Trinity.
Again, Let us pray for the spirit of our Brother, that the mercy of our Lord
may place him in the bosom of Abram, Isaac, and Jacob, that, when the day of
Judgment shall come, he may resuscitate him on the right hand, among his Saints
and Elect. Again, We pray thee to command the soul of thy servant N to be
carried by the hands of thy Angels into the bosom of thy Friend Abraham the
Patriarch, to be resuscitated in the last day of Judgment, that whatsoever
vices, by the deceit of the Devil, he has contracted, thou pious and merciful
may blot out by indulgence. In the office of the dead in like manner in the
Roman Breviary. Lord when thou shall come to judge the Earth, where shall I hide
my self from the countenance of thy anger? -- When thou come to judge do not
conde^n me. Again, be merciful unto me when thou shall come to judge in the last
day. Again, Remember not my sins, O Lord, when thou shall come to judge the
world by fire. Lastly, free me, O Lord, from eternal Death in that dreadful
day, when the Heavens and Earth shall be shaken, when thou come to judge the
World by fire. I tremble and fear whilst that discussion and future anger
comes; that day of anger, that day of misery and calamity, etc. To this you may
add the public Litanies, instituted, as it is thought, by Gregory the Great
himself, or at least by him recommended, where you find, In the day of Judgment
deliver us O Lord. And in the commendation of the soul departed, In the day of
Judgment deliver him O Lord.

Finally, if we have yet any And have not one clear word, throughout them all,
of any other delivery.
judgment left us, and are not wholly transported and fascinated with the
opposite opinion, let us consider with our selves, what a strange blindness and
absurdity it had been in the composers of our sacred Liturgy (if they intend to
pray in the Mass and Offices, for the delivery of souls before the day of
Judgment) not to express it in one clear sentence, throughout so many and large
prayers, but perpetually to fix the Readers thoughts and expectations upon the
last judgment. What shall I say of so many who have not only used, but
corrected them, yet never durst take the boldness to violate the ancient and
received style? Since then in Ecclesiastical Ceremonies the significations of
the actions depends on the expressions, and the expressions are so clear for
purgation in the day of Judgment, it is beyond dispute evident, that this is
the practice and intention of the Holy Church in all public Prayers and
Masses, that is, in all that are hers.

The four and Twentietth Account.
That the Practice of the Church, as it is visible in action, makes likewise
for the same truth.

FRom what we have said, the Their rashness who because they can no longer
presume to free the souls departed at their own time and pleasure, refuse to
continue to pray for them.
temerity and precipitation of those appears, who, from the denial of a sudden
and capricious delivery of souls, ^ye immediately to the refusal of
supplicating any longer for them; whereas, on the contrary, they ought more
assiduously, yea, perpetually and without end, to pray, both because their
torments are more durable, and because our own goods are so strictly conjoined
with theirs. Our method therefore instructs us, never to abandon, never to
remit or slacken the charity which we profess toward our friends lately
departed, and consequently by this new temporary motive fastens our souls upon
the love and contemplation of the future world, whereas the contrary opinion
begets a short memory and long oblivion.

And here behold we are naturally put in mind of surveying the other branch of
Practice, which no less attests ours to be the Church's sense, and perfectly
conformable to her practice. I mean the procurement of prayers for the souls of
the Dead. Let us reflect herein on the consequences which are apt to follow
from either opinion. If it be The consequences of both opinions examined.
true, that souls are, from Purgatory, conveyed to Beatitude, before the day
of Judgment, though we know not how long the time may be of their durance, yet
this is certain that every one has a limited time, let us suppose ten years
(as a Divine famous enough has opined,) the Church ought in reason to
prescribe a cessation from thenceforward, of duties for that soul, that others
may be benefited by what to it is now superfluous. You reply, that it is not
done because the Church is uncertain how long the time may be. Very well, but
how long I beseech you shall she continue uncertain? till the day of Judgment?
And this of every one, that is, of all? where then lies Which equally agree in
continuing to supplicate to the worlds end.
our quarrel? I may perhaps affirm it to be certain, that they are not
dismissed before the day of Judgment, and consequently that we ought always to
pray for them; you affirm it to be uncertain whether they are sooner freed or
no, and consequently conclude the same thing, to wit, that we ought always to
pray for them. The practice then of praying always for them is common to us
both: More strongly indeed on our side, from motives both of reason and
antiquity, which ever prayed for all without exception.

You reply, it is so uncertain of every one in particular, that notwithstanding
it is indefinitely certain of some. Let it be so, because you are resolute;
what is that to the practice that remains common to both sides? Can you from
practice possibly convince that some indeterminately are exempted, when you
pray for every one as though he were detained? Practice is an action, and
action is of Individuals, that is, of particular Agents about particular
Patients. But to proceed: Imagine with your self Where it ought rather to be
converted into thanksgiving for those who are set free, if the vulgar opinion
be true.
some practice which may infer that some are freed; ought there not to be a
change in the Tenor of prayer, and a thanksgiving succeed to supplication,
rather then that the self-same supplication should still continue? Show any
such custom, and you have won the day. But if you cannot, and, on the
contrary, I can and do produce men pious and prudent who with their last
breaths pray for their Grandfathers and Great-Grand-fathers, and when
themselves come to dye, build Churches, Hospitals, and the like eternal
institutes, with obligation to have themselves and their ancestors for ever
prayed for, two things I shall esteem my self to have clearly proved, first,
That Ecclesiastical Practice stands with us; secondly, that our Adversaries
cannot bring the least shadow of proof from thence.

They quit not yet their station, but threaten us with sorks, now that their
arrows are spent. Practice, say they, consists not only in the external
action, but in it with the intention, opinion and hope conjoined therewithal.
But it is evident, that the opinion and hope with which men now adays pray for
the departed, is that of a speedy delivery, therefore the Church-practise
concludes it. In which, first, we deny the Major. For when some action is
handed down to us from our The intention is not always visibl^ i^ every action.
forefathers in the Church, it does not follow their intention must
necessarily be derived to us by the same succession, for though we know not in
particular what they intended, yet do we often in belief of our Parents, as the
vulgar term it, do the same thing which they did. So the unlearned receiving or
administering Sacraments, through the confidence they have of the Church's
sanctity, do, with good intention, receive and administer them, though ignorant
what intention is properly due to the action. It is not therefore necessary the
Practice attest that which the private intention of every actor apprehends, but
only that which he intends jointly with the Church, though in particular
ignorant of it. Again, it is manifestly one thing to be a practice, and another
to be the ground of a practice, or reason for which it was instituted. For a
practice is received by custom or command, and may have several motives or
ends for its origin, so that no one end can be evinced, since any one may
suffice; much less does pure opinion belong to practice, which every Age may
vary, or oftener, according to the greater or lesser science of Doctor^,
whereas the Practice may remain the same.

The five and twentieth Account.
The Nature and History of Indulgences.

THere lies yet another accusation Whether Indulgences either in general or
particular make any thing against the tru^ Doctrine.
against us, from the use of Indulgences, which we have not satisfied; and it
is also twofold: For they both urge in general, that the whole force and
fabric of Indulgences falls to the ground, if Purgatory-pains are not
released. For what good do they do either in this world to the living, or in
the next to the departed, if they neither abate nor discharge their present
pains, nor our future ones? And again in particular, what shall become of those
concessions which grant expressly the releasment of a soul to every third,
thirtieth, or single Mass? Which with such and such fasts, prayers, alms,
visitations of Churches, redeems or commutes so many days or years of
sufferings? Nothing can be said why all these should not declare the practice
of the Church. Thus they. And indeed both the outward apparences and inward
merit of the thing challenge a deep inspection, and thorow-examination; but let
us at present content our selves briefly, and according to the smallness of our
volume and ability to discuss it.

No man that has the least acquaintance The first and proper use of remission
or Indulgence in general.
and conversation with Ecclesiastical antiquity, can be ignorant, that all
along even up to the very infancy of the Church, Excommunications, solemn
increpations, penitential ceremonies, and rigorous satisfactions were in use.
That these rigours, in diverse circumstances, sometimes in consideration of the
penitent himself, sometimes of externs, were not only abusively, but
canonically and profitably relaxed, both the monuments of pious men, and the
vicissitude of humane nature assure us. This relaxation was, by the Latins, in
the Apostolical phrase, called Indulgence. And thus far no rational man
questions their legitimate use. These Indulgences being in order to such
penalties as the Governors and Rulers of the Church conceived proportionable
to the cancelling and extinguishing the sin they related to (so The occasion of
its being stretched farther.
that he who had legally performed them, was supposed to have quitted that
score, before God) it naturally became a question, whether the remission
granted by Bishops did free the penitent, not only for those visible penalties
which the visible Church was wont to exact or release, but moreover discharge
him from the account due to those sins in the sight of God, and put him in the
same condition, as if he had actually performed the penalties themselves. And
S. Paul Fron S. Paul 2 Cor. 2.
himself, 2 Cor. 2. gives occasion of this question, where, treating of the
penitent Fornicator, he commands the Church to forbear to afflict him, lest too
much sadness should overwhelm him; adding a general either truth or lenity,
that himself pardoned whatsoever the Church should pardon. And further giving
his reason, he says, For I my self, if I have pardoned any one any thing, I
have in the person of Christ pardoned it, for your sakes, that Satan may not
circumvent us, for we are not ignorant of his arts.

To this purpose the Apostle; wherein he unfolds to us the whole business of
Indulgences; That their matter is that (...) rebuke or correption which it was
fit the Church should exercise toward the sinner: That there are two causes of
remission, the first, the incapacity of the subject's bearing such Rigours, who
otherwise would be swallowed up by grief; the second, the good of the Church,
lest the Devil by pretext of too great severity, or the like, should provoke or
stir up some to murmur and make a schism. So that two things in the infliction
and moderation of Ecclesiastical chastisements are to be regarded, the good of
the Person and the good of the Church. But the Apostle explicates moreover the
efficient cause, which he makes to be threefold; the Church, Himself, us a
Prelate of the Church, and Christ our Lord. For he says, that what he indulged
he indulged in the person of Christ. Had he spoken only of the Church and
himself, it would have passed for a Rule, that as the Church knows not the
interior things, so neither does she judge of them, or pretend to remit them.
But subjoyning that he did it in the person of Christ, he seems to extend it to
all that Christ our Lord does or may remit, and consequently to infer, that the
sinner is no longer, as to that particular, obnoxious to the Judgment of Christ.

This the fathers seem to countenance; And some passages in the Fathers.
both universally, in as much as they apply to Churchdiscipline that famous
speech of Christ, that sins are remitted or retained in Heaven proportionably
to the severity or mildness of Apostolical proceedings upon earth. And
particularly, S. Cyprian, who affirms, that Penitents may be aided before God,
in the abolition of their sins, by the solicitation and prerogative of
Martyrs. Yea Celerinus, in his Epistle to Lucius, beseeches those who were
designed for Martyrdom, which of them soever should first be crowned, to
forgive the sin of two women who had denied their Faith. Could any thing be
more plain for this assertion, that such sins are remitted also by God, the
punishments whereof the Church has released?

But however that matter stood, The posture of Indulgences in the 11th Age.
the use of Indulgences continued till the division of the Roman Empire, and
till the eleventh age, as a certain Ecclesiastical Practice, but without any
special form or Court of Judicature. In that age a new form was instituted,
Penitential Canons ordained, which were partly redeemed by Alms and other pious
works, partly by corporeal austerities, and particularly by flagellation, which
thereupon took the name of Discipline. In the XII. Century their application
was extended to Wars undertaken against Pirates and Infidels. In the thirteenth
Century, the form of Jubilee was instituted, since which time the Harvest has
been too large for the Barns, insomuch that it required the prudence of later
Popes to restrain it.

Now in the XII. Age the Schoolmen grew up; a sort of men, whilst closely
adhering to the Fathers and Councels, grave and learned; whilst intent upon
Philosophy and the Mysteries of Aristotle, acute and sublime; but, when vexed
with the importunity of such as endlessly called upon them for answer, they so
confounded all, that they neither throughout pursued the Allegory of Faith, so
necessary for the people; nor yet were able (straightened and urged by their
importuners) to attend the discovery of it is pure light, which is only
attainable by the faithful study of true and solid Philosophy, and so
bequeathed to their posterity an uneven incoherent, and uncertain course of
Doctrine. These men therefore ravished with the consideration of the
m^taphorical Laws of Justice betwixt God and sinners, fancied certain pure
pains after death, and taught their followers the redemption of them by
corporeal afflictions in this world.

And seeing with their own The design of the School men to establish them on a
new basis.
eyes the great fruits which some remission of penitential Canons did produce;
foreseeing also, or rather already experiencing, that Ecclesiastical Rules did
or would, by degrees, lose their authority, all beginning to subtilize, and
addict themselves to nice enquiries, they concluded it fit to establish
Indulgences upon a more solid basis; and to that end pretended that the pains
of Purgatory, as they were extinguishable with penance, so also with remissions
or pardons. And this they fell upon with such eagerness and numbers, that they
easily over persuaded Leo the Tenth, then engaged against Luther, to propose to
the Christian World their whole fabric, with the treasures of Christ's merits,
and his Saints; although they could never effect or extort any such thing from
the L^teran and Florentin Councels before him, Though they could never procure
any Council to favor it.
nor the Council of Trent after him.

The six and twentieth* Account.
That Indulgences, generally taken, make nothing against the ancient Doctrine.

THis is, as far as I can comprehend, the Historical progress The Schoolmen's
Idea of Purgatory according to the Metaphorical explication thereof.
and period of Indulgences. From which it sufficiently appears, that the
School-men's conceit of them depends wholly upon the Metaphorical explication
of Purgatory; as the leaned Fisher, Bishop of Rochester, well observed, when he
said, that men were first affrighted with the torments of Purgatory before they
ran after those Indulgences; and consequently, that Indulgences are differently
to be treated and explicated, according to the different Lead them to stretch
Indulgences to the next world.
sentiments of Purgatory. Those, who believed pure pains in, and successive
deliveries out of Purgatory, were necessitated to stretch Indulgences to the
next world. For what would such Indulgences signify, or with what spur would
they quicken the Devotions and pious exercises of the faithful, if no benefit
accrue to those that accept them? But on the contrary, those, who took not that
way, must go upon other grounds, and suppose, from what has been said, that
the pains of Purgatory are not purely Vindicative, but, as their very nature
imports. Purgative, and not to cease till that Purgation be perfected by the
fire of conflagration They must suppose also, that there is no proportion
betwixt merits or prayers, and the punishment due to sins; and that this
exchange and traffic of merits and pains smells too much of the Banquier's
Laws, to be formally transferred into Christian Divinity, and applied to God.
But let us take a strict account of this newfound treasure.

They pretend a vast treasure And invent an imaginary treasure of Christ's and
his Saints merits.
and magazine of Merits laid up in Heaven* What do they call merit? Good works
recompensed, or not recompensed? If recompensed, how come they to superabound,
or why do they tell us of them? If not recompensed, what conceit would they
frame in us of God, who make him unable to reward his servants merits, or leave
him in their debt? But we have showed in our Tom. 1. lib. 1. lect. 14.
Theological Institutions, that merit is nothing else but a Whereas every good
work of the Saint is more then rewarded.
good work fructifying to reward: whence necessarily it ensues, that it is
either rewarded, or no merit. Besides, what shall become of that Axiom, God
rewards beyond all merit? drawn from the clear testimonies of the Apostle, that
the sufferings of this life are not proportionable to the future glory. But go
too; heap sin upon sin, will these Divines say that the punishments due to them
exceed the merits of Christ? nay even of one drop of his blood, or of the least
particle of a drop? If they dare not, to what end do they accumulate this
treasure? To what purpose do they add the merits of Saints to those of Christ?
For fear peradventure lest the punishment due to sin should exhaust the whole
source of Christ's merits? And every merit of Christ exceeds all proportion of
demerit or punishment.
Alas* how can you value the least drop of his? How can you assign a particle
so minute as not to exceed the greatest debt imaginable? If the least of
Christ's merits be dispensed, it is too much, and exceeds all punishment It is
therefore consequent, that Christ must long since have offered to his Father
more merit then all the sins that ever shall be perpetrated can require; nor
indeed could he possibly do otherwise, every least merit of his being perfectly
infinite. So that Christ's merits must absolutely be taken out of the scales,
if there must be an equality and exactness of communicative Justice. For it is
simply impossible, even in respect of God's absolute power, that so little
should be offered to God of Christ's merits, as not infinitely to overweigh all
that enters the balance with them. It appears then that all this Doctrine is
incoherent, and incongruous, and consequently to be rejected.

And if our discourse have hitherto been rightly poised, we can no longer doubt
of the two opinions concerning Indulgences, which balance sinks down with it is
gravity, which flies up with its levity. For first, whereas Of Ecclesiastical
penalties.
they put Ecclesiastical penalties to be such as equalize the crime, that may
be understood two ways. The first, that they should equalize the pains due in
Purgatory, which if it were in it self true, what messenger could assure them
of it? For S. Gregory bears us witness, that the Revelations which discovered
the state of souls at that time were new, and consequently unknown to the
Apostles and their successors. But besides, it being confessed, that the
lightest pain of Purgatory outvyes all the sufferings of this world, how can
some determinate quantity of these be equivalent to those? The other
explication then of equivalence, is, that such a penance, inflicted and
performed, How such a Penalty may be said to correspond or be equivalent to
such a crime.
would, by its exemplarity, cause such reparation in point of Ecclesiastical
Discipline, as the fault had caused miscarriage and transgression. And this
evidently may well be determined by the discreet arbitration of prudent censors
of manners. So that hence also it is apparent which opinion is to be embraced.

Let it be then established, that Ecclesiastical Indulgence remits no more then
what the Church imposed, or thought fit to be imposed, for the restoration of
Discipline; and that it affords no argument for remission of sin or pain,
either in this world or in the next, other then the change which is made in the
sinner himself, or the Church scandalized by him. As to that then of S. With a
solution to the objection from S. Paul.
Paul, it is answered, that he who in some certain business is constituted
Att^rney or procurator for another, cannot thence take upon him to do all his
Lord or Master might do, but only act according to the limitations of the power
entrusted to him; yet, this notwithstanding, whatsoever he does, he does it in
the name and lieu of the person who employed him. So S. Paul, what he remitted
of the integrity of Discipline he remitted in the person of Christ: the sense
being either prophetical, importing that by Revelation he understood that
Christ approved what he had done; or natural, signifying no more, then that,
all power being from God, whatsoever, as the Minister of Christ, he dispensed
with, he dispensed with upon the account of Christ.

The places of S. Cyprian are And some Fathers.
of more easy solution; For he clearly seems to teach, that Martyrs have power
to obtain that remission be made in Heaven, conformable to the Indulgence
exercised by the Church upon Earth. He does not then imagine, that by force of
the Church's remission the sin is remitted also in the sight of God; but that
the prayers of Martyrs, especially after their appearance before our Lord, are
effectual to that end. And for those expressions of antiquity, that remission
made on earth is ratified in Heaven; they suppose the Church made a right
judgment of the Penitent; which clears the dispute. The design of those holy
men was to insinuate that there is an obligation in conscience, to comply with
the Church's Laws, and fulfill her injunctions: But when, through her
Indulgence, they are recalled, that then this divine obligation cease. And
thus, by Indulgences, is the punishment from Heaven remitted which is forgiven
on Earth; and whatsoever is remitted here, an obligation remains from Heaven,
and by the command of Christ, to perform it. We have then answered to
Indulgences in general and showed that they do not much concern our Question.

The seven and twentieth Account.
That particular Indulgences granted for the Dead, argue not the Universal
practice of the Church.

TWO things may be disputed concerning particular Indulgences; first, what
substance of truth they have in them; secondly, what they make against us. And
because we have mentioned Indulgences upon no other account then in defense of
our explication of Purgatory (against which they are no otherwise alleged,
then as inferring the Universal Practice of the Church) we are concerned to
examine them no further then to discover with what strength of Practice and
Universality they are supported. The measures whereof must be taken either from
the Giver, or Receivers. First, before Particular Indulgences were not app^yed
to the souls departed before the Schools.
the School men, there was, that I know of, no noise of these Indulgences; for
what is reported of Gregory the Great's granting the redemption of a soul to
every thirty Masses, is (if I mistake not) weak, and grounded on no solid
authority: And for that other story of him, that he should release seven years
penalty to those who should visit certain Churches, makes nothing to our
purpose; since the custom of following Ages shows that Relaxation to have
related only to penances enjoined or to be enjoined; especially in the eleventh
Age, when the ordinary dispensation with Ecclesiastical penalties upon the
deathbed, or otherwise, to such as were desirous to dye or live in the
Church's peace and communion, seems to have been instituted:

From that time forward, how How thi^ come since to be applied that way.
Ecclesiastical questions of Practices depending on Theology, are handled at
Rome, take this account: When any thing is demanded of the Pope, the
difficulties whereof surpass the ordinary administrations of his Courts, a
select Committee of Canon* Lawyers and Divines is nominated to resolve it. For
the Canonists (the Prince being to them the head and fountain of all law and
Power) it is no great marvel if they deny little or nothing to the Papal
Commands. For the Divines, they are generally such, as, confusedly mingling
authority with reason, and so wandering up and down in uncertain Principles,
abhor certitude in things speculative, as the apparitions of a frightful Ghost,
unless some Venerable authority define it.

Let the question now be put, whether the Pope can do such a thing; do you not
perceive the scale already inclining to the affirmative? Answer is returned,
That, since there neither appears in the thing it self manifest contradiction,
nor any exception against the general power given to S. Peter by Christ, it is
probable the Pope, his successor, may do it; and that, if he sees it expedient
for the Church, it is their advice he should do it. If any one oppose, that the
resolution is doubtful, and, if the thing be in truth otherwise, the Popes
concession null; he is soon silenced with the return of Valeat quantum valere
potest, Let it go as far as it can; the Pope has done his part. This is the
Courtstyle in things of this nature; nor do I see much reason to quarrel at it.
The deliberation clearly is prudent, the concession benign and liberal.

For the Pope himself, he neither Which the Pope neither commands nor commends.
commands nor commends it; to those that sue he grants it, or rather denies it
not to those who urge and extort it He exhorts to exercises of piety, his
Indulgences are looked on as rewards, and purchased with pious and laborious
austerities. From the Granter then, this sort of Indulgences has no
Universality, since it depends not on him, but on the receivers, how many will
accept them. Nor can he be supposed to strengthen or authorize the practice,
who, as has been said, behaves himself as purely passive and permissive,
sometimes restraining, never extending it without compulsion.

The same degree of liberty has the people. He that has a mind seeks them;
upon him who is not desirous of them, they are not obtruded. If then your plea
be, they are frequented by many, by most; I grant both. But if you will have
that which neither is confirmed by command nor long custom, pass for a
practice, and that not of Individuals, but an Universal one, and of the whole
Church, I shall slowly consent. Whence does it appear to me, how many they are
who receive them, of what rank, with what intention they do it? I know some
that desire not to appear singular, and therefore do as their Neighbors: I
know others that openly express their dislike. There are those who are said to
allow them only when there is some great cause, some extraordinary Christian
necessity; and Cardinal Bellarmin himself is reckoned among these Others prefer
quiet of mind before such less retired Devotions, amongst whom I find S. Philip
Nereus, who is reported to have usually quitted the Roman magnificences, and
frequented those Churches where in silence he might pour forth his prayers to
God,

You will urge, That may justly An Objection from the Prelates corn vence at
least.
be styled a Practice of the Church which is done by many, the Prelates seeing
and not forbidding it. I answer; If the question only be, whether they do well
or ill that frequent them, A^s^ is a V^ rather (...) Vi^e in them.
I easily admit they do well, and according to their conscience. For what can
they be reproched for? the worst you can say, is, they act ignorantly, not
wickedly. Nor does the c^nnivence or permission of Prelates conclude any thing
more; For what reason have they to inhibit those who of their own accord
perform good duties? nothing can from hence be drawn for the remission of pains
in Purgatory. For what have the Prelates to meddle with things indifferent and
unknown, in which it is no crime to be ignorant, or act mistakingly? whilst the
opinion stands probable, that Purgatory- pains are discharged by Indulgences,
it is and will be lawful to use them What need the Prelates be troubled? let it
be first demonstrated, that these pains are not releasable, then take your
liberty to accuse their backwardness; whilst it is a thing indifferent, commend
their ^^citurnity.

It is delivered to us, Tradition And will be till the Demonstration of the
contrary Doctrine be generally acknowledged.
assures us, that we are to pray for the Dead, and that our prayers are
beneficial to them. That their works are to be examined by fire in the day of
Judgment, and accordingly remunerated; in the mean while that the condition of
some is better then that of others. But for the particular reasons of all
these, and how they are effected conformably to Nature, and the progress of
divine operation, is a business of Theological disquisition. That which shall
be clearly demonstrated to consist with the Principles delivered will finally
get the Victory. Till then, that is, till the demonstration be not only found
out but acknowledged, it is and will be lawful for the Prelates of the Church
to follow either opinion, and accordingly to proceed to action.

The Eight and twentieth Account.
That the Vulgarity of the opposite Opinion ought not to prejudice the true one.

THey yet, though gasping, The last objection, from the universality of the
vulgar opinion, at least since the Schools.
struggle and contend, that the opinion which we have called Vulgar, is, and
has been the opinion of the whole Church, at least ever since the Schools
reigned; and lest we deny our assent, they argue thus: The opinion of the
people is the opinion of their pastors; the opinion of the Pastors is the same
with the Schoolmen (for they either are, or depend on the Schoolmen.) The
opinion therefore of the Schoolmen* is the Church's opinion. Either therefore
the Church has erred these 500 years, or the vulgar opinion is plainly it is
belief. In this difficulty we are to enquire, Answer, There are three degrees
of them; the first from suspicion.
what opinion, what Church signifies. I observe that there are several degrees
of assent in man. The first may not improperly be called suspicion; when there
are some sympt^mes which if you narrowly scan, you easily perceive them to
incline doubtfully to either part of the contradiction, though at first they
inclined you only to one. These render a man suspicious, that is, more intent
and propending to one side, as it were expecting thence more light and
satisfaction.

The second degree is, when the The second, from probabilities.
verisimilitude or probabilities are very great, and which persuade a man
through their difficulties or multitudes, that it is not worth his farther
inquisition; but according to the proportion of consideration which every thing
challenges more or less in this life, he has bestowed pains enough in the
question. He therefore so satisfies his mind in that point, that he rejects not
him that shall oppose it, but if he bring any thing new and unheard of, is
ready to give ear to him, and if his proofs merit it, assent also. The third
and last degree of assent is his, who will not endure any opponent, The third,
from Demonstration.
but is certain that nothing can solidly be alleged to the contrary.

Now I ask of my adversary, whether the first degree be of that quality, that
if the Church be supposed upon any occasion to suspect one part of the
contradiction to be true, this suspicion must prejudicate the opposite? I
cannot think any one who is so much as fit to pretend to Divinity, can be so
foolish as to deny that hitherto it is lawful to opine the contrary. For as yet
there is properly no assent, The first, rather obliges the Church to a farther
Inquiry.
and the Church by the very position of the case, resolves on a Melius
inquirendum. Nay he that should forbid an opposition, would bind the Church to
a most evident danger of erring, and that even in her own Judgment, by which
she is carried to a further enquiry. This being settled, we may observe, the
second degree is so compared to the first, that as the first exacts, so the
second admits of an inquisition. The same inconveniences therefore The second
still admits it.
recur again, though their danger be less manifest and more remote. It is then
an injury also offered to the Church, to prohibit investigation in this second
degree, or to alledg the said opination of the Church, to the prejudice of the
opposite Doctrine, since, by her very opining, she confesses a readiness to
thank those who shall take the pains to clear the truth. For she ought not to
be thought opiniastre, but a Lover of truth, wherever it be found.

The third degree cannot otherwise The third is not pretended to in the Case.
be attained to but by infallible authority, or evident Demonstration; for a
professor of reason* cannot resist the force of either of these. If then our
adversary shall be pleased the declare, which of these degres he honors with
the Churches opinion, it will hence soon appear what answer he ought to receive.

As for the name of the Church, that is, of the Church supposing or opining any
thing, I thus distinguish; that the Church may either be said to opine, because
she has established something by a public and solemn decree, or by private
suffrages: If by private An opinion may be held by all the men of the Church,
and yet not by the Church.
suffrage, then she did it either as a Church, or as so many men. As when all
her members acknowledge Columbus for the discoverer of the West- Indies, they do
it not as parts of the Church, or as faithful, (for Turks and Idolaters do the
same) but merely as so many persons.

Let the arguer, amongst these three significations of the Church thinking or
opining, choose which he conceives most to his advantage. If the first, let him
produce the decree; which if he could do, we should not hear so much of the
Church's opinion. If the third, he exposes himself to derision; for how does it
concern faith, what the Church's sentiments are in matters of History or
Philosophy? The second, as it were only useful to his intent, so is it
absolutely false, the Church being a congregation of faithful, that is, of
believers, that is, of such as have accepted the Doctrine of Christ, and to
this day conserved it. But clearly this opinion began about Gregory the Great's
time, was unknown and unthought of in the days of S. Augustine, of little
credit before the Schools, not yet proposed to, or if it were, That is by them
as believers, that is grounded upon and preserving inviolate Tradition.
rejected by, the Oriental Church. So that by what other means soever it may
have speciously insinuated it self into the men composing the Church, it can
challenge no sway over them as they are a Church, that is, as believers, that
is, as grounded upon a perpetual Tradition.

Hence we see how vainly they labored in forming the proposed argument: For be
it granted the peoples opinion is the same with their pastors, and the pastors
the same that the Schoolmens, and consequently the opinion of the men of the
Church the same that the School-mens; it follows not, that it is in the Church
otherwise then in the School men. So that if it be but opinion in the
Schoolmen, and such as may be changed, it is being dispersed through the Church
will not add to its certainty, but by consent of the whole Church it will be
always subject to change, and, if sufficient reason be brought, justly to be
changed. It is then so far from following, that an opinion, by being the
opinion of the whole Church, cannot be changed, that on the contrary, very
unexpectedly, it appears to be mutable, and that in fit circumstances it ought
to be changed.

It is easy to gather from That the Vulgar opinion neither is nor ever was
taught as a p^int of faith.
hence what answer is to be afforded them who go about to accuse the Church of
circumventing us, affirming they were taught as a point of faith, tha^ souls
might be delivered out of Purgatory before the day of Doom, both by other
prayers, and especially by those which have Indulgences annexed to them. Of
whom I demand; were they taught that this was the persuasion of all the Pastors
of the Church? If they affirm it, I cannot deny but they themselves were
circumvented. But let them not accuse me, from whom they have received no such
Doctrine. I who have detected the Legierdemain, (if any such there be,) why
must I suffer what they deserve who put the sl^r upon them? Let them complain
of their own Doctors, let them call upon them to prove what they have taught;
which if they cannot do, let them find them guilty, and accordingly punish
them, but withal give me thanks for the discovery of the cheat. But if, in
truth, they have been taught no otherwise then that it is a pious credulity,
But as a pious credulity.
that souls are, before the day of Judgment, delivered (which, if they take the
pains well to examine them, they shall find to be the meaning of their Doctors)
who has circumvented them, but their own selves through sloth and negligence?
consequently, let them lay the guilt at their own doors.

What I have in this whole disputation The Conclusion.
performed, let them, in Gods name, judge whom he has been pleased to make fit
Arbitrators in Theological Controversies. What I have aimed at was this, That
antiquity did believe, that men in the next world, whether their souls are
beatifi'd or no, were not admitted locally to Heaven till the day of the final
conflagration. That then every ones works were to be examined; that the work^
of the imperfect, whose foundation was on Christ, were to burn, and by that
means their sins, not without detriment, to be remitted. That the opinion which
holds pure pains, and those in the interval betwixt Death and Judgment, either
of their own nature, or by prayers determinable, is new in the Church, built
upon slight grounds, and such as are incapable in things Theological to beget
faith; obnoxious to many and weighty objections; and finally by it is Patrons
weakly defended. These endeavors I have crowded into this small Volume, for
the benefit and conveniences of such as take delight in Dissertations of this
nature.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 12. l. penult. r. inviolable. p. 28. l. penult. r. privation^ p. 30 l. 9
r. Judgments, and for, it. r. is. ibid l. 11. r. saying (...) 32. l. 26 r.
soul. p. 36. l. 5 r. advantages. p. 38. l. 5. r. denunciati^ p. 39. l. 3. r.
regions. p. 40. l. 11. r. eternal puni. p. 41. l. 16. for, (...) r. that. p.
43. l. 10. for, are r. have p. 46. l. 1. r. lections. p. (...) l. 2. r whole
ibid l. 15. for, the r. is. ib. l. 23. r. correct. p. 54. (...) 20. r. us. p.
75. l. 17. r. decision. p. 83. l. 6. r. they. ib. 7. r. employ. 20. r. others.
23. r. connected. 27. r. secures. p. 87. l. 12. r. fetched. p. 103. l. 7. r.
adapt. p. 106. l. 18. r. sensible. p. 121. l. 3. r. peopl^^ p. 122. l. 8. r.
purging. ib. 12. r. their. p. 123. l. 6. r. on. p. 126. l. 1^* r. ordered. p.
128. l. 5. for, of r. and. p. 130. l. 23. r. adapt. p. 1^^* l 9. r. model of.
p. 137. l. 10. r. subintromission. p. 153. l. 19. ^* concresion. p. 156. l. 16.
r. informant. p. 157. l. 16. r. stock. p. 1^1. l. ult. r. whole delay. 166. l.
2. apparitions. 168. l. 21. r. witness^^* p. 171. l. 19. r. supposed. p. 172.
l. 2. r. detect. ^b. 16. r. perfectly* p. 174. l. ult* r. many. 175. l. 26. r.
sprightly. p. 178. i. 16. r. sight* p. 179. l. ult. r. foster. p. 182. l. 26.
r. were. p. 184. l. 26. r. decrees. p. 186. l. 18. r. Directories. ib. 25.
exibilated. p. 187. l. 5. r. have. p. 188. in the title r. came. ib. l. 9. r.
least of. p. 189. l. 19. r. are urged innumerable. p. 190 l. 14. r. Cells. p.
123. l. ult. r. distracted. p. 212. l. 3. r. distribution. p. 238. l. 9. r.
commutative.


