THE Church's Security In the midst of All Difficulties and Dangers, Explained,
and asserted, in a SERMON Preached upon the 5th of November last, Upon those
words of Numb. 23.23.

By R. W. B. D. And Minister of Kedarminster, in the County of Worcester.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Parkhurst, at the Bible and Three Crowns, the lower
End of Cheapside. 1694.

To the Worshipful, The High-Bayliff, Justice, Aldermen;
And the rest of the Corporation of Kedarminster.
Gentlemen!
YOU being generally my Auditors, at the Time of my delivering this Ensuing
Discourse, were quickened from what you have heard, to make it your general
desire, by the Mediation of several of the Chief amongst you, that I would make
my late Discourse more Public, by the Printing of it: This being the first
Request in this kind, which you ever made unto me; I am therefore the more
willing to comply with it, especially considering, that I know not how much of
a Call from Providence, there may be in your so general Concurrence, in this
matter: I commit the Ensuing Discourse to the Divine Blessing, and you all to
the Divine Protection, subscribing my self,

Your Affectionate Minister, R. W.
Nov. 13. 1693.
The Church's Security, etc.
Numbers 23.23. Surely there is no Enchantment against Jacob, neither is there
any Divination against Israel; according to this time it shall be said of Jacob
and of Israel, What has God wrought?


THESE words were uttered by Balaam, when he endeavored to curse Israel, the
People of God, that so he might obtain a reward from Balak; he was in himself
no better than a Witch or Conjurer; but when he sought to do mischief to God's
People by the assistance of evil, and wicked Spirits with whom he was
confederate, the holy Spirit of God did strangely interpose, and made use of
this Conjurer to be his Instrument for Prophecy as to several particulars that
relate to the Church of God in general, and for the declaring of a Blessing to
Israel, which was God's Peculiar and Chosen People, his Church at that present
time; and so God by the overruling power of his Spirit, did turn the Curse,
that was intended by this wicked In chanter, into a Blessing.

More especially, in the words of my Text, there is a discovery made, by the
plain confession of this Wizzard, of the vanity of his own attempts, against
the Church and People of God; Surely, says he, there is no Enchantment against
Jacob, neither is there any Divination against Issrael, etc. as before.

In which words we have contained two general parts.

1. An Assertion firmly laid down, with relation to Jacob and Israel; Surely,
or assuredly, as if he had said, you may take this for an assured thing, for a
certain truth, that there is no Enchantment against Jacob, neither is there any
Divination against Israel. We know that the names Jacob, and Israel, were both
of them first given to him, who was the Father of those twelve Patriarchs, from
whom were derived those twelve Tribes, of which the Jewish Nation was
constituted. The name Jacob signifies a Wrestler, or a Supplanter, and was
given to him at first, upon occasion of his laying hold, of his Brother Esau's
heel, at his Birth, and was further confirmed to him afterward, in the fitness
of its signification, by his supplanting his Brother Esau, and depriving him,
both of the Birth right, and of the Blessing; and also again in his famous
wrestling with God by Faith, and Prayer, as well as with the Angel of God by
bodily exercise; from the success of which wrestling, it also came to pass,
that the other name here mentioned, the name of Israel, was given unto him,
that is, a Prince with God, according to the words of the Angel, Genesis 32.28.
And he said, thy name shall be called no more Jacob, but Israel, for as a
Prince, have thou power with God, and with Men, and have prevailed. These names
Jacob, and Israel, are here, as in many other places, used to denote the whole
Nation, which derived from this person, there being nothing more common, both
in Scripture, and likewise in other Authors, than to call a Nation by the name
of the Person, or Persons, from whom it proceeded.

Now forasmuch as this Nation was the Church and peculiar People of God, above
all the Nations of the World, according to that of the Psalmist, In Judah is
God known, his name is great in Israel, at Salem also is his Tabernacle, and
his dewlling place in Sion; he has not dealt so with any Nation, that is, with
any other Nation, neither have the Heathen the knowledge of his Law: For this
reason it is, that by the names Jacob, and Israel, the Church of God in
general, especially that, which we call the Invisible Church, the Church of the
Faithful, of such as are what they profess themselves to be, even real
Believers, is to be understood, and even in this large sense, are these words,
Jacob and Israel to be understood here in my Text, even to denote all true
Believers the Church of the Faithful throughout all Ages: These are all, (1.)
Jacob's Wrestlers, and that both with relato God and also with relation to Men.

1. They are wont to be Wrestlers with relation to God, by Faith and Prayer;
they are not willing to give the Almighty any rest, until he establish
Jerusalem, his Church in general, a praise in the Earth.

2. They are Wrestlers with relation to Men, those that are the Enemies of God,
and Christ, and true Goodness; as in Baptism they are enrolled in the number of
Christ's Soldiers, so they make it their business, to fight under his Banner,
against the Devil, the World, and the Flesh, which are his Enemies, and to
acquit themselves well, in their spiritual Combat and Warfare; for as the Seed
of the Serpent, is an Enemy to the Seed of the Woman; so is the Seed of the
Woman an Enemy to the Seed of the Serpent; and they do in the issue get the
Blessing from, and prevail against those carnal Esau's, who though they are
Brethren it may be, according to the Flesh, yet bear an Enmity to them; yea
they become at length more than Conquerors over all their spiritual Enemies,
through Christ strengthening of them; which makes it evident,

2. That all the true Members of the Church of Christ, are also Israel's, such
as have power with God, and with Men, and do prevail; as they wrestle with God
by Faith and Prayer, so through the Divine Grace and Condescension, they are
wont to prevail with God by Faith and Prayer: And as they wrestle and contend
in the Cause of God against Sin, and sinful Men; so they are wont to prevail,
and to be Crowned as Conquerors at last, though it may be even by suffering; so
that there is enough said for the explication of these two names here
mentioned, Jacob and Israel.

Concerning these it is here said, that there is no Enchantment against Jacob,
neither is there any Divination against Israel: Some read it, there is no
Enchantment in Jacob, no Divination in Israel, to denote that God's People do
abhor such wicked practices; as in their Baptism they renounced the Devil, and
all his Works; so they abhor the thoughts of entering into League with Hell, and
of being at an agreement with destruction; they abhor such practices, wherein
the Devil's assistance is required and expected. But the plain and most obvious
sense of the words seems to be this, That though the Devil and his Instruments
may design the ruin and misery of the Church of God, yet all the Contrivances
and Machinations of wicked Men, yea though they take in the assistance of the
Devil himself, for their help, shall not prevail against the Church, so as to
bring ruin and destruction upon it; in this sense, to be sure, There is no
Enchantment against Jacob, there is no Divination against Israel. It Is added in
my Text. (2.) According to this time, it shall be said of Jacob and of Israel,
What has God wrought? The properest sense and meaning of which words seems to
be this; That according to this instance here before us, wherein God did
frustrate all the designs of Balak and Balaam, for the cursing of God's People
in that Age, and bringing mischief upon them; so he will deal with his Church
and People throughout all Ages; God will repeat the same deliverance to his
Church and People in all succeeding Ages, which he afforded in the instance
before us; so that God's People shall have reason to say, not only in that
present Age, but also in all Ages following, that God is one and the same to
them, the same in Power, and Mercy, and Faithfulness; according as 'twas said
at this time, so it shall be said in all times following, by Jacob and Israel,
What has God wrought?

So that the words thus explained, do afford unto us these three Notes, as a
ground of further discourse.

1. That it is, and has been all along, and will be more or less to the end of
the World, the wont and custom of the Devil, and his Instruments, to contrive,
and design the ruin and misery of the Church and People of God, though by the
wickedest means that can be thought of, or invented.

2. That the Church and People of God are from time to time, and shall be to
the end of the World delivered from, and shall even prevail against the
contrivances, and machinations of the Devil, and his Instruments.

3. That the whole honor of this is to be ascribed to God, and must be
acknowledged to be the effect of his power and operation. I shall resume these
particulars, and a little consider them more particularly, in the same order in
which I have propounded them.

I begin with the first; That it is, and has been all along, and will be to
the end of the World, the wont and custom of the Devil, and his Instruments to
contrive and design the ruin and misery of the Church and People of God, though
it be by the wickedest means, that can be thought of or invented. The History
of all Times, and the many Books of Martyrology, which are extant, will confirm
us in this. We have an Instance of this, in the most early Times of the World,
in the case of Cain and Abel; Cain was of that wicked one, and slew his
Brother; and wherefore slew he him? 'twas because his own works were wicked,
and his Brothers were righteous; as the Apostle gives account of this matter, 1 John 3.12. This was the main ground of the quarrel between them, that one was a
true Believer, the Seed of the Woman, a true Member of the Church, and the
other was of the Seed of the Serpent, and nothing suitably could satisfy the
Rancour, which Cain had conceived within himself, but to persecute his Brother
to the Death. Thus Pharaoh set himself against the People of God, and was not
satisfied with oppressing them by hard bondage and service, but at length took
a course, which if it had prevailed, would have destroyed the whole Nation in
one Age, and so the Church of God contained therein; he bethought himself of
that wicked course, of killing all the Male-Infants of the Israelites, as soon
as they were born. Thus it was likewise in the Instance here before us, to
which my Text refers. Balak would hire Balaam, to make use of the power of
Witchery, and Divination, that is, to press and engage Hell it self, and the
powers of Darkness, to this work, of cursing the People of God and all to this
purpose, that he might the more easily consume and destroy them. Thus Haman
laid a Plot not only against Mordecai, but also in order to the ruin of the
whole Jewish Nation, that were then dispersed throughout the Persian-Monarchy,
and this to be accomplished by no less than an Universal Massacre. Thus the
Primitive Christians did wade through a Sea of Blood to Heaven; being persecuted
with infinite varieties of Torments in ten several Bloody Persecutions from the
Heathens, besides what they endured from the unbelieving Jews, who were also
their implacable Enemies. And the Blood of Protestants, that has been shed by
the Papists, has by the account of some fallen nothing short of that Christian
Blood, that was shed by Heathen Rome, in the first 300 Years of Christianity;
and we may find reason to believe it to be true, if we consider those many
thousands that have been destroyed by Burning, and Massacres, almost in all
Nations of Europe, particularly, 60000 Protestants massacred in Paris, and
other parts of France, in the last Age; and 20000 barbarously murdered by the
Papists in Ireland, in the memory of some here present. Add to this the Design
of the Spanish Invasion in Eighty eight, which tended to the ruining and
enslaving of the whole English Nation, and the barbarous Slaughter or all, that
would not presently have bowed down to the Idols of Rome and Spain. Add also
the Design of this Day, which was, with one Blow, to destroy the King, and
Royal Family, and all the Estates of our Kingdom, and in them to have destroyed
in effect the whole Nation, more especially the Church, and the Protestant
Interest established therein. By all these Instances it does abundantly appear
as to the truth of the thing, That it is, and has been all along, and by
consequence will be, more or less to the end of the World, the wont and custom
of the Devil and his Instruments, to contrive and design the ruin and misery
of the Church and People of God, though by the wickedest and most barbarous means
that can be thought of, or invented: And we shall be further confirmed in this,
by considering the Reasons upon which this is founded, which are such as follow.

1. The most universal ground and reason, is that everlasting Enmity, which is
set and fixed, and that by God himself; between the two Seeds, the Seed of the
Womon, and the Seed of the Serpent, that is, betwixt Christ and his Church on
the one hand, and the Devil and his Angels, and all wicked Men, that are his
Seed, on the other. This Enmity was fixed by God very early, even as soon as the
Covenant was renewed with Mankind through Christ after the Apostasy of Adam, as
you will find, Genesis 3.15. where God says to the Serpent, And I will put Enmity
between thee and the Woman, and between thy Seed, and her Seed; it shall bruise
thy head, and thou shall bruise his heel. This was the main ground of the
quarrel between Cain and Abel Cain killed his Brother Abel; his nearness in
Blood could not save him from an hand of violence; and the fundamental reason
was, because Cain's works were evil, and his Brother's were righteous: And this
has suitably been the fundamental ground of all the Persecutions, and
Massacres, and Burnings, and Violence, that ungodly Men, in all Ages, have
exercised toward the Members of the Church, whatever else has been pretended,
as the reason of them. But yet;

2. There are some other reasons that may be given of this matter; as (1.)
Because that gracious persons are by their words and example, a continual
reproof of the evil practices of wicked Men; they do by their words and
example, reprove their Superstitions and Idolatries, in matters of Religion,
and their Hypocrisy therein; as also their Wickedness and Profaneness in life
and practice; and this wicked Men cannot bear; they look upon such kind of
reproof to be no better than a reproach; and therefore are apt to revenge it by
any kind of violent practice whatsoever. Thus God's Attestation, which he gave
to Abel's faith and sincerity in his Worship which he offered to God, was that,
which provoked Cain to that violent dealing, which he afterward expressed
toward his Brother. Thus the Christians in the Primitive times, disowning and
reproving the Idols, that did then so much abound in the Heathen World, did
provoke the Heathens so much to persecute them to the death. And thus the
Protestants reproving and disowning the Superstitious and Idolatrous practices
of the Papists, is that which has especially stirred up the Papists to all
their Cruelties against them.

2. Another ground is an inconsistency, it may be, in temporal interests and
concerns; wicked Men do make Self their God, and Self-interest their Diana,
which they chiefly adore; when therefore this is crossed by any one, though it be
done no other way, but by the performance of necessary duty, they are hereupon
apt to be provoked to endeavor Revenge, though in the most cruel way and manner.
Thus that which provoked Balak to procure Balaam to curse the People of Israel,
was a fear lest they should disturb him in his Kingdom and Government: And that
which has especially provoked the Popish Party against the Protestants, is
because that by their Doctrine they touch the Pope's Crown, and the Friars
Bellies; if these had been let alone, as some have observed, Luther had not met
with such opposition in his Preaching. Thus England's standing of old in the
way of the Ambition of Spain, and its standing of late in the way of the
Ambition of France, has been the main ground of England's Troubles from Spain
formerly, and now from France; so that if we consider these particulars, it
will appear to be no matter of wonder, That it is, and has been all along, and
by consequence will be to the end of the World, the custom of the Devil and his
Instruments, to contrive, and design the ruin and misery of the People and
Church of God, though by the wickedest means that can be thought of, or
invented: But I have further added,

2. That the Church and People of God are from time to time, and shall be to
the end of the World, delivered from, and shall prevail against the
Contrivances and Machinations of the Devil, and his Instruments. It Is true
indeed, and must be acknowledged, that particular persons, who are real Members
of the Church of Christ, may be, and often have been brought to untimely Ends,
by the machinations and contrivances of wicked Men in this kind; this is
suitable to all History and Experience; and the Apostle confirms it, Romans 8.36.
quoting it out of Psalm. 44.22. As it is written, for thy sake are we killed all
the day long; we are accounted as Sheep for the slaughtor; by which words he
proves, that tribulation, and distress, and persecution, and famine, and
nakedness, and peril, and sword, may be the portion of the People of God; as he
says in the verse before; this is evident likewise from what is said, Heb.
11.36, 37. Others had trial of cruel mockings and scourgings, yea moreover of
bonds and imprisonments; they were stoned, they were sawn asunder, were
tempted, were slain with the sword; they wandered about in Sheepskins, and
Goat Skins, being destitute, afflicted, tormented, etc. But even in this case
there are two things very considerable; 1. That as to such as are persecuted
thus to death, they are hereby but hastened to the enjoyment of a blessed
Immortality, even as Abel was; though they may lose their Heads in the quarrel,
yet they do not lose their Crown, but enjoy it so much the sooner; nay in all
these things, says the Apostle, we are more than Conquerors, through him that
has loved us, Romans 8.37. 2. It Is farther observable, that the Kingdom of
Christ is generally the more increased, and enlarged, occasionally from such
persecutions; Sanguis Martyrum est semen Ecclesiae; 'twas an old observation,
that the Blood of Martyrs was the seed of the Church: This Tertullian tells the
Heathens, in his Apology, the more we Christians are mowed down by the sickle
of death, the more we are increased, and grow up the thicker hereby: But,

2. It must be allowed further, that as for particular Churches, they may
possibly be utterly destroyed and scattered by the violence of Persecution; for
God has not given his promise to any particular Church, whether
Congregational, Provincial, or National, that it shall always continue in the
state of a true Church of God; but then it is to be considered, 1. That God does
long preserve some National and Provincial Churches, notwithstanding all
designs and machinations to the contrary; of which our Church of England has
been hitherto a singular, and standing Instance. 2. When at any time he suffers
the destruction of any particular Church, it is because of some great
provocations from that Church preceding; as he threatens the Church of Ephesus
to remove her Candlestick, because of her forsaking her first love, Rev. 2.4,
5. which threatening has been since so fully accomplished, that, as a late
Writer observes unto us, there is not one Christian Family now to be found in
Ephesus. 3. When at any time it so falls out, that particular Churches are
dispersed and destroyed by the violence of Persecution, yet even this falls out
oftentimes to the good and benefit of the Universal Church, and the greater
spreading of it, those that are dispersed by Persecution, spreading the Gospel
for which they are persecuted so much the more, where ever they go; as happened
upon occasion of the persecution, that was raised against Stephen, Act. 8.4.
it is said, that they that were scattered abroad upon that occasion, went every
where preaching the Word. And it is the observation of some, that the Turks
breaking into Europe, caused several of the Greek Church, who were endowed with
much more Learning than was ordinarily found in the Latin Church, to betake
themselves toward the Western parts of Europe; and this, amongst other things,
made way for the Reformation that followed, and this may serve for the case of
particular Churches. But then,

3. As for the case of the Universal Church, certain it is, that no Persecution
shall ever be able to destroy it, and root it out of the World; God has
founded his Church upon a Rock; Thou art Peter, says Christ, and upon this
Rock of thy confession, that I am the Son of God, will I build my Church, and
the Gates of Hell, all the Power, that is, and the Policy of Hell, shall never
be able to prevail against it. It Is the original promise of God, that as the
Seed of the Serpent shall be suffered to bruise the heel of the Woman, and her
Seed, that is, that part of it that is here upon Earth; so the Seed of the
Woman shall bruise the Serpents head; so that in the issue, the Church of God
in general is sure to be delivered from, and to prevail against the
contrivances and machinations of the Devil, and his Instruments, according as
the Apostle says, Behold God shall tread Satan under your feet shortly. And
this is confirmed by all History and Experience. Thus the Church of God was at
length delivered out of Egyptian Bondage, and Pharaoh, and his Host, who had
persecuted the Israelites, and drowned their Infants, were drowned in the Red
Sea. Thus God turned Balak's design of a Curse upon Israel into a Blessing.
Thus the Jews were delivered from Haman's designed Massacre, and Haman and his
Sons were hanged upon the Gibbet that was prepared for Mordecai. Thus
Christianity was at length delivered from the Persecutions of Heathen
Idolaters, and the Heathens Idolatry was soon banished out of the Roman Empire.
Thus the effect of the miscarrying design of the Spaniards in Eighty eight,
was, that it brought such a declension upon their Power, as from which they
have not recovered even to this day. Thus some have observed, that the
Massacres in France were followed with a quick and wonderfully reviving of the
Protestant Interest in that Nation, and with miserable calamities upon the
Popish party therein; and what was the effect of the Barbarity of the Irish
Papists in their Rebellion, but miserable ruin upon themselves, and their
Families? Thus to conclude, we were at this day, delivered from the intended
ruin and destruction by Gunpowder, and the Conspirators brought a just
Execution upon themselves, and Ruin upon their own Families; and which is more
yet, the effect was, that it has caused Popery to be much more abhorred ever
since by the generality of this Nation: By all which Instances, it is abundan tly
made good, That the Church of God has been from time time, and therefore shall
be, no doubt, to the end of the World, delivered from, and shall prevail
against the contrivances and machinations of the Devil, and his Instruments.
Now if the ground and reason of this should be inquired, we have a sufficient
account of it in the

3d Note before observed, That the whole honor of this matter is to be
ascribed to God, and it must be acknowledged to be the effect of his Power and
Operation. This is clearly intimated in the words of my Text, According to this
time it shall be said of Jacob, and of Israel, What has God wrought? The
Deliverance of God's People from time to time, is the work of God, and the
effect of his Power; and therefore to him alone is the honor and glory hereof
to be ascribed.

It Is true indeed, in subordination to God, there may be some other account
given of this matter, why God should do thus much for his Church, and that we
have intimated likewise in my Text, the Church of God is here said to be Jacob
and Israel; whereby is signified,

1. That they are God's Covenanted People, a People that have a
Covenant Relation to God, and a Covenant Interest in him, to whom he has made
many gracious Promises, and has confirmed them by his Word and Oath, which are
two immutable things, in which it is impossible for God to lie.

2. They are a praying wrestling People; they are Jacobs, they are such as give
the Almighty no rest, and therefore suitably as for such as thus cry day and
night unto him; as it is said by Christ in the Parable, He will, tho, he seems
to defer Deliverance, yet avenge them speedily: Whence

3. It follows, that they are wont to be Isreal's, such as have power with God,
and Man, and do prevail; they have an Interest in God, in his Power, and Mercy,
in his Attributes, and Promises: No wonder then, if he do in due time, create
Deliverances for them; and therefore suitably not unto us, not unto us, but to
God alone, be the praise of all his Delivering Mercy. More especially,

1. Of this great Mercy and Deliverance, which he bestowed as on this day to
our Forefathers, and in them upon us, a mercy which contained many singular
mercies in the bowels of it, even the enjoyment of whatsoever is desirable, to
make our Lives comfortable here in this World, or in order to the securing of
our Eternal Welfare in that other World. But farther,

2. We have reason to bless God, that he has still continued to us, the fruit
and benefit of this days Deliverance, in the enjoyment of the Gospel, together
with the enjoyment of our Lives, Liberties and Properties, notwithstanding all
the Designs of the Popish Party to the contray. We know that 'twas not long
since, that a Conclamatum est was ready to be pronounced upon our Religion,
Liberty and Properties, and that not only by our Enemies, in a way of exulting,
but also by our selves, in a way of diffidence and despondency. And we know
farther, that there is a Party mixed every where amongst us even in our very
Bowels, who desire, and as far as they can, and dare, are plotting, and
contriving in effect, that thus it may be still; and this, although it is more
than probable, that by seeking the Ruin of the Nation in general, and the
present Establishment, they do but hew at the Bow, upon which they themselves
do stand, and which, falling, may in the issue prove their own Ruin. But
blessed be God, who has hitherto so far appeared for us, a sinful undeserving
People, as to raise us up a Temporal Savior, and deliver in the nick of time;
and has hitherto afforded unto him, the same Mercy, that Jacob takes notice
of, as afforded to Joseph; as you will find, Genesis 49.23, 24. The Archers have
sorely grieved him, and shot at him, and hated him; but his Bow has hitherto
abode in strength, and the arms of his hands were made strong, by the hands of
the mighty God of Jacob. And we may hope, that it is not for nothing, that God
has hitherto delivered our King, from so many Deaths and Dangers, but that the
design of God, in these gracious Providence, is to reserve and use him still,
in his due time, as an Instrument, for our more full deliverance from all our
Fears and Dangers; and suitably, as the Deliverances, that we have already
received, do engage us to, such Instances of real Holiness and Conformity to
God's Will, and to such hearty, and through Reformation, as may express our
Thankfulness to God, for Mercies already received, and restrain us from taking
occasion from past Mercies, to sin the more against God, as too many have done;
as if they thought themselves delivered on purpose, to do all these
Abominations: So if God shall (as we hope he will) make use of our King, as a
means yet more fully to deliver us out of the hands of our Enemies; we should
in the mean time resolve seriously, in the strength of God, that the issue and
effect shall be, that hereupon we will serve him, in Holiness and Righteousness
before him all the days of our lives; according to the prayer of holy Zechary
to this purpose, That he would grant unto us, that we being delivered out of
the hands of our Enemies, might serve him without fear, in holiness and
righteousness, etc. Which God of his mercy grant, etc.

FINIS.

