DEVOTION AND REASON, FIRST ESSAY. WHEREIN Modern Devotion for the Dead, is
brought to solid Principles, and made Rational; In way of Answer to Mr J. M's
Remembrance for the Living to pray for the Dead. By THOMAS WHITE, Gent.

In quo quemque invenerit suus novissimus dies, in eo eum comprehendet mundi
novissimus dies. Aug. Epist. 80. ad Hesychium. PARIS, MCDLXI.

PREFACE To the Gentleman who sent me Mr. J. M's Book.
SIR.
PEradventure you may desire as well my Judgment of Mr. J. M's Book, as the
answering of it. In Brief then. The man I knew many years ago, and concieved a
good Idea of his honesty, and such Learning as could then be expected from him.
He went after beyond the Seas, where (as I heard) he followed other studies,
and at his return I saw him once, but had a good Character of him from a common
friend, as touching his Honesty. For, as to his Learning, either my friend had
not tried it, or we had no occasion to discourse of it. With this Character of
his Person I undertook the reading of his Book. In which I find all the Arts
necessary to the d^fending of a bad cause with as little shame as is possible.
He brings known Heresies for his defense: of lawful Authors he stretches
their Persons to the height; their words beyond their extent; if he lights
upon an Authority of some Church Book, you would think it were the Definition
of a General Council, he so presses the Authority of the Church for it. By
Interpretations and Translations, he makes them say what he lists. He imposes
upon his Adversaries Erroneous Doctrine, sometimes because he has not taken the
pains to understand them, and other times, because otherwise his cause would be
openly gone: He specially presses my opposition to Popes Bulls, as aiming, by
confirmation of them, to have me censured. Of two, the one he corrupts, the
other he understands more like a Banquier then a Divine, and yet sets his rest
upon them. Most of his Arguments are from places common to both sides. A great
weapon with him is, to tax his Adversaries Arguments as employed by Heretics
to prove Errors; not knowing that it is a principal Method of gaining Science,
to use the Arguments of extreme Errors to conclude the middle Truth, a way
much practiced by Aristotle, and very laudable. For as Aristotle teaches there
is n^ famous Error without some truth in it, seeing wi^h ^t show of Truth,
Nature could not receive it. He has made a Collection of good and bad; I think
of as much as can be said, but seems to make no distinction between those that
have some weight, and those which have none. His Answers are sometimes the
admitting of plain Contradiction, sometimes admitting of all we say, and for
the most, some difference in words more then in meaning. Yet he brags fearfully
of his great Exployts and Triumphs. When he pleases he explicates my opinions
in disguised Language, and ordinarily imperfectly. I hope his Book will prove
the decision, if not of the cause, at least of the handling of it. He has had
two great Advantages against me. One by which a witty Spanish Preacher called
Padre Mancio overcame his corrival to a Sermon in a Country Parish. For putting
him to say his Pater noster in Latin before the People to try his learning,
when his corrival said it right, he would correct him according to the false
pronunciation of the common People, which the People applauding preferred him.
So your Author has the Advantage by explicating Spiritual things corporally,
to have the apprehension of Ordinary, both Men and Divines, and consequently
the applause for him. The secend is, that he has commodity of Books, which to
me, being a stranger, and unknown, and in a Town not extraordinary bo^kish, are
hard to find, for which reason I am fain to be content with the faults his
citations afford, without being able to give so ample satisfaction as the
seeing of the works themselves might have made me able to exhibit. Yet all this
does not cause me to make an evil apprehension of the man. I know the nature of
the cause, and the persuasions he has been imbued with, must needs have this
effect, that he must help himself by all the means he can, and very likely is
conceited that he does Sacrifice to God in making my opinion seem the worst he
can: His way of Piety, his instruction to handle Divinity by the Authorities of
Authors whose Votes have no force, his Obedience, and the Utility of his
Friends, all drive him to this. I on the other side am forced to treat
sometimes his opinions rudely, sometimes his Arguments, because the English
Tongue makes our Controversy exposed to such Judgments, as are to be told what
the nature of proofs or saying are, and well it falls out when even after
telling it they be able to see it. But I do not desire any of my sayings should
reflect (...) his Person, for his Learning beseems well enough the Narrative
Divinity that he has followed, which has no deeper root then whether some
Classical Author (under which nation comes many a mean Divine) hold such an
opinion: and, if some Number hold it, then it is Canonized for good Doctrine.
But it is not my Theme here to declaim against the weakness of vulgar Divines,
but to recommend my pains and self to you, desiring yours and your friends
opinion of them, and of

Your ever Friend and Servant Thomas White.

FIRST PART.
Refuting the Arguments from Authority, and Reason, against the Doctrine of the
Middle State.

FIRST DIVISION Containing what in the first four Chapters concerns the Author
to answer.
The Adversaries misrepresentings of the Author's Doctrine, and mistakes of the
Council of Trent. His Arguments to prove that some Saints of the Old Law
reassumed not their Bodies, drawn from Authority and their remaining Relics,
shown inefficacious and springing from shallowness in Philosophy.

SIR,
1. THE Book you sent me, put me in mind of a punishment St. Hierom reports to
have been used to some Martyrs; whom first the Pagans anointed with honey, and
then exposed to be tortured with flies and gnats. For so it serves me; first it
declares my opinion reasonable heartily; It testifies that I aim at showing the
Fabric of the World to be a perfect work of Wisdom, and not a wilful and
arbitrary government. Thus far is Honey; for, if I do perform it, questionless I
play the part of a good Divine; if I do not, at least he gives me the
commendation of intending it. Some parts of my opinion he explicates not well,
but I conceive it is our of mistake. One thing he fumbles in which was plain
enough. Whereas I put in a sin three parts; the strong and resolute Affection,
Relics in the Soul after the resolution is changed, and lastly the outward
Action, and give to all these for punishment their several proper effects, so
that the Resolution, which is properly the Sin, may be forgiven and cancelled,
and yet not those effects which follow the other two parts; so that part of the
pains remain due after the sin is forgiven; and if this had been plainly
delivered, it would have cut off his chief imputation, that I say the sin being
forgiven there remains no punishment due; he was fain to frame such a piece of
nonsense, as you may see in his third Chapter, N. 3. etc.

2. This being understood, I may proceed to his fourth Chapter; in which out of
Scripture he pretends to prove the deliverableness of souls out of Purgatory
before the last day. His first proof out of Scripture is to cite Scripture for
that, in which we both agree; to wit, that some pains remain due after the sin
is remitted. So that his argument must be purely out of reason, Scripture
serving but for a stalking-horse, and indeed in this point is utterly
unserviceable to him. But, whencesoever it be drawn, let us see the force it
carries. The Council of Trent accurseth those, who say a man cannot satisfy
God for temporal punishments due after the sin is remitted by fastings, etc.
(where we are to note there is never a word spoken of Purgatory.) Therefore,
(must he infer to make it carry fully home to his designed point) we may
satisfy for souls in Purgatory. Two things be wanting in this Argument; One is
some Speech of one Persons satisfying for another, for the Councils words seem
to be plainly of a man satisfying for his own sins; The other is, that there is
no mention of any satisfaction for the sins of the dead. So that the whole
Argument is nothing, but his own assertion or supposition. The rest of his
Texts of Scripture are drawn after the same trifling manner, having never a
word worthy the explicating; but, their sayings being plainly common to both
parties, he frames some weak Argument under them; the which being out of pure
Reason I expect to find hereafter, where he pretends to bring Reason for his
Opinion.

3. In the mean while I may pass to the fifth N. where there comes into play
another question. For so he argues, Christ in his resurrection delivered souls
out of Purgatory, therefore their acts were changed from acts of grief into
acts of joy, and this without any change made in Body. He proves the Antecedent
largely, nor will I dispute it with him. But the consequence I must utterly
deny. For both in St. Mat. 27. it is expressed, that many rose, and came into
the holy City, and appeared to many; And, if we do consider that the gifts of
God are perfect, or, as Saint Paul terms it, sine poenitentia, we will easily
see that it cannot be rationally thought that they ever died again; specially
they rising in glorified Bodies, for else they would have been publicly seen,
and not appeared only to whom they listed. Besides that the Union to the Body
perfects the very beatifical Vision, and if they had died again, they should
have lost that perfection once possessed. If again we consider that no apparent
difference is mentioned in Scripture why some should have that bliss, and
particularly that many should enjoy it, and not all, we shall find this
privilege fit for all; and if for all, then that none were changed without some
change in their Bodies. And, that I may not speak this without Authority, I
call him to witness, who was present, our Savior Jesus Christ, in the fifth of
St. John, where he makes mention of two resurrections, the one of only good
which he says to be at hand, the other of all both good and bad which was to
come, in both which he was to be Judge as he was man.

4. He would persuade a man that the position of saying, all the Just of the
Old Testament rose with our Savior, was so absurd that no man would say it,
though he had read it in my Book, and comes prepared to oppose it, which he
does, or may do out of diverse Histories of the Relics of some of the Ancient
Fathers yet extant, or at least found long since our Savior's Ascension. But I
wonder that a man of so much Criticism as he either is, or I mistook him to be,
should never consider what the power of History is, and what it can witness.
Take the stories of the invention, or translation of the Prophet Samuel;
History can testify there was carried from Jerusalem to Constantinople, a Body
withgreat solemnity; That the body was said to be Samuel's, and for such
presented; That it was found in a Tomb, which was by some probable tokens held
for the same, in which Samuel was buried: But that the Body was truly Samuel's,
is beyond the power of History to testify. For History can testify nothing but
what men can witness, nor men witness more then they can hear or see; Nor could
it be judged either by eye, or ear, whether this was the true body of Samuel,
or no; Therefore History cannot assure us of any of the examples which he
brings against our position, and the truth must be resolved either into
probable conjectures, or to some obscure revelation, neither of which is
sufficient to make a Theological Argument.

5. Yet, because I will not discourage the good man, I will pass all his
sayings, and grant him those he cites were the true Relics of the Saints,
whose Bodies they were esteemed. Then he triumphs, and finds a Saint John, who
has two or three heads in the World, to have none in Heaven; and the Saints,
who have left their bodies in Earth, to have none in Heaven. And, if I should
say they were either replicated, or at least by diverse Ubications in two
places, he might easily rap me over the fingers, and tell me such solutions are
fit for more Metaphysical Schools, that look beyond nature; and not for me, who
ought to say no more then I can understand. Wherefore keeping my self to
Aristotle, and Saint Thomas, I must declare that the things we call Relics
are not the very Bodies of the Saints, but new substances made out of the
living bodies of such Saints, as much different substantially as if the bodies
had been turned into ashes or grass, though morally keeping a respect to the
Persons whereof they were made. Whence it follows, that in Heaven the Saints
may have the same bodies they had upon Earth, though these Relics remain in
the Tombs. Peradventure this lesson will seem a hard one to him; But, let him
study well how in Aristotle and Saint Thomas's way there is but one materia
prima, or pura potentia under all forms, and how there is a compound made of
this Matter and the Soul without any middle Entity to cement them together, and
he may come to understand this mystery: the which I explicate no farther,
because People, for whom Books are printed in English, for the most part are
not capable to reach and judge such points.

6. Here I should have made an end of troubling you with this Chapt. but that I
found it necessary to put you in mind to reflect how in all this Chapter he
has said nothing to the purpose: Neither Scriptures, nor the Council any way
touching the Controversy, but brought out to cover a silly Argument, which I
expect will be often repeated over. But chiefly that the Fathers he cites are
for the most part besides the game, speaking of what was done at our Savior's
resurrection, wherein we and he all agree very friendly, as far as concerns our
present task; that is, that our Savior set them all free that were then in
Purgatory; but I say withal, that he bestowed their Bodies on them, in which
they should rise and accompany him to Heaven. The which I think he would not
mislike, if it sprung in his own Garden: Now I know not how circumstances may
blast it in his opinion.

SECOND DIVISION. Containing an Answer to the fifth Chapter.
Three Heresies club'd together to prove Antejudiciary Delivery. Nothing
evinced from th Testimonies of the Greek Fathers.

1. IN the fifth Chapter he gives very great words as if he would do wonders
out of the Greek Fathers. To judge of the effect let us put some Notes, which I
believe will be common to us both. The first is, that Origin, otherwise a great
Doctor and Father, held how at the day of Judgment wicked men should begin to
be punished; every one should be tormented by fire, some more, some shorter,
according to the quantity of their crimes; but in fine, all at last set free,
and received into Bliss. And, it is well known, that he had many followers; but
at last was condemned, and it settled in the Church, that the damned were damned
for all eternity.

2. My second Note is, that, though this Error of Origin was quelled in the
Church, yet the Venom of it remained in the hearts of many under other words,
and this question, whether it be lawful to pray for the damned. I say the
malice of the former Error remained in this. For the Article of our Faith is,
that the wicked deserve and have at death eternal damnation. Now, he that
says, that they may be prayed for, says that by Prayers this sentence is
revocable; and, by consequence, that whosoever is damned eternally it is for
want of Prayers; and so evacuates the main Article of our Faith, engages all
good men to have charity toward the damned, and wish to them the good which
they are taught is possible, and makes the communion of the faithful to reach
into Hell. No wonder then, that St. Gregory the Great judged the opinion that
Christ at his resurrection had freed some out of Hell to be Heretical, and
would much more have condemned this opinion that it is lawful to pray for
damned souls; which gives every man, though he live and dye never so wickedly,
hope of salvation, if he has but money to get Masses enough.

3. My third Note is, that there was amongst the Ancient Christians an Heresy
called of Chiliasts or Millenaries, which our Fifth-Monarchy-men pretend to
resuscitate in England. They said, that there were two resurrections; the first
of the Just, who were to live and reign with Christ here upon Earth for a
thousand years in all corporal prosperity before the general resurrection. And
there wanted not great, and otherwise Holy men, who were deluded into this
opinion, by the apparency of some Texts of Scripture.

4. These be my Notes. Now the Conclusion, for which I drew them, is, to let
you understand, that this great Divine makes a Gallimawfry of these three
Heresies to present his unwary Reader with a dish of Purgatory; and, taking
away these, and the speeches of some Fathers concerning the delivery of souls
at Christ's resurrection, his Chapter will be both very thin and lean, his
testimonies few, and of no efficacity, if not contrary to his design.

5. As for Origenism, he cites Origin himself, and Saint Gregory Nyssen, and
would fain pull in St. Basil by the way of Brotherhood. As for the Error it
self, it has two points in it, which makes it nothing to the Purpose; the
first is, that whereas Purgatory ends amongst Catholics at the day of
Judgment, Origen's Purgatory begins then. So that Origen's Testimonies are very
unskilfully applied to Purgatory. The second is, that this Divine aiming mainly
to prove, that a soul separated from the Body can receive change, can make no
use of Origenism otherwise then to cosen his auditory, seeing Origin puts the
souls to have resumed their Bodies before any change be made in them. As for
the Person of Origin, it is so famous for this Error, that our Divine cannot
choose but be ashamed to say he knew not this was his Error. As for Saint
Gregory Nyssen, it is a confessed thing both by Ancient and Modern Authors,
that his works have been corrupted by the Origenists, and particularly the Book
our Divine cites, as I persuade my self he had read in my answers to the
Vindicatour and Result; though it was not to his purpose to take notice that
his Arguments were already answered. But I, for not being too troublesome to my
Readers with repeating over the same things, must refer them to the second Part
of Religion and Reason, Divis. (...) in the answer to the 22 th. Section. Out
of which it will clearly appear, that we are not to seek Saint Basil's opinion
out of Saint Gregory's, which we cannot know perfectly, but rather Saint
Gregory's out of Saint Basil's.

6. His Testimonies from Authors of the second Heresy begin (as he would have
it) from the great Saint Macarius, that is to say, is fathered upon him, as
this Divine cites it by Rufinus Aquileiensis; but it imports not by whom, for
the story carries discredit enough in its own bowels, so that there is no need
to look into the Authors credit. Yet something I have said to this in my Notes
upon the first Chapter of the Result: So that here I have need only to note
that Gloss of Saint Thomas which he mentions, That the comfort which the damned
Oracle speaks of, is no other then such Joy as the Devil has when he makes men
sin. Which signifies, that the damned souls are glad, that men sin in praying
for them, which seems to be quite against the Intention of your Heretical
citers of this story, and in a manner a rejection of the effect of it.

7. His next citation of this rank is out of the Oration of the Dead attributed
to St. John Damascen, and is so shameful an one, that I wonder any man; who
esteems St. John Damascen for a grave Doctor, and one who holds not that the
damned are to be prayed for, should attribute that Oration to him. For, besides
that it is directly against Saint John Damascen's Doctrine, who teaches expressly
that souls cannot be changed, what an unexcusable impudent assertion was it to
say, that in his time both the whole East and West did testify the delivery of
Trajan's soul. Wherefore either this Writer lived after Joannes Diaconus, that
is some 150 years after St. John Damascen, who could find no Testimony for this
fable in the Latin Church of any weight, but that rather it was contradicted in
Rome as against Scripture and Catholic faith, and had it out of him, or else
he fained it by all probability. Neither did I ever hear of any authority for
it in the Greek Church ancienter then this Oration.

8. Another excellent History he has of the Emperor Theophilus, exempted from
Hell by the Prayers procured by the Empress his wife called Theodora. The
substance of the History is, that this Theophilus was extremely wicked all his
life time, embrued in the blood of diverse holy Martyrs; A little before his
death he put a Gentleman to death upon false surmises, and taking his head by
the hair in his hand, spoke his last words. Thou shall be no more Theophobus
(that was the Gentleman's name) nor I Theophilus. So far public Histories.
After this he is reported to be stricken by God with a disease of gaping so
wide, that men might look into his bowels (of which how unlikely it is, let
Physicians consider.) In this case it is reported he repented, but sure he was
speechless, and by all likelihood could make but few certain signs. Howsoever,
the story goes, he died and was cast into Torments. But the Empress making
great multitude of prayers to be said for him, she had a Revelation of his
delivery. This is the story; in which his wickedness is certain, his repentance
surmis'd, his delivery known by Revelation. If you ask whence he was delivered,
it is answered (...), out of torments, properly such as are given to make one
confess, that is, laid upon one by others, by which, and by the whole strain of
the Authors, who generally speak of damned Persons, you may see it was not out
of Griefs, such as the Grecians put in Purgatory, that he was delivered, but
from Hell. The Author of this story he cites Triodium and Gennadius, both
admirers of the delivery of Trajan, as likewise the Euchologium, out of which
he cites this prayer to God, that he, who delivered Trajan an infidel, should
deliver N. N. a Christian,

9. But, to conclude the Testimonies of this quality, I must not forget two
Authorities; the one out of the pretended Oration of St. John Damascen, the
other from Gennadius. They both tend to the same purpose, that the stories
concerning these things which are in the Lives of Saints, and Divine
Revelations, are not to be counted. Of which proposition, I pray take special
notice, that you may see the truth of my proposition, that the Greeks have as
many stories of relieving the damned, as we have of the delivery of the soul^
in Purgatory. Now, Sir, I pray if you can have that freedom, by friends cause
it to be asked of the Author, whether he thinks the opinion of delivering and
relieving the damned to be true, and I think he will say no. Then let him be
pressed, whether these stories be true, or false: It must necessarily follow
they are false in his Judgment. Here I would entreat to know what greater
certitude there is in our Revelations then in the Grecian ones, or why it is
more unlawful for me to give little credit to ours, than it is for him to
refuse the Greeks. And so hitherto I believe I may safely say, I have heard
nothing, by which I may understand the Greek Church holds the antejudiciary
releasing of souls out of Purgatory; the two questions being very diverse, of an
ordinary releasing out of Purgatory, and an extraordinary releasing out of Hell.

10. Though my case be very hard, yet I must not conceal it, that I am
condemned by Pagans, Jews, Mahometans, and at last the Ethiopian Church. And
as for the Jews, I cannot deny it, but they hold a true Jew can be but year in
pains for his sins, and therefore I must be liable to have erred against the
Thalmud. The Alcoran is known to have taken diverse points from the Jews,
thiough the Turks are said to wear a tuft of hair, by which Mahomet must catch
them to carry them to Paradise, when he comes to fetch them, which now, they
cannot tell when it will be, seeing the eight hundred years are passed, which
he prefixed. Zaga zabo's Aethiopical faith, that in Purgatory there are kept
Saturday, and Sunday Holidayes every week, whence it has any ground, I can no
more guess, then I can, how Plato, whom he also cites, got such fine stories of
the other world. Wherefore helping out his account by Aeneas his returning from
Hell thorough the Ivory Gates of Hearsay, and remembering his prayer to the same
purpose; Si Fratrem Pollux alterna morte redemit,
Itque reditque viam toties, etc.
I end this rank of his Testimonies, Noting only, that his inconsequent
descant upon the Council of Florence, p. 76. was prevented by me in Religion
and Reason, p. 60. Though he thinks it the safest way not to take notice of my
former Replies, when they disable any Testimonies, which he concieves bear some
show of weight and Authority.

11. Besides these his Arch-Patrons, he has some by-helps, which I must
examine. I find them of two kinds, some express that at that very time, in which
Prayers are said for the dead, the dead feel some relief. For this his chief
Testimony is from the story of the Idolatrous skull, whose words he cites to
be. At what hour you make commemoration of those, and pray for them, who are in
pain, they feel some comfort. And I cannot deny but the Doctrine agrees very
well both with the Devil who spoke it, and the Pulpit, out of which he preached.

12. His next Authority is out of one Leontius, an holy Bishop, who wrote the
life of St. John the Almoner, a man who spent great Alms upon all sorts of
poor, and specially upon those who were plundered by the Persians, who in those
times took the Holy Land, and amongst other Captives, one a Cypriot, who having
been prayed for by his friends as a dead man, was thrice in a year set free
from his bands (but not from his Prison) for one days space, and found fast
the next day. And it is added, that the Holy Bishop St. John relating this
story was used to say, From hence we learn, that the dead have then rest when
we make Collects for them. This is the story, and for the authenticalness of
it, this Divine mentions how this work of Leontius was attested in the second
Council of Nice. But he does not tell us, that the authentical copy of this
book is not extant, but only a Paraphrasis of it made by Metaphrastes, of whom
good Authors have that opinion, that he added many things of his own, and that
he wrote Saints lives, not as they truly passed, but as they might have passed,
and this Judgment is not of him only in common, but particularly of this life
of St. John. And concerning this very story, you may note two things, The one,
that he telis the story to have passed in Cyprus, whereas St. John lived in
Alexandria; Secondly, that, whereas other stories of the same nature in Pope
Gregory, and Venerable Bede, make the Bands remain loose, this story makes them
to be supernaturally bound again; which seems to be against the nature of Gods
gifts, which are given without repentance, but much favors the Doctrine of
Relief in Hell. Wherefore it is vehemently to be suspected, that those words
then and when come from his Paraphrase, and that the Saint's words reached no
farther then what we read in others, that this story argued that prayers
relieved the dead; As truly no more can be gathered out of such Histories,
which are Parabolical; and it were very absurd to parallel small circumstances
betwixt corporeal Allegories, and spiritual things signified by them. Howsoever
the Authority can be no greater then of Metaphrastes, who is held in a
Rhetorical way to fain many things; and it is to be noted, that he lived after
Gregory the Third's d^ys, and peradventure after the time of the Oration De
dormientibus was written.

13. Being freed from these slight stories, we may see what Testimonies of
solid Fathers he brings for his opinion. He cites St. Denis, but never a word,
which brings the Testimony home to our Controversy, he speaking but in common
of the remission of the sin. His second Author is St. Athanasius. The words,
that The souls of sinners feel some benefit when good works and offerings are
performed for them. This Testimony has three faults. First the Author is not
St. Athanasius, as is so manifest by the work it self, that it is a gross
mistake to cite it as his, though this Divine be not the first who objected it
to me; and farther it is clear, the Author wrote since the Turks were Masters
of Greece, by the phrase of calling the Romans Frenchmen. His second fault is,
that he distinguishes not dead, but pronounces of all dead men's souls: which
argues the opinion of those, who hold relief in Hell. Thirdly, these words,
When good works, etc. are equivocal, and may be as well interpreted, that good
works are the causes of relief, as they do the time, unless other words force
them to be taken emphatically, which do not appear here. St. Ephrem is also
cited, but not in what work, nor of what certainty, for his works are very
ambiguous. Besides, that he is cited out of another Author named Severus
Alexandrinus, who, what he was I know not; One I read of, but an Arch-heretick.
The Testimony it self smells of the intervalls, which the comforters of Hell
invent; and the works attributed to St. Ephrem are so uncertain, that no guess
can be made of what value this Authority is.

14. The Testimonies he cites out of St. Epiphanius, and St. Chrysostom are
more certain, but they favor my opinion, not his. For to help, and not cancel
the sin, and that some comfort accrues to the dead by the sacrifice of the
Mass, are the very expressions, which we use. But the other words, to wit, that
it may happen that a total pardon may be obtained for them by our prayers,
comes out of a false Translation. The true Translation is, that it is possible
to gather pardon from all sides by prayer, that is, that abundance of prayers
may be gotten either from all sorts of persons; or all sorts of actions toward
getting of pardon: for St. Chrysostom makes mention of both. And these words
(...) and (...), signifies motion from the circumference to the center. His
last place of St. Chrysostom. out of the 21 Homily upon the Acts, I must tell him if
he had not another Text then I, he has much abused the good Saint. The words
as I read them are, est enim, si voluerimus, leve ipsi supplicium facere. If we
will, it is possible to make his punishment light. Which he translates lighter,
to which he adds as his own descant to make out the Testimony, then it was at
first. Much from the Saints mind, who, though he be earnest to persuade to
prayers and good works, yet never descends to more particulars then that they
will do some good, or else that the Living shall get good by them; nobis Deus
placatior erit, which St. Austin also glances at, to wit, when the soul is
damned. Now if the torment of the dead be sooner ended, your Divine will not
doubt, but that it is lighter.

15. But I must not forget his citation of St. Greg. Nazianzen, of which he
seems to make great esteem, and it is least of all to the purpose. For, as it
is true St. Gregory speaks of a Purging before Resurrection, so is it clearly
to be understood of that, which is made by death, as is evident by that
expression, either purged or laid aside; For nothing can be understood to be
laid aside, but the body, and what is laid aside with it. So that all his
expression is of the effect of death, and nothing touching what is to be done
in the pure spirit. And so I am quit of this troublesome Chapter, without any
mention of delivering souls out of Purgatory in the Greek Fathers.

16. As for the Greek Church he brings me a Letter from some Town, wherein
there lived many Catholic and Learned Grecians, from whom his friend received
this Character, that all the Grecian Catholic Church approves, and admits
privileged Altars and Indulgences for the souls in Purgatory, the which they
believe go straight to Heaven as soon as they have satisfied. And I am so far
from discrediting this Letter, as that I sincerely believe it, and yet think
what I said to be true. For this word Catholic Greek Church is not exempt from
the Law of other words, to wit, that it may be understood in diverse senses by
diverse speakers; so that if this City he speaks of signifies either Rome, or
Venice, which are the likeliest Cities of Christendom to have Grecians of that
quality living in them, and the Greeks in those two Cities communicate with
none but such as either live under Latin Governors, and so do easily follow
their customs, or otherwise are instructed by such Missionaries as go from the
Greek College in Rome, I do not wonder, that they should answer that the
Catholic Grecians hold Indulgences; as they do in Italy: Nay, peradventure may
think the rest no Catholics even upon this score. But, when I spoke of the
Greek Church, I spoke of the descendents from the Greeks, which made the Union
in the Council of Florence, without receiving any new Doctrine since.

THIRD DIVISION, Containing an Answer to his sixth Chapter.
Testimonies from Latin Fathers before St. Austin, either savouring of
Millenarism, or opposite to the Alledger, or (not found, but) framed to his
purpose by Additions of his own; and, lastly, his only express Testimony,
uncertain.

1. IN the sixth Chapter he pretends to show that the Latin Church before St.
Austin held the delivery of souls out of Purgatory before the day of Judgment.
His two first Testimonies, according to the custom of those whose chief end is
to make a show, hang in the position which is common to both sides, being but
pure prayers that deceased souls should go to Heaven, without specifying when.
But because his devotion was so hot, that it could not expect God's pleasure
and determination, he would have us believe it was meant presently.

2. His next two Testimonies are drawn from the Heresy of the Millenaries,
praying to God, that the soul may rise in the first resurrection. For the
former Testimony being Tertullians, of whom it is known that he was of that
Sect, and the words being proper to that Sect, it cannot be doubted of his
meaning. The second Testimony is from the Gothic Liturgy, the which of what
authority it is I know not. We well know the Goths were Arrians for the most
part of their Flourish in Italy, and a great while in Spain; we know that this
Millenary Error was greatly dispersed even amongst Catholics, but more
amongst Heretics, who have not the rule of Unity and Tradition, which keep
Catholics from easy changing. The words of the prayer are the proper words of
the Millenarians. The glosses he seeks to make, as they may be good to the Text
of the Apocalypse; so is their sense too far fetched to be the sense of a prayer
for common People. Wherefore either it is a pure piece of Millenarism, or at
least he must first vindicate it from being so, before it can serve him for a
Testimony. Now the Chiliasts Error was, that Christ was to reign upon Earth
corporally with his Saints for a thousand years before the general
resurrection, then to give the hundredfold of what his Saints had forsaken for
his sake in this world, according to his promise in the Gospel. But, because
this was a corporal resurrection, therefore, though there had been no Heresy in
the position, it could serve your Divine to no purpose. Now it serves only to
show how short his performance falls from his bragging promises.

3. His next authority comes truly after St. Austins time, being a story out of
St. Gregory of Tours contemporary to the Great, yet because it is of St. Martin
it must speak for St. Martin's age. The story, as he relates it, is of a Holy
Virgin, to whom St. Martin after her death procured bliss. His first Note is,
that Saints, whose Sepulchers are visited for Saints Sepulchers, may yet stay
some while in Purgatory: I easily grant him that, without the Authority of this
story. For the fallibility of Peoples Judgments in such things is very well
known. And I should not boggle at it, though it were until the day of
Judgment. His second Note is, that St. Martin in the primitive Church believed
as we do. But for this, I know not that the name of the Primitive Church
reaches after Constantin's time, and St. Martin was but a young man in Julian's
time, when, being but a Catechumen, he gave half his Cloak to our Savior.
Farther to think he believed as we do is a hard matter. For I must first
believe the story to be true, which may be doubted, since St. Gregory gives
testimony of it only as a report he had heard from some old men, who lived
where this Tomb was, and none of them could have had been witness of the fact,
which was passed 1^0 years before. So that it has no better Authority then of a
Country tale. Nor does St. Gregory's Vote (which is his third Note) much mend
it, as he may easily see, if he reads Baronius his Opinion of St. Gregory's
History, T. 2. An. 109. Sect. 49. And in the true History (which he sets down
but by halves) there are diverse inconvenient circumstances. One he makes
mention of, to wit, that the Holy Maid was kept from Heaven by reason of a no
very great fault; but in the History you cannot perceive there was any fault at
all. His fourth Note is, that St. Gregory the great was not the first, that
began to write such stories: but St. Gregory of Tours before him. Those that
will be accurate say seventeen years before him, if that, in such a question
as this is not to be together. But truly I believe it was one hundred at least.
For the Pope Gregory tells so many of like stories, that a popular Error can
hardly be thought to grow so fast, as that the first should have been, but
seventeen years before it could grow so common.

2. Then he comes to St. Hierom, out of whom he recounts what words a soul
delivered out of Purgatory may say. And if you ask what this is to the purpose,
he answers by adding to the words of St. Hierom, that the soul speaks this
before the resumption of her body, and proves it; because the Saint passing to
other things says, they shall be done in the consummation of the world. Is not
this goodly stuff for a Divine to fill a Book withal?

3. Next in rank is brought in St. Ambrose with the Elogy of the Father in
Christ to St. Austin. Out of him he cites two places. The first out of the
Preparatories to Mass assigned for Friday. His words, to entreat that the Mass
may this very day (in great Letters) be a great and full banquet of thee (Jesus
Christ) the living Bread, which came from Heaven. I would he had taken the
pains to apply his Text to our question: for I find a great difficulty. Yet I
think I can find two pretty good constructions. The one is to understand it
objectively, the other efficiently: For the proposition being, that the Mass
should be this banquet, either it must be meant, that the dead should rejoice
of his saying of Mass by way of the devotion, that is used to be called,
communicating spiritually, or else that the Mass should be cause of their
seeing of God. Whether way soever it be taken, the effect of the prayer is,
that he may this day say Mass with that Charity and Devotion, as that it may be
profitable to the souls of the dead. But both these may be done without any
change in the souls. For if his Mass prove so good, the souls knew of it, at
their first going out of the body, and were to have the effect of it in its due
time, merely by the position of the Action this very day, without any great
Letters. But to understand it as it must be understood to serve for his
purpose, that this very day the souls should receive bliss, was a very uncivil
request, to expect Purgatory should be emptied for the saying of one Mass; and
surely takes away all excuse from the Pope, why he likewise does not give such
Indulgences as at least once in the year to make a Goaldelivery of Purgatory,
that Christians might have as much privilege as the Jews to lie but one twelve
month in that place. But specially this request befitted not St. Ambrose, whom
we shall have our Divine bring in promising to pray longer for one soul, then
one Mass comes to.

4. By occasion of the great Letters of This very day our Divine remembered
there wanted great Letters in a former citation of the commendation of the
soul, and therefore repeats it adding great Letters that the soul might show a
patent to go out of Purgatory that day. But he had forgot, that the soul which
is there prayed for is taken to be not yet in Purgatory; nor to have received
her judgment. And if he look into the Fathers, and see how hopefully they speak
of dying Christians, he will not wonder at such prayers.

5. Into which Doctrine if he had looked he would not have been so confident of
his next citation out of St. Ambrose, as if St. Ambrose had intended to starve
himself in Prayer for the delivery of Theodosius his soul. For he may find that
St. Ambrose thought Theodosius to be in Heaven when he pronounced the words he
cites. Wherefore if the answer I gave to this Testimony in my Notes on the
fourth Chapter of the Result does not please him, let him distinguish the two
goods that belong to the soul, the one beginning at death, the other at the day
of Judgment, and take notice, that he that has the one may be prayed for to
come to the other, as St. Austin seems to do for Verecundus. So then these
words he cites belongs to the good to be received by Judgment, as likewise
those in the same Oration; Da requiem perfectam servo tuo Theodosio, requiem
illam quam praeparasti Sanctis tuis. And let these others, Regnum mutavit, non
deposuit, in tabernacula Christi; jure pietatis ascitus in illam Jerusalem
supernam, etc. And again, Manet ergo in lumine Theodosius, and sanctorum
caetibus gloriatur; And again, Nunc se augustae memoriae Theodosius regnare
cognoscit, quando in regno Domini Jesu est. Let these, and such others
explicate that he was not in Purgatory, or Torment, of which there is no
mention, nor of delivering him from them, but not as yet corporally in Heaven,
whither nevertheless St. Ambrose expected his prayers should bring him: So that
nothing can be more direct and plain for my opinion, then this Oration of St.
Ambrose.

6. His last witness is St. Paulinus, who could not speak home enough, and
therefore our Divine teaches him his duty, that he should not pray only, that
the dew of Grace should refrigerate the souls which lay scorched in burning
darkness, as the Saint spoke; but that this change should be presently made,
for else it is nothing to his purpose.

7. And thus have we got through his sixth Chapter, where there is nothing more
for this purpose; then that there was an uncertain tale of St. Martin told in
St. Gregory of Tours his days, and unwarily accepted of by him. St. Ambrose
notoriously for my side, and the rest common for both sides, and inched out by
our Divines devices.

FOURTH DIVISION. Containing an Answer to his sixth Chapter.
Pretended Testimonies for St. Austin' s opinion, partly abusing that Father,
making himself-contradicting and blasphemous, partly inefficacious without the
Alledgers assistances, opposite to the te^et they are brought for, or utterly
unauthentick. The great rarity of Mr. J. M's. unanswerable demonstration,
coming off very unfortunately.

1. HIS seventh Chapter is wholly spent about St. Austin, to make him for the
present delivery, or at least refreshment of souls in Purgatory. A hard task,
but truly he behaves himself manfully in it. For he sticks not to give St.
Austin the ly to his teeth, and tell him and us that he says what St. Austin in
plain terms says he knows not. Two places then he draws out of St. Austin in
the front, which the rest must second. The former is in the Chapter 109. of his
Enchiridion. His words, The time, that is place'd between the death of man, and
his last resurrection contains souls in hidden receptacles, according as each
one of them is worthy either of rest or of misery as she has made her fortune
when she lived in her flesh. And after some words of his own, he adds. And of
these souls he says, It is not to be denied, that then when the Sacrifice of
our Mediator is offered for them, they are eased. He adds the Latin words,
Relevari cum^pro^e^s offertur. He tells us farther that the Conclusion of the
Chapter is, that to whomsoever they (prayers) are available, they avail to make
the forgiveness complete, or at least to make the pain it self more tolerable.
This is the main place; for the second is but as it were a repeating of the
last words of this in his Book of eight Questions to Dulcitius: So that it is a
confirmation, that St. Austin spoke the first words not slightly, but upon a
constant resolution.

2. He adds diverse caveats to make his argument sure, and some replies upon
answers which I shall not give him. The which therefore I shall partly omit,
partly touch as far as they shall open the question. For the present I only
ask whether if any man being asked whether Mr. J. M. were gone to London,
should answer, truly I do not know, but if he be gone to London, (...) am sure
he went by Dunstable, for there is no other way; whether I say, that man could
take it well at one's hands, who would take his oath he had said Mr. J. M. was
gone to London by Dunstable, and justify it to his face. Now, my Answer is,
that Mr. J. M. does so to St. Austin. He brings two places, in which he tells
St. Austin he says souls are released, or refreshed in Purgatory: And St.
Austin in the very same Books in precedent Chapters, expressly professes he
does not know whether there be any such purgation, or no. The one place is in
the 19 Chapter of the Enchiridion he cites, whereas his Chapter is the 109th.
The second is in the resolution of the first question to Dulcitius, whereas his
is in the second question: The words are these in his own Translation, about
the end of this Chapter, It is not incredible also that some such thing may be
after this life; And whether it be so or no, it may be examined, and either be
discovered, or continue hidden, to wit, that some of the faithful are by a
certain Purgatory fire, so much sooner or later saved, by how much more or less
they set their affections upon transitory goods. And the same words has he in
his E^chiridion, out of the which he repeats them in this. I might take notice,
that St. Austin's word being qu^ri potest, it may be inquired, or sought for,
which signifies that as yet it had not been looked into, he interprets it
examined, as if it had been doubted of. Secondly, that whereas St. Austin
expresses the question to be, whether some faithful People be sooner or later
saved, by his own Translation, and therefore this was that which might be found
or not found out, your Gentleman will draw that St. Austin says that it cannot
be proved that their opinion is false, but only that it may ly hidden. And I
cannot deny but that his Cavil is cunning. But I pray when the question is of
being, or not being, cannot the solution be either that it is, or is not, and
if the question be not solved (which is, the solution to ly hidden) are not
both parts hidden, and not only one? So that this answer is expressly against
the Text.

3. His other solution is no less either against the Text, or unreasonable, for
indeed it is a mere puzzle, and not an answer. For what matter is it whether
the object be lawful or unlawful, if this be confessed that the affection is
sinful? Therefore it is not to be doubted but the question is, whether sins in
Purgatory be shorter and longer punished, according to their gravity? For, let
him look whether St. Austi^ speaking of the punishment in this life, puts it
for any thing but sin. Wherefore, if Bellarmin had no better solution, it was
not worth the looking for, and he rather disgraced the Catholic cause then
helped it by so poor a discourse. Therefore I can conclude no otherwise then
that your Divine gives St. Austin fairly the ly to his face, seeing that where
he professes expressly he does not know, nor that it had as yet been brought in
question whether in Purgatory some souls were purged sooner then others, This
Divine tells him he does know, and brings his words to make him eat them. But
what are these words of St. Austin. It is true he says, The souls are help^ by
prayers, which is the position common to us both. But then when is your Divines
liberality, whom I find light fingered enough in his Translations.

4. St. Austins adds that to whom prayers are available, aut ad hoc prosunt ut
sit plena remissio, vel aut certe tolerabilior fiat ipsa damnatio. Your Divine
explicates it, that in Purgatory, either all the pain, or some part be
remitted. But reading St. Austin makes me think that he speaks of Purgatory and
Hell. For he speaks in common of the dead, and descends particularly both to
the damned and those in Purgatory; and of the Damned he pronounces that, Etsi
nulla sunt adjumenta mortuorum, qualescunque vivorum consolationes sunt: As who
should say their damnation is less, because it is good to their living friends,
according to the prayer of the rich glutton in Hell, who would not have his
Brothers come to him; which if it be the true meaning he will put that all
prayers for those in Purgatory obtain full remission, to wit, when the time
comes. And though it be clear, that seeing these words can be spoken no
otherwise then upon supposition of a truth which he expresses to be unknown to
him in the same Book (and in the one has these words, Sive ergo in hac tantum
vita ista homines patiuntur, sive etiam post hanc vitam alia quaedam judicia
subsequuntur, non abhorret, etc.) they truly signify nothing to our
Controversy, yet let them be taken in all the rigor the words can bear, they
say nothing against our opinion: For both full remission in virtue of the
prayers may belong to the day of Judgment, and the more tolerableness of the
pains argues not that the pains are lessened after the beginning, nor that they
receive end before the day of Judgment. For God being the imposer of the pain
in their way, and all things being present to him, he can, when he list, that
is, at the first instant, proportion the pains as well to prayers as to sins,
and set such a pain to endure to the day of Judgment, that the merit of prayer
may have its value notwithstanding the equality of the duration: This I speak
in your Divines manner of discourse, so that you may see that this conclusion
may stand with their apprehensions of Purgatory, so Revelations were set on
side.

5. Out of the explication of this place, all other places out of St. Austin
are plain, though indeed even without this place they have no difficulty. For
who doubts but that the dead are helped by prayers; and if helped, dealt more
mercifully withal? or that this is come to us by Tradition? Likewise there is
no question whether these torments begin before the day of Judgment, or at the
very hour of our death, but whether they end before that day. Nor likewise do
we question whether they be purged after resurrection: For our position is,
that Resurrection is the end of their torments. But these I easily pardon him,
for I easily apprehend he understands not fully my opinion. Wherefore to talk
to him in his own Language, let him compare an Instans Angelicum to the time it
dures for example sake some grief, that in a soul would be purging to the time
which runs parallel to it, and see whether it will not be a purging in every
instant of time, and yet will have purged nothing until the Resurrection,
which we put to be the ending of the pains of Purgatory: by which you will
understand how far he looks awry, to say we put no purging before the day of
Judgment, but all at or after it.

6. Yet were he content to abuse St. Austin in a small matter, we had reason to
have patience. His insolency grows so high as to condemn him of no less then
Blasphemy. Read in his fifth Number. After he has told us that St. Austin
speaks of spirits being purged before they receive their bodies, not
distinguishing betwixt Purging, and being purged, which later St. Austin speaks
not of, He adds to make it more evident that he speaks of a purgation wholly
ended and dispatched, before any one resume their body: And tells that St.
Austin moves the question if any dye so immediately before the day of Judgment,
that there is not time enough for prayers to be said for them, what shall
become of them; And St. Austin's resolution he does not let us know, but he
presses that St. Austin requires time that they may be cleansed before the day
of Judgment. To which is answered, I see well that the objection seems to do
so, but why the objection St. Austin makes should be taken for his Doctrine, I
do not know. And if I were to answer the question, I should doubt whether the
great Persecution of Antichrist's times, and the wonders of the dying world,
can stand with that tepidity, which carries men to Purgatory. But what says
your great Divine? He tells us St. Austin stands in doubt whether a man who
dyed then in the state of being to be purged, should not be damned if there
wanted time to purge him; That is, that St. Austin is of mind that a Venial sin
becomes a mortal one by an extrinsecal accident, that changes nothing in the
soul. Can you take this man either to be a solid Divine, or to bear any respect
to St. Austin, that sticks not to impose such an abominable Error and
Blasphemy upon him? As to say, that God is so cruel as to punish a man
eternally, who loves him as his last end, and otherwise deserves it not merely
for want of time to punish him: St. Austin would persuade himself that God
would rather keep off the day of Judgment, and let all the world stay for their
resurrection, so abominable a Blasphemy he would take it to be.

7. In his seventh N. he tells us news of an unanswerable demonstration against
us: but because it belongs not to St. Austin, I shall let it alone until he
comes to his Reasons. Another Authority then he brings out of this, that St.
Austin praying for his Mother, says, that he doubts not but that God had
granted his request. So your faithful interpreter translates these words,
Credo jam feceris quod te rogo, I believe thou have done already what I ask
thee: which is no more then that he believed his Mother was already in Bliss,
to wit, from the first hour she died; but that she had gotten it by his prayers
not a word, if not expressly contrary; for he expresses that his prayer was
after the dead.

8. The next Text I know not whether he means to bring it for himself, or for
me, but surely it speaks for me; that is so expressly of the day of Judgment,
that there is no comparison. The fire which the Apostle testifies to go before
Christ's coming to Judgment, being the chief subject of the place, and himself
confessing the literal sense of the Prophecy to be so, but that St. Austin (to
do him a pleasure) might apply it to Purgatory. Nay, that St. Eucherius does
plainly, which put together makes this Conclusion; that Purgatory is terminated
with the last Judgment, as my position holds forth. His last Testimony is out
of the Sermons, ad Fratres in Eremo, the which he says have crept into the
times of St Austin. But whence? Baronius answers you, calling the Author of
them Impostorem and fictorem frigidum, qui multa delira, vana, fabulosa
effutiat, and portentosa mendacia blaterat.

FIFTH DIVISION Containing an Answer to the eighth and ninth Chapter.
Testimonies from St. Austin to Bid, either unsound in Faith or Divinity. St.
Gregory's mis-translated and maimed. Canus his Rule opposite to the Alledgers
intention, Venerable Bede not engaged in our Controversy. The first Allegation
from him misinterpreted. Drithelmus his Revelation opposite to the Church's
Doctrine.

1. HIS eighth Chapter contains the Authors betwixt St. Austin and Bid. The
which to make the fuller, he devides one Author into Eusebius Emissenus, and
Eucherius Lugdunensis; and, if I am not mistaken, it is the same, whom before
he cited for St. Austin. The words be before answered, and the answer is, that
they deliver directly my opinion, seeing they mention both the fire of
Judgment, and the Condition of Purgatory, that the last farthing must be paid
in it.

2. After this Trinity and Unity, he brings in two Fathers, whose works I
cannot yet get to see, St. Isidore, and St. Julian of Poledo; Their Testimonies
both seem to be derived from St. Austin, but with their own explications or
additions, which I must desire your Divine to make consonant to the Doctrine of
the Catholic Church before I accept of them; Otherwise I must think the Text
some ways corrupted. Peradventure when I see the Texts, some solution may
appear. In the mean while he makes Isidore tell us, that suffrages profit the
dead, not to any merit of eternal life, but ad solutionem poenae; which he
interprets the payment of their pains; And I, the releasing, or dissolving of
their pains. And I think more properly. For suffrages are Votes or
Intercessions, and belong to Impetration, not to Bargaining: Which as far as I
have heard, was not thought of in those days. But this by the way: My
difficulty is, how, seeing we see all the prayers for the dead to be
supplications to bring them to Heaven, and enjoying of God, it can be denied
that these suffrages of the Saints profit the dead toward the gaining of
Heaven, and merit of eternal life. Surely he must say one thing is prayed for,
and another thing given. I doubt if I get the Book I shall find some other dash
of a cunning Painter i^ this citation, yet take it as it lies as far as
concerns our question. the same solution we gave to St. Austin's words, how the
pain is mitigated or released, serves for the meaning of this Saint, who seems
clearly by the very words to have drawn it of St: Austin.

3. St. Julian's Testimony also as far as he adds to St. Austin's words contain
this Doctrine. That the torment of fire in Purgatory is equal to all souls, and
only different in duration. He gives us the words thus, What is performed in
those who are reprobate by distinction of their torments (into sharper or
milder, is his comment) that is performed by the measure of time in those who
are saved by fire. For to them lesser or greater punishment of Purgatory fire
shall be so much the more extended (according to the measure of time, adds your
Divine) by how much they have here more or less loved temporal goods. So that
the addition this Father Father makes to St. Austin is that the Variety of
Purgatory pains rises purely out of the measure of time. The which Doctrine I
have not heard of either before this Saint or after. And yet I cannot but
confess it is a Doctrine necessary to the maintenance of this opinion, that
souls are released from Purgatory, some sooner, some later: For, putting that
the pains of Purgatory are some more grievous then others, that variety would
take away all just occasion of ones being delivered before another; for the
lessening of pain would recompense the length of time in him that is longer
there for lesser faults, and leave the proportion of justice still constant in
both: Now, as it is not impossible this Holy Father might hold this Doctrine,
though I believe your Divine if he should speak his conscience, would say he
thought it false, so why your Divine should be so stiff upon one half of the
proposition, and refuse the other, let himself answer, specially one depending
upon the other, and having no ground but upon the other, which it self has no
ground at all.

4. We are come to his ninth Chapter, and the Visionarie Ages. And first he
brings in St. Gregory the Great, and he accuses me that unskilfully and
injuriously I make this our Apostle and Father in Christ to be Father of their
opinion. And I cannot deny but I was in the wrong and liable to his blame: But
I hope I have given him satisfaction in part in my answer to the Vindicatour,
which by all circumstances he could not choose but have heard of before the
printing his Book, yet pleased not to take notice of. He may find it in page
77. and repeated in my Notes upon the Result, page 32, 33. 70, 71, 72. So that,
supposing my confession will deserve his absolution, I confess my fault to have
laid that Book so flatly to St. Gregory's charge, whereas I find now some
reasons to doubt of it. But yet I cannot deny but that the Author of that Book
was the main Origin and supporter of the opinion. Nor does his opposition
remove me from believing the Author, who tells it me with his own mouth.
Your Divine himself cites the words, but not without the mystery of a
Translatour. For the Popes words in the Person of his Deacon are. Why in these
Testimonies (by the answer, I conceive he means toward the end of the World)
so many things concerning souls, (clarescunt) become clear, which before lay
hidden: In so much that the world to come seems to open and press it self upon
us by plain Revelations and Manifestations. Your Divine instead of do grow
clear, which signifies the present time, puts were discovered. For which before
were hidden, he translates, had remained undiscovered, as if they were not
things, which needed Revelation, but only Discovery. The last words by which
it is manifest that the discovery is made by Revelations and not by our
endeavors, he quite leaves out. He fairly grants that the Pope acknowledges
the case of the question to be true; And gives the answer, to wit, that the
nearer this world araws to the next, the state of the next is by more signs
made manifest, as the latter part of the night partakes of the dawning of the
day. I wonder if the question were divided, and first asked, did this knowledge
begin in this Age? What could be more plainly answered then, in these latest or
ending times. If it were asked, was the Doctrine delivered before? what more
plain then Ante latuerunt, they were before unknown. If it were asked by what
means do they now come to be known? what more plain then, by plain Revelations
and Manifestations or Apparitions. I wonder where is the sincerity I saw, or
thought I saw in this man at my first acquaintance with him that he should
bring so manifest and plain an assertion into question? I fear a new Divinity
has taught him also new Morality.

5. For his own defense he objects that St. Gregory in the former Chapters, for
nine Chapters together had recounted strange things of souls, wherefore it may
be the Author meaned of them. Nor will I deny that; but, seeing the story is
the occasion of the question, and immediately advances and brings it in, there
is no probability this should be none of those he speaks of. I should be
tedious to my Reader to press a thing so clear beyond enough. Therefore I will
only note how unlikely this Testimony and the alleging of it is to the
practice of Magdeburgians, by which he would obscure it. For here is expressly
held forth; Now it begins, it was unknown before Revelations, and, the pressing
upon us of the next world; not old Tradition, does manifest these things, of
which kind if the Magdeburgians would bring proof, this Divine would find a
hard task to maintain the contrary.

6. He makes mention of the Judgment of Canus concerning these stories of Pope
Gregory, and venerable Bede, and expresses it, that the Nicety of this Age will
not credit them; so he translates Aristarchi, which word signifies the grave
Censurers or good Divines, to whom Censuring belon^ And truly I do not doubt
but if such stor^^s were written now, they would be forbidden as some have
been: For indeed they undermine Christian Divinity, by introducing vaga bond
Purgatories, Circumstances not according to the Rule of faith to be required to
Salvation; and scarcely can you find a story of any length, but it has a smack
of somekind of superstition in it. He adds a Rule of Canus to distinguish
Histories as to their truth; to wit, to see whether the Author relates what
himself saw or had from those who saw it. In which kind of stories he says it
is an heinous offense, to suspect that approved Doctors will recommend a ly to
eternal memory.

7. This Rule being settled, he produces the story of the simoniacal Monk, whom
his Abbot, Author of the story, caused after 30 days Purgatory to be redeemed
by thirty Masses. Well then, according to our Rule let us not deny any thing
that the Author saw or had from those who saw it. We must confess then, that
the Monk was simoniacal; His fellow Monks forbidden to assist at his death; His
body with the money buried without Christian Ceremonies, No prayers for him for
a whole month, and Mass for the second month. All this was seen, and therefore
we should wrong the Author, and offend against Canus his Rule if we denied any
of this. After this follows how after thirty days the Monk appeared to his
Brother (who as I remember was an Apothecary, and the Apparition in his Sleep)
telling him hitherto I have been in bad case; but now I am well; For this day I
have received the Communion, which (says your Divine) I understand to be the
full effect of the Communion of the Saints. I pray, Sir, do you think Pope
Gregory, or Copiosus who had the Vision were eyewitnesses of this gloss? and
yet the verity of the History depends chiefly and mainly upon it. For, if it be
not true, there is somewhat that stands not well with ordinary Divinity, and so
the whole History the which subsists upon Copiosus's, whether you call it
vision or dream, will fall to the ground. Now I see the forbidding of his
fellow Monks to assist the Simoniacal Person at his death, and the burying of
him unchristianly, was a kind of Excommunication to him; and this without
question we are to think he alluded to whatsoever the dark meaning of the word
be, which seems rather to be a fancy that run in Copiosus's head, out of what
he had seen done to his Brother, then to bear any perfect sense with it.

8. Your Divine here has another pretty invention, which if he can prove, I
shall submit to all he says of Purgatory. He lays it forth in these words.
Lastly, some are so ignorant in Antiquity, as to account it an exotical kind of
Excommunication which is extended to Purgatory. And I confess my self one of
those. Yet, he must not bring instances to me, how dying or dead men were
excommunicated. For all that I shall not stick to grant him; but I shall tell
him, Christian Burial and public Prayers and Ceremonies, were forbidden to be
exhibited toward them, to terrify the living, not to endamage the soul. And so
the present History tells how much other Monks were terrified by the example of
this punishment laid on the Simoniacal Monk: I know some Greeks have been of
the opinion that the bodies also of excommunicate persons could not dissolve
into Earth until Absolution was given to them: But I know likewise it was held
to be an Error. And, as for this action of the Abbot, I confess I understand
it not. For had he had the apprehension that the torments of Purgatory be so
great as Divinity tells us, he could never methinks have with a Christian heart
spoken those words, It is now a good while since our brother who is departed
remains in torments of fire, and therefore we must show him some charity. As
who should say, I am content he has suffered the pains of Purgatory for one
month, nay two, for so long it was before he designed him to be released.
Imagine he had caused him to be racked or impaled so long, would not all the
Christian World have abominated the cruelty? What conceit then had he of
Purgatory, that would let his Brother burn in that cruel fire so long without
showing him any Charity? I would to God your Divine had told us where we might
find that Vindication o^ the Book he speaks of; For the more I consider it, the
more unworthy it seems to me to be our great Doctor, and savor more of the
Monk then of the Pope. Though, besides, he tells us that this story happened
three years before his writing, and Baronius tells that the Book was written in
the fourth year of St. Gregory's Popedom, at which time St. Gregory could not
be in his Monastery. Nor do I think Baronius can rattle Canus for this opinion
then, since he held it himself in his eighth Tome, and revoked it in his ninth;
Therefore he may have patience with one who falls into the Error, into which
himself fell before.

9. Let us omit that ridiculous opinion of excommunicating souls in Purgatory,
and answer the question he puts, what any Judicious Catholic can say to the
story? Which is, that the Author of this Book shows no such exact inspection
into every circumstance, as that any man should be bound to believe that he
could not be deceived, either in his Judgment, or in his narration, as that
truly Copiosus knew not of the saying of the Masses. And I wish you to note
your Divine's advice he gives, that when the Author makes this Argument that
concordante visione cum Sacrificio res aperte claruit, he speaks like a
Doctor. Is this Tradition, or Scripture, or Councils, upon the which Doctour's
proceed, or a common and ordinary prudence, by which every man conducts his
private business?

10. There follow two stories out of Venerable Bede, written as an Historian
should write, and as it was worthy of his Learning and Wisdom. The first is
nothing to the Alledger's Purpose, being but of the profiting of the Mass to
the dead, which is the position common to us both. That which he chiefly takes
notice of, is this word delivery, or loosing, as if we held the souls were
never to be delivered, or that their delivery came not to pass by prayers and
other good works: So that this being agreed on, and that there is no
specification of time, there is nothing particular in this story, but that many
who heard this story were devoutly inflamed in faith; to wit, to pray for the
dead; by which we understand that this story was the occasion of their
apprehension of sudden delivery, which has no other ground then the
parallelling of the loosing of his fetters to the help in Purgatory, which
every man would guess of according to the principles he was before imbued with:
So that both the effect is common to both opinions, and the ground every ones
application of the Miracle to a spiritual effect, which they saw no otherwise
then in a corporeal allegory. But your Divine explicates inflamed in faith,
which as it lies, signifies no more then that they grew fervent toward good
life, to signify that they had recieved this faith from the beginning, which,
seeing there is no ground for it in the Author, is but a kind of a corruption
of the Text by the Divines addition to it.

11* The later story of Drithelmus has one circumstance that favors your
Divines opinion, but the very same words have a blot to mar it, that is, what
you^ Divine (I doubt) will acknowledge to be a flat Heresy. I mean that these
words. all shall come to Heaven in the day of Judgment, include some who have
no Obstacle of Sin, to wit, those in the fourth place. So that he affirms them
not to go to Heaven as soon as purged, against the Council of Florence and
Benedictus his Bull. Whence, by the Rule that no Revelations are to be
admitted, which contain any thing inconsonant to Faith, this Revelation is to
be rejected: not so far as concerns venerable Bede, who truly relates what
Drithelmus not only reported, but truly thought: But that he, Drithelmus, was
some way deluded, either because the Vision was a natural effect of forgoing
thoughts, or that he mistook himself in the rehearsal, or some such like cause,
whereof the contingency of sublunary causes furnish us with store. I pray take
notice also that the works of the living help many to be freed before the day
of Judgment, be the words of the Angel, not of Venerable Bede; narrative, not
doctrinal. Whence you may see this Divine continues still his practice, of
proving earnestly that which is not in controversy, and saying little or
nothing of that which is the true difficulty.

SIXTH DIVISION, Containing an Answer to his tenth Chapter.
Of the Nature and Certainty of private Revelations. The rare Spright in the
Jesuits House at Vienna. His Relations (for what in them concerns the
Alledger's purpose) found to be in likelihood, what himself intitles them,
Stories.

1. IN his tenth Chapter we must launch into the Ocean of Revelations, for
after once by the foregoing Relations they grew into fashion, every Spiritual
body had of them, either truly, or at least put upon him. Nay, this very day
there want not spiritual directours, which profess a kind of skill in such a
space of time to bring their Ghostly Children to Ecstasies and Revelations. And
who doubts but that if a Devout soul of her self, subject to those passions
which Galen and other Physicians call Extases or Enthusiasms, light into the
Government of a Ghostly Father delighted with admirable accidents, both their
thoughts being continually busied upon spiritual matters, the Ghostly Father
having such a pitch of Divinity as to correct in his Ghostly Child's
apprehensions what is plainly naught and contrary to Faith and Christian life,
both being constantly conceited that God uses to discover extraordinary
verities to those who much converse with them, who, I say, can doubt but many
relations of wonderful sights must needs proceed from them, nay many times of
things which verily fall out as they see them (as all Heathen Histories recount
some which happened so as Philosophers teach us by a secret combination of the
soul with outward causes) amongst which the Divine Providence, mingles it self
to work its proper ends.

2. But your Divine and I frame, about these, two propositions, seeming
contrary yet so well agreeing that one good conclusion will follow out of both
joined together. His proposition is that these Revelations are undeniable
because the Authors are known to be of great virtue and integrity, who for a
world would not recommend what they thought to be a ly, or not as they deliver
it; and the Relatours are either those who had the Vision, or some who had it
from them immediately; so that there can likewise be no moral difficulty or
doubt of their true relating. This proposition I fully acknowledge, and a man
would think that in so doing, I give him full content. Here must I advance my
Proposition, which, if it please him as well as his does me, I hope we shall
agree in the conclusion to be drawn out of both. Mine then is, that
Revelations, Visions, Apparitions, etc. cannot be certain to any body but only
to whom they are made, and by consequence it is a folly to seek to prove them
to any one who does not of his own good nature take them for true. As for the
party to whom the Revelation is made, I doubt not but God may have such a kind
of influence as to make it beyond all doubt that it is himself who speaks to
the party; But that it must not rely upon the Authority of this party
whatsoever is communicated to others, that is the position I deny. I say
therefore, the security of a Revelation may be as great as the Authority of the
party to whom it is made: And it must be certain to others, that such a party
neither was nor could be deceived in this kind, before we can make any argument
from the Revelation. Out of these two propositions I gather this conclusion.
That private Relations for the most part can neither be proved nor denied, and
therefore make nothing probable or improbable, and so by Divines are to be let
alone and laid by, to let the Historians first resolve of them whether they be
true or false; which is impossible to do, unless there be some outward effects,
which seldom happen in matters of Purgatory of which we treat.

3. I must add one note about his undeniable stories, that diverse of his
Authors are known sometimes to have miscarried in their Revelations, as by
name St. Brigit, and St. Bernard, as likewise St. Catharin of Sena, St.
Mathildis and others. And since I know no more assurance for others then for
these, I believe that prudent men will neither doubt but that diverse
Revelations are true, nor precipitate easily to believe that this in particular
is to be held for such. Nevertheless I except those apparitions which come out
with Authority beyond exception. As I have light upon one which the Author
brags of, that its Authority is not begged from ancient writers, but signified
by present experiences, the year the Author printed the seventh Edition of his
Book: So that it may be of as great Authority as our Authors Latin book which
was translated into many Languages. It came to Sevill where Father Martin de
Roa a great Jesuit printed his brave Book in the year 1634, on Monday the
twenty ninth of May, when his seventh Edition was quite done; and so it was
fain to be put after the end to give you a faithful Testimony of the duration
of the pains of Purgatory. The Title of the Book is, Estado de las almas de
Purgatorio; and you may have in it, both for Theological resolutions, and for
fine stories concerning Purgatory what your heart can wish. Having told you
where you may find what you want, I may contract the story it self. Not
forgetting that it past at Vienna in Austria, in the Jesuits house there, which
I do not know, for they had three in that Town. The substance of the story
carries, that a woman one hundred and thirty four years before had killed her
two Children with poison, and dyed six and thirty years and an half afterward,
having recieved the Sacraments, and suffered incredible torments ninety four
years and four months. And the Author notes that surely they all three had no
body to pray for them that they lay so long in Purgatory. First appeared one of
the sons to a lay Brother as he went to see whether all doors were well shut,
and laid hands on him to carry him to the Church; but being contented with the
promise of three Masses, let him go to bed: Yet as it seems, repenting of his
bargain, two hours after came to his bed, to get him out of his bed to go to
the Church, though being fed with the promise of four Masses more it left him;
but so broken with resisting the violence of the spirit that he could not stir
himself. Some three weeks after he came again two several nights with the like
violence, and some eight days after came again (as it seems) more gently, and
waking him out of his sleep bad him say nothing and follow him, but the Brother
speaking and asking what he was, vanished away. Now whether the souls in
Purgatory want civility to treat one so rudely of whom they desire succor, or
that they do not understand how to insinuate themselves without frighting of
People I leave to your Divine, for the Author gives no account, nor likewise
why he could not endure to be spoken to. A while after the spirit came to his
chamber, and led him silent into the Church, where were other two spirits; but
all vanished as soon as the Brother being frighted cried out: and he was found
on the Floor in a Town, from which the Physician freed him; yet was he not for
some days able to go, he was so weakened. Eight days after he had a new vision,
and the next night the apparition of two of the Spirits, who after a great
entreating that he would not speak, told him the story above mentioned, and
having entreated some prayers, and that he would keep fast and silence 34
hours, let him alone so long, and then appeared all glorious, though two of
them before had appeared all white, and the first ever, yet they were all three
delivered together. It seems the two Children expected their Mother. They told
him how they meant to have led him to their Mother's grave, whom he should have
seen in such a case that it would have killed him, if they had not negotiated
for his life by the Intercession of their good Angels, because it was revealed
unto them, that by his prayers they should that year be set free.

4. I doubt not but that the great Divine, will out of this Revelation draw
high points of Divinity, and enrich the Art of Apparitions greatly. It must
needs be more certain then Venerable Bede's revelations, seeing at least three
housefull of Jesuits were witnesses to the whole Process. Therefore it is no
doubt but it is as strong a princple of Divinity, as any, if not all the
Revelations hitherto cited, and set forth expressly to inform the Christian
World of the conditions of Purgatory. I pray then use your diligence to your
great Divine to know of him some points in particular. As why the children who
could be but young when they dyed, should be ^^x and thirty years in Purgatory
longer then the Mother, since that there is no mention of such enormous sins of
theirs as that of their ^other, ^or of any extraordinary penance the Mother had
don. Secondly, Why they should stay in Purgatory or at least out of Heaven
until their Mother was released. For First one appeared all in white, the
other in black; afterward they both in white, and the Mother partly white,
partly black, as if some sins were forgiven, and others not. Why Souls are sent
to straggle with People? Why they stand not to their bargains but after having
been contented, return again to molest the Party? Why they afflict their
Benefactours? How, if a separated Soul offered violence a man could resist it?
Why they forbid him to speak, Whereas in other Visions they can not speak
until they be spoken to? Why the Spirits vanish if the man spoke or cried out?
Why he must fast just 34. hours, and keep silence so long? and you may add
what your self shall think good to enlarge the Science of the st^ of souls in
Purgatory. For as to my self I c^ consider such fine stories, without a great
suspicion of folly and superstition in those who tell and believe them. And if
you ask me what I can guess to be the very truth. I think some body of the
House (for he notes it was a College) had a mind to abuse the poor Brother,
and when they had begun and saw it take well, they ^ought how to bring it unto
such an end as might hinder it to be sought into. Therefore they had a great
care he should not make any noise, and as soon as he did, got themselves away:
therefore the one came once with a cudgel in his hand, that if any one should
come, they might not lay hands on him. Therefore when there was company with
him, they came not into the Chamber: And therefore, when they would give the
upshot to the whole story, they caused him to fast and ^under upon his own
thoughts until his brain was so weak, that he might believe he saw whatsoever
they would have him say. As for the Jesuits of Vienna, I concieve they went
innocently to work, further then what much talking and verdicting upon the
business, did (unawares to them)* after the story. You may object that the Book
is licensed by the (...) ^nquisition. I do not deny it, and that as for one of
the qualificators (as they call them.) I knew him and bear him very willingly
this witness, that he was a very pious man, of a sweet condition, a clear wit,
and, according to the course of the Jesuits chools, a great Divine. But all
this makes no authority that cannot be deceived in a matter of fact, as the
Divines speak, as all Apparitions and Revelations be.

5. But per adventure your Divine will reply he brings Testimonies which were
evident. Here (says he in his 3 N.) is no secret Vision, no private
Revelation, cujus nox conscia sol^ est. The words of this dead man professing
that he should soon be freed from Purgatory, and his ref^sing life upon the
score were spoken before thousands, and therefore it has the very first degree
of Historical certitude. His story is the famous and known relation of St.
Stanislaus, how he raised one Peter that had sound him a piece of ground, and
brought him into the Court to bear witness that he had paid him for his
ground, which being done, the man retired to his grave again? Thus far the
History has the grounds he makes such a noise with But your Divine adds that
St. Stanislaus offered Peter to continue in this life if he would, which Peter
refused because of the uncertainty of salvation in it, and that now his
Purgatory was almost at an end, yet prayed the St. to make it shorter by his
prayers. By which story we may learn many things which heretofore we were
ignorant of. As that it does not affright a man so much to be in Purgatory, as
to see Purgatory, since Drithelmus only by seeing it lived so secure a life
that there was no danger of loosing Eternity. Secondly that Peter had not got
the Charity which some Saints professed in this life, that it was more pleasing
to God to live in this world with hazard, to do good for our neighbors, then
to go to Heaven immediately. Much less had he learned the Charity of St.
Christina mirabilis to live in torments to save others out of Purgatory. Nor
also did he consider of this world are lesser then those of Purgatory. Nor had
he got the skill that souls have learned since, to know how many Masses or Alms
will set them free: Neither that one Mass of so great a Saint at a privileged
Altar would free him instantly: Nor (it seems) not so much as that St.
Stanislaus was not deaf: Seeing your Divine testifies that he spoke so loud
that thousands might be witnesses of them. Nevertheless this Argument of your
Divine has that advantage over the rest, that it has the Authority of being a
History, and deserves the Credit which we give to Livy, or Plutarch, or Di^,
when they tell us of prodigious events. For Longinus the Canon of Cracovia, out
of whom the other Authors have this History, is esteemed of good Judgment, and
although he lived long after the fact, and had it ex antiquioribus* ^on^mentis,
as Baronius testifies, and so the story be not of the first degree of
Historical certitude, yet because he is a grave man, an ordinary Historical
faith is not to be denied him. But, since your Divine charges me amongst other
Readers to take notice that this History is contained in Cromerus his Books of
Lessons, approved by the Sea Apostolic; Surely he imagined this Approbation to
be a Definition ex Cathedra, or would have his Reader think so: For he could
not be ignorant how many times (...) Lessons of the Roman Breviary have been
corrected, old ones put out, and new ones p^t in. The like in Missals, Rituals,
etc. he could not be ignorant that such an App^oba^ion breeds no more Authority
then of a grave History, which Cromerus has of himself; though he be taxed to
be the first Brocher of that sweet History of Pope Joan, and therefore no rest
of truth.

6. At least we cannot doubt but the ensuing History is in the first degree of
Historical credit. For it was performed in the sight of the whole two Countries
of Liege and Brabant, The recounter of the story, ^choolfellow to St. Thomas of
Aquin, and writes he could bring innumerable witnesses to testify the truth of
all he did write. Jacobus, also, de Vitriaco, a famous Cardinal, is an
irrefragable witness of the same story; And Cardinal Bellarmin holds it to be
undeniable. Who then dare doubt of such a History so thoroughly authenticated?
(...) confess it is against my will to make any doubt of it, and should easiler
hold it for a History not to be mentioned, then to write my opinion of it. For,
considering the story wi^h abstraction from the Author who wrote it, no man
could judge it worth the degree of a Romance, but rather a pure Fable of
Garagantua, invented for to please Children, or rather to disgrace the
Catholic opinion concerning Purgatory. It has no respect to nature, making
this supernatural Ghost, to be now a Bird, now a Fish, now a kind of an Insect
to live in fire. And, for acts of Christian life, and to increase in virtuous
actions and examples, little or nothing: All miraculous, all hideous
sufferings, a life not imitable, wholly corporeal, little spirituality: that
setting aside the imagined good of freeing souls out of Purgatory, would not be
fit to mention before a prudent Auditory. What necessity can be thought of in
the soul of Purgatory for those forty years of her life that was neither
before not since? All St. Odiloe's and the Cluny Monastery's prayers were begun
before: I hear no body of opinion that there go fewer souls to Purgatory since,
then in her days. What extraordinary zeal of God. Almighty was it to raise such
a great assistance to the souls for one Age? Let us think a little farther.
Could so strange a miraculousness endure forty years, and not all Christian
People from all parts of Christendom resort to it? Would not all Princes,
specially neighboring ones, cause it to be examined, and have authentical
relations brought to them? Would not innumerable foundations for the dead have
been made out of the Astonishment of the world at such rare miracles? Would not
all Histories, all Chronicles have made mention of it? Would not the Popes
themselves have sent to have examined it? Where are ^ll these Testimonies?
Cantipratanus was a worthy man, and has at large written the story, true it is.
But if you confer him with Gregory the Author of the Dialogues, you may think
he may as well be decieved as he was, and was no less given to collect pious
stories then the Pope. He affirms he could bring innumerable witnesses then
living for what he wro^e. This is a sign it was much talked on, and a popular
story in every man's mouth, but how many of this great number would have proved
eyewitnesses is not let down; though when a famous story is in vogue, every
one who has been in the Country will be ashamed to say he had not seen it. The
Church has done wisely and worthily in later Ages to command Miracles, should
not be published without first being examined: which if it had been done by
Cantipratanus, I doubt this story would have fallen very short. Yes, but it
has the authentication of two Cardinals, to wit, of Jacobus a Vitriaco, and
Bellarmin. As for the former, he is accounted an able man; but the quality of
his approbation being not set down by your Author, I may easily conjecture it
is but some memory of fame and hearsay, which gives no great confirmation: And
as for Bellarmin, this story puts me in mind, how that good Cardinal was newly
dead when I went first into Rome, and the report of his worth in every man's
mouth; and amongst other commendations, one was of his Christian simplicity,
and that he was according as we phrase it in English, a mere Scholar, and
understood not the ways of the world, but was subject to be deluded by
fraudulent Persons: And some Learned men have extended the same Censure to his
works; full of great reading, but without any great choice and judgment in his
Arguments.

7. There wanted yet a piece of canting Rhetoric to set forth these goodly
Merchandises. You shall have it in the fifth Number: There he tells you that
without holding your self wiser then St. Gregory, and the rest, you have heard
of all this while, you cannot hold the contrary. Who would have expected so
absurd a proposition from a Divine? In a manner their whole study and pains is
to impugn one the other, and dissent from great and little, and must we be
bound to think they think themselves wiser or better then all from whom they
dissent? He himself confessedly will dissent from two of the chief of these he
cites St. Bernard and St. Thomas about our Ladies Conception, peradventure also
from Snarez and Vasquez in other points; shall we therefore think he esteems
himself wiser then they? As to the particulars we have already answered, and
many of those he cites, they are not the men themselves, but the writers of
their lives, whose information how good it was we cannot tell; though it be but
too evident, that the writers of Saints lives are for the most part desirous to
speak the most good of their subject, which they admire; and therefore a slight
information is sufficient to make them give credit to what is spoken in their
favor; specially in miraculous things. To end his Chapter, he has another
pretty subject; to wit, to persuade his Reader that I think that anciently
there were no Visions; and so cites St. Austin, testifying there were many who
had seen the pains of Hell; the which as it is nothing to the purpose, so is it
a cunning slander to suggest to people that we utterly deny such Miracles.

SEVENTH DIVISION Containing an Answer to the eleventh and twelfth Chapter.
His weak Attempts from Liturgies, Rituals, and Offices. With what folly he
charges Heresy and Excommunication upon the Doctrine of the Middle State. How
the Pope truly applies the merits of the Saints to the assistance of souls in
Purgatory. The Pope's Bull corruptedly alleged. The Bull of Leo the tenth
against Luther, not touching the Authors Doctrine. What Authority the Council
of Trent gave the Pope. No Authentic Testimony of the Antiquity of Indulgences
for the dead.

1. HIS eleventh Chapter pretends to show out of the Liturgies and Rituals, the
Testimony of the Church against the delivery at the day of Judgment. But to
fill this new head he repeats first diverse of those he brought before, as that
from St. Ambrose's prayer before Mass; The Churches prayer that the dying
person may never come in Purgaiory; He mingles the prayers for the dying with
the prayers for the dead, as if they must needs signify the same; specially
because the Church so lately prayed for her not going to Purgatory, therefore
she must needs after death pray for it again; as if in different cases the time
ought to make the request the same. Otherwise, all he brings after death is
common to both opinions; and still he presses that to be going out of the body,
and being in Purgatory, be the self-same occasions. The like is his
confirmation out of a prayer common to the living and dead; as if we had not
the wit to know their necessities were different, but that we must pray that
God should give both the same gifts. I am ashamed to spend time and paper on so
gross mistakes, not without admiration how zeal and obedience can blind so far
a man of otherwise a good understanding.

2. There follows the repetition of the Gothic Liturgy; the which, if it be
found to be a Catholic Liturgy, notwithstanding the Phrase be Millenarian, at
least cannot serve him, For the Text of the Apocalypse does plainly speak of
Martyrs who cannot be prayed for otherwise then for the receiving of their
bodies at the last resurrection, or honor in this world.

3. His last Authority is from the Churches acceptance of the custom St. Odilo
began of praying for the dead generally the second of November. But it is not
enough for him unless he adds of his own that the Church did it for the same
end, or upon the same Motive on which St. Odilo did; the which if he could
prove he would say something: But there is nothing hut his conjecture for that,
seeing St. Odilo himself is like to have taken it from an higher origin, it
being known that this custom was in the Church two hundred years before, though
not universally; and the reason of it, that as All-Saints-Day was instituted
for such Saints as had not private days, so this day for those dead who had not
private service said for them, which is likely to be the Churches intention in
celebrating this office, though St. Odilo was the occasion of it. For the
Church is tenacious of Ancient professions, and is not lightly to be thought to
take up new opinions, which that it did your Divine will be hardly able to
prove, and so he may put in his pocket his sentence out of St. Austin
concerning the opposing of what the whole Church practices. For one thing is
the Practice, which he acknowledges; another thing the Reason, which stands
only upon his slight guess.

4. The like invention ^e ^btrudes upon us, that all the stories of the
Martyrologe be Articles of faith; a position that never wise man thought of.
Yet forsooth because the name of Paschasius is in the Martyrosoge, the Church
must hold it forth for a truth. Is not this an unsufferable abuse, both of the
Church and of all her faithful Children? to impose upon them a necessity to
believe stories partly corrected, partly of new corrigible when it shall please
the Church to look into them, for in^rrable Doctrins of that uncontrolable
Mistress? And these men forsooth must pass for great Divines whose verdict must
carry the world.

5. His twelfth Chapter is all fire, and to nothing but Excommunication and
Damnation. As for my Doctrine, he tells us that it professes that the Church to
the living remitteth not the satisfaction due to God alone, but that which
belongs to God and her; and as far as experiences can guide us, I think the
Church holds with me. In the Roman absolution is pronounced Quicquid boni
feceris vel mali sustinueris sit tibi in remission^m peccatorum; This I ever
understood to belong to the satisfaction due to God, and I see the words may
extend themselves to Purgatory as well as to this world. But I never heard that
what we were to do or (...) in this world was remitted by Indulgences. Of
Purgatory I can only say, we that walk by five Senses have no experience what
Indulgences do there: But nevertheless if your Divine can bring any Rule of
Faith for it I shall not any way resist. His first proof is out of Maldonat.
His discourse is that Indulgences are proportionable to Church-p^^ances, but
Church-p^^^nces are imposed to satisfy not only before the Tribunal of the
Church, but also before the Tribunal of God, so then do Indulgences also. This
is the first part of the excellent declaration of Maldonat, which had the ill
luck to ^ight upon such a dull Reader that understood not the consequence, how
it followed, that because the Churches penance (if it had been performed) would
have diminished the pains which should have satisfied God; therefore if they be
not performed, so it be by the Churches consent, they will nevertheless satisfy
for those which were due to God. I never understood that either the Church knew
how much was due to God, nor, that Gods judgments were to be bound up to the
Churches; but that the Rule that, man judges according to the appearance, and
God according to truth had run in this as well as in all things else.

6. This then is the first solly of this discourse, that whereas binding and
loosing's being ratified in Heaven, means that Christ ratifies it here toward
the Government of the Church, this excellent explication without the least
proof applies it to Gods Spiritual Tribunal, and confounds the external
Tribunal set up in this world with the secret Tribunal of Gods inerrant
judgments. His next folly is that he takes this Principle, that God does not
punish twice that which himself confesses was never punished but once, but
remitted. But the most bold folly of this discourse is, that the whole
discourse is common to punishments in this world, as well as in the next. For
the Council of Trent declares expressly, that good works and sufferings of this
world do satisfy for the pains due to sin in God's judgment, which are to be
paid in the next world if not in this. Then the plenary Indulgence which
exempts from all pain due in Purgatory, frees from all which in this world
would have served for the remission of Purgatory pains; so that a plenary
Indulgence will save the Drunken man from the dropsy, the quarelsome man from
being beaten or wounded, the luxurious man from soul diseases, nay, the Robber
from the Gallows; For no man can deny that all these are due punishments of
sin, or that received (...) judgments of God, they do not diminish the f^tute
torments of Purgatory, if not q^it^ take them away. So that none of all this
(...) fall upon him who has received a plenary Indulgence; but God, by this
excellent Doctour's discourse, must punish him twice for the same fault.

7. Upon this solid Foundation your Divine builds the bloody scaffold of no
less then Heresy and Ex^cation against ^^y Doctrine. The censure of Heresy began
1478 laid upon it as he tells you by Six^^s Quartus. The proposition upon
which it is laid (as he recites it) is that the Bishop of Rome cannot pardon
the pains of Purgatory. Then follows the Thunder and Lightning. I persuade my
self when you read this you could think no otherwise then that I was fallen
into open Heresy, for the censure says it contains manifest Heresy: unless
your Divine gave you occasion to think otherwise, by adding to the same words
in his next Number, denying that the Pope by any Indulgence can pardon the pain
of Purgatory. Now this word by any Indulgence being not in the proposition,
your Divine will permit me not to fall under the censure of the Bull, if I
confess the Pope can forgive the pains of Purgatory otherwise then by
Indulgence; and seeing he finds nothing spoken in my Book but of Indulgences,
before he can press this Decree against me, he must show there is no other way
of remitting Purgatory pains; Which certainly there is, since all Catholics
agree, that the satisfactions and prayers of the faithful, and almsgiving, do
assist the souls of Purgatory: So that the Pope by such means may redress the
souls of Purgatory more assuredly then by Indulgences. And when this is done by
way of Command, it is as full and perfectly a pardon to the souls, as if it be
done by the application of the merits of the Saints: For they are assuredly in
the Popes Jurisdiction, and may be applied by him; of the others it is
questionable, and otherwise the way is the same, both being the applying of the
Church's merits.

8. Yet have I one scruple more about this point^, Why your Divine changed the
words of the Sentence condemned by the Bull, which I find to be Quod Papa non
potest indulgere alicui vivo poenam Purgatorii. Now these words alicui vivo,
quite alters the question, and makes that the Bull does no way touch what the
Pope can do to the souls in Purgatory, and the leaving out of these words
wholly disgraces both the Bull and the Pope, making him speak against the
received opinion of Divines, both before and since his time, who for the most
part agree that the Pope has no Jurisdiction over Purgatory, and cannot
absolve men from the pains of it: Which is contradictory directly to the words
your Divine cites; to wit, that the Bishop of Rome can pardon the pains of
Purgatory. For a proposition taken abstractedly to be censured, must be
understood in the proper sense of the words; and the proper sense of these
words, The Pope can forgive the pains of Purgatory, is that he has Power and
Jurisdiction over Purgatory to forgive punishments there; which some one Divine
may have ^eld, but it is generally rejected even by Martinus Roa that great
Visionaire. What should I think of this ^eless proceeding and corrupting a
Pope's Bull in so main a point? Truly the good opinion I have of the Author of
the Book, will not let me think he did it maliciously, but rather to guess that
the Bullary consen'd him, having copied this Bull out of some negligent
Transcriber, to whose Error I impute this fault. ^or the Ballary is not a
public work, but the collection of a private Author who cannot be free from
such mischances. Wherefore I let him understand, that the Text I cite is out of
the Authentical Copies which are conserved in Spain.

9. Next he brings in the Bull of Leo the tenth against Luther; to what purpose
is hard to say. For I do not know, that any man makes difficulty of the three
propositions he cites as therein condemned. The propositions are these. The
first that the Treasures of the Church whence the Pope gives Indulgences are
not the merits of Christ and his Saints. This proposition was well condemned in
Luther, who denied Indulgences, and the Pope's Authority in them; but what it
has to do with my opinion, who profess that the Pope, when he remits sins, or
the pains due unto them, does it in the same Authority in which St. Paul did,
who clearly says he does it in Persona Christi, I do not understand: For I
think that includes the merits of Christ; and to be an immense Treasure, if it
can be called a Treasure, that cannot be consumable in the least part of it.

The next condemned proposition is that Indulgences to those who do truly gain
them, do not avail them to gain pardon of the pain due to actual sins by the
Divine Justice. This proposition may well be Luther's, a boystrous fellow, more
clamorous then understanding. But how it can be applied to my way of
discoursing, who profess all punishments Natural, Civil and Ecclesiastical
which follow sin, to be the punishments due to God's Justice, which is the
plain sense of Scriptures, Fathers, and Councils, falls not into my brain. For
assuredly he gains not Indulgence, who gains not the remission of some of these
pains.

11. The third proposition brought for condemned, is that to six kinds of men
Indulgences are neither necessary nor profitable, to wit, to the Dead, etc. As
for this proposition I think his want of Divinity is cause why he applies it to
me, because he understands not how any thing can profit the dead, unless it be
immediately put into their hands. Which Error of his likely enough is the
cause of applying all the rest to my Doctrine. For when he hears the Pope
pronounce these propositions to be false, he presently appprehends the Pope had
the same fancies which he has, and therefore can mean nothing else but what
rings in his Ears; Whereas Pope's use to hear all opinions, and then to declare
so abstractedly, as not to hurt any Catholic Tenet, but only what is against
all Catholic Doctors.

12. But to understand more fully the case, it is not amiss to set down a
discourse related by Francesco Chiericato, Bishop of Fabriano, and Nuncio to
the Diet of Noremberg against Luther, sent by Adrian the sixth, with whom he
had much acquaintance and confidence. He wrote a Diary of what passed in Rome
in the beginnings of Adrian the sixth's reign, and in it this History. How this
good Pope had (as it is yet to be seen in his works) written of the nature of
Indulgences, and his opinion was, that when an Indulgence was granted to any
one for doing a good work, the work might be so done, that the whole Indulgence
might be gained: But if the work were not performed perfectly enough, then the
performer gains so much of the Indulgence as answers in proportion to the
imperfect work. This thought the good Pope to decree ex Cathedra, and propound
it to the whole Church, but first communicated his thoughts to Cardinal
Caietan, who had been a great Student of this question by o^der of Leo the
Tenth, and by the necessity of dealing with Luther; and both a better Divine,
and more practiced in the World then Adrian was. This man, as to the substance
of the Divinity-question agreed with the Pope, and told him, that he steadfastly
believed the Doctrine in his conscience, yet had so carried it in his writings,
that none but the most Learned men could draw it from his words. Further he
gives reasons why he thought it not fitting this Doctrine should be made too
public to the common people.

13. This story the Author of the Roman History of the Council of Trent does
much disparage. And, as far as concerns the Historical Verity, it concerns not
me; but that at least it is ben trovato, that is a likely and rational History,
seems to me evident, out of the opinions of the two men extant, not only in
their works; but confessed in the Roman History. For he confesses, tom. 1. l.
2. c. 4. that the subtilty, that Adrian the sixth invented, consisted in this,
that every good external act might bud out of so great a charity, that it might
deserve the concession of any Indulgence never so large; And that the Pope
intends never to give any larger Indulgence, then what may be discreetly
given in regard of such an act including the charity with which it is done. Now
the question is wherein consists the difference of these two explications; The
Pope gives proportionable to the desert of the Act, and the Pope gives what is
fit to be given according to the proportion of the Act. And considering that
the Pope has no means to judge of the quantity of the Charity, nor of what
part of Christ's satisfaction is proportioned to a known degree of Charity, I
believe the Pope's Judgment must be referred to Christ's Judgment, which is
known to be proportioned to that Charity, making the effect of the Prayer
according to the Desert of the Prayer. I not deny but that the way of
explicating this same verity may be made with taking a greater or lesser
compass, or by diverse mediums in one way, then in the other; but that the
effect is not the same in both, that is it whereof I am not capable. Whether
the Reasons fathered upon Caietan, why it was not fit to publish this Doctrine
be good or no, concerns not me to dispute, but rather to execute. For when
niceties which are beyond the ordinary capacity, are disputed before unlearned
and unstudious people, they will be sure to follow the easier part, let the
truth ly where it will. The Author of the Catholic History is so favorable
to this explication of Adrian the sixth, that he cites for the same St.
B^nture, Rich^rdus, Gabriel, Mayor, Gers^, Felinus, and Pope Innocentius: And
thinks the cause why Adrian did not decide this question was, because diverse
Divines held the contrary opinion: Which, if the other History be true, cannot
be so, for he was resolved to have determined it before; though he could never
be ignorant that others held the contrary, having himself set down four diverse
opinions of Catholics concerning Indulgences.

14. To apply this story to our purpose, I understand that these two
explications differing not in the Effect, but only in the Way to the End, the
Definition of Leo the tenth is truth in both, and so when he says that
Indulgences are granted out of the Treasure of Christ's Merits, it is true
whether those Merits be that which gives the efficacity to the Pope's grant,
or whether it be that it is the matter he uses. Likewise, when it is said,
Indulgences received profit the living, that is true and maintained whether the
debt be paid by commutative Justice, giving God one thing for another, or
whether God cancels the debt by good will as pleased with the action done.
Neither is there any substantial difference in respect of the Dead, by what
means the good they receive from the living comes to them, so it comes from the
living's receiving the Indulgence: Whether I mean it comes by the virtue of the
Action done by the receiver of the Indulgence, or by the like Commutation as
some Divines put in the living.

15. I was about to have made a distinct explication of this question in this
place, but being pressed here to clear the Authorities, and expecting there
will be a place for Reason hereafter, though not in his Doctrine, yet when he
comes to oppose mine, and foreseeing that the explication would make this
Chapter very long, I thought better to defer it, and to go on with the
answering of his Authorities. Only I would entreat you to comfort the good
soul, and tell him, that if I could have foreseen those lamentable tears, which
he shed for my sake, I would have done my endeavor to have presented him with
some crumbs of comfort beforehand, that might have stopped the dissolving of the
melting humor; Now I shall present him with a clean handkercher to dry his
watered Cheeks: and it is no other, then the censure of the Author of the
Catholic History of the Council of Trent, on the Bull of Pope Leo, which so
much distempers his brain. This Author then, whose Authority I doubt not but
is sacred to him, in his first Book, Chapter 21. N. 4. being to give an account why
the form of the condemnation of Luthers propositions was given respectively,
without qualifying every proposition with a singular censure, has these words:
The Pope therefore intended not by his Constitution to take away all doubt, of
which kind of doubts God's will is that all the knowledge of this life should
be full, and chiefly Divinity: as that which has her objects more obscure, and
more above our understanding: But only intended we should have as much certain
as was enough; that is, he declared those sentences to be per^cious to teach,
and dangerous to believe. Now, in case all that this Bull condemns, if it be
not otherwise known to be false, may be true, let him wipe his eyes with the
charitable, conceit, that he who holds any of them may have found that truly
those which he holds are true, and therefore now no more dangerous to believe,
and much less to teach: and out of this charitable persuasion keep his
fool-pious expressions to entertain Children with. As for his Readers, he sends
them away to B. Fisher, to know what opinions I hold; for otherwise I do not
know how he can teach them, that I hold propositions in the same sense that
Luther does: It seems it is the mode of this Age, to look the farthest off they
can from an Author, and his Writings, when they will determine what his
meaning is.

16. In his eighth N. he asks, who can say the Doctrine contrary to all these
Articles (...) not the Doctrine of the Uniuersal Church? And my answer is, that
for my part I doub^ not of it. But, whosoever believes the Author of the
Catholic History of Trent, will tell him he does not know why these Articles
be not of those which God will have to be doubtful, and that it is a Blasphemy
to call that the Doctrine of the Universal Church, which is as yet uncertain,
and as far as we know, false. Nevertheless he will now put it out of all doubt.
For he tells you the Council of Trent does expressly decree, that not only in
the censuring of a few Articles, but even in the censuring of whole multitudes
of Books, all Christians should stand to the decrees of the Bishop of Rome, and
that every doubt of that nature shall be terminated (and quite ended) by his
Judgment and Authority. And after some few lines he adds, And this must be
admitted as undoubted by those who will and must admit this Definition of a
General Council. You see a horrible charge; Will you know the truth of the
business. The Council of Trent had given the charge to a Committee to review
such Books as they thought fitting to have conversant in the hands of
Catholics; When they were ready to break off, these men came in and told the
Council they had performed their charge. But, because it was time to end, the
Council referred the execution of the Decree to the Pope, as also of the
setting forth the Catechism, and reforming the (...) and the Breviary; and
ordered the Popes determination in (...) question that rose abo^ these Books
should be held for deci^.

17. If I had been left to mine own Judgment, I should have thought this no
great honor to the Pope, further then as it was a good Action in him to concu^
to the good of the Church. For, if the Pope had refused it, they must have
appointed some Congregation to have done the same, as we see the Inquisition
and Provincial Councils to have done the like in diverse* Countries. Now your
great Divine finds in this great Mysteries, that the Council gave the Pope
Authority to determine the Verity of all propositions. Was there ever such a
p^ece o^ Mountebankery? Or is not the Pope well se^ up to have got such
Champions to proclaim his Power and Authority? And what again h^. Divinity
made, that now we have so many Articles of faith confirmed by the Definition a
General Council, that must be received, as there be sentences either put out,
or allowed in the Books censured in the Index Expurgatorius? I must not conceal
his Demonstration for this Learned Conclusion* Could (says he) the Council
give him* Authority to do that after the sitting of the Council, which by his
own Authority he could not (...) by himself before the Council? And out of this
infers, that the Pope does it by his own Authority. As for his question I will
not meddle with it, but hold it at present for one of those doubtful Articles,
which God will not have known, though he may find many Divines* who would
answer him that the Council could: but what I am certain of is, that the
Council could not give him that which he had before, and therefore your Divine
contradicts himself in alleging the Council for giving the power, and saying
he had it before.

18. The following Numbers until the twelfth are but Repetitions of the same.
Only one Argument of his tenth number is worth the nothing, where he asks Who
can say the Council of Trent approved not the the Pope's proceeding in this
point? It is answered, only they that read the Council, or otherwise have
understood that the Council never took notice, neither to nor fro, what the
Popes had done in this kind* But he urges, that the Council left to the Pope
the ordering of the faults and abuses in the matter of Indulgences. And who
knows not (who knows any thing of those times) that the Pope promised to reform
what belonged to the Court of Rome by himself? So that the Council had no need
to meddle in such points, in which it is expected the Pope would do well of
himself. Now, whether the Pope reformed all that deserved reformation, or no,
is a thing impertinent to our question, in which there is all agreement to the
Popes decrees, and it is a thing not fitting to be made public table-talk, as
our Books are like to be.

19. In the twelfth Number he seeks the Antiquity of the use of Indulgences for
the dead. And no wonder he cannot find any great Antiquity for them, seeing
Caietan, and our Holy Bishop of Rochester, had looked before him, and could
find none. Caietan's words be Opusc. 16o (...). No Holy Scripture, no written
Authority of Ancient Doctors, either Greek, or Latin has brought this (the
beginning of Indulgences) to our knowledge: But this only concerning Ancient
Fathers is written some three hundred years since, that St. Gregory began the
Indulgences of the Stations. These Indulgences were, as I remember, of seven
years penances remission for visiting certain Churches, no mention of any for
the dead granted by St. Gregory. But what says the great Bishop? It persuades
(says he) ^er adventure ^any not to trust very much to these Indulgences, that
the use of them seems to be too new and very late invented amongst Christians.
I ^^swer (says he) That it is not certain who first began them, and some say
that amongst the most Ancient Romans there was some kind of use of them. Nor,
does any man doubt but that later wits have both better examined, and clearly
understood many things, both out of the Gospels and other Scriptures, then
their Predecessors. So that you see this great man thought that the Scriptures
explicated only by h^man wit, were the solid Foundation upon which Indulgences
were to be grounded, for want of Ancient Testimony. Not so your Divine, but he
can prove it out of Ancient Records; and first of Paschal the first, some eight
hundred or more years since, which is a very long time (as he well notes) for
the Church to be in Error. This Paschal is said to have given an Indulgence to
the Church of St. Praxedes in Rome, for the freeing of one soul out of
Purgatory. But the ill ^^ch is that this Monument is accounted to be Apocryphal
in Rome it self, and not esteemed of by men accurate in History of that nature:
And so neither Caietan who was very inquisitive, nor Baron ever alleged it.
And Fabers story of its being approved by eleven Popes, if properly understood*
must needs declare as much; seeing it is impossible any writer living in Rome
could be ignorant of so notorious a thing. But I pray take notice by the way of
the spirit of these men, to abhor it. See how they keep the souls of those who
will believe them in an Egyptia^al slavery, persuading them that if this Pope
had committed a private fault, the Church had been in an Error (...) years,
even though no more know of the Popes mistake, then have heard of this piece of
Paper lying in a private Sacri^ty. As to Bell^r^ine's approbation we answer, he
is to be thanked for his pains, of gathering so many things together; not to be
proposed for an Authority, for the reasons I alleged above in the like
occasion.

20. The next instance is out of Baronius, or Spondanus in the year 878* how
Pope John the eighth gave an Indulgence to all whose h^p it had been to dye in
the war for the defense of the Church, or whose hap it should be hereafter?
Before we look into this Testimony, I must not omit to note, that this very
Spondanus was bred a Minister, was very conversant with Bellarmins works; and,
after his conversion, with his Person; and, as it is reported, had Baronius his
approbation to the compendium of his History which he made; and clear it is
such a man must needs ^e zealous to put in his work whatsoever was to help the
Catholic cause; and this, if it were not in Baronius, in notes of his own; as
he does diverse times. This I note to let you understand that this man could not
be ignorant of the former Testimony of Paschalis, and living in Rome when I
first went thither after Bellarmin's death, could want no commodity to search
out the truth of the citation; nor if he had found it true could have forborne
to give a note on it in his History; wherefore we may justly conclude, that
both Baronius and he held it for Apocryphal. Now to his Testimony. He says,
the Pope in a Letter to the Bishops of France, in the Government of Lewis the
third, who had assisted him to recover his Seat, granted an Indulgence to all,
etc. Had he cited the words of the Popes Letter, or expressed the fact more
larger, we might have guessed how much this Testimony was to our matter: Now
the words going equally for the quick and the dead, or rather only for the
dead, and given immediately to the dead, (which is a new story in the Catholic
Church, if it be spoken in the new sense of Indulgences) no mention made of
remission of sins or pains, this being the first mentioned toward the dead,
and Spondanus in no reputation of a Divine, I see not why this word Indulgentia
should be taken for the remission of sins or pains due to Go^, rather then for
the relaxation of some Ecclesiastical Duties or Obligations which such
Soldiers might have incurred in their life times; in which times the stories
record great violences offered by the Gentry to the Clergy, and Ecclesiastical
Liberty. And if you object; that it is not to my Divines purpose, unless it be
understood of the pains in Purgatory; I answer it was his duty to have made his
objection home, who could not choose but have the command of good Libraries, in
one whereof my last enterview with him happend. For this Pope was no such man
as to authorize a new Institution in the Church, being infamous. both for his
loose life, by which he is suspected to have given occasion to the tale of Pope
Joan; and for prudentia carnis, that is Worldliness. So that he is not much to
be suspected of beginning of spiritual customs, nor would such novelties have
come gracefully from him. Wherefore I know no elder then Gelasius the second,
who lived in the twelfth Age, and though he were a little Ancienter then Peter
Lombard, yet cannot be esteemed before all Schoolmen, for Rome was not built
in a day. Wherefore, if I had said the Scholastic Divines were the first
inventers of these Indulgences, it had neither been concluded false, nor to
have proceeded out of the ignorance of Antiquity. Since your Divine
acknowledges, that St. John Damascen was Prince of the Scholasticks of the
Greek Church, who lived diverse Ages before Peter Lombard. But the truth is my
chief aim was at this manner of explicating Indulgences, by a Treasure whence
every one got from the Pope a share to pay his debts; which, as far as I find,
came not into the indultive Bulls, until Clement the sixth's time, which was
two hundred years after Gelasius the second. Of the which manner of explication
your Divine treats until the end of this Chapter. But because it supposes many
by-questions, is not to be treated by snatches, and therefore I shall put it
off until a more commodious place, when all his Authorities shall be answered.

EIGHTH DIVISION Containing an Answer to the twelfth and thirteenth Chapters.
Remarks of several Follies and Mistakes of the Author's Doctrine; as also of
Councils, and Pope Benedict his Bull.

1. I had conceived good hopes I might have passed over the next Chapter with
silence, having found the Title of it concerns the two Councils of Trent and
Sens, and knowing the Council of Sens went no farther then Trent, and that the
Council of Trent was already showed to have nothing against our opinion, and to
contain it self within the verities acknowledged by both parties, which also I
found to be true; and that the whole Chapter is employed to show how really he
thinks and would prove, that we put no pains due to Gods justice after the
remission of the sin; which if it were true, yet it followed not that we
opposed the Council, but that we missed in some Doctrine consequent, which he
would draw to be a contempt of the Council. And the truth is for the main
Doctrine of this Chapter, I intend to remit it until after the explication of
my opinion, for there is nothing in it to require any explication of the
Councils, but only to see how consequently we proceed to the Doctrine of the
Councils which we profess. Nevertheless, as the Scripture warns us, in much
talking there must needs drop some folly, and so I am forced to some notes even
upon this Chapter, for fear I should afterward forget them.

2. My first note shall be that in his third Number, he puts it for the Doctrine
of Councils, that sinners that be only imperfectly contrite, when they are
with due disposition baptitized, go immediately to Heaven: Which is a false
Doctrine, and no where to be found in the Councils or Fathers, but only in new
Divines.

3. My second note is, that he imposes on us (N. 8.) to say all the punishments
cited against Heretics by the Councils are miraculous; Where as in the very
example of David we put part of the punishment Miraculous, and part to follow
naturally from the sin. Where also is to be noted that sweet Argument, that the
examples would prove nothing against Heretics if they were miraculous: Whereas
it is evident, their proof is so much the stronger, the more manifest God's
hand is in punishing after the sin was forgiven.

4. My third note is that (N. 10.) he would persuade his Reader that we deny
Bodily austerities are undertaken to satisfy the pains due to God's Justice:
and after he has made an exclamation in the same Paragraph he puts us to affirm
that they are to be done for the taking away of passions or ill motions left by
sin, and that this is to satisfy for the sin passed: And this himself calls a
weak reply made in our defense; by which he confesses we hold the contrary to
what he imposes, and therefore it is injuriously laid upon us; For how weakly
soever we defend what we hold, yet assuredly we hold it. As for his oppositions
I refer them to their proper place, for they concern not authority.

5. My fourth note then is, that (N. 11.) he explicates the receiving of
Baptism duly, to be the receiving it sine fictione; an explication I never
heard before, nor ever was given by good Divine. For, although it be necessary
to come ^ine fictione to the effect of receiving Grace, yet to say that this is
all that is due or fitting, or that men should endeavor to have to receive
Baptism as they ought, is a Doctrine I have not yet found in any Casuist; and
yet it is a point deeply concerns his discourse as we hereafter shall show.

6. In his fourteenth Chapter he intends to press the Council of Florence; and
the decree of Benedict the eleventh. It seems therefore the oppositions made by
former opponents are judged by him not sufficient; and his friends, indeed
seemed to confess those were satisfied, with a threatening of a greater Champion
to follow: yet I must take leave to remit my Reader to that Answer when your
Divine goes no farther then the Vindicatour. As for your Divine, my first
exception is that in his first number he affirms that both sides agreed, that
what was left to be purged, at death, might in some time before the day of
Judgment be often truly said to be now wholly purged, and he adds in Latin, Jam
Purgatum ex toto. I see it is happy for him that he has a good pair of
Spectacles, such as can make him see deep into a Millstone. For I that can see
only the outside, find no such sense in these words. I find nothing in the
words cited by him that speaks of Esse Existenti^, as Philosophers term it, but
only of Esse Essentiae, that is, of this consequence, These men are purged,
what follows: That they go to Heaven, or no. I never learned in Logic, that an
Interrogatory form was affirmative. Had he said that both parties had agreed
that this should be the question; I perforce must have submitted; but to make
the world believe that he who asks what is to be said in such a case, should be
supposed to think the case true, is beyond my Logic. But you may reply that it
is no great matter, for his Logic may be far beyond mine. Nor can I deny it;
specially if he can make them agreed of what they never thought of. For in the
same Paragraph he tells us, that before our unhappy age he finds no mention of
any Catholic who denied such Souls to be deliverable before that day. He had
done me a great pleasure if he had set down what Heretics before that time had
denied it: For then we might have gathered all Catholics had agreed against
those Heretics. Now the Agreement must be such as was the Solution a
Schoolfellow of mine was wont to give to the difficulties he found in his
dictates, which was to forget them. So this Agreement was never to think or
motion it, or at most to hold it no way concerning the difficulty then proposed.

7. This I believe is the substance of this whole Chapter. For I see he tosses
it and tumbles it in diverse expressions, but gets not a foot farther. For what
he tells us in the next Number, to wit, that this question concerned much the
souls in Purgatory is very true, but how he can inser it belongs to the Popes
question is what I make difficulty of. For I do not understand the Pope either
meant to handle all questions, or any one of Purgatory, or to make an
exhortation to pray for the dead by this Definition, but only to declare the
efficacio^sness of Grace to carry people to perfect bliss, as is evident by the
Popes so much insisting upon the explication of the fullness to which men
arrive.

11. In his fourth Number he presses what an intolerable thing it is to keep
the souls of one who has spoken but one Idle word, so long not only from the
sight of God, but also in most afflictive punishments. I do not remember I have
any where declared that any man was sent to Purgatory for just one Idle word. I
think my way teaches that the next world depends on the habits, not on the
acts, otherwise then as they are causes of remaining dispositions in the soul:
I do not know also where I have determined how far the pangs of death do
satisfy for sins, so that I take his supposition to be very aerial; but it is
not here place to discuss it. In the mean while I see it was a providence of
God that your Divine lived not before our Savior's Passion, for had he gone to
Limbo, he would have so murmured against God for keeping Holy Abel so many
years out of Heaven for Original sin, which Divines hold to be less then any
Venial sin, that it would have troubled the whole company.

9. He seems to press that this will retard men in their progress toward
Heaven. But he that were to speak for my opinion, would say no, but that it
would press them so much the more, to be of that number that shall not be
stayed so long from their desired reward, seeing it is in their own hands to go
immediately to Heaven if they will. For the case the Pope speaks of, differs
from ours in this, that in his case it was not in the power of the living, to
obtain their coming to Heaven, but in our case it is. For Purgatory must needs
be a place for tepid people, seeing it is written of Heaven that Violence does
carry it.

10. In his fifth Number he tediously repeats the same Argument of pressing the
word esse to signify existence; only he adds a more silly confirmation. For,
where the Pope speaks of all three sorts of souls being in Heaven in common and
uses the three tenses have been, are, and shall be, he presses that these 3
tenses must be true of all 3 sorts of souls, whereas any one soul is enough to
verify those three tenses, seeing who once has been in Heaven, is there and
ever shall be: And this, upon no other ground then because it is fit for his
purpose. So wilful an Interpreter he is.

11. In his sixth Number he finds a gross Error in him that shall say the Pope
made but one Definition concerning the state of souls departed. What a piece of
Divinity is this? It is agreed upon by both sides, what the Pope determins, and
in particular there is no disagreement of any point whether it be defined or
no; And your Divine finds a gross Error whether it is to be called one
Definition or more. And I take it for so pidling a question, that though the
Book ly by me, and to my memory it is sufficiently resolved in former writings,
yet I do not think it worth looking the place to see what the resolution and
proof is, but only that it is a great impertinency to count it a gross Error
though it should be found to have missed.

12. In the same sixth Number your Divine finds the Popes definition concerning
the point in difference in these terms, That if there shall be any thing to be
purged in them, when, after death they shall be purged, they presently after
the before said purgation even before the resumption of their Bodies, and before
the general judgment, were, are, and shall be in Heaven, have seen and do see
God. Now I am so blind that I can find neither good sense nor true English in
these. He begins with, if there shall be any thing to be purged, and ends with,
were, are, and shall be, have seen, and do see; So that in the same proposition
the medium is future, and the effect passed. Which is a rare piece of Grammar,
and newly invented to make the Popes Definition reach to what the Pope thought
not of. Would it not turn a man's stomach to see men so wilfully seek to blind
themselves, and others in a question as clear as that two and three make five?
Suppose, of those Divines whom the Pope heard in this question, the one held
that souls were delivered before the day of Judgment out of Purgatory, and the
other as stoutly denied it; And the Pope asked them whether at least they
agreed in this, that whenever the souls went out of Purgatory, they went
straight to Heaven, and both answered, yes; they both hold that the Pope could
not without nonsense tell them he would define that which they both agreed
upon, without m^dling with the question they disagreed in. And, if this be as
plain as that two and three make five, if it were the ordinary Rule and
proceeding of the Fathers in the Council of Trent, as every one may see in the
Catholic History of it, is it not pure frowardness and pertinacy in your
Divine to spend some four leaves to prove this Nonsense? But you may reply for
him, that there was no such opposition of Divines. First I ask how he knows it,
for he has cited never a Diari^ of what passed about making of the Bull. But
suppose there was not, does what passed a day or a month before, make the
Pope's proposition as it lies to be Sense or Nonsense? And the substance of
this answer, by all probability, your Divine had read in Religion and Reason
page 69. since (though without naming it) he often cites it, and yet resolvedly
rambles upon other solutions without taking notice of this, which was the main.
I would entreat my Reader who shall not be satisfied with this, to read the
place newly cited: for this Divines Catching of Larks and Pope Joan, is such
stuff as deserves not to be looked into.

13. In his twelfth Number he falls upon the Council of Florence, but speaks
nothing of any consequence which has not been answered: Wherefore I re^it the
Reader to Religion and Reason, p. 58, 59, 60.

14. N. 13. he turns us back to his fifth Chapter, where he had mentioned
Gennadius; and the truth is, my answer there was short, and must be still* For,
although I am secure that what I there said was true, yet I am desirous to see
the Book it self before I give a fuller answer; not to your Divine, but to
another who before him objected the same Authority a great deal more strongly
against me. There remains no more in this Chapter, but to join in prayer with
your Divine, for the good man who published in English this Bull of Pope
Benedict, and the Council of Florence, that every Judicious man may see who
truly stand to their words and meaning; and who do violently strain* them
against both words and sense.

NINTH DIVISION. Containing an Answer to his fifteenth and sixteenth Chapters.
Universality of Opiners no way obliging to Belief. His bold, and weak
Challenges. That the imagined Corporeity of Spirits grounded the Opinion of
their Mutability.: What fo^ed and spread it. A short Account of J. M's weak
performances hitherto.

1. HIS fifteenth Chapter carries for title. The Verdict of the Catholic world
for us. A brave title (...) and I will do him that right as to testify he
follows it handsomely. His first Argument is, that, suppose the delivery of
souls before Judgment had been but a probable opinion, yet Universal to all
Pastors, Doctors, and leading Teachers for five hundred years, it would be far
more rational to follow it then another which should be pretended a
Demonstration, but (for whatsoever the Auditour can tell) may have some horrid
Error ly for a while couched in it, which might in time be discovered. To this
I give two answers.

2. The first is, that in Metaphysical rigor of truth, no multitude of men can
be so vast, no gravity and wisdom of them so high and great, as to oblige any
ingenious man to believe that which themselves profess they do not know whether
it be true or no. ^or all Belief is grounded upon the knowledge of another. If I
be secured he does not know the thing I should believe upon his credit, I have
no ground of belief; for upon this point he is a pure Ignorant. If you reply,
though he do not know it to be true, yet he thinks so; I must answer that I
ought to believe him the less, seeing he is not so honest to himself but that
he will cozen himself, by trusting that to which his own conscience tells him
he ought not to trust. Now this is the condition of all those who hold a
proposition as probable: And therefore, though all the world for five hundred
Ages had held the deliverableness of souls out of Purgatory, only as probable,
in rigor it made no advantage at all.

3. My second Answer is more accommodated to human practice, and it is taken
out of Nature and Experience, out of which St. Austin took it. This
distinguishes Mankind into two degrees; One that is able fully and properly to
judge of a truth proposed with due proof, and as it should be; The other that
either for natural dullness, or for unwillingness to take pains, is not in
state to look upon truth in it self, and therefore is fittingly to be governed
by Authority. To the former, no multitude nor time can bring obligation to
refuse a well proposed Verity as long as the contrary Authority is uncertain:
The other ought indeed not to meddle, but if by any necessity he must do beyond
his reach, it is clear the greater number ought to oversway with him as far as
he is not able to weigh the worth of both sides. By these two Answers you will
see the pleading of multitudes of Opinatours, will not much advantage your
Divines opinion further then amongst them who ought not to meddle in such
questions.

4. Although this evidently ruins his Argument, yet I cannot omit to show
another weakness unsufferable for its plainness. For, he adds that if they had
no other witness then of the Latin Church for these last five hundred years,
this alone were not to be slighted. I pray why not? Is not the contrary
Testimony of the Greek Church predominant over the Latin, where there is but an
opinion of five hundred years on one side, and one thousand five hundred on the
other. Nay, put case the Greek Church were not against it, considering that the
subject is a matter not otherwise to be known then by Revelation, were it not
intolerable to bind any man to the belief of it otherwise then because it is
revealed? which if it were but of five hundred years standing were impossible
to be: For the Church professes no Revelations for her guide since the Apostles
dyed: If then your Divine professed no farther, he must confess it to be a weak
and ungrounded Innovation. For, supposing it cannot be known but by Revelation,
and that there has been no Revelations these six hundred years, it is clearly
wholly ungrounded. And, because the subject is a subject of Revelation, that
is, that on their side can have no ground but Revelation, this ungrounded
Innovation is in matter of Revelation, and we know only Faith is the proper
matter of Revelation: Their opinion then is a piece of Faith as to the matter,
and should therefore have, but has no ground of Revelation.

5. Your Divine replies that he groundedly challenges also six hundred years
before. It is a folly to dispute this Question. He speaks in supposition that
he has laid solid grounds: My answers are since made. The two being compared,
men of wisdom and learning are to judge how solid his grounds are to make such
a challenge upon. He challenges us to show one Author who does so much as by
one Word insinuate that our opinion did grow to be more Universally received in
the Church these last five hundred years then before it was. A strange and
shameless confidence! Did not Odilo make it Universal in the Order of Cluny?
Did not the Pope command the Feast? Did these make no more Universality? See
how many Revelations were before those days, and how many since; do all these
signify no more Universality? And this may serve until his fourth Number, all
before being but the supposition of what he has not done.

4. In the fourth Number he tells us it cannot be denied but for these five
hundred year; all who have prayed for the dead were instructed by their
Ancestors, to pray for the present, either ease, or delivery, of the Dead. Yet
it is denied him that their Ancestors taught it them, as likewise it is
impossible to prove, and improbable to believe, that all were so taught. We
know Doctrins that are new, first infect one part, and then another, and so by
little and little get a popularity. The reason why it easily attained to this,
is because the Corporality of those substances which we hold to be spiritual,
was long held in the Church, nor is yet perfectly out. I have heard men
learned, as they are generally called, that is of much reading, affirm that
there were no simple substances but God, and declare that this was the common
opinion of the Fathers. You see this opinion is very conformable to the
apprehension of all who are not Metaphysicians: And our opinion depends wholly
of the Spirituality of Angels and Souls, the which even those who follow,
follow but imperfectly. For the nature of Science is to be attained by pieces
and degrees, so that we must not expect that all who hold the Soul and Angels
to be Spirits, should discourse of them as pure Spirits ought to be discoursed
on. St. Thomas took away proper Locality from them, but is weakly follow^d, not
only by other Schools which are filled with Ubications, but even in his own.
Now Immutability which Aristotle demoristrated of Spirits, is not as yet
accepted any thing commonly: But if once it come to be thoroughly looked into,
it will be as well as Illocality, and your Divines opinion of Purgatory as much
rejected as the Corporality of Spirits is.

7. To return to our purpose. This apprehension of Corporal Torments, and
succession, and parts in them, being so natural to man's understanding, also the
ending of them was naturally apprehended as a thing conformable to the rest,
and so all this Doctrine when it began to be superadded to Tradition, was
received as conformable to it; men not penetrating the consequences that
followed out of the souls being a Spirit: And otherwise seeing nothing contrary
to Christian Piety, before the excess came to be so great that it grew but a
sport to deliver souls out of Purgatory. This began to make men reflect; and
abhorring the excess to look into the causes of the mistake, and to find it
proceeded hence, that some who ventured to meddle with Divinity without
sufficiency in Philosophy, in liew of explicating the Metaphorical words in
which Scriptures and Fathers deliver Christian Doctrine, that it may be common
to learned and unlearned (the which is the proper duty of a Scholastical
Divine) undertake to justify that the Metaphors and Allegories are to be
understood according to the very bark of the Letter, and to force the learned
to have no other apprehensions then the unlearned have, and so to understand
Spiritual things corporeally, and to cry out against them who seek to apply
Incorporeal modifications to Incorporeal Substances. So that the reason of the
vulgarity of this opinion, is because Animale is before Spirituale. For what
was delivered by the Apostles, was only that Prayers should be made for the
dead. You may note specially in St. Austin and St. Chrysostom, that having much
occasion to speak of Prayer for the dead, they are earnest to report that this
could not be unless some good arrived to the dead thereby, but are as careful
not to tell any good in particular, for fear of missing in what they had not
found sufficient ground in Scripture (...) declare. Weaker men finding the
question started, resolved by the proportion to what they saw in human actions,
without reflecting upon what the Conditions of Incorporeal natures required;
and upon this apprehension followed the multitude of Visions and Revelations to
confirm this position; the which being colored with two grateful
sightfullnesses, Piety and Wonder, easily got a great strength amongst the
meaner sort of learned men, and the multitude of the unlearned.

8. In his fifth Number he presses that the Apostles taught the faithful why
they should pray for the dead, and therefore he argues that motive must still
remain in the Church. I answer, the Apostles taught them to pray for the dead
to receive their reward at the day of Judgment, as is beyond exception plain in
St. Paul's prayer for Onesiphorus, and abundance of Scripture and Fathers, as
may be read in my Treatise of Purgatory, and is still conserved in the Church
Offices.

9. In his sixth Number he repeats the pressing of the Bulls so fully answered,
and of the cause of the keeping the Holy Commemoration of the dead, and this
holds to the end of the Chapter. Only I must note, himself confesses Number
the sixth, that the Popes Decrees are not of the point it self, but of others
necessarily connexed with the point. So that, if his discourse do fail him,
there is no prohibition, even by his own words of our tenet; and out of what we
have said it is easy to see it does fail him; And by consequence that all the
ground they have is but a pious credulity.

10. In his 16 Chapter, and the last of his proving discourse (for afterward
follow the answers to my Grounds) he professes to deliver the fundamental
reason of his opinion; And I suppose in his first Paragraph he would say (if he
did dare speak out) that he had none. Yet not to scandalize his party he must
make a show, and so in the midst of his third Number he says our opinion is
Paradoxical, which is all the reason I can find. And as for that I must remit
him until we explicate our opinion, which will notnow be far of. For, the rest
of this Chapter he spends in saying his Doctrine is conformable to the Councils
of Trent and Florence, and to St. Austin; all which I confess, for they speak
but of Purgatory in common, and so both our opinions are conformable unto them;
our difference being only a particularity of Purgatory, and not about the
sense of it.

11. Here if it please you to cast an eye upon what is passed, you will find
his first proofs to be out of Scriptures, speaking Doctrins common to us both;
the second out of Fathers, who say Christ at his Resurrection delivered souls
out of Purgatory; which we grant. His next from Fathers who are known to have
fallen into Errors in the points he cites them for, that is, he cites three
Heresies for himself. In the fourth place Revelations out of Greg. Turonensis
and Metaphrastes, insufficient Authors. Fifthly some Fathers and Councils who
speak no more then what both sides agree of: Later Revelations enough, but they
are such Testimonies as are insufficient (I think even in his own judgment, to
make a Theological proof. Two Bulls of Popes, whereof the one is grossly
mistaken. And lastly, a false apprehension of the Churches present devotions;
which he takes not out of public Prayer-Books, but out of private intentions.
These are the most substantial passages of his discourse; others of less moment
I neglect, not to make my period too tedious.

SECOND PART.
Maintaining the Arguments brought by the Author from Authority and Reason for
the Doctrine of the Middle State.

FIRST DIVISION. Containing preparatory Grounds for the ensuing discourses.
That God being All-wise and Self-Blessed, acts only for the Good of his
Creatures; and especially Man, what God's Honor signifies, and how he governs
Man. The Nature of Sin, and its Effects. How God's Justice is satisfied. Of
Merit, Impetration and Satisfaction. A Breviate of the Adversary's opinion.

1. BEfore I begin to look into his Impugnations of my Doctrine, I think it
expedient to lay down a brief explication of mine own thoughts in this
question, entreating my Reader's patience, if he thinks I fetch it too far
about; whereof he will see the necessity hereafter. I settle therefore, or
rather explicate, some Principles, necessary to the seeing how intimately my
Doctrine is connexed with Christian Faith.

2. Let the first be, that God is Essentially Wise and Wisdom, or Truth, or
true Understanding of his actions and the Government of them. For if any man
sees what he should do, but by passion, or rather distraction does not what he
sees should be done, we may call him Understanding or Knowing, but not Wise.
Therefore God whose Essence it is to be Wisdom, cannot swerve from what he
sees to be done, or best to be done: ^or it is all one to him who is governed
purely by Wisdom, to be best to be done, and to be to be done; because nothing
but true Good can move such a Will; and, betwixt two unequal goods, the greater
is only the true Good.

3. My second Principle is that God is essentially Bliss and Blessed; and that
in so high and pure a degree, that no Good which is adventitious from either
his own action, or the action of any other Substance, can be wanting to him, or
desirable by him: and because Good signifies desirable, that there is no
extrinsecal good that can truly challenge the denomination of a Good to God.
Honor for example is the Good of a Man upon two scores; one, because when he
hears himself commended, he has an act of pleasure which perfects him
intrinsecally; the other, because Honor brings him help to do somewhat which
perfects him; for example, to get Wealth or some Office, out of which he can
gather contentment: So that still the interior contentment is that which makes
the exterior instruments to have the name of Goods. Wherefore seeing Christian
Religion teaches us that God gets no new contentments out of the effects his
action has, it is also necessary to believe, the honor that all Saints give
him is no Good of his.

4. Out of these two follows the Third; that, whatsoever God does, he does it
for the Good of his Creatures; and that, when he says that he acts for his own
Honor, the meaning is, that he works that other men (whom the Action touches
not) seeing those he acts upon well governed, may be bettered and praise him,
and conceive a greater apprehension of his wisdom and goodness, and by that
means the good of his whole Mass of Creatures be perfected. So that the Honor
he speaks of, is nothing but the well ordering of his Creatures; in which one
principal and main part is, that his rational creatures have Faith, Hope, and
Charity, which are all parts of praising him. So that we are not to look for a
farther end of God's works, then the perfection which is intrinsecal to the
Universal Mass of his Creatures.

5. The fourth is consequent to these; to wit, that seeing the Good of his
Creatures is his main end, and the Good of a Creature is that which is
desirable to that Creature, and every Nature desires its own Perfection, and
that perfects Nature which makes it able to do those actions to which such a
nature is instrumental (or for which such a Nature is made) in perfection: It
follows, that if we consider the whole Mass of Creatures, God's action is still
that which is most conformable unto it, or to the Nature of all Creatures. But,
if we consider a particular Nature upon which God acts, God's action is that
which is most conformable to such a Nature, as being in such a posture of
Nature in common; or the best to this particular Nature, as far as it stands
with the greatest good of the general Mass. Whence it is evident that God never
did nor will do any thing but conformably to the Nature of Creatures. And this
you see evidently out of the Attributes of his Wisdom and Self-sufficiency,
which are main Articles of Christian Faith.

6. The fifth Principle is that because Man is the end of all material
Creatures, and Man is to be governed by his own Understanding, it is necessary
that some things or actions be so done, that the effects be not only
performed, but that they may be persuasive to man. Further, because Mankind is
of a short apprehension, and subject to follow his senses, whereas his
Beatitude and chief Good is beyond his reach; Therefore it is necessary God
should be the Teacher of Mankind, and speak immediately to him in words and
Doctrine, as he did to Adam, Moses, and the Apostles: and that they should know
that the words spoken were from God; and therefore some extraordinary actions
which are above the power of those natural causes with which we are familiar,
should be in convenient occasions exhibited; out of which it should be known
that a higher hand gave Testimony to the words and Doctrins delivered. The
special conveniences which require such actions God alone knows, but it seems
rational to think, that a very private good cannot exact them, but only such
which either singly or in multitude concur to a Public Good. Other
circumstances which prayers made by Faith may require to be heard, may be
supplied by the subtle twisting of causes by the Divine providence,
unpenetrable by us, which fulfill the desires of weak Persons who with great
Faith demand the help of God. Howsoever, this is the main Principle, that God
never does such actions but when they are to be known, and to govern men by
persuasion Out of which it follows, That whenever such Actions have not
connatural ways to be known and manifested, they ought not to be supposed to be
done, but that God proceeds according to the course of natural second causes.
Nor must it be omitted that even in these miraculous Actions, God proceeds more
according to Nature in general then in the others. For, this being the main
point of Nature to bring Man to Bliss conformably to his nature, that is by the
way of Persuasion; what is most conformable to Persuasion, is most conformable
to the chief part of Nature, that is to Mankind in the greatest effect, which
is in ordering him immediately to Bliss.

7. Hitherto my Principles have been somewhat abstracted, yet necessary to be
known and taken purely, either out of faith, or out of evident and confessed
natural Truths concerning man's nature. The following Principles will be more
close to our subject.

8. The sixth therefore is that a Sin is an action against Reason; that is,
against the Nature of Man, and therefore hurtful to him, first in soul, the
which it most principally corrupts; next in Body, both according to his
internal faculties, and many times also in his external and vegetative
qualities. Thirdly, if it be an external act, it prejudices Mankind, that is,
his Neighbors; either in their souls by Scandal, and evil Example, or also in
their Bodies or Fortunes: and out of these Considerations, the Sinner remains
subject to Satisfaction toward himself, (which consists in the reparation of
the damages done to himself) toward the Church, and toward the civil
Government. As for the damages of his Soul, if he repairs them not with penance
and good works, he goes, thorough the violence of his affection sinful into
the next world; and there suffers the sorrows and contradictions which follow
distracted affections. As for the damages of his inward Bodily powers, those
breed in him, or increase in him, either more sinful actions, or at l^ast
greater strife betwixt the rational and the material part; and, if they be not
remedied in this world, cause the disposition of the parting soul to be worse
and imperfecter then it should be, and so subject to ill effects in the next
world. As for the other damages to himself or his Neighbors, unless he has
the will to repair them, he does not quit the sin, as is manifest in the case
of Restitution: But, if he do what lies in his power, and truly is not
negligent, they hurt him not in the next world: But all Negligence and Tepidity
is carried into the next World, in quality of a sinful disposition, and so
accrues to the punishment due to the sin.

9. The seventh Principle is, that by Gods order all the evils which follow sin
either by its proper nature, or by the orders of Ecclesiastical and Civil
Government, are ordained by God to be punishments of that sin; and therefore
whosoever by way of penance does prevent the punishments which other ways would
fall upon him by this order of God, does plainly extinguish the dueness of the
pains; as St. Zacchaeus when he paid four double of all that he had wronged any
man, quitted the score of what he had offended human nature civilly: He that
did willingly undergo the Penitential Canons, or like a Holy Mary Magdalene, or
Mary the Egyptian, did retire to a voluntary penance, did satisfy the Church;
And those who have perfect Contrition, satisfy for all the defects of the soul
and her interior powers in the body. I find it is a clear case, that he who
leaves nothing due to any of these parties, has satisfied for all the pains
they can exact of him.

10. The eighth Principle is, that Gods Justice may be taken either for the
virtue of Justice in himself, or for the effect it has in its creatures. If it
be taken for this later, it consists in this that every creature has that
which is fitting to him, in respect of its proportion to the rest of the world,
and its situation and order in it. Therefore it is clear, that he who satisfies
for his sins as it is explicated in the former Principle, does absolutely
satisfy Gods Justice in this sense. But, if you take Gods Justice, as Justice
signifies a virtue in him; then to satisfy Gods Justice adds to the former
explication, that the satisfaction the man does, is that which God by the
virtue of Justic^ exacts to have done; the which because it is that which the
repentant sinner has done, it is clear that the sinner has satisfied God also
in that sense.

11. The ninth Principle is, that all and every good act done in state of
Grace, and proceeding from Charity, is meritorious; that is, deserves a reward.
And the Reward may be the extrinsecal or intrinsecal good of the actour; that
is, either a good to his own Person or to his Friends. For who does an act of
Charity increases Charity in himself, and becomes more Holy then he was
before, and therefore a greater and better member of Gods Church: And, because
we know that all things (as the Apostle teaches) be made for the Elect, and do
cooperate to their good, we know that they are more made, and do more
cooperate, to the good of them who are more just and more Saints. Hence it
comes that God orders by his ordinary Providence (for it is not an infallible
rule) that the friends of the just man fare better, because he is Just; and and
so the just man by being just, merits, not only for his own Person, hut also
for others. Again, because God does this in respect of the desire of the just
Person, whether that desire be actual, or only in preparation of heart, this
which we call meriting, is also obtaining or impetrating: And, because what is
merited or impetrated, may be either addition of good, or diminution of evils;
when it is diminution of evils, it is called Satisfaction: Wherefore the same
Action by the same virtue is meritorious, impetratory, and satisfactory. I know
some scruple at saying one man can deserve for another, taking that to be the
property of Christ: but I see the Fathers use the word merit freely in this
sense, and therefore I do not scruple to do the same. Wherefore I do not put
these three Words to signify three Qualities of the Action, but one quality
according as it is related to diverse Causes or Effects.

12. Hitherto you have read the explication and deduction of my opinion, and I
do not think my Adversary will quarrel at much of this; not that I think them
to be his opinions, but because partly he knows them to be the opinions of
other Divines, and partly they are so rational that any sensible man will
condemn him at first sight. Now therefore it is time to lay down the
Adversary's opinion as I apprehend it, leaving him all liberty to explicate
himself in what I shall miss in, at his own pleasure.

13. You must know therefore, that the Scriptures preach the Doctrine I have
laid down minutely and Philosophically, in few and Metaphorical terms. They
represent you God like a Man-Law-giver, tell you that he has laid up fire for
those who will not obey, in the next world. My Adversaries take this as a word
and a blow, and conceive that Sin is an Action to which punishment is due of
its own nature, and that God should not be just if he did not bestow it on the
sinner; so that they put the relation between sin and punishment, and both them
to God: nor will they hear that this follows out of the Order of Causes, which
are set for the carrying of Mankind to Heaven, that there may be a proportion
natural of the sin and punishment; but that God appoints what punishment he
thinks best. After this, they put that the three conditions or names of the
Virtue of every Action, be three diverse Virtues or Qualities, whereof one
concerns not the other, or at least may be separable. So that the Action may be
meritorious, and yet neither impetrate nor satisfy; likewise, may be
impetrative* but not satisfactory; and may be satisfactory without impetration
or merit: And hence they say, some Saints have had Actions both meritorious and
impetrative that satisfied for nothing or little; because they owed little, or
little pains were due to their offenses: Whence it comes that there be great
heaps of Actions as they are satisfactory, laid up in the Treasure of the
Church, and that the Pope has the power to take what quantity seems to him
fitting, and to p^e^ent it to God for the s^ns of living or dead, and that he
is bound to accept of it for the debts or pains of such men or souls; whereas
my saying is, that the abundance of the merits of Christ, and the Saints give
the Church and the Pope all power and virtue to relaxe sins and punishments
always that are for the Churches good. This I understand to be the substance
of their opinion And now the Reader may be prepared to understand what shall be
said on both sides.

SECOND DIVISION, Containing an Answer to his seventeenth Chapter.
That we agree with others in the Torment, and disagree only in the
Instrument; Ours, more connatural and ^it. His self-contradiction, and false
imposing of unheld Doctrine. When Baptism remits all pains; and how a soul in
Purgatory purges her self. Several petty mistakes. No place for merit in the
next world. That souls in Purgatory are Saints, and may be prayed to. The
effect of those Prayers which accelerate the day of Judgment. Diverse
intolerable errors and weaknesses in Divinity.

1. IN his seventeenth Chapter he professes to show my Principles to be ill
grounded, and that there are bad sequels following from them. And if that
sh^wing signify no more then saying, so I believe fully he will do what he
promises, but if it be taken for proving, I doubt he will fall very short of
his Title. The reason of my suspicion is, because I find it so, as far as I
have hitherto looked. For example, the first Principle of mine he makes, that
the venial affections which men's souls carry into the next world, are cause to
them of great griefs and torments of mind; he farther says, I put no other
torments in Purgatory but the grief of this affection being joined to the soul,
and the privation of bliss. And I tell him on the other side, that he puts no
torments in Purgatory, but that I put the very same. I confess this proposition
is a very bold one, for I know not how absurdly he may talk of those pains; but
in hope he speaks as commonly his fellows do, I venture upon this affirmation.

2. To make which good, I distinguish between the Torment, and the Instrument
of the torment; as to say Burning is the torment, Fire the instrument by which
the torment is inflicted. And then I make this discourse. Let him look into the
ordinary explication of Divines, and see whether they put in Purgatory any
other torments then Acts of the will which they call griefs: Now the question
being of souls in Purgatory, that is, holy Souls, I cannot imagine they will put
them to be of other objects then such as deserve grief, as of their sins, of
the want of ^lory, and such like. Now all these I put in the souls of
Purgatory; It is clear then, then, that I put the same torments in Purgatory
that he does, not one excepted. The difference then is only that I do not put
the same Instruments of torment which he does; but I put connatural
Instruments, he strange and forced Instruments: I the nature and eminency of a
spirit, he a dead body, which cannot be imagined how it can hurt a soul. Ask
which is the stronger Agent, and fitter to torment the soul; it is clear that
her own nature is infinitely more strong, infinitely more fit. Why then does
not my way satisfy him? Because he does not understand that the words of the
Scripture are Metaphorical; because he understands not what signifies Gods
Justice: because the Bells ring in his ears that the Councils signify other
punishments then their words express. He vaunts the Councils be against us, but
when he declares them, he cannot find one word beyond what is common to both
opinions.

3. In his third and fourth Number he would persuade his Reader that we fall
into his own Error of denying Purgatory, because we say these purging torments
end not until the day of Judgment; and has not so much reflection as to
remember that there is no place for Purgatory when purging is done: As long as
we profess Purgatory, we must profess not purged. This is the Doctrine
perpetually before his eyes in the Council of Florence and Pope Benedict, and
he looks so a squint that he cannot see what is plainly before him, that as
soon as purging is turned to purged the soul is in bliss. About what then does
he quarrel with me? because I say the ill affection is in Purgatory all the
while the soul is there: and yet he says the same. Let him reflect upon these
his own words N. 4. Whereas Purging cleansing, etc. signifies the taking away
of something which contains the nature of a stain or blemish. If this be so,
then clearly something containing the nature of a stain or blemish is in the
soul as long as the soul is in Purgatory. Then he unjustly accuses me of saying
this which himself is ^ain to confess, and I think against his own opinion, who
puts (if I am not mistaken) no stain or blemish in the souls of Purgatory, and
therefore no purging nor Purgatory: and so all the Fathers he repeats anew be
plainly against himself.

5 In his fifth Number he imposes a new falsity upon me, to wit, that I say the
souls at the day of Judgment pitifully burn in their Bodies, but that that
fire purges nothing that can be called sin. I wonder where he found this
imagination. For my Doctrine is that the fire of Judgment is ministerial to the
Angels, framing the Bodies to Resurrection, and by this precedent service is
instrumental cause of what is done in the instant of Reunion and Resurrection,
and in that instant all the Action of fire ceases, and is turned into the
Purgatum esse, which Purgatum esse is the sight of Christ and God, in the very
first instant of Reunion. And this Doctrine may he find in my second tome of
Institutiones sacrae, page 244. and, in my book De medio statu by pieces here
and there. So that all this good man's discourse is built upon a fancy of his
own, and touches not my Doctrine.

6. In his sixth Number he argues from the difference betwixt Baptism and
Penance, that the one takes away all the punishment due to sin, the other
leaves some punishment to be expiated by satisfaction* And puts the case of an
old man who comes to Baptism after a wicked long life with an imperfect sorrow
and disposition; yet says he, all the punishment is remitted to him though
there remains many vicious inclinations in him: Now if this man dies soon after
with some small Venial sin, he shall ly in great torments until the day of
Judgment according to my Doctrine; This is his Argument, which he repeats now
the second time, and therefore it requires an answer. I tell him therefore that
it is very true, that Baptism being taken with a fitting disposition to the
nature of the Sacrament, remits all pains, and the Sacrament of Penance does
not, as is plain, seeing Satisfaction is one part of this Sacrament: But I
would gladly know, by what Authority your Divine changes the Councils
Definition, and that which the Council speaks of men coming to Baptism with a
disposition conformable and proportionable to the nature of the Sacrament, he
enlarges it to them who come with an imperfect and unproportionable
disposition. All men know Baptism is a Regeneration in which we are made nova
creatura, in which our Vetus Homo is buried, And therefore the connatural
disposition is that a man come with a resolution of a perfect change of life,
such an one as we see in St. Austin at his conversion, which made him feel no
more tentations of his former imperfections; such as we acknowledge in people
perfectly contrite; such as is supposed to be in men who relinquish the world
to be Carthusians, Eremites, Anachorites, etc. in all which we acknowledge that
their repentance cancels all pains; but likewise we acknowledge it takes away
all inclination to former Vices, at least out of the spiritual part of men; and
so leaves no matter for the fire of Purgatory to work upon, which burns only
ill affections.

7. In his seventh Number, he cries out against this Principle, that the Soul,
now become a pure Spirit, should retain her Affections to Bodily Objects, and
thinks this misbeseems a Philosopher to say; therefore I think my best play is
to say, I speak as a Divine: For I hope so to have the protection of all those,
who say, that in Hell the Souls are unrepentant, and obstinate in their sins,
and sinful desires. Nevertheless, if he will needs appeal to Philosophy, let
him consider what Plato 10. de Rep. What Cebes, what the Pythagoreans teach,
and Virgil, out of Philosophers.

Conjux ubi pristinus illi
Respondet curis, aequatque Sichaeus amorem.
And again; -- Quae gratia currum,
Armorumque fuit vivis, quae cura nitentes,
Pascere equos, eadem sequitur tellure repostos.
But let us see what he objects against this received Doctrine of Divines, and
Philosophers. Is, says he, such a Soul purging her self? I answer; Yes,
forsooth: I pray, if you ever looked into the strife betwixt the Spirit, and
the Flesh, either how a man purges himself in his whole life, or in some great
Battle, and Pitch'd-Field, see whether both are not compounded of
vicissitudinary Victories, now of the Spirit, now of the Flesh. Reflecting now,
that the eminency of the separated Soul, contains in it self, at once, more
then the whole lifetime of an incorporated Soul; what must, or can we think,
but that all this contradiction of Wills, must be at once in an imperfect
separated Soul? which is, in our life, in parts, and separated in time.

8. He says again Philosophy teaches him, that no body loves evil, clearly
apprehended to be evil, and that no disguise of good can cheat a separated
Soul. I must confess both these Propositions to be true, and therefore I am
forced to say, that in Purgatory their love is not about evil objects, but
truly good, and conformable to Nature, and their fault consists only in excess
of love, which makes them apt to follow their objects, where, and when they
should not.

9. His third Objection is, How we know the Soul will embrace this wilfulness,
since it is voluntary, and therefore, in her liberty, not to accept of it, or
choose it. This Objection has two faults; the one, that it does not distinguish
betwixt Voluntary, and Free; their own Philosophy teaching them, that the love
of our last End, or good, in common, is a voluntary act, but not free. The like
they teach of the accepting of a medium, when there is but one to gain the
fore-embraced End. The other is, that he thinks that this wilfulness begins at
Death, whereas it does but continue, and began in the Body. As the very words
of remaining, and being conserved, do signify.

10. His last Objection is, that there is in Purgatory, an efficacious
repentance, and therefore no will to do the like again. I answer, this word
repentance does stick in my stomach: for if it means only an act of a contrary
affection, I easily accord it to him; for in this consists the torment of a
Soul, that is vicious either in this World, or in the next; that she has
contrary Affections in her self, one fighting against the other: for the
general inclination to her last Good, can never be rooted out, and no Vice can
be, but contrary to this inclination. But if Repentance be taken for the
revoking, cancelling, or blotting out of the unlawful desire, I doubt it would
prove an Heresy, to put that, and that the Soul shall remain in Purgatory; for
then she would have no blemish in her.

11. In his eighth Number he prosecutes the same, but against all Divinity, and
himself. For whereas he puts that after this life there is no place for merit,
he will here needs make an act of Charity not begun in the Man's life, but in
the first instant of his great knowledge of the next World, enough to make such
a weak one as I am worse then an Origenist: For I know not why, by his
Argument, any body should be damned, or rather could be damned; for,
questionless, every Soul, whatsoever it be, has, at her separation, so clear
an understanding of the goodness of God, and the variety of all corporal goods,
that if there were then place of Repentance, and making of new an act of
Charity, she could not choose but cancel all her idle desires, and turn to God.
For, if there be Repentance, it may be as well in the choice of her chief good,
as of the ways to it. But whence shall we know the good Thief was violently set
upon his evil courses? For my good Nature inclined me to think, he had been for
want or ill company, brought into inconvenience: But seeing it is fitting for
the Divine's Argument, let it pass; what will follow? That if he repented in
this life, there is place of Repentance in the next, for all that have a
perfecter knowledge of God's Goodness, and their own Folly?

12. His ninth Number shows a great fear, that some in Purgatory may be
honored for Saints. But what if they were? Are not they God's Friends? Are
they not truly Saints? Why then should the Church err in declaring them so?
But that he may not be afraid, I would desire him to believe, until he gains
knowledge, that it is the Habits gotten in this life, and not the acts which
make Saints. For the Acts pass, but the Habits remain, and budd into Affections
of their own Nature in the next life: So that if his Saints have no evil
Habits, the obreption of an act will do them no harm; besides, that the
anguishes of Death have virtue in such men to purge slight sins. As for his
Stories, he will understand that I am more a Lover of good ones, then a
Creditour of unlikely ones; as of that out of St. Peter Damian, concerning
Saint Severinus; for I cannot judge his act to have been irrational, as far as
you recount it. The Story also of Paschasius, I beleve, is of no better credit
then of Baronius, who was, as I take it, the last Correctour of the Roman
Martyrologe, and gave more credit to the Dialogues, called St. Gregory's, then
I do.

13. Now are we arrived to the tenth Number, in which he puts a Second
Principle of mine, though you will find, in effect, it is the same with the
former; or, at least, so joined with it, that he has already impugn'd it. Yet
that is nothing to me, so he brings new matter. That which most terrifies me,
is, that he threatens, after he has done with it here, he will make a new
Chapter of it: So desirous are People of making great Books, though it be with
the tedious repetition of the same thing ten times over. But (says he) this
Point is attended with so long a train of absurdities, that one Chapter will
not serve, and so one must be largely prosecuted in this Chapter. The Principle
is, that what affections the Soul embraces at her separation, she persists in
the same the whole time of her separation. His inconvenience he finds in this
Doctrine is, that he must find some present asswagement of the pains in
Purgatory, when the Prayers are made for the Dead: And repeats over the
Authors he cited before to that purpose, whereof the Devil in the Scul, and
Metaphrastes, a Tale-finder, are to his purpose; All the rest speak but what we
will hold as well as he, yet must be plain for him. Only I must note, that he
changes the former Text he cited out of St. Isidore into paying part of the
pain. I must desire him to look well into his Books, and see whether his own
Fellows teach the Doctrine which here he presses, to wit, that at that very
time when a Mass is said, or an Alms is given, there be some relaxation of pain
given, as his fine Stories relate. For I know the ordinary way is of delivering
Souls, or, at least, of the shortning the time of the Souls punishments;
whereas present Refreshments would rather make the pains longer, and the delay
of Heaven greater, which would be worse to the Souls in Purgatory, then to be
without such relief and so by the greatness of the pain to make the time
shorter: therefore if there be not a perfect release, the comfort should stay
until the end may come, with, or by it. Another quaint conceit is, that all the
aboveused Authorities, makes relief flow from the pious acts effectively. Truly
this is to be a great Divine. The Authorities, all that are esteemable say,
that good Prayers and Works help the Dead, and we agree with this saying; But
it is necessary for him, that it be presently done, and immediately these very
words no whit changed signify, that it is presently done.

14. This is not enough for him, but he requires that the Prayers should do
them effectively, and, upon his least beck, the words ply themselves to signify
an effective causality. Is not this strong Divinity, to make the words of
Councils, and Fathers, so pliable to his Will, that without any change, they
signify what he pleases? What would not Simon Magus have given, to have had the
Holy Ghost so in a string? He objects that the relief of Souls is certain, and
must not be made depend of the probable opinion that Souls know future things?
Where should I have learned this Divinity, if I had not met with it here? I
might have read all Suarez and Vasquez over, and have found all the Mysteries
of our Faith explicated by probable Opinions, of which they dissent among
themselves, without ever understanding that therefore the mysteries depend of
those Opinions. But hereafter I must be waryer, and know that probable Opinions
are not to be employed in that kind; and therefore I pray let him think I hold
it for certain that separated Souls know future things, as we have an example
of Samuel, Moses, and of Onias, and Hieremias. He cites next the Author of the
Supplement at the end of Saint Thomas his Sum; which Work has not the
Authority of Saint Thomas, no not when the Author uses the very words of St.
Thomas. For St. Thomas having in his Sum much change of his Doctrine in his
other Works, the Sum is the absolute Work, which bears the authority of St.
Thomas; the other Works as far as they disagree not with the Sum, are
confirmations of it, or consequent to it. Which I mark, because this Divine
freely uses the name of St. Thomas when he cites this Work; whereas in truth
what is in the Supplement must first be proved to be St. Thomas his Doctrine, at
least in other Books, before it can be fathered upon him. For the very name of
Supplement shows the credit of the Doctrine, to depend from an Author of less
esteem then St. Thomas; though I do not deny, that ordinarily the Doctrine of
the Book is, or was, St. Thomas's Doctrine in his younger days.

15. And now we are brought on to the twelfth Number, in which he advances a
difficulty which is truly Theological, and deserves to be discussed. But
whereas it has two parts, that part which is chief, and should go fore-most,
he leaves to be discussed in his 22. Chapter; to wit, Whether continuance of an
indivisible Entity makes it greater or no: Wherefore here I must only treat
the second part, which is, what good Prayers do, which do but accelerate the
Day of Judgment. And to do this, I must explicate a Doctrine, whereof he should
not be ignorant, yet I perceive he is. I lay forth therefore this Proposition;
No Prayer is heard by God Almighty for any particular effect, but for such as
are fore-determin'd by God, not only to be, but to be by this Prayer. Another
I add to this of the same quality; to wit, that no effect which God has
foredetermin'd to be for such a Prayer, can be, if the prayer be not. These two
Propositions, as peradventure to the ordinary sort of Faithful may be unknown,
or rather unreflected on, so is it a shame that any Divine should doubt or
question them. As for the former, he that will maintain the contrary, must say
God foresaw not what he would after do, or fore-would not what he after did;
which are both notorious Blasphemies. And he who opposes the later Proposition,
must say that some cause which God has ordered to be the cause of an effect,
is superfluous, and has no influence into the effect, since the effect can be
without such a cause; which is no less a derogation to God's Wisdom, and the
perfection of his ways. Out of ^hese two ^ropositions it follows evidently,
that if God has ordered the Day of Judgment to come by the prayers for the
Dead, the Day of Judgment would not, nor could not come, unless those prayers
were said. And, if this be evidently true, it is an evident want of Divinity,
to ask what good the prayers for the Dead do, if the Dead receive no other
profit, then the advancement of the Day of Judgment? Against this Doctrine,
Number 17. he objecteth, What then shall become of Christ's Promises? This is a
good Objection for a Catechumen who learns Christian Doctrine, but a poor one
for a Divine, who should know that Christ governs the World, not, as Aristotle
puts, in common, by moving the first Mobile, but as Faith teaches, by
foreseeing, fore-willing, and ordering every particular act of Angels, Men,
and irrational Creatures; and, as far as the acts have any good in them,
setting and settling the whole Frame of the Causes inerrantly: So that Christ's
Promises rely upon this, not only power or foresight, but (as I may so speak)
a kind of fore-acting in his Providence, all the good Creatures shall ever do.
Therefore it is silly to talk so, as if Christ's Promises would fail if this
particular man did not say this particular prayer, for it proceeds upon the
actual ordering of this prayer. The like, or weaker, is the Objection, that
Christ's Judicative Power will depend of particular prayers; First, because in
some way of speaking, it is evidently true, as it is that Christ could not damn
Judas, if Judas were not, or had not betrayed him. Another way, and that in a
proper manner of speaking, is, that it does not follow, that Christ's Judiciary
Power depends from these prayers, but these prayers of it; For, seeing no
body doubts, but that Christ has in his power what acts shall be, and what
shall not, it is clear, that what shall be, depends of him, not He from what
shall be: So that this, which with his great Divinity he deems the worst of
shifts, is as certain as any Article of our Faith, and Blasphemous and
Heretical to deny.

16. To justify this proceeding of his, he brings another piece of sweet
Divinity. It is, that there be some things which God resolves shall come to
pass by certain prayers, and some, that he resolves to effect quite
independently of any such means, upon other motives. To give you his true
meaning in this distinction, is hard: yet I think his meaning is, that the
means or causes of some effects are such, that though de facto they are causes
of the effect, yet God would have done the effect, if these causes had failed;
and other causes are such, that if these causes had failed, God would not
secure the effect; that is, his meaning is, that some causes which are truly
causes, notwithstanding God's Providence that they should be causes, might have
failed, and therefore God had cast, if these causes should fail, to provide
others which should supply, that the effect might not fail, Quantum capio,
quantum sapio, what is this, but to put that God's Providence, as far as
concerns that this prayer should be, or should be cause of this effect, is
fallible, and not certain? Are we there great Divine, that you tell us God's
Providence is errable? That neither by his Power, nor by his Wisdom, he can
ascertain that which he orders to be done? Or, if peradventure you will not
venture to deny his Power, at least that his act falls short? That some good
Action is done, which he did not will efficaciously should be done? Is this
Catholic, or Christian, either Divinity, or Metaphysics, to make God's
Providence fallible, to make the Essential Wisdom doubtful of what he is to
do? casting about like a man, If this day will not do, I will take another; O
pitiful stuff! O three halfpenny Divinity!

17. He objects it were superfluous to pray that St. Francis be not turned out
of Heaven, because God is resolved not to do it whether any body prays for it
or no? What ill luck have I to meet with such Counselors of God Almighty, who
know upon what motives he does all his Works, and what things must be wanting
to break God's intentions? I am bred simply to believe, that if the least dust
or straw in the streets should not fall, or be cut, when it does fall and is
cut, it would change the greatest effects of God's Providence: So exact be the
Rules of God's foresight, so just and fitting all that he determins. To us is
revealed, what is fitting to promote the saving of our Souls; that is, as
concerning our purpose, to pray for those things; the solicitude of which stirs
us up to pray heartily and willingly, and therefore it is revealed to us that
we ought to pray for the Dead, because it causes in us a fervent and great
recourse to God. It is not revealed to us, to pray that St. Francis should
possess his bliss eternally, because that motive of prayer would either be of
small efficacy, or have other inconveniences annexed. And yet I do not doubt
but this, amongst the rest, may be an effect even of the prayers we say for
other motives. And comformable to this we ought to understand that rule, that
it is an injury to a Martyr to pray for him; to wit, as we pray for other Dead,
or for remission of his sins. But that we may not join our prayers with theirs,
for the glorification of their Bodies, I do not know. Their prayer is recorded
in the Apocalypse; and the Answer, that they must expect until the number of
their Brethren be filled up. Nor do I see how we can leave praying for them, as
long as we say, Thy will be done; for in that we pray for all things which we
know to be God's Will that they shall be done. And I fear it is only a blind
Reverence, not any knowledge in Divinity which keeps him from quarrelling with
the Church, as doing a superfluous action when she prays in the third Secreta
of the Sunday Mass in Lent, ut omnium fidelium nomina beatae praedestinati^nis
liber adscripta retineat.

18. Out of what is hitherto discoursed it is evident, that to accelerate the
Day of Judgment, is to cause it, and all the good that shall be there done to
any body, and that therefore it cannot be questioned but that it is a great
good. But he presses the term of Acceleration, and I must give account why we
use that term: which is, because we find it to be Christ's own word. He told us
that propter electos breviabuntur dies illi. And, though he spoke literally
only of the time of Antichrist, yet we know all the rest has proportion and
Analogy to that. What good is it which the Elect gain by this shortning of
those days? What, but to be saved? This same good get the Souls in Purgatory,
their Beatitude. But your Divine's Fancy is so fixed upon their pains, to have
them decrease, or increase by time, that he cannot think of the substantial
change from Pains to Bliss. The which if he did consider, he would not tell us
Christ did no considerable favor in delivering the Fathers out of Limbo; He
would not tell us he that had more prayers got no more then he who had fewer;
unless he imagins prayers can get no other good then the relaxation of pain. If
in this World prayers can get all sorts of goods, can it get nothing in the
next World? Do not the Saints tell us, that prayers accompany Souls to the
Tribunal of God? that there they bring respect to the Person? How this is to be
understood is another question. Two things are certain, One that this is
another thing then releasing from pains; the other, that these prayers make his
reward the greater. All therefore your Divines Arguments, that he who has no
prayers shall have as much as he that has many, miss of their aim. For in the
payment comes the difference, and your Divine cannot cast his eye once upon
that, his heart is so frighted with the pains. By this you easily see, that the
apprehension of this good from the first instant in Purgatory, must needs be a
lessening of their pains in Purgatory. For we do not esteem the Doctrine he
learned from the Devil, that it is just when the prayers are saying or said.
And, though our Divine's discourses, that then they begin to have efficacy, is
conformable to the Nature of the Prayers, it is not to the Nature of the Souls
which are to be helped; which also is to be respected. As for the Fathers, they
must be inched out by his good Translations or Explications, or else they will
not come home, but favor our opinion.

19. The first part of the proposed difficulty we delay until the 22. Chapter,
in expectation of a fuller account. The later we find chiefly to be grounded on
one Error, and one Carelessness. The Error, that he makes God's Providence
uncertain, irresolute, and, depending on, not making the comportment of the
Creatures. The Carelessness, that he wholly neglects the good gotten by prayers
at the Resurrection, which has it is effect in the whole state of Purgatory;
fixing his discourse only upon that which is no good, So that of this
Principle he has no more to say now, then that he says that to put the
acceleration of the Day of Judgment to be the fruit of the prayer for the Dead,
is an unheard novelty. And I conceit it to be the chief fruit of all our
prayers commanded in our Lord's Prayer, containing our final Beatitude, which
should be our greatest, if not our only prayer. He adds, it will make many lay
aside praying for the Dead. I can say no more, then that I wish they were
better instructed. But he is afraid that if the Day of Judgment come sooner,
fewer will be saved, though our Savior was of the contrary mind, and tells us
that if the time were not shortened, non fieret salva omnis caro. God was forced
once to drown the World and shorten men's lives, because all flesh had
corrupted their ways; to wit, by the great adh^sion to corporal objects
thorough the long enjoying of them. Once again will he be forced to destroy the
World by fire for the like malice of men. In the mean while he is forced to
contract the length of it, that more may be saved, and the number of the Elect
come up in a shorter time. I cannot omit his pleasant consideration that some
will have a horror to pray for the Day of Judgment, because then the bodies of
the wicked shall go to Hell. O pious meditation! to have a horror that that
should be done which Christ shall command with his own mouth; and themselves,
if they will be partakers with Christ, must have a share in! O pitiful hearts!
that will not pray for the glorifying of their own bodies, for fear that
thereby others bodies may be cast into torments! Yes, but there is another
secret, which is, that peradventure their own body may be one. I perceive he
makes them as prudent as the Spanish Soldier, who lying on his Deathbed, is
reported, when he had occasion to speak of the Devil, still to term him Senor
Diablo, and being evil used if he fell into his hands; as he had experience
that it happened to Soldiers to fall into their Enemies power by the chance of
War.

Numb. 22. He comes to the third Principle, of how the Fire of Conflagration
works upon those in Purgatory, of which we have declared our Sentiment in the
fifth Number, to which I must remit you, not knowing when I answered it, that
it would be repeated here over again. Only I must note, that he understood
nothing at all of what I said, so that his Objections are against pure
mistakes. Numb. 24. he repeats very stoutly that I deny any pains to be due
after the remission of the sin, though it be most manifestly against my
Writings and Doctrine, in all places where I have occasion to speak of it in my
Sacra Institutiones, in my Book of Purgatory, and Reason and Religion, etc. He
is so out of the way in the whole, that I cannot set him right; for he mistakes
all, and makes no sense of my sayings of this point, and corrupts what he cites
of other points. Therefore I must seek the remedy of desperate evils, to cut out
all this discourse as incurable, until he having read what I have written upon
his fifth Number, become capable of speaking and hearing fence in this matter.

THIRD DIVISION. Containing an Answer to his Eighteenth Chapter.
Bellarmin's Errors advantageous to Heretics. The Arguments in the
Middle-State from Scripture maintained to be solid, and the Adversary's
mis-interpretations shown weak and inconsistent.

1. SO thorough many Brambles we are come to his eighteenth Chapter. In the
Preface of which he gives me two warnings. The first, that in reason he should
expect some clear demonstration to justify the abandoning the known persuasion
of the Church. And although I have already justified that it is no persuasion
of the Church, but only a popular Error which I forsake; yet will I not
insist upon that, not to make needless repetitions. But I must tell him he must
not expect to see clear demonstration; For that belongs to them that have
scientifical eyes, and not to them who learn only to babble of what they
understand not. A Demonstratour must begin from the first Principles of
Philosophy, and drive them on to his Conclusion, not take up his opinions upon
Reasons, that fall into his mouth out of the Air. What he takes out of Faith,
he must not be only able to say the words, or cite them out of some good Book,
but he must be sure to understand them well, and see that his Explication
contradicts neither Divinity, nor any other Science. And of these two courses,
neither he nor his Masters (as far as I could see) were ever guilty. They take
Texts, and urge the letter; without ever penetrating the sense; and foregoing
all principles, they fly at every question with fantastic flashes, like Hawks
at their prey where ever they spy it.

2. His second warning is, that my Arguments are the outcasts and refuse of
their Authors; And I am far from denying it, For indiscreet people are as
subject to reject the best as the worst, and if I be not mistaken in h^s
Authors, they ordinarily choose the worst Opinions for themselves: being men
that in Sciences hunt after vanity, and the pleasing of the unlearned
mustitude, and so are fit to make a show in discourse, until the weaker sort be
beyond their speculation; but never understand things solidly, nor are able to
give satisfaction to sober Wits, who look into the depth of a difficulty. He
concludes that we never take notice of the Answers so fully made to the
Objections we take out of his Authors. I will not return this upon him, and
ask him how many Answers he has read in Religion and Reason, and my other
Writings, which he has read, as appears by the impugning of the Doctrine, yet
will not cite, that he may say he knew not of those Solutions which he impugns
not. But I will only say, let this encounter betwixt him and me bear testimony
how fully and solidly the Answers are made.

3. He begins his plea with telling his Reader that I borrowed the first and
chiefest Objection from that infamous Heretic Ochinus. How does he know this?
Bellarmin says Ochinus uses this Argument, What then? therefore I found it
either in Bellarmin, or Ochinus. How proves he that? The Spirit with which he
writes tells him so. And my Spirit tells me, that the Spirit which tells him so
is the Spirit of Error and Calumny. For when I wrote my Book, I had neither
Bellarmin, nor Ochinus. Nor did I ever study Bellarmin so much as to remember
such particularities out of him. I am not ashamed if I had taken any thing out
of Bellarmin to acknowledge it. For I acknowledge him to be the best Dictionary
of Controversies I have seen; but a man must beware how he trusts either his
Arguments, or Solutions: Yet he is very good to suggest to a man occasions, and
matter that may be well used. Neither should I be ashamed to use any Argument I
had found in Ochinus, or any other Heretic, so the Argument be solid to my
purpose. And it is the prognostic of cosenage in the carriage of the cause, to
make such exceptions. An Argument is good and bad by it self, not by his
Author; and Aristotle used to find the middle truth, by comparing the
falsities extre^mly opposite; and so, if I by comparing Ochinus, and your
Divine, should find the truth to ly in the middle, I should think my action
deserve honor, and to be profitable to the Church. Let us then look into the
Argument it self. Ochinus, to prove there was no Purgatory, argued, if there be
a Purgatory, then Souls are delivered before the Day of Judgment by prayers,
but that is false by the Text alleged, etc. Now Bellarmin if he had been a
solid answerer, would have denied his first proposition, and told him, whether
prayers delivered them before, or not, yet Purgatory remained safe, and Ochinus
choked that he could not have opened his mouth, and this Answer I have found
printed at Rome against the Greek Heretics.

4. This Error produced a greater, to wit, that their great Bellarmin was
forced to confess that the words of the Scripture as they ly, or in the plain
sense, are false; and so he fairly betrays the Catholic position of Purgatory
to set up his own fancy. For his solution says that these words, If there were
no Resurrection, signify' If the soul were not immortal; which be so different
meanings, that by many Philosophers the one was confessed, and the other denied:
So that the two propositions are neither the same, nor such as that their
connection is plainly seen. Therefore to make this good he fains a third, either
falsity, or at least not proved, nor very probable; which is, that the writer
of the second book of Macchabees, wrote after Jonathas his time, when by reason
of a firm peace, the Jews fell to dispute about their Law, and so into great
divisions and sects: Whereas by probability this Book was written in Judas his
time. For it makes no mention of his death, which it had been a fault to leave
out if it had passed before the book was written: which if it be true, these
words must not be spoken against any infection of Sadduces, but of Greeks who
had long domineered over Jury, specially in Antiochus his time.

5. His fourth Error is, that he makes our Savior also make a false Argument,
and to conclude the Immortality of the soul in stead of the Resurrection, and
to make this consequence; Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob's fouls are alive,
therefore Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob's bodies shall rise again. The which
would not have silenced the Sadduces, but rather have made them contemn our
Savior; For they better understood Resurrection, then the being of an
abstracted spirit; which we see amongst even our Moderns, many profess not to
understand; and many of those who profess to understand it, by their gross
explications show they do not penetrate it. But you may ask, what then is the
force of our Saviors Argument? I answer, that we have it from our Savior
himself, who told his Apostles that Lazarus was asleep, not dead, and the like
he spoke of the Prince of the Synagogues daughter; and the phrase amongst
Christians is used of all the Faithful, and so we sing, Regem cui omnia
vivunt, venite adoremus, and St. Paul expresses it in the words, then (says he)
those who have fallen asleep in Christ, are perished. When then our Savior
says God is not God of the dead, this word dead must be taken for perished,
according to what St. Paul comfort the Christians, and tells them they must
not be sorrowful at their friends deaths as Gentiles were, and gives the reason
qui spem non habent; that is, who expect no Resurrection, but think their dead
for ever perished, and not to be as it were in a sleep until the last Trumpet
awakes them. There is yet a deeper Mystery in our Saviors words, which neither
pleased Bellarmin nor his admirer; to wit, that because all things are present
to God in eternity, therefore no future thing is absent to God, so that
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob did live to God, and as to God were really living.

6. He presses also that St. Paul urges the like Argument, saying, that if
there be no Resurrection, let us eat and drink, for tomorrow we shall dye. But
this Argument shows plainly that his former solution was naught. For St. Paul
speaks not to Sadduces, but rather to Pharisees, to whom belongs the custom
of often Baptisms, which he there urges: therefore it depends not out of the
connection of the Immortality of the soul and Resurrection, but rather it
supposes the Immortality of the, soul to be a thing not known to the vulgar.
For, according to that saying of his, sapientiam loquimur inter perfect^s, he
applied his Doctrine to his Auditory. To the multitude he preached what they
were capable of, (...) is, he proposed the Goods proper to the whole man, and
as it were an excellency and height of those goods whereof they had
experience, reserving the declaration of goods purely spiritual to the special
audience of the more understanding part. Wherefore all his public preaching
being of the rewards (...) be received in the Resurrection, be m^ke^ this
Argument; if there be no Resurrection we are the most miserable of men, for in
this world we enjoy no pleasure, and in the next we have no reward. So you see
this solid resolution of Bellarmin to be compounded of pure mistakes and
improbabilities. And yet, if his worship had been so curious, he might have
found it confuted in the third account of the Book whence he read the objection
made, though Bellarmin is not by name cited, not every petty confirmation
impugned, the which I should have done if I had taken it out of Bellarmin.

7. He yet presse^. That those who were seduced by the Ge^^ils would not esteem
of (...) Authority of Judas Maccab^^^ in which he shows either little
experience or much cunning. For, as an Ordinary Protestant, such as depend from
the Authority of their Preacher, if he see it proved that all Antiquity is
against what his Preacher teaches, is presently stricken with a horror, and
begins to waver, because it is natural, to men to love and adhere to their
Ancestors so those who were wavering amongst the Jews upon the persuasions of
the Gentiles, when they saw the public profession of their Country in the fact
of Judas Maccabaeus, would be much solicited to forgo the apparent reasons of
the Gentiles, and prefer their Countries belief before them. Either therefore
your Divine did not understand this, or else under the color of some obstinate
Persons he would cunningly make his Reader believe that no body would take good
by this example of Judas Maccabaeus.

8. His opposition to my second Text is already answered, for St. Paul did not
speak to the Sadduces but to such as received the custom of Baptisms or praying
for the dead; and his Argument is as strong, as that when we, out of praying
for the dead, prove a Purgatory and remission of sins in the next world; so
does St. Paul prove the Resurrection. Whence it is manifest that he taught the
Christians to pray for that good to the dead which they were to receive at the
Resurrection, and by consequence, that all the good the dead can receive before
that day is already received before they are prayed for.

9. The third Text he dissembles to understand, and for that reason with his
Paraphrase corrupts the Text: The Text it self says; that his spirit or soul
may be saved in the day of our Lord. He paraphrases Saved to signify to appear
with great honor and glory. But every one who understands the word, know^ it
signifies to be freed from some danger or harm: and all Catholics, by
admitting a particular judgment, know all danger is past; therefore the meaning
must be that in that day he shall be freed from punishment and misery. At
length he turns off this Text with a jeer, telling us St. Paul was not so
uncharitable as to wish no good to Onesiphorus before the day of Judgment. As
if it were not charity mistaken to wish him what St. Paul knew was not to be
had St. Paul therefore in this expression wishes Onesiphorus all good that
could happen to him which as yet, he possessed not, and so shows there was no
good to be expected for the dead, but either what they have before prayers, or
else are to receive (...) the day of Judgment.

10. In his eighth Number he goes over this Text anew, and says, or rather
grants, that indeed it is the common phrase of Christians to speak so, but that
as it cannot be inferred thence that the wicked go not to Hell before that day,
no more can it be in^ed that the just commonly receive not their reward before
that day. But the difference of the two (...) is very manifest. For the damning
of the wicked is not proposed to us as a thing to be desired and effected by
our prayers, and therefore concerns not us when it is done. But the Reward of
our Benefactours is proposed to be gained by our prayers, and therefore we
ought to know what to pray for; and he confesses that Universally the phrase,
which is the witness o^ our thoughts and of what we are taught, runs so as to
wish good in the day of Judgment. The consequence therefore is most infallible,
and in a manner belonging to Tradition, that all our prayer for the dead must
be that they may receive their reward at the day of Judgment. For although
Tradition does not expressly teach the Negative, yet because it Universally
teaches the positive to pray for good at the last day, it follows clearly that
the position putting another time is added to Tradition; and being in a matter
that depends of Revelation, and therefore cannot be known but by Tradition, it
appears not only to be a Nov^ but also ungrounded, and not to be followed. I
must here note how your Divine who heretofore asked for but (...) A^r who
should say that the acceleration of the day of judgment was that which we were
to pray for, can here tell you that such speeches ^re in most common use, and
that the usual phras^ ru^s of this day; that, as the (...) of speech is so
usual in Scripture, it is no wonder that the Fathers and our Liturgies do
sometime make use of it: Where you shall see a gradation made, that in
Scripture it is the usual phrase, but the Father's and Liturgies do sometime
make use of it; As if the Fathers did not usually speak as the Scriptures, not
the Liturgies were made by the Fathers, and at least follow their customs,
though every man of judgment cannot choose but see the use of Fathers and
Liturgies must of necessary be the same with the Scriptures whence they are
taken; which were it confessed, as it is evident, what Testimony could I desire
at his hands greater then this?

11. N. 7. he impugns the Text taken from the tenth to the Hebrew^, where the
Apostle threatens a Purgation of (...) to them who (...) after Baptism; which
Bellarmin is forced to gloss against the Text, to avoid No^^tus his Error. For
whereas the Text speaks of a fire that should feed upon those who were not
quite contrary to God, which words cannot be understood of any ^^re but
Purgatory fire, he very freely without any ground of the Text, and only
because otherwise it will not stand with his opinion, takes no notice of the
properties which particularise this fire, and by his own Authority puts in Hell
fire, and a distinction of the effects of these two fires, to which sense a
Cable is not strong enough to draw the words.

12. In his ninth and tenth Paragraphs, he impugns the Texts taken out of St.
Matthew and St. Luk^, concerning agreeing with our Adversary in the way, that
is, in our life time, that we may not be delivered to the eternal Judge: And he
thinks we urge this Text for not reflecting upon the particular Judgment at the
hour of death, and I cannot well deny it. For I do not remember that in any
place of Scripture Christ is called Judge in regard of the next World, but
either at his Refurrection, or at the last day. And besides what passes at
man's death, I ^^ke to be very improperly called Judgment; and, if it were a
true Judgment, this Formality of your Adversaries delivering you ^ver to the
Judge, I do not know that any one attributes to particular Judgment; Which
circumstances, though they were pressed where he found the Argument, he totally
neglected and presses for himself those words of being sent to a Prison, there
to remain until he pay the last farthing. This says he, is most unnaturally
spoken of the day of Judgment* after which there remains no prison but eternal.
And his discour^^ were good, if this delivery of our Savior were not
Allegorica^; that is, a human expression of things above human reach, and
therefore not to be expected to be verified entirely to the material word:
which taken away, it signifies no more then at the day of Judgment the sinners
shall be punished without remission. But to think there shall be other Prison
then the man's own guilt, or other to^rer then his own knowledge and conscie^, is
to be proved not supposed. And why this must require length of time more then
what precedes the sentence, and of the which the sentence is the approbation as
of all the rest that shall be executed all that day, I expect some better
declaration before* I frame a new Judgment properly so called, without any
ground in Scripture or Antiquity.

13. In his eleventh Number he treats the famous place taken out of the third
Chapter of the first to the Corinths, but so as if he aimed not to give the
sense of it, but only to wave the force from his opinion, no matter how much
against the words themselves. For it being agreed between parties that the
Apostle speaks of the day o^ Judgment, and of material fire, yet he has three
solutions. First that it is meant of no material fire, but of the fire of the
district Judgment. But this is to prevaricate against themselves, who agree
there is a true material fire at that day, which is the faith of all
Christians, and the Apostles words are plain, that that great day shall be
revealed in fire. Now so far being the common* Faith of Christians, it is
against all sense to say this is not the fire which shall try the works of all
men. For the Apostle gives for proof or ground why all men's works shall be
tried by fire, because (says he) that day shall be revealed in fire. What a
strange perversion then of the Text is it to make the Apostle make this
Argument. The day of Judgment shall be revealed in material and elemental fire
therefore the works of men shall be tried by Gods judgment or spiritual
districtness; and yet this is the sense given to the Apostles words by this
Interpretation. His second Interpretation is, that the meaning is, the sinners
shall be saved as it were by fire, but fire precedent to the fire of Judgment,
and this explication (...) more against the Text then the other. For this
ground which the Apostle takes, that the day of Judgment shall be revealed in
fire, can be no more brought for the cause why the sinners works shall be tried
by a precedent fire, then why they shall be tried by Gods judgment. And
besides, the Apostle so expressly says that every ones work shall be tried by
the fire in that day, or, of that day, that nothing can be spoken more plainly
against the Text, then to say it is meant of another fire which went before.
Likewise that speech that whose work abides the fire he shall be rewarded, but
if any man's burn, he shall suffer detriment, is plainly spoken of the fire of
that day, so that such an interpretation is a plain corruption. And no less can
be said of his third explication, that the meaning is, that the fire shall
manifest, that is, show what was done before, but not do any thing. For those
words If any man's work burns, he shall suffer detriment, cannot be understood
of what was passed before the day of Judgment, but of what is done in that day.
And therefore the trying he speaks of must necessarily be the working of the
fire upon the sinners works: so that it is evident he and his Bellarmin do not
explicate, but corrupt the Text against the plain words of the Apostle.

14. The ninth Text concerning the Remission of sin in the next world, is
brought to show, that some sin remains truly in Purgatory to be purged, and
that if only pains are put in Purgatory, it is no Purgatory. This consequence
we handled before, when he pressed we put no Purgatory because there was
nothing purged until the day of Judgment, Chapter 17. N. 4. Where I showed how he
himself acknowledges that there must be something that has the nature of a
Blemish, that purgation be necessary. His first objection is that Calvin uses
this Argument. I answer it was the fault of them who explicated Purgatory as
Bellarmin and he does, to give such an advantage to Heretics by evil
explicating our Faith, that their argument though otherwise weak against Faith,
yet are demonstrative against it in their Explications. His second solution is
to fall into that condemned Heresy, that after the souls are perfectly purged,
yet they remain in Purgatory. For he will needs put a most intense act of
charity and contrition, for the first act of the soul separated, which expels
the guilt of Venial sin; and by consequence, the souls after they be purged,
remain to be tormented. Besides, he does not reflect that if this act can
deserve the Remission of the sin, it can also the Remission of all pain, which
Doctors assign to perfect Contrition. His third solution is, that by the name
of sin is to be understood lyability to punishment: Which is very true if it be
taken proportionally as it ought, for there can be neither sin without pain due
to it, nor owing of pain but by s^n; But the mystery is, that he will not
understand this, though a man should beat it into him with a pestil; but will,
if you say the sin is not wholly remitted as long as pains are due for it, cite
you I know not how many Texts of Councils against you, and yet now he can cite
out of St. Thomas, that the Remission of the pain belongs to the entire
Remission of the sin, and promises he will show it to be the sense of the
Fathers; which I shall be thankful to him for, because it is a most plain
truth. But yet I cannot allow his consequence, that when our Savior says that
a Sin shall not be forgiven either in this World or in the next, it must in
this World signify guilt, and in the other only pain. For our Savior does not
use to make his words straddle so wide, as within three words, and continuing
the same proposition to make a double sense of the same word. He concludes that
hitherto his Adversaries have brought no Demonstration. Which whether it be
true or no, let wiser men then judge: I can only say, that he has solved no
one Authority with any colorable answer, but either by falling into Errors,
or abusing the words of Scripture by Paraphrases or inconsequent explications,
which are easily made appear to any one who attentively reads my Replies.

FOURTH DIVISION, Containing an Answer to his nineteenth Chapter.
The Testimonies from Fathers and Antiquiquity brought for the Authors
Doctrine, in his Book of the Middle State, maintained to be assertive of it; and
the Adversary's Interpretations shown to be most weak and senceless distortions
of their words and meanings.

1. HE begins his nineteenth Chapter with the Comparison of the multitude of
Fathers he has brought to the paucity of mine. To which I have nothing to say,
for a comparison ought not to be made before both parts are seen, and he will
have the Reader judge before he has made any discussion of mind. Let the
Reader therefore remember what is passed concerning his Fathers, which he
professes to have cited plentifully, to wit, one class of them who speak of
our Saviors Resurrection in which we are more forward then he, that all souls
were then delivered, Another class of such Testimonies as are confessedly
Erroneous and Heretical. The rest of Fathers speaking in common what we both
agree in, unless St. Julian of whom I cannot pronounce, having not seen the
Books: Lastly, certain stories which some Fathers mention, your great Divine
making no difference betwixt the stating of Divinity, and telling of news, but
parallelling what a Father says he heard, to what the Church receives from
Jesus Christ and his Apostles. Is not this think you a goodly score to vaunt so
much of? He adds, for the last thousand years, not so much as a whisper of any
one Father. In what age then lived Alacinus, St. Anselm, and St. Thomas, who
are cited for holding the Fire of Judgment to be the fire of Purgatory, and
were in a manner the beginners of the Scholemen?

2. In his second Number he comes to the objections. Before I begin them, I
must give you a short note of the state of the question. You are therefore to
take notice of two famous propositions in Antiquity, which modern use has much
relinquished. The one is, that in the primitive Church the day of Judgment was
hotly proposed to Christians, as in which both rewards and punishments were to
be expected; Whereas now adays all the preaching almost tends to the present
going to Heaven or to Hell. And this is so plain thathe himself renders causes
why it was so: The second Doctrine was, that because some souls needed purging,
and this was apprehended to depend of Judgment, also the day in which the
rewards or punishments were given, was deputed for the purging of the souls
which needed purgation. This purging was by the Saints generally taken to be
done by fire, and therefore of the last conflagration; and other purging we hear
not of, until private Revelations took Authority to build Divinity, new
Principles; since which time almost all the Devotion of the Latin Church runs
after the delivery of souls from present pains of fire, which the Greek Church
professed in the Council of Florence not to have heard of. But as in the former
proposition, the difference betwixt Antiquity, and the present use makes not
either reprehensible, so in this later question there is no formal opposition,
but the Essence Purgatory is conserved in both, to wit, that some souls are in
torment until they be delivered: But Antiquity makes no mention of any
delivery, but at the day of Judgment. Our later Revelations make irregular
deliveries upon diverse occasions. Now what I aim at in the citation of Fathers,
is to show that the Test^ brought out of them for purging of souls, all, or
generally speak of the day o^ Judgment: so that as to the Fathers the question
is all one, if whether there be a Purgatory, and whether the souls be released
at the day of Judgment; and all the Authorities which prove Purgatory fire, be
such as to prove that fire to be at the day of Judgment. Whence it follows,
that who will put a Remission before, must look for Fathers who say that
directly, and not rely upon the common speeches. Farther, the question is of
that nature that it depends from solid Revelation out of Scripture or
Tradition, and no less Authority is able to make it a Schola^^cal Doctrine. It
is likewise to be noted, that because the cry of Antiquity is for the day of
Judgment, it signifies not that some sew shall suffer that fire, but that all,
good and bad, better and worse, every one shall from that fire reap their
deserts, the good rewarded, the bad damned, the middle ^ort purged. This
solution therefore that some few shall be purged by that fire, is excluded by
the Universality, which because it includes all others, good and bad, must
include likewise the purgable part.

3. His first Reply is against my citing Saint Basil, and Saint Hierome, to
explicate the Baptism of fire to be the Fire of Judgment. He answers, Bellarmin
cites these Fathers for the fire of Purgatory. Wherein I note two weaknesses;
the one, that he takes Bellarmin to be some Oracle not to be contradicted; for
otherwise he should have been bound to show that Bellarmi^ had done it solidly,
and not only that he had done it. But the more concerning weakness is* that he
understands not the question. For I also cite this Text for the fire of
Purgatory; seeing that I say the fire of Judgment is the only purging fire. We
are like to have good solutions from this man who marks not what the question
is. Such a one is that which he cites of Ven^rable Bid, who, as far as can be
seen in the words, says, some men explicate Purgatory fire of the tribulations
of this life, whereof St. Austin is one.

4. In his third Number he plays us the like trick. For whereas we cite three
F^thers, not the Scripture, he answers what St. Hierom says is the meaning of
that place of Scripture, which is nothing to our question, but what the cited
Fathers say, whom he tur^s over with his old song, that some shall be purged by
that fire, without giving any ground out of the Fathers words for it. St.
Austins Testimonies he here omits, peradventure he will remember them
afterward. He goes on to St. Denis, whom I cite, to show that all the good to
be expected for the dead, was to be expected at the day of Judgment, because
the prayers for the dead tend to that effect. This he cavils at, as if I made
the consequence that therefore happiness might not be hoped for before, whereas
I only say that our intentions are directed to that day as is before
explicated.

5. I cited farther Origin, St. Ambrose, St. Hilary, Lactantius, St. Hierom,
and Rupertus, all most manifestly declaring the trying and purging of the last
fire. But he has a salve for all sores, to wit, Bellarmin says, that by the
name of fire is understood Gods exact Judgment. I wonder a man of his worth can
be so silly, as to think Bellarmin's ver, dict without alleging other proof
must pass for a demonstration. The man is one who has taken much pains, and
labored for the Church of God, and it grieves me to be forced to diminish any
way his credit, but this impertinent manner of proceeding obliges me to
remember, what Possevinus of his own order said of him, to wit, that
Stapleton's solutions were better then his. And for the present, his solution
is particularly absurd out of this head, that seeing both these truths are
acknowledged, that there is at the Judgment-day real fire, and district
Judgment; the one naturally signified by the word fire, the other improperly;
where there is no occasion to understand the word improperly, it is doubly
absurd to take it so* both because it violenteth the nature of the word, and
brings a calumny against the reality of true fire in Judgment; and because it
makes the speeches of Saints improper* without any ground or necessity. He
cites St. Gregory Nyss^^ again; but because it is certain his works;
particularly that which he insists upon, are corrupted by the Origenists, whose
Error that was, which this good Divine offers us for water of life, as is
heretofore declared, I need not trouble my self about him. He takes notice of a
place of Origin cited by me, in which he says the pain^ of Hell may cleanse him
whom the Apostolical Doctrine could not, and he says this is Origen's, Error of
purging men in Hell after Judgment, and I will not peremptorily deny it, since
it is certain he held that Error which his followers have sprinkled in St.
Gregory Nyssen's his work, but I may freely say that it is not known out of
these words whether it be or no: For Orig^ held the fire which began in
Judgment, to become afterward the fire of Hell. So that the word Gehennae, or
of Hell must not be explicated of Purgatory, but truly of Hell; but materially,
as the fire which will be Hell fire.

6. He taxes another place of Origin, N. 6. where Origin says, that in the
second Resurrection sinners are purged by burning, which he says is against us;
because we say that smarting in fire is punishing, not purging, which I
acknowledge to be very true. But Origin says, that the fire he speaks of
consumes what ever he ^ad of Wood, Hay, S^ubble; and this is plainly purging,
and as plain, saying that the sinner brought this to the second Resurrection.
After this he brings for himself Origen's known Error, that some are longer,
others shorter time purging after the Resurrection, for that is known to be his
meaning.

7. Number 7. He explicates those words of Tertullian, Modico quoque delicto
mora resurrectionis expenso: In English, Every small fault paid for by the
delay of Resurrection; That is (says he) in the interval betwixt Death and
Resurrection. But I would willingly know of him, by what Grammar an ablative
case governed by expenso can signify the same, as if the Preposition in were
added. If it be governed by expenso, Mora was that which was weighed against
the sin. If it be not governed of expenso, what is weighed against the sin? If
it be lawful for him to make new Latin Rules and Phrases to make the Fathers
speak for him, I do not wonder at his great bragging of his Fathers and
Councils; For there is no more to be done, then to say, These words shall
signify my opinion, as he has often done already. Nor needs he to bring his
Examples of in this year. For the ^ore is in the Latin which wants an in, which
he puts in the English example.

8. His abusing of Saint Cyprian is much worse, whose words he translates so.
It is one thing to stand (before the Tribunal of Mercy) for pardon, and quite
another thing to come presently to Glory: It is one thing to be cast into
Prison without going thence until the last farthing be paid; and quite another
thing to receive presently the reward of Faith and Virtue. It is one thing, by
a long grief of torments to be cleansed from their sins, and to be purged for a
long time by fire, and another thing by sufferance to have purged all their
sin. It is one thing to hang in suspense concerning the sentence of our Lord in
the Day of (their) Judgment, and another thing to be presently crowned by our
Lord. In this Translation, He puts in two words, the first before the Tribunal
of Mercy; the other Their which break the sense of St. Cyprian, for other
faults I mark not. We must first note that all this is spoken of the next
World, as the antithesis proves. For, to come presently to Glory is in the next
World, so then must also be the waiting for Pardon, which he explicates to
stand before the Tribunal of Grace for Pardon, whereas it signifies no more
then as yet not to be pardoned. Again, what the Saint calls to pendere in die
Judicii ad sententiam Domini, which signifies plainly to depend of the sentence
our Lord shall give in the Day of Judgment, he translates to hang in suspense
concerning the Sentence of our Lord in the Day of [their] Judgment. So that by
false translating and adding, he changes the whole mind of St. Cyprian, because
it will not fail with his opinion; And against all sense, puts one part of the
Antithesis in this world, and the other in the next. What Saint Cyprian speaks
plainly of the Day of Judgment, by adding their he makes it to be spoken of the
Day of Death. For it is plain the Day of Judgment taken without determination,
signifies the last Day, the private Judgment being called so, neither properly
nor at all, without one explicate himself to signify so much. He objects, to
excuse his violence by necessity, that the Souls of Purgatory are not in
suspense of their Sentence. It is answered, not S. Cyprian, but he only uses
that expression; And that there is no doubt but that the Souls in Purgatory
depend for their delivery from the Sentence of that Day, which is the natural
sense of the place. He would fain persuade his Auditory, that this place is
against us, because there is an expression of length of time, as if I held that
time stood still betwixt the death of a Sinner, and the Day of Judgment.

9. In the next testimony cited out of Saint Chrysostom, telling us that One
siphorus should have his reward in that dreadful day when we shall stand in
need of much mercy, his Solution does so waver, that it is hard to find where it
lies. As to that part that One siphorus shall then receive his reward, he seems
to say nothing, but rather to deny that most faithful men shall need mercy at
that day; whereas, it is not only St. Chrysostom's, nor only Saint Hierom's,
or Saint Hillary's, whom he cited when he would persuade us that we should not
pray for the acceleration of that day, chap. 17 Nu: 21. but the apprehension of
all the Christian World, and for this reason, because (...) must then render an
account of ^ll our actions, Saint Hillary specifies of every idle word; And
here denying their standing in need of mercy, he infers, that then they must be
in a sad condition until then. How will he excuse this from being a
contradicting the general apprehension of the Church? But the good man seems to
be afraid, that if we pray for mercy at that day, we should pray to have none
before: a very superficial and weak consequence; seeing the means ^o have mercy
then is to have mercy in other things beforehand, and that the mercy there
will not hinder the foregoing mercies, but rather complete and increase them.

10. Lastly he comes to St. Augustine, and first to a place in which St.
Augustine says that at the Day of Judgment, those who have not Christ as a
Foundation are condemned, those who build upon that Foundation Wood, Hay, and
Stubble, are punished (for that is the force of the Latin emendantur) that is,
purged; His answer is, that they are said to be purged by that fire, because
that last fire by not touching them, shows them to be formerly sufficiently
purified. Is not this a very curious explication; they are punished, id est,
not touched; they are purged, id est, not purified. If these be good
explications, let that pass for good also, that a Poet making an Argument to
the first Chapter of Saint Matthew* wrote Pri^^ipium vita Christi lib^r
a^stinetiste; and set in the margin Absti^et, i. e. c^^tinet.

11. The next Text of St. Austi^ tells us, that the fire of Judgment divides
betwixt the carnal People who are to be d^ed, and the car^al who are to be
saved. Yes, says your answerer, by not touching them; or, if it does touch
some, quickly dispatchi^g. But this fine Solution is against the word Carnal,
which signifyes that there is in them purifying matter, which is not in
spiritual ones. His second Solution, by not refu^ing the universality of the
word carnales, admits that this fire belongs to all c^r^ales sal^^nd^s, as well
as to all carnales ^s.

12. There follow two places out of St. Austin, in which St. Austin says that
in the Day of Judgment the sins of some are to be remitted; which he easily
puts off by saying those some are such as die so lately that they have not been
purged. But the evil luck is, that St. Austin makes this Argument in the later
place, that unless this were so, there would be no remis^in of si^s in the next
world. Which is to say, that all that are remitted in the next world, are
remitted in the Day of Judgment; which is invincibly to say there i^ no
re^ission of (...) before that d^y i^ the ^^xt wo^ld. A^ ^a^^ Argument is repe^
in the ne^t ^itation, to which he ^nswers, he verily thinks that it is spoken
not of remission, b^t of ^a^^festati^n. How rationally he thinks so, you may
judge ou^ of Christ*s words, which are, shall not be remitted in this world,
nor in the next. Did any man ever hear such a hobling construction, as to make
the same word remittetur, not as much as repeated, joined to in this world, to
signify true remission, and joined to in the next world, to signify
^^nifestation? Have we not need to study Grammar again, to understand so
obscure speeches? As for Pope Gregory, I cannot remember his very words, yet as
far as I do remember them, they reach only to prove that there is a r^ion in
the next world; but not that it is made at the Day of Judgment.

1^. The last Text of St. Austin is, that in what state a man dies, in that he
will be found the last Day. This ^e says we esteem much, and I think with good
reason, for the words are plain. His Solution is, that after this life there is
no more merit, nor demerit, which he proves to be St. Austin's opinion; but
needed not, for we not only agree, but hold it more rigorously th^^ he and his
Bell^rmin whom he cites. But we question what has that position to do with
these words, I^ what condition every (...) l^st day fi^ds him, in the same
shall the worlds last day catch him. For these words signify no kind of change
to be made in him, and not only concerning merit and demerit. Likewise the
following words are, For such as in that day he departs, such in the last day
shall he be judged. Which sentence plainly says, if he dies impure and
deserving to be purged, the last day shall find him impure and deserving to be
purged; what stories soever Bellarmin tells us of another thing.

14. There follows ^^ffinus his Testimony, which of it self might have been
common to both opinions, if it had not clearly alluded to the words of St.
Paul, which he and Bellarmin with him acknowledge to be spoken of the day of
Judgment, and which by consequence draw the words of Ruffinus to be meant of
the same. To E^cheri^s Lugdun^^^is he answers, that he has showed his words
are against us; and there where he endeavored to show this, that is, Chapter 7. N.
8. I have answered his proof. Only I must note that he cites the words for St.
Austin's, whereas it is clear they are not; nor that homily, of which the one
half where these words are, is taken out of E^cheri^s, and therefore the whole
Homily must be of an Author later then St. Eucherius, whence his pressing of
St. Austin's other places to confirm this, is nothing to the purpose.

15. He concludes his Chapter with saying, there is no one Authority alleged
by which it is made clear that every one, though he died never so long since,
is to be detained in Purgatory until the last day, though he had but one
Venial sin to answer for. In which words there are so many circumstances, that
it were indeed very hard to find the proposition formally, and in terminis in
Scripture or Fathers. Therefore I deem it enough for me, if I find that the
faithful who die in sin, without exception, must be purged by the fire of
Judgment; if I find no mention of any ending of purging but by this fire; nay,
if I find that there is no remission of sin in the next world, unless it be at
the day of Judgment; and, finally, if I find the whole direction of Scripture
and Fathers publicly to be to that day, without any mention of any change in
the Interim. This I think enough for me, and plainly enough laid down, since
your Divine has not given a plausible solution to any one place of Scripture
or Father alleged. He confesses the trial by fire, but puts it to be a
manifestation, against the force of the words, without other reason then
because it would be against his opinion: He confesses the Universal direction
to be to the day of Judgment; He confesses there is no true Remission of sin in
the next world, unless it be in the first instant, or be, as we say with the
Fathers, in the day of Judgment. What can I ask more? unless it be, how the
fire acts upon the good and bad. For he not putting it to have this force by
preparing their Bodies to Resurrection, must of necessity make some fine
procession of all who rise thorough this fire, and a great discretion in it to
know which it must touch, and which not, and how much every one must suffer,
and when it will be time to end the dance, and tumble with the wicked down to
Hell, which will make a curious piece to contemplate; and so I must expect his
farther leisure, and prepare my self to his next Chapter.

FIFTH DIVISION. Containing an Answer to his twentieth Chapter.
Of Vindicative Justice, and in what sense it is transferrible to God. His
Ignorances and Mistakes of our D^ctrin and Arguments. Why Fire cannot be an
Instrument to torment Spirits. His rare Mystery of surcea^ing from Action by
pure cessation, and of Obediential Power.

1. THough his twentieth Chapter bear in the front of its title, to answer the
objection of Novelty, yet it discourses of other circumstances. As that Pope
Gregory puts not any to go to Heaven, but only to be delivered out of pains,
and Venerable Bede the like; out of which we do not infer Novelty, but Error
and want of Authority in the Revelations they bring. For Alcuinus I do not
remember I cited him for any such matter; but, for the opinion it self, to be
for us. Nor do we make this consequence because Abel went not to Heaven,
therefore others go not now; but only by this example re^ute the importunity
he makes from the length of Time. He says no man can deny that St. Anselm and
St. Thomas, held this delivery out of Purgatory, and brings for witness his
first Number of the tenth Chapter, where there is nothing but stories written
in the two Saints lives, which to take for their Authorities is a great
mistake. For the Authority of those stories belongs to the writers of the
lives; who how prudent and exact they are, and by how many hands they received
them, are guesses in the air. I was told within this week a story, how the
Devil fetched away a Minister at Zurick. It was read me out of a Letter of a man
against whom I had no exceptions, but because it came thorough more hands,
neither he to whom it was written, nor I could find faith enough to trust it.

2. As to his defense that their opinion is not new, I remit my self to (...)
Answers in the places he cites; that is (...) Answers of the fifth and sixth
Number, Chap. 9. his N. 12. Chapter 7. N. 11. and 12. Chapter 5. N. 11. and 12. Chapter 14.
And as to his solid Judgment that those proofs are sufficient to make this
opinion be defined for an Article of Faith, if it be not already, as of one
side the Church expects no new Faith since the Apostles time, so on the
otherside what he brings in his fifteenth Chapter is not able to make his
opinion as much as probable. For the matter being a matter not knowable of his
side but by Revelation, seeing it depends wholly upon Gods free counsel and
will, beyond our reach otherwise then by Revelation, so it must needs follow
that the Verdicts of all men who go not out of solid Revelations, are the
Verdicts of blind men judging of colors.

3. In his second Number, he tells his Reader as concerning whether God sets
pains purely vindicative, that we dressup old Arguments in new Clothes, the
which I must needs confess to be a custom not only laudable, but necessary.
For, otherwise, no Argument that were old could be good, whereas experience
teaches that oftentimes they are the best, and by the regular course of nature
they must be so, for what is strongest endures the longest. But let us look
into his process* (...) cites out of the Supplement two Arguments to prove
there are no pains in Hell, and concludes, Thus you see these Arguments do the
Devil as good service in taking away Hell, as they do our Adversaries to take
away our Purgatory. So that your Gentleman, after he has spent so large a
book, to make people believe that the pains of Purgatory are not so great as we
make them, now will persuade the world we take away pains out of Purgatory. Who
would have believed that toward the end of the book we should be put to lay
open the question? I pray then take notice, that (as (...) have before also
declared) we put the pains of Purgatory to be the very same that they do, only
longer, and by more connatural means, and of their natures stronger and more
powerfully tormenting. The question betwixt us is only about the Instruments
and manner of effecting these Torments. Wherefore if the Supplement gives
answers common to Hell and our Controversy, they are to be suspected not to be
solid, or rather, not well applied to our case.

4. To open therefore the particular case so it stands. Where men live under
Government, by the course of Law certain actions or things are due from one
Fellow-citizen to another, these are as well negative as positive, as it is
equally due not to hurt my neighbor, as to pay him what I ow him. If I offend
by not giving him his due, the Magistrate forces me to observe the equality,
and keep Commu^ative justice as they call it; but, if I hurt my neighbor, then
the Magigistrate himself imposes a penalty upon me, either in purse or body;
and this is said to be Distributive Justice, and particularly vin^ative. Ask
the reason of it, ^^is because I have offended the Magistrate. For if I had
only offended my neighbor, Restitution, that is ^ative Justi^^ had satisfied
him. In what then is the Magistrate o^^ended? Why, the good of the Magistrate,
as he is a Magistrate, is to have his Government not hindered, but easy to him.
Now his Government becomes easy when every one does as he should do, and when
they do otherwise, his Government becomes difficult, both because he is gorced
to put his own hand to hard work; and because the example, if the offender be
not punished* makes others prompt to do the like. Here you see two reasons
making Vindicative Justi^e prudent and good* but both reasons concern the
common Wealth. There is in private men a third occasion of Revenge; which is,
that a harm done to a private man, makes him angry, that is grieved, and as it
were sick for the time, and this he seeks to amend by Revenge. This is plainly
the Revenge of fools, as proceeding out of passion, not of reason: but it is
the most spectable in human Conversation. By this a sensible man will easily
understand, that if Revenge be to be attributed to God, the translation is to
be made from the first sort of Revenge, which because it i^ rational, may by
reason be transferred to God who works, like the Author of Reason, according
to Reason; and not out of the second which grows out of passion, and is an
affection of the Beast that i^ in ^an joined to Reason. Notwithstanding this ^o
so plain, nevertheless weak Divines make the Translation from the later, not
distinguishing the one from the other, because of the common name, leaping from
word to word, without considering the different fignification. Taking therefore
Revenge to be an act of Justice, and Justice to be (...) Virtue, they think the
beastly act of Revenge to be a virtuous action, and attribute it to God.

5. Now to descend to the Answers of the Arguments out of the Supplement; it is
plai^ that the Author makes the pains of Hell not purely Vindicative, because
he says they are ordered for the correction of those who are now in the Church.
And when he says that the exercise of Divine Justice is grateful to God for
its own sake, who can doubt but that he speaks of a rational exercise which is
done for some end? Likewise that he says that the punishment of sinners
rejoices the Saints, it is plainly true, (...) this makes the pains not to be
purely Vindicative, and therefore are nothing to my Argument, which speaks
only of such kind of pains, for of others there is no question; and if there
were any, it would press us more then them to answer them. But the question
betwixt us and your Divine, is of the quality of the punishment, and the manner
of executing them, and that special end to satisfy Gods Justice as they take
it. For they explicate Gods Justice not as it regards the square and frame of
the world, but abstractedly from circumstances, they think one act to be good,
another to be bad of its own nature, and that God is bound to give a reward to
good acts, and punishment to bad ones, purely out of a virtue whose nature it
is so to do, which is called* Justice. We on the contrary side put acts to be
good or bad, in order first to the Doer, afterward to Neighbors, in both to
the End they were made for, and the Fabric of Causes ordered to bring them to
their Ends. This is the difference specially touching this point of Vindicative
Justice, which they apply to the acts immediately, we proportion to the ends of
Persons and the whole World. Conformable to this rises another difference,
that we put the punishments of the next world to spring connaturally out of the
behavior of the Persons in this World, and so can give some account of their
Quality. They put the punishments to be chosen by an ^^bitrary esteem of God
Almighty, which is neither revealed, nor is there any Ladder to climb so high
as to have a s^ght of it: to help which defect they bring us Revelations, some
of which may be proper, some allegorical, all imperfect, uncertain, and
ungrounded, having nothing for the most part, but the word of some one Person
in a trance, or some other doubtful plight.

6. Hence you see that the Arguments of the Supplement are so far from being
ours, that we stand more obliged to solve them then they, for they are against
torments in General, and concern Revenge in the first signification, and our
Arguments are against Revenge in the bestial meaning, and against this
voluntary framing of torments; and therefore he is deceived, when in ^his third
Number he says our two best proofs are solved: For they are not as much as
touched. And to answer them he must not show that pains in common, but this
quality of pains, is profitabler then if they were natural, which he never goes
about; and, for the other part, that it is rational to do them for pure
Revenge, he shows plainly he understands not what what is objected, framing his
answer in his fourth Number, about Revenge inco^n, and showing out of that
common place, not that pure Revenge is rational, but that Revenge for a farther
end is good. For all that is spoken of Revenge in common is questionless
fulfilled in that branch, whereas pure Revenge is an irrational and unfitting
action.

7. In his fifth Number he attempts to solve an objection which truly does
inv^^cibly confute that principle that to every good act is due a Reward, and
to every ill one a Punishment. The Argument is that the best deeds are in
Heaven, the worst in Hell, neither rewarded. His answer is, that the time of
merit and demerit is passed; which is true; but nothing to the purpose. For
nevertheless it quelleth that Principle in common; that to every act a
proportionable payment is due. Therefore the ground of their Doctrine is false,
and they must make pains due to sins for some farther end, that is, by rational
Revenge not for pure Revenge.

8. Number sixth, he treats an objection which he mistakes. For, because in
explicating corporal torments, we said that by diversion they were alleviated
or hindered; (as it is written in the life of St. T^; that when his L^^ was to
be ^ear'd, ^etting himself to study hard, he (...) not the burning;) he
imagined the same to be meant of abstracted spirits, and that they could also
divert themselves; whereas before he acknowledges for my Doctrine, that acts are
unchangeable in pure Spirits: and our of this apprehension he teaches us, that
some actions are voluntary, but not free, a Doctrine true, but not to the
purpose. My Argument then is out of the Doctrine of St. Thomas, taken by most
Divines for an Axiom, that the will cannot be forced. And the demonstration of
it is plain and set down in St. Thomas: Because force is against the
inclination of the Person or nature forced, the Will is the inclination of the
person said to be forced; therefore the act of the will is still according to
the inclination, and by consequence never forced. This is so plain, that every
common Divine knows it; and yet so mistaken by him that he distinguishes not
between doing an outward action at which a Spirit wilfully grieves, and the
making by force an Action of the will: and upon this score, sets in array a
squadron of places of Scripture to fight against a shadow.

9. Number seventh, he advances another question, to wit, why the omnipote^t a^
should not have power by himself, or other i^strument to make in the soul an
afflictive Q^^lity? I gave you three answers. One, for want of a subject; for
in the Will there can be nothing but voluntary, since voluntary signifies no
more then the act of man's inclination. The second Answer is, because there are
no such Entities as you call Species or qualities makeable, as every one who
knows more then trivial Philosophy can tell you; And thirdly, because God is no
hangman, but has all nature to serve him when he pleases to punish a creature,
and defiles not his own hands with such actions. He steps on to fire, and asks
why that cannot torment a soul by some unknown way to us? I answer because it
cannot burn us, for all that put fire, put burning; but, burming, seeing it is
the dissolution of a thing that has parts, cannot by all the Invention he can
give to God, be in a thing that has no parts; therefore fire cannot torment but
Metaphorically. He says our Arguments have a thousand times been solved, but
because he takes not the pains to repeat either the Arguments or Solutions, I
also may pass them in silence. Mine be in the eleventh account of my book of
the Middle State of souls. He may assign the solutions where he pleases. Only
to his saying, They are solved, I must oppose my word, that they neither are,
nor can be to sensible men, that have not speculated beyond all reason. He
objects St. Austin. I answer St. Austin affirms nothing of this point, but
only presses an Argument of the Unity of the body and soul. I answer,
Philosophers affirm that Union to be of Actus and Potentia, and that such an
one cannot be betwixt a Spirit and Fire. The meaning of those words, and the
reason why the same cannot be said of fire, here is no place to declare; It is
enough they are Terms common in the School.

10. He proceeds to prove, that at least there is corporal fire in Hell,
because our Savior shall say to the damned, Depart from me you accursed into
eternal fire, prepared for the Devil, and his Angels. Another man would have
proved out of this place, that there was no corporeal fire in Hell. For what
can be more incongruously taken, then to say, that one had prepared corporeal
fire to punish Spirits withal? Wherefore this qualification of prepared for
the Devil does clearly manifest the fire to be spiritual. If one, who found his
Garden dried with the hot Sun, should send to Londen to buy a Penknife to
water it withal, would not any man that heard it judge him to be mad? This
sport he makes with God Almighty, telling us that, when he would punish pure
Spirits, he took corporeal fire, which is far less fit for such an effect, then
a Penknife to water a Gurden. And yet Christ expresses, that the fire, into
which the damned were sent, was fit to punish Angels, that is, nothing less
then corporeal fire. As for his Testimony from the Author of the Dialogues, I
hope to have a time to answer it more largely then is here fitting.

11. He presses farther St Julian's words, that no wise man denies the souls of
Reprobates to be detained in fire. But to have made an Argument, he should have
added the word corporeal. For truly the Scripture so frequently using the word
of fire, it is not for a good Christian to deny the word; which were to affront
both the Scriptures, and all such as ^se, without examination, the same words:
But yet it is the part of a Divine, to admit of the literal word, and understand
the sense so, that it may stand with God's Wisdom. As for Bellarmin, and
Maldonatus's censures of temerity for resisting the consent of Schoolmen, I
have answered it fully in my MUSCARIUM, Ventilatione deci^^, to which I remit
my Reader: For such questions, amongst ignorant people, are ^ot to be much
handled. He presses farther, how our explication of Torments is not convenient.
As to that of loss of past pleasures, he says their state sets them above it.
In the which he shows himself ignorant of the nature of material sin: for it
does subject the soul to things under its worth, and therefore is sin; and this
subjection is far greater in Hell, then in this World. As to the delay of
future glory, he says we forget our selves to make that grieve the Souls, since
it is but one moment, though it were of Millions of Ages. Nor can I deny, that
I forget my self sometimes in speaking truths to them, who are not capable of
them. Therefore I entreat him for the present, to put instead of delay, the not
having of glory, and if he pleases he may add, while so much time ran: for all
this he knows to be my constant Doctrine, that the Soul knows, and grieves for.
And as for farther explication, he himself has remitted us to his 22. Chapter.
As for disordina^^ affections remaining, he says there are none, as he has
proved: but we replied, It was Heresy to put Purgatory without them.

12. In his twelfth Number ne seems something to stumble at his fire, because
the Grecians explicate it a fire not combustive; and the good man does not
perceive, that that signifies no corporeal fire. For, as if one should say a
knife, but not made to cut; a beetle, but not made to maul; an eye, but not
made to see; it were plain he must needs take away the essence of the thing
signified by the word, and by consequence the property of the speech: so he
that says a fire, but not a burning one, clearly speaks of no material fire.
For Fire is as properly an instrument of Burning, as a Beetle of knocking, or a
Knife of cutting.

13. In this thirteenth Number he pretends to reveal a mystery (as he calls it)
of surceasing from action by pure cessation. An high mystery, that surceasing
is cessation! Well; But let us seek to understand this mystery, if we can reach
to it. Painfully purging fire (says your Divine) being elevated as an
instrument of God's revenging will, to produce in such intensness that
afflictive spiritual quality, with which the Soul is tortured, acts so long,
and no longer, then his Justice moves his Will to apply it: Then that fire that
acted only as obedientially elevated by his Will, can now act no farther.
Behold the mystery, etc. And I submit: for what is said passes all
understanding. Philosophers, which use commonsense in their Philosophy, tell
us, that a Knife of it self has a fitness to cut; But when a Carver takes it
to make a Statue, or other pretty Work, Art does elevate the Knife to an higher
work, then it has by the proprieties of its Nature, which make it only able
and fit to cut. Likewise a Pipe, or Recorder, of its own qualities, is fit by
the inspiration of air to make one sound, as we see in the drone of a Bag-pipe;
but, when a Musician uses it, there comes from it a song, which the Art of the
Musician makes dependently from the natural sound of the Pipe. This now
understanding Philosophers call elevating the Knife, or Pipe, that is, to make
the natural Action of the Pipe more perfect and excellent, then their proper
qualities did dispose to. But in later ages, Mysterious Divinity by the
assistance of canting Philosophy is soared beyond all wisdom, and tells you,
That all Creatures have in them an Obediential power to do what God will have
them. As for example; If God will have a Knife to create an Angel, the Knife
will presently do it in virtue of its Obediential power. And if you say a Knife
signifies an instrument, or power to cut, and look that it shall make an Angel
by cutting, as it makes a Statue, they take you for a dull fellow, and repeat
to you that it does not this by its nature, but by its obediential virtue. So
that if you will stick to the solemn Principle, that nothing does but what it
can do, and nothing can do but what is virtually in it, this Knife must be by
Obediential power, which nevertheless they say to be the very Entity of the
Knife, the nature of all things, which it may be elevated to make; to wit, a
Man, a Horse, an Eagle, an Angel, and all sorts of Angels. O height of
Learning. Is not this a pure MYSTERY? Truly it seems to me no less. But yet his
Mystery is higher, for when the time comes that the punishment is enough, God,
and Fire, and Soul remaining unchanged, the fire leaves to work by a deep
understanding of God's Judgment, and without changing becomes changed from an
actour, to a thing not able to act. Is not this pretty stuff to beat poor
Pulpits withal? Are not the Scholars brought up in such Principles like to be
great Lights of the Church? and their Masters worthily held for the Masters of
the World? Who shall tell us, that every thing is all things, and the same
thing without any change now able to work, now not? against common sense, and
the first notions common to Mankind.

SIXTH DIVISION. Containing an Answer to his twenty first Chapter.
Our Savior's sufferings not forced. More mistakes of our Doctrine. The
improportion of the pains he puts. Places from Scripture answered. His success
in impugning of our Opinion, concorning the indivisible duration of Souls. His
Ignorance of the Ground of Eviternity.

1. HIs 21. Chapter begins with that question, Whether the pains, his way
p^ts, are to any purpose? In which, it is explicated already, how by the name
of Pains are understood the Instruments, which are proper to his way: For as to
the griefs, seeing we both put the same, no question can be between us. Now to
show any utility in their proper explication, he never goes about it, he
penetrates the matter so little* Nor is there any fruit imaginable to the Souls
there, to be reaped out of this, that the pains come from an extrinsecal Agent,
but rather they are more profitable, if they come from an intrinsecal source.
Nor to us can there come any profit, seeing they cannot be known but by
Revelation, of which there is none; since it is constantly known, that the
Latin Church consented to the Greek Church, to hold without opposition there
was no true fire, besides, so the torments be the same, what matter is it how
they are made? But he presses, that whether the Fire be corporal, or no,
concerns not the main question. The which, though it be true immediately,
because to be corporeal fire may stand without the ending of the torments
before the Day of Judgment; yet peradventure the ending of Torments before the
Day of Judgment is not necessary, yet rationally is joined with the succession
of the pains, and that with the corporiety of the causes.

2. My Objection went higher, and said, such kind of pains would prove no
pains, but pleasures to the Souls of Purgatory; being they could not but
rejoice at the means of gaining Beatitude, and even in this World great courage
takes away the force of the torment, which they could not want. His Answer is,
that our Savior's courage was greater then any man's, and the good to be
obtained by his Passion motive enough to rejoice, yet hindered not either
sorrow in his soul, or that his pains were unparalled. This Objection I
answered already in Religion and Reason, page 146. wherefore I may be shorter
here; only admonishing him, that the divinity, which says our Savior had
those griefs by force, and that his Soul was not able to have hindered them
even by the natural perfection it had, is too low for a Champion of his
Company. Let him look, upon the Transfiguration, and there see what the power
of Christ's Soul was over its Body: Let him look how he died cum clamore, which
moved the Assistants to knock their breasts, and say, Vere Filius Dei ^rat.
Which your Divine may do well also to do, for divulging this Doctrine so
prejudicious to Christ's honor, as to put him to have been forced by natural
causes to the sorrow, and pains, which he suffered: Out of which Doctrine
depends a very ill consequence, that not only Christ's fancy, but even his
concupiscible part was subject to tentation, and passion. Now if your Divine
does not hold this, why does he apply it here, to show that the constancy of
the Souls in Purgatory cannot abate their sufferings from extern causes, and
turn them to pleasures? Another pitiful answer he adds, that (...) Torments of
Purgatory do not cause the entrance to Heaven, but only remove what hinders
it. As if he, that destreth Heaven, were not glad to have the hindrances taken
away.

3. In his third Number he p^etends to answer the improportion betwixt
corporeal pains, and spiritual offenses; but, by his great skill in missing of
the question, his first Answe^ returns the question upon us, as if we held that
some are burned more grievously, or longer then others at the Day of Judgment.
The which is a pure mistake of our Doctrine, as I have often repeated. His
second Objection is of the bodies of the blessed, and damned, the which he
mistakes also, thinking those pains, and glories to be immediately proportioned
to the Acts of Virtue, or Vice, which they are not: But the immediate
proportions are of the Acts of the blessed, or damned Souls in their lives, and
in their ending states. Now as these Acts are stronger, so do they diffuse into
their bodies different qualities; and hence it follows, that the bodies are
proportionably rewarded; not that the good, or ill of the body has any
proportion to the merits, or demirits, but because the dispositions of the
bodies follow (...) of the final acts, and dispositions of the souls, which
have proportion.

4. He presses Scripture: First out of the Apo^alyps, where there is no mention
of corporeal and spiritual, but merely of demerits and punishments. Secondly,
from Job Chap. (...) desiring that his offenses and punishments ^ight be
weighed in a pair of S^ales. What shall I say? If your Divine were asked,
whether the least venial sin be not worse then all the Torments Job suffered,
he would say questionless, Yes; What then does he mean to make of this saying
of Job? That Job was a Fool to make such a proposition? Surely in his way no
less can be understood. But, that we may not only confute simplicity, but
deliver true Doctrine; we must tell him, that Job cast his eyes upon the
Providence God uses over the good and bad in this World, to show to his
unpitiful friends, that those harms were not come upon him for his excess of
misbehaviour beyond others, but out of God's special pleasure. So that this
example is nothing at all to our question, since it speaks nothing but of God's
external Providence in this World.

5. Like to this is his next out of Levititus; where to several sins several
offerings were paralleled, the which (it seems) he would have to be understood,
as if the gifts were the true worth of the offense: which I believe our
Casuists, and Ghostly Fathers will not allow of. Another Objection is from the
Proposition made by our Divines to the Greeks, and by them not admitted, which
in great words he vents, saying, All the Latin^* Church stands accused of
folly. Here the force of the Objection lies in the word folly; a worthy
Objection as the most of his are. For no man doubts, but every speculative
proposition, which is false, may be in rigor called folly, but civility gives
this name only to such falsities, as are avoided by the most of that Art, or
Science, to which the discovery of such follies appertain. Now to make an
Argument, this Proposition must be termed folly, though in the same breath he
professes few do avoid it. He repeats diverse other Authorities, which, as far
as we got the books, we examined in the places in which they were first urged.
He adds the practice of Indulgences. But every man knows they are proportioned
to the Poenitential Canons, not the Laws of Purgatory, when it is said, so many
days, or years pardon; and for the plenary delivery, it has been heretofore
discussed. At last he comes to reason, and there he tells us, that God looks
not on the Physical Nature of the Acts, but upon the Moral; But what this Moral
signifies he declares not. Now according to my skill, I must profess, that I
take it to be a mere nonsensical expression, when it is applied to spiritual
acts. For an act of the will is Morality it self, and how much it is physically
harmful to the soul, so much is it morally naught; and how far profitable, so
much is it morally good: so that to distinguish moral and physical in
intrinsecal acts of the will, is but to give a bob instead of a bit, a name
instead of a thing, a covered mess without any meat in it.

6. In his fourth Number your Divine (as it seems) feels himself in some
streights, for he cries for room, and not without effect, for he has found a
matter of twenty Leaves to examine one discourse: yet I fear he has not made
room in his brain for truth, which is so elevated, that a fancy stuffed with
corporeal imaginations, and the sounds of unexamin'd words, can afford it no
place. Nevertheless I must try to break in, if not into his, yet into our
common Auditors apprehension: Si qua fata aspera rumpam.

7. In his fourth and fifth Number he explicates my Arguments, for the most
part truly, whether sufficiently, or no, our encounter must declare. Number
sixth he begi^^ his hattery with telling us, that he has showed it to be
contrary to the Doctrine both of the Church and of our own profession, Chapter 17.
N. 12. and 13. Where our answer also is given as far as depends not from this
place. The substance of it is, that a present relief of the dead by prayers, is
neither the expectation of the Church, or understanding Persons of their own
opinion: who all teach we must remit circumstances and substance also to Gods
high Counsels, and will. And besides it is declared, how the unchangeableness
of spirits hinders not, that the souls have relief in Purgatory, and that
Relief at the very time of prayers is contrary to the very sense of their own
Divines.

8. After this your Divine is equivocated something strangely, not
distinguishing between the duration of a Spirit, and our measuring of that
duration. For no man disputes this with him, whether we apprehend the duration
of Angels, or Souls, as we do the durations of Bodies, and so say, that such a
thing, or action, endured so many days, weeks, months, or years; But whether
their proper duration be conformable to our apprehensions, or that our
apprehensions be, as to the truth, a weak babbling fit for us, but far below the
truth of the thing, and no more like it, then a Body is to a Spirit. So he need
not trouble himself, whether our expressions be by true time, for they are by
that same time, by which we measure our actions and all corporeal motions.
Therefore all his examples are easily, I will not say answered, but assented
to, as not speaking of the question, that is, what the duration is in it self,
but of how it appears to us, or how we apprehend, and express it. But not to
leave him thus in the dark, I will exemplify a little. When we apprehend God
is, is Wise, is Just, is Good; St. Thomas his School will tell you, that Being,
Wisdom, Justice, Goodness, does not signify the same that they do when they
are spoken of St. Peter, or St. Paul: But that God is of a notion unknown to
us, yet of such an one as we are sure in our low Language, and conformably to
our incomparably-undervaluing-God apprehensions, is to be not so much
explicated, as vestigiated by the notions, which are signified by these words
of Being, Wisdom, Justice, Goodness, etc. So likewise true it is, that Christ
was three days in the heart of the Earth, but in such a manner, that wise men
understand that these words have not an Univocal signification in the duration
of his Soul, and the duration of his Body: but in this, in a signification
known to us; in that, in a signification so above our knowledge, that
nevertheless we know it is to be so explicated or expressed to a human
apprehension in the weakness of this life.

9. In his seventh Number, he attempts the explication of the necessity of
existence of diverse creatures, and tells us, that all that can be required is
most briefly and accurately expressed by St. Thomas, 1. P. Qu. 10. A. 5. Where
another man would have told him, that every man does not follow St. Thomas his
explication; I only enquire of him whence he has certainty of this his
saying, that St. Thomas has in this place declared all that is necessary. For
having treated it more largely in other places, it is to be suspected he
thought somewhat necessary in other occasions, which had been superfluous to
his Theme in the place cited. His ninth Number he begins with Whence you see
the Eviternity of souls, etc. Whence I see, he takes all, which he has cited
out of St. Thomas, for coined money, so that I may conclude that the certainty
of his Doctrine is no more then that it is St. Thomas his opinion: which is a
poor payment for him, who seeks the contentment of his understanding. I
reverence St. Thomas his Doctrine, because I find many and great truths in him,
but to give him the privilege of Scripture, that things are so because he says
it, that I am tanght by himself not to do. And in our own present case I am
forced to specify one particular: which is, that some things are removed from
permanency in being, because their Essence neither consists in Mutability, nor
is the subject of Transmutation, yet those things have Transmutation joined
unto them. This St. Thomas exemplifies in the Heavens: But later Phoenomena's
have shown that the Essence of the Heavens is subject to Transmutation;
Wherefore that example fails him. The other example is of Angels, which truly
St. Thomas says, but proves not here; so that until that be proved, we know no
substance that is not the subject of Transmutation, and yet has Transmutation
joined to it, and he who is acquainted with St. Thomas his Principles will
expect that there can be no such, since St. Thomas teaches that Accidents have
no existences of their own, and are but modifications of the Substances to
which they belong, and consequently their existence must be of the same nature
of which is the existence of the Substance, seeing it is the very same. He
tells us also, that St. Thomas says that Angelical intellections are measured
truly by time, or as he says afterward by true time. But I remember not that
word true in him, nor do I think it stands with the exact Logic of that Prince
of Divines. For Time signifying a common measure, how can there be true time
where there is not a common measure? but every act must be its one measure, and
one be longer, another shorter, without any common rule. Besides St. Thomas
knew the motion of the Heavens had appropriated to it self the name of Time
before any Spiritual actions of Angels were talked of. Wherefore the name of
time could not be attributed to Angels but in respect of the motion of the
Heavens, because the duration of the acts measures the acts, as the duration of
time measures our actions and corporeal motions, which is plainly to take time
as applied to Angels and their actions in an improper sense, and one derived
from the former.

10. After this to the end of the Chapter, he does nothing but lay forth his
own conceits, without any likeness of Proof or Argument. In so much that all he
says for himself, is nothing but the acceptance of St. Thomas his words
without any proof. Only Inote that he lets us understand by the way, that he
knows not what signifies the Necessity of Existence, upon which is built the
nature and notion of Eviternity. To declare which, you are to look into the
Metaphysical Principles of nature, as Arist^tle does in his two first Books of
Physics. There you shall find that a corporeal substance is divisible into two
parts, the one which makes it be what it is, the other a pure possibility to be
any of many; and how it is clear out of this, that the former part is it by
which Existence is had; and which has nothing betwixt it self and existence,
and therefore is inseparably connected with existence. The later part because
of its indifferency to diverse forms, is separable from any particular
existence, and so is cause of the corruptibility of the whole; the existence of
the whole perishing in the separation of the Form from the Matter, in all
things but in man. Hence it follows, that if such a thing as we call a form be
capable of existence without the support of matter it can never perish, because
it is of it self, and without mediation bound to existence. Therefore such a
substance is called Eviternal, and is so because it is such a form, and so
annexed to existence. The cause then of Eviternity is nothing changed, whether
the form be to be reunited or no to the matter; nor depends it of having no
contrary, but the having of no contrary flows from this, for contraries are
only found where there is a common subject; nor from I know not what
obligation in God, which are the principles he seems to conceit to be the
grounds of Eviternity.

SEVENTH DIVISION, Containing an Answer to his two and twentieth Chapter.
How Angels understand, and why necessarily all at once. His Ignorance of what
is meant by true Time; and mistake of St. Thomas. His unskilfulness in applying
allegorical places of Scripture (like the Anthropom^rpbites) to Spirits
literally. The fruit of his superabundant Demonstrations. His
selfcontradictions and Absurdities, and how weakly he refu^es a pretended
Demonstration of an unknown Author.

1. WE are now come to the so often promised two and twentieth Chapter, and
hope to have the happiness to see the Mysteries worthy of so great expectation:
but they ly not in the first four Numbers, whereof the first contains no more
then a weak explication of my Tenets, the which I will take notice of as
occasion and his Errors themselves shall present. In the second Number your
Divine wonders to see all Schoolmen taxed of Ignorance: So should I to see his
wonderment, if I did not know the cause of it. For every School-man who thinks
himself sure of his conclusion, cannot choose but tax all that be against him of
ignorance in that point: But those Divines who think nothing to be certain, or
(which is all one) true (for what is not certain is not true to him to whom it
is uncertain) have no reason to tax others of Ignorance, knowing themselves to
be ignorant, and in verity thinking there is no Science, upon this Argument
which to them seems evident; We have as much knowledge as any body, but we have
no Science; therefore no body has any. The Major Pride and Vanity makes evident
to them; The minor experience demonstrates to them and others: And the
conclusion is not only the Condemnation of all Schoolmen but of human Nature
it self. But this must be born withal, because they say it, who call
themselves, All the world, the whole Church, etc. though never so impudently. I
that do nothing but what every good Divine does, and is obliged to do, that is
to say, who apprehend that all who hold not that which I conceive to be true,
are amiss in this point, am unsufferable, and to be condemned upon the score of
many being against me. Again, your Divine wonders to see St. Thomas stand
accused to have mistaken somewhat that followed out of a former Verity
acknowledged by him. And, because it was apparent that this bore no blame, but
is a thing necessarily befalling to any Divine who writes very much, and arises
from the weakness of our nature, your Divine adds out of his own Treasure, that
he is accused of missing grossly; the which all who know my respect to that
great Doctor, know I would not say even if I thought it true. His third and
fourth Numbers are but a repeating of the same Doctrine and Testimony of St.
Thomas.

2. In his fifth Number he proposes to show that Angels and Spirits have*
change of Intellections and Affections. And first he tells us how Angels and
Souls come to know, to wit, by Gods infusing of certain Entities called
Specieses, of the which he bestows upon every one what is conformable to their
natures, and this in his first Number he takes for my Doctrine. Which because it
is not so, I am constrained to lay forth a short declaration of my Doctrine in
this point: Which is, that in an Angel, out of the force of his creation, his
Essence is actually in his intellective Power, that is, is actually
underderstood. Now to understand a thing connected to his Essence the Essence
it self is cause enough; as the hollow of a bowl seen, is sufficient to make us
understand what globosity is necessary to the filling of that vacuity. So out
of the Essence of an Angel is to be understood both the quality of the cause
which is to make it, and the quality of such matters upon which the Angel can,
or is made to act: that is, God above him, and Bodies below him, as far as they
have connection with him: And these two parts we think to be connected with all
other Creatures whatsoever. Whence the extent of his knowledge we conceive to be
all existe^t substances, and all their actions, which follow the substances. As
for the manner of his knowledge, instead of sy^^ogistical discourse we conceive
to be such an intuition as sometimes we have after we have found a truth by
discourse, and for the most part have in the assenting to those Verities which
we call per se nota. So that an Angel sees in his Essence that there is a God
as clearly, as we see the verity of this truth, that the whole is greater then
its part. And in the same manner he sees in God, that God has made the world,
and so every other verity, as it hangs to these by a connection, in virtue of
which we might draw the same consequences, if we had Science and time, which he
draws without time, by force of pure intuition, and intuitive strength. He
cannot then know the farther conclusion, without knowing the nearer; nor any
other, without knowing his Essence.

3. You will easily see by this, that an Angel cannot have the knowledge of a
particular thing or accident, without having the actual knowledge of all the
causes on which it does depend; and therefore that his actual knowledge is
extremely large. To which if we join, that whatsoever is foreknown,
strengthens and prepares the understanding toward the succeeding knowledge,
you will not fear the understanding's being clogged with too many objects; And
out of that you will see a necessity that the Angel must see all things at
once, unless there be some that have no connection with those which are linked
to his Essence, and that such he can never see unless by some unnatural means.
And so you have my thoughts of the manner and extent of Angelical knowledge. And
the like apprehension I frame of separated Souls, though there be some
differences which concern not our present quarrel.

In his sixth, seventh, eighth, and ninth Numbers, he pretends that this our
Doctrine is against many verities which we know by Faith: Whether these, that
Angels know not future things depending of hazard, or the present secrets of
men's Hearts, or the number of elect or damned, be any of these which he thinks
to be of Faith. I know not; but I well know, that I know no ground why they
should by any understanding Divine be so accounted, and since there is nothing
for them but some places of Scripture enlarged beyond the intention of
Scripture, and one prayer of the Church, and all these in common without any
special mention of Angels attributed to God alone; in which kind of speeches
God is commonly understood to include his Ministers, and to be
contradistinguished only against the knowledge of Men, without entering into the
nature of Spirits unknown to us, and not concerning our government in way of
Christian life to be curious of. The like is of the souls knowing what their
posterity do in the Earth taken out of the 14. of Job. Which out of the Hebrew
Text we understand to be that the dead man takes no notice of his posterity,
non advertit eis, to wit, he meddles not with it or them, which is also a
legitimate sense of the word ignoravit, when it is said Esaias 6^. Abraham
nescivit nos, and Israel ignoravit nos, See Muscari^m. Ventilatio 7.

4. In his tenth Paragraph he cites out of St. Thomas that the Angels were not
created in Beatifical Vision; and in the eleventh, that it is against Scripture
to say the Devils were not once in state of Grace, and not bad; but seeing he
cites nothing for it but the Authority of St. Thomas, sure he does not mean to
make it undeniable: seeing St. Thomas's authority is so professedly denied by
(...) own Divines. And, as for the places of Scripture, seeing they are
Allegorical, to build so nice a Verity as of the duration of one instant, upon
corporal similitudes and comparisons is a weak Argument, and as freely denied
as affirmed. For the opinion it self, St. Austin and Scotus justify it from
being erroneous or impossible, though where there are no other Arguments
brought against it, it is superfluous to bring in Auxiliary forces.

5. In the thirteenth Number he urges the Illumination of Angels, and in the
twelfth their speaking to one another, which both are explicated in my sacred
Institutions. To. 2. l. 2. Lectione 8. and are too subtle questions to divulge
in vulgar Languages. He presses farther, that the souls in Limbo just upon good
Friday began their Beatifical Vision, though the Bodies rose not until Sunday,
and that it was not true upon Maundy-Thursday that St. John Baptist's soul was
in Paradise, but on good Friday it was. If you are persuaded he has some
special. Revelations you may believe him, I must know some better proof before
I be of his mind.

6. In his sixteenth Number he tells you, that Moses soul spoke with our
Savior, Mat. 27. Luke 9. but the Scripture speaks of Moses, not of his soul;
And St. Thomas ^ill tell you that a soul can govern no body but its own! and so
will make you think it was an Angel in the ^^keness of Moses that spoke to
Christ. In his seventeenth he tells us that the Devil did contend w^^h St.
Michael about Moses his Body. He should have said scolded, for otherwise
contention may be some outward action about the Body it self, and so nothing to
us. Likewise he tells us that Dives spoke to Abraham by a new Act. Indeed there
is mention that Dives had a tongue, for otherwise we should have thought that
story to be parabolical, and that there needed no new words to ve^f^y it. Again
he tells us the Devil had a new act by which he heard the ^itth of En^ call for
Samuels soul. This it is to be well acquainted with the Devil, so that he can
tell what passes in his very breast: Whereas simple Divines like my self should
have thought that it was not the Devil, but a good Angel which represented
Samuel in that passage. Yet this will not serve me, for he knows likewise what
passes in the breasts of Angels, and so he tells us how Raphael by a new act
did offer Tob^as his prayers to God. But he should have expressed whether it
was in a dish or a censer that he offered them, and likewise with what kind of
rope or ^^ain he tied up the Devil. Also what bustling there was for one and
twenty days, between the two Angels of Persia and Israel. For I, that think all
these expressions to be allegorical, and some of them at least done by outward
and corporal actions, find no necessity of new acts in the Angels to any of
these effects, no more then we are bound to put new acts in God Almighty when
he is said to do so many new things of which the Scripture is full. As the the
Son of God to be incarnated, to create every day souls of new, to speak to our
Savior out of a cloud, and many such other things.

7. His Tediousness in multiplying diverse particulars of the same kind, to
which the same solution (that all the same things or the like are verified of
God without any novelty in his acts) has quite wearied me; yet I cannot omit
his last Argument, because it has something particular. He says then that the
Devils sin did at first please them, but now these affections be their
torturers; therefore he thinks they are repented, and have changed their acts,
and adds, Mark how you contradict your selves. Mainly without doubt, seeing we
say that the Devils were damned in the ve^ instant of their creation, that is
had all the same sorrows even during that complacence, and that they have still
the same complacence with which they sinned, and that the very sinning is
continued until this very day, which is a Doctrine often repeated. By this you
see how sleevelesly he puts me to trouble and to so much loss of time. His most
solid Arguments are the Testimony of St. Thomas; in verity a great Doctor, yet
such an one that it was never taken for a fault with modesty to refuse his
sayings. Other Arguments are taken out of Tenets, for which are pleaded no more
then some criticisms of the word solus, or some supposed Antonomasia excluding,
if they be not well looked to and helped out by additions, known truths; as
when the knowledge of chances to come, or the secrets of our hearts, is so
verified of God as to exclude Prophets, unless you put in that they, or Devils,
and Angels, do not this by their natural power, which is not in the Text; Other
Arguments rely upon the applying of Allegories to Angels, as if they were
proper speeches. And whereas to a reasonable Divine this cannot be unknown,
that we misapprehend Angels and their Actions, by our usual conceits and words,
as we do likewise God; yet our Divine presses the same things which are to be
solved in God Almighty, as rigorously to prove a true change, as if he saw with
his eyes all that past in their breasts: And then cries out he has super
abundantly demonstrated that in which the main difficulty lies, when as he has
not brought one word fit to come out of a Divines mouth in way of being a
proof. Which rev^eless I do not impute unto him as a fault, for it is not his
fault, but of that pitiful Topical counterfeiting of Divinity, used by them
amongst whom he was instructed.

8. Now would it pity any Scholar to see him, when he has caught the word time
by the end, as applied to that which has no other reason to be called time but
because we have no other names then of corporal things to design out spiritual
qualities, (whereof though we want the true notions, yet we are forced to
speak) so to play with the words, and insist upon the words of true time,
showing plainly he understands neither what time is, nor what a word to be true
means. For as for time, he will tell us that the motion of the Heavens are not
true time N. 3. but that our time is measured by those motions; which is most
unlearnedly spoken: Again he puts that there is an extrinsecal measure of
Angels intellections, in one part of which a proposition is true, and in
another false: Again he tells us that Angels are not above time by their acts,
as if the duration of every Angelical ^ellection did not hold up more parts of
our time, and therefore must needs be higher then our time. But he will say
they have a time of their own, and so cast us upon the other question what it
signifies Time to be true which he understands as little, not knowing that in
Analogical Terms, or such as are by design equivocal, no secondary sense, but
only the primary is the true sense of the word.

9. Out of this he proceeds N. 21. to exemplify in the Locality of Angels, in
which he tells us that we know they are truly in a place in St. Thomas his
Doctrine. Whereas St. Thomas tells us it is per se notum sapientibus in
corporalia non esse in loco, That to wise men it is known of it self, or
without need of proof, that spirits are not in place. He concludes that men
should content themselves to know that St. Michael was ever in Heaven, as
properly as Christ descended in-Hell. I must answer so they do, but that is to
know that neither is properly spoken, no more then it is properly spoken, that
the S^n of God descended out of Heaven at his Incarnation: And, because they
know that both are improperly spoken, therefore they endeavor to know in what
sense they are spoken, that they may not chatter words without understanding,
like Magpyes, as is the use amongst his Divines. He adds it is no hard matter
for a Scholar of ordinary capacity, to conceive the succession of Acts in
Angels. Which is very true, but peradventure it is a hard matter to overcome
that apprehension, and to see that Angels cannot be governed like Bodies, nor
are to be apprehended to have such a succession. To the like purpose is it that
he says, that our absurdities will be infinitely increased by putting that the
acts of a spirit are her very substance For the good man understands not, that
the playstering and mason-like Philosophy he has been bred unto, is the most
prostituted absurdity that can be taught.

10. Page 378. He begins to answer objections, and first this: that if there be
no in^rinsecal change, the torment cannot be greater for the passing of time:
And he does ingenuously confess it cannot: But when he comes to apply his
Doctrine, he first advances this ^bsurdity, that in our corporal torments there
are no parts, but the same part of the torment is put in more parts of time: I
do not wonder that an oversight might escape him, whom peradventure weariness
had dulled; but that he had never a friend or overseer of his Book, that could
tell him corporal torments were motions, and had their diverse parts
proportioned to the parts of time, I can hardly believe mine own eyes when I
see it in his Book. I pray consider to what absurdities their positions leads
them, it. The next absurdity is nothing less, though peradventure more covered.
He grants that if there be no real change, there is no greater pain, and he
puts that time purely makes no real change but what? it puts the same pain in a
new time. Be it so. Where is the real change? in the pain? No, for you say it
is the same: To be the same signifies not change. Where then? in the ti^* you
say that adds nothing. Where then? in the putting of the pain to the time? He
says not so. And it is plain that signifies but perma^e, or that the pain is
the same in a (...) time: Where, all novelty or change is in the time, and
only in the time: So that he puts both parts of the contradiction, the pain
without change is no greater, and the pain without change is greater, and in
matching of these lies his solution.

11. After this he hopes it will not be hard to answer another objection he
will put, and he has reason. For such solutions which admit both parts of a
contradiction to be true, are most easy to be made, and impossible to be
replied well against. But let us hear the objection. Says the objectour, if
two acts be indivisible, they cannot succeed one the other; but they will be
together. This your Divine makes to be the objection, and answers, No they will
not be together, but succeed one the other. And then says, St. Thomas well
observes this, and that Aristotle for want of knowledge in Scripture knew not
this, and that he has proved it by above a dozen better demonstrations, then
this so often miscalled by that ^ame. What can I say to this great Doctor?
Whence your Divine has taken this Argument I cannot remember, though my fancy
gives that some where I have used Letters in this or some like subject, but I
cannot find the place. I find the substance of the Argument is in my twelfth
Account of the Treatise of the Middle State. But there it is put in this
Tenor, that seeing the act of a Spirit has no parts, nor is capable of them,
either it will dure but for only one moment of our time, or else by by its
nature it will dure for ever: To dure for one moment of our time, is not to
dure at all, for there are no instants in time or motion, for they signify
nothing but the not-being of motion. Now if you assign a part of time in which
this indivisible act continues, you give it a duration essentially above the
nature of time, and therefore by its nature to endure all time, if not longer
then time. There is added to this Argument this confirmation; suppose of two
acts which begin together in diverse Angels, one be put to dure longer then the
other, without any real addition of duration, wherein can this consist? that
is, it consists in nothing, and therefore is impossible, and Chimerical. Of
this Argument he brings no more, then that of two acts succeeding, one must
needs be together with the other, without any proof why; which makes me think
he aimed not to bring this Argument, though he professed to answer all he had
ever heard of. By the form of the Argument as he relates it, the Author of it
seems to aim at this Conclusion, that two acts of the same Spirit cannot be
disjoynted by an intermission or Cessation from all act, because there would be
no medium: but this your Divine seems not to ^ym at* So that I can see nothing
into this Argument, but that it is imperfectly related. Unless peradventure the
Arguer takes the duration of Angelical acts to be purely Instantaneous, as are
the instants of time; and your Divine speaks so ambiguously, that a man cannot
understand by his words whether he ever lookd into that point, or desired to
meddle with it. For Aristotle has demonstrated that two such instants cannot
be together; and that St. Thomas made no scruple to admit, though your Divine
seems to contradict Aristotle in his Doctrine, which may easily be, for not
understanding either St. Thomas, or the question, or the force of a
Demonstration. As he plainly shows by bringing in Zeno's Error, in comparison
to Aristotl's demonstration, and saying that in Aristotl's way there be
insuperablr difficulties, which uses to be the saying of those who understand
not this Demonstration of Aristotle; which is fundamenta to Philosophy, and
acknowledged by all who deserves the name of Philosophers. And so you may see I
did well to promise him no demonstrations, who know not what they signify, but
thinks every Anthropomorphitical explication of Scripture to be Demonstrative.

EIGHTH DIVISION Containing an Answer to his twenty third and twenty fourth
Chapters.
Our Opinion avouch'd by true Philosophy. Hi^ Calumny of our Te^ets. God's G^
of the Synagogue, different from that of the Church. The notion of the word
Merit. The connatural^ess of the pains we put, and the needlesness of his. The
many ill-consequences and absurdities of the Opinion, that all Venial
affections are blotted out by Contrition in the first Act of Separation. The
^illiness of his Opinion that souls in Purgatory cannot help themselves. His
probable Divinity. His non-s^ that lyability to be punished, without Fault, is
(...) blem is^ refu^ed.

1. I cannot but complain of your Divine, that having promised such wonders in
the last discussed Chapter, he came off so pitifully, that where he had the
advantage of human apprehension against me, he gave me not as much as occasion
to explicate my Doctrine, unless I should have gone and strayed from his Text.
His oppositions were pure opinions without any sight of Evidence: His Authority
for the most part of St. Thomas, from whom in this point we professedly recede:
His Scripture such as he himself is bound to solve in respect of Almighty God;
So that in its words it has no force, and all the force must come out of this,
whether the nature of Angels requires to have the words explicated improperly
or no; which he may suppose, but goes not about to prove, otherwise then from
uncertain Authority: His solutions, to admit contradiction, or else propose
some Argument by halfs: The rest of his Chapter, high words.

2. Howsoever I hope his three and twentieth Chapter will make amends, for the
question is not so Metaphysical as the other was. It begins with an explication
of my Doctrine, disguised in high terms, yet true ones for the greatest part. In
his second Number he accuses it of being against Philosophy, to say that God
so ordered all things in the beginning, that he need not since put his hand to
it. By which if he understands that God does not continue conserving of his
creatures, it is not my Doctrine* If he grants Conservation to God, though the
truth is that Conservation is but the very Act of first Creation, though in
name and notion it be diverse, then I must see how he proves it against
Philosophy. For (says he) no natural cause can produce the soul of a man, and
therefore God must do some new action when there is an exigence of creating a
soul. I grant no creature can create a ^oul, but affirm that the first act of
Creation creates every soul when time is, without farther or greater Influence
of God. He may reply he understands not this. To which my answer is, that I
believe him, but cannot help him, seeing it is not here place to explicate
Mysteries of incident Philosophical points. He may help himself, if he pleases,
with my Institutiones both Peripaticae and Sacr^. He adds two other
Philosophical necessities he finds: one of the necessity of Gods actual
concourse with second causes, the other of Gods choosing Individ^s for the
second causes to produce. The former as far as it has sense in it, is done by
the Action of Creation or Conservation, by which God sets the Angels on work to
move celestial Bodies, from whose motion actual motion flows into all other
causes; and this is the true either premotion or concourse of God with
creatures plain and visible. The other which I fear he means, has no kind of
Philosophy, nor Divinity in it. The choosing of Individ^ is the rascallest, and
the ridiculousest Position that ever was affirmed by any scum of Philosophers.
You see what sound maxims ^e takes to impugn the perfection of God's Wisdom.

3. In his fourth Number he begins to employ his Divinity. And first he asks
what natural cause can raise dead bodies, and give them due torments? And I
must answer with a reply of a question; to wit, when this is to be done? While
the Fabric of Nature holds? or, when it is ended? If when it is ended, how
comes it to our purpose? Or is not he grossly mistaken to put this amongst the
workings of Nature. Yet that the course of Natural Causes does prepare the
World even to this unmaking of Nature, you may find in the last book of my
Institutiones Sacr^. For the proportionable pains, the Soul of themselves will
cause those, as you may see in the same book. To fill up here a Page with his
own opinion of Purgatory was besides the matter, for we doubt not but that he
puts more Wilfulness then Wisdom in God Almighty's Actions.

4. His main Answer begins N. 3. where he tells us, that it is Heresy to make
natural causes to have virtue sufficient to bring man by themselves alone to
his final end of Eter^ Bliss. And then he tells you, that our prime Argument is
the same that P^gius's, to wit, that every natural Agent ought to have power
given it from the Author of Nature, to bring it self to its natural perfection.
But first I would enquire where ^e sound in any Writing of mine the Propos^^on
he condemns? If I say that God h^th ordained second causes to do all effects,
which are not to be seen to be miraculous, do I exclude supernatural causes?
Are not Christ's coming and Preaching, the coming of the Holy Ghost, the Habits
of Faith, Hope, and Charity, the Prayers, and Preaching, and good Works
proceeding from men thorough such Habits, the Sacraments, the whole ^orm of the
Church, all Supernatural causes interwoven with natural? To what purpose then
does this man talk, that natural causes are not sufficient to bring a man to
Heaven? Is it not plain he knows neither what I say, nor what himself. See how
just our Argument is the same with the Pelag^^n's? Out of this you see his
Answer is like to be a good one, and so it is. For Numb. 8. he has, so I
answer. As man's last (...) cannot be re^ched by Nature, so is it out of the
reach of natural causes, by their natural operation, to chastise man's sinning
proportionably to his voluntary acting against his supernatural end. My Reply
is, that he must seek out to whom to answer; for I never talked of purely
natural causes, but natural and supernatural together, as they compound all
second causes. But the good man could think of no supernatural causes, but God
himself working immediately, and so strayed to seek out why such actions were
not miraculous, which we will not follow him to, because it is not concerning
to our Theme.

5. Yet I may deliver one Doctrine, which I know not whether he has reflected on
or no: which is, that before Christ, Miracles belonged to the Ordinary
Government of the Church by God Almighty; since Christ and his Apostles time,
these are become parts of Extraordinary Providence. This I speak by reason of
his great insisting upon pains in the Old Testament, which followed not
connatural to the sins. For no small part of the motives proposed to the Jews
were temporal Commodities, which are propounded unto Christians merely as
accidents, not to be sought for; according to that saying, Qu^rite primum
regnum Dei and caetera adjicientur vobis. And St. James tells us, Siquis
indiget sapientia post^let a Deo and dabitur ei; but for any thing else he does
not tell us so: but we know they are sometimes granted, and sometimes denied.
But in the Old Law the Prophets foretold both punishments, and rewards, and
they failed not: Now that sort of Government is turned into a better, and we
have order to govern our selves by Reason, and Faith is given us to help and
strengthen our Reason, that it may reach the motives propounded to us out of
the state of the next World, and to expect rewards and punishments there which
spring out of our lives here; according to the words of the Apostle, that
Afflictions here do work glory in Heaven; and the other, that their works
follow them. And this to those who use understanding Divinity is signified by
the word meritorious. After this he makes a repetition of some Arguments many
times told over; and at last Number 12. he tells us, that he never said, that
after that God is in part pacified, there still remains in him a boiling of his
fury not quite allayed: But (says he) we speak of a most just and rational
proceeding in God, etc. What mood the good man was in, when he wrote this, I
know not. For the words express, as if he meaned, that before God is in part
pacified, there were in God a boiling of fury, and not a just and rational
proceeding.

6. I told you somewhat of the signification of this word Meritorious, but I
fear I must eat it again. For in his 24. Chapter, Number second, he tells us,
that when Nature, by Death, has put a man out of this World, she has put his
soul out of her reach, etc. So that now in this state the nature of a
meritorious cause occurs to be considered by Divinity, and Aristotle his
Philosophy must stand in great part out of doors. Farewell then poor Aristotle,
and his Philosophy. Yet because he is a Philosopher, he will ask a cause why he
should be turned out of doors. Let us then look into this Mystery. If that a
Workman has bestowed a days work upon another man's ground, he receives at
night what according to the manner of living in that Country, and the quality
of the work, is esteemed equal to his labor. If a Soldier in a Battle, or
Siege, did eminent service toward the winning of the ^attle, or Town, his
General consults what is fitting to stir up others to dare the like, and the
Soldier receives it. And both the Workman and the Soldier are said to have
deserved their rewards. Another Workman, for example a Watch-maker, makes a
Watch, and has it; and the fruit of it, to know the hour of the day, but is
not said to deserve the Watch. And another Soldier goes out upon his enemies,
and gets a good booty, and is not said to have deserved it. What is the
reason of this variety of language? Why the later used the natural causes of
the effect, which by their own force produced it; The other got not this
particular reward by a natural, but by a rational means, that is, by pleasing
one in whose power it was to bestow it upon him. If this be well discoursed,
then also concerning Souls rewards, if they be such as follow not out of the
force of the disposition, which their works have made the Soul to have in the
next world, but God by his arbitrary will determins to give them what he thinks
best out of the General Principles by which he governs the World, these rewards
will be said properly to be deserved. On the other side, if the rewards are
necessarily consequent to the disposition on which the Soul departs out of her
body, they will be properly called Effect, improperly to be deserved.

7. Applying this to our case, that is, to the pains of Purgatory, let us see
what is to be said. And first I ask, what pains does the fire of Purgatory
inflict upon the Souls? I suppose your Divine will answer, Griefs and Sorrows.
The next question, are the griefs of Objects that deserve to be grieved for, as
it is fit for Holy Souls to have? I suppose he will again say; Yes. The third
question, Would not she of her self have all those griefs? I think he cannot
choose but say Yes, and not put a new fault in the Souls not to have a grief
which they ought to have. The fourth Question is, If she have this grief, is it
not a punishment laid upon her by God, notwithstanding that it proceeds from
their natural inclination, which God gave them, amongst other Reasons, to
punish their faults? I know not what he can deny. The fifth Question, What then
does the fire do? make the same over again, or increase it? The former answer
is absurd. To the later, we ask the sixth Question. Is not the grief of a holy
and separate Soul proportionable to the offense or ill it did in this World? If
it be, God's Justice requires no greater. If it be not, a probable cause must
be rendered why a less sorrow would have quitted the sin in life, and now such
an excess will not: Or else, for any thing that I see, Aristotle will claim a
share for his Reasons in the next World, as well as in this; which if your
Divine will grant us, we will in silence pass over his two first N. N.

8. In his third Number he cuts out a new piece of work to his friends, which
is, that an act of contrition (which they put in the first instant) of it is
nature takes away pain, as well as guilt; therefore, say we, it must take away
the p^ins of Purgatory, if it has there power to take away the guilt, as in
this World it usually does, and would do, if that act were here done, seeing it
springs out of the whole Heart and power of the Soul. His first answer is, that
Bellarmin has said much to this difficulty, which your Divine passes over
with a Besides, and upon so good an authority I cannot doubt but that it
deserves to be laid aside; His second Solution is out of Saint Thomas, which
neither your Divine does stand to, nor as it seem Saint Thomas himself, making
no mention of it in a later work, where he handles the question largely.
Wherefore omitting it, let ^me to the third, which he says to be ^isfactory.
Which I believe, if he takes (...) comparatively, for of the three it is the
least faulty; but if he means truly satisfactory, he must first clear me a
doubt or two, before I can be of his mind. First in it, is supposed, that we
must necessarily say that Venial Sins are remitted after this life: Which is
true, but unless the time be specified, it may be at the Day of Judgment, and
so nothing to our present question. What he adds that the remission of sin does
take away all impediment of going to Heaven, but abateth nothing of their
pains, I do not understand for three Reasons. First because it is only said,
and no other cause rendered, but because the state of merit cease after this
life. But why to take away the guilt of sin, and the impediment of going to
Heaven, is not the effect of merit, is not declared, and seems that it cannot
be denied. Secondly, there is no reason given why it abates nothing of the
Souls pain. For why should this be accounted a merit more then the other?
Seeing it increases not Charity, nor the reward of Charity, and is but a
remov^ns prohibens, as well as the other. Why then is one admitted, the other
rejected? Thirdly, since the Council of Florence, it is not to be tolerated to
say, that to a pure Soul ^ins any impediment of going to Heaven* And this
answer puts the Soul to be pure.

9. Another difficulty I have about that Proposition, We must hold that in the
life to come, there is no essential change in the will; to wit, for that which
belongs to the increase of Charity; First, about the Truth of it; For, I doubt
not but by the Beatifical Vision whenever it begins Charity is increased; and
likewise, that at the reunion of our Bodies, Charity and the reward of it
shall both increase. Neither do I take it to be spoken consequenter to put many
acts of Charity, and not put them to increase the habit, though you put the
acts to be of the same degree of intension. For we cannot deny but one and one
makes two, and that two are more then one; and (ad hominem) if the same pain
put in a new time, makes the pain greater, much more two acts of Charity are
more Charity. If it be answered, the time of merit is passed. I reply then you
must put no more merit, But with one breath to put merit, and cry the time of
merit is passed, is to oblige us to believe Opposites.

10. A third difficulty I have, how it is proved that in Purgatory there is an
act of Charity with detestation of a Venial sin inconsistent with the affection
of Venial sin. For only to say it is so, is not to answer the Argument, but to
repeat your conclusion, or ask the question. It is confessed by both parties,
that Charity, not only in habit, but also in act stands with venial sin, for
otherwise every time we make an act of Charity, we should revoke our affection
to Ve^ial Objects. St. Thomas's known Doctrine is, that a will once taken
resolutely in the next World is unchangeable, and truly that one act remains,
until a contrary be put out; We must therefore either say that the Soul has a
new deliberation at her going out of the body, or that she keeps the same she
had in the body, until she return to it: If we put a new deliberation, it may
be as well of the End, as of Venial Objects, and so the Soul shall change her
state of Salvation after Death, and all place of merit will not be denied: It
follows then that there can be no act in the Soul incompossible to the
affection of venial sin until Resurrection. Wherefore I doubt not but to a man
of a not-preoccupated Judgment, this Answer will be so far from being
satisfactory, that it will manifestly appear that the holders of your Divine's
Opinion, as much as they cry up that there is no room for merit with one
breath, so much they pull it down by their inconsequent positions on the other
side. Besides another thing, which in a Divine is a manifest defect, that they
render no rational cause of the impotency to merit, which in our opinion is
most manifest.

11. In his sixth number he falls upon another question not properly against
us, but amongst his own Divines, which I must a little rip up, because it so
clearly shows the huge weakness of their Doctrine, and Doctors. The Question
arises out of this difficulty, that it seems inconsequent, that if the Souls in
Purgatory may be helped by others they cannot be helped by themselves. And it
is as true an absurdity as it seems to be, and rises out of the denying of our
Opinion. He seems to give an answer, by saying, that they have deserved in this
life time to be helped in the next World. But this does rather aggravate the
difficulty then solve it. For, it shows they are helpable, and then the
difficulty is greater why they cannot help themselves: For to say it is
precisely, because God will not give them leave to help themselves, is to call
God unreasonable, and wilful and cruel, instead of playing the Divine, and
giving an accom^t why to do so, is conformable to God's Goodness and
Government. But to fall to the Question; Some of their Doctors seem to deny to
the Souls of Purgatory power to pray, which how it can fall into a Christian's
head, much less a Divine's, I am not capable. Are not the Acts of Faith, Hope,
and Charity, prayers? Will any body deny them these? Are not the acknowledgment
of their sins, and the desire of forgiveness, prayers? Do they doubt of this?
Can they wish the relaxation of torments from men, and not from God? How absurd
a Position is this? that God whose whole endeavor is to bring men's hearts to
him, should send abstracted Souls from himself to men? The very absurdity of
this saying to an impartial man would condemn the whole Opinion: And yet more,
that they can impetrate that the Living may pray for them, nay impetrate Graces
for the Living, but none for themselves; whereas we are taught, that God grants
us easilier for our selves, then for other men. These sayings are so empty of
all Divinity, and Solidity, that depending as they do merely from this
uncertain and unlikely ground of the Souls present delivery from Purgatory,
they make it like to themselves, uncertain, and unlikely also.

12. In his seventh Number he tells us, that perhaps God was moved by his
Justice to ordain, that the pains due in the other life be not ordinarily
remitted, but by satisfaction, made either by themselves, or others. An
excellent piece of Divinity, to ground so substantial a point, as whether the
Souls in Purgatory pray for themselves or no, which every man of any Judgment
cannot doubt but that they can no more cease from doing, then they can cease
from loving themselves, from hoping and desiring Beatitude, and from saying
adveniat R^gnum tuum, all this being nothing but praying for themselves. So
learned are his Divines, who question and dispute this: Now to say such ardent
prayers have no effect, is as great an absurdity on the other side. The like is
of that nonsensical division of Works into three as it were parts, and to say
quatenus they are impetratory of pardon, they are not satisfactory for sin, or
quatenus they are meritorious of grace; they are neither impetratory of
remission of sin-, nor satisfactory for it; a quibling of terms, without ever
weighing the signification of the words. Toward the end of his ninth Paragraph
he says, that though some have inconsideratly said, that this Divinity is
brought out of the Skullery, or Kitchen, yet it may be maintained as probable,
even when a most rigorous, examine shall be made of the Principles from which it
is deduced. To which I reply, that he who said those words, will say again,
that all such Opinions as have no more to plead for themselves then that they
may be maintained to be probable, are fitter for Skulleryes, and Sculs, then
for Schools and Divinity. For a Divine should not advance any Opinion which he
thought not he could make appear certain to any well-disposed understanding;
though the Proposer might be deceived in his confidence, and deserve pardon, as
a Man, not an Angel; but what in his Conscience he does not persuade himself to
be true, it is unworthily done to propose it for a Divinity conclufion, either
to be taught in the Schools, or preached in Churches.

13. In his tenth Number he begins a new Objection, to wit, that because pains
are neither sin, nor foulness or blemish, if there remains in Purgatory nothing
but pains to be paid, nothing is there to be purged, and by consequence there
is no Purgatory. This is the Objection; His Answer is, That when one sins,
he commits a fault, and gains the Lyability to be punished; that this
Lyability is a blemish, and so there is somewhat to be purged, and by
consequence a Purgatory truly so called. Our Proverb is, that an old Daw is not
to be catched with chaff. Therefore I desire not to be bobb'd off with two
words, signifying the same thing, whereof one being affirmed, the other denied,
the Answer comes to be a pure contradiction. I know there is nothing more
frequent in his Divines mouths, then the distinction of the guilt of fault,
and the guilt of pain: But what meaning corresponds to these words, that is my
difficulty. I look upon a mortal sin remitted by Contrition or Sacrament, and I
see if any pain remains after Contrition presently men say his Contrition was
^ot perfect, for had it been perfect, it would have quitted all the pain. Now
the work of Contrition is by detestation, to expel the affection to the
detested Object. I see therefore that some inclination to the same object
remains, that is, some infection of sin, whenever all pain is not taken away
by Contrition. Remission by Sacrament is held to be done by a weaker
disposition then is to be found in perfect Contrition; Therefore, I doubt not
but rather more dregs of sin remain in the Soul after the Sacrament, then when
the sin is remitted by pure contrition. I see likewise a satisfaction required
in Penance, by which we seek to equal Contrition, and so greater pains also to
be generally esteemed to remain after Sacramental Absolution, then are thought
to be left after Remission by (...) contrite heart: But in both I find dregs of
sin left inwardly, besides the pains due exteriourly. Nor do I remember, that I
have had any certainty of pains remitted without the sin: nor of sin remitted
with no pain at all; for, the Councils specify directly that in the remission
of the sin all pain is not remitted, but some to be is evident, in the
remission of mortal sin, where eternal pains are acknowledged constantly to be
remitted. So that looking into practice and things as far as we have any
certainty, neither pains are remitted without sin, nor sin without pains. So we
see the Church provide in Indulgences, that there go before Penance and other
Acts, which are supposed to help to the Remission of sin.

14. Now let us look into the words. There is (say they) guilt or Lyability of
fault, and guilt, or lyability to punishment. Here I note the impropriety of
their Language, that in the same distinction they must change the phrase, from
Lyability of, to Lyability to; a certain sign of imperfect Language, but
necessary. For what could lyability to fault fignify. Did any thing go before
fault by which the Person was made liable to commit the fault? Again, ask why a
man deserves to be punished, which signifies the same, as by what he is liable
to punishment? is it not answered, because of such a fault; fault then
signifies lyability to punishment; and lyability to punishment signifies fault.
Does God or Man* do harm to another by reason, unless he wishes harm to him? To
wish harm to him, is not that to bear him illwill? and can a fault be called
pardoned or remitted, as long as God wishes him harm, and evil? Yes (say they)
but a man may remit death to a man, and yet keep him in Prison, as we see David
remitted his banishment to Absalom, yet for two years would not admit him to
his sight. (...) is not this clearly not to be so angry as before, yet to be
somewhat angry? What plain nonsense then do these Divines speak? And what a
solid Solution do they give, when they tell you there remains no fault, but
there remains a lyability to be punished? that is, as a Lawyer* I have heard of
used to say, when one told him what he knew to be false; it may be so (he would
answer) but it is impossible. Such is our great Divine's distinction, and
goodly subtilty. Further, this lyability either is in the sinner, or not? If
not, how can it be purged away, or he purified from it? If it be, it must
either be some ill affection, or some natural quality; Ill Affection is sin, a
natural quality is not to be purged, seeing it is not hateful to God. In a
word, it is senselesness to put lyability to be any thing that is neither sin,
nor some extrinsecal denomination. Therefore nothing can be purged out of a
Soul but sin. The Fathers plainly call it Stubble, H^y, Wood. They talk of
consuming of Earthliness, of feeding upon, mending, and many such terms, which
signify a real subtraction from the Soul, and not only of smarting, as the
Divine would persuade us.

NINTH DIVISION. Containing an Answer to his three last Chapters.
His Gross Error concerning the Efficacy of Almsdeeds to remit Sin. His
needless Repetitions; his blundering in one Council, and open abuse of another,
and of his Adversary's Tenet. The publishing uncertain Revelations punished by
the Church with Excommunication. The efficacy of Prayer in common, and to what
it is efficacious, particularly of those Prayers, which are made for the Dead.
The Charity and Pr^dence of the Donour, not the exterior Action availing him.
That the impetratory power of Masses is to be weighed by the Charity of the
Priest who says them, not by their multitude said indifferently by any, or the
external Action. How the Mass is the most efficacious Prayer. The Churches
Prayers, and practice in Foundations opposite to him.

1. HIs twenty fifth Chapter is made up of Repetitions of what is before said,
and therefore to avoid your trouble, and mine own, I say at once that we have
already answered the most part of it. Yet we must see whether he has not
sprinkled some new aspersions on our Doctrine. When I object that Scriptures
teach us to pray for remission of Sins of the dead, He answers it means the
Lyability to punishment, which is lately confuted. He brings some places of
Scripture in which he pretends the remission of only pain to be signified by
the remission of Sin. The answer to one will clear all. He cites the giving of
Alms to quit sin, and proves out of St. Paul that giving of Alms is to no
purpose but to avoid pain. A foul error! for the Alms-deeds St. Paul speaks of
are done without Charity, and so according to his own Doctors cannot remit
pain, and St. Paul expresses that they are nothing worth, which would be false
if they could remit the pain due to sin. When as our Savior teaches us date
Eleemosynam and omnia vobis munda sunt, he means as they ought to be given, to
wit, out of Charity, for Charitas operit multitudinem peccatorum, not only as
to pain, but as to fault. And as in this, so in all the places he cites, if the
works be done as they should be done, they remit sins, by being joined to a
good heart, and without that conjunction they remit nothing.

2. In his sixth Number he seems to charge me to hold that souls are in
suspense until the day of Judgment. But he knows I hold no such thing, ^^d am*
bound to explicate the Fathers w^seem to favor that way as well as he. From
hence to the eleventh Number are pure Repetitions, saving a place of Genadius,
whom as yet I have not found. In his eleventh Number he has this
propositition. It is the unquestioned Doctrine of the Church, that a soul truly
penitent has that Charity which Scriptures, Councils, and Fathers hold to be
requisite to Beatitude, and to suffice thereunto in its rank. This is a
blundering, equivocal, and blinding proposition. For if truly penitent
signifies of all Venial sins and fully penitent, the proposition is true, but
nothing to the Council of Florence, which speaks not of such; and, how often
does he himself put people to die in Venial sin, whom he will not deny to have
Charity sufficient in its rank to Beatitude, and will not deny that the Council
of Florence speaks of such, and of these it is nevertheless certain they have
not that Charity which is necessary out of its own force to bring them to
Bliss. So that the word Truly penitent must be distinguished to make any clear
sense; and likewise sufficient Charity, or else he blunders and speaks words
without any certain meaning.

4. The twelsth and thirteenth Numbers have nothing not before con^ted. In the
fourteenth he seems to acknowledge it lawful to be held, which before he had
called a gross Error, that the Pope defined but one question, though with many
branches, which was never denied. Nothing more but Repetitions.

4. In his fifteenth there is a slipperiness worth the noting. For repeating an
Argument in which the main force stood in the word difference: In the answer he
turns it to debate, and solves the Argument by saying there was no debate,
which was the very thing that the Argument aimed at: Whose force is this. About
the Ante-judiciary delivery there was a difference between the Greek and Latin
Fathers in the Council of Florence, but no debate; therefore it was not thought
a matter worth debating. His answer is, there was no debate, therefore this
flashing Demonstration is evaporated into smoke.

5. I believe the remaining Chapters will be of the same tenor. Yet in Chap.
26. N. 2. I must note, that the Testament of St. Ephrem (as indeed all his
works we have) is uncertain. For St. Hierom notes in his works sublime
Ingenium, a lofty (...). The works we have are accounted pia sed non docta.
This Testament which is cited contradicts his narration of his conversion, so
that we cannot judge whether of the two is true; or, if either be, we have them
from such uncertain Authority.

6. Likewise N. 3. your Divine adds to the Council of Chalced^n by virtue of
interpretation bequeathed to Monasteries to recommend the so^ls of those who
had left these Legacies unto them, whereas in the Council there is no more then
that such Legacies were given for the good of the doners soul which speaks much
less.

7. I leapt over the former number unwarily, not marking one proposition which
is, This is certain, that either those whom the Church worshippeth for Saints
have been the most deluded Persons that ever lived upon the Earth, or else many
things in this kind are true, which some are pleased very freely to carpat.
What he sp^ke before was of Revelations, Apparitions, and Visions, so that he
would make his Reader believe we admitted none of all these, whereas himself
concludes presently after, that exceeding great caution in ^st be used in
crediting things of this nature after a narrow and judicious examine. He adds In
which though some writer have not been so punctual, yet it will be a great
discredit to Gods Church to say that all of them have been Universally to blame
in this point. I pray mark how venomously he is malicious against his own
conscience. He cannot doubt but that we admit of many Visions, Apparitions, and
Revelations: He finds nothing in my writings but conformable to his own saying,
that exceeding great caution is to be used: He finds me except against none, in
which there is not either plain absurdity, or at least in which I suppose to
find ill Divinity, and as he professes of me, that I think to demonstrate it.
And yet will he persuade his Reader that I am an enemy to all. One thing it is
to admit Historical relations in the degree of History, which their nature is
capable of, and another thing to set them up upon so high a throne as to
command Divinity; this is that I refuse. Though I blame not him for thinking
that no man is able to discourse like a Doctor about Visions and Revelations
without great danger of Erring, unless God has made him partaker of such
extraordinary favors, because he speaks according to his pitch; yet I may take
the boldness to tell him he knows not what he says, and in this temerarious
proposition, he wrongs all Universities, and learned men, and the very Science
of Divinity it self; All Prelates of the Church, not excluding the Pope
himself; none of these in their qualities and degrees by which they are Judges
of Christian demeanor, pretending the extraordinary favors he requires to
make them speak like Doctors. I wonder he is not acquainted with the Bull of
Leo the tenth beginning Supernae Majestatis: In which he lays Excommunication
upon all Preachers who in their Sermons do lay forth any such Visions or
Revelations before they are approved by the Church, because ordinarily they are
but Illusions of Melancholy Persons, who in their prayer have conceited such
dreams, and imposed them upon their Directours. I pray persuade him to consider
how much worse it is to preach such things, then to point them in a vulgar
Language, by which they run amongst the unlearned sort, and consider how far he
and the divulgers of his Book are from deserving Excommunication. Again, how
many of these Visions in particular have passed the examine, and approbation of
the Church, for which they may not be accounted the dreams of waking men?

8. To return now to our former course in his third Paragraph he cites the 63
Canon of the Council of Nice, the which though it be known to be none of the
Council, yet because the custom it speaks of is laudable, I except not against
it. For we doubt not but the multiplication of pryers is ever good, St. Paul
has taught us that: but the question is only of the end for which the custom
was instituted. Yet I may note this, that peradventure your Divine is mistaken
in the number, for we find in the first ages, that though there were forty
Priests in a Church, only one said Mass upon private days. But it is a tedious
thing to walk in the dark, and to handle a question whereof the Roots are not
understood. Wherefore I shall to my power lay down the grounds of the question,
out of which Authorities may be the better understood.

9. There are therefore two questions to be displayed, the one whereon relys
the efficacy of Prayer; the second to what it is efficacious. First therefore
we must note, that this word prayer has two significations. In the one it is
nothing but the praising of God, in the other it signifies the begging
something of God. Prayer in the first signification chiefly consists in the
acts of the Theological virtues. By Faith and the qualities consequert to
Faith, we acknowledge and admire the attributes of God; and the perfection of
his works, and so break out into those motions which follow such Acts. By Hope
and Charity we love and desire God as our proper good, whether by his Essence,
or by and his Creatures. Out of this follows that we ask him what we apprehend
as necessary to us, in which consists that prayer which is properly called
Petition. Now let us consider God as we would consider a wise man, and we shall
see that if we beg any thing of a wise man, he considers two things; one is
whether the Petition be convenient for it self; which if he finds, without
difficulty he grants it: The other is, that though it be not convenient in it
self, yet he considers whether the friendship of the Person who begs it, makes
it convenient to be done or no; And if he find it does, he grants the request.
So then likewise must we esteem of God, that he does what is begged of him,
because of it self it is fitting to do it, even if there had been no prayers.
At other times it is not good unless it had been begged. Further in the Beggar
we find two Considerations; one of the Person, the other of the Begging. This
later consideration is not considerable before God, more then as it makes the
Person more acceptable. For whosoever begs of God, addresses himself to God;
and, by that, exercises some virtue, for which he comes to be more acceptable.
But then the begging obtains because of the worth of the Person: Abstract from
this, and begging is but the affection to a created thing, and so has more
imperfection then perfection in it, unless it be the desire of what is
commanded us: as when it is said Quaerite Reg number Dei, and again, siquis
indiget sapientia postulet a Deo. And it is added in fide nihil haesitans,
which if I be not mistaken, signifies that he shall certainly be heard. Of
other things we hear Pater vester scit quia his omnibus opus habetis, and if we
will nevertheless ask them we have the form shaped out to us, sed tua volunt as
fiat, non mea.

10. That this explication of Gods hearing our prayers is true, depends of the
Principles long since explicated, that God under forfeit of his Wisdom and
Goodness is bound to do what is best for his creatures, and nothing else;
Wherefore what he does is either therefore best because begged, or of it self:
therefore on one of these motives to be granted. Now if it be best because
begged, since the title of begging is the favor the Beggar has, he must by the
act of begging be in greater favor then without it; for if it had been
convenient otherwise, it would have been done without begging; and so not for
the begging; for God needs no Monitor to tell him what and when it is best. And
so you have the first point cleared that Charity, and only Charity on the
Peggars part is the cause of the effect.

11. The other point was what God grants in respect of our prayers. That is to
what our prayers are efficacious. In which the first proposition is that God
grants nothing upon our prayers but what first he stirs us up to pray for, and
ordains our prayers to be causes of the effect: the which is both evident of it
self, and formerly declared. The next proposition is, that God stirs up no body
to pray for any thing, unless the action of praying be good to him that prays;
So that, whether the effect be granted or not, the good of praying never fails
him who prays. A third proposition is, that all things confider'd, no
extrinsecal good is the good of the man who prays for it, but is absolutely
indifferent* whether it be the spiritual good of Father and Mother, or
Children, or whatsoever it be; and therefore by a perfect soul none of those
things is to be absolutely prayed for, or desired, but only under the good
will and provideoce of God. This is clear also to all those who understand the
nature of Good to be respective to him who desires it; and that it signifies
what according to reason is to be desired by him; and, that every man is a part
of the World, and cannot with reason desire the World should be conformable to
him, and therefore may or must desire his own good, because he is made for it,
and has that charge from the Author of nature to procure it, and be
sollicitous of it; But, as his Beatitude is but the end of him, so the
Beatitude of others how near soever bound to him, hinders nothing the
confecution of his Beatitude, and so is desirable no farther then the procuring
of it is the best means to gain his own, and that is by desiring of it wholly
indifferentlyas concerning the providence of Almighty God.

12. A fourth proposition is, that the desiring or praying for the goods of
others is many times good for us when the obtaining it is our good, to wit,
when we are not ra^onal enough to abstain from wishing, and desiring such a
good; For then our desire of such a temporal or accidental good has the
strength to make us lift up our Hearts to God, and exercise Acts of Virtue,
which is a great good to us; when peradventure if the effect were granted. us
it might be our harm or destruction. A fifth proposition follows out of these,
that there is no certainty of effect when we pray for others, unless we pray
for known goods, and undoubtedly conformable to Gods providence; such as are
the good spiritual and temporal of the Church in common, or else we have some
particular instinct from God Almighty to pray for such a thing in particular,
the which peradventure happens oftener then our selves know, or can give
account of. The conclusion is clear. For, seeing all other Goods are
indifferent, and depending from Gods providence, and only these kind of goods
determined to us to be under Gods providence we can have no certainty of the
grant of others, seeing we have no warrant of being heard for any but for our
own good; as the experience of so often missing the effect of our prayers when
we pray for temporal things, do put out of all doubt. And for any man to
contend that our prayers are still heard where we cannot perceive whether they
be or no, though it be evident in things where we have experience that the
event is very uncertain, is to play the Juggler, as Astrologers and other
Fortune-tels do, and to be contemneed and condemned.

13. Coming now to apply this Doctrine to our question. As it is certain that
prayers for the dead in common have effect, so to come to particulars, and to
say that it has effect upon this soul, or that soul, is wholly uncertain; but
certain it is that it has good effect upon him that prays. Therefore clear it
is that prayers for the dead are to be recommended to the faithful for the
living's sake. For it is a clear case, it does a great deal of good upon them.
It puts them in mind of death, of Judgment, of hope of Resurrectfon, and loving
it, where they shall meet their friends, and toward which alone they can
assist their friends. It makes them see and loath the Vanity of the World, out
of which they lose their friends, and see that they must have their time to
follow and quit all this good which here delights them. It makes them love
their friends and kins-folks or children more spiritually. And, because it has
all these effects the stronglier, how more vehement their affection is to their
deceased friends, therefore they are to be more incited to pray for them then
for others. But because man's nature is framed so so as to expect an effect of
his prayer, God has not left us without hope of great goods to our friends in
the day of Judgment by our prayer, and the Church likewise in all her offices
puts us in mind of it, and to pray whatsoever faults our friends carry out of
this World, they may be all forgiven then, That day comprehends all Gods gifts
from death forwards. It is the full of Christian hopes and desires. Fear not,
that if there be any good to be granted before this day, but that praying for
this day, you pray for it. It is all preparation to this day, and if it go
before it shall not be lost for this days coming so late. But, praying for this
day, we pray for what we know, out hopes are certain, we shall not find our
expectations deceived. Those who aim at receiving good in the mean while, trust
upon promises no where given, upon the presumption of men speaking without
ground, upon a hazard: as if the goods which are certainly promised, were not
enough to satisfy the longing of man's natural Appetite. The teachers play with
their Auditors, as Nurses do with Children, tell them lys to still them until
their longing be passed, and then care not whether it prove true or false. This
is not Christ's way who is Verity it self; this is not the Churches way which is
the Pillar of truth, but the Inventions of such as would dandle weak souls with
a present content.

14. It is time now to look into what your Divine objects, for he seems to be
in choler. He tells us we use loud exclamations, purposely to cool the laudable
practice of such, who by their Will and Testament leave a strict obligation to
their Executors to procure the next morning, or as soon as may be, all those
Sacrifices to be offered, which they intend for the relief of their souls,
though they should be thousands, yea, though they should take no special order
to have many offered after that time. He does as he was wont to do, and as Don
Quixot gave him example, to mingle some false, and some true to shadow the
false; For the multitude of Masses I no ways dislike, so the intention and
practice be right, and conformable to the Circumstances that the Church
requires. That which I dislike is, that the practice of hudling up of Masses
seems to make a great dependence on the Execution of the work more then on the
Charity of the Donour: If the Action of the Donour be out of Charity and
discretion, I make no difference, as to that consideration taken alone, whether
the Masses be said in three days, or three years. I do not believe God's
foresight is so short, that he cannot accept of that this day which is ordered
to be done three years after. I depend not from the explication taken out of
the Author of the Supplement, whatsoever later Divines follow it. I pronounce,
the Masses to do so much more good to the Soul, the more good they do to the
Church of God, and the Priests who say them. No man can deny, but the Action of
causing so many Masses to be said is the better, by how much wiser and
commodiouser it is. I expect the profit of the Soul from Charity and Prudence.
Therefore I conclude, where there is more Charity and Prudence, there is also
more profit to the Soul. As your Divine has read, Make unto your selves friends
of the Mammon of Iniquity; so I have read, That the poor Widow offered to God
more then the rich men. And shall I not think that her two Mites redeemed more
pain due to sin, then the Sacrifices which were made by the Rich-mens Gubbs? He
that will teach otherwise, let him seek other Auditors, I will not be of his
School. I believe that the poor man who gives but a shilling, or has but the
hearty will to do what were fitting for the Church of God toward the good of
his Soul, shall find as much relief as the rich man, who distributes an hundred
pound in all have for four thousand Masses. Yet do I not say the like to rich
men. For in a Rich man, a small thing is no Charity; The Charity which dilates
not his heart toward his Neighbor is no Charity; to give that which he would
not stoop to take up, is no Charity. If what he gives be not sensible to him,
if it does not diminish his love to Money; if greediness does not miss it, it
is no Charity. Therefore the Richer man must give more then the less Rich or
poorer, that it may do him first good in this life, and thereby to his Soul in
the next.

15. He objects, that if the Opinion which has prevailed for five hundred
years be true, it cannot be but solid prudence, to procure the Souls delivery
as soon as may be: But he mistakes the question, which is not n^; Whither the
Soul be deliverable before the Day of Judgment; but by what means she comes to
gain the good she may receive; Whether by the pure execution of the External
action, or by the internal Charity; which is, where it can be, the necessary
and unfailing cause of the exterior act. And, as for the opinion that the
external act gains the remission, I am afraid it is subject to that curse,
Pecunia tua sit tecum in perditionem. For who can doubt but the remission of
sin or pain, and the coming to Heaven are Dona Dei, and cannot pecunia
possideri. I abhor to hear, that where there is no difference of Charity and
internal goodness, there should be a difference in remission of sins, and
purchasing of Heaven. Now in this hudling of Masses, regularly there is less
internal virtue, then when they are dispensed with choice and commodity of the
Church.

16. By what is said, his second and third Arguments are annulled; for, the
value of the gift, and the good of the Soul is the same, whether the Masses be
said a hundred years hence, or upon the obit day, or even not at all, so there
be no fault in the Donour. And if you object, that then the Prayers are not
said; I answer, that is an harm to those who should have said them, and
peradventure to the Church, if God's Providence does not supply it other ways,
but no hurt to the Donour, whose work, that is the Prudence and Charity by
which he ordered it, shall follow him, and procure by their own s^rength what
is due to him. What then? Do the prayers no good, or impetrate nothing to him?
We know that impetration f^r others is uncertain, depending from God's
Providence, no ways due to the prayers, but as much, and how, and when they
agree to God's Providence; and therefore not to be relied upon for any effect,
but every one must look to bear his own burden, and to receive according to
his deserts. He tells us in the end of his fourth Paragraph, that if he had ten
thousand pounds at his death, to leave for his Souls good, he would expressly
order that none should be touched by them, who think it indifferent whether
they pray for him this year, or next, etc. I answer, that I am of that mind
also. For, who will take Alms must follow the Donour's conditions, not his own
knowledge. But if I had but five shillings to leave for Masses; I would rather
seek out the Priest on whom I thought it best employed, though he should say
never a Mass for it, then another who had a privilege to say two Masses that
very morning, but who was not so prudently relieved by my Alms. It was my
fortune to have recommended to me by a Gentlewoman upon her Deathbed, about
4^. for the good of her Soul. She died in poverty, in a strange Country, yet
had saved this to be prayed for, according to the course of Piety she had been
instructed in. She had a Child to be put to Nurse, without means to pay for the
nursing. I openly confess, I procured her not one Mass in virtue of her money,
but caused it all to be bestowed on the keeping of the Child; out of opinion,
that in this I did supply the imprudence of the Mother, and that to do so, was
to employ the money best for the Soul of the Mother. And such a mind I pray God
I may have for my self at my death, if I have any thing to leave, to make my
last Act of the greatest Charity to my Neighbor that I can; and I hope I shall
do mine own Soul the greatest good that lies in my power to do by disposing of
Temporal Goods.

17. In his fifth and sixth Paragraphs, he takes that Souls are chiefly to be
helped by the Sacrifice of the Mass, according to the Council of Trent: But if
one can help (says he) many much more. What (says he) can be here denied by
any Catholic? I answer easily, that nothing is to be denied, but something to
be understood. And, first, because that out of the Principle laid, Charity is
the ground of all impetration, therefore to understand how it is true, that the
Mass is the greatest help for souls inPurgatory, we ought to understand how the
Mass is the greatest act of Charity: Which to do, we must remember the Mass to
have these two relations. The one, that it is the Christian Sacrifice: The
other, that it is the Commemoration of the Passion of our Savior. The first
Consideration stirs up our Intellectual power toward the Admiration, and
Adoration of his Essence, and Thanksgiving for all the benefits which we have
received, and are to receive, from his Almighty hand, and to vow all our love
and affection to him upon that score. The later stirs up the man, the Compound
of Reason and Passion, to the apprehension and esteem of the Mystery of our
Redemption, of the good received by it, and of the penal course Christ took to
do us this good. Both these considerations are helped, by an awful reverence to
the Action we do of handling Christ's own real Body, and of presenting to God,
not our temporal goods, as in Alms, nor our own bodies, as in Penal Exercises,
but the true and real Body of Jesus Christ, accompanied with his Soul and
Divinity. If all this raises not Charity to the height that Charity can have
in this life, it is not the fault of the Work, but of the Person. Wherefore,
clearly, if Souls can be helped by nothing but Prayers, and that Alms-deeds,
and Satisfactions, can have no place but as they are Suffrages, or
impetrations; who can require greater evidence, that of all exterior actions,
the Mass of its nature, is the most impetrative and helpful to the deceased
faithful? But presently you see that Masses are to be weighed, not numbered, to
increase the power of prevailing. I might add to all this, that the very
procuring of Masses is the greatest Act of Charity that a Layman can do,
speaking of exterior acts, and regularly. For the procuring of Masses,
discreetly performed, and of its own nature, works not only that Priests be
maintained, but also makes them devout and good. The goodness of the Priest is
the very health and happiness of the Parish. The Spiritual good of the Parish,
is the greatest good that, speaking of regular and not extraordinary heroical
Works, is found in Man's life; therefore the procuring of Masses, is the
greatest extern Charity, that any private Layman can do, when it is done with
prudence and discretion.

18. I believe the rest of his Chapter is already answered. For, we scoff not
at the multitude of Masses, but at the indiscretion of using them, and
procuring them. Nor do your Arguments persuade us, that Rich-men are in any
thing in better state then the Poor, not only for accidental considerations,
but for the very substance. The Rich may do greater-acts of Charity, but not
acts of greater Charity; they may relieve other Bodies and Souls more then poor
men, but poor men have as much power to help their own as the richest. The Rich
may procure more to pray for them, but the Poor can pray for themselves as well
as the Rich, which is the certain and essential good. And, if you ask me,
whether these be not great enticements of Avarice; I answer, no Avarice but
keeps its goods until death; these men, for the most part, do their Alms while
they live; which makes no Avarice, though they should procure Riches for such
an end; the which I believe is rare. Our Wisemen have a saying, I will make my
own Hands my Executours, and my Eyes my Overseers. Whose Estates permit them,
this is their way; for this perfects the heart, extirpates or moderates the
love of Temporalities in them, which is the main good. But the hope of good, by
what Nature takes away from them, leaves the desires as great as ever to the
last gasp. St. Austin advances an Opinion, that he who fears God, and behaves
himself like a Christian, only upon the fear of Torments in the next World, is
no good Christian, and shall not reach to Heaven. He says it is the love of
Heaven, and not the fear of Hell, makes a good Christian. I will not interpose
my verdict in this Controversy: but will not he say the like of those, who
only for fear of the pains of Purgatory, part with their Goods to the Church,
when they cannot keep them; when by Nature, they are their Heirs Goods, not
theirs; Will he not say, it is no act done out of Charity, and therefore does
them no good? And as for the prayers of them who pray for the Donour, besides
the uncertainty of whether, how, and when they shall have effect, let us but
reflect that we cannot doubt but that if prayers can do the effect, they cannot
want the prayers of all Saints and Angels, which must needs be more acceptable
then ours. But the difference is, that they pray for nothing but what they know
shall take effect by their prayers, because they see what God's Providence and
determination bears; We pray blindly, and many times for that which is not
decreed by the Eternal Providence, and so cannot be granted. And this many
times thorough concupiscence, like to St. James's phrase, Petitis and non
accipitis, quia petitis ut in concupis^s vestris insumatis. So do we through
natural desires, or love, without sufficient resignation; and so give cause on
our own parts* to be denied.

19. In his eleventh Number, he answers the abuse of multiplying Priests to
ferve in dead Masses to the devotion of the people, by saying, that if the
Decrees of the Council of Trent were observed, notwithstanding these, Opinions,
Priests would not be over multiplied. The which, as I will not contest, so I
may well say, your Divine does not consider that the maintaining of these
Opinions, is the cause why the Orders of the Councils cannot be observed,
thorough the importunity of credulous People, which leaves not Bishops free to
look to the observation of the Holily instituted Canons, chiefly to thi^,
Incerta etiam and qu^ speci^ falsi laborant evulgari ac tractari non
permittant. The Council forbids uncertain opinions to be handled before the
People, your Divine teaches the People to leave the Ancient and Apostolical
devotion to pray for a happy Day of Resurrection, to fix their thoughts upon
the uncertainty of being freed from imaginary pains; which the Holy St.
Catharine of Genua (commended by my Adver^aries for one of the most illuminate
Saints of our Age) says they would not be freed from, but by satisfying God's
Justice. Toward the end, he cites us a speech of G^nadius, to say that it
(whatsoever that relates, for the does not declare i^; but I think *it is praying
for the Dead) was not decreed, that the Priests might thereby gain their
maintenance, but for the good of the Dead; which is to be understood with
discretion, as not to deny the one, but to prefer the other. For seeing St.
Paul, and God himself tells us, that the Priests are to live by the service of
the Altar, it would be a very unadvised speech to deny the maintenance of
Priests to be a secondary intention of the Church, though the first and
chiefest were the good of the Dead*

20. He begins his last Chapter with telling us how invi^cible Arguments he has
brought out the practice of the Church, which makes me think the good man means
honestly, and verily persuades himself he has done wonders. His Arguments, and
my Answer, may be compared together, and the Reader thereupon give judgment. As
to what is particular in this Chapter, in his second Number he, not content
with the translation made before him of those words, Donum fac Remissionis;
himself mends it so, Thy Pardons grant not to delay, until the last accompting
day. Where he puts in the word last; and, in stead of saying, Give Pardon, he
puts not to delay the Pardon. The which, though they leave the true sense, yet
they change the face of the speech, and make show, as if until the very last
day there were place for remission, of which, in the Latin there is no
appearance, but only a desire of pardon while time is, to wit, in this life,
insinuating nothing whither after death there is place for Pardon until the Day
of Judgment or no, which his words make show of; such craft there is in dawbing.

21. He seeks many ways of solving the plain prayers of the Church; as saying
the Church imagins this to be yet before the Soul is departed, or that they are
not spoken by the Dead, but by him who prays. And I cannot deny, that if such
explications be admitted to be the explications of men who proceed sincerely to
understand the mind of the Church, and not who seek to draw the words of the
Church to their own Error, any words may be so colored. As I remember, my
Master of Philosophy taught all to explicate Aristotle when he was against us,
by saying Aristoteles loquitur cum vulgo. But if this be an unworthy practice,
let us see what his fourth Number offers us. To wit, that, whereas we object to
them how the whole face of the Churches prayers is directed to the Day of
Judgment, and not one word insinuated of remission of pains before that day,
which is an irrefragable testimony of the Churches meaning; he seeks to retort
the same Argument, by saying, Why does not the Church pray for the acceleration
of the Day of Judgment? To which we answer, she does it perpetually. For he
that prays for good at the Day of Judgment, prays for the Day of Judgment, and
he that prays for the Day of Judgments coming, prays it may come as soon as
possibly: So that the Church prays perpetually for it, when she prays for the
Dead, but their fixedness on their Opinion permits them not to see it.

22. In his fifth Number he answers our Argument from Foundations, for prayers
until the Day of Judgment, because those who made them were notoriously of
their Opinion opposite to ours. But we must expect more ground to believe that.
For such Foundations are said to be in France ever since the Children of
Charles the Great's time, who were instructed by Alcuinus. And therefore were
of his and our English Saxon Opinion: And later Foundations were made by the
imitation of the former; and though, since the University of Paris got a great
Vogue, this new Opinion has been amongst the Doctors, yet it cannot be
doubted but for a great while the Churches governed themselves by their an^ient
Customs, and by little and little admitted the Opinions of learned men:
Wherefore it is not to be admitted without proof, that the Authors of
perpetual Foundations proceeded out of an Opinion contrary to their practice.
He wonders how the Church should prefix a time to praying for the same soul. I
answer by Revelation, if she did accept of Opinions by private Revelations; for
why might not some Saint have a Revelation that no Soul lay in Purgatory more
then 100 years, as well as that such a Soul laid but three days. What
discretion of Prelates can provide, that particular souls may have
proportionable prayers I understand not; for where there is not knowledge enough
to found a ghess, there discretion has no place.

22. Here we might have made an End, had not a saying of our Holy Bishop of
Rochester stuck in his stomach* I do not remember where I have made u^^ of that
place; But I less find to what purpose he brings it, more then to frame an
irreverent Interpretation of his own* and impose it upon me, and to take
occasion to leave the Reader's mouth seasoned with a scandalous ^alumny
against^ me, as if that I favored Luther. Whereas, it is one of the greatest
signs of Truth to be betwixt two opposite Errors Luther's and his; and
therefore no wonder, if he cries it s^ells of Luther's Doctrine, as ever the
middle Truth is wont to be calumniated by the extreme Errors. He repeats here
that I deny the three Propositions he mentioned in his proof against me,
because I understand them like a Divine, and not in his gross Market-way. He
tells us, that supposing the Pope's Definitions be not infallible, yet it is
rashness not to admit such determinations, and for so much he cites Veron. But
this ^olly, to think Propositions (and the like is of actions) to be
temerarious in common, I have spoken of before: In particular, an Action is
rash, when it is not done upon good grounds: But to say there cannot be good
grounds to oppo^ a Proposition supposed to be false, is beyond Logic. As
likewise it is against my Divinity, to say that a true Proposition may have
opposition to Principles solidly deduced from F^. Which if it be not directly
condemned in the Later an Council under Leo the tenth, it is by consequence.
The words are these: S^g that one truth is not contrary to another, (...) (...)
all Propositions contrary to a truth known by Faith, to be wholly false; and do
strictly co^ it not to be lawful to teach, any otherwise. And decree that all
such as adhere to such Propositions are to be avoided and punished as
Heretics. And so leaving him, and the Divulgers of his Book this Bit to chaw
upon, I remit what is said on both sides, to yours, and all judicious Readers
Judgments.

POSTSCRIPT.
SIR,
I have teceived the second part of Mr. J. M's remembrance to pray for the
dead, but to what purpose you sent it I do not know. I cast my view over it,
and find it divided into two parts; The one contains the Motives of praying for
the dead, the second ^e Practice.

As to the first, saving that he supposes his falsity for truth, and the
Divines imagination of the separable virtues of Satisfaction, and Merit, and
Impetration in every charitable act, which has been sufficiently discoursed
of, his whole Doctrine is common to both opinions. The proper Motives are
contained in the three first Chapters, in which there is no difference more
then some applications of the same words diversely.

The seven following Chapters comprehend Motives common to all charitable
actions; and so, unless it be in some considerable passages, are common to all
good books that exhort to any good work.

The five last Chapters lay forth a petty manner of devotion, fit enough for
weak souls, and therefore not to be hindered. What he says of Indulgences has
been twice answered in the book. Some things there are in these last Chapters
which deserve to be excepted against; but, because they require the declaration
of some Principles of Devotion, which I have not as yet explicated, I hold it
better to speak nothing then to speak without profit. Those who understand any
thing of devotion and perfection, know that Charity is the end of it all; and
therefore know that those good acts, whatsoever they be, that increase Charity
in our own souls, are the best; and that Charity is the love of God, or of
Bliss, for so St. Thomas, out of St. Austin, defines Charity that it is motus
Animi ad Deum ut fruendum. The minds moving it self to the enjoyment of God.
Who then will understand what acts are best, let him consider how much they
advance this Love of God; and whether he be only a Christian, or also a
Directour, let him select to his charge such actions, as have the greatest
power to make the soul he looks to, more solid and fervent in the Love of God,
as of his last end. For the substance of actions, the nobler actions fit the
nobler souls, and fo are to be proposed unto them; and, as no body can doubt
but it is better to hinder a soul from going to Purgatory, and much more from
going to Hell, then to free it out of Purgatory, so actions which cause men to
be good in this world are more to be recommended to comprehensive souls. But if
any one thorough subjectness to passion, and shortness of discourse, is more
moved to Charity by corporeal apprehensions then by strength of reason, this
praying for the dead is well proposed to him. Though the truth is, it does
enervate the perfection of Charity, not only in it self by entrenching upon
true resignation, but also concerning the special fruit of praying for the
dead: of which the wise man admonishes us, saying, it is better going to the
house of wayling then to the house of banqueting, because in the former we are
put in mind of the end of all men. And J. M. himself cites out of St. Austin,
that when we celebrate the days of our dead Brethren, we ought to have in our
mind that which is to be hoped, and that which is to be feared; that is to say,
the day of Judgment. What a strange humor then is this of men who pretend to
devotion, to cast away the substantial, certain, and ever in all Antiquity
practiced part of praying for the dead; to set up a new, fallacious, uncertain
way, against the orders of the Church forbidding uncertainties to be taught
publi^y to the people; against the perfection of those who pray, to whom they
preach to determine God, and to desire a particular effect, of which we neither
have any promise that it shall be granted, nor know whether it stands with Gods
providence, and even common rules of Government. Let then Priests say their
Masses and Offices according to the words they find in their Missals and
Ceremonials, and not frame senses that are not in the words; Let them pray as
all the former Church has done, and not frame out of Origenical or
Chiliastical Principles, new inventions, to magnify themselves by having some
privileges, or more power then others. Let them first make it plain, that what
they profess has better grounds then such as the Popes call the dreams of
devout Persons in their prayers, before they impose upon our belief new
Articles of Faith. Let them not oblige Divines to think that falsities may be
solidly connected with Faith, and such like Doctrins destructive of Truth and
Religion, and Devotion.

I pray also inquire where he found those words in St. Austin, whence he
fathered that gross absurdity upon him, that some should be damned for want of
time to be prayed for. For I read the Chapter he cites twice over, and could
espy nothing like it

Your Servant T. W.

Errata.
Page 28. l. 25. as this, is. 48. l. 1^. in these (...). 63. l. ^8. swoun. 65.
l. 19. struggle. 66. l. ult. alter the story. 67. l. (...). ^ir Inquisition.
68. l. 11. severe. l. 20. consider how much the torments of this. 77. l. 27. we
acknowledge. 109. l. 28. that; the Pope, 154. l. 28. If this way. 160. l. 18.
for fear of being. l. 28. knowing, 180. l. 6. then we ^udg. 181. l. 23. if
mine. 182. l. 15. Alcuinus. 183. l. 24. essence of 184. l. 6. one, whether.
190. l. 20. not suit. p. 19^. l. 6. by ^s. 24^. l. 23. change: but. 249. l. 16.
Peripateticae 253. l. 2. for we.

FINIS.
A short Letter sent after the former.
SInce I writ the former, I have found commodity to see the cited Books which
before I wanted; And can give this account of them. The Author of the Oration
imposed upon St. John Damascen is an unexcusable Heretic: The intent of the
Oration to persuade men that however they live, they may come to Heaven by
other men's Prayers. He puts Infidels to have been delivered out of Hell by our
Savior Jesus Christ at his desc^^sion; which St. Gregory declared to be
Heresy. He puts perfect good works without Faith, against the constant Doctrine
of St. Paul; which is perfect Pelagianism. He puts that the Heathen
Philosophers knew almost all the Mysteries of our Faith, as much as we hear of
the Sibyls. And to make it wholly fure that he is an Heretic he does more then
half profess his Doctrine is his own invention, and that he has evinced against
the Prophet, saying; In inferno quis confitebitur tibi; and against the present
persuasion of Christians, that there is confession in Hell.

As for Gennadius, whom he presses likewise, he is of the same stamp. He
teaches St. John Damascen found this Doctrine of praying for the damned; He
takes the whole sum of Doctrine out of that Oration. He only cousen'd the Latin
Fathers in pretending in common to hold prayer for the dead; And being returned
into Greece joined with Marcus Ephesinus, to annul the Union made in the Council
of Florence.

The work of St. Isidor I find to be none of his, but of some Author who lived
about the beginning of the Schools, he so perfectly uses the School-terms; and
so his Authority is no more then of a School-Doctor.

As for St. Julian of Toledo, it is true, that he holds the opinion of our
Adversaries, but so that he confutes their intention. For having proposed the
question, he is so far from saying it was the opinion of the Church, that he
resolves it as upon his own head, and that uncertainly, with a Puto, I think,
alleging St. Austin for his saying, whose sentence you have heard examined
already. So that his Authority is no greater then his ghess, that so it is; as
St. Austin ghessed there might be some such thing. So that we have out of St.
Julian that it was not the credulity, or received opinion in his days. By which
you will understand how small performances accompany the good man's great
boastings. And see the growing of their opinion. St. Austin ghessed it possible
at most, for he professes only not to oppose it. The Author of the Dialogues
credited unlikely Revelations. St. Julian ghessed it positively. St. Odilo and
those who followed him, took it up for certain upon private Revelations. The
later Greeks upon the like Revelations took praying for damned souls; And upon
the combining of these two, your great Doctor seeks to make it an Article of
Faith. These short Notes I thought fit to acquaint you with to complete your
satisfaction, which done I rest

Your Servant Tho. White.

FINIS.

