A METHOD AND INSTRUCTIONS for the Art of Divine Meditation, WITH Instances of
the several Kinds of Solemn MEDITATION.

By Thomas White, late Minister of Gods Word in London.

The second Edition.

London, Printed for Tho. Parkhurst, and are to be sold at his Shop at the
Bible and three Crowns at the lower end of Cheapside near Mercers Chapel, 1672.

ERRATA.
PAge 1. Line the last Read made. p. 4 l. 25. r. might be. p. 8. l. 14. and 17.
r. blessednesses. l. 26. r. but blessed. p. 9. l. 15. r. them. l. 16. r. they.
p 17. l. 5. r. one's, p. 23. l. 11. r. Obj. p. 26. l. 4. r. of Christ. p. 31 l.
3. r. straining. p. 33. l. 11. r. to be. l. 15. r. body of, p. 38 l. 20. r. he.
p 52 l. 6. r. to our l. 12. r. receipt. p. 54. l. 20. r. this. p. 57. l. 10 r.
such a street. p 69. l. 12. r. inability p. 73. l 10 r. too: p. 74. l. 4. blot
out every day. l. 13. blot out of. p. 77. l. 15 r. as I have. l. 17 r. in. p.
78. l. 16. r. affections. p. 80 l. 21. r. matter. p. 85. l. 2. blot out not. p.
89. l,. 4: r. subject. p. 91. l 7. r out of doubt. p98. l. 3. blot out grace p.
100. l. 23. r. by my. p. 102. l. 1. r. strange. p. 106. l. 14. blot out has p
110. l. 6. r. heart p. 112. l 13, r, heart, p, 113, l, 22, r. is it. p. 114. l,
11, r. Is I, p, 123, l, 23, r, God, p, 137, l, 19, r, she, p, 147, l, 12, blot
out not, p, 148, l, 24, r, It is not, p, 192 blot out no. p, 228, l, 18, blot
out me, p, 232, l, 19, r. here, p, 271, l, 17, r, tell, p, 274, l. 20, r, thou
who p. 275, for to, r, we should, p, 282, l, 7, r world, p, 292, l, 19 r, soul,
p, 299 l, 15, r, world, p, 4, of the conclusion l, 7, r, though, p, 5 l, 18, r,
for this.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
Christian Reader,
OUR Active Souls can no more forbear to think, then the Eye can choose but see
when it is Open; and we being accountable to God for thoughts (he being the
searcher and judge of them) it would be our wisdom and security to improve all
means for the Spirituallizing of them. It Is charged upon no less penalty then
damnation, for Jerusalem to purge her self from vain thoughts.

The Meditating Mind is the beginner of all Goodness. On the Sinners part, it
is the Rise of his Returning unto God, Ezekiel. 18. 28. In Saints, and Persons
Converted, it is the way to a Progressive Conversion, and Renewing Repentance,
Psalm. 119. 59. I considered my ways and turned; the more consideration, the
more conversion; Men's bold and eager pursuit in Sin, is greatly from want of
consideration, Jer. 8. 6. Even in a Nation when God intends to work Great
Returnings, he stirs up great bethinkings, 1 King. 8. 47. If they shall bethink
themselves. He minds them of considering to bring them to returning. In Nature
Rational, the first Mover is the Mind by consideration; In Grace, the first
mover is the Mind, by Meditation, Luke 15. 17. And when the Soul is returned to
God, Oh how sweet are the Meditations of him! The sweetness thereof is better
felt then expressed; thereby the Christian does improve his knowledge, quicken
his affections, and excite practice.

He that has the Grace and skill to be always communing with God, or his own
Heart, will never want Work or Company, never need he complain of Solitariness,
or tedious Hours, for there is no time wherein there is not some great business
to be done between God and him.

Apious heart by meditation is least alone, when most alone; his God with him,
and he with God, are good company. He is doing the most and best business when
he is employed with his God about his own and other men's Souls.

It was the great Design of the Reverend and holy Author Mr. Tho. White, at
first in publishing this small Treatise, to help Christians forward in this so
advantageous and heavenly Duty. A few Pages of Manuscript are inserted which he
left behind him for that purpose, if it came to be reprinted.

All that knew the Author, honored and loved him. He was a Burning and Shining
Light; he was too Bright a Star to shine longer in the Terrestrial World; God
made use of him to turn many unto Righteousness, and now he is gone to Shine
in the Kingdom of his Father.

Reader, If thou be unskilful in the Duty of Meditation, here thou may be
directed; If thou be backward in Performance, here thou may be quickened;
The Instances here given argue such a holy Heart in him that used them, that it
will be much thy own fault if they do not make thy Heart who perusest them, if
it be bad, good, and if it be good, better: that it may do so, shall be the
prayers of

R. A.

A METHOD OR INSTRUCTIONS for the Art of Divine Meditation.
Psalm. 1, 2; But his delight is in the Law of the Lord, and in his Law, he does
meditate day and night.
CHAP. I. An Introduction to the following Discourse.
A Book wherein the Lives of the most Eminent Saints were written, would be the
delight of Saints to read. Yet to read of the wonderful discoveries God has
mad of himself to dying Saints; to hear the wonderful things that such Souls
filled with ecstasies of Love and Joy, do speak, is sweet as the honey and the
honey comb; it seems to realize Heaven unto us.

To hear a dying Saint just as entering into Heaven saying blessed be God I am
arrived safe to glory: The gates of Heaven stand wide open for me, and Christ
stands with stretched out Arms to receive me, blessed be God for free Grace,
blessed be God for Jesus Christ.

To hear another as he was on his sick bed expounding Romans 8. he stopped and
Mr. Holland.
said, what light is this I see? They about him said it is the Sunshine, nay
said he it is my Saviors shine. I doubt not but you all see this Light; but I
feel a light within me which no one of you all can know, and turning himself to
the Minister that Preached his Funeral Sermon, he said this night I dye, and
speak this from me, I speak it confidently that God deals familiarly with
man, I feel his Mercy, I see his Majesty, Whether in the body or out of the
body, I cannot tell, God he kn^weth; I see things that are unutterable, and
with many ^^^h like speeches he ended his life* So it is no less delightful to
he^ the ravishing speeches of Martyrs crying out with clapping of hands saying,
O you Papists, you talk of Miracles here is a Miracle, I feel no more pain in
the midst of these torm^nts then if I was upon a bed of Roses.

Another though in desertion to that very time, yet when come to the Stake, he
cried out, O he is come, he is come whom my soul loved.

Yet to have an opportunity to hear one of the (...) Saint; in the World in
their s^^ret addresses unto God, is not less desirable then the former, when
Saints pray with others they refrain from several expressions, for fear of
scandal, either of pride, or hypocrisy: There is that (...) that liberty of
speech in secret, which is not lawful if possible to be uttered, except by a
Soul in secret, when no one hears but God alone. To hear a poor soul in
desertion bemoaning it self like Ephraim, to hear it fetch such sighs and
groans for one glympse of Gods smiling countenance, such sighs and groans I
say as never any one yet heard the sorrowfullest in the world fetch for the
loss of a dying, or new dead friend, or child, or Husband: nay such groans as
never any in the agonies of death, or in the midst of the greatest torments
ever fetched: O how you would be affected to hear such sighs and such groans
as some of the people of God fetch, and such sighs they have, Romans 8. 26. they
might and were actually expressed, if indulgent Parents had them when they
dyed, or men in torment had any equal to them. But the Holy Ghost says that he
helps the infirmities of his people with sighs and groans that cannot be
expressed. To hear a man sigh as if his heart would break because he could not
enjoy the ordinances of God, Oh how would it make one say, alas alas! I was
never thus affected because I could not enjoy the Ordinances of God

1. Oh how would it have aff^cted you could you have heard David in his secret
addresses unto God; See how affectionately he speaks in the 119. Psalm and
the 20th verse, My soul breaks for the longing that it has unto thy Judgment
at all times. This was no strain of Rhetoric, David would not lie to the holy
Ghost, and tell God his heart was ready to break if it was not, for he well knew
God knew his heart; nay for this to be constant when ever he thought of such
things, then for his very soul to break gives a sufficient testimony to the
truth of what I have asserted: Doubtless hypocrites cannot in their actings of
love or joy, come up to the real affections of some of Gods people; I say
therefore to hear the expressions of Gods people, in their secret addresses
unto God, their lovesick pangs in their ecstasies of joy, were worth our
hearing, for they would wonderfully affect This very thing is done in the book
of Psalms, where we have David writing his secret devotions, for abundance of
the Psalms are David's secret addresses unto God upon several occasions, as by
the titles of several of his Psalms does appear.

CHAP. 2. A short explanation of the words together with some short
Observations upon the same.
BEcause the first Verse is part of the description of the blessed man, and an
Introductory also to the following words, I shall speak something to them. The
words of the first verse are far more emphatical then they are rendered in our
English Translarion: For indeed our English Dialect will not bear to be
translated exactly according to the Hebrew; but as near as it can be take it
thus: O blessed is the man, or he man, (i. e. whoever he be rich or poor, noble
or ignoble) that walks not in the counsel of the ungodly, nor stands in the
way of sinners, nor sits in the seat of the scornfu: But his will is in the Law
of the Lord, or of Jehovah, and in his Law he does meditate in the day and by
the night. Give me leave to gather up the Pearls that lie in the way to the
Text.

Let me a little consider the greatness and excellency of the righteous man's
blessedness.

He is blessed.

2. He is blessedness, made up of blessedness, blessed in his body blessed in
his soul, blessed in health, blessed in sickness, blessed in every state and
condition.

3. He is blessedness, blessed in the highest degree: For the plural number is
sometimes put for the Superlative, or else blessedness signifies all manner of
blessednesses, temporal, spiritual, and eternal; if riches be a blessing, he
shall have them; if poverty be a blessing, he shall have that; for sometimes
poverty is a blessing, sometimes riches: whatsoever is a blessing he shall have

4. A Saint is not only blessed, blessed even to admiration. It is brought in
here with an interjection, or note of admiration. O! blessedness is the man.

5. Saints admire the Saints blessedness, and it is no small matter will make
the Saints admire. The glory and happiness of the world, they despise, which
the men of the world admire at, and they despise the happiness of the Saints.

6. See the goodness of God, he gives the Saints happiness beyond their
understanding. f God should send the Saints a book as large as Heaven, and bid
us write down what we would have, we should be losers by the bargain, for the
happiness and blessedness of Saints puts the Saints to a stand, and makes
them silent, for admiration is, Silentium intellectus. When the understanding
perceives that there is more in the object then it is able to comprehend, it
leaves off making notions of the subject, it then falls to admiring of it.
The Platonists say of God that he is (...) visibile, invisible, by reason of
his excellency and abundance of light God may be praised well by many words but
better by few, and best of all by none, but by silence, admiration and ecstasies
of love and indefatigable desire after everlasting enjoyments of him, So I say
of the blessedness of Saints, surely as Adam in his best estate was altogether
vanity, Psalm. 39. So the Saint the man, whosoever he be, is in his lowest
condition altogether blessed: I shall pass by the gradation of the words, as
walk, stand, sit, counsel, way, seat, wicked, sinner, scornful, though one may
observe by the way, one grows wicked by degrees, but I forbear: yet this I
shall observe from the coherence of these words with the former, viz. That
negative divinity damneth thousands (is is Luthers expression) though we must
first cease to do evil; before we can do good, yet it is not enough so cease to
do evil but we must also do good, for as sins of commission poison the soul, so
sins of omission starve the soul. From that his will is in the law of Jehovah,
we may observe, that we should have no will of our own, the Law of God should
be our will, if you would know the will of a Saint, you may find it in Gods
Law, Saints will is the transcript of the Law written by the finger of God,
Jer. 31. 33. I will put my Law in their inward parts says God, and write in
their hearts, if any would know what a Saint will do in such or such a case,
you need not go to ask him, but see what God commands, he wills nothing but
what God commands, and whatsoever God commands is his will.

Further, we may observe, that it is not enough to do holy duties, but we must
love holy duties, for the blessed man does not only keep to the utmost of his
power, the Law, but delights in the Law, the Commandments are not grievous but
delightful to him. A wicked man though he may pray, yet he loves it not, a
Saint would not for all the world that God should say to him, you shall think
so often of me in a day; it would be a great trouble to a Saint that God should
forbid, as it is to a wicked man that God commands him to think often. But
passing by these I shall choose this observation as the foundation of the
following discourse, viz. that to meditate upon the word of God, is the
essential character and indispensible duty and constant practice of every one
that is a true blessed man; and that this meditation on Scripture may be the
easier understood and practiced, I shall proceed as follows.

CHAP. III. Of the nature, kinds, and differences, of solemn, divine meditation.
SOmething seems necessary to be premised concerning the nature of
Meditation, what it is, and how it differs from other acts of the
understanding that seem like it, and how one kind of meditation differs from
another, else this treatise will be defective without it.

First, For the nature or definition of Divine Meditation we may say, that it
is a serious solemn thinking and considering of the things of God, to the end
we might understand how much they concern us, and that our hearts thereby may
be raised to some holy affections and resolutions.

Secondly, Solemn Divine Meditation differs from occasional meditation.

1. In that occasional meditations are shorter, like ejaculatory prayers which
though they are as parenthesis in our worldly employments, yet they signify
more then all the rest of the business we are employed in, but meditation is
generally of longer duration then ordinary solemn prayers.

2. Such occasional meditations are things that we have in transitu, or by the
by; and this that I speak of is a solemn set duty.

Thirdly, The subject from which occasional meditations arise are very
frequently things artificial, civil or natural, indeed any thing that we see or
hear but the subject of solemn meditation, are only things spiritual.

Thirdly, Solemn Divine Meditation differs from study.

1. In respect of the subject, wicked men: Study and Godly men meditate, and it
may be the former, study more then the godly. Nay it is the very distinguishing
Sign between Saints and others. that they meditate in the Law of God day and
night, Psalm. 1. 2. And I believe it is a thing far more rare for a meditating
Christian to be an hypocrite, then for a Christan that spends much in prayer,
especicially if it be public.

2. In respect of the Subject of study; so solemn meditation differs from it,
for

1. Study is of all manner of things whether natural, civil, or artificial, or
mathematical, etc. But meditation is only of matters that concern our eternal
welfare.

2. The matters that are most knotty and difficult, and generally such as
afford little spiritual nourishment, as Criticisms, Crenologies, and
controversies: but the matter of meditation is of things plain, and of great
spiritual advantage.

3. Thirdly, The end of Study is knowledge, but the end of meditation is
holiness. If one sees a learned man we may conclude that he has been a great
student; and if we see a godly man, we may conclude that that man has
meditated much.

Fourthly, Solemn meditation differs from contemplation in these several
particulars, as

1. Contemplation is more like the beatificial vision which the Angels have of
God in Heaven. Mediation is like the kindling of fire and contemplation more
like a fire when fully kindled; the one is like the Spouse seeking of Christ
and the other is like the Spouse enjoying of Christ

2. Contemplation is one effect and end of meditation.

3. Meditation is like the Bees flying to several flowers, or like one,
smelling to Flowers particularly, and contemplation is like the smelling of
them altogether in a nosegay, or like the water that is distilled from them
all. The Spouse in her description of Christ is like to meditation, her
concluding that he is altogether lovely is like to contemplation.

Now there are four kinds of solemn meditation according to the four several
subjects of it.

1. Some solemn Meditations are upon Sermons that we hear, which is a very
useful and necessary practice for Christians, and it is better to hear one
Sermon only and meditate on that, then to hear two Sermons and meditate on
neither: neither is it necessary nor possible to set down a method for
meditating on Sermons, since th method of Sermons is so various, I shall only
say thus much in particular, that the end of such meditation is neither only,
nor chiefly that we may the better fix the heads and substance of the Sermon in
our heads, not that we may the better understand, and be fuller instructed of
the truth of the point we heard preached upon, but especially to work those
truths, advices and motives upon our affections, that are proposed to us in the
Sermon.

2. The second kind of solemn meditation, is, when upon some providential
occasion, or upon some spiritual distemper, or temptation, or almost any thing
of that nature, we retire our selves and power out our souls in prayers and
soliloquies, which may not but in a very large sense be called prayers, being
mixed of such various and differing parts, sometimes speaking to God and telling
him how we stand affected to him, and his ordinances, sometimes speaking to our
own soul, chiding encouraging or instructing of it, sometimes speaking to our
selves what we resolve to do, what we intend to say unto God; all which you may
find in the 42. Psalm, and many more of that nature both in that and many other
Psalms which may not properly be called prayers, but solemn occasional
meditations, and the occasions of those meditations are often set down in the
beginning of the Psalm, and they differ from those occasional meditations (of
which I spoke in the beginning of this Chaper) only in their duration and
solemnity just as solemn prayers differ from jaculatory prayers, and to set
down any method for these is not convenient, because they observe no method,
and differ very little in any thing else from that kind of meditation for which
directions are set down in this Treatise.

3. The next kind of meditation is upon some practical truths of Religion: many
directions for which and instances of the same are set down in this Treatise.

4. The fourth and last kind of solemn meditation is that which is upon
Scripture, which shall be the subject of the fourteenth, fifteenth, and
sixteenth Chapters of this Treatise.

CHAP. IV. That solemn Meditation is a duty.
THat this is a duty is evident,

1. From the practice of Gods People, Genesis 24. 63. That this was a solemn
Meditation is evident, because he went out into the field to perform it, and
had no other business there but this; It Is not said when he was in the field he
meditated, as if it were occasiona but to show that it was a set duty, it is
said that he went out to meditate.

2. It Is commanded Josh. 1. 8 and this duty of meditation is set down as a
chief means to be sanctified of God for the keeping of the Law.

3. It is as a Characteristical difference between a wicked man and a Saint.

4. To consider, in Scripture, and to meditate, are Synonima's, and the
necessity of it appears in this, because that the cause of sin is the want of
consideration and not want of knowledge, Isa. 1. 3. and it is not much for us to
hear Sermons, nay, though we be neverso attentive, it will not serve the turn,
Psalm. 41. 12. It is more then to know, for who is there almost in the world
that knows not that he must dye, but few are there that consider it? Deuteronomy. 32.
29.

5. The necessity of Meditation appears in this, that no man is converted
without Meditation, for every one that is converted the method is this.

1. He hears the truths of God.

2. He is convinced of them.

3. He considers and meditates upon them, and sees how much they concern him.

4. He is affected with them.

5. Being thus affected it raises holy resolutions of better obedience.

But it will be objected, alas, I am not book learned, how shall I perform
this duty of Meditation? This is rather for Ministers, etc,

Ans. 1. I may say of Meditation as it is said of the Mathematics, he that is a
rational man, and does but improve his reason, though he has neither tongues
nor art to help him, may understand and grow to an extraordinary excellency in
those Arts; So he that has grace, if he do but exercise and improve it,
though he has not learning, will excel the learnedest man in the world that
has not grace in the duty of Meditation it is not learning but devotion that
enables a man to this duty.

2. Can a man be a blessed man without Learning? then he may meditate without
it, Psalm. 12.

Obs. But it is a very hard duty.

Ans. 1. That shows it to be an excellent duty, for the harder any duty is, the
more excellent; the hardness consists in this, that it is contrary to our
corruptions and the more contrary any thing is to that which is bad, it is so
much the better.

2. Can you expect any duty should be easy at first? Is there any thing so of
temporal things which are of any excellency, as Writing, playing on a Lute, etc.

3. Because it is so powerful to mortify corruptions; sweet things nourish, and
bitter things purge: therefore if you will only perform those duties that are
delightful, they will nourish not purge out corruption.

4. Get but your hearts inflamed with the love of God, then this duty will not
only be easy and delightful, but it will be a duty that you cannot tell almost
how to avoid; for it is as hard not to think of what one loves as to think of
what one hates; bid the covetous man not think of his money, or bid him think
of the things of God, and he will find an equal difficulty in both. Indeed the
love of God and desire of heavenly things are got by meditation, but when once
our hearts are enflamed by Meditation then our Mediattions are enflamed by
love: As an Oven is first heated by fuel, and then it sets the fuel on fire,
and as with the fuel you must put in fire and blow it, but afterward it
kindles of it self, so the difficulty of Meditation is at first: When there is
but as it were a spark of love in the heart, it will cost him some pains by
meditation to blow it up to a flame, but afterward the heart will be so heated
with these flames of love, that it will so inflame all the thoughts, that it
will make us not only easily but necessarily to meditate on the things of God.

5. The people of God generally have found a great deal of difficulty in
praying without a form at first. Many godly Ministers used a set Form of Prayer
before their Sermons not many years since and when they and priva^^ Christians
came to pray at first without a Form, they found a strangeness and an
unreadiness thereunto; So it is in Meditation, Christians being not used to it,
it will seem a strange and difficult work unto them, but I may say of it, as is
said of the yoke Christ, Grave cum tollis, suave cum tuleris, thou will find it
very delightful, or at least very profitable.

Ob. But if it be such a necessary duty, how comes it to pass that it has been
so generally neglected by the people of God.

Ans. It has been practiced by the people of God both in Scripture as is
proved, (and it is evident that the Psalms of David are frequently nothing but
Meditations, though not in this Method) and by many in our days.

2. It being a private Closet-duty, the omission nor performance of it could be
taken notice of, and so the omission of it could not be reproved, nor
performance observed.

3. The Directions and Instructions for Meditation have been generally very
abstruse and intricate.

CHAP. V. Preparatory Directions for the Circumstances of solemn Meditation.
1. FOR the place, that must be private, remote from company and noise; Isaac
went into the fields, our Savior into a Garden, and David wishes us to enter
into our chamber, and be still, Psalm. 4. 4. and our Savior bids us enter into
our Closet, and shut the door, the place must be such as must be remote from
noise and company, or any thing which might distract us in the duty; and such a
place that we may not be interrupted or forced to break off, before the duty be
ended, it must be also private and remote from the observation of others, so
that we may neither be he heard nor seen, because there are diverse gestures and
expressions, which are not convenient for any one but God and ones own soul to
be privy to: Which of those places you find to be most advantageous to you in
the matters of Meditation you may choose.

2. For the time when; The best is in the morning. 1. Because it is the
first fruits of the day, and the first fruits being holy, all the rest are
fanctified. 2. Because our thoughts being then not soyled with worldly
business, will not be so subject to be distracted. 3. Because the body it self
is more serene then after Meals, and this Duty needs an empty stomach, not only
because the head will be more clear and fit for Meditation, but also because
many passages of Meditation require so much intention of the mind and fervency
of affection that they do hinder Digestion. 4. Because that it being in the
morning will have an influence upon the whole day, but this is not an Universal
Rule; for we read that Isaac went forth in the Evening to Meditate, Genesis 24.
36. and in case the subject of your Meditation be a Sermon, then it may be the
best time is, immediately after the hearing of it before your affections cool,
or your memory fail you.

2. For the how long, considering the parts of Meditation are so many, viz.
Preparation, Considerations, Affections, Resolutions, etc. and none of them are
to be past slightly over, for Affections are not so quickly raised, nor are we
to cease blowing the fire as soon as ever it begins to flame, until it be
well kindled, half an hour may be thought to be the least for beginners, and an
hour for those that are versed in this Duty; But there are two Rules in this
Particular especially to be observed. 1. That as we ought not to leave off our
prayers before that temper and frame of heart is wrought, which is suitable to
the matter of our prayers, viz. we should not leave off the confession of sin
till our hearts are made sensible of and humble for our sins, nor should we
leave off our praises until our hearts are filled with holy admirings and
adorings of God, and inflamed with his love; So the end of Meditation being
affections and resolutions, we should not leave off until those are wrought. 2.
As in private Prayer, so long as we find our hearts enlarged by the pourings
of the Spirit of Supplication upon us, we are not to leave off unless by our
continuance in that duty we must omit another duty to which we were more
particularly obliged at that time; So in meditation as long as we find the
heart affected we are to continue it: But this Caution must be given, that in
such enlargements we must not continue them longer general^y then while they
come freely and without much straing and compulsion, for that honey that comes
freely of it self from the Comb is pure, but that which is forced by heat and
pressure is not so well relished, but this Caution is for extraordinary
enlargements, for if the heart be dead, we must use all means to awaken it; But
as fire must be blown till it be well kindled, but afterward blowing hinders
the boiling of any thing that is set over it; So when once our hearts are
inflamed and enlarged with holy affections in an extraordinary manner, it is but
a hindrance of our affections to return to the Meditation of those Points that
raised them.

CHAP. VI. Rules for the Subject, of Solemn Meditation.
1. BY no means let it be Controversy, for that will turn Meditation into
Study.

2. Nor nice Speculations, for they be sapless, without nourishment: Besides
being so light they float in the brain, having no weight to sink them down into
the heart, and indeed were they there, they have nothing in them to affect the
heart withal.

3. Let the Subject of Meditation be the plainest, powerfullest, and usefullest
Truths of God, as Death, Hell, Heaven, Judgment, Mercies of God, our own sins,
the Love and Sufferings of Christ, etc.

4. Let the Subject of your Meditation be that, that is most suitable to your
Spiritual wants; as in time of desertion, meditate most of the love and mercies
of God, etc.

Rules for meditation it self, they are of three sorts. 1. Preparatory. 2. For
the body of the Duty. 3. For the Conclusion.

Two things by way of preparation, besides the choice of the Subject, the first
is, be convinced of, and to be affected with the presence of God: The second
is, Prayer for assistance from God. 2. For the body Meditation it self, It
consists of three parts: The first I call Consideration, which is nothing but
the convincing our hearts of several Truths that do belong to that Subject
whereof we Meditate: As if the Subject of our Meditation be Death, the
Considerations may go thus, Alas O my Soul, how, and when, and where we shall
die we know not, generally men die sooner then they expect, and certain it is,
whenever that hour comes, we must bid adieu to honors, pleasures, riches,
friends, and at last our own bodies, etc. The second part is affections,
whether it be love of God or Christ, or spiritual things, despising of the
world, admiring of God or any other spiritual affection: The third part are
Resolutions to do this or that, or leave this or that; Now this is the most
proper and genuine way of Meditation appears by this. 1. Because it is not
artificial and such as requires Learning, as those Directions are which wish us
to consider the efficient, final, formal, material cause of death, the adjuncts
concomitants, etc. which though they may somewhat help the learned, yet such
hard words and artificial methods fright the ignorant: ^. This is the very
method of those Meditations by which every one that is brought home to God is
converted; For the first thing in conversion is our being convinced of some
Truths, which conviction raises affections, for if the truths of God end in
conviction, and go no no further, nay, if they end in affections only, and
never come to resolutions of shunning evil and doing good, conversion can never
be perfected, as for example, One is convinced that he is a miserable undone
wretch by reason of Original and Actual abomination, Upon this conviction fear
and sorrow are raised yet if these do not work in us a firm resolution of
leaving those sins, we are yet in our sins and unconverted. 3. There are
several things for the concluding of Meditation, as shall appear.

CHAP. VII. Directions for the working of our hearts to be convinced of, and
affected with the presence of God.
FOR being convinced of and affected with the presence of God, it may thus be
wrought.

1. We are to consider that God is present every where, as truly, really, and
essentially, as he is in Heaven; For God did not create Heaven to continue
still but to manifest his presence, for the Heaven of Heavens are not able to
contain him, for God is neither included by, nor excluded from any place, and
though Jacob says, Surely the Lord was in this place, and I knew it not, Genesis
28. 16. yet we must not imagine that Jacob was ignorant of that Truth, but did
not actually consider it; but David in the 139 Psalm is clear in explaining and
clearing up the omnipresence of God. 2. We must consider that God does more
peculiarly observe his people, while they are performing of heavenly duties,
whether it be, while they are speaking unto him, or he speaking unto them, he
does then more especially observe the motion and frame of their hearts, as when
we are in any company we do more especially look upon and observe those to whom
we speak, or who speak to us; yet this is to be understood not as if God did
observe us more at one time then another, in respect of Gods knowledge it self;
but thus, that God is much more offended with us, if our carriage and frame of
heart be more irreverent, and unholy in the time of prayer and Meditation, then
at such times as we are in the works of our particular calling.

3. We may consider with our selves that Christ does actually behold us,
especially in these duties of holiness, for it is not the distance of place
that does hinder Christ's knowledge and exact observing of us. Little did
Nathanael then think that Christ saw him under the Fig Tree; Nathonael did not
see Christ, nor was he corporally present then, yet Christ beheld Nathanael
when he prayed; so Christ beheld Stephen before the heavens were opened, and
the opening of the heavens was not that that thereby Christ might be enabled
the better to behold Stephen, but that Stephen might thereby be the better
enabled to see that Christ looked on him; without all controversy God knows
and observes with what reverence, faith, love, etc. we pray, for else our
prayers would be in vain, and our faith also vain, for how could he give us
according to our faith if he knew not how much our faith were? If the inward
frame of our hearts were not observed by him, then an hypocrite that has
better expressions should get more by his prayers, then a true Nathanael that
has a better heart.

4. Suppose that thou had lived in Christ's time, or suppose that Christ were
now in England, consider with what joy, reverence, and confidence thou would
go to him for the pardon of thy sins, or for any other mercy thou stoodest in
need of; Thou may go so to him now, his distance from thee in respect of
corporal presence does not make him less able to know thy wants, or hear thy
prayers, nor his being now glorified makes him less willing to grant them then
if it were bodily present in the room with thee in the form of a servant, as he
was once at Jerusalem: the glory of Christ does not hinder his love and
goodness, for Christ is the express Image of his Father, and Gods Attributes do
not not hinder one another; The Majesty of God does not set bounds unto his
goodness, and make that finite, nor does his goodness make his Majesty less
glorious, his goodness makes his Majesty more amiable, and his Majesty makes
his goodness more wonderful; So neither does the exaltation of Christ cause him
to abate any thing of his goodness unto his people, but if any way his Love be
altered, it is by being made more then it was, and when Christ was upon earth,
you must have come to him by Faith, or you could obtain no mercy from him, and
by faith though he be in heaven you may obtain any mercy now: You may consider
any one or two or more of these considerations, until your heart be so
convinced of and affected with the presence of God, that you may thereby be the
better fitted for the carrying on the duty of Meditation more effectually.

CHAP. VIII. Concerning the Preparatory Prayer that is to be used before
Meditation:
THE next Preparatory consideration is Prayer, and it is to be performed in
these words, or to like purpose: Lord, my design in this Duty of Meditation is
not to be an hour sequestered from Worldly Employments, for that were to be idle
an Hour, and to increase my Sins not my Graces, but my Business at this time
is to be so convinced and affected with those spiritual Truths revealed in thy
Word, that I may fully resolve by thy strenghth and power to reform my Life,
because I can neither understand the things that belong to my peace, nor
understanding them, be convinced of the certainty and truth of them; Nay Lord,
though my understanding be enlightened, yet without thee mine affections cannot
be enflamed; I can neither know, resolve, nor perform what is good without
thee, for from thee comes both the will and the deed of thy good pleasure, I
beseech thee Lord that thou would give me thy grace to make conscience of
performing this duty with my whole strength, and not carelessly and
perfunctorily; And Lord do thou enlighten me with and convince me of thy
Truths, and so affect my heart with the love of holiness and hatred of sin,
etc. that I may thereby be enabled fully, firmly (notwithstanding all the
opposition that the flesh, world, or devil can make) to run the ways of thy
Commandments with joy and with speed, and when thou have wrought in me the
will so to do, give me also the deed and that I may not trust to the strength
of my resolutions, but to the continual gracious assistance of thy Spirit for
the performance of those things that through thee I shall resolve to do: Holy
and blessed God, Christ has sent me, wishing me to come to thee in his Name
for any mercies I stand in need of; grant these things which I have begged for
the Lord Jesus sake, Amen.

This, or a prayer to the like purpose thou art to put up unto God, but it is
to be done with thy whole heart, for thou must know that it is by the strength
which thou shall get from God by prayer, whereby thou shall be enabled to
perform this or any other duty profitably, for it is he that teaches us to
profit, he that begins a holy duty without God, will end it without God also.
It is a dangerous thing to think that we can by our natural parts, Learning, or
by the strength of Grace already received without Gods further assistance
perform any thing that can please God, or edify our own Souls; For though our
Mountain be made strong, yet if he shall hide his face, there will be trouble.
We may with much more Sense say, Now the Sun shines so bright, and the Air is
so clear, that now we can do well enough for a while, though the Sun be
Eclipsed; then to say, though our Hearts be never so much inflamed with the
love of God; Now we are so filled and inflamed by his Love, we shall do well
enough by our own strength, for at the present we need not Gods further
assistance; Give us but Fuel, Matter to Meditate of, and we shall be able to
continue and increase our flames: Do not count it a Burden but a Mercy and
Privilege, that God has necessitated and commanded thee always to draw
strength from him.

CHAP. IX. Several Rules for managing the Duty of Consideration.
1. THey must be plain Considerations, not intricate and abstruse, For the main
end of meditation being the affecting of our heart, and resorming of our lives,
and not informing of our understandings, our considerations should be so plain,
that they may be without difficulty understood.

2. It must be certain and evident, not controversial and doubtful; For the end
of Meditation is not properly to increase our knowledge, but to improve our
knowledge.

3. Much less should our considerations be Curious and Nice Speculations, or if
we choose any Book, by reading whereof to help our Meditation, we must not
choose such as are filled with flourishes and Rhetoric, for let a truth be
dressed never so curiously, the Wit and Eloquence wherewith the Truth is clothed,
leaves the Truth before it comes to the heart, as some Meats that are made in
curious works are spoiled of all those curiosities before they come to the
stomach; and the Be lights not upon the Rose which has the freshest color,
and the sweetest smell, but upon the Thyme that is an Herb of little beauty,
Besides Eloquence to them that Meditate is much like Pictures in Books to
Children, they neglect their Lesson to look on their Pictures, they will be
looking on their pictures while they should be getting their Lesson? So the
fancy will be playing with the Eloquence, when the heart should be feeding on
and affected with the truths we read. The less time the Truth stays in the
understanding, the better; for the work of the understanding in this business
is not to retain, but to convey the Truths to the heart; As Physicians use when
they are to give Medecines to Cure any Disease in the Bladder', they give such
as may soonest come to the part affected, for if they stay by the way they lose
their virtue, before they come to the part which they should cure; So if the
Understanding shall stay dallying with the Eloquence or searching out the
meaning or certainty of the Truth it considers any long while, the heart will
lie cold and unaffected all that while: It is somewhat like that Story
concerning Musi^ians that were to play before the Emperor of the Turks, who
were so long tuning their Instruments which they should have done before, that
he would not stay to hear their Music; Therefore let the Truths you consider
of to raise affections be plain, certain, nourishing.

4. The fourth Rule is, that in case any doubt arises upon a plain known Truth
(for Satan will be subject to cast in doubts against the most evident Truths)
then do as the Arch angel did with Satan, you may enter the Lists with Satan,
and it may be when you have a little considered and disputed the matter, the
mist may vanish, and the Sun shine clear, and Satan being resisted will
presently fly: but if Satan shall still wrangle, and your Blasphemous Doubs
shall not be removed, then dispute no more, but say as the Arch angel did, the
Lord rebuke thee Satan: As a woman that is attempted to be ravished will strive
and struggle a while, and if she finds that she can quickly get loose, she
flies, but othewrise she cries out for help: The Arch angel first disputed, but
when that would not speedily prevail, appealed unto God; To this purpose it is
good to be exceedingly well grounded in Truths from the word of God, for that
is the Sword of the Spirit, and that by which our Savior silenced Satan in all
his Temptations. It Is a dangereous thing to dispute with Satan by Humane
Reason, we must put on the Armor of God, if we will be able to stand in the
evil day of Temptation, and when all is done to stand.

5. The fifth Rule is, that we should not over-multiply our Considerations, but
as soon as by considering of the Truths of God we find our hearts strongly
affected, ^hen we are to pass over that part: but this Caution must be
observed, that we must not as soon as we find our heart never so little
affected, leave off our Considerations; The Be will not go from the Flower so
long as any Honey is easily drawn out of it: and indeed it is a Temptation
which the people of God ought to take notice of; That Satan is subject to make
one pass over Duties before we have drawn half the strength of them, as for
Example, When we are confessing of our sins, as soon as ever our hearts begin
in the least measure to be humbled, be fills them with joy, such joy may
generally be suspected to be from Satan, or our own naughty hearts, not from
God. Corn when it springs up too fast, and grows rank, Husbandmen cut it down,
a Corrosive that is laid on to eat dead flesh, must not be taken off as soon as
it begins to smart, the Wheat in the stony ground did soonest spring up: We
should let our Considerations take deep Root, and not pass over to affections
and resolutions as soon as ever they take hold of our heart, but it is always
to be remembered, that in case our affections be very much inflamed, as soon as
ever we begin our Considerations we are to yield to the Inspirations of God,
and to follow the leading of the Spirit; for this Method that is set down, is
not to bind up and limit the extraordinry working of the Spirit of God; but if
our hearts be only a little moved, we must do as I have said, not leave blowing
the fire as soon as ever it begins a little to be kindled, for green wood (for
such are we in spiritual matters) will suddenly go out, unless it be very well
kindled.

CHAP. X. Concerning Affections.
KNowledge is for Consideration, and Consideration is to raise Affections, and
the end of Affections are Resolutions, as the end of Resolution is Action and
the reforming of our lives; Our affections are various according to the Subject
we Meditate of; Sometimes we admire Gods goodness, his Majesty, his Wisdom;
Sometimes we admire and wonder at our own folly and madness, that we should
live so contrary so our own Principles, that those truths that God revealed
unto us on purpose that we might improve them to our eternal welfare, we should
lay by as things forgotten and useless; As if one that had a Recit to cure the
Stone, and were convinced of the Excellency and Efficacy of it, yet should make
no other use of it, but to read it over and, lay it by; Sometimes the affection
is despising the World, and abhorring our selves in Dust and Ashes, sometimes
Sorrow, sometimes Joy, Love, Fear, etc. which you may find abundantly in the
Psalms of David, which were but David's Meditations, though not in this Method,
Now a^ soon as our affections are much stirred and raised, it is time to pass
over to resolutions.

CHAP. XI. Rules Concerning Resolutions.
1. LEt your resolutions be firm and strong, not sleighty, let not them be
Velleities or wishes, but resolved purposes or Determinations; Do not say with
thy self, Well, I see very well that the wrath of God comes upon the Children
of disobedience, and I must to Hell, or leave my taking the Name of God in
vain; I do not well to swear, and I wish I could leave it but say thus with thy
self, I am resolved by the blessing of God whatsoever comes of it; to leave my
swearing; There is no dallying with God, nor giving a faint denial to sin; I
have heard of one who hearing the sin of swearing spoke much against by some in
whose company he was, observed their Discourse, and said, Well, by the blessing
of God I will never swear more, and though he was a common Swearer before, he
was never since heard to swear one Oath to this day.

2. Let thy Resolutions be for the time present, not for the future; Do not
say, Well, I do intend to leave my drinking, but for the present I am engaged
in such a meeting, and for that time I will do as I have done, but after that I
will think of it, and take some order for the mending of it; This is but one of
Satan's wiles whereby he cosoneth thee of the whole life by days, which he
could not do by years; If Satan should say unto thee, Thou shall never repent,
never leave thy drunkenness, it may be it would startle thee, and he would be
in danger of getting nothing of thee by asking so much: but he tempting thee
only to let it alone this week, and afterward for a week longer, etc. he
obtains the same thing at several times which he could not obtain at once.

3. The third Rule, Let thy resolutions be not only against thy sin, but
against the means, occasions, and temptations to it; for it is better to
discern Satan, if it may be, then to put a Sword in his hand, and say, thou
can well enough defend thy self against him: This is Solomon's advice, He does
not say to him that would fly Adultery, You may talk with a Harlot, but, Be not
enticed by her words to uncleanness, he will not give thee leave to go into her
house, or so much as by her door, Pro. 5. 8. So when he diswadeth the Drunkard
from drunkenness, he wishes him not so much as to look upon the Wine; For as
the beauty of a Harlot, so the color of Wine will inflame our desires after
it, Prove. 23. 31. after this manner did Job resolve, I have made a covenant
with my eyes that I will not look upon a woman, and he resolved not only
against the sin it self, but against the beginnings and temptations to the sin,
Job 31. 1. and God forbidding the Nazarites Wine, forbad them to eat Grapes,
least by that they should be enticed to drink Wine. Now that I may press this
Rule, I shall answer an Objection which generally wicked men are subject to
make, as thus, When we persuade a Drunkard that he would leave his Drunkenness,
that he would for two or three Months resolve not to go into a Tavern or an
Ale house, he cries out of preciseness, and says, What, do you count it a sin
to drink in Tavern or Alehouse? I answer therefore,

1. That when our hearts are affected with the sinfulness of sin, and wrought
up to a hatred of it, we do as when we exceedingly hate any man, we avoid all
those places where we are likely to meet him; I may bid such an one ask God why
he forbids the adulterer to walk by the doors of the Harlot; May he not say,
Why, she lives in a street, and as honest and godly men walk that way as in any
other place in the City.

2. Consider that Licitis perimus omnes is a good saying, we generally perish
by lawful things, for in things that are unlawful we are generally more
watchful.

3. Know this, that though to be tempted be not a sin, yet when we have found
by experience that going to a Tavern, etc. has been a Snare and temptation
that has generally prevailed over us, then to be tempted with such a
temptation is a sin though one yields not, because by going into temptation
which we need not, we sin; for if one shall say, I resolve that though I do
speak with the Harlot, I will not consent; though thou do so, and resists
all her Enticements, thou sinnest notwithstanding, for thou plainly breakest
the Command, Pro. 5. 8.

5. But suppose that it were lawful for thee to drink Wine in a Tavern that
thou have been so often ensnared by it, yet one effect of true repentance is an
holy revenge, by debarring our selves those things which are lawful, taking
Gods part against our selves, 2 Cor. 7, 11.

6. Consider that if thy hatred of sin and love of God be not strong enough to
stop thee from the beginnings, and keep thee from the occasions of sin, how
can thou expect that it should keep thee from committing the Sin it self,
when it has got some advantage over thee. He that cannot stop himself at
first, will much less (when he has rolled down a steep hill half way) be able
to stop himself, for then he falls with more violence, and the same strength to
hold will not serve then which would at first; therefore I shall continue the
advice, to resolve not only against the sin, but against the occasion, etc. But
I must give you one Caution, that though you find your heart never so much
resolving against and abhorring of any sin, yet take heed that you build not
upon the strength of resolutions, but beg of God that he would enable you by
his strength, and that as he has given you the will, so he would give you the
deed also. It was well observed by one as follows.

In effect it is true that we do understand many things by experience which we
should not understand by knowledge, as this, I having oftentimes determined to
do many things, the one more pious, holy, and Christian then another, and
having seen for the most part the issue and effect to be quite contrary to what
I determined; and on the contrary, observing that other pious and Christian
things were done by me, without my praedetermination or forecast; I stood as it
were confounded in my self, not understanding in what this secret did consist;
I did not wonder that in things which I determined as a man, the contrary
should come to pass of that which I would; but I did wonder that in the things
which I determined as a Christian, the same should befall me; and finding my
self in this Confusion, it came to pass that I read that Resolution of Saint
Peter, Though I should die with thee, yet will I not deny thee; and considering
that though the Resolution was pious, holy, and Christian, the contrary of that
which he resolved befell him; I understand that my determinations had not their
issue and effect according to my desire, because I did not well consider mine
own utter disability to perform any holy and good work; So that I understood by
experince, that although God punished my inconsiderateness in not suffering
that to come to pass which I intended; yet on the other side he satisfied my
general desire of doing good, by suffering that to came to pass which I did not
procure, nor hope, nor pretend unto; whence I have gathered, that the will of
God is, that I should depend on him in such manner, that I should determine or
propound nothing without holding him before mine eyes, showing unto him my good
will, and referring unto him the issue and success of my desires and endeavors.

CHAP. XII. Directions for Vows.
NOw because Vows do very frequently, especially in young beginners follow upon
resolutions, and because that very many pious and religious persons have been
ensnared by rash Vows, and after Vows it is not fit to make enquiry, therefore
I shall set down some Cautions of, and Directions for Vows.

1. As we have said concerning Resolutions, let your Vows be rather against the
occasions of sin then against sin it self.

2. When the subject of your Vows is of things indifferent in themselves.

1. Take heed of making any perpetual Vow, for the reason why you make any Vows
against any indifferent thing, as in drinking Wine, etc. It is, because then it
was a snare unto you, but in process of time, it may cease to be a snare unto
you, nay, it may be a very great Snare, and occasion Sickness or death, not to
drink it, as in some cases has happened.

2. Let all Vows concerning indifferent things be Conditional, and let these
two constantly be two of the Conditions. First, That you will abstain from such
a thing, or do such a thing, unless you shall be otherwise advised by some
godly Minister or private Christian. I knew a Religious woman that had Vowed to
Read many Chapters every day; when she was unmarried she made this Vow, but
afterward in the time of her lying in, and other Weaknesses, the Chapters were
so many, that the did much endanger the loss of her sight, and the neglect of
all other duties, when her poverty and family grew great; Now had she added
this Caution to her Vow, she might have been delivered out of that snare, and
though it be true that in many cases a Vow may be dispensed withal, when we
cannot keep it without sin, as in this case, one has vowed a weekly secret
Fast, ones Health, or Child with which one goes will certainly be destroyed by
it, yet if it be but an inconvenience, though a very great one, it will not
release one from ones Vow, Now the reason why I add that condition (unless some
Minister or for want thereof some other godly Christian shall otherwise advise)
is because the several cases that may happen are so various that it is
impossible to specify them all, or think of them all, and very difficult to
judge of them all, when we make the Vow: And moreover if we should leave it to
our selves, we should be too partial, for as when our Consciences are much
touched for our sins, we are subject to be too violent in our spiritual
revenge, so in a little time when that pang is over, we are subject to be too
indulgent to our selves, therefore it is better to say thus, Lord, I do vow
unto thee, that I will keep every week a day of Humiliation, or that I will not
drink any Wine this three months next following, unless some such occasion
shall be; That if it had then been, or then thought of when I made my Vow, that
such or such, or some other godly Minister would (had I consulted with him
then) wished me not to make that Vow; then to say, I will do this or that,
unless some such occasion be, that were the Vow to be made again, I would not
make it. 2. Add this Caution, viz. If I remember it I will not drink Wine this
month, the reason is, because if you drink Wine, though you did not think of
it, you sin if your Vow be absolute; but if it be with that condition it is not
a sin, and yet by adding that condition, we give our selves no liberty, since
it is not in our power to forget it. The next Caution concerning Vows in
indifferent things is this, add a penalty upon the breach of your Vow, which
penalty is not added by way of hope of Satisfaction, that is gross ignorance and
Superstition, but it must needs run thus, I will spend half an hour an hour a
day in Prayer for the Church to the end of this month, or else give so much to
the poor, and in such a case if we do either, we sin not: the reason why we
should add a penalty to it, because some inconveniences may be so great, that
it would bring some very great mischief upon us, and then we have liberty to
take the other part of the Vow, viz. And now this penalty must 1. Not be two
light and trivial, but it must be of such consequence that it may be a Tie upon
us, and yet not of so great weight as if it should happen, it might prove some
great inconvenience to us; For a rich man to say he will give 6 d. to the poor
is not considerable, and yet the same may be to heavy a Burden for one that is
very poor to give. The next Rule is, Let this penalty be always of something
that is Materially good, as giving to the Poor, spending some time in reading
of Scripture; for as for Popish Penances, as whipping, Pilgrimages, and such
like, they are unprofitable and ridiculous: The next Rule is, Let this penalty
be always some holy Duty that is most contrary to thy Master sin, as if thy
Master sin be Covetousness, let it be Alms; if it be voluptuousness, let it be
fasting with prayer, or abstaining wholly for a time from that wherein thou
most delightest, etc. The next Rule is, Let your vows be rather against the
outward then the inward acts of sin, rather against speaking angrily then being
angry, for though inward acts of sin are worse, yet they are not so much in our
power. The next Rule is, if your vows are concerning doing holy duties, it is
better to vow to spend some time in reading holy Scripture, or such like, then
to read so many Chapters for thou will be tempted to read them over too fast,
that thou may have ended, whereas if it be, so much time that thou have
resolved to spend, thou will not be so subject to this temptation.

CHAP. XIII. Rules for the concluding of Meditation.
1. THou art earnestly to beg of God strength to perform whatever thou have
resolved to do in his service; This must be done fexvently, though briefly and
humbly, proceeding from an earnest desire to do what thou have promised and
resolved, and also from an humble sense of thine ability to perform it.

2. The second Duty is Thanksgiving, if thou shall perceive any heavenly warmth
of love or Spiritual hatred of sin, or any other Spiritual effect wrought in
thy heart, thou art to give God the glory, and not to rejoice in thy self, but
in the Lord, but thou art to rejoice with trembling, knowing that if thou art
puffed up, though thou have the will to do good wrought in thee, yet if thou
provokest him, he can stop it, that thou shall never be able to do what thou
resolvest to do.

The first is an humble acknowledgement of our failings in the performing of
this duty; For if we were not green wood, that love which is now but a spark,
would have been a flame; God is not wanting unto us, but we are wanting unto
our selves and him; After these are performed, there remain three Duties more.

1. We are to remember what Vows and promises we have made, and it is very
useful to write down all the Vows (as thou make them) in a Book, because
that we shall else be subject to forget the Vow, or the time, or conditions
upon which we made it: And it is good to have a Book to keep a Register of
things in it (besides a Diary which I have spoken of, and given Rules for in a
Manuel, Entitled, A Directory to Christian perfection.

1. Let one head be (for which you are to leave some leaves) for Vows, under
which you must write down all your Vows or Resolutions, as you make them, or
Spiritual promises for Christians, and such like.

The Second must be for the mercies of God, Eminent deliverances, and also
answers of Prayers; These are to be set down with all pertinent Circumstances
that may any way increase the mercy.

The third head should be for grosser failings, which were good to be writ
down, not in Letters at length that every one may read them, but in Characters
known only to our selves; there are other things which because I do not now
speak purposely of that business I omit.

The second thing after Meditation is ended, is, to remember what passages in
our Meditation did most affect us, and as it were to lay them up in our
thoughts, that frequntly we may in the rest of the day think of them; As when
we walk in a Garden we content not our selves with enjoying the fragrancy of
the flowers while we are there, but if we may have leave we often gather a
Nosegay to smell of the rest of the day. In this business of Meditation do thou
likewise.

The third duty after Meditation is by degrees warily and unwillingly to go out
of the presence of God to wordly employments; Do not go from the presence of
God ^^ a bird out of the Snare, with joy and with speed: And thou must go also
watchfully and warily from such Employments, as one that carries some precious
liquor in a shallow, broad, brittle dish he looks to his way, to the Dish and
liquor that is in it, lest by holding of it awry by falls or stumblings, he
should spill the one, or break the other: So must thou be watchful over thy
ways, else the grace that God has powered into thy heart in this duty will be
spilt. To rush into holy Duties or out of them, argues two great undervaluing
of the things of God.

CHAP. XIV. Of the Duty and General Rules for Meditating upon Scripture.
THere are three great Designs the people of God have in reading of the Holy
Scripture.

1. To be very ready and conversant in the holy Writ, that so upon all occasion
whether it be for direction or answering of a temptation. We may not be to
seek, and to the end it is necessary that we read some Chapters in the bible,
every day three or four Chapters every day will read over the Bible once in a
year.

The next Design and end that the people of God have in reading of the Bible
is, that they may understand it: The first had need be done with all serious
attention, but this with much more; And so I come to the third end of a Saints
reading the Word, of which is that when he has read it, he may meditate upon
it, this is the most necessary and useful Design of our reading the Scripture,
which is to be done with the greatest seriousness of mind as possibly can be.
But as all Scripture is not equally suited to this end, so neither can we think
at all times to be in a fit frame and temper to perform this duty, we can go
but slowly on in this way, and were every verse in the Bible a fit Subject
matter for our Meditation, our life were far too short to Meditate it over, or
the third part of it; That this Meditating upon Scripture is a duty needs no
more proof then this, to wit, that the Psalmist puts it as a necessary
Ingredient, into the Character of a blessed man, viz. that he is one that
meditateth in the Law of the Lord day and night, in the 1. Psalm and the 2.
verse; If thou did never Meditate (I do not say according to the Method that
I have set down) upon the Word of God, thou art an accursed Creaturre; There
are but a few who think this to be true, or are persuaded that this Duty of
Meditation is so Indispensibly necessary, or at least, that live accordingly.
Let us look a little into the holy Scripture, and see the practice of the
Saints, David the holiest man for his affections that we read of, and you shall
find him very frequent, nay indeed daily exercised in this duty, Psalm. 63. 6.
77. 12. 119. 15, 23 48, 78, 79, 99, 146. by this means he says he got more
wisdom then those who one would think are most likely to get wisdom, for first
Malice makes a man very wise to do mischief, it is no wonder, for the Devil
helps such in their wicked devises. Secondly, Those who are aged are
generally wise men, for Wisdom is with the Aged. And then Thirdly, Tutors are
wiser then their Pupils, yet David went far beyond them all, which wisdom he
attained unto by being much in Meditation upon the Scripture, as he tells us
in his 119. Psalm. and ver. 98, 99, 100 Thou through thy commandments have made
me wiser then my enemies, for they are ever with me, nay further he says in
the 99. ver. I have more understanding then all my Teachers; how got he that
wisdom? Why it was by making Gods Testimonies his meditation, and then he
understood more then the Ancients, because, I keep thy Precepts, as he speaks
in the 100. verse. Joshua a King, not withstanding his great and important
Affairs (being the Monarch of the Jews) yet he was commanded continually to
Meditate upon Scripture. The Book of the Law was not to depart out of his
mouth, but he was therein to Meditate day and night, as you may read more at
large in the 1 Chapter of Jos. v. 8. I have observed in other kinds of Solemn
meditation. So is this, there is little of learninng required for performance
of it, as Joshua was but a servant to Moses, and so not likely to be so learned
a man; and David a man, the most conversant in meditation, and that with the
best success that we do read of, yet he was but a Shepherd, and afterward a
Soldier, employments which require much Learning to make a make a man capable
of: As for the Rules and Direction of this Duty, they differ as to the main not
much from those I have hereafter given, for solemn Meditation upon some
particular Points of Religion: As for the preparatory acts they are the same in
both; We are to consider seriously with our selves of the Scope of the words,
that so we may the more fully understand their drift and aim, and we are not to
let the truth pass, until we have by effections, examination, or resolution
some ways advantaged our selves in the most holy Faith, or some ways else
benefitted our souls, by a general view taken of the words of the Text, we may
see the abundant sweetness and fragrancy of the Word of God, as we do the odor
of flowers by senting them; Now Meditation draws forth the Honey of the
Flowers into our bowels, and nourishes us thereby, the beauty and Odor of
Flowers are very delightful, but they nourish not, so bare understanding of the
words themselves do rather delight then profit us, and if we go no further, it
is but so much on in order to Solemn Divine Meditation. I look upon it as one
of the greatest sins of the Professors of England, That the reading, studying,
and meditating upon Scripture is so much neglected, hence people grow not in
knowledge: I have writ the great things of my Law, and they are strange things
unto you says God, Hos. 8. 12. Does any man let the Letters of his friends lie
by him and never read them: If Lawvers should never read Law Books, but have
them in their Studies, it would be very absurd; how wonderful would they be to
seek in the resolving of case, if upon the thousand part so good grounds as we
have, that the Scripture is the Word of God, we should hear of some Prophecy
from God, setting down what would be the doom of England, and all these public
Transactions, would not every one be industruous to get it, and read it? We
have a more sure word of Prophecy, and that which teaches of matters of far
greater concernment, then the temporal welfare of this Nation, and yet it lies
by us as a thing forgotten.

The Rules for Meditating upon the Scripture, are either those which highly
concern the matter of Meditations, or the right Manner of them; For the right
Manner of our Meditations, let it be with all Reverence and Humility, and sense
of Gods Majesty upon our Spirits, and how utterly unable we be to understand
the Word of God, without the Spirit of God; if any one in the pride of his
heart shall think by the strength of his Gifts and Parts, Savingly to
understand the Mysteries of Salvation, he will find himself quite mistaken; For
as God sends the Rich empty away, so he will send the Wise, and the Prudent,
ignorant away.

It seems a strange carriage in Christ, to rejoice in the Spirit, that God
had hidden the Mysteries of the Gospel from the Wise and Prudent: It is
wonderful Arrogance for any one to think he can know God without his leave,
whether he will or no, or think to see God by any Light but by his own. He may
as well see the Sun without the Sun; one put a question why Christ came not as
Moses, or as a Prince, but in the form of a Servant, nor as John the Baptist in
an outward austear way, but came eating and drinking, he was answered among
many other things, especially for this, that he might deceive the reason of
man. For had he come in the outward Form and Manner of a Prince, then humane
reason, might have something to build upon that he was the Messiah: Outward
Mortification is in high esteem with the World, but inward Mortification, and
to be inwardly holy without proclamation, is most sincere.

The second thing for the manner of your Meditation, if you would meditate
aright, is to come with an indifferent mind, and take heed of bringing the
Creature to your mind, but bring your mind to the Scripture, and hear what the
Lord will say unto you.

Thirdly, Let your Meditations upon Scripture be very serious, we are to know
God as well as to love him with all our mind and strength: We may do the things
of the World well enough, and yet mingle many thoughts of God with our worldly
Employments, but we cannot mingle the things of God and the World together.

Fourthly, Let the end of your Meditations be to raise holy affections, and to
have stronger resolutions for God then ever you had before, not only to know
more of, but that we may have a greater love to God, or else it is not
Meditation but study.

CHAP. XV. Several Rules for the Subject of our Spiritual Meditation.
1. THe first Rule to be observed in the choice of a Subject for your
Meditation, is this, viz: To choose those places of Scripture to meditate upon,
as are most suitable to your Master Sin, as if your Master Sin be Pride, choose
those Scriptures to Meditate upon which is most in speaking against Pride, and
set down Gods hatred and Detestation of it, or his severe Judgments executed
upon it; And all his Threatenings against it, as you may see in several places
that set down the Evil Nature or Effects of it, and so of any other Sin that
is not thy Master Sin, for it is of great concernment, and a sure sign of
Sincerity to keep our selves from our own iniquity: Thus you find David
speaking of himself, that he kept himself from his own iniquity, Psalm. 18, 23.

2. Meditate upon those Scriptures which you find suitable to the dispensation
of Gods Providence, as when the Church is in danger of persecution, Then
meditate upon those Scriptures which either command you to have, or do commend
the Saints of God for having a sense of the Saints sufferings upon their
Spirits, set down the places that make Promises to those that are sensible of
the sufferings of the Saints, and also those places that do set out Gods love
to his people, and promises of support, and deliverance to them in the time of
their adversity meditate also upon the Histories of Gods deliverance of his
people in their great straights, and also of the way and Method of his
deliverance, of those Prayers also that prevails with God for their
deliverance in such cases.

3. Meditate upon those Scriptures which are suitable to men's personal
providence, as if thou art rich, then meditate upon those Scriptures that set
down the danger, and the duty of the rich: If thou art afflicted with sickness,
poverty, or disgrace, imprisonment, meditate upon those places which set down
thy Duty in those Conditions, and those Promises that set down comfort for thee
in those conditions. Meditate upon those Scriptures which set down the carriage
of Saints in thy Condition, and how God supported them, and at last Delivered
them.

4. Let your Meditation be upon Scriptures suitable to your Temptation: As if
you are tempted to uncleanness as Joseph was, then meditate upon those
Scriptures which speak against uncleanness; It is fit to meditate of the
hainousness of sin in such cases, and not of those Scriptures that may increase
your Temptations, but of those that may remove them, as a person under
Desertion is not to meditate of those Scriptures which do speak of the
sinfulness of sin, or of the Majesty of God, and his terrible Wrath executing
judgments upon sinners, all which serve rather to terrify a poor drooping
Soul then to comfort it, but let him rather Meditate upon those Scriptures
which do speak of the merciful nature of God, of the full satifaction of
Christ, and of his great love to poor sinners, as to Paul, Manasses, Mary
Magdalen, and some such other great sinners whom God has pardoned.

5. Let your meditations be suitable to the Ordinances that you are to be made
partakers of, as if you are to receive the Sacrament, Then meditate upon your
preparatory, concomitant and subsequent duties: Meditate upon the love of God
the Father, upon the love of God the Son, Jesus Christ, consider the excellency
of his person, the greatness of his sufferings, and how valid they be to the
satisfaction of Gods Justice, and so likewise to consider of the excellency,
nature, and use of the Sacrament. So if thou have a Child to be baptized,
consider the Duties and promises of belonging to that Ordinance, the Duties
thereof belonging to thee for the present, but to the Child for the future.

6. The Scripture is not to be meditated on as it is to be read: There is no
part of the Scripture but what is to be read by us, but there is a great deal
of Scripture which cannot be a fit Suject for us to meditate upon, but such as
I shall mention, though there be many parts of Scripture besides, which may be
fit proper Subjects for us to meditate upon, but these most especially, as the
Psalms of David, many Chapters of the Proverbs of Solomon, some choice places
of the Canticles, most of the Holy Gospels, and most of the Epistles, Something
of the Revelation, and then all promises in general, and that for two Reasons,
The one is, because the Promises themselves put us upon the Duty, and then the
promises bring Comfort; Far be it from us to despise the Consolations of our
heavenly Lord: Meditate also upon the holy and blessed Commands of God, and the
Examples of Saints; and let this be your Meditation to say thus within your
selves, Why should Abraham love God, or David love God more then I? Why should
the Angels love God more then I? God has forgiven me thousands of Iniquities
and transgressions, but never forgave the Angels one. When thou read holy
Examples of the Old Testament, you may see that not only such and such things
are feasible, but that with far less help it was done, then now we in these
Gospel times have to do it with.

7. Let Christ be very much the Subject of your Meditation, when I consider the
whole business of the worship of God from the beginning of the World to Christ,
and how God does acquiesse in Christ, and that the highest Angels desire to
know him.

I fully conclude, that Christ is wonderfully worththy, to take up our
thoughts, our chiefest love, and our greatest joy, so that the question will
not be, whether Christ be worthy of our love, but rather whether our love be
worthy of Christ, and as the other, so this is unquestionable and of doubt,
that it is not.

Instances OF Solemn Divine MEDITATION.
Meditation I.
ALas my God, I am in a sad condition, mine afflictions grow daily upon me, and
that which is mine unsupportable misery, my corruptions grow faster upon me
then my affliction; What before made me weep will not now make me sigh; The
heavy burden of a great abomination does not lie upon me so much as before I
was oppressed with a vain thought in my prayers: Alas Lord, alas, I am undone,
alas my Corruptions have almost made me love them, and make me weary of Duties,
and careless of Graces, My joys are gone, and my sorrows are gone that were
suitable to thy Word, and now my joys are but the laughter of Fools, and my
sorrows are Carnal, Sensual, and more of Hell in them then of Heaven, and as
now I can scarce tell my sorrows, so have I scarce any sorrow to tell; I have
sat down and wept to consider the great decays of holiness in me, but now I
can see my God going from me, and when as now he is even out of sight, mine
eyes are as dry as my heart is hard; Alas Lord if thou will not return, thou will lose a poor Soul that has loved thee, and is somewhat troubled; Now
poorsad Soul that it is so wicked as it is.

Meditat. II.
Lord, thou see the strange distempered temper of mine heart and Spirit, ah
blessed God I should take more comfort if I should see my heart-blood running
forth before mine eye, then to see mine eyes so dry and my heart so hard, I
have worn out almost all Motives to holiness, they now take no impression in me
which before were too strong for me to bear, they ravished me which now do not
move me: I scarce ever go to Prayer but I have enough and too many Spiritual
complaints to employ it to express; If every day I had not just cause to bewail
a continued decay of Grace, I might have some respite of my griefs: But what
shall I now do? When every day shall bear witness against me, and every night
my sin shall go to bed with me, and lie in my bosom, and rise in the morning
more strong then at night: Ah when my former holy life shall be more terrible
then others wicked lives; when my former prayers shall be like the Gall of Asps
unto me, When those Duties which should be my comfort are my terror: Alas
what can my poor Soul do? when my present sins, and my past duties, which of
them are the heaviest burden unto me, I do not know, what shall I do? When I
consider these things, then the thoughts of the affliction that lies upon me
makes me weep a tear or two, and my vain heart, my deceitful heart, would
persuade me that I weep for my sins: Those in desertion are in a blessed
condition to me, they are sad and I am miserable; I am guilty of that which
their Consciences do but accuse them off: Alas, have I my communion with God?
my sweet Communion, and the power I had to prevail with him for any mercy
almost that I prayed for; now I can pray, and pray, and pray, and go away
without a blessing, I can almost be content to be wicked, Thou know mine
heart, or else my tears would deceive thee as well as me: If they are worldly
thoughts that have estranged me from thee, thou know how to cure me; if mine
utter impoverishings will cure me, let me be as poor Job; if thou wast not such
a Physician as thou art, I was past cure.

Meditat. III.
Lord, I am come now to power out my soul before thee, and my tears in thy
bosom, to tell thee the sad thoughts and sorrows of my heart; Ah my God, in
this bitterness of my Soul, and with tears in mine eyes, and pride in my heart,
and sencelesness upon my Spirit, I speak these things: Ah Lord, thou have
scourged me with scorpions, for my sins do increase as well as my afflictions,
these afflictions to me are scorpions, to me they have poison in them, and at
once I am scourged and stung with them, a sad ease it is when my punishment is
heavier than I can bear, and yet notwithstanding I go from the presence of God
too, and that more and more. My tears dry up in mine eyes, and my love goes out
of my heart as soon as kindled; When the Candle of the Lord shined upon my
Tabernacle in my first conversion, when the fire of thy love was kindled in my
heart, I have had some discourses, of devotion, that I was not able to bear the
ravishment that the remembrance and meditation of them brought to my soul, now
almost as full of sadness as then of joy: after those times, as those after the
Flood; my joys and the acts and workings of my grace grace grew very short
lived in comparison of what they were before; then they were Methusalems for
age, and Sampsons for strength to what they are now; before though I fell
spiritually sick, and my strength and comfort was gone, yet I was sensible of
my weakness, it was a pain and a grief unto me that I could not walk into the
delightful Garden of the Spouse, and to the sweet bed of his Spices; I could
weep for want of tears; if not, I could mourn for sorrow, but now like a man
that groaned and strugled so long that he can struggle no longer, but grown
senceless, can hardly be perceived to breathe or live; If the sweetest Music
should be played by him, or the dearest friend in the world should come and ask
him with tears in his eyes, Dear Husband, or Dear Wife, how do you? the poor
sick one does not so much as open the eye to see who it is that speaks, or if
open them, they being presently heavy with death, fall down again, and he dies;
So is it with my poor Soul sometimes, I can hear my Savior as it were saying
unto me (for sometimes methinks I see him about my sick Soul,) Ah poor Soul how
do thou do? Is my Joseph yet living? But alas, Lord, thou know I have
scarce strength or life to lift up mine eye to thee, Lord, Can these dry bones
live? Can these dry eyes weep? Can this frozen Heart be enflamed?

Meditat. IV.
Lord, I am ashamed to consider what I know of thee, when I think what I do for
thee: Ah my God, the cares of the world lie heavy upon me, Resolutions though
never so strong are too weak to overcome my corruptions; Alas, I can scarce say
any more then I have said in the confessing and bewailing my sad spiritual
condition, though I have said nothing to what I should say, Have I not told
thee Lord, with tears in mine eyes, and with a sad heart, that I found my
Corruptions get ground of me? my prayers, my tears, my resolutions, and some
endeavors do resist, but cannot overcome them, these keep them from prevailing
so soon, but not from prevailing; I humbly confess or desire so to do, that I
may complain to thee, but I should add to mine abominations exceedingly if I
should complain of thee; Mine heart does always tempt me to it, when I
consider what I was, and what I am, it is a Talent of lead upon my soul, yet
since my preaching thou art glorified, and thy people edified more then if I
should spend all my time in private Meditation, I am willing to submit, only I
do humbly beseech thee with tears in mine eyes, that though I have less time to
spend in such private duties, yet that my poor Soul may not lose her love to
them, and though I perform fewer duties, I may not perform them worse then I
did when I performed more.

Meditat. V.
I do much wonder at my self and at many, nay some what at all Christians upon
days of humiliation, but most at my self to hear the tongue of a poor
Christian confessing, and his eyes weeping for his sins, and speaking of them
with such expressions and such fighs that one would think. Surely this
Christian keeps a strict communion with God, surely he would not sin for a
world, surely God is in all this man's thoughts: And yet stay but whilst he
has done his prayer, and you find in him such strong thoughts, words, and
actions, that are almost incredible, loose and idle words, and vain thoughts, I
but too often experience it, and makes it even past hope it should be otherwise
with me: If any Town that was straightly besieged with cruel enemies, should
send for aid to such or such, and when they came they should send out most of
the Town to join with the enemy against those that came to help them, What
should we say of such people! Lord, just thus are we, We have a world of
corruptions and temptations, Sin and Hell, and Satan, all beset us, and
violently assault us, we pray for the help of God against them, day after day,
We send our prayers to heaven for assistance, Well, God does send his holy
Spirit to helped his poor Soul, in the Ministry of the Word tells us what we
should do to overcome these enemies, and sending many motions of the Spirit to
bring into our souls grace to strengthen us; we will not do what he advises us
to do, nay, but we take part with our corruptions, and resist and fight against
the power of ^he world to come; O thy patience is not to be understood, I am
weary, to think before I go to prayer, how little fruit I expect from them, I
pray, and pray, and weep, and hear, and sigh, and confess these as well as
other of my sins, and yet as a Ship in the Sea they do divide my corruptions
for the present; but they presently return to their former course; Lord do not
the bowels of thy compassion yern within thee to see me thy poor Servant in
such a miserable condition as I am in? Do not thou see how sin and corruption
do as it were lie gnawing upon me, and eating up my very flesh, and destroying
my soul, and I have neither hand nor foot to move against them? Lord, who is it
that must make me hate corruption, is it not thy Spirit? who must overcome my
resisting of thy Spirit, is it not thy Spirit? Lord, I do not know in the World
what to do, to leave off striving were not only to despair of thy goodness,
because thou do not help as much and when I will, and besides if I cannot get
ground, nay, though notwithstanding I lose ground, yet doubtless I shall not go
so swiftly down the stream as if I strove not at all: if I must be forsaken by
thee to all eternity, yet Lord, let me not while I live so fall that I should
be a scandal to Religion; Alas, is it come to this, O my soul, that I must
say, if God will forsake me for ever!

Meditat. VI.
Since our dear Lord Jesus Christ has loved me and given himself for me, Oh
that my heart was ravished with his love! Oh that he was the beloved of my soul,
and that I were sick of his love who dyed for the love of me! Oh that I could
not be stayed but with his flaggons; This my Jesus the chiefest of ten thousand
has told me that he that saw thee, saw the Father, whereby I understand that
thou art just as he was, as pitiful, as gracious, as willing to forgive, as
sweet and as easy to be entreated as my good Savior; and in all the things
and passages that thy word has made known to us of him, I read not of one of
all that came to him, not one poor soul that ever begged any grace or any
pardon, nor never did any come to be healed of any bodily disease in vain;
Lord, thou art as he was, Lord Jesus thou art as thou wast, thy being in Heaven
makes thee not less like thy Father, or thy self; Blessed God, I do beseech
thee, to give me, thy poor hard-hearted servant a soft heart; Lord Jesus I
beseech thee (thou see mine heart, my poor heart desire as imperfectly, as
coldly) to make intercession for me, me, for whom thou have paid a dear price,
as one that has been so long from his Friend has he can hardly call to
remembrance what countenance he has, So I, poor I, that cannot choose but pity
the sad condition of mine own heart, which though it does not uncessantly and
importunately desire grace as it should, yet methinks it is a sad thing to see
it in such a careless temper, I am such a stranger to thee that I have much ado
to make one thought of thy sweet love and excellencies that may affect my
heart, and bring the sweet apprehensions of thee to remembrance. Thy tender
mercies and former relishes of thy goodness are to me like the shadow of death,
they are as Christ walking upon the waters, they terrify me; Lord let me weep
thee to me again; Oh my God I am undone, undone, undone; a poor undone
creature; Those in desertion are in a thousand times better condition then I
am, they want the comforts, but then indeed they have the graces of the Spirit,
but is not my poor soul that wants both in a sad condition, that can sit down
and fall asleep when I should seek my Savior? I have a soul of such a temper
as makes me wonder at my self, as in the Spring, and sometimes there will come
a cloud that will seem to overspread the Heavens, and yet on the sudden all
will be blown over, and the day so fair that there will not be a cloud to be
seen; So am I, sometimes my heart is full of sorrow, and mine eyes full of
tears, and yet upon the sudden, my heart loses that sweet sad temper, and all
is blown over, and not a cloud appears, and these clouds of grief are not
dispersed with the comforts and joys of thy Spirit, but with worldly business
or company: when I do grieve for my sins, carnal grief bears a share in it and
carnal joy abolisheth it.

Meditat. VII.
To confess my sins without any sense of them, without any hatred of them, to
pray for grace, and not to be sensible of the necessity or excellency of it, to
come to thine Ordinances without reaping any good from them, to think and
meditate of thee, and neither admire nor love thee, nor long and delight to be
in thy company, to what purpose are these things? thou desire of us our
hearts and not our works, words, or thoughts, without that: Ah my Lord and my
God, shall all be in vain, and will thou cast me off for ever? Do thou hate
my soul, and am I an abomination unto thee? Must I be shut out for ever, and
never enjoy the sweetness of thy presence? Thou will not O my God, thou will
not, thou can not O my God, thou can not, for thou have made a Covenant
withme, and I claim that Covenant, for I have not any thing in world besides
thy Covenant in the Lord Jesus Christ, that I can so much as have the least
hope that will do me any good: if the Lord Jesus Christ did not sit at thy
right hand to make intercession for me my sins continually, daily, hourly
clamoring against me, and accusing of me, must needs prevail against me.

Alas my hear is far from that spiritual frame that thou requirest, for the
miseries that sin brings are more troublesome and heavy to me then the
silthiness that is in fin; thy blessings are more lovely in my eyes then thy
self; Every duty hardens me in my formality; Lord, thouart the father of
mercies, Oh have mercy upon me, for my case is not the common case of thy
people, but few, few of many, may be found whose soul is like my poor soul, for
where is there any that can say so, and yet be so little affected as I am.

Meditat. VIII.
Mine hopes are false, and my fears are true, the deadliest poisons do not make
me sick, nor the excellentest Cordials do not comfort me; I am not sick of sin,
nor does the Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ fill me with joy, nay,
rather does it not fill me with griefs and fears? if my fears and griefs were
not Carnal, would they were more, but my Carnal joys eat out my Spiritual
grief, and my joys also: I am as it were like Absalom, I hang between heaven
and earth, I would fain have heaven, and yet would not part with earth: Oh my
Lord Jesus Christ, art thou of no more excellency in mine eyes? Does thy love
to me raise up no more love in me then to stand deliberating what to do, when
thou stand with stretched out arms to receive me to thy bosom? Can thou
love one that loves thee so little as I do? Thou did love me when I loved
thee not at all: Why sit thou so sad O my Soul? Go cast thy self into the
arms and bosom of the Lord Jesus Christ, there lie and hear the beatings of
his heart toward thee, and it may be thou may be warmed with the heat of his
love; Christ pours out the boiling streams of his heart-blood upon thy poor
soul, for his hear, boiled in love toward thee, and can thine heart still be
frozen? Oh infidelity thou art the poison of my Soul, thou with thy cold blasts
have frozen m^ne heart and keep'st it so; Lord give me faith, or else all thy
mercies are in vain, Thy love is, and has been too great for me to believe:
Lord, thou that love me so much as to give me Christ, Oh love me so much as
to give me says to believe it; There remains in mine heart no more then the
first spark of thy love, and the first Principle of grace that thou did put
into my soul when thou did regenerate me; All the flames are gone out that
were once kindled in me: All the Fruit, and Leaves, and Boughs are stripped from
me, there are all things to do beside bare regeneration, I am as an arm cut
off, so that it hangs only by a little skin, a slender thread; Lord, this is my
hope, that my Corruptions and Satan that have quenched these flames that I have
had, shall never be able to quench this spark: But alas that is a poor comfort,
that this is all my comfort, that I shall not lose heaven, though it be a
thousand times too great a comfort for such a wretched sinner as I am, to have:
It it nothing to lose all my comforts, all my duties, all my sweet Communion
with thee, or at least only so much of these remains as to keep me from being
utterly cast off; For one that had fared deliciously every day, to come to have
no more bread then to keep life and Soul together, though he dies not, yet he
has a miserable life: Thus, thus, and far worse it is with me.

Meditat. IX.
I. I stood clear before thee O my God, of those many sins, of sencelesness
under judgments, fruitlesness under Ordinances, mispending of time, want of
watchfulness of mine one ways, and for the appearing of the Lord Jesus Christ;
Only my sins of unkindness to the Lord Jesus Christ, were enough to cause thee
to take away thy Mercies from me; I have heard and read the great Mystery of my
Redemption, of his being Scourged, and Crowned, and Nailed, of his Bleeding and
Dying for me, of his great love, and such things, that if a Friend of this
world had done or suffered the thousandth part so much, his memory would have
been precious.

Meditat. X.
Ah my dear God, thou have been my God, and therefore thou art my God, how
little can my Soul know by any thing that I now either do or feel? I am fain to
fetch Evidences and signs from actions done many years since: My prayers and
other holy Duties were Matter of more joy when I did them than now; they have
terror in them: Now I think I do them not as heretofore: I have been assisted
by thy grace, Oh my lost Joys and my lost Duties, where I shall find you I
know not, the Joys I had formerly, and the great zeal of mine heart made me
pray, but now not out of feeling and zeal, but for zeal and joy, and I go from
prayer with a sad heart and a hard heart: My prayers come neither from my heart
nor reach to my heart: Oh my Lord Jesus Christ where are thy Motions and the
Joys of thy Spirit to work thine own work in me? Why do I walk in this Valley
of Tears not only without comfort, but without grace, I do even stand astonished
at my self to see the vast difference between my self now and when I was thine;
When the Candle of the Almighty shone upon my Soul, and the Spirit of my God
dwelt in me, then sorrow and weeping flew away: Alas! I now have scarce any
thing left me but carnal tears, and one great cause of my grief and part of my
misery is, that I can weep no more; sometimes indeed tears stand in mine eyes
when I consider these things; Lord give me Faith, O give me Faith, I feel a
deal of Atheism in my heart; Mine heart is so full of Corruption, of all kind,
and all Degrees, that I can feel no bottom of this stinking Ditch; Mine
imagination is diverse times a through-fare for Satan's blasphemous thoughts,
which my Soul abhors, I may even sit down and spend the remainder of my wicked
life in weeping and wailing, and wringing of my hands, and tearing off the
hairs of my head: My sad Soul may say to my God, Art thou quite gone from me,
have all my hopes of thee been as dreams and empty shadows unto me, and have
thou shown me so much of heaven, and will thou make hell more terrible and
bitter to me? Shall thy sweet Mercies be turned into the Gall of Aspes to me,
not only to be bitter but deadly? I have cause, I have cause, Lord, to mingle
my drink with my tears, to water my couch with weeping: Thou art too great a
God to be dallyed withal, and what do I else? As our dearest Friends, though
we never so much delighted in their company while they were living, yet we are
afraid to be alone with them, they are a terror to us after the Souls have
left their Earthly Tabernacles; So my prayers while they were living prayers
were a great comfort to my poor soul, but now my prayers are without life, and
my Supplications are dead, they are a terror to me, they look gashly upon me,
and I upon them.

Meditat. XI.
My dear God, thou art not moved with words, if we had the tongue of Men and
Angels, if we could speak as never man spoke, if our hearts meant no more than
they do, what would our vain words do? I am ever weary of my life because of my
Corruptions, I can go no where nor do any thing, but my coruptions follow me,
and tire me even out of my patience: O that I could weep over my prayers to see
how dead they are, which way to turn I know not, I have prayed a thousand times
for another heart, and yet mine heart is as hard as a stone, and so full of
hypocrisy: Lord, shall I cast away my confidence, and lay down my weapons, and
put off mine armor, because my corruptions are so strong and impetuous, and
deaden my very soul? But alas what am I weary of? not of my sins, but of the
accusations of my conscience. that will not let me alone; blessed be thy Name
that I am troubled that I do not live holily; Lord, mine heart is entangled in
the snares of the world, blessed Savior, thou which have overcome the world,
deliver me from the cares and love of the world; Alas what good do my tears do
me? Do thou bottle up such tears, such puddle water in thy bottles? let the
bowels of thy compassion yern within thee toward my poor soul. it is full of
sin, but my sin is my sorrow, though my sorrow itself is sinful, if thou
stand as a stranger to me I must give over my self for lost, then I may say,
farewell prayers; better to say, farewell, then to add to my former sins a
greater guilt by defiling my prayers that are as Chariots to carry out my soul
into the bosom of God; What am I to stand against corruption or temprations? I
am no more able to overcome, nay to resist them, than to remove Mountains. I
have sinned away my joys, and sinned away mine hopes, and even my God, if thy
mercies be not greater, and what remains for my poor soul to do, but to sit
down in sorrow, and even to mourn until my Soul be heavy unto Death? It had
been better for me that I had not been one to show the way to others: Nay, but
Oh my God, that is best for me that thou have done for me; Blessed God, do but
make me thine.

Meditat. XIII.
In the most serious addresses of my Soul to take hold upon God, I find an
unhappy frozenness benum the best of my Devotions, and thereby I show either
that I am extremely ignorant of thee Lord, or what is worse, senseless of thee;
The truth is I may justly tremble when I come to keep any day of Humiliation in
thy sight, not only because of the desperate sins I am guilty of, but
especially because such Duties do work little or nothing upon me, and this is
sure enough, that those Ordinances that do not soften, do harden; I am in a
great straight, my Conscience drives me upon Duties, and I dare not omit them,
and yet my heart is so hard and filthy that they do not purify me, So I am
more defiled than before: Ah my God, thou know what afflictions are bitter
and strong enough to purge these Corruptions; Lord, send them, and though I am
so vile that I do not now fervently and earnestly enough desire to be cured,
but yet Lord I know my want of desires of Reformation is one of my greatest
Corruptions, I desire to be cured of that, or at least Lord, thy Fatherly
goodness I hope will take care to cure me of that, and Lord, this I know, that
when thou shall send any such affliction upon me, I shall it is too likely
Murmr and be weary of the Chastisment of the Lord; it may be I shall pray for
the taking off of that Corrosive before it has eaten away that deadness of
heart and other corruptions that now lie upon me, yet Lord do not yield to such
prayers, go on with thy Cure, and if I be impatient, cure that corruption also,
and every other corruption that shall appear in the time of cure of any
corruption, I shall bless thee one day for not hearing, and not granting such
prayers as shall be for my spiritual harm: Lord Death is very bitter unto me,
surely it would not be so bitter, if there were no Root of bitterness in me; if
I kept a stricter communion with thee in this world, I should long for a full
communion with thee in heaven for ever.

Meditat. XIII.
Alas, Oh my soul, may not I justly spend the remainder of my days in sighing,
to perceive my good, from whose presence I have in former times had so much
grace and comfort, to be such a stranger now to me, and what is worse, mine
heart so senseless of his absence! The time has been when my heart has almost
bled within me to think what a miserable condition I should be in, if ever it
should come to pass that it should be thus; Lord, why do thou absent thy self
from my poor soul? If I were in a desertion of comforts, I were in a far better
condition, but to be in a desertion of Graces and not to be troubled, is a sad
condition: Me thinks I see my stock of grace grow weaker and weaker, and more
and more to languish, as one that is dying, the pulse grows weaker and weaker,
until at last it be no more. O Lord, what to say, I do not know; alas! I cannot
but call, and cry and pray, Lord if ever thou will take pity upon a poor
Miserable speechless Sinner; Lord, if thou will that I may overcome, Lord, I
cannot get my heart to be content to be damned, and indeed since then I must
eternally be separated from thee, I do not desire to get mine heart to be
content, but to struggle against it as long as I am able.

Meditat. XIV.
To have Satan and Corruption come and beset me as soon as I awake, and to
follow me all the day long, and go to bed with me, and to keep me waking, to
have no respite, is a sad condition: When I should awake with my God, my good
God, who kept me, and watched over me whilst I slept; to have Satan stand
ready, and hold his Temptations before mine eyes which way soever I look, and
to prevail so far with me, as at last to make me scarce to hate the sin he
tempts me to: I feel in my Spiritual part an utter abhorring of the Sin, I
would give ten thousand Worlds rather than commit the Sin, and yet I have much
ado to refrain; alas, can my secure soul live?

Meditat. XV.
I am in such a wretched temper as to be willing to offend my God, and when I
go about to grieve, sorrow is far from me; nay, the grief which sometimes I
feel, is not strong enough to conquer the temptation, when tears stand in mine
eyes to consider the miserable condition of my Soul in being so pro^e to Sin,
the Temptation increases; To hear one of thy servants groaning under thy hand,
and then to stand parlying with temptation, and not rather be afraid that the
same affliction, etc. Lord, I am in thy hand, for affliction, lay what thou will upon me, I must bear it, and I would bear it patiently; nay Lord, though
this Temptation be such an unwelcome guest, and I am two weary of it, yet so
thou will give me grace to overcome my impatience, I am content Lord as much as
I can; but alas my God, to have Satan my Companion instead of my God, I hope
will never be pleasing to me.

Meditat. XVI.
Lord, what vain heart thinks of thee it matters not, except it be to discover
the wretchedness of it, thou have more glorious Creatures to praise thee: my
praises, and my thoughts of thee are so low and so unworthy of thee, that thou
might forbid me as thou did the Devils to confess thee, or to say any
thing of thee: My dear God, if a World would buy it for one such sight of thee
as might so ravish my Soul, that I might never more see any beauty, or taste
any sweetness in any thing but in thee, that I might see thee with open face,
that I might be transformed into thy image from glory to glory: Lord, thou art
still beyond me, the higher my thoughts are of thee the more thou art beyond me
and above me; when my thoughts are best, my thoughts are lost in the meditation
of thee, as the stone that is thrown into the calm Sea, makes greater and
greater circles, but can never reach the shore: Lord, I am content I may be
lost in my self so I may find thee, Lord, though there were none but thou and I
in the world, I had enough, nay, though there were none but thou and I in
Heaven, I had enough, enough; Though I have nothing to say to thee but what I
have said a thousand times, Thou art my God my Savior, my all, thou art he
whom my soul loves; yet though I have nothing else to say, nor case there is
any new relish yet I delight to be alone with thee: nay, though thou say
nothing to my poor soul but what I have heard from thee, yet let me still be in
thy company: I had rather weep and mourn for mine offending thee, then enjoy
all delights in the world; Those salt waters are more precious then their Wine.

Meditat. XVII.
Lord, I beseech thee to order all mine affairs by thy wisdom, thou know
what afflictions are needful for me; I murmr oftentimes when thou afflictest
me, although I have again and again desired thee to direct all things that
belong unto me: but blessed God, let not my Murmurings so provoke thee as to
leave me to mine own self; Give me not what I desire but what I want, my
judgment in judging what is good or bad for me is little worth; for many times
I have judged such a thing to be for my hurt, yet it has proved much for my
good, and so on the contrary, but then I have by experience found it evidently
for my good, when I have yielded my self wholly to be guided by thee, all
things Lord make me know my self; I am a poor Creature with tears in mine
eyes, and hypocrisy in my heart.

Meditat. XVIII.
Lord, it fares with me as it fares with one that has been a long time from
his friend, he has many things to tell him of, several particulars that befell
him since their last being together, so Lord, I have been a stranger to thee,
and I have much to say to thee, much have I suffered from mine own corruptions,
and little have I done; I have a heart will let me do nothing for thee; Lord, I
am but a Child, pardon my bablings; I have none to make my complaint to, no not
one; Thou have caused me to live in Mesech, and to have my habitation in the
Tents of Kedar, and if thou Lord wilt supply the want of those Christian
friends I am now deprived of, Lord, my heart is so deceitful, that I have much
a do to know whether I ever was, or am yet thine: I know Lord how I have spent
days, sometimes whole weeks together in Prayer, and Meditation, and reading
Devotionary Books to Prepare my self for the Communion, and yet then I had
gross sailings, for there was a World of Covetousness in me, and thirsting
after Humane Learning exceedingly, and little prizing the knowledge of Christ
in my Sermons, I did little aim at thy glory but to preach my self: Now in
these things I find some healings, but my duties are fewer, and now there is
far more wanting in comparison of what I should be, then was then, of what I am
now: Nay Lord, thou only know I shall be a gainer: but alas! if now I am
alone I shall have no more fire of thy love then I had when I lived in the
midst of Glowing Coals of Devotion, how can I but go out now, since I had much
ado to burn then? When I think of serving thee, then my heart is so perverse as
to put in a Carnal Motive, and says, If thou do so, then God will bless thee
in such or such a temporal blessing, and my heart closes with that Motive.

Meditat. XIX
O my God, as thou art my Father, so let me know that thy love to me being
known by me, may put Wheels to my Obedience, that now goes so heavily and that
it may make mine obedience more pure that now is so full of insufficiency: I am
fain to be glad almost of any Motive to make me serve thee, but yet it is my
burden that fear should make me do that which love should make me do, for
besides that such obedience is painful, that which is worse, it is impure also:
Alas, I am a stranger too much unto thee, and in being so, an enemy to my self;
Lord this is the first day I have given thee this great while, it does appear
it is so by the poor and weak duties I perform; my poor soul is like a poor
desolate Widow that has lost her dear Husband, every one trampleth upon her,
and oppreiseth her.

Meditat. XX.
Lord, where are those sweet embrances and manifestations of thy love, that
thou have bestowed on me in former times? when I have gone unto the treasury of
thy mercies, and fetched any mercy from thence that I wanted. Thou have given
unto my prayers my dear Brother, who went forth a blasphemer, or at least a
common swearer, and came home, I seeking thee for him, a convert, after thou
gave me his life and the life of my Mother, and indeed Lord, what was it but
I had of thee? thou did almost miraculously restore one of my Sisters to
comfort: But now when I cry and shout thou shuttest out my prayers, and art
almost as if I never had any acquaintance with thee: Lord, I know that the
fault is mine own, indeed Lord I then was scarce ever from thee, or out of thy
thoughts: For were I but as I have been, so often keeping days of humbling
before thee; it could not be that my duties should be such as they are, but
Lord thou see the tears th^se thoughts cause me to shed, they are thine, do
thou increase them, but take away this dullness and deadness of heart that is
the just reason why I shed them, and if thou shall once purify and inflame
mine heart by faith and love, I shall shed abundant more tears for my wandering
thoughts in prayer, then now I do, for all the abominations I am guilty of;
Alas, Lord, the ordinary days of thy Saints are far more holy then the days I
set apart for special service of thee; and their thoughts in the midst of their
worldly businesses, are more devout and zealous then my thoughts in my prayers,
were always with thee: I scarce did any thing, though almost of never so small
Moment, but the reason why I did it this or that way, was, because it was some
way or other more for thy glory: Lord, it is not thy fault, for thou do wait
to show Mercy, whether my wretched heart will consent to it or no: This I do
set down as an infallible truth, and let all the world give thee the glory of
it, all thy ways are holy, just and good, and thou do stretch out thine arms
to embrace us, it is our fault that we do not run into thy bosom, the
infidelity and other corruptions that are in our bosoms, make us think that
thou art not willing to receive us, or embrace us, and so we not coming, we
want that experimental knowledge of thee, that would (if we had it) make us not
so timorous of coming to thee as we are.

Meditat. XXI.
Before I begin to write, I know I have more cause to Write in blood, or tears,
then in ink; Can a Mother forget her Child? It is not, Can a Child forget the
Mother? nor is it, Can a Mother her Child, if the Child forget her? or, Can
there be any case wherein the Mother can forget her Child? Lord, do thou awaken
my heart for it is a sleep; Lord, do thou raise mine heart, for it is dead; Do
thou thaw my heart, for it is frozen; Lord, thou art that Celestial fire that
enflames all thine Angels with love, I have no way but to come before thy
presence in hope that at the last shall be thawed, if not inflamed, thou will
not put out the smoking snuff of a Candle, I am such an one, enlightened and
enflamed, though now I send forth nothing but an unsavory stench: What, shall
I stand imperfect as I am thus speaking, what I may, and what I have to lay, to
my God, Lord. Thou have commanded in thy Word, that if an Adulterer defile a
Woman, and she cry not out, then he shall be put to death: Lord, Infidelity,
Hypocrisy, and Vainglory are come to undo me, to defile my Soul, and they
have almost persuaded my Soul not to cry out; To be ravished is a great
affliction, but to embrace the Adulterer is an abomination.

If I cry to Men for succor, if I go to Ordinances, Alas the Adulterer is a
strong Man, he has locked the Doors of my Soul, and none can break them open
but thou only: Lord, do not thou stand knocking at the Door of my heart, for
the strong man will not, and I am kept so fast by my corruptions, I cannot come
to let thee in; Lord, break open the Doors, and come in to help me before I am
utterly undone, as it was with the Levites Concubine, so will it be with my
poor Soul, Corruption after Corruption, and Sin after Sin, will so abuse
her, that she will be at last dead: Alas! me thinks I look upon my poor Soul as
one looks upon a Ship tossed among Rocks in the Seas, one sees it, and pities
it, but knows not how to help it; there comes a Wave, and carries it with
violence amongst the midst of the Rocks, and makes it reel and stagger like a
drunken Man, and then all in the Ship are fain to pump and toil to save their
lives, at last it was dashed in pieces, and all fain to get upon broken pieces
of the Ship to swim to the shore, if it may be: My Soul is even laboring for
life; Lord, what will thou do? will thou be as a Man astonished, and as a
Mighty Man that cannot help? then I am undone, then I may say if thou will not,
then farewell all my Duties, farewell all my Graces, and all my Comforts which I
have had in the dear embraces of my God: Ah, must I not pray but with my
Tongue? Mast I have no more Comforts but what poor Creatures can give me? Lord,
if I must perish, let me perish in thy way, let me convert many unto thee;
Though I know my Damnation shall be greater if I perish for living so contrary
to mine own Doctrine: Lord, I am a poor Miserable Man, and a more Miserable
Christian, thou art, I cannot possibly imagine what, but I hope Lord, I shall
know; these days of ignorance and sin will not always last: when my change
comes, I shall no more sin and repent, and repent, and sin, as I do now: Oh my
corruptions I hope one day I shall leave you all in the Grave behind me; The
day is coming, when while I am praising God you shall not come and lie as a
Talent of Lead upon my Soul; and hinder my flight, Come Lord Jesus, come
quickly, Come while my Soul is filled with joy to think of thy coming; O my
God, thou art enough for me, for my Soul can hold no more; Lord, I am afraid of
the joys sometimes I have to think of thee, Tears for my sins are fitter for
me then tears of joy, yet I dare not refuse them, nay, I cannot if I would,
they are so sweet, so sweet; Heaven is but a greater Measure of them; Lord,
thou art enough, enough for them that love thee.

Meditat. XXII.
To see a dead Man arrayed with all the Richest Clothes, still there is more
horror to behold him then delight; So my poor Soul looks gashly in all the
Duties I perform, I have a cold and dead soul for all them, and more terror
there is in the deadness then there is comfort in the Multitude of them, this I
know by experience; yet Christ is not sweet unto me, My dear Savior, to whom I
was so dear: Lord Jesus give me a heart that may feel thy sweetness, I am
convinced that thou art so, but my poor heart has not enough tasted the
sweetness of this Truth, That all things are Dross and Dung in comparison of
Christ: Lord here is Mine Estate, Mine Health, My Life, My Liberty, and all
that I have, and had I more, I would freely give all; give but such a heart as
I desire, and the same will I consecrate unto thee in Spiritual affections all
my days: now I think thus with my self, When I was most desirous of, and
addicted to Humane Learning, it was wonderful delightful to me to be instructed
in some new truth, or to have some difficult question clearly resolved; To read
the Mathematics was wonderful delightful, because they prove such strange
things, then I have recourse to the Word of God, and by that I am assured that
all the Treasures of Wisdom and knowledge are hid in Christ, and in his Gospel,
then further I have recourse to the experience of the people of God in the Word
of God, and in particular to Paul, who being a Learned Man, yet accounted all
things as Dross and Dung in comparison of Christ; I have also recourse to the
experience of several godly persons I know, of the abundant sweetness, and
excellency of the knowledge of Christ, therefore Lord though I have not at this
present the power and ravishing feelings of Christ's Excellency, yet assuring my
self all these ways whereby I fully do assent to that truth, That it is life
eternal to know thee, and Jesus Christ: I do beseech thee, O Lord to give me a
fuller knowledge of thee in Christ; I beseech thee, I beseech thee, Let not my
undervaluing of this knowledge cause thee to deny it, I shall more value it, if
I had more of it: Lord, I know if thou should look in me and my life, to see
what thou can find to hinder the granting of this request, thou may find
enough; nay, I that know my self not so well as thou do, know enough, and
enough, nay, I know nothing to move thee in my self, except something I have
had from thee, those things I have so abused, that I know they may be swift
witnesses against me: But Lord, if thou should give me this knowledge of
them, I might do great things for thee; Lord hear me: Alas, Lord, my desires to
know Christ do even die, while I am praying to know him; Alas, Lord, such an
heart as I have is fit for none but thee, for none in the world can tell what
to do with it, but thou only; It is past the skill of all in Heaven and Earth
but thee, it is not in the power of Ordinances and Duties, if thou should not
set in.

I would pity the Soul of my greatest Enemy, if I should see it in such
continual storms and troubles as are in mine, there are new corruptions appear,
such as I may term them nothing so fitly as sparks of of the fire of Hell, to
have ones heart rise against God, when the continual desire of ones soul and
prayer is, that one might be inflamed with the love of God; Lord, while I am
working my heart to a serious thought of thee, endeavoring to have my heart
full of admiration of thee, and affiance in thee, before I pray unto thee, that
if it may be my prayers may be as an Arrow drawn up to the head, but when I go
about to pray, and send up my petitions, my thoughts of thy Glory and Goodness
slack, and it fares with me, oh my Soul, as sometimes it does with one that is
tying knots, when one has pulled the first very hard, yet it slacks before one
can tie the second; it I keep but a strict communion with thee, and did as thou
desire, (Lord, why should thou desire us always to be with thee, how
should we be acquainted with thee far more then we are, and if we knew thee
more, how shoould we love thee more; and if we loved thee more, how should we
know thee more? For thou revealest thy self to them that love thee; Alas! O my
Soul, why should not we always be with God* since he gives us leave? How
gracious art thou to invite such sinners as we are to come to thee! For thee to
wash our souls clean with the Immaculate blood of the Lord Jesus Christ; Alas,
Lord, I am Mine own enemy, nay, I see it and know it, and it cannot be
otherwise: Lord, I am so tired out with my corruptions, that I am even weary of
my life, and almost weary of my Duties; Lord, even at this present, how when my
^oul was so troubled that mine (...) were ready to weep, there (...) a thought
of a poor worldly business into my Soul, and my thoughts and sorrows for
heavenly Matters are gone!

Meditat. XXIII.
O my God, how coldly without love, how doubtingly without faith do I call thee
my God! Lord, how careless am I in thy service? how very careless? How long
Lord, holy and true, shall I be thus laden with corruptions? Nay, which is my
greatest Misery, I am not but very little sensible of my own vileness, that
makes me that I do not hunger after righteousness. Blessed Lord, I do humbly
prostrate my Soul before thee, and do with all the weak power of my soul
importune the Merits of my dear Savior; I pray thee to look upon me in Mercy:
When the poor wounded Man that went from Jerusalem to Jericho, lay half dead,
and speechless in the way, though he was not sensible of his Misery, yet the
good Samaritan was; though in his Tongue did not, could not, call for pity, yet
his wounds opened their Mouths wide, and spoke aloud to the Samaritan, Though
his eyes shed no tears, yet his heart wept blood at his wounds, and moved
compassion. Like to that poor wounded Man I am, so weak, so sick that I am
scarce sensible of mine own desperate condition; Lord, though my heart be not
full of love, it is full of wounds; Lord, thou know my Miseries, I humbly
beseech thee to pity me, not according to my Prayers, but according to My
Wants. Lord, that I do not desire to serve thee, that I do not hunger nor
thirst after righteousness, it is the greatest Misery that I have.

Meditat. XXIV.
Oh how terrible is the thought of Death to me, is it not so much for want of
Faith as holiness, and indeed I find that I can never with comfort think on
death, but when I have lived very holily before, for what will Faith in that
case help Me, without holiness? for Faith without holiness, is not faith but
presumption: Oh how sweet! how dear! how excellent a thing is holiness? Oh how
full of peace and joy is my Soul, when I am full of that? and yet Lord, how
careless am I of thy service? how many times in the day when I might think of
thee without any hindrance of My Studies, do I choose rather to think of
vanity? O wean my Soul, O God, from every thing that is not thee. Fill my heart
with thy self, dwell in me, my dear God! Why do I call thee dear? when I prefer
every trifle before thee, O most glorious Lord God, whom ten thousand Worlds
cannot sufficiently praise, nor love, which art thy self, and can be no more,
nor can be no less; how easy Lord, is it for thee to change My Heart, Mine
heart of Stone for an Heart of Flesh: Lord, as long as I have this heart of
stone, there is no hope that I should serve thee with any cheerfulness, or any
constancy; Lord, hear my prayer.

Meditat. XXV.
O blessed God, if the way of thy Providence be such, that thou will not give
so much Grace as to make me, through the abundance of it, almost whether I will
or no, to serve thee, yet to whom thou do give so much grace as to desire
more grace, O let not this desire which is of thy own infusing; be in vain, if
there be any thing in the whole world that I desire more then thy grace, then
let me want grace to desire it any more; Lord, if the reason why thou deniest
my prayer, be, because I do not desire as I ought, I humbly beseech thee to
grant that I ask aright; alas my afflictions lie heavier on me then ever they
did, and I am more wicked, or at least less holy then ever since my conversion
I was; how little am I affected with any thing that belongs to thy service, nor
yet does it affect me that I am not affected: Lord, if there were any in heaven
or in earth that could help me besides thee, then considering my Manifold Sins,
I should; I but Lord, I would not, thy Mercies are so great, go to any other:
Now Lord, now is the time to have Mercy upon me; I am like the Man that went
from Jerusalem to Jericho, wounded, naked, and half dead, I cannot call for
help, O let my wounds move thee to compassion; if I could bewail my sinful
Misery with tears of Repentance, I know thou would deliver me, but I cannot
weep, nay, hardly mourn; Oh saint, faint is my grief, and cold is my love? What
will thou do, Lord, with one that scarcely from his heart desires to serve
thee: Alas, what can thou do for me more or less, then to make me desire to
serve thee! Accept I must, or for ever be lost: What a low degree of goodness
am I come unto? a soul full of sadness, and empty of goodness; To morrow, Lord,
I am to receive thee into my Soul, thee my blessed Savior: Lord, thou know
I did not use to have a heart so empty of goodness, when I expected thee to
come next day.

Meditat. XXVI.
Lord, now I do resolve to serve thee, and in this particular especially; I
will not speak evil of any man what injury soever he does me, Now I will so
watch over my words, that I will not offend with my Tongue, And that by degrees
I may attain some perfection herein, I here vow every week between this and the
next Communion to keep one day so strictly, that I will not, during that day,
speak so much as one idle word that day, if I do, I will give to the poor.
Lord, how excellent is thy service? so pure, so sweet; O that there were such a
heart in me, that I might for ever serve thee.

Meditat. XXVII.
When I read the Story of the Martyrs, I do wish that I had lived in those
days, that I might also die as they did; or methinks I could now willingly lay
down my life, rather then yield to the abominable Idolatry, and Superstitions
of the Sea of Rome; but when I search and try my heart, I much fear that the
reason of this my desire is, because I think it easier to lay down my life for
Christ's sake, then for his sake to overcome my corruptions; for it being but
one act, though it has more pain, yet being but of small continuance, it is
less trouble, then all my life long to fight against sin; and thus I do ill
even in my best wishes, in diverse respects; For I chose Martyrdom, not because
thereby I might more honor God, but that I might the sooner and easier come to
heaven; And again, that I think I might content my self though I did not so
much hate corruption, if I died a Martyr, all would be well; whereas Though I
give my body to be burnt, and have not Charity, it would profit nothing, and to
love God, it is impossible for him that does not hate, and fight against his
corruptions: Alas, O my Soul, how weary are we of our Spiritual Fight, and we
would fain find some other way to Heaven, then by the continuance of it; O that
I were dead to the World? yet while we know something better, we shall not think
so; We talk much of the Vanity of the World, but who believes that the World is
Vanity and vexation of Spirit? Or who is sensible of this Truth? Or if he were
sensible of it, and sometimes affected with it, yet it soon wanisheth, and we
do not live accordingly, How much easier is it to speak like an Angel, then
live like a Saints!

Meditat. XXVIII.
Lord, that thou would do it for me take my Soul and my Body, what shall I
do with them any longer? I govern them so ill, and indeed am so unable to
govern them, that they govern me; Lord, if thou shall condemn me at the last
Day, I do now justify thee, and testify to all the world that thou art just,
though then (if such a time shall come) I shall blaspheme thee; My dear God, I
have yet a spark of thy love, I will not leave that small hold of thee for ten
thousand Worlds; I know, Lord, there is no dallying with thee: What if I spoke
with the Tongue, and writ with the Pen of Men and Angels? it is nothing; Lord,
take a poor soul at his word, Lord, I am thine, and do now give my self, and
ten thousand Worlds if I had them, to thee; yet when thou do take from me
some poor part of my Estate, I murmr; Alas, I have a poor weak heart.

Meditat. XXIX.
Lord, my knowledge of thee is but small, and that which is, is but little
Spiritual or Experimental; To know thee by what others write and say of thee,
is sweet to them that can set their Seal to it from their own experience; Lord,
what is it that has kept me so long from thee, or kept thee so long from me? I
know that I have been wanting to thee, and to my self; Lord, take my heart, I
have too much love for any besides thee; though I have too little for thee: Oh
how sweet are the thoughts of thee, and would be sweeter, if I thought oftener,
and longer, and more attentively of thee: Alas, I am almost grown out of
acquaintance with thee; I do not perceive my corruptions in any thing more then
in this, that though to think of thee be a thing so easy and so profitable,
yet I think so seldom: My dear God, deliver me from the business of the World,
Suits of Law, and such things, they undo me, they take up my thoughts that I
cannot be rid of them, I feel upon me the curse which thou threatnest upon the
people of Israel, If they would not serve thee with joy, they should serve
strangers with a great deal of hardship: I was well while I was with thee, then
I had my Songs in the night, now my days are turned into the shadow of Death:
Lord, draw me, draw me, make the cords of thy love stronger, or rather then I
should perish, make the cords of thine afflictions stronger, and if I murmr,
scourge me while I leave murmuring; How true do I find that saying, He that
injures, forgives not; My wickedness I have committed against thee, makes me
not able to believe almost that thou art, or can be reconciled unto me: When
I should do more for thee, and less against thee, I shall easilier believe thy
loves, or rather when thy Spirit shall shed abroad thy love in my heart; I
shall know thou love me, I sigh and Mourn, and Weep over my poor Soul, but
cannot help it: Dear Lord, Let My Tears prevail with thee; Pity, pity, have
pity upon a poor languishing Soul that is even gasping out his last breath; It
grieves me to see what a sad condition I am in, I am not yet in Hell, and by
thy Mercy I may never come thither, but I am running thither; Woe is me that I
am constrained to live in Mesech, and to have my habitation in the Tents of
Kedar.

Meditat. XXX.
Lord, I pray for Mercies, and when I have them, to see the unsuitableness of
my Spirit to them, and mine unthankfulness for them, brings more sadness upon
me then to want them; All the things I begged of thee for temporal Mercies,
both in carrying me forth and bringing me home, and concerning my business I
went about not finding things in such a sad condition at home, yet my poor
heart is the same still, and is as hard, and as stony, not willing to yield it
self, and all up to thee, as if I were more able to order matters then thou.
Now my heart is subject to murmr that it is so hard when it should mourn:
Lord thou have done enough to justify thy love, and thy tender compassions to
me, if thou should never do more, and not only thy justice could not be
blamed, but not thy Mercy.

Medit. XXXI.
Accept of my poor prayers and when at the last day, when the secrets of all
hearts shall be known, the hypocrisy and cold -- and my Desires shall be
known, and thy goodness shall be admired in hearing such prayers as mine are:
For the light of thy Countenance to shine upon, and the Breathings of thy
Spirit to blow upon a Garden of Spices, is not so much for the advancement of
thy Free grace, as for thee to shine upon, and thy Spirit to breath upon such a
Dunghill as I am, that sends forth such unisome savours as I do: Lord, if thou will be my God, I have a body and a soul, I will give thee them; It Is true,
they are thine already, but alas, if I had any thing to give that were not
thine, I would; but I have not.

Meditat. XXXII.
Lord, I wait to see the day of my Salvation, and the hour when thou will show
me thy loves, and when I shall lie in thy bosom and arms and hear the beatings
of thy heart in love, and the soundings of thy bowels toward me, and know thy
everlasting thoughts of love to me, when thou shall seal the pardon of my
sins to me, and make me read thee Counterpain of the Covenant of love between
thee and me, which thou reservest in Heaven, and is fair and not blotted as
mine is, and when shall the day of the love and joys of my Espousals return,
and my thoughts be swallowed up in love! Lord, why should thou withold thy
love, the Manifestations of thy love? Can thy love be concealed from thy
Beloved? I will wait for the Discoveries of thy love, I am loath to do any thing
before thou come whom my soul loves, for fear thou should come when I am
not looking for thee, and thou escapest me. I look every Prayer to see thee
come leaping on the Mountains, and skipping upon the Hills, as a Row or an
Hind; But I see thee not, Why do thou put a Spark of Love into my heart; If
thou will leave me, why did thou cast thy Mantle upon me, and when I low
after thee, say, what have thou done? thy loves are better then Wine, sweeter
then honey, even more to be desired then life it self; Lord, if the small
Sparks and relishes of thy Love be so sweet to me, what will the feeding on
this heavenly Manna be? If a drop of thy love be so sweet? what will the
overflowing be? If thy smiles bring so much joy, what will thy embraces do?
Lord, I long till I am undone with thy love; All my carnal and Worldly Joys
undone. Lord, it is not my unworthiness that should hinder me, nor will hinder
me from bestowing; Lord, help my unbelief; Well Lord, if I must walk in
darkness and see no light, yet give me thy Grace that I may stay my self upon
my God, My life is but short, and when the hour of my departure shall come,
then I shall enjoy him whom my Soul loves, and know as I am known; then I
shall forget the sorrows, pains and throws of my travel, for the joy that shall
be revealed. My Bride says come, and the Spirit says Come: Come Lord Jesus,
Come quickly.

Meditat. XXIII.
I wait for the appearing of the Lord Jesus Christ, if thy love be as fire in
straw, or such like matter, lie smoking, and makes ones eyes weep while one
strives to find the fire; at last it being able to hold no longer, breaks forth
into a great flame; and the longer it is before it discovers it self, the
greatter is the flame and light when they do break forth: Lord, whil^st I am
looking for thy love, thou make me weary, let the length of thy stay be made
up by the fullness of thy Presence, and Greatness of thy Manifestations when
thou come; I seek thee in my Prayers, and I say, O where art thou whom my
soul loves, and yet thou sendest me away weeping and mourning: I seek on my
bed when I awake in the night, but I find thee not; I speak with those which
have found thee, and they tell me, nay; I know it by thy word, that thou art
near to every soul that seeks thee; and when a poor soul cries, thou will
answer it, then I multiply my prayers, and call louder, and yet my prayers are
as the wind that passes away, and returns no more; O my Lord and my God, thy
love was strong enough to suffer, and thou did suffer, and thou did die,
that thou might make known and commend thy love unto the Sons of Men, and
now thou have done all this to manifest thy love, and will thou hide it from
me? Creature-love has wrought strange in me, I have never been weary of their
discourses and humane learning, how has it made me ravished with some learned
saying: and if thou would discover thy love, and shed that abroad in my
heart, certainly it would work wonders: For the Creatures flames of love are
but as a blaze that straw makes, but is soon out, it has not substance enough
to nourish and maintain what it begets; For Creature-Excellencies are not
strong enough to keep up the delight we take in them; but thou Lord art love,
and thou art such a treasure of excellencies that the poor soul makes new
discoveries of those treasures every day. To all Eternity thou art enough to
keep alive and in full strength all the love and joys, and praises of Saints
and Angels. Lord, thou art enough to answer thine own love, but what am I that
I should speak of thee? thou art so glorious that I am afraid to speak of thee.

Meditat. XXXIV.
Lord I call, and thou do not answer, I am even tired out if thou do not
support, I sink under the burden, I long and look to see thy beauty, but I
cannot behold nor perceive one glympse: that thou art excellent, I see by the
eye of faith, but excellencies do not affect me: All my prayers are turned unto
this, Lord show me Christ, and him whom my soul loves, for I have heard of
him, and the same of his excellencies have come unto me, yet mine eyes have not
seen him; I think with my self, Surely Christ manifesting himself, and to be
filled with all the fullness of God, and to have a conversation in Heaven, must
needs signify more then ever I have experienced in my self; For such poor
things as I have found wrought in my soul cannot fill up those expressions,
Then I hear of those whose lives are spiritual and Christ-like, not glorious in
out ward mortifications. Thou art blameless that way speaking of such things
which God has wrought for them and in them, which I have not found, but are
the very same things which are in my view, and I follow after to attain but
cannot: Then from their relation of the Lords dealings with them I perceive
that God did humble them more before he did discover himself unto them then
ever he has as yet humbled me, so that I find no rest day nor night in my
spirit, and yet though I am thus restless in seeking after something which I
cannot know what is it I seek for, I cannot discern any true, sincere, constant
love to Christ. He neither lets me know that he lovesme, nor that I love him,
so that I stand amazed, and know not what to do, and still by the help of God I
will not cease to cry and call upon him for whom my soul I doubt not but would
love, if he discover his beauties and love unto me, and work them on my heart:
I seek for one, who I cannot tell who he is before I find him, then I shall
know, and shall tell to all who he is, and set forth his excellencies, though
they shall as little understand me, a I do them, who declare the things that
God has wrought for them.

Medit. XXXV.
There is not such an one in the world as I am that I know; Publicans and
harlots, I justify them; I in the midst of ordinanees and mercies, in the
midst of the flames of love, nay, when thou layest on me that affliction that
is now fresh bleeding in mine eyes, or rather despised and forgotten, I should
have learnt obedience by things I suffered, and I have done as if I were to
learn to sin by them; Thou have chastised me with rods, and I have put the
sting of sin into them, and have made them scorpions; Thou sendest them for
Antidotes, and I have turned them into poison; Lord, teach me what it is
wherein thou art so offended, to leave me thus: Lord, I believe thou have
pardoned me, but small is my comfort, when thou pardonest sin, but subduest it
not.

Meditat. XXXVI.
Lord, I do so evidently find my self unable to judge of truths, or to resist
temptations, that I almost, nay altogether lie at the mercy of every
temptation, and to be carried about with the wind of every vain doctrine, if
thou do not stand by me: what should I tell thee the secret puddle of my
heart? I am weary of the stench and filthiness of it; there is not a prayer but
they meet me at it, and lie as a talent of lead upon me: if my heart were all
on fire with thy love, these things could not be: I sometimes have thoughts
rising in my heart that are wicked, proud, and foolish thoughts; I begin to be
offended, that I begging for the manifestations of thy love, yet have them not;
but those thoughts no sooner begin to arise, but I consider what am I that thou
should give me thy love! sand how can I expect the manifestations of thy
love when I will not give thee my love, but let it run wast upon the creature?
How many times do I choose to do anything rather then spend my time in
Meditation and Prayer, nay to do nothing and be idle; for although thou love
us first, yet thou do not usually discover thy thoughts of love to a Soul,
before she has made over her love and her self unto thee; then I think thou
can by the power of thy Spirit bring in my heart, my Soul, and my love, and
that usually ere thou do ravish the soul with the discoveries of thy love:
this I know, and let all the world know it, that whatsoever wicked thoughts do
arise in my weak heart, which I cannot answer, I know that all thy ways are
holy, just, and good; Lord, what shall I give for the sheddings abroad of love
in my heart? that which should be given for it, were it at the utmost parts of
the world, I could fetch it thence. But Lord, the price of it already paid,
it is near unto thee, even at thy right hand, O thou most High, he has paid for
this Mercy by his blood long ago, and my Prayers thou requirest, not as a
price: Lord, fill me with these Spiritual Supplications, that I may give thee
no rest, nor take any rest my self, until I have found him whom my soul loves?
Come Lord Jesus, Come quickly.

Meditat. XXXVII.
O Lord, beat me, and drive me with storms and Tempests, I am come unto thee
like the Prodigal Son, for all but that which most of all I should have, a
Spiritual Sorrow, ragged, and tattered, and undone; My Sins and Misery are like
his, not my sorrow; For me to see my self languishing, my Graces daily grow
weaker, my love colder, and even almost to be speechless in prayer; Alas, the
Sorrow that I have is rather bewailing my Misery then my Sin; I know not what
it is Lord, but thou do; Sure I am, my condition is sad, and I am sad, and my
sadness is all the poor remains of Comfort that I have; and yet I no sooner
begin to take any comfort in my grief, but I perceive so much hypocrisy in my
Grief, that the poor Spark of Comfort that I have is put out; Alas, Tears of
Blood were fitter for me then dry eyes; O Lord, must every trifle steal away my
heart from thee? Thine Excellencies are too high for me, Wisdom is too high for
Fools: O that thou would take me out of my own hands, and deliver me from my
self; and howsoever my heart is not importunate enough now, I shall thank and
praise thee to all Eternity, if thou will make me thine; Thou have done as much
to draw me with the Cords of love, even to wonder: Lord, do thou snatch me as a
Fire brand out of the fir^: if thou should stay till I am willing without thy
making me so, I am lost: For I shall never part with these painted Vanities,
for all the glory in heaven, except thou give me the eye of Faith to see it,
and a Spiritual palate to relish it.

Meditat. XXXVIII.
O Lord, will thou let a poor sinner lie gasping out his last breath at thy
feet, and die in thine arms: I have abundance of love for the world, O that
thou had it all: I am sure I am not, and shall never be at quiet, until thou
have it; nor would I sleep until I am in thine arms of love; My dearest God,
how comes it to pass that my heart cannot give it self to whom it will? Had I a
thousand worlds, I would give all for thee, that I might be thine; O my soul,
why should we stand consulting and contriving what to do? God is ten thousand
times more then all things; Why should we weigh a Talent of Lead and a Feather
together to see which is heaviest: O Lord, My soul has chosen thee long ago, I
have abundance of experience of the Truth of those things which I have
believed: I am thine, and thou art my God; Thou have chosen me, and I have
chosen thee; Is I should be so vain at any time as to leave thee, thou art the
same, and thy choice fails not; Thou Lord which made me choose thee, whilst I
had no experience of thy love, wilt make me continue my choice. Lord, that any
one should choose hell before thee! It makes thee not to be less glorious;
Lord, must my Blasphemies praise thee? I find so much hell in my heart, that it
is not troubled in any proportionable Measure, that there is so much hell in
it. When I set apart an hour for Meditation and Prayer, then I kept my heart
somewhat close; But at other times, I am little careful to improve what I read
or hear to inflame my heart; I had better not set an hour apart, and give thee
all the day by thinking always of thee; Lord, I do now acknowledge; for then I
shall not, but if thou should leave me, I should be too much given to
blaspheme thee; Nay bl^ssed God, let that never be; Lord it shall never be:
When I consider the desperate hypocrisy of my heart, I may every Morning
expect that thou should give me up to a r^probate sense, to commit sin with
greediness; when I think of these things, I pour out my soul within me: To
think with my self, I shall lose my Estate, a little troubles me, to think I
shall lose such a friend, it affects me more, but to think I shall lose my God,
and become an Apostate, that is a hell unto me; I have begged of thee, as for my
life, that thou would not leave me, and now I beg, O forsake me not utterly;
To have such a heart, that will neither inflame my words, nor be inflamed by
them, is that which has not been so; Lord, except thou will follow one, that
will not stay when thou call, and overtake one that runs from thee when thou
followest, I am lost: Well, I am sure my froward and careless carriage will
justify thy justice if thou condemn me, and magnify thy Mercy, if thou savest
me.

Meditat. XXXIX.
Lord, this day is thine own, and by being thine, is the more mine, I must now
burn without coals about me; The time has been, when if I had been cold and
dull, the Society, Expr^ssions, and Examples of others in days set apart to
thee, would have in^lamed me; Now the company I have is water and snow; Woe is
me that I am constrained to have my habitation in the Tents of Kedar, and yet
Lord, thou art never wanting; Thou sendest forth thy beams of light and heat,
if I bring not Clouds over mine own head, I may have enough light from thee;
Lord, when will these days of sin be ended, and the time of refreshing from
the presence of the Lord come? I come into thy presence, but when I am come, I
am silent and deaf, neither able to speak to thee, nor hear the sweet
whisperings of thy Spirit; O that I had a heart to give my self unto thee, or
that thou would take these poor longings of my Soul for a Gift, and
thereupon take possession of my Soul, My days of leaping for joy to think of
thee are gone, and now my days of sorrow to see mine own vileness are come; My
tears are now my Meat and Drink, O that I had more of them, so they were more
Spiritual; I am a poor creature, but thou art the rich God. My poor heart, why
do thou not speak? why art thou silent? what say thou? Is not God a good
God? what relish or sweetness is there in these words, if thou do not set to
thy seal, Lord, to thy glory, though not to my comfort be it spoken, Thou have
been a good God to me, but I have no comfort from this truth, if I never relish
it; yet if mine heart will be so wicked and vile, and base, as not to
acknowledge it, yet my hand shall write that which shall witness for my God,
against my self; Thou art good, patient, and Merciful unto me, enough to make
earth and heaven to wonder at thy goodness, and my vileness: Ah my God, my God,
must my words go beyond my thoughts of love to thee? Lord, thou art enough for
heaven, enough for thy self, and art thou not enough for me? Try O my Soul,
try, thou will never trust before thou know this by experience; thou know
abundantly that the creature has told thee, It is not in me, this thou know
by experience, and by faith thou know it is in God; Well then, lay all thy
weight and strength upon him, and none upon the Creature; Hold upon him with
both hands, or else thou will attribute the greatest failing unto God; For as
he that stands upon never so strong a place, if he lean against a rotten wall
he shall fall, and one that is asleep, when he falls, will not know whether
failed him, and so if we do but lean to our own wisdom, we shall happily think
that God fails; Lord, I wait, I long for thine appearance; Thou art enough
Lord, I know not what to say, I am undone without thee; Lord, I hear the poor
fly, oh how it flies up and down; Now it is warmed and revived with the warmth
of the Sun; yesterday it lay still as dead; surely Lord, if thou will shine
upon my Soul, I should be active and cheerful in thy service: No marvel heaven
is so full of thy praises, when thou communicatest thy self so fully to them;
The Crumbs that fall from thy Table are too much for me, these temporal
blessings are more then I can challenge, yet Lord, I cannot be content with
them, give me thy self, and it suffices, for all is nothing and shares without
thee.

Meditat. XL.
Alas my God, Pride and Despair divide my life. When I find any thing I do in
some manner as I should, I begin to be pust up, and think, that I do more then
some others of Gods people; and when I look upon my failings, these thoughts
begin to arise, It is in vain, I shall never overcome such corruptions, My
Sins do me more harm by discouraging me, then in the commission.

Meditat. XLI.
Lord, There is no peace until thou have all our love, while our heart is
divided between the world and thee, we can have no quiet, Natural conscience
draws one way, and Natural Corruptions another way: It is our ignorance that
makes us think that there is not enough in thee to satisfy all our desires,
and supply our wants, which makes us join the Creature with thee: When Lord,
when shall all my thoughts be of thee? I am weary of being thus divided; Lord,
if I can dispose of my self, I give my self wholly to thee; O refuse not that
gift which thou have so often desired, thou have said, give me thy heart, Lord,
my heart longs whilst thou have it: If thou say that I do not give my self
freely and wholly enough, alas, nor never shall until thou take my heart, and
discoverest the secrets of thy love unto me; when thou do that I shall run
after thee; Lord, he^e's my poor soul, it lies at thy feet, grovelling and
gasping for life; the Creature has left me, and I have left the creature, and
would not that it should have any more of my love, but it still woes me, and
follows me for my love, unless thou overcomest these strong corruptions, I
shall never be at quiet.

Meditat. XLII.
Sometimes my heart begins to be filled with joy, so that I am ready to cry
out, Thou art mine exceeding joy, and then I consider what I shall do, for I am
afraid that my joy is false, When I consider how I came by it; whether my
prayers have been more servent and frequent of late, or my repentance more
profound: in the midst of this consideration, I can hardly say but think with
my self, Why should I delay or refrain my enjoyment of God? and am ready to
say within my self, The false joys in God are better then the true joys of
the world; these joys are too sweet to let go; Lord Jesus when thou kissest me
with the kisses of thy mouth, I will kiss the Son lest he be angry; Lord, thou
art too good for me, if I may say so; how could I ever expect that thou
should come near me more? the poor love I have, makes me say a thousand
worlds, and a thousand heavens for my God; the small beams of the light of thy
countenance are so sweet; Lord, if thou would but continue the joys thou
sometimes affordest, I had enough; I need not the comforts of the world to make
it up, nor fear the afflictions of the world: though one need continual
supplies comforts to support one, yet they could not spend them.

Meditat. XLIII.
I will go to God, says David, he is mine exceeding joy: a sweet saying! O
that there were such a heart in me; yet I have an un^nflamed heart, a frozen
heart: if I leave all things and my self, I should find thee, but these poor
joys of the world quench the joys of the Spirit, I shut out the glorious beams
of thy heat and light, and light up the Candles of the Creatures, which have
neither heat nor light in comparison of thine; When I go about to rejoice in
thee, My sins come and tell me that they must be mourned for first: Any thing,
Lord, any thing, so that I may do what is pleasing in thy sight; I am willing
to stay for my joys while thou art pleased to give them; Only I beseech and
desire these three things of thee.

1. That I may not want grace, though I want joys.

2. That I may not go about to make up the want of thy joys with carnal joys:
let me not kindle a fire, and walk and rejoice in the light and sparks of what
I have kindled, etc.

3. That though thou have kindled joy, yet that I may have sorrows that are
Spiritual: Lord, how abundantly good art thou to them that love thee! I lie
under the weight of thy love and thy joy, when I come hungry and thirsty to
(...) to be satisfied with thy joy to (...) lie now as a ship upon (...), while
the Tide of thy (...) and lift me up, and carry me into the Ocean of thy
goodness. When Mary Magdalen stood weeping at the Sepulcher, thou did call
her by her name, and she forgot all her sorrows, she left her tears, the
Sepulcher, and the A^gel, and cried out Rabboni. My heart makes me believe that
I would give the whole world to see Jesus Christ, for I think if I could see
him I should lie down at his feet, and beg his grace, and he would not deny me;
This is part of my weakness and want of faith, for he hears my prayers as
fully, and is as willing to grant them now he is in Heaven, as if he were on
earth; Lord Jesus, thou that never did deny any poor soul that came to thee
for grace and pardon, thou never sendest them empty away, but grantest their
request, Have mercy upon me, O Lord, my need and wants are as many, and as
great as many, and as great as any of them all; and if my sense of my misery be
not so great, my misery is so much the greater.

Meditat. XLIV.
Lord, I perceive that spiritual sorrows and spiritual joys are wholly thy
work, for my sins are as many, as great, and of as deep a dye as any in the
world, that is not the sin against the holy Ghost, and I am fully and sensibly
convinced of it that they are so, and yet I am as senceless as if my condition
were quite hopeless; for were it not so, could I possibly be so feared as I am?
Thou have said, I will take away the stony heart, Lord, if thou will work, who
or what can hinder? My corruptions and my sins have, and do harden my heart by
having and committing them, nor will they soften it by considering them; What
hinders thee from taking away the infidelity and stoniness of my heart? If that
hardness and infidelity does, why that is the thing to be cured: If I were not
sick I need not a Physician: Lord, I say not this to justify my self, for it
is thou of thy free grace that must justify me; for I am lost: And so for
Joys and Comforts, though I read and hear of the Comforts that thou pourest
out on others, I am not moved; nay, those very Stories and sayings which have
formerly inflamed me, now are as sparks falling into the Sea, warm not at all:
alas, when I shall meet thee at the last day, thy Mercies they shall testify
against me, when they shall witness my sleightings of them, my fruitlesness
under them, and unthankfulness for them: What can I say, Alas, my poor soul, we
are undone; but that day is not come yet, one hour more the Lord it may be will
give me, Come Lord Jesus, Come quickly, Come into my poor soul, for I am afraid
to meet thee at the Tribunal of thy Judgment: If thou were on the Earth,
methinks I could go with confidence to thee that thou would hear me, but now
thou art in heaven I cannot; Blessed are they who have not seen, and yet
believe: Lord, I have received double for all my sins in respect of any profit
or pleasure I have had by them: I have had full measure, pressed down, and
running over; but alas, my vexation of Spirit is more gall then all the
pleasures that I have had, that have been worldly. The loss and want of the
discoveries of thy love, cannot be recompensed with all that the world has;
thy loves are better then wine. Indeed in respect of the offense to thee, every
prayer deserves hell.

Meditat. XLV.
Lord, I am as afraid of Comforts as of terrors, for when I have comforts I am
subject to pride my self in them, and instead of having sweet thoughts of thee,
have high thoughts of my self; Afflictions breed sorrow, and comforts pride;
Sorrow is better then pride. My preaching is my temptation, and and my accuser;
If I preach not the strictest ways of God, my negligence condemns me; and if I
domy Sermons condemn me; For my life is hell, I am afraid of publishing
something I have by the help of thy Spirit written, left my life should do no
more harm by scandal, then the writings should do good by directing to
holiness, and yet sometimes I think that if I publish and own such writings,
they would be a strong Engagement to live more holily: But I have something
against that also; for that Motive would in short time lose its strength; Such
waxen wings would melt, and let me fall to my former ways, and that holiness
which is born up with such carnal motives is a poor thing; Lord, how am I
distracted and torn in pieces with these thoughts; Nay Lord, if thou will have
me go with these burdens on my soul, do whatever seems good in thine eyes; If
I may but drudge in thy house, though I lie among the pots, yet to be a
Skullion in thy house is better then to sit at the Table of Princes; Lord, I am
undone except thou work a miracle of mercy; yet if I am undone, it may be,
before thou give me over, and discoverest me to the world, thou will let me
do something more that I may glorify thee, and edify the people, nay, it may
be thou may suffer me as long as I live to do much of which thou may have
glory; Lord, if my heart be not upright, yet O that my actions and my
Preachings may be such, that men seeing and hearing them may be stirred up to
glorify thee, by doing those things sincerely, which I it may be do out of
hypocrisy, I am sure too much hypocrisy; Lord, I have begged for such a heart
as may not deceive me, nor dishonor thee; O my God, What shall I do? Nay,
Lord, what will thou do? I am undone, unless thou do work mightily above all
that I can speak or think, according to that mighty power wherewith thou did
raise the Lord from the dead: O that I might be so raised that I might return
no more to corruption.

Medit. XLVI.
By this I know and am sensible, It is not for any man to live by his own
strength, by my knowing how impossible it is for a sick Man to recover without
thee: If a living man cannot speak, how can a condemned man live without thee?
If living bones cannot move, how can dry bones live? Lord, thou meetest me not
at Duties, thou speak not to me there; Thou speak to me in mercies, and I
answer not; in judgments, and I carry my self as a sleepy man that is
unwilling to be awaked; What will thou do with me Lord, when I will neither
speak to thee, nor answer thee when thou speak! O the weakness of my graces,
and the power of thy Mercies! Those sins I have had a mind to commit, thou have
taken from me the opportunity to commit; It is a comfort to me that I had not
opportunity, but it would be a greater comfort not to have a mind.

An Instance according to the Rules given for Meditating on the Scripture.
A Meditation on these words.
Isa 66. 2. But to this man will I look, even to him that is poor, and of a
contrite Spirit, and trembles at my Word.
LET us seriously consider, O my Soul, That if an Angel, or God himself from
Heaven had spoken these words in our hearing, as once Christ did to Paul, when
he was going to Damascus, surely I think they would have very much affected us:
Is the Word of God less his Word because it is written? I read that the
Apostle, 2 Pet. 1. 17, 18, 19. speaking of a voice that he himself heard from
Heaven, says, that he had a more sure word of Prophecy, that is, as I
conceive, that he was no less sure that the words of the Prophets were the very
words of God, then those that he heard with his ears; Then let us not be less
affected with these words, then if we our selves had heard God himself speak
them.

2. Nor let us think that they less concern us, then if we had earnestly begged
of God to tell us what he would have us to be and do; and as an answer of our
prayers we had heard him speak to us from heaven in particular, To this man
will I look that is of a poor and contrite Spirit, and trembles at my Word:
For doubtless God has not caused his Word to be Written in vain, at a
venture, for whomsoever should read it, but knew not who they were should read
it, but he knew every particular person, to whose hand his Word should come,
and knew his word should come to my hands, and I should read these weary words,
and therefore caused them to be written in particular for my sake, though not
exclusively: Christ died for all his people, yet Paul says, that he loved me,
and gave himself for me; and Christ did think particularly of Paul, and so of
every one else for whom he died, and gave himself up as a Sacrifice and
Ransom, particularly thinking on, and intending every one that should be saved
by his Death: If a Minister should go to one that is given to Swearing, and
tell him of the hainousness of that sin, and lay it home to his Conscience in
private, it generally does affect him more then to hear the same sin reproved
in public, yet he should as particularly apply it then, though he had not in
this respect so much reason to apply it, as I have to apply these words to mine
own soul; For the Minister does not, nor can actually and particularly intend
every one that is guilty of the sins he reproves (for he knows not every
particular person that is guilty of the sin he reproves) as God does every one
that reads his word; Therefore let us take this and apply it to our selves, as
if God had sent these words written with his own hand to us in particular:
When it is said that the Scripture is written for our Learning, etc. Romans 15.
4. I conceive the meaning is not only by way of sufficiency, but by way of
intention, efficacy, and decree, in resgect of his people, that is, not only
that there is a sufficient matter in Scripture to instruct us, but that God did
intend and decree that this place of Scripture should instruct every particular
one of his people that is instructed by it.

3. And indeed what is the reason that I now read these words, and do now
intend to Meditate on them? Is it not, or certainly it ought to be, that I
should try whether I am such, or whether I have such an heart and Spirit as
these words signify? and if I am not so much as I ought to be, that I should
humble my self, and be as truly sensible, and as much affected, and much more,
then I am with those bodily infirmities that lie upon me; and if so be there
were a receipt given me, which I had a long time sought for, and endeavored to
get, being assured that if I had it, it would cure me; Surely I should not only
read it, because I might be able to tell others what would cure such a Disease,
or to enable my self to discourse of that matter, but I should read it with
abundance of joy, and unquestionable resolution to take it: Alas, Lord, why do
I not read thy Word so also, where the unquestionable remedies of all spiritual
diseases are set down? Surely it is my senselesness of the mischiefs of these
Spiritual Distempers that makes me so little affected with grief for them, and
with joy that I have found out the remedies for them.

4. Blessed God, it is no more in my power to know thee by the strength of mine
own abilities, if thou do not manifest thy self and thy truths unto me, then
it is for me to see the Sun without the Sun; therefore Lord do thou take off
the Veil that is upon my heart and understanding, and that which is upon thy
Truths. I read in thy Word that my blessed Savior did rejoice in Spirit, and
give thee thanks, because thou did hide thy Truths from those that were wise
and prudent, and reveal them unto babies; O that I were of the number of those
Babes to whom thou would reveal thy Truths: Lord, give me a powerful,
Experimental knowledge of the Truths that are included in these words.

5. And holy and blessed Father, If thou will be pleased to let me know thy
mind in thy Word, though thy commands should be never so cross to my
corruptions, (my base corruptions, which have hindered me from a world of joys,
grace, and Communion with thee, which if it had not been for them I might have
had long ago I will do them by the power of thy might; Lord forbid that I
should be so wicked as to enquire of thee the Lord, (which I do or should do as
often as I read the Scripture) as we read the Jews did desire the Prophet
Jeremiah, to enquire of thee for them, though they were resolved beforehand
what to do; Yet they said, they would do whatever thou should command,
whether it were good or evil: O that I had at least a heart to resolve to serve
thee; If I must want, let me want riches, health, liberty, rather then grace;
Rather let me want strength, then want a will to serve thee; I had as good sin
unwillingly, as to do what thou command unwillingly; Lord, give me truth in
the inward parts.

6. Those things that lie plain in these words is, That those that are of a
poor and contrite Spirit, that tremble at the Word of God, are highly esteemed
of him; So that poverty of Spirit, and Contrition of Spirit, and trembling at
the Word of God, are the three things that are here so highly commended and
prized by God.

7. But now let us seriously consider whether we are thus qualified: Am I poor
in Spirit? Those that are so, have low thoughts of themselves, and are not
troubled that others have low thoughts of them too; They like reproofs better
then praises; They do not murmr under afflictions, but rather wonder they are
no more afflicted. Is it thus with us?

8. Lord, If there be any thing of poverry of Spirit in me, if I take reproofs
well, or afflictions in any measure patiently, certain it is, it is not at all
from my self: I was born with as proud a heart as any, and certain I am that I
did not change mine own heart; Thou take away the stony heart, we do not give
thee it.

9. But alas, Lord, I am far from being poor in spirit in any measure,
according to that which thou in thy Word requirest. My passion, and the
boylings of my heart, my loving to be called Rabbi, and to be esteemed by
others, and many other distempers and corruptions of that nature, which I have
daily to struggle withal, evidently prove the pride of my heart; nay, and the
afflictions that thou laeyst upon me plainly show what the corruption is that
thou intendest especially to cure: By the Medicine often times one may know what
the Disease is; and Lord, it is in vain (if there were no other end in it, then
to manifest my distempers to thee) for me to confess the secret pride of mine
heart, the strange windings, turnings, depths, and the strange and new Monsters
of pride and hypocrisy, that I might daily discover in my self; alas Lord,
thou know these altogether, and since thou do so, what cause have I to
wonder that thou should shine upon such a dunghill as I am! But Lord, thou
only can cure me of this pride and hypocrisy of heart, for my prayers
cannot; nay, though I consider and am convinced of the desperate wickedness of
mine own heart, the vileness of my nature; the abominations of my life, yet
these cannot work without thee, as a plaster though it be never so excellent,
laid on the wounds of a dead man, it draws not; it heals not, so are all
consideration and convictons to a dead heart.

2 But alas, what is there in me, whereof I should in any measure pride my
self? For others to have good thoughts of me is no very strange thing, for so
they had of the Scribes and P^aris^es; but for one that knows the baseness of
his own heart, the cernal grounds, manner, and ends of his actions, and a
thousand other distempers and corruptions, for such an one to have high
thoughts of himself, is, one would think, impossible. But, as to God nothing is
impossible, that argues power; so to such a heart as every one has by nature
nothing isimpossible, that argues sin; and we have more cause to wonder that we
have not committed the sin against the holy Ghost, then that we have done the
evils that we have; For certainly, had God but given us up to the strength of
our own corruptions, and to Satan's subtlety and malice to improve them, we had
committed that sin long ago. And alas, what good does the high esteem of
others do us? are we ever a whit the more holy because they think us so? Nay,
has it not proved a means to make us more sinful? God has abundantly declared
his wrath against this sin, by that vengeance which he has poured out upon
Satan for being guilty of it: how many severe threatenings are there in the word
of God against pride? and how many precious promises to those that are humble?
The Lord beholds the proud afar off; but to this man will he look that is of a
poor and contrite spirit, and trembles at his word:

3. What are the things that cause thee to pride thy self? Are they thy gifts
either of edification or sanctification? Consider that 1. They are very mean;
scarce any of thy calling, has weaker gifts of edification; and no Saint under
heaven has weaker gifts of sanctification. 2. Suppose thy gifts were great, O
what an heavy account must there be for mis-spending such Talents? What way
can thou worse mis-spend them then by priding thy self in them? Do men praise
thee? Alas thou may go to hell with their praises, for so did the Scribes
and Pharisees: Do all men speak well of thee? and do thou pride thy self and
rejoice in that? Fear and tremble at what our Savior says, Woe unto you when
all men speak well of you, for so did their Fathers of the false Prophets. 3.
Consider how unkindly thou dealest with God; thou do as a woman that should
deck her self with the jewels that her husband had given her, but despighting
his love, gives away those Jewels to those with whom she played the harlot, the
more to entice them; is not this the act of an imperious whorish woman? as God
himself does phrase it, Ezekiel. 16. 30. and do but read that Chapter, and you
shall see whether you have not a bused all the blessings of God more then they
did; They spent them in honor to, and in worshipping of Idols; and can one
make a baser Idol in the world to fall down and worship it then ones self?

4. Let us consider what are the remedies of this sin.

1. Consider how much hell there is in thy heart, what a base and vile wretched
nature thou have: Consider what the Scripture speaks of men in their natural
condition; and be sure the Scripture which was written by the Spirit of God,
does not use to do as those vain men do, who when they praise or dispraise,
care not whether their expressions are true or false, so they be high enough;
and they rather strive to speak as much as they can, as then much as they
ought. Surely whatsoever the Scripture has spoken is made good to the utmost
by those that are in hell, and would by every man on earth, did God withdraw
his restraining, sanctifying grace, and were those sparks of hell fire that is
in every one by nature blown up to a flame, and heightened by those sufferings
that are there inflicted.

2. Consider how little good and how much corruption there is in our best
actions, from what carnal grounds, and for what carnal ends we perform our holy
duties; surely there is more sin in our best actions then ever yet we have
discovered in our greatest abominations: Do but meditate upon those several
considerations set down in the meditation of our sins, and it will be a great
preservative and remedy against pride. Lastly, Resolve with thy self never
(unless the glory of God may be thereby advanced) to speak or do any thing that
may cause others to have high thoughts of thee, or at least not to that end;
whatever good duties thou do, whether of prayer or alms, etc. do them as
secretly as may be, Let not thy left hand know what thy right hand does. Though
thou art exceedingly to be humbled for thy sins, because they offend and
dishonor God, and scandalize Religion, yet let not this at all trouble thee,
that thereby the esteem that men have of thee is much abated: To conclude, pray
earnestly as if thou were to pray for thy life, for it is thy life, that God
would humble thee; desire God to afflict thee, or use any means that he would
sanctify to that end; and when thou have finished thy Meditation, consider what
passage has most aff^cted thee, and keep it in thy thoughts, that by of ten
thinking of it thou mai'st be humbled, and made to be of a poor and contrite
spirit, that God may delight in thee, and that thou mai'st delight in him Now
to the King eternal, the immortal, invisible, and only wise God, be honor and
glory, for ever and ever.

Amen.
Meditat. I. Of the end for which we were Created
Preparation.
1. BE convinced of and affected with the presence of God.

2. Desire of God to assist thee with his Spirit.

Considerations.
1. Consider, God did not create thee for any need he had of thee (for though
thou should do all that he commands thee, thou art an unprofitable servant
to him; but thou come wonderfully short of doing what God commands) but only
to declare and exercise his bounty and goodness to thee, in bestowing upon thee
his grace in this life, and his glory in the life to come. But as it is in
Deuteronomy plainly set down, Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy
heart, and all thy strength and all thy mind: and to this end he has enriched
thee with understanding to know him, Remembrance to be mindful of him, Will to
love him, Imagination to represent his benefits to thy thoughts eyes to behold
the wonders of his works, and a tongue to praise him, etc. 1. Thou being fully
convinced of this, thou will plainly see that it evidently follows which is the
next thing to consider) that whatsoever is contrary to this end, that hinders
thee in or from knowing, loving, serving, and enjoying of God, must be avoided
and abhorred as the greatest mischief that can befall thee in the whole world.
2. The second thing that plainly follows from this, is, That thou should be
little or nothing troubled for the loss of any thing, which though thou losest,
thou may notwithstanding serve God; thou mai'st lose thy riches, and yet thou
mai'st be holy, therefore thou must not mourn nor grieve for the loss of
friends, of health, etc. 3. Nor must thou much desire and endeavor for those
things which no way further thee in this great business of knowing, serving,
and following God, but they are to be accounted superfluous and frivolous.

2. Consider the folly and madness of those who live no otherwise then as if
they had been created for no other end then to drink, and eat, and sleep, and
dance, and game, or to get riches, or such like fooleries. Certainly if these
people were asked whether they did in their consciences think that God created
them, that they might spend their lives in dancing, etc they could not say,
yes; None can imagine, that have any understanding, that at the day of
judgment God will ask them why they did not dance more, and game more, and
gain more riches.

3. Consider seriously with thy self, whether thou live suitable to the end
of thy Creation; think with thy self, that when that time which thou spendest
in eating, drinking, sleeping, recreation, visits, vanities, is taken from thy
life, what a small pi^tance is left for God, and for the works of thy
particular calling nay, thy sleeping, eating, drinking, recreation, should all
be done some way or other to enable and fit thee the better for the service of
God; but alas how seldom is it that thou have thought of fitting thy self for
Gods service by eating, drinking, etc. Nay how many times have thou made thy
self unfit for Gods service by such things? Now before thou go any further
be fully convinced of these truths; and if any scruple should remain (which
cannot though a man be but truly rational) argue and pray them away; for though
it may be some Objections may be too hard for thy arguments (which
notwithstanding seldom comes to pass, since thy consideration must be of
truths so plain, evident and obvious, which all grant) yet no scruples will be
too hard for thy prayers.

Affections.
1. Be ashamed and confounded within thy self, that thou have lived so contrary
to thine own Principles, and that thou have minded that little or nothing in
doing of it as a thing by the bye, which if now thou do but seriously think
of it, thou plainly see to be the main business of thy life, saying thus,
Alas, O my God, what did I think of when I thought not of thee? What was I
mindful of when I forgot thee? Alas, O my Soul, how comes it to pass that we
thought of these things no sooner? It Is a strange thing that our hearts and the
world should so far deceive us, that we should prefer every trifling thing
before that which concerns us more then ten thousand worlds? we have served the
world, which was not made but to serve us.

1. Abhor thy life past; Well, I am resolved to leave you, ye vain and sinful
pleasures, I will no longer dote upon you, you have but too long bewitched my
soul. I might have had a thousand holy thoughts and prayers and Treasures of
Alms laid up for Eternity, which I am sure I should not have repented of when I
come to die, and you vanities have took up my time, and stole away my heart and
thoughts from these things: Well, I have enough of you, I have done with you,
for the rest of my strength and days I will give unto my God.

3. Turn thy self to God, and say, Blessed God, will thou accept of the service
of a poor wretch, that has spent so much of his time and strength upon base
lusts and vanities? Nay, surely Lord, If thou will accept of such a wretch as I
am, such a heart, such love, such service as I have, I will give to thee; and
for the time to come, thou shall be the very joy of my Soul, and the
deliciousness of my thoughts, and do thou indeed entreat and importune me to
be reconciled, how wonderful is thy Mercy, that notwithstanding I provoked thee
hitherto daily to thy face, yet that thou should follow after me to embrace
me! whereas what could be expected but that thou should pursue me to destroy
me?

Resolutions.
Well, by the blessing of God, I am resolved, that though heretofore I have
spent whole days in such and such like recreations, which at best are but
vanities, for this month I will either not use such and such recreations at
all, or at least spend no more time any day in them, then I do in Prayer and
Meditation, and I hope one day the Lord will work in me such a heavenly frame
of Spirit, that Prayer and Meditation shall be in stead of a thousand
recreations; David was of that temper, for he says, that he will go to God his
exceeding joy, and that the Law of God was dearer to him then thousands of Gold
and Silver, and that his heart was ready to break for the very desires and
longings that he had after God; O my Soul, that will be a rare time when it
shall be thus with us; Why should David love ^od more then we? ^e forgave David
much, but he has forgiven us more, w^ll O my soul, if thou will pray hard, and
follow hard after God, thou little know what he will do for thee, and the
joys that he has laid up for them that love him, even in this world are
unspeakable and glorious.

Conclusion.
1. Pray: Lord, thou know the deceitfulness of my heart, the strength of my
corruptions, and the multitude of Snares and Temptations which encompass me on
every side, especially when I am in worldly employments in company, thou
know how subject holy flames are to go out, therefore be thou pleased by the
holy breathings of thy Spirit to keep these holy fervours of love from being
quenched; It Is not the strength of my resolutions, that can enable me to resist
temptations; if I am not kept by the mighty power of thee my God, I am lost.

2. Praise God, blessed be thou, O God, for an heavenly Motion or Desire that
has been wrought in me, thou might have suffered me as thou do thousands
(I have provoked thee as much as they) never to be convinced of, or affected
with these Truths. it is thy wonderful Mercy that thou did make me for such a
blessed end as the enjoyment of thy self; and much greater Mercy, that thou
have let me know so much, but most of all that thou have given me a heart to
desire and endeavor after it, Bless the Lord, O my Soul!

3. Acknowledge thy failings, alas, Lord, whatsoever is wrought in me that is
good, had been far greater, but that I am green wood to the sparks of thy love;
Lord, pardon the iniquity of my holy services; My highest and most inflamed
thoughts of thee are unworthy of thee: It is well that I have thee to love,
whom I need not fear loving too much.

After the Meditation is ended.

1. Think with thy self which of these Truths, or what passage of this
Meditation did most warm thy heart and affect thee, and fix it, and treasure it
up in thy thoughts, keeping it (as it were a Nosegay in thy hand to smell unto
all the day.

2. Set down this that thou have resolved to spend no more time in such a
Recreation, then thou shall spend in Prayer and Meditation.

3. Go unwillingly from this duty, and do not rush into worldly businesses, but
look to thy heart which is a slippery deceitful thing.

Meditat. II. Of the Mercies of God.
1. BE convinced of, and affected with the presence of God.

2. Pray, beg of God that he would put such considerations and thoughts into
thy heart, that thou may be so convinced of, and affected with his goodness,
that thou mai'st love, praise, and serve him.

Considerations.
1. Consider how much thou art engaged to God for bodily Mercies, he has given
thee thy senses, sight, hearing, and other parts of thy body; It thou did
want thy sight, what woulst thou give for it if thou wast Emperor of the
world? How many thousand pound; would thou give? A Diamond is not therefore
worth no more then 6 d because a poor man can give no more: if thou should
reckon up what thy hands, feet, health, liberty were worth, to what a vast Sum
would they arise? Thou have all these things from God, thou have not them from
thy Parents, they know not before thou were born whether thou should be Male
a Female, thou ma^'st say to God, as David did, In thy Book were all my members
written.

2. Consider what faculties of Soul God has given thee; What a miserable
condition are mad men in, those that are born Natural Fools; Thou art well, and
thousands are sick, thou have plenty when thousands beg their bread.

3. Consider what spirituality of Mercies God has given thee, how many
thousand poor ignorant Heathens are there which never heard of God and of
Christ, who were born and bread where the Gospel is not preached, but worship
the Devil, but thou dwell in the Sunshine, and under the droppings of the
Gospel, and are not these great Mercies and unvaluable? If thou do not value
them, it argues so much the greater goodness in God to bestow them upon thee;
nay, has not God made thee to know him; he has not only given thee the light
of the Gospel, but eyes to behold it.

4. Consider the greatness of God; why should he look after thee, nay, why does
he not destroy thee? Thou art but a Worm, nay, a Viper: why does he let thee
hang upon his hand of Providence, and not shake thee off into Hell fire? As we
walk we do not step out of our way, to avoid crushing a Worm to death: If we
see an Adder, or such a venomous Creature, we go out of out way to destroy it;
God has not dealt so with thee, but when thou have run from God, he has
called after thee* and would not suffer thee to perish though thou would;
and when thou have come against him with thy sins, and thy rebellions, he has
stood with stretched out arms to embrace thee, Are not these Miracles of Mercy,
O my Soul? how many mercies do thou receive from God, even at that very time
when thou sinnest against him?

5. Consider the innumerable multitude, the infinite greatness of his Mercies,
and the wonderful love wherewithal he bestows them: How precious are thy
thoughts toward me, O God (says David,) I am sure thou had just cause to say
also, O my Soul. The Mercies that God has bestowed are, wonderful, but those
that he has promised, are far greater: What manner of love has the Father
bestowed upon us, that we should be called the Sons of God! Now we are the Sons
of God, and it does not appear what we shall be; That he should make us his
Sons is very much; but that he should not spare his own Son, that he might
spare us, is beyond all admiration.

Affections.
Admire the goodness of God; Lord, what is man? what is sinful man, that thou
should so regard him? What am I that am the worst of men? Why art thou so
good to me that have been, and am so bad? When I was in my blood to the
loathing of my person thou said unto me in my blood, Live; nay, not only
when I was weltering in my own Blood, but in the Blood of Christ, thou said
unto me, Live; What did I ever do to deserve those Mercies? or what have I, or
can I do to require them? As thy glorious Name, so thy Metcies are extolled
above all praises.

2 Admire thine own ingratitude; Have I so requited my God, O my Soul, as to
return rebellious for m^ Mercies! Has God heaped upon me, many glowings coals
of love and mercy, and is my heart still ^ozen? Must God on y be a looser by
his blessings? If m^n (who is bound to do me good when i^ lies in his power)
^e^^o us a small co^rtesie on me, how do I thank him whenever I meet him? but
though God (who is no way engaged, of his free grace bestows thousands of
thousands of blessings, how do I live in the midst of them, without ever
regarding of them? Nay, my ingratitude is such, that I make God a looser by his
mercies: If thou, Lord, had made me to beg my bread I should have been more
thankful for one days food then I am now for a years; Are his Mercies less
because they are continued? Alas, O my Soul, how foolish are we? We do even
daily provoke God to take away his blessings, because we will not pr^ze them
while we have them; and th^^ there is another thing wherein we do wonderfully
ill, if God does but lay any affliction up (...) us, and take away but one
mercy, in stead of being thankful we have enjoyed it so ^ong, and that he has
not taken away all, we murmr and repine, and rob him of all the praise that
is due for the rest of the Mercies we enjoy. Alas, what does God require of us
for all his Mercies but this, that we should love him with all our Heart, Soul,
and strength?

3. Stir up thy heart to Praise and thansgiving; Bless the Lord, O my Soul, and
all that is within me, bless his holy Name; Forget not all his Benefits, who
forgiveth all thine iniquities, who heals all thy diseases; who redeemeth thy
life from destruction, who crowns thee with loving kindness and tender
mercies: Not love God, not not praise God, O my Soul! why what could God
require less at thy hands then these? I have heard of one that being delivered
out of a great and long desertion, had much ado to stay within doors and not
run into the streets and stay every one she met, that she might tell them what
God had done for her soul: How do the Angels love and praise God to all
Eternity? and why should the Angels love and praise God more then I? He never
forgave them one sin, he has forgiven me thousands: it is true they are in
glory, so shall I be too if I be not unthankful for the mercies I have received.

Resolutions.
I am resolved for the time to come to sing Psalms the oftener, I have not
enough delighted in that duty: It Is strange that that which is the happiness of
heaven, I should find so little delight in: well, for this next Month I will
spend one hour a week in meditating upon the Mercies and Love of God; His
Mercies are enough, and great enough surely to take up so much time; for in
heaven Eternity is little enough to admire them.

Conclusion.
1. Pray, desire God that he would by his Spirit blow these Co^ls of Mercies,
that he may inflame thy heart with love and joy, and prase of him; alas
otherwise the judgments of God will not affect us, nor the Mercies of God
inflame us; it is the Spirit that quickneth, else Mercies will not profit.

2. Praise God, Call upon thy Soul again, and again, aw^ken thy heart, let it
not be so drowsy at a work of so great importance.

3. Acknowledge, that were thy heart ought, thy ^outh and thy heart would be
filled with the praises of God, acknowledge that is no w^nt of m^tt^r, and
Motives of praise in the Truths which thou have considered, but thy heart is so
dead that nothing almost will work upon it

After the Meditation is ended think with thy self what Truths did most affect
thee, etc.

2. Write down thy resolution, etc.

3. Go unwilingly from this Duty.

Meditat. III. Of Sin.
1. BE convinced of, and affected with the presence of God.

2 Desire God to assist thee in this Meditation.

Considerations.
1. Consider seriously how much God abhors Sin, and how odious it is to him,
this you may see both by what God has said, and what God has done to show the
abhorrence of it.

2. Sinners, it is said, that God loatheth them, and they loathe God, Zec. 11.
8. and God by his Prophet cries out, saying, O do not this abominable thing
which I hate; How often does God prosess his hatred of Sin? if one should spit
in a man's face, or lay Toads or Serpents in his bosom, or whatsoever you could
imagine, it could not be so abominable to him, as Sin is to God, he hates it
more then we hate hell, how can we know any ones hatred of any thing, but by his
expressions and his actions? suppose you should see one take some curious,
costly, or rare Dish of Meat which he loved above any thing in the world, and
because there was some small crum of another meat which he had an antipathy
against, he should fling all with violence and detestation away, were not this
enough to satisfy you that he abhorred that meat, a crum whereof made him
abhor that which he so much loved? Suppose you should see one take a Watch,
whose wheels and all the rest were cut out of entire Diamonds and spying some
little small and almost undiscernable Spider in it, should fling it to the
ground with so much violence that he should break it all to pieces, it would
evidently argue how much he detested a Spider: What excellent Creatures are
Angels, and yet because a Sin though but of thought was found in them, how does
it cast them like lightning into Hell! Suppose further, thou should see the
meekest, wisest man, and lovingest Father in the world, taking his Son, and
scourging of him with rod after rod, until that he were all of gore blood from
head to foot, and though he cried out and begged of his Father to spare, yet he
would not spare him, but scourged him to death: Would you not say that the Son
had done somewhat that the Father did wonderfully abhor? Has not God dealt
thus with Christ? Did he not chastise him until he shed blood from the Crown of
the head to the sole of the feet? Did not Christ die under his correcting hand;
did not Christ cry out again and again Father, if it be possible let this cup
pass from me? And did he not love Christ more then any Father loved his Son,
and all this because Christ was guilty of Sin, though but as a surety; these
things are not inventions of wit or rhetoric, but real Truths; If the
dostroying of Sodom, Gomorrha, Jerusalem, Angels and the most part of Adams
posterity and the whole world, save eight persons; If the Sufferings of Christ
be not enough to satisfy thee of Gods hatred of sin, then thou may go on to
thy own destruction: but know this, that it will be bitterness at the last.

2. Consider what thou do when thou sinnest, every sinner does virtually put
Heaven and Christ, and God, and his favor and lovingkindness, and all his
promises in one scale, and that pleasure, profit, or honor, which sin
promises, with a wouded conscience, the torments of hell, the wrath of God in
the other scale, and doubtless virtually a sinner chooses sin with all these
mischiefs, before the service of God with all his mercies. It is as if a sinner
should say, rather then I will not satisfy my base lust; I will part with God,
with Christ, with heaven and all; I will suffer his wrath, let God do his worst
I will have my will; Every obstinate sinner does in his heart say thus, and
though now thou (...) imaginest it. yet at the day of judgment this will be
made manifest to thee as i^ it were writ with a beam of the Sun; things that
now seem less consequent, shall then be made evident: A wicked wretch that sees
one of Gods people hungry, naked, imprisoned, and does not relieve him he
little thinks, that is all one, as if he had seen Christ so, and not relieved
him; but at the day of judgment Christ will make it manifest unto him.

3. Consider how often thou have sinned against God, every unconverted man does
nothing else; his plowing is an abomination, All his imaginations are only evil
and that continually: Nay, though thou art one of Gods people, yet David cries
out, that his sins are more in number than the hairs on his head, and do thou
think thy sins are fewer then David's? how many years have thou lived? how many
days, hours, minutes? thy sins are more; The Hourglass that runs has not so
many sands in it as the sins that thou committest in that hour; If thou do
not believe this, consider, that there is not one of thy thoughts, words,
actions, but is polluted with abundance of sins; If thou say (Our Father)
since thou do not speak it with that reverence, attention, fervency, faith,
love, joy, confidence, admiration of his goodness, and many other which we are
engaged to have, when we call God by the Name of Father, thou becomest guilty
of all the contrary sins, and many more that are not named, in speaking that
one word in thy prayer not as thou ought. Fear not making thy sins seem
greater or more then then they are.

4. Consider further for what trifling vanity, nay for what base things that
thou will be ashamed to own before men, thou have lost God, lost thine own
soul, if thou returnest not, and have brought on thy self more miseries than
the tongue of man can express, or the heart of man concieve: the^e is nothing
thou ^^^st with thy eyes, or hear with thy ears, or f^^lest with thy hands,
is more certainly true than this. But alas, b^^ause thou have he^rd i^ so
^ft^n, and, God or his ^^fin^te goodness and patience has no^ made thee yet to
feel the stroke of his justice, and the misery due to sin; thou will not
believe (...), though his threa^nings be never so clearly for down, and with
much earnestness.

5. Consider, against what precious mercies, what sweet love, what blessed
experience, holy inspirations, what abundance of means, strong resolutions
(...) promises, clear light, etc. ^hou have ^inned.

Affections.
1. Pray to God to help to a further sense of the sinfulness of sin.

Blessed God, must all these considerations pass as a Serpent on a stone
without making any impression upon my soul? Lord give me an affecting knowledge
of the sinfulness of sin, and not have such slight thoughts of sin as I have
had; but grant that I may esteem of Sin as thou esteemest it.

2. Talk with thine own Soul about this matter. O my Soul, are these
considerations true or false? If thou think them false, bring thy objection,
show wherein the error lies, which thou can never do; but if they be true
(as certainly they are) how comes it to pass that we have made nothing of sin?
it is vain for us to put off the sense of our sins until it be too late.

3. Be confounded and ashamed in the presence of God; Alas, O Lord my God, as a
thief is ashamed when he is taken, or as a woman is ashamed when her adulteries
are found out by her loving husband; so, and a thousand times more I desire to
be confounded and ashamed in thy presence, when I consider, how abominable my
life has been; and how that I have committed my abominations even in thy
sight, and provoked thee to thy face; and had not thy patience and mercy been
infinite, thou could never have stood out against so many provocations: I
had been in hell roaring and blaspherning long before this day; and then I had
been past prayers, and past mercies, and past pardon. What shall I say unto
thee, O thou preserver of men? to excuse my sins I cannot, I have nothing but
the multitude of thy tender compassions, and thy free grace in Jesus Christ to
fly unto; Lord lay my sins home to me to humble me, and to break my stony
heart, but lay them not to my charge to condemn me. If thou had not in thy
word promised forgiveness to Sinners through Jesus Christ, I could no more hope
to obtain pardon, then ever the Devils themselves.

Resolutions.
It is enough, O my soul, and too too much, that we have been undoing our
selves, and provoking God thus long; That we have as it were with all our power
pulled down the vengeance of God upon us, and as it were kindling his wrath
against us, but he has not suffered his whole Displeasure to arise, nor
suffered us to perish though we would; blessed be his Name that we have not
committed the Sin against the Holy Ghost; which we certainly had done, had he
given us up to the strength of our own corruptions, and to the power and malice
of Satan to improve them to our destruction. Is it true indeed that God says,
Yet return, and I will save thee; does he stand with stretched out arms? does
he indeed stand with stretched out arms to embrace us? is it possible he should
be so gracious to forgive such and so many sins, and of such long continuance?
well, blessed be God, we will go unto him, and never offend him more. We will
hereafter whenever we are tempted unto sin, say, what* sin against such
love, such mercy, such experiences? offend that God that has pardoned us? that
has done such things for us, and is not content with that, but has promised
to do more? I will not hereafter stand parlying with Temptations; but I will
cry out unto God, and say, Lord help me, for I suffer violence, and in
particular, I am in some measure sensible that I pray not with that servency
and reverence as I ought to do; for the time to come, I shall (by the blessing
of God) mend that: I am too passionate, well, since God has been so gracious,
as to forgive so many, so great, so grievous sins, that mine own heart is not
able to understand their vileness or number; I will not hereafter be troubled
when I hear my neighbor, or underling, or when I hear my fellow N. use such or
such taunting words against me; I will not be provoked by this or that despite
or contemptuous trick, that he or she does use against me, but rather I will
endeavor to say or do such a thing, to gain his good will, and to pacify his
anger conceived against me; for certainly his injuries are not comparable to my
sins; and yet God forgives me them: there is a difference between I. N. and
me, I am resolved I will go to him, and be reconciled this very day, or if I
cannot, I will pray for him, and speak well of him this very day, if I have
occasion to speak of him at all: howsoever I will pray for him now.

Conclusion.
1. Pray; desire God that he would increase thy Detestation of sin, and that
thou might as well hate Sin, as leave Sin, and that he would not let any
Spark that has been kindled by his own Spirit go out in thee: Say unto him;
Lord, I do not beg Riches, I can go to heaven without them, please thee
without them; but I beg of thee Grace, and strength against corruptions, pardon
of sins, if thou deniest me these, I am undone.

2. Praise God: Blessed be thy Name that my heart has been in any measure
affected with the hatred of sin, that I have in any measure known and
considered the things that belong to my peace; thou might have suffered me
to drop into hell, and never to have thought of it before I had been there, but
thou have not dealt so with me.

3. Acknowledge thine one unworthiness of so great patience as God has
exercised toward thee; thine inability to think any of those good thoughts
that thou have had, etc. as in the first Meditation.

After all, think what passages most affected thee.

2. Write down thy resolutions, etc.

3. Go unwillingly from the Duty.

Meditat. IV. Of Death.
1. BE convinced of, and affected with the presence of God.

2. Pray for his assistance.

Considerations.
1. Can thou not remember that thou were by such an one when he died? did
thou not see how his countenance failed, his eye-strings broke, how he grew
weaker and weaker, at last grew speechless; how he throtled in the throat how
his teeth grated, how he sweated and strugled for life, and at last gaspt and
died: consider that thus thou must do likewise, how soon the Lord only knows;
that thou art well now is nothing; that thou art young and strong now, is
nothing; for how many are there that have been strong, and well, and as young
as thou, within a very few days after have been in their Grave. That thou must
die is certain, when, where, how, none knows but he that made thee: only this
is true, that generally men die sooner then they expect.

2. Consider that there will be an end of the World as to thee; thou must leave
Riches, Friends, Wife, Children, Houses, Lands, and thine one body also. Thy
friends may stand weeping by, but they cannot prolong thy life one minute.

3. Consider that when thou come to die, it will certainly not repent thee
that thou have spent so much time in prayer, so much in meditation, so much in
holy duties, it was never known since the world began, that any one did then
say, O that I had prayed less; though these holy Duties now seem irksome and
troublesome to thee, doubtless then they shall bring more comfort to thee, then
all those Riches and Vanities in which thou have spent so much time, and took
so much delight in. These things are certain and infallible, our understandings
cannot (O that our lives did not) deny them.

Consider how that the dearest friends thou have in the world, will hasten thy
filthy carcass out of the doors; they will scarce dare to stay with it alone,
but say as Abraham did, Let me bury my dead out of my sight: and then how
seldom will they think or speak of thee; or if they do, what good will it do
thee?

5. Consider, alas, poor man, whether will thy soul go then, to hell or to
heaven: do thou know to which? do thou not think thou shall go that way
which thou have gone all thy life long? if thou have walked in the ways of
hell, how can thou imagine that at the end of that journey thou should
arrive at heaven?

6. Consider, what good will all thy wealth, all thy pleasures, all thy
vanities do thee at that day? they will all vanish as does the morning dew.
Alas, who knows not all these things, and yet not one of a thousand consider
and lay them to heart; and to know these Truths, and live unsuitably to them,
does but add to our folly and madness: O that they were wise, says God, that
they would consider their latter end. These serious considerations of our
death, and preparations for it, is one of the chiefest points of wisdom in the
world.

7. Consider if thou miscarry in this great work of concernment, viz. thy
death, thou art undone for ever. If thou might live again, and mend that
error which thou committedst in thy dying ill, then there were some hope, but
it is appointed for all men once to die, and but once.

Affections.
1. Abhor Sin; It is you, and you only that can make that hour miserable unto
me; Alas, O my Soul, though we now have slight thoughts of such and such
Sins, through the deceitfulness of Satau and our own hearts, yet at that hour
if we had a thousand worlds, we would give them all, for that which we have so
little regarded while we live, viz. that we had kept a strict Communion with
God, and watch over our own hearts.

2. Despise the World; O ye vanities and fooleries of the world, why should I
spend my time and strength in following after you? what have ye done for me, or
what can you do? when I shall stand most in need of comfort, you will not only
prove vanities, but vexation of Spirit: Solomon has tried you, and he has
from his own experience, and from the teachings of the Spirit, has told me,
that you are but vanity; and all men when they come to die, set their Seal to
this Truth: Shall I to mine own destruction yield to your enticements? why
should I not have the same opinion of you now, as I certainly shall have when I
come to die?

3. Humble thy self before God, and cast thy self into his arms of love; beg
wisdom of him; every night I am a day nearer my Grave then in the morning; I am
nearer to it; but Lord make me fitter for my Grave, and when that hour shall
come, let it not come as a Thief in the night to rob me of my comforts; and
rather then that hour should not be an happy hour, let my whole life be nothing
but affliction and misery; Alas, Lord, if thou deniest me this Petition, what
will thou give me? Thou have said, O that they were wise, that they would
consider their latter end; and I said, Lord, teach me so to number my days,
that I may apply my heart unto wisdom.

Resolutions.
O my Soul, since things are thus, let us not resist known Truths: shall we
neglect these Truths because they are plain? if they are abstruce, then we
doubt them; If they are plain, shall we despise them? Do thou not know how
soon thou shall die, then what have we to do that must be done before we die,
do it with all thy might, for the night comes, wherein no man works: My
children are not yet sufficiently instructed in the ways of God; I will set
apart half an hour in a day to instruct them for this month, or give so much
to the poor every time I miss: there is such a neighbor or acquaintance who
goes on in wicked ways, and my words have so much power with him, that I am
confident if I do earnestly beg of God to bless me in the work, and take him
privately, and lay before him his danger, and press him to holiness, he may be
wrought upon; I have omitted it hitherto, but I am resolved sometime within a
week to take some opportunity to speak seriously and home unto him, or give so
much to the poor; and so every week give so much to the poor, until I have
spoke with him, etc. And since it so much concerns me to be prepared for Death,
I will every day make it one special clause of my prayer, to beg of God that he
would fit me for that hour, and I will lay up a Treasury in heaven by giving to
the poor, and make my self friends of this unrighteous Mammon, that when I
fail, they may receive me into their habitations.

Conclusion.
1. Pray; Beg of God that he would increase in thee strong Spiritual
apprehensions of Death, and that the thoughts of Death might imbitter every
unlawful pleasure to thee; Say unto God, Lord, how few days are between me and
eternity, whether of horror or of glory, I am not yet fully satisfied; It is a
sad thing, that a thing of so great concernment I should be uncertain of: O
blessed God, let this Meditation so work upon me, that I may not cease to pray
unto thee, and to examine my self, and use all holy means for the making of my
Calling and Election sure; For very shortly I shall be past praying, past
examining; for when thou shall summon me out of this life, then I must come to
judgment; therefore those resolutions that I have made of walking more
strictly, give me grace to perform them to the utmost.

2. Praise God, blessed be thy Name, O God: for any inward motions of thy
Spirit, that thou have afforded me, and for any etc.

3. Acknowledge thy weakness, etc. blessed God, if my heart were not so base,
so hard, so vile, that it always hinders me either in holy Duties, or from
holy Duties; it were not possible but that such serious Truths, such powerful,
spiritual, practical truths, should have wrought so mightily upon me, that I
should never from this very hour be deceived any more with the vanities of the
world, but should have set my self, and made it my business to prepare for that
great day, etc.

After all, 1. Think what passages most affected thee.

2. Write down thy resolutions, etc.

3. Go unwillingly from the duty.

Meditat. V. Of the Day of Judgment.
1. BE convinced of, and affected with the presence of God.

2. Beg of God that he would enable thee seriously to think of, firmly to
believe, and strongly to be affected with the Truths concerning the day of
Judgment:

Considerations.
1. Consider how Dreadful and Terrible that day will be when the Sea shall
roar, when the very powers of heaven shall be shaken, when Christ shall come
with thousands of his Angels in flaming fire: When an Angel came down from
Heaven to roll away the stone, the Soldiers that watched there became as dead
men; nay, the holiest men that have lived, have been exceedingly afraid at
things of far less Terror then those things are which will be at the day of
Judgment; For Moses himself did exceedingly fear and tremble, when he heard
and saw the terrible signs that were at the giving of the Law: and the blessed
Apostle, Hebr. 12. 21. became as a dead man, when he saw Christ not in a
flaming fire, as he shall appear at the day of Judgment, Rev. 1. 17.

2. Consider, that at the day of Judgment Sin will appear out of measure
sinful, for then it will appear with all its aggravations, for the Majesty,
Holiness, and Mercies of God will appear in their perfect glory; Men shall then
know what it is to sin against God; our ignorance of God now makes us
senseless of the sinfulness of Sin, but when God shall appear like himself, how
shall those sins that men now make light of, make them run mad with despair.

3. Consider, O my Soul, that those excuses that now quiet thee, will not serve
at that day, nay, thou will be ashamed to own them.

4. Consider how strict an account God will require of thee at that day, if
only thy grosser abominations that are odious in the sight of all men, should
be brought to judgment; but the smallest sin that ever thou committest, every
idle word and every vam thought, the very Grounds, Manner, and Ends of thy most
holy performances shall then appear more dreadfully sinful, then now the most
crying sin that ever thou committest does.

5. Consider that every one o thy thoughts, words, and actions, whether good or
evil, shall be brought to judgment, even thy most secret and unknown Sins to
thy self, or others. Consider O my Soul, what shame and confusion will cover
thee at that day; do thou not remember what at such and such a time thou
did in secret: Suppose all those Sins that ever thou committest in private,
should be known to all in England, or should be writ on thy forehead, that all
that saw thee might read them: would thou not be ashamed to come into any
company? but what is this ^o that which shall be at that day, when all thy
secret Sins shall be published before all Men, Angels, and God himself; these
are not inventions of men to terrify thee, but truths of God to reform thee.

6. Consider how fully and ^^^rly thou shall be convinced that day of thy Sins,
those with whom thou have committed them will witness against thee, thy dearst
friends that thou had in the world, must and will testify against thee,
nay, Satan, that tempted thee to those sins, and God that or bad thee those
Sins nay, ^ine own conscience (which ^hen will as perfectly remember ^very
Sin, with its aggravating circumstances, as if it were but ^hen committed) will
be a swift witness against thee; this will be that worm that dies not; a
clamorous and a wounded Conscience are insupportable even in this life; but
neither are the clamours so loud, nor the wounds so deep and pestilent as they
will be.

7. Consider the dreadful Sentence of Condemnation that God will pass upon the
wicked, viz. Go ye cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his
angels; Wicked men know not now what it is to depart from God* but then they
shall know; for God, before Men and Angels, in fury poured out, to bid them be
gone, and call them cursed wretches, who knows the horror o^ it? If the wrath
of a King be as the roaring of a Lion, what will the wrath of God be? Consider
further, that word is Everlasti^^ Fire and Eternity; How dread^ art thou
further to have such miserable companions as Devils; the Devil should appear to
thee when thou art alone, how could thou bear it?

8. Consider the sweet Sentence that shall pass from the gracious mouth of
Christ to his people, viz. Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom
prepared for you, from the foundation of the world: and how sweet will those
words be, when in the midst of all their fears and troubles, the righteous
shall hear the Sentence of absolution: What abundance of comfort have the
people of God, when God manifests and gives them his loves even in this life,
and seals them to the day of Redemption, and lets them see their names written
in the Book of Life, giving them full assurance that he is theirs, and they are
his; but alas, all those joys may not be compared to these: the testimony of
our own conscience, and the witnessing of the Spirit, the manifestations of his
love, and the smiles of his countenance are not so clear, so full, so lasting,
as they shall then be, no more to be compared to them, then the light of the
Sun is to that of a spark of fire: For Christ to call us blessed, is more then
for all the world, and for all the angels in heaven to call us so: doubtless it
did exceedingly affect Daniel, when the Angel told him that he was greatly
beloved, Dan. 9. 23. If thou had a thousand worlds, O my soul, would thou
not give all for this, that God would say so to thee; Well, if thou will be
watchful over thy ways, live holily, love, and believe in Christ, and repent,
the day will shortly come, when Christ shall say that, and much more.

Affections and Resolutions.
1. Tremble, O my soul, when thou think of these things; Why art not thou
exceedingly affected with the thought of them? have thou such a full assurance,
or is thy life such, that thou need not fear; Was not Moses and John as holy
as thou? Was not John the beloved Disciple, and Moses one with whom God spoke
face to face, and yet they trembled: O my soul, it is much to be feared, that
it is Ignorance and infidelity, not a Gospel-assurance that makes thee so
senceless; nay, it is infallibly certain, that whosoever lives wickedly, and
trembles not at the thought of judgment, it proceeds from a conscience feared
with a hot Iron.

2. Admire and be astonished at the miserable condition of all those that live
without God in the World, such are all they that repent not, and believe not
the Gospel.

3. Examine and try thy self, O my soul, Let us judge our selves that we be not
judged; We may easily know what Questions shall be put to us that day, we must
be judged by the Word of God, then let us judge our selves by it now; do we
indeed strive to enter in at the strait gate; May that which we do in the
service of God be truly called striving or no? Can a faint prayer be called
striving, or no? when every Temptation at the first assault overcomes thee, and
thou fightest not a stroke; Is this striving? Is this to fight a good fight?
and resisting unto blood? Do we think that God at the day of Judgment will
avouch this striving? nay, can your own Conscience think it so now? Be not
deceived, God is not mocked.

4. Pray, O blessed God, thou that art the great and just Judge of all men, be
pleased to fit and prepare me for that, that that day may not come a^ a thief
in the night, as to rob me of all my Comforts, deal with me how it seems good
in thy eyes, afflict me, chastise me, only let me be saved in the day of the
Lord.

5. O my Soul, Let us truly consider what we are to do, and how we are to live,
that when others at that day shall call to the Hills and to the Mountains to
fall upon them, and to hide them from the wrath of the Lamb; we may lift up our
heads, because our Salvation draws near: Well, O my Soul, I read in the Word
of God, that the neglecting to judge our selves, and the judgeing of others,
are two Sins that will cause all those to be judged and condemned that live in
them, therefore I am resolved by the gracious assistance of the Spirit of God
for the time to come, never to censure or judge any one, as I have done; and
frequently to examine my self, and as frequently and severely to judge my self
as formerly I have used to Censure and judge others, and to use as much Lenity,
mildness in judging and censuring others, as ever I did in censuring my own
ways, and if I do speak ill of any one I will, if I remember it when I am
before the Throne of Grace, not only beg pardon of my Sin in rash judging, but
as much as in me lies, make him some restitution by putting up as many prayers
for him as I have spoke evil things of him: and let us further resolve of my
soul, and by thy blessed assistance, O God, I am resolved, and do promise
before thee for the time to come, frequently, and I beseech thee that I may
always do it before I do or speak any thing, consider whether I dare own that
action or that word at the day of Judgment, and if I dare not own it, I will
not dare to do or speak it; and when at any time I think of omitting of any
Holy Duty, and think that such or such an excuse will serve, I will bring it
before the Judgment Seat of God by seriously considering with my self whether
in my Conscience I think that God will take that for a sufficient excuse at
that great day: For the Conclusion of this Exercise I refer you to the
Conclusions of the former Meditations, for I am loath this Manual should swell
too much.

Meditat. VI. Of Hell.
BE convinced of, and affected with the presence of God.

Considerations.
1 Consider, O my soul the greatness of these Torments; certainly if God so
heavily afflicts his own people as he did Job, Heman, and diverse of his people
who have been in disertion many years: How sad are the expressions of David, he
says, he roared for the disquietness of his Soul: And how many sad Expressions
had Job, that he had not time to swallow his spittle, and how that he chose
rather a strangling then life, and many other exceeding sad expressions, which
could never have proceeded from an holy man, who is set before us as a pattern
of patience, if his afflictions had not been very great: And Heman said, that
the terrors of the Lord were so great, that he was almost distracted with
them: and so from his youth up until that time that he writ that Psalm. Psalm.
88. If this be done to the green tree, what shall be done to the dry? And if
God chastise his people with such Rods, what Scorpions shall the Damned be
Scourged with? and if the righteous have been thus afflicted, tossed with
Tempests, and not comforted, where shall the wicked and ungodly appear? what
shall the portion of their cup be? even the dregs of the vials of Gods wrath,
for upon the wicked he shall rain snares, fire and brimstone, and a horrible
tempest.

2. Consider what the sufferings of Christ were; if we do truly and seriously
consider how much those words signify, when our Savior says, My soul is
heavy to the death, we shall be helped to understand what our Saviors sorrows
were. If the wisest, holiest and patientest man in the World, who was not
oppressed or distempered at all by reason of any bodily distemper of
Mclancholly, I say, if such a man should come to an intimate bosom friend, and
with a sad countenance should fell him that he was even ready to die because of
the abundance of grief and sadness that lay upon his Spirit, would not this
argue that his sorrows were exceeding great? especially when his friend never
heard him to complain in all his life, though the injuries and sufferings had
been very great all along: If he should further say unto his friend, I beseech
you to watch with me; surely it would argue an heart overwhelmed with grief.
Now I say, for a Savior to say so to his Disciple, and afterward to sweat
blood; O what unknown sorrows did our Savior feel! How then is it possible for
the wicked to escape, when God spared not his own Son though he was but a
surety; and those sorrows that made him groan, will crush thee to pieces; Woe
be to that man that is to satisfy the Justice of God in his own person.

3. Consider, O my Soul, the sad aggravating concomitants of these Torments;
every Member and faculty both of Body and soul shall be tormented: here if our
head aches, may be our heart does not ache; if we have the Stone, we have not the
Gout, or if both them, yet not some other Torturing disease; or if the whole
body be tortured, yet one may possess his Soul in patience; but to have a
tortured body, and a wounded conscience, who can bear it; besides all this,
none can help, none will pity those that are in hell; nay, what is the height
of misery, that way God himself shall in the midst of all their roarings and
tortures, laugh at their calamity when it comes, as desolaion, and as a
whirlwind upon them.

4 Consider seriously what Eternity means; for ever, ever, ever, to be
tormented, is an overwhelming consideration: To lie under the torture of the
Stone but one night, how tedious is it; but to be tormented to all eternity, O
it is the Hell of Hells.

Affections and Resolutions.
Be aostnished, and tremble at the wrath of the Lord: Alas, O my Soul, why do
thou not tremble as Felix did, when thou considerest these things, why art not
thou more sensible of the power of his wrath? do not the Foundations of the
Earth tremble, and the pillars of Heaven shake when he is angry; and how comes
it to pass, that thou art so little affected with these things? have thou full
assurance of the favor of God? when was it sealed? sureley the very
possibility that these things should come upon us, should very much affect us.

2. Pray: O blessed God, thou that have the keys of Death and of Hell, take
pity of me; and though I neither understand, nor am sensible in any
considerable measure, either of the the Misery of Hell, or of my own danger in
falling into them; Lord, how thou know both, let the bowels of thy
compassion earn toward me, and never suffer me to fall into that devouring
fire, and into those everlasting burnings: blessed be thy Name that I am on
this side of Hell, if thou had cast me into that place of Torment, as I have
daily provoked thee to do, I had been past hopes, past prayers, past mercies,
past repentance; I beseech the^, O Lord, that thou will chasten me, that I may
not be condemned with the world.

3. Despise and abhor the sinful vanities and pleasures of the world: O vain
world, there is nothing in thee but sin and misery, temptations, vanity and
vexation of Spirit, and are thy vain profits and pleasures so much to be
valued, as for them to dwell in devouring fire? and are the pleasures of Sin
that are but for a season, to much worth, that for them we should dwell in
everlasting burnings? have we not had frequent experiences, that the sorrows we
have had for committing of Sin, have far exceeded the pleasures that we have
had in committing of it, and surely the terrors of an awakened conscience, are
not to be compared with the horrors of the damned, and other insupportable and
endless miseries of that place of torment.

Come, O my Soul, let us not deceive and flatter our selves with vain and false
hopes of the mercies of God: It is true, God is very merciful to them that fear
him, and we may be sure of this, that if we do sincerely desire and endeavor
to serve him, that we shall find his mercies as much above our thoughts and
expectations of them, as the heavens are above the earth; but if we slight
them, and are careless of his service, and turn his grace into wantonness, let
us not deceive our selves with vain words, for because of these things comes
the wrath of God upon the children of disobedience: and those that live so,
shall surely find, that at that day the mercies of God will not serve at all to
mitigate, but abundantly to Justify the wrath and fury of God, that he shall
pour out upon the wicked: then they shall pay for every Mercy they have
received, and the riches of his despised goodness shall but increase the
Treasures of his wrath: therefore, O my Soul, since these things are so, what
are we to do? why do we not fear him that can cast both body and soul into
hell? The Prophet Habaccue, when he did but think but of some temporal
Judgments that God had threatened, rottenness entered into his bones. If indeed
the love of God did constrain us, so that we did from a principle of love make
conscience of Sin, so that we never offend God, it were well; but since we
plainly find that it is not strong enough alone, let us not fear to call in and
improve the consideration of the Torments of Hell to defer us from Sin; the
Motive is imperfect, but not Sinful; our great work we have to do in the world,
next to the glory of God, is to avoid hell, and obtain heaven, and to resist
our now three great enemies, the World the Flesh, and the Devil, who endeavor
day and night, to drive us headlong into Perdition If any one in the World,
much more if the Devil should appear to us, and offer us such a sum of money if
we would give him our Souls that we might be damned, we think we should abhor
him and his offer; but alas, does not every one that uses by extortion and
violence either gets or keeps what is not his, do the same thing? his
damnation is as certain and as infallible, though more secretly and invisibly
contrived by Satan, as if Satan should visibly appear to him and he make a
contract with him: therefore, O my Soul, let us take heed of the wiles of
Satan, for he generally works by the world, and the flesh to deceive us,
therefore let us now resolve by the blessing of God to look upon the world and
the flesh, to be as dangerous and implacable enemies as Satan himself, let us
not endeavor to please the World by vain Discourses, by omitting what God
commands, or doing what he forbids: Let us not be troubled, but rather rejoice;
when we are reviled and scorned for righteousness sake; For the time to come,
when I am to do any Religious Duty, I will not so much as consider what men
will judge or say of me, nor endeavor to make the world my Friend, since God
himself has set enmity between us, and as for the flesh, I am sure we are no
debtors unto that, we have paid it far more then ever we owed it, therefore for
the time to come, I will rather abstain from lawful, then use unlawful
pleasures, and I will take heed not only of those pleasures that are unlawful
in kind, but those also that are unlawful in degree: and that I may better
avoid unlawful pleasures, I will sometimes abstain from those that are lawful;
and having seriously considered, I am convinced of this, that I have not made
conscience enough in the matter of sleep, I have not redeemed the time from
that, nor have enough considered the Sinfulness of it, but like the Sluggard
that Solomon speaks of, have turned upon my bed as a door upon the hinges,
therefore henceforth I shall endeavor to get as much time from sleep, as the
health and strength of my body will permit: and bcause I am confident that if
the damned were in their natures changed, and were to live again on earth, they
would think it a blessed change, to change their howlings into singing of
Psalms, and their roarings into Prayers, nay if they were to live Methuselahs
age upon the rack: Therefore whenever I am at any time tempted to be weary of
this labor of love that is to be undertaken in the hardest duties of Religion,
I will endeavor to shame my self out of that temptation, by thinking thus with
my self, that Hell is so much worse then we can suffer in this world, either in
Gods service, or for Gods service; that it were not only a desperate wickedness
but madness, for the avoiding of the one, to fall into the other. For the
conclusion of this Meditation, observe the Directions and Instances of former
Meditations.

Meditat. VII. Of Heaven.
1. BE convinced of, and affected with the presence of God.

2. Pray to God to assist and enable thee in the work.

Considerations.
1. Consider, O my soul the wonderful greatness and incomprehensibleness of
those joys. For, 1. Consider what great things God has given to wicked men in
this work, what vast dominions, power, wisdom, learning, Majesty, and indeed as
to the things of the world, as much as their hearts can desire; if God gives
such things to Dogs and Swine, what may we think are the dainties of that
banquet which God feasts his children withal.

2. Behold the Earth and the Heavens in the height of the beauty of the Spring,
and in the strengh of the glory of the Sun, how delightful a sight is it to
behold the works of Gods Creation here below, the commonness of this sight much
abates the delight and wonder of it; but doubtless if a man that were born
blind should when he had attained to the full perfection of his age and
understanding, be placed in a Paradise as Adam was, and should see as soon as
his eyes were opened, the earth adorned with all manner of curious Flowers and
Trees laden with all manner of Fruits, and Sun shining in its full strength,
how wonderfully delightful would such a fight be? and if the foot stool of God
be so rich, how glorious is his throne.

3. Consider the wondeful manifestations and joys that God has bestowed upon
his people in this life, they are unspeakable and glorious: Some have cried
out, Lord, either withold thy comforts, or enlarge the Vessel, for I am not
able to bear my joys. We read of Daniel, that the Manifestations that God gave
him, drunk up his Spirit, and made him sick some days after, Dan. 8. 27. Such
joys have been so great, that they have sweetened the bitterest persecutions;
they have made them clap their hands for joy in the midst of flames, and cry
out in the ravishment of their spirits, O ye Papists, you talk of miracles, but
here is a miracle, I am in the midst of these flames, as in a bed of Roses But
alas, what are the joys that God communicates to his people in this life, they
are but as the drop of the bucket to the whole Ocean: the Apostle tells us,
that it does not appear what w^ shall be. We would give it we had it a thousand
worlds, one would give all to enjoy these spiritual sanctifying ravishments of
spirit one day; If these then are so sweet, what are those things that thou
have laid up for them that love thee!

4. Consider that God has prepared these joys, on purpose to glorify his
goodness, and power, and wisdom, in preparing joys for his people worthy of
his magnificence and love; he does it for that end, that he may be glorified
and admired in all his Saints; and what cannot infinite power and wisdom, and
what will not infinite Love and Goodness do, when they set themselves to
prepare an entertainment, and to bestow a reward that may set forth their
greatness? what do Kings do in such cases? that which is accounted a Feast
amongst poor people, is a rich man's fast. If the strength of this consideration
were drawn forth, it would wonderfully affect us.

2. Consider wherein these joys consist for the negative part of them: There
will be no sickness, no pain no death no temporal misery or imperfection; nay,
there shall be no Sin, no Temptations nor corruptions, no Desertions, no
imperfections of Graces, or Duties, or Comforts What would a poor (...) from
this body of Sin and Death, there we shall see God clearly, fully,
everlastingly; there our enjoyments shall be incomprehensible, our union
wonderful and inseparable, and all shall be eternal. What a world of difference
is there betwixt a dead Carcass, and the same body when he lived? when it is
dead, it is senseless, ga^^ly, filthy: how beautiful, how active, how many rare
endowments had ^^ when it lived? and all these pr^ceeded from the union of the
so^^ with it; and if the soul which but a poor creature by its union, does
communicate such rare things to the body, what do we imagine will be
communicated both to the body and the soul, when God shall be more nearly
united to them, then they are one to another; when they shall be made more
capable of receiving, and God will be more abundant in communicating:

Affections and Resolutions.
1. Admire the love and goodness of God, O blessed God, from the beginning of
the World, men have not perceived by the hearing of the ear, nor have they seen
with their eyes, nor have any understood, save only thou, O God, what thou have
prepared for them that love thee; how have thou commended thy love to us, that
we are thy Sons, but it does not yet appear what we shall be; O the length, and
breadth, and h^igth, and depth of thy love that cannot he known; Lord, what are
our duties, or what are our persons, that thou should so highly reward them
and us; our best righteousness is as filthy rags, and for us we are worms, nay,
a generation of Vipers; Is it not enough that thou do not shake us off from
thine hand of providence into Hell fi^e, but that thou should lay such
Vipers in thy bosom, and warm us with thy love; Is it not enough for thee to
forgive us our rebellions, but that thou should give us such blessings: were
it not a miracle of bounty and goodness, for thee to bid us seriously to
consult and think what to ask of thee, and thou would give it us, though it
were to the half of thy Kingdom, but that thou should set thy wisdom on work
in preparing and thy liberality in bestowing such incomprehensible reward that
we could neither ask no think, but as far as the heaven is above the earth, so
are thy thoughts of love above our thoughts; For thee to give thy Kingdom, thy
Christ, thy self, these are acts of goodness, that are infinitely above us, yet
worthy of thee, that delightest to magnify thy goodness, that rejoycest over
thy people, as the Bridegroom rejoices over his Bride.

Despise the World, What are the things of this World, O my Soul, what is there
here to be desired but Sin and Misery, Snares and Temptations, Vanity of
vanities, and vexation of Spirit; one hours communion with God, and the joys
of the holy Ghost, that he has given to his people in this world, are worth
more then the world can know of; Why do we spend our strength and money for
that which is not bread, and our labors for that which does not satisfy: O
vain world, God has out bidden thee, thou offerest trifles, he offers me
Heaven for my love and service, though my love be unworthy, too little for him,
yet it is too much, too good for thee.

3. Long for, and breathe after Heaven; As the Hartpanteth after the
Water-books, so pants my Soul after thee, O God; My Soul thirsts for God,
for the living God, when shall I come and appear before God? when shall I be
delivered from my absence from thee, and from mine ignorance of thee; Make
have, O my beloved, and be thou like a Roe, or a young Heart upon the Mountains
of Spices: The Spirit sath Come, and the Bride says Come, and the Bridegroom
sath, Surely I Come quickly, even so come Lord Jesus, come quickly.

4. Encourage, and stir up thy felt to the love and service of God; Come O my
Soul, Let us be steadfast and unmovable, always abounding in the work of the
Lord, forasmuch as we know that our labor is not in vain in the Lord; Let us
not be weary of well doing, nor of the labor of love, for we shall reap if we
faint not? We have known, and in some measure endeavored to serve God thus
many years, were it not a sad thing for the want of continuing one year, one
month, it may be but one week, or one day more, I should lose all my hopes and
expectations of glory: God forbid; O my Soul, Let us encourage our selves in
the Lord, we are not kept by our own, but by the mighty power of God through
Faith to Salvation, and be thou assured of this, that the first minute thou art
in Heaven, thou shall have such full measure, pre'st down, heapt up, and
running over, that thou shall break forth in the Songs of joy and praise to all
Eternity, maynifying, admiring and adoring God, that ever he gave thee leave,
and grace to serve him, then shall thou see, and so thy experience shall make
thee confess with joy and wonder, that the light afflictions and labors of
love that thou endurest in this life, are not worthy to be compared to the
joys that shall be revealed in thee,; When at any time thou beginnest to be
weary, look to the price of thine high calling, and when thou come to heaven,
thou shall admire, when thou see how abundantly thou art over recompensed,
and thou will have just cause to say, Lord, what is this that thou have done
for me, alas, what were the things that I either did, or suffered in thy
service, what were my filthy rags that thou should give me such a Robe and
Crown of Glory; O my Soul, what if we do weep, now the time is at hand when God
will wipe all tears from our eyes.

O my son, these things cannot be believed and slighted, and understood and
neglected; If thou do not believe them, what is the reason? Are they too
glorious things for God to bestow upon such wretched sinners? why do thou set
bounds to the goodness of God, and say, Hitherto thou shall go, and no further,
nay, doubtless since God has said, that he will do that which shall glorify
his goodness to his people, the incredibility of it makes it more credible, but
if thou art convinced of the truth, why art thou not affected with the
Excellencies of these Joys? do thou not relish them? well, For the time to
come I will meditate more of these things, I will by giving to the poor, lay up
my Treasures in Heaven, I will part with such and such vain delights for it, I
will spend more time and communion with God in praising, admiring and adoring
of him, that if it be possible, by frequent performing of these Duties, I may
at last taste and relish the incomprehensible sweetness of them, that I may be
enamoured more of heaven, and because all my endeavors are in vain, if the
Lord reveals not these things unto me, therefore I will beg of God that he will
discover the riches o^ his goodness to me, I have not been careful enough, nor
sensible enough of Sins of Omission, when I have had no just thing to take up
^y thoughts, yet I have not thought of thee; henceforth when my heart is
affected with thy Excellencies, thy love, thy mercies, I will praise thee, when
it is not, I will pray to thee that it may, and for my Master-sin, mine
iniquity, I will be most frequent in those duties that are most contrary to it;
I will especially in my reading of Scripture, take notice of, and write down
those places, and those examples that are most proper for the cure; I will
speak against my iniquity, that if it may be I may thereby the more engage my
self to leave it.

Meditat. VII. Of the Excellencies of Christ.
1. BE convinced of, and affected with the prefence of God.

2. Desire of him who only can to manifest the Excellency of Christ unto thee.

Considerations.
1. Consider, that if the holiest man that ever lived, lived near thee, what
high expectations would thou have of his carriage and conference, when thou
saw his zeal and patience, etc. But no man lived ever without Sin;
Therefore suppose an Angel should take upon him humane Nature, and live amongst
us, with what enflamed expressions and affections would he speak of God, of
Heaven, and every thing that is Spiritual; But alas, his carriage, his
holiness, his wisdom, where as nothing in comparison of Christ's; For there was
not any word, or action that eyer Christ spoke, or did, that if all the Angels
of heaven had studied and set down how it ought to have been done, or they
themselves should have been to have done it, they could not have equalled it,
nay, even God the Father had he taken our Nature, he would not have spoke or
done any word or thin^g which should have had (in respect of it self, or any
circumstance) more holiness or wisdom then Christ's words and actions had so
that certainly in this respect, he that saw Christ, saw the Father, as he
himself says.

2. Consider the wonderful wisdom of Christ, Certainly he was greater then
Solomon; For though he was the humblest man that ever lived, yet he himself
said so, nor did it any more argue pride in Christ to say that he was wiser
then Solomon, then it would have argued in Solomon that he knew more then a
Newborn Babe. When his most malicious and cunning Adversaries came to e^snare
him in his words, so that they thought it were impossible for him to say, I or
No to their Questions, without extraordinary prejudice to himself, yet he
Answered with such admirable wisdom and innocence, that they went away ashamed
of their Folly, Nay, when Satan himself came and set upon him with his
subtilest Temptations that he could possibly find out, yet our Savior without
Deliberation and Study, immediately answered him so fully, that he could not so
much as reply, but was fain to fly to another Temptation; and no marvel, for he
was the Wisdom of the Father.

3. Consider the wondeful and exceeding holiness of Christ, when he was in the
height of all his Agonies and Sufferings, he abated not any thing of his Love
and confidence in God; For his Sufferings did not make him forget, or diminish
any thing, no, not in the least circumstance of his Graces, or of any thing
that the Law required at his hands: To be so freely willing (...) that Agony
continue, which was unspeakable and as the Torments of h^ll (^f his Father
pleased) was more then if those in hell should freely submit to endure the
Torments they suffer. The holiness of those in heaven is not comparably so much
greater then the weakest Saint on earth: As the holiness of Christ was greater
whilst he lived on earth, then that of those in heaven; Nay all the Saints on
Earth are filled from his fullness; For he is the Fountain that conveyes to his
Saints, as they are able to receive the infinite Ocean of the holiness of the
Godhead; No marvel that the Angels when they saw his glory, cried out, Holy,
Holy, Lord God of Sabbaths.

4. Consider, that not withstanding all these infinite Excellencies in Christ,
he thought it no robbery to be equal to the Father; yet how exceedingly did he
humble himself, and how gracious was he: The poorest man or woman in the Word,
nay, the greatest Sinner that truly repented, with what love did he receive
them: He was the Son of Righteousness, from whom the Angels receive their
Glory, and yet he disdains not to shine upon such Dunghills as we are: It is
strange, O my soul, to consider how willing Christ was to please every one;
only provided it was in things that were not for their hurt that desired them;
Many times, nay, most times, when others were with him, when he in respect of
himself, only would have done otherwise, yet he did as their desires required,
Romans 15. 3. The Apostle says, even Christ pleased not himself, many times when
he was hungry; If any came to him that needed Instruction, or if he were
sleepy, and any came to him that needed Consolation, he would abstain from Meat
and Sleep that he might do them good; it is not so with great men, but it was
so with Christ, who was the great God.

Affections and Resolutions.
1. Admire the Excellencies of Christ; O blessed Savior, Thou art the chiefest
of ten thousand; Thou art altogether lovely, Thou have a Name above all Names,
That at thy Name every knee should bow; Thou Lord, art set at the right hand of
the Father in the heavenly places; Far above all Principality and Power, and
Might, and Dominion, and every Name that is named, not only in this World, but
also in that which is to come; Thou art the brightness of thy Fathers Glory,
and the express Image of his Person; Consider, O my Soul, what can these words
mean; Surely if God commanded all the Angel to worship him, when he brought him
into the World, how much more should we for whom he has done, much more
admire and adore him in Spirit and in Truth.

Be confounded and ashamed, that thou art no more affected with these things:
Doubtless, O my Soul, It is not for want of excellency in Christ, for he is the
Lord of Glory, but for want of a clearer Faith in thee to behold his
Excellencies; If the Scripture had not spoke the thousandth part of Christ as
it does, how could thy thoughts have been lower of him then they are; how could
thy heart be more senceless: It is a shame that every vanity should steal away
our hearts from Christ, much more abominable is it that our very sins that
murdered him, should ever prevail with us in the least.

Pray, Blessed God, it is not in man by all his wisdom and industry, to know, or
be affected with the Excellencies of Christ, if thou do not reveal them; If I
had a thousand worlds, they were too small a price for so great a Mercy; O show
me thy self, and thy Son, and it suffices; And now, O my Soul, are the
Excellencies of Christ nothing unto us? Do we indeed admire them? Surely all is
but mere words, and vain thoughts, if we do not strive as far as we may to
imitate him in those Excellencies, for which we pretend to admire him; Are we
as patient as he was, Meck, Humble, Holy, who when he was reviled, reviled not
again, etc. We do but deceive our own souls in giving Glorious Titles, and
speaking high things of Christ, and in the mean while not endeavor to
transform into his Image; It is impossible we should love him for his patience
and holiness, and not love patience and holiness, nor yet never care to
practice and get them; Therefore for the time to come, the Life of Christ shall
be the Example whereby I shall endeavor to frame mine: And that I may the
better do so, I will read over especially the New Testament, and observe in
every particular what Christ did, how he spoke to his friends, to his enemies,
how he demeaned himself in every action, whether civil or natural, or
Religious, how in all his Relations: And when I have written them down, I shall
often peruse them, and shall endeavor in every action that I do, and word that
I speak, to remember if I can, whither there be any parallel instance in the
life of Christ, if there be, I shall make that my pattern, and do likewise, but
if there be none, that I can think of, then I would do that which in my
conscience I think Christ would have done in like case.

For the Conclusion, I refer you to the Directions and Instances of former
Meditations.

The Conclusion of the whole.
I Found a great deal of difficulty in Writing this small Treatise of
Meditation, not into the Doctrinal or Directory Part, because Christian
experience and study are things by which that party is managed, but in the
setting down of instances and examples therein I found the difficulty to lie:
For Meditation is an harder work then to give directions thereunto: and I have
generally found it easier to study a day, then to Meditate an hour; but of all
the kinds of Meditation whereof Instances are set down in this Book, I found
the greatest difficulty in those of Solemn Meditations, they consisting for the
most part of Prayer, which the devout Soul when it has ended forgets so that
if one might gain a world, when the heart is overwhelmed with Grief, or
inflamed with Love, or ravished with Joy, one could not remember the powrings
out of the Soul: In such cases, one may say of such Meditations, as Saint Paul
speaks of those Glorious things which he saw when he was wrapped into the third
Heavens: they are neither lawful, nor possible to be uttered, many times the
secrets in our communion with God, are of that nature, that it is not lawful by
reason of that scandal, nor possible to utter, because the affections being so
intensly employed Invention, Memory, and intellectual actings of the Soul,
during that time do almost quite cease, and indeed whosoever goes about to
invent Instances of Meditation, if it be only a Learned Man, and not holy, his
Studies may exceed his Actings that way, but if it be an holy experienced
Christian, as his inward thoughts of Love, Joy, Grief, and admirings of God are
above all that his Tongue does or can utter, so those secret expressions which
he uses between God and his own Soul, when his thoughts are full of heaven,
and of God, are much beyond what he can invent, or by study expresses;
Therefore since those Meditations that are fullest of Devotion cannot be
remembered, to set down Instances of Meditations, except one should take them
from some Saint as he was pouring out his soul before God in secret; one can
never set them fully down in secret I say; For the Soul is never so free, nor
may be before others, as with God alone, and the truth is, if I had not had
these Instances of Solemn Meditation by me, I think I should hardly have set
down any of that kind; I should only have referred him to the Psalms, It was so
that I wrote these from the mouth of one to whom these unseen, I was ofttimes
so near that I could hear his secretest Devotions, if uttered though but with
an ordinary voice; I am very confident for his part, he thought that none but
God and his own Soul were privy to his Prayers, I have sometimes considered it
as a case of Conscience, whether it was lawful by stealth to hear, and
afterward to publish the private Meditations of others, but considering how
much advantage it may bring to others, and how the party himself can suffer
nothing in it, his Name being concealed by me, I resove to publish them,
besides. I very well know (as I said before) that the Spiritual expressions
between God and ones own Soul in secret, are forgotten almost as soon as ended;
It is very unlikely that any should remember then ten years after, as the most
of these are: I thought good to give an account of this matter, lest I should
be thought to have that holy frame of heart, which many of the expressions in
these Meditations argues, that he had that used them, and arrogate to my self
that which is far from me.

If any shall be offended at the brevity and shortness of my Directions of
this great and weighty business of Meditation, I shall only say thus much as
to that.

1. That I am not willing to overcharge or affright New Beginners (for, for
such I do very much intend this Treatise) with too great a Number of
Particulars.

2. I would not have this swell above the bigness of a Manual, for I have often
observed, that when one has persuaded some to buy some Book, and told them it
has been but a small price, it has been almost as strong a Motive (the
smallness of the price) as the goodness of the Book: and I would not be willing
that both these Motives should be wanting to the buying of this Book.

As for the plainness of the S^ile or Matter, I shall thus excuse it, if it
ought to be excused, I wrote this for the meanest and ignorantest sort of
Christians that they might buy, and understand it, that they might buy it, I
have made it a Manaul, that they might understand it, I have made it plain, and
spoke to them in their own Language; and to the Learned I say, if any such
shall read this Treatise, Indocti rapiunt coelum, and though I highly prize
Learning, yet I know that as to Prayer and Meditation, and all other acts of
Devotion, wherein we keep a strict Communion with God, and watch over our own
Souls, and experimental knowledge and acquaintance with, and inflamed
affections toward God, will more avail us then all the Learning in the World,
and doubtless it is not generally Ignorance in those that live under
Ordinances, but the Non-improvement of the Truths we know, that will undo us,
if we do but improve these plain Truths, viz that God is, that there will be a
Day of Judgment, that we must die, that we ought to love God with all our
Heart, with all our Soul, with all our Mind, with all our Strength, that we
should do as we would be done to I say, if we did but improve these into
practice, we should attain to more holiness, then if we knew a thousand times
more, and left those Truths (as generally men do) by them, as things forgotten,
I do very much think that the Truths of Religion have been spun into too fine
a Thread of late days, and some have observed, that fewer have been converted
of late years then formerly, when fundamentals have been Plainly, Powerfully,
and Practically pressed upon the Conscience, it is an Error to think that
Notions, so they be Spiritual, cannot be two accute or Speculative; I have one
thing to entreat of the Christian Reader, and it was one end of publinging this
Treatise that I might with it publish th^se my desires. The thing that I am to
request of you, will neither be charge nor trouble; It is your frequent,
serious, servent Prayers that I desire of you; I know it is used too much as a
Complement among Christians, to desire prayers of their Christian friends, and
they are too often Superficially promised, and too seldom conscienciously
performed: Nor would I have thee, whosoever thou art that fear God, account
this my Request a thing of course, and that it is at thy Liberty to grant it or
no; for suppose a poor Distressed Man overwhelmed, and almost swallowed up with
the sense of his Miseries and wants, should with Tears and strong importunities
beg relief of thee; Do thou think it were an Arbitrary thing (when it was in
thy power) to relieve him or not? Might thou not justly expect that the next
time thou wentest to pour out thy Soul before God, that he should keep by him
the denial that thou gave that poor man, and give it thee, when thou in the
distressed thoughts of thy heart, make thy prayer to him? and do thou think
that the Lord will hold thee guiltless, when one whose afflictions are many,
Corruptions strong, Temptations to undergo, shall in the anguish and bitterness
of his Spirit desire thy prayers, and thou refuse, or neglect: Consider whether
at the day of Judgment thou will have any sufficient excuse to plead. I have
sometimes thought that the Bills that have publicly been put up for the
prayers of the Congregation have been too little regarded, it may be they have
been too customarily and formally put up, it may be ^o, but it is not good for
us to be Judges of evil thoughts, little do we know what Terrors and Fears,
and Anguishes of Spirit overwhelm them, while they are so little regarded by
us; O that we were sensible of others afflictions and sorrows, whether
spiritual or Temporal, as they themselves are, and as we would have them to be
of ours, were our Souls in their Souls stead: And if the Lord should so by his
providence order it as to bring us into those straits which we saw our brother
in, and would not afford him so much as our Prayers, may we not justly expect
that the next time that we our selves are in streights, our consciences should
take up a Parable and Taunting Proverb against us, and say as Joseph's brethren
did, we are verily guilty concerning our brother, in that we saw the anguish of
his soul, when he besought us, and we would not hear, therefore is all this
distress come upon us. And that which I would desire thee to beg of God for me
is, That he would give me sincerely to aim at his Glory in all my actions, but
especially those that belong to my Ministry, that I might not be as a broken
vessel, and that he would give me greater Discoveries of, and love to himself
and the Lord Jesus Christ; and that he would give me gifts, and strength, and
wisdom, opportunity, and a heart to serve him, and mercies suitable to my
wants, that my afflictions may be sanctified, my Temptations conquered, and my
Corruptions mortified.

One thing more I am to request of thee, that is, to do what I know is too much
neglected by my self, and I fear by others; Thou art to pray for a blessing
upon thy self when thou read this Treatise, and that God would make it a
blessing unto others also, into whose hands it shall come: I desire you that
you would help me with your prayers in this particular; When we do but take our
ordinary daily bread, we crave a blessing, how much more when we do things
that concern our eternal good? When we take a Book, to that end, Spiritually to
benefit by it, do we think that it is in our own power, or in the power of any
Treatise that we read, (without Gods assistance) to do us good? Nay, the Word
of God it self is but a dead Letter, if the holy Spirit be absent when we hear
or read it. But that thou should desire a blessing upon thy self in reading
of this book, is not all I request of thee, but that thou would also extend
thy Prayers further, even for others, that it may be also for their edification
whosoever shall read it; For as we are to pray that every Sermon we hear may be
for the Spiritual advantage of others, as well as of our selves; It holds also
in reading of Treatises of Devotion.

FINIS;
Books to be sold by Thomas Parkhurst, at the Bible and three Crowns in
Cheapside near Mercers Chapel.
A Commentary on the Hebrews, By John Owen D. D. Fol. An Exposition of
Temptation, on Mat. 4 verse 1. to the end of the eleventh, by Dr. Tho Tailor,
fol.

A practical Exposition on the the third Chapter of the first Episile of St.
Paul to the Corinthians, with the Godly Man's Choice, on Psalm. 4. verse. 6, 7, 8.
By Anthony Burgess, fol.

The view of the holy Scriptures, by Hugh Broughton, fol.

Christianographia o^, a Description of the multitude, and sundry sorts of
Christians in the World, not subject to the Pope, by Ephesians. Pagit.

These six Treatises next following, are written by Mr. George Swinnock.

1. The Christian Man's Calling, or, a Treatise of making Religion ones
business, in Religious Duties, Natural Actions, his Particular Vocation, his
Family Directions, and his own Recreation; The first, part.

2. Likewise a second part, wherein Christians are directed to perform their
Duties, as Husbands and Wives, Parents and Children, Masters and Servants, in
the conditions of Prosperity and Adversity.

3. The third and last part of the Christian Man's Calling, wherein the
Christian is directed how to make Religion his business, in his dealings with
all Men, in the choice of his Companions, in his carriage in good and bad
company, in solitariness, on a week day from morning to night; in visiting the
sick on a dying bed.

4. The Door of Salvation opened, by the Key of Regeneration.

5. Heaven and Hell Epitomized: And the True Christian Characterized.

6. The Fading of the Flesh, and the flourishing of Faith: Or, One cast for
Eternity, with the only way to throw it well: All these by George Swinnock 4 to.

An Exposition on the five first Chapters of Ezekiel, with useful Observations
thereupon, by Will. Greenhill, 4 to.

The Gospel Covenant, or the Covenant of Grace opened: Preached in New England,
by Peter Bulkely. 4 to:

An Antidote against Quakerisin, by Stephen Scandret.

Gods holy Mind touching Matters Moral, which himself uttered in ten words, or
ten Commandments; Also an Exposition on the Lords Prayer, by Edward Elton, B.
D. 410.

Fiery Jesuit, or an Historical Collection of the rise, Increase, Doctrines,
and Deeds of the Jesuits. Exposed to the view for the sake of London. 410.

Horologiographia Optica; Dialling Universal, and Particular, Speculative and
Practical; together with the Description of the Court of Arts, by a new Method,
by Silvanus Morgan. 410.

Heart-Treasure. Or, a Treatise tending to fill and furnish the head and heart
of every Christian, with soul-inriching Treasury of Truths, Graces, Experiences
and Comforts. Octavo 1 part.

Sure Mercies of David: being the second part of Heart-Treasure.

Closet Prayer. A Christians Duty; all three by Oliver Heywood.

A Practical Discourse of prayer, by Tho Cobbet.

Of Quenching the Spirit, the evil of it in respect both of its causes and
effects, discovered, by Theophilus Polwheile.

The Re-building of London encouraged and improved in several Meditations, by
Samuel Rolls.

The sure way to Salvation: Or, a Treatise of the Saints Mystical Union with
Christ.

Antidote against Infection of a multitude; these two by Rowland Stedman, M A.

The greatest Loss, upon Matthew. 16. 26. by James Lives^y, Octavo.

A. defense against the fear of Death; by Zach. Crofton.

Gods Sovereignty displayed; by Will. Geering.

The Godly Man's Ark: or, City of Refuge in the day of his distress, in five
Sermons; with Mris. Moors Evidences for Heaven, by Edm. Calamy.

The Almost Christian discovered: or the false Professor tried and cast; by Mr.
Mead.

Spiritual Wisdom improved against Temptations. By Mr. Mead.

1. Heaven taken by Storm.

2. The Holy Eucharist: or The Sacrament of the Lords Supper, briefly opened.
These two by Mr: Tho. Watson.

Nonconformity without Contravercy, by Ben. Baxter.

The Parable of the great Supper. By John Crump, late of Maidstone.

FINIS.

