UNTO ALL GODS HOST IN ENGLAND.
FRIENDS,
THis is a Heavenly Visitation, sent from the Union of the holy Spirit, and
holy Covenant of perpetual Peace, of Love and Consolation, unto all who are of
the holy Faith, and are partakers of the Promise which God made with Abraham,
the same Faith and holy Covenant which God made with him and his Seed after
him, whose Seed are made partakers of the same Promise of Life and blessed
Inheritance, into the Covenant of free Love, of Life, Peace and Salvation, all
must be gathered; for in the Covenant is the fellowship with the Father, and in
it, is the holy Faith known, which works all into love, which is the likeness
of God; and this is the very Nature of God, whose Nature is love. Therefore all
to the Foundation which is elect and precious, which was before the World was,
or before the Mountains were brought forth; into that which was in the
beginning, all must be gathered, into the inseparable love of the fullness of
the Father, into the life of innocence which God at first formed, which was
glorious; into the same Heavenly Life which must reign over all, in which no
discord ever stands, neither any strifemaker did ever dwell. Therefore unto
God's Covenant of peace and blessedness all must come, to have union and
fellowship with God, who is love; therefore all to the Foundation which God
has laid in you, which is his free-Love by which you were at first gathered:
And this is upon me from the Lord God, to declare to all Israel, So in the
Peace of God possess your souls, in the Rest in which the blessing of God is
felt and daily increased. And here life flourishes like the green Willows by
the Watercourse; but verily, verily, every plant which the Gardener has not
planted, must be plucked up, and consumed by the beams of consuming brightness,
which is now breaking forth; for the glory of the Day is come; therefore arise
you Seed and Children of Abraham, shine forth in the glory of the Lord God, for
the reign of the Lamb is come, Christ the Foundation, the chosen and elect
Cornerstone; all feel your Anchor on him; for verily every one that builds,
and not on him, God is coming to throw down; and no other Foundation have I to
declare, but that which God has laid in you, which is his Love; and into Love
you must all be gathered, and into the union of the holy Spirit, who is the
perfection of love. The time is at hand wherein the good Gardener will thoroughly
weed his Garden, and every seed which he has not sown, he will root up.
Therefore all to the search, and thoroughly try what seed there is yet remaining
in you, whether there is nothing but the seed of the Kingdom of God which
remains. For who shall abide the day of the coming of the great God, who is
flames of consuming sire; and what shall stand before him that is not of him?
Verily the Lord God has sent me to declare and publish, and sound forth his
Mess^ge unto all Israel, even to declare the day of free Love, and of
everlasting consolation. Oh how blessed a thing it is for Brethren to dwell
together in the unity of the holy Spirit, in the Covenant of Love and Peace, in
the union of the Saints in Light: Such feel the Life and Power, and
Resurrection of Jesus, in whom is the healing virtue found, whose life is risen
in immortal glory, whose presence fills heaven and earth, Unutterable and
glorious will be the day of the Lord God unto the upright-hearted, who are
found in the Faith of the holy Covenant.

So my dear Friends and Brethren, in the life of holiness I am one with you,
who am the weakest of the (...), but yet I desire the prosperity of all the
called of God. So in the blessed love of God all dwell; And Friends, in the
Bowels of the Lord Jesus let your yearnings be one toward another in the
unchangeable Love and Life of the Lord God; and above all things, be careful of
grieving the Life in one another, and watch over one another with a single eye
in the simplicity and truth, keep your minds staid, and fix your eye always on
the Lord God; and that eye that is fixed on him, who looks not for the evil,
but rather to recover out of the evil, and to regain into that which is good;
so none will be overcome with the evil, but all will overcome the evil with that
which is good; therefore all down into the low, Lamb-like, healing Spirit,
whose virtue and love overcomes the hearts of all that truly wait in the
simple life, which leads through the tribulation, and so to the washing; and
so all who are led by it, will be cleansed, purged and purified from all dross.
And blessed, blessed are all who dwell in the faith which works by love; such
will be overcome, and filled with the Fountain of Eternal Peace, of Love and
Consolation. And Brethren and beloved, the Lord God of everlasting glory, who
is risen in his beauty, who fills both heaven and earth with the Majesty of
his brightness; he will more gloriously appear in his holy Mount, transfiguring
himself in the midst of all the Disciples, who wait for the coming and
appearance of the Lord Jesus, whose coming is with great power, and great
glory. Therefore arise you branches of the true Vine, spread forth you fruitful
boughs, for the Lord God of the Vintage is come to gather the ripe fruit;
therefore sing ye desert places, and rejoice ye that dwell in the low Valleys,
for Gods holy Mountain drops of sweet Wine; so the Lord God is become a place
of broad Rivers, a Fountain full of Streams; and blessed are all who drink at
the still Waters, such are refreshed, who grow to the praise of God.

So dear friends, in the heavenly places all will come to lie down in the
Kingdom with the Seed of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob. So in the patience and
long-suffering of God dwell, for the (...) of Gods Elect must be thoroughly
tried, as purified Gold out of the Furnace, and as Silver that has been seven
times purified, in which burning flames (for God's Consummation) must burn up
and consume all that which cannot stand before him when he appears. Therefore
all feel the Refiner sitting as a Refiners fire in you, that you may know the
Word that burns through all the thickness and the darkness, that by it all
may be expelled. So here is the power that expels, which is the Gospel, the
power of God unto everlasting salvation; so that you may all feel the mighty
power of God working Redemption in you, so that you may all sing the songs of
the Redeemed of the Lord, which none can learn but they who follow the Lamb and
his leading; so the hour and day of Redemption is come unto the house of
Israel, therefore all lift up up your heads, and look over the Mountains, for
God will make the Hills to fly, and trembling must come upon all
transgressors; but blessed are are you that believe, you shall see the mighty
salvation of the God of Israel, whose hope is in him, and whose dependence is
upon him; they shall not miss of their expectation, but the reward of the
righteous shall be sure, and a Crown of Life is laid up for all the faithful.
Therefore rejoice you little Flock, for you is the Kingdom prepared. And
therefore in the Dominion of God, which reigns over death, stand in the
Heavenly Life, so will your peace increase, and the virtue of God you will daily
feel, the showers of his living mercies distilling upon you. So the blessing of
Eternal peace from the Lord God surround you all, for ever.

And his Grace be with you all now and for ever.

Dorothy White.

FRIENDS,
ALL in the Life of the living God wait for the restoration and redemption of
Zion, that you may shine in her beauty, that you may all be covered with the
glory of the Lord God, that ye may know that Mountain of his Holiness
established on the top of all Mountains; that you may know the King of glory
reigning on Mount Zion, that you her Converts may come up in this the day and
reign of the great King, that you may all sing songs of rejoicing, even the
songs of Moses and of the Lamb, that you may all have the harmony of holiness
sounding through Heaven and Earth, that you may all sing Hallelujahs and
everlasting praises unto the God of Power, whose day is come, who is getting
himself a Name and a praise in the Earth. And this is sent from the God of
Heaven, unto the general Assembly of Saints, unto the Church of the firstborn,
who are renewed again by the renewings of his power, into the image of
holiness. Peace be a among you all from God the Father of our Lord Jesus, who
is come again in great power, glory and dominion. So all feel the virtue of the
living God, in the life of holiness distilled upon you, and all that dwell in
peace with the Lord God, and one with another, may know the waterings, the
buildings, the sweet showers which refresh the Plant of Renown, which grows
in the pleasant places. Arise, arise all that mourn, arise in the glory of the
Lord God Almighty; rejoice, triumph in the Authority of the King of Israel,
from whom this is sent to you all. The dew of the ever lasting Hills rest upon
you. This is the greetings of the Father unto the Flock of the faithful.

T^o be read in your Meetings, in the fear of God. D.W.

THis is the mighty day of the Lord God, wherein salvation is come unto the
House of Israel; therefore let Sion rejoice, and the Inhabitants of Jerusalem
be glad; for the King of Isra^l, the Lord of Hosts is arising over all in his
glorious Majesty, and is shining forth in his beautiful brightness; therefore
let the Heavens rejoice, let the beauty of the true Vine spring forth, let them
spread and overspread the whole Earth; for the day of Sions redemption and
glorious deliverance draws near, yea the seventh Trumpet is already blown out
of Sion, to call the holy Host of Angels together. And this is the glorious day
of the Lord God, wherein he has appeared unto the Children of men, as in the
generations past; and from Heaven has the Lord spoken; and blessed are all who
hear his voice. So all in the meek spirit and life of the holy Lamb sink down,
dwell low, for low in the Valleys does the streams clearly run. Therefore all
ye Children and Seed of Abraham, sit down in the Kingdom, in the Faith and
Patience of your Father, holding fast the faithful Testimony unto the end; and
through the fire ye must all be led, as the Lord led the Children of Israel by
the hand of Moses, who parted the Sea before them; And now is the Lord God
leading his Children by an outstretched hand, and by the arm of his own
Salvation he is bringing them into the Gates of Sion, where the harmonies of
the holy Host are sounded unto the God of Heaven. And in this day has the Lord
God put it into my heart to sound forth the day of deliverance unto Sions
Mourners, that they which have sat in the desert places, and in the howling
Wilderness, may now come forth, and sit under the overshadowing branches of the
true Vine, that so they may drink of the fruits of the Grapes thereof; for the
blessed day is come, even the day of everlasting rejoicing, wherein Truth and
Righteousness shall overspread the Earth, wherein the glory of the Lord shall
cover his holy Mountain, and Jerusalem shall become the praise of the whole
Earth; and into her the Nations shall be gathered; for the Kingdom of the Lord
Jesus is come, and establishing in the hearts of the children of men: So all
must know your selves gathered into the Kingdom, into the Righteousness, that
ye may behold the glory thereof, for as the Sun shines at noonday, even so
shall the glory of the Lord overspread the whole earth, and the dread of the
Lord shall come over all his enemies, and great shall be the amazing of Sions
oppressors; yea, the Lord God is working of a great wonder, to the astonishm^nt
of all the Nations round about, and his Enemies shall see his great indignation
poured out, to their utter ruin and destruction. And this is near to be
revealed, the Lord God has spoken it, from whom I do declare it in his dread
and authority, and from the zeal of his holy Majesty I do this publish, the day
of his coming unto all flesh; and now is the restoration and salvation come;
and therefore let the righteous rejoice, let the upright in heart lift up their
heads; for God is advancing his Name, and they who trust in it, shall be
crowned for ever with unutterable and glorious Crowns; in the heavenly places
shall your habitations be with the God of Holiness, who reigns in the Heaven
of Heavens, King in his Eternal Glory; and all must be swallowed up of love,
yea even with the Love and Life of the Lord God; therefore solace your selves
in the Love and Life of the living God, that you may be perfect in love, and in
the life of holiness may possess your souls, in eternal peace, rejoicing and
praising the God of the living, for whom praises have wasted, unto him be
Hallelujahs given, even so says my soul. And so in the living power all dwell,
that life may be felt by all who possess the truth of the living God, that so
none may be found as Wells, but having no Water; as Clouds, but having no Rain;
and whilst they Minister to others, they being dead in themselves. And in the
fear of the Lord God (I say) I do from him declare it; and so let all try the
spirits, whether they are of God, yea or nay; it is of great concernment; and
if they are not, ^urn from them; for such there are who have erred from the
Faith, who have loosed their anchor, but of them beware; for this I do declare
from the feeling of the life of the Lord God, great hurt has been done, and
self has been exalted, whilst the boaster has ruled, God's Heritage has
suffered; but now his life reviveth, and the Lord will establish his own, and
that that which is not of him, shall be thrown down; for the Lord accepts that
which is his own, and of his own begetting, and that bears his, Image, and
that has the seal of the Lamb; and that is that which God will crown and
establish for ever. So the grace of God, and of our Lord Jesus, rest and remain
with you, and amongst you all, for ever. So from the Spirit of Truth I this
publish, as the Counsel of God unto all Israel.

D. W.

THE END.

