CHRYSASPIS TO QUERELA, A LETTER published By a Friend of CHRYSASPIS.

Amicus certus in re incerta cernitur. LONDON, Printed, MCDLX.

The Publisher.
THIS then must be the Mode; two to two; the Authors, and the Publishers; or
rather we, I mean my fellow-Publisher and I, are only as Lay-Brothers to the
Principal Disputants Chrysaspis and Querela; and therefore no more can
reasonably be expected of us, then to present their Papers, stand by, and look
on; or at most, if occasion should afterward require it, bear witness how they
carried themselves: Nor let our lower condition discourage us; we may be honest
as well as they; nay, perhaps with far more ease and security; their wisdoms
still tempting them to be Politicians, while our unskilfulness inclines us to
plain dealing; a Quality, which my reason as well as interest, engages me to
esteem, above all the devices of the finest and craftyest wits.

First then I freely and openly acknowledge my self One, far highlyer obliged
to Chrysaspis, (under another more fortunate Name) then to all the World
besides, having continually received from Him so many and so happy
satisfactions in the noblest and most important Inquisitions of a Rational
Soul; yet seriously profess, I am not conscious of ever following him one hairs
breadth farther then his Reason drew me; and this, not only by the humor of my
nature (whether stubborn or ingenuous, I know not) that secures me from such a
servile spirit; but by his express and constant direction, never to depend the
least jot on him, but entirely on the pure force of Truth and Evidence: a
Lesson I hope the Reader shall see I perfectly observe in my frank relation of
this Encounter; wherein* (if I may judge) they Both gave too much advantage to
one another: for Chrysaspis's foot, which used to stand firm and strong,
unhappily slipped; and Querela, instead of dispatching him, made at him with such
a bungling blow, that himself lay open to an easy revenge.

But, to disguise the story no longer in a Metaphor, Master White having
written many excellent Pieces, both in Philosophy and Divinity, and endeavored
(not without a good degree of Success) to reduce those noblest Sciences to a
fair correspondence and orderly connection, undertook to print a little Treatise
in Geometry, hoping it might invite some apt to be affected with such motives,
to read his other works, not that they needed it, but we; nor is he so severely
to be interpreted that the fate of all his Books should depend on this (God
forbid so rich a treasure should be so rashly ventured) but conceiving he had
found the Quadrature, he consequently argues; He has invented in Mathematics
what was thought impossible, therefore his other speculations are not to be
neglected: which you would pervert to a quite contrary sense; He has miscarried
in what was thought impossible, therefore he is deceived in every thing else;
which consequence if we admit, we are weak discoursers; if we deny, it is a weak
Discourse, having not the least reason to sustain it. It Is true, this his
expectation met with the mischance of failing; but why should he not be allowed
the benefit of repenting? since, as soon as he saw his error, no less friendly
then clearly discovered to him by the Learned and rightly Honorable Lord, my
Lord Brouncker, he immediately retracted it, both by word, in his thankful
Letters to his Lordship; and by deed, in his quick suppressing the Book when
'twas ready to be published, and what in so short a time could he have done
more? who knows how long Guldinus lived in a confidence of his error, before
he retracted it? who knows not how tenaciously all those famous Mathematicians
that conceited they had found this Quadrature, cleav'd to their opinions? read
but Guldinus himself, lib. 2. pro. 4. and you shall see how many he there
brings in more glorying in the Invention, more obstinate in defending it, more
dilatory in revoking it, then the so clamorously condemned Chrysaspis; yet
every one mistaken as well as he: All I can say, is, it is the fate (alas!) of
Circle-squares, and Philosopher-stone finders, to boast and to miscarry.

Instantly after this calling in Chrysaspis, out comes Querela, not only
disingenuous enough to bewray to the World the secret defects of Chrysaspis,
after knowledge of its being recal'd; but bold enough to confess in print that
knowledge; nay worse, envious enough to do all this in plain English, and a
style flat and mean, fit for the lowest capacity of the vulgar. Certainly, a
proceeding neither just nor civil; not to talk of courteous or charitable. But,
Chrysaspis had wronged a friend of Querela's: and I willingly commend his
undertaking to defend him, as one of the worthiest and most generous actions
that belong to our nature; yet with this Caution, he must take heed of injuring
Reason, while he strives to do right to Friendship. Let Us then examine the
Cause.

Querela complains that Chrysaspis had stolen a thing called (for really it was
not) a Demonstration: the Accused answers the Charge, and gives his reasons to
clear himself. But, that they contend about being a plain error, in a Science
where fallacies get neither credit nor profit, I can believe Chrysaspis may
possibly fall into the same mistake with Guldinus (that was the friend's Name)
but scarce can imagine he should steal from him a deaf nut, or a rotten apple:
and therefore, since it is at least probable, the Casuist that allows so deep a
revenge for taking away an Apple, meant a sound one, which no ways hinders my
pretense; I desire this Case may be dismissed for its under-value. You strive
indeed to enhance the Crime, because 'twas Guldinus's proper Invention, of
which Chrysaspis robbed him; and every one is apt to cherish, and tenderly love
the issue of their own brain: But, what if it was no more then one of
Guldinus's by blows? what if not so much, but a mere abortion? and therefore I
desire again, it may be dismissed; for an error ought never to be made much of,
whoever is the father.

If it be said Chrysaspis suddenly took what he thought was sound; That would
acquit him absolutely of even the least suspicion to be conscious of Guldinus's
Retractation, which is a greater Crime, and more severely imputed. Yet, that
'twas possible he might not know it, will easily be believed by any who know
him: a Person soon weary of reading flourishes, and fine words, if they deliver
but ordinary sense; and such perhaps he judged Guldinus's, and I doubt he might
have some temptation to do so, if he did not light on very favorable passages;
if he red his Dedicatory, his Transitionary* his Discoursive parts even among
his Demonstrations, strangely too talkative for a Mathematician. And though we
agree Guldinus have truly acknowledged his error, yet not so openly, that he
that runs may read it; he confesses publicly, but it is in the corner of the
Church: No Title of any the five Propositions, (lib. 2. c. 3.) where he treats
directly of it, expressing any mistake; but proposing still either to examine
something about the Question; or, to try how the Principle he had relied on,
subsisted, etc. not, where it failed: so that his Retractation indeed, is there
in print, yet so nicely touched, and in so few words, and those mingled and
almost lost among many others, that easily it might escape a less diligent
Reader. Not that I mean, in this* entirely to justify Chrysaspis, but rightly
to state his fault; which is, that as it was free for him at first, to think
the Book not worth his study, yet ought he not censure it without a full
perusal.

But, if Chrysaspis judged too hastily; is that a crime beyond all pardon? are
we not every one of us sometimes overseen? He that is innocent, let him throw
the first stone; I Am sure he that threw the fi^fr stone at Chrysaspis is not
innocent for had be with impartial industry red over Guldinus, he might easily
have found very many periods not so uncensurable as he imagins. He complains
that Guldinus is accused, and calls it unworthy, injurious, etc. and cites
places out of his Book to acquit him. I ask, may not a Writer be modest,
humble* and solid, in some parts of his Book, and quite contrary in others? if
I unhappily light upon these, am I not excusable, in saying I dislike them? if
your better fortune lead you to those, may you not commend as you see cause?
Querela may exalt Guldinus, Chrysaspis may depress him, both may have reason:
and, in my conceit, all this is not only possible, but true: for I see
sometimes he discourses ingeniously and modestly; sometimes again trivially and
vainly: This branch I must prove; the other Querela will freely grant; and two
or three Instances I hope will dispatch it. Only here I desire to enter this
Protestation, that I am really sorry the just defense of my best Friend,
engages me to look into the faults of others, wherein I thank God, I take no
delight.

To begin with a short account of the Book in general, whereof first, I find a
great part very little akin to the Title: and of that little, very much
mechanically not Geometrically treated: and this, Guldinus freely acknowledges,
and seems indeed by many passages of his Book, to be a good natured man: He
gathers out of others, most of his notions; of whose names he gives his Reader
two fair Catalogues: in one of which, there are not many above thirty; but, in
the other, almost fourscore. He professes most to meddle with the practical
part, but tells you where to find the Demonstrations. His Collections are often
not pertinent to his end, but are many times, for all that, pretty things in
themselves. The subjects he treats of are, some of them indeed hardly reducible
to his purpose, as Algebra, numbers, ranging of Troops; besides, long Tables,
etc. Yet are they all fit for Youth to learn, and that was the design of these
his Labors, (as himself professes in his Preface to his third Book,) though
afterward collected and printed in Folio: And will you now wonder, that one
who used still to be the best man in the Company he taught and daily triumphed
among his Scholars, should be tainted at last with a little Vanity? for my
part, I think it so shrewd a temptation, that few in such circumstances are
observed to resist it.

But to come to the particulars: this spirit of Vanity may be plainly seen
walking up and down his Book; I Am sure I met it often, especially in his
Epistles and Discourses which generally taste a little strong of the
Scoolmaster. Turn but to the page 67. and read Ultimum ergo mirabilis illius
lineae punctum in quo nimirum vis omnis omneque momentum ac pondus circa
Quadraturam Circuli consistit, quodque neque antiqui neque moderni, (interque
illos nec nos ipsi) omnino geometrice determinant; ipsum tamen Centrum esse
Gravitatis semiperipheriae circuli nos primum mundo manifestamus. Wherefore, of
that wonderful line, the last Point, in which all the force and all the moment
and weight, in relation to the Quadrature of the Circle, consists; and which
neither the Ancients nor the Moderns (nor among them we our selves) do
altogether Geometrically determine; yet that it is the Center of Gravity of the
Circles semicircumference, we first manifest to the World.

Will one more content you? see then the first Chapter of his third Book; where
having briefly mentioned what the Ancients and Moderns had taught for measuring
of round surfaces, and administering their Methods, begins thus of his own; Nos
eam ita tractare constituimus, ut eandem ex solis and unicis nostris
principiis, etc. pendere ostendamus -- Quare etiamsi nullius alterius Geometrae
exstarent de Dimensione Rotundi lucubrationes, eam tamen ex his nostris sine
ullo alio alterius auxilio expediemus. This is your modest man: does he not
deserve to be enthroned on a golden Chariot, and great Archimedes with him, and
so both be led into the Capitol of eternal Honor? what else do his own words
mean in his long Preface to the fourth Book? -- Quem (Archimedem) aureo
nobiscum sedentem curru in honoris perpetui arcem Capitolinam deducemus.

Run now over the rest of this great Volume, and when you have wondered as you
go at the vast variety of foreign subjects he has gathered together, pass on
to the very end where you shall find a long and pleasant exercise, which will
both need, and perhaps by its jolly humor, deserve your Courtesy to forgive a
little tediousness. The mirth, I confess, came with some disadvantage to me,
because I had formerly seen the substance of it elsewhere, though not so
illustriously managed as by this Author. It Is a curious Arithmetical Problem,
and begins page 351. Where after a short Rhetorical Introduction, he entertains
his Reader with some pretty little flourishes, to usher in the grand Work.
Firct he proposes the Case of 100 stones so disposed at several short
distances, which so many times repeated unexpectedly exceed five miles; and
makes that side lose the Wager: then, puts another of a Horse, sold for so
much a nail in every shoe, though, beginning at a very low price, but doubling
Geometrically till the Buyer come to a dear bargain. A third, of one that
invited 12 to dinner, etc. at last he arrives at the grand Question: How many
several Combinations may be made of the 23 letters, which notwithstanding some
restrictions, he reckons up in words at length, (and figures too) to no less a
number then seventy thousand two hundred seventy three millions of millions,
sixty seven thousand three hundred and thirty millions of millions; three
hundred thirty thousand, ninety and eight millions, ninety one thousand one
hundred fifty five words: Then in condescendence to his Auditors, he gathers
all these words into a Book, just like that in his hand; counts how many pages
in a leaf, how many lines in a page, how many letters in a line, then sums up
the whole into a world of millions of millions, etc. and all this while, the
Title of his Book is; Of the Center of Gravity.

But methinks I hear some of you murmur, says he, that you understand this but
a little better then the other. To these he offers all imaginable satisfaction,
first he surveys the bulk of every single Book, then proposes the gathering
them into one Library, whose Model he describes, to say the truth, most
exactly: sets down particularly the figure, which must be square, and is called
says he, by Mathematicians, Cubical; then appoints the height, no less then
that of St. Stephen's Tower, of which he gives you the measure to a foot. Then
goes to the VValls, how high in themselves, how distant from one another, how
many shelves each Wall can hold; how many Books each shelf, etc. then collects
the same, not forgetting what space the boards, and other little necessaries
take up; and still the Title is, Of the Center of Gravity.

It remains, says he, that we consider the breadth: which he contrives to be
filled with several rows, each regarding one another, (like our new Exchange)
to the very middle, yet providently allowing space for two to walk a breast in a
Gallery between the shelves, besides what is requisite for Ladder's, to take
down the Books; for both which purposes, he judges six foot and a half
sufficient: then multiplying and dividing, he learnedly finds out the number of
Libraries, capable to contain all these Volumes, to be eight thousand millions;
not to speak of the 52 millions, etc. as being but an od number: I had almost
forgot the Cover of the Library, which he cares not, though it be the Concave
of the Moon it self.

Still they grudg, and he hears them mutter, that 'twere far easier to
apprehend so intricate a mystery, by the quantity of ground these Libraries
must be built on, then by their number. To these he professes he would
willingly give satisfaction. But what Province, says he, what Kingdom, what
Empire, of the Chinese, of the Turks, or of the Christians, or rather what
World, the Old or the New shall we choose for so vast a foundation? To be short,
he will try it with the whole Globe of the Earth, let it be (says he) as big
as it will, and not to lose time in gathering his Libraries into Cities only,
he takes in every inch of dry Land; and setting aside one moiety of the Globe
for Waters, he casts up how many feet square the more diligent Moderns reckon
are on the surface of the Earth, fifteen hundred millions of millions, etc.
then assigns to every Library its due Plant, then sums up what number of them
will cover the whole Earth, and at last, concludes they are two few for his
work, by more then all our vastest Europe can hold.

If any have yet a curiosity, continues Guldinus to learn whether the said
Books, being laid one by another, and close together, can cover the whole
Globe, wet and dry, (for he doubts some foul play may be suspected in those
large and many Galleries he left for Walks and Ladders, that might have held
some millions of Books, and been perhaps sufficient without building Libraries
on the Sea, which is little better then Castles in the Air) And here he judges
it fit for a Complement of the Problem, that this suspicion be taken away. To
the triple reason: therefore he returns as manifold an answer, (I could not
easily distinguish this triplicity of reasons; perhaps, if you will bestow so
much time, you may at the bottom of the page 356) but to proceed, and end, I
hope, ere long, for I am quite tired. Books, says he, may either stand thus on
their ends, or on their long edges, or so on their flat sides. The first way,
they would overspread above seventeen such Globes as ours: the second, twice as
many: the third, above a hundred such Worlds as these, might so be covered with
our Books, (he means those he there speaks of) that not the least pins point
of Earth should be seen.

And were not this enough to tempt any who loves a short and close method of
writing, to note with some sharpness such extravagancies? would you think any
farther questions should be raised about this business, and that in a Treatise
of the Center of Gravity? would you imagine he should ask how many Clarks were
necessary, and how much time, to copy these Books? etc. Item (says he) whether
or no the paper wherein they are written can cover and cloth, not the Earth,
but Heaven it self, and the very Firmament, called by us the seat of the fixed
Stars. He leaves, least he should seem to abuse the patience of their
courtesy, to be considered by themselves at their leisure, Thus ends the
famous Center of Gravity, and, with these pompous words, closes up it self,
Viam ostendimus qua itur ad astra: and, if any serious Reader can forgive a
Quibble, I think his Motto true and pertinent, since, in my conceit, his
Discourse goes quite away from the Center of Gravity, to the utmost bounds or
Circumference of Levity.

Perhaps he may retract all this mirth in another place, and I be taken in the
same crime with Chrysaspis; but I vow, I am not guilty of knowing any such
correction; and, if there prove any, I am sure it must be in some by corner of
the Book, else had it been in the open passages, I could not possibly have
balk't it.

Besides, I doubt he is a little overhasty too in his Censures, especially
himself being guilty of the fault he charges on others; for having given us* as
his own new Invention, (which I easily believe, it being not very excellent) a
little Treatise of the Center of Gravity, both of one and more indivisible
Points: as also of Lines, he uses a liberty by supposing Points and Lines to
have real Gravity, which he flatly denies to Cavalerius, and somewhat roundly
censures his calling a Surface, All the lines: and a Solid, All the surfaces;
because no multitude of Mathematical lines, can make a surface, etc. And I
pray, how many Mathematical points will weigh a pound? Why may not Cavalerius
as well take up a supposition so advancive of Mathematics, and so approved by
Mathematicians, as Guldinus demand the allowance of One neither beneficial nor
admitted; for should we comply with what he desires, as soon as a Point is
considered to have Gravity, does it not immediately become of the Nature of a
Solid? and then how is the World beholden to him for his new Invention? should
we be froward and deny; how will he possibly prove that to have a Center of
Gravity, which has no Gravity?

Nor was it injurious for Chrysaspis to tax Guldinus of unskilfulness in
Mathematics; when, (as it is rightly observed in Chrysaspis, Nota quarta) he
offended against the very Definition of Inscribing and Circumscribing, and
either knew not that the Inscribed line should with both its ends, touch the
Circumscriber; or took two lines to perform the Circumscription instead of one:
an error most gross and palpable, when once discovered* an^ so indeed are all
mistakes in Geometry, though they may deceive some few for a while, as we see
by experience, both in Guldinus and Chrysaspis.

Nor is Querela exempt from humanity, he is even a mortal too; and when he
takes the Proportion of the Diameter to the Circumference, to be as 7 to 22 he
assumes what no Geometrician will allow, unless to Surveyers and Diallers, etc.
but absolutely reject in an exact Calculation, which perfect method I suspect
was not very easy for him to attain; else surely when he stood upon his
honor, he would have used his utmost diligence, especially this being his
first Essay: for he never did any thing, that I know of, in print, but this
Collection of the Errata's of Chrysaspis, and we shall see, even in so easy a
task, he needs another to correct him. For he, making his Radius of four
places, and not knowing, or not considering the great difference that from
thence arises in the Proportion he follows, of 7 to 22 falls often, even
himself, who so severely lashes others, into gross mistakes, as page 43. line
19. and 25. for 1047619 1/21 he should have put 1047197 that is, greater then
1047197 5/10 and less then 1047197 6/10 for the Radius being 1000, the
semicircumference is 3141 592/1000 6/7 according to Van Cullen's numbers; and
therefore the Circle is 3141592 6/7 and consequently the Sector EBFC 1047197

P. 43. l. 21. and p. 44. for l. 23. 866. he should have said 866 025/1000 BG.
being 500. 3. and consequently p. 43. l. 24. 433000. should have been 433012

P. 44. l. 1. and p. 45. l. 8. and 14. for 614619 1/21 the more true is 614184
8/9

P. 44. l. 9. and 22. for 1802 7/9 ought to have been 1802 because AG. is 500
13.

P. 44. l. 11. and p. 45. l. 7. and 14. he puts 197 2/9 where he should have
said 197

P. 44. number. 2. He does not so much mistake, as which is far worse, discover
himself a very bungler in the skill he professes; for being to seek out the
Angle BAE. he falls a hunting it in the oblique angled Triangle ABE. both the
farther way about, and more intricate to find; whereas there lay plain before
his eyes a right angled Triangle BAG. with all the sides known in such numbers,
that a bare inspection into the Canon gives the Angles; for half the number
(which method I take as more conformable to the Tables) put for BG, considering
only the first four places in the Canon of Sines, gives the Angle BAG: and
half the number put for GA, gives the Angle GBA. whose Complement is BAG.

Page 44 l. 17. 30 should have been left out, see Brigs 's Canons.

P. 44. l. 20. and p. 45. l. 1. 1791126. ought to have been 1791289

P. 44. l. 24. 1561205 5/9 ought to have been 1561249 4/^

P. 45. l. 2.9.16. 230920 4/9 ought to have been 230040 0/1

P. 45. l. 18. 242433 ought to have been 242264

P. 45. l. 19. 11512 8/9 ought to have been 12224

In these mistakes, Querela either Copied the Tables of others; and then, why
did he not choose the more exact? or calculated all himself; and then, why did
he not do it more exactly.

Perhaps he may say, his numbers are favourabler to Chrysaspis, then the true
ones: And it deserved acknowledgement* had it proceeded from kindness: but
besides the unexpectableness in this case, of such a charity; who ever was
known to hide their civilities so darkly, that one must seek the exactest
Tables of Sines, and use so many figures to find them out? No, were Querela a
perfect Master of Geometry, he had not been necessitated to so inferior and
unsevere a Method; where, what never as yet was done, nor perhaps ever will be
done, (the Quadrature of the Circle, and the precise exactness of the Canon of
Sines:) is, in rigorous Geometry, unallowably supposed; both which
inconveniences were clearly avoided by that Learned and Noble Hand that with
evident and unexceptionable Arguments convinced Chrysaspis, such as enforce the
assent, without begging the Courtesy of a supposition.

But Querela may possibly answer, The error was so plain, that there needed no
more then the Doctrine of Triangles to confute it: I reply, how would Querela
else have confuted it, the top of whose skill seems to reach no higher? nor
indeed so high, with any just exactness, as his many mistakes have sufficiently
discovered.

And let him not complain of the easiness of his task; he quickly may find in
Chrysaspis's other Writings an employment worth his undertaking: Let him not
cowardly triumph over One that had already yielded to a Noble Conqueror, and
crossed the Cudgels before Querela took 'em up; but manly begin with him on some
worthy subject, fresh and unfoil'd by any other, and follow him close and
roundly, and if he be but rigorously just, with as little mercy as he pleases;
only he is entreated not to harp perpetually on some one string that happily may
displease him, but strike it a while, that it may be heard, then put it in
tune, and go on to another; for I have often observed among the Dislikers of
that eminent Author, the Parable of the hundred Sheep perversely verified, they
leave the ninety nine just Opinions carlesly in the Wilderness; and all their
zeal is busy about the One that went astray; which when they have found, they
lay on their shoulders, that all the World may see they have caught him; and
calling their Friends and Neighbors together, invite them to congratulate
their happy fortune, that they have found, in a whole flock, one faulty sheep:
whereas, were this excellent similitude duly understood and applied, we rather
should endeavor to rectify any single or rarely repeated error of another;
and rejoice, not that it was committed, but that it is amended.

And here, to acquaint my Reader with the whole design I aim at by this
invitation; I protest, it rises not from any the least humor of provoking or
making debates; but a hopeful desire, by such Discussions, more evidently to
see, and more heartily embrace those solid truths, whom ever they belong to,
that shall stand so severe a trial; declaring openly before hand, this politic
resolution, unblameable I hope in such engagements, to put my self still on the
stronger side, and so be sure who ever overcomes, to have my share in the
Victory.

Besides, a curious eye may note in Querela, some touches also of disingenuity,
as p. 4. where he discourses, as if Chrysaspis should pretend he had never
studied Geometry: and p. 5. that he had not red so much as Euclide: and other
little sleights of hand to help his Game: whereas the truth is, Chrysaspis says
he never read over (or rather thoroughly) so much as Euclide; nor ever professed to
study Geometry; though in that very place he directly affirms, he had both
studied it for recreation, and attained sufficient skill in it, to transfer its
rigorous proceedings to Metaphysics. All which Querela's Publisher honestly
acknowledges in his Translation of the Latin, p. 58. and I am glad my Namesake
is the fairer Gamester.

Nor will I here omit a Passage, wherein, I confess, I have not art enough
entirely to justify either of them. Chrysaspis writes mistakably; and Querela
mistakes him: the One might have expressed himself more plainly; the Other might
have interpreted him more courteously: Both in some sense perhaps defendable;
and in some sense both blameable. Chrysaspis says, Guldinus was so vain, that
when he thought he had committed an error, he could by no means be induced to
cover it, by blotting it out; And so far is true, for he published it: or,
heartily confess the same; Yet, all is well enough: for whoever reads Guldinus
shall see, how long he rolls the sweet morsel in his mouth, before he can be
persuaded to spit it out: but goes on framing excuses, as if in the very error
he had carried himself gallantly; And, does not he frame excuses, who after a
plain Demonstration of his error (and that, found out, as he says, by himself)
puts down in the very next number, a Notandum that what he held was
probabilissimum? and then proceeds to examine on both sides (as if the point
were yet doubtful) which reasons are the stronger, and if any fail, how it
comes to pass, and which are they, etc.

After these Advertisements, he immediately advances this Proposition (of which
already I have given some touch) Detegere quomodo Principium etc. assumptum
subsistat; not how it miscarries: for still he holds the Maxim, that deceived
him, true, though not universally; verum est, sed non universim* which words
must be meant in that sense wherein himself misunderstood the notion of
Inscribed and Circumscribed; else as all the rest of the World interprets them,
that Maxim is absolutely and universally true. And, as to imagine what he called
Inscribed to be less then the Circumscriber, was a pretty Conjecture, and might
not want hope to deceive, were it in some other Science then slow-believing
Mathematics; so, to take those lines to be inscribed, which had but one common
term, was an intolerable Oversight.

Now for the hardest task; that he bore himself as if he had done gallantly,
thus much, even of that, he verifies: not only speaking of his opinion as most
probable, when he knew it to be false: nor only mincing the business, while he
says, his Principle is true, though not universally: but, maintaining that the
ground of what he affirmed was, to use his own odd expression, Commune quasi in
Geometricis assertum generale: and so plausible still, and dear to the good man
was his own invention, that, at last, he sends his Reader once more to review
the Demonstration that sustains his so probable Opinion; and then thus asks his
judgment, annon ea intellectum ipsius quodamodo ad assensum, si non omnino
cogat, saltem suaviter pertrahat?

This is the Crime that amazed Querela; this the foul and evident untruth
against which he exclaims as a most unworthy and false Calumny, and maliciously
imputed to Guldinus. Words of too fierce and rude a sense, for so mild a nature
as Querela seems to have, whose choler sometimes may simber a little, but
surely never boil over, unless some hotter spirits blow the Coals; though
perhaps once put into a heat, we know not when he may cease; but, let him carry
on the metaphor a line or two farther, and it will faithfully give him this
seasonable advice, that intemperate overflowings, both spill themselves, and
diminish the fire that raised 'em.

And sure he was a little warmer then ordinary, else what mean those angry and
rash, and (which I am loath to say) untrue expressions, page 30. Of all that
Chrysaspis so maliciously here imputes to Guldin, there is not one word to be
seen in him, nor the least ground or shadow in his writings; yea, just the
contrary to what is here so shamefully avouch't, etc. and p. 33. No man that
has any worth in him, conscience, or moral honesty, would ever so unworthily
have carried himself: And why so furious good Querela, against your Adversary?
why so passionate for your friend? I Am sure you had not read over his whole
Book when you wrote these undertaking words, not the least shadow in his
writings. You affirm, he says, just the contrary, and it is acknowledged, for he
says almost just the contrary to himself; besides, I must tell you (what
already is sufficiently proved) there is more then one word to be seen, more
then the least ground or shadow to justify Chrysaspis his charge against
Guldinus, of Vanity, unskilfulness, etc. for I find no pleasure in repeating
another faults, if it were not necessary to the clearing of my Friend, and, I
hope, should Querela seek any exception against my proceeding, he will find my
answer in his own.

Again, why so furious at this time, Querela, and upon this occasion? while
your Antagonist opposed only Tenets which you commonly called Articles of
faith, you very neighbourly let him alone: while he did but evacuate all
Christian Religion, and introduce a Pagan Philosophy, as others accuse him, you
patiently held your hands: but when he once presumed to go too far, and touch
one of your friends, then immediately you strike him on the face with
malicious, shameful, nonsense, etc. then flies out Querela (true to his name)
full of complaints and accusations, and bitter resentments.

And now, tell me for love of truth, how comes it to be lawful for the Opposers
of Chrysaspis, to talk, and write, and act what they list against him; and he
not permitted (who neither talks much, nor acts any thing against them,) to
write a little in defense of himself? Remember how insolently his Vindicator
provokes him, with Pagan Fatility, Epicurean Philosophy, Miscreant, Imp of
Hell, etc. Remember how bitterly Querela reviles him, with false Calumniator,
notorious Detracter, a man of no worth, no conscience, nor moral honesty, etc.
Remember how spitefully the ignorant followers of these principal Parties
asperse him, abridging all the anger their Tutors teach 'em, into this
compendious calumny, HERETIC. And when they have done all this, and more, and
every day, and every where, immediately their rash and froward passion will
censure him, if he sit not down in a dull stupid indifferency, but show himself
sometimes a little sensible of their unreasonableness, in his Replies; which
yet he does both very seldom, and only by occasional touches where the subject
invites him; not in downright railings and long invectives, wherein his envious
Adversaries too often excercize both their lungs and spleen against him.

But enough of this captious kind of contending, and too much indeed for an
ingenuous mind, were it not unhappily countenanced by the common practice of
all the Tribunals in the World, even spiritual as well as temporal; nay, in the
inward Court of Conscience too, where the modern Casuists are allowed for
Judges.

But, can we derive no profit from these miscarriages? sure if we had the art,
we might extract good out of greater evils then the worst of these: And
methinks I discern already, some advantages which perhaps may repair what the
misadventures have lost.

Chrysaspis, by retracting this Demonstration, has given us another, in a far
more concerning affair; That when e're he shall be convinced of any error in
his other works, he is ready ingeniously to disown it.

Querela, by discovering this mistake, may receive encouragement to search for
more; an endeavor which as I hope would be very beneficial to the World; so I
am sure, very welcome to Chrysaspis: especially from Querela, whom, I have
reason to say, (for his own hand has told me it) he really esteems as a Person,
in himself, of a good nature, and unpassionate temper. And if I may be
permitted to interpose my conceit, I shall not doubt to affirm that both of
them may more improve the World by confining hereafter their studies to their
proper Profession^; and do better right to themselves, by agreeing, for what is
past, to forbear one another.

The friends of Chrysaspis, too often injuriously charged as blind Adherers to
his Doctrine, may fairly take hold on this occasion; and with one short
question, silence all their Censurers. Which of us believe his Quadrature?
Confute but his other Opinions as we confess this may be done, and you soon
shall see how few will follow him; And yet, (now I remember a letter, he did me
the honor to send me in reference to this very business) we still shall follow
him; for there he heartily professes in these express words, None of my friends
need provide against following me in an error, for soon as it is discovered, my
self shall be the first to go before them in forsaking it.

For Conclusion, I have only this short wish to propose, That hereafter
Chrysaspis may be warier in preventing the objections of his Adversaries; and
Querela temperater in exalting the merits of his Friends; and both more severe
in their Mathematics, and less in their Censures. Which mildnes too, I humbly
entreat of the ingenious Reader, to pardon my detaining him so long with
superficial discourses, from passing on to the following more solid reasons:
and accept* for my excuse, this free acknowledgement; The shallow water covers
most ground, but the deep contains most substance.

ERRATA.
Page 4, l. 17. Circle-squarers. P. 11. l. 25. though dele. P. 12. l. 6.
millions of millions of millions. P. 16. l. 5. Stars, he leaves, ib. l. 11. if
my serious, P. 21. l. 2. 0/1 not 0/1 ib. l. 4. not ib. l. 6. not

A LETTER TO THE AUTHOR OF Querela Geometrica.
SIR,
IF you have read Plutarch's Book, Of the profit to be derived from Enemies, I
hope this Letter may find a convenient Lodging in your breast; for, I doubt
not, you may likely esteem me one of your enemies, though I strive to play the
part of a real friend, since daily experience too often verifies that old
saying, Truth begets hatred. You accuse me of diverse faults, and I must seek to
acquit my self. As for my errors in Geometry, I weigh not much whether they be
great or little; but for your moral complaints, I desire to give satisfaction
to rational persons, and first to your self, if you be so disposed.

In your Frontispiece, you charge me with injuries done to Geometry, but in
your Book, you mention only wrongs against one Geometrician. Who then is this
GEOMETRY? True it is, the Geometrician is one of the Society, and peradventure,
you may be also one or more of the same Company, And I am not ignorant it is an
use among them, to call themselves THE CHVRCH, and to say what ever is written
against them, is written against THE CATHOLIC CHVRCH; but this is the first
time, I ever heard them style themselves GEOMETRY, and aver what is written
against one of them, is written against GEOMETRY.

After your title, you go to my intention in setting out Chrysaspis, and tax me
for thinking it proceeded from God. I confess I did not expect such a censure
from you, that I should be blamed for giving the honor to God, of a work which
I apprehended far above my worth and force, especially acknowledging my self so
weak a Mathematician, as you often profess I give my self out for. Think how
many thousand years the Quadrature of the Circle has been an invincible
Problem in Geometry; can you your self then doubt but if I had done it, it
were by a special providence of God? for, not only rigorous Miracles, but
every remarkable Conjunction of natural Causes singularly influential toward
some good effect, may fitly be called Gods special Providence; or, ought I be
blamed, if, having the opinion that it was performed, I should attribute it to
God? Had you condemned me of rashness, for thinking I had done it, your
Objection might have seemed reasonable, and no other defense had remained for
me then to say, I was not the first, nor the best Mathematician who had fallen
into the same error.

Farther you urge, my adversaries have a great advantage against my other
Doctrins, For they have no more to do to convince them all, then to show my
Quadrature is false, which is the warrant to all the rest. Give me leave, Sir,
to tell you, you speak like a stranger to the true notion of Science. Science
stands on its own legs, and is secure or failing out of its intrinsecal
foundations. The help it receives from extrinsick authority, is only in regard
of the ignorant, who are not capable of Science in it self: so that to make
advantage of Geometrical failings, must either be toward ignorant Persons, or
from them; such as it seems you would frame adversaries to my Doctrine: for
such, all they who take these kind of advantages, must profess themselves to
be. Sure, I may as well argue, that you approve all my other Writings, because
you except only against this; as you conclude, I mistook in this, therefore I
am wrong in all the rest; especially, since, could you catch me notably
tripping in any of them, you would not fail to give me a fall.

After this, you come to the Quadrature it self; wherein your chief annotation
is, that I perform no more then an hypothetical or conditional Quadrature; that
is, if such or such a proportion were known, it were possible to square a
Circle. I answer, my endeavor was to find out absolutely, not conditionally,
the proportion you talk of, and had it been fortunate, had performed it, as all
Mathematicians who have declared themselves about my way, agree; and, if you
please, you may understand from the Noble Lord Brouncker, who with a favor and
civility toward me, matchless by any thing but his own Learning and excellent
endowments, demonstrated the proportion I aimed at to be a plain mistake; yet,
that if my fifth proposition had held, the thing had been done. His Lordship
having thus fully convinced me, and thus highly obliged me, I returned him my
humblest acknowledgements; and immediately directed the suppression of the
Copies, as your self confess you found them: after which, for you to come with
a clamorous and printed confutation, was extremely both unhandsome, and
uncharitable; and looked upon as such by the civillest Wits of our Nation.

You say my Treatise contains 13 Propositions, wherein I wonder you could
mistake. Not only the matter being diverse in three of the four last, and
plainly appertaining to a former work, called Exercitatio Geometrica, but the
very print and paper being diverse, and Finis set at the end of the ninth
Proposition; so that it is evident, Chrysaspis was finished in nine
Propositions, to which most of your reasons are out of a mistake, or not
understanding the work; and indeed, I have from better Mathematicians then my
self, that you understand not well your own; so many and notable errors they
observe in one or two leaves of your Anger against me.

Now as to the Appendix, first you say, Guldin (or Gulden, it is all one to me)
invented the demonstration I repeat out of my Exercitatio. Whether you speak by
hearsay, or by the chance of cross and pyle, I know not, but whoever reads the
two Demonstrations, will find them as different as can be; and yet you tell
your Reader, I acknowledge them to be the same.

You add, I put a second Demonstration, and that you say is mine own; and the
second, I confess, has some likeness with Guldins; for it argues the same way,
though it proceed by straight lines, and Guldins by circular ones.

There follows in your work, your Geometrical Examination of my errors; In
which I intend, neither to justify what I have written, nor reprehend what you
have, not taking it to be worth my pains, till I am assured whether my
Demonstration of the Quadrature, will reach to some other proportion, since the
chief end for which I made it, is miscarried. For I sought not commendation to
my self out of Geometry, but an attestation to my other Writings; which once
disappointed, the rest I have written is not worth my pains to rectify.

As for my bitterness against Guldin, it is not against his Person, who as you
say never offended me, neither did I ever know him, but against a base abuse
done to Geometry, to mingle with its purity, the scurf of probability, and so
to bring it into the scorn of being held no better then Logical discourses.
This he having attempted, by putting into his Geometrical Book, fantastical
Propositions; and coloring his supposed error, by Arguments not favoring of
Geometry, made me say he knew not the duty of a Geometrician; and, though he
might have many Geometrical things in him, was not therefore a Mathematician,
as not having the judgment to discern betwixt the use of probable Reasons, and
demonstrative ones; but thought the Arguments which himself took to be but
probable, might lawfully be entertained in Geometry.

This is the imputation I laid to his charge, and proved by those Instances
you cite, and confess to be his. Yet you are displeased with me: and to make
your displeasure seem reasonable to the Reader, you impose upon me that I say
he holds those errors since he recalled them, which I neither do, nor concerns
it me to do. Now whether it ought to be interpreted gall, when a man lays a
Charge and his Proof down, let the discreet and experienced judge. Ignorance it
may be in him that does the wrong; not passion, if his charge be no greater
then his evidence maintains.

You say farther, that I tax him with moral vices; and I cannot deny, I
thought he had a vanity in excusing himself, nor do his words express any less;
but for any great viciousness, I am far from either saying or thinking it of
him. And, if his proceedings made me conceive he was one of that kind of men,
who draw all things to incertainty, I do not therefore infer, he does so in
matters of Faith, on which he touches not as far as I have understood; nor can
any such sense be fairly deduced out, of my words, since every one of that kind
of men does it in his own sphere, not in all matters. Much less do I tax him of
Heresy, whereof I accuse not the Persons, even of them, whose sentences, I
doubt not, are Heresies. True it is, the endeavors of those whoever they are,
that seek to destroy all certainty, I perfectly hate, and use what means I can
to show their perniciousness.

And with this I think, I have answered your moral oppositions. There is indeed
a Geometrical one against the thirteenth Proposition, of which I make no
mention, because it is the same with the sixth, wherein, I have before affirmed
that my Lord Brouncker had convinced me; and so I have nothing to reply. Only
I hope my yielding to my Lord, will be a pledge to you, that I shall be willing
to do the like in my errors in other Sciences, as you charitably pray for me:
in which prayer I heartily join, adding this farther, that I may find out men
who will endeavor to show me my errors; for I doubt not, but there are diverse,
and I hope I am willing to know them: only I require proper proofs, fit for
the understanding, not extrinsical motives of the will, to make it prevent
prudence.

To come to an end, if you can have so just an opinion of me, that it is want
of understanding, and not malice, that has been the cause of any errors of
which I have not given satisfaction, I shall be glad for both our sakes. If
not, I will seek to imitate him to whom it was said to his face, Doemonium
habes; and not fail on my side, though unknown, to be

Your real well-wisher, and faithful Servant, THO. WHITE.


