A LETTER From Mr. Samuel White, to his Brother in LONDON, Dated in SIAM, Sept.
20. 1686.
Giving a full Account of the Late Rebellion made by the People of Macasser,
Inhabiting in that Country, which ended with the Death of all the Rebels, who
were totally Destroyed by the Kings Forces, Assisted by some Europeans, of
several Nations, amongst whom Capt. Henry Vdall, and some others of our
Countrymen most Unhappily lost their Lives.

IN the past Month, when his Majesty with the whole Court were retired to the
Summer Palace of the Levo; the Macassers (who you know are Seated below the
Portugueze Camp) Conspired to have burnt the City, Seized and Plundered the
Palace, Destroyed the King, and turned all Topsey-Turvy, had not the
faint-heartedness of some few of the Conspirators given vent to the Plot, about
six hours before the designed time of their beginning to put it in Execution,
which discovery, how late soever, came yet time enough to prevent the attempt
for that time, the Vigilance of the Guards, rendering it unfeazeable; The King
on notice hereof dispatched the Lord Phaulkon (who is Lord President of his
Privy-Councell) from Court, to the Palace of Siam, to examine and take
cognizance of the matter, on whose arrival there, a Party to the number of
about Two hundred surrendered themselves to the Kings Mercy, and were sent up
to Levo, where some of them were notwithstanding found worthy of Death: another
Party to the number of fifty headed by a designing and daring fellow, whom they
had made their Captain, pretended to be wholly ignorant of the Plot and with
all earnestness, sued for Liberty to depart the Kingdom, in a Vessel of their
own which was in a readiness to transport them: To which, his Lordship, willing
to have the Country ridd of such dangerous Malcontents, by any way rather
than by effusion of Blood, consented, and gave them a Tarra to pass the Forts
at Bankoke; but after their Departure from hence, being Informed the said
Captain was not so Innocent of the Plot as he had pretended, and Jelous that
such a Crew, Headed by such a Desperado, might do much Mischief by Lurking in
the Bay, and Surprising the small Vessels that daily pass to and fro, to the
great prejudice of the Port; He instantly dispatched an Express to the Chief
Governor of the Garrison, one Monsieur Forbien, a Frenchman, and great
Favorite of his Lordships, to En-order him, though not to stop the Vessel, (yet
if possible to be done without Bloodshed) to detain the said Macasser, Captain,
Prisoner in the Fort. To this End Forbien, on the Landing of four or five of
them, to show their pass before he would permit the opening of the Chain, sent
them on Board again, with an Invitation for their said Captain to come on
shore, who accordingly did, accompanied with six others, and (whether through
Ignorance or Oversight) were all of them permitted to Enter the Fort, Armed
with Greases, where Forbien treated them very Civilly with Tea, etc. for the
space of half an hour; but in the conclusion the Macassers offering to be gone,
the French Governor, now too late, told the Captain he must Surrender his
Arms, which he replied, he would not but with his Life; whereupon Forbien
Commanding a Brazo Pintado, that stood by, to Disarm him, he immediately drew
his Crease and ripped up the poor Siammer, after whose Example the rest began
their Muck, and fought very desperately until they were all killed upon the
place, by the Sentrys and the help of Two Englishmen, at that time Prisoners in
the Fort, having first slain several Siammers, and wounded a Young French
Captain.

This first Brush being over, the Governor sent to Summon the rest of the
Macassers on shore, having beforehand Ordered to be drawn up two Companies of
Siam and Portugueze Soldiers, (Headed by Captain Minchin, and Captain Hues,
lately come-in hither from Bombay) to receive them, whilst himself secured the
Fort with a Third Company; but they refusing to Obey his Summons, he sent to
set Fire of their Vessel, which was accordingly done, and the Macassers then
seeing themselves forced to the shore, and thinking to distract the Soldiers
from too strict an observance of them, immediately on their Landing set fire to
several Houses, which gave them opportunity to rally their Forces, then
amounting to Forty three Persons armed only with Creases in open face of the
Fort, where they undauntedly confronted the whole strength of the Garrison,
which Captain Hues not able to bear, too rashly advanced against such desperate
Fellows, and with six or seven Portugueses that followed him, met their Deaths
on the point of their Enemies Creases, having first laid dead an equal number
of the Macassers, Minchin also very narrowly escaped with Life, being deserted
by the unexperienced and Raw Soldiers under him, the Fort in the mean time not
being able to ply their great Guns to do any Execution for fear of killing
their own men; In this skirmish fell also about Twenty six Siammers, all of
them Creast: However at length the Macassers fled, and being afterward pursued
and hunted from place to place, in Seven or Eight days time they were all
taken, and their fifty Heads staked upon Poles at Bankoke, and it is not amiss
their escape to Sea was so opportunely prevented, for three days after this
happened, arrived some Englishmen from Mergin, who knew nothing of this matter,
yet affirmed, That in the Offing of this Bar, they saw Forty Sail of Mallay
Vesseis plying to Windward, whereas not one had gone out from hence, and
therefore it is supposed they had been Cruising on the Coast, to expect this
said Captain with an Account of their Success on shore, and that then the
appointed time being expired. and the time of English Shipping to arrive at
hand doubtful of a Discovery of the Plot a-shoar, they were returning
homewards. A Third Party of these Macassers to the number of One Hundred or
thereabouts, with their Prince at the Head of them, stood upon their Defense in
their own Camp, to whom the King after his return hither from Levo, was pleased
to make a tender of Pardon, provided they would lay down their Arms, Though
perhaps expecting by this his unlookt for Clemency, to arrive at the discovery
of all such ill-affected Siammers, as possibly might have more then a finger in
this Conspiracy, but this gracious ofter of his Majesty had not the designed
effect; for about the 10th. of this month, the said Prince attended by the
whole Crew of desperate Votaries, all armed with Creases and Lances, went to
the Palace Gate: whence he sent word to his Majesty, That in the sense of his
late Error, and reliance on his Royal word, he was come to ask his Majesty's
Pardon, and promise a peaceable demeanor for the future; and to that end
desired admittance to throw himself at his Majesty's Feet, To which he was
answered, That the Posture he then was in, did not correspond with his
pretenses, but if he would first surrender his Arms, and Command his Attendants
to do the like, his Majesty would readily grant him liberty to come into his
Presence, and confirm the Pardon he had already on that condition offered them;
whereupon the Prince peremptorily replied, he would never be guilty of so base
a Submission as required the parting with their Arms; adding that he was not
unsensible of an approaching great Storm: But, says he, tell the King, I am
like a Great Tree, well Rooted, and shall be able to endure any ordinary Shock;
but if the Storm comes so Violently on that I cannot longer stand it, he may be
Assured my fall will not be without the ruin of much under wood; and since I
cannot be suffered to speak to the King with my Arms, if he has any further
business with me, he knows where to find me at my own House.

All Resentment of these daring Expressions was seemingly smothered, and it was
thought most convenient to lull him into Security, by suffering him for that
time to depart without taking any further notice of it; though all possible
Preparations were with great privacy made to reduce him by Force. And
accordingly the Lord Phaulkon in Person, accompanied with Sixty Europeans,
having first in the Night blockt up the small River, and so surrounded the
Macassers Camp with about two Hundred of the Kings Galleys and Boats, that they
could not possibly fly, on Tuesday the Fourteenth Instant at break of day gave
Order for the Onsett, intending first to have fired down all the Houses before
them, that so they might force these Skulking Enemies to an open Fight, who
otherwise would have the opportunity of Murdering all that came near them, and
yet keep themselves unseen: But alas! the Rashness of some of the Chief
Europeans hurried them on at once, to the breach of Orders and their own
Deaths, and that without any damage to the Enemy; For Captain Coats, and by
his Example and Command, several others Landed before their time on a small
Spot of a dry point, where the Macassers, e're they could well look about them,
rushing out of the Houses dispatched one Mr. Alvey, newly arrived on the
Herbert, and forced the rest to take the Water again, in which hasty Retreat,
Captain Coats with the weight of his own Armor and Arms lost his Life in the
Water, the rest with much danger and difficulty recovering their Boats. This
sad Prologue to the yet sadder Tragedy, a man would have thought warning enough
for them to have proceeded afterward with more discretion: but being for the
most part of them men of more Resolution then Conduct, and unacquainted with
the way of fighting with such an Enemy, and yet Emulous of showing themselves
every man more Valiant then his Neighbor: About three hours afterward having
by burning that part of the Camp, and hot plying of the Guns out of the
Galleys, put the Enemy to a Retreat two Miles higher, up the small River,
Captain Henry Udall (who in complement to his Lordship accompanied him to be
only a Spectator) had not the Patience to continue any longer so; but,
(notwithstanding all his Lordships earnest disswasions from it) would needs
leap ashore, where he had not been long, with several other English in his
Company, e're a parcel of Macassers, in disguise of Siammers, by hawling a
small Boat along the Shoal-water, got so near them, undiscerned to be Enemies,
as to reach them with their Lances, at which time it unluckily fell to Captain
Vdalls Lot to lose his Life, the rest very difficultly escaping by taking the
Water, though those Macassers escapt not the small-shot from the Boats: Nor was
his Lordship exempted from as Eminent Danger as any man that came off with
Life; For Captain Vdall's resolute going ashore had drawn him thither also,
being loath to leave the Company of one he so much respected; but the Enemies
Lances, (at which you know they are most expert) forced his Retreat, being glad
for some time to hang on the off-side of his Boats Stern for shelter. You will
not, (though many others I believe will) wonder the Europeans small shot could
not prevent their doing so much mischief with only Lances and Creases, when you
call to mind their desperateness, who are a sort of People that only value
their Lives by the mischief they can do at their Deaths; and regard no more to
run up to the very Muzzle of a Blunderbuss, then an Englishman would to hold
his hand against a Boys Pop-Gun. There fell also four Frenchmen, among whom
Monsieur de Roan was one: So that now at length other men's harder fates begun
to make the rest more Circumspect; and continuing to burn and lay all Level
before them, about Ten in the Forenoon arrived them a Recruite of Siammers,
(the whole number employed by Land and Water being no less then Seven or Eight
Thousand) with which they began to pick them off very briskly, I mean as fast
as they could spy them Skulking in the Bambo's, Thickets, and other Bushes,
'till at length the Prince himself was slain by the Captain of his Lordships
Lifeguard, and about three a Clock the Fight ended; the Siammers afterward
only continuing to hem-in that place, to prevent the escape of any that might
remain alive and attempt it. There was no Quarter given to any Macassers in
this days Fight, save only the Princes Son, a Boy of about Twelve Years, who
after his Fathers fall came on undauntedly with his Lance presented at his
Lordship; but drawing within reach, and perceiving his Lordship ready in the
like posture to entertain him with his Lance, his Heart failed him, so that he
cast away his Weapons, and threw himself at his Lordships Feet, who received
him with all Courtesy, and brought him unbound to his Majesty. The next day
what Men or Women remained, (for many of the latter were burnt in their Houses
with their Children) were taken Prisoners by the Siammers. And thus ends the
Story of the Macassers with their Lives: But whether the Conspiracy, wherein
they were concerned, will end with them, is very much to be doubted.

Licensed July 28. 1687. To. L' Estrange.

FINIS.
LONDON, Printed for Joseph Hindmarsh, at the Golden-Ball, over against the
Royall-Exchange in Cornhill, 1687.


