Upon the 22 day of the 8th Month, 1659.
THE Word of the Lord came unto me, saying, Write, and again I say, Write with
speed, to the Heads and Rulers of this Nation; Oh! earth, earth, earth, hear
the Word of the Lord, and be awakened unto righteousness, for the hour of his
Judgments are come on the earth; yea verily, the Lord God of Heaven and of
earth, has sounded forth an alarm unto the Inhabitants of the whole earth,
high and low; And this is the Word of the Lord to you all, you Heads and Rulers
of this Nation, as it came to me from the mouth of the Lord, saying, I will
confound, I will overturn all the powers of the earth, both Heads and Rulers,
that are now ruling and governing in this Nation, by the force of cruelty, and
by the unrighteous power are striving to rule and to govern over the Nations,
and you yourselves out of the Government of Christ, and know not him that
should guide you, to rule in justice nor in truth for the Lord God, but you are
rising up against the unlimitted power of the Almighty God, to stop it from
going through; but I say by the Spirit of the Almighty God, all your striving
is in vain, he has began his work, and he will go through, until his foes are
become his footstool, and all that rises up to hinder his work, will he bring
to naught, he will overturn, he will overturn Gog and Magog, and all the powers
of darkness, both Priests and Rulers will the Lord God suddenly throw down, for
behold now is the Ax laid to the root of the evil tree, and the Son of God the
light of the world is come, not to bring peace on earth but a sword, to cut
down the corrupt tree in every one, you must feel the Ax laid to the root of
the evil tree, within your own houses, you must feel the sword of the Lord to
pass through in every one, to cut down the corrupt tree, that has grown
within, that has brought forth the corrupt fruit that has not pleased God;
this you must all feel the work of God in Christ, to destroy the work of the
Devil within you, the prince of darkness, that has ruled in the hearts of men;
but now is the Lord God arisen and arising, from his holy Habitation, he is
come and coming, to make War against the prince of this world, that has had
the dominion in the hearts of men, and he will throw down Kings from their
Thrones, and he will lay low the mighty, and he will bring down the strong from
their seats, and the princes or this world will he overturn, for Michael our
prince is come to make War in righteousness, and to set up his Throne again
over the kingdoms of men, and over the heads of you that are ruling and
governing of this Nation will the Lord God establish his Throne, that he may be
known to be the Head and the Governor of his people, the one head over the
many heads, will rule and reign, and have the dominion, and a through work will
the Lord God make in you, and through you, that are now about to set up your
own government, made without the Council of God, made in your own wills, and in
your own wills you think to set them up, but the Lord God by his Almighty power
will break them in pieces, and throw them down, before you shall have power to
set them up; yea, the Lord God has beheld your ways with his all-seeing eye,
he does see your intents in secret, and he will bring them forth, and reward
you openly, in the view of all people, yea, the Lord God of hosts is risen and
arising, and he will scatter you, and dash you one against the other, if you go
on in your evil intents, the Lord God is coming to shake you like a leaf, and
to break down your invented imagined Laws, made by your evil hearts, hearts
full of corruption and deceit, with guile in your mouths, which proceeds from
an evil heart, in you the Son of God has no place, the foxes have holes, and
the fouls of the air have nests, but the Son of God has not whereon to lay his
head in the earth; but you that know him not to rule nor to guide in the way of
righteousness, you are in darkness. and your works are wrought in darkness, and
you are out of the light of the Son of God; for he that loves the light,
brings his deeds to the light, that they may be known that they are wrought
in God, read your selves, and try you selves, whether or no your works, deeds
and actions are wrought in the light, or in God who is light; But if you are
yet hating the light of the Lord Jesus Christ within your own hearts, that will
be your condemnation, be ye what you will in greatness or in the glory of the
world, I tell you your condition is miserable, and you are without God, living
in the world, you are yet under condemnation, and you have not passed from
death unto life, but are yet children of wrath, heaping up wrath against the
day of wrath; there is no condemnation to those who are in Christ Jesus, who
walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit, and in the Spirit, which is
truth in the inward parts; Are you there? are you found in the path of Justice?
are you judging with true Judgment, the cause of the poor? are you setting
free the oppressed? or are you laying more heavy burdens upon the righteous
seed and heritage of God? If you are, the Lord God of Heaven and of earth will
thunder out his Judgments hastily upon you, with woes and plagues will he
recompense you, and sudden destruction will he bring on you, for the mouth of
the Lord has spoken it, and it shall surely come to pass, and be fulfilled in
and upon you, as ever you were created, if you slight the day of your
visitation, which is hastening and passing away; And behold! as the day comes
and passes away, and cannot be recalled again, even so the night hasteneth and
will come, wherein none shall work; then woe and lamentation will come upon such
as are slighting the day of their visitation, like Sodom and Gomorrah, that the
Lord warned by his messengers to repent, whom they slighted and repented not,
and were destroyed. Oh! let a serious consideration pass through, search your
own hearts, and deal singly with your own selves, and see how it stands
between God and you; Whether or no you are acting for God, and by the power of
God, or led to do his will; Let Gods witness in every one of you answer; and
stifle not the pure witness of God, but let it deal plainly with you, and it
will show you what you have been working, and what you are now a working; let
the light of Christ break through you, and let it arise within you, quench it
not, least it condemn you for ever, for now has the Lord God commanded light
to shine out of darkness, that gives the knowledge of the glory of God in the
face of Jesus Christ, to all that do believe, follow and obey the light of the
Son, it leads out of darkness, and out of sin and transgression, up to God
again, from whence the light comes; So all that are led by the light, are led
by the Spirit of God, and they know God, and they have fellowship with God, for
if we walk in the light, as he is in the light, then we have fellowship one
with another, and the blood of Jesus cleanses from all sin; but they that walk
in darkness, have not fellowship with God, neither do they know him; and here
is fallen man, without God, living in the world in a woeful state, miserable,
blind and naked, quit darkened in his understanding, by reason of transgression,
and the further he runs on in sin and in transgression, the more he becomes
darkened in his understanding, that he cannot understand the things of God, and
is wholly ignorant of his Maker; So is the whole world become darkness, and
darkness has been over the face of the whole earth, and thick darkness has
covered the hearts of all people; But now has the light appeared, and is
expelling the clouds of darkness, and through darkness has the Son broken, and
from the dead is he risen, that is the light of the world, that inlightneth
every man that comes into the world; So the grace of God that brings
Salvation, has appeared unto all men, but all are not guided by this grace,
because they love it not, but they loving the world and the glory thereof, they
have let sl^p the grace of God, the good gift of his own Spirit, and they have
hid their talent, that the Lord gave them, deep in the earth, and they have
become unprofitable servants, and such God will plead with, he will require for
the improvement of it, and then the unprofitable servant w^ll be rewarded,
according to the improvement of the Lords talent; if he has proficed nothing
by the good grace of God, that has appeared to him, and he has slighted it,
then this will be pronounced to him, Go ye cursed into everlasting fire,
prepared for the Devil and his angels; this is the portion of the ungodly, who
hates the grace of God, and kicks against that that has often called them to
return from the evil of their ways, but they would not hearken unto it;
therefore the condemnation of such will be Just, and that is the light of
Christ within them; for whatsoever manifests that is light, and this is the
light of the Lamb of God, and is come to take away the sins of the world, for
he that believes in me, says Christ, shall never see death, and I wall raise
him up at the last day; but he that believes not, abides in death, and death
has dominion over him; for except Christ be risen from the dead, all preaching
^s in vain, and that faith that stands not in the first Resurrection, is a
dead faith; he that believes has entered into his rest, he has ceased from
his own works, as God did from his, all that believes in Christ, knows the
everlasting rest, and are entered into it, and such have rested from their own
works, and Christ has wrought his Will in them; So here is the Will of God
done in the earth, as it is in Heaven, and here is no more their own will, but
the Will of God, as he said that wrought the Will of the Father, I came not to
do my own will, but the Will of him that sent me; So where Christ is known and
lived in, and he living in them that are his people, they know the Will of the
Father, and are doers of it; he that reveals the Father, is the Son, and the
Son is the light, and in the light, is the will of the Father revealed, no man
knows the Father but the Son, and he to whom the Son reveals him and he
that has the S^n has the Father also, for now is the foundation stone coming
to strike on the top of Babel, that great building, and he will confound the
languages of the builders thereof, and of the upholders, that upholdeth great
Babel, the Image of the beast, whereon the fa^e prophet sits, and is upheld by
the powers of darkness, but the living power of God will break down the powers
of darkness, and that and the false prophet shall fall together, and the Image
ground to powder, and that that has been build^d so high, thrown to the
bottom, for a through work will the Lord God make, until he has set up his K
ngdom again over the kingdoms of men, God will glorify his Son, and set him up
again, that has been a Lamb slam since the foundation of the world, and he is
arising with healing under his wings, on them that do believe, and the power of
the Lord God is bringing mighty things to pass; And this is the mighty day of
the Lord, wherein he will gather a remnant from all Nations and Countries, many
shall come from the East, and from the West, and shall sit down with Abraham,
and with Isaac, and with Jacob in the Kingdom of our God; And you will the Lord
gather, if you will hear his voice, and harden not your hearts, and provoke not
the Lord to wrath, and slight not the day of your visitation, but hear that
your Souls may live, for the love of the Lord reaches to all; And to you does
he call in this the day of his everlasting love, and of his glorious
appearance, wherein he is coming to try you, and again will he try you that are
ruling and governing in this Nation, he will carry on his work, over you and
through you, the power of God will limit, and bind all the powers of darkness;
the gates of hell shall not prevail against he that is now risen in the hearts
of his people, the Rock of ages, the power of God, that shakes the earth, and
makes the mountains to tremble; he will shake the earth terribly, and not the
earth only, but the heavens also, that that which is to be shaken, may be
shaken, that that which cannot be shaken may remain, for now is the way of
everlasting life made known in this our day, that has not been known in many
ages nor generations, now is the way of truth openly declared unto all that
will come freely, Oh! stand not out, but be willing to come unto Christ that
you may have life, for there is no other way that you can come to life, but
Christ who is the light and life of men, and to him you must all come, and
submit your Government under his Government, or else you will never prosper; I
tell you plainly, by the Spirit of the Lord, and it will stand upon record,
whether you will hear or no, it will witness against you, and against your
unrighteous actions, for the decree of God is gone forth against you, and
against your injustice, Tyranny, and oppression. Oh! you heads, and Rulers,
that rule by the unrighteous power, and are striving by your own strength, to
limit and bind up the power of the Almighty God of heaven and of earth; Mark
the end of your work, if you go on in rebellion against God, look to receive a
just recompense of reward according to your injustice, the Lord God is just and
righteous, upright, and holy; and he will reward you, according to your
unrighteous dealing, and as you do deal unto others, the same will the Lord God
deal to you, and as you have rewarded the servants of the Lord, that have
foretold you, and warned you and others, to fly from the wrath to come, which
in obedience to the Lord they have done it, and also are yet sent forth with
the message of the Lord God of hosts, to warn you heads, and Rulers of this
Nation, that you may come to the brightness of the arising of the second Adam,
that through the darkness has his light broken, and is rending the vail of
thick darkness, from the top to bottom, and he is making of a through work in
the earth, for through Judgment you must come, and to know true Judgment set
up within you; for until then you cannot know how to deal true Judgment to
others without you, for by Judgment, must the inhabitants of the earth learn
righteousness; and if you had known Judgment set up within you, you would have
known how to deal with righteous Judgment unto all others without you; for
until that you come to know true Judgment, the Judgment of Christ to be
executed upon the transgressors within your own selves; until you feel the
sword of the Lord God to pass through you, and to cut down the root and the
ground of corruption that lodges in the evil heart, the heart unpurified; that
cannot know, nor see, nor perceive the things of God; I tell you, while that
stands that is under the curse, and under wrath, and under condemnation, the
unrighteous rules and bears rule within you; And this causes you to oppress
others without you, but the Lord God will arise in his furious indignation, and
he will overturn you and your oppression, and all the oppressors, and he will
break them in pieces, and dash them one against the other, and you will he
throw down from your high thrones, and you shall become as weak as the weakest
of all; for the tribes of the earth shall mourn, and the strong men shall sit
in desolation and sorrow, and anguish of soul shall possess the lofty; and
mourning and sorrow of heart shall smite the Rebellious, and the hard hearted
that have hardened themselves against the Lord; woe, and desolation, is coming
upon you that fear not God, I do see a storm of vexation coming on you, showed
unto me by the Lord God, and I am constrained by him to make it known to you,
before it fall on you; and also to warn you to fly from it, for I shall clear
my conscience in the sight of God, being moved by his eternal spirit to leave
my own Country in obedience to the Lord God to deliver his message to you; you
heads and Rulers of this Nation of England, you must come down from your high
thrones; and again I say, you must come down and repent, and humble your selves
before he Lord God, that he may have mercy on you, and this is the great love
of God unto you, to warn you in your life time, before the time come when
warning shall be no more, and that you go down into the grave with sorrow. Oh!
harden not your hearts, but let the Word of God pass through you; let it rip
open your hearts, that you may come to have hearts of flesh, that your stony
hearts may be taken away, that you may come to have new hearts, and the Law of
God written therein, and you to act thereby, and then all will be well pleasing
in the sight of God, until then, the hand of the Lord will be against you, and
your will never be able to bring any thing in its right order until you come to
know the God of order to order you, and to govern you by his own spirit, and by
his own power to guide you in the way of righteousness, and in the way of
holiness which is the path of peace to all that walk therein. This is to you
that are ruling and governing this Nation, for a warning and a message, as
received by the Spirit of the living God, as it was given to me to be delivered
to you, for you to read in the fear of God, and in meekness to receive it as
the Council of God.

Given forth by Dorothy White.

THE END.
LONDON, Printed for Thomas Simmons, at the Bull and Mouth near Aldersgate,
1659.


