LETTERIII. TO Mr Nathaniel Tenche, IN ANSWER To a PAPER published by him,
Entitled, Animadversions upon Mr. George White 's Reflection on the Answer of
the East India- Company, to Mr. Samuel White 's Two PAPERS;

WHEREIN The Arbitrary Violences Committed by the said Company on the LIVES and
ESTATES OF THEIR Fellow Subjects and Strangers;

TOGETHER WITH The present sad Condition of their AFFAIRS in INDIA, are
occasionally intimated.

-- Pulchra Laverna,
Da mihi fallere, da justum sanctumque videri,
Noctem peccatis, and fraudibus objice nubem.
Sic orat N. T. ex Horat. Epist. Lib. 1.16. LONDON, Printed, 1689.

Mr. Nathaniel Tenche,
SIR,
YOU have made me sensible, that it is my great misfortune to have utterly lost
my self in your favor, by my presuming to publish some Papers relating to the
East India Company; and I must confess I have since given farther cause to
irritate your Indignation against me, by my so long delaying to render those
acknowledgments are justly due to your Judicious, Candid, and gentle
Animadversions: But may it please you, Good Sir, to pardon my dilatoriness for
this once, and I faithfully assure you, I will be more expeditious for the
future, when You or any of Your Brethren shall give me the like obliging
Occasion: In hopes of which your favorable Indulgence, I will now humbly offer
my grateful Sentiments of what occurs material in your Paper that lies before
me.

I find, Sir, you have taken very great offense at the endeavors I have used
on behalf of my deceased Brother: But you are pleased to be more particularly
incensed against my Reflections on Davenport's Diary, and the Publisher's
Preface, which has provoked you to that degree, that you seem astonished at the
Presumption of so inconsiderable a Person, as I am in your Opinion. Now whether
you look on me with this disdain and Scorn, either in respect to my disparity
with your Deputy, who is very worthy, or your more worthy Self, I will not
enquire, and shall only answer this your Argument, with a Sentence I lately met
with in a very good Author: Tantus quisque est, Quantus apud Deum, and nil
amplius.

It imports not therefore here so much to examine, What I am, as What I have
done, Why I did it, and How you have animadverted upon it.

Now the matter of Fact is truly and briefly this:

My Brother, who went to India in your Companies Service, staid therewith
leave, not only, never did you any disrespect, or disservice; but contrarily
made himself considerably useful to you. Notwithstanding all this, which might
justly give him a claim to your greatest Favors, was, upon your late assuming
a Despotick Power and Sovereign Authority, Robbed by your Servants of above
Twenty Thousand Pounds, and lost as much more by means of your most
unjustifiable hostile attempts at Mergen.

Under all which provoking Oppressions I first sought Relief by a private
Address to your Committee, in as respectful and humble terms, as might become
your most submissive Servant. I need no witness of this, while I write to your
worthy Self, who was present, and heard the answer made me by him, who wears
the Name of your Governor, That 'twas the Opinion of your Court, that what
their Servants had done was justifiable.

Being thus convinced, that neither Justice nor Mercy was to be found amongst
you, I proceeded to make my Applications to our Honorable Representatives in
Parliament, presenting them with the true state of our most deplorable Case:
And I happened suddenly after to meet a good Friend of mine, that is a Member
of your Committee, who was pleased to offer to me, That if it suited with my
liking, he would use his interest with your Deputy to accommodate the matter,
which, I readily accepted. But his endeavors were fruitless, for at next
meeting he told me Sir Josiah had taken other Measures; and what those were,
appeared soon after, in his publishing your Friend Davenport 's foresaid Diary,
with a Preface in the Name of the Company.

Thus did your Deputy pursue the practices of his Predecessor Catiline, in
trying to secure the ills he had already done by attempting greater; and his
guilty Conscience being unable to make the least plausible Defense against the
articles of Complaint, he endeavors to smoother the whole matter by scandalous
Recriminations. So I have heard of some desperado Villains, who set fire to
their Neighbors Houses, That, in the Confusion, they may have the more
convenient opportunity to rob and plunder them.

In these Circumstances stood the Affair; and I presume there is no honest man
living, but will agree, That 'twas a Duty highly incumbent on me, both in
respect to my deceased Brother, and his young Children, that were fallen under
my Care, to endeavor to expose the venomous Malice, and frustrate the wicked
Designs of our Enemies. On which account I pub(...)occasioned you the trouble
of Animadverting on them. Which your Herculean Labors, I now come to consider.

In the three or four first Paragraphs you are pleased to pour out your wrath
upon me in a most Magisterial Style for my daring to speak truth of your
Deputy, your General, and your Company in expressions suitable to their Merits.
Now, Sir, as I said nothing then, which I am not now ready to justify, so I
dare lay it before any unprejudiced Person in the World, who will but consider
the provocations I lay under; Whether I could possibly exceed the liberty that
is allowed to losers, while I kept within the bounds of truth. Besides, Sir,
you know I had to do with a Man, who, as I then told you, had passed with
impunity through a long Course of Transgressions, and was thereby hardened into
a Conceit, that he was above the reach of Censure: So that all I did, or could,
say; was not only excusable, but necessary to awaken him out of his dreams of
Despotick Power, and convince him that the Lives, Liberties, and Estates of his
Fellow Subjects could no longer be bought at the rate of 10000 Guinea's per
Annum to the Crown, with the additional bulky Sums, that stand registered in
your Books under the Title of Secret Services.

This, Sir, is what I hope may serve in my defense, for whatever, those
Oppressions, which would make a wise man mad, may have extorted from me. And
now, if 'twould not be too bold, I would take leave to ask, How it comes about,
that you can, with a Salvo to your Justice and Prudence, commit that very
thing, which, in the same breath, you condemn as so great a fault in me? But I
must confess, this may seem an impertinent Question; for I, who know, that your
Company has of late not only Robbed, but Killed too, with more security, than
others could Look on, ought not to wonder, that their Animadverter can take
upon him to complain of a Mote in my Eye, before he plucks the Beam out of his
own.

The next to be observed is your laudable endeavors to support the Credit of
your Friend Davenport, and invalidate the Testimonies I have exhibited
concerning him and his History: wherein you have quite lost the Character you
assumed, and from a pretended Animadverter, are degenerated into a base
Perverter of Truth, having entirely laid aside your Sincerity, and betaken your
self to Trick and Artifice. And this I perceive is the Masterpiece you most
value your self upon; For you seem to be very much affected with a Conceit,
that you have at once baffled all my Evidence. But after all your vainglorious
boastings, your Sophistry is still to slight to deceive any but those of your
Fraternity, that are alike inclined and qualified with your self, as will be
fully evinced by a brief Examination of the Methods you have taken in this Evil
Design.

YOU lead up with two very (...) wilful Errors: For first you say, I do in the
beginning of my Paper cha^^^ your Friend Davenport with Murder, Rapine, and
Perjury, wherein you very insidiously misplace my words that you may the better
confound the Sense: for if you look over it again, you will find, That I there
conjoined Murder, Rapine, and Ingratitude, and tell you It Is no strange thing,
That those, who are guilty of such Crimes, should have recourse to Perjury for
Protection: Now if you do really misapprehend my meaning in those Metonymies, I
will faithfully explain my self in other words. And suppose I had begun thus:
It Is not to be wondered at, That He, amongst you, who has destroyed the Lives
and Estates of so many Men, and has not spared even those, who have most highly
obliged him, should try to cover his evil Actions, and secure the fruits of his
Depredations, and Pyracies, by the Perjuries of His and Your Friend Davenport.

In the next place you say I declare, That your aforesaid Friend forged his
whole Narrative, wherein you abuse me again, and fallaciously interpose the
word, Whole, which you no where find on that occasion in my Paper, nor did I
ever intend so. No Sir, your Friend Davenport has Cunning enough for a
Committee-Man, and knows exactly well how to interweave Truth with Falsehood,
that the Stuff may go off more currently. And as there are some things in it,
which, I am sure the Editor, as well as the Animadverter, could wish expunged,
[I mean the Account he gives of those considerable Concerns of my Brothers,
which were afterward pyrated by your Companies Servants] so what I before
intended, I now reaffirm, That, That black part, of it which (...) the Editor
to make it public, and You to second him in it, Was dictated and (...) Revenge.

After you have laid this false foundation, you go on with a Confidence
becoming your Cause, and pronounce Sentence against me, That I have not made
the least proof of my Affirmations concerning your Friend and his Narrative;
and to help make out this, you have taken the pains to winnow all my Witnesses,
and pass your Judgment on their Affidavits, wherein you have given the World a
Specimen of your Parts and Principles, which the Sequel will further discover.

What I undertook to prove, was, First, That that vile Wretch Davenport was one
of the most notorious Rogues in nature, and so esteemed by all honest Men, that
ever had the unhappiness to be concerned or acquainted with him: They are my
very words; and to make this good, I have ^^^^uc'd Six credible Witnesses, who
were acquainted with his Person, his Practices, and (...) Reputation, in sundry
parts of the East and West Indies, and here in England; and do all depose, that
in every of those Places he was guilty of such horrid Crimes, and wore such an
infamous Character, that no honest Man alive would attempt to palliate or
disguise such enormous Villainies, much less in any manner to take the part of
such a Miscreant; only your superabounding Charity, Mr. Animadverter, has
inclined you to indulge him with easy Censures. For the worst you will say of
him is, That he may be thought to be none of the best Men: But in other places
you are pleased to suppose, He may be a good Evidence, and tax my Witnesses
with assisting to defame him; and That, what they say, is to be looked upon as
Calumny. But what is most observable, is, The ingenuous Contrivance, you have
to evade the Force of all their Depositions, in objecting, That they come not
up to the Point, in that they do not particularly prove, That his Whole
Narrative was forged at the encouragement of Elihu Yale at Madrass. So that it
seems you have taken up an Opinion ( I suppose in respect to your Friend
Davenport) That those who will not, like him, Swear more than they know, What
they do know, and Swear to, shall signify nothing: For this is the very Case,
and these Witnesses have fully performed what I produced them for; but I never
told you, I would bring those, who knew him only in New or Old-England, or at
Tonqueen, Bengal, or Siam, to make Oath, That his Narrative ( which some of
them, perhaps, never heard of) was wholly false, and forged; or positively to
swear, What encouragement he had in it at Madrass (to the Name of which place,
some of them were Strangers, and all of them here in England when 'twas done).
No, Sir, it is only your Friend can do such Miracles at swearing, and your Self,
I think, are almost as expert at Shamming; as you have shown us by this sly
Trick of yours; wherein, I will not adventure to judge how well your Wit served
you, but it is certain, your Honesty was absent on some other occasions.

Having therefore by my foresaid Witnesses, proved this Friend of yours to be
Rogue enough in general; It now comes to be inquired into, whether I have by
any other Testimonies given sufficient proof, That he has committed Perjury in
his foresaid Narrative, by forging his malicious Stories to wreak his Revenge
on my Brother, for chastising him according to his Demerits; Which was the
second thing I undertook. And for this, I bring Five more credible Persons, who
all positively Swear, That to their certain knowledge, several things in his
said Narrative, are false and scandalous Lies. They all likewise depose, That
he was at Siam, (as in all other places) esteemed a must treacherous Villain.
And Three of them affirm, That my Brother had some time before, publicly whipped
and imprisoned him for his Rogueries, in revenge whereof, they verily believe
he forged those Calumnies against him. And now let us see, by what Legerdemain
you try to shift off these Evidences.

Why, one of them is a bold interested Affidavit-Man, and you make so bold with
him, to say, he is almost, if not altogether, forsworn; which is a Point I Will
leave him to dispute with you, and will trouble my self with no further answer
to that, and your other scurrilous Aspersions, on those, who have in this
Affair, been Friends to Truth and Me, than to tell you, That they are all of
them in some respect, and some of them in all respects, far your Betters.

Another of these Witnesses you are pleased to object against, for That he was
Phaulkon 's and Mr. White 's Dear Friend, and besides that Crime, he Swears not
so much to particulars, as would bear Weight in a Court of Judicature.

And the Three others, you knock down at once by affirming, They were Deserters
from your Companies Service: Which, by the way, is such a groundless Forgery,
that I cannot forbear to reprehend you for it in your own Language, and
Declare, That you are therein a Villainous Calumniator, and the Lie remains upon
you.

So I pass on to the Third thing I affirmed, which was, That your Friend
Davenport was encouraged and abetted in his Villainous Proceedings against my
Brother, by Elihu Yale at Madrass. And this I readily confess is not positively
asserted in any of the Depositions; nor is it essential to the main matter of
the truth or falsity of the Narrative, But it is nevertheless true, and I have
made it sufficiently appear to any reasonable Man, by the Intimations I have
given. But if you will still be pleased to doubt it, I refer you to any
intelligent Person, that came home formerly on the Beaufort, or since on the
Bengal, who were at Madrass, when the Curtana returned, and they will acquaint
you, That when your Friend Davenport was, at his arrival there, scorned and
shunned, as a most detestable Villain, by every one that had any regard to their
Reputations: He was yet highly caressed, and admitted to many private midnight
Audiences by the Honorable Yale; And afterward had the favor done him, (by
the way of your Court of Justice) to force about a Hundred Pounds from my
Brother's Correspondent, on no other Evidence, but his own single Oath, That my
Brother was so much his Debtor. And, as to the reason I assign for these
Endeavors of Yale's, in respect of the guilt that lay upon him for his
Treacherous Dealing with the King of Siam in a parcel of Jewels; If you doubt
of that, I commend you to no other Person, than your worthy Deputy for farther
Satisfaction, who in a Letter of his to his said Creature, tells him, in
relation to this Affair, That 'twas a very ^^^^k Business, but he would bring
him off of it. Which joyful News did so transport Elihu, Tha^ (...) could not
forbear to communicate it to his Companions, and so it came to the Cognizance
of an honest Gentleman there, who has writ my Brother the Account of it. And by
the same good hand I am likewise acquainted how your Friend Davenport after all
his meritorious Services, took his last leave of Madrass, which, because it may
be of use to you in your next Animadversions; I will transcribe Verbatim, and
so conclude this Vile Subject.

AND now to make an end with this brave Fellow Davenport, I will tell you after
all how he went off from this Place. Mr. Robert Freeman having formerly been so
kind to him at Metchlepatam, to credit him with about fifty Pagoda's, and
thinking it just to be repaid, gave a power to Mr. Philip Noden to receive the
same, if he met him in his Voyage to Pegu, as he happily did; But found
Davenport so ill provided, that he could not comply: Which Mr. Noden at his
return acquainted Mr. Freeman with: Who, to secure his Debt afterward,
endeavored to attach the Money in Court out of what Davenport had recovered of
your Friend Mr. Lucas on your Account. But Davenport, whose faculty seldom
failed, for a Legerdemain Trick, had one ready for that, and publicly declared
in Court, and made offer to make Oath, That he had paid the said Debt before to
Mr. Noden ( who was then gone a Second Voyage to Pegu) and that he had a full
Discharge for it, which was unhappily lost with his other Papers at Mergen, and
being then in great Credit, and deserved favor with our Great ones, for what
good Service he had done against you and Captain Weltden, and what other turns
he was to serve: Our Judge, with as unparalled Wisdom, as Justice, took
Davenport 's Word in his own Cause, and instead of allowing Mr. Freeman to
secure his Debt, gave Davenport your Moneys in Mr. Lucas 's hands, as you have
been before acquainted. But as the old saying is, Murder will out, and he that
is a Knave is commonly discovered to be a Fool; it happened by good Providence
Mr. Noden arrived here from his Second Pegu Voyage, and had detected the
Villainy, and offered Perjury of Davenport, which he conscious of, durst not
stay the discovery, but before Mr. Noden could get ashore, slipped off privately,
and got on board a Portugueze Ship then just ready to Sail for Bengal, and so
we lost this honest man's good Company, which has so convinced our very Judge;
That after so many Nine days are over, he does now begin to See, and cannot
forbear saying to almost everybody, I do now in my Conscience believe this
Davenport is a very Rogue indeed.

HAVING thus evacuated your Encomiums on your Friend, and your Animadversions
on my Evidence, I will now take a brief View of the fine work you have made
with my Reflections on the Editors Preface.

And first concerning your Companies War with Siam; You take notice that I gave
it the name of a wicked thing, and said, I would publish a Narrative to prove
it so, which, you there at first promise to answer; But it seems you afterward
better bethought your self, for at the close of your Paper, you acknowledge I
have published such a Narrative, and say, It Is not proper for you to reply
to it, but that I shall have a full answer in due time before my Superiors; A
most Ingenious Animadversion, which in plain English signifies neither more nor
less, than, That, Since you have perused my Paper, you find it impossible to
make any plausible Defense for that most unjust and irrational Proceeding.

You next observe, That I am much offended at the Editor's endeavors to
disparage and lessen my Lord Phaulkon, and that I exposed that ridiculous
Objection, of his having been formerly a poor fellow and Stewards Mate of a
small Ship, which I now again tell you, savours more of the Philosophy and
Morals of a Porter, than a Man that pretends to Despotick Power.

As to my Lord Phaulkon's declaring himself to be of the Church of Rome
(wherein, by the way, he was baptized and educated under his Parents who always
were of that Communion), It Is true, I passed it over in silence, as not
accounting so malicious an impertinence worthy any answer. But I confess there
are some other heavy Charges the Editor has exhibited against him; which I
could no way excuse or palliate, as, That he not only made curious presents of
great value to the Pope and the French King, But (what is worst of all) to the
late King James and his Queen also; which, tho I own to be a most unpardonable
Crime in him, yet I must needs say, I think the Editor was no very proper
Person to be his Accuser, because you know, There is a certain Man in the
World, whom he loves as well as he can possibly do himself, That has presented
the said late King with several 10000 Guineas, for no other end than to
facilitate his obtaining a most illegal and Arbitrary Power over the Lives,
Liberties and Estates of his fellow Subjects.

The next thing you offer at, is to try if you can frame something that may
look like a Justification of your Companies late exorbitant Actions: And all
you have to say is, They are warranted by their Charter; whereto I need give no
other answer, (considering I write to who I perceive is so well read in our
English Chronicles) than to tell you, That if they amongst you, who did first
procure, or have since put in practice those illegal Powers, had their due
deserts: They would not be the first Traitors, that have been Tied up for
making use of the King's Authority to oppress their Fellow Subjects. And here
to bring this matter the more home to you, I will tell you of a passage at
Court, as I had it from a Person of great worth and good intelligence.

When your faithful Deputy had by his Golden Arguments convinced the late King
and some of his Ministers, That 'twas indispensibly requisite he should have a
Commission to execute Martial Law over those, to whom he has lately given the
new Name of The Companies Subjects under the King: His Majesty sent for the
Lord Chancellor, and ordered him to let such an Instrument pass the Broad
Seal; And (tho you know he was not noted to he over tender of the peoples
Rights) yet he seemed very much surpised at so strange a thing, and made
answer, That it could not be done; urging it as a most intolerable Violation of
the Law, and using many arguments to dissuade the King from it, till at length
he was told, Well, I will hear no more against it, but it shall be done, which
charmed him into Passive Obedience; and when he next went to Court, being
asked, whether 'twas accordingly executed; He replied, Yes Sir, and Your
Majesty may now hang Sir Josiah Child when you please, For he has committed
Treason in persuading you to this thing: Ergo Cave.

The next thing that displeases you is the freedom I take to admonish the
Editor of the Traitorous Notions he has infused into his new made General, and
the friendly Advice I gave him to refrain such dangerous Extravagancies, by the
Example of a Citizen, that was hanged in Edward the Fourth's time for a much
more pardonable Presumption; For if that unhappy Man fooled away his Life, by
saying, His Son was Heir to the Crown; though he only meant his own House,
which was known by that Sign, and so seems more guilty of Vanity than Malice:
Of what punishment shall we Judge him Worthy, who has not only assumed to
himself, but delegated to his dependents, A Despotick Power and Sovereign
Authority? And yet you are pleased to say I brought in that Story by Head and
Shoulders, and that it has no allusion to the matter; And very angry you are
with me for it. But however you chanced to be then so much out of humor, I
cannot doubt, but when you think of it again, and consider Rightly, you will
make me a return of thanks, for that seasonable Advice, and suitable Instance.

Together with these your respects to the Editor, you make your self also an
Advocate for his new made General, and accuse me of slandering him in stiling
his Actions Little less than High Treason, without instancing in any
particular, wherein he has assumed an unwarrantable Power. Which strange
passage inclines me to believe you scarce ever gave your self the trouble to
read over that paper of mine you have undertaken to Animadvert upon: Or
otherwise, I could not in my own Justification omit to treat you once more in
your own Style, and tell you the Lie remains upon You: For if you please to
take the pains to look over it again, You will there find a brief Intimation of
the Piracy and Felony he committed on the Estate of Captain Valentine Pynes, in
the Seizure of his Ship and Goods to amount of about 3000 l. And since you give
me this Occasion, I will call no other person than your own good Self, to
witness against him in that matter; For I hear you was one of the Select
Committee upon this Business, and I have had some general Notices how the
affair was managed, As That you never vouchsafed the Captain the favor of a
hearing (which by the way I must tell you, was a method of proceeding, that
would better have become Turks than Christians) But after you had considered
the merits of the Cause, according to your good pleasure, you let him know your
Despotick Determination, That upon his giving an Authentic full Release to
Your General, and all his Confederates, you would condescend to restore him
1300 l. NOW what I argue from this, is, That either you do therein tacitly
confess your General had done him wrong, or else, you cannot excuse your self
from doing wrong to the Company, in giving him so much Money, which was
lawfully theirs. This is impartially the state of the Case; And so I leave you
to vindicate your Celebrated Probity and Piety, from those Imputations, to
which, this unhappy affair has rendered you obnoxious; and when you take the
matter in hand, I pray go through with it, and let us also know, why you gave
him neither more nor less, than the just Sum of 1300 l. Because I Am sure he can
make it fully Evident, That he was at first robbed of double that Amount,
besides the vast Prejudice that accru'd to him by those inhumane Usages of your
New made General, in being so long deprived of the Use of his Stock, and put
out of that beneficial way of Business he was placed in.

Your next Objection against me, is, That I seem to justify those, that, you
are pleased, to term the Rebels at St. Helena, and you adventure to affirm,
That 'twas fully proved, before the Honorable House of Commons; That the poor
People there were guilty of a Horrid Rebellion: Which is so notorious a
Falsity, that I will, in kindness to you, Suppose you were not present at that
Hearing, but have been abused and led into this Error by your Faithful Deputy,
who did at that time make his Parts and Innocence equally apparent. But the
Real Truth, is, That, instead of a pretended Horrid Rebellion there, it
appeared to be a most Horrid Murder, contrived and carried on by some of your
Brethren here, who were therefore numbered amongst the most Execrable
Criminals, and by a Vote of the Honorable House excluded from the general Act
of Indemnity now depending: Nor will our Land be purged from the crying Guilt
of Blood, till He, or They, who projected and perpetrated those barbarous
Murders, be brought to condign punishment. Let me therefore here, Sir, offer
you the Advice of a Friend, who wishes well to his very Enemy, and persuade
you, if you were not at the bottom of this black business (as I think you did
not then move in that Sphere, wherein you have since made your self so eminent)
That you will not now be tempted to defile your hands with Blood, and so bring
the Curse of God on Your Self and your Posterity.

You next inveigh against me for alleging, That your Company was indebted vast
Sums to the Merchants in Surrat, at their leaving that place, and say, It Is
notoriously false; for upon search of the Companies Records, you find they owed
no such vast Sums, and that little they did owe, they were not only able, but
ready and willing to pay, even during the War. Now what Records you were
permitted to peruse, or what you call a vast Sum, I cannot tell; but this I
still affirm, That, when your General gave them the Go-by, your Company was
really indebted to the Merchants there, above 300000 l. sterling. And besides many
other Proofs I can make, I refer you for further confirmation of this
particular, to the Books made up by Bartholomew Harris at Surrat, Anno 1686.
And then as to what you offer, of the Companies readiness to pay it during the
War; I can only answer you, that there are some Men in the World have arrived
to that high degree of Assurance, That they can glory in their very Shame. And
for an Example, I will tell you the truth of this thing, which is, That after
your new made General, had, without any previous Declaration of War, possessed
himself of about Twelve Surrat Ships richly laden, he did in September and
October, 1687. send word to the Companies Creditors, That he was now ready to
pay them, bidding them take notice, That if they did not come or send to
Bombay, to receive their Money; the Interest should cease: To which the
Merchants made answer, They lent their Money in Surrat, where it ought to be
repaid them; and the current Discourse amongst them on this occasion was, That,
Lency intended to pay them with one band, and rob them with the other. Vae
vobis!

And now I come to your new-coin'd Proverb, of Purchasing the Whetstone,
wherewith you think you have sharpened your Answer to my Affirmation, That your
General did by a base Fraud trapan the Surrat Ships into his Snare, in giving
them the Security of the Companies Passes, and afterward making Prize of those
very effects. Which, I said, I could prove by a Gentleman of good Worth and
Credit, that had it from your Deputy's own Mouth: But you say, I find upon
enquiry, there was no such thing uttered by the Deputy Governor to any Man,
and that is all one, as if you had said, I asked the Deputy, and he denied it,
which, I think, is one of the bluntest Answers that ever was pretended to be
whetston'd. For, pray Sir, consider, what a fine World we should live in, if
every Criminal that pleads Not Guilty, should therefore be acquitted? But here
to put you upon bringing this matter to a speedy issue, because you somewhere
threaten me, That my Slanders shall be examined more judicially, I will give
the advantage of an Action against me, in affirming positively, That your
Deputy, Sir Josiah Child, did relate that matter as I asserted it, in the sixth
Page of my Reflections, and I will prove it so. And now the World will judge him
Innocent or Guilty, as he either prosecutes me for a Scandal, or by silence,
gives consent to the truth of my Allegation against him.

The next thing that presents it self, is, the prospect of just such another
Rarity as, Homer's iliads in a Nutshel, being no less matter crowded into one
single Clause, than a full Catalogue of all the Right Honorable Companies
Dominions, Territories, Sovereignties, Islands, Forts, Cities, Towns, large
Factories, and other Buildings. And now that the Verity, as well as the
Validity of your History, may be the more conspicuous, I will insert the whole
Paragraph, and humbly offer you my opinion concerning the import thereof.

[That Argument alleged by the Author of the Companies Defense, to justify,
That it is requisite they should have in India a Sovereign power, over all
People under their Government, as the Dutch have (although at the same time
some of them be respectively their fellow Subjects, in England and Holland)
because of those Towns and Dominions they have there, in Sovereignty under His
Majesty, remains invincible; Notwithstanding all the slight insinuations of
this Gentleman, That they have but one Town called Madrass (which every body
that knows any thing of the English concern in India, knows to be false) they
having besides the said City of Madrass and Fort St. George, two entire Islands
Bombay and St. Helena, and two Forts, Towns, and Sovereignties, upon the West
Coast of Sumatra, Viz. Bencoolen, and Indrapoora; with sufficient Territories
belonging to both, as much as the Company did desire, or is requisite for the
Good of England: The like Town, Fort, etc. at Carwarr on the Coast of Mallabar:
The like at Retora, in the Queen of Attingas Country; And by this time, the
Company hope, and have given Order for the like Fort, etc. to be erected in the
Gingee Country; And the Town of Chuttanuttee in the Bay of Bengal, granted to
the Company for a Bank sall, upon making the Peace with the Mogul, after the
last War. Beside large Factories, and other Buildings at Coddolore, Port Novo,
Conimere, Metchlepatam, Pettipolee, Maddapolam, Vizagapatam, Ballasore,
Hughley, Cassambuzar, Malda Dacca, Pattana, Rajamaul, Tonqueen in the Kingdom
of Tonqueen near China, Amoy on the Coast of China, Broach, Callicut,
Tillichery, Suratt and Swally, on the Coast of India, and Mallabar; And in
Persia at Gombroon, Shyraz, and Spahaun, as also at the ancient City of
Balsora, far up the great River Euphrates, now under the Dominion of the Grand
Seignior.] Thus far You.

And I pray let me eake it out a little farther with this Distich, And sundry
fine Castles they have built in the Air,
As useful and strong as any stand there.
Which my Poetry matches exactly well with your Prose; for they are both alike,
fantastical Chimera's. And here, Sir, I must deal plainly with you, that you
may no longer be deceived your self, nor others by your Misreports; for indeed,
you have in this passage manifested, That you are grossly ignorant of the true
state of your Companies Affairs in India, and that you have been imposed upon
by Somebody, to write as you are bid: For I declare, and will prove, That the
major part of what you have asserted, is either directly false, or very vain
and frivolous.

First, as to Fort St. George, and your City (as you will have it) of Madrass,
you may if you please call it by Twenty several Names; but I assure you, of my
own certain knowledge, it is all one and the self-same thing; and in my opinion,
it is the most important Settlement the Company have yet attained in all India,
which by a continued good management, would have arrived to be a considerable
Emporium. It first began to flourish under the Government of Sir William
Langhorn, who found it without one Ship belonging to the Port, but left it with
a considerable Fleet, and by his judicious Conduct, and indefatigable Industry,
the Inhabitants and Trade did in his time correspondently increase, as it
afterward proceeded under his Successors, till about six. Years past, when
those fatal Orders were sent out by your Committee, and strengthened with more
powerful Mandates in private Letters from your Deputy, whereby that great Work
is since destroyed and ruined, which with so much Wisdom, Art, and Care, and by
such laudable Endeavors and Adventures, had been brought to so good effect, I
mean, Your Tyrannous Oppressions of the Inhabitants with most unjust and
intolerable Taxes and Impositions, which has put a general Damp and
Discouragement on all, and driven many away from the place, most of the
Portuguezes of account and value being already removed to the neighboring Town
of St. Thoma, to put themselves under the protection of the more merciful
Mahumetans, and the rest are preparing to follow; not is there any hope of
their returning, unless the late profound Project of erecting a Court of
Aldermen, and conjoyning them therein with the Hebrew Merchants and the Heathen
Merchants, should overcome all other difficulties, and invite them to resettle
in your new made City. I could here also tell you how much the Arbitrary
Violences committed in your mis called Court of Justice, has contributed to the
general Dissatisfaction; for I positively affirm, and oblige my self to prove
such Decrees and Sentences past there by your temporizing Judge, Sir John Biggs,
that render him as void of Sense, as Law and Conscience. And here likewise I
could make an enquiry, to which I am sure you can give me no rational Answer;
If I should ask What honest Policy there was in sending out the foresaid Hebrew
Merchants? (For so I hear your Deputy has lately christened the Jews) and he, I
confess, is the only Man alive can tell us what Advantage has accru'd by giving
them the opportunity to thrust our Countrymen out of the Diamond Trade. But
alas, there has many more such kind Offices been done the English there, and I
must not omit one amazing thing, that came lately to my knowledge, It Is The
new-fashion'd Poll-Money, of 12 l. a Head, that is by your Despotick Power
demanded of every Person before he is permitted to embarque for his Native
Country; and was accordingly forced from those who came lately on the Bengal
Merchant, for which the Honorable Elihu gave them Receipts, as appears by a
true Copy of one I transcribed from the Original:

Fort St. George, October the 11th. 1688.
Received then of Mr. Tho. Goar the Sum of Twenty Six Pagoda's, for account of
the Right Honorable Company; Being for permission to take his passage on Ship
Bengal Merchant, for England.

per Elihu Yale.


Nay with such inhumane Rigor is this exacted, That Mr. James Harding, who
went out in the Company's Service, and so continued several years, but
afterward by his fault and misfortune together fell to decay, was denied leave
to return home to his relations on that Ship, because of his inability to pay
that Barbarous Taxation, and so is detained there in a most indigent Condition.
This I have from so good a hand, that I dare aver the truth of it: And now I
challenge you out of all your Reading and Conversation, to produce an Instance
of the like prodigious Insolence, and unnatural Cruelty.

As to your Island of Bombay, it is according to its name, a very good Harbor,
and so may be occasionally useful, as well when we return to our old honest
Trade of Merchandise, as it has lately been to your Company in those felonious
Violences they have acted on the Mogul 's Subjects by surprising their Ships:
And I doubt not but by a prudent Management, and good usage of the Inhabitants,
and those, who would thereby be invited to resort thither, 'twould render such
an Income to the Public, as might countervail the charge of keeping it. But if
you entertain any such idle Notions, as That by all the strength and power you
have, or can have there, you will prevail to remove the Mart of Trade from
Surrat to that place, you are but in a Dream, and Embrace a Cloud for Juno: And
let me here tell you, you will find all your vain Dependence on your Force, and
your no less foolish, than wicked aspirings to Territories and Dominions in
those Parts, not only to fail your Expectations; But, if the Government here
does not speedily and effectually interpose to prevent it, You will thereby
serve the Nation such a Dog Trick, as the Dog served himself in the Fable, by
an entire Loss of that noble and beneficial Commerce.

The next is the Island of St. Helena, which, methinks, you should not mention
without a deep Sigh, and a shower of Tears, for the many horrid Murders
committed there, by your Companies means and directions. And then, as to the
Place, because you foist it into the number of those, you would have to be
understood of considerable Trade and Business in India, lest you should have
been so misinformed, I must tell you the Truth, That, it is a small spot of
Earth on this side the Cape, which, in the first Designation, was intended for
nothing else, but an Inn, for the Ships to bait at in their return; Nor had
your Company the least pretense to any Trade there more than in Butchers Meat,
till about Six years since, they sent over a bloody Villain to Butcher Mankind.

And now I come to your two famous Forts on the West Coast of Sumatra,
Bencoolen, and Indrapoora, where you say you have two Towns, and sufficient
Territories, as much as the Company did desire, or is requisite for the good of
England: But I must first answer you, that instead of boasting of what you have
there, Your Company has Cause to be ashamed of the Occasion, that put them upon
settling at that place, which was by the irreparable Prejudice they did the
Nation in throwing themselves out of their most commodious Settlement at
Bantam, as I have already proved in a Paper I formerly published* And now as to
those your new Residences on which you bestow such Rhetorical Florishes, I must
tell you, They were formerly excepted in Charter parties, as Places so
notorious for their unhealthiness, that it looked like Death to all, and proved
really so to most of our Countrymen, who were so unhappy to go to them. Nor has
it since fared better with those you have employed thither in your late
Expeditions; for the Soldiers and Factors have died as fast as they could be
sent, and no one Ship has remained any time in Port without the loss of many
Seamen, and some by a general Mortality have been quite disabled, which has
verified the Old Saying, That every Corn of Pepper costs a Drop of English
Blood. Then as to your Strength and Grandeur there; you say you have two Forts,
and I will tell you of what Force they are; That at Bencoolen has about twenty
Guns mounted on a Bank of Earth, and by last Advices had about Ten Europeans
and thirty Blacks remaining alive; but that at Indrapoora has no Force at all.
You talk also of two Towns; but those, at my Poetry told you before, stand in
the Air: and as for your Sovereignty, it is only in your Conceit; for your abode
there is but durante beneplacito, and the Natives can dislodge you whenever
they please.

But now we come a second time to the place, where you have purchased the
Whetstone, which has set your Tools on such an edge, that you sharp upon us to
some purpose: In telling us, That the Company have ordered a Fort to be erected
at the Town of Chutanutte in the Bay of Bengal, which was granted to them for a
Bank Sall, upon making the peace with the Mogull after the last War. And here
it is very observable to see how luckily it falls out, That your Friend
Davenport should so occasionally (as I before intimated) return to that place
in the very nick of time to serve you in the Government of your new Garrison
there. Nor can I here omit to take notice of those false Rumors have been
industriously spread abroad both by Letters and Discourse, to contradict this
good news of yours: in telling us, That your affairs in the Bay were all still
in a most dreadful confusion, and that instead of erecting Forts, the
Government there does utterly refuse to readmit your Servants till full
satisfaction is rendered for the Murders and Depredations they have committed.
For thus the ill people at Madrass write by the Bengal Merchant, and the
Rochester; and those ill people that are come home on both those Ships say the
same thing: Which makes me believe they are all in Combination against the
Right Honorable Company, being envious at their wise Management and successful
progress of their Affairs: Nay, I doubt they are Interlopers in their hearts,
and I wish it be not at last found out, That they have received as large Bribes
from the Dutch East India Company, as those did who lately petitioned the
Parliament against you: For I will not doubt but their are all malicious Flams,
and yours the Real Truth; Only for the confirmation of my faith in this point,
I desire you will be pleased to resolve me At what time the First War ended,
because you here mention the ending of the Last War? And pray let me know,
Which of the Wars we must call This that still remains on foot, and is now so
vigorously prosecuted?

And thus having visited all your Forts, Towns and Territories, I now come to
your Large Factories and other buildings; And I begin, as you do, with
Coddolore and Porta Nova, where your Company never had any Factories or other
Buildings, but what they Rented; and about two years since, they quitted those
places, as they likewise have withdrawn from Metchlepatam, Pettipolee, and
Maddapollam; As for Ballasore, Hugley, Casambuzar, Malda, Dacca, Pattana, and
Rajamall, they all depend on your War or Peace with the Mogull, And therefore
when you have resolved the Inquiries I made in the close of the preceding
Paragraph, we shall know whether they stand or are fallen; And the like of
Broach, Swalley and Surrat. At Amoy on the Coast of China, you have had no
settled Factory for some years past, and have lately farmed out that Trade to a
sort of Interlopers at the rate of 10 l. per Cent. And as to the Three
Factories you spoke of in Persia, if you had known the true Story of your
Companies affairs in that Kingdom, you would have been ashamed to give that
intimation; For I Am sure that for twenty years together they negotiated no
Merchandise worth naming at any of those places. But to their Eternal Infamy
they have irrecoverably lest their just Right and Title to a moiety of the
Customs at the Port of Gombroom, which was granted to their Predecessors, for
asisting the Persians to retake Ormuz from the Portugueze.

And as to the Ancient City of Balsora, which you let us know is far up the
great River Euphrates, your Company have not I Am sure had any settled Factory
there for many years past, nor made any use of that Port, till the Modena was
lately sent thither on the Honorable Design of taking the Surratt Ships.

AND now I have given you this fair Account of things, which I will justify
before all Opposers, I appeal to your own self, whether you have not been
basely betrayed by him that was Your Dictator, who took advantage of your being
so grea a Stranger to these Affairs, and so put upon you to publish what he
pleased. But we are all thus subject to be abused, when we will be meddling with
what we do not understand; Not that you are therefore the less qualified to be
a Member of the present Committee; But (as the Case now stands) rather the
better accomplished, For your ignorance is the Mother of your Devotion to your
worthy Deputy, and has created in you a Venerable Esteem for him; Ay, And it is
that likewise has inspired you to declare, That, since you have searched more
narrowly into his Conduct of the Companies Affairs, and are more experienced in
the affairs of India, you have found nothing but what is Prudent, Just and
Honorable. And I pray when you write again remember that you add Generous
also, which, above all, he highly deserves at your hand for that magnificent
Present of 50 l. per Cent. he has lately bestowed on you and your Brethren.
There want not some Envious Detractors we know, who repine at your prosperity,
and would fain persuade us to believe he has done this to secure what he could
of a desperate stake, and to be beforehand with your Creditors, because he is
conscious to himself, That all the Effects the Company have in the whole World
cannot near discharge their vast Debts at home and abroad, besides the great
Demands that many injured persons make, and still cherish some hopes of
reparation. But let them all say what they will, notwithstanding this
astonishing Dividend, with the loss of the Nathaniel, and the Dismal news of
War and Confusion in India; Stock is still really worth as much as 'twas
before. Ask John Sewell else.

And now it only remains, That I take notice how much you stomach it, that I
should intimate, There are some of your Brethren of the Committee, who hold
their Places on condition that their Consciences are at the Deputy's Command.
Which you say you take to be a Reflection on your self, and so by the way I
cannot but observe, That Guilt does often make strange Discoveries. But what is
still much more observable, is that ingenious Innuendo, whereby you would bring
it about, That I am guilty of a Scandal against those Noble Peers, who are
pleased to condescend to sit among you. But hold Mr. Animadverter, This sly
Trick will not serve the Turn you design it for, but rather gives me an
opportunity to do my self the honor of letting the World know, I have had the
happiness of a more Gentleman-like Education, than to be ignorant of that
humble Respect and Deference due to the Dignity of those most Honorable
Personages. And if it would not make you sick with Envy, I could further tell
you, There are several Noble Lords in the Kingdom that do not disdain sometimes
to admit me to their Conversation: so that I will not doubt but 'twill suffice
to take the Sting out of this your malicious Suggestion, That I here solemnly
declare and protest, It has been as far from my Thoughts to design the least
Detraction from any of those Noble Peers that permit their Names to be inserted
in the List of your Committee, as it is from my Intentions to rake in the Dust
of my dead Father. And now I have taken this Occasion to tell you how much I am
a Gentleman, you shall likewise know I am a free born Englishman too, and will
not be afraid to tell You and the rest of your Fraternity that are my
Fellow-Commoners, I say my Fellows (for tho you may be Older, or Richer, or
more Cunning, yet the Law has included us all in the same Classis) That every
one of you, who takes upon him to justify the illegal Violences in seizing my
Brother's Estate, and is not really and readily inclined to make entire
Restitution thereof, is therein a most dishonest Man. Nay, that I may further
convince you how much I slight your Judicial Menaces, I will be more plain and
particular in declaring, That Sir Josiah Child, your Deputy, Mr. Nathaniel
Tenche himself, and Sir Ben. Bathurst, who wears the Name of your Governor,
are, all Three of you, in case you persist to justify those Depredations,
Guilty of Aiding, Abetting, and assisting Pirates and Robbers, and of receiving
and detaining plundered Goods. So take it amongst you.

And now I close all with those Words of mine, which you borrowed in the
beginning of yours: and I affirm, That the profligate Age we live in has not
produced a greater Prodigy of Villainy, than to see a Man, who would fain be
thought to be Somebody in this World, and makes a show of sanctimonious
Preparations for a better, and is withal arrived even to the Age of Must-Die:
Yet that under all these Circumstances He should appear a public Patronizer of
the most flagitious Crimes, and employ his Time and Talent to assist in the
Opression of injured Orphans; Which I recommend to your quotidian
Consideration, immediately before your Mattins and Vespers; and remain

YOURS, Not as You deserve, George White.


