THE Reward of Christian Patience: As it was Discovered in a SERMON Preached at
the FUNERAL OF Mr. Tho. Badland, A Nonconforming Minister at KEDDERMINSTER.

By R. WHITE, B. D. And Vicar of Kedderminster.

LONDON: Printed for Tho. Parkhurst, at the Bible and Three Crowns, in
Cheapside, near Mercers Chapel. 1693.

TO THE READER.
READER,
THis following Discourse being delivered before a Numerous Congregation both
of Ministers and People, both Conformists and Nonconformists, about the
beginning of February last; had the good hap to meet with a general Acceptance
from the Auditory then present, and therefore I am hereby encouraged to make it
more public; hoping that it may Conduce to the making of some good Impressions
upon those that shall peruse it, under what denomination soever they are
rank't: I commend it and thee to the grace of God, and rest

Aug. 22. 1693. Thine, in our Common Savior, R. WHITE.

JAMES 1. xii. Blessed is the Man that endures temptation: for when he is
tried, he shall receive the crown of life which the Lord has promised to them
that love him.


I Have chosen these Words to be the Subject of my present Discourse, because
they bear an especial suitableness to the Case of that Person, who has given
occasion for this present Solemnnity, as will more fully appear in the Process
of this Discourse.

The words contain a complete sense within themselves, and therefore I shall
not trouble you or my self, with the Consideration of the Coherence and
Relation which they may bear with that which goes before, or follows after.

In the words you may take notice, 1. Of a Doctrinal Assertion, laid down in
the first part of the Words, Blessed is the man, that endures temptation.

2. Of the Proof and Evidence that is further given to this Assertion, in the
following words; for when he is tried, he shall receive the Crown of
Righteousness, which the Lord has promised to them that love him.

I begin with the first General, the Doctrinal Assertion that is here laid
down, and that you have in these words; Blessed is the man that endures
Temptation; wherein for orders sake, we may farther take notice of these
following Particulars:

1. The Subject or Person spoken of, together with the Character that is given
of him; it is the man that endures Temptation.

2. The predicate, or what is asserted of him, declaring his happy State and
Condition, he is a blessed man; Blessed is the man that endures Temptation.

1. Then as to the subject here spoken of and characterized, it is the man that
endures Temptation; for the explaining of this I must descend to two
particulars: 1. To explain what is here to be understood by Temptation: 2. What
it is for a man to endure Temptation.

1. Then I am to explain, what is to be understood here by Temptation. The
Greek word here used is, (...), which plainly is derived from (...), which
signifies to explore, or search, or make trial; so that the word in the general
sense of it, denotes no more then something whereby trial is made of a Person;
and so far Temptation is a thing Adiaphorous, and capable either of good or
evil, to explore or make trial or discovery of a Person may be either good or
evil, according to the intent and design of it, and other Circumstances that
may attend it. 1. Sometimes to explore and try a Person of whom we are in
doubt, may be warrantable enough, so it be done by fair and just Means and
Methods; whence it is that this tempting, by way of trial and exploration, is
sometimes attributed to God Himself; not as if he could improve in Knowledge of
any Person, by any such trial and exploration, for His Knowledge is
Omniscience, and it is impossible by any trial or exploration, to make it more
perfect then it is in itself. He Searches the hearts, and tries the reins of
men, and knows their thoughts long before. The reason therefore of this
exploration and trial, which God makes of men at any time, is thereby to
discover that to themselves or others, which though fully known to himself, yet
was not before so clearly known to them. Thus in this sense God is said to
tempt Abraham, Genesis 22.1. that is, he laid such a commandment upon him, even
the commandment which required him to Sacrifice his only Son Isaac with his own
hands, as should try him and discover him to the utmost, and by Obedience to
which he would fully discover that true principle of the fear of God, which was
fixed in him. Whence, when Abraham expressed his readiness to perform this
command, God says, now I know that thou fear God, seeing thou have not
witheld thy Son, thine only Son from me, v. 12. Now I know; not as if God could
be Ignorant of this before, who is the searcher of all Hearts, and
understands all the Imaginations of the Thoughts; but it signifies that. God
knew this now by trial and exploration, and he knew it so as to make a clear
discovery of it to Abraham himself for his comfort, and to the Church in all
Ages and Successions, in order to Abraham's honor, and to encourage others to
an imitation of this Father of the Faithful.

2. Sometimes and most generally temptations do signify such kind of trials, as
have not only some tendency through the corruption of Men, to draw them to sin,
but are also intended by the parties that make use of them, as means whereby to
seduce men into Transgressions against God, that so they may become liable to
the miseries threatened in his Law, against the transgressors of it; in this
sense, God is not tempted of evil, neither tempts he any man; as our Apostle
says in the Verse following my Text: God never designs in any of these trials
or explorations, which he makes of Men to draw them to sin; but he leaves them
it may be, to the free Motions of their own Wills, and these being corrupted
with Lust and Inordinate Appetites, are apt to be seduc't to close with what is
offered in the Temptation, so far as thereby to run upon the breach of God's
Commandments; in this sense every man when he is Tempted, is drawn away of his
own lusts and enticed, as the Apostle says, v. 14. It Is only the Devil the
Apostate Angels, and men as their Instruments, that can be Tempters in this
scense, these only can offer any thing to the Persons Tempted, with this design
to draw them into sin thereby; and even good men may unawares be made use of by
Satan, as Instruments in this matter; whence when Peter would advise our
Savior, to save himself from those Sufferings, which he declared would light
upon him; our Savior rebukt him severely for it, and called him Satan, as
being his instrument in this matter: Get thee behind me Satan, for thou
savourest not the things that be of God, but the things that be of men, Mat.
16.23. Now it is further to be observed in this matter, that 1. As there is
scarce any Person, so there is scarce any thing but may be made use of as an
Instrument by Satan, to draw men into sin: All things that are grateful to our
Appetite, he can make use of as Bates to allure men to Sin, in order to the
obtaining of them. All things that are adverse and grievous to us, he can make
use of as means to fright us from Obedience to Gods Will and Commandments; yea
sometimes he makes use of the very Gifts and Graces, with which men may be
Endowed, to become a Snare and an occasion of Pride, and Security unto them;
and so as Lime Twigs whereby to draw and allure them to sin. But yet 2.
Persecutions and Afflictions, and such things as are grievous to our Tender
Natures, are those things which the Apostle here especially means by
Temptations, as being especially those things whereby men are wont to be tried,
whether or no they will persist in a course of Obedience to the will of God to
the end, and whereby Satan particularly designs to draw men into Sin; that
Afflictions and Persecutions are here especially to be understood by
Temptations, is evident, because of the Expression of enduring them, which (as
you will hear more by and by) denotes something of Patience and Christian
Fortitude, which are the Graces and Virtues, that are conversant about and wont
to be exercised by Afflictions and Persecutions; and this may serve for the
explaining of the first Particular propounded, which was, what is here to be
understood by Temptations.

2. I proceed now to show what it is for a Man to endure Temptations; in Answer
to which you may take these following Particulars: 1. This enduring of
Temptations does signify a Willingness and Readiness to suffer Afflictions and
Persecutions, yea an Actual Suffering of them, and that even to the Death,
rather then for the avoiding of them, to be guilty of the Commission of any
known Sin. It Is true, Afflictions and Persecutions are not things Eligible and
Desirable in Themselves. It Is Lawful, yea our Duty to endeavor to avoid them,
and get rid of them by all honest and lawful ways and methods; it is plain from
hence, because they are Temptations; and as we are to Pray unto God not to lead
us into Temptation, so we are by all honest and lawful means, to endeavor to
avoid and get rid of Persecutions and Afflictions, as being those things which
are great Trials of our Constancy, and may, if we have not the greater Care, be
occasions of Sin unto us; Affliction and Persecution are never to be chosen and
embraced, but when they stand in competition with Sin, and then indeed they are
to be chosen; when it comes to this Point, that we must either choose Sin or
Suffering, the Case is plain, Suffering is to be chosen rather than Sin;
according to that Rule, E malis minimum, of two Evils the least is to be
chosen. Now that Suffering, even the greatest Suffering is a less Evil than
Sin, even the least Sin, is plain hence that Sin is the procuring and deserving
cause of all Suffering; if there had been no sin, there would have been no
Suffering: All the Calamities, Woes and Miseries, that any where appear in the
World, yea and Death it self came in at the backdoor of Sin: By one man sin
entered into the World, and Death by sin, and so Death past over all men, for
that all have sinned, as the Apostle says, Rom, 5.12. so that it must needs
be, that since Sin is a greater Evil then Suffering, when these come in
Competition together, so that we must either choose Sin on the one hand, or
Suffering on the other; in this Case Suffering is to be chosen and submitted
to; and thus to choose and submit to Suffering for the avoidance of Sin, is one
great Instance, wherein does consist this enduring of Temptation here
mentioned: But 2. It denotes further something of the manner of our submitting
to, and enduring Afflictions and Persecutions, that Patience and quiet
Submission to the Divine Will ought to be exercised therein.

It becomes not Christians when at any time they are under Afflictions in any
kind, to be Tumultuous and Unquiet, both to themselves and others about them,
like a Wild-bull in a Net; but to remember that a State of Affliction is a
special Season, wherein we are called upon to Exercise the Grace of Patience
and to fortify our selves therein; from all those Considerations that are apt
to Conduce thereunto; as particularly 1. From a believing Consideration of
this, that Afflictions arise not out of the Dust, but are directed to men by a
special Providence; he that believes a Providence in general cannot doubt of
this; Is there any evil in the City, says God, and the Lord has not done it.

2. From a believing consideration of this further, that God does not delight
in Men's Afflictions merely for themselves, that he does not Afflict willingly,
nor grieve the Sons of Men: He takes no more delight in Afflicting Men,
especially his own People, then the Father in Correcting his Child, or the
Surgeon in Cutting and Lancing his Patient, that he intends all Afflictions to
be Medicines, whereby to Purge away our Sins, and to bring us to Repentance,
and Humiliation for them, and that it is in very Faithfulness and Love, that he
Afflicts his People, and that there is some need of it one way or other,
whenever he lays his Rod upon them, according to those words of the Apostle, if
need be; Ye are in heaviness through manifold Temptations, 1 Pet. 1.6.

3. From a believing Consideration of this further, that God will continue the
Affliction no longer then there is need of it, but that in due time he will
quite remove the Rod from us, or us from it; and that He knows how to cause all
things to work together for good, to them that love God, to them that are
called according to his purpose: These Truths and such as these, are things
which being really believed, and duly considered, are apt to quiet and compose
the Spirits of Men under Afflictions, and to make them of a patient submissive
frame of Spirit, these are the things which must enable the Soul in a State of
Affliction, to say heartily with Job, Shall we receive good at the hands of
God, and shall we not receive evil; and to bless God and persevere in the
praising of him, even when we are under a State of Affliction, as well as when
we are compast about with Prosperity; saying again with Job, The Lord gave, and
the Lord has taken away, blessed be the Name of the Lord. This patient and
quiet Submission to the afflicting hand of God, as it does arise from the
Exercise of Faith, is likewise included in this enduring Affliction here spoken
of, so that by this time you may conclude who it is that is the Man, that
endures Temptation, he is one that chooses Suffering rather then known Sin,
when he is under a State of Suffering, is careful to exercise Patience, and
quiet Submission to the hand of God, as being by Faith persuaded that God has
an Hand in all these matters, and that whom God loves he chastens, and
scourges every Son whom he receives, as the Apostle says, Heb. 12.6. And
thus you have had the Subject of this doctrinal Assertion, that is contained in
my Text, sufficiently explained unto you: Now

2. Of this Person that is thus qualified, it is asserted that he is a blessed
man; Blessed is the Man that endures Temptation: I need not stand long to
explain the nature of true Blessedness, let it suffice for the present, that
true blessedness so far as attainable here in this World, consists in the Love
and Favor of God through Christ, and in a Right and Title to the Happiness of
Heaven, and to the enjoyment of God in that other World; this is the utmost of
that Blessedness, which a Man on this side Heaven is capable of, and which
every one partakes of here below, that is a true Penitent and and a sound
Believer. That which I shall further descend unto, shall be to show and prove
in some Particulars, that the Man that endures Temptation, is indeed an Happy
and a Blessed Man: And this will be evident if we consider, 1. That this is
plainly asserted concerning a patient enduring of some kind of Afflictions and
Temptations, I mean Persecution for Righteousness sake, that they being
patiently submitted to, to the end, do certainly give a Right and Title to true
blessedness; thus says our Savior who is Truth it self, Matthew. 5.10. etc.
Blessed are they which are persecuted for righteousness sake, for theirs is the
Kingdom of Heaven: Blessed are ye when men shall revile you and persecute you,
and shall say all manner of evil of you falsely for my sake; rejoice and be
exceeding glad, for great is your reward in Heaven, for so persecuted they the
Prophets which were before you.

Now though Persecutions for Righteousness sake are that sort of Afflictions,
which being chosen and submitted to, rather then Men will run into known and
wilful Sin, for the avoiding of them, do give a Man eminently a Title to
Happiness and Blessedness, and are likewise those Temptations, that are here
especially to be understood in this Text, yet any other Affliction, which being
also a Temptation to sin, yet is so endured with Patience and Constancy, out of
a Principle of Faith in God through Christ, as that the Temptation does not
finally prevail upon the Soul, must suitably be concluded in a parity of
Reason, to give a Right and Title to true Blessedness.

2. Let us further consider, that this enduring Temptation, as it has been
before explained, does carry in it necessarily the exercise of Grace, of Faith
and Patience, and quiet Submission to the Divine Will, and a Resolution to
embrace a Suffering State and Condition, rather then to Sin against God, all
this has been already proved. Now it must needs follow, that he that does in
this right manner endure Temptations, is an Happy and Blessed Person; he must
needs be interessed in the special Love and Favor of God, he must needs have a
right to pardon of Sin and everlasting Life; for this is the certain condition
of every truly gracious Person, of every one who has the Image of God,
reimplanted upon his Soul, which consists in righteousness and true holiness,
and shows forth the power of it, in his Life and Conversation. When it is here
said, that blessed is the man that endures Temptation, it is not hereby to be
understood, that every one who suffers Affliction here in this World, has
forthwith hereupon a Right and Title to Blessedness in that other World, for
this is certainly false; Men may be Afflicted with deep and sore Poverty, and
many are through the whole course of their lives, and yet such is their
sinfulness, their sottish Ignorance, and carelessness of the Welfare of their
Souls, that we have no reason to think or believe that they are likely to be
happy and blessed in that other World. But when Men do endure Afflictions and
Temptations, so as to exercise the Grace of God under them, by chosing
Affliction rather then Sin, by the exercise of Faith and Patience, and quiet
Submission to the Will of God; this does indeed clearly evidence, that they
have a Right and Title to true Blessedness, because it does plainly discover,
that they are endowed with the saving Grace of God in their Souls.

3. And lastly, The last evidence that I shall give of the Truth of this, that
the Man is blessed that endures Temptation, shall be taken from the Reason and
Evidence, which the Apostle gives of this matter here in my Text; for when he is
tried he shall receive the Crown of Life, which the Lord has promised to them
that love Him; in which words we have a plain demonstration of the truth of
what is said before, that the Man is blessed that endures Temptation; and I
shall consider the words briefly in these following Particulars:

1. We have here the evidence, which the Apostle gives, whereby it may appear
that such a Person is blessed, it consists in these words, he shall receive the
Crown of Life, that is, he shall be made partaker of the Happiness of Heaven,
which consists in a perfection of Holiness, and a full and uninterrupted
enjoyment of God in Glory and Bliss, together with a Separation for ever of
every thing, that may any way prove a disturbance to the Soul. In that State
all Tears shall be wiped away from the Eyes of Believers, and all the
remainders of Sin shall be purged away from their Souls, yea and all
Temptations to Sin, shall for ever cease; for the Tempter is for ever cast out
thence, he shall never shoot one of his Fiery Darts in thither, though he slily
crept into the Earthly Paradise, yet he shall never have any admission into the
Heavenly: To conclude, the business of Holy Souls will be, to be for ever
enjoying, and blessing, and praising God, and to be for ever Happy in the
Enjoyment of him. Now this blessed State which such shall partake of, is here
called the Crown of Life: Crowns we know are Splendid attractive things, such
as for the attaining of which Men will too often venture their Lives, yea their
very Souls, and therefore because they are an expression of the chiefest of
Enjoyments, which this World does afford, they are made use of to express that
Superlative happiness, which is to be enjoyed in Heaven: And this is yet
further hinted and set forth from hence, that it is called a Crown of Life. The
Crowns which this lower World does afford, are but corruptible Crowns, Kingdoms
as well as Kings, are here below liable to Ruin and Mortality; but the Crown
which is here spoken of, is an Incorruptible Crown, it is all made of Amarants,
it is Everlasting, it is a Crown of Life, Death can not touch it, any more than
it is possible for Death to become Life; Hence it is suitably called an
Inheritance, Incorruptible, Undefiled that Fades not away, 1. Pet. 1.4. Those
that shall possess this Crown, are Immortal in their Souls, and shall be made
Immortal in their Bodies; that God whose enjoyment makes Heaven, is the God who
is yesterday, and to day, and the same for ever, who only has Immortality and
there shall be an everlasting Union between God, who is to be enjoyed, and the
Souls that are once admitted to the enjoyment of him in Heaven; from whence it
must needs follow, that the Happiness to be enjoyed by the Saints in Heaven, is
indeed a Crown of Life, an Everlasting Crown, an Inheritance that never fades
away. But,

2. We have in these Words further, the reason the Apostle gives, why so it is,
That they that endure Temptation shall enjoy the Crown of Life, and that
consists in the last words, it is no other then what God has promised to them
that Love Him: If they that Love God above all, and take him for their Portion,
and Everlasting Resting Place, shall enjoy this Crown of Life; if God who is
true to his Word, and faithful to his Promise, has promised this Crown to all
such, then certainly it will follow, that they who endure Temptation shall
enjoy this Crown; for they that endure Temptation, that is, that choose
Suffering and Persecution, yea Death it self rather then wilful Sin, and that
do eye God by Faith and Patience, and quietly submit to the Divine Will, in all
their Sufferings, these must needs be Persons who do truly Love God above all,
and have chosen him for their everlasting Portion and Blessedness, and
therefore they must needs be the Persons that shall enjoy the Crown of Life. But

3. And lastly, We have further in these Words, the limitation of Time, when
such Persons shall come to the enjoyment of this Crown of Life; after they are
tried, for when he is tried he shall receive the Crown of Life. After that his
Faithfulness has been tried, and approved by Afflictions, and Persecutions,
and Temptations, after it has been made appear, that his Trials and
Temptations could not prevail with him to forsake God, and Apostatize from him,
then he shall receive the Crown of Life. This is the usual way and method of
God, even that way which he appointed for his own Son, to make the Cross to be
the way to the Crown; to try his Servants first by Afflictions and Sufferings,
and then to receive them to Glory, and give them the Crown of Life; but when
this is done, when he has sufficiently tried and exercised his Servants, (and
he alone knows when this is sufficiently done) then they shall receive the
Crown of Life, which the Lord has promised to them that love him; which is the
last Consideration, whence it does appear, that such Persons as do thus endure
Afflictions and Temptations, are happy and blessed Persons.

Now lastly, For the Use and Improvement of what has been spoken, 1. It
teaches us, how to behave our selves with relation to Afflictions and
Persecutions, which we may meet with in the course of our Lives, on the one
hand, we should not court them, or run our selves wilfully into them, that is
unwarrantable, because at best they are Trials and Temptations, apt to shake
our Constancy, and to hurry us into some measure of Sin against God. On the
other hand, we should not be over much prejudiced against them, but rather
choose Afflictions and Persecutions, then a course of known and wilful Sin, and
when we are under Afflictions behave ourselves with that Patience and quiet
Submission to the Will of God, which becomes Persons that live by Faith, and
not by Sense merely: the reason of all this is plain, because that Afflictions
when thus chosen and endured, do but prepare and fit the Soul, for eternal
Happiness and Blessedness; he is the blessed Man that thus endures Temptation,
for when he has been tried he shall receive the Crown of Life.

We may hence comfort our selves with relation to the death and departure of
such Friends, who having it may be, been exercised with great Afflictions and
Temptations, yet have endured them, have submitted with any good measure of
Patience to the Will of God in them, and this from a Principle of Repentance,
and Faith in the Mercy of God through Christ; concerning such we have much reason
to comfort our selves with hopes, that by their death they are entered into a
State of Blessedness, that God having sufficiently tried them, and purified
them in the Furnace of Affliction, has suitably by Death received them to that
Place and State, wherein they enjoy the Crown of Life, which the Lord has
promised to them that Love Him. More particularly there seems to be in the
Words, a clear representation of the Case of our deceased Friend, as will
appear more fully in these following particulars.

1. He was one that has for many Years, been Tutored by God in the School of
Affliction, it has been his Portion to be exercised with many Trials and
Temptations; besides several Afflictions that are more ordinary, he has for
several Years been exercised, and of late more frequently than in former times,
by those two severe Diseases, the Stone and the Gout, of which we may say, that
whereas Diseases are wont to be distinguished ordinarily, into such as are
Acute, such as are Sharp in the pains that attend them, but not of any long
continuance, and such as are Cronical of long continuance, but not attended
with such Sharp pains, yet these Diseases may be esteemed to be both Acute and
Cronical too, Sharp in their pains, and long in their duration and continuance:
His last Fit of the Stone, that which brought on that weakness, which ended in
Death, was such as had both the forementioned Circumstances in it; being long,
even extended to the length of about Eleven days together, and very Acute too,
being full of Sharp Pains and Dolours: and (at least as some have thought) his
other Disease the Gout did at last take its turn, as it was usual formerly, and
as it is supposed by peircing into his Bowels, put an end to all his Pains and
Dolours, by putting an end to his Life. But

2. Let us consider, for our own Edification as well as for his Honor, his
Behavior under all those Afflictions which he labored under: 1. As for his
Behavior under those great pains which he was frequently visited with; besides
the known and exemplary Holiness and regularity of his Life for many Years in
this place, of which all of you are sufficient Witnesses, and his constant
attendance upon his Ministry, when at any time free from those forementioned
Distempers, yea, and sometimes even when under the sense and feeling of those
pains in some lesser degree: That which I would especially recommend to your
consideration and imitation, is his signal Patience under all his great
dolours, and his biting them in as it were, and keeping them in a great measure
to himself; and when he had any lucid Intervals and Intermissions from Pain, he
was apt presently to show a readiness for profitable Discourse and
Conversation, as if what was past, had been quite forgotten, and he had not
been under any expectations of more to ensue; and this not out of a Principle
of Stocal Apathy or unsensibleness, for he fet his pains, and sometimes groaned
under them, as others do; but out of a Principle of Faith and Heavenly
mindedness, he endured, as seeing him by an Eye of Faith, who is Invisible to
an Eye of Sense; he had cast Anchor within the Vail, and hereby came to enjoy
that great measure of fixedness of Spirit, which was not easily overcome, even
by his greatest pains and dolours; this eminency of Patience and Submission to
the Divine Will, as it appeared in other former Instances, so especially in his
last dolours and sickness, particularly two days before his Death; how did he
before several Witnesses, lay out that little strength that remained, in
speaking of God and Christ, and Heaven and Heavenly things, and this with a
kind of Transport, and more than ordinary Earnestness and Vigor of Spirit; and
when he was put in mind to favor himself, because of the great weakness of his
Body, his Answer hereunto was quick and smart; Can I says he, speak too much
for God? And even the Night before his Death, when his Speech had before failed
him for some Hours, and when by some signs, he declared his sense and feeling
of great pains that he labored under, yet even then when he could utter
nothing else, he was perceived twice to repeat the word Heaven.

2. As for his Behavior for that long time, wherein he was withheld from the
public exercise of his Ministry, because he could not with clearness of
Judgment comply in every thing, which the demands of the Government (which was
no doubt, a great Affliction to him) it was for the good temper and moderation
of it, every whit as exemplary as the former instances of his Patience, under
his pains and dolours were. He was no Friend to that (...), that running into
extremes, which is so common amongst us: But though he had as good Ministerial
Abilities as most others, yet he contented himself with that narrow scene of
Action wherein he was placed, and therein endeavored rather to be an healer of
breaches, then to cause them to grow wider by exasperation; that this was
really true, I shall make out unto you by some few Instances: 1. From that
temper and moderation of Judgment, which he expressed in matters that are under
Controversy; one instance of which was, that in the matter of Reordination,
which I apprehend, did prove as much a Remora and hindrance to his own
Conformity, as any one thing did, yet he did in my hearing urge something, that
was very considerable by way of Apology, for those that did submit unto it: 2.
Another instance, was his constant owning and savouring of the public
Ministry, and that not only by his own constant presence at it, when in a
capacity by means of health; but especially by encouraging, and engaging others
to a constant attendance upon it, by his frequent words to that purpose in
private, and by recommending what had been spoken in public, to the
Consideration of his hearers, as many of you that are here present are able to
testify; which I the rather mention, that it may serve as a standing and
grateful acknowledgment of that encouragement, which he gave from time to time
to my Ministry. 3. and lastly, Another instance was a passage which he uttered
to some that watched with him, not many days before his Death; That in the
choice of a Successor to him in his Ministry, they should labor to fix upon
one of a quiet temper and moderate Principles, upon one that would rather be an
healer than an enlarger of our breaches: Which Advice suitably it will become
you to take care to observe, as you value that easiness of Conversation, which
has been hitherto preserved amongst us here in this place: And for the further
enforcing of this Advice of his, give me leave to add a passage that he
imparted to me, concerning the sense of that Reverend Person, under whose
conduct he was, when he came first to be an Inhabitant of this Town; to wit,
That that Reverend Person judged that those who were serious and sober amongst
the Conformists, were much wiser and more to be valued than those forward
Professors, that were so ready upon account of little matters, to break the
Union and to Separate from the Communion of the Church established by Law. And
let me add this farther, that though that Reverend Person were himself a
Nonconformist, yet he did help to make men Conformists by his Writings, some of
which to my Knowledge, are now fixed in eminent Stations in the Church: And
indeed he has said so much by way of Apology for the Conformists, in the
compass of one Page, which you will find in the 46 Chap. of his Household
Catechism, in the beginning of the Answer to the 11 Question, as gave occasion
to a Person of Eminency to say in my hearing, that he wondered, how that
reverend Person mist being a Conformist. These particulars I mention the rather
in order to the confirming you against the thoughts of any such Person in your
choice, whose Principles may lead him to go up into the breach to no other
purpose, but to keep it open and to make it wider; to be sure this will not be
suitable to the temper of our Reverend Friend, now deceased; nay which is more,
will not be suitable to the design of Christ in his last Prayer, Jo. 17.21.
when he prayed for his Disciples that they all may be one, as thou Father art
in me, and I in thee; that they also may be one in us, that the World may
believe that thou have sent me; where it is plain, that our Savior places much
of the Evidence and Demonstration of the Truth of the Gospel, upon the Unity of
Believers. And this may serve to evidence the Second Particular, to be very
applicable to our deceased Friend, that he was one that endured, and acquitted
himself well under the Temptations with which he was tried and exercised, and
therefore what follows in the

3d. Place, But that we should conclude, that he in particulars is interessed
in that Blessedness, which in my Text by the Spirit of God, is intailed upon
such Persons; when it is said, Blessed is the man that endures Temptations, for
when he is tried he shall receive the Crown of Life, which the Lord has
promised to them that love him. Comfort your selves therefore and one another
with these words.

FINIS.

