AN EXCLUSION OF SCEPTICKS From all Title to DISPUTE: BEING AN ANSWER TO THE
VANITY OF Dogmatizing.

By THOMAS WHITE.

-- Sciri hoc sciat alter.

LONDON, Printed for John Williams at the Crown and Globe in S. Paul's
Churchyard* 1665.

TO THE YOUNG WITS Of Both UNIVERSITIES.
THough I doubt not of more powerful and seasonabler provision against that
destructive contagion of Pyrronism, which, not long since, has begun to take
fresh heart: Yet, hearing no news of any public Cauterization applied to that
Tumor of Glanvil's, which has raged now full two years; methought this silence
of my Betters turned the task upon my weakness, if not to avert, at least to
open and expose to be torn in pieces by eloquenter Pens the injustice of that
Calumny imposed on the whole Profession of Philosophers. Reflect then O
flourishing Englands fertilest hope! the Joy and Crown of your Mother, whose
beholding you - with pleasure swells her silent breast! reflect, I say, and
seriously ruminate what you strain to live and grow to; what persons you hope
and covet to become hereafter: whether wise and skilful to govern Christian
Life and Manners: or a crew of Rhetoricians, pleasantly tattling unknown and
uncertain things; and betraying those under your Tuition into all Precipices
that fall in their way: For, for such blind ones, and leaders of the blind, He
sets you out to the world, who inculcates to your England the Vanity of
Dogmatizing or promising Truths.

I am not angry with the Man, who, with a great deal of wit and an unfordable
stream of eloquence (which will ripen with his years) prosecutes what he
proposes to himself, and takes for a truth; not without some savor of Modesty:
for, neither does he derogote from Faith the power of teaching its Tenets, nor
disclaim all hope of attaining Science hereafter through a laborious amassment
of Experiments. But, he points to acertain person (whom he owns his Master)
that, giving us the Heads of some Books he had written, thus concludes the
second, Here it is where the chief Foundations of Pyrronism are laid; and that
mainly established, that NOTHING IS KNOWN. Well, indeed, may the Future despair,
if the pains of so may Ages have brought it but to this, that there is nothing
known. Have, then, the so many magnificent structures of your Colleges been
devised, only to delude the People with a deal of pretty talk, not a jot
advancive of Reason? Have so many prodigious wits of your Ancesters been sent
abroad over all the Christian World, but to sell Smoke and Bubbles for Jewels
and Pearls? Have you yourselves the patience to be tilled on through so many
years exercises, only to the like emptiness? Scorn and hate that so foul a
reproach should be cast on the Fame of all past Ages, and present industry.

But, what, at length, has enveigled into these conceits that great Interpreter
of Epicurus, a Man never to my hearing, mis-spoken of, either for Wit, or Life
and Manners? Since I Am utterly a stranger to his Privy-Councils, I Will tell you
what his Book seems to offer. There are two Sciences contested about: Physic
and Metaphysick (between which that of the Soul and Morals take their places).
The First, content with few experiments, surprises Truth by virtue of
Demonstration, and fixes it by that force which alone is inerrable, viz. the
power of our spiritual Intellect. This eye alone pierces into the strength of
Contradiction; and is onlily certain and necessary, as far as it scapes
ore-shadowing by the senses: but, it is not overlavish too, in making use of
them; and advances in growth by reflecting on it self its inmost eye. Physic
is more florid, and with a Vernal look, as it were, sooth's our spirit inclined
to Body. It Is more abundant in Experiments, and mere Historical almost, unless
assisted and forced into Rules by this its Companion. That many court this gay
one, no wonder, and slight her Elder Sister as 'twere but dry leaves; whereas,
yet, on her it is the Gallant depends, nor without her help and Principles
borrowed from her, is able scarce to demonstrate any thing and advance by
Causes connectedly. The ignorance of this necessity has bin the ruin of this
Author, and many great Men's endeavors; nay, and will be, 'till the utter
despair of getting forward teach first a retreat back again to settle
Principles.

Another rubb is the unbridled Impudence of very many Moderns, who loudly crack
of Aristotle and Metaphysick, as often as there falls occasion of setting
themselves out. They fill the Booksellers Shops with mighty Tomes: they
counterfeit the Highest knowledge by pompous skirmishes in their own schools;
and by wonderful promises enkindle the native ardour of Science. By these Arts
they heap on themselves the honors and fruits due to Science; they flourish
gayly and are proposed to be adored in the Chairs. Mean while, look but into
the matter, and those vast Mountains bring forth this solution of Questions,
perhaps I, perhaps No. Histories are related of what the Ancients, what the
Moderns have thought of any proposed Thesis; petty reasons for the I or No are
shot out at random, as it were, from bands of Slingers or Archers: so their
Pages get breadth, their Tomes bulk: but, when they come to give Judgment, out
comes an Edict to this purpose, All the Opinions are probable, but, this last
seems to me the more probable. What could be looked for more silly from Midas's
ears? What blind Tiresias could not as truly give verdict of Colors, perhaps
it is white, perhaps not? What wonder now is it, if that ingenious Person
derided such solemn trifles? And imagining these men, because none contradicted
it, entertainers of Aristotle and his secrets, wholly neglected and contemned
them.

You, then, O Young Branches, growing up into Wine to rejoice the hearts of Men!
remembering that Virtue's the Mean hedged in by both Extremes, neither disclaim
and detest Aristotle, nor superstitiously adore and embrace him. Those things
he has demonstrated, though but few and seeming contemptible, yet receive. It Is
the nature of Principles to appear vulgar and despicable; but there is not a
step can be made in Sciences without them. The foundations of Edifices lie
buried under ground, yet it is they sustain the magnificent and towering fabric.
They that slight Aristotle's Grounds must of necessity, being always in quest
of Principles, ever fall short of Science. Yet, far worse than these are they
who feign and profess themselves Aristotelians, and are Ignorants the while in
the Method of Demonstrating, and neglect what He prescribes: Circumventers of
Parents, Spiriters of Youth; whom, enveigled with a show of Philosophy, they
betray to vanity and prattle: worst Enemies of the Commonwealth; to which owing
Youth adorned with Science and Virtue, they pay it foolishly-confident,
sophisticate, and fitted by their education to ill and good alike. For you, let
Aristotle be your Master, of few things indeed; but those such as fructify
into thousands, viz. The whole race of separated substances, the things
necessary to be fore-known to Physical contemplation, and judgment, in fine, of
experiments. You have now the Pleas of both sides: it is your part to call aside
into Council with you that Candor and solicitude which so weighty an affair
deserves.

The most earnest coveter of Your sollid knowledge THOMAS WHITE.

THE TABLE.
First Plea. THere is Demonstration and Science, page 1 Second Plea. The
Scepticks allege nothing Sollid, page 11 Third Plea. It Is imprudent to deny the
existence of Science, p. 17 Fourth Plea Refells the Preliminary Objection, page
24 Fifth Plea Refells our Ignorance of the Soul and Sensation, p. 30 Sixth Plea
Displaies the Pastick virtue, continuity, Adhesion of Parts, and the Mysteries
of Rolling, page 42 Seventh Plea Inquires after the Causes of our Modern
Shortness in Science, page 51 Eight Plea Wards off from Aristotle the Calumny
of special Impiety, page 55 Ninth Plea Wipes off the Aspersions on Aristotle's
Doctrine and Terms, page 60 Tenth Plea Maintains certain Definitions and
Arguings, p. 65 Eleventh Plea Refutes some Topics babbled against Science, p.
71
An exclusion of SKEPTICISM AND SCEPTICKS From all Title to Dispute.
First Plea. There is Demonstration and Science.
1. Skepticism, born of Old by an unlucky miscarriage of Nature, for her own
Credit, carried off the Tongues of the Eloquent where it had long been fostred,
and buried by the steddiness of Christian Faith; this Monster snatched from the
Teeth of Worms and Insects, Peter Gassendus, a Man of a most piercing Sagacity,
of neat and copious Eloquence, a most pleasing Behavior and wonderful
Diligence, by a kind of Magic has endeavored to restore again to life. He, a
Person (which is the strangest of all) most tenacious of Catholic Faith, and
never suspected guilty of mischievous Tenets: whereas, yet, this Skepticism is
the Mother of infinite Errors, and all Heresies, and that very seducing
Philosophy and vain fallacy which the Saints, warned by the Apostles, have
taught us to beware of. Heard, this man, otherwise eminent in his paradoxical
Exercitation against the Aristotelians, has dared to expose, not veiled, as
before, and wandering like a Queen in the dark, but bold-fac'd and painted, to
the Multitude and Market place.

By his Example, the Author of The Vanity of Dogmatizing has produced her
amongst us beauteously trick'd-up in English: He, too, a great Master of Wit
and Eloquence. Nor indeed are vast mischiefs to be dreaded from Vulgar heads.
This is the occasion of my undertaking; and this my Design (if Heaven vouchsafe
to enlighten and guide my pen) to force back into her Grave this Carcass that
would be rivalling Science, and deliver her up a Feast to her former worthy
Commoners. Come on then, let us untie the knot of the Question.

3. Since, then, it is of Science we are to speak, its genius would in some
measure be looked into. Nature her self, therefore, teaches us, that Man is an
Animal endued with Reason, to fit him for governing his Action, and Reason is
allowed to be That whereby what before was unknown is rendered known: daily
Experience also convinces that our Action consists for the most part in such
things as are subject to an infinite and insuperable mutability and variation:
whence it comes to pass, that that Virtue which is immediate to action cannot
properly be called Science (since it is not infallible, and the effect of
demonstrative Discourse) but a power of conjecturing aptly; and uses commonly
to be termed Prudence, either properly or derivatively; properly, if it be
concerning the thing to be done, as to its right proceeding from Reason;
analogically, if of the action or thing to be done, as it regards some other
inferior Faculty subservient to the dominion of Reason. Now Prudence depends on
two previous Powers, Art and Inference or Experiment. Art, though it ows its
birth to Experience, yet is sustained by universal and unfailing Rules: But,
it self understands not the necessary and indefectible efficacy of its Rule;
but is content with the testimony of ever-corresponding effects. Inference, or
Experience for the most part is true, but necessitates not assent, because not
universal.

4. Setting this therefore aside, it is clear the Decrees of Art, since she is
veracious, have necessitating and necessarily connected Principles, which force
the effect of Art to be not possibly otherwise than as Art teaches 'twill
succeed. Whence follows, that the subject Matter of Science and Art is the
same; and every Art has a proper Science due to it self, if the nature of Man
would stretch to attain it. But, the same warning we gave before concerning
Prudence, must be repeated concerning Science. For, as he who behaves himself
prudently in any Artifice, is not therefore esteemed and styled a prudent man;
but only he who rightly tempers his Action in as much as it is Humane: so,
neither is he, with propriety, to be called a knowing man, who skills the
demonstration of Duelling, or Versifying; but he that has the demonstration of
those things which are Principles for governing our life, in as much as it is
Humane: The chief whereof is that which has merited the term of Theology, or
Metaphysics: the next is Ethics: then Physics, or Natural Science; whether,
because all corporeal Natures, or the World, is proposed to the disputation of
men; or because, next Metaphysical Contemplation, nothing so much advances our
desired Beatitude as Physics. Nor yet are Mathematics to be excluded; both
because Quantity, their subject, is the Vesture of those bodies which Physics
speculate through; as also, because the Rules, and as it were, the
demonstrableness of Natural things at every step depends on them. Out of all
which it is clear, that in nothing Equivocation more lewdly cheats Mankind,
than in this term of Knowing, or Learned men. For, if Masters in Sciences,
analogically so called, are not really worthy this name: how much further off
meriting so noble a Title are those, whose ambition streins no higher than,
like Parrats, to repeat others sentiments? and how manifestly pernicious are
they that have the confidence to apply such learning to the government of
humane life; and vent poison, or at best, smoke, under the Reverend name of
Science?

5. It follows, that such Science it is we propose to our selves as is
beneficial to Humane life. And concerning this, three things offer themselves
to our enquiry. Whether there be at all any certainty attainable, at least of
one Proposition or one Reasonment, which we call a Sylogism? At this hangs the
next, Whether at least, any Habit, or Series of more Truths traced with
certainty (such as generally are esteemed those which Arithmeticians and
Geometricians profess) may be acquired by humane industry? The last Question,
by most (at least in practice) disputed (whatever in words they pretend) is
limited to Physics and Metaphysics; whether about the objects of these any
beneficial Multitude of Truths may be spun out connectedly; as the Masters in
Mathematics seem already to have done? And herein consists the usefulness of
my discourse; and the desparation or difficulty of this Conclusion compels me
to clear the former; which of themselves by their own evidence had stood
unscrupled, had not the step, and almost necessary consequence they afford to
the third, terrified those who feel such difficulty to yield this last.

6. To work, then; let us fix the first step, and assert, as invincibly known,
and unshakable by any Art of the Scepticks, that What is is, or that what
terminates and specifies an Identical Proposition as its Object is
self-evident: as if we should say, that Peter is Peter, Wood is Wood, a stone
is a stone; and whatever others carry as open-fac'd an Evidence. The Scepticks
I imagine, will laugh at this Axiom as foolish: because Identical Propositions
use to be excluded from the rank of Scientifical ones, and the Sciences
themselves; as nothing at all advancing the understanding. But, by this their
very laugh they will yield us the Victory; as confessing Evidence in these,
however they be useless: And therefore that wherever the same necessity shall
Intervene, there cannot want Evidence. One thing in this position occurs a
little cloudy, obscuring it through a Mist caused by the shadow of that most
acute Person, Renatus des Carts; who, severely prying to descry the very first
thing falling under knowledge, beat it up at length to this, that the first
thing every one knows, is, that Himself thinks. But, the difference of our
Opinions, I conceive, has sprung from hence, that, whereas Science may be
considered both in its Generation and in its Subsistence; He has taken the
former Method, I the later. For, really, if we examine by what degrees Science
is born in us, we see, the first thing that happens is to have a passion made
in us by Bodies; and the first evident thing that strikes us is that we think.
But, if, looking upon Science now existing* and as its twere at rest in us, we
enquire what it is that fasten truth to our Minds, so that we cannot doubt or,
as were, waver about it: Nothing will appear more simply or originally manifest
then that what is is, wherein, in a manner, is formally included that what is
so is, that, whilst it is, it cannot not-be; which, indeed, is, that the
understander is certain that the thing is, or has a fixedness concerning the
truth which is in him.

7. It being determined that an Identical Proposition is evident, it is equally
determined that Propositions termed self-known are evident: for, if they be
looked into, twill be clearly seen, that a self-known Proposition is in some
sort composed of an Identical Proposition and another otherwise evident, or
taken for evident. For, there are two sorts of self-known Propositions; one
wherein the Generical Notion is predicated of a Species; another wherein the
Species are predicated divisively of the Genus. Take these for Examples: A Man
is an Animal: the sense is, A Rational Animal is a sort, or one of the Animals:
The evidence of the Proposition consists in this, that the word Animal
signifies, as it were formally in predication, to be one of the Animals; and
the word Rational denotes that whereby a Man is one of the Animals. Wherefore
in this Proposition, a Man is an Animal; these two Propositions shroud
themselves, one of the Animals is one of the Animals; and that other, that
Rational is a determiner of Animality: Now this later is not affirmed, but
taken for granted, either from Sense as it were, or some other way supposed to
be known and past doubt; and in force of the former Identification, it is
concluded that a Man is an Animal. In like manner when it is said, Number is
either even or odd, Bulk is either finite or infinite; and whatever Predicates,
contradictorily opposed, are predicated divisively of a Subject; two
propositions lie in them; one an Identical one, for example, that even and
not-even are all, or comprise all the kinds of Number; and another otherwise
known, viz. That such a Number, for example, Ten, is a certain Number. This
later is known as it were by sense; or supposed, not affirmed: The former is
equivalent to this all Number is all Number; and one of all the Numbers, for
example; Ten, is affirmed to be one of the even or odd, because, by force of
the contradiction between even and not-even, even and odd must of necessity
comprise all Numbers, or even and odd and all Number be the same.

8. The same force of Identity is also clear in a Sylogism: For example, when
in the first Mood, or Barbara, two self-known propositions are taken and
another truth, unknown before, is concluded out of them. As, when it is argued
that Every Man is a living Creature, because every Man is an Animal, and Every
Animal is a living Creature: there is made an Identification of Man and living
Creature; or rather it is discovered by the double Identification of Animal
with the Superior and Inferior. The force therefore of the Sylogism whereby it
fixes the mind in this Identity, tha^ Man is a living Creature, lies in nothing
but this, tha^ through the former two Identifications it rests fixed as to the
Premises. Plain therefore it is, that the light of an Identical Proposition
shows it self both in self-known Propositions, and in those which are concluded
by Sylogisms: and, which follows, either that the truth of an Identical
Proposition is not evident, or else that self-known propositions, and such as
are concluded by a legitimate Sylogism are Evident and most certain: and, that
it cannot be doubted, so many truths are palpably certain as can be reached by a
legitimate deduction of Sylogisms. Since, therefore, he cannot be esteemed
other than a Mad Sot that should deny the Evidence of an Identical proposition;
he cannot be reputed Rational who should at all reject propositions self-known,
or collected by legitimate Discourse.

9. Be this, therefore, a Demonstration a priori, as they term it, of this
truth, that there is some certainty or Science; that, since it is undeniable that
what is is, or, an Identical Proposition is true, and every Proposition,
whether self-known or Sylogistically-concluded, has no other necessity than
what shows it self in an Identical one; there can be no doubt of these, unless
Identical ones, too, be called in question. For, since, in a self-known
Proposition, it is Evident, that the thing signified by one Term is that which is
signified by the other: And in a Sylogistically-concluded Proposition, it
likewise appears, that because A is B, and B is C, A too is C; or that, unless
A be C, A will not be A; for it is not A unless it be B, nor B unless it be C:
It Is Evident that whatever is evinced by a legitimate Sylogism, has the same
necessity as an Identical Proposition. Since therefore 'twere mere perverseness,
and such as cannot fall into humane Nature, to doubt whether an Identical
Proposition be true; it is absolutely manifest that whatever is concluded by
ligitimate discourse out of self-known Propositions is engrafted, beyond any
danger of ambiguity; or, that there is Science of all such like: And therefore
that there is some Science, and that, indeed, of many truths. Now, that which
either in a self-known or in a Demonstrated Proposition, is assumed beyond
Identical ones is not capable either of truth or falsehood; but, in a manner, is
taken by way of snpposition; as if 'twere said, if he be a Man; if it be an
Animal: I say, for as much as Man or Animal are the subjects of the
Propositions or Premises.

Second Plea. The Scepticks allege nothing Sollid.
1. NOw, to the Scepticks, or Skepticism it self. What says the Sceptick?
Though, says he, nothing be certain, yet many things appear true to us; and,
out of such appearance we proceed to Operation. Thou entanglest thy self,
Sceptick! for, how, whilst, in common, it most clearly appears to thee that
nothing is true; yet assertest thou, in particular, that this appears to thee
true? Can these two stand together; it appears that none of those things
proposed us are true; and at the same time, it appears that some of them are
true? Besides, if any thing appears true, it is because it deceives us with the
face and similitude of certain or true, (which two, as to us, speak the same
thing; for, we say, that is certain which we know to be true, or which is true
to us): But, it is clear, we cannot affirm any thing to be like another, if we
know not that other: If therefore, there be amongst us no Certainty, or nothing
known to be true; nothing can ever be or appear like Certainty amongst Men.
It Is, therefore, stark folly to join these two togther, there is nothing
certain, or there is no Certainty; and yet some things appear certain.

2. For all that, the Sceptick will stand to it, that at least this appearance
is enough for humane Action: since all Action is singular, that is, in infinite
Circumstances upon which Demonstration has no force, but only Prudence, or the
power of conjecturing which is to be preferred before other. Notwithstanding, if
the Action be truly humane, that is, purely and thoroughly governed by Reason,
this Skeptical appearance is not enough for it. For, first, since Prudence is
an Intellectual virtue, it cannot be indifferent to Truth and Falsity; but
always tenacious of truth. In Action, therefore, governed by Prudence two
things fall under consideration; that which is most conspicuous and spied by
every one is, whether the Action be like to attain its immediate and next end,
to which it is destined: And this for the most part is uncertain; but withal,
in this consists not the primary effect of Prudence, but a certain faculty of
guessing, which they call Sagacity. The other thing, wherein especially
Prudence plays its part, is whether this Action be to be done here and so: For
which it suffices that two things be certain; One, that the Actor is led by no
Passion; the other, that he has used pains, or disquisition enough; which
depends on the former; since that will not fall short, unless some Passion
makes the Actor precipitate. But, as far as the soul proves deficient in these
two, so much, too, she deviates from the Rule of Prudence. Now, these two may
be very clear to an experienced Person. Farther, this Tenet, again, of the
Scepticks fails of sufficiency for Action in the very first root of Acting,
viz. Whether any thing be to be done, or whether Action be wholly to be
suspended: For, in vain the understanding tugs at it, what Action to perform;
unless it be first evident that something is to be acted: They therefore, who
profess not so much as this is known, that something sometimes is to be done,
cannot be moved to Action out of pure understanding. Nor can it be replied that
it appears to the Sceptick he is to Act: For, since Appearing is common to true
and false; Nay, since it is known that false is oft-times more probable and
apparent, than true; it is plain that neither Probability in general, nor the
greater Probability can have any force at all to cause Assent. But, if one has
not assented to this Universal proposition, something is to be done; it is plain
that, as to pure Reason, he has no principle of Acting: And, if he has any
other principle besides, Reason, the Action, as far as it springs from that, is
not Rational. It must therefore be concluded that all action of the Scepticks
is utterly not-humane, but only Brutal; as rising purely from sense and
imagination: Or, rather worse than Brutal; in as much as they force Reason to
submit to and serve sense.

3. But, that which highlyest crosses this Sect is, that Professors of Science
much undervallue themselves, if they vouchsafe to dispute with them or endure
to hear them babble. For, since in all humanenature, no Sect is to be found
more addicted to prattle, and more greedy of that vanity which follows
tinckling Cymbals: At what a distance will they be from their Beatitude, if
among the adorers of Science they be not allowed to vent their trifles? Let us,
therefore, fairly weigh this, whether they are to be admitted among the
Professors of Learning. Scientifical Persons, then, are either Masters or
Disciples; that is, such as have already attained the habit of Science, or such
as endeavor after it, or are seekers of truth. Since, therefore, it is plain,
the Scepticks profess not themselves Possessors of the Science; it remains they
are to be reckoned among the seekers; wherefore, since this contradicts it
self, that one should seek what he thinks is no where, or at least, which
dispairs possible to be found; in vain they declare themselves Candidates or
seekers after Sciences. Add to this, that, since they neither admit self-known
Propositions, nor any legitimate Consequence of Discourse; they have no way or
Method of seeking, or any trace from which to commence their search: But, if
they admit any of these two, they cannot but acknowledge something certain.

4. It ought, therefore, be objected, at the very beginning, to such contemners
of Sciences; what attempt you? what is your aim? How have you the confidence to
attaque any one that is truly a man? For, whence shall what you say derive any
appearance? Is it not just to press on you to prove first whatever you assume;
and this without ever coming to an end? You therefore, will never be able to
assume any thing that can prove our Tenets false or uncertain. Again, will you
use any other form of Discourse then Sylogistical? But, this you deny to be
evident and certain. You, therefore, come but to deride, sillily to play the
Rooks, and chatter figments like Poetical Magpies. You I reply, perhaps, you
dispute ad hominem (as they term it), and show, out of those things which our
selves have accepted, that what we teach thereupon has no certainty. What Is
your meaning? If indeed you endeavored this in any one Tenet, it might be
allowed you to try what you were able to do: But, if universally you assert us
unable to make good Consequences, you call us Beasts and deserve not the
hearing. And, you your selves, how will you evince any one Consequence to be
ill? Will you tell us how it ought to be, to be good, you I say that grant none
to be evident? 'Again, why will ours be false, and yours good? But, if you
affirm your own not good neither; what madness possesses you, that you cannot
suffer us to rest even in our Error; when you neither can nor strive to exempt
us from erring? It Is sweeter, sure, to believe one-self in the light, then to
know one-self in darkness and all light hopeless.

5. In fine, To what purpose do we amass Arguments against those, who, as far
as in them lies, have put off Humane Nature, and made themselves Beasts? For,
if to Reason be to advance our selves, out of certain and known things, to
things before unknown and uncertain; and nothing be certain: neither is any
Reasoning possible; nor consequently any power of reasoning; or Animal endowed
with it. But, if nothing be certain, nothing, too, will be true, since that is
certain which we see to be true; that is, truth had, our Truth true to us, True
by which we are true. For, clear it is, that our Nature is covetous of Truth in
it self; that, when we or our understanding is true, being impregnated with
this Truth, it may be made operative, and Master of all things without it; or,
that it may pursue useful things, fear such as are to be feared contemn things
contemptible, and reject all manner of counterfeit scare-crows. He frustrates,
therefore, the whole bent of Nature, that denies there is any certainty; and
utterly evacuates, as Nature her self, so also her most vehement desire and
aim. What need I mention Humane Conversation, but especially Negotiation? for,
if there can be nothing certain in Humane matters, why do we instruct Infants
and Boys? why strive we to persuade Youth into those things which seem True to
us? for, if there be no certainty acquirable, it is to be judged wholly
indifferent what every Youth does, or whither he tends: Especially, since not
so much as this is certain, that one thing is more probable than another; and
far less, that what now is more probable will be so when the Boy comes to
choose it.

Third Plea. It Is imprudent to deny the existence of Sciences.
1. LEt us raise our Style, and enlarge it to entire Habits. Can it be
believed, that men of excellent wits should be so fond as to deny those things
that Humane life is full of; and without which there is no living, at least
commodiously? I mean Arts. Let Us consider what part of our Action or Life is
exempt from their service: what Arts go to the providing us Food, Clothes,
Houses, Delights? Our minds are cultivated with Liberal ones: the Fields,
Mountains, Seas are mastred by Arts. To conclude, What is there that falls
under man's use, wherein some kind of Art is not exercised? Art, therefore, what
is it, but a Rule which commonly fails not? This, then (if men's souls but own
themselves) is certain, that Art, for the most part, fails not. What if I
should say, that it never fails? but either the Artificer is unskilful, or
else, through laziness or knavery follows not the prescription of the Art, as
often as any Error happens. But, be it so, that Art sometimes fails; at least,
the whole course of our actions is grounded on this that, commonly it fails
not: Wherefore since what never fails is certain, Art, which in most cases
never fails, in most cases is certain; and whoever denies this, either out of
ignorance or stomach, opposes himself to very Nature and the Order of things.
This is, therefore, a throughly-attested Truth, that there are entire and
complete Habits of Certainties: since, both of the several Arts, in common, it is
certain that for the most part they attain their effect; and the same is as
evident of the several Members and Joints in each Art in particular.

2. The next place Mathematics challenge, which have gained the true name of
Science: first, Arithmetic and Geometry, each of so large an extension, that
they make up many entire habits; and if they be acknowledged for Sciences, they
leave no room for opposing others, upon pretense of the abundance of their
Doctrines, or the largeness of their Subject. Such, again is the steddiness of
Attestatition to these Sciences, of so many Ages, so many eminent Wits, by
showing and perpetuating so many Effects, beyond the estimation of humane
Prudence; that there can be no doubt but they winch against Nature it self that
calumniate these Sciences. Let Us behold the multiplicity of Sylogisms; the
derivation of far distant Truths by intermediate Propositions, immediate to one
another; and how many Principles or fore-known Truths are sometimes made use of
toward the search of some one: and we shall see these Sciences will not
sustain themselves alone, but extend their power to others also; and persuade,
nay, evince, that there is nothing but may be demonstrated, if there want not
Industry.

3. Yet I am not ignorant what uses to be urged against these Sciences,
especially against Geometry: which though in other works I have sometimes
repelled, yet here too, as in their properest place, they are again to be
repeated; chiefly because the Scepticks no where, in my judgment deserve more
applause. For, plain it is, though nothing be farther from the meaning of the
Geometricians than what the Scepticks lay to their charge; yet nothing appears
clearer in the Terms they use, than what they mean not: Providence so ordering
it, That those things which best guard themselves by their own evidence should
be most infesed with prejudices; to warn us, in more obscure points, not to
desert evidence, though we be hard put to it with weighty, perhaps, but obscure
Argments. For, what is more manifest than that Geometricians require a straight
Line to be drawn from one point to another? That they dispute, whole Volumes
full, conconcerning Lines and Superficies? That they demand a Line to be drawn
out in infinitum? That a Circle be made? An equilateral Triangle? And a
thousand such like: That none of all which, yet, can exist in the world, it is
either certain, or, at least, so ambiguous that it ought not to be presumed
without Demonstration; whereas the Geometricians neither attempt nor promise
any such thing.

4. Notwithstanding in all these, it is no hard matter to satisfy an attentive
Reader. For, I ask, whether or why it is not lawful for a Mathematitian to speak
universally of his Object, in the same manner as both the Learned and Unlearned
talk of theirs? He may then speak of the body proposed to him, as it is long, not
treating at all about it, as it is broad; since for a Body to be broad is nothing
else, but to be long according to two Dimensions. In like manner, since a Body
to be deep signifies it to be long according to three Dimensions; what an
envious part it is not to allow the same to be considered as broad, abstracting
from the third Dimonsion? These things being clear to the utmost pitch of
evidence; and so that we cannot speak otherwise according to Nature; let us see
wherein lies the fault of the Geometricians. You urge that they assert there is
a Line in being, that is, Longitude without Latitude; I deny it: You prove it,
alleging they mark a Line with letters, saying the Line A. B. I demand, to
what purpose serves this marking? Is it for any thing but to notify the
Longitude of the Body they measure? If that be all, then the sense which serves
the Mathematicians turn in the word is, that the Body proposed, according to
Longitude, is equivalent to the distance between A and B. And, if he assumes
any more, it must of necessity be something impertinent to his Discourse, which
Geometricians, of all men, are farthest from.

5. The very same may be said for their manner of speaking concerning a
Superficies. But, for Points, the solution is more evident: For, in stead of
this word the Point A, or the Point B, put the word End or Term, and there will
remain no shadow of difficulty. For, who can doubt but that a Body, as Long, is
terminated: and therefore can forbid an End or Term to be assigned it? For the
rest, 'twill easily appear the like Discourse serves: For, when he demands a
Line to be produced in infinitum, the clear sense of the Geometrician is to
have it drawn out as far as is necessary for his work; which never does or can
happen to require it actually infinite. Not an infinite, therefore, but an
indefinite Line the Geometrician asks; that he may use any as big a part of it
as he needs. In like manner, if he demands a Circle or straight Line to be
made; 'twere fond to think he expects them scor'd out Mathematically on Paper
or Sand: Since the Demonstration he intends is Universal and exists in the
understanding only, not in Paper. It suffices therefore, that the accurateness
of the Circle or Line be in his Mind, to which the paper yields a phantasm; a
weak one, indeed, but fit enough to delineate the rigorous form in his Mind.
Some, too, will not allow a Line can be cut just in the middle. Nor do I deny
this to be petty work of Geometry: But, neither do I expect the Scepticks
should be able to prove this impossible: And therefore, against a perfect
Demonstration, such as Euclid's is, to listen to slight-babling reasons were to
trifle, not philosophize.

6. Is not this hugely remarkable, or rather to be admired? That those things
which advance Geometry, above other Sciences, in a great measure are false;
taken for granted in order to use, but not credited for Science: For,
Mathematick is not certainer or more evident than other Sciences; but easier
and more adapted to fancy, not understanding. For, if in Geometry we were still
to use strick Terms, and always to repeat this Body, as long, abstracting from
its Latitude, or, as broad, abstracting from its depth, the whole discipline,
losing that inveiglement of clearness by which it tills on the reader, would be
but tedious work. Now, because we may use the names of Points, Lines, and
Superficies, as they were Things; and, according to this gross apprehension,
make visible Figures: Geometrical truths strike almost our very corporeal Eyes.
Whether as much may be done in other Sciences, at least as to some part, is not
yet clear; but, from the way of Algebra, it may be conjectured not utterly out
of the reach of humane industry.

7. This, at least, may pass for evident, from the manner we have expressed of
the Geometricalcontemplation: that the Geometricians use to draw their
Consequences and Positions, not from the sounds of their words, but the Notions
in their minds. But, herein kind Nature has been indulgent to those
Disciplines; that they are excused from any necessity to resolve the
Equivocation of their terms: but having once explained them, they may, without
any rub, proceed, whence we see that if at any time, they are put to explicate
their words, Geometry grows even as troublesome as Metaphysick: as appears in
that question bandy'd concerning an Angle of Contact; because they reflect not
that an Angle speaks a Quantum, whereas yet they confess it cannot exist
without a space. Plain then it is rendered that the first task in the other
Sciences is, to make the question clear between the opposite Parties, not only
in Term, but also in meaning: and that this is the main fault of the weak
Managers of other Sciences, that they stick obstinately at using the words in a
fore-received sense, and that no clear one; nor can be bronght to an agreement
about their explication.

8. It must be concluded, that, in Physic also and Metaphysick, there is a
capacity of infinite Demonstrations, if industry be not wanting. For, who is so
senseless as pertinaciously to deny, that a formal Sylogism may be made even
about the Subjects of these Sciences, or, when made, is of force? It must,
therefore, be said, either that the Discoursers in these Disciplines cannot
comprehend their own meaning, and declare what they feel in their mind when
they pronounce such words: or else, that they may reduce them into a Sylogism
and breed Science. Plain too, it is, that, in that part of Physic, which is
truly called such, viz. that which treats of sensible Qualities, not so subject
to obscurity through the equivocalnesse of the Terms, Demonstration will cost
less pains: in Metaphysics 'twill prove harder, because the Commoner the
words are, the more they are subject to equivocation. But, on the other side,
because, the Commoner the things treated are, the simpler are their Notions,
and consequently, more evident the connection of the terms: Demonstrations in
Metaphysics must needs be most evident and secure, and such as deserve the
evidence of all other Sciences should depend on them.

Fourth Plea Refells the Preliminary Objections.
1. NOw we must give ear to the Complaints, (shall I call them?) or rather
Reproaches of the Scepticks: though themselves are no slight Causes of those
ills which they object to the Lovers of Dogmatizing; who, whilst they even
acknowledge it the entire work of a Man, and one minding his business too, to
dilate the bounds of any Science; themselves, pursuing mean studies and the
applause of a smooth-tongue, strive, under pretense of impossibility, to avert
from that Heroic thought the Scientifically-dispos'd Genius of others. Yet,
would they do even this but solidly, I should think it pardonable: but, if they
fall not on this neither in a legitimate way; how are they not to be exploded?
Now, perhaps, the defects of mis-seekers may be more; but I Will content my self
with the proposal of three. Let the first be of those who seek things incapable
of Truth; or who, of that which has no being at all, enquire how it is or may
be made: as if one should require a Triangle, equal to an assigned Circle, to
be inscribed in it. Let the second be of those, who complain that those things
are unknown, which, though true in themselves, are yet, either, absolutely, or
at least as yet, out of the reach of human power: as if one should be angry
that the Wars or Government of the Planetary Commonwealths (supposing those
Globes planted with Rational Creatures) are unknown to us. For, it is fondness
to quarrel at our ignorance of such things, for reaching the knowledge whereof
Nature has afforded us no Ladder of Accidents. The last defect is of such as
lament those things are unknown, which, by honest industry, may be searched out,
and will, if the ardour of inquisition grow ripe. For, it is ignorance and
importunity to allow no time for increase of Sciences. Amongst these I reckon
not those self-tormentors, who fret that those things are unknown, which are
publicly known to others, but unknown to them; because, upon some extrinsecal
prejudice, they neglect inquiring into what others have said: which race of Men
is, at this day, most frequent among the Courters of Science; but withal most
insufferable: For, what can be viler than to shut the eyes against things most
manifest to the understanding; upon the Calumnies of such as profess they know
not these things which others constantly affirm are most evidently comprehended?

2. Let now the Complaints themselves speak, viz. Those with which the
Contemner of advancing Dogmatically has stuffed his 3, 4, 5, and 6 Chapters: But,
first lets examine those things which he indulgingly reproaches. They are the
two, as it were, acknowledged Ne plus ultra's of Philosophers, viz. The Causes
of the Seas Ebbing and Flowing, and of the Wonders of the Lodestone. I Will
endeavor to look into them severally. And, as to the first, though that may
well be reckoned among the things whose Accidents are not-yet-enough
comprehended by us; and therefore I might justly exact that they, who think it
incomprehensible, should take care to have the Phoenomena's cleared, and teach
us, by just calculations of Seamen, what days, in the several Regions, the Sea
Ebbs and Flows happen: Otherwise, I may deservedly lay the blame on industry,
and excuse Philosophy: Yet I will not proceed so rigorously with a courteous
Adversary; but argue, that These things may be convinced concerning this
vicissitude of the Sea: That the motion is caused by an extrinsecal Mover: That
that is no other than the wind: That what rules the winds is but various
aspects of the Sun and Moon to the diverse Climates of the Earth. Which, if they
be true, if evident from the Phoenomena's; what remains, but that the
Phoenomena's be more acurately traced; and the ignorance of particulars laid to
the charge of Industry, not of Art: and so Philosophy escape scot-free?

3. Lets run over our Proposals one by one. The first is that the Seas motion
is from something extrinsecal, or without it. This is Demonstrated by Aristotle
in his Books of Physics; as they who have studied him know: The Dialogues,
too, De Mundo have made this some part of their pains; and, if a proper place
for it occurs in this Treatise, I shall not be loath of my labor to explicate
the same again: here this proposition is to be assumed, not proved. That the
Author of this motion is the wind comprehends more than one thing, viz. That
the wind is a sufficient stirrer of the Sea; and that it, in particular,
concurs to this motion called the Flux. As to the first part, (not to mention
how many Deluges or overflowings of the Sea have infested the Coasts by the
winds help), we need not travel beyond the Thames; in which, almost every
Winter, the Flood happens, sometimes more than once in a day, to be beaten back
or pour in more abundantly than ordinary, to the overflowing the Streets in the
Subburbs of London, That, again, the Wind causes this course of the Tides,
besides the necessity which the perpetual West-Winde, flowing from the
Atlantic Sea to the East Indies, carries with it; the Six-months strong
Currents, which take their turns constantly backward and forward between Africa
and America, conformable to the Winds always keeping the vicissitude there,
are a manifest testimony. Add to these, that, through the whole Coast of China,
certain Tempests, with most vehement Rains and overflowings of Rivers, are
daily expected at the New and Full Moons; whence the variation of the Fluxes at
the same just periods is increased. Now, that the Winds and Rains and rising
of Storms depend from the Sun and Moon is so notorious that it is past contest.
These things, then being clear; the causes of Ebbing and Flowing cannot be
obscure: though the certain Compasses they fetch be unknown, because the
observations of them are not-yet exactly calculated.

4. Nor is the Magnetical Philosophy less evident, if we will have but patience to
look into it by piecemale. For, it cannot be doubted, from the sudden turning of
Iron-tools fit for the purpose, and other Bodies apt for Magnetical direction;
but that power of Direction, which we call Magnetical, is attaind by a flux of
unperceivable Atoms derived from one Body into another: And as little, that
because a perpendicular or horizontally-sidelong position of the Magnetical
body is apt to beget in it that virtue; the primarily Magnetical body is the
Earth we tread on, or at least the crust of it next us. Nor, again, is it
questionable, from the perpetual Motion of corruption and generation of this
Magnetical virtue in those bodies; but there is a certain perpetual flux of
Atoms upwards and downwards, as also between the Equator and the Poles; whereby
this virtue is infused and fed. Neither, again, will any stick at it, that the
Magnetical Body, if it be set at full liberty, must be carried according to the
flux of the like Atoms; as that which swims in a River follows the violence of
the stream: and consequently, the declination, too, or variation of the Needle
point out the Channel of the Earth's Atoms, which are proper to it. All which
if we solidly remark, and pursue with a steady discourse; I see not what great
Mystery lies in this Magnetical virtue and operation, beyond possibility of
bringing clearly to light. These secrets, therefore, of nature were,
heretofore, like the head of Nilus, undiscovered; but now, themselves attest
not the defect but proficiency of Science. These then thus touched on, let us
fall to the Objections themselves.

Fifth Plea Refells our Ignorance of the Soul and Sensation.
1. IN the third Chapter, therefore, of his most eloquent Discourse, he objects
our ignorance of that thing we ought to be best acquainted with, viz. Our own
souls. Concerning which, what a kind of thing it is in this our earthly
habitation, he neither teaches nor enquires at all, as far as I can discern;
only that it is, he asserts, may be most clearly gathered from its effects;
but, to ask what it is, he says is like the mistake of Infants, that look
behind the Glass for the Body whose superficies they saw painted on its
foreside. And, in my judgment, he had said rarely, had he stopped here: but in
his following Questions, he shows his deficiency even in this. For, he asks
farther, whence the Soul comes? and how it is united to the Body? He is therefore
most manifestly detected, to think that the Soul, lying hid in the Body, is of
it self a certain substance, which may directly be made, come, and be joined to
another thing: whence he terms it subsistence, which doubtless denotes a Thing
and Substance. Now, that this is a most important error in Philosophy none can
doubt, that is able to discern the opposition of One and Many. For, it is plain,
that either a Man is not a Thing; or else that his Soul and Body are not two
Things; if one thing cannot at once be many, nor many one. Nor am I scared with
the distinction (which the Boys that gabble Philosophy have always ready in
their Budget) of a perfect and imperfect thing: which says just nothing,
unless imperfect signify to which somewhat is wanting to make it a thing;
which supposed, an imperfect thing is not a thing, and the distinction
vanishes. Otherwise, the same cannot be one thing and more things: Wherefore
either a Man is not a Thing, but a Pair of Things consisting of an Intelligence
and a Beast; or his Soul and Body are not two things.

2. When, therefore, he asks, Whence comes the Soul? it must be answered with a
question, Whether he doubts whence the man comes? For, if whilst the man lives,
there be but one only thing which is called the Man, it is he alone can have
come; and he beats the wind that enquires whence the Soul comes? Nor am I
shaken with the Authority of our Forefathers, though never so Reverend: I mean
not of those who profess themselves unable to grapple with the Question; for
these deliver the Candle into the hands of Posterity, advising them to pursue
on the same Race, that it may be seen whether any thing purer occur to them
than to themselves, ready to Patronize whoever shall clear the Truth. But their
opposition I resist, who clamor it is the Faith of all Churches that Rational
Souls are framed by God. For, now I Am accustomed to it, to distinguish between
what is due to the sincerity of Faith, and what to Scholastical subtilty. If I
attribute the Making of Man, as he is Intellectual, to the singular power and
operation of God, I have submitted my self to the keys of the Churches
Doctrine, and subscribed to the Tradition of the Saints. But, whether that
action, which is the Generation of Man, consists of two actual parts, or be but
one alone, by more notions equivalent to more really-distinct actions, is a
purely speculative Question belonging to the Schools. And so it must be said
that one Thing, a Man, equivalent to a Beast and an Intelligence, is brought
into existence, by one action, equivalent to two, the Generation of an Animal
and the Creation of an Intelligence.

3. By this truth we are led to the evident solution of the two following
knots; the econd being how the Body and Soul are united? Which, it is plain, is
herein faulty, that it supposes two things to be united existing either before
the Compound, or not destroyed but tied together in it: which is clearly false,
not only out of the 'fore-declared Truth, but also out the definition of a
Part. For, Parts are called such, whereof, by a Motion, called Composition, one
thing is made; or into which, what was one is resolved by Division, or
destruction of the Unity. Now, Unity, not Union, is the form of what is One:
And, in that which is One, to seek for the colligation or cement, is to seek by
what the same is made the same. The same Error runs through the following
Difficulty, which laments that it is unknown how the soul moves the Body: Which
is utterly knocked on the head, by denying the soul moves the Body. For, true
it is, that one animated Member moves another; but not, that any substance,
which is a pure soul, moves immediately any Member in which the soul is not. I
appeal to other Animals, in which there is frankly denied to be a Soul
independent of the Body: and I desire to have shown me what motion there is in
man, which is not in them. I confess freely, that one Member, the Brain
especially, moves the rest after another manner in Man, than in other Animals;
and this by reason of the difference in their Souls: but first it ought to be
made evident by experiments, that a Humane Soul, without the help of the Body,
or some Member acting together with it, moves another Member; before we are to
enquire into the manner how this either is or can be done.

4. The last darkness which he bemoans in this Chapter lies in our ignorance of
that Motion, whereby the spirits are derived out of the brain into the fit
Nerves for the Animal's natural Action. And, if indeed the Objection brandish
an Argument common to all Animals, I should soon quit the field: for I confess
my self not so skilful in Anatomy, that I can lay before the eyes, why, from
the Motion of Anger boiling in the heart, the spirits should start into those
Muscles, by whose streining the Animal is carried toward its Adversaries; and,
from the Motion of Fear, spirits flow into the opposite Muscles, by which the
Animal flies fromwards them; whereas they, in a manner, add strength to and
enforce both alike. Yet, I make no question at all but, by force of the Brain's
Motion, caused by the motion of the heart, it comes to pass that the entrance
into one sort of Channels are shut, others opn'd, and that thence comes this
admirable and as-yet-not-sufficiently-seen-through direction of the spirits.
But, the Authors seems to make Man's case proper to himself; alleging Will, and
perhaps Election, to be, as it were, the first Author of this direction. Still,
therefore, he slips into the same Error. For, first, he should demonstrate some
act of the will, without some either precedent or concomitant Motion of the
Heart, (which, when it is violent, we call Passion; when we endeavor at any
thing, Desire or Flight, or some other such like we style it): But, if there be
no such, then the cause of this direction is purely Mechanical, as he calls it,
and not any certain inexplicable power. Now, that there cannot possibly be any
such exempt act of the will, it is clear enough to them who allow there is no
knowledge without a beat of Phansies: For, Phansies cannot choose but both be
stird themselves and stir others, by the usual ways of Nature. By Motions,
therefore, derived from the heart, whether in Man or in Animals, all Motions,
whether Natural or Free, Universally are performed: and, by consequence, are
subject to the contemplation and scrutiny of Philosophy and acurate Mechanics.

5. The fourth Chapter objects that the Natures of Sensation and Memory are
inexplicable. As to the former, first he acknowledges the substance of
sensation is seated in the Brain alone: Then he inclines to Des Cartes's
fantastical conjecture, shall I call it, or deviation from the manifest
footsteps of Nature; about Motion's being brought down from the Heavens to our
Eyes, through the continuedness of a very thin Either: But, because he esteems
Aristotle's conceits, too, not incredible, I may be excused from that
speculation. At length, therefore, he falls again into the old Error, enquiring
how corporeal things can have any force upon a naked Spirit? He supposes
therefore, the Soul in the Body to be a kind of thing, not the form or
affection of the thing, Man; and so, is upon the same false haunt again, nor
needs repeating former discourses to beat him off it. But, left he should say
nothing new, he objects that, by sense alone; there is no discerning the
Quantities, Distances, Figures and Colors of things. I wonder, I must confess,
at these Objections from a curious and ingenious Man; things so clearly
explained and demonstrated in Optics. Who is so ignorant, that he knows not
that bigger things, at the same distance, strike the eye in a more obtuse Angle
and stronglier? Who knows not that Figure, if plain, as objected to the eye, is
nothing else but Quantity more spacious or contracted this or that way? but, if
it be a solid one and participate of the third dimension, it borrows its
variety from Distance. Again, that Distance is nothing else, but a certain
Magnitude spread between the Eye and the Object; which if it be past judging
of, neither can the Eye attest the distance. Lastly, that Color is nothing
else, but the confused figuration of a Superficies, according to its parts
undistinguisht to sense. Whence it remains clear, that the Eye needs no other
Geometry for all these, than what is necessary to judge of a magnitude from the
variety of an Angle.

6. His next pains is about Memory. To show the explication of that impossible,
he commemorates and rejects four ways of resolving it. I must take another
path than any of those. First, I must weaken this consequence, that If any
thing about Memory has not hitherto been explicated, we must therefore make
account it never will be, or that it is impossible to be explicated. We must be
aware too, that always some things will be unknown; either because their
trivialness merits not the pains of learning them; or in that at length the
bulk of things known will be grown so great, that more will be burdensome to
the understanding. Now, to complain of such like is to have forgot human
shortness. What, therefore, seems my task in this Queston is, to bring into
play those things which are already established and evident about memory; and,
for those that are unknown to make an estimate whether, some time or other,
they too will come or merit to be known. First, then it is evident, we must
distinguish what is Memory and what Remembrance. For, Memory is only a
Conserving of the impressions made by the objects, whereby the Animal is
rendered able to use them when he lists or needs. But, Remembrance is a certain
Motion whereby that power of using the impressions is reduced into Act and Use.
Concerning Memory, therefore, a reason is to be given both of its station or
rest, and of the causes or manner of its Motion: and of both, if I be not
mistaken, Nature and Experience offer evident footsteps, for tracing them.

7. In the first place, that all things that move the sense have certain minute
particles of their body shorn off; as to the Touch, Taste and Smell, is too
notorious to abide contest. He that denies the same force to the Light,
returning from the things to our Eyes, must deny, too, that the Sun extracts
exhalations from the Earth and Sea: there being no other diversity in the
operations, but that the one is greater and stronger, the other weaker and
less. Now that these Atoms get up to the Brain, by the waftage of the Spirits,
(that is, a certain liquid and most subtle substance) can scarce be denied by
one never so pievish, that is but put in mind how Waters and Oils are
impregnated. These Atoms, therefore, must of necessity strike, not without some
violence, upon that part of the Brain, whose being-struck causes perception.
Again, that a stream or any thing liquid dashed against a resister should not
leap back again is most clearly repugnant, both to experience and reason. And,
that a substance any thing viscuous, in a viscuous vessel besides (such as
those are about the brain) being repulsed, should not stick to any thing solid
is equally impossible: as also, that a notable part of that stream should not
cling together, is against the Nature of gluyness. The Walls therefore, of the
empty and hollow places of the Brain must of necessity be all hanged and
furnished with little threads. Conclude we, then, that through all the senses,
except Hearing, the Animal is enabled, by Atoms constantly sticking in it, to
make use again of the Impressions made by Objects. In fine, since sound is made
by a collision of the Air; it is evident by Anatomy, that it drives the Hammer
of the Ear to beat upon the Anvil, by which beat it is not to be believed but
certain particles must fly off and strike the Fancy: the orderly storing up*
therefore, of these is apt to constitute the Memory of sounds. The structure,
then, of Memory (if I am not mistaken) is rationally enough declared.

8. I cannot see why the like track may not carry us to the explaining of the
Symptoms of Remembrance too; or why their Solution should be desparate. For,
there is nothing clearer than that the fore-explicated motion of the Atoms is
set on work by a wind, as it were. For, that Passion is a certain ebullition of
Spirits reeking out of the heart, it is visible even to the eyes, in Anger, and
Love, and Bashfulness. If we make inquisition what effect these motions have on
the Fancy, we experience, that those Objects occur to the mind, tumultuously
and all on a heap, as it were, which solicit these Passions; so hastily and in
a huddle, that they prevent mature weighing. It appears, therefore, that the
Atoms, roused from their places by such like vapors, fly about the
cognoscitive part, in a kind of confused tumble. If then, there are certain
winds and blasts, which we call Motions of the appetitive faculty: is it not
plain, that the cavities of the Brain will be brusht, as it were, and the
Images sticking to the walls be moved to the place destined for attaining their
effect? And that these Atoms are carried neither merely by chance, nor yet in a
certain order, is evident by this; that, upon inquisition, the things we seek
for do not suddenly and perfectly occur; which were a sign of election; and yet
manifestly, such abundance of them suit to our purpose, that it is clear, they
could not run thus without any industry at all. As, therefore, when we treated
of directing the Spirits into the Nerves, we allowed the several Passions each
their ways into certain parts of the Brain: so, here, it is also manifest, the
same Passions have the places and series of some certain Atoms, in a manner
more obvious to them, than others.

9. But our new admirer of Nature is perplexed, how this multitude of Objects,
swimming in the cavities of the Brain, should possibly be, without entangling
and confounding one another: and by what Art they shift out of one another
way, so as to be able to keep humane knowledge distinct. And here, I must
confess, I had need crave the help of a Machine: for, really, we have no
Candle, nor Spectacles enabling us to look into the subtle paths by which the
Atoms avoid and slip by, to escape ruining one another by shocking. But, in
exchange, I ask how many Sunbeams (which Philosophy now questions not to be
Bodies) pierce straight to our eyes, through the vast continuity of Air, and so
many little Bodies flying up and down in it? There Is no body, if we credit
Experience and Reason, without its steams, and a sphere of vapors derived from
it: How do these steams find free paths to run in and attain such wonderful
effects? The Magnetical, Sympathetical, and smell-producing streams, have not
their courses broken, or ends intercepted by one another. They that have not
the confidence to deny these, why are they loath to allow the same may happen
in the wide passages of the Brain? But you will reply, that to multiply a
difficulty is not to salve it; but to profess the rest of Nature inscrutable,
when it is our task to clear this particular. Well then, thus I cut the very knot
asunder: In currents of greater Atoms, where it is easier to make experiment, it is
plain, that many are confounded, many lost; yet, out of the very nature of
Multitude, that some are preserved entire, and those enough to serve Nature's
turn. So it passes even in the Brain: whatever Object enters requires time for
affecting the Sense; which, if it be too short, the Object is lost almost
before it be perceived; if long, it roots in the knowledge by the multiplicity
of the images, and the frequent sight of the same Object does as much; nay,
that knowledge often repeated, works the same effect, is evident beyond
dispute. This being so, we must conclude, that such is the art of Nature as,
for things to be remembered, there shall not want that abundance of images,
which is necessary and sufficient to force their way through the Crowd of all
others they meet.

10. It Is plain that, in this Answer, I have preferred the Digbaean Method
before the rest: Because that, as near as is possible, traces Nature step by
step. I concern not my self in the rest; as studying Philosophy, out of a
design to build, not destroy. Only, I Would remember the ingenious Author that he
mis-imposes the third opinion (which relishes nothing of Philosophy) upon
Aristotle (who taught the Digbaean way); deceived by the counterfeit stilers of
themselves Aristotelians, whereas they are nothingless. In this same Chapter,
the Author seems sollicitous about the will's following the understanding: But,
because, he disputes nothing on it, neither will I; only, hint that the will, as
spiritual, signifies not any thing else, but the very understanding perfect, or
ripe for action to follow out of it. That Mystery of whence comes ill, I deny
not, has bin brought down, by the contests of the Ancients, even to our ears;
nor question I but 'twill last as long as the bold and ignorant shall endure:
But, as the Author mis-insinuates, I doubt not that St. Augustine himself has
most clearly convinced it; nor can it any longer be troublesome to any, but
those who either know not, or neglect his Doctrine.

Sixth Plea Displaies the Pastick virtue, Continuity, Adhesion of Parts, and
the Mysteries of Rolling.
1* IN his fifth Chapter he falls upon the obscurity of the formation of
natural Bodies, especeially living ones: Yet, not so smartly but that what he
says may, with ease enough be repulsed. I say, then, that there are two
Methods, by which the formation of living Creatures may be rendered
intelligible; without any farther difficulty than what may, without a Miracle,
be refunded into the Wisdom of our Maker. Conceive the first, thus: Let Us say
the seed of a Plant or Animal conteins invisible parts of all the Animals
Members: These, lets say, supplied with moisture, increase, with some slight
Mutation, whereof the reason may be easily rendered (for example, that some
parts dryer and harder, others are more thoroughly watered and grow soft); and
what great matter will be apprehended in the formation of living things? The
other Method is, that, observing the progress in Chymicks, which must of
necessity hold the very same in Nature if self, we'd see that things concocted
with a Gentle fire result into three more remarkable parts: A kind of thin and,
as it were, fiery one, though condensablein to the Species of Water; another
Oily and answerable to Air; a third expressing the Nature of Salt and, as it
were, hardened water; with all which there is mingled and lies at the bottom a
fourth, that is dry and of an Earthy quality, however they call it. The same we
ought to expect from Nature; since the acting of Heat upon Moisture is the End
of both Fornaces. This laid for a ground, suppose, in a proper vessel, a Drop
of prepared Liquor, so kept warm and preserved that it may be increased, too;
is it not plain that, by the very action, some parts will become dryer, others
more subtle and liquid? And that the dryer will grow into different figures?
Especially into certain hollow Vessels; if, by the beats of the boiling
moisture, they be extended and thrust out in length? And that all of them will
cling together, where they begin first to divide? And see you not now the
figure of the Animal and its respectively homogeneous parts formed? And that
their connection and variety, and its other heterogeneous parts follow the
variety of either the Fire or Liquor.

2. He that shall comprehend these things well, will not lament that the
Plastic virtue is an empty name and a word without a thing. But, if he be
ingenious and conveniently at leisure, he will either, in spring time
close-observe the breeding Plants in Gardens or the Fields; or at home pluck up
Seeds buried in Pots, just while they are taking life; and daily rake into the
bowels of Berries and Seeds: and I dare promise him so manifestly connected
steps of advance, that, after many experiments, he shall fore-tel, merely out
of what he sees the day before, what will be the next days issue. Those things
which appear wonderful confusedly in the whole, taken asunder discover and
fairly offer themselves to view. If one observe the spreading of figures or
Colors, he shall find the principles of these founded in the nature of Juice;
the reasons of those chalked out by some manner of their production: for both
Fruits and even slips are, by art, variable into any kind of forms. Much more
the figures of different salts or concret Juices spring, not from any
intrinsecal nature, but from their usual generation and the diffidulty or
facilness of their place and Motions. Nor let any be scared by the talk of
Artists, that admire and amplify those things whose causes they understand
not: or of our Author, amazed at the constancy of natural operations; why our
Hens should never be colored like Peacocks-tails or Parrats. For, in different
Regions, great varieties spring from the diversity of Food and Air: And, for
what is out of our reach about these things, we must be beholden to time.

3. In the same Chapter he raises two other Questions, which he thinks
absolutely inexplicable: to me, on the other side, they seem to have scarce any
difficulty in them. The later in Him is concerning the Composition of Bulk or
Continuum: A question both debated by the Ancients and desperate to the
Modern's. The former, though the later in Nature, is concerning the sticking
together of parts, or, why one Body is more divisible, another less. The former
question supposes another, whether there be parts actually in a Continuum,
whereof the affirmative side, though they wrangle in words, yet is commonly
taken by the Modern's, as it were a self-or-sensibly-known truth; but, by the
whole School of the ancient Peripateticks and that of the Thomists following
them, hist out, as demonstratively convicted. The issue of the matter is that,
about the Composition of Bulk, the Moderns, after a world of laborious
trifling, confess Philosophy at a stand: The Peripateticks deride them as
groping in the dark. For, if there be no parts til they are made by division;
they are manifestly out of their wits that seek how those should be united
which are-not at all? The arguments of those that assert actual parts cite even
sense; concerning which there is nothing certainer than that it cannot discern
any part in a Bulk; since the term of each part is invisible, whereas sense
requires a notable quantity to judge of. Their other Arguments commonly assume
our manner of speaking, and end in Logical trifles, how we ought to speak, not
what the thing it self has really in it. Now, this no-very-difficult contest
being decided, all the controversy concerning the composition of Bulk is over.

4. About the other question there is even as wise work. The followers of
Democritus strive to resolve it into hooks and cornered hold-fasts: Not seeing,
that nothing can be imagined so one, or an Atom, as that it self is not
composed of many parts, concerning which it must be asked how they come to
stick so fast together? But, this difficulty they, at least, slip over,
asserting that these in minutest Bodies, by force of Nature, resist whatever
divisive power, not so the Compounds of them: That is, the greatest and
invincible coherence of parts they carelessly ascribe to the force and quality
of Nature, and are narrowly inquisitive about a less. The first resolution,
therefore, it is plain, is refunded into Nature it self, and the division of
Body or Bulk into Rare and Dense, or having More and Less of Quantity in
equality of Bulk. Which Differences most Demonstrably dividing the Notion of
Quantitative and constituting more Species of it in things; there remains no
greater Difficulty in the Adhesion of the parts of the same Continuum, than
whether there be any such thing or not: For, if there be any, by its very being
a Continuum, of necessicity it must be whereof parts may be made, not wherein
parts are; else (as we have pressed above) the same thing would be one and
many, divided and not-divided, in the same Notion. Therefore it is that
substance, from its very Quantity, whence it has its refolvableness into parts,
has also its easier or harder resolvableness, which they call its parts more or
less sticking to one another. But, as soon as ever the speculation is strein'd
up to Intellectual Notions, these Naturalists's stomach turns: as if Philosophy
enjoined us not to know our own thoughts, and made it unlawful to understand
what we speak.

5. His Sixth Chapter is all dedicated to the Motion of Wheels; nor, if we
believe an Author that wants for no wit, is it any ways solvable. But, before
he attaques that fatal Difficulty, he objects a certain previous one to us,
which the Ancients object to Aristotle; but he, I confess, in a clearer form.
For, he considers a Wheel moved about its Center, and plainly concludes that no
part of it moves; but the whole is moved, and the several parts together change
place. But, what inconvenience this conclusion drags along with it, I am
utterly ignorant: For, though he strives to reduce at large, that one part
first quits the place before another is in it; yet evidently the words, not the
thing, breeds all the contest: For, what hinders that, altogether and at-once,
both the quitter should first not-be and the succeeder first be in the same
place? Another solution might be given, did the Argument exact it: But, as I
said, the quarrel is about the words and manner of speaking, not the thing. The
Author subjoyns a second difficulty, how, in a Wheel turned about, the parts
nearer the Center, in the same time, come to run over so little a space;
whereas they are connected with the remoter, which fetch so large a Compass?
And, after he has acknowledged it to arise from hence, because they are not
carried alike swiftly; he infers that, if the swiftness of the Motions be
unequal, the straight line drawn from the Center to the Circumference must be
crook'd: Whereas it is most evident, the right line would be crook'd, if the
nearer and distanter parts from the Center were carried with equal velocity.

6. At length the Author loftily enters upon his boasted experiment, professing
before hand, he will stop the mouth of the boldest obstinancy. Thus he proposes
it. Let one Axle-tree have three Wheels on it, one at each end, both alike, and
a third in the Middle far less. Let the bigger rest upon the floor, the lesse^
upon some table. Let them all be drawn in a progressive Motion, till, having
fetched a full compass, they mark the floor and the table with the very same
points, in which, at first, they rested on them. The three scor'd lines will be
found equal; whereas the middle one is scor'd out by the contact of a Circle
far less than the other two, yet it is as long as them: Which, with no
likelihood, can be denied impossible; since, it is clear, things that touch, as
far as they do so, are, necessarily equal. This is the knot; this the evident
repugnancy. But, alas! let us observe that Motion is called in to help tie the
knot the harder; and that the motion is of two kinds, a Right and a Circular,
compounding a third progressive motion of the Wheel. Observe we farther, that
the Right (or straight) Motion of the three Wheels is equal; and that the
Circular Motion of the great Wheels is equal to the Right Motion; but the
Circular motion of the Middle little Wheel is less than the Right Motion: And,
which follows, that the greater Wheels are moved with the same celerity
according to both motions; but the lesser is moved stronglyer in the Right,
than in the Circular. Now, the compounded Motion is not that which is scor'd
upon the floor or table, which, it is clear, is a simple and purely Right one;
but a certain crooked Motion in the Air, making, with the scored Motion, a
certain Area (whose quantity, Torricellus has demonstrated): as is manifest
beyond dispute to whoever but takes any one point of the Circle or Wheel; and
withal, that the progressive Motion of the bigger Wheels is greater than that
of the lesser Wheel. These things thus explicated, there appears nothing in
this objection more intricate, than in this simple Proposition, that of two
bodies, which are carried according to one line with equal velocity, one may,
at the same time, be carried swiftlyer than the other, according to another
line: which is so evident, that any one, that is a Mathematician, cannot doubt
of it.

7. Yet still Galilaeus presses closer that, in the circumvolution, the several
points of the lesser Circle or Wheel are just fitted, in an immediate
succession, to the several points of the space in which it is carried: And,
therefore, that it cannot be understood how the Right can be longer than the
Crooked. But, that which deceived Galilaeus was his not having discussed
Aristotle himself, but bin overcredulous to his Modern Interpreters, or rather
Corrupters. For, Aristotle has taught us that a Moveable, in actual Motion,
always possesses a bigger (and not-equal) place to it self; which is most
evident: For, since no part of Motion can be but in Time; and, in every part of
time, the thing moved quits some place and gets some new; it is plain, there
cannot be found any so little motion, wherein the Body moved, has not possessed
both the place in which it had rested, and some part of a New one. This
supposed, though the Moveable were conceived indivisible; yet certain it would
be that, in whatever determinate part of time, or by however little a part of
Motion, it would score out not a space equal to it self, but some line; and, in
the conditions of our present dispute every point of the lesser Wheel will draw
a line proportionate to a part of the Circle of the greater Wheel. And, since
really there are no either instants in Time, or indivisibles in Motion, or
Points in a Circular Line: It Is evident, this Argument has no force; but in
virtue of that false apprehension which we have convinced in the 'fore-alledged
defense of Geometry.

Seventh Plea Inquires after the Causes of our Modern Shortness in Science.
1. IN some of the following Chapters he, exquisitely enough, searches into the
Causes of Errors and human Ignorance: Yet, methinks, I could suggest two which
he has over-slipt. One is the Laziness or rather Vanity of this Age: For,
whoever has got himself but talk enough to weave a learned story amongst the
ignorant or half-learned, such as understandings unaccostomed to Sciences are
apt to be dazzled with: partly out of irksomness to pursue harder things, partly
out of confidence of his own wit, he slights descending into those Mines whence
our Ancestors have dig'd out Science; and to take those pains himself which
alone Wisdom regards and follows. Let this Author be my witness; who, about the
end of his former Chapter, complains of the Obscurity of our Speculations
concerning Motion, Gravity, Light, Colors, Sight, Sound; all which the
Digbaean Philosophy makes as clear as day: Whence also (though there they are
more copiously and clearly explicated) we have borrowed our Discourses of the
Lodestone, the derivation of the Spirits into the Members, the Memory and
Remembrance, the Formation of living Creatures, and whatever almost we have
alleged for solving the proposed Difficulties: the very dictates of Nature
leading us the way. Such like Philosophers, therefore, read the eminent and
highly elaborate Works of others, as if they were Romances invented for
pleasure, or as Spectators behold a Comedy: what on the sudden takes them they
commend; if any thing more knotty than ordinary occurs, they either out of
laziness let it pass unregarded, or break some bitter jest on it.

2. Another cause of Ignorance, waved by our Author, appears to me to be a
certain special Error in the nature of Demonstration. For, they feign to
themselves a certain Idea of Demonstration, which should not only have this
force on the Understanding, to render the Truth proposed evident; but, so,
besides, that no objection can with any likelihood be opposed against it. Which
is as much as if they should require this Demonstration to clear whatever
follows out of, or any way relates to it; or, that one Demonstration should be
a kind of entire Science. For, otherwise, how is it possible but opposition may
be raised against this, out of things not-yet seen-through and conjoined with
this Truth? An Understanding then, adapted to Sciences, out of very Principles
and what it already knows, is secure of a deduced Truth: nor fears any thing
can be inferred opposite to the Truth it knows; whatever pains it may cost to
get out of streights. For, it knows, that those things are certain, which the
Understanding, out of a steady sight that a Thing is a Thing, or that the same
is the same, has fixed to and in it self: and patiently waits till the
distinction between the entanglements show it self, and the confusion vanish.

3. In that these Contemners of Sciences endeavor not at fixing any thing in
themselves by a severe contemplation of Truth: as soon as any Truth pretends
but to evidence, as if they were incapable of owning it, they quit their
station, and betake themselves to enquiring whether any one has opposed that
same: and if they find Impugners, they assume it for most evident, that such a
Truth is not evident. For, say they, were it evident, 'twould be so to all;
'twould convince every understanding. But, they may just as well say, the Sun
is not visible, because it is not seen by them who turn their backs on it, or keep
their eyes shut. For, as in corporeal sight, some corporeal motion is
necessary, by which the Ball of the Eye may be set against the Object: no less
to see and fix in the mind this very evidence, that the same cannot be and
not-be at once, a certain Application, and as it were, opening of the mind is
required; even to conceive and give birth to the very evidentest evidence. And,
for want of this, so many of the Ancients and Moderns have not owned, but
corrupted, the evidence of that very first and most notorious Principle. Whence
they can never attain that Scientifical Method which shines so clear in
Arithmetic and Geometry, but are wholly entangled in Logical and Equivocal
trifles; and fill babbling Volumes with fopperies. Let these lusty Compilers of
Tomes show the world but one leaf, or one page deduced, or, at least, attempted
in a Geometrical Method; and then, let them complain there is no Science, or
that it lies hid in an unfathomable Well: now the sordid Sluggards, only
mettlesome at repaoaches, conceit a Lion in the way, and stir not a foot, so
much as to behold the very way.

Eighth Plea Wards off from Aristotle the Calumny of special Impiety.
1. ANd now I seem at an end of the Task set me: did not the same persons
strein, as enviously as possible, to defame Aristotle, with all manner of
Contumelies; that the ignominy of that one man may make way for them to tear
Science it self out of the hands of the Learned, and throw it into the dirt of
Probability. For, he alone, of all the Ancients, has left any Monument of
Demonstration in Metaphysics and Physics. The Academicks, where they leave
the Peripateticks, were Orators, not Philosophers. For, Socrates himself was
merely a Disputer and a Doubter. Plato and Aristotle divided his School. Plato
proposed to himself, with his wholy-divine Wit and purest Eloquence, to set out
Probability, and make himself admired for speaking specious things concerning
the Principles necessary to Human life. Aristotle very concisely hunting after
truth by Experiments, and Marrying with the inspection of Nature, the power of
deducing Consequences, designed to show the world Science in Physics and
Metaphysics worthy to vye with Geometry: And, therefore, as long as a Popular
form of Commonwealth nourisht the power of Orators, He was less esteemed. For,
those Famous persons affected to manage Science after the manner of Civil
Causes, without a solid and firm Judgment. The Orators at length, wearing out
of credit, the Authority of Aristotle grew stronger; and has been derived from
the Romans to the Arabians; from them, to our Schools: the Italians first (to
our knowledge) re-calling into the West, the Science of the Arabians, which the
wars long since had chased away.

2. It Is highly unjust, and a sign of a Cavilling spirit, to pry into his Life,
whose Doctine you go about to impugn: For, these Oratorial preventions of the
Reader argue the Writer has no mind a candid Judgment should be given of the
Truth; but lies in wait to distort Justice by stirring the Affections.
Wherefore, hissing out those things which are tattled against Aristotle's
manners, let us trace what is objected against his Doctrine. Peter Gassendus,
then, in his Third Exercitation, objects it as certain, that it is Aristotle's
Opinion, in his Book of Metaphysics, that God is an Animal: Whereas, on the
contrary, in the 8. Book of his Physics, Chap. 6 and 10. He so expressly makes
God a substance immaterial, indivisible, immovable either by himself or by
accident; that impudence it self cannot be able to deny God, in his Opinion,
not-an Animal. He adds, that God is tied to the out-most Superficies of the
highest Heaven, which is extream-heedlesly said in the Peripatetical Way:
Whether you construe without Heaven, in imaginary spaces (whereas Aristotle
most expressly attests there are no such); or an Indivisible adherent to Heaven;
whereas, both the First Mover must necessarily be said to be in that which is
first Moveable or Moved; and, it is well known, that, in Aristotle's way, the
Superficies is moved only through the Motion of the Body whose it is; as also,
the Superficies (as we have said above) is a certain being divided, or term, or
no-farther of a Body, and not any Entity in which God may be placed.

3. The next accusation argues God bound up to the Laws of Fate and Necessity.
But, here, the Calumniator is clearly in an Error. For, there are two kinds of
Fate; one a Stoical; their's who assert that whatever things are, exist in
force of Contradiction, since, of necessity, every thing must either be or
not-be; and this Fate Aristotle rejects: The other Fate is a Course of Causes.
Since, therefore, it is evident and agreed by all, in the Peripatetical way,
that God is the First-Being, and by consequence, the Cause of the whole Series
of the rest; most clear it is that, in Aristotle's School, He is not Subject to
Fate, but himself the Fate of all other things; which is the most wise Tenet of
the Saints, and the marrow of Christian Doctrine. Like this is the other, that
He is Subject to Necessity. For, the term, Necessity, is ambiguous: For, as it is
attributed to Animals contradistinctly from Liberty, so it takes away perfect
knowledge; which no Peripatetick ever denied to God, to whom Aristotle's
Doctrine forces the very top of knowledge to be attributed. There Is another
Necessity springing from prefect knowledge; to which nothing lying
undiscovered, one perfect in knowledge, and, consequently, God, can take but
one way. But, this necessity implying the determination of an Understander to
Particulars, out of Common Principles, manifestly speaks Election or liberty
actuated.

4. He is farther calumniated to have taught that God knows not despicable and
petty things; and, the 12. of his Metaphysics is cited, where this is not
found but by way of doubting: But, his best Interpreters conclude, out of other
Texts, that Aristotle attributes the knowledge even of these too, to God. This
crimination, therefore, argues an ill will, drawing the words of that excellent
person to the worst sense. Yet, at least, He makes the World increated. But
this may easily be denied. He asserted it, indeed, not-generated, or,
impossible to have begun by Motion and the force of Natural Causes; which is
most consonant to Christian Faith: But, as to the Creation of the World, he has
not a word on it: Yet, it is one thing not to have acknowledged it, or reached so
high; another, to deny; amongst modest Men that babble not incertainties. Yet,
I confess, he thought the World it self Eternal: But, in his very Error, he
showed himself the chief of Heathen Philosophers. For, whereas, they all with
one consent declared, that nothing is made of nothing, 'twas inconsequent for
the World to have begun by Motion, which could not exist without Time; and no
beginning of Time, either out of its own essence, or by the action of moving
Causes, could appear. It Is plain, therefore, that this Error of Aristotle's
argues his excellency above the rest, who by Chance, and not by Science light
on the Truth.

5. The last calumny about his Tenets concerns the Immortality of the Soul,
which Gassendus says, Aristotle in many places denies: but as disfavourably as
before; since, his best Interpreters attest that he acknowledged it; and
Plutarch records him to have written concerning the Soul, upon Eudemus's death;
out of whom is cited that famous Story of a dead man's Soul begging revenge of
his Friend. Whence is evidenced that those Interpreters err, who, out of
Aristotle's Principles, endeavor to conclude the Soul not immortal, and that
this was Aristotle's own sense. It hits strangely in fine, that the Author,
otherwise very ingenious, should judge this a fit Objection, that Aristotle
denied the Resurrection of the dead: which, it is most certain, the light of
Faith first discovered to Mortals; though, after its acceptance on that
account, its conformity also to the progress of Nature might be discerned. This
farther, that he concludes, saying, that Aristotle speaks many things wholly
disagreeable to our H. Orthodox Faith: as if Plato and the rest of the
Philosophers had tendered the World none but Tenets agreeable to Faith: which is
by so much an unworthier part of Gassendus, in that he himself in his Preface,
promises he will show that, it is by Faith alone, any thing comes to our knowledge
of God and the Intelligences; and that all Arguments about these things, drawn
from the light of Nature, are vain. A worthy Epiphonema, indeed, to close up
his Sixth Book, designed against Metaphysick, or the supreme Science.

Ninth Plea Wipes off the Aspersions on Aristotle's Doctrine and Terms.
1. I Must now return from Gassendus to the Author of The Vanity of
Dogmatizing; since he has selected the strongest Mediums: justly preferring
them before that numerable rabble which Gassendus has heaped together, even to
cloying; out of love to reproaching, rather than Science. Our English
Academick, then, first by way of Preface, as it were, seems to decline that
envy, which the honorable train of Aristotle's Followers would be apt to
procure him; applying that sentence of Seneca's, The Multitude is an Argument
of the worst: so prone we are to err, even in the plainest things. For, it is
evident, the Vulgar, in some things, follow men of excellence, as it were,
their Captains; in other things are governed, or rather hurried by their own
judgment. The former Method is that of Nature it self, that many Ignorants may,
by the virtue and Authority of a few, be carried to good: But, that the Vulgar
should judge of things themselves know not, and by a tumultuary consent,
precipitate the counsels of the prudent; this is opposite to the Laws of Nature
and Reason. Here now enquire whence Aristotle has got an Authority with the
Vulgar? and twill clearly appear he has been made the Coripheus of Philosophers
by the sway of the very Princes of Scholastical Theology: to whom if you
compare the Judgments of Orators or Critics, they will dwindle away to nothing.
The Fathers themselves (those great Persons pardon me if I say so) are of
another different Trade; nor have fallen upon any Philosophical Explication of
Faith, otherwise than as forced to it by the importunity of Heretics.

2. The Author subjoins, that in the opinion of the wise, Peripeteticism is a
mass of Terms that signify nothing. But this Author knew not that his own
Terms are so equivocal, that themselves speak nothing. For, who has
sufficiently fifted this, who, or by whose judgment they are called wise, that
have pronounced this of the Peripateticks? If we consult Aristotle's Works
themselves, or his ancient Emulators, it is clearer than the Sun, none ever of
the Philosophers so industriously, and by distributing so many of his Terms
into obvious senses, took care for the clearness of his Dictates, and eluded
the entanglement of Equivocations. It Is manifest then, the Wise men had little
skill in Aristotle. They have mistaken, therefore, for Aristotelians some Apes
cloaking themselves with Aristotle's name, and expose other men's Tenets for
Peripatetical ones: and (which he seems not to know) in very truth Pyrronians.
For, whoever, in mighty Volumes and Questions piled one on another, teaches
nothing else, but, that one part, indeed, is more likely, but either side is
defensible; in such a World of twattle says no more, than had he passed
sentence in one Word, that Nothing is clear. This Calumny, therefore, touches
his own Friends, not Aristotle.

3. Then, he prosecutes his Plea against the Peripateticks by certain Doubts;
which either are not, or seem not, clear to him, in spite of Reason. The
notion of Materia prima, which asserts it to have neither Quiddity, nor
Quantity, nor Quality, he contests is a Description of Nothing. 'Strange, that
Men be so humorsome! Are there, perhaps, in all Nature more usual words than
Being and Power? Who is so sottish, that he speaks not thus of a piece of Brass
or Marble assigned for the purpose, that it is not-yet, but may or will be a
Statue of Mercury? Do they not, peradventure, understand themselves that speak
thus; or, when they say, it may be, or has an aptitude to be a Mercury, Do they
say the Brass or Marble is Nothing, or, is nothing of Mercury? How, then,
besides Mercury, or the Form of Mercury, is there not a certain power or
aptitude to be Mercury, which neither is Mercury actually, nor yet a notion of
No-thing or No-thing? Or if, in respect of the Figure which constitutes
Mercury, there is some aptitude which neither is that, nor yet a Notion of
Nothing; why may we not affirm the same of a Quantum or Bulk, and say, a Boy is
not yet big, but may be big? For he that asserts this does he not, at the same
time, deny Bigness; and yet clearly he names an Aptitude to Bigness? Nor,
perhaps, is there any difference in respect to Entity; for we scruple not to
say that Tallow or Oil may be Flame, and yet that they are not yet Flame: the
Tallow, therefore, or Oil neither are the thing, Flame, which they may be, nor
so big as they will be when they are Flame, nor so hot; and yet they may be
Flame, they may be greater, they may be hotter: and there is in them a certain
power, which neither has Quiddity, Quantity, nor Quality; since they are
referred to all these, and are in a present state of privation in respect to
them. Now whoever professes this unintelligible, directly condemns Mankind for
a company of Fools, that know not what they say in their vulgarest speech and
commerces: And, he that denies Matter it self destroys that solemn Maxim of
Philosophy, that Nature makes nothing of nothing.

4. There are two other Terms which trouble our Sceptick, Form and being educ'd
out of the power of Matter. As for the first, it is strangely odd, that too much
speculation should so render ingenious men no better than the most stupid. Can
any man be born such a Bruit, as not to own that one thing is distinct from
another? or, if it be distinct, can he assert it is distinguished by nothing?
Does the difficulty lie here, that this, by which it is distinguished should be
called a Form? what a strange unreasonableness is this, not to let me call that
a Form, which I see distinguish one from the other? May not I say of two brazen
Statues, that they agree in Brass, and are distinguished by their Figures? Or,
if there be a third of Marble, shall I be chid for saying, the brazen ones are
distinguished from the Marble one, in that this is of Stone, those other of
Metal? As, therefore, before, I distinguished power and being in substance,
Quantity, and Quality; I may, now, in the same, find grounds for the
denominations of Form and Subject in each of them.

5. As to the later Term, being educ'd out of power, let the ingenious Man
reflect whether that which, out of some dark hole, softly and by degrees comes
forth n^o open view, is improperly said to be educ'd or brought out. Again, let
him remember (if he have ever seen a piece of Marble formed by a Statuary) how,
at first it cannot be imagined what the Artist means to form: after a little
pains, there appears a confused resemblance of a Humane Creature; then, whether
it be a Man or Woman; and at length, what Man it is. Behold, how a man, which
was potentially in the Marble, and confused in the dark, as it were, is by
little and little educ'd by Art out of that confusion into clear light, and the
Marble is palpable and expressly made a Caesar. Philosophers consider as much in
Nature; whether you observe the seeds of living things, or the Community of the
Elements to be mixed into a compound, or the abstraction of Matter from the
Elements, whence this Phrase to be educ'd out of the power of Matter signifies
Matter out of its aptitude to many, to be determined, by the operation of
Nature or Art to one certain thing; through a motion from confusion to
distinctness: and not to be, as it were, infused, with a dependence from the
subject, as this Anti-Peripatetick fancies out of I know not what Dreamers.
For, there are none of these triflles extant in Aristotle.

Tenth Plea Maintains certain Definitions and Arguings.
1. NExt they shoot at two of Aristotle's Definitions, either of them most
exact, and as clear as can be, to those that understand any thing in his way.
The first is the Definition of Light, in these words, Light is the act of a
prespicuous thing: which seems obscure to this race of people, because the use
of the Word Act is framed by Philosophers, and not taken from Tully, or found
in Calipine. Let them know, therefore, that Act is derived from Agere, to do,
or Agi, to be done, or the Participle Actum, done; and used by Philosophers for
that, by which what was intended by the Agent at the end of his Action is
termed or demonstrated donc. In Greek, perhaps, it is more elegantly called
(...), as it were, the Operation of the Causes, taking the Operation, not for
the Flux of the Action, but, for that which remains introduced by the
Operation, which is such a Flux. But, because our language affords not a proper
word correspondent to the term, Act; our Sterling Philosopher is all in choler
against Aristotle. For, if he had put but ordinary words, instead of terms of
Art, saying, Light is a certain perfection of a body, that has this in its
Nature, to let colored things appear through it, making them de facto appear
through it; as we experience Objects are seen through illuminated Air, which
are not seen through it darkened: what had he found worth making such a wide
mouth over? Now because he has spoken most neatly and briefly, poor Aristotle
smarts for it.

2. The other Definition has the same fault. The Definition is this, Motion is
the Act of a thing in power, as in power. For, since a thing is said to be in
power, to that it may be brought to by Motion; for example; One that is sick, to
Health; Wood, to firing, or to be fire: it is plain, that Motion is that
perfection, or act with which the subject is affected whilst it is yet in power,
or, till the sick person be in health, or the Wood be fire; as in power, or in
that state by which it may attain the intended perfection. Behold here a most
clear and learned Definition, and subject to no other reproach than a certain
umbrage, from a ridiculous story concerning the Greek term (...), which I
believe framed by the Philosopher to express his intention emphatically. The
story's this; That a Critic, I know not who, went to one Ciccus, esteemed a
Magician (I imagine, because he wrote of Magic) to enquire of the Devil what
was the meaning of that word (...) in Aristotle; and returned as wise as he
went, and mocked at by the Oracle. That it may appear then what a Dunce Devil
our Philosophers have consulted; lte them take notice that (...) is a word made
up of three, (...), with the addition of a foeminine termination, which is
proper for signifying Abstractions: and so signifies the Manner the subject of
Motion is found in at the end of the action; which is the very same thing with
the term Act, as it is explicated above.

3. In his seventeenth Chapter there is a new Calumny forged against Aristotle;
the more unworthily, in that he; above the rest, has endeavored at clearness.
His Philosophy is accused to be litigious, and through the wavering use of his
Terms, confused and obscure. This accusation is found guilty of a double
Ignorance: One, of what Aristotle's use is; for he is the carefullest that ever
writ, to distinguish and form the significations of his Terms: The other is,
that he takes Scepticks for Peripateticks. And, that the Scepticks endeavors
are the vainest that can be, I easily grant; that they little trouble
themselves about fixing the use of their words, to be left more at liberty to
sell any trifles they list for Vanity or profits sake; that they are petty
Orators, or rather janglers, not Philosophers; that they take upon them the
name of Aristotelians, to corrupt Youth and draw Disciples after them. I deny
not that these are to be shunned like the Plaigue, by all pursuers of Science;
nor is any thing of sollidity to be expected from them: this one thing puts me
out of patience, that Persons, otherwise ingenious and desirous of knowledge,
should be averted by these Cheats, not only from true Science, but from all
hope of ever gaining any, in the things most necessary to human life.

4. They back their feigned Plea against the Philosopher out of his own Words
and Actions. Their first crack is upon that saying of his, that his Books of
Physics were so published, that they were not made public. The sense whereof
was, that the Matter or Subject handled in them is so abstracted, that, without
the assistance of an experienced Master, they could not be understood by those
unused to his way; which we see hold to this day: For, scarce any one
comprehends those Books, unless aided by the old Commentators. Whence our
Moderns, for the most part, are quite besides the Cushion as to Aristotle's
meaning; though he himself has spoken, as clearly as possible the brevity He
prefixed to himself could bear. The next Calumny is grosser and more luckless;
that those things which he has collected, to furnish Logical Disputants, and
perfect the Act of Disputing previously to giving Judgment, should be applied
to his Method of Demonstrating, and to his practice not in disputing but
defining. For, as, in Plays, it is a commendation to entangle the story, that it
may come off at last with greater admiration: So, it is the task of the Inquirer
to confound the Question, with proposing Difficulties before it, that the
Demonstrator may clearly Vnidicate it, and, as it were, dispelling the clouds,
restore it to Light.

5. This Plea required Instances out of that work of his. The Author presses
three: Upon Gassendus's credit, I believe, or some other slight Lookers into
it; for, in the Book it self there is nothing to be seen: The first runs thus.
He proves the World to be perfect, because it consists of Bodies; that Bodies
are perfect, because they consist of a triple dimension; that a triple
dimensions is, therefore, perfect, because consisting of three; and that three
is perfect, because two we call both, and never say all till we come to three.
Look into his First book De Coelo, Chap. 1. You shall find these last words
make no part of the Demonstration, but are additional only: and that the
Demonstration, it self is this; Because the World consists of Bodies, the
perfection of the World is to be perfect in the Notion of Body. Now, the
perfection of Body lies in this, that it be spread every way upon three
prependiculars, as the Geometricians demonstrate. And thus are both the several
Bodies, and the World; but in a diverse manner; For the several Bodies are
terminated each to others; whence, though they are spread according to all the
lines, yet not to the whole, or utmost extent of them. But, because there is no
space beyond or without the World (as it is demonstrated in the fourth of his
Physics), the World is spread according to all and the whole lines, or,
perfectly every way; and by consequence, must be said perfect in the Notion of
Body, and, so, absolutely.

6. The second Instance is, that Aristotle asserts, were there more Worlds, the
Moon would fall down upon the Earth. This consequence the Arguer thinks sprung
from such a fancy as theirs, that fear the Antipodes should drop into Heaven.
But, he reflects not how great pains the Philosopher took to establish the
Center of the World in the Earth: Which granted, this consequence would depend
not from fancy but reason, as himself seems to confess.

7. The third Instance, too (drawn out of lib. 2. cap. 5. De Coelo. Is utterly
perverted. For, Aristotle teaches not, that the Heavens are, therefore, carried
toward the West, because the West is the Nobler, (as the Argument makes it);
but, that the West is the Nobler, because the Heavens are carried toward it.
Now, there is this difference betwixt the two; that in the former Method, it is
assumed without proof, that the West is the Nobler; in the later, it follows
out of those things which Aristotle had concluded; viz. That there is nothing
Accidental in Eternal Things; and, by consequence, that the Motion toward the
West is Natural to the Heavens; and Natural Motion is to the more honorable:
whence it clearly follows, that the West is Nobler than the East. It follows, I
say; for, if the Principles were true, 'twere a Noble Demonstration.

Eleventh Plea Refutes some Topics babbled against Science.
1. ABout the end of the Chapter he expresses indignation, that the learned so
employ all their pains upon Logic, Physic, and Metaphysick; that the
Sciences, usefuller to human life, viz. concerning the Heavens, Meteors,
Fossils, and Animals, but especially Politics and Oeconomicks, are much
neglected. Nor can I deny that these are neglected in the Schools: but, what is
guilty on it, but the Skepticism that reigns there? For, if the Sciences were
taught in Aristotle's Method, there would be room enough for all; nor would
nature be taunted with the usual calumny, that Man's life is too short for the
Arts: But, the necessary ones once known, there would advance still a
surplusage of leisure, to take abundantly, in any of these Sciences, that
delight which human Curiosity should be drawn to. But, they are the Scepticks
that envy this happiness to men; confounding all things with endless contests;
especially those common truths which Aristotle has demonstrated: such as are
Formal Divisibility, that what ever is moved is moved by another, that a
Continuum or Bulk is divisible in infinitum, that there is no vacuum: and such
like; without the owning whereof before hand, it is in vain to make Experiments
for acquiring Science: Since, they will all come at length to be resolved into
these Principles; or else there will be ever a straining after Science
unproffitably, without any Principles at all.

2. In his eighteenth Chapter, he reproves the Peripatetical Doctrine as
insufficient to solve Phaenomena's. But, this he does out of Error or Spleen:
For, if he takes the Doctrine of our Modern Philosophical Apes to be
Aristotle's own, he is strangely in an error; but, if he denies Aristotle to
have taken pains to solve Problem's, he will be shown guilty of Injustice by all
his Books of Natural Philosophy, those especially which usually follow his
eight Books. Which of the Moderns has more happily unbowel'd Nature than Digby,
who at every turn is mindful of Aristotle, and heartily accepts his Dictates?
The Adversary urges that the Systeme of Heaven is mis-contriv'd by Aristotle.
Open the accusation, you will find the sum and very knot of it to be, that
Aristotle had not an Optic Table: else supposing those Phaenomenas of the Sun,
which enlightened Aristotle's Age, his Discourse, in his Books De Coelo, merits
all admiration. That the Intelligences are the Movers of the Heaven is
Christian Doctrine. That there is a certain Fire swimming upon our Air is
nothing else but des Cartes's Either, or a kind of rarer Element enbracing the
unequal of our sky. If Aristotle has erred in a very few things; why, yet, so
much anger? shall we not allow Philosophy its growing time? If, yet, he may be
said to Err, and not rather ingeniously, and ingeniously to propose, who
professes he conjectures, not Demonstrates; as Aristotle does in his Books De
Coelo.

3. His ninteenth Chapter inveighs against Aristotle's Doctrine as unfruitful
and barren; but, weakly and falsely. Weakly, because all the inventions he
speaks of belong to Artificers and Handy-craft-Men; not Philosophers, whose
office it is to make use of Experiments for Science, not to make them. Falsely,
because Aristotle's way of Doctrine being about Common Notions, without which
there is no comprehending Particulars; nothing is truly invented without it. I,
but they are Generals that are found in Aristotle. It must be replied, that he
and his Disciples deserve thanks for devulging them, and fixing a step to climb
thence farther and higher. But, (if my Divination fails me not) I see, were
Aristotle's Principles plucked up, Philosophy unable to give an Account of
ordinary Effects. I Am sure, the Philosophy which admits Vacuities is reducible
to no Rules for acting: And des Cartes's Vortices, I shrewdly suspect no way
serviceable to invention. Concerning his Tenets, which savor of impiety, we
have spoken before. For his contradictions, the places are not cited: but,
whoever is skilled in Aristotle knows, he uses to draw Examples out of others
Books and vulgar sayings; and that nothing is to be esteemed his own, which
falls not into the Course of his Doctrine. Whence, it is no hard matter to find
contrary Opinions in his works: but, those things alone are to be ascribed to
him, which either are asserted in their proper places, or brought by him for
confirmation of his known Tenets.

4. The twentieth Chapter renders manifest the eminence of Peripateticism above
all other Methods, by its very impugnation of it. For, it assumes, it cannot be
known that one thing is Cause of another, otherwise than because they are found
together: which we deny not to be an occasion of suspecting, but no Argument of
Causality; for, if nothing else be clear, 'twill be still-unknown, which of the
too is the Cause, which Effect. But, the Peripateticks conclude not A. to be
the cause of B. till, defining both, they find, out of their very Definitions,
that A cannot be, but it must follow out of its intrinsecals that B is. For
example, a Peripaterick collects that Fire is the Cause of Heat; because Heat
is nothing else but Atoms flowing from Fire: and on the other side, he knows
that Fire cannot exist, but it must send out such particles. Des Cartes's
paradox, of Light and the Sun, is just as if we should expect the Skies falling
to catch Larks. That wonderfully ingenious Man is so celestial, that he has
not so much as Sand to found his structures on. Peripateticks choose rather to
collect a few Certainties, acknowledging a Multitude of uncertainties, than,
grasping at all, to hold nothing. Sure I am, none more largely pretends
Demonstration, than des Carts: So that, nothing is more unseemly than for his
adorers to profess Skepticism.

5. Not a jot stronger, to establish the impossibility of Science, is the
argument from the variety of Opinions amongst those that are called
Philosopers. For first, it must be evident that they are Philosophers: before
their judgments deserve esteem in Philosophical matters. Do they profess to
Demonstrate? Do they model their Books in Euclid's Method? Do they interweave
Definitions with self-known truths? And admit no other for proof? All which may
be observed in Aristotle and his ancient interpreters, though not expressed in
Euclids form. These things if they do, either they are not rational, or all
will be of the same mind; as Geometricians are. If they neglect these, it is not
a pin matter for their judgments in Philosophy. Our Author tells a story of the
power of Fancy, which I doubt is imperfect: For, it seems, he would have one
Man be able to order another thoughts without ever acting by his senses or
Fancy: Since, he relates, that one compelled others, absent from him, to think
and speak what he pleased. For, though I allow Men to have a very large power
over Animals, by the help of their Fancies; for example, to tame or enrage
them, by means of sounds or showing them figures; perhaps, too, to strike them
sick or cure them, and such like: Yet, that the Fancy should be moved to those
things, which move it not by any sense, it is hard to believe. For all that, I
do not altogether deny the Motion made upon the sense to be every way like, and
Univocal to that which is in the mind; and, when it happens, to be derived
rather from the vehemency of the affection, than the pure Motion of the
Fancies impressing it.

6. In this twenty first Chapter, he divines of Future Science; particularly,
of some not-yet discovered manners of acting at distance: which I Will rather
await, than discuss or hope for. About the end of the Chapter, he assumes, that
nothing can be known, unless it be resolved into the first Causes. Whence, he
should have seen clearly that the First Causes, and Metaphysics, which treats
of them, is most known of all to Nature, or next to our first knowledges: And
that Naturalists strive in vain, who negotiate much about the particulars of
Nature; and comprehend nothing through their ignorance of Metaphysick. Take for
example the stir about Vacuum; which Metaphysics declare as impossible, as for
no-thing to be a thing: about the spring of Rarity and Density; which the
Metaphysician most palpably demonstrates is out of, or, extrinsecal to the
things that are Rare and Dense, and many such like; whose truth those that
essay by Experiments, but without the light of Metaphysick, shall find an
endless work on it. Metaphysical Principles must be taken from Aristotle, not
des Carts, though a Person of most eminent Wit. For, Aristotle, by
contemplation, formed into method those things which he found engrafted in
nature: Des Carts, in his Physical principles (as if he meant to prescribe the
Creator an Idea) designs in the Air and in the Concave of the Moon, as they
say, what himself thought was to be done, according to Art. From which kind of
Fabric there is no benefit to be hoped for by the Reader.

7. The next Chapter is sick of that error, which Aristotle has very often
detected and confuted; viz. that nothing is known unless it be perfectly known:
for example, that we know not God is, unless we see him, that any Man cannot
make use, and be sure of that des Cartes's first-known thing or Object of
knowledge, I think, therefore I am, unless he comprehends the all things of
that I; so, as to know the Nature of his Matter and Form, the Number of his
Elements and Members, and the Causes and Motion by which he was begotten, and
in short, whatever is connected with him. Which is clearly to profess, he
knows not the question in hand: For, none of the Dogmatizers either arrogates
to himself or hopes for so perfect a knowledge. It Is a piece of the same
heedlesnesse, not to know that all that see a white wall have the same
apprehension of whiteness, though their several sensations vary the degree and
perfection of it. Whence, our Author had done more prudently to have sat down
in silence, and pardoned the affecters of Science their error; than, by merely
Topical and Delusory Reasons, to have averted minds, born to excellent things,
from the first desire of Nature, and gathering fruit, at least, in some degree;
according to that of the moral Poet, Though you of Glycons mighty lims despair,
Do not to keep away the Gout forbear.


8. For all that, our Academick makes no scruple, in general, to lay all kind
of mischief to those that proceed dogmatically, such Art (as the Philosophers
says) it requires to find a mean. First he asserts this Method is the Daughter
of ignorance? who would have looked for this brand from a Sceptick? you that
profess your selves to know nothing, do you object ignorance to others?

Quis tulerit Gracchos de seditione querentes? Next, he calls it the Inmate of
untamed affections: upon what title? for, if there be any Science, that will
The peaceful Temples keep well fortified,
Built by the Sages Doctrine. --
You that profess you know not whether there be any or no; how rashly do you
affirm it to dwell always with untamed affections? since, if there be none, it
dwells no where. The third inconvenience of Dogmatizing is, that it stirs men
up to controversies. The rising Sun seems to me guilty of the very same Crime,
in disturbin the Slug-a-beds, and summoning every one to their work: For, such
a kind of falt it is, to inculcate Truth to those that live in ignorance and
error. A fourth crime is, that one who adheres to any Science, lays ignorance
to the charge of those that know not his demonstration. I cannot deny it; For,
it is the Nature and Title of light to reproach those things, as dark, which
admit not its beams. But, herein the Demonstrators are modester than the
Scepticks, that, at least, they except some, and speak well of Nature; whom,
with all her Children, the Scepticks condemn to the Dungeon of Darkness for
ever.

9. Like this is the next, that the confidence of Science in error bars the
Gates against the liberty to get possession of truth. How blindly does the
Sceptick dispute these things? who freely owns that truth is no where, which
men might have the liberty to get possession of. He concludes at last, the
Dogmatizer has a petty and enthralled Soul. So strangely things are nicknam'd
that are unknown! For, it is Science's part to dilate the Soul, and render it
capable of great things: and this the pleasure of one that knows, to look down
on Scepticks as all in a tumult below, and Lucret. See them at a loss at every
turn, And breathless hunting out the way of life. Which to make ones life and
Task is the miserablest of all things, and an utter casting off Rationality;
and the whole felicity Humanity affords. These things, as they are all most
true, and scarce deniable, even by a Sceptick, to follow out of the possibility
of Demonstration, that is, if there be any Rational Nature, yet I would not
have them so asserted, as to Patronize palliated Scepticks, who admit, indeed,
that there is such a thing as some both Physical and Metaphysical Science, in
common; but neither tend to it by any legitimate Method, nor own any thing, in
particular, demonstrated: and yet, by the press of the Herd, in a society,
thrusting one another on, and by loads of Scriblers, they most absurdly fly at
and arrogate to themselves the highest degree of Doctorship, and the top of
Sciences and name of Wisdom. The Father of Nature grant Mankind may at length
be eased of this Yoke; which galls the necks of the Sons of Adam: and, that the
studious of truth may understand it alike dangerous to think every thing and
nothing is demonstrated.

FINIS.

