NOTES ON Mr. F. D's RESULT Of a Dialogue concerning the MIDDLE STATE OF SOULS:
In a LETTER from Thomas White Gent.

PARIS MCDLX.

To his much esteemed Friend Mr. F. D.
Ever honored Sir,
FOR such both your Prudence and Learning have made you to me, and specially
your rich Systeme, the citing whereof in this your Result, gave me full notice
of your Person, though many good passages in your Book did partly interpret to
me the fairly prognosticating Ciphers of your Name in the Frontispiece. I am
glad to encounter an adversary who knows what Divinity is, and can in due
proportion mingle together subtilty with civility. Therefore I also intend to
my power, to join the satisfaction I am able to offer you with the respect your
grave carriage of the controversy deserves, being really persuaded it was no
interest nor passion moved you to write, nor vain glory to put it in print, but
the entreaty of such who may command, as you ingeniously express your self; and
a cordial persuasion of the truth of your Tenet.

To begin then with your Preface, give me leave to advertise you of a mistake
(as I think) in the word Aristophanes, which I will courteously hope, you
conceive imports no more then a Divulger of high and mysterious truths among
people incapable of such Doctrins, for so your following discourse intimates.
But because Aristophanes did it with Flouts and Jeers (for which the sect of
Poets whose writings were called Comaedia prisca was silenced) some Readers may
possibly interpret you to cast a blemish on a Person, whose true worth and
virtue as much secures him from deserving it, as your discreet and friendly
nature can restrain you from meaning it.

Afterward you add that the Gentleman who rendered that Treatise into English,
was instrumental of great scandal. You are not ignorant that scandals must
come; nor am I, that woe be to him by whom they come. But both you and I are
bound to understand those words with this necessary caution, by whose fault,
no^ by whose act they come. Else even our Blessed Savior himself was an
occasion of scandal; but such, as woe be unto them who are scandalized in Him.
The Quality therefore of the cause, not the effect is chiefly to be examined
ere we charge on any so foul an imputation. Turn then your impartial eyes on
the two sides of the Controversy, and see the great and many inconveniences
visible and sensible that grow upon the Church, in case the Affirmative which
you sustain, be false.

You are not one, I Am sure, who think Priests cannot be too many, but wisely
judge their number well contrived, when the ends they are ordained for are fully
complied with: so that the Church be neither over-charg'd by the multitude, nor
unprovided by the paucity of her spiritual Governors. Consider the dignity of
the Office, and the difficulty of observing its Obligations, and you will soon
discover it is too high and perfect a Calling for a multitude. Consider the
mischief if the unworthy Priests (of which some few I confess must still be
tolerated while we live in this World of flesh and blood) bear any notable
proportion to the number of the worthy ones, how the sacredst Profession on
Earth is under-valued, their Sermons inefficacious, their Sacraments neglected,
and the whole life and vigor of Christianity extenuated and endangered.
Consider what a vast crowd of young Scholars thrust themselves into these holy
Orders by occasion of getting Souls suddenly out of Purgatory; to which they
often think themselves sufficiently qualified with a very mean degree, God
knows, of Virtue or Learning.

Consider how apt this opinion is to breed in all the World a neglect of venial
sins when they shall be taught that a Mass or two, or a few prayers put a
period to all their pains they can fear in Purgatory. And, as for mortal sins,
even they also will find too much encouragement from so slack a Discipline. It Is
but being afraid of Hell; and upon that, receiving Absolution; and then,
procuring some devotions (especially if in a proper place) and the Soul that
has lived its whole life in folly and worse, is instantly taken up into all the
glories of Paradise. What can more dangerously weaken if not quite abolish that
best and only immediate disposition of our Souls for Heaven, the hearty love
of God above all things? what can be possibly more prejudicial to them that
are in the Church, or more scandalous to them that are out of it?

Consider farther, how widows and poor folks defraud their children and Parents
of such helps as else they could afford them, did not the eager hope of a hasty
release from those dreadful pains, divert their charities another way. And
truly in my conceit, with a great deal of reason, if your opinion be the right:
for who to deliver himself from the rack, would not think it fit, his friends,
how near soever, should suffer a little hunger? or who, that believes your
tenet, is not bound, in true and wise charity to purchase at any rate, even
with the disinheriting his posterity, so great a happiness to his own Soul as
the enjoyment of Heaven within a day or week after his departure from hence?
nay, more, what heir is not obliged in duty to give away the vain riches of
this transitory world to gain so speedy an Eternity for his Father, whose
over-loving him perhaps made him need it?

Add to this, the unedifying imputation of Avarice and Fraud upon such as gain
by these offices (and I pray God it be without just cause;) while they promise
far more then they know they can perform. The words they expose to the people
on the faces of their Churches and Altars speak roundly, like fair Chap-men,
let a Mass be said and the Soul of your friend Shall be delivered; or, to that
effect: and who can be uncharitable enough, or such a silly Merchant as not to
disburse a little to procure so great a benefit at so cheap a rate? but when
you come to examine the performance on their side, it amounts to no more then
this short payment; They have offered up their prayers for you, and must leave
the success to Gods mercy, and this is well, and the truth; but why then did
you tell them, when you took their money, that their friend should be delivered,
in what Court would so fraudulent a Plea be allowed? If you will expressly
undertake, for my ten or twenty pounds which I really give you to pay my debts
and free me out of prison; and when I look for Effects as real as my money, you
put me off with this cold comfort, that you have entreated for me, but must
leave the decision of the cause to the sentence of the Judge. May I not expect
you should show me at least some assurance from the Judge himself, that he will
effectually release me? and that within the time you made me believe, when I
parted with my money? and may I not, if you fail in that, charge you with
deceiving me? Is not this case a little too near that unhappy scandal on which
Luther took so fast hold that he pulled down the Churches of whole Provinces by
it? What shall I say of the averting men from cultivating the inward affections
of their hearts, in which the Kingdom of God resides, to the too much relying
on works done by others? what of the laying even to Gods own charge as it were
a kind of Simony, such practices being easily interpretable to a bad sense as
if he dispensed his spiritual goods with a respect to the quantity of what is
given, and that the poor Widows mite cannot have so great an effect as a
Dives's talent. And though much of what I now am discoursing be chiefly
applyable to Priviledg'd Altars and Scapulars, and such like abused devotions,
yet is it in a degree true of those who to invite Customers boldly assure them
if they shall procure so many Masses, of a very delivery; quick, though not
determinately known. But suppose the Affirmative of intermedial Release be in
it self true; yet how does it appear to us? the effects concern not any living
person, but are altogether invisible and out of our reach; which till they are
sufficiently evidenced to us, must needs be uncertain to us, and so continually
disputable, if not improbable, whose settlement must depend on the
determination of this Question, before which final decision it is not improper
that Scholars try their utmost endeavors, to examine and prepare both sides for
discovery of the truth. Nor is it in the least my intention to charge the
Church with any of these irregularities; but only to refute the errors, and
reprove the abuses of particular persons; wherein I have the sure warrant of
the Council of Trent, which while it forbids such uncertain Doctrins, commands
to oppose them that preach'em.

These and many other such observations (of which no subject, that I know, more
plentiful) well considered; permit the Ingenious Gentleman to think the
rescuing Ladies devotions from slight and hazardous practices to solid and
assured pieties, judiciously preferrable to the small and short dissentions
that possibly may spring out of the more general divulging such discourses:
Nor did he this, till the loud and many clamours of some busy heads against the
Opinion, while it lay close wrapped up in its native dark Latin, rendered the
Translation, in his judgment, absolutely necessary. For the Latin Book I am to
answer; for the English, they who talk so much in English against it, and, were
the People such as they should be, those kind of Controversies might easily be
managed without any breach of charity at all, or the least diminution of their
mutual correspondence; it being our duty as in matters of Faith to be zealous
and exactly uniform, so in other debates to be temperate and prudently
condescending. Let every one but seriously read the 13 Page of your Result, and
I doubt not they will proceed in this point as calmly and warily as you do.
There you tell us, that some things have been delivered to posterity in the
Church which could never obtain more authority then Opinion, as is made evident
in your System, even in grave Subjects: but how to distinguish such from
Doctrins of a higher nature, in case Holy Church did not convey clearly their
qualification with them as in some cases evidently It did, and in some cases It
did not, as there you give Instances; then the only way is to return to
General Councils, that they according to their Office may Conquisitione facta,
after the Example of the Apostles, juridically appoint to each their Seats,
where all must acquiesce. Thus you; and excellently well: and to this Trial I
freely submit all my Opinions, how evident soever they may appear to my self.
You cite not the particular place, and I happend to light on one which treated
such businesses, and finding it very proper I contented my self, and it is
System c. 32. p. 335. etc. where, (as indeed all over that Book, it being a
Magazine of curious Questions and Antiquities) I met with some instances, which
as they satisfied me, will I hope, if diligently perused, content my Reader
too, there he should see collected together, not only universal Catholic
Persuasions, but some Conciliary Definitions unallow'd by Divines to be Points
of Faith. But you say, this Point is not among 'em, and I say as tender Points
as this, are among 'em; What think you of the Assumption of our Lady? What of
the Spirituality of Angels? this, embraced by all Scholars; that, by all
People. Besides, do you not there your self acknowledge that very many Orthodox
Divines hold, though all the Fathers admit this or that Point, it does not
follow, we should presently pronounce it of faith; and this, even when the
matter is of weight and consequence. To conclude this introduction, I shall
take leave to transcribe out of the same Place only these few sayings,
recommending them to the serious Consideration of the passionate and biased
Reader. The first shall be that of Bellarmin; In Consiliis maxima pars Actorum
ad Fidem non pertinet, sed tantum ipsa nuda Decreta, and ea non omnia, sed
tantum quae proponuntur tanquam de fide. Another, of Innocent the third,
Judicium Ecclesiae nonnunquam opinionem sequitur quam and fallere saepe
continget and falli. The third, of Saint Aug. Sentiat quisque quod libet tantum
contra Apostolicam manifestissimam Fidem non sentiat. And now Sir, me thinks
the Question betwixt you and me is reduced to so narrow a compass, that we may
see it all with one prospect, and hope by that means to see it well; whereas,
they that spread their view wildly at too much at once, have many things before
their eyes, but nothing in their sight.

Notes on the first Chapter.
YOur first Chapter did somewhat surprise me, for being used to expect in your
writings, Authorities express and driven home, I was amazed to find the main
question of your work, past slightly over with a general assertion that the
Fathers say what you intend, without directly producing Testimonies of
sufficient either weight or number to evince your position. The Council of
Florence I have taken notice of sufficiently in my answer to the Vindicator,
which I shall endeavor to get presented to you. The Result of my discourse
there in short, is that I acknowledge all the Council and Pope assert, and show
they do not affirm what you pretend.

Your only Testimony out of Saint John Damascen perplexed me, for I know your
goodness so great, that you would not wittingly impose upon your Auditory, and
esteemed your Criticism in Fathers so exact, that you would not permit such a
notable mistake to gain credit upon you: How then happens it that you so
confidently cite an Oration of Saint John Damascen, which Catholics either
doubt not to be his, or make a shameful excuse for writing it, saying he was
too credulous to fabulous narrations? In it are recorded the famous tales of
Trajan and Falconilla, saved from Hell by the prayers of Saint Gregory and
Saint Thecla. There is the monstrous story which you are pleased to recount to
your Readers of an Heathens scull that told a good Eremite they received some
comfort when they were prayed for. Which story is taken either out of Palladius
his Historia Lausiaca, or else Evagrius his Vitae Patrum, of which Saint Hierom
testifies only the first life to be true, and even in it, is that notorious
Romance of Macarius Romanus. And of the former, the same Saint Hierom testifies
he was an Origenist: wherefore the Author of this Oration attributed to St.
John Damascen is justly feared to have himself also been one, seeing his fine
stories aim at the comfort of the damned. Besides, our Critics tell us this
story is imposed on the great Saint Macarius, being originally written of
another of the same name, and the Orator adding that the answer was from God,
whereas the Original attributes it to the scull of a dead heathen Priest, and
so far likelier came from the Devil.

All the rest you say in this Chapter is just the Doctrine of your Epistolar
Antagonist as far as you let us understand his mind and mine too; to wit, that
to deny prayers profit the dead comes from the Devil. The general resistance
you plead against this Doctrine of Souls continuance in Purgatory, finds a
parallel in all popular persuasions how weakly grounded soever, which none but
discreet persons can endure to hear opposed; And for the answer I entreat your
pardon, if I remit you to my late Reply to the Vindicator. For the rest you
seem to press us that we must take your sense of the Fathers and Councils,
telling us it is the only ingenious one, and others are but extorted meanings.
Truly I believe you speak what you think, but I desire you, think what you
speak, that is, examine it well, for I believe your thinking is bred ex
consuetudine videndi; your education has been amongst them who daily practiced
it; you hear the Bells ever ringing to such devotions; you see the custom
spread over all the Western Church, and do not lift up your eyes to the
beginning of it, and therefore you think it was ever so, and that it is the
sense of those great Authorities.

But I cannot omit a byword of yours, that it is easy to elude the Fathers by
the voluntary glosses of blasted Authors. Is this spoken like a Controvertist?
like a victorious and crowned Champion over Heretics, and that by weapons out
of the Fathers, as you are esteemed, and worthily too? When you bring Fathers
against any of them, do you profess they may be easily answered by blasted
Authors? Whence then comes it, that in this Controversy you fly to an evasion
so unprofitable to your self, injurious to the Fathers, and advantageous to the
common Enemy? but that you esteem the Fathers you bring come not home to the
point, and that they must be inched out by a pious affection; whereof, to tell
you my mind, I believe all speciousness of piety, which prevents the
understanding from being indifferent to judge of the truth, is in very deed a
piece of impiety and temerity. And in our present Controversy, if the words of
the Fathers by which they attribute purging of souls to the fire of Judgment be
not beyond contest, I will yield the whole cause: (Some I have cited in my
Treatise, and more I can cite, if necessity requires,) but if they be, why is
it not lawful for me to allege them, though Heretics make use of them for
an evil end? charge either the Fathers for writing so, or the Heretics for
abusing them; however I I am free.

Notes on the second and third Chapters.
THese 2 Chapters go without Proofs, being as it were but inferences from the
pretended Ones of the First; and consequently their fate depends on the fortune
of their Leaders, which I hope I have already sufficiently disabled. Yet give
me leave here to add one Caution that may accompany you in your journey to ask
all the Catholic world, whether they believe a Release of Souls out of
Purgatory ordinarily obtainable before the day of Judgment as an Article of
their faith; or only assent to it as a current truth, which they never
doubted, nor ever examined. Should you proceed thus warily, I believe your
number would strangely diminish: how many think you would fall off, as not
conceiving themselves able to examine so hard a Question? how many of the
learned would confess, the more they impartially consider it, the more they
discover reasons not to be too confident of its being a point of Faith:
especially, if they have the fortune to compare it with other common
persuasions, which themselves acknowledge Universal and ancient, yet not of
Faith, as that of material fire now in Hell and Purgatory, etc. how few then
will the number of your Voters be? set but aside all those who think there is
literal fire there, (which you are bound to do, because they believe it
cerraintly, yet is it not of Faith) and presently your multitude in Spain,
Italy, Turkey, and Soria* whither you went for witnesses, will shrink into a
slender and inconsiderable number.

Whereas you add, we never read in Scriptures, Fathers, or Councils, that all
those that go to Purgatory must necessarily be detaind there without any relief
till the day of Judgment. I answer, first, it is but a negative Argument.
Secondly, It plainly agrees with my Opinion, who hold them relieved there as
well as you, though I explicate my Tenet another way. Which here I intend in
brief to show you.

Wherein, that we may proceed more safely, let us first see how far we agree,
and where we begin to differ. We agree that there is a Purgatory; and that
souls there detained, are helped or relieved by the prayers of the faithful. We
begin to differ, in explicating what we conceive by relief; and we wholly
disagree in the time of ordinary deliverableness.

Your conception of Relief, I imagine, is, that when prayers are said for the
departed, their souls are really changed from the state of pains they were in
before, to one of a milder affliction; where they must expect till some new
cause raise them a step higher; and so by degrees, having past over all those
steps, are at last admitted into heaven; your self will agree these words are
metaphorical, and translated from our manner of speaking; and I gather, and
conceive the sense too, of these words, is translated from our thinking; and
indeed, if we mind our selves well, we shall still find our words of the same
piece with our notions: now we, being conversant only with our bodies, frame
all our notions after their measure, and speak, and think too, generally, of
spirits, and even of God himself, as of things we daily commerce with. Do we
not still fancy such motions, changes, and other operations among Angels as we
see here among our selves? Does not the very Scripture in condescendence to us,
use the same method? In most of which cases, both you and I are equally engaged
to seek out a wiser meaning, then appears in the naked expressions; this task
is common to all Divines to endeavor the verifying these phrases (so grossly
absurd in their bare letter) by an explication that may strictly and rigorously
maintain them to be true.

The Spirits I shall treat of to this purpose, are God, the blessed in heaven,
and the souls in Purgatory. And to begin with God, the beginning of all things,
what do we conceit of him, when we read of his being angry, and pleased; his
resolving to punish, and afterward repenting; his having eyes and hands; his
going from place to place; his abiding from generation to generation; his
seeing successively, and decreeing conditionally, and a thousand other
instances; all this Divines must, and do find ways to verify of One simple and
absolute unchangeable Essence, whose being and knowing, and willing, is
altogether, without the least shadow of succession for ever. All this Divines
will say, was perfect in God from the first instant, as I may call it, of his
Being; that is, from eternity; and yet our condition obliges us to speak, and
even think of all this, in a way infinitely below the severe truth, though more
or less approaching to it, according to the pitch of our capacities.

For Angels, as we read many of the like passages concerning them* and their
actions; so the like explications (with observance of a due proportion betwixt
the Creator and the creature) be applied to them. The Angels, we know, rejoice
at the conversion of a sinner; and sure it were no blameable practice to allow
for that joy some little share in our intention; and perhaps to begin a
particular devotion, directed to the increase of joy in the Saints and Angels,
would be as laudable an invention as some that are highly commended. Every day
new sinners are converted; every day new joy is among the Angels for those
conversions. How must we fairly reconcile the difficulties? the Scriptures say
they receive joy, and Divinity says their nature is fixed: In our solemnest
oblations we pray it may profit the Saints to glory: and our Doctors hold they
are in termino, and no longer in the Way. Can a change consist with fixture?
and a going on, with being at the end? in rigor we see it is impossible, and
therefore must cast about to find out the Riddle, which is not so hard as we
imagine, if we take the right course to seek. First, let us sever the parties:
Scriptures and Liturgies are on one side, Divines on the other. Were the
question of the truth of the words, without precisely determining the
particular sense, I should clearly follow the former: but if it be only of the
Propriety of their signification, and what is severely verifiable of them, I
make no scruple to adhere to the later; and this, without the least diminution
to the other. The authority of those, I confess, is more sacred and venerable:
but the reasonings of these, I cannot deny, are more exact and artificial;
each fittest for its peculiar office. Those undertake the instruction of the
world, and perform it according to the capacity of the persons they deal with;
these only intend their notions for the Learned, and their highest praise is,
to illustrate and fortify and improve true Religion by true Reason.

But, to come nearer our particular question; when we pray to Saints or Angels,
do we not hope we move them then to go make their addresses to God for us,
which they were not doing before? do we not expect that at the time of our
prayers to them, they should entertain a new affection of charity to us; and
even ground our devotion on th^s expectance? and wisely too, till our
understandings be elevated to more perfect apprehensions; yet in a strict
Examine, all these our conceits are very unsuitable to what really passes among
these pure spirits.

Nor are we disappointed in the least of the fruit of our prayers, though we
never so much apprehend the manner either of their hearing us, or interceding
for us: which assurance ought to suffice the unlearned; whose sincere devotion
will infallibly save them without these subtilties: the more speculative heads
will find, if they search for it, other satisfaction.

To these inquiries, perhaps this one consideration may give some assurance; it
is clear, in God, (as we said above) all is eternal, and whatever we read or
imagine as done successively in Him, must be entirely verified of his first
instant, were there any such beginning of existence in his perfect eternity.
Why may not the same be affirmed proportionally of Angels, whose being, though
neither independent, nor infinite, yet is purely spiritual, and their duration
altogether? and consequently the joy, our good works give them, was really in
them at their beginning; with relation indeed, and dependence on our
conversions, which were to happen afterward in succession of time, but lodged
in their breasts altogether at first, by the large sore knowledge wherewith
their bounteous God endued them: else what a strange perpetual motion would
there be in heaven, if every good or bad work of all the men on earth, should
beget a new affection of joy or grief in all the Angels of heaven, (I suppose
our sins displease them, as they do God; and contristate them, as they do the
holy Ghost) nor shall I so far distrust my Reader as to doubt his admittance of
the same conclusions for Saints as well as Angels; since they both agree in the
common notion of Spirits.

To apply this now to our present Case; As our conversions procure joy to the
Angels, without making any new change in them; why may not our prayers procure
relief to the souls in Purgatory without making any new change in them? As all
that we express in terms of succession when we speak of Angels, is in Theology
sufficiently verified, by referring it to the first instant of their fixed
being; why may not also the Relief we impetrate in succession of time for souls
departed, be sufficiently verified by referring it to the first instant of
their fixed being or separation?

I confess I know not how to find an unevenness in the two sides, they are so
exactly parallel: Addition of joy in one; diminution of pains in the other: new
honor to the one; new relief to the other; and both from the same act, the
same prayer, the same oblation. If the whole body of Catholics expect to alter
the sorrows of the souls departed, do they not also expect to advance the
honor of the Saints and Angels, nay, even of God himself? If that be
universally practiced, and with such hope, is not this so too? If the common
people feel their imaginations check at our interpretation of that; would they
not be as much startled, did they strongly reflect on it, at the Schoolmens
explication of this? both contain the same difficulty; and therefore both
require the same method to answer: and, as whatever belongs to man in the
quality of a living creature, belongs to a horse or lion by the same title: so
every attribute incident to Angels purely as they are spirits, may justly be
claimed by any to whom that notion of spirit is truly appliable.

Now, souls departed have, in my opinion, so large a knowledge given them
immediately upon their first separation, that they assuredly know all the good
that they have done for them, both by occasion of what themselves procured, and
by the voluntary charity of others; as also what shall be their portion at the
day of Judgment, compounded of all these concurrent causes; and so are now,
from the first moment of their unclothing, in that degree of hope and joy which
those foresights produce: which yet ought not in the least to cool our
devotions toward them, since they never should foreknow that our prayers
obtain for them those advantages, if indeed we did not really pray for them.

Thus far I am drawn in defense of truth and my self, both beyond my intention,
and against my inclination: but still it sometimes happens, that what is not
enough for some, is too much for others.

To conclude then, As prayers for the dead with hope of procuring them relief;
is a traditionary doctrine and practice, so prayers to Saints and Angels (and
even to God himself) with persuasion of advancing their glory. is a
traditionary doctrine and practice: but whether any real intrinsic change
among those spirits be wrought successively, and occasionally after our
sublunary fashion, is merely a Theological inquiry, and no traditionary either
doctrine or practice.

In the third Chapter, you touch upon the Reasons of praying for the dead in
particular; but because you handle it afterward on set purpose; I may lawfully
defer the answer till I meet with it again; in the mean time, I freely
subscribe to every word of the testimony you bring from Saint Austin.

Notes on the fourth Chapter.
Here you pretend to deliver the sense of the Liturgies, both of the Greek and
Latin Church. My first note is that where Saint James prays God to cause the
souls to rest with the Saints; You seek to persuade the Reader, that we
explicate it to pray, that they may not rest till (nay more till after) the day
of Judgment: which I confess to be a jeer, fit enough perhaps for the merry
trifling Vindicator, but you much undervalue your self to use scoffing in stead
of Reason. You tell us too, the Fathers pray constantly for a present help, but
when you cite words, nothing appears, but the common effect in which both sides
agree.

One place you have out of Saint Ambrose which has some show, I loved him,
says Saint Ambrose, and therefore I will accompany him to the kingdom of
heaven, nor will I forsake him, till by tears and prayers I bring him whither
his own deserts call him. These words you interpret to signify material time,
that he will pray so long till he has brought him out of Purgatory into Heaven.
I on the other side conceive it only an expression of the fervency of the
prayer which he would make for him. Let us weigh whether explication be the
more rational. To undertake what I say, was in Saint Ambrose's power, being no
more then to promise the assistance which was in the Churches power. The other
sense which you make, requires that Saint Ambrose should expect a revelation to
know when his soul went to heaven, else he must never give over praying for
him; that he should enter into the counsels of God, and understand both what
punishment was due to Theodosius, and what quantity of prayer was enough to
release him. Add to this the doctrine of both Fathers and Schoolmen, that there
is no promise of God that a good man's prayers shall be heard for others; and
therefore, as to us, it is wholly uncertain. Wherein then are the prayers of
those who think with me less fruitful to their departed friends, then theirs,
who call to God for a determinate or immediate delivery? If the release be
granted when it suits with the justice and mercy of God, as doubtless it is,
then both their prayers are equal, and this only difference is between them,
as to the time, one prays with more importunity, the other with more
submission; but, as to the desire of benefiting, both with the same affection.

Next you urge Saint Chrysostom, saying, the dead receive some comfort if
offerings be made for them; and conclude from that word some, as if it could
not signify heaven. But as you prettily press quiddam, so will I beg leave to
press the future Participle, accessurum; which quite spoils your pretense of
present change upon our prayers; and being indeterminately future, may signify
indifferently, the day of judgment, and that solatium quiddam (as you put it)
let it mean what it will, is given them. Now the word some, being abstractive,
suits very well with the intention of him who would evince, that prayers did
assuredly benefit the dead; as is the method of all wary men, to use the
commonest and surest terms, without engaging into particular degrees, unless
those degrees were the very question. And do you think there are not degrees
too of rewards in heaven? is there not the reward of a Prophet? and that of a
Disciple? that which is proportioned to the giving a cup of cold water, and all
this in the essential part of beatitude; every act of charity increasing it to
its worth and degree? Besides, will you deny accidental rewards in heaven?

Then you insist upon revelations of Saint Gregory and Venerable Bede, and make
an advantage of their not being contradicted, which consequence I do not
understand. For how many things are there written in diverse Authors, both
ancient and modern, neither believed* nor contradicted? or if contradicted,
both themselves and contradictions generally neglected? you add, that both
Greeks and Latins positively approved to them. True it is, Gregory the third,
according to Photius (who could not well be ignorant of it, being so learned a
person, especially in Books and Authors) was the Writer of those Dialogues; a
Syrian born, and for his piety, exalted to the Popedom; and Zacharias, by
birth a Grecian, and for his goodness promoted also to the same dignity thought
them fit to be communicated to Greece, but with what success I cannot give you
any account. Yet I dare say, no grave Divine now living, will undertake to
justify those Revelations, as having ever some smack that agrees not with
Catholic Doctrine. Venerable Bede's Revelations likewise have certain twangs
of strangeness in them, which show that they cannot bear the touch of a
Theological examination; and so, in a fair word, I answer you the Revelations
both of the one and the other, are generally contradicted by Divines, and you
can make no argument from them; but rather I may infer the effect of such an
origin is to be suspected, and dangerous.

You say the Sequence of the Mass for the dead, inculcates the horror of
doomsday, to move good people to help the souls out of Purgatory before it
come: As if you conceived that day would be worse to them, were they not helped
before; which Position, I confess, I understand not: Since it is the general
Doctrine that the same doom is given in the particular judgment, and there is
nothing then to be decided but Eternity. You bid me consider, that these three
alone, Saint Gregory, Zacharias, and Saint Chrysostom, carry the Greek and
Latin Churches on their backs; but give me leave to say, that the Fathers and
Authorities I have cited (of which you take no notice) are so far more numerous
and strong then they, that (to use your own phrase) they carry both their
Churches and them and all on their backs.

You come at last to the Council of Chalcedon, and Ischyrions action against
Dioscorus, for mispending a Ladies monys, bestowed at her death, for the good
of her soul, so the text has it, if I remember right, and not for the souls of
the deceased, as you write it; though if it were so written, it were
conformable to the use of the Church, and true Doctrine, and so I must put this
also, amongst your other proofs, which want a little of that pious affection to
stretch them home to the purpose: For your argument hence, seems to stand thus;
alms given for the dead are to be distributed faithfully; therefore souls are
delivered before the day of Judgment.

After this severe consequence of your own, you entertained the confidence to
censure my explication of the offertory, for a sophisme; because I think the
punishment expressed there, signifies that of Hell, not Purgatory. But certainly,
it is a spice of great weakness, to believe the contrary without a stronger
proof then your bare word; since the expressions are so horrid, that greater or
more significant can scarce be found, as, the jaws of a Lion, or Devil, the
deep dungeon* that Tartarus (or the deepest sink of Hell) should not swallow
them up. And in the Office of the dead, where no order dwells, but everlasting
horror; and other such dreadful phrases. And the Greeks use to call it in
their rituals, Gehennam, But why seeds refrigerii should speak your purgatory,
I am not capable of the consequence. It may be said by Writers, that
refreshment is given there, but sure none before you, ever called that
suffering state, the seat of refreshment.

Notes on the fifth Chapter.
AS your Chapter is short, so shall my Notes. You say, tradition alone cannot
prove faith in all Articles; but you prove it not; for neither the Council of
Trent, nor Saint Irenaeus, though the one say Catholic Faith is contained in
both, and the other, that both are necessary for the Church, say that Tradition
alone is not sufficient; Rather Saint Irenaeus says it is; as all those
Fathers must needs be understood to do, who in case of difficulty, send us to
the Apostolical Churches. But to be short, I make you this argument: If
Scripture teach somewhat that is not in Tradition, either Scripture in such
passages needs an Interpreter, or no. If none, can any sensible man persuade
himself, it has not been the perpetual doctrine of the Church, so it be in a
point necessary to be known? And if Scripture do need an Interpreter, that
interpreter binds the Church, and is the immediate Revealer, and he must have
the Authority of such a Proposer, to oblige the Church to his interpretation.
It is therefore a sophism, to put the Scripture for a self-sufficient authority
to bind the Church, in what is not known by tradition. But Scripture is
necessary for condemnation of Heretics in such points as they pretend to
deduce from it; and so the Council of Trent declares it self, when it speaks
upon what ground it would proceed: What consequents follow of this doctrine, we
must expect your leisure to declare, as yet I know none.

Notes upon the sixth Chapter.
IN the beginning of the sixth Chapter, I find little difference betwixt your
doctrine and mine; For though you explicate Aristotle's Nunc otherwise then I
should do, yet not being necessary to our purpose, it is not fit for me to take
notice of it. Only I understand not how after you have very learnedly declared
that the soul by its aeviternity has the succession of the parts of pain all
together, afterward you put that a soul by twenty years duration in pain has
suffered so long the hard consequents of that duration; For if the extension of
time as far as concerns the intrinsecal existence of the soul was all resumed
in aeviternity, and aeviternity was all together by the very initiating of it;
I cannot apprehend the running of time by it, can add any intrinsecall
consequent, which was not in it by the very making.

You seem to add yet a greater Paradox, telling us notwithstanding the being of
aeviternity all together, yet there is a priority of nature in it: which though
I can conceive in causes and effects, as being different things, yet in a pure
indivisible it passes my understanding; specially when the priority must be in
succession, where, when one part is, the other is not, Neither does Aristotle
help you, in whose doctrine the decreeing of the will is a successive action, as
depending on a corporal motion in the body. But this being the subtilty of a
Scotist, I pray do not persuade your self, that in our doctrine (which makes the
duration of the acts of the soul, the very duration of the soul) a change of
act can be connaturally admitted.

You insinuate something of a Metaphysicall charity, and that our doctrine is
suspected to account voluntarily assumed penance to be superfluous, if not
superstitious. Sir, I desire you by the freedom you see in my writing, to speak
meaning loud, not to mince any sinister conceits framed of my Tenets. Truth
loves light; and in this particular point, I will openly declare you my
sentiment: All austerities or extern actions which either conduce to the
breeding of charity in our selves and neighbors, or to the conserving and
increasing it in those that have it, and to the extending of it by diffusion
into diverse subjects; all this, though there be no obligation for the actions
in common (which is meant by their being voluntary) I esteem holy and
sanctified. But if any one should think God takes pleasure that we should
weaken or afflict our bodies, without intending profit to our souls, but merely
because it pleases God, by and for it self, I am of opinion that he makes God a
tyrant, and that his action is both superfluous and superstitious.

After this point, I find no disagreement between us in any thing that concerns
our question; some words, at the very and, of the souls being exercised in a
passive compliance, seem improper in our natural and vulgar apprehensions; but
not false, and therefore not to be excepted against. Rather I congratulate
among many other learned passages in this Chapter, your truly Catholic
explication of the Churches Tenet, that while they are in Purgatory, their sins
remain, and that their sins once perfectly taken away, they are straight in
Heaven; which is in my mind, the true sense of the Bull and Council. Though I
cannot approve what you attribute to Scotus, that in Hell, venial sins after
certain proportion of punishment, cease to be, which I think a misgrounded and
exotic conceit.

Notes on the seventh Chapter.
IN your seventh Chapter, you give Aristotle's Reason for the unchangeableness
of an abstracted soul, a very true and good one; but so dangerous, if not
perfectly understood, that it has precipitated diverse Peripateticks into the
suspicion (if not the reality) of being Atheists, because a substance without
an action, is accounted among Philosophers frustraneous, and superfluous and
incongruous to nature; to avoid which inconvenience. I must note that this is
one difference betwixt bodily and spiritual substances, that bodies are
essentially isntrumental, and therefore, where they are the directly and
primarily intended parts of nature, they are frustraneous and idle, if they
have not motion; but spiritual substances* especially separated souls, are
certain beings, which are the end of bodies, and of all changes: which end
succeeds to changes as standing still and quiet does to local motion, as being
at home to the journey by which we come thither, as health to curing, and
manhood to growth* therefore souls are of themselves incapable of motion, as
being now grown above materiality, which is the possibility to change and
motion: and so by the negation of materiality in Peripatetick Philosophy is
demonstrated the unchangeableness of souls. And who ever supposes a change in
spirits, must suppose them also to have a potentiality to somewhat, which is to
be attained by motion, as indeed those Divines do, who put change in them.

This is Aristotle's way throughout his Philosophy, which those Peripateticks
understood not, who drew the mortality of the soul out of the deficiency of
fancy in her. I am glad in the mean while, to meet an Adversary so learned, as
to penetrate the truth of Aristotle's and S. Thomas his Tenet, and so ingenuous
as to attest those great Lights are on my side; by which it appears I am not
left singular in my opinion; A favor the Vindicator would not aford me, but
made it injurious in me to pretend or assert I built on Saint Thomas his
Principles.

It is now time to retire from this digression to the imputation you lay upon
the Translator, out of the Council of Trent, where it forbids difficult points
to be preached to the vulgar; which you extend to the putting them into vulgar
Languages, not without some wrong to all such great wits, who are as capable of
high speculations, as the Greeks and Romans were, and yet know no other Tongues
then their mothers; and what Languages, I pray you, did those Greeks and Romans
themselves use in their sublimest discourses, but their mother Language? In
fine, the practice of other Nations testifies, that the Councils prohibition
reaches not so far, if you think it did, I wonder you pressed it not home; look
in his Preface, and you shall see this performed by him, both to his and my
justification; of which yet you vouchsafe not to take the least notice.

But I would heartily entreat you to consider likewise those branches of the
Decree which concerns your party, and is a great deal more moral and important
to virtue. Incerta etiam vel quae specie falsi laborant evulgari ac tractari
non permittant. Uncertain devotions ought not to be divulged, how much less
violently pressed? Were there but one clear sentence of a Father for the
opinion of souls being freed before Judgment; Were there any ground of it but
unproveable revelations before the School? Did there any ancient School man
censure the contrary, did it not pass in the Council of Florence for an
indifferent opinion, and the contrary not to be exacted; Did not even at this
day the gravest School men temper themselves from censure, whatsoever their
private opinion is, I might think this command might less concern you. But if
none of this I have said can be confuted, then lay your hand upon your heart,
and think what is to be done. Remember in what language the scandalous delusive
promises annexed to certain prayers are printed, and improvidently thrust, as
your Epistle calls it, into Ladies hands; look but a little about you, and you
may perhaps, find motives enough to proceed very temperately in applying the
Council of Trent against that worthy Person that translated the Book, whose
conclusion you dislike, but confute not the Premises.

Your next opposition is about the day of Judgment, which you say is not to be
prayed for, and your grounds are the dreadfulness of it, and a place out of
Saint Hilary. And as for the dreadfulness, I pray consider the words you cite:
Cum vix justus sit securus, which if you please to mark, say the just shall be
secure, that is, out of all fear. Consider also the triumph the book of Wisdom
describes, Then that the just stand up in great assurance, etc. And you your
self know it is the sense of the whole Church, that even in Purgatory they are
all secure of their salvation. As for Saint Hierom, he was yet in the state of
uncertainty, and therefore no wonder if he had a deep apprehension of it, being
perpetually in thought of his sins. But this was not the way which the spirit
of God led Saint Martin, Saint Ambrose, and a late Saint, who professed, he
rather desired to live in uncertainty of his salvation so to gain souls, then
to die immediately with security of going to heaven; nor the mind of Saint
Paul, who desired to be dissolved, and accounted death a gain; so you see, one
Saints apprehensions are not to be the rule of the Church. We have our Saviors
warrant and exhortation even to them who shall see the disorder of the heavens
in way to judgment, to lift up their heads with joy, that their redemption is
near. And Saint Paul calls the Saints, those who love Christ's coming. And our
only Master teaches us to say, Thy Kingdom come.

Nevertheless, I admit that the frightfulness of that great scene of the
Universal conflagration, may deterr spirits, weak and not confident of their
strength, from desiring to be alive themselves at that day, but not from
desiring to come when God has prepared elect Saints fit to encounter those
terrors, and to pray that such men may quickly be raised, which is more
regardfull in their way, who think that even in aeviternity the addition of
time is of eminent consequence. Briefly, in the day of Judgment, there are two
things considerable; One, the terrors and dangers; in relation to which part,
none can conceive we ought to pray for it: the other, the great rewards and
benefits to be then distributed to such as are found worthy; and in that
respect nothing can possibly be more desirable to a Christian heart erected
with hope, and enflamed with love of such infinite felicity*

Your ensuing part brings in the difficulty of the fruit of prayer for the
dead, of which I may truly pronounce, it is both the easiest and hardest part
of all this question: easiest to understand, hardest to persuade. And I hold my
self bound to thank you, that you handle it like a grave and solid Divine, and
not with whimsies (like my Vindicative Answerer) unworthy to be regarded, and
able to turn a man's stomach that is bound to answer them; And yet fame
threatens the world, with a second Tome of Christian doctrine, turned into jests
by our Divine Tarleton.

Now to come to the point of the profit of prayer for the dead; wherein there
are three considerations to be managed; first, what is the fruit of this
prayer; secondly, what is obtained by it: and lastly, what comes to the
special share of him who is prayed for. As to the first, remember that prayer
is the substance of Christian life, recommended to us to be constant and
perpetual in all our actions; and let me add what you will not deny, in all
our passions and defects: If we be so imperfect as to desire what is not fit
for us, yet it pleases God, that even that, as long as it stands with ignorance
that it is against his will, be demanded at his hands. For still there is a
conversion of the soul to him, and many times so much the greater, by how much
the passion in us to the thing we desire is the greater.

Turn your eyes on a Gentlewoman that has lost her husband, or dear child: see
the passion she is in, the sorrow she suffers, so far as she conceives, her
beloved loss to be in misery. Remember the words of Saint Paul, Sicut qui spem
non habent, that is, inconsolably; put this Lady with all her passion into a
conceit that her loss is recoverable, that by her prayers to God, she shall
eternally enjoy the missed comfort in a plenitude of bliss and happiness. With
what earnestness of affection, with what a flood of tears, with what
impetuousness of heart does she embrace God and his goodness, and the hopes of
heaven for her self and hers: And will you after this tell me there is no fruit
of prayer for the dead, and this dead in particular; since it has so deep a
stroke upon the living friends?

But your eye lay only upon the fruit of impetration. I pray therefore (not to
repeat again how punctually all our expectation of successive relief for those
souls by our prayers is verifyed in their simultaneous enjoyment of it;) tell
me, is it to be understood, that a cause can make a thing be sooner, and not
make it be? It is plain then if impetration be a causing or making the eternal
reward come sooner, it is the causing of the eternal reward it self to come.

I can put this more home to You, who make no doubt but God so orders Beatitude
to be the End of our works* that withal he orders our works to be the means of
our Beatitude: so that it is perfectly true, if the works precede not,
Beatitude shall not follow, notwithstanding the effectual will by which God
has ordained it. For you understand that in Gods resolutions, there are no ifs
and ands, as in ours; but that with one intuitive and strong act, he orders the
means for the end, and the end by the means; and that all priority and
posteriority is purely in the effects, none in his acts: And that Gods free
disposition of creatures consists not, in that he can now determine what he
list; but in that he has determined what he listed; or rather, that he is
essentially the very determination of what he lists.

But I exceed the bounds of what you think fit for a discourse to be vulgarly
communicated, and therefore I return to my Theme, and conclude, if impetration
of the day of Judgment be such a cause of it, and of all that passes in it,
true Divinity must confess, if this impetration be not, the day of Judgment
shall not be, nor any effect in it; how can any Divine who understands the
exactness of Gods working, deny, but, that the prayers for the dead by which
its coming is procured, procure the very happiness it self of the party for
whom he prays, and brings him to the crown to which his merits call him, as
St. Ambrose speaks; so that you see the difficulty of this point consists in
this, that those who are not Divines, do not understand the connection of Gods
works, and how it is true, that if any one circumstance ordained by God to
bring about such an effect should fail, the effect it self would have no
success.

By which the third consideration is made manifest, that the party for whom the
prayer is made obtains by virtue of such prayer, not only his own glory and
every accidental part of bliss allotted to him, but besides, obliges all the
Saints of God, by being the occasion that by the prayer made for him, all their
bliss respectively comes to atchievment* how hard so ever it be to stamp a full
conceit of this into the heads of the common sort.

Your second Argument presses that the coming of the day of Judgment concerns
the living as well, or more, then the dead; I will not question whether it does
or no, but I ask, what does that prejudice the prayer, if it helps more then
the maker of it thinks on? unless you imagine the good people pray like the
little boy, whose prayer was, that God would bless his father and mother, and
brothers and sisters, and no body else. I have not learned any such restriction
of charity, nor did he teach it, who bids us in his own Prayer call him Pater
noster, not Pater mi; And told us he knew well (that is better then we) what we
wanted, and that our desires should be after the Kingdom of God, and all other
things would be added to us; as, to Salomons Petition of Wisdom, besides the
grant of it, were added those felicities he did not pray for.

And me thinks the reason is clear; for if our charity be the adequate cause of
impetrating what we beg rationally of God, and God is not ignorant of what is
fit for us, certainly, in respect of our charity, he will do it, so we be
careful to increase that* whether we ask it him or no. Look the Pater noster
through, and see if you find any other object of prayer then the good of the
world in common, and the necessaries to our own perfection. Other prayers are
framed in condescension to our weakness, who do not cleanse our souls from
particular desires, and are good and commendable to the proportion of diverse
abilities. But if all could attain the perfection of desiring nothing but what
charity commands, it would be better both for the living and the dead, even in
the way of impetration, though particulars were never thought on. Nevertheless,
since the world is the world, this Article of praying for the dead, is as
necessary as our imperfection (which is not like to leave us) must needs make
it, both in common and in particular, as we see it used.

The rest of your Chapter is so speculative, that I could willingly have
omitted it, but because you recommend it to be weighed, I cannot neglect it. I
pray then take notice, that in Saint Thomas his way, the composition of spirits
is not of materiality and spirituality, but of essence and existence, a
composition whose separability or conjunction belongs purely to the activity of
God, and is not a potentia* but a non repugnantia, and so can have no cause
under God, whose essence is in the order of existence, or rather the order it
self, no other substance reaching to that order. Out of which is inferred, that
as to create and annihilate, that is* to change existence per se, belongs only
to God; so likewise does any change in a pure spirit which cannot have its
source in a conjoined body. Those who put a kind of materiality which they do
not explicate, whether they speak consequently or no, I cannot judge, but I
know Tully makes sport with the Epicureans for giving their gods, quasi carnem,
and quasi sanguinem, without being able to explicate them further. Besides,
that a demonstration could be grounded upon propositions whose sense was not
comprehended and explained, I never read in Aristotle.

Saint Bonaventure (if his ordinary citers do him no wrong) makes duration to
be truly divisible in infinitum, which, that it should agree to any thing, but
either quantity, or by quantity, Peripateticks or any other solid Logician,
think to imply as much as being divisible, without divisibility. To his Reason
and the two following inconveniences, St. Thomas's Scholars use the distinction
of infinite in its particular kind; and infinite simply, or in all kinds; and say
this later only belongs to God Almighty; and that if there were an infinite
quantity, it would not therefore be God, nor that if an Angel know all
specieses of numbers or figures, therefore he knows all things. Nay, that
because the intellect is but a passive faculty of it self is there any infinite
vigor required to knowledge, though infinite, so it be purely infused, as
likewise that the vigor of infinite duration is in the Conserver, not in the
thing conserved; so that I doubt much how valuable these arguments can be made,
though you seem confident of them, even more then of the Demonstration of
Euclid and Archimedes, whom you think apt to swallow suppositions without
proof, which is mistaken, unless you speak of some self-known Axioms, which I
think you also will admit.

By the way I would entreat you to quote me some place of Scripture in which
any Angel is recorded to have had a new internal act, for I know no such;
though external actions they have manifold; and so I end this Chapter, noting,
that whereas you cite my Peripateticall Institutions for my opinion of
Purgatory, that their testimony is not sufficient to declare my opinion in
Divinity matters; the necessity of good method forcing me to abstain from
Theological resolution in a Philosophical Treatise. I could rather have wished
you had taken more notice of the little book I wrote expressly concerning this
very question; where the whole business is largely treated, the Objections
raised, and Answers offered; many authorities produced, and many Reasons; to
none of which, can I any way conceive, you have much applied your thoughts; and
so if they perhaps deserve no answer, I am sure they have none.

Notes on the eighth and ninth Chapters.
IN your eighth Chapter you trouble your self, whether it be possible for the
souls in purgatory to see the humanity of Christ, which I am so far from
disputing with you, that I willingly acknowledge it; and withal, that it
raises a great height of charity in him, so that their state in Purgatory is
far beyond the state of this life for charity, but yet that it takes not away
the dregs of sin left in them at their death. Not that I think Saint Paul
speaks of any such matter in the place you cite, but the meaning of those
words* In corpore an extra corpus nescio, is, that he knew not whether his body
was truly carried locally into the third heaven, or only that he had a sight of
it, as Saint Stephen had of Christ in the place where he stood, and so the
sense may be, whether the rapture was in his body, or only in his mind. For
else we must conceive him dead in the mean while, which I know not that any
affirm; and otherwise these be two species of the three which Divines make of
Visions.

To enquire then why the sins are not taken away in Purgatory; though I could
answer you, that it is because they are in termino; and you Divines tell us
they cannot merit nor demerit; Yet both I and you may ask how this is proved,
and whither we go consequently. I could answer again, that it is for want of
fancy, or of an intellectus agens. But you would reply, God supernaturally
supplies that, and I should think God does not nor cannot prudently change his
settled order of causes merely by favor, and because he will, without the
profit of the world. Therefore I must briefly say, it is the result of nature,
and that the coexistence of compossible desires impeaches not the duration of
these weak affections, since God acts not but by infusion of new existence, as
in the resurrection. He that will assert miracles without proof, plays not the
Divine, but puts all in confusion.

For this Interrogation, Cannot God do it? carries such an awful aspect, that
it seems to lay the imputation of Atheism on him who dares so much as doubt it;
yet you, and all good Divines know, it signifies no more, then whether the
effect implies contradiction; which may be disputed without horror, nay,
peradventure not so much; for if God cannot do in particular, but what is best,
he that can show a thing to be not best (how possible so ever it be) exempts it
from the force of that Interrogation. And although I could largely discourse of
this later part, even by your own occasion, who grant the course of nature to
be for me, yet to make this speculative part as short as I can, I will only
insist upon contradiction, how ever I fear, few more then your self will be
capable of the discourse.

I pray therefore reflect that when Philosophers agree, Identity of Time is
necessary to contradiction, it is not out of the nature of Time it self, which
being an extrinsecall accident, has not power to make any thing compossible or
incompossible in the subject where they imply contradiction; but it must be the
nature of the subject it self, which being susceptive of as great mutability as
time has mutation, is in potentia another thing to the proportion of the
changes of time; as, because a man who walks can stop, and the flame of a
candle go out in an instant; therefore the consistency of a material subject,
as to our minds consideration, is but moment-strong; and we can affirm nothing
of it in force of contradiction more durable then the unchangeableness or
identity of time, which is purely a thought or an abstraction: Out of this it
follows, that if we put in spiritual substances, a more then momentanean
constancy, we must also put the force of contradiction in them proportionable
to that constancy or identity of it self to it self. Now your self seeming to
admit this constancy under the name of aeviternity in spirits, for a future
eternity; it seems to me you should admit nothing in spirits that is not
compossible together in the subject, and by evident consequence that not to
have an act, and to have one in the same aeviternity, is as impossible as not
to have, and to have in the same instant of time.

You will peradventure tell me, this position ruins some common opinions in
Divinity, and my brittle Vindicator would tell me it moulder'd away his faith:
Sir, if you be of the opinion that Theology is arrived to its non plus ultra, I
am not. I think many now common and probable opinions, will in after ages be
demonstrated against, and prove erroneous: and therefore the pure authority of
Divines, who build upon pure reason, has no farther force with me then their
reason. And I think I have learned this lesson out of Saint Augustine, as I am
sure your self also have, how ever in practice apparences may seduce you from
the exercise of it; as if you believe it consonant to Scriptures, Fathers,
Councils, etc. without a legitimate examination of them: which when you go
about, you find them to be easily eluded by the glosses of blasted Authors,
many of which kind of Authors nevertheless Saint Hierom in his Comments upon
the Scriptures was used to cite, that men of understanding might see in the
variety of diverse conceits what truths might be picked out, even of blasted
Authors, as Aristotle out of the verities mingled among false opinions drew his
own demonstrations. The rest of these Chapters is but an explication
indifferent to both sides, in which as you admit in Purgatory a disposition to
charity, so me thinks you should to the change of affections by it: And whereas
you say that the soul is extra viam, the common Tenet of Divines should
admonish you that she is not in state to have new revelations and changes which
are the propriety of Via.

Notes on the tenth Chapter.
WHich is, for its Positions, entirely true and holy; but you seem to suppose
as true, some misinformations, or misapprehensions concerning your Adversary,
as that he questions general traditions, and calls them novelties; which how
you can do who know Saint Austin testifies in his time, as yet the question was
not agitated and that each part might prove either true or false, and that the
Author of the celebrated Dialogues expressly teaches they were unknown till his
days, and from thence till Saint Odilo's time very little esteemed or noysed;
How such an opinion can choose but be a Novelty in respect of the Church of God,
I cannot understand, or that six hundred years ago with a known beginning, can
enroll it into the practices or doctrins delivered by the Apostles, passes my
reach. As for the universal sense of the Church, I hope the Council of
Florence's act will demonstrate the contrary, as you may see in my answer to
the Vindicator; whither I beg leave to remit you.

The Text you cite out of Saint Austin is excellently true, Quae universa tenet
Ecclesia ab Apostolis praecepta, been creduntur, quanquam scripta non
reperiantur; but with these cautions* That the Church (that is, the community
of Believers, as such, not as a multitude of men) hold them as of faith, not
opine them only to be current truths; else every common persuasion grounded on
any probable Reason or Authority, would become an unchangeable Article of
Christian Religion; and in this, I think, I have your consent, if I mistake not
the the 32. Chapter of your Systema, which I formerly cited, and desire my
Reader to peruse the whole Chapter, being excellently pertinent to this
purpose: As also Verons general Rule of Catholic faith, which I hear is newly
translated into English.

There you shall see how warily that experienced Controvertist proceeds in
separating faith from opinions: No doctrine, says he, begun since the Apostles,
though confirmed by miracles, and those miracles reported by Saints, or
approved by general Councils, or attested in the Bulls of canonization can
ever be an Article of faith; Nor is the practice, says the same Auhor, even of
the universal Church a ground firm enough to build a point of Catholic faith
upon; because the object of faith is truth, and the Church often guides her
practices by probable opinions, which upon occasion she may change. And for
Decrees of Councils, the same Doctor maintains, and cites Bellarmin for his
opinion; that unless the Council proceed conciliarly, that is, by due
examination, etc. and define properly, not barely affirm a thing by simple
assertion, and occasionally, as it were, en passant: it does not oblige our
belief; and which is highest of all, though the Council decree expressly and
professedly a Doctrine debated, yet unless it be defined as a truth to be
believed with Catholic faith, they are not properly heretics that hold the
contrary.

What you deliver that one man's satispassion may by way of impetration satisfy
for another, and profit him, is very acceptable* and none but they who mistake
the words, can dislike the sense; for we see humiliations accompany solemn
prayers, both in the Law of Moses, and Grace; and nature it self teaches us, it
is a convenient habit for him that entreats mercy.

Notes on the eleventh Chapter.
WHere I see very little for me particularly to except against, but that you
term our Tenet, an Innovation, which name better becomes your own: But this is
an Indulgence to be granted to the conceit every one has of his own arguments;
For the opinion, that the sensitive or corporeal part of man is capable of
venial sin in it self, and so of goodness; I neither have nor will have any
thing to do with it; You say it is taught by the most speculative Divines, as
Scotus's Scool, and Cajetan, etc. I dare not meddle with such great men. As for
your Opiniators you speak of, I cannot point you to a fairer example then the
Vindicators Creed, which he has declared to be his faith, in his Discourse
against me. To the touch you give about probable opinions, the question is too
great to engage in on so slight an occasion. The place you quote out of Saint
Austin, seems not to concern the question, being only about the meaning of a
Text of Scripture; however the saying is a very good saying.

Concerning some seeming excrescencies, as you call them, in practical
Devotion, you speak like a grave man: you dislike them indeed, but in such soft
and gentle words, that none but a very tender ear will feel the stroke; they
have no strict acquaintance with Church orders, they are only a sort of
Bigotterie; which is a dark word, and many of the persons most concerned, will
least understand it. Much after this fashion did old Eli chide his sons, who
had got an ill-favored trick to fetch up with a new invented fork, part of the
sacrifice out of the Caldron* and cheat the people of the fat of their
offerings: What says the old father to his sons for this? Quare facitis res
hujusmodi, etc. Nolite filii mei, non enim est bona fama quam ego audio, ut
transgredi faciatis populum Domini. And almost thus far you seem angry too, but
is this enough? Have you sufficiently contributed to the secure disparaging
such exorbitances, like a free and zealous Divine? should you not have branded
'em particularly and smartly, as being not only (sure even in your own
judgment) not good, but abominable and detestable? let any indifferent person
seriously consider the intolerable flattering promises, unwarrantably and
scandalously applyd to certain prayers, and other actions (good enough of
themselves, but incredibly abused by such false and covetous Merchants) and he
will find you might have seasonably applyd a little sharper correction, then
what imports they are only in strict account not justifiable. This, I confess,
is not our direct Controversy, yet it is more censurable, only in degree, then
an eager inviting of people to bestow alms, with promise of a speedy delivery
out of Purgatory, especially, if they name the day, as I think some priviledg'd
Altars venture to do.

Notes on the twelfth Chapter.
IN which, you justly say, it is a most uncertain thing to determine of souls in
Purgatory, how long they stay there, and that indeed, there is neither reason
nor revelation to conduct us in that speculation; which is very true, and I
shall seek to confirm it by the testimony of the Church of Rome, or at least,
of the Pope, who takes the granting of Indulgences to be his personal
privilege; If we believe the Author of the Roman History of Trent, who seems
to speak it out of good warrant. I give you the words of an Author, writing and
printing in Rome, not full twenty years since, and therefore who credibly was
an eyewitness of what he wrote. Audiatur (says he) verborum formula qua
utuntur Romani Pontifices in suis de liberandis Animabus concessionibus, and
annexeth for the form these words: Nos divina misericordia confisi concedimus,
ut quotiescumque sacerdos in tali loco Missam celebraverit pro liberatione
unius animae in Purgatorio existentis quae per charitatem Deo unita ab hac luce
decessit, and piorum suffragiis juvari meruit, ipsa anima, quantum Divinae
bonitati placuerit, opportunis de thesauris Ecclesiae subsidiis adjuta,
peccatorum remissionem consequatur, and de poenis Purgatoriis facilius valeat
ad coelestem patriam pervenire. Where you see, that notwithstanding a soul
enjoys the privilege granted to such Altars; she may stay in Purgatory till
doomsday. And that none of our opinion have reason to abstain from the use of
priledg'd Altars, and the like Indulgences for the dead, or do well, if they
speak against them; but ought to cry out against the abuse of those who
persuade innocent souls of strange virtues which were never granted them, so
delude them with hopes for which they have no ground.

Nevertheless, I desire you to reflect, that if this be the profession of the
Roman Church, concerning the souls which seem to have an eminent favor and
degree in Christ's merits and the prayers of the universal Church, that it can
be no greater in respect of those souls which have only the private
intercession of friends; whence we may gather, that such mediations make them
not come sooner then other souls, but easilier to the Kingdom of heaven.

I wonder also that you being near a Jubilate Divine, should make difficulty to
censure an opinion; what is there more of difficulty in censuring then in
approving, nay then in determining a case to be Usury or Simony? Are there not
diverse kinds of censuring? Some juridical, and they suppose superiority: Some
unappealable, and they suppose supremacy: Some only rational, and they need no
more then Equality; and with reference to this last branch, you and I may
freely censure or approve of one another sayings, as we see cause; In this
very Chapter, do not you charge my opinion with Novelty, and consequently with
falsehood? which surely is a kind of censure: and as for the consequence it
self, I shall easily admit it in Faith, but not in Opinions; which I
conconceive may possibly be new, and true too.

I have no more to note concerning your Book, unless I should mark that you
seem to make Participem esse fidei Romanae, all one with submitting to the
decisions of Rome; but that concerns not our present question; yet I desire you
would be more rigorous in your interpretations, that so the credit of your
citations may be the greater. Only three things come into my mind, which I
forgot to note in their proper places; one should have been about the middle of
your fourth Chapter, where you would escape the Argument drawn from the
frequent mention of the Day of Judgment in the Roman Liturgy; by saying, 'twas
partly, that the dead might receive comfort before the last terrible day;
neither can the words have any other sense. Pray read over the sequentia again.
Can these words, Ne me perdas illa die, inter oves locum praesta, etc.
Confutatis maledictis, flammis acribus addictis, voca me cum benedictis; etc.
have no other sense but delivery before the day of Judgment? Join to these the
prayers of the Breviary; Cum veneris in novissimo die: dum veneris indicare
seculum per ignem, libera me Domine de morte eterna in die illa tremenda, etc.
And indeed, all over the offices for the dead. Can none of these words have any
other sense, then release before the day of Judgment? Is it possible the
Churches prayers should be thus cross interpreted, that where we expressly pray
for delivery in the day of Judgment, you should think we must necessarily mean
before the day of Judgment?

Another note which I omitted concerns your first Chapter, where you treated of
Revelations. For farther answer to which, I would offer you a notable example
of no less a Person then Gregory the ninth, who considering the ill success of
the designs he had undertaken at the instance of Peter of Arragon, and upon the
assurances of St. Bridget, and St. Katherin of Siena (who spoke with great
confidence of knowing the mind of God) being now in his last sickness, took the
B. Sacrament in his hands, and with most solemn and fervent entreaties,
conjured his successors not to govern themselves by the Visions of such persons
as give no reason for their counsels. Compare now the probabilities of your
Revelations with these that deceived this good Pope. Reflect first on the
persons engaged; a famous Ermit, and two canonized Saints pretend to have it
immediately from God, on the one side: on the other, (that is, on yours) some
well meaning people perhaps, and devout Pilgrims (the graver Persons that write
of such curiosities being generally, if not altogether, bare relaters of what
they hear from others) tell strange tales of Visions and Apparitions sometimes
to themselves, sometimes to their neighbors, of which not one in a hundred but
has something of ridiculous or superstitious: Remember the poor soul that was
put to scrub and wash in the Baths at Rome, mentioned in those you will call
Saint Gregory's Dialogues. Read well Saint Bedes Revelations (I mean those he
as an Historian recounts to have happened to others, as they said) and you will
find besides heaven, hell* and a penal place where imperfect Christians are
punished (that is Purgatory) that Revelation tells us of a fourth, where was no
punishment at all, but in it agmina laetantia, foelices Incolae, etc. Now, let
us ask in the name of Faith and Divinity what place is this? The Revealer puts
it utterly void of pain, (and so neither Hell nor Purgatory) and full of joy;
nay so full, that he could not imagine greater, and so took it for Heaven; but
the Angel which guarded him checked him in that thought, and showed him Heaven
afterward. What Divine can acquaint us with so much as the name of this place,
or explicate to us why in Justice the very little imperfect Christians whom he
places in this gay place, should not feel some pain proportioned to their
fault, as well as the venially more imperfect souls had to theirs; and these so
horrid too, that he who had the Vision, took the place for Hell. Again, he
affirms absolutely of those very little imperfect souls that they all go to
Heaven in the day of Judgment, and the self same of those seen in Purgatory,
which makes the words following concerning some coming sooner subjoined to this
later, seem an addition, no such words being annexed to the other state;
whereas me thinks according to the doctrine even of my opposers, those who
needed little or no purging, should come to heaven sooner. In a word, this
fourth place either contained souls perfect in charity, and then it is the
heresy of John 22. to hold it; or imperfect, that is, to be purged, and yet in
no penal place, that is, not in Purgatory, which is equally opposite to
Catholicism. How strange a thing is it then that men should build us Articles
of Faith upon Revelations, which are at least subcontrary to Faith. Besides,
which is remarkable, Saint Gregory and Saint Bede, are not pretended revealers,
or ascertaining the Visions on their own experience, but upon the testimony of
others they could never be assured of; whereas those other engaged the
testimonys of the Saints themselves, and yet miscarried most utterly.

After these two Revelations of the Dialogues and Bid, there is none (for any
thing I know) more authentic for this point, then that which you recount in
your first Chapter, usher in so solemnly, and rely on so assuredly; how that
once upon a time, a certain dead man's skul told a certain holy man, that every
time he prayed for the dead, we feel, said the deaths-head, some comfort. Now,
as ill luck would have it, this was the skul of a mere Heathen; and so, if
heathens use to go to Hell and not to Purgatory, it might sound indeed in
behalf of the damned, but not the least concern those in Purgatory, for whose
relief only the Church prays. Next, consider the things they meddle with; the
one side fairly foretold what in time we could discover the truth of, and so
was concerned to be wary; and the matter it self so far from incredible, that
it was not improbable: Your side tell stories far more craftily, such as can
never be disproved, such as may defy all the world to discover any falsehood in
them; but hold a little, all this high confidence, I doubt, is not granted on
their assuredness of truth, but impossibilty of trial: for who can detect the
fraud of such subtle Merchants, who pay us in coin that no touchstone can
examine? who can charge them, as those mistaken ones in Gregory the ninth's case
were by dear experience of the whole Christian world in the miscarriage of the
Holy War lamentably confuted? Many other instances there are, which all
conspire to the confirmation of the holy Popes wise advice; let them give
Reason for their promises.

The third note, which I think, I also omitted, relates to your cencession that
by the order of Nature souls in the state of separation are absolutely
immutable, and cannot change their posture from Purgatory to Heaven, but
supernaturally they may: If you mean by supernaturality, the extraordinary
power of God, I agree with you; and so our controversy will be at an end: but
if you mean any constant ordinary way appointed by God to effect that change
before the day of Judgment; I conceive it very reasonable some clear evidence
be produced, such as may warrant an Opinion, that by your own Tenet so directly
crosses the course of nature: when I see that, you shall immediately find me
most ready to submit: till then, I hope neither you, nor any of my fiercest
opposers will have the least just cause to condemn me.

If after this you demand, How shall we distinguish what the Church or Councils
teach to be believed as of Faith from other doctrins promiscuously delivered?
First, I do not remember this Objection any where insisted on by either of my
late Opponents; and I am very slow to stir farther then I am moved; and indeed,
think it inconvenient to start new game, before we have hunted down the old.
Secondly, Are not you obliged as well as I, to provide an answer for such a
Question? I am confident that the strictest of you do not hold all that is
taught in the Church, or defined by Councils, even in doctrine and manners, are
Apostolical Revelations; if you agree with me so far, why do you think me
bound to sever the points of rigorous Catholic Faith from Tenets of an
inferior degree, rather then your selves? where we are all indifferently
concerned, why do you exact the performance from me alone, as if it were not
your duty as well as mine? not that I conceive it impossible to be done to full
satisfaction, but that I am no more engaged to do it then you; though perhaps
upon occasion of a second Essay, I may offer my endeavors toward the clearing
that point; especially should my Vindicator proceed close and pertinently like
a serious man, and an ingenious Scholar; for so I should have more time to
attend on the weightier matters. And most of all, if he would enlarge himself a
little upon the same Question in his next Vindication, for I shall be glad to
be directed and assisted by any one.

But if any be so unexperienced as to imagine all that is delivered or decreed
is absolutely of Faith, let him satisfy the instances commonly urged by
Divines of the Assumption of our Blessed Lady, of the souls being the Form of
our body, and many other such truths universally assented to, but not admitted
into the Catalogue of Articles. In fine, if this last be your opinion, you will
find very few wise men of your mind; if the former, you are equally concerned
with me to separate Catholic from Theological Faith, or any other Proposition
of inferior qualification.

The Conclusion.
THus have you my Opinion on your Result, as full and particular as can be
expected from a weak understanding subject to negligence and oversight; yet to
my power, sincere and captive to the love of truth. I hope you cannot be
offended at my oppositions, for I have that esteem of you, that you are a lover
of truth, and not swayed by passion or interest, but only prejudiced by the
force of custom, and the reverence of School-opinions. Censures, though I think
they belong to the duty of a Divine, fit to show his works to the Sun, yet in
this piece I have used none. And though the unwary compliance of this age with
Error makes me esteemed censorious, yet my heart told me I was obliged to do so
when ever I engaged my Pen into it, and that I spared far more Opinions justly
blameable, then I censured; because I deemed them not so pernicious as to force
me to it. The style I have not much regarded, holding that both the matter and
my age warn me not to be sollicitous of it, but rather to speak, quinque verba
in meo sensu, quam december millia verborum in lingua. In a word, if I gain your
Opinion of my sincerity, let the Controversy it self speak for the truth, and
the reasons which are on both sides. I must acknowledge my self ever obliged to
you, that you have shown our Catholics how to demean themselves with
moderation toward one another in litigious disputes, and with these thanks
make way to your credulity, that I am

Your cordial Friend and Servant, THOMAS WHITE*

Postscript.
BEing informed that some few scrupulous, and I fear, unsatisfiable persons
object against my Religion and Reason, that it takes no notice of those words [
even before the Resumption of their bodies, etc.] on which they chiefly ground;
I could not, I confess, at first, but wonder at their prejudice, which had so
imprinted those words in their fancyes in Capital, that they could not see or
know them in a lesser Character. For I not only took notice of them in my 34
and 35 pages, and put them down at large, as in the Bull cited by themselves,
but addressed my self purposely there to show them as impossible to favor their
Cause, as it is that the Subject of a Proposition should be the Predicate; which
every smatterer knows to be in Logic the highest absurdity imaginable.
Besides, in diverse other places of my Book where any thing was attempted or
urged from those words, I offered my satisfaction to their difficulties: with
what success the Books must show. In the mean time, I crave the favor (upon
occasion of their miscarriage in this) that none would lend too easy credit to
objections whispered in corners, which are afraid to appear and justify
themselves in writing under their hands. If any such be offered, I shall both
take it as a favor, and acknowledge it my duty to satisfy them. If not, it is
so like the way of clamor and detraction, that all persons meanly prudent,
will, I hope, neglect them; and so shall I.

INDEX.
AEviternal things not changable by Time. p. 37.38 S. Ambrose's Testimony not
prejudicial, p. 29.30 The opinion of Ante judiciary Delivery by occasioning
the multitude of unworthy Priests, harmfull to the Church, p. 5.6. impairing
solid Devotion, p. 6.7. injuring civil Duties, if followed, p. 7. Fraudulently
practiced by many, ibid. The Effects of it, is true, uncertain. p. 9.10. The
Church not chargeable with these Abuses, p. 10. Censures allowable among
Divines, p. 67. S. Chrysostom's Testimony not prejudicial, p 31, 32. Charity
to be used in managing Opinions, and why, p. 12, 13. Composition how found in
Spirits. p. 51, 52. Delivery in the day of Judgment, not singular in being
universally held, yet but an Opinion, p. 12.16. 18.19.26.61. not prejudiced by
Priviledg'd Altars, and Indulgences rightly understood, and sincerely
practiced, p. 65, 66.
Delivery from Hell prayed for in the offertory, p. 34, 35. Devotions not
warrantable, glanc't at, p. 63, 64, 65. Identity of Time, why necessary to
Contradiction, p. 57. Iudgment-day desirable, p. 43, 44, 45. Language
concerning Spirits, how verifiable, p* 21, 22, 23, etc. Penance, how held by
the Author, p. 38, 39. Prayer, when perfectest, p. 50, 51. Prayer for the dead
manifoldly beneficial, p. 45. to p. 50. of equal efficacy in the deniers as
the holders of Ante judiciary Delivery p, 30, 31. Priority of Nature not found
in a pure Indivisible p. 38. Relief in Purgatory in the Authors Doctrine, from
p. 20 to p. 28. Revelations even of great Saints, how errable, p. 69. Those of
Gregory and Bid generally contradicted, p. 32, 33.72. This later unconsonant
to Faith, p. 70.71. That of the dead Skull examined, p. 14, 15, 16.72. Sins
remoining in Purgatory, granted, p. 39. Seuls separate why unchangeable in true
Peripatetick Doctrine, p. 40, 41. This Incapacity of change, the Result of their
nature, p 55, 56. In what sense supernaturally deliverable before Judgment, p.
73, 74. Tradition alone sufficient for Faith, p. 35, 36. Translating the Middle
State not criminally scandalous p. 4, 5. but judiciously pious, p. 10.
occasioned by others, p. 11. Not this, but the Adversaries carriage, forbid by
the Council of Trent, p. 42, 43.
FINIS.

