AOGOS TS PISTEOS OR An Endeavor to evince The Certainty of CHRISTIAN FAITH In
General, And of the Resurrection of Christ in Particular.

By Daniel Whitbie Chaplain to the Right Reverend Father in God SETH Lord
Bishop of Sarum, And Fellow of Trin. Coll. OXON.

Printed at the THEATER in OXFORD. And are to Sold by GEORGE WEST. Ann. Dom.
MDCLXXI.

Imprimatur.

PET. MEWS Vice-Cancel. Oxon.
April. 8. 1671.
TO THE Right Reverend Father in God SETH Lord Bishop Of Sarum.
My very Good Lord,
MY last came to tell your Lordship I had a great Ambition to be related unto
so much Worth and Goodness; this to declare unto the world how happy that
Relation makes me; and what my Obligations are unto your Lordship, to whose
Instructions and Example, Discourse and Counsil (next to the Divine
Benediction,) I owe those small Improvements, which I have hitherto attained:
and from whose Favors and Protection, I derive the Comforts and the
Satisfactions of my Life, and the Encouragements of all my Labors.

But had I no such motives to induce, yet Equity and Prudence would oblige me
to lay this Essay at your Lordships feet, Whose Works sufficiently inform us,
You are as powerfully convincing, and happily succesful, in your divine
Attempts against those Great Leviathans, and proud Goliahs, who have defied the
Armies of the living God, as in those Matters which alone admit of perfect
Demonstration. Your Lordship has secured that Scripture to us, on which our
Hopes and Happiness depend, and all our Arguments do bottom; and rendered
Infidelity as base and scandalous, as it is hurtful to the Soul, by adding
this unto the Sinfulness and Danger of it, that it must be now embraced and
continued in, against the highest Reason and most clear Conviction to the
contrary.

And now my Lord, what can the man do that comes after You? even that which
has been done already. He therefore best consults his Credit in this cause,
who writes after your Lordships Copy, as being not so vain to imagine that he
can do better; he fights securely who marches under your Lordships Banner
against this Host of Philistines, and becomes Armor-bearer to such a Jonathan,
without whose happy Conduct it would be difficult to keep an even Passage
betwixt the Bozez and the Seneh, the two sharp Rocks of Atheism and
Superstition. 1. Sam. 14.4.


Besides, your Life and Conversation, as well as your Endeavors from the
Press, and from the Pulpit, declare unto the World Your Lordship has the
warmest Zeal, and the most passionate Affection and Concern for Piety, and does
so vigorously consult, so tenderly regard, and so industriously promote its
Interests, that all attempts of such a nature, though not so happy in
Expressions, nor so exactly managed, as the Concern and Moment of this Cause
requires, may yet presume upon your Lordships Favor and Acceptance, even when
they dread and deprecate, and find themselves unable to sustain the Sharpness
of your Judgment; and may hope, though Your more piercing Eye discovers many
Spots, ill Features, and undue Proportions in so rude a Draught, Your great
Affection to the Subject may draw the Veil before them. However I have great
Experience that my Lord is Gracious even to the meanest and the least
deserving, and that his Goodness is like his other Virtues, advanced unto to
the highest Measures, and therefore will extend it self unto

Your LORDSHIPS Most Obedient and HUMBLY DEVOTED Servant Daniel Whitbie.

The Preface to the Reader.
Courteous Reader,
A Dissolute ungodly Life being as well the cause as the result of Atheism, we
cannot wonder that it should improve so fast, or think it needless to prevent
its Growth, in such an Age of Wickedness, as this in which we live; wherein men
daily offer such Affronts to Heaven, that it concerns them there should be no
God to punish them, and live so great a contradiction to Christianity, that it
becomes their Interest to prove it false; and then their Interest perverts
their Judgments, and they are easily persuaded to believe, what they are so
concerned to wish, and they find so needful to procure an undisturbed progress
in the ways of Sin, and to quiet all the Clamors of a Guilty Conscience. And
since these Sons of Belial do so industriously promote the Devils Kingdom,
since they have wholly given up themselves to vile Affections, and freely do
indulge to all the Pleasures of a sinful appetite, it is no wonder that their
Eyes are blinded by the Prince of darkness, and that they are led captive by
him at his will. It is but just that God should send among them strong
Delusions, that they all may be damned who believe not the Truth, but have
pleasure in unrighteousness.

And indeed the Generality of Atheists are such raw, shallow, trifling things,
and so unable to judge of serious Matters, that we cannot reasonably impute
their Infidelity, to any thing they can object against Christianity, and
therefore must ascribe it to those impetuous and headstrong Lusts, which bear
the greatest Opposition to it.

And yet had they but leisure to consider, did not their Lusts both busy and
pervert, that little Reason they have left, they might perceive it was not want
of Motives, or of sufficient Reason to believe, which did betray them to their
Infidelity, but want of Wisdom to consider of the Motives tendered; and that to
live the Atheist is to act in contradiction to the avowed Principles of Humane
Nature, and the known Rules of Reason.

For 1. Who knows not that in matters of the highest Moment, that way must be
the best, which is the safest? Since then Christianity affords the highest
Comforts in Calamities, and gives the noblest Pleasures, and the most powerful
Inducements to be just and upright, kind and helpful to our brother: suppose
it were a cunningly devised Fable, what could we suffer by the practice of it
in a Christian Commonwealth? Whereas, should it prove true, our Infidelity must
rob us of the highest Blessings, and everlastingly subject us to the worst of
Miseries.

2. Such a Persuasion as will make men circumspect, and earnest to avoid a
lesser danger, ought with more reason to prevail upon them to decline a
greater; Such a persuasion as will sharpen men's Desires after, and quicken
their Endeavors for the obtaining of a lesser Good, ought with more reason to
engage them with an equal vigor in the pursuit of a greater, yea an infinite
good. For since the apprehension of Good or Evil, is the sole motive to make us
undertake or decline any Action, the greater that Good or Evil is, the stronger
motive it must be. Now do not many Millions in the world foregoe their present
Ease and Pleasure, encounter Difficulties, adventure upon Dangers, and undergo
most toilsome Labors, in hopes and expectations of some finite temporal
Advantage, of which they cannot have assurance? Do they not often abstain from
what they passionately love, only for fear of danger, which possibly might not
ensue upon the Satisfaction of their Appetite? Do they not Sow and Plant and
trade only in hopes of an increase? and should not then the hopes and
probabilities of infinite eternal Happiness provided for the pious Christian,
engage us to obey Gods Precepts, and to resist all those Temptations which
flesh and blood suggests against them? If thus to seek the false uncertain
Mammon be the great Wisdom of the world, can it be Folly to pursue with equal
diligence and vigor, but with better Hopes, the true and lasting Riches? If
then it be but probable, that all the world throughout all Ages, did not
embrace the Doctrine of a Providence, without some plausible Inducement so to
do; If all the primitive Martyrs and Confessors did not suffer for the Name of
Christ, and all succeeding Generations did not embrace or continue in the
Profession of the Faith of Christ, without all reason, motive, or even probable
inducement; If any of those probabilities we have amassed together in the close
of this Discourse deserve to be esteemed such, or any of those Arguments which
in this Treatise we have urged, be probable, then must the Folly of the Atheist
be exceeding great, and clear beyond exception.

3. It must be Folly to renounce that Faith, which has been Generally owned by
men of strongest Parts, and most discerning Judgments, in very many Nations,
and through many Generations, and which delivers matters of so great Moment and
Concern, that our eternal Happiness or Misery depends upon them, till we have
used the Greatest diligence to search into the Reasons, which induced them to
believe it true. Let then the Atheist say, what he has done to satisfy his
judgment in this great Concern; whether he ever did peruse the writings and
Apologies of Ancient Fathers, or the most eminent Divines, who have discoursed
upon this Subject, to the Satisfaction of the knowing World? Whether he ever
did consult with Persons of the best abilities, propound his scruples, and
consider of the Answers given, before he ventured to scoff at, and renounce his
Faith? If not, this is sufficient to convince him of the greatest Folly in the
World.

If any that pretends to have used all this diligence, and all these
Endeavors, continue still to question and suspect the truth of Christian
Faith, and of the Doctrine of a Providence, let me entreat him to consider,

1. Whether those motives which induce him to renounce a Providence, or
Christian Faith, will not compel him to renounce those things of which he has
the evidence of Sense and Reason to convince him? if so, we have as great
assurance of the falsehood of those motives as Sense and Reason can afford.

If then you do reject a Providence because you are not able to conceive Gods
Omnipresence, or any other Attribute on which this Providence depends; if you
renounce the Mysteries of Christian Faith because you cannot apprehend them;
have you not equal reason to reject the Notions of Infinite unbounded space, of
an Eternal Flux of Time, or an Indivisible Eternity, which yet your reason must
acknowledge? Must you not question the Existence of the Souls of Men and
Brutes, as being not sufficient to conceive, that Spirits, if confined to
points, can perform any of those actions which we ascribe to them, or that
they can diffuse themselves through Bodies, receive impressions from them, or
make impressions on them: or that mere matter should perceive, reflect and
reason, or have any sense of pain and pleasure? Lastly must not this Principle
oblige you to Question the Existence of all material Compounds? For who is able
to conceive that Indivisibles can be united? or that a Grain of Sand can be for
ever divisible, and have as many parts as the whole World?

If you do question or dispute the truth of any Miracle, Revelation, or
Prediction, because you are not able to perceive the manner how it was or may
be done, this will oblige you to deny the Ebb and Flowing of the Sea, till you
are able to acquaint us with the true Causes of it, and to distrust that ever
you were born, because you never can explain the manner of your own production.
For as thou know not the way of the wind, nor how the bones do grow in the
womb of her that is with Child, even so thou know not the works of God who
makes all things. Eccl. 11.5.

If you are tempted to disown these Revelations, because you are not able to
conceive Gods Ends and Reasons in them, Why he who has proclaimed Himself the
God of Mercy should threaten an eternal punishment to finite transitory Sins;
why he should leave the World so long in Darkness, and the like. Might not a
Subject on the like account reject the precepts of his Sovereign because not
able to perceive the Wisdom of them, or the necessity of all the Sanctions he
annexeth to them? Is it not certain that if there be a God, he must be infinite
in his perfections, and so incomprehensible, and then his Wisdom must
exceedingly transcend the reach of finite Apprehensions? the Secrets of it must
be double to that which does appear to us, and there must be such depths both
in his Judgments and his Acts of Mercy as we can never fathom. So that unless
the Notion of an Infinite and all-wise Being includes a contradiction in the
Terms, we cannot doubt but that he may reveal what we can never apprehend.
Besides we cannot understand the Beauty or Wisdom of Divine Transactions, but
we must be acquainted with the Ends and Motives, the Tendence, and result of
all he does: for otherwise what seems absurd to us, may admirably comply with
the Designs of Providence, what seems confused in the Beginning may conclude
in Order and the Greatest Beauty. Since then we do not know the mind of God,
since we are not acquainted with the Designs and Purpose, nor are we able to
look forward to the Results of Providence, it is sure we cannot pass a
Judgment on the Wisdom of them.

If you are tempted to disown the Christian Faith, because you are not able to
reconcile it to your shallow reason, and infirm Conceptions; This will oblige
you to deny the Being, Propagation, the Swiftness, or Continuation of all
Motion, it being certain we are not able to give an Answer to all the Arguments
produced against the different degrees of Swiftness, or the Continuation, or
the very Being of it, or to conceive how Motion can be propagated. It is
acknowledged that an immediate, plain, indisputable Contradiction, cannot be
matter of our Faith, or of a Revelation from the God of truth. But seeing it is
also evident that all matters infinitely great, (as infinite Duration, Power,
Space,) and infinitely little, (as the indivisible parts of Space and Time,) do
as much bafle and confound our understandings as do the Attributes of God, and
do abound with difficulties as stubborn and unweildy as any Revelations of the
Gospel do afford, it must be rashness to reject these Revelations as
inconsistent with the Dictates and Apprehensions of that Reason which is
obliged to own such Notions as do abound with equal, if not greater
Difficulties. And certainly if Mathematics will afford its Demonstrations pro
and con, if Matters obvious to sense do often confound the Understanding; it is
not to be hoped it should wade thorough the Abyss of infinite perfections, and
not be overwhelmed and lost.

2. Consider whether you have not greater reason to believe these Doctrines
then to disbelieve them. From what is here discoursed in the introduction, it
is clear we have as many reasons to assert a Providence, as we have reasons to
believe that any signal Demonstrations of Gods power have been made by any acts
of Judgment or of Mercy, in any Parts or Ages of the World, or that his Wisdom
was engaged in any Revelations, Oracles, Predictions, Dreams or Visions
supernatural, or in the Production of the World, and in the exquisite
Contrivance of any Portion of it. We have as many reasons to believe a
Providence as we have to assert that any good or evil Angels do exist; or ever
did appear, or interest themselves in any actions of Mankind. And yet our
reasons which evince the truth of Christian Faith, are far more numerous and
cogent. Let then the Atheist view and ponder what we have here produced in
confirmation of these Truths, and then consider whether his motives to renounce
Christianity, and to reject a Providence, be more numerous and more convincing,
then what this Treatise offers to establish them. If not, he must have greater
Reason to assert, then to disown them; and so his Infidelity must be the worst
of Follies.

Lastly Consider whether he that rejects the Christian Faith must not be forced
to believe what is more incredible then any Mystery contained in it. For he must
believe, that Christ and his Disciples, and the Christians of the three first
Ages did endeavor to confirm the world in the belief of what they knew to be a
lie; and consequently that all the Primitive Professors, who did so court the
Flames, and were so weary of this present life, were yet the vilest Atheists,
as not believing there was any God to punish this their pernicious lie. Or
secondly that they were all beside themselves, that they had lost the
principles of preservation and Self Love, which Nature has so deeply planted
in the very Brutes, and that they made it their design to ruin and destroy
their Souls and Bodies, their Friends and their Relations, to abandon all the
Pleasures of this Life, and to expose themselves to all the Miseries that can
be incident to humane Nature, without any motive but the love of Misery.

And yet he must believe that they who did so little understand the common
Principles of humane Nature, were able to enrich the World with the best
Notions of a Deity, and of a future State, and the best precepts of Morality
that humane Nature ever was acquainted with. And that these Fools had wit
enough to propagate their Doctrine, and to obtain belief throughout the World,
maugre all opposition that all the powers of men and Devils could make against
them. Or 2ly he must believe these Atheists chose to quit their Lives, and
suffer all the miseries they underwent, only to beat down Atheism, and to
establish that Religion which bears the Greatest Opposition to all the Natural
results of Atheism. He must believe that what is written in the Books of
Scripture, and the Apologies of all the Christians, and that all that they
pretended and appealed to in every corner of the World, were but prodigious
impudent untruths: and that the World was universally induced to Worship a
condemned Malefactor as God Blessed for evermore, and to embrace the Doctrine
of the Cross with all its Disadvantages, without a seeming Miracle. Or 2ly he
must believe that they had no assistance in the Propagation of the Faith
besides those arts of Magic, in which both Jew and Gentile were more expert
then they, and which Apostates who were very numerous and frequent, learned and
ingenious, were equally acquainted with; and yet that never any of them did
attempt to imitate, or to disclose their Art: or that the world, when thus
convinced of the Delusion, would notwithstanding universally embrace and choose
to suffer for what they knew to be confirmed only by those Magical Collusions,
which they saw daily practiced by Jew and Heathen; and in which they were
instructed by those very Christians who did so signally condemn those Arts as
Devilish, and threaten everlasting Misery to all that used them. He must
believe that all the Records of any signal Judgment, which ever did befall the
Enemies and Blasphemers of the Christian Faith, or any portion of it, or of any
Mercies, Preservations, Gifts or Assistances vouchsafed to them in any age or
places of the Christian World are void of Truth in every particular. He must
believe an hundred matters of like nature which this Treatise will suggest: And
therefore Reader, I entreat you to peruse it with that care and diligence which
matters of this moment do require, and then I hope it may be isntrumental to
convince you of, and confirm you in the Truth of Christian Faith, which is the
hearty desire of

Your Servant in the Defense of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, DANIEL WHITBIE.

The Contents of the Chapters.
CHAP. I. WHAT Endeavors have been made to stop the growth of Atheism and
Irreligion, by asserting an All-wise presiding Power visible in the production
of the World. What seems further necessary to be alleged against the
Atheist. An Essay toward the eviction of a Providence. 1. From the existence
of evil Spirits. 2. From many signal demonstrations of Gods Power; 3. Of his
Judgments upon rebellious Sinners; And 4. of his power and mercy in
preservation of his servants, and his miraculous answers to their Prayers. 5.
From Revelations and Predictions of things contingent in their various
Circumstances. 6. From Apparitions of good and evil Angels. 7. From Dreams and
Visions supernatural. 8. From things performed by pretenders to Miracles,
Magicians, Witches, Oracles, Philosophers, which could not be effected
naturally, etc. The confirmation of the Christian Faith by what has been
delivered; 1. by evincing that Providence has been engaged for the
establishment of some particular Religion in the World; 2. That that particular
Religion is no other then the Christian Faith. page 1, 2. CHAP. II. That common
Prudence would not suffer the Apostles to pretend such things in their
Historical Relations of the Life of Christ, and in their Epistles to the
Churches newly converted, as must infallibly disgrace their Testimony, and make
them appear guilty of Delusion. 2. That the Miracles recorded in those
Historical Narrations and Epistles, if true, are a convincing evidence, that
some superior Power did assist the Workers of them. 3. That Christ and his
Disciples had no assistance from good or evil Angels to impose upon the World.
p. 55. CHAP. III. Sect. I. Proleg. 4. That Christ and his Apostles did not
endeavor to impose upon the World. Not Christ. For 1. He could have no
temptation to fulfill those Prophesies of the Messiah, which concerned his
ignominious, poor, and miserable life, and his accursed death. 2. He could have
no expectation of his own Resurrection, or of the sending of the Holy Ghost; or
of the destruction of the Jewish Nation; or of the famishing of the Heathen
Deities; or of the propagation of his Gospel throughout the World; or the
performance of those mighty Deeds which were expected from the Messiah of the
Jews. 3. No hopes this should be done by Men so timorous, so dull, so ignorant,
as were the twelve Apostles. 4. His Disciples, must be acquainted with the
Impostures of their Lord, and so have greatest reason to disown him. 5. If so,
John Baptist, who obtained so great a reputation from the Jews, must have been
guilty of the same endeavor to delude them. 2. Not Christ's Apostles, as is
argued from their simplicity, Sincerity, Interest, The things they did, or were
obliged to pretend. 3. Not their immediate Successors, for the same and many
other reasons. The assurance which we have of what these Arguments suppose.
Coroll. That what they have delivered to the World, must be related bona fide,
and with a full conviction of its Truth. p. 77, 78. CHAP. III. Sect. II.
Proleg. 5. That Christ and his Disciples could not be deceived in their
pretensions to the things they spoke of, and presumed they did, and yet prevail
upon the World to own and to assert their Doctrine. p. 107. CHAP. IV. Proleg.
6. That we may safely take an estimate of Christian Doctrine from what we find
recorded of it in the Books of Scripture, those Writings not being corrupted,
nor yet containing any thing repugnant to the Christian Faith. Corol.
concluding that those Scriptures which we daily read, must be the Works of
those Apostles and Evangelists whose names they bear. p. 113. CHAP. V. The
Truth of Christian Faith asserted from the Gifts and Operations of the Holy
Ghost in general: and more particularly from the Gift of Prophecy, and from
the Gift of Tongues. p. 131, CHAP. VI. The veracity of the Christian Faith
concluded from the deportment of the Christians under sufferings; the patience
and undaunted Courage of the weaker sex; from the kindness of the Christians to
their persecutors, and those Indignities they suffered from them; from Gods
miraculous assistance of them under sufferings, and great deliverances from
them. For had they not been assured of the truth of Christian Doctrine, it is
both impossible they should, and inconceivable they would have suffered after
such a manner. An Objection from Instances of the like nature answered. p. 139.
CHAP. VII. Sect. I. That from the fulfilling of things future and contingent,
we may reasonably infer the Being of an overruling Providence, which interests
it self in their completion. The truth of Christian Faith evinced, 1. From
those Predictions which concern the Person, Birth, Life, Actions, and Passions
of our Lord and Savior. The confirmation of this Argument 2. From those
Miracles which his Disciples wrought agreeable to our Saviors promise,
prediction, and commission: for they healed the diseased, and ejected Devils,
according as our Lord foretold. p. 163. CHAP. VII. Sect. II. The Truth of
Christian Faith evinced from those Predictions which concern the ruin of the
Jewish Temple, Discipline, and Nation; the authors, time, and manner; the
Greatness, and Duration, Concomitants, and Attendants of it, as the Scripture
mentions them; and the wonderful completion of them all. A confirmation of this
Argument from the attempt of the Apostate Julian to rebuild the Temple, and the
miraculous frustration of it. p. 191. CHAP. VIII. Sect. I. Arg. 4. Evincing the
truth of Christian Doctrine. 1. From the Miracles wrought by Christ suitably to
his Design, and to the Prophesies of the Old Testament, and to the expectation
of the Jews. These Miracles were many, mighty, and they had most remarkable
Effects upon the Hearers and Spectators of them. They were avouched with
greatest confidence by his Apostles, who by those means converted thousands,
and whose Records of those things became the rule of Faith unto the Christian
Converts. The confirmation of this from the Miracles wrought by Christ's
Apostles, who affirm, Christ gave commission to them whilst abiding with them,
to work the greatest Miracles, which they accordingly performed. And that this
Power was more abundantly conferred upon them after the Resurrection of their
Lord, is argued from the promise of Christ; from the Confession of Jews and
Heathens; from the Records of Scripture. Like wonders were performed by
Christians in all places of the World, and the same Power continued in the
Church for diverse Centuries. The confirmation of the second Argument. The
result of these Particulars. p. 215, 216. CHAP. VIII. Sect. II. Arg. 3. Proving
the truth of Christian Doctrine, from the speedy Propagation of it through the
World, by inconsiderable and unlearned Men, against those many prejudices which
did attend it. The avowed Principles on which this Argument depends. A further
Confirmation of it, by comparing its Effects with those of Heathen Wisdom or
Philosophy. p. 241. CHAP. IX. An Answer to some Objections 1. Touching the
Miracles of Simon Magus, Apollonius, and touching those Predictions, Miracles,
and gifts of Healing, to which the Heathen Oracles and Deities pretended. And
that 1. From the issue of them, for they were blasted and confounded. And 2ly,
From the Designs they aimed at, which were all unworthy of a Deity. They were
controuled by Providence. They were such whose deceit 'twas no Man's interest to
detect. Obj. 2. Touching the general rejection of Christianity by the Jewish
Nation. An account of their rejection of it. 1. From the temper and disposition
of that People. From the danger to which it exposed them. From the Prejudices
they conceived, 1. Against the Person of our Savior. And 2ly, Against his
Doctrine. p. 267. CHAP. X. Arg. 5. Concluding for the truth of Christian
Doctrine from the excellency of its Precepts, in order 1. To the public
Welfare of Mankind. 2ly, To the perfection of humane nature. 1. By the
clearest Informations of Man's understanding in matters which concern the
knowledge of God, and of Virtue and Vice. And 2ly, by tendering the most
prevailing Motives to engage the Will and the Affections to obedience. And 3ly,
The most strong engagements to seek the welfare of our Brothers Soul. Heathen
Philosophy, and their received Theology, destructive of Religion, and fitted to
promote the Interest of Satan's kingdom. This proved from their conceptions both
of God, and of his Providence, and of his Attributes, and their uncertainty in
matters of this nature, and from their want of Precepts to direct them in, or
promise to encourage to the performance of their duty; and from their doubtings
of a future State, and their denial of all future Punishments, and from the
false Conceptions of the rise and fatality of Sin. That these Opinions are
destructive to the service of a Deity, and the concernments of Religion. That
they received Opinions which destroyed Morality. This proved from their
Mistakes and Errors. 1. Touching the duties and concerns of Love and Charity to
their Neighbor. And 2ly, Touching the Laws of Chastity, Justice, and of Truth.
Heathen Philosophy proved ineffectual, not only to reform the World, but the
Professors of it. The wickedness of their Lives. The accounts and reasons of
it. The result of all in confirmation of the Christian Faith. p. 296. CHAP. XI.
Of the Resurrection. Prolegomena, in order to the demonstration of the
Resurrection of our Lord. 1. That the Apostles did presently attest the thing.
2. That this attestation could not be a barefaced and notorious lie. Arg. 1.
From the Testimony. Arg. 2. From these three Considerations. 1. That our
Saviors Body did not continue in the Sepulcher when they proclaimed him risen.
2. That his Disciples did not conveigh his Body thence. Nor 3. was that done by
any other Persons who had no relation to Christ, and no affection for him. Arg.
3. From the Consideration of the Persons testifying. p. 387. The Conclusion.
Showing, That if what has been delivered should be only probable, yet the
Christian Faith must in all reason be embraced, as being, 1. the safest way,
and 2ly, the greatest Instrument of present Happiness. A recapitulation of the
whole, with a Practical Reflection upon what has been discoursed. p. 306.
CHAP. I.
The Contents.
WHAT Endeavors have been made to stop the Growth of Atheism and Irreligion,
by asserting an all wise presiding Power visible in the production of the
World. What seems further necessary to be alleged against the Atheist. An
essay toward the eviction of a Providence. (1) From the existence of evil
spirits. (2) From many signal demonstrations of Gods power; (3) of his
Judgments upon Rebellious sinners; and (4) of his power and Mercy in
preservation of his servants, and his miraculous Answers to their prayers. (5)
From revelations and predictions of things contingent in their various
circumstances. (6) From apparitions of good and evil Angels. (7) From dreams
and visions supernatural. (8) From things performed by pretenders to miracles,
Magicians, Witches, Oracles, philosophers, which could not be effected
naturally, etc. The confirmation of the Christian faith by what has been
delivered; (1) by evincing that Providence has been engaged for the
establishment of some particular Religion in the world; (2) that that
particular Religion is no other then the Christian faith.

. 1. WHAT Artifices have been used of late to baffle all Religion; to
undermine the pillars and foundations of it: how bold and impudent the
instruments of Satan are, how free to vent, and how industrious to infuse their
poison into every soul; and how unhappily disposed the greater part of Mankind
is, by reason of the vile Affections, and brutish Lusts, which reign in them,
to suck in this hellish Vomit, it is needless to inform the Reader. He must have
shut his Eyes who does not see, and stopped his Ears who does not hear, the sad,
but just complaints, of the increase of Atheism and Irreligion in the Christian
world.

. 2. TO stop the Growth of this pernicious Evil, some have endeavored to
assert the Being of a God, not from the Metaphysical foundations which the
Schools have laid, but from the Phenomenon of Nature, which carry with them a
greater Evidence of some presiding Wisdom and overruling Power: which being
undeniably concluded from what they have discoursed on this Subject, it remains
only to evince, that this presiding Wisdom in the Creation of the World had a
peculiar eye unto the Welfare of Mankind, and does at present watch over that
noble part of his Creation, gives indications of his Will and Pleasure, as far
as is conducing to our Welfare, and Motives to obey that Will: since he that
comes unto God must believe that he is, Heb. 11.6.
and that he is a rewarder of those that diligently seek him. For if we suppose
that from the beginning of the world there were established such Laws of
Action, as do necessitate the operations and productions which show the
Wisdom of their Great Contriver, (though we should also doubt whether he ever
did, or does at present interest himself in the concernments of Men, and the
free motions of their Wills; and should conceave with modern Theists, we are
too inconsiderable to be the matter of his care and Providence,) we should
sufficiently comply with the intent and vigor of those Arguments.

I shall not venture to supply what is lacking to those late attempts, by any
large discourse on the mysterious Theme of Providence, which others have
improved beyond what I am able to perform, but only hint such things which in
conjunction seem to make it highly rational to own the thing: and which I do
not find so fully, nor I think so convincingly, proposed in other Writers on
this Subject.

. 3. AND 1. If there be any evil Spirits which malign the Welfare of Mankind,
then there must be a Providence. For were there no superior Power that did curb
and over awe them, and by so doing show his care of Man, they would according
to their inclinations, either inflict upon Mankind at present the sorest and
most dreadful Evils which could be incident to humane Nature (this being the
design and drift of hatred to plague and to confound its object;) or if Men's
souls be subject unto future Miseries, more Great and lasting then any they can
suffer in this present life, it would be the endeavor of these Spirits, to
reduce the world to such compliance with their humors, and full submission to
their wills, as would assuredly subject them to those future Miseries, or ruin
those who should refuse obedience to them. Now the Existence of these evil
Spirits may be concluded from their Operations. For if the Heathen Oracles did
e're foretell what it was not in the power of man to see, (of which their
Authors give us very many instances:) If any seeming miracles were ever wrought
for the establishment of Heathenism, or any other way of Worship not allowed by
God, (which even Christians do confess, vid. Chap. 9. sect. 1.
and Scripture does acknowledge:) If any persons ever were possessed by the
devil; If they have ever spoken languages they understood not, told things of
which he only could inform them; or have received assistance or temptations
from him to destroy themselves: if ever he appeared to any of his Proselytes in
the dark corners of the World; or the assemblies of those persons that are
devoted to his service; we must then own his Being in the World, and his design
to ruin us at present, or to enslave us to his worship, in order to our future
Ruin. Now only to transcribe the Histories and Records of these things would
be the work of many volumes, they being attested by many Myriads of all Ages,
and of all Countries of the World, confessed by those who have engaged in the
Worship of the Devil, confirmed by the Histories of both the Indies, supposed
by the Laws of Moses, and by the Gospel Story, the 1 Jewish, 2 Christian, and
the 3 Heathen Exorcists; these Spirits being subject, not only to the name of
Jesus, but to the invocation of the God of Abraham, and of Jsaac, and of Jacob,
though used by those who did not 4 own their faith, but notwithstanding did
attest upon their own experience the virtue of those names, as well as 5 Jews
and Christians.

. 4. 2ly IF there have ever been any displays or actings of Gods power, if any
Miracles vouchsafed in confirmation of the faith of Jew, or Christian, Turk, or
Heathen; all which have more or less pretended to them; Acts 2.5.
(the Jew with so much evidence as to gain Proselytes from every nation under
heaven; the Christian with so great conviction, as to prevail upon the world
against the powers of Interest, Custom, and Education, and all the opposition
which the Wit and Power of the world could make, to entertain the Faith
delivered by them,) If the red sea was divided, (which both the sacred and 6
profane writers do attest:) If our Savior and his Apostles, and the first
Christian converts, Vid. Raymund. Pug. fid. part. 2. c. 8. s. 6.
did any of those miracles which. in their writings are recorded of them, and of
which we give a large account in our Discourse upon that Subject: I say, if any
of these things were done, we must acknowledge some superior Power did engage
in the assistance of those persons, and was concerned to have the world believe
what they delivered. By which assistance, if the superior Power did intend the
Happiness and Welfare of Mankind, he makes provisions for it, and by so doing
shows a Providence; but if he design man's Ruin and Destruction, he must then
be an evil and seducing power, which sure could not be, were there no higher
Power to challenge and reward our Service, and to revenge our Disobedience.

. 5. 3ly. IF any signal Judgments were inflicted by the immediate hand of God
upon Rebellious sinners (of which the Annals of all ages and books made up of
such collections yield us large accounts:) If any visible declarations of Gods
wrath, and of approaching Judgments, have been made unto the world by Signs
and Prodigies, by Dreams and Apparitions, by Prophesies, or by a voice from
Heaven, (of which not only Histories Ecclesiastical and heathen do inform us,
but suspected 7 Atheists do confess and prove the same:) If there has ever
been a deluge over the world, (which, since the Caverns of the earth contain
the waters of it, can never be effected by the course of nature;) or Sodom and
Gomorrah were destroyed by fire from heaven, (both which the 8 Heathen records
have at large delivered to us; preserving the traditions of the 9 Ark, the 10
Dove sent out of it, and of the 11 Mountains where it rested, and frequently
attesting that the fruits and apples of the land of 12 Sodom being touched do
vanish into smoke and ashes:) If Lots wife looking back became a pillar of
salt, and that so lasting that 13 Josephus and a In Genesis 19.26.
Brochardus testify it was extant in their days, and the Jerusalem Targum does
conclude it shall be so unto the Resurrection; so notable, that 14 Heathens
used to conjure by invocation of that God who turned Lots wife into the Pillar:
If the 15 destruction of Jerusalem was prefaced with prodigious tokens of
approaching Vengeance, and God has still appeared in plagues and Judgments
against 16 those who have attempted to rebuild the temple there: If any waters
of probation, have had the virtue to discover and chastise the sinner, whilst
they cleared the innocent; as Heathen writers affirm of 17 Olachas, and other
rivers, which were wont to put off their natures and become fire to the Guilty
person; of the 18 Crateres Palicorum, and the 19 Sardinian fountains, which did
strike the thief, or perjured person, blind, or dead; of the 20 Indian
Brachmans probatory waters, and many others of that kind; and as the Jews say
with much better ground, of those of Jealousy, which being used according to
the prescription of their law, to try the chastity of any woman of whom her
husband should be Jealous, Numb. 5, 27.28.
did cause the Guilty thigh to rot, and had no like effect upon the innocent; I
say with better Ground, for had they failed upon trial, the Jews could not have
owned that law for sacred which left them such a standing lie: Lastly If king
21 Agrippa suffered by the immediate hand of God, Act. 12, 23.
because he gave not God the Glory of what the people did ascribe unto him, (as
is attested by Josephus agreably to what St. Luke delivers;) we have from all
these instances the clearest evidence of Gods vindictive Justice on the
transgressors of his law, and of our own concernments to obey it.

. 6. 4ly. IF any acts of mercy, or preservation by the power of God, have been
vouchsafed to any of Gods servants: If Daniel was preserved in the Lions den,
and Shadrach Meshach and Abednego from the devouring flames; which must be a
relation of the greatest credit, if we consider that it speaks of matters done
in so vast a company as were then met together, to adore the Image which was
erected by the king of Babylon, and in the Greatest Court the world then knew,
and in defiance of the decrees and statutes of so Great a monarch; and yet so
done as to prevail upon him, to own and reverence the God of those poor
Captives, and to establish a Dan. 2 47.3.29.
decree in honor of him, which must be left on record in the Annals of that
Empire, (in which all Ezra. 4.15.19.
matters of any moment were digested,) to witness to the truth of what was seen
and done: and that it also speaks of matters done by men, whose actions and
Religion did blast the reputation of their Heathen Deities, did baffle and
confound their Sorcerers, Magicians, Astrologers; and Men whose Religion did
still 22 thrive under oppression, and bring in daily Proselyts;

Again, if any answer has been made unto the prayers of Christian, Jew, or
Heathen, of which they all do boast so much, and give such frequent instances:
If God according to his promise, did still command his blessing on the sixth
years crop, Levit 25.21.
and make it double unto that of other years, (and had it not been so, this
promise must have been a vain presumptious boast sufficient to discredit the
whole law of Moses:) If fire of course came down from heaven in the days of
Moses, and extraordinarily at the petition of Elijah, to consume the Jewish
sacrifices, (as the 23 Apostate Julian does acknowledge:) If 24 Heathen Records
do pretend the same, (whose stories and examples of this kind seem too exact
and frequent to be deemed cheats:) If Gods miraculous assistance and answer to
the 25 prayers of Theodosius, did vanquish his two potent Heathen Adversaries
Eugenius and Maximus, against all humane probability, as is attested by the 26
Poet Claudian, the 27 soldiers who engaged in those wars, and by the 28
Christian writers of that age; and is said to have been foretold, with other
matters of like nature, by an 29 Ermite whose 30 name was celebrated in the
Christian Church for the prediction of things future 31: If that miraculous
rain and thunder which Antoninus did obtain for the confusion of his enemies,
and the refreshment of his army, when almost dead with thirst, was the result
of Christian prayers, (as his 32 Epistle, and the Christian writings do averr:)
All these are instances of Providence, and of that kindness which God bears
unto his Servants. Some Heathens, I confess, ascribe this wonder to the powers
of 34 Magic, but (not to urge how insignificant they are in matters of this
nature, and how incredible to those who do not own a Providence;) the Emperor,
(as his own 35 works inform us) was a professed enemy to all such devilish Arts.

. 7. 5ly. IF any Revelations, Jos. 7.9.14.20. Judge. 18.23.29.1. Sam.
23.11.12.2. Sam. 2.1.5.19.23.
or Predictions of things contingent in their various circumstances have been
delivered from the mouth of prophets, Oracles, or any other way of Divination
used or recorded by any sect of men; If from the Urim and the Thummim the Jews
received daily answers (and had it been a constant cheat, what could induce
them upon all occasions to consult it, or to abide in that profession which
bottomed upon such a lie, when other (...); Orig. in Celsum l. 1. p. 28.29.
Nations about them had, or were believed to have true Oracles; nay how
impudent and shameless had it been to put the Question, 2. Kings 1.3.
is it because there is no God in Israel that you enquire after Baal, if verily
there had been none in Israel who could have satisfied their curiosity?) If
there were any thing but Gross and shameless forgery in that Gift of Prophecy,
of which the Acts of the Apostles and the Canonical Epistles speak, and the
Effects whereof Vid. ins. c. 5. sect. 2.
Eusebius mentions as things experimented among Christians; or in the
Prophesies and Prophets of which we read so often in the records of the Jews,
(which prophets they most highly reverenced, though still denouncing Judgments
against them, and representing them as a most stubborn and Apostatising
Nation:) In a word if Heathen, Jew, or Christian, have been supernaturally
assisted in these things, they must derive this power from that all ruling
wisdom which orders all things according to the pleasure of his Will. Now to
omit all other instances, in which it is easy to abound, God by the prophet Esaias
said of Cyrus, whom he expressly named Joseph. Ant. Jud. l. 11. c. 1.
210. years before his birth, he shall perform my pleasure, even saying to
Jerusalem, Isaiah 44.28.29.45.1.2.3.
thou shall be built, and to the temple thy foundation shall be laid; and Again,
Thus says the Lord to Cyrus, whose right hand I have strengthened to subdue
nations before him, and turn the backs of Kings, to open before him the two
leavd Gates, and the Gates shall not be shut. I will go before thee, and will
break in pieces the Gates of brass, and cut in sunder the bars of Iron, I will
give thee the treasures of darkness, and hidden riches of secret places. Now
that these things might be accomplished, this Cyrus first subdued Croesus, then
the Jonians, and then Nabonidas king of Babylon; thus did he turn the backs of
kings, and subdue nations, and answer what Astyages's dream did signify, viz.
that from his daughter sprang a vine whose branches spread themselves
throughout all Asia. Who calls it (...) apud Eusebius. praep. Evang. l. 9. c. 49.
That Babylon had Gates of brass, Abidenus witnesses, and therefore by Cyrus's
conquest of it the Gates of brass were broken. And that God gave unto him
hidden treasures Pliny informs us in these words Cyrus devict a Asia pondo 34
Millia invenerat, praeter vasa aurea aurumque factum, and in eo folia, ac
platanum vitemque. Qua victoria argenti 500. Millia talentorum reportavit, and
craterem Semiramidis cujus pondus 15. talenta colligebat. l. 33. c. 3.
Cyrus having conquered Asia besides the Golden vessels, and other Gold which
he found ready wrought, met with 34000. pounds of Gold, with certain leaves, a
plane, and a vine tree of Gold, and carried thence five hundred thousand
Talents of silver, and Semiramis her standing cup that weighed fifteen talents.
And that the manner of his conquest was punctually such as was delivered by the
prophet Jeremiah viz. Jer. 51.28.36.
that God by the kings of the Medes, and Captains of that Nation, would dry up
her sea, and make her springs dry, will appear from what Herodotus has plainly
told, Tov (...). Herod. l. 1. p. 78. ed. Goth.
viz. that by the cutting of a channel he brought back the River into the
neighboring fens, and by so doing made the old channel passable for his
soldiers. That he gave power and commission to the Jewish Nation to rebuild the
temple, and gave assistance to the work; that he professed the God of Israel
had given to him all the kingdoms he enjoyd, and charged him to build his
remple; we have recorded in the book of Ezra. C. 1. v. 2.
Now to imagine that these prophesies were written after that the things were
done, without the least imaginable show of reason, is in it self a thing
precarious, and may by these presumptions be concluded false.

(1) That the prophets do so punctually set down the times, the place, and the
concernment of their Prophecy. The book of Esaias begins thus, The visions of
Isaiah, son of Amos, which he saw concerning Judah and Jerusalem in the days
of Uzziah, Jotham, Ahaz, and Hezekiah kings of Judah. The prophet Jeremiah
speaks thus, The words of Jeremiah the son of Hilkiah, of the priests that were
in Anathoth in the land of Benjamin, to whom the word of the Lord came in the
days of Josiah the son of Amon king of Judah, in the 13. year of his reign; it
came also in the days of Jehojakim the son of Josiah king of Judah unto the
carrying away of Judah captive in the 5. month. (2) That they did threaten to
the Jewish Nation, that they should go into captivity, and accordingly both
they which lived in that Captivity, and returned from it, acknowledged that all
things happened to them according to those prophesies, as is evident in the Books
of Daniel, Nehemiah, Zachariah, Haggai, all which books must be but one
continued chain of forgery, or else it is evident there were such Prophesies, and
that those Prophesies were true. And 3. from the sufferings they met with from
the Jews; Certissima apud Hebraeos traditio est, quod a Manasse serra lignea
dissect us sit Drus. observe. l. 10. c. 19. Justin. Dial. cum Tryp. p. 349. B.
Tertull. adv. Gnost. c. 8. de not. c. 14. Orig. in Mat. p. 225. Hom. 2. in
Esaiam. Epist. ad Iul. Afric. vid. de la Cerdam in Tert. tom. 1. p. 389.
Esaias was sawn asunder, the Prophet Jeremiah was cast into a noysom dungeon,
yea so inhumane was their carriage to him, Vid. Grotium in Esaiam cap. 53.
that some Great men interpret all those passages which were intended by Isaiah
to set forth the Passion of our Lord, of what this Prophet suffered in his own
Person.

But 2ly. The Revelations made to Daniel do more effectually conclude a
Providence, they being such as did immediately concern the King of Babylon,
unfold his Dreams, declare unto him, that for the space of seven years he
should be driven from his People to abide with Beasts, and feed on Grass like
them; and yet that afterward he should enjoy his Kingdom: which that it came
to pass we are assured, not only from the book of Daniel; but the concurrent
Suffrage of an Heathen Abydenus apud Eusebius. praep. Evang. l. 9. c. 41.
Author. Chap. 5th, he tells King Belshazzar, that his Kingdom was to be taken
from him, and given to the Medes and Persians, and so immediately it happened;
his Kingdom being then transferred unto Darius Medus, and to Cyrus King of
Persia, of which event (says 35 Abydenus) Nabuchadonosor having prophesied,
disappeared.

Now here let it be noted, (1) that all this is pretended to be done in the
most famous Court the World then knew, Ezra. 4.15, 19.5, 17.6, 1.
which kept its Records of all matters of Concern and Moment, which occurred
amongst them, and with whose Great and most remarkable Affairs the Nations
round about must be acquainted; and therefore such a Forgery could not have
passed without Discovery. 2ly. That Metamorphosis so full of Wonder, and which
so much concerned the Empire, could not have been concealed if true, nor
believed if it had been false. 3ly. Consider the Events and Circumstances which
did attend those things; the Advancement of Daniel and his Friends by
Nebuchadnezzar, the Decree made by him in Honor of his God; the Disgrace and
Danger of the Magicians, who being then, and many Ages after, in Great Place
about those Eastern Monarchs, were not likely to have suffered this Story in
Disgrace of their Profession to have passed without some public Animadversion,
if it had not been true. Afterward in Belshazzars time, when Daniel seems to
have been retired from Court and Business, we read how on occasion of the
Appearance to Belshazzar, and his Disorder thereupon, the Queen, who is
supposed to have been the Widow of Nebuchadnezzar, brought Daniel and his
Prophesies afresh into Remembrance; how thereupon he was called, and heard, and
approved, and preferred; what Largesses were bestowed on him, and Proclamation
made that he should be the third Ruler in the Kingdom: all which things
whether true or false, would appear by the forementioned Records of the Empire.

Besides these we have in the Book of Daniel sundry other Prophesies, which
concern the Translation of the Empire of the Assyrians, to the Medes and
Persians, and from them to the Macedonians, and what was to be done both by the
Lagidae and Seleucidae, and particularly by Antiochus Illustris; all which were
so evidently foretold by Daniel, as they did afterward fall out, that 36
Porphyry was forced to say, this Prophesy was written by another Daniel, who
lived under Antiochus Epiphanes, and so after these things were done. But this
he says without all Ground, and therefore might have said the like of any other
Author; and so may any one that pleases of the works of Porphyry. That Daniel
was in high repute even while the Babylonian Monarchy yet stood, appears by
those sayings of Ezekiel, who was his Contemporary, where he ranks him with
Noah and Job, Ezeck. 14.14.
and where he says Ironically to the King of Tire, whose City was to be
destroyed by Nebuchadnezzar, chapter 28.2.
behold thou art wiser then Daniel, there is no secr et that they can hide from
thee. Besides 37 Josephus tells us, this Danicl built a Tower at Ecbatane of a
most admirable structure, wherein the Kings of Mede and Parthia were interred;
and that a Jewish Priest presided there unto his times; as also that Alexander
saw the Book of Daniel, and was confirmed by it in his Conquests; all which
adds to the Glory of that Great Prophet, and to the proof of that Supernatural
Gift, which could proceed from no other Cause but a Divine Inspiration.

. 8. 6ly. THE Apparitions of good or evil Angels, Ghosts or Spirits, to seduce,
or to instruct, comfort, or terrify the World, do give in Pregnant Evidence,
that God does manage the Transactions of it; and therefore firmly do evince his
Providence. Which Spirits had they not anciently appeared to men, Moses could
not have been so frequent in the mention of them; the World could not have been
so forward to believe and worship them, and through all Ages to assert their
Being, and pay their Homage to them, or think they did 38 preside over each
Nation, and attend on every 39 individual Person as his Good or evil Genius.
Their (...), vid. Stanly, Theol. Chald. sec. 3. chapter 6, 7, 8.
or consultation of the Dead would not have been so common, or so famous
through the Heathen World; nor their endeavors by Theurgick or Telestick Rites,
to call forth and converse with good, or to repel the evil Demons. Of this,
the Anges which did move the Waters of Bethesda is a most signal Instance: for
if those Waters had not wrought the Cures that were said to be done by them,
what could induce the Impotent to wait the motion of them? or why should
Christians ascribe those Cures to them, which had they not been true, the Jews
of that Age would have eagerly denied, and might have easily confuted? but if
those Cures were true, it is evident they were Miraculous: For if the Water did
the Cure by any natural Virtue, why did it only help the first that stepped in?
why at such special Seasons only? and whence could it derive so Catholic a
Virtue against all Distempers?

. 9. 7ly, IF any (...). Orig. in Celsum, l. 1. p. 35.
Dreams and Visions of the Night, which were in Ancient Times Gods frequent and
familiar Way and Method to instruct his Prophets, and inform his People; and
constantly affirmed by the Jewish Prophets, and pretended also very often by
the Heathens; and Of which so many Tracts and Histories are written, such
numerous Examples given by Jews and Christians also, that to conclude Them all
mistakes, would be to shake the Faith of History. I say, if any Revelations of
this Nature were vouchsafed by God, he hereby shows how much he does concern
himself to let us know his Will and Pleasure, and so assures us of the
dispensations of his Providence. And of this nature was that Dream of Pharaoh,
which foreshew'd him the seven Years of Plenty and of Famine, according to
Josephs's Interpretation. Genesis 41.
Where note, 1. The vast Plenty for seven Years, such as was never known in
Egypt, the most fertile of all Countries. 2. The rise of Joseph to be a chief
Minister of State, on the Experiment of the Truth of his Interpretation. 3. The
building of such vast Storehouses as could contain sufficient Corn for feeding
of the Land of Egypt, and all the Neighboring Nations, throughout the seven
Years of Famine. And 4. The admission of Jacob and of all his Family into
Egypt, and the planting of them in the Land of Goshen. 5. The altering of the
Tenures of the Estates in Egypt; for hereupon every Man's Land (except the
Priests) became the Kings, and paid the fifth part of its Income to him. Now
since a matter of this moment must be recorded to Posterity, and preserved in
their Traditions unto future Generations, (as we find this was;) and since the
Memory and motive of their repair to Egypt, the Exaltation of an Alien, the
Tribute of their Lands, and the (...). Artap. apud Eusebius. l. 9. c. 23.
Exemption of their Priests, could not so quickly be forgotten: it remains,
that both the Jews, Egyptians, and Strangers, which joined themselves to
Moses, must be assured of its truth.

. 10. LASTLY, If any Heretics, if any 41 Gnostics,42 Carpocratians,43
Marcionists, or Saturnilians, 44 Menandrians, 45 Montanists, 45 Eunomians,
Arians, 47 Priscillianists, 48 Donatists: if any 49 Finland, Lapland, or
Tartarian Witches: if any of the Persian, or Chalde an Magi, vid. Stanly, Phil.
Chald.
or the 59 Egyptian Sorcerers, (whose names, and their contest with Moses, are
still preserved in Heathen Story) If a 51 Zoroaster, or Hostanes; if any wise
Philosopher, a 52 Pythagoras, or a 53 Socrates: if any Sect of Men, as
Brachmans or Druids; or of Women, whether the Pythonissae, or the like: If
lastly, vid. chapter 9.
Apollonius, Apuleius, Simon Magus, any false 54 Prophetess or Prophet, ever
did what could not be effected without the help of some Superior Power; as we
have cause to believe both by the reputation they obtained, the Records of
those things both in profane and Sacred Story, and the Experience and
Traditions of all Times and Places: this gives us full assurance of the concern
of Satan to oppose some Truth, and some Religion in the World, and so of Gods
concernment to establish it: In a word, if but Quin etiam hoc non dubitans
dixerim, si unum aliquid ita sit praedictum praesensumque, ut cum evenerit ita
cadat ut praedictum sit, neque in eo quicquam casu ant for tuito fact um esse
appareat, esse certe divinationem, idque esse omnibus confitendum. Cic. Divin.
l. 1. p. 106.
one real and undoubted Instance of these things has been afforded to the
World, it does conclude a Providence. And surely then these many Myriads of
Examples of each kind, which Histories of every Age and Country will afford
from Persons living in those Times of which they write, must give in such
Conviction as the greatest Sceptick shall not be able to control. And having
made good the Doctrine of an All-ruling Providence, it will be easy to advance
unto the Confirmation of the Christian Faith, by these Gradations.

. 11. 1. THAT this Providence has been engaged for the Establishment of some
particular Revelation and Religion in the World; and has as signally opposed
some others, which have pretended to those Names, and consequently does not
esteem them all indifferent. This is the natural Result almost of all these
Instances we have produced in confirmation of a Providence, they being such as
visibly declared Gods Approbation of the Faith of Jew or Christian, in
opposition to the Heathen Deities, and to their Modes of Worship.

. 12. AND secondly, That no particular Revelation, to which the adverse Parties
have pretended, can stand in Competition with the Christian Faith, or give in
equal Demonstrations of its Truth, and Derivation from a Deity, it being
certain, that of these Instances produced to evince a Providence, none are so
powerfully convincing as those that do assert the Christian Faith; the
Experience of Gods Mercies, Protections, and Assistances vouchsafed to the
Professors of it, as also of his Judgments on their Adversaries, and the
Engagement of his Power in Confirmation of this Doctrine, being more numerous
and evident, and more unquestionably true. Add to this, That seeing Moses and
the Prophets (by their evident Predictions of a Messiah that should come
attended with those very Circumstances, and should perform and undergo all
that Christ did and suffered? do confirm the truth of Christian Faith, it will
follow that these Instances forementioned, which do ascertain the Veracity of
those Prophets, and Gods Concernment for the Laws delivered by them, must also
give in full Conviction to the Truth of our Messiah, and his Doctrine.

And secondly, It is evident that all these Forms of Worship, which stand in
Competition with it, are either most apparently repugnant both to the Wisdom,
Purity, and Goodness of a Deity, or such as carry with them no Conviction of
their Truth and Goodness, nothing which speaks them worthy of the Concernment
of the God of Heaven. For that those Modes of Worship which had obtained in the
Heathen World, were vile and filthy, ridiculous and brutish, and most repugnant
to those Conceptions of a Deity which Nature has implanted in us, will be so
evident from what we shall discover of them, that he who runs may read it. As
for Mahometism, that having no internal Evidence which may convince us of its
Truth, no Purity and Goodness in its Precepts, and no Subservience unto the
Welfare of Mankind at present, or to his Happiness hereafter, beyond what
Scripture does afford us, but Promises and Precepts more Carnal and Judaical,
and Stories more extravagant and idle, then the wildest Fables; vid. Cantucuz.
Orat. in Mahum. sect. 23.
and being such a Doctrine, as never did pretend to Miracles, (except some
petty Trifles pretended to be done by Mahomet;) it cannot lay upon us any
Obligations to believe its Truth, and therefore we may rest assured, Azora
3.14, 17, 30, 71.
that God has no Concernment that we should believe it.

That the Religion of the Jews is antiquated, that it has passed the Period to
which it was appointed to continue, is most apparent, from the completion of
those Prophesies which did relate unto the promised Messiah, (of which we shall
discourse hereafter;) from the Destruction of the Temple, to which their
Worship was confined, and from those heavy Judgments they have labored under
above 1600 years without any intermission. Their wanderings in the Wilderness
were only for the space of forty years, their Captivity but seventy, (although
their Whoredoms and Idolatries, and their Stiff-necked disobedience in those
days, was far Greater then those sins which they at present charge upon
themselves:) whereas since the rejection of our Jesus they have continued
(...); Chrysostom. (...). p. 324. and (...) p. 338.
Vagabonds for 1600 years and upwards. In their Captivity, and the dispersions
of their former Ages, God gave them Favor in the eyes of those with whom they
lived, and that so visible, that Heathens have complained, how they incroached
upon all Nations, and even gave laws unto their Conquerours; in the midst of
Judgment he remembered mercy to them, and made all those who carried them away
captive to pity them. Since their rejection of the holy Jesus, their Names and
Persons have been infamous to all Posterity, vid. chapter 7.
their Sufferings Great beyond Expression, and dreadful beyond apprehension,
Titus.
and those who did inflict them have been forced to say, that divine Vengeance
did compel them to it. Notwithstanding their Captivity in former times, still
the distinction of their Tribes continued, and that of Levi was preserved for
the restoreing of their Sacrifices; yea many of them lived to see the
Restoration of their Temple, and Gods assistance to dispatch the work, maugre
the Wit and Malice of their strongest Enemies: but now their Temple has been
razed for 1680 years, and they have been deprived all this while of City,
Sacrifice, Altars, and Offerings, Lamps, and Incense, Feasts, and Sabbaths, and
all their Tribes are so confounded, they know no longer how to distinguish
them, nor unto whom it appertains to be Priest or Levite. All their Attempts
for Restoration of their Temple under Adrian, Constantine, and Julian, have
proved not only ineffectual, (though having the Assistance of the wisest
Emperor,) but visibly opposed from Heaven. (...), Chrysostom. (...) p. 325.326.
vid. etiam. p. 331.
As for all former Judgments, God by his Prophets did foretell the Measure and
Duration of them, and when they should give place to Mercy; that their
Egyptian Thraldom should expire after Ex. 12.41. Gal. 3.17.
430 years, that after Jer. 25.12.29.12. Dan. 9.12.
70 years accomplished they should return from Babylon, and that Dan. 12.12.
3 years would work deliverance from the more Cruel Rage and Fury of
Antiochus: of their Deliverance from the dispersion they now suffer, we have no
word of Prophecy. To conclude, At other times God left them many tokens of his
peculiar Presence with them; whilst they continued in wandering in the
Wilderness, they had their Ark and Fiery Pillar, Eid D. Kimchi and 11. R.
Solomen. in Hag. 1.8.
and during their abode in Canaan their Urim and Thummim, Gods Glorious
Presence in a shining light, their Prophets, and their Fire from Heaven; under
their captivity their Prophets, and till the coming of our Savior, their Bath
col, their Revelations and their Visions, of Quin que defuisse templo secundo
Arcam cum (...), and Cherubin, ignem (...), Spiritum Sanctum, Urim and Thummim,
ejusque rei indicio esse quod Hag. 1.8. (...) vocis (...) in scriptione
omittitur, traditum est in Joma cap. 1. Coch. in Sanhed. p. 157. comment. in
hac verba. Ex quo mortui sunt Prophetae posteriores Haggaeus, Zacharias,
Malachias, ablatus est Spiritus Sanctus ab Israele, nihilominus tamen usi sunt
filia vocis: vide Chrysostom. (...) 3. p. 340.
which at present not the least appearance. All which assures us of Gods
Rejection of that Nation from being his Peculiar People, and of the Abrogation
of that Worship.

ANNOTATIONS On the first Chapter.
1. THe Jewish exorcists] Josephus de Solomone. (...). l. 8. c. 2. p. 257. vide
Talm. Bab. Joma f. 57.1. Galat. de Arcanis fidei l. 8. c. 5.

2 The Christian Exorcists] (...). Just. Dial. cum Tryph. p. 247.
Mart. per exorcistas voce humana and potestate divina flagellatur, Ex. 76.
and uritur, and torquetur diabolus. Cypr. vide eundem Cypr. Ep. 2. ad Donatum.
Minutium p. 31. Lact. l. 4. c. 27. Petrum Siculum p. 57. Hieron. in Matthew. l.
2. c. 12.

3 The Heathen Exorcists] (...). Justin. Mart. dial. cum Tryph. (...).
Plutarch. Philops. p. 570. and 574. ed. 8.
sympos. lib. 7. qu. s. p. 706. D. vide Lucianum.

4 When used by those who did not own their Faith] Depone suspiciones a
veritate cadentes, quibus suspicaris Aegyptiam ibi confer linguam ubi
Aegyptius est, vel usus Aegyptia lingua qui tunc invocatus; potius autem
existimato quoniam primi omnium Aegyptij praesentiam participationemque deorum
sortiti sunt, ideo deos invocantem potissimum approbare, quando Aegyptio ritu
vocantur: neque vero dicendum est barbara haec obscura divinorum nomina esse
quaedam praestigiatorum fascinatorumque machinamenta. Iamblic. l. de divinis
Nomin: c. 9. Barbara appellat (...). Orig. Page 17.
in Cells. Discede in nomine Dei Jacob, in nomine Dei Sabbath. Marcell. de
Medicam. Emp. c. 21. (...) (...). Orig. Page 184, 185. v. p. 262.
in Cells. and rursus, (...). ib.

5 As well as Jews] (...). Just. Mar. Dial. cum Tryph. page 311.
Altissimi and Omnipotentis appellationi omnia subjecta sunt, and hujus
invocatione etiam ante adventum Domini nostri salvabantur homines and a
spiritibus nequissimis, l. 2. c. 5.
and a Daemoniis universis. Iren. v. Grotium in Mat. c. 12. v. 27.

6 Profane writers do attest] (...) (...). Diodorus Siculus. l. 3. p. 122.
Atque hinc in exorcismis Ethnicorum (...). Origin. in Celsum. Page 184.
vide Artabanum apud Eusebius. Praep. l. 9. c. 4.

7 Suspected Atheists do confess and prove] Ut causam facile confitebor me
ignorare, ita rem ipsam cum ex antiquis, tum novis exemplis agnoscere oportet
and confiteri, omnes magnos motus quicunque aut urbi alicui, aut Regioni
evenerut, vel a conjectoribus, vel a revelatione aliqua praedici ac
praenunciari solere. Machiavel disp. l. 1. c. 56. vid. Iusti Lipsii Monita pol.
l. 1. c. 5. Mon. 5.

8 The Heathen Records have at large delivered] (...). Joseph. vide Abydenum,
Molonem, Nicol. Damascenum apud Grotium, Antiq. Jud. l. 1. c. 4. p. 10.
in Not. in lib. de Christ. Rel. veritate page 73. and Traditionis hujus
vestigia inter Americanos mansisse docet Heideggerus Hist. sac. p. 582.

9 Of the Ark] (...). Lucian. p. 756, 757.
de Dea Sir. vide Cyrillum Alex. cont. Iulianum l. 1. p. 8, 9.

10 The Dove] (...). Plutarch. De solertia animalium p. 968.


11 Of the Mountains where it rested] (...). Berosus apud Iosephum. l. 1. c. 4.
p. 10.
(...). Cyril. cont. Jul. l. 1. p. 9.
Alex. ex Abydeno.

12 Sodom and Gomorrah] vide Diodorum Siculum, Strabonem, Plin. apud Grotium in
not. in Christ. Rel. ver. p. 100. Similia habent Just. Mart. Apol. 2. page 88.
Tertull. Apol. c. 40. sed prae omnibus Chrysostomus, cujus haec sunt verba,
(...). Genesis 13.10.
Chrysostomus in primam Epistolam ad These. Hom. 8. Duo ibi oppida Sodoma
nominatum alterum, alterum Gomorrum, apud quae pomum quod gignitur, habeat
licet specimen maturitatis, mandi tamen non potest; nam fuliginem intrinsecus
favillaceam ambitus tantum extimae cutis cohihet: quae vel levi pressa tactu
fumum exhalat, ed. Sal. c. 36.
and fatiscit in vagum pulverem. Solinus. Haud procul inde campiquos ferunt
olim uberes magnisque urbibus habitatos, fulminum jactu arsisse, nam cuncta
sponte edita, aut manu sata, sive herba tenus aut flore, seu solitam in speciem
adolevere, atra and inania velut in cinerem vanescunt. Hist. lib. 5 c. p.
Tacit.

13 Josephus and Brochardus] (...). Joseph. Antiq. l. 1. p. 20. Brochard. p. 1.
c. 7. S. 34. Uxor Loath foeminea mollicie ducta retrospexit, moxque in statuam
salis versa est, durante, mirum dictu, at que in aeternum duratura hac statua
ut vidimus. Bartholomaeus de Saligniaco Tom. 9. c. 6.

14 Heathens exorcised by invocation of that God] (...). Alexander Trallianus.
lib. 11.

15 The destruction of Jerusalem was prefaced with prodigies] (...) (...).
Josephus de Bello Iudaico. l. 7. c. 12.


16 Gods Judgments upon those who attempted to rebuild the Temple] (...).
Nazianz. in Iul. (...) 2. p. 81.


17 Olachas] Amnis Olachas in Bithynia Briazum alluit (hoc est and templo, and
Deo nomen) cujus gurgite perjuri notantur pati velut flammam urentem. Plinius
l. 31. c. 2.

18 Crateres Palicorum] (...). Arist. de Mirab. p. 1089. E
(...). Diodor. Sic. l. 11.


19 The Sardinian Fountains] Coarguendis valent furibus, nam quisquis
Sacramento raptum negat, lumina aquis attrectat, ubi periurium non est, cernit
clarius; si perfidiam abnuit, detegitur facinus coecitate, and captus oculis
admissum tenebris fatetur. Solinus cap. 10. vide.

20 The waters of the Indian Brachmans] (...) Porphyr. de styge. p. 282.

21 If Agrippa suffer'd] (...) Josephus. l. 19. c. 7.


22 Whose Religion did still thrive] usque eo sceleratissimae Gentis consuetuao
invaluit, ut per omnes jam terras recepta sit; victi victoribus leges dederunt.
Seneca apud August. de C. D. l. 6. c. 11.
Est id genus hominum apud Romanos etiam, at que tametsi saepe imminutum
fuerit, ita tamen auctum est, ut etiam condendi leges licentiam sibi
vindicarit. Dion. lib. 37.

23 The Apostate Julian does acknowledg] (...). apud Cyril. Alex. lib. 10. page
343.


24 Heathen Records do pretend the same] In Graecorum and Romanorum libris
nihil frequentius quam sacrum ignem e coelo decidisse, aut sponte sua fuisse
accensum, sic Appianus in Syriacis de Rege Seleuco diccit, (...) -- Et
Pausanias in Eliacis prioribus ubi de Lydiae urbibus Caesarea and Hypaepis; in
templo utriusque urbis amplissimo Cellae cum aris, super his cinis alio long
color a vulgari cinere. Huc ingressus Magus ubi foco lignis impositis tiara
caput velavit, implorat cognomen Dei, quicunque ille sit, ex libro enim recitat
carmen Barbaricum lingua plane ignota Graecis; ubi peroravit, sponte sua e
lignis nullo igne admoto purissima emicat flamma. Graece, (...), quod in Lydia
miraculum ipse se vidisse asserit. Similia habet ex Solino, Valerio, and Plinio
etc. de oppido Egnatia in agro Salentino, cujus meminit and Horatius l. 1. sat.
5. and quod de eanarratur rejicit ut fahulosum, sed tam multis (inquit
Bochartus) testibus fidem abrogare difficile est, cum haec Satanae potentiam
non superant, qui est (...), and in elementa multa potest, ignemque immisit
coelitus in Jobi Greges. Bochart. ae Animal. S. Sc. part. 1. l. 2. c. 35. col.
363.

25 Answer to the prayers of Theodosius] (...). Socr. Hist. Eccl. l. 5. c. 24.
(...) (...). Sozomen. Eccl. Hist. l. 7. c. 24. contra Eugenii robustissimum
exercitum magis orando quam feriendo pugnavit. August. de C.D. l. 5. c. 26.
orationem ipsam vide apud P. Diaconum in Theodos. S. 14.

26 The Poet Claudian]

O nimium dilecte Deo cui fundit ab antris
Aeolus armatas hyemes, cui militat ether,
Et conjurati veniunt ad classica venti.
in 3. Consul. Honor. p. 96. The Soldiers which engaged in those warrs] Milites
nobis, qui aderant, retulerunt extorta sibi esse de manibus quaecunque
jaculabantur, cum a Theodosii partibus in adversarios vehemens ventus iret, and
non solum quaecunque in eos jaciebantur concitatissime raperet, verum etiam
ipsorum tela in eorum corpora retorqueret. Aug. de C. D. l. 5. c. 26.

28 The Christian writers of that age] (...). Socr. l. 5. c. 24. v. Theodor. l.
5. c. 24. Ruff. l. 2. c. 33. Sozom. l. 7. c. 24.

29 Foretold by John the Hermite] Johannes ille eremi cultor praedixit Eutropio
eunucho Theodosii and ipsum victoriam de Eugenio reportaturum, and in Italia
moriturum, quod utrumque accidit. Hist. trip. l. 9. c, 45. vid. Cassianum l. 4.
collat. c. 13. Niceph. l. 12. c. 39.

30 Whose name was celebrated etc.] ad Iohannem in Aegypti eremo constitutum,
quem Dei servum prophetandi spiritu praeditum fama crebrescente didicerat,
misit: atque ab eo nuncium victoriae certissimum accepit. August. de C. D. l.
5. c. 26. (...) vocat Soz.. H. Eccl. l. 7. c. 22. (...). Theodorit. Hist. Eccl.
l. 5. c. 24.

31 That miraculous rain and Thunder] (...). Dion Cassius.

32 As his Epistle and their writings do aver] siliterae M. Aurelii requirantur
quibus Germanicam illam sitim Christianorum forte militum precationibus
impetrato imbre discussam contestatur. Tertull. Apol. c. 5. Marcus Aurelius in
Germanica expeditione Christianorum militum orationibus ad Deum fact is imbres
in siti illa impetravit. Id. ad scap. c. 4. vide Apollin. apud Eusebius. l. 5. c.
5.

33 The Emperors devotion] Fulmen de coelo precibus suis contra hostium
machinamentum intorsit, suis pluvia impetrata cum siti laborarent. In vita M.
Aurel.
Capitolinus. (...). Themist. orat. ad Imperat. Theodosium.

34 To the power of Magick] (...). Xiphilinus compend. Dionis.

35 As his own works inform us] (...). M. Aur. Ant. (...). Xiphilinus.
Rescripsit in Insulam relegandos, qui aliquidfacerent quo leves hominum animi
superstitione numinis terrerentur. Paulus in digest. l. 48. Tit. 19. de poenis
l. 30.

36 Astyages's dream] (...). Herod. clio p. 46.

37 Abydenus] (...). Abyd. apud Eusebius. praep. Evang. l. 9. c. 41.

38 Porphyry] Contra prophetam Danielem duodecimum librum scripsit, nolens eum
ab ipso cujus inscriptus est nomine esse compositum, sed a quodam qui
temporibus Antiochi qui appellatus est Epiphanes fuerit in Iudaea, and non tam
Danielem ventura dixisse, quam illum narrasse praeterita. Hieron. praef. in
Danielem.

39 Iosephus] (...). l. 10. c. 14. de Alex. M. sic (...) (...). l. 2. c. 8. p.
386. A.

40 They did preside over each Nation] (...). Julian. apud Cyril. Alex. l. p.
115. vide etiam p. 143, 148. Genius in cujus tutela quisque erat ab nativitate
sua (...) dicebatur Genius, sed ille totius patriae nuncupatus est deus Magnus,
Voss. de Idol. l. 2. c. 62. p. 322.
sic inscriptione ea quae Puteolis reperta DEO MAGNO GENIO PUTEOLANORUM ET
PATRIAE SUAE.

41 And attend on every individual person] (...). Plutarch. De tranq.
Majores nostri singulis and Genium and Iunonem dederunt. Sen. Ep. 3. Quum
nascimur duos Genios sortimur, unus est qui hortatur ad bona, alter qui
depravat ad mala, quibus assistentibus post mortem aut asserimur in meliorem
vitam, aut condemnamur in deteriorem. Serve. in illud Virg. Aen. 6. Quisque suos
patimur manes. vide de utrisque Geniis multa apud Lipsium Stoic. Philos. l. 1.
c. 19, 20. Lact. l. 2. c. 14. p. 218. and Spencerum not. in Orig. l. 8. p. 91,
92. Apuleium de Deo Socratis.

42 Their (...) would not have been so antient] (...) divinatio ex mortuis
omnium divinationum antiquissima and signum creditae (...) durationis animaru^
post mortem; frequenter id inOriente factitatum docent. Aesch. and Herod. Com.
in 1 Samuel 28.11.
Grotius. Publica jam literatura est quae animas justa aetate sopitas etiam
proba morte disjunct as, and prompta humatione dispunct as evocaturum se ab
inferorum incolatu pollicetur. Tert. Falsa est Democr. De anim.
and Epicuri de animae dissolutione sententia, qui profecto non auderent de
interitu animarum mago aliquo praesente disserere, quisciret certis carminibus
ciere ab inferis animas and adesse, and praebere se humanis oculis videndas and
loqui, and futura praedicere, and si auderent re ipsa and documentis
praesentibus vincerentur. Lact. (...). l. 7. c. 13. page 690.
Just. Mart. apol. 2. P: 65. (...) (...). Max. Tyr. diss. 26. p. 25. and
postquam multa id genus exempla protulerat sic ait, (...) id. p. 252.

43 Gnosticks] Simon Samarites universam magiam adhuc amplius inscrutans in
stuporem cogebat multos hominum, quippe cum esset sub Claudio Caesare, a quo
etiam statua honoratus esse dicitur propter magiam. Iren. l. 1. c. 20. Just.
Mart. Apol. 2. p. 69. Tertul Apol. c. 13. Eusebius. Hist: Eccl. l. 1. c. 12.
Cyril. Hieros. Catech. 6.

44 Carpocratians] arts enim Magicas operantur and ipsi. Iren. l. 2.24. (...).
Eusebius. His. Ecc. l. 4. c. 7.

45 Marcionists] (...) (...). Iren. adv. Haer. l. 1. c. 7. (...). Epiph. Haer.
34. vid. Theodoret. l. 1. Haer. fab. c. Tertul. de praescript.

46 Menandrians] (...). Just. Ap. 2. p. 69, 70. ad summum Magiae pervenit.
Iren. l. 1. c. 21. vide Eusebius. l. 3. c. 20.

47 Montanists] (...). Eusebius. H. Ecc. l. 5. c. 3. vid. c. 14.

48 Eunomians, Arians] (...). Photii excerpta ex lib. 9. Philostorgii. (...).
ib. lib. 2. c. 8. vid. l. 3. c. 4. l. 4. c. 7. l. 5. c. 2.

49 Priscillianists] Priscillianum Zoroastris Magi studiosissimum and ex Mago
Episcopum ait Hieron. Ep. ad Ctesiphontem contra Pelagium. vid. Sulpitium in
vita Martini.

50 Donatists] de quibus vide Augustinum ep. 165.

51 Finland Lapland or Tartarian witches) possunt quamcunque volunt figuram
assumere, item quae in alio gerantur orb ab amicis vel inimicis lineae vestis
pretio explorare, ventos quoque quos optent navigantibus vendere. Olaus Magnus
de Lappis Finnis and Biarmis l. 1. c. 1. l. 3. c. 18.

52 Egyptian Magi whose names and their contest with Moses] Est and alia
Magices factio a Mose and Jamne and Jotape Judaeis pendens. L. 30. c. 1.
Plin. Si quamlibet modicum emolumentum probaveritis ego sim Charimondas, vel
Damigeron, vel is Moses, vel Jamnes, vel Apollonius, vel ipse Dardanus, vel
quicunque alius post Zoroastrem and Host anem inter Magos celebratus est. Apol.
p. 54.
Apuleius. (...). In Celsum p. 199.
Orig. vide Eusebius. praep. Evang. l. 9. c. 8. Hammondum and Drusium in 2. ep. ad
Tim. c. 3. v. 8.

53 Zoroaster or Hostanes] atque nunc veniat quaeso per igneam Zonam Magus
interiore ab orb Zoroastres, Apollonius, Damigero, and Dardanus, Velus,
Julianus, and Baebulus, and si quis est alius qui principatum and nomen fertur
in talibus habuisse praestigiis. Arnobius. Et p. 25. quis nescit hos aut
imminentia studia praenoscere quae necessario velint nolint suis ordinationibus
veniunt, aut mortiferam immittere quibus libuerit tabem, aut sine clavibus
reserare quae clausa sunt, aut ora silentio vincere? Magorum elogio and negotio
primus Hostanes. Minut. P. 30.

54 Fythagoras] (...). Porphyr. in vita Pythag. vid. P. 193.
Iamblicum c. 28.

55 Socrates] de cujus Genio ita Chalcidius, H. 3.
Socrati dicitur a puero comes Demon rerum agendarum praeceptor fuisse, non ut
hortaretur eum ad aliquem act um, sed ut prohiberet quae fieri non expedirent.
In Platonis Timaeum p. 112. vide Apuleium de Deo Socr. Plutarchum and Max.
Tyrium dissert. de Genio Socratis. Xenoph. Mem. l. 4. f. 8. s. 1.7.

56 Prophetesses] erat mulier quae propheten se praeferret; and quasi spiritu
sancto plena sic ageret, ita autem principalium daemoniorum impetu ferebatur,
ut per longum tempus sollicitaret and deciperet fraternitatem mir abilia
quaedam and portentosa perficiens. Firmilianus apud Cyprianum Epist. 75. sect.
9.

CHAP. II.
The Contents.
THAT common Prudence would not suffer the Apostles to pretend such things in
their historical Relations of the life of Christ, and in their Epistles to the
Churches newly converted, as must infallibly disgrace their Testimony, and make
them appear Guilty of Delusion. (2) That the Miracles recorded in those
Historical Narrations and Epistles, if true, are a convincing Evidence, that
some Superior Power did assist the Workers of them. (3) That Christ and his
Disciples had no Assistance from Good or evil Angels to impose upon the World.

NOW that we may with greater Evidence conclude the Certainty of Christian
faith, we shall premise these things.

Proleg. 1. That if it were not certainly known to the Churches newly converted
to Christianity, that unquestionable Miracles had been wrought among them,
common Prudence would not have suffered the Disciples of this Jesus in their
Epistles to those Churches, or in their Historical Relations of the Life and
Acts of Christ and his Apostles, written in Confirmation of the Faith
delivered; or in the asserting their Apostleship against false Brethren: or
lastly, in the reproof of their Miscarriages for whom those Writings were
intended, to have appealed to them as to things notorious. Nor would it suffer
them to ask their Converts whence they received those Gal. 3.2, 5.
Gists, whence they derived that Power of working 1 Cor. 14.26.
Miracles, and why they did abuse those Spiritual Gifts they never had. Nor to
make large 1 Cor. 12.9, 10.
Catalogues of their miraculous Endowments, and many Rules to limit and
restrain their Exercise; nor yet to Acts 2.38, 39.
promise the like Gifts to such as would embrace their Testimony; or give it
out, that they were frequent and familiarly exercised in the Christian
Churches, and communicated by the Imposition of the Acts 8.17, 18.
Apostles hands. Nor to assert, as they did with the greatest confidence, that
God gave Heb. 2.4.
testimony to their Doctrine by signs and Wonders, and diverse powerful
Operations, and Gifts of the Holy Ghost: and that the 2 Cor. 12.12.
Marks of an Apostle had been visible among their Hearers, in all patience,
signs and wonders, and mighty deeds. That Christ enabled them to Mark 16.18
raise the dead, to cast out devils, and to heal the sick, to tread on serpents
and on scorpions, and to drink deadly poisons with the greatest safety; to
Matt. 17.20.
remove mountains, and to do greater Job. 15.20.
works of wonder, then he in Person had performed. Or, that according to his
Promise, these Gifts were plentifully vouchsafed to his Church throughout the
World. Nor to leave on record such Instances of fact as these, viz. that all
who touched their Masters Mark 6.56.
garments, were entirely healed; that Acts 19.12.
handkerchiefs and aprons sent from some of his Apostles, would cast out
devils, and remove diseases; and that their very Acts 5.15.
shadows healed all that were afflicted with any evil spirits, all the sick
that were placed on beds and couches as they passed by; that whither soever
they went forth, and preached, the power of this Jesus was still working with
them, and confirming the word with signs Mark 16.20.
following. Nay farther, to appeal unto their Adversaries as Judges of the
Truth of what they said, to bid their Eyes, and Ears, their Acts 2.22. and
10.37.
Senses, and Experience, judge of what they had delivered touching their
Masters Miracles and their own: to pretend that such Miracles were often done
before their Eyes, upon their Persons, Friends, Relations, upon whole
Multitudes, and many Thousands at a time; and to affirm, 2 Cor. 13.5.
that they were such as must convince them, if they were not reprobates, that
Jesus Christ was truly preached among them; 1 Cor. 15.6.
to avouch that above five hundred persons were eyewitnesses to his
resurrection; and that the greater part of them were living many Years after
the thing was done. To declare publicly, that the Acts 2.39.
like Gifts were promised unto the Primitive Professors of Christianity, and
were really Acts 8.17, 18. and 10.44, 46.
conferred upon them according to that Promise; and give it out, that they had
standing Officers invested with a Power, to 1 Cor. 5.5
deliver up to Satan for the destruction of the flesh, Jam. 5.14, 15.
to heal the sick by prayer and unction, to give the Holy Spirit, to exorcise,
and to cast forth devils, to 1 Cor. 12.10.
speak with tongues, and to interpret what was spoken, and to discern the
Spirits by which they spoke; and saying all this, to appeal to the Gal. 1.6. 1 Thessalonians. 2.10.
Searcher of all hearts that they did not lie; and with much confidence to
assert, they did not follow 2 Pet. 1.16.
cunningly devised Fables; did not walk in 2 Cor. 2.17. and 4.2.
craftiness, did not adulterate the word, or do the work of God deceitfully, as
others that opposed them did; but did by 1 Thessalonians. 2.3, 4, 5.
manifestation of the truth commend themselves to every man's conscience.
Lastly, to say, Romans 15.18, 19.
they would not speak of any thing which Christ had not performed by them
through mighty signs and wonders, through the power of the Spirit; but that
they writ such things as every 1 Cor. 14.37.
spiritual person must acknowledge to be true; that they delivered only what 1 John 1.2.
they had seen and heard, and handled of the word of life; things which were
Luc. 1.1.
perfectly understood, and surely believed amongst them, and written of by
many: that many of them were 2 Pet. 1.16.
eyewitnesses of his power and majesty; that others had what they writ from
Luc. 1.2. Mark 3.14. Act. 1.21.
them who were eyewitnesses from the beginning; that one of them was 2 Cor.
12.2.
snatched up into the heavens, where he heard things unspeakable. I say, to
leave upon record all these things, of which the greatest part, if they were
false, might easily have been evicted in that Age when they were written; this
had been not only a desperate Wickedness, but an extreme Folly: for the
evicting of those Sayings would certainly have overthrown their Design, which
was the propagating of the Christian Faith throughout all the World. But we see
not only by their Writings, but by the Writings of the Heathens, that they sped
in their Design; that Christian Religion was so propagated in that Age, whilst
some of Christ's Disciples were yet living; and therefore we may reasonably
conclude they were not, and could not be convinced of Falsehood; but that what
they had said and written of these Matters was unquestionably true.

Proleg. 2. The miraculous Operations of Christ and his Apostles, if done
according to the Records left concerning them; must be a signal Evidence of
some invisible superior Power engaged to assist them. For 1. They chiefly were
employed in the ejection of the Devil, who is a Spirit, and therefore
invisible, and therefore not to be ejected but by a Power which is Invisible.
And secondly, They were done by means which could have no proportion to the
greatness of the Work, no real Influence upon the Object, and so could be no
Causes of the Effect produced. For instance, that these Words, Matt. 8.3.
I will be thou clean should cleanse a Leper; Joh. 4.50. Matt. 8.13.
that Go thy way, thy Son lives, thy daughter is made whole, should give both
Life and Health; or that the Faith of a Centurion should work a perfect Cure
upon his Servant: Murk 9.38. and 5.8.
that the mention of the Name of Jesus, or his Command to them, should eject
whole Legions of evil Spirits; that Ananias and Saphira should Give up the
ghost, and Elymas be struck blind, Acts 5.9. and 13.11.
only because St. Paul, and Peter said it should be so; and that an Hymn of
Paul and Sylas should make the Earth to tremble, the Prison doors to open, and
all the Prisoners Shackles to fly off; that these Words Talitha cumi, or
Lazarus come forth, should raise the dead: These things could not be done by
means so weak and ineffectual, without some secret and invisible Assistance. 2.
That Faith in Jesus should immediately enable Men to speak those Languages they
were never taught; that Bread, by being broken, should be multiplied above an
hundred fold; that the cursing of a Fig Tree should make it wither; that at the
Crucifying of a supposed Malefactor, there should be such a concurrence of
Prodigies; the Sun to gather darkness, and the Earth to tremble; the Rocks to
rend, and Dead to rise: It is not to be imagined that these things should so
happen, without the assistance of some Heavenly Power. Thirdly, Some of these
Operations were for matter such as Juglers never did, or could pretend to with
any show of Truth, viz. Speaking with diverse Tongues to others, and giving this
Power unto thousands, only by Imposition of the Apostles hands. We read
elsewhere of Persons who have spoken Words they understood not, yet no History
speaks of any who had the boldness (...) pretend they could confer the gift of
speaking with all kind of Tongues, or of Interpreting those Tongues to others.

Fourthly, they were some of them things and actions seen and done in places
where no other power could act, but such as is invisible. And such were the
production of that Star which led the wise men to the Star of Jacob; Luke
2.13.24.4.
the frequent apparitions of Angels, singing their Anthems at his birth, and
being present with him at his Temptation in the wilderness, at his
Transfiguration in his agony, at his Resurrection and Ascension into heaven,
Luke 1.11.28.
and being sent to Zacharias, the Virgin Mother, Cornelius, Peter, and many
others. Lastly, such were those voices from heaven, Mat. 3.17
saying at one time, this is my beloved in whom I am well pleased, at an other
time, this is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased, hear ye him; Mat. 17.5.
at a 3d time, when Christ said, Father Glorify thy name, I have both Glorified
it, Joh. 12.28
and will Glorify it again; and saying to St. Paul in the hearing of diverse of
the Jews, Saul, Saul, Act. 9.7.
why persecutest thou me. 5ly The Greatness of the works, to wit, the raising
of the dead, nay more the raising of himself from death, show evidently the
Greatness of the power which was engaged to effect it. In a word, Christ still
pretended that he was the Joh. 5.16.17.
Son of God; that what he did, was by the Joh. 5.19.20.21.
power of God, and by that virtue he Joh. 8.18.10.25.
received from heaven; that God bare witness to him by his mighty works, and
did them to this very end, that all might honor Joh. 8.18.10.25
the Son, even as they honored the Father; and that they gave sufficient Joh.
5.36.14.11.
witness to his doctrine. And it is recorded by his disciples, that God declared
him by those Mat. 3. Pet. 2.1.17.
voices before mentioned, in the hearing of Joh. 1.33.
many and by a special revelation to St. John the Baptist, to be his beloved
Son; which is sufficient to evince, if he and his disciples had no intention to
impose upon the world in those relations, that the invisible power by which he
was assisted, was the hand of God.

Proleg. 3. Christ and his disciples had no assistance, whether from Good or
evil Angels, to delude the world. Good Angels are the Ministers of heaven, and
strict observers of the pleasure of a good and holy God, and consequently, what
they endeavor to promote, must be agreeable to the will of God; their actions
and designs must be consistent with their natures and appellations, and
therefore such as must design the good and welfare of those Persons whom they
endeavored to confirm in this belief; which since it visibly did tend unto
their present ruin, must give assurance of that future Bliss, which it did
promise as the reward of what they suffered, who embraced it; and so assure us
that God was well pleased with, and stood engaged to reward their sufferings.
Nor is it reasonable to imagine, that divine power should be so signally
employed, to beguile and betray the world into so Gross Idolatry, as is the
worship of a vile Impostor for the God of heaven; or that this power should be
at such expense of Miracles, to lift an Impudent blasphemer into the usurpation
of his own prerogative. Or lastly, that his Goodness should permit him, to be
so highly instrumental, to engage whole Myriads of well meaning Persons in the
profession of a lie, so visibly destructive to their present welfare;
especially considering that the same ministry of Angels, or some more
immediate engagement of divinity, might as effectually have reduced the world
into obedience, to the unerring dictates, whither of reason, or of Revelation.
To transfer this office to the prince of darkness, seems yet more palpably
absurd; it being his design and interest, to fill the world with blood and
rapine, to make men's bodies the Greatest sinks of vice and all impurity, and so
incapable of bliss and mercy from the God of purity. For the effecting of which
ends, he could use nothing better, than that Gross and palpable Idolatry, which
then reigned in all parts of the Gentile world; nor could more debase the
nature of mankind then it was done already by Luis enim non sentiat cujusmodi
spiritus talibus obscoenitatibus delect entur, nisi vel nesciens utrum omnino
ulli immundi Spiritus Deorum nomine decipiant, vel talem agens vitam, in qua
istos potius quam Deum verum, and optet propitios, and formidet iratos. August.
de C. D. l. 2.2.4.
those 1 barbarous and inhumane rites, those 2 ridiculous, 3 brutish, and
filthy ceremonies; which it was therefore the Devils business to confirm, by
frequent answers of his Oracles, by miracles and predictions, by Auguries,
their feasts, solemnities, and modes of worship. That he knew not how to change
these for worse, it sufficiently appears by the care that his instruments took,
to prevent all innovations in religion, and specially the bringing in of new
Gods, least the only true God should come in among the rest. It appears
likewise by the ways he now takes in the dark corners of the earth, where he
has power to do what he pleases; and nothing does please him better, than to
keep them under the same Gross and palpable Idolatry. But in case the Devil had
been once minded to have changed his method; of all methods in the world he
never would have pitched on this. For nothing can be more contrary to his
design, then those things which are brought in by the Christian Religion, which
cautions us so often, and so severely, against those wiles and Methods, which had
so long seduced and captivated the Heathen World unto his pleasure; whith tends
wholly to promote true Love, and to knit men together in the bonds of Charity;
to instill those laws of Purity and Virtue that contribute so much unto the
Welfare of mankind; which press us with so much zeal to imitate divine
Perfections, become the fairest transcripts of a Deity, and so the Greatest
Sticklers against Satan and his Kingdom. Would the enemy of mankind endeavor
to promote that doctrine which carries such repugnance to his nature? which
sets the blackest brand on Pride, and Envy, Malice, Falsehood and Hypocrisy, and
all that viperous brood of fleshly lusts, which are the proper characters of
that evil one? If so, he very ill deserves the name of Satan, the Destroyer,
the devouring Lion, or the evil one. Besides Christianity was raised upon the
ruins of the Devils kingdom, and the Church built on the confusions of his
Babel; no sooner did the Joyful voice sound in the Heathens ears, but it 4
struck dumb his Oracles, silenced his Tripods and his Pipes: the very presence
of a 5 Christian or a 6 Martyrs Bones, would put a stop unto his Service; at
their command their Gods were 7 forced to confess they were but Devils, and
could do 8 nothing where the name of Christ was Invocated, and so were forced
to forsake those Seats they had so quietly possessed. Thus, as the Prophet had
foretold, Zeph. 2.11
they famished those earthly Gods; the Foolishness of Preaching outwitted all
their Policies; the Weakness of the Gospel overcame their Strength, it outed
them of their Possessions, it forced the Conjurer to become the Convert, Acts
8.13, 19.
and the Magicians to burn their Books; and made the very name of Demon become
the hatred of good Men. Orig. in Celsum, p. 234
It was this extorted that Ingenious Confession from the Mouth of Porphyry,
That since the Blessings of a Savior, all others were in vain expected from
the Heathen Deities, whose Statues and whose Powers were become Insensate. It
was that which forced the Heathen to enquire, (...), what so benumbed their
Deities? what chased them from their Dens and Altars? and this made the
Christian so triumphantly (...); Nazian. (...). 2. p. 99. vide Eusebius. Praep.
Evang. l. 1. c. 1. August. de C. D. l. 4. c. 29.
cry out, Ubi sunt dii vestri, ubi Prophetae, ubi oracula, ubi auguria, ubi
Sacrificia? Again, If what they did was by the power of Magic, and Infernal
Arts, whence should they learn, and by what means obtain to such dexterity,
that all the Wit and Learning in the World could neither equal nor detect their
Subtilty, nor do what was the daily work of Idiots and Mechanic Souls? If we
enquire of the Jew or Gentile, they will derive this skill from the Egyptian
Magi, with whom our Savior did converse; which they imagine without the least
pretense of Evidence, as having nothing else to say. But were it so, How came
this Doctrine to convert even those Egyptian Sorcerers, and make them suffer
so much for the Christian Faith? Eusebius. Hist. Eccles. l. 8. c. 8.
How is it none of them did e're contend with this new Moses in the power of
working Miracles, as of old they did? (though they had more prevailing Motives
so to do;) or manifest those slights to the deceived World with which they were
so well acquainted? How is it, Secondly, That of those many which did desert
the Christian Faith, none ever did confess their skill in Magic; Produce one
Book, or one Instruction which they had received from Christ, or his Apostles,
to work such wonderful Effects? Thirdly, Why did they constantly profess so
great an enmity unto that Art of Magic which the Jews and Heathens exercised,
that even their Artists, when converted, condemned their Books of Magic to the
Flames. In fine, Matthew. 9.4. and 12.25. Mark 2.6, 8. and 9, 33. Joh. 2.25.
Christ was acquainted with the thoughts of Men, knew the Conceptions, and the
discourses of their very Souls; rebuked the Pharisees and Scribes for what they
did conceive within their hearts; which things assure us, that he was assisted
by a greater Power than that of Good or Evil Angels; we having neither heard or
known that this has been attempted, or pretended by them; though to be able so
to do, or to have it only believed that he is able, would be highly
instrumental to the preserving the Devils Power, and the establishment of his
Kingdom.

ANNOTATIONS On the 2d. Chapter.
1. THose Barbarous and inhumane rites] 1. eviration. Matri deum. Homines suis
ipsi virilibus litant. Lact. l. 1. c. 21. vide August. de C. D. l. 7. c. 26.
Tatian. or. cont. Gentes. Prudentium Hymno in Romanum. Samia testa Matris Deum
sacerdotes virilitatem amputant. Plin. l. 35. c. 12. vide Herodian. l. 1. c.
20. Tibullum l. 1. El. 4. Voss. de Idol. l. 1. c. 20. l. 2. c. 35. 2ly.
incision of the flesh. (...). Lucian. de Dea syria. p. 419. Ille viriles sihi
parts amputat, ille lacertos secat; ubi iratos deos timent qui sic propitios
mirentur. Senec. apud August. de C. D. l. 6. c. 10. vid. l. 7. c. 26. Hoc Matri
Deorum factum esse vide apud Apulcium l. 8. Metam. Vossium de idol. l. 2. c.
53. p. 303. Bellonae. Lact. l. 1. c. 17. Tertul. Apol. c. 9. Minut. p. 34.
Horat. l. 2. Sat. 3. Tibul. l. 1. El. 6. Lamprid. in vita Commodi. 3ly. the
murder of their tender infants. (...). Athanas. orat. adv. Gentes. (...).
Plutarch. de superst. p. 171. vide Platonem in Pol. p. 315. (...). Eusebius.
praep. evang. l. 5. c. 18. (...). ita Dionys. Halicarn de Pelasgis quos oraculo
motos hoc fecisse tradit l. 1. p. 18. vid. Tert. Apol. c. 9. and com. in locum.
Minut. p. 34. Elmenh. in locum p. 80. and Ouzel. p. 189. 190. 4ly. Human
sacrifices. Which obtained amongst the Egyptians, Aegyptio Busiridi. Lact. l.
1. c. 21. amongst the Gauls to Mercury, Hesus, Taran, and Teutates. Caesar de
Bello Gallico l. 6. amongst the Romans to Jupiter Latiaris, Graecus and Graeca,
Gallus and Galla. Minut. p. 34. amongst the Britains, Germans, Sclavonians
Rhodians. Elmenh. in Minut. p. 80, 81, 82. Ouzel. in eunaem p. 191, 192, 193,
194. through the whole world. (...). Eusebius. praep. Evang. l. 4. c. 17. quorum
omnium exempla vide in sequentibus. Sacrificabant ad hunc modum (...). Eusebius.
ibid. Sacrificabant autem plusquam Hecatombas. (...) (...). Diod. Sicul. l. 20.
p. 756. Ad hanc autem (...) hac ratione potissimum movebantur, quod pro vita
hominis nisi vita hominis reddatur, non posse deorum immortalium numen placari
arbitrantur. Caesar de Bello Gall. l. 6. Utque essent reliquorum piacula.
(...). Philo. de. Phaen. Historia apud Eusebius. praep. ev. l. 4. c. 17. vide
Porp. de abst. l. 2.

2 Ridiculous.] such where 1. the threatening of their Gods. (...). Porph. ep.
ad Anebonem. apud Theod. sermon. 3. p. 48. 2ly. cursing of them. Apud Lindum,
quod est oppidum Rhodi Herculis sacra sunt, quorum a caeteris long diversus
ritus est, siquidem non (...) sed maledict is and execratione celebrantur,
eaque pro violatis habent, siquando inter solennes ritus, vel imprudenti alicui
exciderit bonum verbum. Lact. l. 1. p. 122. (...) (...). Orig. in Celsum. l. 7.
p. 368. Nazianz. (...). p. 64.

3 Brutish and filthy ceremonies] Solent etenim (...). Chrysostom. Tom. 5. or. 2.
in Babylam p. 451. Talia autem erant sacra Eleusinia vide Meurs. c. 7. Floralia
and Lupercalia. Lact. l. 1. c. 20. Aug. de C. D. l. 2. c. 8. Thesmophoria.
Arnob. l. 5. p. 173. vide Elmenh. in locum. Bacchi and Priapi sacra. (...).
Diod. Sic. de Baccho. l. 4. p. 210. (...). Theodoret. sect. 3. p. 51.
Porro ab Assyriis and Persis pudenda venerabantur, ob Solis, Saturni, and
Veneris aspectus qui seminales sunt. Seldom. de diis syris. p. 227. ab
Atheniensibus. (...) (...). Diod. Sic. l. 4. p. 211. ab Aegyptiis, atque aliis
plerisque. (...). Idem l. 1. p. 11. vid. Theodor. sermon. 10. p. 137. August. de
C. D. l. 2. c. 14. 7. c. 21. Eusebius. praep. Evang. l. 2. c. 1. Arnob. l. 5. p.
176.

4 Struck dumb his oracles] (...). Et rursus (...). ib. p. 2. (...). Julian.
apud Cyrill. Alex. l. 6. p. 198. 199. (...). Strabo l. 17. p. 813. and rursus
de Phano Delphico, (...). p. 419. vide Theodoret. de curand. Graec. affect.
sermon. 10. p. 142. Arnob. l. 1. p. 27. August. Ep. 42. Cic. de divin. l. 2. p.
132. and l. 1. p. 88.

5 The presence of a Christian] Cum Diis suis immolant, si assistat aliquis
signatam frontem gerens sacra nullo modo litant, nec responsa potest consultus
reddere vates, and haec saepe causa praecipua justitiam persequendi malis
Regibus fuit; cum enim quidam Ministrorum nostrorum sacrificantibus dominis
assisterent, imposito frontibus signo Deos illorum fugaverunt, ne possent in
visceribus hostiarum futura depingere, conquerentes profanos homines sacris
interesse. Lact. l. 4. c. 27.

6 Or a Martyrs bones] (...). Unde quaestione facta (...), de quorum veritate
testem Deum invocat Constantinus apud Eusebius. in vita Constant. l. 2. c. 50. 51.
(...) (...). Chrysostom. or. 2. in Babylam. p. 461. Theodoret. sermon. 10. p. 142.
Ruff. l. 10. c. 35. Socrat. l. 3. c. 16. Theodor. l. 3. c. 9. Sozom. l. c. 18.
19. Philostorg. l. 7. c. 8. 12.

7 Their Gods were forced to confess they were but devils] quic quid daemonum
colitis victi dolor quod sunt eloquuntur, nec utique in turpitudinem sui,
nonnullis praesertim vestrum assistentibus, mentiuntur; ipsis testibus esse eos
daemonas de se verum confitentibus credit. Minut. p. 31. Credit illis cum
verum de se loquuntur, qui mentientibus creditis: nemo ad suum dedecus
mentitur, quin potius ad honorem; magis fides plena est in adversus semetipsos
confitentes, quam pro semetipsis negantes. Haec denique testimonia Deorum
vestrorum Christianos facere consueverunt, quia plurimum illis credendo in Deo
Domino credimus; ipsi literarum nostrarum fidem accendunt, nollent enim vos tam
fructuosos tam officiosos sibi amittere vel ne a vobis quandoque Christianis
fugentur, si illis sub Christiano volente vobis veritatem probare mentiri
liceret. Tertull. Apol. c. 23. vide Lact. l. 2. c. 15. l. 4. c. 27. Cypr. Ep.
ad Demetr.

8 And could do nothing where the name of Christ was invocated] (...). Eusebius.
Praeparat. Evang. l. 5. c. 1.

CHAP. III.
SECT. I.
The Contents.
THAT Christ and his Apostles did not endeavor to impose upon the World.
Proleg. 4.
Not Christ. For first, he could have no temptation to fulfill those Prophesies
of the Messiah, which concerned his ignominious, poor, and miserable life, and
his accursed death. Secondly, He could have no expectation of his own
Resurrection, or of the sending of the Holy Ghost; or of the destruction of the
Jewish Nation; or of the famishing of Heathen Deities; or of the propagation of
his Gospel throughout the World; or the performance of those mighty Deeds which
were expected from the Messiah of the Jews. Thirdly, No hopes this should be
done by Men so timorous, so dull, so ignorant, as were the twelve Apostles.
Fourthly, His Disciples must be acquainted with the Impostures of their Lord,
and so have greatest reason to disown him. Fifthly, If so, John Baptist, who
obtained so great a reputation from the Jews, must have been guilty of the same
endeavor to delude them. Secondly, not Christ's Apostles, as is argued from
their simplicity, Sincerity, Interest, The things they did, or were obliged to
pretend. Thirdly, Not their immediate Successors, for the same and many other
reasons. The assurance which we have of what these Arguments suppose. Coroll.
That what they have delivered to the World, must be related bona fide, and with
a full conviction of its Truth.

BUt Fourthly, Sect. I. Proleg. 4.
we premise, That Christ and his Apostles, with their immediate Successors, did
not endeavor to impose upon mankind; nor did they Preach unto them cunningly
devised Fables. And

1. It Is both incredible our Savior would, and inconceivable he should
endeavor to delude the World, and yet obtain so many and such stiff Assertors
of his Doctrine. It Is

1. Incredible he would, as having no Temptation thereunto. For had he lived a
soft and pleasing Life; had he been chief among the Rich and Honorable; had he
not come into the World poor and lowly; Zach. 9.9.
had he not been despised, and set at naught, Isa. 53.2.
whilst he continued in it; had he not found Reproach and Infamy; ver. 12.
had he not been numbered with transgressors in his death, and suffered from
those Persons whom he came to save: I say, had he not done all this, he had not
answered the Predictions of the Law and Prophets, which yet he was obliged to
do, and declared in the end of his Life that he had done it. He said immediately
before his Expiration on the Cross, (...), All things are finished and
accomplished which were spoken of me; Joh. 19.30.
and his Disciples, in their Preaching to the Jews, insisted upon this as the
chief Evidence of his Messiahship, That he fulfilled all things that were
spoken of him in the Law and in the Prophets. Acts 3.18. and 10.43. Luke 24.44.
But he well knew before he entered upon this Office, what the Conditions were
which those Predictions did require: that the Messiah was not only to perform
those Mighty Things, which being misunderstood by the Jews, made them expect
his coming in Worldly Pomp and Grandeur; but that he also was to come in
poverty and abjectness, so contrary to their Expectations, that this would
cause them to despise and to reject him, and in the end provoke them to put him
to a cruel Death. It was necessary therefore, that as in one respect he should
perform the greatest Wonders; so in the other, Isa. 53.3.
he should be a Man of sorrows, rejected and despised of his Brethren, and one
who made his grave with the wicked. ver. 9.
Had he not dyed an ignominious and accursed Death, Joh. 3.14. Matt. 16.21.
he must have suffered under the reproach of a false lying Prophet; and what
could tempt him to seal so great and vile a Falsehood with the loss of Life and
Credit? Had not this Death concluded in a most glorious Resurrection, Matt.
26.31.
attended with the Gifts and Consolations, Joh. 7.39. Act. 1.5, 8. Mark 16.7.
and mighty Workings of the Holy Ghost, He had been manifestly false to his
Promise and Predictions, and the just matter of his Disciples scorn and hatred;
as having made them leave their present Welfare, and their Worldly Comforts, to
be exposed to Shame and Beggary; and having promised what they must immediately
perceive to be a Lie; he could not hope that they should afterward continue to
assert his Cause: nor had he performed what the Prophets and the Psalmist
foretold of the Messiah, Psalm. 16.8, 9.
whose soul must not be left in hell, nor his body see corruption; and in whose
days the Spirit was to be poured upon all flesh. Joel 2.28.
Had not the Jewish Temple been thrown down, Matt. 24. Mark 13.10.
and so their Laws and Worship, which was confined to it, cancelled; had not
the City, which was full of People, become an heap of Stones; had not his
Doctrine spread it self throughout the Heathen World; Zeph. 2.15.
had it not famished all their Deities, and made their Names to perish from the
Earth, he had not done the Work of the Messiah. And this he could not hope
should ere be done, without the aids of Heaven; nor that God should be engaged
to assert, and not confound lying Blasphemies.

He could not cast out Devils by Beelzebub, or heal Diseases by any Magical
Collusions (which only was objected against his Miracles by the Jew and
Gentile) but his Disciples on whom this Power was conferred, must be Instructed
by him in those Arts; and having thus discovered himself to them as a most
dangerous Impostor, and one that laid Designs to work the ruin of their Nation
and Religion, and his own Apotheosis; and to engage the World in a new kind of
Idolatry; and all this, under pretense of the greatest Innocence, Sincerity,
and purity of Life, and kindness to Men's Souls and Bodies: I say, being
discovered to his Disciples to be such an one, what hopes could he conceive
they should desert their former Faith, and quit it for so vile a Forgery, which
must expose them and their Nation to the worst of Evils? Matt. 17.6. and 20.21.
What Expectations could he have? what reason to conceive that Men so timorous,
so worldly, Luke 9.46. and 24.37.
so forward to contend who should be greatest, (as they themselves do of
themselves confess,) should by Humility and Self-denial, Disgrace and Poverty,
by Confidence and Perseverance, continue to assert what could not any way
conduce unto their Interest; yea, what it was the Interest of humane Nature to
detect and oppose?

In fine, he could not thus deceive, but his Forerunner, who gave so large a
Testimony unto his Mission, and who proclaimed him the Son, John 1.34.36.
the Lamb of God, the true Messiah, and the Savior of the World, must do so
too; and were this so, How came the Jews to have so great a Kindness and
Respect for the Confederate of an Impostor? to own him for a Prophet, Mar.
6.20. Matt. 24.5. Luke 20.6.
a just and upright Man? to receive his Baptism, and be so much affected with
his Sayings, as Josephus witnesses? How came they to retain the same Opinion
of him after his Death? and to ascirbe the ruin which befell the Author of it,
unto the Murder of (...). Iosep. Antiq. l. 18. c. 7.
John the Baptist? so great assurance have we, that our Lord and Savior was no
designed Impostor; which thing we have acknowledged and confirmed to us by Ipse
est Deus quem doctissimus Philosophorum, quamvis Christianorum acerrimus
inimicus, etiam per eorum Oracula, quos Deos putat, Deum magnum Porphyrius
confitetur. August. de C.D. l. 19. C. 22.

Denique tanquam mirabile aliquid atque incredibile prolaturus, praeter
opinionem, inquit, profecto videtur esse quod dicturi sumus: Christum enim Dii
piissimum pronunciaverunt, and immortalem factum cum bona praedicatione ejus
meminerunt. Et post haec, de Christo interrogantibus, si est Deus, ait Hecate,
Viri pietate praestantissimi est illa anima. Aug. l. 19. c. 23. and lib. 22. c.
25. Ille est Deus quem nec commemor are me piget confitente Porphyrio, atque id
Oraculis Deorum suorum probare cupiente, ipsa Numina perhorrescunt.


Porphyry, the greatest Adversary of the Christian Faith, who owns our Savior
for a God, and tells us, That one of their oracles did yield an ample Testimony
unto his Worth and Merit.

But secondly, We have no reason to conceive, that his Disciples should
continue to gull the World in this particular: For such was their simplicity,
they could not; such their sincerity, they would not go about to do so.

. 2. Lucian. Peregr. p. 338. Mimet. p. 4. Celsus apud orig. p. 146, 147.
Hieroc. apud Eusebius. contra Hieroc. p. 5, 14. Tertul. Apol. c. 49. Arnob. l. 1.
p. 34, 35.
1. SUCH was their Nam cum videret futuros vos esse gestarum abs se rerum
divinique operis abrogatores, ne qua subesset suspicio magicis se artibus muner
a illa beneficiaque largitum, ex immensa illa populi multitudine quae suam
Gratiam sectabatur admirans, piscatores, opifices, Rusticanos atque id genus
delegit imperitorum, qui per varias Gentes missi cunct a illa miracula sine
ullis fucis atque adminiculis perpetrarent. Arnib. l. 1. p. 30.
simplicity they could not. Plots and Designs to overturn the World, and
introduce a Doctrine which carried such a signal Opposition to the Faith and
Tenets, the Wisdom and Philosophy, the Interests and Vices of the World, must
call for better Heads and deeper Judgments: nor was it ever heard, that twelve
simple Mechanics (for such the Apostles and primitive Professors of
Christianity were still reputed by their Adversaries) should be so much
concerned for any way of Worship, or durst adventure with the hazard of their
Lives to Preach it to the World, (though after such a Grand delusion of
mankind, by men so rude and infamous as the Apostles were esteemed, nothing
could have seemed too foolish and absurd to be imposed upon the world (...).
Chrysostom. or. 2. in Bab. p. 446.
) Should any man have said, when Christ was nailed to the Cross, that many
thousands of his bloody murderers, which then reviled him as a malefactor,
should in few days become his converts, and venture all their present and
Eternal interests upon the truth of his pretended Resurrection; should they
have said, that through all the world he should be shortly worshipped, as that
King, to whom all power both in heaven and earth was Given, and as that Jesus
who alone could give Salvation; should they have told us that all this should
be done in spite of all the powers of wit and policy, of eloquence, and of the
sword, the Interests and lusts, the superstitions, and corrupt opinions, and
the reputed wisdom of mankind, by a few mean unskilful men, the hatred and
derision of the place they lived in. I say should so extravagant a thought have
then been vented, it must have surely passed for an Idle brainsick dream, as
little to be heeded, as that twelve cripples should beseige, storm, plunder,
and destroy the strongest and best peopled city; or that a naked man should
vanquish all the powers of the Roman Empire.

Besides such is the excellency of the Christian faith, so much above the reach
of humane wisdom to conceive, so seemingly repugnant to it when revealed, that
it was most unfit to be the matter of a design to gull the world; so sublime
and spiritual are its precepts, so far exceeding all that the learning and
wisdom of the Greeks could snew, that it is impossible to believe, they should
derive from witless and mechanic persons.

. 3. NAY such was their sincerity, that if they could, yet they would not thus
abuse the world. Whosoever views their writings, so full of wisdom, and of
purity, so admirably pathetical in their expressions, (...). Orig. in Celsum.
p. 70.
free in the confession of their own infirmities; Mat. 26.36. Mar. 14.71. Gal.
1.13. 1 T-m. 1.15.
so full and pregnant in those doctrines, which speak the greatest self denial;
so plain in the delivery of Christian duties; so void of all the arts of wit
and policy, all the advantages of Eloquence and humane wisdom; and then
considers that their lives were suitable to what their doctrines did deliver;
that they became examples as well as Preachers, both of the Christian faith and
patience; 2 These 3.9.
and did appeal to the Churches newly converted by them, and attempted by
others to disown them, how holily, and (...). 1 These. 2.10. Romans 16.17. 1 Timothy
1.20. Titus 3.10.
how unblamably they had lived. He that considers their quickness to condemn
and censure, to avoid and punish those who did not walk according to their
rules of piety, as enemies unto the Gross of Christ; and yet how irksome and
distastful those things are to wicked men, how prone and strongly biased their
affections are the other way: I say, he that shall well consider these
particulars, will quickly see sufficient reason to believe them upright and
sincere.

. 4. BESIDES no man is wicked to no end; which must be their case, if they had
been deceivers. For what could they expect to get by lying? Was it to grow big
with honor? They confessed (and every days experience made it good,) 1 Cor.
4.9. 2 Cor. 4.9. Luke 6.20
their doctrine and their Persons, were the scorn and derision of their
Adversaries. Was it to abound in wealth? Poverty was their beatitude; their
Charity and faith were sure to keep them low enough; the Pearl of price was to
be bought with the loss of all they had, if they had any thing to lose. Was it
to swim in pleasure? The witness of the spirit and their own knowledge could
inform them, that bonds and Prisons would abide them in every place; Acts
20.23. 2 Cor. 23.27
and their whole life was a continued Scene of troubles, perils, and
afflictions. They could not seek Great things, but they must contradict that
doctrine of selfdenyal, humility, and an heavenly mind, which they so often
inculcated; nor enjoy them without a contradiction to the (...). Celsus apud
Orig. lib. 7 page 343.
predictions of Jesus, which they had left on record. For He foretold them,
that in the world they should have tribulation, and that their names should be
cast out as evil doers; that persecutions, scourgins, death, and Universal
hatred should be their portion among men. They knew by reason and experience,
that if their hopes depended only on the enjoyments of this present life, they
must of all men be most miserable: and it is repugnant to the principles of
humane nature to be in love with misery; Self-preservation (as it includes the
welfare both of soul and body) being the Great and fundemental rule of Action.
We see how backward even the best of Christians are to quit the enjoyments of
this present life, in expectation of a future bliss. what then could move those
men, who if their Savior was not risen, could not expect the blessings of
another world, but rather vengeance from that God, whom they so wickedly
belied, to broach that doctrine which laid an obligation on them to quit their
pleasures, honors, and enjoyments, and suffer all the hardships of this present
life. 3ly, What hopes could they conceive of their obtaining credit from the
world? whence could they gather matter of so strong presumption? Not from that
Jesus who was (if what they published of him was a lie) detained under the
power of the Grave; Not from that God whom they so wickedly belied, engaging
both his power, and veracity to attest a falsehood. 1 Cor. 1.17. cap. 2.4, 13.
Not from the powerful charms of eloquence; they neither had, nor needed them
in publishing the doctrine of the Cross; nor from the more prevailing powers of
worldly riches: staves in their hands, and sandals on their feet, were all the
treasures they carried with them. Not from Authority and power to overballance
and bear down their adversaries; this could not be expected from twelve poor
illiterate men, contesting with the world, and all the powers of darkness. Not
lastly, from any Good affection which the world bore them; or any proneness
whether in Jew or Gentile to embrace their doctrine; it being every where
Gainsaid, and by the Interests, affections, the eloquence and power of the
world opposed. The chiefest of the Jews had even then preferred a Thief and
Murderer before their Lord and Master; Mark. 5.13. c. 3.3.
they regarded not his Miracles whilst living, with their tumultuous clamours
they persecuted him to death, and were they likely to give credit to the bare
word of those men for his Resurrection; Act. 17.32.26.8.
which to the Gentile seemed a thing incredible, and to the Jew a fiction? The
doctrine of the Cross was to the one a stumbling block, and to the other,
folly. Had they designed to commend their doctrine to the world by any
artifice, they would in the first place (...). Tom. 8. p. 101
have stripped it of tenets so offensive and incredible; they b would not have
made the cross the matter of their daily Sermons, 1 Cor. 2.2, Phil. 3.8. Gal.
6.14
and their greatest Glory; they would have Preached things pleasing to the
Flesh, and not have spoke so much of loosing Life, and all the Pleasures and
Enjoyments of it for a Savior; at least their Sufferings must have taught them
Wisdom, when they and Preached the World about their Ears, and themselves into
a Dungeon; Self-love must have prevailed upon them to begin their Recantation
Sermons, and confess the Imposture, and not persist in the assertion of so
great a Folly for which they had suffered so much already, and could expect no
better, but much worse.

. 5. BUT Fourthly, This Lie, if such it were, must have been managed with the
greatest absurdity, and by pretending to such things as must infallibly expose
them to the reproach and hatred of those with whom they did converse.

For first, They must pretend to call Men from the Worship of dumb Idols, 1 Thessalonians. 1.9.
and dead Men unto the Living God, and yet seduce them from the Worship of that
God, unto the Adoration of the greatest Malefactor and Impostor.

Secondly, They must pretend to the greatest kindness to the Souls and Bodies
of Mankind, and yet be known to Prosecute what visibly procured present and
eternal ruin of them both: they must pretend to buoy them up with hopes of
future Blessings, and unconceivable Rewards of all their Faith and Patience,
and of Consuming Fire to their Enemies at an approaching Day of Judgment; and
yet be well assured, that either no such Day was coming; or if it were, it must
reveal their folly, and load them with those Judgments they denounced against
others.

Thirdly, 1 Thessalonians. 2. v. 3, 4, 5.
They must pretend unto the greatest Truth, Sincerity, and Holiness of Life,
and be confessedly the greatest Liars, and most vile Impostors.

Fourthly, They must pretend to be Ambassadors from Heaven, and yet know they
could have no assistance but from Hell; nor could Instruct their Converts in
any other Arts, but those which visibly derived thence.

Lastly, They could not be Deceivers, but others who embraced, and did
successively promote and spread their Doctrine, must know that they were such,
and be instructed in the same Arts of Magic by them, which how incredible a
thing it is, may be sufficiently concluded from the foregoing Proofs. For,

. 6. FIRST, Their meanness and simplicity was still the great Objection of
their Adversaries; their Virtue and Sincerity, their Purity of Life, their
humble self-denying Tempers, their Charity and Mercy, their Aversion to the
Pomps and Vanities, the Pleasures and Concernments of the World, were still the
same as in their Teachers; they had as little hopes of those Enjoyments which
Honor, Pleasure or Advantage might present to tempt them to this Undertaking,
they being called to suffer, and told that all that would live Godly must
suffer Persecution. Nay, 1 Pet. 2.21. 1 Thessalonians. 3.3. 2 Timothy 3.12.
the Experience of others must Convince them that this would be their Portion
too, whereas no Comfort was pretended to support them under these Fiery Trials,
but such as did unquestionably suppose the Truth of their Religion; viz. the
Comforts of the Holy Spirit, the Blessings of another World, and an assurance
that all the Rage and Malice of their Enemies reached only to their Bodies, and
the destruction of this present Life; and yet they suffered with the greatest
Constancy and readiness of Mind, as even (...). Lucian Peregr.
Heathens do attest Besides, they could not propagate the Cheat, without those
false and Hypocritical Pretensions we have mentioned, nor yet prevail on any
that were not willing to be their Confederates, and learn their Artifices for
the imposing of this Faith on others: But those Artifice swear contrary to the
Faith it self which they had Learned, and were to Teach. For still they
represented it a very (...). Just. Mart. Ap. 1. p. 43. (...). Idem Apol. 2. p.
57.
wicked thing, not to speak Truth in every thing; and held it much beneath the
Christian, to redeem his Life by Falsehood and Hypocrisy. And as their
Multitude increased, so still they were the more likely to disclose it: their
Dispersions, both through Design and Persecution, carried them throughout all
the World; and being so divided in Place, it was hard for them not to
contradict one another, it was impossible for them to conspire in so great a
Juggle; their Enemies were every day more awakened to oppose them, more
vigilant to search and pry into their Arts, and more concerned to quell the
growing Faction; their Miracles more frequently repeated, and before greater
Multitudes; and lastly, were continued through diverse Ages: all which may
assure us that they were no Deceivers. For to reflect a little upon what has
been discoursed, It Is first.

A Miracle of Impudence and Folly, that any one should begin this Cheat with
all these Disadvantages, and without hopes of Benefit; much more, that
Illiterate, Unreflecting, and Mechanic Souls should do so. And secondly, It Is
more miraculous, that after all their Sufferings they should continue to
promote it, without the least regret of Conscience for so great a Villainy, and
without the least Concernment for their Freedom from such Cruel Torments.
Thirdly, Much more, That a Lie thus managed by such mean and contemptible
Persons, of a most hateful Nation and Religion, should prevail upon one single
Person, much more upon a City, a Nation, yea a World of Men, to ruin both
Themselves and Families, their Souls and Bodies to promote it. Fourthly, That
it should prevail so wonderfully without the help of humane Power, or any thing
to tempt affection, nay in despite of all that Eloquence and Power, and
Interest could do unto the contrary. 5ly. That they should prevail by known
Hypocrisy and lies, and feigning a Commission from the God of heaven, and a
Great kindness to those very men they thus helped forward to their ruin, and
only taught to be as very Hypocrites and base Impostors as themselves. 6ly.
That they should all conspire to transmit the falsehood by the same Method, but
with Greater Efficacy, unto succeeding Generations. 7ly, Yet more incredible it
is, that they who went out from them, 1 John 2.19.1 Tim. 1.19. Act. 20.30.
Cypr. Ep. 52. ad Antm. sec. 7.8.9.1 Cor. 5.5.1 Tim. 1.^0.
and renounced the Gospel, and so made Shipwreck both of Feith and Consciencee;
those many Heretics that spoke perverse things to draw many Disciples after
them, and to pervert the simple; those Libellatici and Thurificati, and
Traditores, who were so hated and so infamous amongst them; those many that
were delivered up to Satan, or underwent severest penance, should none of them
be tempted to disclose the cheat, or by that art which from the Christians they
had learned, to confront that Testimony which by these Miracles they gave unto
their Doctrine; but that the heathen should be forced for want of such
confessions and assistances, to urge some See Aot. in e. 8. s. 2.
silly women to confess them Guilty of those Villainies from which more sober
(...). Tryph. apud Just. page 227.
Jews and Plin. Ep. l. 10. ad Trajanum Ep. 97.
Heathens did acquit them. It Is lastly most incredible their most malicious
Enemies the inquisitive and learned Grecian, and the Zealous Jew, who sent
their chiefest Rabbis into each corner of the World to publish and proclaim
the Christians Atheists, and Guilty of most Gross impiety, durst not accuse
them of fraud or falsehood in what their Story had delivered; Justin. Dial. cum
Tryph. p. 234.
for it does not appear by any records of the Jews, that this so necessary and
so effectual a Method to disgrace the Christian faith, was once attempted by
the most able Doctors of their law. In fine, ought it not to be matter of our
admiration, that men so vigilant, malicious, and powerful, as the Heathen were,
though they had frequent opportunities in the first three hundred years, and
though they were so much concerned and so desirous to do it, should not be able
to find out the fraud, which they declare the Christians exercised, in any one
particular, or to out do and counterplot their Magic, or to bear up against
its power; but should suffer them to trample over their supposed Gods, and
force them to confess unto their very faces they were devils; to stop the
mouths of their Magicians, Inchanters, and Southsayers, their Oracles and
famous Tripods, and so to challenge them as Arnobius does: Potestis aliquem
monstrare ex omnibus Magis qui unquam fuere per secula consimile aliquid
Christo millesima ex part qui fecerit l. 1. p. 25.
Where is the man that can pretendunto the 1000th part of what Christ did? but
that the most able and (...) testatur Orig. adv. Celsum p. 368.
admired Philosophers should be seduced to believe and suffer as the Christians
did, and the Tum paene omnes Christum Deum sub legis observatione colebant.
Sulpit. Hist. Sac. l. 2. c. 45. (...). Eusebius. Hist. Eccl. l. 4. c. 5. Vid.
Epiphanium, Eusebius. Chron. ad An. 125.
most zealous Jews rather bring in their Judaisme, and mix it with Christianiy,
as did the Ebionites the Nazarites, then to question, or deny the truth of it.

. 8. SHOULD it be here objected, that the assurance which we have, that the
Apostles did pretend such things on which our Arguments do bottom, depends upon
the truth of Sc. Story, of which no evidence is Given.

I Answer; That our Arguments depend partly upon such postulata as carry with
them a convincing evidence, and partly, on the supposition of such actions
done, of which we have the best assurance that matters of that nature can
afford. Our postulata are these.

1. That Christ professed to be the King, or Messiah of the Jews, and
consequently both to do, and suffer what was expected from, and prophesied of
their Messiah; and had it not been so what expectations could he have of being
so esteemed? or what could tempt the writers of his life and actions to be so
frequent in the mention of things to which he never did pretend? what could
induce the Primitive Professors to insist so much upon those Arguments? what
motives could he have to suffer or pretend such things as were expected from
Shilo?

Secondly, That the Disciples of this Jesus were what Jew and Gentile still
objected to them, and they themselves confessed, poor ignorant despised
Persons. Thirdly, That these Disciples could not be taught to carry on their
Masters design, if it were a Delusion, but they must know their Master to be a
vile Impostor, and must despair of all that Happiness and that Assistance which
he promised; and that the like must be asserted of all those who did endeavor
to promote the Christian Faith, by Arts received from them. Fourthly, That
things being thus supposed, they could not but know, that all which He and his
Disciples did pretend, was gross Hypocrisy. Fifthly, That Persons having all
the Reasons to renounce Christ, which both their present and eternal Interest,
their love of Truth and of their Countries safety, Credit and Religion could
suggest unto them, but not one Motive to avouch his Doctrine, would not
continue so to do; much less could they prevail upon the World to imitate that
Frenzy which was so greatly opposite to all the Principles of Ingenuity and
Reason, Truth and Interest.

But secondly, That we have just assurance that the Primitive Professors of
Christianity did pretend these things, will be evinced from these
Considerations. For,

First, It Is evident from their Apologies and Writings in the first Ages of the
Church, that throughout all the World the Christians did for diverse Centuries
appeal to the Predictions of our Lord and his Apostles, and to the Gifts and
powerful Operations of the Holy Ghost, they daily exercised, and to the speedy
Propagation of the Gospel through the then known World, as to the most
convincing Evidences of the Truth of Christian Faith; which consident Appeal
assures us, That those things were matters of unquestionable Truth. And 2ly, It
is likewise evident, they held that riches were (...). Synes: (...). Beatior in
hoc itinere vivendi qui paupertate se sublevat, non sub divitiarum onere
suspirat. Minut. p. 40. vid. Lact. l. 7. c. 1. Cypr. de lapsis, f. 219. Hieron.
in Jonam. c. 3.
unprofitable, a (...). Synes: (...). Beatior in hoc itinere vivendi qui
paupertate se sublevat, non sub divitiarum onere suspirat. Minut. p. 40. vid.
Lact. l. 7. c. 1. Cypr. de lapsis, f. 219. Hieron. in Jonam. c. 3.
burden and temptation, and a great Virtutis via non capit magna onera
portantes, hanc tenere non potest nisi qui fuerit expeditus and nudus. Nam isti
locupletes multis and ingentibus Sarcinis onerati per viam mortis incedunt.
Lact. l. 7. c. 1. and l. 5. c. 15. p. 505.
impediment to their eternal weal, and that they thought it sufficient to have
Meat, Drink, and Clothing, and their Duty not to cover more; and thereupon
declined Peregrinis mercibus delectabitur qni nec lucrum sciat appetere cui
sufficit victus? Lact. l. 5. c. 17. p. 510. Tertul. de Idol. c. 7. Arnob. p. 71.
Merchandise, and all those Callings which might tempt them to it; that Quia
animo animaque miscemur nihil de rei communicatione dubitamus, omnia apud nos
indiscreta sunt praeter uxores. Tert. Ap. c. 39. Aug. de Civ. D. l. 5. c. 18.
Tom. 10. Sermon. 27. de verbis Domini. Arnob. p. 152.
Charity made their Enjoyments common not only to their Christian Brother, but
their (...). Julian. Apost. Epist. ad Arsacium. vid. Eusebius. H. Eccl. l. 9. c. 8.
Heathen Enemy; that they refused the Nobis ab omni gloriae and dignitatis
ardore frigentibus nulla est necessitas coetus. Tert. Ap. c. 38. Minut. p. 35.
Honors and Preferments of the World, and were so far from an ambitious pursuit
of Glory, that they religiously declined it; that they were wont to slight the
Vos vero suspensi interim atque solliciti honestis voluptatibus abstinetis, non
spectacula visitis, non pompis interestis, Convivia publica sine vobis. Cecil.
apud Minut. p. 12. Tert. Apol. c. 38. sect. 2.
Pleasures of the World, and by their readiness to dye, made it Non igitur
quaestus and commodi gratia religionem istam commenti sunt, quippe qui and
praeceptis and reipsa eam vitam secuti sunt, quae and voluptatibus caret, and
omnia quae habentur in bonis spernit, and qui non tantum pro fide mortem
subierint, sed etiam morituros se and scierint and praedixerint. Lact. l. 5. c.
3.
appear how little they did relish all the Sweets and Satisfactions of this
present Life; that they abstained from the most Lawful Pleasures, refused to
(...). Conc. Laod. c. 53. p. 23. v. Elmen. in Arnob. p. 90.
Dance, and gratify the Flesh with Feastings, but rather chose by solemn De
Icjuniis Christianorum solennibus v. Minut. p. 8. and p. 13. Tert. Ap. c. 4.
sect. 2. and Comment. in utrosque
Fastings to subdue it. That this they did, and held themselves obliged to do
in order to their future Bliss, and in compliance with the Christian Precepts;
we have abundant Evidence from all the Writings and Apologies of Christian
Fathers, and consequently we have the best assurance that they were not acted
by any of those Principles in the Propagation of the Christian Faith. In a
word, their Eccepars vestrum major and melior egetis, algetis, opere, fame,
laboratis, and Deuspatitur, dissimulat, non vult, aut non potest opitulari
suis. Cecil. apud Minut.
Poverty, and their contempt of Worldly Pleasures and Grandeur; their daily
Vid. Annot. in cap. 8. number. 31.
Persecutions and seeming Derelictions, were the great matters of the Heathens
Scandal, it was this they daily did object unto them, and reproach them with.

. 9. Corol. NOW hence it follows, that what they have delivered to the World
touching the appearance of Angels, and what they did and spoke;

Secondly, That what they do relate of Christ's Predictions of his Death, the
Persons from whom he suffered; viz. the Scribes and Pharisees; the Elders and
chief Priests; the Disciple that betrayed Him to them; the manner of His Death,
and the deportment of the Gentiles toward Him; the flight, fear and scandal of
His own Disciples, though promising the contrary; the three Denyals of St.
Peter; the Predictions of His Death, and the continuation of the Life of His
beloved Apostle;

Thirdly, That what they tell us of his acquaintance with the Thoughts,
Conceptions and Imaginations of his own Disciples, and of those Jews with whom
he did converse; their secret murmurs and desires to ask him Questions; the
reasonings and disputings of their Hearts; the secret Councils, vile
Surmisings, the treacherous Intentions, and the mental Blasphemies of the
malicious Jew; or whatsoever of like nature they have left on Record, were
delivered bona fide, and with a full Conviction of the Truth of what was thus
asserted by them.

CHAP. III. SECT. II.
The Contents.
THat Christ and his Disciples could not be deceived in their pretensions to
the things they spoke of, Proleg. 5.
and presumed they did, and yet prevail upon the World to own and to assert
their Doctrine.

THAT Christ and his Disciples could not be deceived in their pretensions to
the things they spoke off, Proleg. 5.
and presumed they did, and yet prevail upon the more knowing part of the
World, to credit and assert their Doctrine under the greatest disadvantages. 1.
Our Savior could not be deceived, if his pretensions to be the Savior of the
World, and to accomplish what was foretold of the Messiah were not false: and
if they were, this must infallibly destroy his Credit waith his Friends,
(supposing what we have already proved, that they were not wilfully Deceivers)
and give his Enemies too, just occasion to cry out on the Impostor. The
Testimony of St John concerning him; the voice from Heaven; the Holy Ghosts
descent in likeness of a Dove; Gods Declaration to him by these Tokens, that he
was the Lamb of God, must be Delusions too: What Zacharias, and his Virgin
Mother did pretend to see and hear; what Simeon, Elizabeth, and Hannah
Prophesied, must be the issue of distempered Brains; however, they were Men and
Women of unblameable Lives, and Reputations. Both they who tasted of the Water,
which he presumed was turned into Wine, and those Five thousand Persons which
were fed with five Loaves, and with two little Fishes, must have their Eyes,
and Appetites, and Palates all deceived; Christ having, as it is here supposed,
no Design to put a Cheat upon them: All Christ's Predictions must be false, and
all the Spirit of Prophecy, to which the Primitive Christian did so much
pretend, must be the Illusion of the Fancy: Imagination must produce that Star
which led the Wise Men to our Savior, and form those Voices which both he and
his Disciples, and the whole Multitude did seem to hear; It must produce those
frequent Apparitions of Angels, and that Transfiguration which his Apostles
seemed to see. It must rebuke the winds, and make the Sea obey him, and must
enable him to walk upon it; It must form a conceit in him that he was the Son
of God, and Savior of the world; one sent into it from his Fathers bosom to
take upon him flesh, and suffer for the sins of men; and all these great and
strong delusions, must consist with an exemplary life, and an excellent
wisdom, so visible both in his Doctrine and discourses, as he that runs may
read it; and lastly, with a Glorious resurrection, and the abundant Graces of
is Spirit. Again, it must prevail upon himself and his Disciples, and the
whole body of Believers (dispersed through the then known world) not only to
believe that they did daily cast out Devils, cure diseases, raise the dead,
that they did prophesy and speak with tongues, but also on the eyes and ears
of his and their Spectators, and their Hearers, and make them flock with their
diseased to the places where they were, and press to touch their Garments, and
come within the compass of their shadow, or beg they would but speak the word
that so their dead might live, and their diseased might be whole. Imagination
must prevail on those who were before possessed, to believe, that afterward
they were not, and so upon the very devil to lie dormant in them, it must
prevail on those that were sick of what disease soever, to conceive that they
were well; and think their sores and issues did not run; upon the Lame to think
they walked, upon the Deaf to think they heard, upon the dead to think
themselves alive, and lastly, upon those with whom they did converse (that is
on their professed enemies throughout the world, me learned and inquisitive,
and most concerned to find out the truth) not only to believe the same, but own
the Christian faith upon the strength of those delusions. In a word this
fancy must give eyes unto the Blind, and feet unto the Lame, and ears unto
the Deaf, and life unto the Dead, through diverse centuries together, or it must
have deluded the whole world with those pretentions for diverse Generations, no
man intending in the least to put a cheat upon them. Or lastly, it must prevail
upon mankind to credit and to venture both their present and future, even their
eternal welfare, to confirm what both their eyes and ears and other senses
told them, was but the vain delusions of some brainsick Persons; and what is
now recorded thus, that Many when they sew the miracles that Jesus did,
believed; should be written thus, that many when they saw the Great Delusions
Christ and his Disciples suffered, believed on him. Now to conceive so strong
and spreading a delusion should seize upon so many millions throughout all
climates of the world, and this alone in the first ages of the Church, never
before or after; that it should be peculiar to the Christian, never should
agree to the Apostate, or the Heathen, is a phansy so prodigious, that nothing
can be more. If we can once imagine, that the eyes and ears, and apprehensions
of so many millions, should throughout diverse centuries, be so continually,
and universally deceived, what reason have we to believe either our senses, or
our undestanding, or to expect that others should do so? Why do we not
continually suspect the like in all we seem to see, or hear, or understand? and
so set up for Scepticks and seekers in all things whatsoever. In a word it was
never heard since the foundation of the world, that men of a deluded fancy did
pretend to matters of so high a nature, and yet deliver precepts of so
confessed an excellency, that no Philosophy could match, no Laws or Rules of
Living, how ever framed by long experience, hard study, and the greatest
strength of humane reason, could compare therewith. And hence it is, that never
any of their malicious Adversaries, however they pretended things as frivolous
and as absurd as this, did ever charge them with such Gross delusions, or once
imagine, that they could prevail upon such feeble Grounds; and therefore it
would be folly to proceed to Confutation of what no Atheist, Heathen, Turk, or
Jew, did ere object against them.

CHAP. IV.
The Contents.
THat we may safely take an estimate of Christian doctrine from what we find
recorded of it in the books of Scripture, Proleg. 6th.
those writings not being corrupted, nor yet containing any thing repugnant to
the Christian Faith. Corol. concluding that those Scriptures, which we daily
read, must be the works of those Apostles and Evangelists whose names they bear.

But 6ly we premise,. 1.
that we may safely take an estimate of Christian doctrine, from what we find
recorded of it in the books of Holy Writ. For it is incongruous to conceive,
that Records which pretended to derive from the Apostles and Evangelists,
(whilst both they, and many of their Converts lived, and did receive the Gospel
from their mouths,) and which exhorted all with so much passion to retain,
(...), the Faith delivered to the Saints, and which denounced such dreadful
curses and Anathemas upon those who preached another doctrine; and charged them
to shun the man who did not own their platform, and not bid him God speed: I
say it is incredible, that records of this nature should undermine that Faith,
which those Apostles had so largely planted, and should present the Churches
they converted, with such a standing contradiction to that doctrine they had so
lately taught, and yet obtain and be received as the sacred Oracles and only
Records of the Christian faith; still more incredible it is, that such a
writing should be indicted by those very men, and yet they pass for the
Ambassadors of the King of Heaven, and the prince of Peace.

2ly. It is most apparent, that the immediate succeeding Age could not be
ignorant of what was thus delivered to the Church, (whilst the Autographa were
extant, as Tertullian tells us in his time they were) when the Canonical books
were evidently proposed as such, and (if we may believe the suffrage of
Antiquity) collected and avouched by St John; yea whilst those very persons
were alive to whom those writings were directed, and with whom they were
entrusted, yea by whom they were transcribed, and 3 read in public and in
private.

3ly, This corruption of the word of God, or substitution of any other doctrine
for it, could not be done by any part or Sect of Christians, but they who had
embraced the Faith, and used the same Copies of the word of God in other places
of the Christian world, must have found out the cheat; and therefore this
corruption, if at all effected, must be the work of the whole world of
Christians. But can it be supposed that the immediate succeeding ages should
universally conspire to substitute their own inventions for the word of God,
and yet continue steadfast in, and suffer so much for that Faith, which
denounced the severest judgments against them that should do such things? or
that a world of men should with the hazard of their lives and fortunes, and all
that was dear to them in this present world, avouch the Gospel, and at the same
time make so great a change even in the frame and substance of its doctrine,
and become guilty of so universal an Apostasy from what the Gospel had
delivered, whilst it yet sounded in their ears, employed their tongues, and
was the Matter of the worlds Great Contest, and by so doing make it
ineffectual? Can it be thought that they should venture upon that, which, were
the Gospel true or false, must needs expose them to the Greatest evils, whilst
they continued Abettors of it? But had this bin done, can we in reason think
that of those many thousands who in the Primitive Ages did renounce the Gospel,
that of those many 3 wavering Spirits, those excommunicate Members, especially
those 4 Heretics, who upon other motives did renounce the Greatest part of
Scripture: I say, can it be thought, that none of those should publish and
disclose the forgery, or answer the Allegations made from Scriptures, that they
were all supposititious; but that such apparent forgeries should find a general
reception from all that searched into their Truth, and be unquestionably
received as genuine both by Jew, and Gentile, Christian, and Pagan, ever in
those times in which, and in those places where they first were uttered, and by
those Persons who so lately received another doctrine?

4ly, Suppose those Primitive Professors could have been Guilty of so vile a
thing. Can we believe that God who sent his Son out of his bosom to declare
this Doctrine, and by the assistance of the Holy Spirit to indite and Preach
it, and by the witness of so many and great miracles confirm it to the world;
should suffer any wicked Persons to corrupt and alter any of those terms on
which the happiness and welfare of mankind depended? Much more to suppress and
smother them, as that a counterfeit repugnant Story should obtain in lieu
thereof; and so the benefit of all that Christ had done, and his Apostles
delivered to the world, should be entirely lost? That Christ should do or
suffer so great things in order to the welfare of mankind, and yet permit those
Sons of Belial to frustrate all that he had done, and rob the world of all the
virtue of his death and sufferings, can be conceived rational, by none but such
as think it not absurd to say, that That God who sent his Son to die for our
Salvation, and that Jesus, who became so great a sufferer in order to the same
design, should jointly envy and malign the Good of Man. Nay since those very
Scriptures which have been received for the word of God, and used by the Church
as such from the first ages of it, pretend to be the terms of our Salvation,
Joh. 7.16.26, 28. Joh. 3.16. Joh. 6.40.
and precepts of that Savior whose message was from heaven, and to be
scriptures indicted by men commissionated from Christ, and such as did avouch
themselves Apostles by the will and command of God, Gal. 1.1.1 Cor. 1.1. Ephesians.
1.1. Col. 1.2 Tim. 1.1.
for the delivery of the faith of Gods Elect, and for the knowledge of the
truth, and the delivery of that which they received by the revelation of the
holy Ghost, they must be what they are pretended to be, or Providence must have
permitted, yea contributed unto that Error, which has continued fifteen Ages:
and which, if it be a Forgery, has ruined so many Thousand of well-meaning
Souls.

Lastly, Those Records being once so 6 generally despers'd through places at
the greatest distance, so universally acknowledged and consented to by Men of
curious Parts, and different Persuasions, and repugnant Judgments, and great
Aversions from each other, preserved in their Originals unto succeeding Ages,
and 7 multiplied into diverse Versions, esteemed the Christians Magna Charta,
the Records of his Hopes and Fears; and thereupon being so 8 carefully sought
after, so riveted in their minds (for many Fathers had them all 9 memoriter,)
so frequent in their Writings; so constantly 10 rehearsed in their Assemblies,
by Men whose work it was to Read and Preach, and to exhort to the performance
of those Duties they enjoined: being so often cited in the Confessions,
Comments, Apologies, and Epistles of the Christian Worthies; as also in the
Objections of those Adversaries to whose view they still lay open: it must
needs be true, that they were handed down to the succeeding Generations, pure
and incorrupt; and therefore they are such upon whose Credit we may venture to
pass an Estimate of Christian Doctrine.

. 2. AND if it be objected, That we find by the Citations of the Ancients, that
there was a difference betwixt their Copies of the Scripture, and these now
extant among us; it is answered from ocular Demonstration, whosoever shall
compare the ancient Copies, or any Texts that were cited by the Primitive
Christians, with those Scriptures which we now own and use, shall find no
considerable variation. We see that English Bible which we read and use in
every Parish and Family, though it be often falsely Printed, yet receives no
variation which is not soon and easily corrected: and why should we suspect the
same of the Original Scriptures, and of those Versions which were transcribed
and read thorowout the Christian World. If then no Writing, whilst the
Apostles lived, could pass for Christian Faith, and yet destroy and undermine
it, and be received as their Epistles when it was nothing less: If their
immediate Successors could not be ignorant of what the Apostles committed to
them, to be read and Preached as the Records of their Faith and Doctrine, nor
would they be induced to deliver that for such, which they believed not to be
so, (they being Men whose Holy Lives, as well as Sufferings, made a full proof
of their exact Integrity.) If neither they could universally conspire to effect
this thing; nor can it be suspected that Providence should suffer them to do a
thing so contrary to its great design of love unto Mankind: If lastly, it is
morally impossible, that since the second Century those Writings should be
either forged, or accidentally corrupted in matters of concern and moment, they
must remain sufficient Records of the Christian Faith.

Corol. Hence it follows, That those Writings must be the very Works of those
Apostles and Evangelists, whose Names they bear; since no Man could pretend
they were so, had they not really been such, but they must put a cheat upon the
World, and substitute their own Inventions for the Word of God. Indeed, they
have been handed down for such by a more general Tradition, and of a firmer
Credit then any of those Books of Virgil, Cicero, or Martial, which we
indisputably own as theirs. For it was a Tradition of the whole 12 Christian
World, which owned, and cited, and received them for such from the Apostles
days; as is apparent from the Epistles of St Clement, Barnabas, Ignatius,
Polycarp, the Works of Irenaeus and Justin Martyr, whilst others, which
pretended to the same Original, were universally rejected by them. Besides,
they did attest them so to be by many Sufferings (which they had no Temptation
to endure, besides the truth of their Assertion;) and many Wonders to confirm
their Testimony. It was a Tradition which concerned things of the highest
moment, and which it was their greatest Interest to be well assured of, they
being the sole ground and matter of their support at present under the sharpest
Trials, and of their future hopes, and therefore Writings they were concerned
to get, and hear, and read, and keep; Books written to whole Churches, Nations,
yea the whole 13 World of Christians, who could not have received them easily,
had the Apostles, by whom they were at first converted, given no Intimations of
them: Books of the greatest opposition against the Superstition both of Jews
and of Gentiles, and which denounced against them the greatest Plagues and
Judgments; such as obliged them to search, as much as it was possible, into the
Truth of what they said: And yet these Books were not denied to be the very
Works of those Apostles and Evangelists, whose Names they bare: Books which no
cheat could be concerned to forge, nor could obtain that belief which was not
due to them, without the greatest Forgery: Books which could not be spread
abroad as they were in the Apostles Names, whilst they were living, unless the
Apostles had Endited them, nor be esteemed as if they were the greatest Charter
of the Christian Faith, and the Apostles be so forgetful of them, as not to let
those Persons know it, for whose sake they were written: Books which pretended
to a Commission from the Holy Jesus, to leave a rule of Life and Doctrine to
Mankind, which was entrusted in the Hands of none but the Apostles and
Evangelists; all others still pretending to deliver what they received from
them. Lastly, They being written partly to confirm and to ascertain to us the
story of Christ's Birth, Life, Passion, Resurrection, and partly to engage us to
believe; partly to put an end to Contentions, and rectify those Errors which
had crept into the Church in the Apostles days, and which did need a speedy
Reformation; partly to justify themselves against false Brethren, and to
assert the Truth of their Apostleship; and partly to preserve their Proselytes
from such as did pervert the Faith; and partly to instruct them how to bear up
in Fiery Trials, and to support the Soul under those Miseries the Christians
suffered; and therefore on those Grounds which did require their quick dispatch
on that Errand, and to those Churches unto which they did intend them, it is
evident the Apostles must intend that early notice should be given of them, and
so accordingly commit them to their newborn Proselytes and Babes in Christ:
and so the Records of our Savior his Life, Death, Resurrection, Miracles, must
be divulged throughout Judea, whilst the far greater part of Men were able to
disprove them if they had been false.

ANNOTATIONS On the 4th Chapter.
1. TErtullian tells us] Percurre Ecclesias Apostolicas, apud quas ipsae
authenticae earum literae recitantur, sonantes vocem and repraesentantes
uniuscujusque.

2 Collected and consigned by S. John] Veteres narrant Johannem Asiaticarum
Ecclesiarum rogatu Germanum Scripturae Canoncm constituisse. Eusebius.

3 Those many wavering Spirits] nutant enim plurimi and maxim qui literarum
aliquid attigerunt. Lact. l. 5. c. 1.

4 Those Heretics who upon other motives did renounce the greater part of the
New Test.] Cerinthus allowed only the Gospel of S. Mark; Valentinus only that
of S. John; Iren. l. 3. c. 11. Marcion only that of Luke. Tertul. cont.
Marcio. c. 4. Epiph. Haeres. 42. Iren. l. 3. c. 11. the Ebionites rejected all
the Epistles of S. Paul, and embraced only the Gospel of the Nazarites. (...).
Orig. in Cells. p. 274. (...) (...). Eusebius. Hist. Eccl. l. 3. c. 27. vid.
Valesium in locum. Ejusdem farinae erant Severiani and Tatiani, ex quibus
conflati sunt Encratitae: (...). Euscb. Hist. Eccl. l. 4. c. 27. Hieron. catal.
script. Eccl. in Tatiano. De Encratitis vid. Theod. haeret. fab. l. 1.

5 So universally acknowledged and consented to] Eusebius. calls them, (...).
Hist. Eccl. l. 3. c. 25.

6 So generally dispersed] for even the passage of S. Irenaeus, which tells us
of some barbarous Nations, Qui fidem crediderunt sine literis, sine charta,
sine atramento, scriptam habentes in cordibus suis salutem, does show plainly
that other places not deemed Barbarous, enjoyed them; as also does the question
following. Quid autem si neque Apostoli quidem scripturas reliquissent nobis?

7 Multiplied into diverse versions] Cum enim fides Christiana ab ipsis
Apostolorum temporibus recepta est (nec sine scriptur is esse potest Ecclesia)
probabile est a primis nascentis Ecclesiae incunabilis harum versionum originem
accersendam esse. Walton. Proleg. in Bib. Polygl. Of the innumerable latin
versions that were extant in S. Augustine's days, we have one styled by S.
Jerome. in Esaiam c. 14, 49. Communis and vulgata; and by S. Gregory, Epist. ad
Leandrum. Vetus; probabile est (inquit Waltonus) ipsam ab ipsis Ecclesiae
primordiis in usu fuisse, cum Ecclesia Latina sine verfione Latina esse non
potuit, eamque Ecclesia Romana in communi usu reciperet. Of the Syriack version
he speaks thus, Ab Apostolicis viris factam concedo, quod praeter generalem
Ecclesiarum Orientalium traditionem (cui multum in hoc loco tribuendum, cum
nulla ratio clara in contrarium affertur) etiam ex insitis argumentis in ipsa
versione, quae magnam ejus antiquitatem testantur, suaderi possit; in antiqua
enim editione non extant Epistola secunda Petri, and tertia Joannis, Judae,
Apocalypsis; -- Scriptoresque Syritestantur has parts in antiqua editione non
versas fuisse, unde colligi videtur factam esse antequam Canon N. Test. communi
Ecclesiarum consensu firmatus esset, cum de his Epistolis and Apocalypsi certum
sit apud Antiquos dubitatum esse. Proleg. 13. ad Bibl. Polygl. p. 91.

8 So carefully sought after] As for the Books of the old Test. we see what
great and early care they took to be assured of their number. Eusebius. l. 1. c.
26. how constantly they perused them, and with what diligence they preserved
them, as from Origen's Hexapla and Octapla may be collected; and how
unanimously they agreed in the number of them. Vid. Dr Cosen's Canon of Scrip.
c. 3, 4, 5. and would they then be less regardful of those Books which the
Apostles had delivered them?

9 Many fathers had them memoriter] Eusebius l. 8. c. 11. p. 336. tells us of
one Valens who was so perfect in them, (...), as being able (...). and of one
John who being blind, could when he pleased (...). Eusebius. l. 8. c. 13. p. 344.

10 So constantly rehearsed] Of this we have a full account in Justin Martyr
Apol. 2. (...). vide Orig. Hom. 11. in Ex. Hom. 7. in Lev. Eusebius. l. 6. c. 19.

11 In the objections of their adversarys to whose perusal the Scripture was
permitted] (...). Just. Mart. Apol. 2. p. 82. (...) Tryph. dial. Inspice Dei
voces, literas nostras quas neque ipsi supprimimus and plerique casus ad
extraneos transferunt. Tertull. Apol. c. 31.

12 The tradition of the Christian World received them for such] Non per alios
dispositionem salutis nostrae cognovimus, quam per eos per quos Evangelium
pervenit ad nos, quod quidem tunc praeconiaverunt, postea vero per Dei
voluntatem in scripturis nobis tradiderunt fundementum and columnam fidei
futuram. Iren. vide Orig. adv. Celsum p. 120.138. August. contra Faustum l. 2.

13 To whole worlds of Christians] (...), 1. Cor. 1.1. (...), 2. Pet. 1.1.
(...).

13 Who questioned their divinity] So the Ebionites, qui Apostolum Paulum
recusabant, Apostatam eum legis dicentes. Iren. l. 1. c. 26. Idem de
Cerinthianis tradit Epiphanius Hear. 28.

14 Not denied to be what they pretended by the Jew or Gentile] (...).
Chrysostom. Homil. 6. in 1. Cor. p. 277.

CHAP. V.
The Contents.
THE Truth of Christian Faith asserted from the Gifts and Operations of the
Holy Ghost in general: and more particularly from the Gift of Prophecy, and
from the Gift of Tongues.

. 1. HAVING by what is thus premised prepared the way, we now advance to that
most clear and cogent evidence of Christian Faith, which the Apostle styles the
demonstration of the Spirit, and of Power; I Cor. 2.4.
and we have ample confirmation of it, both from the Gifts, and Graces, the
Predictions and Powerful Operations of the Holy Ghost, the Excellency of the
Christian Doctrine, and its Subservience unto our present and eternal Welfare.

. 2. NOW that the Gifts and Power of the Holy Ghost were thus engaged to
confirm and propagate this Faith, will be apparent, 1. From that assurance
which the Baptist give both to the Luke 3.16.
Jews in general, and to the Matt. 3.7, 11.
Pharisees and Sadduces in particular, that the Messiah would suddenly baptize
them with the holy Ghost: And secondly, from a like Promise which our Savior
made to his Disciples, that he would joh. 15.26.
send his holy Spirit down upon them, and would Acts. 5.5.
baptize them with the holy Ghost; and by that Spirit would Joh. 16.13.
show them things to come, and bring to their Joh. 14.26. and 16.13.
remembrance the things which he had spoken; and that he would instruct them,
and teach them all things. For had no signal Evidence been given of the
completion of these Promises upon the Primitive Professors of the Christian
Faith, as they pretend there was, the Expectation of the Christian would have
been entirely frustrated, and the whole Story of the Acts of the Apostles have
been convinced of Falsehood; especially, Acts 4.31, 33.
when it so roundly tells us, They were all filled with the holy Ghost.
Thirdly, This is apparent also from their confident appeal unto the Testimony
of the holy Ghost, as a convincing Demonstration of the Resurrection of our
Lord. Acts 5.30, 31, 32.
The God of our Fathers has raised Jesus to be a Prince and Savior, and to
give repentance unto Israel, and we are his witnesses of these things, and so
is that holy Ghost, which he has given to them that obey him. They spoke of
this Testimony as a convincing motive to the Prophet, or Spiritual Person, to
acknowledge, that what the Apostles writ, 1 Cor. 14.37.
was the commandment of God; and that the Gospel which they Preached was the
undoubted Truth, and that which was to be retained in opposition to the Law:
Gal. 3.5.
The ministration of the Spirit, and Power of working Miracles, being the
result not of the Law but of the Gospel. And lastly, This is apparent from the
manifestation of this Spirit in the Church of God, by gifts of wisdom,
knowledge, 1 Cor. 12.8, 9, 10.
prophecy, and the discerning of the mind of God, by miracles, by gifts of
healing and of faith, by diverse kind of tongues, and the interpretation of
them; by the effusions of which Gifts on Jew and Gentile, bond and free, 1 Cor.
12.13.
they were all baptized into one body, and made to drink into one spirit.

. 3. BUT secondly, The Gift of Prophecy affords a second Demonstration of the
assistance of the holy Ghost vouchsafed unto them; this being represented as a
thing common and luxuriant in the Church of Corinth. For the Apostle tells
them, that each man has his revelation, and that they all might Prophecy; 1
Cor. 14.24, 26, 31.
he instructs them how, and when to use, and when to limit and restrain this
Gift, and chides them for abusing it to the confusion of the Church, and the
disturbance of her Peace. Now, Joh. 7.39.
since the tenure of the Promise made by Christ, of giving of his Spirit to
Believers, and both the use and reason of the thing, did equally concern
Believers, it may be rationally concluded, That this Gift of Prophecy was
equally vouchsafed unto other Churches: Hence (...). Iren. l. 5. c. 6. and l.
2. c. 57. (...).
Irenaeus tells us, That Prophesies and Visions, Predictions of things future,
and Revelations of things secret, were frequent in his days: and (...). Just.
Mart. dial. cum Tryph. p. 308.
Justin Martyr does attest the same. And in (...). Eusebius. Hist. Eccl. l. 5. c.
17.
Eusebius we have mention of an ancient Author, who to confute the Montanist,
all whose pretended Prophets were Extatick, and bereft of sense, brings in a
Catalogue of the Renowned Prophets of the true Christian Church, who never
suffered the like phrensies. And not contented so to do, he calls for a (...).
Eusebius.ibid.
Succession of those Prophets as a thing requisite in the true Christian
Church; which, had the Gift then ceased, could not have been required from its
Adversaries, without the Greatest prejudice unto the Church of Christ.

. 4. BUT 3ly, Of those Gifts which show the power of the Holy Ghost engaged to
promote the Christian Faith, that of Tongues is most illustrious; For the
Spirit, which fell upon the Christian Converts, opened their silent mouths,
and made them speak the proper Dialect of every Nation under heaven. No sooner
did an Apostle lay his hands upon a rude illiterate Person, Act. 5.8.8.17,
10.46.19.6.
but he spoke with Tongues; A thing so requisite unto the speedy propagation of
the Gospel, which in the space offourty years was to disperse it self
throughout the World; so public and notorious to all the Heathen World, among
great multitudes of whom it was daily exercised; they having free admittance
unto the Christians public Service, 1 Cor. 14.22. and 26.
and whose conversion was intended by it; yea so continually experimented by
those Persons, who became daily Converts to the Christian Faith, as nothing
could be more. Act. 2.38.39.
All which appears (1.) From that promise which our Lord and his Disciples
made, that they who believed, should, speak with Tongues; that they who did
repent and were baptized, should receive this Gift; and that because the
promise did belong to them, and to their Children, and to as many as the Lord
should call. 2ly. From that Assurance which the Scripture gives us of the
miraculous Completion of this promise to the Disciples at the day of Pentecost,
in presence of somany Persons of every Act. 2.5.
Nation under heaven. Unto Verse. 41.44.
3000 Converts at one time; to the Chapter 8.17.
Samaritans, to the 11.5.
Family, Friends, and kindred of Cornelius, to 19.6.
twelve Disciples by the hand of Paul; to the Act. 4.
Disciples in General, and to the Chruch of Corinth in particular; amongst
whose Gifts are 13.52.
reckoned diverse kinds of Tongues, h 1 Cor. 12.10. Cor. 1.14.26, v. 33.
with the interpretation of them; and amongst whose standing Offices, which God
had placed in their Church, diversities of Tongues are numbered; to whom it is
objected, that when they came together every one had his tongue; and that, if
they proceeded thus to spoke with Tongues, it would breed confusion, Verse. 26.
and make those Heathens, who were permitted to assemble with them, conclude
them mad; and if unto that Church in which the Apostle found so Great
divisions, Errors, and Miscarriages, much more to those whose greater Love and
Piety gave them a better title to the Gifts and Graces of the Spirits. So that
it is justly questionable, whether the pregnant evidence of the thing, or the
frivolousness of the exceptions, which are made against it, do more
irrefragably confirm it. For (1.) We have sufficiently prevented those who have
attributed this wonder to the Devil, by Proleg. the third. And as for others,
who ascribe it to the strength of melancholy, or the diseases of the brain,
their Fancy seems to have to much of both to merit our more Serious
refutation; For to affert, that at the laying on of an Apostles hands, the
Preaching of a Sermon, the rushing of a mighty wind etc. so strange a fit of
Melancholy, and such unaccountable diseases should seize upon so many
thousands, and should direct each motion of their Tongues; and to assert that
this effect should be so proper and peculiar unto the Christian temper, as that
no other persons should pretend unto it; that it should naturally cease when
once the Christian Faith had spread it self throughout all nations, (for it is
observable that after Irenaeus, not any Father has made mention of its
continuance in the Church,) and never give the world one fresh experience of
its wonted Efficacy, is sure an Argument of a more distempered Fancy, and a
deeper Melancholy.

CHAP. VI. SECT. I.
The Contents.
THe veracity of the Christian faith concluded from the deportment of the
Christians under sufferings; Proleg. 4.
the Patience and undaunted Courage of the weaker sex; from the kindness of the
Christians to their persecutors, and those indignities they suffered from them;
from Gods miraculous assistance of them under sufferings, and Great
deliverances from them. For had they not been assured of the truth of Christian
doctrine, it is both impossible they should, and inconceavable they would have
suffered after such a manner. An Objection from instances of the like nature
answered.

. 1. A Further evidence of the assistance of the holy Ghost, vouchsafed to the
primitive Professors of Christianity, is their deportment under sufferings,
their unwearied Patience, and unshaken Faith, their undaunted Courage under the
Greatest pressures, and more amazing Kindness to their bloody Persecutors.
Which will appear more visible, if we consider. (1) How 1 great and exquisite
the torments which they suffered were. For it was the business of their
Persecutors, both to invent the keenest and most confounding Torments, and to 2
take care the Christians might still live to suffer them; that if their
sharpness could not, their continuance by degrees might weaken and subdue their
Faith. And 2ly. If we consider the number of their adversaries. Quoties suo
jure nes inimieum vulgus invadit lapidibus and incendio. Tertull. apol. c. 37.
Eusebius. Hist. Ecel l. 5. c. 1. l. 6. c. 41.
For 3 Jew and Gentile, Prince and Peasant, the 4 Wisdom of the Wise, the Zeal
and Fury of the Ignorant, yea the whole World conspired against them; and that
with such an Indignation and impatient rage, as could not stay the Execution
till sentence were past upon them, or let their 5 Ashes rest when they had
suffered. If 3ly. We consider the continuance of those Persecutions for 300
years and upwards. And 4ly. The Quality and Condition of the Persons suffering;
they being of all Ages, 6 Places, and 7 Conditions; the soft and yielding Sex,
whose weakness and infirmities could not have born much lesser sufferings,
without some Heavenly power to assist them; the wisest 8 sages, who could not
easily be fooled into their ruin, or perish without Good assurance it was
their interest so to do: and on the other hand, the greatest Idiots, who are
most subject to be frighted by the rod, and overawed by terrors into base
compliance, as having not sufficient reason to defend their tenets, or to
oppose against the sense of present misery; they being also Men of religious
Education, lives unblamable, which bore the greatest 9 Kindness, did the best
Offices, Occidunt eos quos and ipsi fatentur imitatores esse justorum Lact. l.
5. c. 9.
and showed the strongest bowels of compassion to their Persecutors, and
greatest freedom from revenge; yea men which gave the best examples, taught
the best precepts which the world e're knew; and all whose hopes, designs, and
interest depended only on a Future Life. 5ly. If we consider the 10 number of
those Christian Sufferers; so many, that Sulpitius tells us, l. 2. c. 46.
the World was more exhausted by one Persecution then by the most bloody Wars.
And 6ly. the effect of those so bloody Persecutions, viz, The 11 increase of
Proselytes, the more effectual Propagation of the Christian Faith; the shame
and the 12 Conviction of their Adversaries; Conviction so great, that on this
very score they often desisted from their intended executions. And to conclude,
the manner of their Sufferings does give us full assurance, that the assistance
of the Holy Ghost, which Christ and his Apostles promised to true believers,
was accordingly vouchsafed to those Martyrs. They having born the Greatest
sufferings, not only with undaunted Courage, but with 13 Joy and Exultation;
and being as desirous to suffer for the name of Jesus, as their Persecutors
were to Torment them; and finding oftentimes 14 a perfect freedom from all
Sense of Pain under the most afflicting pressures; Miraculous 15 Experience of
Consolations under Sufferings; of 16 deliverance from them, and of an
overruling, 17 controuling, and sometimes 18 vindictive power upon the
instruments of their Sufferings. Now,

(1) It seems impossible they could thus suffer without Divine assistance. For
(1) what could create a freedom from the sense of Pain under the Greatest
Torments, and most intolerable burdens unto flesh and blood? What could inject
so great a Terror into the fiercest of wild beasts, as to muzzle their mouths,
and stop their craving appetites? and what could cause insensate creatures,
which by the Laws of Nature act to the utmost of their strength, to loose their
wonted Efficacies? What should create such Joys and Exultations, suggest such
comforts and supports under the sharpest and most fiery Trials and continual
pressures, the very thoughts of which afflictions have slain their hundreds,
and made them out of dread of others Fury become their own Tormentors? What
could embolden those who tremble at the Rod, and are so scared by the threats
and frowns of angry Parents; Those who cry out, and Skreek, and Swoon at the
approach of lesser Evils, yea dread those Terrors which their own Phansies
did create; to despise the worst of Torments when they were placed before their
eyes? to bear up with more then humane Courage against inhumane Cruelties; to
endure them without a Sigh or Groan, and by their patience to baffle and
Torment their Persecutors? That which does cool the courage of the stoutest
hearts, how should so many Feeble Souls encounter? And that at which the best
of men do shrink and tremble, which they do pray and strive against, how could
they who were held to be the filth and the ofscouring of the world, despise and
laugh at?

. 3. BUT 2ly. It Is more improbable they would undergo those fiery Trials without
a full assurance of the Greatest blessings and rewards hereafter. We see how
few will quit their Pleasures and Enjoyments here (though conscience speaks so
loud, and their duty is so often inculcated) to purchase all the Glories of
another world. Life is so sweet, that most men do desire to preserve it, though
upon most dishonorable and unworthy terms. And would then such a world of men
in so many Nations, and throughout so many Centuries of years, without all
hopes of future blessings (but what deluded fancy could suggest) do what is
so highly inconsistent with the first principle of humane Nature, the reason
and experience of all past ages, and of all that were then to come? In a word
if they were Good men, to be sure they would not ruin and destroy themselves;
if bad men, it must be their concern to live, and to enjoy the pleasures of
this present world; the future being either the matter of their dread, or at
least no matter of their hopes. Nor can it reasonably be conceaved that
Providence, which has so Great and tender a regard to the sincere and honest
heart, should let so many thousands of well meaning Souls, perish by the
delusions of ungrounded hopes, and vain imaginations, and not dart in one ray
of light to guide them to the truth.

. 4. Object. SHOULD any here object the 19 Spartan boys, who would not shrink
at the severest whippings; the 21 Roman Legions, who went with Joy unto those
places whence they expected never to return; a 20 Polemo, or a 22 Possidonius,
an 23 Anaxarchus, Regulus, or a Zeno; the Quakers, Anabaptists, or such like
hardy sects: It may be sufficient Answer to remind them of the rareness of
their sufferings, or the condition of the Persons suffering; in all which
circumstances they are not to be compared with Christian Martyrs. At least not
any of them will be found to have shown such Charity toward them that were the
causes of their Sufferings, experimented such Joys and consolations under
sufferings, such perfect freedom from all sense of pain, such signal instances
of an all ruling and sometimes Vindictive Power upon the instruments thereof,
as was vouchsafed to those Martyrs.

Add to this, that Philosophers stood bound in honor, (the thing they mostly
thirsted after) thus to do and suffer. Their Philosophy was but the doctrine
of contempt of Death. It was their daily buisiness to commend it to their
Scholars; and hence so many of them did either Menippus. Laert. lib. 6. Ed. St.
p. 162. Empedocles ib. p. 614. Ed. Steph.
Hang, or Metrocles. Laert. l. 6. p. 161. Ed. St. Zeno ib. p. 171.
Choke, or Pythagoras. Laert. l. 8. Ed. Steph. p. 592.
Starve themselves, when life became a burden or a trouble to them; and when
necessity was laid upon them, they suffered which the Greatest Valor. Whereas
the meaner sort of Christians could have but little sense of Honor; their
profession did forbid them to desire, or to receive it, and would be sure to
expose them to the greatest infamy.

Again, the Spartan boy was taught by custom and Instructions, Experience and
Practice, to endure his Stripes; and frequent Meditation made the wise man
valiant; the Christian void of all those helps became a constant and undaunted
sufferer; and oftentimes the Christian and the Martyr did begin together.

As for the Anabaptist and the Quaker, besides the lightness of their
sufferings, they bottom upon expectation of an exceeding weight of Glory:
whereas the Christian must suffer all those Miseries (as our adversary
supposes) only to propagate a known delusion. For we have fully proved by
Prolegomenon the 5th. that he could not be so far deluded as to believe himself
in his pretensions, if they had been false. And this 24 consideration gives the
Greatest strength unto this present Argument, it being never known that any
Sect of men considerable, scarce any single person, continued for one year,
much less through diverse Centuries, to suffer the severest Torments to
propagate a known delusion.

ANNOTATIONS On the 6th. Chapter.
1 THe greatness of their torments] Tertull. de Anima, p. 482. in illos omne
crudelitatis ingenium exhauriunt. Hoc inenarrabile est qoud fit adversus eos
qui malefaccre nesciunt. Lactant. Cyprian. ad Demetrium, Bestiis, gladio,
ignibus punis, nec saltem contentus es dolorum nostrorum compendio, as simplici
and veloci brevitate paenarum, admoves laniandis corporibus longa tormenta,
multiplicas lacerandis Visceribus numerosa supplicia, nec feritas, atque
immanitas tua usitatis potest contenta esse tormentis. (...). Just. Mart.
dialog. cum Tryphone. p. 337. In the first persecution. Pereuntibus addita
ludibria, ut ferarum tergis contecti laniatu canum interirent, aut crucibus
affixi, aut flammandi, atque ubi defecisset dies in usum nocturni luminis
urerentur. Tacitus, Annal. 15. p. 363. in the 2 d. persecution. (...). Eusebius E.
H. l. 5. c. 1. Under the 7th. persecution. Lib. 6. c. 41. (...), Eusebius. H. E.
l. 8. c. 8. In the 10th. persecution, Dioclesian and Maxim. being Emperors,
they suffered, (...) idem ib. c. 9. Their Persecutors contending Lib. 8. c. 12.
(...). And the same Author speaking of the same Persecution, after a short
remission being more vehemently prosecuted, says (...). l. 9. c. 6.

2 And to take care the Christians might still live to suffer them] Pertinaci
stultitia Jubent curam tortis diligenter adhiberi, ut ad alios cruciatus membra
renoventur, and reparetur novus sanguis ad paenam. Lact. l. 5. c. 11.

3 Jew] (...). Just. Mart. Ap. 2. p. 72.

4 The wisdom of the Wise] Crescens Philosophus, Antoninus Philosophus,
Hierocles, Porphyrius, Plinius, Celsus, Julian, etc.

5 Or let their ashes rest] Bacchanalium feriis nec mortuis parcunt
Christianis, sed ipsos de requie sepultureae, de Asylo quodam Mortis jam alios,
jam nec totos avellunt, dissecant, distrahunt. Tertull. Apol. c. 37. In cineres
saeviunt, ne quis extet sepulturae locus. Lact. l. 5. c. 11. (...). Eusebius.

6 All places] (...). Just. Mart. dial. cum Tryphone, p. 337.

7 All conditions] Pueri and mulierculae nostrae cruces and tormenta, feras and
omnes suppliciorum terriculas inspirata patientia doloris illudunt. Minutius p.
42. Quid facies de tantis millibus hominum, tot viris and feminis, omnis sexus,
omnis aetatis, omnis dignitatis, offerentibus se tibi? Tertull. ad Scap. c. 4.
Ecce sexus infirmus, and fragilis aetas dilacerare se toto corpore urique
perpetitur, non necessitate, quia licet vitare si vellent, sed voluntate, quia
confidunt in Deo. Lact. l. 5. c. 13. (...). Eusebius. Hist. Eccl. l. 5. c. 11.
vid. Ambr. de virg. Basil. in Mart. Julittam. Bedae Martyrologium Niceph. Hist.
Eccl. l. 4. c. 17. l. 5. c. 30. l. 6. cap. 21.

8 The Wisest sages] Tam magnis ingeniis praediti Oratores, Grammatici,
Rhetores, Consulti juris, ac Medici, Philosophiae etiam secreta rimantes.
Arnobius. (...). Orig. In Cells. P. 285.

9 The greatest kindness to their persecutors and greatest freedom from
revenge] Ipsi (scil. Advocati contra Christianos) beneficia habent
Christianorum, licet adclament quae volunt. Tertull. ad Scap. c. 4. who having
spoken of the multitude of Martyrs, and their readiness to suffer, adds, Quid
tamen de tam desperatis unquam denotastis, de tam animatis ad mortem usque pro
injuria repensatis? Itid. Apol. c. 37. Justin Martyr speaking of the Jews whose
custom was to curse the Christians in their synagogues, says thus, (...).
Dial. cum Tryph. p. 335. And again, (...). p. 236. They prayed for all their
persecuting Emperors, for Jews, Samaritans, and Heathens, for all the people
that beheld them, for the Judge that condemned them, for the Executioner.
Eusebius. Hist. Eccl. l. 8. c. 8. p. 332. When Plague and famine raged among the
Heathens. (...). Hist. Eccl. l. 9. c. 8.

10 The unmber of their sufferers] under the 8th persecution. Leo mag. tells
us, Innumera Martyrum millia coronata esse, Ser. 2. de festo Pentecost. In the
10th persecution. Adeo in Christianos toto orb saevitum est, ut nomen eorum
extinctum videretur. Hor. Hist. Eccl. Unde nummi a Diocletiano cum hac
inscriptione cusi, nomine Christianorum deleto qui Rem-publicam evertebant:
immo de subactis deletisque penitus Christianis columnae erigebantur. Baron.
Ann. 304. number. 89. Infinite were the suffercrs says Eusebius. Hist. Eccl. l.
3.16. (...); In Egypt. l. 8. c. 8. (...). l. 8. c. 9. At Thebes they slew an
hundred by the day. Erat illa acerbissima persecutio, quae per december annos
plebem Dei depopulata est. Sulpitius. l. 2. c. 46. trig. dierum spatio 17.
millia trucidata sunt. Beda.

11 The increase of Proselytes, and propagation of the Christian faith] (...),
Just. Ep. ad Diognetum, p. 499. vid. p. 498. (...) (...). Auth. Quaest. and
Resp. ad Orthod. (...). Clem. Alex. Stro. l. 6. p. 698. vid. Tertull. Apol. c.
50. Orig. in Celsum p. 183.349. Arnob. l. 2. p. 45. Aug. de Civ. Dci. l. 22. c.
6.

12 The Conviction of their adversaries] And that (first) by their constancy
and joy under the greatest torments, Just. Mart. Apol. 1. p. 50. (...);
secondly, inquiry into the Causes of their sufferings. Dum inter se invicem
quaerunt quae sit hujus perseverantiae causa, multa quae ad Religionem
pertinent divulgata dicuntur, quae quia bona sunt placeant necesse est. Lact.
lib. 5. c. 22. quisque enim tantam tolerantiam spectans, ut aliquo scrupulo
percussus, and inquirere accenditur quid sit in causa, and ubi cognoverit
veritatem, ipse statim sequitur. Tertull. ad Scap. c. 5. s. 2. Idem Apol. c.
50. Illa ipsa obstinatio quam exprobratis magistra est: quis enim non
contemplatione ejus concutitur ad requirendum quid intus in re sit? Quis non
ubi requisivit, accedit? ubi accessit, pati non exoptat? 3ly Gods vengeance on
their persecutors. Praeterea ultio consecuta (sicut semper accidit) ad
credendum vehementer impellit. Lact. p. 533. (...). ita Constantinus apud
Eusebius. in vit. Constable. l. 4. c. 12. vid. Tertull. ad Scap.

13 With Joy and Exultation] (...), Just. Mart. Dial. cum Tryph. p. 265. Cum
omni saevitia vestra concertamus, etiam ultro erumpentes, magisque damnati quam
absoluti gaudemus. Tertull. (...). Eusebius Historiae Ecclesiasticae libro
octavo cap. nono. Great Courage in the midst of sufferings. Solebant etenim
(...) (...). Eusebius. Hist. Eccl. l. 8. c. 9. Nostri autem (ut de viris taceam)
pueri, and mulierculae Tortores suos taciti vincunt, and exprimere illis
gemitum nec ignis potest. Lact. lib. 5. c. 13. vid. Orig. in Celsum l. 7. p.
357. and p. 359. Minut. p. 41.

14 An Apathy under the severest torments] Apostolus Johannes in oleum igneum
demersus nihil passus est. Tertull. de praescript. c. 36. (...). ita Eusebius.
Hist. Eccl. l. 5. c. 1. de Blandian. vid. eundem l. 8. c. 10. p. 338.339.

15 Experience of Consolations under them] For they did, (...). Eusebius. Hist.
Eccl. l. 8. c. 9. vide Historiam Theodori, Sozom. Hist. Eccl. l. 5. c. 20.
Socr. l. 3. c. 19. Aug. de Civ. Dei, l. 18. c. 52.

16. Deliverance from their sufferings] Under the 10th persecution, (...)
(...). Eusebius. Hist. Eccl. l. 9. c. 8.

17 His controuling] (...). Ita Eusebius. de feris quibus Christiani exponebantur.
Hist. Eccl. l. 8. c. 7.

18 And vindictive power] (...). Eusebius. Hist. Eccl. lib. 8. p. 342. who
instanceth in the death of the two persecuting Governors of Damascus and
Caesarea Hist. Eccl. l. 9. c. 6. Possumus exitus quorundam Praesidum tibi
proponere, qui in fine vitae suae recordati sunt deliquisse quod vexassent
Christianos, Vigellium, Saturninum, Claudium Herminianum, Cecilium, Capellam.
Tertull. ad Scap. c. 3.5.2. (...), in Julian. (...) p. 57. Nazinaz. de
Maximino. Unde vindice and ultore Deo cogebatur (...). Eusebius. Hist. Eccl. l. 8.
c. 16.17. (...). Chrysostom. or. 2. in Babylam p. 462. de Juliano verba faciens.

19 The Spartan Boys] Spartae vero pueri ad aram sic verberibus accipiuntur, ut
multus e visceribus sanguis exeat, nonnunquam etiam ut cum ibi essem, audiebam
ad necem. Quorum non modo nemo exclamavit unquam, sed ne ingemuit quidem. Cie.
Tusc. 2. p. 209. A. and p. 212.

20 The Roman Legions] Quas scribit in Originibus Cato Major in eum alacres
profect as locum unde se nunquam redituras scirent. Lud. Vives. in August. de
C. D. l. 1. c. 12.

21 A Polemo] De quo Laertius tradit (...). l. 4. p. 264.

22 Possidonius] Solebat narrare Pompejus eum graviter de hoc ipso (nihil esse
bonum nisi quod honestum esset) cubantem disputasse, cumque quasi faces ei
doloris admoverentur, saepe dixisse, nihil agis dolor quamvis sis molestus,
nunquam te esse confitebor malum. Cic. Tusc. 2. p. 215. B. 216. A.

23 Zeno, Anaxarchus] obversentur species honestae animo, Zeno proponatur
Eleates qui perpessus est omnia potius quam conscios delendae tyrannidis
indicaret. De Anaxarcho Democritio cogitetur, qui cumtin manus Cyprii
Nicocreontis Regis incidisset, nullum genus supplicii deprecatus est neque
recusavit. Cic. Tusc. 2. p. 213.

24 This consideration does give the greatest strength unto the present
argument] (...): Chrysostom. in prima ad Cor. Ho. 4. p. 263, 264. (...). Orig. in
Celsum p. 65.

CHAP. VII.
SECT I.
The Contents.
THat from the fulfilling of things future and contingent, we may reasonably
infer the Being of an overruling Providence, which interests itself in their
completion. The truth of Christian Faith evinced, 1. From those predictions
which concern the Person, Birth, Life, Actions, and Passions, of our Lord and
Savior. The confirmation of this Argument. 2ly. From those miracles which his
disciples wrought agreably to our Saviors promise, prediction, and commission:
for they healed the diseased, and ejected Devils, according as our Lord
foretold.

. 1. TO strengthen what we offer from the predictions of our Lord in
confirmation of the Christian Faith, it will be needful to premise, That the
punctual fulfilling of predictions of things future and contingent, especially
when those predictions descend to many Circumstances, and those such as are
peculiar and unusual, and such as respect the unconstrained motions of the
will: I say, this fulfilling of predictions, gives just assurance to us, that
an all Wise and overruling Providence does interest it self in their
completion. For 1. He only who at first made all things by his Power, and by
his Wisdom guides them to their respective ends, He whose will and pleasure
does give laws to all the motions of the Soul, and limits to the powers of
Inferior causes, he only can foresee the issues, and foretell those
Circumstances, which do entirely depend upon such causes. Yea 2ly. that mind,
which through its own inherent power, is able to determine any matters of this
nature, must on the same grounds be acquainted with all future things, though
never so contingent in their immediate causes; there being equal reason for
them all. For since things Future have at present no existence, nor is there
any reason, if contingent, whence it may be certainly concluded, they rather
are to be, then not to be; no mind can possibly foresee their futurition, but
that, whose understanding is so perfect, as to be able to extend it self to all
things future, as they in due time shall exist; and whose commanding pleasure
does limit and determine, or Guide and Manage their indifferences, as seems
most conducing to his Glory. Whence God provokes the Heathen Deities, Esa.
41.23.
to show the things that are to come hereafter, that so it may be known that
they are Gods, Cic. de div. li. p. 82.
and Heathens did conclude it certain, si divinatio, ergo Deus if there were
divination, there must be a Deity.

. 2. NOW that predictions of this nature have been made in confirmation of the
Christian Faith, will be abundantly evinced from those, which more immediately
concern the person of our Savior; he being signally marked out unto us, by
such peculiar Circumstances of his Birth, Life, and Passion, such singularities
of his actions, such proper Characters of his Person, so certainly foretold in
the Law and Prophets, (and therefore firmly credited by the Jew) as must
infallibly conclude them ridiculous and mad, that should falsely pretend to
them. An Elias was to usher in his advent, and to Mal. 3.1.2.3.
make ready a people prepared for the Lord, by turning of the disobedient unto
the wisdom of the just: accordingly John Baptist in the Luke 1.17.
Power and Spirit of Eliah went before Jesus, attesting that he was the true
Joh. 1.29.34.33.31.
Messiah, the Lamb, the Son of God, and that he was informed from Heaven of
him, and thence commissionated to prepare his way. And so effectually this
Elias prevailed on the whole Nation of the Jews, that they esteemed him a Mark.
11.32.
Prophet, a Joh. v. 35.
Burning and a Shining light, in which they willingly rejoiced; a Just and Holy
man, whose Doctrine they liked very well: Joseph Antiq. Judaic. l. 8. c. 7.
whose Counsel they would gladly follow, and whose baptism they received with
greatest readiness. The Messiah was to be the offspring of a Esa. 7.14.
Virgins womb, and have no Father but the God of Heaven; an opinion too
incredible to find acceptance without greatest Evidence, or to be unnecessarily
pretended without Greatest Folly, or to obtain and win upon the world, when
managed by the worst of fools. He was to come into the world 2 before the Genesis
49.10.
Scepter did depart from Judah, before the 3 ruin of Mal. 3.1.
Jerusalem, before the Dan. 9.26.27.
ceasing of the daily Sacrifice. He was to come into the world whilst Mich.
5.2.
Bethlehem remained amongst the Governors of Judah, and whilst the second
Hug. 2.5.7.9.
Temple stood. He was to suffer Death at the Conclusion of the Dan. 9.24.
weeks of 4 Daniel; which in the Judgment of the Jews, 5 who then impatiently
Luc. 2.25.38.
expected their Messiah, was that very time in which our Savior did appear.
And well might they expect his present coming, when both John Baptist taught,
that his appearance was at hand, and some of them were assured by special
revelation, that their Luc. 2.26.
eyes should see their Savior; when both that 6 Ancient Prophecy, which had
obtained Credit throughout the Eastern world, Talmud. Cod. Sanhedr. c. 11.5.33.
and their own Prophets, Paraphrasts, and Doctors, did agree in the assertion
of it: It being in it self so evident out of their writings, that at this day
the Jews confess, Christ either came about that time, and lies concealed ever
since, or else his comeing was deferred beyond the time prefixed, by reason of
the abounding sins of their Nation. In 7 Bethlehem he was to be born, a thing
which happened by so strange and unaccountable a taxing, (such as none was ever
known before, and there was no occasion for it then, there being peace
throughout the Roman Empire,) that nothing but a secret and overruling
Providence could have procured it. All which particularly afford a most
convincing demonstration to the Jew, that his Messiah was in vain expected, or
is already come. For where is now the second Temple, and the City Bethlehem?
What place amongst the Governors of Judah does it now retain? where is Judahs
Scepter, and where the Lawgiver between his feet? Is not Jerusalem destroyed?
Are not their sacrifices and oblations ceased? And if the weeks of Daniel do
not end, where Christians do contend they did, what certain period can they
have? or what instruction can they give us, when the Messiah, whom they speak
of, will appear? Besides he was to be a Deuteronomy. 18.15.18. Joh. 4.25.
Prophet and foretell things to come: in his times was Esa. 9.6.7. Janum terra
marique pace parta ter clausit. Suet. de Augusto cap. 22.
peace to flourish, as at his birth it did throughout the then known world;
Janus his Temple being shut, which in the time of War stood allwaies open. A
constant throng of 8 Miracles was to attend his life and doctrine; he was to
bear away our griefs, and 9 heal our sicknesses, to cure the Esa. 35.56.
Lame, the Deaf, the Blind, and Dumb, and make his bodily cures become the
preface to his spiritual; and yet his gracious Embassage, his infinite amazing
love, must find no other welcome but Esa. 53.12.
reproach and infamy; he was to come into the world poor and lowly, and riding
on an Zech. 9.9.
Ass; to be 53. Esa. 2. Esa. 50.2. Chapter 53.12.
despised, set at naught, buffeted, and spit upon, and to be numbered with
transgressors: he was to be 10 rejected by, 11 and suffer from those very
persons for whose sake he suffered. He was to be a Esa. 53.3.
man of sorrows, and to increase those sorrows nothing but Psalm. 69.21.
Gall and vinegar was to be tendered to him: his Life was to conclude in an
Dan. 9.26.
untimely Death; a death attended with such circumstances as added to the
wonders of his life; his Psalm. 22.17.25.12.1.
Hands, and Feet, and 12 sides were to be pierced, yet maugre all the Tyrannies
of Custom, and Jewish Malice of his adversaries not a Ex. 12.46. Psalm. 22.18.
Bone of him was to be broken, not a Rent was to be made upon his Garment; His
Psalm. 16.10.
Soul must not be left in Hell, nor must his Body see corruption; his 13
resurrection was to be as signal as his death, for he was then to see the Esa.
53.11.
travel of his soul, and to draw all men after him. He was to be exalted into
the highest Heavens, and sit at the 14 right hand of God; Ps. 110.1. Mat. 22.43.
Government was to be upon his shoulders, and to continue there for ever. The
fresh appearance of the Star of Jacob, was to expel the shadows of the 15 law,
Christ at his resurrection was to throw down the Mat. 23. Mark. 13.
Temple of the Jews, and to inflict upon them for their unbelief the Greatest
and most dreadful vengeance, which ever yet befell the nation: he was to ruin
and pull down the Kingdom of the Prince of darkness, to spread the 16 Gospel
through the Esa. 11.10. Jer. 16.19.
Gentile world; and by the plentiful effusions, and powerful operations of the
17 spirit on his own Disciples, to justify his mission, and convince
Gainsayers, that his Doctrine was the Mind and Will of God; and lastly to
transform into the Christian purity, a world of men, inslaved to heathen
superstitions, and overwhelmed in sin.

. 3. LO here a crowd of Circumstances, so certainly foretold of the Messiah,
as that the Jew found nothing to except against them: so signally fulfilled in
our Jesus, that nothing can be farther needful to confirm their truth. And
3dly. incompatible to any other person. For that I may not here repeat what I
have already said, that no man would have chosen to undergo those hard
terms, which were declared in the Scripture of the Old Testament, to belong to
the Messiah; it being contrary to humane Nature to desire to lead a poor and
miserable life, and then dye a painful Ignominious death, unless it were in
prospect of some great advantages that might accrue unto him; such as the
resurrection, and those other glorious things that were foretold of the
Messiah. But now could any other person hope for such a glorious resurrection,
and to enable a few illiterate despised persons, by mighty signs and wonders
by admirable Gifts and Graces of the Holy spirit, to subdue the world to the
belief of things incredible? viz. To own and worship for the God of Heaven
and Earth, one who was lately hanged on a tree, and one that by his own Nation
was rejected as the worst of Malefactors.

. 4. AND now to take off that objection which is so often made by 18 Celsus,
and other Adversaries of the Christian Faith, that all those places of the old
Testament, which are supposed to respect our Jesus, are in themselves ambiguos,
and may by pregnant phansies be applied and fitted unto any subject. Let it be
considered. 1. that the prophesies which are here selected, are in themselves
most clear, and such as cannot well admit of any other sense. And 2ly. That the
sense here given of them is confirmed, where it is needful, in the
Annotations. And 3ly. That they are such as Christ and his Apostles urged with
greatest confidence in their discourses with the Jews, and their Epistles to
them, and by these they prevailed upon some thousands of them, notwithstanding
their great and many prejudices, to own this Faith, as being publicly and
mightily convinced from the scripture, Act. 18. 28.
that Jesus was the Christ; which sure would not have been attempted, nor could
possibly have been effected, had not those scriptures been applied by them,
according to the clear importance of the words, or the received interpretations
of the Jewish Doctors. And hence when Justin Martyr in his dispute with Trypho
urged those places, (...). Justin. Dialog. p. 316.
he (though a Jew) confessed that they were all intended of the Messiah of the
Jews; the truth of which confession we shall abundantly make good in the
ensuing Annotations on this Chapter.

But to proceed unto some further instances; the prophesies of Christ touching
the mighty signs and wonders, which should attend the first Professors of the
Christian Faith, and touching the destruction of Jerusalem, have been so
signally fulfilled that 19 Phlegon reflecting upon those and such like
instances, confessed Christ was endowed with the Gift of prophecy, and the
event did answer his predictions. And,

(1.) It was prophesied, and that without exception or restriction to any sort
of persons, that they who did believe his doctrine, should be endowed with
power to cast out devils, and to heal diseases, and to speak with tongues. Of
the completion of which prophecy as to the Gift of tongues we have already
spoken. Mark 16. 17. 18.


As for the Gift of healing, this was so common in the Apostles days, that the
Epistle of St. James directs the Sick and the Diseased to the Rulers of the
Church, with promise that they shall be healed. It was a thing so constantly
pretended in their Story, Act. 5.12. 4. 30. 8. 7. 28. 9.
and made so often the matter of their Prayers, as well as of our Saviors
promise, that Christianity, had this pretention been a lie, would have
assuredly been blasted by it. Besides this Gift continued frequent and
notorious in after Ages; its instances were famous and innumerable, throughout
the Christian World. Net e im caecis possunt donare visum, neque surdis auditu^
neque omnes daemones effugare, neque debiles, claudos, aut paralyticos curare,
vel alia quadam part corporis vexatos; quemadmodum saepe evenit fieri secundum
corporalem infirmitatem, vel earum que foris accidunt infirmitatum bonas
valetudines restaurare. Iren. l. 2. c. 56. etc. 57. (...).
To restore to health by imposition of hands, to cure the Weak, and Lame, and
Paralytick, and those that labor under any other malady, is a thing frequent
in the Church, faith Ireneus. And (...). Orig in Celsum. l. 1. p. 34. and
rursus (...). vid. l. 2. p. 80.
Origin gives us his own experience of it in these words. We often have seen the
people by the Christians freed from ecstasies and madness, and from a 1000 other
dreadful symptoms and calamities, from which nor Men nor Devils could recover
them; and they at present heal by invocation of Christ's name. Whence 3ly. We
may note that generally those diseases were incurable by all the powers of
humane Arts, and all assistances of Heathen Deities, or any other name then
that of Jesus. Thus Et quoniam beneficia salutis datae aliorum numinum
comparatis and Christi quot millia vultis a nobis debilium ostendi? Quot
tabificis afectos morbis nullam omnino retulisse medicinam, cum per omnia
supplices irent templa, cum Deorum ante ara prostrati limina ipsa converrerent
osculis? cum Aesculapium ipsum datcrem, ut praedicant, sanitatis, quoad illis
superfuit vita, and precibus fatigarent, and invitarent miserrimis votis? Quid
ergo prodest oftendere unum aut alterum fortasse curatos, cum tot millibus
subvenerit nemo? Arnob. l. 1. p. 29.
Arnobius; And since you have the confidence to bring the petty cures of the
Heathen Deities into contest with Christ, how many thousands shall we instance
in who have in vain repaired to their Temples? And what does it avail to tell
us of the Good success of two or three, when the complaints of thousands speak
their want of power to assist the needy?

As for the 20 ejection of Devils both out of Men, and Beasts, (...). in Celsum
l. 7. p. 334.
and places where they did reside; that this was done etiam a rusticis
Christianis, as Arnob. or by the rudest and most simple Christians, as Origin,
we have the frequent attestations of all the Records of Christianity through
diverse Centuries, and their Apologies unto the Heathen world; all which abound
in frequent mention of this thing. Moreover they did often urge, solicit, and
21 provoke their adversaries in their Apologies, and Disputations with them, to
try the truth of their assertion; and make their 22 Senses Judge of what they
did pretend to. They did 23 appeal to their own Consciences and knowledge of
it, and tell them that many 24 Hundreds were still living of their own
superstition, as well as Christian Proselytes, who by their personal
experience could attest it. They offered upon 25 pain of Death, and loss of all
that could be dera unto them, not only to eject those very demons they invoked,
but make them confess, that 26 they were cheats, and own themselves to be but
Devils. They publicly declared, that by their presence only they could stop 28
mouths of Oracles, and put to flight their Gods, or render them unable to
assist the Priest. See notes in Chap. 2. Number. 1. 2. 3.
that when the 27 Heathens could not by all their charms, and exorcisms, and
invocations of their Deities, the Christian by the name of Jesus could eject
them, that false and Hypocritical Professors had this power, and that the,
name of Jesus 29 though pronounced by Jews or Heathens, would perform the
same. A thing so notable, that evne their 31 Inchanters used it for that end,
and 30 many Proselytes were won unto the Christian Faith by due consideration
of it. In fine the Apostles, and the Church had power to command the Devil to
torment Irregular professors, and to inflict diseases on them; and 32 this was
often the punishment of their Apostasy, impenitency, and such like
irregularities, for which the censures of the Church did pass upon them. All
this we have delivered upon certain knowledge, and confirmed to us with the
highest attestations, by men of greatest Wisdom, Piety, and Sincerity, in
every Nation where the Gospel had obtained. Now can we think the Devil,
without any constraint from a superior power, should not only quit the tyranny
which they had so long exercised on Humane Bodies, and over the Consciences of
men, who gave Idolatrous Worship to them, but should also confess what they
were, to those who sought the ruin of their Kingdom, and made use of their
confessions to that purpose? Or could (...). Orig. in Celsum p. 133. Nomen
Philosophorum daemonia non fugat. Tertull. Apol. c. 46.
the name of Jesus without that power to which he pretended, have been so great
a Terror and a Torment to them? Did ever any of the Heathen Juglers with all
their Arts of Magic extort such plain confessions from them? Did they thus
force them to desert, not only their possessed Bodies, but their Temples too,
and to exert their power unto the ruin of themselves, and and the amendment of
those Souls they had ensnared? Or would the Christians thus appeal unto the
senses and experience of their most subtle Adversaries, would they provoke
their Trial, and boast of their continual Triumph over Satan's kingdom
throughout all the world, and could they by those means prevail upon the world,
and daily gain new Proselytes; had not the evidence of truth confirmed their
sayings?

ANNOTATIONS On the 7. Chapter.
1. THE coming of Elias to prepare his way] This the Jews put among the
previous signs of their Messiah. R. Abraham ex Seder Olam in lib. Juchas. p.
12. Maimon. in Hill. Mel. c. 12 s. 2. Kimchi ad c. 4. Mal. Before the coming of
the Son of David Elias shall come to declare his advent, faith the Gloss in
Hieros. Pesach. fol. 30.2. vide Lightf. in Matt. 17. 11.

2 He was to come into the World before the scepter did depart from Iudah]
which Prophesy the Targums do apply to the Messiah, and Shilo is by Onkelos
interpreted (...), by Jonathan and the Jerusalem Targum (...). The Cabalists do
also so interpret it, because (...), according to their computation, makes the
same number with the letters of (...) i. e. 358. And Rabbi Iohanan, asking the
name of the Messiah, they of the School of R. Shila answer (...) according unto
what is written, until Shilo come. Coch. in duos tit. Talmud. p. 359. Now that
the scepter did depart from Judah before the desolation of Jerusalem, their
greatest Rabbis do assure us. Our Rabbis have delivered that 40 years before
the Temple was destroyed, judgment of life and death was taken from them, and
of pecuniary causes in the days of Rabbi Simeon. l. Sanhedr. Hier. and dine
Mammonoth. And when the Romans had expelled the Sanhedrim out of their Palace
at Jerusalem, they put on sackcloth and cried out, Woe to us for the scepter is
removed from Judah etc. and yet our Shilo is not come. Talm. Hieros. Tract.
Sanhedr. And Epiphanius tells us that the translation of the Kingdom (...)
(Herodianorum) (...). that the Scepter is now departed, is confessed by Kimchi
on these words. The Children of Israel shall abide many days without a King and
without a Prince. Hos. 3.4. for these (says he) are the days of the captivity
which we at present suffer, having no King nor Prince in Israel, but being
subject to Heathen Potentates.

3 Before the Ruin of the Temple] The Lord whom ye seek shall suddenly come
to his Temple, Mal. 3.1. This lord says Kimchi is (...). Whence R. Iose, who
saw the destruction of the Temple, said, the times of the Messiah are now come.
That the Prophesy of Malachi concerns the Messiah, is farther evident from
those expressions which style the person mentioned, Lord, the Angel of the
covenant, and the desire of the Jews, and speak of an Elias to prepare his way.
That his coming was not be defered 2000 years, is clear from these expressions,
behold he comes suddenly.

4 At the completion of the weeks of Daniel] That the weeks of Daniel
comprehended only 490 years the Jews confess. Whereas it is written that 70
weeks are determined for the cutting off of the Messiah, we are by him to
understand 490 years Auctor. Beth. Israel. R. Saadias Gaon. Aben Ezra. apud
Raymund. Pug. fid. p. 237. R. Moses and R. Selomo apud Morn. de Christ. Relig.
c. 29. (...). Joseph. Antiq. Iud. l. 10. c. 12. So that in his opinion the 70
weeks were then concluded, and that of which he prophesyed was come to pass.
There are who so interpret the 70 weeks of Daniel as to conceave, that at the
end of them the Messiah should appear to make them Lords of all things; and
this did animate the Jews in their Rebellion against the Romans, they still
expecting under the greatest miserys, that their Messiah would appear to save
them. Manasse Ben Israel de termino vitae. p. 175.

5 Who then impatiently expected their Messiah] Hence so many false Christ's and
false Prophets. 1. Herod. Herodiani Christum Herodem esse dixerunt. Tertull.
adv. Haeres. c. 45. 2. Dositheus. (...). Orig. in Celsum l. 1. p. 44. 3.
Barchocheba. Ille Messiam seipsum pronuntiabat. Auctor Schalschelet Hakkabalah,
vide Drusium de tribus sect is l. 3. c. 4.6. 4. Vespasian, who by the flattery
of Josephus was induced to destroy the line of David, (...). Eusebius. Hist. Eccl.
l. 3. c. 12. Joseph. de Bello Iud. l. 7. c. 12. 5. (...). Joseph. de Bell. Iud.
l. 2. c. 23. with many others. (...) (...). Joseph. Antiq. Iud. l. 20. c. 6.
and this made them so forward to rebellagainst the Romans. (...). Joseph. de
bello Jud. l. 7. p. 967.

6 That ancient Prophesie] Percrebuerat Orient toto vetus and constans opinio
esse in fatis, ut eo tempore Judaea profecti rerum potirentur; id Iudaei ad se
trahentes rebellarunt. Sueton. in Vespas. c. 4. Tacit. Hist. l. 5.

7 Of Bethlehem] From Thee shall spring Messiah the Son of David. R. Salomo
Iarchi in Mich. 5.2. Chald. Paraph.

8 A continual throng of Miracles] Midrash Coheleth in Eccles. 1.11. R.
Hadarshan in Ps. 74. Raymund. Pug. fid. p. 610. vide Comment. in c. 8.5.1. number.
1.

9 Heal our diseases] Our Masters tell us that the name of the Messiah should
be (...) id est, leprosus de domo Rabbi. It being said, surely He took upon him
our infirmities, and healed our sicknesses. Gem. Sanhedr. cap. (...) sec. 36.
That the Messiah was to open the eyes of the blind we are told Midrash in Ps.
146.

10 Reproched and rejected] Esa. 53.2.3. on which place R. Moses Alsheid says
thus. Behold our Doctors of happy memory conclude with one mouth, that this is
spoken (...) of the Messiah as they received from their Ancestors. The Son of
David shall be a stone of stumbling, and a rock of offense to the two families
of Israel. R. Jehud a. vide Coch. in duos tit. Talm. p. 210. Gloss. Talm.
tract. Sanhedr. c. 11. Mornaeum de Christian. Relig. c. 30.

11 He must suffer] That the Messiah of the Jews should suffer death, was so
expressly delivered by the Prophets, that they who dreamed of a Messiah, who
should sway the scepter and subdue nations under them, were forced to invent a
double Savior; Messiah Ben Joseph to be slain, and Messiah Ben David, whose
reign was to be glorious upon earth. Targum. in Cant. 24.5. and 7.3. Talmud in
Massecheth Succa c. 5. Sol. Iarchi in Esa. 24.28. Kimchi in Zach. 12.10.

12 His Sides were to be pierced] R. Sol. on the place speaks thus, Our Rabbis
have expounded this of Messiah Ben Joseph, who was to be slain. vid. lib. Succa
did. Hachalil Chamisha.

13 His resurrection] Of which Ps. 16.9. is expounded in Midrash Tehillim, and
for which the example of Jonah is alleged Menasse B. Israel de Resur. l. 1. c.
5.

14 At the right hand of God] That the Ancient Rabbis did understand this
Psalm. of the Messiah, will appear from R. Ionathans Targum, from Midrash
Tehillim in Psalm. 2.7. and 18.36. R. Moses Hadarshan in Genesis c. 18.1.

15 The shadows of the Law] The law which thou at present learnest, shall be
vanity compared to that law which is to be delivered in the days of the
Messiah. R. Hizkiah apud Raym. p. 608. Our Doctors of happy memory conceive,
that Israel shall afterward receive another law, as formerly they did
immediately from the mouth of God. Auctor Sepher. Ikkarim l. 3. c. 19. Our
Rabbis said of Sacrifices, they should all cease excepting those of prayer and
praises, Midrash in Number. 13. vide R. Hadarshan in Genesis 41.49. Jonathan sup.
Esaiam 12.3. Raymund. Pug. fid. p. 608.

16 The Conversion of the Gentiles] The Gentiles shall be saved after the war
with Gog and Magog. R. David Kimchi in Esa. 49.6. which they expect before the
coming of their Messiah. The whole World shall be one Church, according to that
of Zeph. 3.9. that they may all call upon the name of the Lord with one
consent. Bereschith Rabba on these words, on that day will I build the
Tabernacle of David etc.

17 The Gift of the holy Spirit] Then shall the Spirit of Prophesy reside among
the people, so that our sons and our daughters shall Prophesy, according unto
that of Joel 2.28. R. Saadia Gaon in Sepher Haemunoth c. 8. Sal. Iarchi in Es.
44.2.

18 Celsus] Who calls the Prophesys of the old Test. (...). Apud Orig. l. 7. p.
333. and p. 338. he speaks thus of them, (...).

19 Phlegon] (...). Orig. in Celsum p. 69.

20 The ejection of Devils out of men and beasts and places] (...). Orig. in
Celsum p. 376. the Attestations of the Christians thorough diverse Centuries,
(...). Just. Mart. dial. cum Tryph. p. 302. (...). Orig. in Celsum p. 20.
subjecta est nobis tota vis daemonum, Tertull. Apol. c. 23. sec. 3. (...).
Eusebius. contra Hieroc. c. 1. p. 514. vide Iren. l. 2. p. 215.218. Justin Mart.
p. 45.247.302.311. Origin. in Celsum p. 7.20.34.53.62.124.127.334.337.376.
Minut. Fell. p. 31. Tertull. Apol. c. 23.25. ad Scap. c. 2.4. Cypr. ad Demetr.
Firmic. p. 19. and p. 40. Theodoret. de curand. Gr. aff. ser. 3. p. 55.

21 They provoked their adversarys to try the truth of what they sayd] Veni and
cognosce vera esse quae dicimus. Cypr. Epist. ad Demetr. sec. 12. Tertull.
Apol. c. 23. edatur hic aliquis etc.

22 To make their senses judge] Vel ipsis quos colis creed, aut si volueris and
tibi credere, de teipso loquetur, audiente te, qui nunc tuum pectus obsedit.
Videbis sub manu nostra stare vinctos, and tremere captivos, quos tu suspicis
and veneraris ut Dominos. Certe vel sic confundi in erroribus tuis poteris,
quando conspexeris and audieris Deos tuos quid sint interrogatione nostra
statim prodere, and, praesentibus licet vobis, praestigias illas and fallacias
suas non posse celare. Cyprian. Epist. ad Demetr. (...). Just. dial. cum Tryph.
p. 311. vide Ap. 2. p. 45. Dictis non stetis si oculi vestri and aures
permiserint vobis. Tertull. Apol. c. 23.

23 They appeald to their own knowledge of it] Daemonas de hominibus expellimus
sicut plurimis notum est. Tertull. l. 2. ad Scap. Haec omnia sciunt plerique
pars vestrum. Minut. p. 31.

24 To hundreds of living witnesses] Haec omnia tibi de officio suggeri
possunt, and ab eisdem advocatis, qui and ipsi beneficia habent Christianorum,
licet adclament quae velint; nam and cujusdam Notarius, cum a Daemone
praecipitaretur, liberatus est, and quorundam propinquus and puerulus, and
quanti honesti viri (de vulgaribus enim non dicam) aut a Daemoniis, aut a
valetudinibus remediati sunt. Tert. ad Scap. c. 4.

25 They offered upon pain of death] Nisi se Daemonas confessi fuerint,
Christiano mentiri non audentes, ibidem illius Christiani procacissimi
sanguinem fundite. Tertull. Apol. c. 23.

26 And make those very Demons confess that they were cheats and devils]
Ipsis testibus esse eos Daemonas, de se verum confitentibus, credit. Minut. p.
31. vid. Lact. l. 2. c. 15.

27 That when the Heathens could not by their charms and exorcisms, the
Christian by the name of Jesus could eject them] (...). Just. p. 45. Dial. cum
Tryph. p. 311. Ecce aliquis instinctu Daemonis percitus effertur, insanit,
ducamus hunc in Jovis O. M. Templum, vel quia sanare homines Jupiter nescit, in
Aesculapii vel Apollinis fanum, jubeat utriuslibet Sacerdos Dei sui nomine, ut
nocens ille spiritus excedat ex homine; nullo id pacto fieri potest, at vero
iidem Daemones adjurati per nomen Dei very protinus fugiunt. Lact. l. 4. c. 27.
p. 441.

28 That they could stop the mouth of Priests and Oracles] Si constituatur in
medio is quem constat incursum Daemonis perpeti, and Delphici Apollinis vates;
eodem modo Dei nomen horrebunt, and tam celeriter excedet de vate suo Apollo,
quam ex homine spiritus ille Daemoniacus, and adjurato fugatoque Deo suo Vates
in perpetuum conticescet. Lact. 4. c. 27. vide supra Prol. 3d.

29 The name of Jesus pronounced by Jews and Heathens would perform the same]
(...). Orig. ad Celsum. l. 1. p. 7. D. N. nomini subjecta sunt omnia, and
propter hoc Judaei usque nunc hac ipsa advocatione Daemonas fugant. Iren. l. 2.
c. 5. Vide quae Judaei virtute nominis hujus praestabant Raymund. pug. fid. p.
289. 290. Voisin. in eundem.

30 Many Proselytes were won unto the Christian Faith by the consideration of
it] Nec haec quidem levis causa est, quod immundi Daemonum spiritus accepta
licentia, multorum se corporibus immergunt, quibus postea ejectis omnes qui
resanati fuerint adhaereant religioni cujus potentiam senserunt. Lact. l. 5. c.
22. 533. Haec denique testimonia Deorum vestrorum Christianos facere
consueverunt. Tert. Ap. c. 23. sec. 6.

31 Inchanters used it for that end] Illi ipsi qui seducunt per ligaturas, per
incantationes, per machinamenta inimici, miscent percantationibus suis nomen
Christi. August. tr. 7. in Joh.

32 And this was often the punishment of their Apostasy, or those
irregularities which brought the Censures of the Church upon them] In Judaeos
(...) sive Apostatas (inquit Grotius) utpote exsortes divini foederis Diaboli,
divina concessione, dominium exercebant; sic and in Iudaeos incircumcisos
Angelo cuidam jus fuisse concessum tradunt Hebraei ad Exodus 4. and ex Hebraeis
Origenes. Sic and Christiani deficientes a fidei regula mancipia Diaboli
fiebant. Cyprian. Quam multi quotidie poenitentiam non agentes nec delicti sui
conscientiam confitentes immundis spiritibus adimplentur? Tert. de spect. c.
26. vid. Cor. 4.21.5.5. and 2. Cor. 13.10. 1. Tim. 1.20.

CHAP. VII. SECT. II.
The Contents.
THe Truth of Christian Faith evinced from those Predictions, which concern the
ruin of the Jewish Temple, discipline, and Nation; the Authors, time, and
manner; the Greatness, and Duration, Concomitants, and Attendants of it, as the
Scripture mentions them; and the wonderful completion of them all. A
confirmation of this Argument from the attempt of the Apostate Julian to
rebuild the Temple, and the miraculous frustration of it.

. 1. OF the destruction of the Temple, and downfall of the Jewish Economy; the
Predictions of our Lord are extant Matthew. 24. Mark 13. Luke 21. where we have
punctually foretold,

1. Matt. 24.9, 14. Mark 13.10, 13. Mark 13.6. Matt. 14.5.11. Mark 13.22, 14.
Matt. 24.12.
The forerunners of the ruin, viz. The preaching of the Gospel throughout all
the world: And 2ly, the multitude of false Prophets and false Christ's, which
should endeavor by many lying Wonders to deceive both Jew and Christian. 3ly,
The Apostasy of many from the Christian Faith, whose love, when Persecutions
did grow hot, would cool and vanish.

2ly, The Concomitants, or the immediate Attendants of it, Luke 21.25, 26.
Matt. 24.29. Matt. 14.30. Matt. 24.29. Matt. 16.1. Mark 8.11.
viz. Great earthquakes in diverse places, famines, pestilences, and dreadful
apparitions, or occurrences, signs in the sun and moon, and stars; the sea, and
the earth roaring; men's hearts failing them for fear; signs in the heavens of
the Son of man, or his appearance in the clouds with power, and great glory:
which sign from Heaven, both Pharisees and Sadduces expected, and desired of
our Lord, as being what their Doctors had concluded from the Words of Daniel,
chap. 7.13. I saw in the night visions, and behold one like the Son of man came
with the clouds of heaven: thus R. Alexander tells us, that R. Joshuah B. Levi
did compare these places, The Son of man comes with the clouds of heaven, Dan.
7.13. and he comes poor and riding upon an ass, Zach. 9.9. and he resolves the
seeming Contradiction thus: Gem. Sanhed. cys. 33.
If the Jews deserved that the Messiah should come Gloriously, he should come
in the clouds of Heaven, if not, he should come poor and riding upon an Ass.

3ly. The Authors of it, viz. The Roman army, Marc. 13 14.
Matt. 24.28. ( called the abomination of desolation) which should besiege
Jerusalem. Matt. 24.15. Luc. 21.20. Matt. 24.15.
For what is thus delivered Matt. 24.15. when you shall see the abomination of
desolation etc. then let them that are in Judea, flee unto the Mountains, is
Luc. 21.20. when you shall see Jerusalem compassed with Armies, then let them
that are in Judea etc. 2ly. It Is the abomination of desolation spoken of by the
Prophet Daniel, who speaks of the destruction of the Temple, when the Messiah
should be slain chap. 9. 26. and after 62. Weeks shall Messiah be cut off, but
not for himself, (...) Antiq. l. 10. c. 12.
and the people of the Prince that shall come, shall destroy the City and the
Sanctuary; which we know after the death of the Messiah the Romans, and they
only, did. And hence Josephus tells us, that Daniel prophesyed of it.

4ly. The time when; and that, both Negatively, not till the Gospel should be
spread over the then known world, and positively, before the Generation that
then lived should be extinct. Marc. 13.30. Luc. 21.32.
This Generation shall not pass away till all these things be fulfilled.

5ly. The Greatness of the ruin, 1. Of the Temple, Mat. 24.2 Luc. 19.44. Matt.
24.21.
of which there was not to be left one stone upon another which should not be
cast down. And 2ly. Of the People, to whom God threatens such afflictions as
never happened heretofore, nor the like should ever happen hereafter.

6ly. The continuance of the desolation of Jerusalem, and of the Judgments
threatened to the Jewish Nation. Marc. 3.19. Luc. 21.24.
They shall be led away captive into all Nations, and Jerusalem shall be
trodden down, until the time of the Gentiles be fulfilled.

7ly. Gods providence toward the true and persevering Christians of that time,
Matt. 24.13. Marc. 13.13. Luc. 21.28.
to give Salvation to them, and redemption from the cruel persecuting Jews, and
so preserve them, that not one hair of their heads should perish.

In fine the very manner of the seige is most particularly described Luc.
19.43. Thine enemies shall cast a trench about thee and compass thee round, and
keep thee in on every side. Now the completion of all these so many, and so
remarkable, and so improbable particulars, has been so full and pregnant, that
nothing could be more. For, to resume these heads.

1. Saint Paul in his Epistle to the Romans, written about the 2d Year of Nero,
vid. Lightfoot Harm. N. T. P. 121.136. Cha. 1. 8, 1. Col. 6. 22.
tells them their Faith was celebrated throughout all the world. In his Epistle
to the Colossians, about the 6th of Nero, he assures them that the Christian
Faith was preached to every creature under Heaven, and proclaimed to the whole
world. The truth of which assertions will be sufficiently made Good from
Proleg. the 6th.

2ly. Of the multitude of false Christ's, we have already spoken. Of false
Prophets we are informed by 2 Eusebius, who from Josephus tells us of one
Theudas, who by his Magical collusions prevailed upon a multitude of Jews to
follow him to the river Jordan, which that pretended Prophet promised to divide
before them: and of an 3 Egyptian in the days of Nero, who being also a
Magician and pretended Prophet, deceaved 30000, who partly were dispersed, and
partly slain by Felix Governor of Judea. 4 Josephus speaking of the
conflagration of the Temple, and of the multitude that perished in it (6000.)
ascribes their ruin to a lying Prophet, who drew them thither with promises of
signs and wonders, that should there be wrought for their deliverance; and then
adds, that there were many such deceivers who still endeavored to delude the
people with promises of help from heaven. Nay the Apostle tells us, Tit. 1.10,
11, 14.
that they especially were the vain bablers and deceivers, and the perverters
of the truth; that by their Fables, and their zeal for their Traditions, and
empty Ceremonies, they did pervert Men from the Faith, and hinder the progress
of the Gospel.

Thirdly, Their false and lying Wonders made them deserve the Title of
Magicians. And indeed the Miracles recorded by their Rabbis, Lightf. Horae
Hebr. in Mat. p. 266, 267.
the Stories which their * Talmud gives us of their Skill this way; their
frequent 5 Exorcisms by Invocation of the God of Jacob; their Amulets and *
Ligatures, and confident 6 Assertions, Lightf. ibid Voisin observe. in Raymund.
p. 557, 558.
That God gave power to his Law, his Name, and Attributes, when thus applied by
them, to heal diseases and work signs and wonders. Lastly, Those many 7
Instances Josephus gives us of Men pretending to such Works; all these
sufficiently evince how much they were addicted unto false and lying Wonders.

Fourthly, the Apostasy of many from the Christian Faith, especially of the
Jews, is manifest from the Epistles of St Paul, complaining that they
apostatized unto the Law of Moses, Gal. 3.4. 2 Tlm. 1.15.
and that all Asia had shaken off the Gospel; and from the descriptions which
St Peter and St Jude give of them, That they denied the Lord that bought them.
They went out from us, 1 John 2.19.
says St John.

Fifthly, The sign of the Son of man coming in the Heavens, being some visible
appearance in the Heavens of his coming to destroy Jerusalem, and to revenge
his death, and all the Persecutions of his Prophets and Apostles on them: that
8 Comet which appeared like a flaming sword, and for the space of a whole year
did point down upon the city, may refer unto it. But that which best comports
with the Expression of our Savior, who tells us, his appearance should be in
the clouds with power and great glory, Matt. 24.29, 30.
or with an Host and Splendour; and also agrees with the Opinion of the Jews,
That this his coming with the clouds of Heaven, was coming with the host of
heaven as 9 R. Saadias has it) is that 10 appearance in the clouds of
Chariots, and of Armed Men incompassing the City, and attended with the noise
of War. And whereas it is said, immediately after the tribulation of those
days, the Sun shall be darkened, Matt. 24.29.
and the Moon shall not give her light, and the Stars shall fall from Heaven,
and the powers of heaven shall be shaken, let it be noted, That these Words
intend not to declare unto us, what should happen after the desolation of
Jerusalem; as will appear, 1. From the Words ensuing, Matt. 24.33.
When you shall see these things come to pass, know that it is nigh, even at
the door. Secondly, From the encouragement that follows to the Christian: Mark
13.29.
When these things begin to come to pass, then look up, and lift up your heads,
for your redemption draws nigh. If this Redemption do not import the
Christians freedom from this present vengeance, and from those fiery
Persecutions which were raised against them, chiefly by the malice of the Jews,
it will be hard to know what it can signify, since all the Judgments which
befell the Heathen World, did not redeem the Christians from their Persecutions,
but were the causes of them, they being still ascribed by them unto the 11
anger of their gods against the Christians. And thirdly, Because the Prophet
Joel, who foretells the very same events, Joel 2.31.
That God would show wonders in the heavens, and on the earth; that the sun
should be turned into darkness, and the moon into blood, assures us, this was
to happen before the great and terrible day of the Lord; that is, before the
plenary Execution of Gods vengeance on the Jews, 1 Thessalonians. 2.16.
when wrath should come upon them to the uttermost. Now hence it follows, That
these Expressions must concern the Jewish Nation, and signify (by a 12
Prophetic Scheme, and sutably unto the manner of the 13 Eastern Nations) those
great and dreadful Judgments God had resolved to bring upon the Jewish Nation,
which would Eclipse their Sun and Moon, convert their glorious and shining
Days, into the days of darkness, and create as great a Terror to them, as if
these Prodigious Things had happened in the course of Nature.

The 14 (...), fearful Occurrences or Apparitions mentioned by St Luke, Luke
21.11.
may happily respect the flying open of the Temple doors; the Light that shone
about the Temple and the Altar before the multitude; the Conflagration, the
Voices of an unseen multitude crying out, Let us depart and quit this place,
Joseph. de bell. Jud. l. 7. c. 12.
and especially of one Jesus denouncing Woe continually unto the City, Temple,
and the People of Jerusalem; and many other Signs which did declare their
desolation, and by the wiser Jews were thought to signify it. Lastly, how
dreadfully the 15 Famine raged among them; how great and numerous the
Earthquakes were which happened about those Times, Josephus, 16 Grotius, and
other Authors will inform us.

Sixthly, That the Authors of this Desolation were the Roman Armies, led on by
Vespasian and his Son Titus; that the destruction of the City and the Temple,
happened within the space of 42 Years after our Lords Predictions, and so within
the compass of that Generation, it will be needless to evince by Testimony,
these being things attested by the general consent of Writers.

Seventhly, That the ruin of the Temple completely answered our Lords
Prediction, is evident from what 17 Josephus has recorded; viz. That Titus did
command his Soldiers to dig up the City, and the Temple; which was so fully
done, that they who saw it, judged it never would be built again; yea, the Jews
Talmud speaks the same, and Maim. Taanith. c. 5. Apud Josephum, l. 7. c. 7.
vocatur Terentius Rufus.
Maimon. gives the very Month and Day when Turnus Rufus, the Captain of the
Army left by Titus, did with a Plough-share tear up the Foundations of the
Temple, in order to the completion of the Prophecy, Ier. 26.18.
Sion shall be ploughed as a field. After all this, when Julian the Apostate
sent the Jews to build again the Temple, St 18 Cyril Bishop of Jerusalem did
confidently tell them, this Prophecy of Christ should be most signally
fulfilled by them, which came accordingly to pass; for Sozom. Hist. Eccles. l.
5. c. 22. (...).
they in preparation to their intended Temple, dug up, purged out, and took
away the Relics of the old Foundation: the work being thus begun, an
Earthquake comes, and casts up the remnants of it, and the adjacent
Buildings.

Eighthly, As for the greatness of the Judgment, 19 Josephus gives us an
account thereof, just parallel to that of Matthew, assuring us, 'Twas such as
never City suffered, nor ever City more deserved.

Ninthly, The 20 manner of the Siege was such as Scripture had foretold; for as
Josephus tells us, The Roman Army built a Wall 39 Furlongs in compass, and
having 13 Castles on it which did enclose the City. And here I cannot but
observe with him, (...). Joseph. Bell. Jud. l. 6. c. 13.
That they were instigated to the work by a Superior Power; and as if the same
Power had assisted them, 'twas built with an incredible celerity.

Tenthly, Gods Providence toward the Christians, and that Salvation he
vouchsafed to them, when the Confusion was spread upon their Enemies: Dr.
Hammond in Matt. 24. Not. G.
for when Gratus who besieged Jerusalem, had on a sudden (no other cause
appearing that could move him to it) raised the Siege, the Christians presently
did quit Jerusalem, 21 being admonished so to do by Revelation from Heaven, as
Eusebius tells us.

Lastly, For the continuance of this Desolation, not to dispute whether it
shall be perpetual, as many of the 22 Fathers taught and held; or whether the
Jews shall be converted and brought back unto Jerusalem, and have a Glorious
Appearance there; whether the times of the Gentiles will ever be fulfilled, and
God provoked by their Sins, will cast them off, and reassume the Jews into his
favor, as 23 H. Grotius thinks the Words may signify; or whether these Words
import the final desolation of the Temple, State, and People of Jerusalem (as
Dr. Lightfoot thinks,) vid. Harmony of the New Test. p. 195.
I say not to insist on this Dispute, it is sure the Jews have often in 24 vain
endeavored to rebuild it. Their last attempt was under Julian, who to convince
these Prophesies of Falsehood, (...). Sozom. l. 5. c. 21. Theodor. l. 3. c. 17.
gave them a Commission to rebuild the Temple; but the immediate hand of
Providence soon forced them to desist from that unhappy Enterprise. The Story
is very signal and remarkable for many Circumstances. As,

1. The Persons that relate it, who are many and very considerable Authors,
Gregory Nazianzen, (...). 2. Ambros. Ep. 29. ad Theodos. Chrysostom. orat. 3.
adv. Iud. Ruff. l. 1. c. 38, 39. Men that flourished in that very Age, and writ
when the attempt was fresh; and as Theodoret assures us, was frequent in the
mouth of every one: to omit Socrates, Theodoret, and Sozomen, who writ the
Story within the space of fifty Years after the thing was done. Ambitiosum
quoddam Templu^ apud Hierosolymam sumptibus immodicis instaurare cogitabat,
negotiumque matura^dum Alypio dederat Antiochensi; cum itaque rei idem fortiter
instaret Alypius, juvaretque Provinciae Rector, metuendi Globi flammarum prope
fundamenta crebris insultibus erumpentes, locum exustis aliquoties operantibus
inaccessum fecere, hocque modo Elemento obstinatius repellente cessavit
Inceptum. Am. Marcel. l. 23. ab initio. (...). B. p. 83.
Ammianus Marcellinus, a Heathen, who flourished in those very Times, gives us
the story thus, That Julian endeavored to rebuild the Temple of Jerusalem, and
gave it in charge to one Alypius of Antioch, assisted by the Rector of the
Province, and a vast Treasure from the Emperor to hasten and promote the Work;
which undertaking to perform, he was soon forced to desist from this his
Enterprise by Balls of Fire, which issuing from out of the Foundations, did
terrify and burn those Persons that were engaged in the Work. To this
Nazianzen, Chrysostom. Socrates, Sozom. and Theodoret, add, That an earthquake
did tear up even the relics of the Foundation.

Secondly, The Evidence of the thing is most unquestionable: Nazianzen tells
us, It was believed by the very 25 Atheist; Theodoret, That it was common in
the mouths of all Men; (...). H. Eccl. l. 2. c. 20. (...).
Socrates, That it was done in the presence of exceeding many, and that the
Fame thereof brought many far and near unto the Place. Sozomen assures us, That
it was a thing believed of all; and adds, That if to any it should seem
incredible, it would be attested by many yet living, both of them who were
present, and of them who received it from the Mouths of them who were present
at it.

Thirdly, The 26 Effect of it, in the Confession of the Jews, that Christ was
to be worshipped and adored. And secondly, In their Conversion to the Christian
Faith: For (...).
Sozomen and Nazianzen tells us, That many upon this occasion were added to the
Church, and were Baptized, and did endeavor by their Hymns and Supplications
to this Jesus, to appease his anger for their attempts against him.

Now to conclude, If this Relation be a Truth, it is an abundant confirmation of
the Christian Faith: If false, How came it to obtain so great and uncontrouled
Credit? How came it to be left on record by the Adversaries of Christianity,
and to force such clear Confessions from their mouths, and to be a means of
converting many of them to the Christian Faith? How great must be the Impudence
of those Historians, who durst so confidently relate a lie so gross and
palpable; and having done so, appeal unto so many Living Witnesses for
attestation of what the World must know to be a lie? and how prejudicial must
these Pretenses have been to the Christian Faith? These things considered, I
may conclude with that of our 27 Eusebius, He that does weigh these things,
must soon be forced to confess, and to admire the Truth and the Divinity of
Christ's Predictions: or in the Words of Nazianzen, (...). B. p. 83. (...). What
can the Wise men of the World object against such clear Predictions, and such
convincing Demonstrations of the Power of Christ?

ANNOTATIONS On the 7th Chapter. SECT. II.
THeir Doctors had concluded] Ideo moderni Judaei dicunt Messiam non venisse,
quia nondum viderunt eum venire in nubibus Coeli. Raymund, Pug. fid. p. 276.

2 Eusebius.] (...). Eccl. Hist. l. 2. c. 11.

3 Of an Aegyptian] (...). Eusebius. Hist. l. 2. c. 21.

4 Josephus ascribes their ruin to a lying Prophet] (...) (...). Joseph. de
Bello Judaico. l. 7. c. 11.

5 Their frequent Exorcisms by the invocation of the God of Jacob] Matt. 12.27.
(...). Just. Dial. cum Tryph. p. 311. vide Tertull. contra Marcionem.
Theophilum, l. 2. ad Autolyc. Orig. in Celsum. p. 185. vide Annot. in c. 1.
number. 4.

6 Their assertions that God gave power to his law name and attributes to heal
diseases] The Author of Sepher Ikkarim tells us, That the Attributes of God are
Instruments to which he has annexed a power (...) id est, That signs and
wonders should be done by them. Why is it that they who skill this art work
miracles? The reason is because the law is of divine Original. Auctor Neve
Shalom l. 5. c. 5.

7 These Instances Josephus gives] (...) (...). De Bello Jud. l. 7. c. 12.

8 That comet which appeared like a flaming sword] (...). Joseph. de Bello Jud.
l. 7. c. 12.

9 R. Saadias] Quod autem scribit Cum nubibus coeli, illi sunt Angeli de
exercitu coeli, haec erit maxima dignatio, quam conferet Deus Christo. In Dan.
7.

10 The Appearance in the clouds of chariots and of armed men] (...). Joseph.
ibid.

11 To the Anger of their Gods against the Christians] vide infra. Not. in c.
8. s. N. 19.

12 A Prophetic Scheme] See the like Esaiah 13.10. c. 24. v. 18.19.20.23. c.
34. v. 4. Jer. 4.23. Ezekiel. 32.7.8. Joel 2.10. Rev. 6.12.8.12.

13 And sutably to the manner of the Eastern Nations] Apud Arabes, de eo cui
singular aliquod infortunium accidit, dicitur, quod coelum ipsius in terram
conversum sit, vel super terram ejus ceciderit. Maimon. More Nevochim p. 265.
and again, Neque quemquam puto ita ignorantem, caecum, literaeque Parabolarum
and narrationum Historicarum vel Oratoriarum addictum esse, ut existimet
stellas, coelum, lucem Solis and Lunae, mutata esse, vel terram de centro suo
motam, quando destructum fuit regnum Babel: verum repraesentat nobis tota haec
narratio, statum and conditionem hominis victi, cui lux omnis atra, dulce
amarum, immo cui terra nimis angusta, and coelum ruinam minitari videtur: ib.
part. 2. c. 29. (...). Artemidorus Oneirocrit. l. 2. c. 36.

14 The (...) may respect the flying open etc.] Of which things we have the
testimony of Josephus. (...) (...). scilicet (...). De Bello Judaico l. 7. c.
12. etc. 11. Evenerant prodigia, visae per coelum concurrere acies, rutilantia
arma, and subito nubium igne collucere Templum, expassae repent delubri fores,
and audita major humana vox, excedere Deos, simul ingens motus excedentium.
Tacitus Hist. l. 5. p. 621.

15 Of the famine] see Josephus de Bello Iudaic. l. 7. c. 7.8.

16 Of the Earthquakes in diverse places] Grot. in Matt. 24. verse. 7.

17 From what Josephus has recorded] (...), and Paulo post, (...), de Bello
Jud. l. 7. c. 18. lin. 1. Gr.

18 S. Cyril Bishop of Ierusalem] (...), Socrat. Hist. Eccles. l. 2. c. 20.
Ruff. l. 10. c. 37. (...) (...). Socr. ibidem.

19 Of the greatness of the judgment Josephus gives account] (...).

20 The manner of the Siege.] (...), Joseph Bell. Iud. l. 6. c. 13.

21 They did quit Jerusalem being admonished from Heaven] (...). Eccles. Hist.
l. 3. c. 5. and Epiphanius de Ponderibus and Mensuris c. 15. (...).

22 Whether this desolation shall be perpetual as many of the Fathers held]
Origin. Annot. in Sh. 16. c. 17. (...), in Cells. l. 4. p. 174. Chrysostom. crat.
3. adv. Iudaeos. Dionysius Alexandrinae Ecclesiae Pontifex elegantem scribit
librum irridens mill annorum fabulam, instaurationem Templi etc. Hieron.
Proaemio ad l. 18. Com. in Esaiam.

23 As Hugo Grotius thinks.] (...). Intelligere licebit ^^mpora divinae
patientiae praestituta emendationi eorum qui ex Gentibus Christi nomen
professi, a disciplina Christi plurimum recesserunt; ut nimirum intelligamus
Deum irritatum a Gentibus, modo quodam novo atque extraordinario usurum in
convertendis adse Iudaeis, sicut ab Iudaeis irritatus, modo simili Gentes ad
obsequium suum pertraxit. In locum.

24 Says Chrysostom. (...), orat. 3. adv. Iudaeos.

25 That it was believed by the very Atheist] (...). Nazianz. (...). 2. p. 81.
(...). Sozom. l. 5. c. 21.

26 The effect of it the invocation of Christ.] (...). Nazianz. (...). 2. p. 85
Sozom. Hist. Eccl. l. 5. c. 21. Socr. Hist. Eccl. 21. c. 29.

27 Conclude with that of our Eusebius.] (...); Eccles. Hist. l. 3. c. 7.

CHAP. VIII.
SECT. I.
The Contents.
Evincing the truth of Christian Doctrine. 1. From the Miracles wrought by
Christ suitably to his Design, and to the Prophesies of the Old Testament, and
to the expectation of the Jews. These Miracles were many, mighty, and they had
most remarkable Effects upon the Hearers and Spectators of them. They were
avouched with greatest confidence by his Apostles, who by those means converted
thousands, and whose Records of these things became the rule of Faith unto the
Christian Converts. The confirmation of this from the Miracles wrought by
Christ's Apostles, who affirm, Christ gave commission to them whilst abiding
with them, to work the greatest Miracles, which they accordingly performed. And
that this Power was more abundantly conferred upon them after the Resurrection
of their Lord, is argued from the Promise of Christ; from the Confession of
Jews and Heathens; from the records of Scripture. Like wonders were performed
by Christians in all places of the World, and the same Power continued in the
Church for diverse Centuries. The confirmation of this second Argument. The
result of these Particulars.

FOURTHLY,

1. The Design on which our Savior came into the World: For it was requisite,
that he who came to baffle and pull down the Devils Kingdom, should show his
Power over those evil Spirits which upheld it. Needful it was, that he who
taught the World to slight and to detest those Heathen Deities, which had so
long obtained in the World, and had confirmed it in their service by seeming
Miracles, vid. Not. in cap. 9. number. 5, 6, 7, 8.
Predictions, gifts of Healing, and the like, should by more powerful works
convince the World he was more worthy of their Adoration. And it was also
requisite, that he who gave it out that he came down from God to manifest the
will of heaven to the world, should by unquestionable signs of Gods assistance,
prove the truth of his Commission from him. And lastly, It was requisite, that
he who came to null that Law of Moses which was established, or by the Jews
conceived to be established by many Miracles, should give a greater proof of
his Commission from the God of Heaven, then were the Miracles of Moses.

Secondly, This will be farther evident, if we consider that the Jews expected
great and many Miracles from their Messiah. They tell us, Midrash Coheleth, in
Eccles. 1.11.
that the Miracles of Moses should not be remembered, by reason of those greater
Miracles which their Messiah should perform: That the signs of the Messiah
should be (...) substance, vid. Raymund, Pugfid. p. 610.
whereas the signs of the departure out of Egypt, compared with them, should
be only accidents. And this their Expectation was grounded upon these
Predictions of their Prophets, that their Messiah should make the blind to
see, the deaf to hear, Isaiah 35.6.
the dumb to speak, the lame to walk.

Thirdly, The Jews and Heathens did in effect confess, that sutably to these
Predictions of the Prophets, and to the expectation of the Jews, they did work
Miracles. For to ascribe them to 1 Shem Hamporash, or to the Arts of 2 Magic,
as Jews and Heathens did, is to confess that they were done by Christ; since
nothing but the evidence of Fact could tempt his most malicious Enemies to use
such slight Evasions, and to confess, as did the Pharisees and the Chief
Priests, that Christ did Miracles so many, and so powerful, that if he had been
let alone, Joh. 11.48.
all men would have believed on him. The wiser Heathens, as 3 Celsus, 4
Porphyry, 5 Hierocles, and 6 Julian, confessed the thing. 7 Pilate, who lived
upon the place where his Disciples tell us that all his Miracles were done, and
who passed Sentence on him, gave such a large account to Tiberius, both of the
Wonders of his Life, and Death, and Resurrection, as made the Emperor 8 propose
him to the Senate, as one fit to be admitted among the Roman Gods. And this
account the Christians frequently appealed to, and sent the Romans to their own
Archives to be convinced of its truth. Others conclude, that he did his Wonders
by that Art of Magic which he had learned from the 9 Egyptians, vid. Annot.
in cap. 9.1.
and think it is sufficient to oppose against him an 10 Apollonius, or an
Apuleius, as Men of equal Fame for working Wonders: which, had the truth of
what the Christian Records do affirm concerning them been questionable, they
could have had no reason, and no temptation to have done, it being sufficient
for their purpose to have questioned, or disproved what was delivered by those
Records.

But fourthly, His Apostles do affirm his Miracles were very many, and done in
many places: They tell us, that he compassed all Matt. 4.24. and 18.16. and
9.35.
Galilee, and all the cities and villages of Judea, preaching the Gospel of the
Kingdom, and healing all diseases, and all sicknesses among the people. He Mat.
12.15. and 15.30. and 19.2.
healed many that were sick of diverse maladies. All the diseased throughout
Syria. Great multitudes, yea all that could be Luke 4.40.
brought unto him. He Mark 1.34.
cast out many devils, and Matt. 8.16.
healed all that were possessed of the devil: And then they add, that there
were many other John 20.30.
signs which Jesus did, which were not written by them. From which compendious
Repetition of them, we may well infer his Miracles were more than they were
able to recount particularly, or more than they thought needful so to do.

Fifthly, The same Apostles tell us, they were mighty deeds, for he rebuked the
winds, and g quelled the ragings of the sea, and Matt. 8.26. and 14.25.
walked upon it. He Mark 6.42.
satisfied 5000 with two loaves and with five little fishes; he gave sight unto
the blind, and life unto the dead; he cast out devils, and knew the secrets of
the heart: He wrought his Miracles by inconsiderable means, Matt. 8.3, 16. Mark
8.7, 13. Joh. 4.50.
for he cast out the evil spirits, and healed diseases with a word; or by such
means as were as insufficient by any natural Virtue to produce the Cure. He
raised the dead only by touching of the Bier on which they lay, Luke 7.14, 15,
16. and 18.54. John 11.43, 45.
or taking of them by the hand: His word made Lazarus come forth, though bound
with Grave-cloathes, and his Word made the Figtree wither.

Lastly, The Wonders of his Death were as remarkable, as were the Actions of
his Life; For then the Heavens were overspread with darkness, Matt. 27.49, 52.
the Temple vail was rent, the Earth trembled, the Rocks rent, the Graves
opened, many dead Bodies did arise, and show themselves to many living in the
holy City: which when the People saw, some of them being forced by remorse of
Conscience, Luke 23.47.
smote upon their breasts, and said of Christ, Truly this was the Son of God,
this was a just and upright man: and so notorious were these things, that
Heathens have recorded them.

But sixthly, His Apostles tell us, That he performed these things in public;
and in the presence of the Pharisees, Luke 5.17. and 6.17. and 18.19. Matt.
14.35, 36.
and Doctors of the Law of every Town of Galilee, Judea and Jerusalem, and from
the Seacoast of Tire and Sidon, which came to hear him, and to be healed of
their diseases. That he did nothing privately, but in the Synagogues and
Temples, John 18.20, 21.
where his Accusers were still present.

And seventhly, they affirm, That these his Miracles had most remarkable
Effects upon the Hearers and Spectators, even the most perverse and spiteful of
them: Both Pharisees and Lawyers throughout Judea, Jerusalem, Luke 5.17, 26.
and Galilee, when their eyes saw the Power of God so efficacious to heal the
sick, were struck with fear and ecstasy, and forced to cry out, We have seen
(...), strange and unheard of Miracles, Mark 2.12. Luke 19.37. John 3.2.
such as we never saw before, and such as only God could do; whence they so
freely owned Gods power in them, and gave him the glory. The Multitude cry out
with much astonishment, He has done all things well, Mark 7.37.
he makes both the deaf to hear, and dumb to speak. When they beheld his Power
over evil Spirits, they were amazed, saying, Luke 4.36, 37.
What a word is this? for with authority he commands the unclean spirits, and
they come forth. Upon all these accounts, Mark 1.28. John 2.23.
his fame was spread throughout the Regions round about; and many who had seen
his Miracles believed on him, concluding from the wonders he performed that God
had visited his people, Luc. 7.16. Mat. 21.11. Joh. 3.1.
that a Great Prophet was risen up among them, and that this Prophet was one
sent from God, and one assisted by his power, that he was the Son of David the
true Messiah, Joh. 4.29.6.14.
the Shilo that was for to come. And generally they expressed their confidence
and full conviction of his power to work the greatest Miracles. The Leaper
says unto him if thou will thou can make me clean. Mat. 8.2. v. 8.
The Centurion, speak but the word only, and my Servant shall be healed. The
Ruler of the Synogogue, come and lay thy hands one my Daughter, Mat. 9.18, 21.
and she shall live. The Diseased woman, if I may but touch his Garment I shall
be whole. The people of Gennesereth, as soon as he was entered into their
coasts, run through the Regions round about, Mat. 14.35, 36. Mark. 6.56.
and carry out in Beds those that were sick to all places where he was. And
whithersoever he entered into Villages, or Cities, or Countries, they laid the
sick in the Streets, and besought that they might touch if it were but the
border of his Garment, and upon all occasions the multitude are flocking after
him.

8ly His Apostles did avouch with greatest confidence, that what they thus
ascribed to their Master, were things notorious to the Jew, and what their
consciences bore witness to, and by these sayings they converted those that
heard them. Thus in that Sermon of Saint Peter's which added to the Church 3000
souls Jesus of Nazareth is said to be a man demonstrated to be the Christ by
signs and wonders, Act. 2.22.
and powerful operations done in the midst of those to whom he spoke, for which
he presently appeals unto their consciences in these words This you also know.
In another Sermon preached to Cornelius and his Friends he speaks thus You know
(...) the thing done throughout all Judea viz. how Jesus of Nazareth, Act.
10.36, 37.
whom God anointed with the Holy Ghost and with power, went about doing good,
and healing all that were oppressed with the Devil, for God was with him.

Now all these things, had they not been beyond the possibility of just
exception, are such as could not be delivered in those ages, and by those
persons, by whom pretended to be done, and presently obtain upon the Faith of
thousands at a bare relation, and engage so many of that very Nation, besides a
world of Gentile Converts, to seal the truth of things so hard to be believed,
and harder to be done with their hearts dearest blood; and rather suffer all
that malice could invent, than disbelieve them. Impossible it is, that men
pretending that the miraculous operations of Jesus were so many that should
they all be written the world would scarce be able to contain the Records. Job.
21.15.
That he went about among them doing Good, and healing all that were possessed
of the Devil, and all that were afflicted with any manner of Disease. That he
did this often in the presence of the greatest multitudes as well of Pharisees
and Doctors of the Law as of the ruder sort; and commonly upon their persons.
That by these actions he astonished and amazed his adversaries, and forced
them, notwithstanding all that prejudice they had against him, to own him for a
Prophet and one sent from God, and made them throng and strive to touch him,
and upon all occasions bring the diseased for cure to him; and that even
Gentiles did confess the thing. I say impossible it is, that men declaring that
these things were acted and experimented, in the places where those persons
lived who embraced this Doctrine, and for whom those Gospels were indicted which
contained, these things, should by such Gross untruths prevail upon these
persons, to embrace that story, which told these Barefaced lies, for a divine
unerring History, fit to be sealed with their Blood. In a word let it be
considered (whether any person can imagine this to be the likely'st way to gain
a reputation in the World? Or whether any reasonable man can think it fit to
suffer death, in attestation of such things, which all his neighbors must know
to be untruths, or whether he were like to gain belief by doing so. And 2ly
whether a story of like nature, pretended by 12 Quakers to be done in England
by one James Nailer, or the like, were likely to prevail upon one single
person, not to say the Nation, or the whole world of Christians, to desert that
Faith they own at present, and embrace another which condemns and vilifies it,
and casts reproach upon the Nation.

Moreover these Disciples tell us, that Christ, whilst he continued upon Earth,
gave them commission, to heal all manner of diseases, Mat. 10.1.8.
and to cast out Devils, and to raise the Dead, and triumph over all the power
of the enemy assuring them, that neither serpent nor any other thing should
hurt them. Luc. 10.19. Luc. 9.6. Luc. 10.17, 18. Marc. 6.13.
And they accordingly did preach the Gospel, healing every where, casting out
many Devils, and making Satan fall as quick as lightening from the Heavens,
rejoicing that evil spirits were made subject to them, anointing many with oil
and healing them.

And that this Power was more abundantly conferred upon Them, and upon their
Converts, when their Lord had left this world, has been sufficiently showed in
the foregoing chapter, and may more fully be evinced by these considerations.

1. That they have left on record in the Books they published and committed to
their new converts as the Rule of Faith, and which were owned by many thousands
as Divine, Christ's Promise, that his power should miraculously assist his
Church, that his Spirit should be conferred upon as many as the Lord should
call; and this by virtue of a promise which he stood obliged to fulfill, by
pouring his Spirit on all flesh, to make their Sons and Daughters prophecy,
their young men to see visions, and their old men to dream Dreams; They gave it
out that Christ assured them, (...). Chrysostom. Tom. 5. Orat. 2. in Bab. p. 442.
they should out do those many miracles which He himself had wrought; Ioh.
14.12. which was a promise of so strange a nature, that never any person did
pretend the like, nor could it be fulfilled, according unto what these Records
have delivered, without the greatest demonstration of Christ's power, or fail of
being so, without the ruin of that faith which he had planted, and the
rejection of those Histories, which spoke of its exact completion. But let it
be considered,

2ly That Jews and Heathens, their most malicious and subtle enemies, confess
the thing. Act. 4.16.
That indeed a notable miracle has been done by them, is manifest to all them
that dwell at Jerusalem, and we cannot deny it, say the High Priest and Rulers
of the Jews. The Heathens tell us, that they were the greatest 11 Juglers, and
had 12 received from our Savior Books which did instruct them in these arts,
and made them able to derive the cheat unto their followers. Nay they 13
acknowledge that at their very Sepulchers were many wonders done.

3ly Agreably to these predictions and confessions, we are told in the
forementioned Records, that God confirmed the word of his Grace, Act. 14.3.
(...), Act. 19.11. (...) Act. 8.13. Act. 4.23. Act. 9.40.20.10.
by doing signs and wonders by the Apostles hands: and that these Miracles were
not mean ordinary things, but mighty, that with great power gave the Apostles
witness to the Resurrection, and that great grace was upon them all. The dead
were raised by them; Tabitha by Peter, and Eutychus by Paul: and Irenaeus tells
us, that in his time by the prayers and fastings of the Church, the dead were
frequently restored to life. (...) Iren. l. 2. c. 56. etc. 57. (...).
Heretics (says he) for all their boast of miracles, they cannot raise the
dead, as Christ and his Apostles did, and as many of the Brotherhood when the
necessities of the Church required it, have by their prayers and fastings often
done. Their miracles were wrought at distance, and by unlikely and
inconsiderable means; by Handkercheifs and Napkins, which obtained this virtue
of doing mighty cures, only by being sent from an Apostles hand. (...),
Chrysostom.
St Peter's shadow healed all that were afflicted with evil Spirits, throughout
all Jerusalem, and all the Cities round about it. Their very Sepulchers were
instrumental to the working of so many and such apparent Miracles, that as
their Enemies were forced to confess them, so Christians did often 14 plead
them with the greatest confidence: they were such as conquered and amazed the
Conjurer, Acts 19.18, 19.
such as prevailed with the Magicians to burn their Books, and make confession
of their Practices, and own that Doctrine, (though with the hazard of their
Lives) which pronounced them guilty of contracting with the Prince of darkness.

3ly, These Wonders were performed by Christians, throughout all places of the
World, in which the Gospel did obtain and flourish: St Paul assures us, that
from Jerusalem, Romans 15.19.
and round about unto Illyricum, the Gospel had been preached by him with
mighty signs and wonders, and by the power of the Holy Ghost; and both the
reason and the necessity of the thing assure us, that what was done by him,
must be done also by the rest of the Apostles, and especially by those, who
were preferred above him by the Church of Corinth and Galatia. The Records of
the Churches, and the Apologies of Christians, writ from each corner of the
World; the Conversion of so many by the Apostles Preaching, in every quarter of
it; Joel 2.28.
the Promise of the Holy Spirit to be poured out upon all flesh, Acts 2.29.
and given to as many as the Lord should call: all these, and many other
Circumstances, confirm us in the Truth of this Particular.

Fourthly, This Power of working Miracles, was still retained in the World for
diverse Centuries. For the Apologies and Records of the Christians in their
respective Ages, still avouch and plead them against the Heretic, the Jew, the
Heathen, for confirmation of their Faith. Irenaeus writing against the
Gnostics, Carpocratians, and Valentinians, asserts, That if they truly did
what they pretended only, yet was it not to be compared with the Miracles of
Christ and his Disciples. And then he adds, (...). Iren. l. 2. cap. 57.
It is impossible to reckon up all the miraculous Gifts which the Church
throughout the World receives, and exercises to the benefit of the Heathens.
Origin in commendation of the Christian Faith above the Jews Pretensions, tells
them, That (...). Orig. in Celsum. l. 2. p. 62.
since the coming of a Savior, they were left destitute of all the signs of
Gods especial Presence with them; they had no Prophets, nor any Wonders done
amongst them: whereas the Christians were plentifully endowed with these Gifts
of Miracles and Prophecy. Quanti honesti viri (de vulgaribus enim non dicimus)
aut a Daemoniis, aut valetudi nibus remediati sunt? quando non Geniculationibus
and Jejunationibus nostris etiam siccitates sunt depulsae. Tertul. ad Scap. c.
4.
How many Men of reputation, (for we speak not of the vulgar sort) have been
freed from Devils by us? when is it that our Prayers and Fastings do not cause
their dearths to cease? So Tertullian. Of this miraculous Power, the second and
third Ages give us instances innumerable: Of its continuance in the fourth
Century, Eusebius and 15 Cyril, Theodoret and 16 Augustine, are sufficient
Witnesses. If therefore these were matters, which the Jews and Heathens, who
persecuted Christ and his Disciples, do confess; if Christians of all places,
through diverse Ages of the World, pretended and appealed to them, using no
other method to convince the World: If their Apologies and Disputations with
their Adversaries, which were so mightily prevailing, did bottom on the truth
of these Particulars; and if those Writings which contained them, were
universally acknowledged as Divine, and absolutely true, then must the Miracles
recorded in them be Divine, and such as they are held to be by Christians.
Besides, the Apostle Paul assures the Church of Rome, Romans 15.15, 18, 19.
he would not speak of any thing which Christ had not performed by him: and yet
he adds, 2 Cor. 11.6. and 12.12.
That he could glory of the grace given to him, to make the Gentiles obedient
by word and deed, through mighty signs and wonders by the power of the Spirit
of God: And to the Church of Corinth he writes thus, That he had given them
full proof of his Apostleship; that he had fully been made manifest among them
in all things; that he did not come behind the very chief of the Apostles.
Which is sufficient to evince, that not St Paul alone, but others of the
Apostles, were eminent for working Wonders. Now to imagine, that what St Paul
in these Epistles thus asserted, was a lie, is to conclude him not only a vile
wicked Person, but an unreflecting Idiot, who in those Letters he endited, to
arm his Converts against false Disciples, (who sought to blast his Mission and
Apostleship,) should go about to stablish and confirm it to them, by what they
could not choose but know to be a lie. This is, as if a Mountebank in
commendation of his Balsomes, should pretend that he had wrought great Cures
upon many Persons present, and before his Eyes, who all were ready to attest,
that they were ignorant of any benefit received by him. But now his Education
at Gamaliels Feet, his Apologies for himself, and his Epistles to his Christian
Converts; his Disputations with the Jews, and mighty Power to convince the
Gentiles, are Arguments sufficient that he was no Idiot, nor could be guilty of
so great a folly.

Now to conclude: These Miracles thus done, are a most pregnant confirmation of
our Saviors Mission, and of the Truth of Christian Doctrine. For be it so, that
Providence could assist such vile Impostors, (as Christ and his Apostles are
esteemed by Infidels) to back and to confirm their Cheat, with Miracles so
great, so many, and of such long continuance, the like to which were never
done, nor any thing that can deserve to be recorded with them, and give in no
immediate internal Evidence of the Imposture, we must stand bound both by the
Laws of God and Nature, to believe and do as they require, as having no
sufficient reason to conclude their Message false, but the most powerful
Motives to believe it true.

ANNOTATIONS On the 8th Chapter. SECT. I.
1 SHem Hamphorash] The Jews confess that Christ by virtue of this name did
raise the dead, and walk upon the Sea, and cure the Lame, and cleanse the
Lepers. vide Raymund. Pug. fid. 290.

2 The Jews expected miracles from their Messiah] The Messiah shall be exalted
more then Abraham, more then Moses, more then the ministering Angels. Beresch.
Rabba sup. Genesis 28.10. See Annot. in Chap. 7. Sect. 1. number. 8.

2 To the arts of Magick] Solent Judaei (...). Orig. in Celsum. Which also
Celsus did. (...). Orig. adv. Celsum p. 7. vide p. 30. vide Lactant. l. 4. c.
13. Eusebius. demonstr. Evang. l. 3. c. 3.8. August. de verbis Petri sermon. 9.

5 Hierocles] (...) (...). Apud Eusebius. contra Hieroclem p. 512.

6 Julian] who tells us Christ did (...). Apud Cyrill. Alexandr. l. 6.

7 Pilate gave such a large account] That there were such acts of Pilate
appears, 1. From those false Acts the Heathens made containing (...). Eusebius.
Hist. Eccles. l. 9. c. 5.7. 2ly From the appeal of Heretics to them, (...).
Epiph. de Quartadecimanis. That these acts were such as did confirm the
Christian Faith is evident from those Passages of the Fathers which appeal unto
them for this end: (...). Just. Mart. Apol. 2. p. 84. Ea omnia (sc. quae de
Christi miraculis, morte, resurrectione, ascensu in coelum enuntiant Evangelia)
Pilatus, and ipse pro sua conscientia Christianus, Caesari tunc Tiberio
nuntiavit. Tertull. Apol. c. 21.

8 Tiberius proposed him to the Senate] Tiberius cujus tempore nomen
Christianum in saeculum introivit, annuntiata sibi ex Syria Palaestina, quae
veritatem illius divinitatis revelaverant, retulit ad Senatum cum praerogativa
suffragii sui; Senatus quia non ipse probaverat respuit; Caesar in sententia
mansit, comminatus periculum accusatoribus Christianorum. Tertull. Apol. c. 5.

9 Others say he did his wonders by those arts which he had learned from the
Aegyptians] Magus fuit, clandestinis artibus omnia illa perfecit, Aegyptiorum
ex adytis Angelorum potentium nomina, and remotas furatus est disciplinas.
Ethnicus apud Arnob. p. 25. (...). Orig. adv. Celsum p. 30.

9 The Jew and Gentile though frequent and expert Magicians] Of the Jews their
Talmud tells us that the great Sanhedrim was skild in Magic, tract. Sanhed. c.
Dine Mammonoth. (...) (...). Chrysostom. contra Judaeos sermon 5. p. 360. 361.
Et rursus (...). Vide Cochum in duos tit. Talm. p. 18. Joseph. Antiq. Jud. l.
20. c. 6. Annot. in c. 1. n. 1. The Heathens] Circa Deos ac Religiones
negligentior, quippe addictus Mathematicae, persuasionisque plenus cuncta fato
agi. Sueton. de Tiberio. c. 69. Quin and facto per Magos sacro evocare Manes,
and exorare tentavit Nero. Idem c. 34. vide Plin. l. 30. c. 11.

10 So notorious that Heathens have recorded them] (...). Phlegon. l. 13.
Olymp. (...). African. vide Eusebius. Chronicon. ad An. 2040. Tertull. Apol. c.
21. Orig. tract. 35. in Mat. and p. 80. adv. Cells.

11 The Heathens tell us that Christ's Disciples out did all others in the art
of Jugling] (...) habemus apud Julianum. vide Cyril. Alex. l. 3. p. 100. (...).
Orig. adv. Celsum p. 7. (...). Hieroc. de Apostolis apud Eusebius. contra Hier. p.
514.

12 And that they had received from our Savior books and instructions in that
art] Celsus affirms he saw (...), apud Orig. p. 302. who thus replys (...).
Ibid. (...). Julian. de Apostolis apud Cyrill. Alex. l. 10.

13 They acknowledge that at their Sepulchers were wonders wrought] Responde
quomodo in vilissimo pulvere, and favilla nescio qua, tanta sit signorum
virtutumque praesentia, nisi forte in morem Gentilium Impiorumque, Porphyrii
and Eunomii has praestigias daemonum esse dicas. Hieron. adv. Vigilant.

14 And Christians confidently appealed unto them] (...). in Iulianum p. 36.

15 Cyrill.] (...). Cyrill. Alex. contra Iul. l. 6. p. 202.

16 August.] Etiam nunc fiunt miracula ejus nomine. Et rursus. Fiunt ergo etiam
nunc multa miracula, eodem Deo faciente per quos vult, qui and illa quae
legimus fecit. August. de Civitate Dei l. 22. c. 8. vide Theodor de cur. Gr.
affecta. Eusebius. contra Hieroc. c. 1. p. 514.

CHAP. VIII. SECT. II.
The Contents.
PRoving the Truth of Christian Doctrine from the speedy Propagation of it
through the World,

. 1. THIRDLY, The Powerful Assistance of the Holy Spirit, was manifested in the
effectual and speedy Propagation of the Christian Faith. For it is not to be
conceived how such a Doctrine, as this was, should be so wonderfully
propagated, without the special Help of God. A Doctrine so 1 new and therefore
so Reproached and Vilified, so necessary, as it was pretended, for the
promoting of Gods Glory, and for the Good of Man, that no Salvation was to be
expected from any other Name but that of Jesus; Act. 4.12.
and yet reserved for the 2 last of times, and the declining Ages of the World;
A Doctrine so inconsistent with, and so 3 destructive of all other ways of
Worship; and whose Professors, as many of them as came out of Heathenisme, were
obliged to look upon the Heathen World, upon their former selves, and the whole
Race of their Progenitors, 1 These. 1.9. Ephesians. 2.12. 1 Cor. 10 20.
as the most vile Idolaters; and such as hitherto had lived without God and
without Hope; yea were obliged to detest as Devils those whom they had hitherto
adored as Gods; A doctrine so 4 incredible in its Author, in his Birth from a 5
Virgin, and the Obscureness of his Parentage; in the 6 Meanness of his outward
Condition, and in his Reception and Usage by the Governing part of the world,
in all those circumstances which are most considered by the Generality of
Mankind. For he was contemned, opposed, reviled, whipped and 7 condemned as the
Worst of Malefactors by the Chief Priests, and Scribes, and Rulers of the
People; by the Rabbis, who were held to be the wisest, and the Pharisees who
went for the Holy Men of his Nation; he seemed to be, and confessed he was one
8 deserted by that God whom he presumed to call his Father, and whose Message
he pretended to deliver. He that had taken upon him to be the Sav our of the
World, could not save himself from the Greatest Miseries that can be suffered
in this Life; nor at last from a Painful and Accursed death. This it was which
so disparaged his Doctrine both to Jews and Gentiles, that to one it is said to
have been a stumbling block, 1 Co. 1.23.
and the other looked upon it as foolishness; A Doctrine so incredible in that
Article, which is alleged to make amends for the Scandal of the former, and,
which is indeed the Basis of the Christians Hope; viz. The 9 Resurrection of
Christ from the dead, as a pledge and earnest of a future Resurrection for all
them that believe in him: A Doctrine so infamous for those horrid things that
are charged upon the Sectators of it both by Jews and Gentiles; who made them
Guilty of 10 Atheism, 11 Rebellion, Sacrilege, 12 Incest, Murder,
Anthropophagy, the 13 Worship of the Clouds, and of an 14 Asses head, and of
the 15 Secrets of the Priests; which foul defamations that they might Spread
the more effectually, and with the better show of Truth, they forced some
Slaves and 16 Silly Women by torments to confess them; and formed 17
Supposititious acts of Pilate, filled with the vilest Blasphemies, and Impious
Revilings of Christianity, and caused them to be learnt by Children, the more
assuredly to print an hatred of it on their Spirits, and cause them upon those
Accounts to 18 quit the Christians company. A Doctrine so pernicious,
Infructuosi in negotiis dicimur. Tertul. ap. c. 42.
as to make every Christian an unprofitable member of the Commonwealth; and
their Religion so hateful, as to be deemed the 19 Rise of all those Miseries,
which afterward perplexed the Roman Empire; Whose sudden 20 Ruin it pretended
to foretell, 21 the pleasure of whose Senate it controuled, and whose 22 Gods so
vigilant, to preserve and extend its bounds farther then the Sea washes, or the
Sun shines, Vltra solis vias and ipsius Ocedni limits. apud Minut.
(as Octavius says of them) it traduced as Devils or dead men; and by such
vile affronts made them, as their Worshippers imagined, to 23 withdraw their
kindness, and forget their wonted Love to that Empire; A Doctrine so repugnant
to every Sect of Philosophers, in those opinions for which they most eagerly
contended; to the Epicurean's conceit of an idle and unconcerned Diety, to the
Academicks Scepticisme, the 24 Platonists Demons, 25 and community of Wives; to
the 26 Pythagoreans (...), the Peripateticks conceits of a God shut up in
Heaven, and of a World that has been from Eternity; to the Stoics opinions of
a Corporeal God subject to the Laws of Fate, and of every man's Power over his
own Life to destroy it when he pleases. Again, it is a Doctrine professedly
opposite to the 27 Decrees of Emperors against Witchcraft, 28 Conjurations, 34
Unlawful Conventicles, night meetings, and against the 29 Introduction of new
ways of Worship; and what they styled Rebellion, Sacrilege, irreligion. A
Doctrine which call's for Self-denial, Love of enemies, a life of Highest
Purity, and separation from the Pleasures, and the Enjoyments of the World; and
for a willingness to bear the Cross, and suffer all the Miseries of Life, and
cruel Death if there be occasion, and this only in hopes of future blessings
from a crucified Jesus. A Doctrine which did thwart the Principles of
Education, the Passions, Humors, and Affections, the Inclinations, Customs,
Prescriptions, and Superstitions of the World; and that Habitual Corruption
which had so long orespread it, and therefore rendered the Practice of it as
difficult as the Belief. A Doctrine which for these causes was so violently
contradicted both by the 30 Zeal, and malice of the Jew, 1 Cor. 1.19. 3, 19.
Romans 1, 12.
and the Philosophy of the Gentile, which it condemned as Folly, and its
Authors as the worst of fools; and by the Sword of Emperors, still glutted
with the blood of Christians; and by the Rhetoricians Topics of persuasion,
and all the Machinations both of men and Devils: I say it is not to be
conceived, that such a Doctrine should by the means of Simple and Illiterate
men, subject to many thousand miseries, 31 and destitute not only of that
Eloquence which was so taking in those days, but of all visible protection, and
apparent kindness from that Jesus for whom they di pretend to suffer; and void
of all that might commend them to the World, or which might fit them either to
instruct their Proselytes, or to confound their Adversaries: I say, that such a
Doctrine should, by the means of Persons so unqualified, spring forth and shoot
like lightning from the East unto the West, cancel the Ceremonies of the Jew,
confound the Scepticisme, and baffle all the Wisdom of the Creeks, that it
should instruct the Rudeness of Barbarians in the sublimest Mysteries, and
change their Savage Customs unto the Christian Charity and Humility; that it
should suddenly usurp the name of 32 (...) or the Prevailing Doctrine, as
Porphyry and others call it; that it should shackle even the Prince of
Darkness, and make his Kingdom fall more quick than lightning from the skies;
that it should subdue by sufferings, and make the Scepter stoop and bow to the
Cross; that it should 33 Conquer the most part of the civilized World, in
lesser time than others take to travel over it; A world of so riveted by Laws,
and Customs, and so enslaved by mulcts and penalties, to its Ancient, and
therefore Venerable Superstitions; so enthralled to the Vassallage of Satan, and
Overgrown in wickedness, and so impatient of disturbance; I say, that such a
Doctrine should convert such a World, by such unlikely means, having no
heavenly Power engaged to assist it, but rather to confound it, if our
adversaries say true; and having no other thing to be alleged by its
Assertors, but the assistance or the holy Ghost, and the performance of their
Saviors promise, that he would be with them, and Give a mouth and wisdom to
them which all their Adversaries should not be able to Gainsay; this of all
matters of this nature must be most incredible, and is no less then a very
Prodigy of Prodigies.

. 2. THIS Argument depends on these Principles, which are confirmed to us by
Reason and Experience.

1. That the stronger the prejudice is, the stronger must that power be which
overcomes it.

2ly, That a new Doctrine, which stands obnoxious to Great and many prejudices
both of the Judgment and affections, and which contains many things, that seem
to render it incredible to the one, and many more which render it unpleasant to
the other; and also suffers disadvantage both from the infamy, and rudeness of
its propagators, is most unlikely to prevail upon the World, in opposition to
all other Doctrines.

3ly, That men are not easily induced to reject those Principles, which they
received from their Education, but still are backward to admit new Faith, and
to confess their Errors, and condemn themselves, and pass hard Sentences upon
the state of their beloved Friends, and their Relations, and their Ancestors.

4ly, That men are naturally wedded to their Lusts, and bear a passionate
affection to the pleasures and enjoyments of the World; and therefore that
which suddenly prevails upon them, to Renounce them all, must be of Greater
Power, and of more prevailing Efficacy, than the Temptations of the World.

5ly, That as any distemper is more dangerous and more rooted and inveterate,
so the nature of it is the more Malignant, and so much the ^^onger and more
efficacious must that Power be which effects its cure.

6ly, That it is not easy to prevail upon the World to quit a present and
important Interest, only in hopes of future Good, to or expose themselves to
the worst of sufferings in confirmation and pursuance of those Hopes, without
the most concluding Grounds of hope, much less in contradiction to them.

7ly, That men of the lowest Birth and Education, and such as were Great
Sufferers both in their Reputation and their Persons, and thereforeseem to be
deserted by that God they owned, were men unlikely to prevail upon the Wise,
and the inquisitive Philosophers, who examine things by Reason; upon Princes,
and Statesmen that consider their Interest; upon the Magician and Sorcerer, the
Merchant and the Tradesman, who measure things by their advantage and profit;
upon the Giddy and inconstant multitude, which is led by the sense and custom
and opinion of Persons; upon the soft and tender Sex, the passionate and heady
Youth the infirm and feeble Age; upon Persons of all sorts and conditions
whatsoever, to quit their Religion, and their habitual Lusts, their Worldly
Interests, and their alluring Pleasures, and their espoused Tenets; much more
their Livers and Dearer Relatives, and to expose themselves unto those evils,
which are most contrary to the desires of humane nature, and to the designs of
mere natural men.

Lastly, That when the Greatest Potentates and Princes edged with the keenest
malice, and assisted by the Arts of Wit and Policy, Learning and Eloquence, and
driving on professed designs to ruin, and extirpate such inconsiderable men,
whose faith enjoined them to endure all afflictions without the least
disturbance of the Civil Government, or opposition to their Cruel and tyrannous
Governors: I say when Persons of so Great ability and wisdom, by all their
subtilty and power, and all their other arts engaged against them, only
increased the number of those men, whose utter extirpationthey intendedand
pursued; it is rational to conclude, as they affirmed, that a more powerful hand
was on their side, and that God had choosen the foolish things of the World to
confound the Wise, and weak things to confound the mighty.

. 3ly, IN confirmation of this Argument, it may deserve to be considered, that
albeit the wisdom of the Heathe Philosohers had nothing in it that seemed to
thwart the reason, or the affections and inclinations of mankind; albeit their
divinity did not reproach what their Forefathers owned; but was consistent with
all those modes of worship which had obtained in every country; albeit it met
with nothing to oppose and persecute the first Abettors and the Promoters of
it; but was encouraged by Kings and Princes, and had all the advantages of art
and Rhetoric to set it off; and the engagements of the smooothest pens, and
subtlest heads to recommend it to the World; yet could it not present the world
with any thing so well accommodated unto our natural apprehensions, or any
thing so worthy of a Deity, and so entirely fitted to the Good and welfare of
mankind, as are the Christians Faith and Precepts; nor yet obtain and spread it
self in many hundred years, through any places of those Barbarous Nations, in
which the Gospel flourished in the Apostles days; but in its flourishing
condition was confined to Greece and Italy; where it did either vanish of its
own accord, or else concluded in Scepticisme, or was ecclipsed by the
appearance of the Gospel light: and whilst it did continue, it is apparent from
the compliants, confessions, and from the declarations of their Greatest Sages,
as well as Christian Writers, how ineffectual it was to work a reformation on
the world, how few of those who were the Greatest masters of it, live according
unto what they writ, how rare a thing it was to find a Polemo or Phaedon, Vid.
Orig. in Cells. l. 3. page 152
or any other person, whose reformation it had wrought. Since then the
Christian Doctrine, though stripped of all those fair advantages, which might
commend it to the world, and clogged with all the prejudices forementioned, did
in the space of forty years make such a large diffusion of it self through
many places, where scarce the name of a Philosopher was known; and since it
wrought so admirable a change and reformation in the customs, lives, and
manners, laws, and conceptions of so many millions; it may be rationally
thought to be derived from that superior Power to which all other ways of
Worship do in vain pretend. Add to this, that none of the Philosophers or of
their chief admirers, would suffer for the truth of their assertion, or seal it
with their blood, none did pretend their doctrine derived from heaven, or that
they had received the Gift of miracles or tongues, in order to the propagation,
and to the confirmation of it, unto succeeding Cenerations, by any of those
acts they could deliver to them; whence evident it is they wanted all those
motives and Arguments of credibility, which Christianity affords us. See this
Argument excellently managed by St Chrysostom. in 1 ad Cor. Hom. 4.5, 6, 7. in
Act. Apost. Hom. 36. Sermon. 2. in Babyl. page 444. 445. Sermon. 2. Contra Jud.
page 322. 323. etc. Sermon. quod Christus est Deus page 622. 623. etc. by
Theodoret. de Cur. Gr. affec. Sermon. 5. page 80.81. Sermon. 9. page 124. 125, 126.
by Origin in Celsum l. 1. p. 20 21, 22. l. 3. p. 152. l. 8. p. 408. by Eusebius.
in his Evang. praepar. and demonstr. passim.

ANNOTATIONS On the 8th. Chapter. SECT. II.
1. SO new] Christianity was by Suetonius called Superstitionis novae Genus.
Suet. in Nerone. Arnob. l. 2. p. 92. Tert. l. 1. ad Not. c. 10. and this was
thought sufficient to stablish heathenisme, and to confound Christianity. Hoc
unum satis est Majores nostros ita tradidisse. Cic. de N. D. l. 2. Servanda est
tot seculis fides, and sequendi sunt nobis parents, qui sequuti sunt feliciter
suos. Symmach. in Relat. ad Imp. vid. Licinii Orat. ad milites apud Eusebius. de
vita Constant. l. 2. c. 5. Cic. de N. D. l. 3. ab initio.

To question what Antiquity had taught them, was to reproach the Gods and sit
in Judgment on them. Quanto venerabilius and melius Antistitem veritatis
Majorum excipere disciplinam, nec de numinibus far sententiam, sed prioribus
credere. Caecil. apud Minut. p. 6.

It was to contradict their Oracles, (...) (...). Arist. Rhetor. ad Alex.

And the consent of all mankind. Omnes enim religione moventur, and Deos
patrios sibi retinendos arbitrantur. Cic. or. quint. in Verrem.

And to disturb the peace and quiet of the World. Patrum Avorumque aetate
negocium Magistratibus datum, ut sacra externa fieri vetarent, omnem
disciplinam sacrificandi praeterquam more Romano abolerent: judicabant enim
prudentissimi viri omnis divini humanique juris nihil aeque dissolvendae
religionis esse, quam ubi non patrio sed externo ritu sacrificaretur. Posthum.
apud Livium l. 39.16. Separatim Deos non habendos neque novos, was the Roman
Law. Cic. de leg. l. 2. The Graecians had the like, (...). And both of them
establisped the severest penalties against offenders in this Kind: for as S.
Cyril goes on, (...). Cyrill. Alex. cont. Julian. l. 6. p. 189. Hence Socrates,
(...), dyed for it. Laert. in vit. Socr. p. 114. Ed. Stanl and the Roman law
ran thus, Qui novas and incognitas religiones inducunt, ex quibus animi hominum
moveantur, honestiores deportentur, humiliores capite puniantur, Paulus 5.
sentent. (...). Eusebius. praep. Evang. l. 4. c. 1.

2 The last times] (...), Diognet. apud Iustinum p. 492. (...). Celsus apud
Orig. p. 165. (...). Julian. apud Cyrill. alex. l. 3. p. 106. and l. 4. p. 138.
Iaponenses eadem objecerunt. Siquidem est Deus ut dicitis, idemque adeo bonus
est, cur ad hoc usque ^empus celavit bonitatem suam, eamque tam sero Iaponiis
declaravit? Varen. descript. Regn. Iapon. c. 8. p. 143.

3 Destruction of all other modes of worship] The Heathen worship. 1. Cor.
10.21. Act. 14.15. 1. Cor. 8.4. 10.22.5.13.6.9. Gal. 5.20.21. 1 Thessalonians. 1.9.
Atque hinc Christianos Atheos, sacrilegos, homines desperatae atque illicitae
factionis pronuntiabant. Cecil. apud Minut. Odio dignus est (Christus scilicet)
quod ex orb religiones expulit, quod ad Deorum cultum prohibuit accedi.
Ethnicus apud Arnob. l. 2. p. 43. vid. Iustinum Apol. 1. p. 47. 2. p. 56. B.
Tertull. Apol. c. 10. Athenag. leg. pro Christianis p. 13. B. Eusebius. H. Eccl.
l. 4. c. 15. Arnob. l. 1. c. 16. Elmenh. in locum. 2ly The Jewish Paedagogy.
For it pretended the abrogation of the Jewish Law, as rude, imperfect, and
fitted only to their infant state. Heb. 7.12.8.13. Gal. 4.1.9. Unable to
purify the conscience, Heb. 9.10.1.2. and remove the power and guilt of sin,
and justify the sinner. Romans 8.3. Gal. 2.21.5.5. Heb. 10.11. Now this
exceedingly incensed the Jews, who were all, (...), Act. 21.20.22.3.15.1.5.
To. 10.2.

4 Incredible in its Author] (...), Celsus apud Orig. l. 4. p. 162. (...).
Trypho. Dial. cum Just. p. 292. D. vid. Lact. l. 4. c. 22.

5 Virgin Birth] to assert this says Trypho is (...). vid. Lact. l. 4. c. 12.

6 The meannes of his life] (...) (...). Celsus apud Orig. l. 1. p. 47. vid. p.
51. Cur ad docendos homines non ut Deus venit? cur se tam humilem imbecillemque
constituit, ut ab hominibus and contemni and paena affici posset? cur vim ab
imbecillibut passus est cur non Majestatem suam sub ipsa saltem morte
patefecit? Lact. l. 4. c. 22.

7 His condemnation] (...). Trypho. dial. cum Justino, p. 249 B. vid. p. 317.
A. (...). Just. Mart. Apol. 2. p. 61. vide Celsum apud Orig. l. 7. p. 340.
Julianum apud Cyrill. Alex. l. 6. p. 194. Arnob. l. 1. p. 20. Lact. l. 4. c.
16. Theodoret. ser. 8. p. 112.

8 Descerted by God] Celsus ridiculum dicit, (...) (...). apud Orig. p. 62.
(...). p. 404. (...); Chrysostom. in Cor. c. 1. (...). Haec cum infirmis
quibusdam Christianis incredibilia videbantur, fidei naufragium fecerunt, and
depravati sunt ab itinere recto. Lact. l. 4. c. 30. vide locum.

9 The doctrine of the resurrection] Erat hoc (...). Orig. in Celsum. Arnob. l.
2. p. 51. Act. 17.32. Idque 1o quia sine exemplo: tot jam secula transierunt,
quis unquam unus ab inferis resurrexit, ut exemplo ejus fieri posse credamus?
Lact. l. 7. c. 22. Min. Fell. p. 11. Just. Mart. Ap. 2. 2o Quia impossible.
Act. 26.8. (...). Cells. apud Orig. p. 240.

10 Atheism,] (...). Just. Mart. Apol. 2. p. 56. Athenag. Legate. pro
Christianis, p. 13. Eusebius. H. Eccl. l. 4. c. 15.

11 Rebellion] Sacrilegii and Majestatis rei convenimur. Tertull. Apol. c. 10.
etc. 31.

12 Incest, Murder, Anthropophagy, Athenag. p. 4. Minut. p. 8.9. Tertull.
Apol. c. 2. Patres fere omnes.

13 The worship of the Clouds] Hoc crimine infamabantur Christiani, quia inter
orandum ad caelum oculos tollebant. Tert. Apol. c. 24.

14 An Asses head] Audio eos turpissimae pecudis caput Asini consecratum inepta
nescio qua superstitione venerari. Hinc dicti Asinarii. Minut. p. 9. Tert. Ap.
c. 16. Adv. not. l. 1. c. 11.

15 Antistis Genitalia] Minut. p. 9.

16 Some silly women by torments to confess] (...). Eusebius. Ecc. Hist. l. 5. c.
1. l. 9. c. 5. (...). Just. Mart. Ap. 1. p. 133. Ed. R. Steph. 1551.

17 Supposititious acts of Pontius Pilate] (...) (...). Euse. Eccl. Hist. l. 9.
c. 5.

18 Quit their company] (...). Orig. in Celsum l. 6. p. 294.

19 The rise of all the miseries they suffer'd] Omnis publicae cladis, omnis
popularis incommodi. Tert. Ap. c. 40. Christianorum (inquiunt) causa mala omnia
Dii ferunt. Arnob. l. 1. p. 1.3, 8. Cypr. Ep. ad Demetr. Orig. in Matt. c. 24.
tr. 28. Aug. de C. D. l. 2. c. 2.3.

20 Whose ruin it pretended to foretell] Esse enim Romanum imprium, (...),
Omnes Ecclesiastici scriptores tradiderunt. Hieron. in Dan. c. 7. donec de
medio fiat. Quis, nisi Romanus status? Tertull. de resurr. carnis c. 24.
Romanum nomen quo nunc regitur orbis (horret animus dicere, sed dicam quia
futurum est;) tolletur de terra, ac rursus oriens dominabitur, atque occidens
serviet. Lact. l. 7. c. 15. etc. 25. (...). vid. Tert. Ap. c. 32. Ambros. in 2.
Ep. ad These. c. 2. Chrysostom. in locum Cyrill. Hieros. Cat. 15. De la Cerda in
Tertull. p. 170.

21 The pleasure of whose Senate it controuled] Vetus erat decretum ne qui Deus
ab Imperatore consecraretur nisi a Senatu probatus. Tertull. Apol. c. 5.
Chrysostom. Hom. 66. ad Pop. Prudent. ad Symm. l. 1. and it was an ancient Law,
Separatim nemo habessit deos, neque novos, sed ne advenas nisi public adscitos
privatim colunto. Cic. de leg. l. 2.

22 Whose Gods so vigilant] Pro eo imperio augendo custodiendoque pertinax
Deorum indulgentia semper excubuit. Valor. Max. l. 1. vide Minut. p. 27.
Tertull. Apol. c. 25.

23 Made them withdraw themselves] Querebantur enim ipsos etiam caelites
derelictis solennibus, quibus quondam solebant invisere res nostras, terrarum
ab regionibus exterminatos esse. Arnob. l. 1. p. 1.

24 Platonists Daemons] (...) (...). Plat. Tim. p. 69. vide Apuleium de Deo
Socr. Orig. in Celsum, p. 200, 203.

25 And his community of Wives] (...). Plato de Rep. l. 5. and eodem lib. p.
459. hanc habemus legem, (...).

26 The Pythagoreans (...)] (...). Diog. Laert. l. 8. p. 576. vide Agell. l. 4.
c. 11. Cic. qu. Tusc. l. 1.

27 The Decrees of Emperors] Quinetiam sceleratissimi homicidae contra pios
jura impia condiderunt, nam and constitutiones sacrilegae, and disputationes
Iurisperitorum leguntur injustae, Lact. l. 5. c. 11. Against night meetings,]
Cautum 12 tabulis ne nocturni caetus in urbe agitarentur. Cic. 2. de legibus.
vide Minut. p. 8.

28 Conjurations] Magicae artis conscios placuit bestiis objici, aut cruci
suffigi, ipsi Magi vivi exuruntur. Paulus l. 5. sentent. ad L. Cornel. de
Sicariis: Scio multos ad bestias damnasse sacrilegos, nonnullos etiam vivos
exussisse. Ulpian. l. 6. D. ad l. Jul. pecul. Christiani autem magi and
sacrilegi existimabantur.

34 Unlawful Conventicles] D. Severus rescripsit, eos qui illicitum collegium
coiisse dicuntur apud Praefectum urbis accusandos. Ulpian. de off. Praetoris
Urb. l. 1. Affirmabant hanc esse summam vel culpae suae vel erroris quod essent
soliti stato die ante lucem convenire -- quod ipsum facere desiisse post
edictum meum, quo secundum mandata tua Hetaerias esse vetueram. Plin. Ep. ad
Trajanum l. 10. Ep. 97.

29 The introduction of new ways of worship] vide supra number. 1.

30 Zeal and malice of the Iew] (...). Just. Mart. Ap. 2. p. 72. (...). Dial.
cum Tryph. p. 363. vide p. 234.266.321.323.335.

31 Destitute of all visible protection from that Jesus etc.] (...) (...).
Julian. apud Cyrill. alex. l. 6. p. 213. Cur Deus ille Magnus quem rerum
potentem, quem Dominum omnium confiteris, haec fieri patitur, nec cultores suos
aut vindicat aut tuetur? Lact. l. 5. c. 21. p. 529. vid. Clem. Alex. Strom. l.
4. p. 505. Eusebius. Eccl. Hist. l. 5. c. 2. demonstr. Evan. l. 8. c. 8. Minut.
Fell. p. 12. Arnob. l. 2. p. 97. August. de C. Dei, l. 1. c. 29.

32 (...)] Porphyr. l. de orac. Philos. vide Valesium in Eusebius. p. 62, 63.

33 Conquer the World in lesser time then others travel over it] Quod enim
fides Christiana, juxta Domini nostri praedictiones, ante Templi
Hierosolymitani demolitionem per omnes orbis tunc noti parts diffusa erat and
disseminata, ex D. Pauli Epistolis hoc ipsum expressim and saepius asserentibus
constare potest. (...). Clem. Romans Ep. ad Cor. p. 29. (...). Justin. dial. cum
Tryph. p. 345. Neque enim civitates tantum, sed vicos etiam atque agros
superstitionis istius contagio pervagata est. Plin. Ep. l. 10. ad Trajanum Ep.
97 vide Orig. (...). l. 4. c. 1. Isidor. Pelus. l. 1. Ep. 270. Arnob. l. 1. p.
33.

CHAP. IX.
The Contents.
An Answer to some Objections 1. Touching the Miracles of Simon Magus,
Apollonius, and touching those predictions, Miracles and Gifts of healing, to
which the Heathen Oracles, and Deities pretended. And that 1. From the issue of
them for they were blasted and confounded. And 2ly. From the designs they aimed
at, which were all unworthy of a Deity. They were controuled by Providence.
They were such whose deceit it was no man's interest to detect. Obj. 2d. Touching
the General rejection of Christianity by the Jewish Nation. An account of their
rejection of it. 1. From the temper and disposition of that people. From the
danger to which it exposed them. From the prejudices they conceaved 1. Against
the person of our Savior. And 2ly. Against his Doctrine.

. 1. SHOULD it be here objected that Heretics, and Heathens, 2 Simon Magus,
and 1 Apollonius Tyanaeus, have been so signal and Renowned for working
Miracles, and for 3 predictions of things future, that the 4 wisest sages have
been deceaved by them, and have 5 esteemed them Gods; and their Abettors have
compared them with Christ, and his Apostles, as men of equal fame and power.
And 2ly. That 6 Heathens do pretend the same 7 predictions, 8 Miracles, and 9
Gifts, and do appeal unto experience; as that which did abundantly confirm
this thing; and that their Magicians had the like 10 power of Ejecting Devils,
and doing things which did, as far as we are able to conceave, transcend the
power of nature; and that all this is frequently confessed by 11 Christians,
and as to Miracles foretold by Christ and his Apostles: I say should any plead
these things against the Arguments we have used, and should hence infer with
(...). Clesus apud Origl. l. 6. p. 303. and rursus, (...); ibid. page 89.
Clesus, that it is incongruous to conclude the truth of our profession from what
may be consistent with the worst of cheats.

. 2. IN refutation of these things, it is obvious to say, (1) That the world
was in those times of darkness very 12 credulous, and apt to be imposed upon,
as it is apparent from those Fables which their Religion did espouse. Vid.
August. de C. D. l. 7. c. 35. de doctr. Christ. l. 2. c. 23.
(2) That God in Judgment might permit their seeming divinations, and pretended
wonders (in poenam impiorum) that they whom the convincing evidence of
Christian Piety could not win to the reception of the truth, might be deluded
by a lie. (3) That the predictions to which they pretended, were either so 13
false, that they knew not when to believe them, or so 19 obscure, as to comply
with any issue. That they were false, and the result not of divine assistance
but of chance, was confessed both by those 17 wiser Heathens who resorted to
them, and by those 14 18 Priests who served at the Altar, and attended on those
Oracles. Their obscurity was the complaint, not only of the Poets, but the
Historians and the 16 Philosophers, who did assert upon their own 15 experience
of them, that they had Generally either many senses, or none that could be
understood. And when they were intelligible, they did commonly 20 (...), not
speak the inspirations of a Deity, but the desires or interests of their
Priests; who would be bribed or forced to answer any thing. But besides all
this, the Christian Fathers tell us, that those predictons were either Grounded
on the 21 Revelations of God to his Prophets, or were the 22 conjectures of the
Devil bottomed on experience, or natural 23 observations; or were present
informations of those spirits conveyed and told to their favorites of things
that were acted on another Stage.

As to the 24 Miracles pretended it may be Answered. First, that they were
partly false, and such as did 25 serve the ends of nature, or the interests of
man. (2.) That they were few and mean, 26 unworthy to be brought into
comparison with those of Christ and his Apostles, and such as hapily might not
27 exceed the power of those evil Spirits, whose interest it was to set them up
in opposition unto Christ and his Apostles, and to whom they were 28 ascribed
by the greatest enemies of the Christian Faith. (3.) The 29 diseases which they
cured, were only those which their familiars did inflict and heal by ceasing to
inflict them, or those which might be wrought by Fancy, or humane skill, or
by natural observations, and diabolical assistances and applications, without
the miraculous power of God; All these, and many other Answers of this nature I
shall wave, insisting only upon such as fundamentally destroy the force of
these, and of such like objections.

3. 1. THAT all the great things ascribed to those persons have been 30
suddenly blasted, and they like Comets have appeared for a while to amaze the
world, and presently have set in darkness; nor 31 being able, nor so much as
pretending to transmit this power which they vaunted of, to any other person,
as our Savior did in confirmation of his doctrine, or to leave behind them
those who by like actions should attest the truth of what they did deliver; or
32 suffer for the cause they owned. Which is a pregnant evidence that they
derived from the Prince of darkness, and only feigned a commission from the
King of Heaven. For can it be supposed that God, who wants not power or wisdom
to carry on his purpose and decrees, maugre all opposition that the world can
make, should not assist his messengers in the tradition of that faith, which he
commanded them to preach to the world; or doing so should fail of his intended
purpose, though working all things according to the pleasure of his will? And
yet this was the fate of Apollonius, and Simon Magus, and other like Impostors;
whilst the Religion we profess was like the rising sun, which shines more and
more unto the perfect day; and the Apostles of our Lord out did their Master,
and a continued throug of miracles did through diverse centuries attend that
Faith which they delivered to the world, as has already been evinced.

4. 2ly. THAT the Adversaries of the true Christian Faith either 33 wa^e all
pretenses to the power of working miracles, or else pretend them 34 wrought to
none or evil purposes, as being done to establish the barbarous obscene and
foolish rites of Heathen superstitions; (which was the Grand design of
Apollonius,) or else to introduce the lust, intemperance, and all the other
villainies of 35 Simon Magus; or somewhat equally repugnant to the concerns of
real piety; and consequently, it is sure that Heaven would never set its seal
unto them, or be so much concerned to propagate an Hell above Ground. Whereas
the propagation of the Christian Faith, was a thing worthy of the most pure and
Holy God, as being the most lively transcript of his own perfections; and a
most effectual method to work the Soul into the Greatest likeness to a Deity,
and opposition to that Sin which he does infinitely detest. For to walk worthy
of this holy calling, is tolead a life of most Angelick purity, abstracted from
all worldly mindedness, and anxious concerns for temporal things; to abound in
meekness, and humility, long suffering, patience, and mercy, love, and charity;
and to endeavor with the Greatest care, to keep the unity of the spirit in the
bond of peace.

. 5. 3ly. I add, that as for Heretics and Heathens, providence controuled
their attempts, and gave in evidence sufficient to evince their vanity. It 36
struck dumb the statue of Apollonius, and the oracles of the Gentiles; it
confounded 37 Simon Magius, and in compliance with the Apostles prayers, put a
conclusion to his miracles and life.

. 6. 4ly. That it was no concernment of mankind, to sift these things before
the coming of our Savior; they opposed not their interests, their
superstitions, lusts, or reputations; they did not go about to overturn all
other ways of worship, and to establish new Laws of Government, and to subject
the knowing would to the humors and conceptions of rude Mechanic Souls. But 1.
The world found it necessary in order to the ends of Policy, that a Religion
should be kept on foot, and 38 knew nothing better to strike an awe upon the
consciences of men, than the religion then estalished; and therefore had Just
reason to conceal, but no inducement to disclose its falsehood. 2ly. Who e're
should venture to oppose what was so Generally owned, must have done it without
encouragement. For they might well expect the Greatest opposition and affronts
from men, nor could they promise to themselves assistance from an higher power
in propagating any other doctrine.

. 7. 5ly. It Was the concernment of the swicked one, thus to confirm their
superstitious and Idolatrous worship, and their absurd and brutish ceremonies,
and give in his assistance toward the propagation of those heresies which did
evert the Faith of Christ. This was to propagate and to uphold his kingdom,
and put a fatal stop to the prevailing influence of Christian Faith. It was
also the concernment of all Heathen Priests; they got their Honors and
revenues by it, and therefore all those seeming miracles, and those pretended
divinations this objection mentions, may be presumed to derive from him, who is
the Great deceaver of the world; and to whose power, arts, and subtilty, the
Fathers do so often ascribe them, or from the skill and Magic of those Priests,
who served at his Altars.

. 8. Obj. 2. If the Miracles of Christ were so Great, and many, and if He so
visibly performed all that the scriptures had foretold and spoken of the true
Messiah: If his doctrine were so holy, his life so full of Goodness, and
obliging Charity, is it not matter of astonishment, that of that Nation, which
was then big with expectations of a Savior, and did so readily embrace false
Christ's, which saw the miracles he did, were the objects of his pity, and
living monuments of his power, so few embraced his doctrine, so many did reject
and blast him as a deceaver, and a Malefactor?

. 9. Ans. WE shall have little reason to admire this issue of our Saviors
coming, if we consider, (1) the temper and the disposition of those men with
whom he had to do; whose promises being mostly carnal, their minds were wholly
bent on Riches, Victory, Grandeur, Act. 7.51.
Dominion, and such things which bore the Greatest opposition to Christ's
spiritual Kingdom. They also were persons of the most stubborn and rebellious
natures, (...). Orig. in Celsum l. 2. p. 106. Nihilmirum videri potest Christum
ab his non esse receptum, cum jam inde ab initio toties in Dominum rebels
deprehendantur. Sulpitius Hist. l. 1. c. 48. p. 135.
proud and 'covetous, and very prone to infidelity, and of most wicked and
unhallowed lives; and therefore very much indisposed to receive this pure,
humble, self-denying doctrine of Jusus. Josephus tells us, that never any
Generation of men was more corrupt, or could more deserve that ruin which
befell them, than the Jaws. And as a just result of their impiety, their
disobedience and deafness to the prescripts of their holy Prophets, they were
men given up by Gods just Judgments to unbelief and blindness. Hence holy
Scripture tells us, that the destruction which befell them was that to which
they were designed; they being Vessels fitted for it; 1. Pet. 2.8. 1. To. 22.
Joh. 12.40.
that both their hearts were hardened, and their eyes blinded, least they should
be converted and be healed.

. 10. AND 2ly. We shall have little reason to admire this issue of our Saviors
Preaching to the Jews, if we consider the danger to which it exposed them. To
own him for the true Messiah, Joh. 9.22.
was to incur the censure of the Jewish Sanhedrin, Joh. 12.42.
and to be rejected from the Synagogue, a thing exceeding dreadful to the
people, and to the Rulers of the Jews. Besides Christ gained the favor of the
Multitude, and was a likely man to blast the reputation of the Scribes and
Pharisees, and as they thought, to raise a tumult, Joh. 11.48.
and so engage the Roman Empire to take away their Place and Nation. So that
their interest and Reputation, were both engaged to disown him.

. 11. BUT 3ly. This will be yet more clear, if we reflect upon those many
prejudices which they conceav'd against his Person and his doctrine.

And 1. against his person they had these prejudices. 1. That they were very
well acquainted with his birth and parentage, Joh. 7.27.
but when Christ comes, no man can know (says their tradition) whence he is.
Mat. 13.55.
2ly. that his descent was mean and base (his Parents being not sufficient to
redeem him with a Lamb, LUc. 2.24.
but only with a pair of turtles.) And 3ly. he came out of Galile, Joh. 7.41.52.
from whence no Prophet could arise. 4ly. He came not riding on the Clouds of
Heaven as the Prophet Daniel did foretell of the Messiah; nor 5ly. Dan. 7.13.
Did Elias come to usher in his advent, according to the prediction of Malachi.
Chap. 4. 5.
6ly. Joh. 12.34.
That Christ was to abide for ever, whereas our Lord was lifted up, and died an
ignominious death. Tryph. Dial. cum Justin. Mart. p. 249. 365. Coch. in Tit.
Talm. p. 364. 365.
7ly. That the Messiah Ben David was expected in a triumphant manner, to subdue
Nations under them, and make the Jews to Lord it over all their enemies:
whereas our Jesus renounced all title to an earthly kingdom.

. 12. BUT 2ly. His doctrine and his conversation was greater matter of offense
unto them. For 1. He did what seemed inconsistent with their holy and perfect
man, for he conversed with publicans and sinners, and suffered a sinful woman
to embrace his feet. 2ly. He did what they esteemed a violation of the Sabbath,
and hence they took occasion to conclude, this man is not of God, Joh. 9.16.
because he keeps not the sabbath day. 3ly. He represented the Scribes and
Pharisees and renowned Rabbis, as the most gross deluding Hypocrites, Matt.
23.19.
men blind and foolish, and busy about mint and Cumin, as Children of Satan,
refused to enter into Heaven, or suffer others so to do; whereas the Jews
esteemed them men of greatest piety and knowledge, and did proverbially say, if
Heaven were reserved for but two men, the one must be a Scribe, and the other a
Pharisee. He representted their whole Nation as men that neither did observe,
nor yet believe the Law of Moses; Joh. 5.49.7.19. Joh. 5.38.42. Joh. 8.44.
that had no real love to God, nor any knowledge of him, such as pretended to
be the seed of Abraham, but were indeed the Devils Children, as people whom no
reason could reclaim; they having shut their eyes, made Gross their hearts,
Matt. 13.15.16.
and stopped their ears, least they should be concerted, and be healed. He
represented their traditions (for which they had so Great a Zeal) as foolish
and absurd, Matt. 15.6.
and such as did evacuate the law of God. He taught the abolition of that law
which they esteemed Eternal; the ruin of their darling temple, and the
destruction of their Nation, Matt. 24.21.
by a doom more sad than that of Sodom and Gomorrah, and with such a
tribulation as never was before, and never should hereafter be.

And now it is obvious to consider how hardly we can brook the man, who blasts
those things and persons, for which we have the Greatest kindness and concern,
and from which we expect our chiefest happiness: since to be patient in this
case, were to renounce our judgments, and to proclaim our selves superstitious
fools. Besides it is a thing most difficult to sentence and condemn our selves
as the most vile and hypocritical, especially when zealous, as we do imagine,
for the cause of God. And lastly it is visible, that we are very slow to credit
what we are most unwilling should be true, and what does contradict those
tenets which we received for the Greatest truths.

ANNOTATIONS On the 9th Chapter.
1. APollonius Tyanaeus] Nihil amplius dominum, quam alii homines facere
potuerunt, fecisse vel gessisse mentiuntur: Apollonium siquidem suum nobis, and
Apuleium, aliosque magicae artis homines in medium proferunt, quorum majora
contendunt extitisse miracula. Marcell. Epist. 4. ad August. Apollonium vel
paria vel etiam majora fecisse contendit Ethnicus apud Lact. l. 5. c. 3. p.
464. (...). Hierocles de cod. apud Eusebius. contra Hier. p. 512.

2 Simon Magus] Dicebant autem se ex eadem circulatione cum Jesus habere
animas, and similes ei esse, aliquando autem and meliores. Iren. de Gnosticis.
l. 2. c. 59. vide Clem. Recogn. l. 2. f. 32.

3 Predictions of things] (...), tradit Philost. in ejus vita l. 1.

4 The wisest sages have be deceaved by them] (...), tradit Orig. in Celsum,
p. 302. vid. Eusebius. contra Hierocl. p. 530, 531.

5 Esteemed them Gods] Simonem Magum statua and inscriptione sancti Dei
inauguratis. Tertull. Apol. c. 15.5.4. Justin. Mart. Ap. 2. p. 69. (...). idem
p. 349. de Apollonio.

6 The Heathens did pretend the same] (...); Celsus apud Orig. l. 4. p. 407.
vide eund. p. 417. Minutium p. 7. Arnob. l. 4. p. 133.

7 Heathens do pretend te same predictions] (...). Celsus apud Orig. p. 417.
Pleni and mixti Deo vates futura praecerpunt, dant cautelam periculis, morbis
medelam. Cecil. apud Minut. p. 7. Isid. Orig. l. 8. c. 9. Cic. de Not. Deor. l.
2. p. 59.

8 Miracles] De Miraculis Apollonii vide Philostratum, qui magna industria
studebat, (...). Cyrill. Alex. contra Iul. p. 76. de Simone Mago. Vide Iren. l.
1. c. 22. Eusebius. l. 2. c. 13. Hammondum and Grotium in 2 Thessalonians. 2.9. Cyrill.
Hieros. Catech. l. 6. p. 53, 54. tradentes, eum magicis praestigiis in tantum
valuisse, (...), SIONI DEO SAGKTO.

9 Gifts of healing] Frustra tantum arrogas Christo, cum saepe alios sciamus
and scierimus Deos and laborantibus plurimis dedisse medicinas, and multorum
hominum morbos, valetudinesque curasse. Ethnicus apud Arnobium l. 1. p. 28.
(...). Ita Porphyr. de Pythagora. (...). Julian. apud Cyrill. Alex. l. 7. p.
235. vide Celsum apud Orig. l. 8. p. 416. v. Philostr. de Apollon. vita l. 4.

10 The power of ejecting devils] Horum mystici Sacerdotes libidinose quidem
vivunt, Magias autem perficiunt, and quemadmodum potest unusquisque ipsorum,
exorcismis and incantationibus utuntur. Iren. de Gnosticis l. 1. c. 20. (...),
scilicet Philostratus de Apollonio. Eusebius. contra Hieroc. p. 521. (...). p. 530.

11 All which is frequently confessed by Christians] Signis and miraculis and
oraculis fidem divinitatis operantur. Tertull. Apol. c. 21. s. 8. c. 23. s. 1.
(...). Justin. Dial. cum Tryph. p. 225. vide Lact. l. 2. c. 16. iAugust. de C.
D. l. 21. c. 6.

12 The Word was very credulous] Majoribus nostris tam facilis in mendaciis
fides fuit, ut temere crediderint etiam alia monstruosa miracula; Scyllam
multiplicem, Chimaeram multiformem, and Hydram felicibus vulneribus
renascentem, and quicquid famae licet fingere, illis erat libenter audire,
Octav. apud Minut. p 21. Antiquitas recipit fabulas etiam fict as incondite.
August. de C. D. l. 22. c. 6.

13 Their predictions were mostly false] (...). Porph. apud Theodor. sermon. 10.
p. 137. Nonnunquam ea quae praedicta sunt minus eveniunt, Cic. de div. l. 1. p.
85. and l. 2. p. 119. B. Quid ego aruspicum responsa commemorem? possum equidem
innumerabilia, quae aut nullos habuerunt exitus, aut contrarios. vide
Theodoret. sermon. 10. p. 138. Eusebius. praep. Evang. l. 5. c. 27. Arnob. adv.
Gentes. l. 4. p. 133, 134. Cic. de Not. D. l. 2. ab initio.

15 Which both their Priests confessed] (...). Diogenianus apud Eusebius. Praep.
Evang. l. 4. c. 3.

16 Their experience proved] (...). Diogen. 16. p. 137. Quae nobis in Graeciam
Roma responsa Aruspicum missa sunt, quae dicta Pompeio, non lubet commemorare,
nec vero necesse est, tibi praesertim qui interfuisti, vides tamen omnia fere
contra ac dicta sunt evenisse. Cic. de div l. 2. p. 119.

17 As their own Philosophers do assure us etc.] (...), dicit Porphyr. sermon.
10. p. 137. de Elect. Philosophia apud Theodoretum. (...). Diogen. ib. p. 138.

18 So esteemed by the wiser Heathen] (...). Eusebius. Praep. Evang. l. 4. c. 2.
Similia habent, Orig. in Celsum, p. 333. Plutarch. de plac. Philos. l. 5. c. 1.
Diog. Laert. l. 10. p. 299. Edit. N. Cic. de Not. Deorum, l. 1. l. 2. de div.
l. 1.

19 And by those Priests who served at the Altar] (...) (...). Eusebius. Praep.
Ev. l. 4. c. 2.

20 Or so obscure] (...), Porph. de Philosophia ex oraculius hausta apud Eusebius.
Praep. Evang. l. 4. c. 8. Multa obscura, multa ambigua, Cic. div. l. 1. p. 104.
(...). Lucian. de Apolline dial. Deorum p. 32. vide Thucyd. 3.15. Herod. 3.54.
Plutarch. in Flamin. c. 34. Aelian. l. 3.45. Justin. l. 12. c. 2.

21 That they did (...)] Demosthenes quidem qui abhinc annos prope 300 fuit,
jam tum (...) Pythiam dicebat, id est quasi cum Philippo faeere, hoc autem eo
spectabat, ut eam a Philippo corruptam diceret, quo licet existimare in aliis
quoque Oraculis Delphicis aliquid non sinceri fuisse. Cic. de div. l. 2. p.
402. Diog. Laertius testatur, (...) l. 5. p. 361. vide Minutium p. 29.

22 Either Grounded on the Prophetic revelations] Dispositiones Dei and tunc
Prophetis concionantibus exceperunt, et lectionibus resonantibus carpunt; Ita
and hinc sumentes quasdam temporum sorts, aemulantur divinitatem, dum furantur
divinationem. Tertull. Apol. c. 23. vide Lact. l. 2. c. 16. p. 224.

22 Or the conjectures of the Devil built upon experience or natural
observation] Aut enim alitum volatu, aut extis, aut oraculis homines
praemonentur, praedicente aliquo propitio Daemone, qui sit eorum quae deinceps
sequuntur praescius. Chalcidius in Timaeum. Tertull. Apol. c. 22.

23 Or by their swiftnes conveyed and told to their favorites] Memento ubique
sunt, totus orbis illis locus unus est, quid, ubi geratur, tam facile sciunt,
quam enuntiant, velocitas divinitas creditur, quia substantia ignoratur.
Tertull. Ap. c. 22.

24 Their pretended miracles were mostly false and delusory] (...), 2 Thessalonians.
2.9. quod de Simone Mago and Apollonio eventus docuit: porro ejusmodi sunt quae
de Ulmo Apollonium voce muliebri alloquente, de lunatico abs eo precibus ad
Mindum fluvium fusis sanato etc. tradit Philostr. l. 6. and 8.

25 Such as did not serve the ends of nature and interests of man] Qualia erant
apud Brachmanas tripodes lapidei sponte sua nutantes, and ab aereis pincernis
calices in gyrum acti, fulmina and venti in doliis asservata etc. Eusebius. contra
Hierocl. p. 526. Philostr. l. 3.

26 Unworthy to be compared with those of Christ] Potestis aliquem nobis
monstrare ex omnibus illis Magis qui unquam fuere, consimile aliquid Christo
millesima ex part qui fecerit? Arnob. l. 1. p. 25.

27 Such as might not exceed the power of evil spirits] Quicquid miraculi
ludunt, per Daemones faciunt. Minut. vide Tertull. Apol. c. 22.

28 To whom they were ascribed by the enemies of Christian Faith] (...). Porph.
de Elect. Philosophia apud theodoret. sermon. 3. p. 47. and rursus, (...). Idem
l. 2. de abstinentia.

29 That the diseases which they cured were only such as their familiars did
inflict] Benefici plane and circa curas valetudinum, laedunt enim primo, dehinc
remedia praecipiunt, ad miraculum nova, sive contraria, post quae desinunt
laedere, and curasse creduntur. Tertull. Apol. c. 22. vide Minut. p. 30.
Tatianum adv. Gentes.

30 What others persons have pretended to has suddenly been blasted] De Simone
Mago. Epiph. sic. (...). Haer. 22. de Menandro Simonis discipulo. (...). Orig.
in Celsum p. 44. vid. p. 282. de Apollonio Lact. sic. Cur igitur O delirum
caput, nemo Apollonium pro Deo colit, nisi forte tu solus? p. 465. and
Chrysostom. (...). Orat. 3. in Judaeos, Tom. 6. p. 322.

31 Not being able to transmit this power toother persons] Neque quicquam est
ab illo gestum -- quod non omne donaverit faciendum parvulis illis and
rusticis, and eorum subjecerit potestati. Quid dicitis, o Mentes incredulae, --
alicuine mortalium Jupiter ille Capitolinus hujusmodi potestatem dedit?
Curionem, aut Pontificem Maximum, quinimo Dialem, quod ejus est, Flaminem isto
jure donavit? non dicam ut mortuos excitaret, non ut caecis restitueret lucem,
etc. sed ut Pustulam, reduviam, papulam, aut vocis imperio, aut manus
contrectatione comprimeret. Arnob. de Christo l. 1. p. 30. Transcribere posse
in hominem jus tuum, and quod facere solus possis, fragilissimae rei donare,
and participare faciendum, supra omnia sitae potestatis est. Idem p. 31.

32 Or suffer for the cause they owned.] Eusebius inter Gnosticorum placita
haec enumerat, (...). Hist. Eccl. l. 4. c. 7. Tertull. adv. Gnostic. c. 12.

33 They either wave all these pretenses to the power of miracles] Mahometes
asserit se non cum miraculis, sed cum armis missum esse. Azora 3.14.17.30.71.

34 Pretend them wrought to the establishment of Heathen superstitions] Ita
Apollonius introducit, (...). Eusebius. contra Hierocl. p. 528. Et. p. 531.
Domitianum sic affatur, (...);

35 The villainies of Simon Magus] Qui ejus sectae sunt omni libidini and
intemperantiae se dederunt. Iren. l. 1. c. 20. Theodoret. Haeret. fab. l. 1.

36 It struck dumb the statue of Apollonius] (...). Author quaest. and resp. ad
Orthod. p. 405. qu. 24.

37 Confounded Simon Magus] quem Petri precibus praecipiti ruina prostratum
esse tradunt. Arnob. l. 2. p. 50. Sulpit. Severus l. 2. c. 41. Clemens Constable.
Apost. l. 6. c. 9. Hegesippus l. 3. c. 2. Epiph. l. 1. contra Haer. p. 31.
Cyrill. Hieros. l. 6. Ambr. Hexam. l. 4. c. 8. August. de Petro and Paulo sermon.
3. Tom. 10. f. 268. Philastrius, Palladius, and Maximus Turonensis apud Grot.
2. ad These. c. 2.

38 The World knew nothing better] Cicero cum multa dixisset quae ad eversionem
religionum valerent, ait tamen non esse illa vulgo disputanda, ne susceptas
public religiones disputatio talis extingueret. Lact. l. 2. c. 3. Errabat
multi^^^ rebus Antiquitas. Retinetur au^^^ and ad opinionem vulgi, and ad
magnas utilitates Reip. Mos, Religio, disciplina, jus Augurum. Cic. de Div. l.
2. p. 123. Imperiti and insipientes falsas Religiones pro veris habent, quia
neque veram sciunt, nec falsam intelligunt; prudentiores vero quia veram
nesciunt, aut in iis quas falsas esse intelligunt perseverant, ut aliquid
tenere videantur, aut omnino nihil colunt, ne incidant in errorem. Lactant. ubi
supra.

CHAP. X.
The Contents.
COncluding for the truth of Christian Doctrine from the excellency of its
Precepts, (1.) to the public Welfare of mankind. 2ly, To the perfection of
humane nature. First, by the clearest informations of man's understanding in
matters which concern the knowledge of God, and of Virtue and Vice. And
secondly, by tendering the most prevailing motives to engage the will and the
affections to obedience. And thirdly, the most strong engagements to seek the
welfare of our Brother's Soul. Heathen Philosophy and their received Theology
destructive of Religion, and fitted to promote the Interest of Satan's kingdom.
This proved from their conceptions both of God, and of his Providence, and of
his Attributes, and their uncertainty in Matters of this nature, and from their
want of precepts to direct them in, or promise to encourage to the performance
of their duty; and from their doubtings of a future State, and their denial of
all future punishments, and from their false conceptions of the rise and
fatality of Sin. That these opinions are destructive to the service of a Deity,
and the concernments of Religion. That they received opinions which destroyed
morality. This proved from their mistakes and errors. (1.) Touching the duties
and concerns of love and charity to their neighbor And secondly touching the
laws of Chastity, Justice, and of truth. Heathen Philosophy proved ineffectual,
not only to reform the world, but the Professors of it. The wickedness of
their lives. The accounts and reasons of it. Theresult of all in confirmation
of the Christian Faith.

. 1. BUT that which is the Crown of all, and indeed potissima demonstratio, a
most convincing evidence of the Assistance of the holy Spirit toward the
propagation of the Gospel, is the excellency of the Christian precepts, and the
subservience they bear, not only to our future, but to our present welfare.

. 2. IT were endless to insist upon the incredible Power of Christianity, when
cordially embraced, to sheath the Sword, and beat it into plow-shares, to still
contentions, and bind the hand to its good behavior, to prevent all ways of
being cruel to our neighbors life, or prejudicial to his estate and Fortunes,
or injurious to his name or honor, by taking up or venting a reproach against
him, or by discovering those Errors and infirmities which Charity does bind us
to conceal. It were infinite to recount those liberal provisions it has made
for Love and Charity, pity and compassion, and whatsoever may indear my Brother
to me, and draw forth all my powers to assist him. It gives the truly generous
and public Spirit; it commands every man to seek his Brothers weal, and show
him all that kindness, which he could expect or beg, when under like necessity.
It bids us burn, when others are afflicted, and weep with those that weep; That
is, it bids us be as forward to relieve them under all their pressures and
afflictions, as if their afflictions were our own. Now what can further be
required to our present happiness, than the security of what a present we enjoy
from any hand of violence, and the assurance of our Brothers help toward the
enjoyment of the thing we want: Nor is it less conducive to the public good.
Christianity gives such a relish of sublimer Bliss, as disintangleth the more
noble Soul from all the trivial concerns of earth. It tells us that the
freindship of this world is enmity to God, that he who bears affection to
these earthly things, is but pretender to the love of heaven. It inspires into
us that contentme^t which allayes the hell and torment of an inordinate and
still gaping appetite. It transformes the man into humility and meekness, and
so prevents the tumult and disturbance of the haughty Spirit. It enforces
peace upon us by the strongest motives, and threatens an eternal flame to the
Incendiary. It moulds the Soul into a simple honest, and sincere deportment,
and interdicts those flattering Addresses, which belie the thoughts and
Conscience of the Speaker; and more then this it cannot do in order to our
public welfare, since that can never suffer, but from unjust and treacherous,
factious and turbulent, proud worldly or rapacious Spirits.

. 3. CHRISTIANITY is a Religion highly perfective of humane nature, and such as
best comports with the concernments of our Souls, and most advances its most
noble faculties.

It gives the best discoveries of the Divine existence, and of Providence, and
of that obedience and homage which we owe unto a Deity, and of those attributes
which are the only grounds, and most prevailing motives to it; viz. The Truth
and Freedom, the Justice, Power, Goodness, the Wisdom, Unity, and
Omnipresence of a Deity; all which must be entirely owned as the foundations of
real Piety. It presents us with such admirable discoveries of Wisdom,
Justice, Goodness, Mercy, and Compassion, in the contrivance and procurement of
Pardon and Salvation to us by the death of Christ, as Judaisme could never
boast. It holds forth the clearest light to guide our dark and purblind Reason
into the paths of virtue, and to secure us from the splitting rocks of Vice. It
gives the best and largest Comment upon those duties of the moral Law, which
are so imperfectly and so obscurely hinted by the light of nature, and so much
questioned and disputed by the Gentile World, as we shall see hereafter. It
discovers to us those impediments which would retard and clog us in the
performance of our duty, that so we may avoid them. It makes the evil thought
as guilty as the evil action, and calls as much for purity of heart, and
freedom from every vile affection, as from those actions that do issue from
them. It setleth the floating soul on the firm Basis of divine veracity; and
for the Heathens faint surmises, and the Jews darker shadows of good things
to come, it gives the Christians lively hopes, and full assurances of Faith. It
tenders the holy Spirit as an earnest of our future bliss, and assures us if we
do the will of heaven, we shall know what is so. In fine, the knowledge of a
future endless bliss and misery, is the result of Gospel revelation, which upon
all these grounds does best provide for the information of our understanding,
in what it is concerned to know in order to our future happiness; to wit, the
being of a God, and our engagement to adore and serve him: what will procure
his Favor, and will provoke his Indignation, and what concerns we have
sincerely to avoid the one, and to pursue the other.

. 4. NEXT it presents the Will, with the most sovereign motives and
engagements unto duty, and binds that on us with most powerful cords of Love,
and the amazing mercies of our God and Savior; The obligations of repeated
vows, and Covenants, especially of those of Baptism, and the Sacred Eucharist;
the convictions of our conscience, the laws and Sanctions of that Majesty, who
strikes an awe upon it, and the example of our Saviors which does at once
prescribe to our obedience, and provoke us to it. It pains forth sin to us in
its own dress, attended with the dangers of present, and a dreadful expectation
of eternal miseries; and those enhanced by all the aggravations which love and
mercy, conscience and duty, the light of reason and religion, the experience of
our selves and others can afford it. It presents Goodness to us in its fairest
and most tempting aspects, assures us that the ways of God are Good and
honorable, safe and easy, and full of comfort and present satisfaction to the
Soul. It courts the affections with the most admirable delights that heaven can
tender, it surrounds us with the pleasures of a virtuous life, the joys of
charity, the comforts of an upright conscience, the smiles of heaven, and its
concernment for the good man's welfare here and happiness hereafter; such
happiness as far exceeds what we are able to conceive. It blows off all our
prejudices, buoys up the sinking Spirit with fresh supplies of grace and
spiritual assistance, and all the comforts of a never failing promise, that God
will never leave us nor forsake us, Heb. 13.5.
but will make the heaviest of afflictions be instrumental to work together for
our good. Romans 8.32.
It quells all fears and Jealousies of the desponding Spirit, by giving full
assurance of our pardon on the most reasonable and easy terms, and
representing our heavenly Father, not only willing to receive, but so gracious
as to invite the Prodigal. It renders our discouragements the best of motives,
assuring us that our afflictions will augment our joys, and that our thorns
will blossom into crowns of glory. And what can weigh against such powerful
motives, when life the first of mercies, and the foundation of all others, and
death the last and most dreadful evil, are such low trifles, as are not worthy
to be compared to them:

. 5. AGAIN, it lays the highest obligations on us to endeavor the welfare of
our Brothers Soul. Heb. 5.2. 2 Timothy 2.25. Luke 17.3. Heb. 10.24.
It calls upon us to a instruct the ignorant, and them that oppose themselves
to the truth; to warn the unruly Person, to rebuke him, and not suffer Sin
upon him; It requires us to support the weak, and to administer comfort to the
feeble minds, to stir up and provoke each other to the greatest heights of
love, and piety and goodness. In prosecution of these ends it shows how much
our Lord has done and suffered by emptying himself of all his glory, and
taking on him the infirmities of humane nature, by entering on that life of
miseries which did at last conclude in an accursed ignominious death, by
interceding daily for mercy to us; and by conveying of his Gifts and favors to
all the members of his body: lastly by guiding all the Acts and ways of
Providence, to the best compliance with the good and welfare of his servants.
It shows how much the God of Heaven has been concerned for them, in employing
his Wisdom from eternal ages in thoughts of mercy to them, in sending his
Beloved from his own bosom, to redeem them by his bloody sufferings; his
Spirit first to convince them of Sin and misery, the more assuredly to fright
them into the arms of mercy, and then to sanctify, and by so doing to fit
them for those mansions of eternal bliss he has prepared for them; and lastly,
sending his Ambassadors by their most passionate entreaties to bessech them to
be reconciled to him.

. 6. SUCH is the nature of the Christian Faith, so good and pious are it is
Precepts, and so well suited to the interests and apprehensions of mankind;
whereas the wisdom of the hearthen world, the faith they owned, and the
religious customs they espoused, were such as overthrew religion in the
foundations of it, and such as made it to be consistent with the most vile
impurities, and only serviceable in the promotion of the devils Kingdom, or
such as did exceedingly deface the beauties of it, and obstruct it is influence.
Morality was either wholly slighted, and Vice or Virtue deemed to be only what
humane laws commanded and forbid, or their conceptions of it were so gross, and
so exceeding various, that not one duty of the moral Law was left unquestioned
by them. The 1 common issue of their search after the knowledge of those things
was only Scepticisme, and the most knowing men were they who did renounce all
knowledge of them.

. 7. TO touch upon those things which do exceedingly obscure the influence, or
ruin the foundations of true Piety; some of those heathens plainly denied the
2 being of a God, and many of them 3 doubted and demur'd upon it; especially
when a 4 cross act of providence did tempt them to it. As for his overruling
providence, we find it exploded by the school of 5 Epicurus. By 6 Aristotle and
his party it was confined to heaven, (whence it is well inferred by (...). apud
Eusebius. praep. l. 15. c. 5.
Atticus that his opinion is in effect the same, as to the interest of Vice and
Virtue, with that of Epicurus.) This great concern was by the 7 Platonist and
8 Pythagorean (that I add not the 9 whole heathen world) committed to inferior
demons, this being their professed Tenet, August. de C. D. l. 9. c. 16.
quod nullus Deus miscetur homini, by which denial of Gods immediate power
engaged to create, preserve, and govern us, they 10 robbed us of our chiefest
motives to adore and imitate him, who thought us thus unworthy of his care.
Some 11 doubted of the thing, others allowed a general, but 12 denied a special
providence, and hence took liberty to sin at pleasure. The 13 Stoics mostly
did restrain the actings of this providence, unto the great concerns of earth,
and held it unconcerned for lesser matters. Scarce any of the heathens could
afford a satisfying answer to that grand objection which was made against it
from those adversities which happened to the best, and those prosperities which
did attend the vilest persons.

. 8. 2ly, THEY were as much mistaken in their conceptions of his attributes,
and the nature of a Diety; renouncing the only true God, they knew not where to
stint the number of their Deities; some held them 14 thirty thousand, others
conceived them to be numberless, and yet they stood obliged to worship all the
rabble of them, that none might be offended because slighted by them; for as
Tertullian tells them, Cum alii alios colitis, Apol. c. 13.
utique quos non colitis offenditis; praelatio alterius, sine contumelia
alterius esse non potest, quia nec electio sine reprobatione; and therefore
when calamities befell them, they paid their homage to an 15 unknown Deity, and
made addresses in these doubtful forms. Quisquis es sive Deus sive dea, Plaut.
Rud. Act. 1. Sc. 4. Plutar, qu. Romans 61.
(...), to that unknown God or Goddess, who as they presumed might be incensed
by the neglect of service. And albeit the wiser sort of heathens acknowledged
one Supreme, and all-ruling Deity, yet did they worship Demons; not only such
as they accounted good, but 16 evil and pernicious, least they should destroy
them. They paid their homage to the 17 Sun and Moon, and to the whole host of
heaven, to 18 men with whom their Forefathers had conversed, and to whose 19
departed souls their superstition did give an Apotheosis upon designs of
policy. To 20 Emperors and all that had been knowing men; especially if they
had suffered for their Country. They advanced the 21 meanest creatures into
Deities; earth, fire, water, aer, the herbs and cattle of the field, the fishes
of the sea, their leeks and onions, and paid their homage to those Idols which
were nothing in the world; and which is yet more vile, they worshipped those
parts which nature binds us to conceal, and modesty permits me not to mention.
Add to this, that they who knew what these Gods were, yet chose in 24 practice
to comply with all those rites, which custom offered to such execrable and
ignoble Deities. Thus did they give the knowledge due to the only true God, to
what they knew to be a lie.

. 9. 3ly, THE 25 Stoic and the School of Epicurus held that God is a corporeal
Being, which must exceedingly degrade him in the conceptions of mankind. They
26 universally fancied him to be of humane shape, and so they changed the image
of the incorruptible God into the likeness of a corruptible man, and hence they
deemed an 27 Image requisite unto the worship of a Deity, and would reproach
the Christians, and pronounce them Atheists for defect of it. They took the
boldness to 28 limit and confine Gods power, and dispute his omnipresence, they
held him 29 unable to do any thing without the help of matter, and unsufficient
to 30 correct those evil dispositions to which it inclined us. They owned an
evil and pernicious God of equal power with, and independent on the God of
heaven; who, as they thought, was insufficient to restrain the actions of this
31 evil principle. Thus did they make vice loose its name by being necessary,
and leave us all in misery, because inevitably subject to the power of this
pernicious being. The Stoics bound up God in the Chains of unalterable fate;
the 32 Peripatetick made him not to act at all, or else to do it from the 23
necessity of his nature; both which are equally repugnant to his worship, and
to the nature both of vice and virtue; They doubted of his omnipresence, and by
so doing made it doubtful whether our supplications could be heard, and he
become a present help in trouble. 34 The Platonist would not permit him to be
free in the expressions of his Goodness, and so they robbed us of those motives,
which the consideration of that freedom does afford; some thought he could 35
conceive no anger, and therefore could not punish sin; others conceived him
so severe and froward that he could never be atoned; the first spoke comfort
and encouragement unto the vilest sinner, and made all Gods threats to be but
bruta fulmina; the other did as much discourage all inclinations to be good.
36 Prayer was rejected as a useless thing, not only by the school of Epicurus,
which renounced providence, and by the Stoics fate; but also by the 37
Pythagorean who held we should not pray because we knew not what to ask, and by
the 38 Stoics who deemed it needless to entreat that happiness from God which
they were able to confer upon themselves; they also agreed in this, that it was
every man's duty to serve God More patrio, after the manner of the place he
lived in, what ever were his private thoughts; and so obliged men to be
obscene, and lustful, unnatural toward their Children, inhumane to their
brethren, and the like, where customs of this nature did obtain in their
solemnities. Thus did they bind the world to those rites, which whilst they did
observe, they must be hateful and reproachful to a Deity, and infinitely
distant from that Piety which chiefly does consist in being like him; For what
is more Cum enim probrum jacitur in Principem patriae bonum atque utilem, nonne
tanto est indignius, quanto a veritate remotius and a vita illius alienius;
quae igitur supplicia sufficient, cum deo fit ista tam notoria tam insignis
injuria? August. de C. D. l. 2. c. 9.
reproachful to an holy God, then to conceive we are as pleasing to him by the
most vile obscenities, as by the purest actions? And what is more repugnant to
this good and merciful Creator, then to imagine he seeks the ruin of his
creatures?

. 10. 4ly, THEY who obtained the best repute for wisdom, and had gone farthest
of all the heathens in pursuit of knowledge, after all their search, were
forced to confess their ignorance and blindness touching the nature of a God,
and the concernments of another world. Socrates confessed he knew not any thing
concerning them. Democritus and Anaxagoras, Anaximander and Empedocles,
Pherecydes, Protagoras and Melissus, and almost all the Ancients did
acknowledge this. They concluded all matters of this nature to be 49 uncertain,
and beyond the reach of humane knowledge; and therefore either quietly 21
submitted to the popular error, and out of fear of punishment, complied with
the absurdest rites of any Country, as 42 thinking all religion to be a
politic contrivance; or if they durst and thought it worth their while to be
inquisitive, they ran out into vain and idle speculations concerning God; They
conceived opinions of him so strangely 53 various and uncertain, as could leave
but small impressions on the soul, and must needs render all her pious motions
faint and heartless. Such were the fluctuations of the wisest men in matters of
this nature, that others knew not what to say or think concerning them. Nullum
negotium est patefacere omnia in rebus humanis dubia, incerta, suspensa,
magisque omnia veresimilia quam vera. Min. p. 4.
This says a Cecilius might be made good, that all things of this nature are
uncertain, doubtful, and at the best but likely to be true. The various
apprehensions of wicked men (says Tum demum mihi procax Academia videbitur, si
aut consenserintalii, aut erit inventus aliquis qui quid verum sit invenerit.
de N. D. 1.
Cicero) will justify the doubtings and demurrs of Scepticks, and it will be
then sufficient to account them malepert, when others have found out the truth.
That nothing was concluding which their wisemen spoke, was the complaint of
(...). in Theaet.
Plato; and (...). apud Theodoret. de cur. Gr. affect.
Porphyry cries out, what opinion is there in all Philosophy not doubtful? what
apprehensions of the Gods which is not mere conjecture?

. 11. 5ly, THE Heathen Sages were as much deficient in the grounds and motives
to obedience, they having no experience of that love and mercy which the
scripture tendereth, and which alone can be the spring of that ingenuous
service which results from Gratitude; Nay they had no example to provoke, no
promise to encourage to the performance of their duty, nor prescript to direct
them in it, and therefore had no means to know what worship would be pleasing
to a Deity. They had a sense of (...) Max. Tyr. diss. 22. p. 218.
weakness and infirmity and of a (...) and disability of the soul to virtuous
actions, and of it is head strong bent and inclination to evil, but no assurance
of assistance in the ways of Virtue, or of its future recompense; nor could
they possibly obtain the knowledge of it without a revelation, those blessings
being free, and not the fruits of our desert, but Gods abundant Goodness. They
knew not what would reconcile them to God, when by their sins they had
offended him; nor being reconciled, what would continue and secure them in his
favor. This was the rise of that inhumanerite of sacrificing Infants, and men
of riper years. They that did this, conceited that nothing besides death could
make atonement for their sin against God; yet they were loath to dye for it
themselves, and therefore they made others dye; hoping God would accept them in
their stead. The 44 doctrine of the souls immortal state, and of a future
recompense was laughed at and contemned, not only by the school of Epicurus, but
the most learned men of the other sects. Their records tell us, that Pherecydes
Syrus was the first that taught it. It was the prevailing judgment of the 45
Stoic, that departed souls continued for a while, but still were subject to
corruption. And yet their Great Friend 46 Lipsius does confess, that this was
matter of contest among them. 47 Antoninus, Seneca, and others of them do very
much distrust, or 48 else deny it; as Aristotle also did; and that eternal
state of which we read so often in the Platonist, Credebam opinionibus magnorum
virerum rem gratssimam promittentium magis quam probantium. Scn. Ep. 102.
seems rather to have been their Guess than any matter of their Faith. They
ventured to say of it what they could not prove; and that they were not
confident of what they said, it appears by the style and manner of their
writing; every thing comes from them so coldly, and so timorously, so qualified
with ifs, and Ands, and peradventures, when they write upon this subject. Plato
himfelse when he had persued this theme with all his Rhetoric how lamely comes
he off at last? (...). in phaed.
of this (says he) I am not very confident. Nor is it to be wondered, that he
was so uncertain of the concernments of another life, who renounced all
certainty in this. The Pythagorean doctrine of the Metempsycosis condemned the
soul to a continual round of troubles; it imprisoned it in Brutes, and made its
prison (for so the body was by them esteemed) as immortal as it self. Among
those many Gods to whom they could address themselves for Corn and Wine, the
Gentiles had none from whom they craved or expected the 50 blessings of eternal
life. And for the 51 punishments of another life, those were but matter of
contempt and scorn to the wisest Heathens, who looked upon the 52 Christian
doctrine in this matter, as an absurd and melancholy fancy, a thing so vain
and so extravagant, that scarce their children and old wives could credit it.
They generally held, that either 53 death bereft men of all sense and being, or
changed this present for a better life. To the more virtuous and noble soul
the 54 Stoic would allow a future happiness as lasting as the world; but for
the simple and debauched Person, who had lived the Brute, they made him dye so
too; or else abide some very little season. The 55 Pythagorean and the
Platonist who make the Sinner come so often upon the stage, give him no small
encouragement to sin, and do at worst but threaten he shall live that brute
to which his sins have best disposed him. Among those few who held the soul
immortal, 56 some hence concluded her impassibility, and so her freedom from
all future punishments, then which no Greater motive to impiety could be
propounded. The 57 Stoic held the Soul to be a part of God, whence Pythagoras
qui censuit animumesse per naturam rerum omnium intentum and commeantem ex quo
nostri animi carperentur, non vidit distractione humanorum animorum discerpi
and dilacerari deum, and cum miseri animi essent, quod plerisque contingeret,
tum Dei partem esse miseram, quod fieri non potest. Cic. l. 1. de Not. D. p. 7.
B.
Tully well infers, that should it suffer, God must do so to.

. 12. AGAIN, they did ascribe the 58 origin of evil either to an incorrigible
fate, or to an evil Demon, or to that 59 matter which composed us, whose
inclinations, they presumed, it was not in the power of the God of Heaven to
correct; or to the 60 influence and overruling power of the Stars; and by so
doing they made all evil actions necessary, and therefore such as could deserve
no punishment. This also was the natural result of the 61 Platonic year, and
62 of the circuit of the Stoics; it being foolish to conceive that after any
period, all actions should become the same again, without some cause that should
infallibly produce the same effects continually. And yet those doctrines were
mostly the received opinions of the Heathen world. This circulation was the
professed doctrine, not only of the Platonist and Stoic, and of Pythagoras and
Heraclitus, but of all those who held the 62 world to be eternal. That all our
actions were the result of an 63 inexorable fate, was the opinion of Democritus
and Heraclitus, Empcdocles, and Aristotle, Parmenides and Lucippus, Chrysippus,
Celsus, Pythagoras, and Epicurus. Fatum homines quando audiunt usitata loquendi
consuetudine nihil aliud intolligunt nisi vim positionis syderum August. de C.
D. l. 5. C. 1. ibi esse fata Plato, Stoici, and caeteri prope Philosophi
existimarunt, Chaldaeos ac Aegiptios secuti, qui bus omnis Mathematicorum manus
suffragata est. Lud. Vives in locum.
The Platonist and Stoic, Chaldean and Egyptian, Pythagoras, and all the
lovers of Astrology, subjected all our actions to the power of the Stars, our
vices were ascribed to the incorrigible bent of matter by Plato, Zeno, and
Pythagoras, to an evil Genius by the General suffrage of the ancient Heathens.
The Stoics 65 held all sins were equal, and that all virtues were so too, and
by so doing they lessoned our concernment to prevent the one, or to pursue the
other. And now how perfectly destructive these opinions are to the service of a
Deity, and to all the parts, and the concernments of religion is exceeding
evident.

. 13. FOR first, since hope and fear are the two radical and leading passions
of the soul; seeing the expectations of reward, or future Good, and dread of
future evil, are the two sovereign motives to the renouncing of a lust, or the
embracing of a virtuous life; who ever comes to God in way of duty, must
believe that he is, and that he is a rewarder of all those that diligently seek
him. And sure that homage may be spared which brings me in only my labor for
my pains, and the complaint of David that he did cleanse his hands in vain
must be allowed of, if with like fredome from vindictive justice, and as much
temporal advantage of himself, he might have imbrued them in his Brothers
blood. And therefore to deny the being of a God who can reward or punish; to
question providence, and to say it is unconcerned in the affairs of men; to
make God a being who has neither Epicurus vero exanimis hominum radicitus
extraxit religione^, cum diis immortalibus opem and Gratiam sustulit; cum enim
optimam and praestantissimam naturam Dei esse dicat, negat idem esse in Deo
Gratiam, tollit id quod maxim proprium est optimae praestantissimaeque
naturae: quid enim melius aut quid praestantius bonitate and beneficentia qua
cum carere deum vult neminem deo, nec Deum, nec hominem, carum, neminem ab eo
amari, neminem diligi vult. Cic. de N. D. l. 1. p. 25.
love nor hatred, affection or concern for what we do; to set up fate and
evil Demons, stars and matter to control and overrule him; and to make the
expressions of his power and Goodness necessary, and therefore such as lay no
obligations on us to returns of love, is to renounce Religion, and the worship
of a Deity; because these apprehensions take off all the motives to it.

. 14. NAY seeing God is an all powerful Being, and therefore able to dispense
rewards and punishments according to our works; what ever can induce me to
believe he will not do it, must also force me to conclude that he is wholly
careless in those matters; that he does not love that virtue, which he will not
crown, defend, and cherish: nor hate that vice, which he will not restrain and
punish; it being the most natural result of hatred to show a Great displeasure,
and where our power is equal to our will, to leave some tokens of dislike and
opposition to what we hate, by our endeavors to suppress and crush it. As on
the other hand it is the genuine effect of love to wish and to endeavor, where
our power meets with nothing to control it, the preservation and welfare of
the object loved. And therefore it is folly to conceive that Gratitude should
lead me to the pursuance of that virtue which will not be Grateful, or the
forbearance of that vice, which cannot possibly displease the Person to whom I
stand obliged to express my gratitude.

. 15. 2ly, SINCE evident it is, that all things here do come alike to all, and
there is one event unto the just and unjust. Since it is not the experience
only, but the complaint and scandal of the world, that wicked persons flourish
in it like a green bay tree; that they are fat and well liking, and often have
a late and quiet passage to their Graves. In a word since here we find no
dispensations of rewards or punishments, according to the Good or bad
demeanours of mankind; it follows, that those doctrines which deny the future
being of the soul, and make its bliss or misery conclude with its existence in
the body, must render Piety not only useless, but often destructive to the
interest both of the soul and body, and so repugnant to our reason.

. 16. 3ly, SINCE all rewards dispensed by the hand of providence must be the
consequents of actions, ordered according to God's will and precepts, and
tending to his honor; and seeeing all the punishments inflicted by Him, must
be the products of such actions as bear an opposition to his will, and so are
proper acts of disobedience; (it being inconsistent with the wisdom, as well
as with the justice of a God, to give rewards to what does infinitely displease
him, and reflects on him with dishonor;) to leave the soul uncertain of his
will, must clip the wings of the most fledged devotion. For when beholding the
variety of men's inventions to appease a Diety, and pay their homage to him,
their soul could only pitch on one, and that as disputable as the rest; it must
be either tempted to put the matter to a venture, and renounce Gods' service,
or else be scared into superstition, or an immoderate dread of God. For what
can free the soul from endless terrors, when it can arrive at no security,
that what it does, is acceptable to that God, from whom it must expect a future
and eternal recompense, according to its actions in this life.

. 17. 4ly, SEEING the will is guided by the convictions of the judgment, where
this does doubt and fluctuate, its influence upon the will, especially when
tempted to oppose its dictates by the strongest passions and inclinations of
the soul, and by all the pleasures of our senses, must be inconsiderable. For
whether we are moved by hopes or fears, the terrors of an evil threatened, or
the expectations of a future good; the more our doubtings are of what we hope
or fear, the less our judgments are convinced or satisfied, and so much the
less able they are to prevail, or stand their ground against the strength of
our affections and the importunity of our passions.

. 18. 5ly, SINCE what it is not in my power to avoid, it cannot be my duty to
avoid, and what does follow from the laws of fate, and those extrinsick causes
whose operations are immutable, is also unavoidable, it follows, that those
doctrines which make our sinful actions to proceed from such a cause, must make
it cease to be my duty to avoid them.

. 19. THE Heathen had as gross conceptions in matters of morality, as of
Religion toward God, they embraced opinions which thwarted all the duties of
the second table, and acted sutably to those opinions. Christianity indeed
calls for the largest Bowels of Col. 3.12, 13.
compassion to our Brother, and an entire Gal. 6.10.
forgiveness of his offenses against us. It enjoins us Romans 13.9.
to do Good to all, and bear the same affection to others, which we do to our
selves, it pronounces Mat. 5.22. 1 John 3.15.
damnation upon those who indulge any causeless passion, that may Provoke them
to do mischief to him; it tells us no murderer can have eternal life, and so
prevents the shedding of our Brothers blood, and all the mischieves of revenge
and passion; so well does it consult the peace and welfare of mankind. Whereas
among the Heathen-, it was held the sign of a low 65 dastard spirit to pass by
an injury; and their 66 Good man, when provoked, might do the greatest
mischiefs. Lycurgus his laws were wholly Lycurgi leges agrestes and
sanguinariae erant ut Plato and Aristotiles notarunt, finis enim earu^ uon erat
alius quam ut optimos bellatores facerent Spartanos L. vives in August. de C.
D. l. 2. C. 16.

(...). Arist. de Repl. l. 7. c. 14.


sanguinary, and only did intend to make the Spartans the more able murderers;
Their 6i gladiation was but an art to kill, their sacrifices and service to
their Gods were stained with the blood of Infants, and men of riper years. 6g
Mercy was by the Stoic made a vice, self 69 murder was held sometimes a duty
by Epicurus and the Stoic, and made the 70 common practice of Philosophers. To
cut and launch, to be cruel to, and to unman themselves was to be pleasing to
their bloody Dieties.

. 20. 2ly, The Christians rule commands the greatest Chastity, Mat. 5.28. Heb.
13.4. 1 Th. 1.4.4, 7.
the lustful eye is by that law adultery and fornication; damnation is the
punishment of both. The Christian is to possess his vessel in the greatest
purity, and not indulge to an immodest unbeseeming Gesture. His bond of
matrimony is such as never can be canceled, and he that takes a second to his
bed (though married to her) whilst the first survives, commits adultery; of
which this only reason can be given, that the first remains his Wife, and
Christ permits not to assume a second to her, and that our matrimonial contract
gives the power of our body wholly to her, and therefore renders us unjust if
we presume to give it to an other Person: But now the 71 Heathen rites were
many of them full of the most vile obscenities, their temples were the worst of
stews; Amongst the 72 Cyprians and Babylonians their women were obliged to
repair unto them to commit adultery, and by so doing were made sacred to the
Gods: the 73 Lydian Cyprian, Armenian, and Phaenician Virgins did commit
whordome in their Temples, till by so doing they had earned a dowry; their
service was the prostitution of their souls to lust, and fit only to be tendered
to a Phallus, a Priapus, or such like beastly Deities. 74 plurality of wives
was common both to Jew and Gentile, 75 no wonder the Philosophers were free to
lend them when they could spare so many; the Stoic and the Platonist allowed
community of wives, the 76 Cynicks, Diogenes, and Theodorus fulfilled their
lusts publicly in the market place; It is said that many Indians did the like;
78 Incest was commonly allowed, it had the approbation of Philosophers, and was
79 practiced by diverse nations. To enjoy a Mother or a Sister, was a common
thing, only with the softer Persian and Egyptian, but with the wise Greek and
the Athenian, from whom the custom was derived to the Persian. To use a common
Strumpet was no disgrace to any man; it was frequent with the 81 Philosophers,
and others had their liberty to do it when their lust provoked them; 82 Stews
were allowed and paid their custom and their tribute, both the 83
Philosophers at Athens, and Senators of Rome were wholly given up to the love
of Boys; and to the sin of Sodom, for which God rained fire and brimstone
down upon four Cities; and made the land of Canaan spew forth its inhabitants,
and yet their 84 Oracles allowed the same; the 85 Stoics held it lawful to use
the most obscene and filthy words, and to do 86 actions as immodest, and fit
only to be used in 87 Plato's common wealth, where women were commanded to
uncover what nature bound them to conceal. Lastly, such was the 88 vileness of
their secret Mysteries that they disowned and renounced them, when they were
charged with them by the Christian, but all in vain, for they were either
practiced or approved by them as Arnobius does largely show.

. 21. 3ly, CHRISTIANITY forbids not only violence and rapine, opression and
extorsion, but it restrains us from all the arts of fraud and overreaching
practices; it commands us not to take advantage of our Brothers wants, or
ignorance, or weakness; as knowing that God is the avenger of all such. These.
4.6.
Whereas amongst the 89 Spartans and Egyptians, Sicilians, and Barbarians,
theft was a thing permitted and commended, to rob their neighbor was not their
shame, but matter of their glory, all was their own that they could get by
fighting, Cic. apud Lact. Epit. c. 1.
and to restore what by violence they had taken, must have reduced the the
Greatest Monarchs unto the condition of poor Cottagers.

. 22. 4ly, THE Christian doctrine makes it a part of the new creature, Col. 3.9.
Ephesians. 4.24, 25. Apoe. 22.15.
and of that image to which Christianity renews us to speak the truth and put
away the lying lip; It speaks damnation to the man that makes or loves a lie.
Whereas the Heathens Rule was this, ubi expedit mendacium dicere dicatur. 90
Philosophers, Layers, Physicians, Rheroricians maintained it sometimes lawful,
viz. when it was useful to preserve themselves, or to deceive their enemy.

. 23. LASTLY, Christianity did work a 91 through reformation upon all its
Proselyts and made the worst of Christians better than the Exactest Heathens.
And in this argument the Christian chiefly triumphed, that whilst 92 Philosophy
did prove so ineffectual to reduce the world to sobriety, Christianity did
mightily prevail on the Professors of it, and exalt them to the Greatest
purity, a thing so certain, that even 93 Heathens did confess it, and the
Apostate Julian did urge their pattern and example to provoke the Heathens to
love and piety; and which is most to be admired, this reformation was effected
(notwithstanding all lets and prejudices which we have largely mentioned) on
many thousands at a time, and that by speaking of such words as seemed to carry
nothing of power and demonstration in them; which is an argument more
efficacious, than their miraculous Gifts of healing, to prove the assistance of
a Deity. Whereas the lives of Heathens after all arts and subtilties,
insinuations, Rhetoric and demonstrations, which their Philosophy could boast
of, were suitable unto their loose opinions, and Guilty of most vile enormities.
Philosophy did but amuse their understandings, and employ their heads, it left
the manners of the wisest Sages as corrupt as ever; nor was it much to be
expected that it should it be otherwise if we consider.

. 24. FIRST, that the wisdom of the Greeks was either 95 purposely concealed
from the vulgar, or incommunicable to them, the 65 Pythagorean held the ruder
Person who was not versed in Mathematics unable to receive his precepts; they
could not work on the unruly passions of our Youth; that 97 age was deemed
unfit for philosophical instructions, or for moral virtues; whereas the
Christian doctrine wrought its effectual reformation upon those of all ages,
sexes and conditions, as being not the empty rudiments of humane wisdom, but
the demonstration of the Spirit, and that which was enforced upon the Soul not
by the slender powers of Rhetoric, but by that power of God which nothing can
resist.

. 25. 2ly, THAT they had no discoveries of what was 98 just and unjust, but
were entirely left to the dim light of nature which if not helped by education
and instruction, will not be able to resist the force and interest of passion,
affection and example, and all the importunities of an unbridled appetite;
their Gods gave them no rules of piety, no revelation of their concernment to
be good; and hence says Maximus (...). M. Tyr. diss. 1. p. 7. (...). Id. diss.
25. p. 243.
Tyrius, could I consult an Oracle which would return a plain and undeceiving
Answer, I would enquire about those Great concerns of piety and justice, in
which the Gods have been so silent and obscure

. 26. 3ly THAT they continually did thwart 99 each other, and what ws equity
and goodness to the one, was to the other highly culpable, what seemed the
worst of follys unto some, was to the others innocent; what any 100 rightly did
conceave they were not able to defend against their adversarys, as having no
foundations whereupon to buid.

Besides those sects 110 and tenets, Authors and opiniosn which overthrew the
pillars of true piety, Justice, and equity, and introduced the greatest loosnes
and corruption, were as freely tought, and had as full permission to be
discoursed of, and embraced by any, s those of Plato and the Stoics: The
Epicure and Sceptick, the Cynick, and Peripatetick had no restraints upon them,
but as great freedom to corrupt the people as others to instruct them: nay it is
observable that those vile opinions flourished 102 most, and that the Abettors
of them did 103 accord the best among themselves, and had as great a stipend
104 from the Roman Emperors as those of any other Sect.

. 27. 4ly THAT they were destitute of motives and inducements from a superior
interest which should enforce upon them those acts of equity and justice. We
see amongst Christians self interest so strong, and worldly love so powerful
in those who most pretend to live above it, and to be crucified unto it, as
that too often it tempts them to act in opposition to all the Rules of charity
and justice, and if the light of Christian doctrine and all the motives of
eternal bliss and misery are unsuccesfull, no wonder that the light of nature
should be so, hence also it was that they 105 took up with carnal pleasures;
and held them the 106 chiefest good, and many of them would pretend they knew
no other, and many made the pleasure of the mind to vail to them.

. 28. 5ly THE Philosophers were so taken up with contemplations as to neglect
Morality, Hence we are told that Socrates 107 first introduced it into familys,
and towns, and countries, and made it matter of the Schools enquiry, the issue
of their disquisitions was too often this, that there was 108 nothing just or
unjust in it self 108 but as the Laws of Nations by their peculiar
constitutions made it so: Or that the truth in matters of this nature could be
hardly found, and therefore it was wisdom to embrace what they already found
established.

. 29. 6ly THE examples and worship 109 of their deitys did give encouragement
to the leudest actions, for to be come the vilest miscreants was to be likest
to those Heathen Deitys. Hence Porphyry 110 complains of this as the matter of
his Greatest trouble, De Rep. l. 2. p. 249.
and Plato took such care that what they had received from their Ancestors
should not be taught the younger fry, least they should say with him in the
Comedian, Terent.
when when Guilty of Adultery and incest, and such scarlet sins. Quod fecit is
qui templa caeli summa sonitu concutit, Ego homuncio hoc non facerem?

. 30. AND now to give you the result of these particulars, If it were so great
a matter of admiration to Amelius that one of these Barbarians should have the
same opinion and conception of the production of the world with Heraclitus; if
one sentence of our Savior was thought so memorable by a Heathen 112 Emperor
as to be writ in diverse places of his Imperial Court, is it not matter of the
greatest wonder, that those Barbarians should in all other tenets which concern
our Faith and manners so much out strip the wisest of Philosophers and best of
Moralists, and with the Greatest perspicuity and most prevailing evidence
deliver to the world what they in vain had studied to discover, or persuade
them to, and what they could not but acknowlegde to be worthy both of their
approbation and imitation?

ANNOTATIONS On the 10th. Chapter.
1 THE common issew of their search was only scepticisme.] (...), Socrates
apud Plat. in Phaed. cum Zenone Archesilas sibi omne certamen instituit non
pertinacia aut studio vincendi, ut mihi quidem videtur, sed earum rerum
obscuritate quae ad confessionem ignorationis adduxerant Socratem, velut jam
ante Socratem Democritum, Anaxagoram, Empedoclem, omnes poene veteres. Cicero
Acad. quaest. lib. 1. p. 57. de Socrate vide Diog. Laert. l. 2. p. 41. ed. n.
Aristot. Sophist. Elench. l. 2. c. 34. de Democrito Laert. l. 9. p. 957. de
Protagora l. 9. p. 662. de Anaxarcho l. 9. p. 667. de Pyrrhone ibid. de
Heraclito Stobaeum, ser. 19. de Xenophane Empedocle and Platone. l. 9. p. 255.
ed. n. de seipso Cicero. Non sumus ii quibus nihil verum esse videatur, sed ii
qui omnibus veris falsa quaedam adjuncta esse dicamus tanta similitudine ut in
iis nulla insit certa judicandi and and assentiendi nota, de not. Deorum l. 1.
p. 4. vid. Acad. qu. l. 2. p. 9. A. B. p. 7. A. l. 1. p. 51. vide sextum Empir.
adv. Mathematicos p. 146.153. Gatakerum in Anton. p. 199.200. Laert. l. 9. p.
677.678.

2 Some of those Heathens plainly denied the being of a God.] (...). Plutarch.
de Plac. Philosoph. l. 1. c. 7. Diog. Laert. l. 2. p. 152. (...), Philostrat.
de Magis Persicis.

3 Many of them doubted and demurred upon it] (...). Protag. apud Laertium p.
250. vide Arnobium l. 2. p. 82.

4 When a cross act of Providence did tempt them to it.] (...); Plutarch. de
Plac. Philos. l. 1. c. 7. (...)

(...)
(...)
Simpl. in Epictetum c. 38. p. 223. vide Ciceronem de Natura Deorum, l. 3. p.
76. Caecilium apud Minutium p. 5. Ouzelium Notis in eundem p. 29.

5 Epicurus his axiom being this] Quod aeternum beatumque est id nec habere
ipsum negotii quicquam, nec exhibere alteri. Cic. de N. Deorum l. 1. p. 11. de
divin. l. 2. p. 130. (...). Plutarch. de Plac. Philos. l. 1 c. 7. p. 881.

6 By Aristotle and his party it was confined to Heaven.] Aristoteles Dei
providentiam usque ad Lunae regionem progredi censet, infra vero neque
providentiae scitis regi, nec Angelorum open consultisque sustentari, nec vero
Daemonum perspicientiam putat intervenire, proptereaque tollit omnem
providentiam, negatque praenosci futura, Chalcid in Tim. Plat. ed. Leyd. p.
345. (...), Theodoret. de cur. Gr. Affec. p. 77. Plutarch. de Plac. Philos. l.
2. c. 3. vide Laert. l. 5. p. 321.

7 It Was by the Platonist committed unto Demons] (...), Plato in Timaeo. vide
Alcinoum de doctrina Platonica. c. 15. etc. 16. August. de C. D. l. 9. c. 1.
etc. 16. Max. Tyr. diss. 27. p. 259.

8 And by the Pythagorean] qui statuit, (...). Diog. Laert. l. 8. p. 587.

9 The whole Heathen World] (...). Julian. apud Cyrill. Alex. l. 4. p. 115.
vide etiam p. 143. 148. (...) (...). Plutarch. de Orac. def. p. 418. and p.
414. (...). vide p. 416. (...). Numen. apud Eusebius. Praep. l. 11. c. 18. (...).
Celsus apud Orig. p. 247.

10 They robbed us of our chiefest motives to adore and imitate him] (...).
Cyrill. Alex. contra Jul. l. 2. p. 61. vid. p. 68. 117. and rursus p. 60. (...);

11 Some doubted of the thing] (...) (...). Just. Mart. p. 208. Audimus quosdam
philosophandi studio deditos, partim ullam negare vim esse divinam, partim an
sit quotidie quaerere. Arnob. l. 1. p. 18.

12 Denied a special Providence] (...). Arrian. in Epict. l. 1. c. 12. (...).
Just. Mart. p. 36. and de Xenophane Plutarch. (...). Apud Eusebius. Praep. Evang.
l. 1. c. 8. Atque hinc (...). Justin. p. 218.

13 The Stoics did restrain the actings of this Providence unto the great
concerns of earth] Balbus ex Stoicorum sententia, Cic. de N. D. l. 2. sub
finem. Magna Dii curant, parva negligunt, and l. 3. p. 77. At enim minora Dii
negligunt, neque agellos singulorum, nec viticulas persequuntur. (...) (...).
Eurip. apud Grot. vide Plutarch. de leg. Poet. c. 7. and de irac. coercenda.

14 Some held them 30000, others conceived them to be numberless.] (...). Max.
Tyr. dissert. 1. p. 15. Nominum non magnus numerus, ne in Pontificiis quidem
nostris, Deorum autem innumerabilis. Cic. de N. D. p. 18. and 79. and p. 12. ex
hoc illud efficitur, si mortalium tanta multitudo sit, esse immortalium non
minorem. Et si quae interimant, innumerabilia sunt, etiam ea quae conservent,
infinita esse debere. Sit ista quam praedicatis plebs numinum, sint Deorum
innumerae Gentilitates, unde vobis compertum est, hine dii sint in caelo quos
colitis? fingamus enim vos colere deos mill, potest forsitan fieri ut deorum
millia centum sint, potest ut hoc amplius. Arnob. l. 3. p. 102.

15 To an unknown Deity] Hence their Sacrifices, (...); their (...). Laert. in
Epimenide p. 78. (...). vide Vossium de Idol. l. 1. c. 1. p. 7.

16 But evil and pernitious] Pernitiosis etiam rebus non modo nomen Deorum
tribuitur, sed etiam sacra constituuntur. Cic. de N. D. p. 72. Labeo malos deos
propitiari caedibus and tristibus supplicationibus asserit, bonos autem
obsequiis laetis and Jocundis. August. de C. D. l. 2. c. 11. (...). Eusebius.
Praep. Evang. l. 5. c. 3. (...). Porphyr. de Orac. Philos. apud Eusebius. Praep.
Evang. l. 5. c. 8.

17 The Sun and Moon and the whole host of Heaven] (...), vult Pythagoras
Laert. l. 8. p. 582. Stoici. Singulas stellas numer as Deos. Cotta ad Balbum.
Cic. de N. D. l. 3. p. 67. (...). Plutarch. de plac. Philos. l. 1. c. 7. vide
Anton, l. 8. s. 19. Plato in Timaeo dicit, and in legibus, and mundum Deum
esse, and coelum, and astra, and terram, and animos, and eos quos majorum
institutis accepimus. Cic. de N. D. l. 1. p. 8. (...). Plato in Epin. p. 702.
p. 699. (...). Sanchoniathon apud Cyr. Alex. in Jul. l. 6. p. 205. (...). Plato
in Cratylo. (...). Plutarch. adv. Colot. p. 1123. vide Porph. Ep. ad Anebonem
apud Eusebius. Praep. Evang. l. 3. c. 4. Cic. de N. D. l. 2. p. 36. and 42. Celsum
apud Orig. l. 5. p. 234.

18 Men with whom their Forefathers had convers'd] (...) (...). Sanchon. apud
Cyrill. Alex. in Jul. l. 6. p. 205. In Craecia multos habent ex hominibus deos,
cuncta Craecia Aesculapium, Herculem, Tyndaridas. Cic. de N. D. p. 37. (...).
Aristot. Eth. l. 7. c. 1. (...). Diod. Sic. l. 6. Hos deos medioxumos vocabant,
eorumque festa, necia. Vives in Aug. de C. D. l. 2. c. 14. Vide Herod. Clio p.
56. Diod. Sic. l. 2. p. 9. Lact. l. 1. c. 15. etc. 10. p. 43. Comment. Aug. de
C. D. l. 18. c. 3.4.8. Minut. p. 21.22.

19 To whose departed Souls] (...). Plato apud Eusebius. Praep. Ev. l. 12. c. 3.
Horum cum remanerent animi, atque aeternitate fruerentur, Dii rite sunt habiti,
cum and optimi essent, and aeterni. Cic de N. D. l. 2. p. 38. vide Max, Tyr.
diss. 27. p. 266. 267.

20 Upon designs of Policy] In plerisque civitatibus intelligi potest augendae
virtutis gratia, quo libentius Reip. causa periculum adiret optimus quisque,
virorum fortium memoriam honor Deorum immortalium consecratam. Cic. de N. D.
l. 3. p. 69. (...); Plato de Reip.

21 To Emperors] (...). Theodor. de cur. Gr. affect. p. 43. Justin. Ap. p. 67.

22 They advanced the meanest creatures into Deitys, Earth, Fire, Water, Ayre]
(...). Herod. in Clio de Persis. (...). Laert. de Magis in Proem.

23 The fishes of the Sea, their Leeks and Onyons] Quidam illorum coluerunt
ovent, quidam Hircum, alii Vitulum and Porcum, nonnulli Corvum and Accipitrem,
and Vulturem, and Aquilam, alii vero Crocodilum, quidam Cattum, and Canem, and
Lupum, and Simiam, and Draconem, and Aspidem, alii Cepas and Allia, and Spinas.
Auct. Historiae Barlaami ubi de Aegyptiorum superstitionibus. Vide copiose de
his omnibus. Ouzel Comm. in Minut. p. 32.

24 Chose in practice to comply with all those rites which custom offered to
such execrable and ignoble Deities] Omnem istam ignobilem Deorum turbam, quam
longo aevo longa superstitio congessit, sic adorabimus, ut meminerimus cultum
eum, magis ad morem, quam ad rem pertinere: haec omnia sapiens observabit
tanquam legibus jussa, non tanquam Diis grata. Seneca apud August. de C. D. l.
6. c. 10. (...). Plato in Tim. vide August. de C. D. l. 10. c. 3. quae cum
recitaverat Theodor. haec addit, (...) (...). de cur. Gr. affect. sermon. 3. p.
43. and Velleius apud Ciceronem de eodem, in Timaeo dicit and in legibus,
mundum esse Deum and coelum and astra and terram and animos, and eos quos
majorum institutis accepimus, quae and per se sunt falsa perspicue, and inter
se vehementer repugnantia. l. 1. de N. D. p. 8. Orig. etiam (...). In Celsum l.
5. p. 277. Vide eadem de Cicerone reliquisque Philosophis apud Lact. l. 2. de
Orig. erroris c. 3.

25 The Stoic and the school of Epicurus held that God is a corporeal being]
(...). Orig. in Celsum l. 4. p. 169. (...). Theodoret. de cur. Gr. aff. sermon.
2. p. 37.

26 They universally fancied him to be of humane shape] Velleius apud Cic. a
natura habemus omnes omnium Gentium speciem nullam aliam nisi humanam Deorum,
quae enim alia forma occurrit unquam aut vigilanti cuiquam aut dormienti? l. de
N. D. p. 11.

27 They deemed an image requisite unto the worship of a Deity] In hac
consuestis part crimen nobis maximum impietatis affingere, quod non Deorum
alicujus simulacrum constituamus aut formam. Arnob. l. 6. ab initio. Verentur
ne omnie eorum religio inanis sit and vana; si nihil in praesenti videant quod
adorent, nec ullam religionem putant ubicunque illa non fulserint. Lact. l. 2.
c. 6. Minut. p. 10.

28 To limit and confine Gods power, and dispute his omnipresence] Molestum
illum volunt, inquietum, impudenter etiam curiosum, siquide^ adstat factis
omnibus, locis omnibus intererat, cum nec singulis inservire possit per
universa districtus, nec universis sufficere in singulis occupatus. Cecil. apud
Min. p. 10. de Christ. Dec. Templa his construimus, and imagines, ut eos
possumus coram and cominus intueri, affari de proximo, sub axe enim undo and
sub aetherio tegmine invocati si fuerint, nihil audiunt, and nisi de proximo
admoveantur iis preces, tanquam nihil dicatur, obstructi atque immobiles
stabunt. Ethnicus apud Arnob. l. 6. p. 192. cui sic regerit Arnob. Tollitur
ergo omnis spes opis, erit in duhio audiamini a diis necne, si quando res
sacras caeremoniarum conficitis debitis. Et rursus; Si omnes uno in tempore
rebus divinis factis, quod sua quosque necessitas cogitare compellit, poscunt
de numine, referendi beneficii quaenam omnibus spes erit, si non undique ad se
missam vocem Deus exaudiet? p. 192.193. (...). Max. Tyr, dissert. 27. p. 259.

29 Held him unable to do any thing without the help of matter] Nullo modo
arbitrabatur quicqua^ effici posse ab ea natura quae expers esset corporis, nec
vero quod efficeret, aut quod efficerctur, posse esse non corpus. Cic. de
Zenone Acad. qu. 1. p. 54. Neque enim materiam ipsam cohaercre potuisse, si
nulla vi contineretur, neque vim sine aliqua materia. ib. p. 53. A. Quod vero
sine corpore ullo Deum vult esse, id quale esse possit intelligi non potest,
careat enim sensu necesse est, careat prudentia, careat voluptate. Cic. de
Plat. l. 1. de N. D. p. 8. vide Lact. l. 7. c. 3.

30 And insufficient to correct those evil dispositions to which it inclined
us] (...) (...). Max. Tyr. diss. 25. p. 248. Amagno artifice prave formentur
multa, non quia cessat ars, sed quia id in quo exercetur saepe inobsequens est
arti. Sen. in Praefat. quaest. Not. l. 1. Non potest Artifex mutare materiam.
haec passa. est. quaedam separari a quibusdam non possunt. idem de Provid. c.
5. vide Gatak. in Anton. p. 54.66.

31 Of this evil Principle] Diog. Laert. de Magis ait, (...) (...). Plutarch.
de Iside and Osiride p. 369.370. (...); chrysostom. in Act. Apost. (...) B. vide
ib. plura.

32 The Peripatetick made him not to act at all] (...). Arist. pol. l. 7. c. 3.
and Eth. l. 10. c. 8. (...);

33 Or else to do it from the necessity of his nature] (...) (...). Arist. Met.
l. ult. c. 7.

34 The Platonist would not permit him to be free in the expressions of his
goodness] (...). Laert. l. 3. p. 229.

35 Some thought he could conceave no anger] Omnino irasci posse negatis Deum.
Cic. de N. D. l. 3. p. 78. (...). Plutarch. p. 1102. (...). Laert. l. 10. p.
755. vide D. Laert. l. 10. p. 285.300. ed. n. Plut. adv. Colotem Cic. de N. D.
l. 1. p. 11. Nemes. de Not. Hominis c. 44. Sen. l. 4. de Ben. c. 4. And hence
Lactantius infers that he destroyed the worship of a Deity, Si enim Deus nihil
unquam boni tribuit, si colentis obsequio nullam gratiam refert, quid tam vanum
tam stultum quam templa aedificare, sacrificia facere, dona confer, rem
familiarem minuere, ut nihil assequamur? l. de ira Dei. c. 8. and rursus. Quod
si negotium Deus nec habet nec exhibet, cur non ergo delinquamus? etc. ibid.
vide Sen. de ira l. 2. c. 27. de Ben. l. 4. c. 19. Arnob. l. 1. p. 10.12.
Celsum apud Orig. p. 229.280.

36 Prayer was rejected as an useless thing, not only by the School of
Epicurus] (...). Orig. in Celsum p. 68. vide M. Tyr. diss. 30. p. 294.295.

37 By the Pythagorean.] (...). D. Laert. de Pythag. p. 216.

38 The Stoics who deemed it needless] Quid votis opus est, fac teipsum
felicem. Sen. Ep. 31. and rursus, Quam stultum est optare cum possis a teipso
impetrare, non sunt ad coelum elevandae manus. Ep. 41. Judicium hoc omnium
mortalium est fortunam a Deo petendam. a seipso sumendam esse sapientiam. Cic.
de N. D. l. 3. p. 77. B. vineta, segets, oliveta, -- omnem denique commoditatem
prosperitatemque vitae a diis habemus, virtutem autem nemo unquam acceptam Deo
retulit, propter virtutem enim jure laudamur, and in virtute recte gloriamur,
quod non contingeret, si id donum a Deo non a nobis haberemus. ibid. vide eadem
apud Max. Try. diss. 22. p. 216.217. unde plutarchus optime, (...). de Stoic.
repug. c. 27.

39 To serve God more patrio] Hinc illa Mecaenatis ad August. apud Dion. (...).
l. 52. ritus familiae patrumque servanto, divos and eos qui coelestes semper
habiti colunto. leg. Romans apud Cic. de leg. l. 2. vide in c. 8. not. 1.

40 To be uncertaine] (...). Pherycydes apud D. Laert. l. 1. p. 86. (...).
Socrat. in Euthyp. p. 49. Dicendum est mihi ad ea quae sunt a t dicta, sed ita
nihil ut affirmem, quaeram omnia, dubitans plerumque and mihi ipsi diffidens:
si enim aliquid certi haberem quod dicerem, ego ipse divinarem, qui esse
divinationem nego. Cic. de div. l. 2. ab initio: and rursus, Quearitur primum
sintne Dii nec ne, difficile est negare, credo, si in concione quaeratur, sed
in hujusmodi sermon and consessu facillimum, itaque Ego ipse Pontifex qui
ceremonias religionesque publicas sanctissime tuendas arbitror, Hoc quod primum
est esse deos, persuaderi mihi non opinione solum, sed etiam ad veritatem plane
vellem, multa enim occurrunt quae conturbent, ut interdum nulli esse videantur.
Cotta apud Cic. de N. D. l. 1. p. 13. Vos cum perturbare Philosophiam been jam
constitutam velitis, Empedoclem, Anaxagoram, Democritum, Parmenidem,
Xenophanem, Platonem etiam and Socratem profertis. Lucullus apud Cic. Ac. qu.
l. 2. p. 9.

41 Submitted to the popular errour] Existimo tardiores ad hanc sententiam
multos esse factos, quippe cum poenam ne dubitatio quidem effugere potuisset.
Cic. de N. D. l. 1. p. 14. and Plutarch. de Epicuro (...). lib. non posse vivi
suaviter etc. p. 1102. B.

42 As thinking all Religion to be a Politic contrivance] Quid hi qui dixerunt
totam de Diis immortalibus opinionem fictam esse ab hominibus sapientibus Reip.
causa, ut quos ratio non posset, eos ad officium religio duceret. Cic. de
Natura Deorum l. 1. p. 25. vide p. 16.

43. So strangly various and uncertain] Cic. de N. D. l. 1. ab initio. Qui Deos
esse dixerunt tanta sunt in varietate ac dissensione constituti, ut eorum
molestum sit dinumer are sentantias. Et p. 5. Profecto eos ipsos qui se aliquid
certi habere videantur, addubitare cogit doctissimorum hominum de re maxima
tanta dissensio. Et. l. 3. sub finem. Haec fere dicere habui de natura Deorum,
non ut eam tollerem, sed ut intelligeretis quam esset obscura, and quam
difficiles explicatus haberet. p. 79. vid. Arnob. l. 1. p. 18. Minut. p. 5.
(...). Ep. ad Anebonem Aegyptium. Et rursus, (...). idem ibidem.

44 The doctrine of the Souls immortal state] Caterve veniunt contradicentium,
non solum Epicureorum, quos equidem non despicio, sed nescio quomodo
doctissimus quisque contemnit. Cic. Tusc. l. 1. p. 189. B.

45 The Stoic that departed Souls continued for a while] (...). Laert. in
Zenone l. 7. Diu mansuros aiunt esse animos, semper negant. Cic. Tusc. 1. vide
Lips. Phys. Stoic. l. 3. c. 11. Gatak. in Anton. p. 139.

46 Lipsius does confess that this was matter of contest among them] Rarus ipse
est Epictetus, in immortalitate, aut and longaevitate animorum adstruenda: quid
adstruenda? vix tangenda: nimirum inter Stoicos ipsos controversa ea res, nec
consensu recepta. Phys. Stoic. l. 3. diss. 11. Panaetius apud Ciceronem,
interire animas arbitratur, Tusc. 1. p. 190. Arnob. l. 2. p. 82. vide Gat. in
Anton. p. 141.142.143.

47 Antoninus Seneca and others much distrust] Antonin. (...). l. 7. s. 32.
vide l. 3. s. 3. l. 7. s. 50. l. 8. s. 25.58. Seneca. Fortasse, si modo
sapientum vera fama est, recepitque nos locus alius, quem putamus periisse,
praemissus est. Sen. Ep. 63. vide eundem. Ep. 54.78.82.102. ad Mar. c. 19.
Socrates apud Platonem, (...). Et rursus, (...). In Phaedone (...) (...). Apol.
Socr. Cic. Ea quae vis ut potero explicabo, nec tamen quasi Pythius Apollo
certa ut sint, and fixa quae dixero, sed ut homunculus unus e multis probabilia
conjectura consequens, ultra enim quo progrediar quam ut verisimilia videam non
habeo. Tusc. 1. p. 175. A. vide p. 176.177.189.195. and l. 2. p. 202.

48 Or else deny it] (...); Anton. l. 5. s. 13. (...). Arrian. in Epict. l. 3.
c. 13.

49 Aristotle] (...). Atticus de Aristot. apud Eusebius. praep. Evang. l. 15. c.
5. Aristotelem qui animarum immortalitatem e medio omnem sustulit, silentio
praetereo. Aenaeas Gazaeus in Theophrast. Voss. de Idol. l. 3. p. 463.

50 The blessings of eternal life] Varro ipse ostendens in omnibus quid sit
cujusque munus, and propter quid cuique debeat supplicari, in hac universa
diligentia nullos demonstravit vel nominavit Deos, a quibus vita aeterna
poscenda sit, propter quam unam proprie nos Christiani sumus. August. de C. D.
l. 6. c. 9.

51 The punishments of another life, these were but matter of contempt and
scorn to the wisest Heathens] Naturae cognitionem admirantur, ejusque Inventori
and Principi gratias agunt exultantes, liberatos enim se per cum dicunt
gravissimis Dominis terrore sempiterno, and diurno and nocturno metu: quo
terrore? quo metu? quae est Anus tam delira quae timeat ista quae vos, si
Physica non didicissetis, timeretis? Cic. Tusc. l. 1. p. 173. (...). Plutarch.
de superst. p. 166. and l. non posse suaviter etc. (...). Plutarch. Mor. p.
1104, and p. 1105. (...) Vide Juv. Sat. 2. v. 149. Arnob. l. 2. p. 52. Lact. l.
7. c. 26. Platonem apud Eusebius. l. 12. c. 6.

52 They looked upon this Doctrine as an aburd and melancholy fancy] Audetis
ridere nos cum gehennas dicimus, and inextinguibiles ignes. Arnob. l. 2. p. 52.
(...) Just. Mar. Apol. 2. p. 47.

53 They concluded that either death bereft men of all sense and being, or
changed the present for a better life] (...) Aristot. l. 3. de Mor. c. 11.
Gradietur ad mortem, in qua aut summum bonum, aut nullum malum esse cognovimus.
Cicero Tusc. 1. p. 198. v. p. 200. eundem de finibus 2. p. 102. and Caesar apud
Salust. in Catil. Mortem aerumnarum requiem, non cruciatum esse (dicit) eam
cuncta mortalium mala dissolvere, ultra neque curae, neque gaudio locum esse.
Vide Marc. Anton. l. 6. s. 28. Epict. l. 3. c. 13. Senec. Ep. 24.65.72.
Socratem in Apol. Gatak. in Anton. l. 3. p. 90.

54 The Stoick] Sapientibus placet non cum corpore extingui animas magnas. Sen.
Ep. 57. (...). Numenius de Stoicis apud Eusebius. Praep. Evang. l. 15. c. 17. vide
Lips. Phys. Stoic. l. 3. diss. 11. Gat. in Anton. p. 139.140.

55 The Pythagorean and the Platonist] Inter Platonis sententias hanc refert
Laert. (...) l. 3. Ed. St. p. 227. vide Minutium p. 38. Nemesium, (...) c. 2.
ipsum Platonem de Rep. l. 10. p. 620. in Tim. tom. 3. f. 104. (...) Author est
Diod. Siculus l. 1. and Herodot. Euterpe. (...), dicitur apud Olympiod. in
Platonis Alcib. Iudaeos, Gallos, Germanos eadem docuisse, vide apud Ouzel in
Minut. p. 202.

56 Some hence concluded her impassibility] (...) Just. Mart. Dial. cum Tryph.
p. 218. Rem enodabilem suscipit, ut cum animas dicat immortales, puniri eas
dicat tamen, and doloris afficiat sensu. Arnob. de Platone. l. 2. p. 52. Et
rursus. Quis hominum non videt, quod sit immortale, quod simplex, nullum posse
dolorem admittere? Haec ille, Theologia Ethnica instructus magis quam
Christiana.

57 The Stoic held the Soul to be a part of God] (...), Epict. dissert. l. 1.
c. 1. Dei pars. Seneca, Ep. 92. (...) Marc. Anton. l. 5. s. 27. of the
Pythagorean see Cic. de N. D. l. 1. D. Laert. l. 8. (...) Plutarch. quaest.
Platon. l. 1.

58 The Origin of evil either to an incorrigible fate] (...) Plato in Theat. p.
176. and Celsus apud Orig. p. 205. (...) Et rursus, (...) p. 207. Whence
Origin. concludes, (...) p. 208.

59 Or to that matter which composed us] Pythagoras ait, Existente providentia
mala quoque necessario substitisse, propterea quod sylva sit, and cadem sit
malitia praedita. Chalc. in Tim. Plato de Diis minoribus. (...) in Tim. p. 69.
Hinc de Platone August. Is ad creatoris injuriam, carnis accusavit naturam, de
C. D. l. 14. c. 5. and Theodoret. inter ejus opiniones hanc ponit, (...) addit
vero, (...) De cur. Gr. aff. ser. 3. p. 63. (...) Theod. ser. 6. p. 87. vide
Orig. in Celsum p. 207.

60 Or to the influence and overruling power of the Stars] (...) Porphyr. de
elect. Philos. apud Theodor. ser. 10. p. 138. (...) Porph. apud Eusebius. Praep.
Ev. l. 3. c. 4. (...) Mercur. ad Ammonem. Stob. Ecc. Phys. l. 1. p. 13. Et
rursus, (...) ibid. Eandem sententiam tribuit Platoni and Pythagorae,
Theodoret. de cur. Gr. aff. ser. 5. p. 74. vide Lud. viv. in Aug. de C. D. l.
5. c. 1.

61 Of the Platonic year] (...) Orig. in Celsum l. 5. p. 245. Vide Spencerum
in locum. Cic. de fin. bon. l. 2. p. 102.

62 Of the circuit of the Stoicks] (...) Orig. 16. p. 244. and 246. Vide
Spencerum in locum p. 63. de Chrysippo vide Lact. l. 7. c. 23. de Heracl.
tradit Laert. eum asseruisse (...) l. 9. p. 632. vide M. Anton. l. 3. s. 3. l.
5. s. 13. l. 10. s. 7. l. 11. s. 1. and Gatakeri annotata in eundem. Philonem
de Mundo. Lipsium Phy. St. l. 2. c. 22.23.

63 Who held the World to be eternal] (...) Stob. Ec. Phys. l. 1. p. 44.

64 That all our actions were the result of an inexorable fate was the opinion
of Democritus, and Heraclitus, Empedocles, and Aristotle, Parmenides, and
Leucippus, Chrysippus, Epicurus, and Pythag.] Duae sententiae erant veterum
Philosophorum, una eorum qui censerent omnia ita fato fieri, ut id fatum vim
necessitatis afferret, in qua sententia Democritus, Heraclitus, Empedocles,
Aristoteles fuit. Cic. de fato. De Democrito vide Laert. l. 9. p. 658. Sext.
Emp. adv. Math. p. 329. de Heraclito Laert. p. 631. Plutarch. de pl. Philos. l.
2. c. 27. (...) Theodor. de cur. Gr. aff. ser. 9. p. 87. de Pythagora vide
Laert. l. 8. q. 584. (...) Stob. Eclog. Phys. l. 1. c. 8. de Epicuro vide
Laert. l. 10. p. 299. Empir. ad v. Math. p. 312.

65 The Stoics held all sins were equal, and that all virtues were so too]
(...) Laert. de Stoicis l. 7. p. 499. 510. Sen. Ep. 59.82. Plutarch. de
Stoicorum repugn. p. 1038.

66 Amongst the Heathens it was held the sign of a low dastard spirit to pass
by an injury] (...) Arist. ad Nicom. l. 4. c. 11. Anger was defined by them,
(...) and Cic. ad Antonium ita secum statuit. Sic ulciscar facinora singula
quemadmodum a quibusque sum provocatus.

67 Their good man when provoked might do the greatest mischeif] Vir bonus
nocet nemini nisi lacessitus injuria. Cic. apud Lact. qui sic reponi. Non minus
mali est refer injuriam quam infer: nam unde certamina, pugnae,
contentionesque nascuntur, nisi quod improbitati opposita impatientia magnas
saepe concitat tempestates. l. 6. p. 610.

68 Their Gladiation was but an art to kill] Disciplina est ut perimere quis
possit, and gloria quod perimit. Cypr. Ep. 1. ad Donatum. In Gladiatoriis
homicidii disciplina est. Minut. Fell. p. 42. vide Tertull. de Spec. c. 19.

69 Mercy was by the Stoics made a vice] Erat enim dogma Stoicum and quasi
rata sententia, (...), Laert. in vita Zen. p. 512. Sapientem gratia nunquam
moveri, nunquam cujusquam dclicto ignoscere, neminem misericordem Esse nisi
stultum aut levem, viri non esse exorari, neque placari. Cic. pro Muraena.
Clementiam mansuetudinemque omnes boni praestabunt, misericordiam vitabunt, est
enim vitium pusilli animi ad speciem alienorum malorum succidentis. Sen. de
Clem. l. 2. c. 5. vide Gatak. in Anton. l. 1. s. 15. p. 28. l. 2. p. 69.

70 Self-murder held sometimes a duty by Epicurus and the Stoicks] Torquatus
Epicureus apud Ciceronem. Robustus animus ad dolores ita paratus est, ut
meminerit maximos morte finiri, par vos multa habere intervalla quietis,
mediocrium non esse nos dominos: ut si toler abiles, sint feramus, sin minus,
aequo animoe vite cum ea non placeat, tanquame Theatro exemus, de fin. Bon. l.
1. p. 71. and p. 73. B. Sapiens non dubitat, si ita melius sit, de vita
migrare, vide Sen. Ep. 26. de Stoicis Laert, (...). In Zen. l. 7. p. 195.
Sapiens vivit quamdiu debet, non quantum potest, si multa occurrum molesta, and
tranquillitatem turbantia, emittit se, nec hoc tantum in necessitate ultima
facit, sed cum primum illi caeperit suspecta esse fortuna. Sen. Ep. 70. vide
Marc. Anton. l. 3. s. 1.5. s. 29.8. s. 47. and Gatak. p. 83.213. Stob. Collect.
To. 1 tit. 4. s. 8.

71 And made the common practice of Philosophers] De Aristotele vide Laert. p.
304. de Metrocle l. 6. p. 161. de Menippo p. 162. de Empedocle p. 614. de
Pythagora l. 8. p. 592. Plerique istorum temporum Philosophi, ut in Laertio
legimus, si affecta jam atate diuturniore aliquo morbo premerentur, ne qui
contemptum mortis aliis commendaverant, ipsi vitam in tali vita nimis diligere
viderentur, mortem solebant occupare. Mer. Casaub. in Laert. p. 2. c. 1.

72 The Heathen rites were many of them full of the most vile obscenities] Nam
quo non prostat foemina templo. Juv. Sat. 9. v. 24. Caeterum si adjiciam quae
non minus conscientae omnium re cognoscunt, in templis adulteria componi, inter
aras lenocinia tractari, in ipsis plerumque aedituorum and sacer dotum
tabernaculis, sub iisdem vittis, and apicibus, and urpuris, thure flagrante
libidinem expungi. Tert. Apol. c. 15. vide de la Cerda in locum.

73 Amongst the Cyprians and Babylonians their women were obliged to repair
unto them to commit adultery] (...). Herodot. l. p. 83.84. Vide Cyr. Alex.
contra Jul. l. 7. p. 238.

74 The Lydian, Cyprian, Armenian and Phaenician Virgins did commit whoredom
in their Temples] (...). Herodot. l. 1. p. 40. de Cypriis vide Justinum l. 18.
c. 5. de Armeniis Strabonem l. 11. De Phaenicibus Eusebium Praep. Ev. l. 4. c.
8. Aug. de C. D. l. 4. c. 10.

75 Plurality of Wives was common both to Iew] Rabbini vestri (...). Dial. cum
Tryph. p. 364. vide p. 371. B.

76 And Gentile] (...). Diod. Sic. l. 1. Euripides mulieres fere omnes exosus
est, sive quod duas simul uxores habuerat, cum id decreto ab Atheniensibus
facto jus esset, quarum matrimonii pertaedebat. Agellius l. 15. c. 20. (...).
Sext. Empyr. Hyp. l. 3. c. 24. vide Athen. (...). l. 13.

77 The Stoic and the Platonist allowd community of Wives] (...) Laert. l. 7.
p. 517. Vide p. 457. and l. 6. p. 411. (...) Plato de Rep. l. 5. and eodem lih.
p. 459. hac legem habemus, (...). Laert. l. 9. p. 684. Sext. Empir. Pyr. Hyp.
l. 3.24. (...) Athen. deip. l. 3. p. 555. (...) Bardes. apud Eusebius. Praep. Ev.
l. 6. c. 10.

78 The Cynicks, Diogenes, and Theodorus fulfilled their lust publicly in the
market place.] (...) Sex. Empir. Pyr. Hyp. l. 2. c. 24. (...) Laert. de
Theodoriis p. 153 (...) Laert. l. 6. p. 154. de Cynicis Lact. l. 3. c. 15. p.
284.

79 Incest was commonly allow'd] (...). Sext. Empir. Pyr. Hyp. l. 3. c. 24.
Plutarch. de Stoicis Repugn. (...) vide Laert. l. 7. p. 209. (...) Chrysostom.
(...). B. (...) p. 452.

80 And practiced by diverse Nations] (...). Schol. in Naz. (...). p. 64. Ed.
Mont. (...) Iow (...), tradit Diod. Sic. l. 1. p. 12. Aegyptiis and Athenis cum
sororibus legitima connubia. Minut. p. 35. de Persis res notissima esT. De
Aegyptiis vide Sext. Empir. l. 3. Hyp. c. 24.25. Eusebius. Praep. ev. l. 6. c. 12.
De Athenis Philonem in Dec. praec. 6.7. Senecam de morte Claudii. Aemilium
Probum Cimone. Cyrill. Alex. contra Jul. l. 6. p. 167. Wov. and Emen. in
Minutium.

81 To use a common strumpet was no disgrace] Plautus.

Nemo hic prohibet nec vetat
Quin quod palam est venale, si argentum est, emas
Dum te abstineas nupta, vidua, virgin,
Juventue, pueris, liberis, ama quod lubet.
Si quis est qui meretriciis amoribus interdictum putet juventuti, est ille
quidem valee severus, negare non possum, sed abhorret non modo ab hujus seculi
licentia, verum etiam a majorum consuetudine atque concessis, quando enim hoc
non factum est? quando reprehensum? quando non permissum? Tull. orat. pro
Caelio. (...). Just. Mart. ap. 2. p. 70. vide Tert. ap. p. 112.115. Lact. l. 1.
c. 10. Origin Celsum p. 177. Aug. de Civ. D. l. 2. c. 20.

82 'Twas frequent with Philosophers.] Vide Laertium de Demetrio p. 132.
Aristippo p. 137. Plato. p. 204. Erillo p. 540. vide Athenaeum Deipnos l. 13.
c. 2.

83 Stews were allowed and paid their custome] (...). Justin. Mart. Ap. 2. p.
70.

84 Philosophers at Athens and Senator at Rome were wholly given up to the love
of Boys] (...) Schol. in Naz. (...). p. 64. (...). Tat. orat. adv. Gentes, vide
Orig. in Celsum l. 7. p. 365. Chrysostom. Tom. 5. p. 452. vide Laert. p. 352. Juven.
Sat. 6. v. 34. Bardes. apud Eusebius. Praep. Ev. l. 6. c. 10.

85 Their oracles allowed the same.] (...) Theodoret. ser. 10. p. 141.

86 The Stoics held it lawful to use the most obscene and filthy words] Placet
Stoicis suo quamque rem nomine appellare, sic enim disserunt nihil esse
obscaenum, nihil turpe dictu. Cic. Ep. ad Paetum l. 9. Ep. 22. and de off. l.
10. Quint. inst. orat. l. 9. c. 3.

87 And do actions as immodest] (...) etc. Sext. Empir. Pyr. Hyp. l. 3. c.
24.25.

88 In Plato's common wealth] Ubi (...) esse voluit. De Rep. l. 5. p. 457.
Chrysostom. Vide Plutarch. in Licurgo, Laert. l. 7. p. 457. in Act. Ap. Ho. 4. p.
634.

89 Such was the vileness of their secret mysteries that they renounced them]
Non sunt Reip. nostrae haec sacra dicitis. Quisnam istud dicit, Romanus,
Gallus, Hispanus, Afer, Germanus, aut Siculus? and quid adjuvat causam si
vestra haec non sunt, cum qui ea conficiunt vestrarum sunt partium? aut quid
refert utrumne ea probetis necne; cum quae vestra sint propria, aut simili
faeditate, aut turpitudinis genere reperiantur esse majore. Arnob. l. 5. p.
173. Et rursus, Si vobis viderentur ineptiarum fabulae neque in use retineretis
quotidiano, neque ut rerum simulacra gestarum sacrorum conservaretis in
ritibus. p. 154. Nunquid barbatum Iovem, Imberbem Mercurium Poetae habent,
Pontifices non habent? Nunquid Priapo Mimi, non etiam Sacerdotes enormia
pudenda fecerunt? an aliter stat adorandus in locis sacris, quam procedit
ridendus in Theatris? August. de C. D. l. 6 c. 7.

90 Amongst the Spartans and Egyptians, Cecilians, and Barbarians, theft was a
thing permitted and commended] (...) Sext. Emp. Pyr. Hyp. l. 3. c. 24. (...).
Laert. l. 9. p. 684. (...) Bardesan. apud Eusebius. Praep. Ev. l. 6. c. 10. vide
Grotium de Ver. Christianae Rel. annot. in lib. 2. p. 109.

91 Philosophers, Lawyers, Physicians, maintained it sometimes lawful.] (...).
Menander apud Stob. ser. 12. (...), Plato apud eundem ibid. (...). Herodot. l.
3. p. 191. Stoicorum quoque asperrimi confitentur facturum aliquando virum
bonum ut mendacium dicat. Vide Stob. Tom. 1. l. 2. Tit. 4. s. 8. Lucian.
Philoph. Celsum apud Orig. p. 171. Lact. l. 6. p. 608. (...). proclus.

92 Christianity did work a speedy and effectual reformation, upon all its
Proselytes.] 1. A speedy: Dei praecepta quia and simplicia and vera sunt
quantum valeaut in animis hominum quotidiana experimenta demonstrant, da mihi
virum qui sit iracundus, maledicus, effrenatus, pancissimis Dei verbis tam
placidum quam ovem reddam. Da cupidum, avarum, tenacem, jam tibi eum liber alem
dabo, and pecuniam suam plenis manibus largientem. Da timidum doloris ac
mortis, jam cruces and ignes contemnet. Da libidinosum, adulterum, ganeonem,
jam sobrium, castum, continentem videbis. Da crudelem, and and sanguinis
appetentem, jam in veram clementiam furor ille mutabitur. Da injustum,
insipientem, peccatorem, continuo and aequus, and prudens and innocens erit.
Uno enim lavacro malitia omnis abolebitur, tanta divinae sapientiae vis est, ut
in hominis pectus infusa, matrem delictorum stultitiam uno semel impetu
expellat. Lact. l. 3. c. 26. p. 329. 2. An effectual reformation. When Lact.
had reckoned up those vile enormities of which the Heathen world stood guilty,
he puts this question to them. Nostro autem populo quid horum potest objici,
cujus omnis religio est sine scelere vivere? l. 5. c. 9. p. 484. 485. (...);
Orig. in Celsum p. 128. vide Tert. Ap. c. 3. Orig. in Celsum p. 50. Its many
thousands: (...) (...). Orig. in Celsum l. 1. p. 21.

93 Whilst Philosophy did prove so ineffectual] Ineffectual (...), etc. Orig.
adv. Celsum l. 1. p. 50. Their lives: Veterum quidem sapientiae professorum
multos and honesta praecepisse, and ut praeceperunt, vixisse, facile
concesserim, nostris vero temporibus sub hoc nomine maxima in plerisque vitia
latuerunt, non enim virtute ac studiis, ut haberentur Philosophi, laborabant,
sed vultum and tristitiam and dissentientem a caeteris habitum pessimis moribus
praetendebant. Fab. inst. orat. l. 1. in Proem. Haec eadem number censes apud eos
ipsos valere, nisi admodum paucos, a quibus inventa, disputata, conscripta
sunt? quotus enim quisque Philosophorum invenitur qui sit ita moratus, ita
animo ac vita constitutus, ac ratio postulat, qui disciplinam suam non
ostentationem scientiae, sed legem vitae putet? videre licet alios tanta
levitate and jactatione iis, ut fuerit non didicisse melius, alios pecuniae
cupidos, gloriae nonnullos, multos libidinum servos, ut cum eorum vita
mirabiliter pugnet oration. Cic. Tusc. 2. p. 203. B. vide Senecam de B. vita c.
20. item Ep. 20. Ep. 108. Epict. l. 2. c. 7. l. 3. c. 7. Agel. l. 13. c. 8. l.
17. c. 19. Quintil. decl. 268.283. Plin. l. 1. Ep. 22. l. 3. Ep. 11. Lact. l.
5. c. 2. Orig. contra Celsum l. 4. p. 178. Minutium p. 43.

94 Heathens did confess it] se Sacramento obstringunt non in scelus aliquod,
sed ne furta, ne latrocinia, ne adulteria committerent, ne fidem fallerent, ne
depositum appellati abnegarent. Plin. Ep. ad Trajanum l. 10. Ep. 97.

95 The Apostate Julin urged their example.] (...), Epist. ad Arsacium Pontif.
Gal. Et rursus (...). Ibid. (...). Sozom. Hist. Eccl. l. 5. c. 16. vide eadem
apud Naz. (...). p. 69.

96 The Wisdom of the Greeks was either purposely conceald] (...). M. Tyr.
diss. p. 286. (...). Laert. in vita Pythag. p. 577. maxim ea quae ad Deos
pertinE^tquos fuisse (...) ait Proclus in Plat. Casaub. in locum.

97 The Pythagorean held him unable to receive their precepts who was not
versed in Mathematicks] (...), Laert. l. 4. p. 259. vide Just. Mart. p. 219.
Lact. l. 3. c. 25. p. 326.

98 That age was deemed unfit for Philosophical instructions] (...). Arist.
Mor. l. 1. c. 1.

99 They had no discoveries of what was just and unjust.] Pertinebat ad
consultores deos bonae vitae praecepta non occultare populis cultoribus suis,
sed clara praedicatione praebere, per vates etiam convenire, atque arguere
peccantes, palam minari poenas male agentibus, praemia recte viventibus
polliceri, quid unquam tale deorum illorum templis prompta and eminenti voce
concrepuit? Aug. de C. D. l. 2. c. 4.

100 That they continually did thwart each other, and what was equity and
goodness to the one was to the other highly culpable.] (...) (...). M. Tyr.
diss. 1. p. 4. Sapientibus vos viris creditis nempe illis qui nihil sciscunt,
nec pronuntiant unum, qui pro suis sente^tiis bella cum adversantibus
conferunt, qui pervicacia semper digladiantur hostili, qui dum alter alterius
labefactant, destruunt, convellunt que decreta, cuncta incerta fecerunt, nec
posse aliquid sciri ex ipsa dissensione monstrarunt. Lact. l. 2. p. 48. vide p.
83. Pereunt igitur universi, and sicut Spartiatae illi Poctarum sic se invicem
jugulant, ut nemo ex omnibus restet; quod eo fit, quia gladium habent, scutum
non habent. Lact. l. 3. c. 4. p. 243. 244.

101 What any rightly did conceave, they were not able to defend, as having no
foundations whereupon to build it] Totam igitur veritatem, and omne divinae
religionis arcanum Philosophi attigerunt, sed aliis refellentibus defendere id
quod invenerant nequiverunt, quia singulis ratio non quadravit. Lact. l. 7. c.
7.

102 These Sects and Tenets] Palam in conspicua and novissima porticu, in
Gymnasiis and Hortulis, in locis publicis ac privatis, pro sua quisque opinione
certabat. August. de C. D. l. 18. c. 41. Et rursus, Has and alias diffensiones
innumerabiles Philosophorum quis unquam populus? quis Senatus? quae potestas?
vel dignitas publica impiae civitatis dijudicandas, and alias probandas, and
recipiendas, alias improbandas repudiandasque curavit? ac non passim sine ullo
judicio, confuse que habuit in gremio suo tot controversias hominum non de
agris and domibus, sed de his rebus quibus aut misere vivitur aut beat,
dissidentium? August. ibidem.

103 A stipend from the Roman Emperours] (...). Lucian. Hunuch. p. 160. and p.
161.

104 Flourished most.] Quaeritur saepe cur tam multi sunt Epicurei. Cic. de
fin. Bon. l. 1. Multi postea defensores and nescio quomodo ii qui auctoritatem
minimam habent maximam vim populus cum illis facit. Idem l. 2. p. 87.88. and p.
89. Dicitur Philosophus nobilis a quo non solum Graecia and Italia, sed etiam
omnis Barbaria; commota est. (...) Laert. l. 10. p. 712. vide p. 721.

105 The Abettors of them did accord the best.] Epicurus una in domo, and ea
quidem angusta, quam magnos, quantaque amoris conspiratione conjunctos tenuit
amicorum greges? quod fit etiamnum ab Epicureis. Cic. de fin. l. 1. Numen. apud
Eusebius. Praep. Ev. l. 14. c. 5.

106 Hence they took up with carnal pleasures] Nec equidem habeo quod
intelligam bonum illud, detrahens eas voluptates quae sapore percipiuntur,
detrahens eas etiam quae auditu and cantibus, detrahens eas etiam quae ex
formis percipiuntur oculis, suaves mentiones, five quae aliae voluptates
gignuntur in toto homine quolibet e sensu; -- quae sequuntur in eadem sententia
sunt, totusque liber qui est de summo bono refertus and sententiis and verbis
talibus est. Cic. Tusc. 3o de Epicuro. Et rursus. Nam singo? number mentior? cupio
refelli: istam voluptatem Epicurus ignorant quippe qui testificatur ne
intelligere quidem se posse ubi sit, aut quid sit ullum bonum praeter illud
quod cibo aut potione and avrium delectatione, and obscena voluptate capiatur.
An haec ab eo non dicuntur? de fin. bon. l. 2. de N. D. l. 1. Non id semel
dicit sed saepius, annuere te video, nota enim tibi sunt, proferrem libros si
negares. His gemina habes apud Athen. deipnos. l. 12. c. 12. Laert. l. 10. p.
710. Plutarch. Moral. p. 1098.

107 Held them the chiefest good.] Plerique voluptatem summum bonum dicunt.
Cic. de div. l. 2. and de fin. bon. l. 2. (...). Plutarch. adv. Colotem p.
1125. vide Laert. l. 2. p. 54. Ed. St. Cic. de N. D.

108 Socrates first introduced it into families:] Ab antiqua Philosophia usque
ad Socratem numeri motusque tractabantur, and unde omnia orirentur, quove
recederent, studioseque ab his syderum magnitudines, intervalla, cursus
inquirebantur, and cunct a caelestia: Socrates autem primus Philosophiam
devocavit e coelo, and in urbibus collocavit, and coegit de vita and moribus
rebusque bonis and malis quaerere. Cic. Tusc. qu. l. 5. and l. 3.

109 That there was nothing just or unjust in it self, but as the Laws of
Nations made it so] (...). Aristot. Eth. l. 1. c. 1. (...). Pyrrho apud Laert.
p. 262. Hujus sententiae erant Archelaus. Laert. l. 2. p. 37. Cyrenaici ib.
Theodorii p. 57. Aristippus p. 55. Pyrrho p. 252. Epicur us p. 302. vide Sext.
Empir. adv. Math. p. 450.

110 The examples and worship of their Deities did give encouragement unto the
lewdest actions] (...). Plato de Rep. l. 2. vide August. de C. D. l. 1. c. 7.
Nazianz. (...). p. 77.

111 Porphyry] (...) Ep. ad Anebonem apud Theod. ser. 3. p. 48.

112 Amelius] (...). apud Theodoret. de cur. Gr. aff. sermon. 2. p. 33.

113 A Heathen Emperor as to be writt] Clamabat saepius quod a quibusdam sive
Judaeis, sive Christianis, audierat and tenebat, idque per praeconem quum
aliquem emendaret dici jubebat, quod tibi fieri non vis alteri ne feceris; quam
sententiam usque adeo dilexit, ut and in Palatio and in publicis operibus
praescribi juberet. Aelius Lamp. de Alex. Severo Hist. August. Leyd. ed. p. 577.

CHAP. XI. OF THE RESVRRECTION of our Savior Christ.
THE CONTENTS.
PROLEGOMENA in order to the demonstration of the Resurrection of our Lord. 1.
That the Apostles did presently attest the thing. 2. This attestation could not
be a barefaced and notorious lie. Arg. 1. from the testimony. Arg. 2. from
these 3 considerations. 1. that our Saviors body did not continue in the
sepulcher when they proclaimed him risen. 2. That his Disciples did not
conveigh his body thence. Nor 3. was that done by any other persons who had no
relation to Christ, and no affection for him. Arg. 3. from the consideration of
the persons testifying.

AND thus we have dispatched our demonstrations of the Christian Faith. We now
proceed unto that Article of it from which we may infer the rest, viz. The
Resurrection of our blessed Savior. Which that we may conclude with Greater
evidence, we premise,

. 1. THAT the Apostles did presently attest the thing. The predictions of our
Lord and Savior, owned by the malice of the Jew, and all their vain endeavors
to prevent what he foretold touching his Resurrection; the expectation of his
friends, and that abundant satisfaction which they found in this particular;
the early records of the Christians Story, and Symbols of his faith, which
every where inculcate it, all these give in a full assurance of this truth. Nay
had the knowledge of his resurrection been deferred beyond that period which he
himself had fixed, how impossible had it been to have cajold the world into so
firm and steadfast a belief of the particular circumstances? to have held up
the drooping Spirits, and baffled hopes of his disciples? or to have kept the
insulting Jew from giving visible demonstrations of the vanity of their
pretensions, or from crying out of the imposture. Could his Disciples be
assured of his resurrection, by frequent apparitions of him, and not endeavor
to acquaint the world with what so much concerned the truth of his predictions,
and their hopes, and which was of so great importance to mankind, and could not
be neglected by the Disciples of our Lord, and they be faithful unto the
commission which they pretended? Or could they be so quick and nimble to
conveigh his body from the sepulcher, and yet their tongues be backward to
proclaim him risen? Would interest or reason suffer them to pull the greatest
prejudice on their cause, to blast their Growing hopes, and frustrate their
bold adventure by an undue concealment of what their Masters promise and
predictions had made so necessary to be divulged? But

. 2. 2ly I premise that common prudence would not suffer the Disciples of this
JESUS, to pretend such things in confirmation of their testimony, which must
infallibly render it the scorn and hatred of the world. Wherefore they could
not possibly pretend such things were newly acted on a public stage, and in
the face of their professed adversaries, which owed their being only to their
phancies, and of which their story gave the first account unto the world. For
men to certify to all Jerusalem, that lately there was such a man as JESUS
known throughout all Judea to be mighty both in words and deeds, Luc. 24.19.
Matt. 20.18, 19. Mark 10.33., 34. Mar. 8.31 Matt. 27.63. v. 66.
one who did publicly foretell unto the Scribes and Pharisees the place and
manner of his death, the time, and glorious issues of his resurrection, and to
aver that this prediction was notorious to his mortal enemies, and the
contrivers of his sufferings, and made them industrious to secure his body, and
watch the motions of his friends, and carefully provide against what ever the
most subtle malice could invent to gull their senses, and put a cheat upon
them,

3ly To pretend the earth did quake and tremble, and the watch grow pale, and
that dead bodies did arise and show themselves to many (which (...) id est,
Messiah resuscitabit dormientes in pulvere. Midrash Tillin. f. 42. 1. Justi
quos suscitabit Deus e mortuis in diebus Messiae. Gloss. in Bab, 102. Sanhed.
f. 92. Non tantum ex libris Mosaicis, verum etiam Propheticis constat
resurrectionem mortuorum conjunctam fore adventui Messiae. Manasse Ben Israel
de Resur. l. 3. c. 2. Vide Cochum in duos Tit. Talmud. p. 317.
resurrection was a thing expected by the Jews upon the advent of their
Shilo,) I say to testify all this unto those persons who could as readily
confute, as they relate it, yea whose interest it was to confute it, was the
most certain way to ruin and confound their testimony, had it been found a
lie, and consequently assures us that it must be true.

These things premised, our Arguments will naturally result from a due estimate
of these particulars. The testimony, and the persons testifying.

. 3. FOR 1. it was a relation in it self incredible, whose fundamental article
contained the ignominious and accursed death of the beloved Son of God, and the
miraculous resurrection of a man condemned for blasphemy. A thing which they
might easily foresee could gain no reputation to them, but of fools and madmen,
especially considering it found so little credit in that City where it was
pretended to be done.

It was 2ly a testimony which did acquit this Jesus from all the calumnies and
false aspersions of the Jew, pronounced their greatest Rabbis an evil brood
of vipers, hypocrites, Matt. 3.7. Matthew. 16.3. chapter 23. Matt. 23.17.33. Matt.
12.39. Matt. 23.33. Act. 4.11.12. Matt. 28.18. Matt. 24. Maro. 13. Luc 19.
fools and blind, serpents and vipers, a wicked and adulterous generation, a
divelish damned crew; nay their whole Nation Guilty of the most horrid crime
that could be charged upon man, even the murder of the Lord of life, and which
assured them there was no salvation to be hoped, but from that very person whom
they had taken, and by wicked hands had crucified and slain; and that all
power both in heaven and earth was given to him; which told them also that he
would shortly come and execute the most dreadful vengeance on their Nation
which ever yet befell mankind; that he would cancel their Laws, bury their
temple in its own ruins, and cut them off from being any more a people.

3ly It was a testimony delivered at such a season when all the Jews seemed to
be crowded into one Metropolis, and their dispersions recollected; for it was
the (...) (2700000) (...). Joseph. de Bell. Jud. l. 7. c. 17.
Passover, and so that time when all stood bound to worship at Jerusalem,
Deuteronomy. 16.5.6. and when the Messiah was become the universal matter of their
expectation; and therefore such a testimony as must be thoroughly sifted both by
the Jew (who were it true must be the greatest sinner, and after a few days the
greatest sufferer) and by the Gentile, (for whom it did pretend the greatest
kindness,) and undoubtedly would have been suppressed, had not the evidence of
truth upheld it since.

4ly. This testimony avouched a thing no sooner done than certified to the
world; and the same Theater which saw it acted, heard it as soon proclaimed to
the face of the professed adversaries of Christ. Earthquakes, and apparitions
of dead men, the consternations of the watch, and their confessions thereupon;
the testimony of five hundred men eye witnesses of his ascension, (and many of
them living when St Paul indicted his Epistle to the Church of Corinth) were all
produced in evidence of the fact; and therefore means of information could not
be wanting in this case to those that sought them. For can we think those Jews
who persecuted Paul whilst preaching in the Synagogues of Asia, and afterward
impeached him at Jerusalem, would not enquire into the truth of this his
confident report among them; or that St Paul should be so wholly void of
reason, as to divulge a lie so palpable, in such a place where there were Jews
abundant to evince its falsehood, and in an Epistle to be read in all the
Churches of the World.

And yet this testimony so incredible in it self, so contradicted by the Jew,
so punctual, and yet so various in its circumstances, so fresh in its delivery,
which underwent so critical and severe a scrutiny; I say this testimony found a
reception more incredible than it self. For the bare relation of it converted
thousands, which nothing but the insuperable force of truth, and the more
pierceing influence of Heaven could so miraculously have effected.

. 4. OUR second demonstration of the Resurrection of our Savior, will arise
from three conclusions. First that our Saviors body was removed from the
Grave. For its continuance there must surely have discovered the falsehood of
this bold assertion, and made all other ways of confirmation of it, not only
needless, but absurd, whilst by an ocular demonstration any one might have
perceived the truth, and discovered the impudent folly of all those, who durst
affirm that it was risen from the dead.

2ly. The disciples of our Savior cannot be justly charged with its conveiance
from the Sepulcher, for (besides the no advantage, nay the assurance of the
worst of miseries which could attend the promulgation of this doctrine;) they
dreamed of a Messiah who should sway the Scepter, and subdue the Nations under
them; and when they found it otherwise, their hopes lay buried in his Grave,
and expired together with him. After such manifold experience of their Masters
power to assist them by an Almighty hand; after their solemn protestations
made to own him in the sharpest trials, they shamefully deserted him, and at
first assault betook themselves to their heels; their Prolocutor renounced
him, and seconded his denial with an oath; they barred their doors, and hid
their heads, dreading every thing they heard or saw. And can it be imagined
that persons so extremely timorous should hazard their lives to rescue his dead
body from the Grave, who after all obligement both of faith and duty, did so
little to preserve him from it, against a watch so vigilant, and zealously
concerned to prevent the mischiefs of a second, and therefore more pernicious
error? After commands so strict and peremptory to secure the Sepulcher, in vain
must they attempt to rifle it; which if any say they did whilst the watchmen
slept, how came they privy to it, what credit can their word deserve? if whilst
they waked, what could induce those watchmen to make lies their refuge and
wilfully permit the cheat? Besides it is a timorous trade to play the thief,
much more to rob the Grave of its Inhabitants, and they might well expect that
vengeance should arrest them in a fact designed to delude the world, and to
entitle God unto the worst of villainies, and hence not only their respect unto
their Master, but their own safety must have taught them to dispatch their
business, and not to spend their time in the uncasing of his body, and rolling
up the Napkins that were about his head, and to do things of such needless
curiosities.

But 3ly more incredible it is, that persons unconcerned for this Jesus should
run so great an hazard, or be concerned to remove his body thence; or that the
Apostles should bottom all their hopes on such a tottering foundation, and
trust to the fidelity of those men, who in this very business, in which their
silence could alone befriend them, were the worst of cheats. It Is lastly most
incredible that persons of this temper should still go on to stifle and conceal
the matter, and not be tempted by the pleasure of the thing, the service they
might do to their Religion, the hopes of a considerable reward, or by the
hatred of a cheat so Gross and palpable, to manifest the shame and infamy of
those that forged it. Besides how could his own Disciples hope by mighty signs
and wonders, by Gifts and Graces of the Holy Spirit, great and numerous, to
give in evidence unto his Resurrection (which they confidently pretended) had
he been still reserved under the power of death, and only by their own or
others art reoved from his Sepulcher? How is it that they never thought within
themselves, he could not save himself, and whence shall we expect Salvation? He
could not by his Miracles of power and Goodness prevail upon one Nation to
believe his Doctrine, and can we, though destitute of all that power which
resided in him, think to reduce the world into obedience, or to impart the Holy
Ghost to others, when we our selves have the Spirit of delusion only? Nay might
not the example of Theudas, Judas, and many others (both of their own and other
Nations) all whose endeavors (although their hopes and their abilities were
greater and their undertaking less) proved unsuccesful, and ended in the ruin
of those bold adventurers, be sufficient to deter them from such bold attempts?
Lo here a testimony which gives the Greatest evidence to it self, and yet
asserted by such men, who neitheir would deceive, nor were deceived in this
particular, and consequenty whose attestation could be no deceit. Which that it
may appear with greater evidence,

Consider first, That they pretended to many and infallible convictions of the
Truth, to frequent apparitions of this Jesus, attended with some signal
circumstance to evidence their truth unto them, and gae it out that they
conversed with him forty days, saw many Miracles done by him, received
instructions from his mouth, to feed his Sheep, to teach all Nations and
Baptize them. Yea that they were endowed with power from him to confirm the
testimony by mighty signs and wonders, and for the truth of this they
frequently appealed unto their adversaries, and the experience of those who did
embrace their Doctrines; in all which confident appeals and attestations,
requiring little more then eyes and ears to certify the truth unto them, it is
equally incredible they should deceive or be deceived.

Did they give credit to this Jesus, they must conclude him risen according to
his own prediction, and therefore could not be deceivers in asserting it? Did
they conclude him an Impostor, what motives could they have to publish him the
Savior of the World, who after he had called them to leave all and follow him,
and made such ample Promises unto them of Judging the twelve Tribes of Israel,
left them so sadly in the lurch, exposed unto shame and infamy? Did they give
credit to the Sacred Oracles, and reverence the Law of Moses, why did they not
dread those Judgments which God proclaimed against the false and lying
Prophet? if they did not believe it, why were they so concerned for the Truth
of the predictions of the Law concerning the Messiah, as to assert them with
the loss both of the freedom and safety of their lives?

Should we ascribe the cheat unto the powers of imagination, (since they
pretended to be eye witnesses of the Resurrection, and to deliver nothing but
what they saw and heard) is it not strange to think that Fancy should create a
person to them frequently appearing, preaching, and instructing, giveing out
commissions, administering of holy Ordinances, and the like; that it should draw
them out unto the mount of Olives after an aerie Phantasm, and then present it,
carried up into Heaven? In short, they were certain his body was not privately
conveyed away by their endeavors, and that this only was pretended to disgrace
their testimony, and what could farther be required to assure both them and us,
that they were not deceived? To Conclude,

If this relation were untrue either they were beside their senses when they
did believe, or besides their wits when they affirmed it, and did endeavor to
confirm what they did not believe with loss of life and fortunes; and if so,
what shall we say to the world of Christians, that maugre all temptations to
the contrary did steadfastly believe these men, who had so little reason to
believe themselves? It is prodigious to think, that a poor ignorant young man,
of meanest birth and breeding, of a most hateful Nation, and hated by that
Nation to the death, because pretending that he was a Prophet sent from God,
and after this his death, only avouched to be so by twelve Fishermen,
pretending with loud boasts of miracles, false as God is true, to testify his
Resurrection, though a greater falsehood, and promising to all that would
believe it nothing, besides this power of working Miracles, but death and
miseries at present, which their experience proved to be true: I say, it is
prodigious to think, that He and his Disciples should with no other charms
work such a lasting Faith in all the wisest part of men, that neither time nor
vice, though most concerned to do so, should ever be able to deface it. And yet
what is so prodigiously incredible, must be certain truth, or else the
Resurrection must be so.

THE CONCLUSION.
SHOWING that if what has been delivered should be only probable, yet the
Christian Faith must in all reason be embraced, as being, 1. the safest way,
and 2ly the greatest instrument of present Happiness. A recapitulation of the
whole, with a practical reflection upon what has been discoursed.
IF what has been delivered do not seem to any to carry a convincing evidence,
let it but pass for probable, and that which proves the Christian Faith more
likely to be true than false, and this will be sufficient plea for the
profession of it. For were it supposed only such, it must in reason be embraced
as being the securest way, and the best instrument of present happiness.

And(1) CHRISTIANITY is the best help to present happiness, because it gives the
highest motives to contentment in our present state, the strongest comforts and
supports against those evils we can fear or suffer, the best preservatives and
remedies against the terrors of an evil conscience, the most effectual remedies
against those passions and corrupt affections, which impair our health, and
which disturb our peace and quiet. It gives the fairest hopes and promises, and
so the greatest motives unto love and kindness, as is exceeding evident from
Scripture, and from what we have discoursed in the 10th Chap. of this Book.

(2.) That Christianity is also the securest way has been already proved; and
is invincibly concluded from what Arnobius says of it, See the Preface.
in illo periculi nihil est, si quod dicitur imminere cassum fiat and vacuum,
in hoc damnum est maximum, id est salutis amissio, si cum tempus advenerit
aperiatur non fuisse mendacium.

Besides, all other ways of Worship, which stand in competition with it, are
so absurd, or surely antiquated, as not to bear the least degree of Evidence,
compared to the Evidence of Christian Faith: and therefore we may rest assured,
that if there be a Providence, it cannot be offended with us for preferring
this before them: But God may justly be incensed against us, for not embracing
of the Christian Faith, though the Inducements so to do were only probable,
because we prosecute the most important Actions and Affairs of humane life
upon the like Inducements. We go to sea only in hopes of a good Voyage, and a
safe return, and have recourse to the Physician only in hopes of a recovery,
and therefore cannot be excused, if we neglect to do what we have like or
greater reason to believe is both the will of God, and that which does conduce
to our eternal happiness: especially considering that Christianity does promise
greater measures of Conviction, and degrees of Evidence to such as do obey its
Precepts; assuring us that he who does the Will of Christ, shall know the
Doctrine whether it be of God or not.

. 2. IF then it be but probable, that Christ and his Disciples were endowed
with any Power of working Miracles in confirmation of the Christian Faith, that
any of them healed diseases, cast out devils, raised the Dead, and whilst they
constantly pretended to these things for many generations, and in all places of
the World, and did avouch them with their dearest blood, were not the worst of
fools and knaves, or most deluded persons. Or if it be but probable that such
Men could never leave unto the world the best and the sublimest Revelations,
such as outdid the Laws of wisest Nations and all the Precepts of Philosophy,
such as best serve the present and eternal Interests of Man, such as are most
consistent with the common Principles of Reason, and yet too hard for reason to
invent. If it be probable that they could never by the bare Assertion of the
Resurrection of a condemned malefactor (confirmed only by a lie) prevail upon
the world to own him for their God, to desert all other ways of Worship, and
to run the greatest risks at present, only in expectation of some future
Blessing, which he had promised in another life. If it be probable that such a
world of men would never suffer fiery trials, and sundry kinds of death, become
the scorn, and the Ofscouring of the world, only to propagate that lie which
scarce afforded a temptation so to do. If it be probable that any real
Judgments were inflicted upon the Enemies of the Christian Faith, or upon such
as did prevaricate in the profession of it, or that the Church, and chiefly the
Apostles, had power to inflict such Judgments, and did not terrify their
converts vith vain words. If it be probable that any Revelations have been ever
made in favor of the Christian Cause, 1. Cor. 14. 29, 30, 31, 32.
and that S. Paul in his Epistles to the Church of Corinth, does not give
directions about things of naught, and confidently tell them that ever one had
a Revelation, when no man did enjoy it. If it be probable that any Dreams or
Visions have been vouchsafed to them, or any tokens of divine Assistance under
sufferings, of wonderful deliverance from them, of confusion to their
Adversaries. If it be probable that the predictions of the Messiah of the Jews
were perfectly accomplished in our JESUS; and that things particularly foretold
by him (viz. his Death and Resurrection, the large and speedy Propagation of
the Christian Faith, the Miracles of his Disciples, the destruction of the
Jewish nation) however most incredible, were most assuredly fulfilled, or that
that gift of Prophecy, to which so many thousand souls pretended throughout
diverse centuryes, was really vouchsafed to any one of them. If it be probable
that any of them spoke with Tongues, and the Apostle did not charge the Church
of Corinth with the too frequent exercise of a gift with which they never were
acquainted. If it be probable that the whole Sect of Christians for three
hundred years were neither wicked Impostors, nor yet deluded Persons. If it be
probable that they had no assistance from good or evil Angels to delude the
World, and yet did things which could not be effected without the aid of some
supernatural Powers. If it be probable that both their Gospels and Epistles
were indicted in that Age they lived in, and sent to those Persons to whom they
are inscribed, and if it be improbable that whilst so many were alive that
could attest the truth or falsehood of their story, it should, though a
prodigious and barefaced lie, obtain to be the Rule of Faith. I say if all
these things are probable, then must Christianity be highly probable; and if it
ought to be embraced upon the Probability of any one, the Probability of all
these Circumstances must give an ample confirmation to it, and make it needless
to insist farther on this Argument.

. 3. AND now that this discourse may have that Influence upon the Reader which
matters of this moment ought to have, let me entreat him to consider, how much
his interest and Wisdom does oblige him to improve the certainty of Christian
Faith into a Christian conversation; that so his knowledge may not aggravate
his future doom, and render all his wilful Disobedience against the Christian
precepts inexcusable. The speculative Atheist may have some color of a plea,
that his miscarriages were the Result of ignorance, not of contempt and wilful
disobedience, whereas the man who owns the certainty of Christian Faith, but
lives a contradiction to his knowledge, and by his practice gives the lie to
his profession, he, I say, can have no shadow of Excuse. He must confess his
full acquaintance with his Masters pleasure, and that his Reason did commend
those precepts to him, which Christianity enjoined, as things most excellent,
and certain, and infinitely to be preferred before those vile affections which
stood in competition with them, and those enjoyments he preferred before them.
His conscience must accuse him daily of most strange ingratitude, in acting his
rebellions against the Majesty of heaven, and his dearest Lord: it must
convince him of his stupidity and folly, not only in neglecting of so great
salvation, but in running headlong to his own destruction, and being at such
cost and pains to purchase to himself damnation. He must acknowledge at the
dreadful day, his life was spent in a contempt and full defyance of the holy
Jesus; and that he still maintained that contempt in opposition to, and in
despite of the convictions of his conscience, the striving of the Holy Spirit,
and all the motives of his present and eternal interest: and then how miserable
must is condition be? how dreadful, but how just his doom? The sorest judgments
that ever happened to the Gentile world, those derelictions which betrayed them
to the most brutish and unnatural lusts, were the result of sin committed
against conscience, and truth detained in unrighteousnes: Romans 1.
and if to sin against the dim and gloomy light of Nature became so fatal to
the Gentile, how dismal will the doom of Christians be, who sin against the
clear Meridian shine of Gospel Revelation? For if Christianity be true, the
disobedient and unbelieving person will be convinced by sad experience of the
assured falsehood of his infidelity, his flattering hopes, and false
imaginations, and be deprived for ever of Gods blisfull presence, and those
comfortable relations which he bears unto his creatures, and all those
glories, pleasures, and perfections which the Saints hereafter shall enjoy. His
soul shall be exposed to that incensed justice, 2 Thessalonians. 1.8.
which shall come in flaming fire to take vengeance on it, and to that God, who
will then stir up all his wrath, 9. Romans 22, 23.
and make the Greatness of his power known upon such vessels fitted for
destruction: and he shall find no rest by day or night, Rev. 14. xi.
as being still tormented by that worm which never dies, and suffering the
vengeance of that fire whose smoke ascends for ever: this being the avowed
doctrine of the first Cent. 1. (...). Clemens Romans Frag. Epist. 2. Ed. Patricii
Junii. (...). Barnabas Ed. Vossii p. 251.

Cent. 2. (...) Iren. lib. 1. c. 2. Et l. 3. c. 4. de norma fidei and veteri
Apostolorum traditione loquens haec habet, venturus est (scilicet Christus)
judex eorum qui judicantur, and mittens in ignem aeternum transfiguratores
veritatis, and contemptores Patris sui, and adventus ejus. Poena damnatorum
apud Justinum Mari. dicitur (...). p. 41. and 46. (...), p. 71. (...) page 57.

Cent. 3. Post inexpiabile malum saeviens ignis aeterna scelerum ultione
torquebit. Cypr. l. de laud Martyrii. Servantur cum corporibus suis animae
infinitis cruciatibus ad dolorem. idem lib. contra Demetr. Tormentis nec modus
ullus, aut terminus. Minutius p. 39. Si. quis occisionem carnis atque animae in
gehennam ad interitum and finem utriusque substantiae arripiet non ad
supplicium, quasi consumendarum, non quasi puniendarum; recordetur ignem
gehennae aeternum praedicari in poenam aeternam, and inde aeternitatem
occisionis agnoscat; tunc and aeternas substantias credet quarum aeterna sit
occisio in poenam. Absurdissimum alioquin si idcirco resuscitata caro occidatur
in gehennam uti finiatur, quod and non resuscitata pateretur. Tertull. de
resurr. Carnis. Illud tamen scire oportet, quoniam sancti Apostoli fidem
Christi praedicantes de quibusdam quaecunque necessaria crediderunt omnibus
credentibus, etiam his qui pigriores erga inquisitionem divinae scientiae
videbantur, manifestissime tradiderunt. Origenes in Proaemio. (...). Omnis
turba impiorum pro suis facinoribus in conspectu Angelorum and justorum
perpetuo igni cremabitur in aeternum, haec est doctrina sanctorum Prophetarum
quam Christiani sequimur. Lact. l. 7. c. 26. Vide Theophilum ad Autolycum l. 2.
page 79.


Ages of the Church, and that which did expose them to the worst of sufferings,
and the The derision of their heathen adversarys] (...). Justin Mart. Apolog.
1. p. 47. Hoc errore decepti beatam sibi, ut bonis, and perpetem vitam
pollicentur, caeteris ut injustis poenam sempiternam. Caecilius apud Minutium
p. 11. Haec est nostra sapientia quam isti qui vel fragilia colunt, vel inanem
Philosophiam tuentur, tanquam stultitiam vanitatemque derident, quia non
defendere hanc public, atque adserere nos solemus. Lactant. l. 7. c. 26. Vide
Origin. in Celsum p. 408. 409. vide not. 52. in c. 10. p. 357.
derision of their adversaries.

Besides, if Christianity be true, then all the blessings it has promised to
the pious and obedient Person must be accomplished in their season, by the
advancement of our weak, vile, mortal bodies into a state of incorruption,
power, Philip. 3.21.
and glory, and into the likeness of Christ's Glorious body; and by the
exaltation of the soul to a capacity of seeing God as we are seen of God, 1.
Joh. 2.2.
and being like to him whose happiness is infinite; for when he does appear we
shall be like him, by the participation of a superlative, exceeding, and
eternal weight of Glory, and the enjoyment of those blessings, which neither
eye has seen, 1. Cor. 2.9.
nor ear has heard of, nor has thought conceived.

As therefore (...). in Gorgia p. 312. Ed. Ficin.
Plato does conclude his disputation on this subject with this resolution viz.
Being convinced of a future state of bliss and misery, I bid adieu to the
caresses of the world, and to the vain applauses of the vulgar, and have no
other care but how I may appear before my Judge with a soul pure and spotless;
how I may live the best of men and dye secure of happiness: So let the Christian
Reader be persuaded to improve the confirmations and convictions of the truth
of his Religion into a fixed Resolution, and sincere endeavor of obedience to
the Christian precepts, that so he may avoid those dreadful torments, and
everlasting miseries it threatens to the disobedient, and may enjoy that more
exceeding weight of Glory, which is prepared for the upright Christian.

FINIS.
ADDENDA.
AD page 23. l. 16. after as we find this was, add. Prodigiorum sagacissimus
erat, and somniorum primus intelligentiam condidit; nihilque Divini Juris
humanique ei incognitum videbatur, adeo ut etiam sterilitatem agrorum ante
multos annos providerit: periisset que omnis Aegyptus fame nisi monitu ejus Rex
Edicto servari per multos annos fruges jussisset: tantaque experimenta ejus
fuerunt, ut non ab homine sed a Deo responsa dari viderentur. Justin. Hist. l.
36. cap. 2.

Ad Not. 6. p. 34.35. add. (...). Damascius in vita Isidori Philos. apud
Photium Bibl. p. 1038.

Errata in the Chapters.
P 29. l. 14. 1630. r. 1600. p. 96. l. 8. artificers r. artifices p. 107. l.
11. which r. with p. 115. l. 26. master r. matter p. 272. l. 19. want r. wave
p. 274. l. 12. religions r. religion.

In the Annotations.

P. 124. l. 4. add faciem l. 9. mutant r. nutant p. 148. l. 6. puris r. punis
p. 157. l. 21, 22. dele cemma primum, tertium, quintum p. 181. l. 24. add
(...) p. 256. l. 4. unde r. (...). p. 261. l. 22. impium r. Imperium p. 262. l.
8. quis r. qui.

There are other small saults which the understanding Reader will easily
discern and correct: and besides it must be confessed, that the references to
the Annotations are not always exact, but yet you will find the note within one
or two figures of the direction.


