AN APOLOGY FOR RUSHWORTH'S DIALOGUES.

WHEREIN The Exceptions of the Lords FALKLAND and DIGBY are answered: AND The
Arts of their commended DAILLe Discovered.

By THO. WHITE, Gent.

Psalm. 63. 8. Sagittae Parvulorum factae sunt plagae eorum. A Paris, Chez Jean
Billain Rue St. Jacques a l'ensign St. Augustine. 1654.

TO His ever Honored Cosen Mr. ANDREW WHITE, of the House of THUNDERSLEY.
Honored Cosen,
THough Kindred, Education, and known love all conspire to make me obnoxious to
any good Counsel you please to give me; yet the aversness I have from answering
Books, permitted me not, in our last enterview, to promise obedience to your
directions. But, since that happiness of seeing you, an unanimous consent of
other friends has made me more steadily reflect on what you desired; and
considering besides, that the Doctrine of Rushworth's Dialogues takes a path
not much beaten by our modern Controvertists, I resolved to imitate the example
of the penitent Son, who, after denial, performed his Fathers commands. Behold
then, here, the brood hatched and brought forth by your advice: 'pray heaven it
prove worthy your acknowledging! which I say, not, to engage you in the
patronage of what I deliver, farther then truth shall convince your judgment; or
to make the World imagine these Conceptions may find shelter in your breast: No,
I am as cruel to my writings, as the Ostridge to her Eggs: when once they are
laid, let nature play her part to foster or smother the Chickens, as she
pleases. Let truth commend or condemn my sayings. He that is ready to renounce
falsity, and acknowledge his weakness, is stronger then envy, and beyond the
shot of malice. Neither have I occasion to suspect any imputation should fall
upon you for this publishing my Present to you, as I fear it happened to
another friend: For, I apprehend, I may have written here some Periods, which
none will expect should be approved by you; Only, who understands the amplitude
of your soul, may know, it is able to harbor with indifferency what is spoken
against your own sense and consent; it being the gift and task of a wise man,
Imperare liberis. What I have performed, wherein failed, is your part to judge;
for my self, I can profess I desire not to irritate the meanest person, nor
seek I the glory of oppugning the Greatest: my ayne is, to open and establish
truth; Frivolous and by-questions I have on set purpose avoided. Whether all
objections of moment are answered, as I cannot affirm, so I can protest I am no
more conscious of declining any, then of dissembling, when I write my self

Your affectionate Cosen and humble servant, THO. WHITE.
Paris, Sept. 21. 1652.
A Second DEDICATION to the same Person.
Learned, and by me ever to be honored Cosen!
It Is so long since the former Address to you was written, that no wonder it
should now be ashamed to come abroad without some excuse to justify the
slowness of its pace; which is no other, then a simple protest, that it has not
stuck in my hands for at least a whole year and an half. Upon these few words I
could sit down and confidently promise my self your pardon; But emergent
imputations force me to a larger Apology: The expedition in some other late
Works of mine rendering the seeming neglect of this more obnoxious to exception;
as if I were rather ambitious to display the errors of some of our own side,
then the enormities of professed Enemies; and your self are conceived to have a
part in this suspicion.

Now, since, from that long and constant commerce you have still maintained with
true Virtue and Learning, I cannot but expect a great rationality and amplitude
in your Soul, even to bear with the defectuousnes of others, as far as you see
they govern themselves by that measure of understanding which God affords them,
I find my self obliged to give you the best account I can of my proceedings,
which I doubt not will prove so much an easier task, as you, with whom I am to
deal, are of a higher strain, then our trivial discoursers; for, as I think,
those who set up their rest, that there is no science to be attained by study,
are pardonable, if they choose opinions by pretense of devotion or reality of
interest: So I give my cause for lost, if they be my Judges. But I hope the
great fire of truth, which first kindled in my young breast a glowing of it,
and an earnestnes of seeking it in St. Thomas his way, has not been by length
of time as much quenched in you, as quickn'd in me; and therefore with a full
confidence I represent my Case to you, not doubting but the evidence I produce
will justify, if not the action it self, at least the necessity I have to act
as long as the present persuasion is not forced from me.

To come then to my Plea; If St. Peter commands us to be ready to give
satisfaction to all that shall ask it, concerning the hope that is in us, by
which is meant our belief, the basis and firm support of our hope; If the
design of all that meddle with this sort of study should chiefly aim to show,
that the doctrins of Christianity are conformable to reason, and such as a
prudent Person, though also learned, may embrace, without prejudice either to
his discretion, or knowledge: If the suggesting to our first parents, that God
sought to govern them like fools, without the least discernment betwixt good or
evil, be the greatest and unworthiest calumny Satan himself could invent to
charge upon the Almighty: If it be the basest condition that can befall a
rational Essence, and the most contrary both to God and man, whose natures
consist in knowing and reasoning; what can I conclude, but that such Teachers,
as, for ignorance or interest, obstinately resolve (in treating with those who
are out of the Church) to maintain opinions, whereof no account can be made,
either out of Antiquity or Reason, are unworthy the function they profess, and
highly obstructive to the progress of the Catholic faith?

You, who have looked into the large Volumes of Controvertists on both sides,
cannot but know they are petty questions, and the impugnances of private
opinions, that swel those vast Tomes into such an unweldy and intolerable bulk;
I Am sure not only I, but diverse of my friends have had experience, that those
very opinions (for opposing which, I am exclaimd against) have been the
retardment of the most ingenious and disinteressed party of Protestants; and
that others, who were become Catholics, out of a pure necessity which they saw
of submitting themselves to some unerring authority, when they heard their faith
declared in a rational way, found themselves eased, as it were, of chains and
imprisonment, and translated into a natural state and liberty. I need not
press, how ulcers in our vitals, are more dangerous then in our outward
members; and that we cannot convince others, whilst our selves are ignorant in
the Points we pretend to teach them. No wise Captain searches the Hospitals for
Perdues and Forcers of breaches. It is a great step toward the reducing others
to reason, if first we make our own thoughts rational. This is my endeavor,
this is my fault, for which I am so deeply censured, even by Catholics.

As for Persons, my writings neither name nor touch any: and those who make
themselves pointed at by their forward boasts of defending the opinions I
dispute against, either understand not me or themselves: for, did it deserve the
pains, I would undertake to show out of their printed Writers, that they do
not, with any universality, maintain those tenets I contradict. If in this
present Treatise I have in one place descended to more particulars then my
course and nature incline me to, I appeal to your own Judgment, whether I do
more then follow my Adversary, by replying upon his very words; and therefore
your commands ought to be my excuse.

But some think, at least this conjuncture improper to begin this Work, and I
wish they could give me a good cause of delay; they should find me very ready
to accept it; But I know no time in which destructive Errors should live
unconfuted; our great Master securing us by his example, neque ad horam
cessimus; nor can your self be ignorant with what fury and violence the
opposite opinion strives at this very day to possess the Chruch of God, and
break the eternal Rule of Christian faith. Wherefore, though conscious of my own
weakness, and that, unless God extraordinarily shows his power, my endeavors
will take no place, yet propter Sion non tacebo, and propter Jerusalem non
quiescam.

Your most obliged Cosen, and obedient servant, T. W.
27 March 1654.
The Table.
THe Introduction page 1 The first Encounter. Explicating the argument, by
which Rushworth proves the infallibility of Tradition p. 7 The second
Encounter. Defeating three Oppositions made against Tradition p. 14 The third
Encounter. Solving two other Objections against the infallibility of Tradition
p. 22 The fourth Encounter. That unlearned Catholics rely on the infallibility
of Tradition p. 31 The fifth Encounter. That Catholic Divines rely on the same
infallibility of Tradition p. 36 The sixth Encounter. Disabling three other
arguments brought against Tradition p. 44 The seventh Encounter. Answering the
Greeks and some Divines. who object new beliefs to the Catholic Church p. 50
The eighth Encounter. That our Lady's immaculate Conception is not likely to
become an Article of Faith p. 64 The ninth Encounter. Showing the unanimous
agreement of Divines, that all infallibility is from Tradition p. 70 The tenth
Encounter. That there was no Tradition for the error of the Chyliasts p. 77
The eleventh Encounter. That there was Tradition for the Trinity, before the
Council of Nice p. 84 The twelfth Encounter. That the necessity of
communicating Infants is no Tradition, but prayer to Saints is. p. 99 The
thirteenth encounter. Reflecting on certain considerations, and showing that
there is nothing able to disprove the Church of Romes Communion, to be the sign
of the true Church p. 107 The fourteenth Encounter. Four other Arguments
reversed p. 113 The fifteenth Encounter. Declaring the state of this question,
Whether the Scripture can decide Controversies? p. 135 The sixteenth Encounter.
Examining five Texts brought for the sufficiency of Scripture p. 150 The
seventeenth Encounter. Examining such places as are brought against the
admittance of any but Scriptural proof in Religion p. 262 The eighteenth
Encounter. Declaring the reasons of the Authors concluding, without proceeding
to the examination of the Fathers Testimonies p. 173 The first Survey. Of the
Nature and subject of Deille's Book p. 179 The second Survey. Of the two first
Chapters of his first book; wherein he urges, that the Fathers of the three
first Ages were few, and their writings wholly unconcerning our Controversies
p. 188 The third Survey. Of his third and fourth Chapters; wherein he objects
forgery and corruption of the Fathers works p. 197 The fourth Survey. Of the
fifth Chapter, wherein he objects the Fathers Eloquence, and that on set purpose
they spoke obscurely p. 208 The fifth Survey. Of the six Chapters following,
wherein he objects wilful deceit to the Fathers p. 216 The sixth Survey. How the
Authority of Fathers is infallible p. 226 The seventh Survey. Of the four first
Chapters of his second Book; wherein he pretends, The Fathers gave wrong
notions of the Faith of the Church; and that they spoke not like Judges. 232
The eighth Survey. Of the two last Chapters of his second Book; wherein he
says, many Fathers have agreed in the same Errors; and objects certain
varieties between the ancient and modern Church p. 238 The ninth Survey. In
Answer to two Questions, in his last Chapter: One, the Fathers being rejected,
to what Judge we ought to recur? The other, What use is to be made of the
Fathers? p. 250.
ADVERTISMENT.
THe Reader is desired to take notice, that this Apology particularly relates
to the last Edition of Rushworth's Dialogues (in 80 of the Long-Primer-Letter
1654, as which alone has felt throughout this Authors last hand) and
principally undertakes the refutation of Lucius Lo. Falkland's Discourse of
Infallibility, and George Lo. Digby (now Earl of Bristow) his printed Letters
to Sir Ken. Digby; which he performs in a style modest and respective,
answerable to the dignity of their Persons, and civility of their Writings.

The Animadversions upon Daille are applied to the English Translation by T. S.
not to the French Original; wherein the Reader will easily pardon those
uncourteous expressions he shall meet with, if he consider how little favor he
deserves from his equals, that insolently condemns his Betters; nay perhaps
approve the justice of so necessary a resentment; since 'twere unreasonable in
him to pretend the least regard from his Cotemporaries, that has composed so
infamous and injurious a Libel against all Antiquity.

ERRATA.
PAge 13. l. 1. since in Constable. p. 27. l. 13. Eight's, p. 58. l. 20. which
were. p. 78. l. 10. handing p. 82. l. 16. to our ears. p. 102. l. 7. reatus,
and l. 17. is there. p. 106. l. 2. be not. and l. 28. but by their. p. 119. l.
2. exposes. p. 127. l. 3. evident they cannot. p. 128. l. 5. part, that is,
the* p. 137* l. 10. the venom. p. 142. l. last, attempt the other. p. 143. l.
1, 2, dele (but out of Scr. nor yet in that do they use so fair play) p. 148.
Parenthesis begins at (this, l. 10. and ends at being) l, 13. p. 152. l. 2.
vivifying, and l. 25. in the first. p. 174. l. last, day, as com -- p. 179. l.
7. with. p. 193. l. 2. so few. p. 237. l. 28. not bound, p. 238. l. 19. certain
varieties, p. 245. p. 243. l. 23. dele of, l. 7. in his. p. 248. l. last, shall
not in.

AN APOLOGY FOR TRADITION.
The Introduction.
THus it will sometimes happen; that events of greatest importance take their
rise from small occasions. The Controversy, this following Treatise undertakes,
began in a slight familiar conference betwixt two intimate friends and kinsmen,
as it were only for exercise to train themselves, and practice their postures:
but since by the entrance of new Allies is become of so high concernment, that
what at first was a private voluntary skirmish, seems now to spread it self
into a public and solemn War. Nor need I strain much to make good the phrase,
since the eminent Names, on the one side, and the great advantage of ground on
the other, may justly be admitted to supply the number of an Army in both.

And, because I desire to prepare my self with the fittest proportion I could
for the assaults of my Adversaries, I have declined the Sword and Buckler, and
taken up a single Rapier; changed the antique weapons of Dialogue, (though* in
my opinion, they want neither ornament nor particular efficacy) into the modern
mode of direct discourse: Wherein, as I confess, Their gilded Armor shines
more, and dazles the ey; so I fear not, when we come to charge, our courser
steel will prove substantial and impenetrable. However I shall not spend much
time in parley; but after a short relation how I come to be drawn into the
quarrel, and by what method I intend to carry it on, I shall immediately
advance to a close encounter.

Before those Dialogues (wherein that original private conference is at larg
delivered) were brought to light, or (as I think) fully conceived in the
Authors brain; an honored friend, Sr. K. D.
and Patron of mine had couched some small, but quintessential part of their
doctrine in a little pithy Present to a new-converted Lady; and having cited it
afterward for brevity sake, in a controversial Epistle to an eminent Friend, L.
Digby.
engaged it thereby into an almost fatal combat; nothing but truth being able to
rescue it from so potent an enemy.

Besides, a deceased friend of mine having obliged me to declare my opinion
concerning a witty discourse made by one of his acquaintance, extorted from me
an unlick'd Mola, representing suddenly and imperfectly, L. Falkl.
my judgment in reference to that Authors work. This again, stirring the same
humors, drew the doctrine into an eminent danger of encountering opposition.
Nevertheless, God so ordering it, many years past, in calm and happy days of
peace, the two Adversaries (whom these occasions had provoked) not publishing
their Labors, as things below their persons; till all-discovering time (as I
believe) against the Authors intentions, brought them both to light, and, by
consequence, an imputation on those Dialogues, and a necessity on me to
dis-engage the honor of their Composer.

In order to which, my intention is not to reply minutely to either of the
Opponents works; muchles to handle any by-questions: but only to choose out of
them, or any others, what I conceive may possibly be thought as yet unanswered,
and consequently capable of prejudicing those Dialogues.

By this reserved and moderate temper, I hope to free my self from all such
incivilities as necessarily attend on the undertaking to convince a particular
person of weakness or inconsequence in his discourse, from which kind of
captious proceedings, besides my Reason, I am beholding to my Nature for its
extreme aversnes. Besides, in answering a writing, many impertinent quarrels
are picked, the substantial controversy lost or confounded, and the Truth it
self, by multiplicity, left more obscure then when the disputant began: for,
where many questions are started and none deeply searched into, the Reader goes
away without any resolution, more then what himself brought along with him. I
intend therefore with all candor and fidelity, to select such objections as I
think really interest the Controversy; and handle them without relation to
Books or distinction of Authors, or citations of places: as one who seeks
Truth, not the glory of confuting or vanity of answering.

But some may be unsatisfied with my proceedings, and demand, if this be my
intention, why do I cite those Authors in particular; and, as it were, make a
show of answering, without any effect: I desire those to consider, that the
names of Author's carry weight, among two sorts of Readers; One, such as
diligently peruse the books written on both sides; to whom I offer this
satisfaction, that they may find the solution to any difficulty which occurs
concerning this subject, in their writings: The other, such who look no farther
then the Title page, or whether a book be answered or no, are insolent upon the
writers name, and importunely clamorous, that it is a Piece beyond all
possibility of reply, be it never so weak and trivial; to whom the simple
profession that it is answered, is a wedg fit for their knot.

I must confess, next to the assuredness of my Cause, it is my chiefest
comfort to deal with Persons of such quality: such as the Protestant party
never produced before: it seems to have chosen them to live by, or die with.
Two, whose Merits found the way of honoring their Descents, by their
generosity; whose eloquence none were found to exceed, whose wits none will be
found to equal. What erudition in Languages, or acutenes in Logic could
furnish, was treasured in their breasts: But above all, a comprehensive
judgment, in managing the numerous and weighty affairs of a Kingdom to the
very heightning that sublime and subtlest Office, (Secretary of State) which
they both, successively, exalted to such a pitch, that it must expect a fall in
whoever shall succeed them.

One is, the right honorable George Lord Digby (now Earl of Bristol) ever
mounting the scale of Honor to a degree so far above the reach of others, that
it is even beyond their sight: The other, Lucius Lord Falkland, who crowned his
deserved Laurel with a wreath of Oaken Scyons; dying in such a posture, as if
mischief could not have ravaged England, had it not made its passage through
the breast of that Martyr of Peace. I can accuse him of nothing, but that he
left this Book behind him; it being too plain what unhappy impression it maks
in his Friends, since my self, almost a stranger, cannot read those quaint and
gentile expressions, those rarities of wit, those coruscations of Greek and
Latin remarques, and (which most of all surprises my admiration) those Noble
sweetnesses and civilities so unexpected in a quarrelling Treatise; but I feel
in my heart an unusual sorrow and regret, that our thoughts cannot stay on him,
without the sad check of a fuit.

But, since we are out of hope to resuscitate him that is gone, like the day he
died on; let us (by David's example) leave these flattering weaknesses of
nature, and seek severe reason in the controversy we pretend to manage.

THE FIRST ENCOUNTER, Explicating the Argument, by which RUSHWORTH proves the
Infallibility of Tradition.
THe Dialogues (in whose defense we now appear, as Second) govern their
discourse by this fair method: First, they treat and settle these definitions;
Tradition we call, the delivery of Christ's doctrine from hand to hand, in that
part of the world which, with propriety, is called Christian: By Christ's
doctrine, we mean that which was generally preached by the Apostles, and
contains all such points as are necessary to the salvation of the World; not
only in particular, to single persons, but for government of the Church, and
bringing multitudes, with convenience, to perfection in this life, and felicity
in the next. Which being established, they immediately proceed to this general
Position, that All Christ taught, or the Holy Ghost suggested to the Apostles,
of this nature, is, by a direct uninterrupted live, entirely and fully
descended to the present Church, which communicates with, and acknowledges
subjection to the Roman: Adding also the convers of that proposition, viz.
Nothing is so descended, but such Truths; nor any thing held by this tenure,
but what is so descended; which being cast up, amounts to this great
Conclusion, No error was ever, or can be embraced by the Church, in quality of
a matter of faith.

The proof consists in this: Since it is confessed the Catholic Church goes upon
this Maxim, that Her Doctrine is received from Christ, and still handed along
to the present generation; they who cavil at this assertion, should assign some
Age when they conceive an error crept in; and the maintainer should prove it
entered not in that Age, Because that Age held nothing was to be admitted, as
of Faith, except what was delivered to it by the former: but the Objectors
themselves say, this supposed error was not delivered by the former, since
they put it to be, now, first, believed; therefore the Age in which they imagine
this error crept in, could not be the first that believed it.

And, lest some might reply, though the present Roman Church stands now upon
the proposed maxim, yet anciently it did not; the same argument may be thus
reiterated, If this principle which now governs the Church had not always done
so, it must have been introduced in some Age since the Apostles: name therefore
the Age, and immediately it is urged, either the Church had assurance, in that
Age, all she held was descended lineally, as we spoke, from the Apostles, or
not: If so, then questionless she held her doctrine upon that maxim; For it is
the only undoubted and self-evident principle: If not, then she wilfully belyed
her self, and conspired to damn all her posterity, voluntarily taking up this
new Rule of faith and commanding it to be accepted by all the world, as the
necessary doctrine of Christ and his Apostles, descended upon the present age by
universal Tradition from their Ancestors, and for such to be delivered to their
children; and all this against the express evidence of her own conscience. Thus
far reaches the argument.

He that shall compare this perpetuation of the Church, with the constancy of
propagating mankind; and proportion the love of happiness and natural
inclination to truth, (which is in the superior part of mankind, and commands
powerfully in it) to the material appetite of procuring corporal succession,
and weigh what accidents are able and necessary to interrupt the progress of
one and the other, will find the propagation of Religion far stronger and less
defectible, then that of mankind; supposing them once rooted alike in
universality and setledness. Since therefore the means of conducting nature to
its true and chief end, Felicity, are more principally intended, then those by
which it is simply preserved in being; this Contemplator will clearly discern,
that if humane nature continue to the last and dreadful day, this succession
also of a true Church must be carried on through the same extent of time: there
appearing indeed no purpose why the world should endure a minute longer, if
this once come to fail; that part of mankind, which arrives to bliss, being the
end why the rest was made, as mankind is the end for which all the other
material Creatures are set on work.

Again, if a rational discourser should plot in his head how, with
condescendence to the weakness of our nature, he might bring mankind to bliss;
and, to this end, plant in it a perpetual and constant knowledge of the true and
straight way thither; and did observe that Man in his immature age is naturally
subject to believe, and after his full growth, tenacious of what he had sucked
in with his milk: could he choose but see, that to make the Mothers flatter into
their Children the first elements of the acquisition of Beatitude, and
continually go on nursing them up in the maxims of piety, till their stronger
years gave a steady setledness to their minds; must needs be the most sweet and
connatural way that can be imagined, to beget a firm and undoubted assent to
those happy principles.

If he think on, and chance to light on this truth, that the greatest part of
mankind, some through dullness of understanding, some by the distractions of
seeking necessaries for their subsistence, or at least conveniences for their
accommodation, and others for the diffluence of nature to Pleasures and
Vanities, are, to their very departing hour, wholly incapable of searching out
their Religion, either by their own contemplation or the learned books of
others: I cannot doubt but such a considerer would without the least difficulty
or hesitation, conclude that, were it his design to set up a Religion, which he
would have constantly and universally propagated, he must of necessity pitch
upon this way; And so, with a resolute and pious confidence pronounce, if God
has not already taken this course, certainly he should have done it.

To these considerations give my pen leave to add the confession of our
Adversaries, who boldly acknowledge the Roman Church has had universal
Tradition for the whole body of its faith ever since St. Gregory's days; which
is now a thousand years, and very near two parts of the three that Christian
Religion has endured. They confess those Doctrins, which are common to us and
them, remain in our Church uncorrupted, and have still descended from Father to
Son, by virtue of Tradition, since the very times of the Apostles. They will
not deny the Ages, betwixt Constantine and St. Gregory, flourisht with an
infinity of Persons famous both for piety and learning; and the Church never
more vigilant, never more jealous, being continually alarmed by such Troops of
powerful and subtle Heretics: so that there is no likelihood, gross errors
(such as Idolatry and Superstition import) could creep in undiscerned, in those
days. And perhaps, much less betwixt Constantine and the Apostles; the time
being so short that it scarce exceeds the retrospection of those who lived with
Constantine: At least that age could evidently know what was the faith of
Christendom in the age of the Apostles great Grandchildren, and they again be
certainly assured of the Doctrine of the Apostles disciples, their Grandfathers.
Which is an evidence beyond all testimony of writers, that since Constantines
time it was known by a kind of self-sight what the Grandchildren of the
Apostles held, and it could not be doubted of them but they knew and held the
doctrine of the Apostles; that, I say, in Constantines time, the public doctrine
of Christianity was the doctrine of the Apostles.

Besides, the communication of Christians being very difficult and infrequent,
during those persecutions; the contagion also of heresies scattered it self
slowly among Christians in those times. And here I shall note a ridiculous
cavil, very common not only in the mouths of the more rash and shallow
Protestants, but even in the writings of many of their gravest and most solemn
Doctors, who cry out against the Ignorance of our Church, as the cause of our
errors, and yet put the Ages in which they insult, that Frigebat Scriptura cum
vetustis Autoribus, some hundreds of years after the time, wherein they
acknowledge the doctrins, termed errors, were already flourishing; as if they
could proceed, from a defect which followed them: A slander so palpably absurd
that all the charity I have can scarce persuade me to think they are not
blinded rather with malice then ignorance, that dare vent such gross
contradictions.

And now, having abridg'd as 'twere, the whole sense of Rushworths Dialogues
concerning Tradition, into this short compendium; I will apply my pen to answer
what exceptions are taken, against either the form or matter of that Discourse.

THE SECOND ENCOUNTER, Defeating three oppositions made against Tradition.
THe first objection against the form is, that I put my Adversary to prove his
position instead of going about to maintain my own. This they imagine, because I
bid them assign the Age; which they take to be as much as a demand of them to
prove that in such a time came in the error: but it is a plain mistake. For I do
not require they should prove the error began in such an Age; but only exact
of them, for Argument sake, to name the Age in which they find most difficulty
for me to conclude, or wherein they conceive the sinnews of my discourse will be
most slack and feeble: for the force of the main argument is indifferent to any
Age they can pitch upon, equally demonstrative in all, and so, by striking at
every one, concludes against all. This I say not, any way to disclaim the
advantage we Catholics have, whilst we press our adversary to prove his
Thesis, being no less a just then strong and secure retreat; and which I
reserve my self the liberty of retiring to, perhaps, at another time: but now I
only urge him to name one Age at hazard, merely to give way to the prosecution
of the argument; a Justice I might do for my self, if I would, without his
courtesy, and have all the laws of disputation bear me out in it.

It is therefore to little purpose to demand, whether I ask of the first man
that held such an opinion, or when it came to be universal (though the question
be plainly of this later, for we hold it was ever so;) nor is there any art
necessary to answer it, the argument made being indifferent to all. The skill
therefore required, is only to know what belongs to the form of demonstrating;
for the most part, indeed, not found in the quaint discourses of Rhetoricians.
But the Adversary thinks, when the Question is put concerning a Doctrine's
being Universal, it must suppose none to hold the contrary opinion; as if we
could not know what is the public Faith of France, because perhaps a few
concealed persons may believe somewhat different. Wherein, he reflects not, that
Heresy signifies the cleaving to a private opinion: so that, when there were
any such in former ages, that very thing made them Heretics (how good wits or
great learning so ever they had) if they dissented from the doctrine delivered
by their forefathers. He presses, Catholics cannot tell when the communicating
of Children began, since St. Austin thinks it an Apostolical Tradition. We
answer, we are of that mind too: but with this qualification, that it was a
Tradition begun by some Apostles, not all, in some Countries, not all, in some
circumstances, not all: And therefore 'twas neither superstition to use it, nor
sacriledg to leave it off; how strongly soever the opponent avers one of these
two to be unavoydable.

The second opposition made against the form is, that it is a fallacy of that
kind, called Soritae, in which the Scepticks found so great difficulty, that
they used to press them against the Stoics and other dogmatists, as insoluble
and manifestly demonstrating there was no science. But, to understand the
meaning of this objection, the demonstration proposed is to begin from the
Apostles time: and so it must be supposed, that the next Age after the
Apostles, in any controversy against new doctrins, examined no farther then on
which side stood the verdict of the Apostles, whereof they could not be
ignorant. The Argument therefore pressed that the next (that is, the third Age)
must of necessity take the same method against its Novellists, convincing them
of falsity, because their doctrine was contrary to that of those who had heard
the Disciples of the Apostles speak. And so, since the Tradition of Faith was
conveyed from age to age, still with this caution, that the latter was to
believe such a doctrine, because received from the former, upon this warrant
that it descended lineally from Christ in the same manner, to them, as they
delivered it to their posterity; it necessarily follows, that this doctrine
could not but continue pure even to our present time: unless some age should
prevaricate all bounds of truth and nature, and deliver something to the
following age, as traditionally derived from Christ, which had not been so
received.

This argument, so proposed (though I know not whether so understood) seemed to
the opponent like the ratiocination of one Mr. Thinn, a melancholy Philosopher,
who persuaded himself, a person might be found that could leap from off Paul's
(for sure he needed a high standing) to Rome, because 'twas possible some man
might leap full twenty foot, and no doubt but another somewhat more, and still
another more then he, and so without end; therefore among all, one quick
springer would be found, who could make his jump from hence to the Capitol.

But certainly he that weighed the two arguments, might without extraordinary
study, have found there was some difference in their form: Mr. Thinn, being
obliged to take variety of men undetermined: but this argument engaging only
sixteen ages, and peradventure, not needing above six, or in rigor, some
three, and those such as have had a real existence, whereas the Worlds durance
and latitude are not sufficient to find men enough to justify Mr. Thinns
Process. This I say was obvious enough to any mean understanding, not
preoccupated with prejudice against the conclusion. But one, who had understood
how Aristotle unwrapped Zeno's fallacies, might easily have known that Infinity
it self could not add more then one full foot to Mr. Thinns leapers: if the
increase were made by sub-proportional parts, whereof the first was one half
foot; and if by equal quantities, as Feet or Inches, he would soon come to an
end of his addition, unless he put men's strength and nimblenesse to be
infinite. But to sit Judge of Religion, of eternal bliss and damnation, some
curious and unhappy wits dare think requires neither so much indifferency nor
reflection as the composition of quantity.

Yet I cannot but admire it could escape a piercing ey to discern, that as the
consequent of Mr. Thinns discourse is ridiculous and impossible, so that of the
proposed demonstration is evident and undeniable. For what ingenuous forehead
will deny, but such verities as all the world allows to remain still untainted
in the Church of Rome, have descended by this traditionary way to us from
Christ? Wherefore both the possibility and actuality of this way is not only
acknowledged by the unanimous confession of all parties, but its force and
efficacy made evident by the downright violence of reason: all the controversy
being merely about the multitude and sufficiency of the things received, not
the impotency of the means to convey them to us.

But, to make an end of this petty Question, I appeal to all Masters, nay even
Scholars in Geometry, whether this form of arguing be not the same that Euclid,
Archimedes and Apollonius use in their severest demonstrations? As when Euclid
undertakes to demonstrate this plain and elementary Theoreme, that No Circle
can touch another in more then one point; himself acts the part of the Denier,
and according to the law of Mathematics, supposes at random the other point,
to see whether the Proposition be maintainable: and if the Contactus in the
point assigned be proved impossible, by an argument applyable to any other that
can be offered, the Theoreme remains infallibly demonstrated, and the Rules of
that precise and strict Science perfectly complied with.

The third opposition is drawn out of a conceited impossibility of the case;
and so they demand how can it come to pass that all the Doctors of one age
should meet together, to instruct the world of Scholars that are to succeed
them in the next? an action, if not impossible, at least so incredible, as by
no means to be aver'd without legitimate Authority, which they say, is wanting:
And further, should we undertake, that not only all Doctors, but all men of one
age met with the men of the next, to teach them; it were an enterprise so
highly impossible, as not to be thought on even among the wildest capriches of
a Romance: yet to so hard straits are we driven, that we must defend the
possibility of this later assertion.

Which to compass, we distinguish this word, Together, as capable of
signifying an unity either in place or time: and, if the Opponent mean one Age
cannot meet another in a Town or great Hall, as Councils use, I am easily
persuaded such interviews are impossible; but if this Assembly needs only the
unity of time, I think it will require but a moderate stock of faith to
believe, either that men of the same Age live together in that Age, or that
Fathers meet with their Children. If then we put all Fathers and Mothers, all
Pastors and Teachers to make one Age, and all Children and young persons, who
come to be instructed, and afterward outlive their Tutors, to compose the other
age; I see no great impossibility in this position, but a clear one in the
contrary. For, I cannot believe the Opponents think, men, since Christ's time,
start out of mole-hils with clods on their heads, as it seems Empedocles and
Horace imagined, and the Toscans of their wise Tages, high Master of their
skill in Augury.

And this answer cuts off another difficulty, urged by certain Speculatists,
that, because, in some rude times, they imagine the learned were few, and
therefore subject to corruption by hopes or fears, they might more easily be
prevailed with to proclaim a falls Tenet in that Age; whence, this claim of
infallibility would remain broken: But the former answer saves it; for since
neither the great multitude of Instructors, nor instructed persons can meet in
any other assembly then that of the whole and open World, all possibility of
corruption is evidently avoided.

THE THIRD ENCOUNTER, Solving two other Objections against the infallibility of
Tradition.
THe fourth opposition denis the necessity of assigning any Age wherein an
error may be said to have crept in; because (say they) an error might begin
first in one Country, and insensibly steal over into another, without any
notice taken of its novelty, so that there is no time wherein its beginning is
discoverable: For proof, they instance in some error held by diverse Heretics
in diverse ages; and tell you, the best Historian knows who was first mentioned
to have broacht that error: whereas perhaps a less diligent or careless Writer
may cite some middle or late Author, attributing to him the original invention
of that opinion.

To this we reply, it is too desperate an Answer to call a hundred years an
insensible time, to suppose all the Pastors stupify'd, and the Doctors asleep
for a whole century together. At least, let us ask this fair question, Was
there no Doctor or Bishop made it his business to promote that new opinion
within a hundred years? If you say, no; how could an innovation of any
considerable importance get footing which had no eminent patron? If you say
yes; see whether that was not the occasion of impugning all heresies, when
extraordinary persons divulged them: I, but you will say, it was so transcendent a
Doctor that he overtopt all. Here, I confess my weakness: for if some sky-faln
Angel, indeed, should come, with tongue and pen more then humane, I doubt not
but he might perhaps endanger a great part of the Church: but, if we make our
comparison only betwixt men; who ever had the like reputation in the Greek
Church, as Origin? yet he was condemned by the same Church. Who was more
eloquent then Eusebius Caesariensis? more cunning then Eusebius Nicomediensis?
more subtle then Arius? Let us add a faction so powerful, as to make ten
Councils, to number three hundred Bishops; yet, notwithstanding all this, the
Arians were condemned. The Dragon drew but a third part of the Stars; and the
Apostle has armd us, even against the treachery of Angels; charging that, in
spite of them, we cleave fast to what we have received, to what was Preached
to us, that is, to Tradition: For rely but on what, in memory of our own age,
the Church has universally held, and delivered, as from Christ, and no subtlety
of men or Angels can make you mistake.

Yet, Let it be supposed, some unparalled Brain had the power to make a
doctrine universal; could this stand with the still way of creeping in
insensibly? Is not this position, that a Doctor was so great, and took so much
pains to divulge his opinion, wrote so many Books in defense of it, that he
overcame all opposers, and at last made it universal; and yet all this while
the new doctrine stole in unawares, the Pastors of the Church never dreaming any
such thing: is not this as very a Bull as to say, an Army shot off all their
Attillery, that the Enemy might not discover where they lay? or to do, as is
reported of an acquaintance of mine, who being in good company, to ride through
a Town, where he was afraid to be taken notice of, at his entrance set spurs to
his horse, holding his Cane straight before him, and Trumpeted Tararara
Tararara the whole length of the Town? Nevertheless, since it is for our side
(says the Zelot) it is an invincible demonstration.

But we desire leave to consider one point farther; In what times came in the
errors, our Adversaries so loudly complain of? see whether they be not those
ages when there were great quarrels about innovations encroaching on the
Church, and multitudes of exceptions taken: so that, had any side entertained a
new error, not common to both parties, especially if the novelties were any
way notable, they could not have been passed over without mutual contradictions
or upbraidings. The doctrines therefore which in those times passed
unreprehended, and were currantly admitted among all parties, as being common
to them all, without question were not Errata, sed Tradita. Whence, certainly
it must needs appear a manifest folly, to think any error could run through
the Church so uncontrol'd, as to gain, without the least sign of opposition, an
universality: and much like the story, that the great Turk, with an Army of
three or four hundred thousand men, should steal upon Germany by night and take
all the good fellows so fast asleep that not a man should escape, nor so much
as a Goos gaggle to wake the drowsy neighbors, and, having thus silently run
over the Empire, should pass into France; and thence into Spain, and still
catch them all napping without the least notice or resistance: whereof, if any
slow and dull heart should doubt, as seeming indeed somewhat an improbable
story, the reporter should immediately prove all with a why not? since the
Greeks had surpised Troy so, and perhaps some other great Captain one single
Town or Garrison.

Besides, if we venture to throw away a little faith on so extravagant a fable;
the action will still remain unpossible to be concealed. Who shall hinder the
Conqueror from proclaiming such unparalleld victories, to applaud himself and
terrify the rest of the world? who can forbid his soldiers to Chronicle their
own valors, and everywhere boast such un-heard of exploits? Certainly, were
there no Catholic testimonies of these late unhappy divisions from the Church,
yet would succeeding ages find evidence enough (as to the matter of fact) even
in the writings of the Reformers themselves. How often do their Books insult
over the blindness of their Predecessors, and triumph in the man of God Martin
Luther, and the quicker light Jo. Calvin, as first discoverers of their
newfound Gospel? can we think it possible distracted Europe should blot out of
her memory the sad effects of schism and heresy, before the tears they have
caused be wiped from her eyes? for my part, I am confident our once happy Island
will never forget the graceless disorders of Henry the hights unfortunate
intemperance, though there were not one English Catholic left in the world, to
remember them by the smart he endures ever since.

Add to all this, the points, wherein Protestants accuse us, are the most
palpably absurd positions that can fall into a Christians head; as, making Gods
of Saints or Statues, which were the dotages of the basest sort of Pagans.

Nor is the example of errors often sprung and often quelled again, of any
advantage to the Opponent. For our question concerns opinions remaining till
this day, and by himself, supposed to have gaind the mastery of the Church, and
never failed since their beginning: because all doctrins, which appear to have
a being before any age the Adversary can name, are thereby evidently proved
perpetual Traditions; especially when the Authors were such as lived in
Communion with the Catholic Church then extant, and remained in veneration with
the Church succeeding.

Methinks also since the opposer maintains it was more then a whole Age in
working it self up to this universality, if the error were gross, it must
without doubt have been a long time in one Country, before it passed into
another; else we shall scarce find a reason why it became not general in a
shorter period of years; and so it would easily appear, until such an age that
new doctrine was never heard of: and in every Country the beginnings would be
mentioned by the Historians and other writers: as, who came out of Greece into
France to plant Images, who first introduced the Priests power of absolution,
who invented the doctrine of preferring the judgment of the Church before our
own private interpretation of Scripture; all which we see exactly performed
against every considerable Heresy, a minute and punctual account being still
upon Record, who were the original contrivers, who the principal abettors,
where they found patronage, where opposition, How long they lived, and when
they died.

To evade this reason, is framed the next crimination, by saying what is
answered has its probability, if the errors laid to our charge were contrary
to Christian doctrine: But they only pretend to accuse us of superfaetations,
or false and defective additions to the Faith first planted; which
excrescencies, only, the Reformers seek to take away. And, though it be
manifest, when they come to charge us in particular, they instance in doctrines
substantially opposite to the Faith of Christ, as Superstition and Idolatry,
could their calumnies be justified against us: yet, because this objection
civilly renounces such harsh and uncharitable language, let us see what may be
intended by Superfaetations.

Either the disliked additions are of truths, or of falsities. If, of truths,
we expect they would demonstrate who has forbidden us to learn and advance our
knowledge in Christian Religion, or matters belonging to it. Did God give his
Law to Beasts, that have no discourse nor capacity, by joining two revealed
truths to arrive at the discovery of a third? Again, where is it prohibited for
the Doctor and Preacher to know more then the Idiot and old wife? What fault
then can even the proud and peevish humor of this age find in this point? If
Heretics will raise dust, and obscure the clearest articles of Christian
faith, and that so maliciously, as without settling some further explication,
the people are in danger of being perverted: is it a sin to establish such
defenses and Ramparts against encroaching errors?

If the addition be of falsities; let us examine how the Opposer knows they are
false? If he reply, because they are contrary to clear Scripture: then they are
also contrary to that Faith which delivered Scripture to be true. If the points
be not against Scripture; either they cross some known Article of Faith, or
only the Principles of natural reason. If they be purely objects of natural
reason (though truths) they belong not so to Religion, as to be accounted
Articles of Faith: if they contradict some other fore-taught Article, then the
Argument before explicated (concerning the infallibility of Tradition, and the
creeping in of Errors against it) returns to its force. If neither of these,
why are they false, or upon what grounds condemned?

But peradventure he excepts not against the Truths, but the obligation to
believe and profess them. Admitting then the additional points to be, in
themselves, true; why will not the Opposer assent to them? has he a
demonstration against them? No, for then they could not be true. Has he such
Arguments, that nothing opposite is equivalent to their eminent credibility?
No; for, setting aside demonstration, no argument can be comparable to the
Churches Authority. The reason therefore, if the inward thoughts be faithfully
sifted, will at length appear no other, then the preferring his own Opinion
before the judgment of the Church: which being the effect of an obstinate and
malepert pride, makes no legitimate excuse for not believing.

THE FOURTH ENCOUNTER. That unlearned Catholics rely upon the infallibility of
Tradition.
THe next exception is of main importance; for it undermines the demonstration
at the very root, denying that the Church of Rome relys on Tradition: and
having divided the believers into learned and unlearned, first undertakes to
prove the unlearned not to be grounded on Tradition; at least, not for their
whole Faith. For, if a question arise never thought on before, and once a
Council determine the Controversy, that decree is accepted, as if it had come
from Christ by Tradition; and all profess a readiness to obey, and therefore
are like to perform their word, if occasion be offered. Besides, in Catechisms
and instructions, the Common People are not taught, that the doctrine comes
handed down to them from the Apostles. In Sermons, we see, when any proposition
of difficulty or concernment is treated, proofs are alleag'd out of Scripture
and ancient Fathers: a practice even the fathers themselves continually observe,
who, having proposed a point, are ready to add, it is not they alone that
teach this doctrine, but the Apostles or Christ, or some renouned Father; never
mentioning Tradition, unless to oppose or disable it, when some Heretics have
laid claim to it, as the Quartadecimans, Chyliasts, Communicants of Infants,
and the like.

The charge I confess is fierce; let us see what powder it bears, what shot. We
agree, the Church comprehends both learned and unlearned, and so are bound to
maintain that both sorts rely on Tradition. As for the first objection then,
concerning the readiness to embrace a Councils definition, with the same
assent, as if the truth were descended by Tradition; I can either and
indifferently grant or deny it: Since, if I please to grant it, I have this
secure retreat, that a conditional proposition has no force, unless the
condition be possible: and for the possibility of the condition, I distinguish
the subject; which may be matter of Practice and Obedience, or a speculative
proposition. Of the first I can allow the assent to be the same; that is, an
equal willingness to observe it: Of the second, I deny it ever was or can be,
that a Council should define a question otherwise then by Tradition; Therefore,
to rely on the Councils definition taks not away, but confirms the relying on
Tradition. This, if need were, I could easily justify, by the express
proceedings of all the principal Councils. Thus the condition having never been
put, nor supposed ever will be, all this Argument rests solely on the Objectors
credit, and is with as much ease rejected as it was proposed.

Now should I choose (according to my above reserved liberty) to deny such
equality of assent; the Opponent has offered no proof, and so the quarrel is
ended: for though I could produce instances to the contrary, I think it not fit
to multiply questions when the argument can be solved with a simple denial.

But how the Opponent can justify the second branch of his exception, that in
Catechisms this doctrine is not taught, I am wholly ignorant. As far as my
memory will serve me, I never heard the Creed explicated, but, when the
Catechist came to the Article of the Catholic Church, he told them how
Catholic signified an universality of place and time; and that, for this title
of Catholic, we were to rely on her testimony. Likewise, in the word
Apostolic, he noted that the Apostles were the founders of the Church, and her
doctrine theirs, as being first received from them and conserved by the Church
ever since; and that for this reason we were to believe her Authority. Thus you
see, that famous phrase of the Colliers faith is built on this very principle
we maintain. True it is, Catechists do not ordinarily descend to so minute
particularities, as to tell ignorant people whether any position may be exempt
from this general Law: But then we also know the rule, Qui nihil excipit, omnia
includit.

Sermons (upon which the third instance is grounded) are of another nature;
their intention being, not so much literally to teach the Articles of Christian
doctrine, as to persuade and make what is already believed sink into the
Auditory, with a kind of willingness and easiness, that their faith be quickened
into a principle of action to govern their lives, the principal end perhaps for
which the Scripture was delivered and recommended to us. Therefore, neither the
common practice, nor proper design or use of Sermons reaches home, to make us
understand on what grounds the hearts of Catholics rely; who after all
disputations, retire themselves to this safe guard, To believe what the Catholic
Church teaches; as none can be ignorant that has had the least convers with
such Catholics as profess not themselves Divines.

For the last period of this objection, where the Fathers are brought in to cry
out against Tradition, and Heretics made the sole pretenders to that title:
it is a bare assertion, without so much as a thin rag of proof to cover it; of
which, I believe, hereafter, we shall have particular occasion to discourse
more largely. Thus cannot all the diligence I am able to use find any ground of
difficulty in the belief of the unlearned, but that assuredly their faith is
established on Tradition, if they rely on the Church as it is Catholic and
Apostolic; which all profess, from the gray hair to him that but now begins to
lisp his Creed.

THE FIFTH ENCOUNTER That Catholic Divines rely on the same infallibility of
Tradition.
It Is time now to come to the second part, and see what is objected against the
learneder sort and the long Robe's Resolution of their faith into Tradition:
And first is brought on the stage a couple of great Cardinals, Perron and
Bellarmin; the former saying, out of St. Austin, that the Trinity, Freewill,
Penance, and the Church were never exactly disputed, before the Arians,
Novatians, Pelagians and Donatists: Whence is inferred that, as more was
disputed, so more was concluded; therefore more known, and consequently not all
derived by Tradition.

But if we should answer, that disputing, betwixt Catholics and Heretics, is,
on the Catholic part, no other then proving and defending those points which
were derived by Tradition, and found in Christian action and behavior, this
argument were cut up by the roots, and all pretense and color of it taken
away: Which is the very truth of the business: this being inseparably the
difference betwixt Heresy and Catholicism, that when those perverse novelties
first peep out of their dark grots, the Catholic Religion securely possesses
the World; and upon such opposition is at first surpised, and the Divines,
perhaps, put to cast about for plausible defenses and grounds to satisfy
unstable heads, who easily conceit themselves wiser then their forefathers, and
scorn authority, unless reason proportioned to their capacity or humor marshal
it in.

Nevertheless, because disputing cannot choose but bring to light some
deductions, consequent to the first and principally-defended Position; I shall
not deny the Church may come to know somewhat, which happily before she never
reflected on. But then those new truths belong to the science we call Theology,
not to Faith; and, even for those, the Church rely's on Tradition, as far as
they themselves emerge from doctrins delivered by Tradition: so that the truth
attested by the learned Cardinal out of St. Austin, is, that, by much
canvasing, more clear proofs and answers are discovered, or more ample
Theological science concerning such mysteries, acquired.

Bellarmin is brought in excusing Pope John 22. from being an Heretic, though
he held no souls were admitted to the vision of God, before the day of
Judgment; because the Church had not as yet defined any thing concerning it: I
confess, many more might be produced deprehended in the like actions; and,
before all, St. Austin excusing St. Cyprian on the same score. Now, to draw a
conclusion from hence, this is to be added, that surely if there had been a
Tradition, neither the Pope nor St. Cyprian could be ignorant of it, and
therefore not excusable upon that account. But, in truth, I wonder this point is
no harder pressed; for, if any would take pains and look into our Schoolmen,
they might find very many of them maintain, that Tradition is necessary only
for some points not clearly expressed in Scripture: whence it seems to follow
they build not the whole body of their Faith upon Tradition.

For satisfaction of this difficulty, I must note, there is a vast difference
betwixt relying on Tradition, and saying or thinking we do so. The Platonists
and Peripateticks are divided about the manner of vision; Aristotle teaching,
that the object works upon the eye; Plato, that the eye sends out a line of
Spirits or rays to the object: Yet nothing were more ridiculous then to affirm,
the Platonists saw in one fashion, the Peripateticks in another. Some (as I
fear may be experienced in too many of our modern Scepticks) are of this
desperate and unreasonable opinion, that we have no maxims evident by Nature,
but contradictories may be true at once; the rest of Philosophers think
otherwise: yet we see, in all natural and civil actions, both sides proceed, as
if those maxims were evident and irresistible. So likewise, there is a wide
distance betwixt these two questions what a man relys on for his assent of
Faith, and what he says or thinks he relys on. Look but among the Protestants
or other Sectaries, they are al taught to answer, they rest wholly on the
Bible, the Bible, for their Faith; but nine parts of ten seek no farther then
the Commands of their own Church: that is, all those who either cannot read or
make it not their study to be cunning in the Scriptures, or have so much
modesty as to know themselves unable to resolve those many intricate
controverted points by the bare letter of the Text; who, perhaps are not the
less numerous, but certainly the more excusable part of Protestants.

Whence, farther, it is clear that; to ask on what a private person grounds his
belief, and on what, the Church? is yet a more different question; especially,
if you enquire into what he thinks the Church resolvs her faith. For, supposing
the Church, as to some verity, should rely on Scripture or Councils; a Divine
may know the Church holds such a position, and yet (though of a just size of
learning) not know, or, at least, not remember on what ground she maintains it:
and in that case, no doubt but his faith stands on the same foundation with
that of the Church; yet he cannot, perhaps, suddenly tell, whether it be
resolved into Scripture or Councils. To conclude therefore this demand, whether
Bellarmin himself relied on Tradition, for all points? has not the least
resemblance with this other, whether he thought the Church did so? And, to come
yet closer to the question; it is evident, every believer, under that notion, as
a believer, is unlearned and ignorant: For, as such, he rests upon his teacher,
who in our present case is, undoubtedly, the Church as Catholic and
Apostolic; so far, therefore, the Collier and Bellarmin depend on the same
Authority. As for the other part of the interrogatory, on what he thinks the
Church rely's for her doctrine? it may be inquired either in common or
particular. In common (relating generally to the body and substance of
Catholic doctrine,) there is no doubt, among Catholics, but their reliance is
upon Tradition, this being the main profession of great and small, learned and
unlearned, that Christian Religion is and has been continued in our Church,
since the days of our Savior, the very same faith the Apostles taught all
Nations, and upon that score, they receive it: Speaking thus therefore, no
Catholic makes any scruple but Religion comes to him by Tradition.

There remains now, only, what learned men think, concerning the ground whereon
the Church rely's, in some particular cases: which we have already shown
concerns not their private belief, as it is the foundation of their spiritual
life; for, so, they rely on the Church, and what the Church rely's on: and by
consequence, it will prove but a matter of opinion in an unnecessary question
belonging purely to Theology, not Faith, whatever is said in it. Whence Divines
in this may vary without any prejudice to the Church or salvation, either in
private or in order to Government; seeing the main foundation is surely
established, that every believer, as such, rely's on the Church immediately. This
difficulty therefore is so far resolved, that it little imports what opinion
Bellarmin or any other private Doctor holds in the point: since it follows not
that the Church, or any particular member thereof, rely's on such a ground; no
not Bellarmin himself, though he conceive, in some points, the Church rely's on
Scripture or Councils.

But, since St. Austin marches in the head of this Troop for defense of St.
Cyprian, let us proceed with more diligence and respect in reconciling the
difficulty. We are to remember, it is a different question, to ask Whether an
opinion be Heresy? and, Whether the Maintainer be an Heretic? the opinion
becomes heretical by being against Tradition, without circumstances; but the
Person is not an Heretic, unless he knows there is such a Tradition. Now, St.
Cyprians case was about a doctrine included in a practice, which, he saw well,
was the custom of the African, but knew not to be so of the universal Church,
till some congregation of the whole Christian World had made it evident. And
herein consists the excuse St. Austin alleges for St. Cyprian; it is true, I
have no assurance this Apology can be alleged for John 22. but another perhaps
may, that the multitude of Fathers (which he conceived to be on his side) might
persuade him, the opposite opinion could not be a constant Tradition. There
remains only Bellarmins excuse to be justified, which is not of so great
moment: Divines helping themselves by the way that occurrs best to them, and
missing in such reasons, without any scandal to their neighbors.

One of these two solutions will generally satisfy all such objections as are
drawn from some fathers mistakes against the common Faith. For nothing can be
more certain, then, if any Father had known the doctrine, contrary to his
error, to have been universally taught in the Catholic Church, by a derivation
from their ancestors, beyond the memory of any beginning, he would readily
without dispute have submitted to such an Authority, and so much the sooner, as
he being nearer the Fountain, could less doubt that the stream, of which he saw
no other rise, reached home to the Springhead. This therefore is evident, that
whoever erred, knew nothing of such a Tradition, whencesoe're that ignorance
took its root: the several causes of which depend upon the several cases of
their mistakes, here not pressed, and therefore not examined.

THE SIXTH ENCOUNTER, Disabling three other Arguments brought against Tradition.
THe seventh objection pretends, not only different, but opposite Traditions
might be derived from the Apostles. And this they support with these two
crutches: one consists in a demurrer, that the contrary is not proved: the
other in an Instance, that it plainly happened so in the case of the
Quartadecimani, who inherited from St. John a certain custom, which was
condemned by a practice derived from some other Apostles. But the weakness of
this objection appears by its very proposal: For, since all Catholics, when
they speak of Tradition deliberately and exactly, define it to be a Doctrine
universally taught by the Apostles, we may safely conclude, where two Apostles
teach differently, neither is Tradition: And that this word, universally, may
not seem, by slight of hand, cog'd into the definition, on purpose to take away
this objection; the necessity of it is evident: because, all that wear the
name of Christian unanimously agreeing that, in point of truth, one Apostle
could not contradict another; wherever two such Traditions are possible to be
found, it absolutely follows, no point of truth is engaged: An inference
expressly verified in the example of the Quartadecimans; their contention being
merely about a Ceremony, not an Article of Faith. Wherefore, only indifferent
and unnecessary practices are subjects of such a double Tradition: and, by
consequence, such Traditions are not of Christian belief, or concerning
matters, here, in controversy; this very definition rather directly excluding
them.

The eighth Argument seems to take its rise from our own confessions; telling
us, We acknowledge some points of Faith to have come in later then others, and
give the cause of it, that the Tradition (whereon such points rely) was, at the
beginning, a particular one, but so that yet at the time when it became
universal, it had a testimony even beyond exception, by which it gained such a
general acknowledgment.

The example of this is in certain Books of Scripture, as the Epistle to the
Hebrews, and the Apocalypse; whereof, in St. Jerome's time, the Greek Churches
refused the one, and the Latin the other; yet now both have prevaild into an
universal reception. To which I return this clear answer: it is the nature of
things acted, (that depend on Physical and mutable causes,) to have diverse
degrees in diverse parts, according to the unequal working of the Causes: and
so, Christ having delivered, by the hands of his Apostles, two things to his
Church, his Doctrine, as the necessary and substantial aliment thereof, and his
Scriptures, ad abundantiam; it was convenient, the strength of Tradition, for
one, should far exceed its strength for the other; yet so, that even the weaker
should not fail to be assured and certain. Upon this reason, the Doctrine was
delivered to all the Apostles, and by them to the whole community of Christians:
the Scriptures, to some particular person or Church, (yet such whose credit was
untainted) and from them, by degrees, to be spread through the whole Church, and
communicated to the Pastors, in the Books themselves; to the people, by their
Pastors reading and explications. For, who does not know, before Printing was
invented, the Bible was not every man's money? Whence it appears, Scriptures are
derived to us by a lower degree of Tradition, then that of Catholic doctrine;
and consequently our Faith and acceptance due to them is not of so high a
nature as what we are bound to in respect of doctrine. For the sense of
Scripture is to be judged by the doctrine: as the Church and custom of Antiquity
teaches us: always commanding and practicing, that no man exercise his wits in
interpreting the holy Scripture against the received Faith of the Church; as,
in all matters of science, they who are Masters in the Art, judge the text of
Books written upon such subjects by their unwritten skill and practical
experience.

And here I would willingly ask, what such Protestants as object this to us,
can answer for themselves? since they directly profess not to know Scripture by
the Spirit, and therefore must necessarily rely on Tradition; especially those
who take for their rule to accept only such Books for Canonical, as were never
doubted of: for they cannot deny, but the Scriptures were received in one
Church before another; as the Epistles of St. Paul, St. John, or St. Marks
Gospel, etc. and how do they admit the Apocalypse, so long refused by the Greek
Churches, whom they use to prefer before the Latin?

But they press us farther; that, if a particular Tradition became universal,
this depended on the Logic of those Ages, to discern what testimony was beyond
exception. I demand what signifies Logic? do they mean common sense,
sufficient to know three and four make seven; or wit enough to comprehend and
manage with a just degree of discretion, the ordinary occurrences in humane
actions? If they do; I must confess it depends on Logic: For I cannot think
God Almighty delivered the Scriptures to Apes or Elephants, who have a mere
imitation of reason in their outward carriage; but to Men, that have truly
understanding, and a capacity of evidence within their Souls. But, if they take
Logic for an ability to discourse beyond the reach of ordinary prudence, and
that human evidence which governs our lives; I see no occasion of expecting any
such Logic in our present question.

The ninth attempt consists in a diligent survey of our Fortifications, to spy
out some breach, or weaker place, by which error may creep into the Church.
This I cannot call an Argument; for none are so unwise as to make such a
consequence: It may be, therefore it is; unless they bring strong proof of this
necessity in some particular instance, that may show it to be an exception from
the common maxim, a posse ad esse non valet consequentia: And yet, in this
discourse, I find not so much as the very posse, which I thus declare. If any
should deny that George could leap over Pauls-steeple; and a quaint Orator (to
maintain the affirmative) should largely discourse, how the rise of the last
footing, the help of a good staff, the cast of his body, and many such
circumstances give advantage to the leap; but never think of comparing these
with the height of the Steeple: no sensible person would say, he had proved the
possibility of performing such a wild and extravagant enterprise. So, he that
discourses at large, how errors use to slide into man's life, without comparing
the power of the causes of error to the strength of resisting, which consists
in this principle, Nothing is to be admitted, but what descends by Tradition;
as also, without considering the heat and zeal still preserved alive in the
Churches bowels from the great fire of Pentecost: says no more toward proving
an errour's overrunning the Church, then the Orator we exemplified, for
Georges leaping over the Steeple. Wherefore this attempt is so far from the
business, it deserves not the honor of being accounted an Argument.

Yet, because we compared the propagation of the Catholic Faith, to the
perpetuation of Human kind, let us propose the like discourse against it: and
say, that in Afric or the Land of Senega, there are under earth, great mines
of Arsnick: Whereof one may at some time or other, vapor a contagious smoke,
which, encountering with a strong wind from the South, may breed so great a
Plague in all the North Countries, that none can escape it; and hereupon
presently conclude, that all, on this side the Line, are quite dead, and those
who seem to live and discourse are but phantasms and have nothing of real in
them: though I believe the instances (brought in, for declaration of so
groundless a conceit) may seem better to deserve that name.

THE SEVENTH ENCOUNTER. Answering the Greeks and some Divines, who object new
Beliefs to the Catholic Church.
THe first is of the Greeks; Hieremie Nilus and Barlaam, who profess to stand
to Tradition and the first seven General Councils, and can be no way
disproved, says the objector, unless by what shall be as forcible against the
Catholic cause. But truly, this instance is so lame, it needs a new making,
before it be answered: For the Author expresses not in what points of
difference betwixt us and them, he intends to urge it. If, about shavings or
fastings and the like; we shall have no quarrel against him; if about the
Procession of the holy Ghost, I doubt he will find himself entangled in an
equivocation, betwixt the matter and manner of that mystery. However, that all
arguments against them will serve against us, is but the Authors liberal
addition, without any proof or means to guess at it. That they accuse us, to
corrupt Tradition by sowing tares among it, has two parts; one justify's my
plea, that we rely on Tradition, since they charge us with endeavoring to
corrupt, not disclaim it: the other, that we do indeed corrupt it, is only said
not proved; and farther shows that the plea of the Greeks is non-Tradition;
alleging only this, that their Fathers do not deliver the doctrine of the
procession of the Holy Ghost, not that they say the contrary; which clearly
demonstrates, there are no opposite Traditions between them and us.

As little force has the Note cited out of Tertullian, to prove that he thought
more was to be believed, then what was drawn from antiquity; because he was
content private men might begin good customs in their own houses: For sure he
could not believe, that omnis fidelis could constituere for the whole Church,
or even for his neighbors house. So that we need a great deal of Logic to
draw from this remark, the creeping of an error into the Church: not a word
being so much as intimated, that this good custom should be against what was
already received; which had been enough to make it rejected, and not
comprehended, in Tertullians known judgment.

There is another instance, strongly urged and largly dilated; but, if I guess
right, of so much less credit, the more it is opened. It is out of a history by
one Wadding, an Irish man, concerning two Treaties of two Kings of Spain with
two Popes, to tear from them a definition for the Immaculateness of our Ladies
Conception. (I follow an Authors words who has read the book, and it seems
found a great violence in the carriage of the business, which made him express
it, by the word tearing.) Who this Wadding is I know not, for I have heard of
more then one; but whether this be any of them, I am totally ignorant, having
never seen the Book nor any other signs by which to discover the Author.

Out of this Book they collect three arguments: One from Waddings testimony;
another from the State of the question he handles: a third, from his practice,
jointly with the practice of diverse others of the same degree. For the first, I
am desirous notice should be taken of the Authors condition; When he wrote this
book, he was Secretary to the Bishop of Carthagena, and He his Kings
Ambassador, to move the Pope to define our Ladies Conception without original
sin; and, in soliciting this, to use an extraordinary importunity: Wherein I
see two circumstances that concern the qualification of his Book; One, that he
was to act a business of great heat; and, if his zeal were not conformable to
the eagerness of his senders, he was like to have little thanks for his pains;
The second that he was Secretary to an Ambassador, by which he had privilege to
say and publish Dicenda Tacenda, whether they were his own opinions or (...),
so they any way advanced his cause.

Now, this encouraged Secretary undertakes to affirm, that many things have
been defined against the opinions of some Fathers; and in the present case, he
says, peradventure, it has been defined, that our Lady was free from all actual
sin: He adds, the validity of Heretics Baptism, the beatifical vision before
the day of Judgment, the spirituality of Angels, the souls being immediately
created, and not ex traduce, the Assumption of our Lady, and her delivery
without pain. To Wadding we may add Salmeron, who has the boldness to say
Doctores quo juniores eo perspicaciores. Poza is no les audacious, in citing
opinions defined against the Fathers. Erasmus says myriades Articulorum
proruperunt. Fisher, Bishop and Martyr, and as learned as any in his age,
consents that Purgatory was brought in by little and little: and Indulgences,
after men had trembled a while at the torments of Purgatory. Alphonsus de
Castro puts, in the rank of newly received Doctrines, Indulgences,
Transubstantiation, and the procession of the holy Ghost. But beyond all, is
the fact of Clement the eighth, a grave and wise Pope; who, desirous to end the
controversy between the Dominicans and the Jesuits accused by them of
Pelagianism, neither sent for learned men, by way of a Council, to know what
their Forefathers had taught them, nor examined with which of them the purest
Ages sided: but referred the whole matter to what St. Austin said: and so it had
been defined, had not Cardinal Perrons advice prevailed. And St. Austin was so
various in his own opinion, that he knew not himself what he held: whereas,
before him all the ancients sided with the Jesuits. Thus far that Book.

I know this term Defining, is frequently used by our Divines in matters of the
Churches determinations; nor do I see any great inconvenience in the word, if
the thing be understood, to wit* that Defining is nothing else but the
acknowledging and clearing a Tradition, from the dirt and rubbidg opposers had
cast upon it. For the rest, that some Fathers have had their eyes tied, in
particular points, so far as not to see the force of Tradition, by which the
Church had notice of the truth of some position, is a thing not to be doubted.
And, if it were fit or necessary, I could bring instances of bold Divines, in
our days, so blinded by arguments, that they see not the light of Tradition in
some particular questions; and so, the expressions only changed, hold condemned
heresies: So short is the sphere of our discourse, if not directed by a
carefulness to wel-imploy our Logic, or by a secret grace steering us toward
truth beyond the ability of our Reason.

But, what consequence any can draw, out of these sayings, against Tradition, I
understand not: unless this be taken for a Maxim, that every one must
necessarily know, of a special point, that it is derived by Tradition, because
really it is so; an inconsequence, I hope already sufficiently demonstrated.
Now, if these two can stand together, that, truly the Church has a Tradition
for a point, and nevertheless some learned man may be ignorant of it; this
argument has no force at all.

As to the positions he cites for newly adopted into the family of faith; he
fairly shows the privilege he and his Master had to speak any thing that
sounded to his purpose, and let his adversaries take care whether true or no:
For, nothing is more clear then that the validity of Baptism by Heretics was a
Tradition, and decided by it: so, the Beatifical vision of the Saints before
the day of judgment, the spirituality of Angels, are not yet held matters of
Faith, but only Theological conclusions; as likewise, the souls being
concreated to the perfecting of the body: Then for the blessed Virgin's being
free from actual sin, as also her Assumption, and her delivery without pain
(which others add) these either are known by Tradition, or not matters of
Catholic Faith: and so, no ways advance our Adversaries pretenses. For
Alphonsus de Castro, it is plain by his very expressions, either he means the
manner only, or at most some circumstances unessential to the things, and
therefore certainly not cited without some violence offered to his words.

Poza is a condemned Author: and Salmeron's saying not to be followed, or to
be understood (as it is, whence he took it) in such things as later disputes
have beaten out more plainly; Erasmus was learned in Criticism, and one whom,
if not others, his very English Patrons, Warham of Canterbury, Fisher of
Rochester, and More in the Chancery, exempt from all calumny of being a
desertor of the ancient Faith: besides his own Books, especially his Epistle Ad
Fratres inferioris Germaniae, by effects demonstrate his loyalty; whatever bad
impressions a certain liberty of practicing his wit too freely may have made in
some even great and eminent persons. But, what he speaks concerning Articles of
Faith, he either took from the scoldings of some ignorant Divines, (who are
ready to call every word, they found not in their books, when they were
Scholars, Heresy) or else because, truly, he understood not what belonged to
Decisions in that kind.

There remain two Authorities really considerable; one of the holy Bishop
Fisher; the other, of the prudent Pope. As for the first, I conceive there is a
great equivocation through want of care and wariness in distinguishing. For,
let us take either the Council of Florence or Trent, in which we have the
Churches sense concerning both Purgatory and Indulgences; and see whether the
holy Bishop says any of the points, those Councils defined, are either denied
by the Greeks, or brought in by private revelations or new interpretations of
Scripture. For, how could he be ignorant, that the Greeks had agreed to the
Latin Church, about the definition of Purgatory, in the Council of Florence; or
forget himself so far, as not to remember a public practice, Indulgences, in
all the ancient Church, for remission of the Penal injunctions laid upon
sinners? Besides, he says, the Latins did not receive Purgatory at once, but by
little and little. Whence it is evident, by the name Purgatory, he means not
only so much as is established in the Council, but the manner also and
circumstances were introduced by revelations of private persons and
argumentations of Divines. The like he expresses of Indulgences, saying, They
began, after men had trembled a while at the pains of purgatory. Whence it is
plain, he contented not himself with the precise subject of the Councils
Definitions, or the sense of the Church; but included also such interpretations
as Divines give of them. So that, by speaking in general terms, and not
distinguishing the substance of Purgatory, from the Accidents and dressing of
it; as likewise, in Iudulgences, not separating what the Church has always
practiced from the interpretative extention which Divines attribute to them; he
is mistaken to suppose new Articles of Faith may be brought into the Church.
Neither imports it, that he uses those words, No Orthodox man now doubts; for
that is true of such Conclusions as are termed Theological and generally
received in the Schools, yet are not arrived to the pitch of making a point of
Catholic belief: besides, he expresses himself, that this generality extends
no farther, then That there is a Purgatory.

In Clement the eighth's action, the main point is to consider, on what grounds
he sought to establish the Definition he went about to make. And, upon the
immediate step, we both jointly stand; to wit, that it was to find out,
whether parties opinion was conformable to St. Austin: But, if I mistake not,
my Adversaries make not the same apprehension of it that I do. They seem to
take St. Austin for one Doctor, peradventure a great one, peradventure the
chief, but yet only one: I apprehend him as the leading Champion of the Church
in the Question of Grace; whence it follows, that the Doctrine of St. Augustine
was the Doctrine of all those Catholic Writers, by whose demonstrations and
authority the Pelagians were condemned; that is, it was the faith of the Church
in that age, and consequently, which the Church continued ever after.

Father, because St. Austin neither had the Authority to bring in a new Faith,
nor pretends it; but both proves his dictrin to have descended from his
Forefathers, and found Pelagius his opinion condemned, before he meddled with
it, by some Council; that is, by the apprehensions of the then present Church;
and, as it spread from Country to Country, was still found contrary to the
received doctrine, every where planted in their hearts before Pelagius
contradicted it. Therefore, I say, I cannot but esteem, that, in the point of
Grace, it is all one to say, the Doctrine of St. Austin, and the Doctrine of the
Apostles, planted by them and continued to St. Austins days, illustrated by
him, and transmitted to his posterity, even to our present time. If this be
true, (as no Catholic can deny, nor prudent person doubt but we esteem it so)
Pope Clement had great reason to endeavor the decision of that question by the
Authority of St. Austin: since the doctrine of St. Austin was evidently the
faith of that Age; and the faith of that Age the faith of the Christian Church,
from the Apostles to us.

But we have another quarrel about St. Austins doctrine, that It is so
uncertain, himself knew not what he held. Nor do I wonder such a thought should
fall into the head of a Gentleman-Divine; especially in a Liberty of wit, to
censure, without the least respect or reverence of Antiquity: But I tremble to
hear, that some (of whom we are in justice as well as charity bound to expect
more staydness and Religion) seem so wedded to their own Sect, as to mutter the
same. My answer, I believe, is already understood.

I say therefore, such as have made it a principal employment of their lives,
to be perfect in St. Augustine; those who with great attention had read his
Polemical Treatises against the Pelagians, (as I take it) some five and thirty
times, were of another mind: And so are all those who at this day study him,
not to make him speak what they think, but to make themselves speak what he
thinks.

But this question transiit in rem judicatam, since, when it was handled at
Rome before the Congregations, when both oppositions and defenses were solemnly
made by the proof of present books, when the maintainainers of the opinion
accused of Pelagianism, were the choicest wits and ancientest Scholars could be
picked out of that so famed Society: nevertheless, almost in every Congregation
the sentence of St. Austin was judged to be against them; as is evident, both
out of the printed Compendium of the Acts of those Congregations, and the very
manuscript Acts themselves, extant at this day.

But, let us hear the Pope himself speak. Upon the 8. of July was held the
second Congregation; His Holiness began with these words. Nos personaliter
vidimus congeriem locorum, quam vos, qui Molinam defenditis, induxistis ex
Augustino; and nullus inventus est qui faveat; immo contrarium tenuit
Augustinus: Vnde mirum quod tot artibus utamini. And hence it seems they were
forced to corrupt St. Austin to the Popes face the 30 of September following;
which being discovered, the Author died of melancholy and disgrace. Again, in
the tenth Congregation, the same Pope taxed them, Quod Scholasticis, maxim
suis, non Scriptura, Conciliis, Patribus, uterentur. A sign how sound their way
of doctrine is, how sincere their proceedings to defend it.

Yet, it is urged farther, that the Fathers who lived before St. Austin, are
generally of the contrary opinion. This is a simple assertion without proof,
and my name is Thomas: I would entreat therefore such of my Readers as light on
this objection, to remember that the question, of the force of Grace, and
liberty of Free will, consists of two truths, that seem, like the Symplegades,
to butt at one another, as long as we look at them afar off; but if we make a
nearer approach, they show a fair passage betwixt them. So then, it is not hard
that one who studies the question for pleasure, especially in such Fathers as
wrote before the combating of the truth by Heresies, should be deceived, by the
seeming overlaying of that side, which the Fathers had occasion to inculcate;
though they meant nothing less then to prejudice the verity, which stands firm
on the other side the fretum of this disputation. Add to this, that St. Austin
himself examined the Fathers, and found in them the doctrine he maintained; nor
could it be otherwise, the general apprehension of the Church being against
Pelagius. Therefore I shall follow the advice of the Proverb, and be fearful to
leap before I look: especially, since a great reader of St. Chrysostom solemnly
professed he could show as strong places in him for Grace, as in St. Austin;
though he be the man chiefly set up against St. Austin.

THE EIGHTH ENCOUNTER, Showing, our Ladies immaculate conception is not likely
to become an Article of Faith.
AS for the state of the question, about our Ladies being conceived in Original
sin, some would willingly persuade us, the Negative is in great probability to
be defined; whereas certainly there is no Tradition for it (if Wadding's
sayings be rightly reported.) But if defining signifies the clearing of
Tradition, (as we explicate it) nothing can be more evident, then that there is
no probability of defining the negative part: rather it may be in danger of
being, at least, censured, for rashly putting an exception in the general rule
of Scripture, which expressly condemns all but our Savior to Original sin;
except the defenders can show good ground for the privilege they pretend, which
I much doubt. For, as far as I can understand, the whole warrant of that opinion
stands upon a devotion to our Lady, arising chiefly from a persuasion that
original sin is a disgrace to the person in whom it is found: So that, if the
people were taught original sin is nothing but a disposition to evil, or a
natural weakness, which, unless prevented, brings infallibly sin and damnation;
and that in it self it deserves neither reproach nor punishment, as long as it
proceeds not to actual sin, the heat of vulgar devotion would be cooled, and
the question not thought worth the examining.

However, there is no great appearance of deciding that point in favor of the
negative; since the earnest solicitations of two so potent Kings could so
little prevail toward it: For, all that was done had only this design, to
appeas the seditions sprung up in Sivil by occasion of a Dominicans
Conclusions, in which he affirmed that our Lady was Conspurcata with Original
sin. But, the controversy was so uncivilly carried, that it scandalized our
English Merchants; as one of them there present told me not long after, meeting
him at Dunkirk.

But because this objection is much urged, let us see the probabilities of its
being defined. The first is, that the maintainers of the Affirmative are only a
few of one Order, and some few taught by them: But, if good account be made, I
believe these few will prove some thousand or fifteen hundred of the most
learned in the Christian world. Their Order is known to have always been the
flower of the Schools; to have had the Inquisition many ages in their hands: to
have a style of Divinity of a higher strain then ordinary; by their great study
and adhesion to the Doctrine of St. Thomas of Aquine: Their Monasteries
numerous, especially in Spain and Italy; no great Convent wherein there are not
a dozen or more grave and learned Divines, almost all the honors amongst them
being distributed according to the probate of ability in knowledge: so that the
Order is no contemptible part of the Learning of the Church. Neither is it
credible their Scholars can be few; much less, as this Author passionatly
terms them, unus et alter.

He objects farther, the subscriptions of many Prelates, Orders and
Universities, the general acclamation of the people, the weighty necessity of
cutting off scandals; That some Universities oblige the Scholars to make vows
to maintain the negative; and in a word that the Affirmers hold against the
whole Church. Nor do I doubt that many Prelates, Orders and Universities
subscribed the Negative, and peradventure to the Petition, or that the people
(who follow the greater cry) did demand the same: but, that the Affirmers held
against the whole Church, I totally deny, and show manifestly the contrary.
For, Bulls having been accepted and standing in force, by which all Censure
against the Affirmative is forbidden, and no one syllable obtained any way
derogatory to the probability of the opinion; but generally, a caveat to the
contrary expressly put into such instruments and the Defenders of the negative
submitting to them: it is clear, that all the maintainers of the Negative allow
the Affirmative to be probable, and by consequence not against the consent of
the Church; since it seems to imply a flat contradiction, that the Church
should believe a Negative to be true, and yet at the same time admit the
affirmative may be true.

Now, as for Universities, there are entire ones for the Affirmative; and that,
not on the score of St. Thomas, but of the Fathers. What Universities strive
for the Negative, so ranckly as to make men take vows, I know not: The Article
of Paris, as I hear, is only that they shall not teach it in the University;
els-where every one is free. As for hindering scandals, it is a necessary part of
Government; but certainly obliges not to a defining or deciding of Truths
according to the inclinations of the people, pushed on by the clamours of
violent Preachers.

Notwithstanding all this, our adversary presumes this very point may prove an
Article of Faith; especially, if a Council should meet about the decision:
wherein he proceeds with a very high confidence, it being, as he thinks, now
ready to topple into a matter necessary to salvation. But I am far from that
mind: for I see the fervours of the Schools are a quite different thing from
the judgments of the Church, and how little all those tumults moved the Court
of Rome, and certainly would have made far less impression in a general
Council. The controversy betwixt the Jesuits and the Dominicans, what a busle
makes it in the School and in the world; while it stands upon the fairer
tongue, upon motives esteemable by the people, and mere plausibilities? Whereas
coming to be examined before the Pope in Congregations, it could not hold
water; but the weaker part was forced to break off the course of judgment, by
mingling Princes quarrels into Ecclesiastical questions. I dare confidently
say, if the Point of our Ladies, Conception were to be handled, either in a
Council or grave Congregation: the party that free her (setting aside the
passions of Princes) would be distressed to find an argument that themselves
should hope would endure the discussing. And so, the pretty gradations of our
imaginative adversaries, who so easily frame a ladder for this opinion to climb
up into a matter of Faith, is like an odd attempt of an acquaintance of mine;
who, being come out of Lancashire to go beyond sea, and repulsed at Dover for
want of a Pass, put off his hose and shoes and began to wade into the sea;
when, being asked what he meant, he answered he would go on foot, since they
would not let him pass in the Boat; for, said he, I have often waded through
the Beck at my Fathers door when the bridge was taken away. By which
counterfeiting of simplicity he got to be admitted into the ship: whereas those
who make their argument from the School-discussions to Church-definitions, will
(if I am not mistaken) remain on the wrong side of the water.

THE NINTH ENCOUNTER. Showing the unanimous agreement of Divines, that all
infallibility is from Tradition.
THe third argument is drawn from this Waddings proceedings and his consorts,
with the addition of another not unlearned man (according to the course of these
times) who puts Scripture and definitions of the Church to be the adaequate
ground into which our Faith is resolved. Besides, it is urged, that even those
who speak of Tradition, seek it not in the testimony of the present Church, but
of the ancient Fathers: This being already answered in the sixth Objection, we
need not here add much to it; For what imports it, if Wadding and his
associates understood not upon what grounds the Church uses to resolve and
decide controversies, (and therefore bring Revelations, Metaphorical expressions
of Scripture, the cry of the people, a multitude of School Divines, and the
like arguments) so that in their lives and believing or acting as Christians,
they proceed not out of these grounds, but, by the Colliers principle, rely on
the Church, and by her, on what she rely's. Galilaeo dislikes the notions of
wet and dry, which Aristotle gives: do they therefore disagree or not know one
another meaning, when they talk of a wet and dry cloth? Among our modern
Philosophers great quarrels there are about the explication of time and place:
yet this hinders not, but that in common discourse, when they speak of years and
days, Country's and Towns, they make a shift to understand one another.

The reason is; because these conceptions (used in ordinary discourse) are
planted in them by nature; the same objects working the same effect upon souls
of one nature: But the other notions are made by study and artificial
proceeding, and prove falls or true according as the precedent discourses are
fallible or solid. Even so, believing is made by nature in us, and is all alike
in those to whom the object is proposed alike: But to explicate and declare it,
happens differently among Doctors, as they understand better or wors.

Now then admit all those we call Schoolmen were against the doctrine I
maintain, though I conceive such an universal agreement impossible, unless they
be supposed to demonstrate their Tenets, (which if they do, I readily submit;
if not) what does it impeach the opinion I defend? or what would it avail to
bring one or more on my behalf, whose authorities may be rejected with the same
facility as offered; since they neither carry with them security from error nor
evidence of Truth? let us therefore permit Divines to try out their own quarrels
in their own Schools: not mingling them in our business.

Yet, to give some satisfaction, let the objector answer me himself: Does not
the greater part of Divines seek out Tradition? Yes will he say: but not that
Tradition which rely's on the present Church: for they seek it in laborious
quotations of Fathers, in all ages. Let Us agree then in this, They seek
Tradition as well as I: But I pray what do they intend by so great labor in
heaping of Fathers? do they mean it was those Fathers opinion? and so make
their conclusion good, because such a number of Doctors held it: or do they
farther pretend, out of these Fathers testimonies, to show it was the public
doctrine of the Ages in which they lived? If the adversary be as ingenuous as he
is ingenious, he will confess they pretend to argue the public belief out of
this numerous Catalogue. Nevertheless, for fear some other may be more
reserved, let us remember, what was before objected, that some points have been
defined, notwithstanding the opposition of many Fathers; and this, by the
verdict of these Divines: Whence it clearly appears that this numbering of
Fathers would not make a doctrine certain to them; unless they thought the sense
of the respective Ages were implied in it: Therefore, in conclusion, it is
evident that they also rely, for Faith, upon the succession of it through
diverse ages; which is the same as the Doctrin's being handed from the Apostles
to us. So that you see we all agree; and I, whom you took to be particular in
this conceit, am thus far of the common opinion.

But the adversary urges, that I come to the knowledge of this succession, by
the testimony of the present Church; whereas they who search it in Fathers find
it by the consent of antiquity. Suppose it be so: what difference makes this?
It is too great a servility to be bound not to say any word but what has before
fallen in my adversaries way: Yet, at least, can he justify this? do not those
Divines according to what himself would have them say, profess that the present
Churches definition makes a certainty in our Faith? Admit then the present
Church (in a Council or otherways, as it shall please those Divines) should
define, that a point doubted of were come down by Tradition, from the Apostles
to us; would not they say, Tradition were sufficiently known by such a
Testimony? Surely it cannot be denied; I ask again: whether the professing a
point of doctrine to be hers, by receiving it from hand to hand, be not to
testify and define that Tradition stands for this doctrine? Therefore all such
Divines confess Tradition may be known by the testimony of the present Church.

Why then do they use such diligence in collecting so many passages out of
Fathers? chiefly for this reason, because Sectaries deny that principle:
therefore they are forced for their satisfaction (not for instruction of
Catholics) to take so much pains with little thanks many times. Though it be
true their learned labors confirm, besides, some weak believer, and enlighten
the borders of Catholic Faith: and so in themselves are both ornamental and
profitable to the Church.

And now, what if I should add, that these very Doctors hold there is no
security of Faith, but only by Tradition? I know I am thought subject to talk
Paradoxes: nevertheless, because it is a point important to the unity of the
rule of Catholic Faith, out it shall go, and the discourse be neither long nor
obscure. I ask therefore, do not these Doctors require to the certainty of a
Definition, that the Definers proceed without malice or negligence, and use all
human endeavors to discover the truth? I cannot answer for every particular,
but am sure the principal Divines require these conditions: otherwise they
doubt not but the definitions may be erroneous. I ask again, what certainty can
we have of this proceeding of the Definitors? or was there ever Council yet,
against which the condemned Party did not cry out, that they had failed in
observing them? I conclude therefore two things; first, that, in the Churches
definitions of this nature, there can be no more then the certainty of moral
Prudence, according to these men's opinions, (if they follow their own grounds:)
Secondly, that there is no Moral quarrel betwixt Sectaries and them, concerning
the infallibility of such definitions: for the exception generally, in the
first condemnation of any heresy, rises from this part, Whether the Judge
proceeded equally? and not, Whether, if he did so, his authority were to be
rejected? there being seldom found so blind a boldness in any as to say, a
Judge does him wrong, and yet proceeds rightly: for either he judges what he
understands not, and that is rashness; or, seeing the right, he pronounces
wrong, and that is malice: both which are unexcusable from injustice. So that, I
believe, in this point, they do not assure the Church against Heretics, though
both sides should agree in the speculative part, that the Difinitors were
infallible.

I know, Divines say, Catholics are bound to believe the Definitor proceeded as
he ought, unless the contrary be evident; and I see they speak with a great
deal of reason: but withal, I see this maxim is a principle of Obedience and
Action, not of Infallibility and belief.

I have yet a little scruple about this doctrine. For, either the Definitors are
assured the doctrine they define is true, or no: If not, how can it be said they
proceed rationally, who determine a position, as certain, which they see not to
be so? If they are, then the Opinion was certain, before the Definition, on
some ground precedent to, and independent of it; and so, not made certain by
the definition, but only declared to the ignorant, by the Authority of the
Definer, that it was and is certain, upon other grounds. Now, excepting
Tradition, Scripture and Definitions, I know not any thing men seek into for an
irrefragable Authority: Therefore, what is defined, must be, before, certain,
either by Scripture, or by Tradition.

Let those Divines, now, choose which they think fittest to cleave to: For
Rushworth has declared his opinion sufficiently; and it is clear enough, what
all they must say, Catholics or Protestants, who think the Scripture needs
Explicators, to make a point certain. Neither can we doubt of this, if we look
into the actions of the Catholic Church; where we see an Heretic is termed so,
for choosing an Opinion against the Faith certainly received, and in possession
of the Church from which he separates himself. But this separation is, at the
beginning of the error, and before the interposure of the Church: He is
therefore an Heretic, before any decision makes him so.

THE TENTH ENCOUNTER That there was no Tradition for the error of the
Chiliasts.
BEsides the objections we have already endeavored to answer, some other
instances are urged: As, of Origin, whose doctrine being explicated in such
large volumes, how an Adversary can draw it into the compass of Tradition, or
how it can be argued, that the condemning of him was a breach of Tradition, I
know not. But chiefly they insist upon the Chiliasts error, as an
unquestionable Apostolical Tradition. To try the business, let us remember, we
called Tradition, the handling of a doctrine, preached and settled in the Church
of God by the Apostles, down to later ages. Now then, to prove the Chiliad
opinion was of that nature, the first point is to evince, that it was published
and settled by the Apostles: the contrary whereof is manifest out of Eusebius
History, who relates that the root of it was a by-report collected by Papias, a
good, but credulous and simple man. His goodness surprised St. Irenaeus; who
(as may be inferred out of his Presbyteri meminerunt) learned it of Papias, (for
the plural number does not infer that there was more then one, as all know that
look into the nature of words; or, if there were more, they may be such as had
it from Papias) St. Justin the Martyr esteemed it not, as a point necessary to
salvation; but rather a piece of Learning higher then the common: since he both
acknowledges other Catholics held the contrary, and entitles those of his
persuasion (...), right in all opinions, that is, wholly of his own mind; for no
man can think another right in any position, wherein he dissentes from him:
Nay, he shows that the Jew (against whom he disputes) suspected his truth, as
not believing any Christian held this opinion; so rare was it among Christians;
nor does he ever mention Tradition for it, but proves it merely out of the
Prophets. Whence it appears, there is no ground or probability this was ever a
Tradition, or any other then the opinion of some Fathers, occasioned by Papias,
and confirmed by certain places of Scripture, not well understood, most errors
being indeed bolster'd up by the like misapplications; a scandal that ever
since the practice of the Tempter upon Christ himself, may well be expected to
importune Christians.

But first is objected in behalf of the Chiliasts, that they had no Tradition
against them. To which I reply, A contrary Tradition might be two ways in
force against them; one formally, as if it had been taught by the Apostles
directly, Christ shall not reign upon earth a thousand years, as a temporal
King: The other, that something incompossible with such a corporal reign was
taught by Them: and of this I find two; one general, another particular; the
general one is, that the pleasures and rewards promised to Christians are
spiritual, and the whole design of the Christian Law aims at the taking away all
affections toward corporal Objects; whereas this Error appoints corporal
contentments for the reward of Martyrs, and by consequence, either increases,
or at least fosters the affection to bodily pleasures and temporal goods: The
particular one is, that Christ being ascended to Heaven, is to remain there
till the universal judgment: Wherefore it is evident, by the later, that it is
against Tradition; and, by the former, that it is not only so, but a Mahumetan,
or at least, a Jewish error, drawing men essentially to damnation: as teaching
them to fix all their hopes and expectance hereafter on a life agreeable to the
appetites of flesh and blood.

It Is opposed also, that the Fathers of the purest Ages received it, as
delivered from the Apostles. A fair Parade* but, if we understand by the
Fathers, One, St. Irenaeus; and him deluded by the good Zeal of Papias (as
Eusebius testifies) but good even to folly (for less cannot be said of it;)
where is the force of this so plausible argument? Add to this that the very
expression of Ireneus proves it to be no Tradition; for he sets down the
supposed words of our Savior, which plainly shows it is a Story, not a
Tradition; a Tradition (as we have explicated it) being a sense delivered not
in set words, but settled in the Auditors hearts, by hundreds of different
expressions explicating the same meaning.

There follows Justin Martyr's testimony, That All Orthodox Christians in his
age held it; (for (...) and (...) (say they) are not so different, but one may
be taken for the other.) Nevertheless, there is no such saying in Justin; for,
however (...) and (...) may pass one for the other, yet the word (...) has (by
Ecclesiastical use) an appropriation to the Catholic or Christian right
believers, which descends not from the Primitive, and so cannot be transferred
to the Derivatives from (...): Wherefore (...) is neither fairly nor truly
translated Orthodox.

No more does it help the Adversaries cause, that Justin compares the
maintainers of the conrary opinion to the Sadduces among the Jews: For, he
mentions two sorts of persons denying his position; whereof one he resembles to
the Sadduces, the other he acknowledges to be good Christians, and says they
are many, or (in the eloquent usage of the word (...)) the Commonalty of
Christians.

Nor will the next Objection give us much trouble, That none opposed the
Millenary error before Dionysius Alexandrinus: To which we apply this answer:
First, for any thing we know, it was hidden and inconsiderable till his time,
and then began to make a noise, and cause people to look into it. Secondly,
there are probable Motives to persuade, it was impugn'd long before: For, it
being clear, that both Heretics and Catholics sustained the contrary, we cannot
well suppose it was never contradicted till then, though the report of it came
not to their ears; since, who considers the few monuments we have of these
first Ages, must easily discern the hundred part is not derived to us, of what
was then done. But lastly, admit there was no writing against it till Dionysius
Alexandrinus; does it follow, there was no preaching neither?

As little can be gathered out of St. Hierom's being half afraid to write
against it; both because he did write against it, as is clear in his comment
upon St. Matthew, and upon Ezekiel, where he calls it a Jewish Fable, l. 11. and
because the multitude he speaks of, argues nothing of Tradition, but the
numerosity of that sort of believers, occasioned by the writings of the
Heretic Apollinaris, as the same Saint testifies, Comment. 10. in Esaiam.
Neither does St. Austin stick to condemn it, since those words c. 7. 24. de
Civit. Dei, esset utcunque tolerabilis, signify, that it is not tolerable.

Yet truly I cannot but admire, that he who puts the Chiliasts opinion to have
been derived duly and really from the Apostles by verbal Tradition, should
conceive that either St. Hierom or St. Austin could think such a Tradition to
be no sign of the Churches doctrine, or not care whether it were or no: which
seems to me the same as to impute to these Saints a neglect of what they
thought to be the Churches opinion; or else, to the Church, a neglect of what
was Christ's doctrine, if She would not accept what She knew was descended
verbally from Him; or, at least that St. Austin and St. Hierom lay this great
slander, of neglecting the known doctrine of Christ, upon the Church.

THE ELEVENTH ENCOUNTER, That there was Tradition for the Trinity, before the
Council of Nice.
THe Chiliad error seems to have been only an Usher to the Arian; which speaks
far louder for it self. And that learned Cardinal Perron is placed in the front
of their Evidence, whose testimony is, that The Arians would gladly have been
tried by the writings yet remaining of those Authors who lived before the
Council of Nice; for in them will be found certain propositions, which now
(since the Church-Language is more examined) would make the Speaker thought an
Arian. From whence the Opposers infer, that before the Council of Nice, there
was no Tradition for the mystery of the blessed Trinity. But to maintain this
consequence, I see no proof; for the Cardinal's words clearly import that the
Fathers before that Council (though being Catholics, they knew and held the
mystery of the Trinity, yet) in somephrases spoke like Arians: How then can any
man draw out of this Antecedent, that these Fathers believed not the Trinity,
or had not received by Tradition the knowledge of that Mystery? I confess my
self unable to see the least probability in such an inference.

If it be permitted to guess what they aim at that make this objection: I
believe it is that, some propositions concerning the Trinity, by disputation
and discussion, have been either deduced or cleared, which before were not
remarked do draw so much consequence upon the mystery, as since is found they
do: out of which they think it follows that such propositions were not
delivered by Tradition, and so not our whole Faith. To this the answer is
ready; that, as he who says a mystery was taught by the Apostles, does not
intend to say the Apostles taught what the words were, in every Language, which
were to signify this Mystery; so neither is his meaning that they taught, how
many ways the phrase in one language might be varied, keeping the same sense:
But, as they left the former to the natural Idiom of the speaker or writer, so
the latter to the Rules of Grammar; as likewise they left it to the speakers
skill in Logic, to contrive explications or definitions for the terms wherein
they delivered the Mysteries.

It is not therefore to be expected that men, who had received the Mystery
simply and plainly, should, without both art and attention, know how in
different cases, to explicate it according to the exact rules of Science. And
thus, the defect of the argument or arguer is, that he supposes, not only the
main verity should be formally conveyed by Tradition; but all manner of
explication and in all terms, which the subtlety or importunity of Heretics
could afterward drive the Catholics to express this Mystery by: a task both
impossible to be performed, and most unreasonable to require, and perhaps
unprofitable if it were done.

Nor therefore does it follow that something is to be believed, which came not
down by Tradition: For, as he that says Peter is a man, says he is a living
creature, a body, a substance, (though he uses not those words,) because all is
comprehended in the term Man; so, he that delivers One God is Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost, delivers, that those persons are not Alia but Alij, and that truly
the Son is not an Instrument, a commanded servant etc. Yet, as it may happen,
that one man sees another to be, but knows not what the definition of him is;
nor needs he ordinarily know it, because he knows the thing defined: so may it
also chance that some Fathers, who knew well enough the mystery, might falter
in explicating it precisely according to the rigor of Logic; and it is no good
consequence, The Fathers were less exact in some expressions concerning the
Trinity, therefore they held it not or had not learned it by Tradition.

Yet I must also intimate, these differences of speech proceeded many times
from the various usage of the words; as the Greeks generally say, the Father is
cause of the Son; the Latins abhor it, calling him Principium: which
difference is not in the meaning, but in the equivocation of the expression. So
we read in St. Athanasius, that he found an opposition in some people; one sort
saying there were in the Trinity three Hypostases and one (...); another three
(...) and one Hypostasis: and St. Hierom, though perfect in the Greek Tongue,
was so exceedingly troubled with this question, that he sent to St. Damasus for
the resolution of it; yet he well knew there was no difference in the sense, but
only in the terms; however he feared lest, by the wrong use of the words, he
might unawares be drawn into a wrong meaning. So likewise did St. Athanasius
find, that the two former parties, of which we spoke, agreed in the Catholic
sense, though their words were opposite.

The reason of this opposition is the nature of these two words, (...) and
Hypostasis, which primarily and radically signify the same thing; Aristotle
telling us, that Hypostasis is prima or primo substantia, which in Greek is
(...): whence it appears, this word, (...), does not signify what in Latin is
called natura, (to which the word substantia, by use, is now appropriated, when
we speak of this mystery) but only in a secondary sense. Again, the word
Hypostasis is derived from Substando, or Subsistendo, and therefore usually
translated Subsistentia and might properly be expressed by Substantia.

Now, applying this to the mystery of the Trinity, Because in God there is one
common Nature, abstrahible from three proprieties; therefore the nature seems to
substare to the said properties and so deserv the name Hypostasis: whereupon
some explicated the Trinity to be una hypostasis, et tres Ousiae. For Ousia
being derived from (...) or Ens, and Ens or Substantia, and (in Greek) Ousia
signifying primarily what the Schools term Suppositum (that we see with our
eyes, a demonstrable singular, named substance, as Bucephalus, Athos etc. which
among men (if restrained to particulars) is called Socrates or Plato, (if used
at larg) in the common name a person:) these men, very Catholikly, said three
Ousia's and one Hypostasis, meaning three Persons and one God. But, the Fathers
of the Council of Nice (by much pondering these words, by their debates with
the Arians, and to determine a rule in speaking, that Catholics might not be
subject, through equivocation, to be drawn into error,) agreed upon the
contrary; because Hypostasis was more commonly in use for that we call a
Person, and Ousia was rather a School term fetched from Philosophers books, and
therefore might, with less violence to common language, be taken in a secondary
sense. Thus it became the rule of speaking in the Church, to say three
Hypastases and one Ousia.

Besides, those speeches which Perron cites are not so harsh, but as, in a
rigorous interpretation, they are falls, so, in a moderate sense, they contain
undeniable truths. Philosophers divide instruments into Conjuncta and Separata;
and, among the Conjuncta, number up our Arms and Legs etc. which are our very
substance: It does not therefore follow, if the Son be called an Instrument,
that his substance is distinguished from the Substance of his Father; because
the Instrumentality consists in nothing but the difference of their notional
conceits of Being and Knowledge, whereof Knowledge seems to be but the Vehiculum
of Being toward the operation or effect: So likewise, whoever works by a power
that is not in himself, otherwise then from another in whom it is principialiter
and (as the Greek speaks both anciently and at this day,) Authoritative may,
not improperly, be said to be commanded; though the other be not his Master or
Better. Neither is there such rigor in the genders of aliud and alius, but
that aliud is many times applied to the person; and only Ecclesiastical use,
grounded on the height of propriety and distinction of Genders, binds us to
this manner of speaking, which for unity and charity sake we observe.

Out of what has been discoursed about the name Ousia, we may easily solve the
seeming contradiction of the Council of Antioch to that of Nice: for, if Ousia
may signify a person, (as we have showed it does, in its best and chiefest
signification;) then Homoousion signifies the same person. So that the Conncil
of Antioch, denying Christ to be Homoousios to his Father, denied no more then
that he was the same person with his Father; which no subtlety can ever prove
to be against the Fathers of the Nicen Council. Nor is this said to reconcile
contradictories, but discover equivocations: For that this was the true reason
of the opposition, is easily deduced out of both St. Athanasius and St.
Hillary, and the question which St. Hierom made to St. Damasus.

But it may be urged, if there were a verbal Tradition, how could the
Christians, through want of caution, contradict one another: or, had it been as
known a part of Religion as the Resurrection, how could Constantine have so
slighted it, when it first rose, or Alexander the holy Bishop for a while have
remained in suspense? To this I answer, If, by verbal Tradition, be understood,
that the Tradition was delivered in set words; certainly those set words could
not be doubted of, though their sense must needs be capable of eternal
controversy: but the meaning of verbal, here intended, is only as
contradistinguisht to written Tradition; which (being in set words, whose
interpretation is continually subject to dispute) is therefore opposed to Oral
or mental, where the sense is known, and all the question is about the words
and expressions.

Nevertheless, suppose it had been delivered in a set and determinate phrase,
and that Heretics began to use other words; a controversy might be about those
terms which the Heretics introduced, and many might demur, uncertain of the
question in such new expressions: as we see, those who rely on Scripture are in
perpetual quarrels about the sense; whereas, to Catholics, the sense of their
Faith is certain, though the words be sometimes in question.

The reason therefore, why, at Arius his first broaching that desperate heresy,
Alexander remained a while in suspense, was not that he understood not his own
Faith, but because he apprehended not what Arius meant, nor whether his
propositions were contrary to the received truth: But when once Arius broke
into those speeches, that Christ was a creature, and that there was a time when
Christ was not; then that holy Bishop likewise broke into those words, Quis
unquam talia audivit? and this is the crime which Socrates reprehends in Arius,
that he began to move points (...), formerly not questioned, but received with
an uniform consent and credulity. As for Alexanders praising, sometimes one,
sometimes the other party, it proves no more then that he was a prudent man:
though Ruffinus seems to tax him of oversoftness. But, because few falsities
can be void of all truth, and few truths (at least before much discussion)
totally free from all mixture of circumstantial error; therefore it could not
be otherwise then well, to praise both sides ingenuously, according as they
spoke truth and reason, and discommend them, when they fell into falsities.

As for Constantine's slighting the Question at first, it shows no more but
that, then, he did not penetrate the consequence of it, or rather, was not well
enform'd concerning it. For, ordinarily, the craftiest and most active party
are they who make the first report; and if themselves be in the wrong, (as many
times such are more eager and diligent then those that hold the right) their
remonstrance is accordingly. And so it was: for, Constantine received his first
information at Nicomedia; very probably too, from Eusebius, Bishop of that
City, a most perverse adherent to Arius: nor did Constantine himself know
wherein the question consisted; as appears by this, that in his whole Letter
there is not one word of explication of the point, but only in common, that it
was of slight questions, not belonging to the substance of Faith; the Arians
still craftily endeavoring to diminish the importance of the controversy.
Besides, we have good ground to believe, that some learned men in Court were
prevented by Arius, and solicited into a secr^^ favor of this error; from
whom, it is likely, proceeded that motion of Constantine to the Council, for
determining the point out of Scripture. Nor imports it, that the Bishops
contradicted not this proposition of the Emperor in words; because they had
reason to follow it, (though not to that end to which the Emperor proposed it,
viz. the solution of the question, but) to the conviction of the Arians, and
satisfaction of the world.

For, to speak to the reality of the business, there was no doubt among the
Fathers about the truth or falsity of the main matter, (being fully satisfied
concerning that, by Tradition, even from their childhood:) but the question was
about the answer to their enemies proofs, and to consult what arguments and
reasons should be alleged against them; for the satisfaction of the Church,
and the world without the Church, and for the expression of the Catholic
doctrine, in such words as the Arians could not equivocally interpret to their
own perverse meaning: especially, finding they had fo puzzled the world with the
dust they had raised in men's eyes, that even some good Catholics could scarce
see their way, but were in danger of stumbling against the blocks those
Heretics maliciously cast before their feet. Eusebius Caesariensis testifies
of himself, that He thought Alexander's party had held the Son of God to be
divided from the Father, as one part is cut from another in Bodies; which would
have made God a body, and truly two Gods.

For these reasons was their magna conquisitio, their turning of Scriptures,
and their meeting in Council, as St. Athanasius witnesses, speaking in the name
of the very Council it self, in his Epistle de Synodis: We met here (says he)
not because we wanted a Faith, (that is, because we were uncertain what to
hold) but, to confound those who contradict the truth and go about novelties.

Neither can any argument be made out of Eusebius's Epistle to some Arians, in
which he says, The Bishops of the Council approved the word homoousion, because
they found it in some illustrious Fathers: for, though the inward sense of that
term was perfectly traditional, yet was it not til then precisely fixed to that
particular expression. But the same Bishpos consented to the Excommunication of
the Contradictors, to hinder men from using unwritten words: and was not that a
proper and prudent remedy to prevent the inconveniences that easily arise from
confusion and incertainty of language; when every one phrases the mystery,
according to his private fancy, and governs not his terms by some constant and
steady rule, as, the writings of the Apostles or ancient Fathers: which
interpretation exactly agrees with the Greek of Eusebius, (...), that literally
and truly signify Words written neither in Scripture nor any where else, as
the word (...) was in the Fathers. And so, I need not allege He was a secret
Arian; though, if he were, his testimony, as far as it reaches, would be so
much the more efficacious against them, as Theodoret imploys it.

Now, by all this may be seen, why in Councils there are engaged so many
disputations: for no calumny can be so impudent as to deny, the Fathers know
their Faith before they meet there; which is plainly implied by the Heretics
ordinary protesting against them, as unfit Judges because they are parties, and
therefore refusing to come to the Council; besides, the possession of the old
Religion being as publik and notorious, at such times, as the Sun it self at
noon: wherefore, to say they come to seek out or dispute their Religion, by
those long conferences, is a pure folly. They then hold their Religion upon
Tradition or possession: but dispute things, either for regulating the Churches
language, that all Catholics may keep a set form of explication of their Faith;
or else to convince their Adversaries out of such grounds as themselves admit.

To dispute, whether a Council, not confirmed by the Pope, makes an Article de
fide, or no? concerns not the difficulty now before us; and engages Catholic
against Catholic, which is not our present work. In the mean while, out of all
which has been said, we may gather, that there is no appearance the Catholic
Doctrine, concerning the Trinity, was diversely taught before the Council of
Nice, and, then first, established out of the Scriptures: but, that it was the
known and confessed faith of all the Ages before, as St. Athanasius expressly
teaches; avowing confidently he had demonstrated it, supplicating the Emperor
to permit the Catholics to live in the belief of their Forefathers, and
upbraiding his adversaries that they could not show their progenitors. And to
say the truth, unless a man be so perverse as to affirm Christians did not use
the form of Baptism prescribed by Christ, there can be no doubt of the
Tradition of the blessed Trinity: the very words of Baptism carrying the
Tradition in themselves.

Lastly, it is objected, there was no reason for the Council of Nice, in this
quarrel, to look into Tradition, since they had such abundance of Scripture.
But we must put out our eyes, if we do not see that even at this day the Arians
are so cunning as to avoid the strongest Texts of Scripture, and explicate them
by other places; and that it is impossible to convince, in this manner, any
Heretic, as long as one place can explicate a hundred opposed. The Council
therefore, at last, (though favored with as much advantage as Scripture could
give over its adversaries) was forced to conclude out of Tradition: as
Theodoretus, St. John Damascen, and chiefly St. Athanasius himself confesses: a
necessity which the Rules of St. Irenaeus, Tertullian, St. Basil, and
Vincentius Lyrinensis (who teach, it is to no purpose to dispute with Heretics
out of Scripture,) and our own experience of above a hundred years, plainly
convince and fully justify to any rational man, whose humor or interest is not
to have all Religion obscure and doubtful.

THE TWELFTH ENCOUNTER. That the necessity of Communicating Infants is no
Tradition; But Prayer to Saints is.
THere are yet two instances urged against Tradition. One that, for six hundred
years, 'twas believed necessary to give the holy Eucharist to children; which
custom has now been a long time disused. The proof, as far as I know of the
necessity, is drawn only out of St. Austin and St. Innocentius, and some words
of St. Cyprian: The former of which Fathers are cited to make this argument
against the Pelagians, The Eucharist cannot be given, unless to those who are
baptized: But the Eucharist is necessary for Children: Therefore Baptism is
necessary for them. To which I answer with a formal denial, that any such
argument is made by those holy Fathers: For their discourse runs thus, It is
necessary for Children to be incorporated into Christ's mystical body; but this
cannot be done without Baptism: therefore Baptism is necessary for Children.
Whether of us take the right sense of these Fathers, let the Books judge; I will
only add, it is a great shallowness to think the Pelagians (who denied the
necessity of Baptism) should admit the necessity of the Eucharist, or that it
was easier for those Fathers to prove the necessity of the Eucharist, then of
Baptism; So that, their argument must be supposed, by the objector, to be drawn
ex magis obscuro ad minus obscurum.

Yet, because, especially, St. Austins words seem equivocal, I will briefly set
down the state of the question. St. Dennis tells us, no Priestly function was
complete without the administration of the blessed Sacrament: Thence came a
custom to communicate those who were baptized. This custom reached even to
Infants, but neither universally, that is, in all Churches nor indispensably:
For, it was only then used, when Bishops were present at Baptism; as is
apparent, both because Communion was never administered, anciently, but after
Confirmation; and because, it was always held for the complement of all
Priestly Benedictions, as is before declared: Besides, in some Churches, there
is not the least sign that ever it was given to Infants.

Another thing to be understood is, that St. Austin uses to explicate the
Communion to be an incorporation into Christ's mystical Body; of which no doubt
but the Sacramental body is both a figure and cause. This St. Austin himself,
upon the sixth of St. John, plainly delivers, and, in his phrase, takes the
eating and drinking of Christ's Body to be Faith or Baptism: So do Orosius,
Prosper, Fulgentius and Facundus, either explicating or following him. This
equivocal manner of speaking makes those, who are either not attentive enough,
or not willing to have him speak orthodoxly, construe his words Grammatically,
that are spoken Allegorically; which last his best Interpreters, and most
expert in his works, account to be his opinion.

But to conclude this History, After their loud and full cry, as if the prey
were in their sight, which I believe wii never come within their reach, (for a
deep mouth is a sign of slow heels;) let us see how necessary the African
Church (an objection more strongly urged) thought Baptism it self was to
Infants, that is, in how perpetual use. And presently Tertullian (the mainly
cited and glorified for St. Cyprians Master) tells us lib. de Bap. c. 18.
Itaque pro cujusque personae condition ac dispositione, etiam aetate,
cunctatio Baptism^ utilior est. St. Austin. (Disciple to the other two) reports
what happened to himself, having asked Baptism in his Childhood, by reason of a
sudden danger of death: which being passed, his Baptism was deferred by his
Mother; Quia viz. post lavacrum illud, major et pericul^sior in sordibus
delictorum eatus foret; and adds, ita jam credebam, et illa, et omnis domus,
nisi solus pater. And that this was not the Faith of that house only, but of
the whole Country, is evident from these words; unde ergo, etiam nunc, de alijs
atque alijs, sonat undique in auribus nostris: Sine illum, faciat quod vult,
nondum enim Baptizatus est. If then Baptism it self was not perpetually
administered to Infants, can we think the Eucharist was? or is here any
probability it was so used to children, as not to be also often omitted, and
that lawfully?

Maldonatus (a grave man, otherwise) exceeded, and I wonder he is tolerated,
speaking so directly against the Council of Trent, after the publishing of it.
But his assertion is manifestly falls: Since, it is known Communion was not used
to be given but after Confirmation; and Baptism, without Confirmation, was held
sufficient for salvation; as is beyond cavil, expressed by St. Hierom, in
Dialog. cont. Lucifer. about the middle.

The last instance is of Prayer to Saints, which is proved not to have
proceeded by Tradition from the Apostles time; by four arguments. First,
because diverse Fathers held that the souls of Saints were not received into
Heaven, till the day of Judgment; therefore certainly they would teach no prayer
to Saints. The Antecedent I will not dispute; not that I believe it, but that I
know not what it is to our question: For, suppose they are not; may they not
nevertheless pray for us? we Catholics think that Jeremy the Prophet was not
in the Macchabees days admitted into Heaven, yet we make no difficulty to
believe that he did multum orare pro populo and sancta civitate. Those Fathers
that are cited for the Receptacles, are acknowledged to place the Saints in
Sinu Abrahae; and our Savior teaches us, that Dives prayed to Abraham. The
Protestants, as well as we, allow prayer to living Saints: wherever then the
dead Saints are, are they worse then when they were living, that they may not
be prayed to? But the principal answer to destroy utterly this objection, is,
that those who say we learn by Tradition, that Saints are to be prayed to, say
likewise we have learned by Tradition that Saints go to heaven, that is, are
admitted to the fight of God, before the day of Judgment.

The next proof is, that prayer to Saints began with a doubting preface of
(...); to which I find my self no ways engaged to frame a particular answer,
having no farther ground from my Adversary (who cites not any Author) to
explicate the meaning of this objection. I remember, Cardinal Richelieu, at his
death, is reported to have taken his kinsman, Marshal de Meilleray, by the
hand, and told him that, if the next world were such as was figured to us here,
(I deliver what I conceiv to be the sense, not the words) he would not fail to
pray for him: Now some, who had a hard opinion of that great Person, would
press out of this speech, that he believed not the Immortality of the Soul.
Whether this also be pretended to be the meaning of that Optative term, (...),
I cannot judge; for then I should easily admit it has some force against the
Tradition of praying to Saints: But, if it be but an Oratorial expression and
obtestation, such as is in St. Paul, when he presses men to good works, by the
like phrase; I know not how it reaches any way to his intent, and much less
against the receiving of this use by Tradition: except the objector suppose
that, truly, the first Prayer he finds in writing was the first that ever was
made, which is neither proved nor probable.

The third opposition is out of Nicephorus Calixtus, who reports, that Prayers
to the Virgin Mary were first brought into the public Liturgy, by Petrus
Gnaphaeus, a Heretic. The consequence I should make out of this antecedent is,
that, seeing the Author's being a Heretik (a condemnd and hated Person) could
not hinder this institution to take root and be approved, it is a sign it had a
deeper foundation then of his beginning: not that it was before in the
Liturgy, but that it was an ordinary practice among Christians; which use,
because we know no origin it has in Scripture, must have been out of Tradition,
and not of a short time: how our Adversary will prove the contrary, I am not
able to make any likely conjecture.

The last argument is drawn out of the confession of our own Doctors, who
affirm, there is no Precept for praying to Saints in the Church of God (for so
much is meant by those words, sub Evangelio;) and yield the reason, that Pagans
might not think themselves brought again to the worship of men. Which
Antecedent having two parts, the non-precept, and the reason thereof: out of
the first part nothing can be deduced; out of the second this consequence is
inferred, Pagans would be equally scandalized by the Permission, as by the
Precept. Wherefore, if it be commanded, neither certainly ought it be permitted.

Although no law obliges one Divine to maintain the reasons of another, yet I
see no such evidence in this consequence, as, for it, to renounce the reason:
for, me thinks, if those we call Saints, were meant to be Gods, we should of
necessity be bound to worship them; whence it follows, if it be not necessary
to worship them, neither are they Gods, nor the worship exhibited to them, such
as is due to God; but only of that degree which we give excellent creatures: a
position so conformable to Nature, that it can scandalize none but the enemies
of Perfection; who, under pretense of avoiding Idolatry, take away the due
honor and excitation to Virtue. But, which way, out of a non-Precept, can be
inferred the non-Teaching of the Doctrine, I cannot imagine; since what those
Doctors hold, continues true at this day, when it cannot be denied that Praying
to Saints is both taught and practiced: For though, in our prayers, there be
some directions to Saints; yet, generally, Christians are not bound to such
d^votions, and they that are, it is but their own voluntary acceptance of the
obligation to which such prayers are annexed.

THE THIRTEENTH ENCOUNTER Reflecting on certain considerations: and showing
that there is nothing able to disprove the Church of Rome's Communion to be the
sign of the true Church.
ALthough, out of the whole preceding discourse it be evident that this way I
defend, makes the Churches Definition depend upon the Tradition of the point
defined, and not Tradition upon them; as if, because by Tradition, we know the
Churches Definitions to be true, therefore we know the truth delivered by
Tradition: Nevertheless, since there may be some truth in this reflection, That
Tradition is known sometimes by Definition, let us see what can be said against
it: It Is first, therefore, put into consideration, whether since four Disciples
of Christ have written Gospels, or the Gospel, that is, as much as they
preached (for they preached nothing but the Gospel:) if God would have us trust
the Church, he was not both to specify so much, very plainly, in them, and
farther deliver such signs as were necessary ever to know Her by.

For answer, I ask a cross question, Whether if God Almighty would have all men
see by the Sun, he was first to tell them which It is, and paint 'Its picture
on every wall, that so we might know which is the Sun? And because any question
may seem rather offensive then deserving any answer, I proceed to the
application; and ask, Whether any of those Christians, of whom Saint John says,
exierunt ex nobis, could doubt which was the Church, whereof he had been a part
and left it? And, since you cannot answer otherwise then affirmatively, I think
I need not repeat the same question, of Arius, and Pelagius, and Luther. If
then God has provided for all these, that they were taught to yield obedience
to the definitions of this Church, so clearly, that they could neither doubt
which Church was their teacher, nor of what Church he spoke; how dare they
presume to accuse him of deficiency in his providence? The same Authority that
gave you the Scripture, and told you it was the Word of God, said likewise,
that what she taught was no less the Word of God. If you believe her report
for the Book, why refuse you it for the Doctrine? If her recommends be not
security enough for the one, they will certainly prove far less for the other;
since, unless I am strangely mistaken, the doctrine of the Catholic Church is
not so hard to believe, as the story of the Bible: let any Atheist or discreet
Moore or Pagan be judge.

Oh, but since the Evangelists wrote Gospels, they wrote all they preached; for
they preached nothing but the Gospel. The Gospel is known to be the same with
the Greek Evangelium, that is, the Good-spel, or happy tidings of Christ's
coming: so that the Book or Preaching which tells us Christ is come, is a
Gospel, be there never so much, more or less, in the Book or Sermon: how then
it can be inferred out of the name Gospel, that the Apostles writ as much as
they preached (for it is not credible they preached all they wrote) I am not
able to comprehend.

The second consideration is, how we know when the Church has defined? To which
I answer, In the practice of sixteen ages it has no more been doubted, when the
Church had defined, then when a Parliament had enacted: Why then is there
required more information? But, some Divines say more, some less to be enough.
Let them be doing in the Schools, as long as the practice goes on sufficiently
for the Churches government.

Thirdly, we are to consider, Whether sufficient notes be left to know the
Church by? But who shall use these notes? Catholics? They are in the Church.
Heretics? They know what Church they forsook. Pagans? They look not into the
Scriptures to find the Churches mark. Peradventure those Heretics whose
separation is so long since, that they remember not out of what Church they
went. But none are grown so aged yet. However the marks of the Church are
apparent enough in Scripture, if there want not will in the seeker to acknowledge
them.

The fourth consideration is, Whether points of Faith, or to be of Faith, be
infinite (new ones continually springing) or finite? if finite, why are they
not all delivered at once, to make an end of incertitude and defining? The
answer is, they are both finite and infinite: finite, in gross, and wholly
delivered by the Apostles, wholly believed and practiced by this present Church;
but infinite, in the detail, by which man's wit can parcel out this general
stock of Faith. For, as soon as any sharp and crafty Heretik has varied some
proposition, necessary to the explication of a fore-believed Doctrine, there may
be occasion of settling some new proposition, which shall be no other then a part
of what was formerly believed in Substance, though not so explicitly deciphred.
As he that professes Christ is a Man, implies he has a man's Nature, a man's
Understanding, and Will, and Action; though this word Man distinguishes not
precisely these faculties: nor does he that repeats all these qualities in
particular, say any more then he that said in general he was a Man. Now then I
answer the objection, as Aesops Master did those who would have bound him to
drink up the Sea: stop the Rivers (said he) and I will perform my bargain: So
say I, hinder impertinent curiosities from importuning the Church, and her
Truths will be undoubtedly seen in her belief and practice, without making new
Definitions.

The last objection; that it will appear a shift to say the Churches
definitions are certain, and yet not let it be known when she has defined, of
it self falls flat to the ground: both because I take not that way; and, if I
did, since we are not troubled about knowing our Churches Definitions, who have
the burden of obeying and do it in practice, the Objectors are confuted as
Diogenes did Zeno, (when he disputed against motion,) by walking before him.

For all this, the Church of Rome must not escape yet: And so, we are told
that, if she were designed for the Pharos to know the rest of the Church by,
somewhat had been advan'd; for, otherwise (say they) we can assign no mark of
the true Church, the Roman being denied to be such as we make her. First, I
answer, we have no need of recourse to the Church of Rome; it being the
infallible distinctive sign of the Church, to lay claim to the handed Doctrine,
or Tradition, which evidently appears cannot be claimed by two: For, if two
agree in a point to day, and one dissent to morrow, it were madness to say the
disagreer can lay claim to yesterdays opinion.

Secondly, we say, if we would fly to the Roman Church, the oppositions force
us not from it: For, why is not Cardinal Perrons answer to Plessis invincible,
that the whole Church condemned St. Cyprians proceedings? Likewise the Asian
Bishops were condemned in the Council of Nice. The African Bishops question was
about the enacting a Law, which nevertheless, was carried for the Bishop of
Rome.

If the Fathers remit us to the Apostolical Churches, whose successions were,
then, visible and evident; what is that to us, now, when all successions are
interrupted, save only that of the Roman Church? The definition of the Council
of Calcedon is known to be only the conspiracy of a Cabal, never approved as
legitimate; but reversed afterward: So that all these angry darts turn their
points against their Authors; the judgment in every instance having past in
favor of the Church they oppose. But this question, concerning the Church of
Rome, is of greater extent and importance then to be huddled up in one sheet of
Paper: Therefore, let us leave Her to the acknowledged Majesty she possesses in
the Christian world; and not, by slight objections and answers, rather seem to
undervalue her Dignity, then either oppose or defend her Authority.

You present us therefore next, with what is kept for the closing of our
stomachs; and they are two dishes: One, that at last we Catholics resolve into
Reason, as well as Protestants. To this I answer, if you mean we must see
Reason why we give credit to Authority, I agree with you: But then, since
Reason is on both sides, Why (say you) must it be a Wall to us, and a Bulrush
to others? I Will tell you. Reason has two parts, Demonstration and Sophistry;
and, in Demonstrations, that evidence which governs our Lives, is the most
familiar to us, and consequently, besides its firmness, it is the most clear and
least denyable: Now, this proposition, that we ought to believe a knowing
person, in that wherein our selves are ignorant, is, of this nature, a Maxim
that governs all our life, public and private: wherefore our ground or Reason,
is a wall, a rock, or if any thing be yet more solid. On the other side, of all
parts of Sophistry, that which is built on broken ends of obscure sentences of
dead men, who cannot declare themselves, is the most weak and contemptible: and
this being that you rely on, Reason therefore, to you is weaker and more
deceitful then any Bul-rush.

The second dish is, that whatever is delivered in defense of the Church of
Rome, only proves that, as yet, she is the true Church: not that she cannot
leave the way she is in, and fall to reform (as her adversaries call it;) or
that there may not happen some Shism among the Churches now adhering to her,
where both parts may claim Tradition: and then where is the guide? To this I
answer, I will not weigh the proofs of others for the eternity of the
particular Church of Rome: since there is no contest betwixt us here, about
that: but those who are acquainted with controversies, cannot be ignorant, that
our writers intend to prove Her indefectibility. All I Will say is, did you but
agree with us, that she is at present the true Church, it would be argument
enough for you to submit, til the cases happen which you suppose possible; and
I should think my self too grating and severe toward a Person, in other
respects extremely recommendable, if I should press harder, then so upon him,
nor could I desire a repast more delightful to my soul, then to have seen that
in practice concerning him, which is now too late to be hoped.

THE FOURTEENTH ENCOUNTER. Four other Arguments reversed.
SUch is the condition of Religion, when the liberty of choosing is permitted to
all that have the boldness to challeng it; who having no other Scales, to poise
any arguments proposed them, then the affection to their own wills or prejudice
against others reasons, suffer every light objection to overballance the most
weighty and solid Demonstration. Therefore am I forced to follow certain other
Adversaries (my chase not being confined only to the noble game) into every
by-turn and beat every little bush, where either the necessity of a desperate
cause, the fables of some wild Reporter, or the craft of any juggling Hypocrite
can drive them to hide their weak heads in.

As for reason, in our present business, they tell you, every one is born in
liberty to Religion, and, til it be demonstrated he is bound to acknowledge some
Teacher, the presumption stands for liberty, and it is merely of curtesy and
graciousness, they take the pains to bring arguments for the Negative. This I
shall answer as the Caprich of some pragmatical Chaplain; not having incivility
enough to entertain the least suspicion, that so great a Wit, stored with Art,
in so busy a time about questions of government, should bring forth so misshapen
a Monster. But alas! what cannot an unruly fancy, that bites the bridle of
reason? Say then, my young Divines, of Politic, of Paternal government, what
you say of Religion: Is not the absurdity so palpable, it will make you ashamed?
That no child is bound to honor Father and Mother, till it be demonstrated to
him he ought to do so? No Subject to obey the Magistrate, til, after a long
dispute his power be evidently proved legitimate? Pass from these to Arts, and
say every one may play the Physician, the Pilot, the Judge, (for Doctor of
Divinity, you freely give your license to all the world) without having any
Master or Teacher, what a goodly Commonwealth you will make?

But it is replied, Nullum tempus occurrit veritati, no more then Regi; since
veritas fortior est Rege. I, Sir, but in your major you put veritas, and in
your minor, falsitas. For, what is your truth, when you come to declare your
self, but probable arguments, of which nothing is more certain, then that they
have no truth in them? a proof, as such, still carrying its truth in its force
of concluding; but probable arguments have no force to conclude, and
consequently, no truth. For, the truth of a saying is different from that of an
argument: a true argument being that which proves the thing to be; a true
saying which only affirms it to be.

And, if we look into it, we see, what I say is but the Law of Nature, and
natural constancy: for as, to not act, it is enough to have no reason; but, to
act, we ought to have a positive cause: so, to remain in the Religion of our
Birth and Education, there is no other reason required, then because we are in
it; whereas, to change, we must have efficacious motives to persuade us.

Here, my Adversary will exult, and think, at least, Protestants cannot become
Catholics, without evidence, which he conceives impossible. And, I grant his
consequence, if he can prove his supposition. For, to my sight, nothing is more
clear then, that Protestants changed their Religion from being Catholics, and
that upon but probable grounds: whence it is evident, no Protestant, who is
formally such, (that is, holds his Religion on probable arguments, against the
Catholic Church) but stands in a continual formal rebellion against Her, who by
his own acknowledgment was once his Magistrate, and against whom himself
confesses he has no more then probable exception.

Therefore, whoever, of a Protestant becomes Catholic, goes so far with
evidence, that he reconciles himself to a government under which he once was,
and had no just reason to depart from it, (none being sufficient to excuse so
great a disorder) and so, ought, under peril of eternal damnation, return to
his first obedience. For, where he is, he is certain to find no security;
since, his relyance, by his own verdict, is at most but upon plausible
arguments: whereas, under the other government, there may be certainty, for
ought he knows; of which there is this fair motive, that they all profess it,
which is more forcible for the credit of it, then what ever he can say in
abetment of the contrary. Rashly, therefore, he opposes himself to follow a falls
way, a way that assuredly leads to unavoydable precipices.

They reply, the Turks also agree in the Law of Mahomet, and yet that brings no
evidence their Law is true. But alas! they observe not that, in saying so, they
unawares call themselves no Christians: For, to us, this consent is no argument
Mahometanism is true, because it carries no farther then that the Law is
Mahomets; And so far is manifest out of their common agreement: therefore, in
parity, it is evident, out of the consent of Christians, that the doctrine handed
down from the Apostles, is Christ's; and the doubt may perhaps remain with the
Objectors, but not with us, whether Cbrists doctrine be true? as neither we nor
they doubt that Mahomets preaching was falls.

And seeing the case is common to all Christians, against the Roman Catholic,
he only relying on Tradition, they all renouncing it, he only can run his
Religion up to the Person of Christ, and there leave it securely established,
upon the infallible credit of his word. And as no other sort of Christian
society can pretend to this privilege, so neither can they with any color of
justice, exempt themselves from the Authority of that Church that enjoys it: an
Authority, which, if ever she had, and such as she claims it, is of so
unchangeable a nature, being constituted by God, being the rock on which the
salvation of mankind is built, and the fundamental stone of the Church, no time
nor variation of material accidents can prejudice or prescribe against it.
Wherefore, if Protestants at first departed unjustifiably, they remain for ever
guilty of the same crime, til they restore themselves to the Primitive union.

Again, who, unles he had renounced all morality, ever called it liberty, not
to know, or not be bound to the rules and principles of good life? Sure these
objectors either think religion concerns not good life, but is a vain and empty
Idea in the air, little important whether it be known or no: or forget
themselves so far, as to fall into the sequel of this gross absurdity. Besides,
who can be so desperately passionate, as to term it liberty, to have no good
government; and relaps again to the rude state of barbarousnes, where murder,
rapes, and a thousand intolerable insolences are publikly permitted? For, if
we cast our eyes on the End of Religion, we shall see, that to want the due
Rules, is as inconvenient toward the direction of mankind to final beatitude,
as the Laws of Canibals are destructive to all civil and friendly society. So
that it is to be ignorant of all reason, to cry up a liberty to have no
Religion, or to choose one indifferently, as unconcerned whether it be right or
wrong. Were it not better plainly to avow the preferrence of the pleasures and
profits of this world, before hopes so far off as the future life; then, with
these ambushes, to ensnare unwary souls into the same inconveniences, under
title of a probable Religion?

And truly, if we look upon their lives, we shall find that hoc Janus summus ab
imo Personat. I intend not by this any ways to derogate from the old Roman
virtues, in this sort of people, as if there may not be found Regulus's, or
Cato's, or Seneca's among them: for, I doubt not but the very vapor of
Christianity has this wholesome effect among whom it passes, to breed in them as
Heroic spirits as ancient Rome ever saw, and more too, if the like occasions
presented themselves: But Nature, and Generosity, and Opinion, too often
challenge their shares, or rather mastery, in such actions; and how little can
justly be ascribed to the hope of heaven, I rather suspect then declare.

To return therefore to our discourse. The Jew, the Turk, the Heathen, can
pretend a profession of his Religion; for all these stick to such conclusions
as their principles afford them: But the Christian, who calls Christ's doctrine
his, and confesses that he or his Sect has deserted those who alone pretend to
the successive livery and seisin of it, can no way presume to the possession,
till he plainly demonstrate the clearness of his title. Wherefore, it avails not
any drowsy, rather then quiet, nature, to say his Father, (and peradventure
Grandfather) was Protestant before him, and therefore he is Possessor bonae
fidei, whilst he pretends only probable arguments: for so long he implies the
possession to be unjustly detained from the advers party, who has the actual
receipt by succession; especially when this so unparalleld a Riot is committed
without susficient evidence, by the very Actors confession. A Protestant then,
has no better claim to posse^sion of Christ's Doctrine, by his so long
continuance in Heresy, then the Parricide in Aristotle, who, having beaten his
Father pleaded that his Father had beat his Grandfather, and his Grandfather
his great Grandfather: as though such a graceless entail could prejudice the
law of Nature.

Though not so absurd, yet as weak is another Objection taken from the Jewish
Cabala: however, it seems worthy of thanks to the Suggestor. What it was, is
not hard to guess, our Savior himself having given us the hint of it, when he
reproached the Jews for following the Traditions of their Fathers or Elders, to
the ruin of Gods commands. But to decipher it better, I ought to divide it into
matter and form. The form I call the Rules: the matter, what was delivered or
found out by these Rules. As for the matter, it seems in some way proportioned
to the proceedings of certain of our Divines, who pretend to be mystical; and
their employment is, in the sublime mysteries of our Faith, to invent or imagine
what they think congruous circumstances, to move the affections to petty
devotion: which imaginations, as they are framed out of good intentions, so
have they many weaknesses, and little or no doctrine in them. Conformable to
this we may conceive that, after there were no more Prophets among the Jews,
(who failed them, not long after the second building of their Temple) the
Rabbis began to frame explications on their Books of holy Scripture, and the
mysteries learned from the Prophets. These interpretations, according to the
degree of their skill and prudence, some performed better, some worse. But, as
the Jews were a superstitious and ignorant Nation, not having principles of
true knowledge naked before their Eyes, but wrapped up in Metaphors and Allegories;
all together went among them for sound Law. Til, after our Saviors time, and
the dispersion of that generation, some foolish knave, to give authority to
this mess of good and bad jumbled together, invented the story how Moses had
delivered this doctrine to the Sanhedrin, and they had conserved it, by
traditional conveyances from Father to Son. A story as impossible and
incredible, to one who penetrates into the carriage of that Nation, as the
Fables of Jeoffrey of Monmouth, and King Arthur's conquering Jerusalem.

Now, if we look into the form, we shall find it more ridiculous then any Gypses
canting, or the juggling of Hocus Pocus, and as pernicious to true Doctrine, as
any Pseudomancy. To make good this censure, I shall in short describe their
form: it consists in inventing the sense of Scripture by three abuses of the
Letter, which (as far as my memory servs me, for I have not the books
necessary) are these. One by taking every letter of a word, for a whole word
beginning with that letter: Another, by changing letters, according to certain
rules framed by themselves: The third, to find numbers of years or other things,
by the numbers which the letters of the word compound, in such Languages where
their letters are used for ciphers. So much being delivered in short, I cannot
conceive any indifferent judgment so blunt, that he sees not how far these
ridling ways of explication are from the natural intention of a Writer; and how
destructive to all truth, if used otherwise then for pleasure and as a disport
of chance and encounter. Our Country man, Doctor Alablaster, invented a far
more convenient trick, by purely dividing words and joining the ends of the
former to the beginnings of the following: as we also do, sometimes in English,
to disguise common words; and the Hebrew is far more apt for such knacks. But
he found this age too subtle, to cozen any considerable number with such
trivial bables: Whereas the Cahala gained upon the Valentinians and Gnostics,
to build prodigious errors, in very good earnest, upon their more ridiculous
invention. I am not ignorant some eminent persons have been pleased sometime, to
give way to such toys, through luxury of wit and gayety of humor: But it is
one thing to play for recreation, and a far different to establish a Basis of
Faith and doctrine, which is abominable, on such Chimerical dreams. And yet,
this it is our Opposer would Father, upon no less then Moses and the Sanhedrin
and all the sacred Magistracy of the old Law.

Let us give a step farther and see, if it were true, how like it were to our
case. The Tradition we speak of, is the public preaching and teaching and
practice exercised in the Church, settled by the Apostles through the World: This
Cabala, a doctrine pretended, as delivered to few, with strict charge to keep it
from publicity, and so communicate it again successively to a select Committee
of a few; wherein you may see as fair an opportunity for juggling and cozenage,
as, in our case there is impossibility. The Moderns therefore, who profess
Cabala, may say they received it from their predecessors: but they can yield no
account why any Age may not have changed that which was in the breasts of few
shut up together in a chamber; and so there is no possibility of farther
assurance, then the vote of a Council of State, for its being derived any
higher.

But the Arguer demands, whether they cannot ask me, In what age or year their
doctrine was corrupted? And I answer, they may very boldly: But, if I assign an
age or year, can they acquit themselves in point of proof? clearly they cannot:
for, since there was no Register nor visible effects of this doctrine (it being
forbidden to be divulged) it is evident, that cannot convince it was not
corrupted in that year or age. He urges farther, the notoriousness of the ly,
so impudent as few would venture on: not reflecting that he speaks of a secret,
altogether incapable of notoriousness. May not they add, says he, the
dispersion of their Churches through so many Countries and Languages? I yield
they may, but to no purpose, unless they continue Sanhedrins in every Country:
For otherwise, this dispersion will prove but the derivation from their Council
of Tiberias, or such like time, which is nothing to the succession from Moses.
Add to this, that the Nation since Christ's time, is infamous for falsifying
doctrins and corrupting Scriptures: and, even in our Saviors time and long
before, their Rabbis were justly branded with the foul imputation of frequent
forgery; their Sects and heresies being grown up to that desperate height, as
to deny there were any spirits, or shall be any Resurrection, which is the very
top of impiety.

But (what is no less to be considered, then any thing yet offered) the very
subject of the question is different. The Church, we speak of, is a vast and
numerous body, spread over the world; and he must be a mad man that would go
about to deny this Body has remained perpetually visible, from Christ's time to
ours: however some Heretic may pretend the invisible part, viz. that the Faith
has been interrupted. But, for the Sanhedrin, what assurance, nay what
probability is there of deriving its pedigree, from Moses to the days of our
Savior? In all their oppressions during the time of the Judges, in the
division of the Tribes, in the reign of their Kings, in the captivity, first of
the ten, then of the two other Tribes, very little mention of any such
Magistrate, much less evidence of a perfect continuance. How far then, are we
from having any certainty of a doctrin's succession, by them, of whom it is very
obscure, whither any such persons were or no?

A third objection is collected, from the natural proness in Mankind to
conserve Tradition; by which they intend to show Religion is corrupted: Wherein
you may note the force of wit and Logic, to draw arguments against a truth,
even out of these very causes, which are made to conserve the truth impugned.
The arguments are three. First, that diverse Fathers, for zeal to the received
doctrine, were very earnest against the belief of the Antipodes, which, new, is
an ocular certainty. That diverse Fathers did oppose that doctrine, I willingly
grant: but that it was for zeal to Religion, and not through the opinion of
absurdity in Philosophy, I am not satisfied, nor does the Author bring any
proof. I remember they object, as absurd, that men should stand feet to feet; I
remember they conceit those under us would fall into heaven; for the rest, some
places of Scripture are alleged; so that, not our of zeal to Tradition, but
through misunderstanding the Scripture, they fell into this error. Yet I deny
not there may, perhaps, be some argument out of Religion; as men confirm their
opinions from all they can.

The second proof, I imagine touches the History of Virgilius; who, for a like
opinion, is reported to have lost his Bishopric. But it is a mistake; for that
holy man was no Bishop when he was charged with this error, That he held there
was another Sun and Moon, belonging to the hemisphere opposite to us, and a new
world: nor is it certain, whether truly he thought so, or recanted, or was
falsely accused; but well known he was afterward made Bishop, and lived and dyed
with opinion of sanctity.

But though the two first proofs are slender, the third will require more
strength to resist it; and therefore it is especially recommended to the Reader,
to look on the place: it being in a Council and our own proper confession, and
so apparently strong and altogether insoluble; if the Author be inexpugnabilis
Dialecticus, as well as St. Augustine, in his Burlesque phrase.

Thus then begins this Onset, which our Adversary manages with as much civility
as strength. I will also desire you (says he) to look into the 584. Page of the
Florentine Council, set out by Binius: and there you will find, that the Latins
confess they added to the Creed, the procession of the holy Ghost from the Son,
because the contrary opinion seemed to them, by consequence, opposite to a
confes'd Tradition of Christ's eternal Divinity: which yet appears by what
Cardinal Perron has excellently shown, not to be contradictory to Faith, but
that this consequence was ill drawn: which may have been in other points too,
and so have brought in no small number of errors; since neither was their
Logic certain to conclude better, nor were they less apt to add to their
Creeds accordingly, at any other times, then they were at that. Thus far the
charge: And I have been obsequious to so ingenious a request; as will, I hope,
appear by my answer, if I first wash my hands from Cardinal Perron, with whom I
do not engage: nor need I, since the Council has age and can speak for it self.
As also, by the way, note that, since the addition of Filioque, (which was
about the year 440, in St. Leo's time) there has not any tittle been added to
the Churches Creed; though very many Heresies have been condemned. So that the
Objector is forward in his assertions, without seconding them with solid proofs.

To come now to the Combat, I doubt much he, who was so sollicitous to have me
look into the Council, was not so careful as to cast an eye upon it himself:
Else he would have found, the question had not been of adding the words
Filioque, or (...), but of the using them; the adding having been for the
controversy with Photius, the using for the expression of our belief; which the
Council says, consists in two points; First, that the Divinity is the same in
all the three Persons, that is, there is not three Divinities in three Persons,
nor yet one Divinity from which the Persons or Personalities be (...)
different, and not (...). The Second, that none should have any cause to
suspect the holy Ghost to be (...). Wherefore, the insufficiency of the
consequence, which (he says) Cardinal Perron demonstrates, is not to our
purpose; no such inference appearing in the Council: the Latins or Roman Church
only professing that, if the holy Ghost did not proceed out of the Father and
the Son, as one principium or cause, then the Divinity were divided in the
Father and Son, and, by consequence, in the Holy Ghost too, and so (...) as the
Council speaks.

Whence, we may see, the Opponent mistook the whole case, there being no
question of the cause of adding, but of what was expressed; nor any dispute of
Christ's Divinity, but of the Unity of the Divinity with the Persons and in it
self; Nor any drawing of consequences, but an expression of Catholic doctrine;
nor any supposed error, but a truth confessed both by Protestants and us: and
finally, the words are said to be used, to express this point, that He proceeds
from the Son; and not questioned why the opinion is held, that He proceeds from
the Son, which is far different from what we now contend about.

There is another objection, and Cardinal Perron made the Author, as having
reported, out of Isidore, that the Jews complotted together to abolish the book
of Wisdom, because it spoke too plainly of Christ. The story the Objector
himself will not avouch, because it would rank the Book (by him pretended to be
Apocryphal) too high: yet, though it be acknowledged falls, he conceives it
strong enough against us, because it shows such a thing might be done. Let us
poize a little the weight of this Argument: It might have been done; therefore
your Tradition may fail you. First I demand, how you prove it might have been
done; because Isidore said it was done. The Spanish Conquerors, when first they
entered the miracles of the Western World, reported, They climbed up great hills
in the Sea: Therefore was it possible? They talked much of waters which restored
Youth: Therefore it is credible? But Isidore's authority convinces this. If it
were Isidore the holy Bishop of Sevil, something were said: But it is Isidore,
surnamed Mercator, one that collects and patches together truths and falsities,
almost indifferently; at least our men spare not to reject him in matters of
great moment. Thus the bare possibility, that it might have been done, is not,
it self, yet, sufficiently proved.

But let us pass that, and, without much straining our charity, grant among
Jews it might have been done, as not a few think the very Law was lost in the
times of their wicked Kings or other oppressions: what inference can they make
against Christian Tradition? Of Books of Scripture, peradventure there was a
time, when some one, or rather any one might have been lost; because it was in
few hands: shall we therefore conclude the same possibility of suppression, when
we treat of Doctrins universally professed by so many Millions? when we dispute
of Practices every day frequented by the whole Church.

Still there is one jarring string, that grates my ears with its loud discord;
though the stroke come not from the hand of these objectors, yet I will
endeavor to put it in tune. Some sick heads roving up and down in their
extravagant phansies will needs entertain a wild conjecture, that at first our
Savior was indeed styled God, and though the learned, who had the knack of
distinguishing, knew well enough the inward meaning then signified only a most
eminent and godlike person, yet the common People understanding their Preacher
simply, as the letter sounded, came by degrees universally to believe his true
and real divinity. But with what ingenuity can such rambling wits think the
chief Principle of Christianity should be so negligently taught? or accuse so
many holy Saints of those purest times to be such deceitful Teachers? Besides,
did not their rashness blind them, they would easily see the raising the Person
of Christ, from humane to divine, would necessarily infer a notorious change in
the solemn Prayers of the Church and daily devotion of the People, which
certainly would give so great a stroke to both, it could not possibly be
attempted, either undiscerned or unresisted. Lastly the Christian Faith being
delivered not in a set form of words, but in sense a thousand ways explicated
and enforced according to the variety of occasions and capacity of the
learners: how can any ambiguity of phrase endanger them into a mistake, who
attend not so much to the dead letter, as the quickening sense, so variously
expressed, so often incultated to them by their masters?

THE FIFTEENTH ENCOUNTER, Declaring the state of this Question, Whether the
Scripture can decide controversies?
THere remains yet a second part of our Apology; for, as this is the Catholics
principle to adhere to the authority of the Church, that is, to the living word
written in their Breasts, which governs all their actions relating to religion:
so on the other side, whoever have at any time, (under the pretense of
reformation) opposed her Authority, such have constantly raised up their Altar
against Tradition, upon the dead letter of the Scriptures: Which, as the
Catholic Church highly reverences, when they are animated by the
interpretation of Tradition; so, by too much experience, she knows they become
a killing letter, when abused, against the Catholic sense, in the mouths of
the Devil and his Ministers.

But, before we set our feet within the lists, I am bound to take notice of an
opposition, no less common then slight and absurd: and this it is. When we
retire to Tradition, after both parties have lost their breath in beating the
aerial outside of Scripture, they presently cry out, Cannot Aristotle, cannot
Plato make themselves be understood? why then should not the Bible, as well,
determine Controversies? If this were not after sixteen hundred years of
experience, after so much pains of our own, since Luthers time, idly cast away,
in tossing the windy balls of empty words, without coming to resolution of any
one point, peradventure it were pardonable: but now, alas, what can it be, but
an obstinate desire of darkness and a contempt of Gods Law and truth, by a bold
and irrational assertion and loud clamours to beat down the Catholic Church;
like Dametas in the Poem, striking with both hands and his whole strength, but
winking all the while?

Let us, therefore open our Eyes and look through this objection, Cannot Plato and
Aristotle make themselves be understood? Yes; but what then? Ergo the Scripture
can determine controversies? The supposition wherein all venom ly's is
concealed; which thus I display: As Aristotle wrote of Physics and
Metaphysics, so the Scripture was written of those controversies which since
are risen among Christians: But Plato and Aristotle can make themselves be
understood concerning those Sciences: therefore the Scripture can do as much
concerning these Controversies. This ought to be the discourse. But had it been
clothed in so thin and transparent a dress, the Authors would have blushed to
thrust it into light: For, it is a most shameless Proposition, to say the
Scriptures were written of the Controversies, long after their date, sprung up
in the Christian world.

Beginning from Genesis to the Apocalypse, let them name one Book, whose theme
is any, now-controverted, Point betwixt Protestants and Catholics. It Is true,
the intent and extrinfical end of writing St. John's Gospel was, to show the
Godhead of Christ, which the Arians afterward denied, but that is not so
directly his theme, as the miraculous life of our Savior, from whence the
Divinity of his Person was to be deduced: and yet the design so unsuccessful,
that never any Heresy was more powerful, then that which opposed the truth
intended by His Book.

But, I suppose, their reply will be, they purpose not to say the Scripture was
written of our present controversies, but of the precepts of good life and
Articles of Faith necessary to them, about which our controversies arise. If
this be their meaning, their Assumption is as ridiculous, as, in the other,
their Major or chief Proposition. For, their argument must be framed thus. As
Scripture was written of the necessaries to good life; so Aristotle and Plato,
of Physics and Metaphysics: But Aristotle and Plato writ so plainly, that all
questions, rising about their doctrine, can be declared out of their words:
therefore all questions relating to good life, may also be cleared out of
Scriptures. Wherein the Minor is so ridiculous to any that have but opened a
Book of Philosophy, that it is enough, not only to disanul the proof, but
discredit the Author.

And yet were it true, the consequence would not hold: For whoever considers
what belongs to the explication of Authors, knows, there is a great advantage
to discern the sense of those who proceed scientifically, above the means to
understand one that writes loose Sentences. An Archimedes, an Euclid, a
Vitruvius will be of far easier interpretation, where the Subject is of equal
facility, then a Theognis, Phocyllides, or Antoninus, because the antecedents
and consequents do, for the most part, force a sense on the middle
propositions, of themselves ambiguous. Now, the works of Plato and Aristotle are
generally penned, though not always so rigorously, yet still with an approach to
the Mathematical way: The Scripture uses a quite different method, delivering
its precepts without connection betwixt one another. And though I deny not but,
peradventure, the Articles of our belief have, in themselves as much connection,
as the severest discourses of those Philosophers: yet the style, wherein they
are couched in the Bible, is accommodated to vulgar capacities, and the
delivery by way of plain and direct affirmation, without attending to the
artificial rules of demonstration.

But, because no controversy can be clear and fit for decision, unless it be
prepared by an exact and rigorous stating the Question; I first intend to set
down my own sentiment, which I conceive is also that of the Catholic Church:
and afterward what I collect to be the opinion of my Adversaries; leaving them
this free and just liberty, to correct me if I mistake their mind.

First then, we Catholics no way doubt but the Scripture is the word of God,
and of infallible truth, if rightly understood: and that whoever, being out of
the Church, receives the Scripture in that quality; the ground of such
reception (if rational) can be no other, then because we taught him so, and
delivered it to him, as such. For I do not intend to dispute against those
Spiritati, who, by an Enthusiastical light, can judge of Scripture without
sense and reason: And, to those, who pretend either Fathers or other Christians
out of our Church, I answer, my meaning is to comprehend in our Church the
Fathers; for so goes our position; and consequently all Sects either received
the Scripture immediately from us, or from those who received it from us.

Secondly, we doubt not but the Scripture is highly profitable, for the
enablement of Preachers to teach, reprove, confirm, in all points of Catholic
doctrine, both concerning Speculation and Practice: and by consequence that the
Church were not so thoroughly furnished for all kind of exigenccis without it;
for which reason it is of particular usefulness, and indeed necessity to the
Church.

Thirdly, we confess the Bible contains all parts of Catholic Doctrine, in
this sense, that all Catholic doctrine may be found there, by places and
arguments be deducted thence, nay more, be topically or Oratorially proved out
of it: so that, if an able Preacher be in a Pulpit, where he speaks without
contradiction, with a full and free scope; he may, merely discoursing out of
Scripture, carry any point of Catholic doctrine before the generality of his
Auditory, and convince at the present such a part of them, as either are but
indifferently speculative, or have not taken pains in the question.

Fourthly, I affirm, that if any point be brought to an eristicall decision
before Judges, where the parties on both sides are obstinately bent to defend
their own positions, by all the art they can imagine: so the question be not,
which part is true, but only which is more or less conformable to Scripture;
the Catholic position may be victoriously evidenced, by arguments purely drawn
from thence, compared and valued according to true Criticism; without aid of
Fathers, explications, or any other extrinsecal helps. Thus far I esteem all
good Catholics ought to hold; and believe that all, (...), do, de facto, hold.

Now then, to come to the true difference betwixt our Adversaries and us: I
understand it consists in this, That having stated a material point, (as
whether that which we see and touch in the Eucharist be truly Christ's body, or
only a figure of it, it self remaining substantially Bread) and that this
question be to be handled contentiously before Judges, each party pretending to
convince and demonstrate, by quotation of places critically exalted to their
highest force: whether the Scripture (I say) be a sufficient Storehouse to
furnish either side with Texts, unavoidable and convincing beyond any shadow of
reply; in the judgment of sworn and expert judges, who are well practiced what
convincing signifies, and how much the various acceptions of words and
mutability of meanings import in the construction of sentences. This is that
wherein I engage the Catholic Negative; and suppose all Adversaries must hold
the Affirmative.

And the first reason of my supposition is, because I never see them attempt
any other way of disputing, but out of Scripture: nor yet, in that, do they use
so fair play, as to put the places which favor them on the page of receipts,
and those which Catholics bring to the contrary upon that of expenses; and then
having by rules of good Criticism examined the qualities of both, prefer that
party which is more deserving.

Next, I know not how that man dare show his face before any person of common
sense, who shall first acknowledge he goes against the opinion of the whole
present Age wherein he lives, against the undoubted testimony of a thousand
years before him, against the known laws both spiritual and temporal, publicly
renouncing all obedience to all kinds of Magistrate, empowered by God and Man
with just authority to conserve those laws; that shall accuse all his kindred,
Ancestors, and whole Country of blindness and ignorance, and pretend all the
world is bound to desert them and follow him: and this in a matter, concerning
no less an interest then Eternity: and after all this so arrogant bawling and
high demands, being asked what evidence, what proof he can bring to introduce
so great a mutation in the world, shall be forced to confess, he can but play at
cross and pile with them, to know which of the two sentences is true, which
falls. For, setting aside real and irrefragable conviction, what is there left
in speculation, but mere contingency?

Now this strange boldness, this incredible presumption was undeniably Luthers
case: and if his, then certainly all his followers: For, neither is the weight
and authority of so many ages become less pressing and efficacious against his
adherents, nor their first plea improved or amended, but rather weakened: if by
his and all his fellows labors, as yet no evidence is produced (an infallible
sign none is likely ever to be made:) Nor is the change of temporal laws and
Princes any motive, to him that goes upon pure reason, and seriously ayms at
the good of his soul.

Again, he whose discourse is not convincing, and yet will be meddling with truths
of highest importance, is either ignorant of that defect, and then he deserves
the name of a rash temerarious fellow that dares, in a matter of such
consequence advance Propositions (by passion or precipitation) whose quality
himself understands not: or else he knows he does not convince; then let him at
the beginning of his Sermon express so much, and tell his Auditors, he is come
to speak to them concerning their salvation, and propose new Tenets about it;
but, in very deed, he can neither prove the old Tenets are false, nor those
which he shall propose, to be true: Can any one think, if the Auditory have
either wit enough to discover so gross an Impostor, or never so little honesty
to care what becoms of their souls, or love to Christianity; they will not with
great indignation pull his jump over his ears, and tumble him out of his
Pulpit? Now what difference is there (so the mischief be done) whether it be
foretold the people or no; saving that, to conceal the wrong, is a more wicked
and destructive piece of cunning?

Another consideration is, that in practical things, more probability
approaches to certainty, and, by multiplication, contingencie at last begets
perfect Necessity; but, in speculation, not so. For, as there is more
probability to throw seven upon two dice, in forty trials then in four: so, in
five hundred, most certainly that cannot fail to be the cast: the reason is,
because the number of casting so exceeds the variety of chances, that it makes
first a difficulty, and after an impossibility of missing. Now, in speculation,
if no particular cause precisely compel, and determine the effect, variety can
prevail nothing; so that, rigorously speaking a conclusion is no nearer being
true, for a hundred unconvincing Arguments, then for one: whence it follows,
where there is no demonstration, neither Opinion is securely the better. He
therefore that pretends the introduction of a change in a speculative point,
ought either to promise evidence and conviction, or else content himself with
silence: for it is absurd to move any one to change his assent (I speak not here
of a practical resolution) without promising him some abetterment.

Lastly, as far as I can penetrate, he that has a changeable and uncertain
Religion, has none at all. For, I conceive a Religion (as we now discourse of
it) is the knowledge by which we are to guide our selves in our way and
progress toward eternal felicity: so that, if the Religion any one professes
be not the true, he cannot by its principles perform what is requisite to the
gaining of that end: Neither is any knowledge which such a Probablist has, the
right and proper means of cultivating his soul in order to future happiness;
and therefore it is as imposs^ble an untrue Religion should lead to Heaven, as a
falls way, to London. Now, if a Religion that is not true, be no Religion, he
that doubts whether he has the true, is in doubt whether he has any Religion or
none; and he that pretends no farther then to doubt about Religion, pretends
not to know he has any: but, the act of knowing cannot be had, if he that has
it, does not know he has it; therefore he that pretends not to know he has a
Religion, confesses himself to have none.

The same is clear in practice. For suppose an Apothecary had composed a drug
for his Patient; but being uncertain whether to administer it like a potion or
a glister, should sometimes give it one way, sometimes the other: or a Guide,
having undertaken to conduct a Stranger through some untroden Wilderness, and for
want of assurance which way to take, should lead him up and down as in a Maze,
first to the left hand, then to the right: were not these excellent Masters in
their crafts, and worthy of continual employment; but with this condition, that
they practiced their Arts upon none but one another? Then, if Religion be the
knowledge of conducting our souls to heaven; is not he like to make good speed,
that acknowledges himself uncertain of the way? who to day marches forwards,
and to morrow goes as much backward; to day confesses and adores Christ in the
Eucharist, to morrow blasphemes him, and damns all that adore him; to day prays
to Saints, bears respect to a Crucifix, and a compassion to the dead, to morrow
cries out against all, as Idolatry, Superstition, and mere inventions of lucre?

Still there remains with me one other scruple about this point. Diverse great
Brains have undertaken the commendations of things, which mankind, is so far
from delighting in, that very few can endure them; (this aversion rising out of
a judgment, not taken up by humor, but taught by nature, which justly abhors
all that diminishes or destroys its being), as Blindness, Folly, Sickness, and
the like: and contrived many persuasive forms and witty inducements, to invegle
their Auditory into an evident absurdity. Others we find, who, by whole Sects,
maintained that all propositions were indifferent; and their practice was, of
every subject to speak copiously and plausibly on both sides: and this in good
earnest, out of a settled belief that they could make which side they pleased the
more probable. I ask then, whether the probability either of these two sorts of
wits bring for their paradoxes, be sufficient to choose a point in Religion? If
you say, I; What imports it in any point which part you take, that is, whether
you have any Religion or none? If you say, no; what means do you prescribe us
to know when a probability is great enough; or, who is he that is able to judge
the degrees of probability, when they are sufficient, and when not?

Peradventure you may say, In the first case, the evidence of nature shows
their probability to be clearly absurd: and I could answer, why may not Nature
sometimes be deceived, as Anaxagoras would persuade us, when he maintained Snow
was black? but I need not; It Is enough to remember, The questions of Religion
are concerning actions whose effects appear not to us; and yet, ordinarily the
effects are the chief means to frame arguments, and produce certainty, in
practice, that the cause is right. It Is enough to remember eternal bliss
belongs to the next world; and the Mysterys we dispute, are such as the Son of
God only has seen and brought us tidings of. But, what will you say to the
second sort of disputers, who equal all probabilities; and are men, against
whose eloquence, erudition, and prudence in other things, you cannot except? To
all this I can yet add one plain but very confiderable reflection; that
certainly, to prove any position, those wild capricious Brains cannot find
weaker places for their arguments, then a mute, ambiguous, dead writing, not
quickened with reason and discourse: which yet, is the boasted ground of all
that renounce the infallibility of the Church, in matters of supernatural
belief.

THE SIXTEENTH ENCOUNTER. Examining five Texts brought for the sufficiency of
Scripture.
THe case thus stated, we have won the field: If I have erred in framing the
question, let them correct it, with these two conditions, that they propose it
so, as to leave themselves a Religion, and different from ours: for unless both
these subsist, the quarrel betwixt us is at an end. But if I have rightly
expressed the point in controversy, let them bring one place of Scripture that
comes home to the question, and carry the Bays. Their position must include
these two branches: That Scripture is intended for a ground to decide
Controversies in such a contentious way as I have set down: and sufficient to
perform this charge. For the former I dare confidently affirm, there is not in
the whole Bible an expression so much as glances toward it. And though the
second includes the first, and can have no verity nor subsistence without it;
yet since there are some who discovering not the first, can persuade themselves
they find the second, we will try how solidly they proceed.

First then, they cite certain Texts in which they say, the Scripture gives us
salvation: But there is a wide difference betwixt giving salvation, and being
the whole means or adequat cause of it, which is the point to be maintained, if
they will prove the Scripture sufficient; else all Faith, Sacraments, good
works, preaching, etc. must be absolutely excluded as unnecessary, since of
every one of them may be said, it gives salvation. Whence in common already
appears these arguments are so weak and defective, they carry not half way home
to our question: Yet let us see at least how far they reach.

In the fifth of St. John, Christ bids the Jews search the Scriptures, because
you think (says he) you have eternal life in them. Our Savior was discoursing
there of such as bore witness to him: and having named his Father and St. John,
at last he descends to the Scripture and tells them to this purpose, You think
to have life in the Scriptures; though you deceive your selves in that opinion;
for you have only the killing letter, and not the verifying spirit:
Nevertheless search them, for they bear witness that I am the true life, to
whom you will not through want of charity and love of God have recours to seek
it. Therefore you refuse me, who come in the name of my Father, a sign of Truth,
because I seek not mine own interest: But you will receive Antichrist or some
other who shall come in his own name, which is a mark of deceit and falsehood,
so pervers are you. This is our Saviors discourse: of all which to this
argument belong only these words, You think you have life in the Scriptures;
that is, (if I understand the Text) you deceive your selves, if you think you
have life in them; which surely must needs be a very strong reason to prove,
Scriptures give salvation: though if the question were not of the Text, I
should make no difficulty of the conclusion.

And it may be noted that our Savior descends to the proof of Scripture, in
the last place: putting Miracles the first, as motives able to convert Sodom
and Gomorrha: in the second Preaching, specially they showing some good
affection to their Preacher St. John: Lastly, the mute words of Scripture. And
as for St. John, our Savior expressly says he cites him, in condescendence to
them, that they might be the rather moved to embrace the truth, by that esteem
they had already entertained of their Preacher. Whereas for Scripture there was
only their own conceit, which our Savior seems to reprove as an humoursom and
froward obstinacy, that they would not be convinced by the palpable
demonstration of his Miracles (the easiest and surest way) nor rest upon the
preaching of his Precursor, whom themselves confess to be a Prophet; nor lastly
make a diligent search without prejudice, into Scripture, which, if interpreted
with charity and humility, might have led them to him and salvation.

The next place is John 20. These things are written that you may belive that
Jesus is the Son of God, and believing may have life in his name. It Is true both
Scripture and Faith give life; but not the least mention made here of any such
quality in either of them. This only is declared that the end of St. John's
writing the Gospel was not to make a complete History either of our Saviors
Acts or doctrine; but only to specify such particulars as prove that Christ was
the true consubstantial Son of God: to keep them out of the Heresy then
beginning to rise, that they might continue true believers in the Church of
God, live according to its Rules and be saved by so living, that is, by being
true Christians or Jesuits; which is certainly the sense of these words, in his
name, or, in the name of Jesus, as to be baptized in the name of Jesus,
signify's to be enrolled among the company known to be his.

Now from this Text we may clearly collect that St. John's Gospel was not
written by the Authors intention for any such end as the argument urges: Nor,
that it gives life, more then this one Article does, that Jesus is the true son
of God; Nor yet that this Article gives life, but that life is to be had in the
name of Christ, whatever these words signify: Only it may be inferred that life
cannot be had without this Article; but not that this alone is able to give
life, or that it cannot be believed without St. John's Gospel, or that St. John's
Gospel of it self is sufficient to give life without the concurrence of
Tradition. So that there is no appearance from this proposition that life
either can be attained by Scripture alone, or cannot be had without it.

The third Text is out of 2 Timothy chap. 3. That the Scriptures are able to make
him wise to salvation through the faith of Jesus Christ. The paraphrase of the
place, as I understand it, is, O Timothy! be constant in the doctrine I have
taught thee; and this for two reasons; One common to all converted by me,
because thou know who I am that delivered it to thee; This is the first and
principal reason, the authority of the Teacher: Another peculiar to thee,
because from thy infancy, thou art versed in the holy Scriptures, which are
proper to make thee wise and understanding in the law of Jesus Christ, or to
promote and improve thy salvation, which is obtained by the faith of Jesus. So
that, he speaks not of Timothy's becoming a Christian, but his becoming a
through furnished (or extraordinary) Christian, a Doctor and Preacher.

And the ground on which I build this explication is derived from the words
following, where the Apostle expresses this virtue of the Scriptures being
profitable to teach and reprove; as also from this consideration that the
sequel, Be constant to my words or Doctrine, because the Scripture can teach
thee the truth of Christ's doctrine, is not very exact, but rather opposite to
the former, and plainly inducing the contrary; as if one should argue, Follow
not my doctrine, because mine, but because the Scripture teaches thee it: which
directly contradicts the intention of the Apostle, as appears in the verse
immediately precedent, Be steadfast in those things thou have learnt, knowing by
whom thou were instructed; whereas this other discourse is perfectly
consequential, Stand to my doctrine because the Scripture confirms and seconds
it, making thee able to defend and prove by arguments, what I have simply
taught thee to be true, by the sole evidence of Miracles, which beget Faith,
not Science.

But to grant our Adversary the less proper sense and consequence, that the
Scripture was to contribute to the salvation of Timothy himself; still there is
an equivocation in those words, through, or by the faith of Jesus Christ: which
may be referred to those, (to make thee understanding) Either so, that the sense
be, The Scriptures (in which thou have been versed since thy infancy) will
contribute to thy salvation, so that thou understand them according to the
Faith of Jesus Christ which I have orally delivered to thee; and this is, in
direct terms, the Catholic Rule, that the interpretation of Scripture is to be
governed by Tradition or by the faith and doctrine so received, and formally
depends from the first words, Remain constant to my doctrine: Or, by another
explication, which is more material and flat and most incredible, That the old
Scripture (for of that only the Apostle speaks, no other being written while
Timothy was a child) should be able, without relation to the knowledge of Christ
by other means to make a man understanding enough to be saved by the Faith of
Him; as may be seen by Sr. Peter's being sent to Cornelius.

So that, of these three senses, the first is nothing to our adversaries
purpose, and nevertheless is the best; The second positively and highly against
him: the third incoherent to the words precedent and following, and in it self,
an incredible proposition. But give it the greatest force the words can, by any
art, be heightened to, they come nothing near the state of the question proposed
which concerns the decision of all quarrels carried on by litigious parties:
Whereas this Text is content with any sufficiency at large to bring men to
salvation: a point not precisely now controverted betwixt us. Besides Timothy
being already a Christian, it is a pure folly to think the Apostle sent him to
the Scriptures to choose his Religion.

The words immediately following the place explicated are urged for a new
Argument: They are these: All Scripture is inspired from God; and profitable to
teach, to reprove, to correct, to instruct in justice, (that is, good life)
that the man of God become perfect, being furnished to every good work. The
paraphrase, according to my skill is thus, The holy Writ I spoke of, is any Book
inspired from God, and profitable to teach things unknown, reprehend what is
amiss, to set straight what is crooked, to instruct in good life; that the
Church of God, or any member thereof, may become perfect, being, by instructions
and reprehensions applied out of Scripture, by such preachers as Timothy,
fitted to any good work or all kinds of good works. This I conceive the natural
meaning and most conformable to the Text, were we to seek the interpretation of
it indifferently, without any eye to our present controversy. And in this
sense, it is a clear case, the Apostle speaks of the benefit of Scripture, when
explicated and applied by a Preacher, in order to the perfecting of those that
hear him.

But if, by importunity the adversary will needs have it, that the Scripture
should give the quality of being (...) to the person himself that reads it; to
content him, I shall not hinder him of his mind, but only prove it nothing to
his purpose: For still this must be the sense, that it produces in the reader
the excellencies required in a Preacher, namely to make him do all those good
works which are expected of him; as teaching, reprehending, etc. so that one
way or other, still the Scripture is applied to furnish him with Precepts,
Arguments, Examples, and such like instruments of persuasion: but of giving the
first Catechism, or binding ones self Apprentice to the Bible, to learn the
first rudiments of Christian profession, there is not the least word or syllable
that colors for such a conceit: nor can it indeed consist with the direct
meaning of the place; since the being already a Christian, is plainly supposed
in Timothy, by St. Paul's institutions viva voce, before any exhortation to this
use of Scripture. So that, here is no question concerning the first choice of
Faith, but of perfection after Faith: much less any mention of convincing in
foro contentioso, about which is all our controversy.

Another place is Acts 26. where St. Paul, defending himself before Agrippa and
Festus, against the Jews accusation, who calumniated him that he spoke in
derogation of the Law, and brought in a new doctrine to the disturbance of the
people; made only this answer, that he preached nothing but what the Prophets
had foretold. His words are these: The Jews for this (teaching Christ's doctrine)
finding me in the Temple, would have killed me: But I having obtained succonr
from God until this very day have persisted testifying (or protesting) to great
and little, that I spoke nothing but what the Prophets and Moses had foretold
should come to pass; as, that Christ was to suffer, that he was to be the first
should rise from death to life, and preach light both to Jews and Gentiles. This
is the true interpretation of the Greek Text, as far as ly's in my power to
explicate it, according to the intention of St. Paul. I deny not but the words
singly taken may be interpreted, I have persisted testifying to great and
little, and in my Sermons saying nothing but what etc. But this explication is
neither so proper to his defense, nor at all advances the Adversaries cause:
For since St. Paul tells us directly what the points are of which he spoke;
whatever can be gathered out of them, only this is said, that these three
points were foretold by Moses and the Prophets: and on the other side, the
discourse is imperfect, running thus, I preached indeed many other things, yet
nothing but what was in Moses and the Prophets, to wit, that Christ was to
suffer, etc. His meaning therefore is, that since he was in hold, his perpetual
endeavors had been, to show that these things he was accused to have preached
against the law, were the very marrow of the Law and foretold by Moses and the
Prophets: and that, whereas the Jews expected Christ to be a temporal King, who
by force of Arms should restore the house of Israel, to a great and flourishing
estate, the truth was quite contrary; for, according to the doctrine of Moses
and the Prophets, He was to be a passible man, to suffer death, afterward to
rise again triumphantly, as the first fruits of the Resurrection, and to send
his Disciples both to Jews and Gentiles to spread the light of the Gospel
throughout the world.

What advantage against the necessity of Tradition, can be drawn out of this
place of Scripture, which does not so much as talk of the extent of Catholic
doctrine, much less come within kenning of our Controversy, is beyond my reach:
This I know, that, to say all points of Catholic doctrine can be sufficiently
proved out of Moses and the Prophets, is an assertion I believe our Adversaries
themselves will deny; as being both ridiculous in it self and absolutely
discrediting the necessity of the new Testament: and yet clearly, without
maintaining so gross absurdities, they can make no advantage of this Text.

THE SEVENTEENTH ENCOUNTER. Examining such places as are brought against the
admittance of any, but Scriptural proof in Religion.
WE are at last come to those places in which they most glory, conceiting
themselves able by them utterly to destroy all Traditions: These are such as
forbid to add or detract from the holy Scriptures: which, though commonly so
explicated by Protestants, yet certainly cannot but appear to every child
altogether impertinent to our controversy. For, it is a far different question,
Whether we were bound to put no new or Apocryphal Books into the Canon (which
our adversaries charge us to have done) or to take none out (which we charge
them to do?) from that now in debate, Whether there be any other means of
assuring matters of Faith, beside the Bible? or rather, Whether Scripture in an
eristical and contentious way, be a Rule sufficient to decide all controversies
in Religion? Nevertheless let us see the Texts they allege for their opinion:
Deuteronomy. 4. 2. Josh. 1. and others to the same effect.

My first answer is; suppose these places imported all the force our
adversaries pretend, we are not in the least degree concerned: since all that is
said is clearly spoken of a certain Book or Law, properly and specially
belonging to the Jews: and no more obliging Christians then the Book of
Leviticus or the Law of Circumcision.

Secondly: since it is held as a main distinction and opposition betwixt the
Laws of the Jew and of the Christian, that those of the Jew were to be written
in Stone and Paper, and those of the Christian in the hearts of men by
Tradition: it would rather follow (if such Analogy were to be made) that
because nothing but Scripture is to be given to the Jew, only Tradition is to
be pressed on the Christian.

Thirdly, to the end this place may have the effect endeavored by the arguer,
all the rest of the Bible, except Deuteronomy or such other Book, to which the
Texts cited particularly relate, may be burnt, or at least cast out of the
Canon; and not have any power to decide controversies, even in the Jews law. I
know it is answered, that Protestants deny not such Books: Neither do we accuse
them of it; only we conceive we may safely say, they contradict themselves, in
pressing these places to that effect of one side, and admitting the Books on
the other.

My fourth Answer is, that the Law it self enjoins in certain cases, other
precepts to be added; remitting the people upon any doubt, first to Judges, and
afterward to the High Priest, and commanding their declarations to be obeyed,
and under greatest penalties punctually observed: So that, the consequence
drawn out of these places, is both weak in it self and prejudicial to them that
use it.

Nor is the inference our adversaries wrest out of the last Chapter of the
Apocalypse less unreasonable then the former: where, he that adds or detracts
any thing from that Prophecy is accursed: whence pleasant discoursers will
needs conclude; that Christian doctrine is no otherwise to be proved but by
Scripture. Questionless, to speak more pertinently to the Text, they should
have said, it was to be proved out of nothing but the Apocalypse: but because
that would appear too palpable and absurd, they included the rest of the
Scripture violently against the express letter and meaning of the Text. This
Argument seems to me, as if the famed Astrologer Mr. Lilly, had obtained a
Protection from the State, that none should presume to abuse his
Prognostications, by foysting in counterfeit ones, or blotting out any part of
his; and thence, one should boldly infer that all our Courts of Justice were
commanded to judge such cases as came before them, only out of Lilly's Almanac:
with this sole difference, that the arguer here unjustly cogs in the whole
Scripture, instead of the single Book of the Apocalypse, which makes his
consequence far weaker and more unexcusable then the other; as I confess the
similitude I use agreeable rather to the impertinency of the objection, then to
the dignity of the subject.

To these two may be paralleled that Preface of St. Luke, so strongly urged by
some. The words, as I understand them, are these. Seeing many have endeav^ured
to compile ae history of the things in great abundance acted among us;
according as they who were from the beginning eyewitnesses and instruments of
the Gospel, have delivered to us: I also have thought fit (excellent
Theophilus) since I was present at all, things almost from the beginning, to
set them down to thee in order, that thou may know the certainty of the
Reports which thou have been taught. This is the Text, though others interpret
it otherwise; who (if they will urge any thing out of their own explication)
must first justify it against this. But out of this, First St. Luke pretends no
more then to tell our Saviors life, like a good Historian; however some of his
excellent sayings cannot be denied their place in his life, as is testified by
the same St. Luke, in the first of the Acts: and therefore we ought not expect
to know more from him, then was fit for an Historian to report; that is, the
eminent deeds and sayings of our Savior. Now, the end expressed in the Text
for the writing of this History may be understood two ways: One, that
Theophilus might know which reports were true, which falls: The other, that
Theophilus out of the recital of Christ's miracles and heroical actions might
understand the greatness of his person, and by consequence the certainty of his
holy doctrine, which depends from them; But whether one or the other, however
there is not a word that this Book should serve for a Catechism, to teach him
and all the world the entire body of Christian doctrine, which must be our
Adversaries meaning.

There are yet two passages I must not omit, because our Adversaries make great
account of them: one is the fourth Chapter of the first to the Corinthians,
That you may learn in us, not to be wise beyond what is written. To understand
this place, you must know there grew some emulations betwixt the disciples of
the Apostles, (if I may guess) betwixt those of St. Peter and St. Paul. This
St. Paul reprehends at large: but for fear of making the breach wider, instead
of closing it, would not name St. Peter, choosing rather to put the case, as if
it had passed betwixt himself and Apollo: and first uses this argument, that
Paul and Apollo are but Ministers of Christ: thereupon after some diversion, he
comes to tell them, how all that any man has, is from God and for the people;
and concludes, to have all esteemed as the Ministers of Christ and dispensators
of his Mysteries: And after he has expressed how little he concerns himself,
whether he be well or ill reputed by them, concludes, telling them he had taken
those two names of Paul and Apollo, to teach them this point; and then brings
in the words alleged, which I may venture to paraphrase thus. I have
disguised my discourse concerning the esteem you ought to have of your
Preachers, under the names of Apollo and my self; that, by what I teach you to
be due to our persons, you may learn not to be affected to your Preachers,
above what I have written to you about a dozen lines before: to wit, that they
are all ordained for you Ministers of Christ and dispensers of his Mysteries;
to the end one of you do not swell with pride or choler against another in any
man's behalf, and so breed Schisms and contentions among your selves.

This is the meaning of the Apostle; as will appear to any judicious
understanding, that can be content to read and diligently weigh the whole
composition of the discourse. And here we are unwillingly constrained to observe
the desperate shifts of many of our adversaries, into which either the rashness
of their passions or necessity of their cause engages them: for so, in the Text
we now treat, they presently snapt at a piece of a sentence, where they found
this charming word (written;) and that was enough for them, without ever
troubling their heads to consider or sense or connection in order to the framing
a legitimate argument. For, had they but taken the immediately precedent line,
These I have disguized into Apollo and my self for you, and then brought in the
words cited, That you may learn in us, not to be wise above what is written;
the nonsense would have declared it self, and stumbled the Reader, who could
not but presently have checked at the inconsequence. And the verse following
would be likewise incongruous to these, that you be not sweld one against
another for any man: For, what connection can either the words precedent, or
subsequent have, with this, that, You are to learn your Faith out of the
Scripture? and yet I have translated the Latin Sapere or Greek (...), against
the true sense, for the objectours advantage; whereas the true meaning is not to
esteem them higher, or bear themselves, as if their Masters were higher: and
thus the very English Translation yields it.

The latter place is out of the first to the Galathians, where he warns them,
that whoever comes to preach any doctrine, besides that which He had taught
them, they should refuse him communion, or account him execrable. This passage
I have always esteemed very strong and pregnant for Tradition* and our
Adversaries call it a most illustrious proof against it. I confess at first I
was at a loss to imagine how they could frame an argument out of so
unfavourable a Text: but at last, I perceived it might perhaps be thus, St.
Paul (said they) preached nothing but what was written, as he testify's to
Agrippa; so then, all he preached was Scripture: But he commands them to
receive no other doctrine, but what he delivered them: Therefore, he enjoynd them
to make Scripture the Rule of their Faith. This is (as far as I can find) the
full epitome of their discourse upon this Text.

But, considering that what is in Scripture may be delivered by preaching,
without any mention of Scripture; me thinks though all St. Paul taught the
Galathians had been written, yet it follows not He commanded the Galathians to
hold the doctrine from Scripture; For those two words, what we Evangeliz'd to
you, and what you have received, signify so plainly preaching, that I can
collect nothing from this place, but that they were to hold their Faith because
He had preached it; then which it is impossible to imagine a more efficacious
argument to demonstrate Tradition.

And, to this effect, he exaggerates his own quality; that he was one who had
not received his doctrine from man nor by the entermise of man, but immediately
by revelation from Christ: and afterward, (upbraiding the Galathians for their
inconstancy) asks them, whether they had received their Christianity by the
works of the Law, or ex auditu fidei, by hearing of the Gospel? So that, in
effect, his command is to the Galathians, to stand to his preaching, that is,
to Tradition for their Faith: and this not only against all men but even
Angels, should they come down from Heaven to preach any thing contrary. For,
that the word praeter may signify contrary, is too well known to be insisted
on; But, that it signify's so here, the particular occasion of this discourse
makes evident; St. Paul expressing that some intruded themselves seeking to
overturn the Gospel of Christ: and charging upon them that, whereas they had
begun in spirit, they ended in flesh, and the like: Wherefore it is plain, he
spoke of doctrine contrary to what he had preached. But if praeter be taken for
besides, it will signify besides Tradition, not besides Scripture: there being
not the least mention of Scripture: Now, how soundly it is proved that St. Paul
taught nothing but what was written, is before examined; which yet if admitted
true, were nothing to the purpose. For, it is not the Catholic position, that
all its doctrins are not contained in Scripture: but not held from thence nor
to be convinced out of the naked letter, especially in a pertinacious dispute:
A question certainly not so much as dreamed of in this place of St. Paul.

And now to close this whole discourse, I shall only add one short period: as a
prudential reflection upon the different fitness and proportion these two
methods have, in order to determine controversies. That, in case where any two
parties disgree, Tradition is very seldom of much as pretended by both, and if
at all, still in points of less importance: whereas Scripture is continually
alleged by all sides, how numerous soever their factions be, and how
fundamental soever their differences: An evident sign, the way of resolving by
Tradition, is incomparably preferrable to that of judging by the bare letter of
Scripture: especially if, still upon examination, one of the pretended opposite
Traditions prove, indeed, either not sufficiently universal or not positively
contrary to the other, but, perhaps a particular custom of some Province, as
Rebaptization: or only a mere negative Tradition, as that of the Greeks
concerning the Holy Ghost.

THE EIGHTEENTH ENCOUNTER, Declaring the reasons of the Authors concluding,
without proceeding to the examination of the Fathers Testimonies.
I Have omitted the petty quiblets of Criticism which our Adversaries use to
press in diverse of the places I explicated: not only because they are often
falls, most commonly strained, and always such pigmy bulrushes, that they merit
no admission into a grave discourse: but chiefly, because, considering largely
the Antecedents and consequents to the Texts alleged, I found the substance of
them wholly mistaken and nothing to our purpose: and that such arguments are
the abortive issue of immature brains, not able to distinguish the force of
Canon shot, from a Faery's squib or a boys pot-gun.

And I dare (had I good conditions) maintain that, in all the differences
betwixt Protestants and us Catholics, they cannot produce one place of
Scripture, in which the words can bear a sense that comes home to the state of
the question. I know many urge those of the Decalogue against Images: To which
I answer, with words analogical to those of St. Paul, Who (speaking to the
Galathians) protested that whoever circumcised* himself, as a thing necessary
or because of the old Commandment, was bound to keep the whole Judaical law: So
say I, whoever condemns Images, upon this prohibition of Moses, is bound to
keep all the law of the Jews: For, if these words be a law to us, because they
are written in theirs, all that is written in their law must be so to us; since
he that made one, made all; and, for whom he made one and delivered it to them,
for them he made and delivered all the rest, as one entire body of law to be
observed by them. He therefore that counts himself bound by this Law, must (if
he have common sense) esteem himself equally obliged to all the rest.

Upon the same reason hangs the keeping of the Sabhath day; for, of all the
Decalogue, these are the only two points unrepeated in the new Testament: so
that, all the rest we are bound to accept in virtue of that, but these two we
cannot. Wherefore, whoever holds, The Sabbath day is commanded by God, either
does so because he finds it in the old Law: and to him I protest he ought (in
consequence to this judgment) submit to all that law and become a Jew: or else,
because he finds it in observation among Christians, that is, in Tradition: and
to him I protest, he is bound to embrace all that comes down by Tradition,
namely, the whole Roman Catholic Faith: Therefore, every rigorous observer of
the Sabbath, is bound in common sense, either to be a Jew or a Catholic.

To make an end, I know our adversaries alledg many sentences of Fathers to
prove the sufficiency of Scripture: whereof the most part I am sure are as far
beside the state of the question, as those places of Scripture we come now from
examining. However, I find my self, not concerned to look into them:
pretending no farther at this present, then to consider the ground upon which
those I oppose rely, for their assurance, that Scripture is sufficient to
decide controversies, according to the state of the question, as it is
proposed. Now, because they reject wholly the Authority of Fathers, from a
definitlve sentence in matter of Faith: it is impossible for them, (if they are
not quite Bedlams) to rely on their Authority for acceptance of Scripture; for
what can be imagined more palpably absurd then to receive upon their credit the
whole Rule of Faith, and yet not take their words for any one Article of Faith?
and consequently what can be imagined more vain and fruitless then for me to
lose my labor in striving to show that Protestants have no color from
Antiquity, to expect this al-deciding power in Scripture, whilst themselves aver
the whole multitude of Fathers is not capable of giving a sufficient testimony
for their relyance on Scripture: since therefore there is nothing like a ground
in Scripture, and they scorn all ground except Scripture, I must leave them to
the freedom of doing it without ground.

FINIS.
DAILLES ARTS DISCOVERED: OR, His RIGHT USE, Proved A Downright ABUSE Of the
FATHERS.

By THO. WHITE, Gent.

EZECH. 13. 12. Ecce cecidit Paries: nunquid non dicetur vobis, Vbi est litura
quam linistis? Printed in the Year 1654.

DAILLe's Arts DISCOVERED.
THE FIRST SURVEY. Of the nature and subject of Daille's Book.
HAving closed the precedent Treatise which this consideration, that, since
Protestants disavow to be determined by the authority of Fathers, I had just
title to decline any farther search into those reverend Witnesses of our
ancient Faith; being a task that would require some labor of me to do, and
yield no profit to them, when done.

Yet, I easily observed, that, as my excuse (to indifferent Persons) will
defend me from the imputation of being troubled with the Writing-Itch: so, it
seems to engage my clearing my self of a far more important charge, which
otherwise might occasion some passionate or captious spirits, to fix this
scandal upon me, that I acknowledge not the judgment of Antiquity; an injurious
aspersion, which the French Daille has actually endeavored to cast upon the
whole Catholic Church, in his abusive Treatise, of the right use of the Fathers.

And because that Monsieur's Book is Denizon'd among us, by the adoption of
those two great Secretaries (whose names forced me into this employment) and
raised to the esteem of being the source whence their streams took their
current; I cannot but give my Reader a hint concerning it: for no other reason,
but only to make him understand, what Great men are subject to, when the
luxuriousness of their wits carries them beyond the bounds of those professions
they are skild in.

With this Note therefore we will begin our discourse; that, Many great and
nimble wits, both ancient and modern, have (merely for their recretation)
undertaken to plead the cause of natural defects, and striven to set them above
the opposite perfections: like Aesop's Woolf, who, having lost his tail, would
persuade other Wolvs to cut off theirs too, as unnecessary burdens. But, nature
contradicting this Art, and by a perpetual current of impressions, forcing us
to the contrary belief; such quaint discourses gain no more credit then
Prismatical glasses, in which we are pleased to know our selves delightfully
cosen'd. Now, what in these men, is only a Caprich of wit and gayness of humor,
were it applied to a business of high concern, and which could not be judged by
our senses, but required a deep penetration to distinguish right from wrong,
would certainly be a most pernicious and insufferable wickedness: a trap to
ensnare and ruin all the weak and unlearned, whom either the cunning of Logic
can deceive, or sweetness of Rhetoric inveagle.

But, being arrived already within sight of my designed Port, I beg my Reader
to believe me of that discretion, as not easily to lanch forth again into the
main Ocean of a new bottomless controversy: and therefore I shall only essay to
decipher the quality of the Treatise in common; leaving its strict perusal to
them that are more at leisure, and have their Noses better armed for raking in
a dunghill.

To make then a nearer approach to the work, I shall begin with the Author's
intention, which aims at no less then this bold and desperate attempt, To
disable the Fathers from being Judges in the Controversies of this present Age.
Let us enquire the true and genuine sense of this proposition.

And first, who are signified by the word Fathers? For this he assigns us three
Ages: from Christ to Constantine; from Constantine to Gregory the great; and
from Him to Us. Now, this last part, (though it contains a thousand years,) he
cuts off from the score of Fathers, and much more, pulls them out of the B^nch
of Judges: the middle division he grumbles at, as not being worthy of, or, at
most hardly admittable to that appellation: the first Age alone he freely
acknowledges.

By what Criticism he does this, I am not able to understand: For, when I
learned Latin, Pater signified the immediate progenitour of the Son; and St.
Paul was of that opinion, telling his Converts, They had no Father but himself,
because he had in person, begotten them by the Gospel: and though, by
ampliation, this word has included also the Parents of our Fathers, and upwards
even to Adam; yet how it comes so to signify the most remote, as to exclude
the nearest, is beyond my skill in Grammar. Pray, let this good Definitor
reflect upon himself: if the first remembered of his race had died without
Issue, how could he have been one of his Forefathers? no more, had there been
no Preachers after the first three hundred years till our time, should we have
accounted those Primitive Ones our Fathers. That they are Fathers, then, is
because they begot Preachers, who continued the propagation of the same
doctrine to our days: which we profess they did among us; and that therefore we
are their Spiritual Offspring, they our Fathers.

But Daille and his Consorts fault is not, that they contract the compass of
the Fathers; but that they acknowledge any. For they are all Mushroms, sprung
up as new as the morning, not so much as one from another, if they be true to
their tenets: every one of them is bound to say to Calvin, as well as to the
Saints, I believe not for thy word, but I have heard it from the Apostles own
mouths in the Scripture.

Though, indeed, I have no reason to quarrel much with Him upon this point:
for, if he acknowledges the word Fathers, he denies the Thing or Virtue of it
in them; since, to be a Father, is to propagate Christ's doctrine to posterity:
which quality he must of necessity deny them, whilst he thinks their doctrine
not to be that of Christ; and that it ought, by every private man, be brought
to the test of the Bible, and so far accepted or refused, as, to the grave
judgment of some judicious Blue-apron, seems agreeable to the sense of
Scripture.

This, then, is the pious design of this Author, To infinuate a belief, that,
since the Apostles days, there has not been a sufficient living Witness of
what they taught the world, or what Christ taught them. In which there are two
notorious propositions infolded, worthy to be looked into. First, that these
good Christians, at one leap free themselves from all the bands of Community
and Society of mankind, and from all subjection to the Kingdom of Christ, which
they flatly deny. For, Nature teaches us, there can be no Government without
Judges; I mean, living Definitors and Deciders of occasional debates:
therefore, if Christ has left no Judges upon Earth, he has no kingdom here:
such Judges I speak of, as should administer His Law; for he came not to plant
temporal Kings, but a spiritual Regiment, wherein, if he has had no Judges since
the Apostles decease, his Kingdom expired with them.

Now then, the whole drift of this Writer is, to establish an absolute Anarchy;
where every one indifferently shall be Master without control, in that great
and principal Mystery of training up souls to eternal happiness: which by how
much more dark and difficult the spiritual conduct to future bliss is, then
temporal government to present wealth and security, so much more unreasonable
and unnatural must the position be, that dissolvs all obedience to
Ecclesiastical Superiors, and abolishes all Order in the Church: An assertion
justly to be abhorred by any, who has the least spark of love to that only great
Good, the salvation of his Soul.

The other Proposition is, that since the Apostles time, there has been no
publik either true doctrine or good life, in that part of the World which we
call Christian. I do not mean, there may not have appeared some virtuous
actions in private persons, (though perhaps the consequence might be driven so
far;) but that, all visible Companies have had both their Doctrine spotted with
foul tenets, and their consequent practices polluted with Superstition and
Idolatry: For, as this is one of the main grounds for their rejecting the
Fathers; so, the reason a priori (which they allege) being once admitted,
evinces the truth of the Conclusion I charge upon them: it being evident, that
if because man is fallible, the Fathers are insufficient to propagate truth to
their posterity; and, out of the position of insufficiency, must of necessity
follow the consequence of defect; certainly then, the following generations had
not sufficient instruction, either for belief or actions. And indeed, the
Reformers themselves acknowledge as much; since they esteem the Fathers errors
so gross, that it was fit to leave the communion of that Church, wherein they
are defended, rather then accept of such abominations. Now if this be not to
deny all good life, and the main and universal fruit of Christ's passion, even
in those preferred Ages, I have lost my little wits.

This; therefore, I say, is the aim and project of his Book; to prove, That
since Christ's time, there has been no sufficient living testimony of the Truth
of Religion, no command or government of Christians, as Christians; and lastly,
no holiness or good life, nor any fitting direction among mankind brought in
and stated by our kind Savior and wisest Lawgiver Jesus Christ. Now, how
great an encouragement and advance this may prove, either toward virtue or
study of Religion, I understand not. This I know, if any would purposely seek
to draw off our hearts from all hope of heaven and practice of virtue, I cannot
imagine a more efficacious argument, then, First, to tell how much pains our
Savior had taken to plant a right Faith and Christian life, in so many years
of example and Preaching, closing all with such strange unparalleld sufferings:
Nay, that he had sent the Holy Ghost, in so manifest and glorious a manner from
heaven, upon his Disciples, to fire their hearts with zeal and empower their
hands to Miracles, giving them Commission to publish his new Law over all the
World, and solemnly engaging to assist them for ever: And yet afterward bring
in proofs, how, notwithstanding all this, soon as these Apostles were dead,
Idolatry and corruption, both of doctrine and manners, began presently to
appear, in the greatest and best Members of the Church, even the immediate
Disciples of the Apostles; and in short time, so overrun the whole World, that
the means of Salvation was generally lost, and the way to heaven obstructed
with an universal deluge of vice and superstition. These proofs are the work of
our excellent Author: whence I think it no boldness to conclude, this Treatise,
of the right use of the Fathers, is the perfectest piece that ever was written,
for the utter extermination of Christian doctrine, and absolute ruin of all
virtue. For, when I turn over the Book, I cannot but acknowledge it full of as
good Topics, cast into as neat a style, and qualified with as seeming a fit
temper conveniently to betray unwary souls, as any modern I ever read: but I
fear not, these few animadversions I have hastily collected, sufficiently
demonstrate to the sight of any that will but open their eyes, how dangerous
and damnable a a poison lies hidden under that gilded hypocritical cover.

THE SECOND SURVEY. Of the two first Chapters of his first Book; wherein he
urges that the Fathers of the three first ages were few, and their writings
wholly unconcerning our Controversies.
THe intention of the Work being so pious, so conformable to nature and the
ways of the Author of nature; you cannot choose but expect the proofs very sound
and convincing: And, if you will believe either my Lord of Bristow's judgment
or my opinion, we shall easily agree in his Elogium, both of them and their
Author, that little material or weighty, can be said on this subject, which his
rare and piercing observation has not anticipated.

To understand his persuasions the better, I entreat you, reflect upon two
ways, or rather two parts of one way, ordinarily chosen by such juggling
Orators, as we before made mention of; who use to employ their wits in
contradicting open verities.

The first is, to talk much of the common notion, when the question is of a
particular. As if one would undertake to dissuade a man from traveling to
Rome, because it is a long journey; he will plead the inconveniences which
accompany long journeys, and immediately talk of Wildernesses, wild Beasts,
great Robberies, dangerous Rivers, unpassable Mountains, want of Company, and
disfurnishment of all accommodations by the way, and a thousand such frightful
narrations which occur in the misfortunes of Shipwrack'd men, and the desperate
voyages of Romance-Lovers: But never descend to consider, whether all these be
found in the way to Rome, or what remedies are provided to correct such
Symptoms; knowing too well, that equivocation is easily couched and ambushed in
common propositions, but soon detected, if a descent be made to particulars.

The other Fallacy is, To assign real inconveniences, but not tell you how far
they annoy the Subject, alleging many sad things, but concealing how great
they are. As a man may have the Gout or Stone in so slight a measure, that they
shall never trouble him: yet a third person, who hears the melancholy relation,
may conceit and pity his case as most deplorable; because the Reporter, not
expressing the violence of these diseases, leaves an impression in our minds of
such a degree of pain and affliction, as we ordinarily commiserate in those
that suffer the extremest fury of such vexatious tormentors.

These two Fallacies run, in a manner, through his whole Book; which he divides
into two parts, very methodically. In the former, he pretends to show it is an
excessive hard, if not impossible, task to know the meaning of the Fathers: In
the later, that, supposing their sense were known, it imported little to the
dispatch of controversies; they being not infallible, nor without all danger of
error: grounding himself on this maxim, that the understanding neither can,
nor indeed ought to believe any thing in point of Religion, but what it knows
to be certainly true.

Which, had it come out of a Roman Catholics mouth, would have sounded
gloriously, and worthy the dignity of that Faith which God and Jesus Christ,
being the Author of, have completely furnished with clear and solid principles.
He perhaps would have offered you choice, either of Faith or Knowledge; produced
in order to this, as perfect demonstrations as Aristotle is adored for; and
toward that, engaged you in the most evident directors of humane life, and
clearly evidenced, by the principles of common sense, that, if you refuse the
Authority of the Roman Church, you renounce all the certainties on which you
build every serious action of your life; and in a word constrained you to deny
or affirm somewhat that your self, in another case, will confess a mere madness
to affirm or deny.

But, in Monsieur Daille's mouth, who, in his next words, will cast you upon
the vanity of a broken breath, which has been a boulting and searsing these
hundred years, without any profit in the certainty of its meaning; I cannot
pierce farther, then that this glorious principle is assumed, as the readiest
means to betray his Auditor into a despair of Christianity, and then leave him
in the gulf of Atheism.

However, let us see the nature of his proofs, which for the first point, he has
screwd up to eleven. The three first are, that the Fathers works, especially in
the three first Centuries, were very few, and of matters far different from the
present controversies; and besides, many falls writings fathered upon those
Saints by unworthy persons; (of which last imputation my third Survey gives you
a more exact particular.) Nor can I deny any of this, but I find two
exceptions, which I believe would shrewdly trouble the Minister to answer: One,
that those of the pretended Reformation, who have so much modesty in them, as
not to renounce utterly the authority of the whole Church of Jesus Christ at
one blow, strive to shelter their nakedness in these three Centuries: whereof
these three arguments make me plainly see the reason, Because by the paucity of
Books, the difference of Subject, and pretense of Forgery, they hope nothing
can be made evident for those Ages: and so, the purity for which they cry up
those days as only worth our conformity, is in that sense the Poet says, purae
sunt plateae, that is, there is no body in the streets.

My other unsatisfaction is, He does not show that even in these ages, and
those very works which he acknowledges for the Authors home-born Children, and
to have descended incorrupted to our days, there is not sufficient to convince
all Heretics. For, though every particular point peradventure cannot, in so
few works and written so accidentally to our purpose, be clearly demonstrated;
yet, the generality of the Rule we are to follow in Christian doctrine is so
manifestly set down, in those very Fathers he admits, that, were their writings
made our judges, no man could possibly be an Heretic: since, as the material
points the Fathers wrote against were different from ours; so the formal ones,
as the deserting the Catholic communion, the renouncing the testimony of
Apostolical Seas, and the hiding themselves under the leaves of Scripture, were
common to all the ancient as well as modern Heretics. But however, if he
cannot maintain, that there is not enough left to convince the truth; his proof
is deficient, and wholly useless to the end he brings it.

One observation more I cannot choose but note: He quarrels with some Catholic
Doctors, who prefer the second Tricentury before the first, as to the right
understanding the sense of the Fathers: Which he says he takes for a confession
of the want of testimonies in the former Ages, and doubts not but in equal
cleerness, they would prefer the first Tricentury, for point of purity before
the latter. But either his own opinion or misunderstanding our Tenets deceived
him: For, we do not imagine the former ages more pure then the later, since we
admit no errors in either, but make no question that the universality of
Fathers in any two ages held the same doctrine; and so, the Faith of the second
Tricentury being known, we account that of the former undoubted; especially we
all believing the latter Fathers received their doctrine from the former, not by
reading their Books, which belonged to few, but by being instructed from their
mouths who had received it from them. But he thinks his Reformers very probably
maintain that Christian Religion has long been in a dangerous consumption,
declining still by little and little, and losing in every Age some certain
degree of its Primitive vigor and native complexion; to which purpose he cites
the words of Hegesippus out of Eusebius, That this infirmity began as soon as
the Apostles were dead.

This position sounds to me, as if the opinions they cry out against for
abominations entered so early into the Church; and have continued in it so
long, that they can now reckon fifteen Centuries: nor can I desire either a
more ingenuous confession or stronger proof of the truth of those doctrines,
which the nature of Christianity has preserved with such exact care, and
constant tenderness that in so many ages, not one of them has been forgotten,
not one of them ever opposed, by those who, in all generations, have still been
accounted the sound party of Christians. Besides, I should expect, that so foul
a blemish, as these bold accusers lay upon the Church; viz. that she has been
an Idolatrous and abominable Harlot, ever since the death of the Apostles,
ought not to be grounded on bare probable conjectures, but evidently convinced;
under penalty that, otherwise, the Calumniators should suffer, at least, as
heavy a Censure, as they attempt to pass against the Church.

But, because, for the maintenance of this odious slander, he chiefly rely's on
H^gesippus's testimony, let the witness be fairly examined; and that according
to the Authors own citation, which runs to this effect, After the Apostles
death, the Masters of Seduction began publicly and professedly, to vent their
falssy named Science, against the preaching of the truth: which, in plain
English signifies no more, then that Heretics rose up against the Church: and
is so far from arguing the Churches corruption, that it strongly concludes her
purity, since the doctrine, which falsehood contradicts, must necessarily be it
self true. Thus clearly it follows from these words, that the wrong imputed
corruption was out of the Church, and soundness of Faith in her Communion.

But, if we look into the Text exactly, the meaning of that passage is this,
After the Apostles death, the consistence of Heresy took its beginning, that
is, Heretics grew into a body, daring to show their heads, where, before they
lurked for fear of the Apostles: which expression manifestly proves, They began
to make congregations, distinct from the true Church. And, this being evident,
we cannot be troubled with those words going before in Higesippus, which say,
till then the Church was a virgin and uncorrupted; for it is a phrase natural
enough, to call the body corrupted, whose putrified parts are cut off or rotted
away, as those degenerate members were from the Church of God: And so this very
Daille could cite (upon another occasion) these self-same Innovators under the
direct notion of Heretics, when he thought it might better serve his turn.

THE THIRD SURVEY. Of his 3d. and 4th. Chapters, wherein he objects forgery and
corruption of the Fathers works.
AS to the third point, of Forgery, our Monsieur dilates himself exceedingly;
but, how much to the purpose, some few notes will discover. First, he objects
many counterfeit Books, that are not now extant, nor have been these many Ages:
and think you not there must necessarily arise a strange obscurity in our
Controversies, from such forgeries? Then, he complains, that Transcribers have
put wrong names to books, either for the better selling them, or out of
ignorance; and, in some of them, the question is about Authors almost of the
same age: all which is likewise little to the point; for, where the Ages
opinion, and not the particular credit of the Author's learning is required;
the authority of one understanding writer ought generally to weigh as much as
another: and this is the case in controversies; where the sense of the Church,
not that of private Doctors, is the subject of our inquiry.

Neither must I forget his defamation of the ancient Christians, as
counterfeiters of the Sybils Prophesies, out of the calumny of the wicked
Celsey, which nevertheless we see Lactantius stands upon to the Heathens
faces. He omits not, for a notorious piece of forgery, that the Canons of the
Council of Sardica are cited as of the Council of Nice: wherein nothing is more
certain, then that the Canons were true, though not admitted by the Greeks,
who, being called, would not come to the Council. So the question stands merely
upon this, whether they ought to be called the Canons of Nice, being made by a
Council gathered afterward to confirm the former? which the Latins defend,
and the Greeks dislike. Doubtless a main forgery, to be urged by this temperate
man, whose charity, no question, would have winkt at small faults.

Yet because no ordinary satisfaction will content him, though those Popes were
all both commended by the Ages in which they lived, and reputed Saints by the
ensuing Church, and One of them that great Saint Leo, whose Oracles were so
highly esteemed in the Council of Chalcedon: I will briefly set down the case.
The Arian Emperor Constantius (though yet, for fear not declared such)
summoned a General Council of the Eastern and Western Churches, to a Town
called Sardica. There assembled betwixt 3 and 4 hundred Bishops. The Arians,
seeing themselves like to come to the worst, by the number of the Orthodox
party, upon sought pretenses, went to another place, called Philippopolis; where,
making an assembly of their own, they termed it, from the Emperors Summons,
the Council of Sardica: And, partly by their diligence and sending circular
Letters through Christendom, partly by joining with a great faction of
Donatists, but chiefly (as it may be justly believed) by the power of the
Emperors Officers, made the name of the Council of Sardica pass for the
denomination of their Conventicle, both in the East, and through such remote
parts as had not special intelligence of what passed in Sardica. Hence, any
Canons pretended to be ordered at Sardica, were blasted before known: whereupon
it fell out, that the small party which knew the truth, was forced, in their
collections of Canons, to place these next to the Council of Nice (as their
order required) without a name, and as an Appendix of the Council. In this
posture these Popes found them about an hundred years after: and, whether it
was that they were not sufficiently acquainted with the Accident, or whether
they thought the action legitimate, and the ground of it sufficient, they urged
them as Canons of Nice; and, after the matter was examined, bore the Cause, in
force of them, and continued on to posterity still the same denomination.

This is that solemn Forgery he decries with so loud a clamor; and concluds his
vehemence with so notorious a falsehood, that every three-penny Controvertist
can spit in his face. For he says, that even now a great part of Christendom
holds, and it is generally urged by all, that the Popes Authority in Appeals was
first given him by the Council of Nice: whereas, the most ordinary opinion is,
that it is jure divino; and those that look on jus positivum, are so cunning, as
to distinguish the Council of Nice from that of Sardica; and in that of Nice,
seek only a Testimony of what was in use before the Council, not a Gift of
this Authority.

His next accusation concerns certain writings that both the Catholics and
pretenders to Reformation agree to be Counterfeit: which, how little it imports
our Controversy, since neither party grounds any doctrine upon them, needs not
be expressed.

Another sort he counts for Forgery, when Catholics, among themselves, question
certain pieces of ancient Authors; in which case, he still joins himself to
that part of Catholics that refuses to admit such passages for legitimate, and
then immediately charges all the rest who receive them, with downright forgery:
which is the same as to call all men Knaves, that are not of his side; as if no
real and just doubt could be made of Authors by sober and virtuous persons, but
all must be imputed to malice; so that, this exception is plainly a peevish and
shallow cavil: and besides, no ways available to his purpose; since, that
which is in real doubt among Catholics, can be no argument against Heretics.

He that has patience enough to take notice of these qualities in his Chapter
of Forgery, and see that, besides this, he has nothing in it but aerie
discourses, in common, how writings may be corrupted, cannot choose but say --
Movet Cornicula risum, Furtivis nudata coloribus.

And yet suppose all he endeavors were true, in abstracto, there remains still
the application; wherein if he miscarry, instead of pulling down the Fathers,
he lays himself in the dust: for, after never so many Books never so much
disabled, if we can find a Library full of unsuspected and universally
acknowledged Authors, we sufficiently discover the impertinency and
deceitfulness of this manner of proceeding.

Therefore, to prevent this inconvenience, our quaint Discourser raises two
suspicions against the confessed works of Fathers: One of Corruption, the other
of Obscurity. The former he begins from the escapes of Transcribers; which, as
we cannot deny to have some force, if spoken in common, so, applied to
particulars, we shall find little important to our purpose: For, if the
question were of some two or three Sentences spoken by the by, such perhaps
might be suspected, though not justly, without better ground then a bare
surmise; because, where the error of the Transcriber has its amplitude to
happen in one of ten thousand lines, to say it lights just here, is a very weak
conjecture, unless there be more particular causes of jealousy alleged,
(which may apply it to that place,) then follow from this common course: But,
when there are formal and set discourses, or frequent and express passages, to
the same effect and purpose; then this suspicion has no weight at all: and such
is the case betwixt Catholics, and the Pretenders to Reformation.

At the next turn, he would persuade us, that St. Hierome, Ruffinus, and
others, who abridg'd certain Greek works in their translation, did thereby
falsify the Authors; afterward, that the collections of Canons made either by
Greeks or Latins are corruptions, because they omitted such as they disliked or
had no use of: not understanding or dissembling his knowledge, that such Books
are not intended for Histories, to tell us what passed, but Rules for
government, and so to be fitted to the particular occasion; taking what
conduces to the writers purpose, and leaving out such passages as are (though
in themselves good) yet impertinent to his designs. In the same rank are
Liturgies; which being the publik prayers, are subject to be enlarged,
contracted, or changed, according to the devotion of the people and prudence of
the Pastors, as we see daily practiced: and so are better testimonies for
universality, in their districts, then of antiquity. These, therefore, neither
are corruptions, nor make the sense of the Fathers more difficult: for we can
use but so much as we find in them, and so far, they are as authentical as any
other; whilst what is not there cannot be pressd out of them.

After these, he produces some debates between the Latins and Greeks, about
falsifying certain passages; whose quarrels it concerns not me to take up: only
I must note, the brotherly correction he gives the Fathers in these words, thus
did they bandy stiffly one against the other; each of them, as it may be easily
perceived, having much more appearance of reason and truth in their accusation
of their Adversary, then in excusing or defending themselves; which is no less
then a plain condemnation of all, how ever disputable the case be in it self.
Now, how many of such passages mutually objected, justly deserved that
calumniation, and were not, by the fervor of disputation only termed so (being
in themselves but mistakes, and wrong informations) is too long a business for
the brevity I propose to my self.

Yet this also I may observe, not without ground, from Daille himself, that the
true controversy concerning such abuses has been indeed between Catholics and
Heretics, but not Latins and Greeks in common; for the Catholic Greeks still
accused their Heretics of great corruption. And this is reasonable, because
Catholics having always stood for, and relied on Antiquity, always upbraided
and condemned Heretics, as guilty of novelty; it necessarily follows, they
were without question fully persuaded their opinion was the same with the
Fathers, and had a real and true evidence of it: whereas Heretics, not esteeming
Antiquity for it self, but only for fear of scandalizing the generality of
Christians, who are still brought up in a high reverence of it, were bound to
seek those ways that might satisfy as well as deceive the people, without any
inward and hearty respect to the Fathers themselves: a charge this very Author
justifies not to be uncharitably applied to such Innovators; whilst his own
chief endeavors strive to make us think the Fathers are like Epicurus's Gods,
Fine things in themselves, but hung so high, their sound cannot reach us mortals
here below upon Earth. Neither indeed is the case of Ambition much unlike that
of Heresy: for, those who encroach upon publik practices of former Ages, are
forced to use their utmost skill in falsifying all they can, to obscure the
evidence of what passed in the days of their Ancestors.

One other particular will challenge me, if I go on without taking at least some
little notice of it: and it is the Grecians objection about adding this word
Filioque to the Creed of Nicaea: which having insisted on more largly in
another place, I shall pacify with this short answer; Since, it is confessed by
both parties, that the main Creed was made in that Council, and received this
addition, from another, freely and openly avowed for such by the Roman Church:
the question could not be of corruption, (which seems to imply a secret design
of imposing on the world) but of the lawfulness of the Addition.

Now, let us pass to his accusation of later times; where, he complains there
is far more falls play. His first instance is, against certain varieties in the
ancient Fathers; that some Manuscrips or Impressions agree not with others: as
if every one that sets out a Book must have seen all Manuscripts, or else he
corrupts the Ancient Copy. But, that which angers him is, the words omitted or
added are against his tenets; whence he gathers it was no casual escape, but a
deliberate plot of voluntary corruption: but he that will lose so much time as
to take notice how weak and inconsiderable the passages are, even in his own
citations, will easily see this chief proof consists merely in a bold assertion.

I shall therefore rely on my Readers ingenuity, and only cite two or three
examples for a pattern of the rest: As, that the word Petra is changed into
Petrus, in that famous sentence of St. Cyprian, Cathedra una super Petrum
Domini voce fundata; That, in St. Amhrose, some books are separated, which in
other Copies are joined together; that, in St. Peter's life, is omitted a
certain Exhortation, advising his Successors to abstain from secular cares:
Pretenses so slight in themselves, so impertinent to the main cause; that, none
but a petty Politician would have stoopt to such trivial corruptions, nor any
but a wrangling Sophister pretended such childish exceptions.

But, not content with what has been done, he presses us with what would have
been done, if I know not whose counsel had been followed: which is nothing but
the wild Chimera's of a sick brain. Next he is offended that Heretical books
have been forbidden and abolished: as if any could think it reasonable,
sedicious Pamphlets against Kings and States should pass unreprehended in
their dominions; exhortations to Idolatry be permitted among the Jews; or such
blasphemies as pretend to prove Christ an Impostor should be tolerated among
Christians. I wonder calumnies so shallow, so impudent, and of so desperate a
consequence can find patience enough in any person of understanding to read
them; and yet I see great wits strangly applaud them.

The actions, therefore, called by him corruptions, consisting only in such, to
the very end of his fourth Chapter, you will easily perceive that this so well
bodied Chapter also (if the impertinencies with which he lards it were
subtracted) would prove as lean and starved as Pharao's Oxen. Besides, if we
seek to direct his arrow toward the intended scope, this last concerns not the
ancient Fathers; since now, Expurgations are only for Moderns, as anciently
they were only against Heretics. The other objections reach no way to disable
this safe and principal answer, That, notwithstanding all his cavils, there may
still remain a sufficient number of the Fathers writings, pure and incorrupted,
to convince the doctrine of the Catholic Church.

THE FOURTH SURVEY. Of the fifth Chapter; wherein he objects the Fathers
Eloquence; and that, on set purpose, they spoke obscurely.
I Shall pass now to the next Flourish, rather then Argument: where, this bold
unwary man (offering to prove the Fathers are hard to be understood) assigns
those very reasons, that make all other Authors more easily understandable. For
first, what Languages more copious, more regular, and wherein Scholars are
more versed, then Latin and Greek, which are the Fathers Idiomes? Yes, says he,
but few arrive to that perfection in them, as is truly requisite for the exact
managing of Controversies. Be it so: But then, let no others meddle with this
part of Controversies, like Masters, but they; let such on both sides try the
quarrel, whilst others for this part rely on them.

But again he renews his first complaint: how small a number are they that are
fitly qualified to enter the lists in so difficult a combat? I do not fear, if
this Author were asked of France, Holland, and Germany, he would readily
undertake to find twenty of his own side completely furnished for such a
skirmish; and, since our Party is both more extended, enjoys better commodity
for studying, and clearly, by its numerous works, shows it self far more
laborious, He may well allow us at least as many as he promises to produce of
his own: If then, betwixt both, may be found at the same time, forty
sufficiently trained for the encounter, what need we ask any more? there will
not want enough besides, capable to prosit themselves out of their Labors.

He proceeds to help himself upon St. Hieroms speech against nimium diserti,
and some faults of weak interpreters: And presumes, the places he brings clear:
though my sight is not quick enough to perceive it of any, but one of St.
Austin cont. Adimant. which he clears himself, by adding to the Fathers Text
cum signum daret corporis sui, the word only in his interpretation. Then he
urges, Men bring obscure places to interpret Scripture: but the unhappiness is,
his instances are of his own party.

He presses, that the Fathers, before the rising of Heresies, spoke ambiguously
and doubtfully, and that which seemed to be against their own certain sense and
meaning; as he exemplify's out of St. Athanasius and St. Basil, concerning some
Fathers before the Arian Heresy. But this Wel-meaner forgets that (at least in
his examples) he brings the salve with the stroke: for, confessing 'twas showed
to be against the writers meaning, he implicitly tells us, either there were
other precedent or subsequent expressions in the same place, which made the
doubtful words plain; or, at least so evident passages of the same Author, in
other places, that there could be no doubt of his meaning, in the ambiguous
ones. And, truly if we observe this gentle Sophisters discourse, we shall easily
see, he imagines, that proofs from the Fathers ought to be brought by the
popping out of half a Sentence, and never regard either what goes before or
follows after; as, by the instances we have already examined, you may perceive
is the reformed fashion of citing Scriptures: Whereas, the Books of Fathers,
being large and ample, allow greater Carreers to those who run matches in them.

He adds farther, that the Fathers delivered some things on set purpose,
obscurely. If his meaning be, they expressed their thoughts in certain occasions,
shortly or not fully; what danger is there in that? We know well all arguments
drawn from them must be made out of what they have, not what they might have
written: and so, the erudition he spends, in proving this, had been better
employed to show the height of those Mysteries the Fathers saw just cause to
conceal, then in cavilling at their compendious expressions, which suited best
with their circumstances. And certainly it is most agreeable to reason, that the
mind of such as wrote before the Controversy began, should be judged by those
Fathers, who (for the easier defense of truth and fuller confutation of the
Innovators) were forced to break the Seal of secrecy: and, who (being their
immediate Disciples) without doubt must necessarily best know their minds, and
consequently were most able to repeat the lessons they had so lately learnt of
their Masters.

He afterward reckons up certain Grammar weaknesses of some Fathers, and the
excellencies of others, and, out of both, draws venom to his comb: So that,
whether a Father write down right natural construction, or (by abilities of
explicating himself) polish his style, all breeds darkness to this great
Illuminator (or Calumniator rather) of the Fathers: Nay, the very vices they
cry out against in evil Preachers, must be the faults of the Princes of
antiquity, by this Interpreters benevolence. But he knocks all on the head, by
the example of St. Hierom; who, having related what had passed in him during
his sleep, in another place defends it was but a dream: And can you believe,
the Objector was awake, when he fumbled out this piece of impertinency? Yet he
urges it for a convincing evidence: and, bearing a special good will to St.
Hierom, he very kindly persuades himself, that the Stories of Malchus, St. Paul
the Eremit, and St. Hillarion, were Romances; the first, because his maligners
calumniated it; the other two, (though never questioned) because he showed wit
in them.

It seems too, he would beget in his Reader this dutiful conceit of the
Fathers, that they were wont to deliver Romances for Articles of Faith;
concluding with this desperate and ungracious demand, Who shall assure us, that
they have not made use of these same Arts, in their discourses concerning the
Eucharist? and afterward renews again the like impudent quaere, discovering
too openly the profaneness of his heart; as if he suspected the Fathers might,
perhaps, have cozened the people, with some falls glasses, to magnify the power
of Prelates.

Next, he objects, the Fathers often affirm or deny obsolutely, what they mean
only comparatively: and, if you will not believe him, he produces examples out
of St. Hierom, St. Chrysostom, Amphilochius and Asterius. But, St. Hierom is
plainly, in the very words comparative: The rest are both explicated to the
same sense, by the bordering Ages, who might easily know the practice of their
lives in that controversy, and in his very citation, have nothing capable of
being urged against that explication; besides, the phrase it self is
favorable. What great difficulty is there to pick out the English of this
sentence, Praemia pudicitiae nuptiae possidere non possunt, etc. with the rest,
too trivial to be repeated?

He makes a second review of the Fathers speeches, concerning some Heresy not
yet debated, upon another design; to show, that while they speak against one
Heresy, they seem to fall into the contrary. But there is no new difficulty
brought, unless it be of those terms (...) and (...), both which this Author
abuses by a wrong interpretation: the first he renders, let fall in heat of
disputation, instead of giving it the true sense, which Englishes it thus,
supposed for disputation sake (for so it is contradistinguish'd to (...), to
which St. Basil opposes it:) the later he explicates done or said by
dispensation, whereas the proper signification is, by discretion; St.
Athanasius's meaning being that he deliverd what was fittest in that occasion,
and for the person to whom, or in whose name he spoke; for his words give us
some hints inclining to either of those senses, that He intended only to
personate an objection against himself, or else to draw some answer out of
another, without engaging to declare his own judgment.

But it is worthy our pains to look into the sweet interpretation he makes, and
compare it with the Greek which himself puts in the margin: he reads therefore
thus, (...); that is, men ought not maliciously to take (or understand) and
draw it to be his proper meaning, what one writes or does (as now its called) ad
hominem; for, (...) signifies according to the art and understanding to apply
every thing to the particular circumstances which offer themselves.

Lastly, he tells us, the use of words is changed since Antiquity; but specifies
so simply, that without question he hoped none but blind men would look into
his book: as if the World now thought, that Papa signifies not a spiritual
Authority, but a temporal Garbo; that Confessio signifies some outward
ceremony; Missa, all the prayers now used, etc.

THE FIFTH SURVEY. Of the six Chapters following; wherein he objects wilful
deceit to the Fathers.
HItherto our Orator has opened those Pleas, which, in a manner, of necessity
followed that multitude of books the Fathers have written: and would, if we
could believe him, persuade us, Nothing is to be learned or understood out of
Books; but every three words will never fail to have some reason or other to
make them so obscure, that no light or satisfaction can be derived out of them.

Nor is all this enough, unless he gives them a touch of wilfulness: which he
does upon three Heads. First, from their writing Commentaries: where he notes,
that many times they recite others opinions, without naming the parties; whence
he would infer that, out of their Commentaries, nothing can be gathered
concerning their own judgment, in the point they handle.

I cannot deny, but such kind of commenting is sometimes used: nor do I
understand why it should be reprehensible, to propose to the Reader choice
judgments of diverse eminent learned Persons, even of Heretics sometimes, at
least in St. Hieroms days, when there were not so many Catholic writers, that
all good explications might be found in them, though this honest man (who,
otherwise is no enemy of liberty in Authors, and opinions) be, at present, for
his interest, offended with it. But, we can come to no assurance of the Authors
mind; what then? If we do not see directly what he inclines to, (though
ordinarily some liking is showed more to one opinion then another;) yet we may
know, he proposes all interpretations for the reader to choose as he pleases;
which implys, that he saw no apparent inconvenience in any.

But, why is this manner of commenting made a calumny against all the rest,
being a particular kind and not much used? why brought for a prejudice against
such places where only one opinion is mentioned? why is St. Hieroms indefinite
doctrine (which imports no more then that such is the nature of some
Commentaries) turned to an Universal, as if none should do otherwise? Let him
reflect upon Beza's or other of his own parties glosses; and see whether they
do not sometimes explicate Scripture in a way equally obnoxious to the same
exceptions. I deny not, but St. Hierom, (once surpised by St. Austin in a weak
explication upon a passage to the Galathians) excuses himself by a confession,
that his memory being confused, he had in that place mingled his own opinion
with other men's, without distinction: But, is it not an excellent piece of
honesty, out of one only particular defect of one Father, to draw an
imputation, not upon him alone, but on the whole Senate of Antiquity? And yet,
this thread runs quite through this captious Objectors Book; whose labor is,
out of a mole in her face, to prove Venus was not fair.

Then he procesds to tax St. Ambrose and St. Hillary, for borrowing doctrine of
Origin, without citing the original: as if Virgil should have still named
Homer, in all the places wherein he imitated him; or Torquato Tasso told his
reader, which Stanza's were his own invention, which translated out of others.

His second discontent is, that, when a passage of Holy Scripture is
acknowledged by the Fathers to be capable of diverse interpretations, yet they
will presume to use that sense only which is convenient to their Auditory,
omitting the others which, in those circumstances, make nothing to their
purpose. The like distaste he takes against them, when speaking of a Mystery
that has two parts, they do not still make mention of both: as, since Christ is
God and Man, he will by this rule be offended, that a Father should style him
God, without expressing in the same breath (though altogether unnecessary to
his Theme) that he was Man; as if we could not, sometimes upon occasion, omit
what we never intend to deny, but were still bound to clog our discourse with
all the jealous cautions of a Lawyers Indentures: though indeed, he seems only
troubled, when this happens concerning the blessed Sacrament: for then, it
utterly disappoints the force of those Arguments he so highly esteems.

Nor does his peevishness stay at these smaller Peccadillo's; but, to fill up
the measure of his anger and farther enforce the accusation he sees himself
engaged in, his bold hand trembles not plainly to insinuate, that the Fathers
are in plain terms downright cheaters: contriving these omissions and
ambiguity's, not by wisdom and pastoral prudence, but by cunning and
hypocritical policy, with a malicious intention to delude their auditory. But
these are little familiar strokes, and kind expressions of his devotion and
respect to the Fathers, and the Church in whose communion they lived, and Him
in whose precious death both They and It are founded.

His last crimination confists merely in a repetition of what we discussed in
the former Chapter, about the Fathers speeches ad hominem: yet, because he has
a little changed his temper, we must observe what he says. First, being in a
kind humor, he now imputes it only to excess of passion in the good old men,
(as if the former had been out of malice) which made them speak they knew not
what: whereas, the Ages after them, explicating such passages of their
Predecessors, attribute it to deep wisdom and solid learning. Secondly, he
shows us, out of St. Hierom, how all Authors use two ways of disputing; one
direct and demonstrative or demonstration like, another Topical and tentative:
but to what purpose, more then to form an aerie apprehension, in the readers
head, of some strange fallacy's and abuses ordinarily practiced by those
ancient Maintainers of Christianity, I understand not.

Yet, there remains about two lines of Latin; which his juggling art has
obscured into a necessity of a short explication: and they are, that interdum
coguntur loqui non quod sentiunt, sed quod necesse est dicant contra ea quae
dicunt gentiles, which is as much as to say, they are forced sometimes not to
contradict the Gentiles propositions, that they may impugn them with better
advantage. As when they seem to admit the truth of some Oracles, and apply
their discourse only to show how such extraordinary actions might be performed
by the Devil: whereas perhaps, in their inward thoughts, they believed there
were really none true, or, if any, that they were by Gods interposing his own
power, to the Gentiles confusion, as he did in the apparition of Samuel to Saul,
the Witch not being able to raise up souls by the single force of her charms.

One new demand he urges, which seems and indeed is strangly impertinent,
Whether it be a part of our Faith, to visit the Holy Land: as if those words of
St. Hierom, adorasse ubi steterunt pedes Domini, pars fidei est, signified
truly, that to exercise adoration were an Article of Faith; then which, what
can be spoken more sencelesly? whereas, the true meaning is plain and obvious,
that it is a duty of Faith, or an action proceeding from Faith, or conformable to
Faith; in which sense, it is impossible to make any rational opposition against
it.

I must not end without taking notice of a goodly piece of wit in
mis-translating a passage of St. Hierom; wh entreats his reader to judge his
meaning out of his whole discourse, and non in uno atque eodem libro criminari,
me diversas sententias protulisse, not to accuse me, that I am of diverse minds
in the self-same Book, which this good natured Interpreter explicates, and not
presently to accuse any Author of blockishness, for having delivered in one and
the same Book two contrary opinions. Nevertheless, himself has been, I will not
say, so blockish, (for of that there is too little cause to suspect him) but so
slight and precipitate, as to put the very Latin words in the Margin, which is,
as near as can be, to contradict himself in the same breath.

In four ensuing Chapters he delivers us certain notes; which are in substance
true, but bring not much obscurity or other disablement to the way of proving
Religion by the writings of Fathers: and if they did, he and his new party
remembering they wholly refuse the judgment of their Ancestors, need not trouble
themselves; but stand upon their exceptions, and leave the Catholics to make
their arguments sound and free from all legitimate repuls. For this is the law
of Logic and reasoning, that the Actor should have liberty to frame his
opposition (so it be according to the rules of discourse) as himself thinks
best.

With this caveat I might justly omit these four Chapters; were it not that in
his eighth he has a note of remark out of Tertullian, as requiring only that
the Rule of Faith continue in its proper form and order, Caeterum, manente
forma ejus in suo ordine, quantum libet quaeras and tractes, and omnem
libidinem curiositatis effundas: to which he adds Ruffinus his Apology for
Origin, as of the same opinion; and seems to take it for the practice of the
present Church: And truly, I think with great reason.

For, as far as I understand Religion, Nothing makes an Heretic, but to recede
from the known doctrine of the present Church, which she practices as derived
from Christ, and whereof she knows no other beginning: He that is not conscious
to himself of this, is no Heretic before God; and he that carries that guilt
in his breast is (...) whatever seeming reasons he has for himself: and whoever
teaches any point contrary to this tradition, not knowing such contrariety,
teaches indeed Heresy, but is no Heretic: Let them agree in this chief
Principle or Rule of Faith, and the rest will be only material errors in them.
But, the cause they perversely defend is inconsistent with any such submission:
their own Consciences and the evidence of the fact stigmatising their unlawful
breach from the universal doctrine of the Church, from which they rebelliously
separated themselves.

As to the Fathers opinion, concerning the necessity of the Eucharist for
Infants, he must give us leave to think the Council of Trent was better
informed then he; as is, in the precedent Apology briefly discussed. That, St.
Ignatius calls him a murderer of Christ who fasts Saturdaies, signifies no more
then that he does an action which of its nature testifies our Savior died
twice, that is, upon Saturday as well as Friday: though this man of truth in his
first chapter vouchsafes not to admit any writings of St. Ignatius for true.
The aspersion laid upon St. Hierom, St. Ambrose, annd Tertullian, as using
Tragical expressions, without occasion, is but a gap to Libertinage and
vilifying of virtue; their sayings being true, though this Reformer dislike
them.

His urging, that the modern points of Controversy are not resolved in former
Creeds or Councils, is of little importance: for every one knows subsequent
Councils have always been so far from thinking it unlawful to add to the
former, that such additions are the very business and end of their assembling:
and yet (as the seventh Council testified) they confirmed all that was either
in Scripture or Tradition, by binding us to these two pillars of truth.

He is farther troubled, that diverse Provinces should out of St. Hierom's
authority, esteem the commands they find have been in use among their
forefathers, to be institutions derived from the Apostles: as if either the
Apostles might not have left diverse customs, in diverse places, for some
practices of less concernment; or that, in St. Hieroms time, it was so hard to
know when a custom of importance started, if it began since the Apostles, which
could be scarce three hundred years.

In the last Chapter of his first Book he thinks it impossible to know the
belief of the ancient Church, either universal or particular, touching any
point of controversies now debated among us. And truly, as he understands the
question, he seems to have some reason: for, he professes that all the positive
evidence out of Antiquity comes short of satisfying him, unless we can make
good that no one did in those days secretly hold the contrary; a proof that
certainly none but a mad man would either expect of another, or himself attempt.

Nevertheless, this he exacts of us, and therefore cites St. Hierom for the
equality of Priests and Bishops: though he writes expressly against it, and the
place he cites clearly speaks of the confusion of the names of Presbyter and
Episcopus. Likewise, when St. Hierom testify's some Bishops held with
Vigilantius, he thinks that sufficient to make St. Hieroms side not universal:
as if Bishops could not be Heretics. He adds, St. Hierom, by his passionate
speeches against Vigilantius, derogats from the authority of his testimony. I
believe him, if he speaks of his own party, who are easily persuaded to
diminish the credit of Fathers: but not, if he mean among Catholics, who think
the modern Heretics no better then Vigilantius and his followers.

Thus have we briefly passed over his first Book.

THE SIXTH SURVEY. How the Authority of Fathers is infallible.
Yet these last five Chapters and the whole next Book will put us to the pains
of explicating what Authority Catholics give the Fathers, toward decision of
controversies; and how they are to argue out of them, if they intend to
conclude any opposite opinion an Heresy.

To be as short and clear in this point as I can; I shall begin with some
propositions wherein I believe, all sides agree. First, that the Fathers, as
particular Authors, might err; and no one's single testimony, how eminent
soever, is sufficient to make a necessary Verity, upon the sole account of
being his judgment. Secondly, that seldom or never, in any controversy, the
Fathers, cited for one part, are so many, as to make the doctrine delivered a
matter of Faith, out of this precise reason that it is their opinion: For,
though their multitude should arrive to the full sum of three hundred, yet it
exceeds not the number of Heretics, nay, even Heretik Bishops, who unanimously
conspired to oppose the Catholic Faith. If then, all certainty of things
contingent and fallible, in their individuals, depend upon universality; and
the number we discourse of, though great, yet considered in its own immediate
force, make but a particular: it clearly follows, No question can be evidently
convinced by the pure numerosity of produced Fathers. Thus far I conceive both
parties are bound to consent.

My third proposition therefore is, If a certain number of Fathers be sufficient
to convince the universality of an opinion in the Church; how little soever
that number be, it is strong enough to support an Article of Faith: not because
it is their opinion, but the Churches; attested by them to be the Faith of the
Church, and by the Church to be Christ's. And thus remains declared what
Authority Catholics attribute to the Fathers in reference to deciding
Controversy's.

The next point is, about the exercise of this Authority: how a Catholic
writer may, by the testimony of Fathers, conclude the general Faith of the
Church, and, consequently, the infallibility of the point controverted. For
which we must lay these grounds. First, that it has always been the nature of
the Catholic Church, to decline communion with those Churches she esteemed
erroneons in any material point; as, Idolatry, Superstition, and the like, upon
which pretenses, our modern presumers for Reformation have separated themselves
from the present Catholic Church: wherefore, if there be convincing testimonies,
that any one particular Church (so known and considerable that the neighboring
Provinces must needs take notice of its public customs) embraces any doctrine
or practice, yet remains still peaceably in communion with the Universal; it is
thereby convinced the whole Catholic Church held the same not to be Idolatrous,
Superstitious, etc. If then the point be of such a nature, that one part of the
contradiction must necessarily be received, and the other rejected, it
unavoydably follows, the whole Church in that Age was of the same judgment with
the particular one.

Nor is the evidence of this proposition built upon some scrap of an ancient
Writer mis-interpreted, as our Adversaries would infer the contrary from three
lines of Hegesippus; but upon the essential notion of the Church, which is to
be the conserver of Christ's doctrine, upon the whole body of Ecclesiastical
History, which contains nothing but either the propagation of the faith or the
expulsion of those that would corrupt it; And lastly, upon the universality of
Christian writers, whose profession and business it has always been to
instruct the Church in the doctrine of Christ and oppose all abuses that offered
to insinuate themselves under the name of reformation, or whatever other
specious mask Heresy has put on, to cover the ilfavordness of her face.

And now we may safely proceed to the second ground, that if the testimony of
Fathers convince the quiet possession of any doctrine in one age, it concludes
the same of all ages that are known to communicate with it: which is, in
effect, with all precedent and subsequent Ages whom either that acknowledges,
or who acknowledge that for their Teacher and Mistress. This consequence from
the former principle is so evident, that I may boldly, yet without presumption
infer, if we can prove one Age, we prove all.

But to make it plainer: let me borrow out of our Adversaries ingenuity, that
the same doctrine has endured these thousand years; which restrains our
controversy only to the first six hundred: and that common sense cannot say
Popery was rank in the sixth Age, but it must have been well grown in the
fifth; which will still contract our strife, to the compass of four hundred
years: whereof, three were undoubtedly acknowledged Parents and Mistresses of
the fourth, and the fourth of two or three following; one of which is confessed,
to be universally overrun with Popery. So that, we need no more pains, but
only to prove that some one Age of the first six hundred years embraced any
doctrine (of a nature substantial and considerable as is above expressed) to
convince all the rest of the same belief: else the Adversary must show the
latter Age disavowing the faith of their Ancestors, and anathematizing it as
heretical, and in the same or equivalent terms, as our late Reformers cry out
against the Catholic unity, or Catholics against their division. For, if the
younger Ages reverence and plead conformity with the ancienter: it is impossible
they should have changed any doctrine of importance or necessity.

My third ground is, that when we speak of the Faith of the Church, we intend
not to say, No single person may think otherwise or be ignorant of it, and yet
live bodily and exteriourly in the communion of that Church: but we speak of
the professed and public belief of all, both Clergy and Laity which meet at
Gods service in such a Church: As all that meet at Charanton are supposed to
agree in the Articles, which the Kings Edicts permit to be held by the
pretenders to Reformation; Yet I believe there are few Englishmen who consent
to all, though they resort thither: So that, by this position, it may stand
with the general or universal faith of one part of the contradiction, that some
few maintain the opposite Judgment: By these three grounds, you will find most
of his doubts and pretended difficulties, in the five last chapters, taken
away, and the possibility of demonstrating a point out of the Fathers rendered
very apparent and practicable: wherefore we have now a little leisure to shake
out his other bundle of Rags, and see whether we can espy any thing, there,
that may entangle a weak Divine.

THE SEVENTH SURVEY. Of the four first Chapters of his second Book: wherein he
pretends, The Fathers gave wrong notions of the Faith of the Church; and that
they spoke not like Judges.
THis Chapter he begins very modestly, and says, the Fathers testimonies of the
Churches Faith are not always true: His first example is in that question,
Whether our soul comes by creation or from our Parents; in which, St. Hierom
brings the verdict of the Churches against Ruffinus: but it is evident, this
objection fails, because we doubt not some one or few learned men may hold
against the tenet of the Church they live in.

His second exception he cites out of Johannes Thessalon, whom he makes in his
translation, say, the Church held Angels had subtle and aerie bodies; but in
his marginal Greek (a language few understand, and so not many are like to
discover his art) there is no such thing: only this, that the Church knows
Angels to be intelligent creatures, but not whither they are incorporeal or
have subtle bodies.

His third instance is, where Petavius reprehends St. Epiphanius, for saying,
It was an Apostolical Tradition to meet thrice a week to communicate: I doubt
wrongfully; For what probability can there be, that some Apostle should not
have left such a Custom in some Province, if it were on foot in St. Epiphanius
his time? besides, this Petavius is noted for an easy censurer of his betters;
nor does the matter deserve any farther inspection.

The next he borrows from the same Author, against Venerable Bede; and it is a
mere equivocation, upon the ambiguity of this word fides: which may signify an
Historical persuasion, or a Traditional certitude; in which last sense Petavius
took it, whereas Venerable Bede pronounced it in the former.

His second Chapter tells us, the Fathers confess they are not to be believed
upon thsir own bare words. Where I must entreat my Reader, to observe, that, If
the Fathers he brings speak of one or few, we acknowledge they are not to be
trusted on their word; and so, have no controversy with him; But, if he would
make them speak of the whole Collection, he cites nothing to the purpose; but
all he brings, reach no farther then the first sense; and have no opposition
with the saying of others, who command us to follow the doctrine and even the
words of our Ancestors. He is offended with Sozomen, for saying, None of the
Ancients ever affirmed, the Son of God had any beginning of his generation;
considering certain passages of theirs, which yet himself has confessed before,
that St. Athanasius, Basil, and others have cleared from any such sense.

He calumniats an excellent place of Vincentius Lyrinensis, explicating what
the universality of Fathers means, and how their sentence is of force. His
first quarrel is, that Lyrinensis requirs, they must have lived and died both
for doctrine and manners, in the communion of the Catholic Church; which, he
says, cannot be known, unless first we are sure their doctrine was sound: Not
seeing alas, that their living and dying with reputation of Sanctity, gives
them this honorable prejudice, To be esteemed, both for life and doctrine,
sincere and unsuspected Catholics, til the contrary be proved.

His second quarrel is against the number Lyrinensis assigns to be, al or the
greatest part: which certainly is meant of Authors then extant, who had written
in some age before the controversy arose; whereof, such a number as may make us
understand what was the belief of that Age, is sufficient; all the rest being
ad abundantiam. For it is plain, Lyrinensis held clearly the Catholic opinion,
that the Church never perished; and consequently, the Faith of one Age was,
with him, the faith of all. But, this good guesser would persuade us no such
evidence can be had; and instead of proof, makes this wild conjecture, that for
ought he knows the greatest part of the Fathers was of the contrary mind to
those we have extant: which is just such an argument, as if one should suppose
that were all the Roman Writers extant, perhaps the greatest part would tell us,
Pompey overthrew Caesar, and that the Roman Empire was always after governed
by a Senate and Tribuni plebis, til the Goths overran it.

His third Exception is against those conditions, That the Fathers must have
said or testified such a truth clearly, often, and constantly; which he thinks
impossible to be found: but let him leave that to the Actors. He therefore
rather chooses to fide with St. Austin: but what says he? He tells Julian the
Pelagian, Puto tibi eam partem or bis sufficere debere, in qua primum
Apostolorum suorum voluit Dominus gloriosissimo Martyrio coronari; this, after
he had cited the testimonies of only Latin Fathers: But when he had cited
Fathers of both Churches, he argues thus: Si Episcopalis Synodus ex toto orb
congregaretur, mirum si tales possent illic facile tot sedere, quia nec isti
uno tempore fuerunt; sed fideles and multis excellentiores, paucos
dispensatores suos Deus per diversas aetates, temporum, locorumque distantias,
sicut ei placet atque expediri judicat, ipse dispensat. Hos itaque de aliis
atque aliis temporibus atque Regionibus ob Orient and Occidente congregatos
vides, etc. In which Discourse St. Austin taking for a principle, that the
Writers in any age are ordinarily of the most eminent for learning, and indeed
of so high a degree, that we cannot expect many such at the same time,
concludes the consent of Fathers, which he had cited, more assured and
satisfactory then a General Council: Now, what apprehension he had of a General
Council, is well known to any, who has made a little acquaintance with that
Saints writings.

Fain also would this pious man fix the slander, upon Vincentius Lyrinensis, of
being a Semi-Pelagian, out of far fetched surmises; which I pardon him, because
that Father sits very hard upon his and his brethren-Separatists skirts.

In the ensuing chapter his pretense is to show the Fathers did not write like
Judges sitting upon a Bench to give sentence; a cavil which neither any will
dispute with him, nor is to his purpose: But, by the pursuit it appears, he
only ranged about for an occasion to vilify the Fathers, by citing or
publishing a catalogue of such weakness as he had espyd in them. The first he
notes, is of Have they used in their works; the next some mistakes in
Chronology or History, whereof one I cannot omit, because he lays it upon them
all generally, That Nilus was one of the Rivers mentioned to water Paradise:
against which he calls for witness Scaliger and Petavius; the former of whom I
cannot blame* seeing he was not born to reverence the Fathers; the other in
this confirms the censuring humor before spoken of in him: But, for the
opinion it self, it is very true, as may appear in the Appendix to
Institutiones Peripateticae.

Afterward he nibbles at their Philosophy and Grammar; then, accuses their
weak memories; lastly, quarrels with their Allegorical explications. Surely, if
he had found an exact history of their lives, he would have chid some of them
for wanting good Voices, or being but indifferent Musicians, or not having
learnt in the French Academies to dance, fence, and complement a la mode.

THE EIGHTH SURVEY. Of the two last Chapters of his second Book: wherein he
says many Fathers have agreed in the same Errors; and objects certain vanities
between the Ancient and Modern Church.
IN his fourth Chapter he proposes, that the Fathers have not only erred
singly, but whole Troops of them together: which though it be nothing to the
purpose, as not touching the precise point controverted betwixt us, since the
Fathers authority is from their concurrence in attesting an universal Belief as
witnesses, and not in delivering their Judgment as Doctors; Yet has our Gallant
bestir'd himself notably in this point, because his true intention was to take
all reverence from the Fathers, though he cunningly with a smooth tongue
professes the contrary. But he has another piece of legier-de-main, very proper
to abuse an unwary Reader; For he neither distinguishes the quality of errors,
whither in Faith, Philosophy, or History, nor their degree, and so makes the
good silly people of his Sect conceive, every mistake of any Father an error,
and every error a gross one; knowing that, when he mentions the word error in
relation to the Fathers, all his Hugonots presently imagine it to be in doctrine,
and great enough to condemn and forsake them. Besides, he never thinks of
explicating what many signify's in respect to the number of the Fathers, so
that, three or four may pass with him for a multitude.

Another juggling trick he has to cast any shadow of words into such a posture,
that they seem clearly convinced of error. As, if a Father say, God governs
the World by Angels; he will make it sound, as if God knew not what was done here
below. Then, of his own accord he will take for granted diverse positions, as if
they were confessed errors, which are first to be proved such; as, That some
souls are kept in Receptacles till the day of Judgment, etc. The length of the
Chapter and its confusedness in not distinguishing private errors from
public, and the multitude of his mistakes, favorable to his own side, deter
me from spending my time upon the false proofs of a confessed, or at least not
controverted Conclusion: For truly, if I would take the pains, I doubt not to
make appear, the greatest part of them are as weak as malicious, toward the
scandalizing those great Persons he calumniat's.

But because St. Hierom is accounted by the Sectaries their special friend, and
one that spares not to give them the truth home; this grateful man in
counterchange, spends four whole leaves in his commendation, as you may
understand by his general judgment upon him: telling us that the course he
ordinarily uses in his disputations, is wresting the words of his Adversarys
quite besides the Authors intention; and framing to himself such a sense as is
not at all to be found in them: and then fiercly encountering this Giant of his
own making, mixing withal base abusive Language and biting girds, and the like
tart expressions borrowed from Profane Authors, in which kind of learning he
was indeed very excellent. Of this modest censure he pretends no less then one
example for proof, and that far short of justifying his bold imputation. The
mischance was that in a certain controversy betwixt St. Austin and him, he
mistook at first St. Austins meaning, from whence this charitable Interpreter
suspects he never dealt any better with others; and after the sentence so
impudently pronounced, rely's upon this bare suspicion as a sufficient evidence.

Then he proceeds to another game he plays very much at, called calumny, and
charges the same Father first about Gods knowing small things: but it is
apparent out of the very citation that St. Hieroms intention is not of
speculative knowledge, but particular providence, of which St. Paul said*
nunquid Deo cura est de bobus? His second instance contradicts his former; For
it is, that Saints are everywhere; which is spoken of their knowledge, not
corporal presence: Christ, by whose company, they are pretended to be
everywhere, being so by his sight and knowledge, not by his presence corporally:
Which this Friend saw was contrary to the former, yet would not make use of it
to reconcile, but aggravate the errors. Thirdly he accuses him to say, that
the Souls of the blessed Saints and Angels are subject to sin: but cites not a
syllable, except for Angels, which so expressed, is an undeniable truth, being
no more then that Angels by envy, became Devils.

But his irreconcilable quarrel is against marriage and what St. Hierom writes
of Ladies respects to their families: that they did not marry the second time,
he interprets as intended against marriage it self. I confess, as concerning
the act of marriage or appetite to it, he says more what is true, then perhaps
what is convenient to be spoken before Persons that should not be dehorted from
a thing so necessary in diverse cases, wherein the temperance, not use is
honorable. He goes on and now charges this old severe Father with a scandalous
doctrine indeed, an intolerable heresy, wherein all true Reformed stomachs are
fundamentally concerned; for he accuses him to say in express terms that eating
of flesh (a most wholesome custom) was abolished by Jesus Christ; but, citing
neither words nor place, and afterward drawing it in by a falls consequence,
makes me suspect it is an arrant forgery. Again he accuses him of saying oaths
were unlawful: but in truth the words of the very Scripture are harder, then
St. Hieroms. The next error is, that he thought the validity of consecration
depended on the sanctity of the Priest: but his words are so common they easily
receive explication. Again, he is offended with him for denying faintly, that
the blessed eat in Heaven.

Lastly, he accuses him of abusing St. Paul; and first of contradicting him
about the inscription of the Athenian Altar: because he says there was more in
the inscription, then the Apostle mentioned; Secondly that he said, he
understood more then he could explicate. Thirdly that to the Galathians he
spoke ordinary discourses, because they were not capable of higher. Of these
three the first had no harm in it, since all the Evangelists do not cite the
whole title of our Saviors Cross, the two latter Dignify a great commendation
of St. Paul among wise men and such as understand there is any other learning
besides well speaking.

I must not pass without one word of Ruffinus too: because our Reformers
account of so fundamental a passage of his, in the interpretation of the Canons
of the Council of Nice touching the Popes authority: And this great Patron of
theirs calls, him an arrant wooden Statue; A pitiful thing; One that had scarce
any reaon in what he said, and yet much less dexterity in defending himself.
Must not then what is grounded upon his property and excellency of language, be
a perfect foundation for a point of faith? By these you may guess how he has
dealt with others, which were too long to examine.

Approaching to the end of his Chapter, he specify's some errors unanimously
held by a just number of the Fathers. First, that of the Chiliasts; an
objection already answered in the former part of this discourse. The second is,
the reservation of souls from heaven till the day of Judgment; which is refuted
in a little Treatise entitled, De medio animarum statu: The third concerns
rebaptization of Heteticks; which also is cleared above: only I cannot forget
how he would insinuate that St. Basil held it, after the decision of the
Council of Nice; but his mincing the matter, by saying in a manner, shows it is
only a largess of his good will, and not any evidence he brings. Next he urges
fiercly a point of Chronology; and then, the Angels having bodies; and after
that, the Angels falling in love with women: three points not very material.
Then again, he repeats the necessity of the Eucharist to Infants; but brings in
rather testimonies of the practice, which is not in question, then of the
necessity, which is: And lastly, that all the Greek Fathers and a great part of
the Latins held Gods foresight of men's good and bad works to be the cause of
predestination; but his authority depending only on modern Writers saying so,
whose diligence in examining their meanings is not known, it might as wisely
have been omitted.

In this next Chapter, he intends to prove that some Fathers have strongly
maintained, against others, some opinions in matters of very great importance;
which is but one half of what follows from, or rather is directly contained in,
the conclusion of the former Chapter, and therefore, not denied by us nor useful
to him: which was the cause why he would not there add (though the place were
very proper) that they defended such opinions against the whole current of
others, and of the Church. But to make a seeming new argument, he left out
this, and expressed himself generally, like a true deceiver, that some defended
against others: and to give his discourse the better relish, he begins his
antipast with calumniating Bessarion, making him say that the Fathers opinions
never clash one against another, touching the points of our Religion (for a
Person so learned could not be ignorant, that some error might be found in a
Father against the common consent of the rest:) But, his meaning was, that not
so many could dissent, as were able to make a party against the general
agreeing judgment of the rest; neither does our Informer seek to prove the
contrary.

In his first instance, if he had put in, that Justin, Irenaeus and Tertullian
had held the Millenary Heresy, against the communalty of Christians of their
Age, he had ruined his own proof; which, nevertheless he might have done out of
Justinus, (as is declared) and indeed was obliged to do, if he intended to
proceed pertinently. But what should I pain my self in a question not
controverted? Only I cannot omit a subtlety he uses against St. Cyril and
Theodoret. St. Cyril had said, The Holy Ghost was proper to the Son. Theodoret
distinguishes his words, saying, if he means by proper proceeding as well as
the Son, or, of the same nature, so he allows the saying: but, if he means that
he proceeded from or by the Son only (both which terms were then in use; for
this and nothing else can be signified by proper added to from or by) then he
condemned St. Cyrils doctrine. Now our sly Interpreter would make Theodoret
condemn this saying, that the Holy Ghost proceeded from the Son.

His last reason is one that makes all the rest impertinent; and shows they
were dilated only to vilify the Saints and the Church, whose Crown they are,
and the Founder of the Church, who glorified himself in Them and Her: It Is,
that the Church of Rome and Protestants agree in the position he seemed to
labor at so hard; what need or occasion had he then to rave into the Fathers
about a point wherein there is not the least difference among us?

Next, he excepts at our Controvertists, for alleging the Fathers against
them; since we know they receive not the Fathers. I answer, there is by nature
planted in all honest dispositions, such a respect to their Ancestors; that,
though the malicious part of their congregation, and this Sophister in chief,
cry down Antiquity, as loud as they can, yet shall they never be able wholly to
root out of the hearts and consciences of the generality of Christians, that
esteem and reverence which they naturally bear in their Breasts toward the
Fathers of Christianity; So that our Controvertists cite writings of those
ancient and holy Doctors, not in reference to the ensoured and barbarous party
of Heretics; but for their sakes, who yet retain some spirits of goodness and
Christian humanity in them.

Then he brings diverse sayings of Moderns to prove the Authorities of Fathers
are not irresistible, especially in the interpretation of Scripture; among
which one something insolent. Afterward, he reckons the varieties betwixt the
ancient and present Church; some in Ceremonies, some in Discipline, and some, as
he pretends, in Belief: these later we have touched before; the two former, for
the most part, we make no difficulty to acknowledge, since the prudential
disposure of such discretionary points falls clearly within the verge of the
Churches jurisdiction.

But here I particularly invite the Ey of the serious Reader, to observe how
maliciously he corrupts the Council of Trent, in two very considerable
passages: one, where he says, It anathematizes whoever shall deny that Bishops
are a higher Order then Priests: whereas in the Latin (which himself has the
boldness to cite truly in the Margin) there is no such word to be found as Order;
but only that Bishops are superiores Presbyteris, a phrase implying no necessiy
at all of their being several Orders; though in that word consists the whole
emphasis of his false imputation.

His other abuse is yet more gross and palpable, concerning our Ladies
immaculate Conception; for the Council expressly declaring their intention was
not to meddle with the Question, he says it is impossible so to expound their
words that they shall in plain terms give the ly to all the Fathers: and to
render this foul play the more plausible among such as look not well to his
fingers, he translates in hoc decreto falsely and perversely in this number, as
if the Council had positively decreed the Blessed Virgin not to be in the
number of those who are born in original sin; when their very words directly
tell him they on purpose resolved to prescind from her particular Case, and not
determine any thing concerning It in that Decree. Certainly, had this man either
face or conscience, an ordinary malice could never have engaged him into such a
desperate absurdity, so notorious, that its practice cannot be unknown even to
him, though he shut his Eyes against the light; since all disputers upon this
point unanimously agree, that the Council intended wholly to abstract from the
question, and leave both sides probable: nevertheless this shameless forehead
dares, in such broad and unmannerly language, not only slander a grave and
venerable Council, but outface the whole Catholic world. What trust can be
given to so bold a Jugler in matters either of less moment or less evidence;
when in a Case so important, as the Decree of a Council, and so palpably
manifest, that all that can read may easily discover the cheat, yet he blushes
not to venture on it? can any thing be answered in his defense, or any excuse
made, why he should not be accounted an impudent lying knave?

THE NINTH SURVEY. In answer to two Questions, in his last Chapter; One, the
Fathers being rejected, to what Judge we ought to recur: The other, what use is
to be made of the Fathers?
ALl this while our new Edifyer of the reformed Temple has used only his
Sword-hand to keep off those dangerous enemies the Fathers; now he begins to
manage his trowel, and bedawb the face of antiquity with a little fine mortar:
Let Us see at least what work he makes; though we have small reason to expect any
good building from him that is not able so much as to pull down.

Thus, then, workman-like, he enters upon his task; demanding of himself this
question, the Fathers being rejected, where shall we now lay our foundation? to
what Rule or Judge must we have recourse? He answers, To the Scripture; and if
in any one place it seem obscure, we must then seek out another to clear it.
Which first supposes, that for all points necessary, there are some evident and
clearing Texts: But I must ask, on what Authority he believes this? does the
Scripture declare it so plainly, that there is no debate about it? He knows the
whole Catholic Church denis any such self-evident alsufficiency in Scripture.
Did they, who delivered him and his Brethren the Bible, recommend it to them
under this qualification? No: for his party went out of the Catholic Church,
and received the Scriptures from none but Her, who never taught them any such
lesson. Perhaps you will say, all other Christians testified the verity of that
book, and so upon their credit you are the more induced to accept it. But those
Christians are such as your selves generally condemn: such as have been cast
out, for taking this very proposition, to justify their rebellion against Her,
whom you acknowledge, then, to have been the true Owner and Mistress of Christ's
Doctrine. Besides, any one that has but half an Ey may see, no
Scripture-disputation with Heretics was ever finished, without new reply's; but
the Church has always been forced at last to condemn them, upon the score of
Tradition. Thus you borrowed this desperate device, from those who in all ages
were thrust out of the same Church, for holding the very same principles.

But suppose there were some clear Texts in our Controversies (as we think
there are in disfavour of you;) may they not be rendered obscure by other places
objected against them; which we pretend you endeavor to do. If so, your
remedy is worse then the evil; and the comparing of diverse places is the very
cause that makes all balanceable, indifferent and obscure. Are we not now
reduced to a hopeful condition of living hereafter in a perpetual and
unavoidable unity of Religion: especially since an hundred years experience
sadly demonstrates what we say to be true?

Besides, why does not this good Orator spend some time to show us, that his
Arguments have not as much force against Scripture, as against the Fathers? I
confess, he has hinted it sometimes; like one that saw the objection so
obvious, it could not be forgotten: yet was unwilling to wade the Ford, for
fear he should find it too deep. To supply therefore his omission, I shall
observe one considerable difference betwixt the Scripture and Fathers, as far
as concerns these objections. Which consists in this, that the Fathers works
are many and copious; The Scriptures bulk every Maid can tell that carry's her
Mistresses Book to Church. Whence it follows, that, as in a great Ocean there
may be many Shelvs and Rocks, and Whirlpools, and whatever else is frightful to
Sea men, and yet nevertheless a fair and large passage remain, either not at
all endammaged by these perilous adventures, or only so, that they are easily
avoided by a careful Pilot: whereas in a narrow Channel or Frith, if we meet but
half the number, there will be no sailing without manifest danger; So I
conceive between the Fathers and the Scripture. Every exception this Caviller
alleges (or at least provs) may be true of their works, and yet more then
sufficient left to convince Heretics: but if Scripture be half as much
disabled, it will utterly lose its Protestant, pretended power of deciding
controversys.

A truth I believe Rushworth has abundantly demonstrated. For the variae
lectiones are so many that they trench upon every line; the several
Translations give some little difference to every sentence; the many
Explications leave nothing untouched; the Comparisons of one place to another
may be more then there are words in the Text; the places brought by one side
and the other, so short that Equivocation has force upon every one; the
Languages in which they are written either Hebrew, whose titles breed a
difference; or Greek written by strangers and full of Improprieties; the Method
and Style, the many repetitions and occasionary discourses speak plainly the
design of the Apostles far different from intending their writings should
contain a full body of Religion, much less to be the sole Judge to determine all
contentions about faith.

Yes will he say, but there are more objections against the Fathers then against
the Scripture. As that the writings of the Fathers for the first three Ages are
few; I confess it: but yet dare affirm, there is more of them then the whole
Scripture makes. That the Fathers treat of matters different from our
controversy's; This is true, but so do the Scriptures. That there are
supposititious works of the Fathers: Heretics pretend the same against our
Scriptures. That the Fathers speak according to others minds; But the like is
found in Scripture. And so going on, it will easily appear, the same objections
or equivalent, might have bin made against Scripture, if Mr. Rushworth had
thought them worthy the labor of setting down.

Now, when these Books are put into a Vulgar language (as is necessary to them,
who pretend every one should be judge of their belief out of Scripture, by
being first Judge of the sense of it, that is, of what is Scripture, for the
dead letter is nothing to the purpose) can it be less then madness, to think of
demonstrating a controverted position out of one or two places of Scripture?
And yet (as I have before noted) this Patron of Presbytery assures us, that we
ought to believe nothing in point of Religion, but what we know to be certainly
true; which is evident, in his way, to be nothing at all.

At last his own good nature has persuaded him to propose one profitable
question, What use is to be made of Fathers for deciding Controversies? And his
first resolution is (in the design of his Book, conformable to the fore-layd
grounds) that we ought to read them carefully and heedfully searching their
Writings for their opinions, and not for our own. A wonderful wise conclusion;
especially considering, he says, the Reader must endeavor diligently to peruse
them all. For my part, I should advise my friend rather to take his rest and
sleep, then spend so much pains and time to search out what others have
written; which, when I have found, little imported what it was, or whether I knew
it or no: this being the idlest and unworthiest sort of study, to know what
such or such books say, without any farther end. Yet generally this is the
great learning these Grammatical Divines glory in, not that they are better,
even at this, then their Adversaries, but because they have no other: As if
they had forgotten there were any solid knowledge to be sought after; but, being
blown like a thin empty glass into the windy substance of words, hang in the
air, not having weight enough to settle upon firm ground.

At least to maintain, the Fathers are not altogether vain and useless, he will
teach us to argue negatively out of their writings; as that such a position is
not found in the Fathers, Ergo not necessary to be believed: and by this to
reduce our Faith to that number of Articles, which they unanimonsly deliver.
But he has forgot his own arguments: for since we have so few of their works,
how can we tell the greater part did not teach somewhat necessary to be believed,
which these have omitted? since corruption entered into the Church immediately
after the Apostles decease; why may not some considerable point be strangled in
its infancy? since the Fathers are so hard to be understood; why may there not
be many doctrins of importance, which we find not for want of quickness of
sight to discover them? and since they oppose one another in so many things,
why may not, at least some one of these be a fundamental Article of Faith?

I cannot give over this discourse concerning the testimony of the Fathers,
without first observing a notorious cheat of our Adversary's, and too great an
easiness in our own party: which once discovered and perfectly understood,
makes our cause so evident, that in my opinion there will be left no
possibility of disputing about Antiquity. The business is this, Whereas their
breach from the old Religion is so apparent and visible, there is not the least
color to doubt it; we let our selves by their cunning be drawn into dark and
petty questions: and so lose the face of Antiquity, by disputing of some nice
point. As for example; when the Presbyterian has ruined the whole fabric of
the ancient Church by taking away Episcopal Authority; instead of questioning
them for so palpable an innovation, we unwarily suffer our selves to be engaged
into the discussion of this partieular quaere; Whether Bishops be de jure
divino? which cannot be determined by the vast body of Antiquity (as the right
and proper question may, to wit, what is the true government of the Church?)
but by minute canvasing of private Texts, which is a far more difficult and
altogether unnecessary method.

Just so it happens in almost all Controversy's. For no doubt but Decision of
matters of Faith was anciently performed in Councils, if the scandal grew so
high as to force such general meetings: These, Heretics absolutely renounce,
preferring their private conceits before the judgment of all the Bishops in the
world; and then, if you press them with the palpable absurdity of so insolent
and destructive a tenet, they presently cast a figure, and, instead of handling
the plain duty of obedience to the supreme Ecclesiastical Authority, transform
the question into a mere speculative subtlety as, Wherein consists the
infallibility of Councils? For the Mass, our Reformers take it quite away,
everywhere breaking down the Altars and abolishing the whole Glory of Gods
service, which is unquestionably ancient; so many Liturgy's to this day, and
the general practice of the Church still continuing: This done, they will dispute
of the antiquity of the word Missa or Transubstantiatio. For the Popes
authority, they at one stroke cut a pieces the ligue and common bond of
Christianity in the unity of one head, and force us to wrangle, either about
his infallibility, or whether his power of Appeals be from Church-Laws or
Christ's commands; and the like. They blot out the memories of Martyrs both in
their solemn Feasts and Tombs: things undisputable in the glorious flourishing
of the Church: and quarrel about what honor is due to their Lives, Relics
and Pictures. They disclaim the public practice of praying for the dead,
everywhere frequented, they deny the universal profession of Purgatory, in all
ages avowed, and then turn their exception upon How and When our prayers obtain
their effect. They pull down Monasteries and Nunnery's, and abandon the
extraordinary and exemplary way of holy life, which no impudence can deny to
have been practiced all the time the Church it self has bin public; and then
dispute, whether St. John Baptist or the Esseni were Religious men or no, or
when Vows came first in.

Hypocrites! if you reverence Antiquity, restore the face of Antiquity. If you
truly honor Jesus Christ and his Saints, and virtuous life, and any thing but
an Ear-itch to be clawed by the phrase of Scripture, embrace what has been
Christian life from the beginning. If not, fill up the measure of your first
Reformers till the Judgments of God overtake you and make you pay the whole
reckoning, for theirs and your own dissembling.

I fear I have already wearied the patience of my Reader, I am sure I have long
since quite tired my own: being unwillingly drawn by the many turns and
windings of the subtle Fox I pursue, far beyond the course intended at the
beginning. To conclude then at last: I doubt not but he, who has not perused
Mr. Daille's Book, will nevertheless, out of what I say, see plainly those
Noble Lords, whose Elogies are posted before it, had great reason highly to
esteem him. For truly his nimble Wit, his exact Method, his polite Style, his
interlarding all with poignant and bitter Jeers, his knowledge in Greek, his
cunning in Topics (of all which those eminent Wits were perfect Judges, being
qualities themselves were excellently endowed with) could not choose but draw
extraordinary praises from those eloquent Pens; whose Masters had not the
leisure, by tedious turning over Books and deep reflections upon the occasion
of the cited places, to ponder the weight of the proofs, or see through the
malice of the Project, which was of no less perni^lous consequence, then to
slander and disparage the most glorious Persons of the World; to blast the
credit of all true Virtue and Honor, in their chief supports: to disable the
sole Mistress of good life here; and so, wholly to obstruct the only way to
eternal happiness hereafter.

FINIS.

