There was a Paper published on Friday last, Entitled Considerations humbly
tendered concerning the East-India-Company: And the Design of it is to offer
some Arguments for continuing the said Company under the present Charter and
Management.
THE two first Paragraphs make a sound of a great Regard to the Public: But
it is indeed the Voice of private Interest: And whatever Pretenses are now made
to serve a Turn at this Juncture: It Is notorious, That the present
East-India-Stock has all along been managed by a few prevailing Men, who have
subjected the General Concern to their particular Advantages: And more
especially for about ten Years past, the whole matter has been made subservient
to the boundless Ambition and Avarice of One Aspiring Person, as it is now so
assiduously endeavored to be continued, by Himself, and a few Others, who have
of late by his Favor been introduced into the Committee.

It Is insinuated, That the dissolving this Charter would be of fatal
Consequence to the Nation, in giving our Neighbors opportunity to make
themselves Masters of all that Trade: But the direct contrary is the real
Truth, for by the late most Imprudent and Unjustifiable Proceedings, we have
already in a manner lost all our Trade and Interest in those Parts, which is no
other way possibly retrievable, but by a New Joynt-Stock firmly and legally
established: And this too, must be speedily done, or 'twill be too late.

'T had been happy for the Nation in general, as well as the particular
Adventurers in this present Stock, if the Managers had timely and faithfully
acted with that great Care to prevent the Encroachments of our Neighbors,
which they now so zealously pretend, whereby we might not only have still been
Masters of our Spice-Island of Poleroon, and continued our Settlement at
Maccasser, Vide, The Letters from Bantam, Anno 1679. and the Answer from
London, Anno 1680.
But have also at this time been in Possession of a most important Fortress at
Bantam, which that King Courted their Acceptance of, and offered to Contribute
to the Building it. But this great Acquisition was rejected for fear of a small
Expense, When One of those many Ten-Thousand-Guinea's they bestowed at Court to
purchase a Power to oppress their Fellow Subjects, would have defrayed the
Charge of their first Settlement, and 'twou'd not only before this time have
repaid them Twenty-fold, but been a lasting and growing Treasure to the
Nation, and enabled them for the future, to stand in Competition with the Dutch
as well for Empire as for Traffic. Whereas the refusal thereof, has occasioned
their being driven out of the South Seas with irrepairable Loss and Shame, and
gave Our Neighbors an opportunity to accomplish an entire Dominion in all
those Parts: And yet these are the Men that now set up for Public Spirited
Patriots, and call themselves the Conservers of the Trade of India, against the
Intrusions of our Neighbors.

How these Managers have disposed Affairs in other parts of India, by the
Violencies they have of late committed on the Lives and Goods of the Subjects
of the Great Mogul, and the King of Siam, has been already intimated in an
Abstract of those their unjustifiable Actions presented to the High Court of
Parliament; whereby it appears what great regard they have had as well to the
Honor, as Interest, of the Nation: For from the most Beloved and Respected, we
are in a short time become the most Abhorred, and Infamous, of all Europeans,
and so have lost a stronger Hold, than all their Force will ever be able to
regain in any of those Parts of the World.

Thus does the National Esteem and Interest, languish, and decline, under the
Mal-administration of the present Managers of the Companies Affairs: And is it
not a fit question to be now asked by ONE of their Committee, What shall we do
for Saltpetre for our Wars when the Trade of India is lost? To which there is
only this answer to be made him, That if the Government does not effectually
and speedily interpose and settle our Trade on a good Bottom, and in a method
that may be more National: We shall soon find our great want of that, and all
things else we used to be supplied with from those Parts, when 'tmay be too
late to recover the Loss.

But it is pretended, there will so many Difficulties occur in the changing
This, for a New Company, that renders it impracticable.

As first, it is said, That the New Adventurers will be a great while at a Stop
and Nonplus. And this is in one sense true; For it is certain 'twill require
some time, with much prudent Care, and Study, to regain that good Respect and
Credit which the late Miscarriages have justly Forfeited: But if 't be meant
that there would want others of as good Parts and Experience, as the present
Managers, to assist in the Conduct of Affairs: It Is a groundless Presumption.

But what reasonable Compensation can be made to the present Company for their
dead Stock, Forts, Castles, Arms, Ammunition, and Privileges? Why just the
same as they made to the Company that preceded them: For this now in being (if
any there be) is the sixth or seventh Joynt-Stock, since our Nation first
engaged in Adventures to India; And so the adjusting of those things is chalked
out to us by several Presidents: And here it aptly falls in, to remind them,
that are so brisk in exacting whatever they can any way lay claim to: That they
also bethink themselves of discharging all their own great Debts, and restore
those vast Sums they have so unlawfully taken, both from their Fellow Subjects
and Foreigners.

There is in the Paper another little Hint or two of no material Concern; And
some supercilious Reflections on Interlopers which may be considered at better
leisure: While the sole intent of this, is to detect the Fallacy of some
Popular Notions that are at this time with such great Industry disseminated;
And to assert this important Truth; That no Man who has a right Cognizance of
the Affair, can be a True Friend to his Country, and at the same time endeavor
the Continuance of this East-India-Company under the present Constitution and
Management.

GEORGE WHITE.


