DOS POY STO OR, AN ANSWER TO Sure Footing, So far as Mr. Whitby is concerned
in it. Wherein the Rule and Guide of Faith, the Interest of Reason, and the
Authority of the Church in Matters of Faith, are fully handled and vindicated;
FROM THE Exceptions of Mr. SERGEANT, AND Petty Flirts of FIAT LUX. Together
with AN ANSWER to Five Questions propounded by a ROMAN CATHOLIC. By Daniel
Whitby, M. A. Coll. Trin. Oxon. Soc.

And let him that thinks he stands, take heed lest he fall,

Romans 11. OXFORD: Printed by W. Hall, for R. Davis. 1666.

Imprimatur,

ROBERTUS SAY, VICE-CANCELLARIUS OXON.

TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
THe Animadversions of Mr. Sergeant being confused and immethodical, would not
admit an Answer in that Order in which they lie, wherefore I have reduced them
to their several heads, and as I hope, sufficiently discovered the weakness of
them in the following Chapters, still being careful that I did not actum agere,
or say any thing which might interfer with his two great Antagonists; I have
since been assaulted by a second Sampson, willing perhaps to show the world
what Execution he could do with the Jaw bone of an Ass. He has three passages
in his Epistle which seem guilty of a little reason, and show he has some lucid
Intervals which therefore shall receive an Answer.

But as for his continual falsifications of my words and arguments, his Wit and
Drollery, his Any mad versions, and his white Boys, (that is, the residue of
his Epistle) I shall leave them to be bound up with Asdriasdust Tosoffacan,

And rest, Thy Friend and Servant, DANIEL WHITBY.

CHAP. I. Of the certainty of Faith, and the use of Reason in matters of Faith.
Prop: 1. REason is that faculty which God has given us to discern betwixt
true and false, good or evil, just and unjust: For that we do discern betwixt
these things, is every Man's experience, and that we do it by the exercise of
Reason, is most evident; for Judgment must be either brutish, or founded upon
Reason.

Coroll: If then my reason does determine what is just or unjust, good or evil,
true or false, and consequently what is to be done, believed, thought or not,
Reason must be my judge in every case. Secondly, To judge, is to determine from
some ground, and that is to infer or reason, and therefore nothing can be judge
in any case but Reason. Thirdly, The Papist must acknowledge Reason for his
Judge in every case; for either Reason must assure them that the Church in her
Traditions is infallible, or else they must believe it, they know not why, this
done, what is unquestionably the Tradition of the Church, cannot be matter of a
doubt; and when it is doubted or disputed what is the voice of holy Church,
Reason must still become their Judge, for sure they must have motives to
incline them either way? And they are Reasons, wherefore in all cases Reason is
their Judge: and were it not the greatest folly to offer Reasons to convince us
of the Roman Faith, and at the same time tell us its judgment is not to be
taken?

Object: But here you presently throw in, p. 187. The existence of the Trinity,
and then cry out, To work now with your Reason, and see how you evince it.

Answ: Do you believe the assertion to be true, or not? if true, Why do you
then disupte against it? if not, Why do you not return some Answer to those
Arguments wherewith it was confirmed? nay, why do you acknowledge, That in
great part of the whole Section, and especially at the beginning, the Discourse
is rightly made, p. 180. since that Discourse is visibly a Complex of
Arguments, professedly evincing this conclusion? But Secondly, I conclude the
existence of a Trinity by rational Inference from such Scriptures, which
affirm, That God is one, and that the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost are truly
God; and therefore do assert it, because my reason judges these Inferences to
be valid: and the Sacinian, who rejects the Article, does not reject the
Authority of those Scriptures upon which I ground it, but only endeavors to
evade the Inferences of my reason from thence: Thus then you see, that Reason
acting on my rule of Faith, produces this assent. And tell me, Are we not
enjoined to give a reason of our Faith, and so of this as well as other
Articles, and consequently to acquaint the Enquirer, why we judge it necessary
to believe the Existence of a Trinity? You indeed teach me to speak thus, That
I have reason to believe Authority, and Authority to believe the Trinity. Answ:
True, but I must still have reason to conclude it from Authority; for it is not
formally contained in Scripture, but only thence inferred by reason, so that I
have here Divine Authority for my Rule, and Reason for my Guide to apply the
Rule unto the Article, and infer it thence.

Object: Belief is as properly relative to Authority, as Science is to an act
of Reason; whence it is as incongruous to say, I must have reason to believe
such a Point, as to say, I know such a Point scientifically by Authority. p.
187.

Answ: As incongruous as it is, I hope you do believe the existence of a Diety,
the Divine Authority of Scriptures, and the truth of Christ's Miracles, and that
you have reason so to do; and do you not now see the strange and monstrous
incongruity of saying, You have reason to believe? Exerc. 3. Art. 3. Sect. 6.
Baronius his hand maid to Divinity will teach you to distinguish betwixt Faith
strictly taken for an assent built upon the Testimony of another, in which
sense it is relative to Authority; or more generally, and so in Scripture and
approved Authors, it denotes any manner of assent: thus we are said to believe
our eyes, and Heathens, without a Revelation, to believe a Diety. And lastly,
this or that to be the sense of Scripture.

Prop: 2. It is confessed on both sides, and in it self most certain, That the
foundation of all our Faith depends on Reason, and is ultimately resolved into
it, the Protestant has his internal and external Arguments to induce him to
believe the Divine Authority of Scripture; the Papist, for his upstart
Tradition, pretends no less then a Demonstration; and for his Churches
Authority, he has his motives of credibility to produce. And certain it is
that, all our Faith and Religion depends upon the Being of a God, and that
assurance which we have, That his veracity is such, as will not suffer him to
deceive us; His goodness such, as will not suffer us to be invincibly deceived,
to our souls destruction; nor let his providence be wanting in providing for,
and preserving to us that rule of Faith, without which, salvation cannot be
attained: unless we are assured of these things, how know we but that God may
have deceived the World with false Miracles? yea, that he has not Imprinted in
us such dispositions as may continually incline us unto Error? That he has not
assisted the Apostles, and first Promoters of Christianity in delivering to us
a false Scripture, and false Traditions? And certain (Secondly) it is, we have
no evidence of these things, but that of Reason, and consequently that the
whole certainty of Faith depends upon it; and this is freely acknowledged by
Mr. Sergeant, in his fourth Section, where he tells us, That our assent unto
Authority is at last resolved into Reason; and clearly follows from his grand
Assertion, p. 181. That no Authority ( viz. whether of Church, Scripture, or
Tradition) deserves assent farther then true reason gives it to deserve; and
consequently it must be beholding to true reason for the assent we yield unto
it. And yet I am confidently rebuked for saying, That if S.C. believes his
church infallible, because his reason judges it to be so, the Church is
beholden to the judgment of his private reason, for his belief of her
infallibility, p. 96. as if her infallibility could be believed on this very
account: deserve assent upon no other, and the rationalness of assenting to it
could be resolved into reason, and she not be beholding to the confessed yea
the only cause of this assent for the belief of that infallibility, which is
the effect thereof; and all this forsooth, Because I therefore come to have
that Judgment of her infallibility, because she as an object wrought upon my
apprehension, and imprinted a conceit of her there, as she was in her self, and
so obliged my Reason to conclude, and my judgment to hold her such as she is:
page 182. A very deep discourse and able to evince that no man is beholding to
his Reason for any thing he assents unto, but contrarily his Reason is
beholding to the Object for causing that assent. Seeing that object works upon
his apprehension, and imprints a conceit of it self there, as in it self, and
so obliges our Reason to conclude, and our Judgment to hold it such, as it is,
but Sir, is your assent rational, or not? If not it is Brutish and Absurd, it
may he false, nor have you any reason to believe it true. If so, then must you
be beholding to your Reason for it.

Coroll. Hence I infer, That Reason cannot be rejected, as unsure, and
unsufficient to ground an Article of Faith upon; for the certainty of our whole
Faith depending upon that of Reason, it must fall together with it. So that to
quarrel with the use of Reason upon that account, (as Papists usually do) is in
effect to quarrel with Religion and Christianity.

Prop. 3. The certainty of Faith, cannot be greater then that of Science or
Mathematical Demonstration, for that (supposing only as the fundation of all
certitude that my faculties are true and not supernaturally inclined to
falsehood) is absolutely certain, and such as takes away all matter of a doubt,
for who can question the truth of these assertions that nothing can produce it
self, and that from equals, if you take only equals, the remainder will be
equal, both which are conclusions arising with the clearest evidence from that
first principle of Science it is impossible for the same thing at once to be,
and not be. Now seeing certainty consists in the removal of what is or might be
matter of a doubt, (for whilst this matter of doubt remains we are not, and
when it is once removed, eo ipso we arrive at real certainty) and seeing nothing
can take off more then all, no certainty can be greater then that which cuts of
all matter of a doubt. Nay, secondly, I ask, whether this principle (viz. it is
impossible for the same thing at once to be and not be) can possibly be doubted
whether some Conclusions Scientifical be not immediately and unavoidably
derivative from it? (for since all Truths are ultimately resolved into it, some
most immediately conclude from it) and whether hence it will not follow, That
Scientifical Conclusions may remove all possibility of doubting? Thirdly, all
Articles of Faith are ultimately founded upon Reason, by Prop. 2d. And so our
assent unto them must terminate thereupon, no reason, can be of greater
certainty, then a Scientifical Conclusion, as being wholly derived from, and
resoluble into that first Principle of Science, impossible est idem esse and
non esse. Fourthly, That any Article of Faith is true or not true, is a
Scientifical Conclusion from that of Logic one part of contradictories must
needs be true; nor can the truth of any article be greater, then the truth of
this, since it is impossible to be true, but eo ipso it must be true or not true.

When therefore you pretend, p. 181. to cleave more heartily and firmly to a
point of Faith, then to any conclusion of Science whatsoever, your adherence
must outgoe your Reason, for what if Faith depend upon divine veracity, and
that be closely applied by the Church unto you. Seeing it depends also on your
assurance of these two Assertions, (1.) That the Divine power could not be
engaged to deceive the Church, or attest a falsehood. Which you owe to Reason,
And Secondly, That the divine veracity is engaged for that, which you esteem an
Article of Faith, which you must owe unto the Eyes and Ears and the Fidelity
of other men, since then each Article of Faith attested by Divine Veracity is
nevertheless known to be so, partly by reason, which cannot rise beyond a
Demonstration, partly by the evidence of sense, and the fidelity of other men,
which is not capable of demonstration, it is not possible that your assent
which bottoms on them, should exceed its certainty.

But secondly, I affirm, that all our certitude of Faith, is less then that of
Science, for notwithstanding all your motives unto Faith, are there not many
real Atheists, and secret rejecters of Christianity? Many that are still
enquirers, many that labor under continual doubts, and scruples, and have
Faith only as a grain of Musterdseed? Yea may we not all cry out with the
Disciples, Lord increase our Faith? Produce your motives, manage them with your
utmost care, and you will find the Sceptick will still make exceptions, put in
his scruples, and ask might it not be otherwise? Whereas Science compels
assent, puts the intellect beyond a fear, and will not suffer us to scruple or
demur upon her Theorems, or labor under the least uncertainty, Whether one
part of contradictories be true, or the three Angles of a Triangle be equal to
two right ones. Since then it is nothing but the clearness of the truth which
expels fears and doubts, and it is the want of such convictive evidence, which
is the cause of their continuance, that certitude must needs be greatest which
is most effectual to this end: but it is superfluous to insist farther upon that
which is so admirably confirmed by Mr Chillingworth, p. 291. Ed. ult.

Yea thirdly, I affirm that the certainty of Faith is not so great as that of
sense, for all its certainty depends on our assurance that the deliverers of it
were infallibly assisted by the Divine Wisdom in that delivery, and is not
this attested by the Miracles they wrought, the Prophecies they delivered, the
Doctrine they taught? And that by sense? Should any of them be questioned must
we not recur unto the senses of the Primitive Christians to confirm them? And
must they not then be the ultimate Foundation of our Faith? and your tradition?
must we not be surer of the proof then the thing proved? And consequently of
the evidence of sense then that of Faith, which deriveth from it? If not, why
secondly does our Lord pronounce them rather blessed who believe and have not
seen, then Thomas who first Saw and Felt, and then Believed? Is it not because
they do it upon lesser (though sufficient) evidence? And so their Faith is more
illustrious and praise worthy; 'Twould be more Generous, and Noble, to die in
the defense of him whom we did only probably believe to be our Prince or
Parent, then to do it only upon iufallible assurance of his being such, because
an evidence of greater love, even so is it more virtuous and praise worthy to
venture all upon an highly probable hopes of the truth of Christianity it being
such a pregnant indication of our true love to Piety and Virtue, that even a
probable assurance of it can prevail against all worldly temptations to the
contrary: Yea this it is which renders Faith rewardable, that it is an act of
the believers choice (and not irrefragably induced) however it be abundantly
confirmed with arguments extremely probable, and such as render it perverseness
and obstinacy to resist. Thirdly should it be otherwise how comes it to pass
that men are equally assured of what equally they see, but have not the like
fullness of persuasion in what they believe? That being once assured of the
objects of sense, they can admit of no greater certainty, whereas after all our
boasts af a plerophory of Faith, we have still need to strive and labor to
increase it? Since then the certainty of Faith is proved inferior to that of
Sense, and Science, to pretend infallibility (which is the highest certainty)
is to pretend such evidence, as is not competible to Faith. But that the Folly
of this pretense may appear more signally, I shall farther manifest. 1. That
Humane nature is not capable of infallible assurance in matters of Faith.
Secondly, that to require such assurance unto Faith is contrary to Scripture.
Thirdly, That our Savior required Faith upon lower motives. Fourthly, That the
Romanists can have no such assurance. Fifthly, That it is no prejudice to the
certainty or reasonableness of Faith, that it is built upon foundations not
absolutely infallible. And Lastly, Answer Mr Sergeants Exceptions to the
contrary. And

1. If Humane Nature (abstracted from Divinity) be capable of this assurance,
its certainty must be equal to that of Vision, of Angels, of Christ's Humanity,
yea of God himself, for even their assurance cannot reach beyond infallibility.
And secondly, Reason must give as great assurance of a thing revealed to others
1600. years agon, and in it self inevident, as it is possible for present sense
or revelation to afford; all which are monstrous absurdities.

Secondly, each Text of Scripture which mentions any that were weak or strong
in Faith, any that were of little or of great Faith, any that were rich, that
did abound, increase, or grow in Faith, any that were grounded, established,
rooted, and consirmed in Faith, that speaks of having Faith as a grain of
musterdseed, and of having all Faith, is a demonstrative refutation of this
pretense, it being certain that infallibility admits of no degrees. Such
secondly, must be every Prayer which the Apostles made, to increase their own
and others Faith, or in the language of the Catholic to advance it some
degrees above infallibility. Such thirdly, are all those places which tell of
Heretics, who overthrew the Faith of some, of others that were unstable and
wavering in the Faith. And lastly, Prophecy that men should Err, and be
seduced from the Faith, or depart from it, giving heed to seducing spirits, it
being as impossible for such who are infallibly assured or guided by what is
self-evident, even to the un-reflecting person, to Waver, Err, or be Seduced,
as to Doubt and Disbelieve that twice 2 is 4, or that if you take equally from
equals, they will still be equal.

Thirdly, Our Blessed Savior required this assent from his Disciples without
Infallible assurance, for does he not call them Fools and slow of heart, Luke
24.26. for not believing all the Prophets had delivered touching his
Resurrection and Ascension into Glory? Had they infallible assurance that these
Prophecyes concerned him yea or no? If not, then did he look upon them as Fools
and slow of heart for not believing upon motives confessedly fallible; if their
assurance might have been infallible, then either as bottomed upon Reason,
infallibly concluding his Ascension and Resurection from the Prophets; or
secondly upon Tradition and the Churches living voice; if the first, why may
not we also (who have greater assistence of the Spirit of Wisdom) be able from
the same Principle of Reason, working on our Rule of Faith, to conclude
infallibly the Fundamentals of Christianity? For is it not unreasonable to
assert, that the Resurrection and Ascension of our Lord is more clearly
revealed in those places of the Old Testament, (which are few, obscure, and by
reason of the Language more ambiguous then the New, and lastly acknowledged by
the greatest part of learned Men to refer primarily to other things or persons)
then the Articles of our Creed are in those numerous, and admirably prespicuous
places of the New Testament which give in Testimony thereunto? Must they be
looked upon as Fools for not infallibly concluding the Ascension of our Lord,
from the obscure items of the Prophets by the help of Reason? And must we be
damned for holding Reason sufficient from Scripture to conclude our Creed? Nay
secondly, is not this to admit Reason as a competent, yea infallible judge of
the Sense of Scripture, and consequently to approve of in the Jew, what you
condemn and rail at in the Christian.

If secondly, you fly unto Tradition, It is not ridiculous to assert that the
Jewish Church should not only Crucify this Jesus, and endeavor with their
utmost powerto prevent the Fame of his Resurrection, albeit she had infallible
assurance of it? But that she should at the same time interpret Scripture so,
as infallibly to attest it, and be condemned from her own mouth? Nay had they
not a contrary Tradition, (viz. That the Kingdom of their Messiah should be
Glorious upon Earth) sufficient to confront all evidence Tradition could afford
them in this case, and void her Testimony because repugnant to it self?
Secondly, I desire to know whether that voice from Heaven which testified that
Jesus was the true Messiah, and the Son of God, did not oblige the hearers to
believe it? And to what other end it was sent? Whether our Savior does not
plead it as his Fathers testimony of him (which sure must be sufficient ground
of Faith) whether Saint Peter does not hence endeavor to make good this truth?
2 Pet. 1.17, 18, 19.
And therefore, whether his argument does not oblige us to believe it? And yet
whether he does not peremptorily say, that 'twas confirmed by a more sure word
of Prophecy? And whether hence it does not follow that this voice from Heaven
was not an evidence most sure? and therefore not infallible; however it were
such as did require belief from us, as well as them that heard it? Go now and
tell your God and Savior (what you have told our Church) That they are guilty
of most Absurd, Ridiculous, Irrational, Self-condemned, Damnable, Diabolical
Tyranny, and such as Humane Nature can scarce own, for requiring any man's
assent to any Point or Proposition whatsoever as evident in Scripture, without
infallible certainty, page 196, 198.

Fourthly, The Evidence which Papists have, or can have of any matter of Faith,
is not infallible; for had they infallible Evidence to produce, is it not
matter of amazement, that so many millions of persons endowed with Intellects
as piercing, and accomplished with all abilities which their Adversaries can
boast of; yea, who many of them have all temporal Motives to incline them to
believe, and all the Miseries that Papal Tyranny can inflict to awaken them
into a serious consideration; nay, who are Men seriously industrious after
their salvation, and such as know that they must perish everlastingly, if this
indeed be the true and only rule of Faith which they reject: I say, Is it not
matter of amazement, that such persons, from generation to generation, should
unanimously reject what offers it self with infallible evidence and assurance
even to the most rude, illiterate, and unreflecting person, Sure footing, p. 5.
s. 10.
that is but capable of Christianity? and not only so, but that they should
dispute, and write Books against it, albeit they could never go about to do so,
but they must necessarily be convinced infallibly (even as unreflecting Layicks
are supposed to be) of the truth of what they thus oppose, which is indeed to
say, we were, are, and (whilst Protestants) must be as bad and obstinate as
the very Devil: This alone is abundantly sufficient to arm the soul against all
temptations unto Popery. Again, the infallibility of your Tradition is bottomed
partly upon this foundation, That your Church thinks her self obliged to
deliver nothing but what and so far as she received it from the former Age and
Church: But what assurance of this at present: are there not of your own Party
who roundly tell us, That what Maldonate in Joh. 6. v. 53. Binius Council: Tom:
1. p. 624. Petavius de la penit: publ: l. 1. c. 7. s. 6. p. 97.
flourished in the Church for many hundred of Years, is now condemned by her?
That there was a time when the Trent desinitions were not Roffensis in confut:
Lutheri, p. 496. Biel in Lect: 57. super Canonem missae Durand. opusc: 15. c.
1. Scotus apud Bellar: de Euchar: l. 3. c. 23.
de fide, yea when the Vid: Potters Answer to charity mistaken, page 73, 74.
contrary was delivered by the Church: That there was time when Fathers Non
mirum est si isti and nonnulli etiam alii patres re nondum eo tempore satis
illuftrata in eam Haresin incidissent Petro Soave, Hist: Council: Trident: l. 7.
p. 575. Petavius in Epiphanium, p. 285.
did, and might teach contrary to what she now delivers, because the Church had
not declared her mind: And is not this to give liberty before the definition
of a Council, to deliver to Posterity, even from the first Age to that very
moment, what is flatly contradictory to the Churches voice, and to unravel the
whole thread you have so finely spun. Bellar: l. 4. de Pontif: Rom: c. 14. Sec.
Res. imprimis.
Are there not those who positively assert, the definition of your Church makes
that to be esteemed a matter of Faith, which before was not necessarily to be
deemed such? who lastly say, To definition of your Church is that which makes a
fundamental? how many hundred times have all, or most of these things been
Printed, Preached, Licensed in your Church? and yet there is not one of them
but bids defiance to your Assertion. But secondly, your infallibility is
bottomed upon this, That it is impossible for your Church to be deceived in
judging what is Tradition. Now first, Is it not as certain as the truth of
Christianity can make it, that the whole Nation of the Jews did err, and that
most dangerously, pretending a Tradition of that nature which rendered them
incapable of embracing the Messiah? Now what was the sad fate of these
Traditionary Catholics, scattered not only over Jury, but through all the
World? why may it not be Romes? When Arianism prevailed so much upon the World,
as to fright the Orthodox Professors into Dens and Caves, when it had defiled
almost all the World, and all (except a very few) obeyed it: Was it impossible
in that juncture of Affairs they should pretend Tradition for their Faith? does
not your Answ: to Du Plessis, l. 2. c. 7.
Cardinal Perroon, and their own Epistle show they did? (...). Epist.
Pseudosynodi Aucyrans apud Epiph: p. 847.
Our Faith, say they, is kept as a Patrimony handed down from the Apostles
times by their immediate Successors, even to the days of our Father: And must
that be impossible to the done by the Church of Rome, which we see done in so
great an instance? How often did East and West plead contrary Traditions, and
impeach, each other for walking Synod: Constable: in Trullo, Can: 55.
(...)? In the beginning of the fatal breach between them, either the Plea or
Tradition was deserted, or falsely pretended by one party; and what impossiblity
can there be, that what happened to the one should be found incident to the
other? And to add no more, Is it not Frequenter contingit unum Theologum
constantissime asserere se habere Theologicam demonstrationem de aliquo dogmate
and illud deducere per evidentem consequentiam ex sacris literis and
traditionibus patrum, alium vero per oppositum certissime affirmare se habere
demonstrationem Theologieam, quod illud sit baresis. Nec solum hoc contingit
inter duos fingulares Theologos sed inter unam Scholam cum altera, Gonzales in
1 disp. 2, 2. N. 34.
ordinary in the Schools to hear contrary Sects, and Parties, pretending to the
Tradition of the Church of God with equal confidence? Should now the prevailing
Party of a General Council be made up of either of these Sects? Were it
impossible for them to define and deliver for Tradition to Posterity, what
they, according to their Private (but misguided) Judgment esteemed to be such?
Must it be possible for many handreds of Lateran or Basil, Nice or
Constantinople, to pretend Tradition falsely (because in contradiction to each
other) and shall it not be possible for 52 Bishops met at Trent to do so?

But what if she has actually deceived us, Is it infallibly evident that she
cannot do what she has done already, and that as sure as History can make it?
For in the sixteenth Century, we have several Translations of the Bible, set
forth with special Prefaces before them (such were that of Santes Pagrinus, the
Dominician at Lions, that of Antonius Braciolus in Italy) every one delivering,
and declaring the distinction that we make, and was then commonly received,
between the Canonical Books of Scripture, and Apocryphal; may, in that famous
Edition of the complete Bibles set forth by Ximenius the Cardinal, and
Archbishop of Toledo in Spain, and published by the Authority of People Leo,
we are told, that Tobit, Judith, Wisdom, Ecclesiasticus, and the Macchabes,
with the additions to Hester and Daniel, are no Canonical Scripture, but such
as the Church read, rather for edification of the people, then confirmation of
her Faith, Yea, the vulgar Bible printed at Basil, with Lyra's Commentary, and
the ordinary Gloss, do not only number her Books Canonical, and un Canonical
as we do, putting that difference between them is be ween what is dubious, and
what is certain; but farther tells us, That she did it for the Information of
them who being not much used to Scripture, did not know how to put a difference
betwixt them, and so became ridiculous to the Learned. Picus Mirandula assured
us, Admitto igitur Hieronymum in ea fuisse opinione, Bellar: de verbo Dei. l.
1. c. 10.
That the Testimony of St. Jerome in this matter (which punctually accords with
us even our Adversaries being Judges) was esteemed most sacred by the Church.
And Cardinal Caietan (that common Oracle of the days he lived in) says as
expressly, What he received into the Canon that do we; what he rejected, we also
do reject: Nay, That the Latin Church was very much obliged to S. Jerome, who
by making this distinction, had freed us from the reproaches of the Jews: left
them no ground to say of her (what now they may of the Latin Church) That she
had forged a new Canon of her own, with which the Jews had no acquaintance:
It Is true, Catharinus opposed this Sentence, as being contrary to what one or
two Popes had held before him: but he was presently derided for it by one of
his Brother Monks, as an unlearned fellow. And to conclude, Johannes Ferus, in
his Book called An Examination of Persons to be Ordained, See this and much
more in Dr. Cosens's Canon of Scripture, Cent: 16.
informs them of nine Apocryphal Books (the same which are so called by our
Church) which were not anciently used in the Church, and whose Authority was
not pressing: To him you may add Faber Stapulensis, Jodochus Clictovaeus,
Ludovicus Vives, Fr: Georgius, Erasmus, and Driedo, all in this sixteenth
Century: This being so, Can any man imagine that the Canonical Authority of
these Books was looked upon in this Century, as an Apostollick Tradition by the
Church of Rome, and a thing necessary to be taught Posterity? and yet they are
pronounced Canonical by a few Men at Trent, in the same Century; and a
Tradition is pretended for it in defiance to their own and other Churches: If
then we cannot be infallibly assured, that the Church of Rome kept to Tradition
when she most pretended it (yea, are abundantly certain, That in her first
Decree she contradicted the prevailing Doctrine of that very age) What
assurance can we reasonably expect that she always did so?

Obj: The Attestation of One thousand Men of good repute, touching a matter
pretended to be seen by them, and confirmed by their Oath, obliges to belief:
And must not then the Attestation of the Church of Rome, incomparably more
ample, render the matter so indubitablec as that only irrational, vicious, and
wilfully blind persons can recede from it by unbelief? p. 196, 197.

Answ. (1.) I desire to know, Whether it were absolutely impossible that One
thousand hypocritical Pharisees should have procured the repute of honest men?
it being Proverbial amongst the Jews, That if Heaven were designed but for two
persons, the one would be a Scribe, the other a Pharisee: or whether it were
absolutely impossible for One thousand of such persons (who were confessedly
guilty of greater sins, and frequently accustomed to swear a lie by any thing
but the name Jehovah) to attest falsehood with an Oath? and if not, Why should
it be impossible to our Modern Pharisee, who can equivocate as well as he?
Whether the Priests of Apolio were not many Thousands in the World? Whether
they might not be reputed honest Men? and whether it were impossible for them
to consent in an Attestation of such a falsehood which might gain reputation to
that Idol? especially, considering that the Frauds and Artifices of the
Priests, were the usual ways of keeping up the credit of their Idolworship.

Secondly, In some cases such a Testimony will oblige unto Belief: But what if
these Witnesses should be confronted by the Testimony of Two thousand equally
Judicious and Pious Men? What if these Witnesses should very in their
Testimonies, and when met in Councels contradict each other? What if Scripture
and History delivered to us from the unquestionable Tradition of many Millions,
of which this Thousand were a part, should manifestly condemn them of a lie?
What if the thing they undertook to testify, depended not entirely on their
Attestation, but required also the Testimony of the next Age, and so up to the
Apostles days? What if the Attestation were visibly for their own Interest? or
they were partly ignorant of what they did Attest? Would not all or any of
these things sufficiently null their evidence, and vet this is manifestly the
case of your Churches Testimony.

Fifthly, It is no sufficient prejudice against the reasonableness or certainty
of Faith, to confess it to be built upon foundations not absolutely infallible:
This is the natural result of what has been already proved, but 1. That it is
no prejudice unto the prudence and reasonableness of our Faith, is sufficiently
concluded hence, That the most weighty Affairs of Life are built upon
Foundations not absolutely such. No Child has an infallible assurance of his
Parents, no Subject of his Prince; and would it not be madness hereupon to deny
Obedience and Homage to them? our Title to our Estates derived from Ancestors,
our assurance of the Laws of the Land we live in, is but moral; nevertheless,
to doubt or question them upon this account, would be extremely foolish:
moreover, Reason and Prudence oblige us to believe what is highly credible, and
exceedingly more probably then it is contrary: And sure it is, That Christian
Religion is upon various accounts more credible, and built on grounds
incomparably more rational then either irreligion, or any contrary Religion can
pretend to, and consequently I stand bound in Prudence to embrace it.

Obj: But what is fallible may be false; and if so, you have no certainty that
it will be true.

Answ. What is fallible (not because equally poysed betwixt truth and falsehood,
but) only because not demonstrable by Mathematical mediums, or because the
contrary does not imply a contradiction, may yet be of sufficient certainty to
produce assurance: The judgment of sense cannot be proved infallible to the
Sceptick; he will argue from experience, That it may once or twice deceive you,
and thence, that it is not absolutely impossible that it should frequently do
so; that it may deceive you for a minute, and then ask what infallible
assurance you can have that it cannot do so for five, ten, twenty minutes: If
you reply, Your senses are infallible, but with such limitations, as having a
due medium, Organ distance, and the like, he will call for your infallible
assurance, that neither God, nor the devil, do at any time infect the Medium,
dis-tort the Eye, alter the Species, and the like. Now tell me, notwithstanding
this denial of the infallibility of Sense, Whether we have any just temptation
to question what we daily see and hear? Whether he that walls in London streets
may not be certain that he sees a Man or Woman? and yet, less reason had the
Primitive Christians to distrust those Miracles which for some Hundreds of
Years employed not only their own Senses, but the Eyes and Ears of all the
World. Again, The testimony of ten, yea of an hundred Men is fallible (as we
have seen already;) and hence it is evident, That the testimony of Two hundred,
yea a Thousand may be so; for seeing all you add is fallible, their
Testification most be so: Tell me now, Whether I have reason to distrust the
Existence of such a Man as Alexander, Mahomet, or that the Alcoran was
published by him? if not, What reason can I have to doubt of what is delivered
to me with greater evidence of general Tradition touching Scripture and
Christianity? you see now what little ground of fear our Doctrine gives you
that it might happen to be otherwise, p. 196. because we dare not pretend
infallibility, even as little as you have to fear the constant Testimony of
sense, or your own sure footing. And when you add, That it is a damnable and
diabolical Tyranny, to oblige men to the hazards of falsehoods in the matters of
Faith, and in the mean time, profess our selves ignorant whether they be false
or no.

Answ: True: And it is as great a falsehood that we do so. No Sir, in matters
Fundamental we profess as much assurance as Scripture and Tradition can afford;
in matters which admit not of the greatest Evidence, we oblige not unto Faith,
but to Submission and Obedience; and in neither do we profess (what you so
dis-ingeniously impose upon us) That we are ignorant whether they be false or
no.

CAP. II. Of the Guide of Faith.
THat Reason still must be my guide after it has brought me to my Rule of
Faith; Prop. 1.
and were it otherwise (since we have no express from the old Testament that
Jesus of Nazareth or the Son of Joseph was to be the Savior of the world) why
are we sent to Scripture to be convince of it? Why is this word of Prophecy
esteemed a surer evidence thereof then a voice from Heaven? John 5.39. 2 Pet.
1.17. Matt. 22.29. Luke 24.25.
Why does our Savior quarrel with the Jew for not concluding that from
Scripture which was not to be found expressly there? Or rebuke the slowness; of
his own Disciples to believe all the Prophets had delivered touching his Death,
his Resurrection, and Ascension into Glory? When visibly they could not do it
without comparing circumstances, and using a long train of inferences? Why
lastly, are the Beraeans so much commended for their search of Scripture, and
Judgment of Paul's Doctrine thence, seeing his business was to prove that
Christ must needs have suffered, and be raised from the dead, and that Jesus
was the Christ. Act. 17.3.11. should this way be rejected as fallacious, and
unsufficient to establish faith? In vain must be Apollos wisdom endeavoring
hence to convince the Jew that Jesus was the Christ, Act. 18.22. And 'twas
their weakness to be over-powred by it, whilst he produced no express from
Scripture, in vain did Peter, attempt to prove the Resurrection of our Lord
from that of David, Thou will not leave my Soul in Hell; Act. 2.27. and S. Paul
to convince the Jew by Reasoning from Scripture, Act 17.2. In vain did he
compose his whole Epistle to the Hebrews, so full of Rational deductions
thence; in a word to infer the unlawfulness of Divorce for any cause from that
of Genesis, They twain shall be one flesh, of Corban from that of Moses, Honor
thy Father and thy Mother; to infer the Lawfulness of plucking ears of corn
upon the Saboth, from David's eating the Show bread; And lastly to conclude the
Resurrection from that of Moses, I am the God of Abraham, must be according to
the contrary Assertion to argue upon Grounds fallacious, and to interpret
Scripture against or else besides the tenor of the Churches voice.

Secondly, If Reason may not be my Guide in these conclusions as well as
others, then (1.) must not all Arguments produced by the Romanist against our
Church, or upon any other subject, be pronounced null; when bottomed only on
the inferences of Humane Reason, from the Rule of Faith, and must not Vanity be
writ upon the labors of their greatest Champions? Must it not follow that no
promise of the Scripture, can administer comfort, no threatening terror, to the
Soul, that is not either expressly contained in it, or otherwise ascertained
and expounded to us from the Tradition of the Church? And must not then the
greatest part of Scripture-threatnings prove bruta fulina, and its Promises be
as unsignificative? And thirdly might not Jew, and Gentile, Sadducy, and
Pharisy have still excepted against Christ and his Apostles (whose
infallibility they little dreamt of) for making faith depend on the fallacious
deductions of their Reasons, and for moulding Scripture according to their
Daedalean Phancies in opposition to the Churches living voice. Had Mr S. been a
Traditionary Catholic or (which is much the same) a Pharisee in those days, he
would have doubly schoold them, (1.) For choosing a wrong rule of Faith (viz.
Scripture) so to avoid the Church: and next for glossing it as seems best unto
their Reasons and that in opposition to the Church: who by her practical
tradition must interpret. Sure footing. p. 193.

Prop. 2. That to assert Reason as my Guide in matters of Faith, is not to
resolve Faith into humane Reason, for Faith is properly resolved into its
Principal efficient, or formal object, which is not Reason, but to the
Protestant Divine Veracity, to the Catholic the Churches voice for ask the
Protestant why he believes such Articles, or asserts their truth, he presently
replies because revealed in Scripture by that God who cannot lie; whereas the
Catholic must Answer because revealed by that Tradition or that Churches voice
which is infallible, to assure me of the Churches voice is the business of my
Eyes, and ears, to ascertain me of the infallibility of that voice is the work
of Reason; Is now the faith of Catholics resolved into their eyes or ears? Is
it resolved into the use of Reason, and not into the Churches voice? If not,
why must this be objected to the Protestant, because his Reason does assist him
to evince his Scripture to be the product of Divine Veracity? If then you take
this praise in its largest sense, as it imports the enquiry into all its causes
in their several kinds, both Catholics and Protestants do resolve their faith
into humane Reason, as giving them assurance of the infallibility both of
Scripture and Tradition, if in its proper notion as it it implies the principal
efficient cause of Faith, it is evident that neither of them do it. Nevertheless
I freely grant that all the certainty of our Faith in things not punctually
expressed in Scripture, depends upon the certainty of our Reason working upon
the never sailing Rules of Logic, which as it is no disparagement to the
certainty of Faith; so is it a thing common unto us with Catholics, who must
acknowledge with my good Friend, That many things have been delivered by the
Church which were not formally contained in her tradition or the Rule of Faith,
but only thence concluded by the help of Reason. Sure Footing. P. 206.

Prop. 3. The Fundamentals of Christianity ( i. e. all doctrines necessary to
the Salvation of each person) delivered in the Rule of Faith, must be both
evident, and obvious to the eye of Reason, for seeing the proper end of a Rule
is to regulate and direct, and nothing unevident, and obscure whilst such can
do that office unto those, to whom it is so, (for this were to require the
intellect to be regulated by what it cannot know to be a rule) what ever is the
the Rule of Faith (and so of Fundamentals) must evidently declare them to such
persons to whom it is a rule, and is it not monstrous to imagine that God
should have suspended our Salvation and Christ the very being of his Church on
what is obscure, and void of evidence? And secondly seeing what is not obvious
cannot be evident to such persons as are unable to search into the depths of
Reason, and see into the coherence of a continued train of consequences, that
this Rule may be evident to such, it must be obvious, Obvious I say in
delivering the affirmative heads of Christian Faith, not in affording means to
extricate the understanding from all the Sophistry of a Learned Adversary,
which to require from the Rule of Faith (especially as applied to the
illiterate person and his certainty thereof) is as absurd, and monstrous as to
require in order to his certainty that he sees, walks, or hears, that he should
have ability to Answer all the quirks of Zeno, and demurs of a Gascendus to the
contrary. As therefore in these matters the clear and immediate evidence of
sense is a sufficient preservative to the rudest person from all the Sophisms
of Zeno, and his Academy; even so the full and pregnant evidence of
Fundamentals, (especially if joynd with that internal evidence of the Holy
Spirit which is promised by our Savior to all those that do his will) is
sufficient settlement unto the meanest person capable of Religion against all
the Fallacies of a subtle Heretic.

Coroll. Hence I conceive it Sophistically objected by my Friend, That we prove
and defend our Faith by skils and languages, history, and humane learning and
so make them our Rule of Faith. For we aver the Fundamentals of our Faith are
so perspicuously revealed in Scripture as to need no farther skill to apprehend
them, then what is necessary to understand that language in which our Rule of
Faith is writ, yea what is equally necessary to understand the Churches voice
which constantly is delivered by her representatives in Greek or Latin, and
therefore the preceding skils are not of absolute necessity to Faith in
General, but only to some portions of it of which we may be ignorant without
considerable prejudice to our eternal welfare; (of which nature is the
legitimacy of Baptism conferred by Heretics, the Millenium etc.) and if we use
such mediums in matters of the highest nature, we do it still ex abundanti,
either to conclude the same things from obscurer places, which are
perspicuously revealed elsewhere, or to obviate the evasions, and confute the
cavils of the Heretics, all which the Catholic does and must do, both when
engaged with him, and us.

Thus when again he tells us, That our Rule is deal Characters, waxen-natured,
and pliable to the Dedalean Fancy of the ingenious moulders of new opinions,
P. 194.

Ans. It Is true some passages there are in it which are, and may be wrested to
such evil purposes, but still the Fundamentals of our Faith are such as are by
no means pliable to any other sense.

Prop. 4. Reason in judging of the sense of Scripture is regulated partly by
principles of Faith, partly by Tradition, partly by Catholic maxims of her own.

1. By Principles of Faith, for Scripture is to be interpreted secundum
analogiam Fidei, that is (say we) particular Texts of Scripture, when dubious
are so to be interpreted, as not to contradict the Fundamentals of Faith, or
any doctrine which evidently and fully stands asserted in the Word of God. and
2ly since Scripture cannot contradict it self; When any Paragraph of Scripture
absolutely considered is ambiguous, that sense must necessarily obtain which is
repugnant to no other paragraph, against what may be so, and thus may Scripture
regulate me in the sense of Scripture, and what I know of it, lead me to the
sense of what I do not.

Secondly, By tradition, for since tradition is necessary to assure us that
there were once such men as the Apostles who delivered that Christianity, and
these Scriptures to us which we now embrace, to question the sufficiency of the
like tradition, to assure me of the sense of Scripture, is virtually to call in
question the motives which induce us to believe it such; this then would be an
excellent help unto the sense of Scripture, only the mischief is that where it
can be had, we do not want it, and where we want it it is but too visible it
cannot be had: Note only that I speak here of a like tradition, to which two
things are requisite. First, That it be as general as that of Scripture. And
Secondly, That it be such as evidenceth it self by Reason, to have been no
forgery (as here it does, it being morally impossible that the whole Church, in
the delivery of Scripture to us, should deceive or be deceived.) For the
infallibility of Tradition does not consist entirely in the delivery of such a
Doctrine, but in the assurance which it gives my reason that it could not
possibly have been embraced upon other terms. The Baptism of Infants is at
present (as the communicating of Infants was of old) the tradition of the
Church, but this gives no unquestionable assurance of the truth, or derivation
of these customs from our Lord, and his Apostles, for happily the Church embraced
them upon other motives; The 1. from a conceived analogy therein to
Circumcision, The 2d from a mistake of that of the Evangelist except you eat my
flesh etc.

Coroll. Hence you may see how injurious my Friend is, in representing us as
rejectors of Tradition, whereas we manifestly own it where we can have
assurance of it, only we dare not boast of it, as the Papist does where it is
notoriously evident that both do want it, we own the constant not the present
Tradition of the Church.

Corol. 2. Hence see the stability of the Faith of Protestants above that of
Papists: The Protestant first denies the Tradition which the Catholic pretends
to, to be sufficient ground of Faith; And 2dly, he denies the Articles of his
Faith to have the least Sure-footing in Tradition, or his rule of Faith nay
proves them wholly opposite unto it; the Papist does acknowledge that even by
his own, the Prorestants Rule of Faith, must be infallibly certain, and
pronounces her Anathema, upon all who do not own both Scripture and Tradition
for infallible, and receive them both pari pietatis affectu, with the like
pious affection, as the Trent Council phraseth it, Sess. 4. The Papists Faith
is not to be found in the Protestants Rule of Scripture, and this necessitates
him to fly unto Tradition, but the Protestants Creed and all his fundamentals
are confessedly certain from the Papists Rule; if therefore prudence does
direct us to the safer way, and that be such which both sides do agree upon,
(which they so frequently insist on to pervert the people) it must be every
man's concern to be a (Protestant rather then a Papist.

Thirdly, Reason is herein guided by her propper Maxims, and cannot rationally
admit of any thing as the sense of Scripture, which is apparently repugnant to
them; for seeing it is impossible to yield a rational assent without reason, it
must be more impossible to do it against reason. Besides, right Reason must be
true, and therefore should a Revelation be manifestly repugnant unto right
Reason, it must equally be opposed to truth.

Thirdly, Do we not all endeavor to give Reasons of our Faith? Would we not all
be thought to follow it, when we conclude our Faith from Scripture or
Tradition? Should we renounce her conduct, might not the worst absurditys be
embraced as the sense of Scripture, and find their Patrimony from thence,
without all fear of refutation from that Reason, which must not be admitted to
dispute its sense? must it not follow, That no Controversy could be
determined, no Dispute resolved, no Contest about the sense of Scripture find
an issue from any rational procedure?

Obj: But does not the Mystery of the Sacred Trinity, the Resurrection of the
Body, the Hypostatical Union, speak Contradictions unto Humane Reason? Why
therefore do you not expunge them from among the Articles of your Faith?

Answ: These things, as far as Scripture does assert them, are liable to no
immediate Contradictions; but if your Curiosity proceed to dive into the Modes
of their Existence, you will presently discourse your self into perplexing
Difficulties, not in these only, but most other Matters: That God is
omnipresent, speaks no contradiction to my Reason; but to enquire into the
Modus of this Presence, is to be lost in mazes of them: That he has infinite
Duration, is a necessary truth; but to call this Duration momentaneous or
successive, is to lay a foundation for endless Contradictions; to assert Gods
Omniscience, is to assert a most received Article of our Faith, but how this
knowledge can consist with the contingency of things, is beyond humane
infirmity to show, that there is such a thing as motion we all see, but whether
it be a mode, quality, or substance, successive only, or instantaneous,
continued or intermixed with morula's, needs an Elias to resolve us; that there
is quantity and corporeal Beings in the world, our senses can assure us, but
how their parts are knit unto each other, and how far they may be divided, is
indeed a Philosophic Trinity, it is then no prejudice to the forementioned
Articles, that we may discourse them into contradictions, since this is common
to them, with the most ordinary things our senses view, the reason of these
perplexing difficulties in matters of this nature, may happily be the exceeding
greatness or parvitude of the thing, which renders it impossible for us to
frame Ideas of them, from any thing which occurs unto our senses; and
consequently to pass judgment on them, thus all the difficulties both of
quantity and motion are bottomed upon instants and indivisibles, and that which
gravels still the mind in the consideration of a Deity, is the infinity of his
nature, and therefore these affections of Goodness, Wisdom, and Mercy etc.
Which we style communicable, when once infinity is annexed to them, do as much
be jade the intellect, as that amazing mystery of the holy Trinity; but
secondly, I answer,

Ans. 2. That Reason cannot think it proper to apply her maxims to these
instances, and consequently cannot judge them repugnant thereunto. This will
appear from these conclusions,

1. That Reason Guided by her own maxims, Tradition and by Scripture, assures
me that the divine nature is incomprehensible, it being impossible that what is
finite should comprehend what is infinite, and certainly if Mathematics have
her Paradoxes, and can vie demonstrations pro and con, if matters obvious to
sense do so be jade the intellect, and lock it up in contradictions, it is
little to be hoped she should conveigh her self through the infinite abyss of
of divine perfections, and not suffer shipwreck.

2. That infinite perfection may deliver such things of it self which are
incomprehensible, because it may deliver what in it self it is.

3. That Reason cannot pretend to judge by her own maxims, of the Truth or
Falsehood of what she does acknowledge to exceed her reach; For sure she cannot
reasonably pretend to know what thus exceeds her knowledge, much less to judge
of what she does not know?

4. That Reason cannot conclude that to be repugnant to her maxims which she
acknowledges to be such of which her maxims cannot judge, for this is to apply
these maxims where they ought not to be applied, and to frame consequences upon
terms whereby the things they signify are not understood, and in effect to
reject the proportions of the Sun and Stars unto the Earth, which Mathematics
gives us as repugnant to the sense.

5. That notwithstanding this, Reason does force me to attribute to God all
that is perfection, and remove the contrary, he being therefore
incomprehensible because infinite in perfection, whence albeit I do not
comprehend his nature, yet can I rationally conclude him not corporeal, because
that necessarily subjects him to variety of imperfections.

6. This does not prejudice the use of Reason in other matters, any more then
the Asymptoticks of the Mathematics, the cruces logicorum, the Insolubilia of
other sciences do prejudice our getting knowledge in these matters, by the use
of Reason.

Corol. Hence evident it is, That Scripture must not always be interpreted
according to the Letter, or Grammatical importance of the words, because that
often is contradictory both to reason, tradition, and the Analogy of Faith,
this cannot be disputed by any person who is not professedly industrious to
render Scripture odious and ridiculous, there being nothing more abhorrent from
humane nature then some Scriptures are in their Grammatical importance, but
you object,

Ob. If Reason must guide you sometimes so as to deny the clear letter of
Scripture (or to deny the Spouse of Christ, is properly whatever she is styled
in the Canticles) by what principles must Reason be regulated in this enquiry,
Whether God has hands and feet, etc. page 193.

Ans. 1. By Principles of Faith, or those perspicuous Scriptures, which
dogmatically aver that he is a Spirit invisible, and without all shape, and
lastly, attribute unto him many things repugnant to a body, and this you see is
done antecedently to the known sense of some Scriptures, though not of all. And
2. by Reason, assuring me that corporeity is incompatible with that power,
which is every where infinite: That it is an imperfection, and so not incident
to this all-perfect Being; that it interferes with his simplicity and
independance, degrades him beneath the rank of Angels, and humane Souls, which
Scriptures represent as incorporeal, that to ascribe such Phrases properly unto
him, must represent him the worst of Monsters (as having wings and seven eyes,
and putting on more shapes then ever Proteus did) and render his reproofs of
Heathen Images irrational and absurd.

Ob. But is not this to fly back for refuge to the old rule Humane Reason,
which you seemingly renounced when you had found your new Rule of Faith.

Ans. Its power to pass judgment of the truth of what is revealed in Scripture
I did, and do renounce, its assistance in finding out the sense of Scripture, I
cannot renounce without the sorfeiture of Reason.

Corol. 2. Hence it must follow, that to be expressly contained in Scripture, is
not to be the mind of God contained in Scripture, for that God is a Shepherd
and a Roaring Lion, a Lanthorn, and a wall of fire, that he begat Israel, and
does continue to beget Believers. That the Messiah is a Lamb, a Lion, and a
Stag, a Worm, Plant, Fagle, Root, and Cedar, this and much more is expressly
told us from Scriptures letter, but to infer hence that Reason guided by
Scripture cannot otherwise interpret them but it must Violently wrest the
Scripture, and be so absolutely the Rule of Faith, as to control and baffle
Scripture though clearly revealing, p. 192. is to make Christ the worst of
Monsters, to out do all the Fables of the Poets, and represent the God of
Heaven more ridiculous then an Heathen Jupiter. Secondly, I defire to know
whether the Church of Rome does own and sense these places according to the
letter, or contradict and wrest, baffle and control the clearest revelations
of the word of God by doing otherwise.

Qu. But if to be in express terms in Scripture, be not to be clearly revealed
there, what is it to be thus revealed.

Ans. It Is manifestly to be the mind of God contained in Scripture. Which being
so if you continue to imagine that every thing contained in Scriptures letters,
is clearly manifested to be the mind of God in Scripture, then must you either
contradict what is clearly manifested so to be, or cut off hands, and feet, and
pluck out eyes, that you may be Christ's Disciple: if you enquire farther amidst
all the variety of Tropes and Figurative Expressions used in Scripture, how
any thing can be manifested to be the mind of God revealed: I Answer, by the
very same means and circumstances, by which we know the mind of one another,
notwihstanding all the variety of Tropes and Figures, which we use in ordinary
Discourse or Writing, how often does the Divine, the Poet, the Historian, and
especially the Orator flourish in all the arts of Rhetoric, and Grace his
subject with the chiosest flowers of Eloquence, and yet presents it in a dress
as clear, as it is pleasant, and were not men wilfully perverse, they would
have less reason to complain of the obscurity of the Scripture in matters
necessary to Salvation, upon this account.

When therefore you thus Argue, That God has Hands, Feet, Nostrils, is plainly
writ in your Rule of Faith, p. 121. and therefore is revealed in it; the
inference must be weak, and the Foundations of it are already overturned. And
yet however you suppose it, all along, I peremptorily deny that it is
possitively asserted in any Scripture, that God has Hands, Feet, Nostrils.
True, we are told the Heavens are the Workmanship of his hands etc. But to
infer it from such places would force you to acknowledge that the Word of God
is Milk, and that Milk is Rational, because Saint Paul has styled it (...).
Here therefore is no need to captivate my Reason, much less to Answer as you
would have me, That the contrary is plain in Scripture too, page 191. and so
that Scripture holds forth plainly contradictions, this Answer so dishonorable
to God and Scripture, so repugnant unto Faith, Reason and Tradition I permit to
be your own.

CHAP. III. Of the Rule of Faith.
Prop: 1. SEeing Divine Faith, in the proper import of the words, is an assent
to Divine Authority revealed, whatever I assent to, as an Article of Faith, I
must assent to as being the revealed will of God; whence evident it is, That
the mind or will of God revealed, and nothing else, must be my Rule of Faith.
Again, What is the proper office of a Rule, but to examine what is to be ruled
by it? Must we not pass a Judgment on our Weights and Measures, by bringing
them to the Rule and Standard? In like manner, Do we not examine each
Theological conclusion by this Enquiry, Whether it be the mind of God revealed
or not, and from the Answer made unto it, pass Judgment on the thing in
Question? This therefore is the Rule of every Theological conclusion: And so of
Faith.

Corol. 1. Hence it will follow, That not Tradition, but the mind of God
revealed in Scripture, or Tradition, is the Rule of Faith: And indeed,
Tradition (where it as certain as Mr. S. supposes it) would be the formal
Object, but not the Rule of Faith, which two things are miserably confounded
through the whole Series of my Friends Discourse, as will appear from the
distinctive Characters of them both, as they are excellently given us in the
Learned Baron, Apoll: p. 34. S. 6.

First then, A Rule is that Exemplar by which the mind is regulated, and to
which it ought to be conformable; and so the Rule of Faith is that Exemplar
which we ought to follow, and conform unto in Matters of Faith: Now such
apparently is the mind of God revealed in general, nor is the voice of Christ,
or of Tradition such, but on presumption that they are the mind of God
revealed.

Secondly, The Rule does limit, and determine what is ruled by it; even so the
Rule of Faith must fix the Bounds of Faith, instructing us what and how many
are the material Objects of it.

Thirdly, The effect of the Rule of Faith, is that knowledge which preceeds the
act of Faith; for it informs the Intellect, by proposing to it what is
requisite to be believed, but not evincing it to be such.

Fourthly, The Rule of Faith is only a comprehensive Systeme of all the
Articles of Faith, as the Rules of Grammar are a comprehensive Systeme of such
things as are to be observed in composing Latin, Greek, etc. Now all these
things do visibly agree unto the mind of God revealed, but are as visibly
inconsistent with Tradition, as it imports a delivery down from hand to hand of
the sense and Faith of Fathers to their Children; Sure footing, p. 41.
for, not the Tradition, but the (...) traditum, or Faith delivered is the
mind of God revealed, and consequently the Rule of Faith. But now the formal
Object is that which causes us to believe the Rule of Faith; and in my Friends
expression, applys with certainty Divine Authority to my understanding, p. 181.
which sure is the pretended business of Tradition, and the whole intendment of
sure footing

Cor: 2. Hence evident it is, That Scriptures Letter, as abstracted from the
sense included, cannot possibly be the Rule of Faith, because, as such, it
cannot be the mind of God revealed: and when my Friend concludes, p. 13. We
cannot own the sense or things contained in Scripture for the Rule of Faith,
because they are the very Points of Faith, of which the Rule of Faith is to
ascertain us: He gives a pregnant Instance of that ignorance of the term I
charge him with, for evident it is from what we have discoursed, That the Rule
of Faith is only a Collection of the Points of Faith, and that its business is
not to ascertain, but propound what is ascertained by the formal Object; nay,
may I not conclude with parity of Reason, that the Churches voice, abstracted
from the signification or import of it is to the Catholic the Rule of Faith,
because the matters signified by that voice are the very Points of Faith of
which the Churches voice is to ascertain us.

Corol: 3. Hence we may rectify these loose conceptions of the Rule of Faith,
so frequent in the Animadversions of Mr. S. thus when he asks, p. 188. Is not
that speaking formally and properly the Rule of Faith, which gives us Christ's
sense.

Answ. That is indeed the Rule of Faith, which gives Christ's sense
subjectively, so as to contain, and be the mind of Christ revealed in
Scripture, not that which gives it, only by declaring the importance of the
words in which this sense is clothed; for then each Pamphlet of this nature
must be a Rule of Faith unto the Reader, each Mass Priest to the illiterate
Papist, each Nomenclator, Postiller, and Comment to the Mass-Priest as often as
they explain unto him the sense and meaning of his Rule of Faith. Thus when
again we are entreated to consider, That a Rule to such an effect, is the
immediate knowledge to the power as conversant about the effect, p. 190. From
what has been delivered we conclude such knowledge, cannot be the rule but the
effect thereof (even as my skill in making syllogisms is the effect of logic
rules) V.G. I doubt of such a truth, put case the Divinity of Christ, the
effect is conviction, the mind of God revealed in Scripture is my rule, this
rule informs my knowledge, and that knowledge produces the assent.

Cor. 4. Hence evident it is that neither Reason, nor skill in Arts or Sciences
is made our Rule of Faith, because we do not look upon them as the mind of God
revealed, or any part thereof. It Is true my Friend endeavors to fasten this
upon us, but by such mediums as show too evidently he was not well acquainted
with the terms he used. And first, That Reason and its Maxims are our Rule of
Faith, he thus endeavors to conclude: p. 190. He that judges must have some
principles in his head by which he is regulated in making such a judgment,
those principles then must be his Rule in that action, and if that judgment be
an adhaesion to the point of Faith (that is if the cause be the effect, for no
man adhers to any point of Faith, till he has judged it to be such) these
principles are his Rule of Faith; now do not Protestants often conclude the sense
of Scripture from maxims of their Humane Reason?

Ans. (Besides the blunder which my Parenthesis takes notice of) we have a
greater weakness in this Argument: For it supposes all by which my Judgment is
assisted in determining of what is Faith, or finding out the sense of any
Scripture to be my Rule of Faith. (and therefore is as effectual to persuade
the Gallenist his skill in Greek, is his Rule for Practice, as inabling him to
find out certainly the rules of Galen) whereas to be the Rule of Faith is a
thing proper to these Principles, which contain the material Objects of Faith.

Secondly, I desire to know whether your continual Disputes (managed by Maxims
of your private Reason) touching the sense of almost every Canon of the Trent,
and other Councels, whose definitions you embrace as the Churches voice, do not
plainly manifest the Maxims of Reason to be as much your Rule as ours?

And thirdly, Whether what was sufficient to produce Faith in me, and upon
which its certainty depends entirely, may not sufficiently assure me of one
particular Object of it?

Secondly, That skill in Arts and Sciences, Language and History, are made our
Rules of Faith, is concluded from a double Argument.

Obj: 1. That in Disputes against them, we prove and defend our Faith by such
skills as Language, History, and other Knowledge got by humane Learning, and
consequently hold it upon the Tenure of these Skills, which therefore are our
Rule of Faith. p. 190.

Answ. This is a very formidable Argument, and must force you to confess, That
in proving and defending of your Faith against us Protestants, you never show
your skill in History, or any other part of humane Learning, or to acknowledge
(what you abhor so much, p. 188.) that these also are your Rules of Faith:
Should a Jew, Socinian, or Pagan, use this very Argument against your Church, I
wonder how you would avoid the blow?

Secondly, Your next Assault runs thus: Do not these Skills clear the letter of
Scripture; that is, make known Gods sense to you? if so, since their immediate
effect is to clear it, it is impossible to deny but they are at least part of
the Revelation (as if it were impossible to deny the Comment to be a part of
that Text it clears) for revealing is clearing; and Gods sense was not
clearly revealed but by these means, that is, by humane Maxims, and so they are
at least the more formal part of your Rule of Faith.

Answ. I remember when I learned my Grammar, that I had a Construing Book, the
immediate effect of which, was to clear to me the sense of my Rules co^tain'd
in Propria quae maribus, Quae Genus, etc. but never was I so happy as to know
that my Construing book was part of them, or to which special Rule it did
belong: I knew indeed that revealing was clearing, and that the sense of these
special Rules was not clearly revealed to me, but by means of my Construing
Book; but was not so inured to Science, and versed in true Logic, as to be
able to infer thence, That it was at least the most formal part of the Rules
forementioned, but must thank my Friend for his Instruction in so deep a
Mystery, and confess I owe that Light I have received in this Point, to his
noonday Sun of self-evidence.

For a close you ask, Might I not have mistaken the true sense of Scripture
without these humane Maxims? if so, then they, not Scriptures-letter, are my
Rule of Faith. p. 191.

Answ. And must that necessarily be my Rule of Faith, without which I might
possibly have mistaken any portion of it? then good Eyes, and Ears, and
diligence in using of them; good Dispositions, Judgment, Instruction, etc.
must be my Rule of Faith; for without these, it is very probable I may be
frequently mistaken in the sense thereof.

Prop. 2. That notwithstanding any thing M. S. has pleaded to the contrary,
Scripture may be a Rule of Faith, for to object, That Christian Religion had
descended many steps ere the Scriptures parts were much scattered, much less
the whole collected, is effect to argue thus, Scripture was not a Rule to those
that wanted, and therefore cannot be such unto those that have it: 'twas not
the only Rule to those who were assisted by the infallible guidance of the
Authors and Propounders of it, graced with the extraordinary assistance of the
same Spirit, who drank even from the Fountain and Springhead of Tradition, and
therefore it cannot be so to us who are removed from it 16 Centuries, and
destitute of all those Privileges and Advantages which they enjoyed: And yet
remarkable it is, That amidst all these Enjoyments the newborn Christian is
sent unto his Scripture Rule; his word of Prophecy, bid to give heed unto it
as a thing more certain then a voice from Heaven, writ designedly for his
instruction, able to make his wise unto salvation, perfect both in Faith and
Manners, and make him thoroughly furnished unto all good Works: and after all,
the Apostles are inspired to indite and to deliver the New Testament unto them
to be the pillar and the ground of Faith; and can it be imagined that
Scriptures so comparatively obscure, so purposely designed for, and
accommodated to the Jewish Paedagogy, should be thus commended and enjoined by
the Spirit of God as a Rule unto the Christian, when graced with all the helps
forementioned; and yet that Scripture which was indicted by the same unerring
Spirit, in a more familiar way with great plainness of speech, 2 Cor. 3.12, 13.
and not obscured by a vail, as was that of Moses, which is exceedingly more
full of moral Precepts, and Rules of Faith and Manners, of gracious Promises to
comfort, and Exhortations to persuade to Patience and every other Virtue; which
lastly, was Indicted not in a Tongue peculiar to the Land of Jury, but such as
was most generally spoken throwout all the World, should never be intended as a
Rule unto them, when destitute of those assistances?

Obj: 2. It Is objected secondly, That that can never be a Rule which many
follow, and yet their thoughts straggle into many several Judgments in Points
of so great moment as the Trinity. ibid.

Answ. If you imagine that these straglers do indeed keep close unto the mind
of God revealed in Scripture, you blaspheme the Holy Ghost, and make the Word
of God the very sourse of Heresy: if you affirm that cannot be a Rule which
such pretend to follow, you in effect assert the Law of Nature, and right
Reason could not be the Gentiles rule, and that he had no Pharaoh's to guide
him to the knowledge of the Being and Attributes of God, because they generally
took up with such uncouth notions, and gross absurdities in matters which are
evident from the light of Reason: That neither Scripture nor Tradition could be
a Rule unto the Jew, who branched into such Sects, as either did evacuate the
Law of God by their Traditions, or denied the Resurrection: That Tradition is
no Rule of Faith; or otherwise, That no pretender to it was ever guilty of an
Heresy, And lastly, That the denial of Tradition must be the only Heresy;
all which are monstrous Absurdities, and yet the natural Results of your
Assertion.

To conclude this Section, I must crave leave to mind my Friend of an early
brood of Carpocratian Heretics, who being confounded by the Scriptures to be
revenged of them gave it out, Cum ex Scripturis arguuntur in accusationem
convertantur ipsarum Scripturarum, quasi non recte habeant, neque sint ex
authoritate, die quia vary sunt dictae and quia non possit ex his inveniri
veritas, ab his, qui nesciunt traditionem, non enim per literas traditam illam,
sed per vivam vocem Iren. lib. 3. cap. 2.
(1.) That they were not as they should be (viz. the Original copies being not
preserved entire Disc. 2. S. 5. and 7.) had not authority sufficient (there
being no means to convince the Sceptick, the acute Adversary, yea the rational
doubter of their trath, no certainty of Scripture in it self and no
ascertableness of it unto as Disc. 4. S. 1. etc.) And (3) That they were spoken
variously (or so as to admit of diverse senses, Disc. 2. S. 6.8.) And lastly,
That in them the truth could not be found by such a were ignorant of Tradition,
it being not delivered by writing but by oral Tradition. Good Sir, I do not in
the least suspect that you have Carpocratians Manuscript, or that this passage
of the Father did supply you with the heads of your Discourse, however it will
let you see that he adheres firm to your Rule, p. 589. If then your inference
stand good, the Carpocratian must be owned for your Brother Catholic, if bad,
then blush hereafter to conclude our union with Socinus, because we both
acknowledge the same Rule of Faith.

Prop. 3. That the Churches voice or practical Tradition is not necessary to
acquaint us with the sense of Scripture as my Friend would have it, for if so
(1.) Scripture must be in vain delivered to us: for where I have the suffrage
of infallible Tradition I cannot want it, where I want that I cannot have it.
(2.) In vain are all the Comments of the Church of Rome, for where Tradition is
silent they want a certain Rule to go by, and therefore must be silent to, or
speak at all adventures, and where she speaks her evidence is such as renders
all their pains superfluous. (3.) All Arguments from Scripture must be vain
whether intended to convince the Heretic, or your brother Catholic, if you
contend against your Brother Heretic from Scripture, he presently demands
whence have you your assurance of that sense of Scripture which you plead for,
if you reply from the tradition of your Church, he laughs to hear you beg the
Question, if from any other Medium, he presently returns upon you is it certain
yea, or no? If not, then may it happily deceive him, if so, then do you act the
Protestant, and own some other certain Guide unto the sense of Scripture then
that of practical Tradition; it is vain also to dispute from Scripture with your
Brother Chatholick, for if you have no practical Tradition to assure you of the
sense of Scripture you have no Medium to convince him by, if you have practical
Tradition it is self-evident, and consequently cannot be matter of dispute or
questioned by your Brother Traditors whilst such, whence it must necessarily
follow that all the School Disputes, and all endeavors of your brother
Catholic, to decide a controversy from Scripture must be in vain, all their
arguments from Scripture precarious, and all their pretensions to Tradition in
these matters wilful cheats: if this be not sufficient, let me farther ask
whether all moral duties comprised in Scripture may be interpreted by
Tradition: if not, whether they be not useless to us; if so whether the Jesuits
and Italian Papists hold no Doctrines inconsistent with them, or whether that
can be esteemed the Tradition of the Church which is supposed by so great and
powerful Members of it? Whether these were the only means and measures of
interpretation to the Jewish Church, if not, how came they to be needful to the
Christian, whose Rule is much the clearer, and whose assistance from that
Spirit which leads unto truth far greater? If so, then let us brand our
Savior for a Malefactor, and pronounce with them that by their Law he ought to
dye, let us reject his Kingdom as being wholly Spiritual, and therefore opposite
to what Tradition taught them to expect, let us reject his Law, as cancelling
and dissolving that of Moses which they pronounced eternal: yea lastly, let us
impeach the Arguments of Christ, and his Apostles as not only wanting this
Authentic medium to arrive at the sense of Scripture, but being manifestly
repugnant thereunto, or at least admire at the stupidity of the Scribes and
Pharisees, who (albeit they sat in Moses Chair) should neither plead this in
their own behalf, nor accuse our Savior, or his Apostles for their pragmatical
opposition to it, but this argument is so copious, and the dream so entirely
Beamenistical, that I shall not upbraid the Readers understanding by its
farther refutation,

Prop. 4. Tradition is not the only Rule of Faith, for if so, the Church must
lie exposed to the greatest perils, and want a rule of Faith in matters of the
highest moment. For if Tradition be the sole Rule of Faith,

First, certain it is, that where we want Tradition, we must want the Rule of
Faith, and consequently must waver, and be undetermined in all these instances
and cases in which Tradition proves silent.

2. It Is manifest that what is eagerly maintained, and practiced by many
thousand Romish Proselites, asserted by whole Sects and Orders of their Gravest
men, what passes daily uncontrouled both from Press and Pulpit, as having
nothing contrary to the Churches Doctrine, and the Rule of Faith, nay is
acknowledged to be such by those who violently oppose it, what lastly does not
render the Abettors of it, how numerous soever, guilty of an Heresy, nor
subject them to the censure of the Church, cannot interfere with the Tradition
of the Church, or be condemned by it, or if so Tradition cannot be
self-evident, as my Friend would have it.

Thirdly evident it is that many positions of this nature are stiffly canvased
in the Schools, many such practices used in the Church of Rome, which if
espoused and practiced, must expose the Soul to the greatest peril in matters
of the highest moment: For instance,

1. Therefore they lie open to the peril of a defective, or excessive Rule of
Faith, for what assurance can they have whether the definition of the Pope
alone, or in conjunction with his Cardinals be the infallible guide of Faith,
or whether this be the peculiar business of a Council, and whether this
infallibility respect substantials only, or circumstances, Faith or Fact, the
conclusion only, or the premises; whether it rest upon the due proceedings of
the Council, the Confirmation of the Pope, the consequent approbation of the
Church, or be wholly independent on them, whether the Tradition of the present
Church be indeed a Rule, or only such Traditions, which can extrinsically be
proved Apostolical, whether this Tradition be a total, or a partial Rule, and
what are the infallible Criterions of it; these things are hotly contested in
the Church of Rome, and therefore cannot be defined by her Tradition, what
remains then but that each soul lie open to the peril of a false defective, or
excessive, yea contradictory Rule of Faith.

2. They lie exposed to the peril either of Superstition, and Idolatry on the
one hand, or Sacrilege on the other: for (to omit their infinite divisions
about the Worship due to Saints, Angels, and the Blessed Virgin, the Veneration
due to Relics, the sacrament, and its appendages, and touch only upon that of
Images) they are altogether uncertain whether they ought to pay their homage to
the image or before it only, (which is asserted by some few, though censured by
their expurgatory Indexes) whether this Homage must be dulia or latria, and if
so, whether absolute, and simple, or only Analogically so called, whether all
or any part of this pretended worship be due unto the image absolutely
considered, or only relatively, as it refers to that of which it is an Image, in
these matters to be deficient is presently to be Sacrilegious, by robbing the
Image of that honor which is due unto it, to exceed is to be guilty of
Superstition, or Idolary, by giving it that Homage which belongs not to it, and
how to fleer my course so as not dash on either of these rocks Tradition cannot
possibly assist me.

3. They must be insmitely uncertain in matters of obedience to God. For seeing
it is as evident as the Sun, and lately manifested by Montalius (a Catholic)
that the Doctrines of the Jesuited Papist touching Repentance, Good intentions,
the Love of God, etc. do cut the sinews of all virtue, and null the precepts of
true piety, and equally certain, that they are maintained by the gravest
Doctors of their Church, nay styled the common Doctrine of the Church, is
follows that they interfere not with their Rule of Faith and therefore cannot
be reproved by it.

4, They must be destitute of all the preservatives against the vilest of
Rebellions, it being frequently asserted in the Schools and held by most
confiderable members of that Church, that Catholics may be absolved from their
Oaths, Vows, and Covenants made to Princes, and authorized by his Holiness to
depose them. From what has been discoursed, it must follow that if Tradition
be the only Rule of Faith: then

1. Should Catholics act up to the most desperate consequences of such
opinions which pass thus current in the Church of Rome, they could not possibly
be condemned by or rationally be said to deviate from her Rule of Faith.

2. That the vilest Christian and worst of Subjects may do all that Catholic
Religion, and his duty does oblige him too, because all that practical
Tradition, or the Churches living voice requires; that what is strangely
opposite and scandalous to Christianity, and destructive unto Civil Government
is yet assistent with their Rule of Faith, and that it is lawful to opine at
pleasure in these matters.

3. That these diseases must be all incurable, and admit of no redress for to
make them pass into Tradition, and improve themselves into articles of Faith,
is to empower the Church to coin new articles, and pretend Tradition where it
is not to be had.

4. That what ever has been said of some does equally proceed against all
other scandalous opinions of their Church, of which nature 'twere easy to
collect sufficient to tire mine own, and the Readers patience.

CAP. IV. Of the Authority of the Church in matters of Faith.
THAT the Church is a Society, Prop. 1.
the very name, and notorelty of the thing, the definition, members,
discipline, and constitutions of it do sufficiently declare.

Prop. 2. That this society must be invested with a Ruling power, is certain,
both from the nature of all Civil union, which implies a compact, and that a
Governor, whose business it is, to see that they who enter into compact, do
not violate the laws thereof, as also from the ends of this Society, viz. The
union and due ordering of her Members and execution of her discipline to the
correction, or exclusion of such persons who cooperate toward her ruin.

Prop. 3. The Church is a Society of Believers, or of men united in the belief
of certain Articles, as the Foundations of it, hence styled fundamental
Articles, this is the joint consent of Christians, however in the notion and
number of their fundamentals they differ much.

Corol. Hence it must follow that Church Governors must be empowered to require
the belief of or positive assent unto these Fundamendal Articles, as being
otherwise unable to secure the Being, and provide against the ruin of that
Church, of which they are a part. When therefore M. S. so confidently gives out
(without all manner of exceptions) that our Church is Shamefaced of obliging
others to believe her, p. 194. and that she professes her self very heartily
content with external obedience, let the interior assent go where it will: p.
199. I cannot but admire, that so ingenious a person should vent such things,
which every day confutes, and tell our Church, she expects not that her members
should believe that Creed which she esteems her fundamentals, inserts into her
Catechisms, requires us to Agnize in Baptism, rehearse in all her Sacred
offices, and that with a peculiar circumstance designed to signify our assent
unto and readiness to defend it.

Obj. But do you not in big words ask when did she challenge any power over our
minds and consciences? p. 198. And does not M. S. well infer, that therefore
you deny that she requires an interior assent. Ans. No, these things are vastly
different, require interior assent he may, who being authorized to guide me in
matters of faith can evidence what he thus requires to be the will of God
revealed, yea such interior assent is due from Children to their Parents, from
Servants to their Masters, much mere from People to their Pastors when
evidencing their duty to them, but challenge power over the mind and
conscience, he only can who is Lord of the conscience, and whose laws by an
immediate virtue bind the conscience, for what binds only mediately, has not
this obligatory power from any virtue of the Legislator over the mind and
conscience, but only from that power which commands the conscience to obey such
Legislators.

And if interior assent may be required, I wonder why it should be more
irrational, to go about to lay an obligation on the Cathol. p. 199. by these
two Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, then upon the Protestant (as my Friend
imagines.) That it should be rational to bind the loyal Subject by those Oaths,
but irrational to bind those whose Treacheries and conspiracies first made them
necessary, if difference of Religion be a just exemption, then may the Quaker,
Anabaptist, and other turbulent persons which renounce our Church, plead for a
share in this exemption, and King and Parliament must be unjust and tyrannous
in laying such a burden on them.

Prop. 4. A particular Church cannot require this assent upon pretense of an
infallible assistance,) (for seeling all have the like title to it, it would be
imposisible for any of them to have erred) and therefore she must do it because
the thing determined is so evident in the Rule of Faith, that all denial of it
must be wilful, for seeing it is already proved that she has power to require
this assent, and that this power cannot derive from an infallible assistance,
what remains, but that it bottom upon the evidence of the thing? But then the
query is, Who must be judge what is so evident in Scripture, as to render the
dissertors guilty of flat wilfulness. p. 195.

Ans. Faith being an assent, and consequently the result of judgment, each
private person must be allowed his judgment of discretion, much more those who
are authorized to require our assent to fundamentals, and to preserve the peace
and union of the Church inviolable, and sure 'twould be a great impeachment to
our Savior, to entrust persons with the preservation of this Depositum, and to
require them to give heed to it, as they will answer it at the great day, and
yet afford no means to be assured of it. But if each private person must have a
judgment of discretion by which he must admit of, or reject the laws of his
superiors, (and if it should be otherwise men must renounce their reason, and
reject the guidance of their conscience, and so of Gods Vicegerent, and act in
the concernments of their eternal souls at all adventures) who shall pass
judgment on the final and irrefragable judge: thus Fiat lux, Ep. 2. p. 198.

Ans. The Conscience being subject unto none but God (who only knows the
secrets of it) he only can pass judgment of its actions and pretenses, and he
assuredly will convince the Shismatick and Heretic it was not their Reason but
their lusts that did betray them to such errors, but the results of such a
Judgment which interfere with the received doctrine or customs of the Church,
must so far be condemned and censured by the Superiors of the Church, as they
do interrupt the Peace and Unity thereof. The Jews were bound to hearken to the
Scribes and Pharisees the Sanhedrim and High Priest, (and they had power to
chastise their disobedience in lawful matters) and yet I hope with that
discretion which was requisite to preferve them from condemning our Messiah for
a cheat, or for embracing those Traditions which did evacuate the Law of God,
for otherwise our Savior was very much to blame, when he so often taught the
contrary, and put in so many caveats against the leaven of the Scribes and
Pharisees. Thus Rulers are appointed for a terror unto evil doers, and an
encouragement unto the Good, and consequently must have surficient means to be
instructed in that Good or evil which they are to reward or punish, and power
so to do, and yet inferiors are forbid to yield obedience to their unlawful
precepts, and in such cases are to prefer obedience to the Laws of God, which
must suppose a judgment of discretion in them to discern what precepts are
unlawful, and when they intersere with the unerring rule of Scripture so well
consistent is the judgment of discretion, we allow to private persons, both
with the power of Superiors and Peace and Unity of the Church.

Ob. But I denied them to be judges of Faith: Now to be clearly revealed, or
evident in Scripture, and to be of Faith is all one so that they must not be
judges of what is evident in Scripture, least by necessary consequence, they
become judges of Faith too. p. 195.

Ans. This Argument supposes that to be judge of Faith, and to be judge of
what is Faith, are terms equivalent, which is a great mistake, to judge what is
Faith, and what is evidently revealed in Scripture, is the business of each
Catechist and Preacher who declares the Articles of Faith, of each believer who
assents unto them because his judgment tells him they are such, and therefore
signally the work of them with whom this Faith is visibly entrusted, but to be
judge of Faith, or to be that person or co^munity whose judgment in such
matters must be infallibly received without farther scrutiny, is a prerogative
as clearly incompetent to any person: or community as it is vehemently
pretended to, 'twas Sir upon this slender Cobweb your doughty inference did
hang.

Ob. 2. You refuse to admit them as Guides of their Faith, which signifies they
may have power to require our assents in matters in which they have no power to
guide us, i. e. they may have power to require us to go wrong for any thing we
or they know. p. 195.

Ans. Let me again inform you that to guide others in their faith, or to it, and
to be guide of Faith, are things extremely differring: whoever does instruct
his Brother in any matter of Faith, or reclaim him from his Error, becomes a
charitative Guide unto Faith; whoever by the Church is authorized so to do,
becomes an Authoritative Guide unto Faith: but to be guide of Faith (especially
in that sense in which this phrase is taken in our present Controversy) is to
be such a one whose judgment must determine for us what is Faith, what not;
and thus our Reason only is our Guide in matters dubious.

Ob: 3. But what can be replied to a Socinian, answering, when his assent to
the Trinity is required, That he humbly submitted to Scrip. that he used al
means he could, but discovered it not so evident there as you conceive it.

Answ: The very same you would return unto your Brother Carpocratian,
pretending as humble a submission to your Rule of Faith, and yet concluding
thence for Heresy; or to the Protestant, asserting Tradition where it may be
had, to be as Authentic as the written Word; and yet protesting, That after
all means used, he could never find therein one footstep of the Romish Faith;
or lastly, to the Arrian of old, or new Photinian, who both laid claim to the
Tradition of the three first Centuries: In a word, the only answer you can
make to such Enquiries, must be this, That your appeal unto Tradition is both
true and just, so was not that of the Photmian or Carpocratian Heretic: And
surely then the like return of Protestants to the Socinian, Quaker,
Independent, when pretending the same reason for their separation from the
Church of England, which we do from that of Rome, if founded upon real Truth,
must vindicate our Church from all your clamors.

Object: But upon the same right and title that we separated from Rome, did
Independants, Quakers, etc. depart from us; for since they do it upon their own
discretion, and so upon our Principle, to deny it to be done by them so justly,
or so truly, is to do wickedly, and talk fondly, Fiat Lux Ep: 2. p. 198, 199.
or which is trantamount, to do and talk after the manner of fiat lux.

Answ: As if not only the Carpocration, but the Jew and Heathen should be
thought to act as justly and as truly as the best of Catholics, because as
vehement Alsertors of the Traditions of their Fathers, and all the Actions and
Sentiments of Mankind should carry equal Truth and Justice in them, as being
equally the products of what they looked on as reason and discretion: Thus Saul
the Persecutor must act as justly, as Paul the Doctor of the Gentiles, because
according to his Conscience; and the Catholic, when Preaching to convert, and
practicing to destroy his Prince, must do both with equal Justice, provided
that his good intentions to propagate the Roman Faith, be alike in both.

Prop: 5. In matters which belong not to the Foundations of our Faith, to be
content with such submission as is consistent with a liberty of opinion, and
binds us only to reserve our Judgments to our selves, in what they differ
from the professed Doctrine of the Church we live in, seems most serviceable to
the ends of Peace and Unity; to the ends of Peace, because it lesseneth the
Objects, and so withdraws the fuel of Contention; of Unity, because it much
enlarges the conditions of it, and renders them such, as may more easily be
submitted to.

Coroll: Hence it is apparently most safe and prudent, to be content with this
submission, as being most conducive to the Peace and Union that is unto the
Sovereign ends of Christian Government; and is it not unreasonable that Men
should be excluded by the Church from her Communion, for what is very well
consistent with our communion with the God of Heaven, our union to the Churches
Head; yea, for what is neither necessary to the Churches being, peace or unity,
nor can be prejudicial to them, whilst reserved to our selves? Besides, the
conditions of Church communion, must bottom upon what is clear and evident, for
else the Union of the Church, and our duty to preserve it, must both rest on
what is uncertain and obscure (a thing repugnant both to the Wisdom and Goodness
of the Churches Head) now that in matters remote from the foundation, we have
mostly no such evidence, is but too visible in the Disputes and Contests which
are on both sides managed by many Learned and impartial Men. To conclude, Let
any Man consider the variety of Gifts, Affections, Prejudices, and infinite
other Circumstances, that are incident to humane Nature: and then tell me,
whether it be not irrational to hope, That all the Members of a Church, in
matters of this nature, should conspire, and knit into one Faith and Judgment?
and must it not be more unreasonable, to make this Union the condition of
communion with the Church? If therefore in these matters our Church contents
her self with this submission, and does not bind us to declare our inward
assent, she acts both prudently and safely, and as becomes an indulgent Mother.

Prop: 6. The Church has power to silence such Disputes as tend immediately to
break her peace and unity: This is so proper a result of civil Union, as that
without it, all Government must shatter into Sects and Factions, and therefore
most of all may be expected in that Platform which our Savior laid, and must be
granted by all those, who dare not think our Lord defective in his Designs and
Contrivances for his Churches Peace and Unity: In a word, Each Church is bound
to look to her own Peace, and therefore is empowered to prevent what violates it.

Prop: 7. All Men are bound, whatever their private Sentiments may be, to
submit externally to the sentence of the Church, in matters which entrench not
on the Fundamentals of their Faith, because the teaching of such Doctrines must
be of lesser moment then the preservation of the Churches peace; for should
such Doctrines wholly perish from the Church, her Peace, Unity and Being, might
be sufficiently preserved notwithstanding, whereas this cannot reasonably be
hoped for under an eager violent abetment of them in despite of all Authority;
and certainly, if Church-Governors stand bound unto the preservation of the
Churches Peace and Unity, they must be bound in many instances to still our
mutual Contests, and require the submission now intended, and then the governed
must be obliged to perform it.

Prop: 8. No Church can justly require assent unto her Proposals, or account of
her infallibility; for were this Privilege vouchsafed to the Church, is it not
wonderful that a Doctrine so necessary to the attainment of salvation should
either be conceased from the four Evangelifts, or by them (if not concealed
yet) so obscurely delivered to the Church? Can we suppose these wise and holy
Men (and especially that good spirit which assisted them) either so envious as
wilfully to deprive the Church of such an happiness, for whose prosperity they
suffered so much, and which they almost Christened with their Blood; or so
forgetful of the Work they took in hand, viz. the writing of the Gospel of
Christ, as to neglect the clear rehearsal of that Doctrine, without which (if
the Papist may be credited) all others are not creditable? it is evident, they
speak perspicuously of many things of small importance in comparison of this,
and is it possible they should conspire to the deepest silence or obscurity in
this most necessary thing, this fundamental of all that is so? Is it imaginable
that S. Luke, intending purposely to satisfy Theophilus in these things
wherein he had been Catechized, and which most surely were believed amongst
Christians, should neglect this great Foundation of them all, without which,
Faith must necessarily suffer Shipwreck, and all his labor be in vain? That the
beloved Apostle having writ so many signs, that we might believe that Jesus is
the Son of God, should neglect that, without which, nothing that he said could
be available to produce Faith in us, or secure us from mistaking in it? It is
possible that our Savior, who foresaw whatever might disturb his Church, yea,
had experience of Men's unwillingness to submit to others, and readiness to
advance themselves in his own Disciples, should yet deliver this Doctrine (if
at all delivered) so obscurely, that now it is become the greatest
Controversy, whether he intended any thing of this nature? and the testimonies
of Scripture so strangely baffled, that Papists dare not go about to vindicate
them from our Exceptions? That he should constitute that to be the only means
of deciding Controversies, which he foresaw would be so determinable without
the certain knowledge of some hundreds of Particulars, in which whole thousands
of Men, excellent for Parts and Piety, do clash perpetually? That under the Old
Testament, the Judge of matters between blood and blood, plea and plea, and
such Political Transactions, should be so punctually set down: And in the New
Testament, this Judge of Faith, and the eternal Concernments of our Souls,
should be passed over in silence, or delivered in such terms as are equally
adapted to all pretenders to be the Church, and altogether unserviceable when
it is doubtful? Is it not strange, that so great a part of the New Testament
should be employed about Antichrist, and all the methods he should use to draw
Men from the Faith, and yet just nothing be delivered of that Guide to which
all faithful Christians were to have recourse against him? That the Spirit
should speak expressly, of some great departure from the Faith in these latter
times, and not admonish us of the sure and only means to secure our falling:
That St. Paul, amongst all his vehement Exhortations unto Unity, all his
endeavors against Schism in the Corinthians, and elsewhere, should not once
deliver this unto them as a means infallibly to preserve them from it, but
spend his time in other matters, which, without this, are not at all available
to our souls welfare? That having assembled the Elders of Ephesus, and told
them, That after his departure, grievous Wolves should enter in among them, he
should not once direct hem to the only means for preservation? That the
Apostles in the compiling of the Creed, should give no intimation of that,
without which, nothing can hang firm? That Irenaeus, Tertullian, Cyprians, and
others, purposely delivering the Fundamentals of their Faith, should be
deficient in the like kind? That never any of the Primitive Fathers in their
Comments on this Symbol, should inform us of this one thing necessary? That
they should talk so much of the Catholic Church, and not one title of its
infallibility? That in their descants on these Passages, which are so often
pleaded by the Romanist, they should never intimate unto us that in the
Judgment of the Catholic Church, or at least their own, they taught
infallibility? That the Nicene Fathers, albeit they had so great occasion from
the multiplying of Heresies, to have insisted upon this so Fundamental Doctrine
(that each Man's Soul must bottom on it, or be built upon the Sand) should not
only wave the stating, clearing, confirming, or the trying of it, but compose
a Creed, and never mention it? That the Catechumeni should never be taught this
foundation of their Faith? That it should never be required at Baptism? That
none of the Treatises ad Calechumenos, Institutiones Mystagogice, Enchiridia
Doctrina Christianae? None of the Treatises of the Church her self, should once
make mention of this great and principal Funamental, is, as if a Man should
write of the chief Cities in England, and leave out York and London, or of the
degrees of Hierarchy in the Church of Rome, and leave out Pope and Cardinal?
lastly, That whereas since the Usurpation of this Prerogative by the Church of
Rome there have been hundreds of Disputes touching the subject of its
infallibility, whether Christ were here or there, without determining of which
to affirm in gross the Churches infallibility is to leave us perfectly in a
maze, and say just nothing, that not any of those disputes should ever be
started, nor any thing resolved upon? These are things morally impossible and
consequently this pretended infallibility must be so: this being so it is
superfluous to refute the pretense of a General Council to it, for besides what
already has been said, can it be that what is so necessary to the welfare to the
Church should by an all-wise God be left at infinite uncertainties? A general
Council is infallible say they provided that it be legitimately called, and
that the members of it be legitimate, that they be legally elected, and in due
number from every part and portion of the Church; that being thus convened they
vote freely and without constraint, and packing: after due Means of Study,
Prayer and fasting used; provided lastly that the decree conciliarly, have
these decrees confirmed by the Pope, and accepted by the Church, diffused, if
one of these conditions be wanting to the greatest Councils they take liberty
to reject them, and yet who knows not what animosities, and feuds there are in
the now present Church of Rome (and much more in the Church of God) touching
the greater part of Councils styled Oeconomical? whether all these conditions
have been punctually observed by them in the whole, and each particular Decree?
how more then probable it is that like uncertainties should arise touching the
definitions of future Councils? and how impossible it is for any, (but
especially for persons illiterate and far removed from the place of their
Convention) to attain to any tolerable satisfaction in all these particulars?
This objection is by the wiser sort of Papists handsomely passed over as
knowing it to be unanswerable; but Fiat Lux has ignorance enough to warrant
his attempts upon it, which are these:

1. That we may as well except against the obliging power of the decrees and
Acts of King and Parliament, and say, is that power in the King alone, or in
the Parliament, what if they run counter, what if they should not be rightly
Chosen. p. 190.

Ans. But dares he say that one of these particulars are undetermined by our
Law? Dares he avouch that the obliging power of our Acts of Parliaments depends
on such a multitude of things, of which no tolerable assurance can be had? If
so, he evidently stands guilty not only of Rebellion, but justifies the late
Phanatick, assuring him that he may safely question and oppose the power both
of King and Parliament, as depending on some hundreds of uncertainties, as
hotly contested, and as unresolved by the Lawyers of the Land, as the
forementioned Decrees of Councils are in the Church of Rome: If not how gross
most his impertinence and folly be, in bringing such comparisons which both his
conscience and his reason tell him are vastly different from what his adversary
produces? And yet secondly, who knows not that a less degree of certainty may
suffice in civil, then in sacred matters.

But secondly, he takes Sanctuary in Titulus colovatus, and moral evidence, and
tells us, that if this suffice not we can be sure of no Authority either
Spiritual or Civil in this world. ibid.

Ans. And is this that Fiat Lux, who writ a pamphlet of infallibility? Made it
so necessary for the Churches welfare, that without it nothing can hang firm
nor Christ be just, p. 5, 6. had he not provided such assurance for our faith
to build upon, is he now content to sit down with Titulus Coloratus, and moral
evidence? And to confess that Catholic Faith, and the Authority of the Church
depends upon so many and such various conditions for which they do pretend but
moral evidence? Is not this moral evidence the very thing at which the Romanist
does so much quarrel in the resolution of our Faith? And must it now become the
refuge of those very men who do so vehemently cry out against it in the
Protestant; See here the triumph and the Victory of Truth, which forces her
professed adversaries to agnize and own her though to the ruin of their cause
and credit, and yet manifest it is that few of the particulars objected will
admit of moral evidence, or any tolerable degree of probability.

Corol. 1. Hence see the excellency of our Churches method for peace and unity
beyond what Rome can boast of, seeing then only she require our assent, when
the revelation is so clear and palpable that he who runs may read it, and when
the thing is such, as has the testimony and approbation of the whole Christian
World, handed down from the Apostles, to this present age, and acknowledged to
be such by Catholics themselves. And in other things rests contented with that
submission which is consistent with men's liberty of conscience, and each man's
duty to afford her, whereas Rome does not only bind the conscience to what is
unnecessary, unheard of in the Churches Creeds till now of late, and so obscure
as to be matter of contest through the Christian world, but does all this upon
pretense of that infallibility woh were it only questionable, must subject us
to the peril of embracing the most destructive errors for divinest truths,
without all hopes of a redress, dispose us unto Atheism, and irreligion, by
making all our Faith and piety depend on what is disputable, and lay us open to
continnal fears and jealousies, doubts and uncertainties, Schisms and
dissentions, about the rule and foundation of our Faith, but being evidently
false, must be most certainly productive of these fatal consequences, and yet
we must be told with so much confidence: p. 200. That plainest common sense
will teach us and every man who considers it, that unless we settle some
indisputable method of arriving at Christ's sense, or faith, that is, some
self-evident (and so all obliging) Rule of Faith, the Protestant Church can
never hope for power to reduce their dissenters, nor to hold together or govern
efficaciously their own subjects, that is, they can never hope for unity within
themselves or union with them that have it. Which in effect, is thus much, That
both his sacred Majesty, and all his Peers and Prelates, Laity, and Clergy,
are professed opposers of what plainest common sense, and each man's Reason must
suggest unto him as the sole expedient of the Churches welfare; for which great
charity, and worthy thoughts of our whole Nation, it is pity but it should be
ordered by the King and Parliament, that due thanks be given to Mr. S.
especially seeing he has been at the vast expense of an ipse dixit, to confirm
the charge, hour contenti sumus hoc Catone, nor have we need to add homine
imprudenti at que imperito nibil quicquam injustius.

Cor. 2. This shows what spirit of Divination had possessed my friend when thus
he talks, Hence we may see confessedly in the Protestant principles the Reason
of their present and past distractions, and divine of the future, for men's
fancies being naturally various, and no power in her to keep them in union,
they must needs ramble into multitudes of Dissenting Sects, which to strive to
unite in one, were to force both nature and conscience too. Nature in striving
to unite their understandings in Faith, without offering them evidence of
Authority, conscience in binding them to act as Protestants do, whereas they
are ready to stake their Salvation upon it, that their best reasons working
upon the very Rule of Faith, Protestants recommend, obliges them to the
contrary. For first in fundamentals, in which only we think it necessary to
unite the understandings of our people, we have confessedly all the evidence
that Scripture and Tradition, (the Role of Protestants and Papists) can afford.
And secondly, in other matters we have power to silence such disputes, and
prevent the spreading of such opinions as may cause divisions, and inflict the
Churches censures upon those that do so, and consequently have sufficient
provisions for that peace and unity, which is necessary to the Churches
welfare. And thirdly, either we do not bind the conscience, and therefore
cannot force it, or else we do it upon that pregnant evidence now mentioned,
and therefore cannot be said to oblige the will against the understanding. And
lastly, we are as ready to protest that our best reason working upon the very
rule of Faith, which Romanists recommend unto us, obliges us to renounce their
faith, and that to force us to act with them, would be to force our consciences
unto sin.

For a close to cry quit with you, this shows the reason of that General
Atheism, Skepticism and Irreligion which is spread over the face of the whole
Roman Church, which prevails so much in France and Italy, and makes Rome
Christian, little differ from her self whilst Heathen, for having built her
Faith upon that infallibility which stands liable to multitude of doubts, and
is confuted by variety of Arguments and Experiences, what remains but that
Religion perish in its ruins. Once more this shows the reason of the sudden
growth of Atheism in this our Nation, for Catholics having by experience found
that all their endeavors must be fruitless whilst we have Scripture for our
Rule, that whilst Christianity stands upon its old foundations, their politic
profession of it cannot find sure footing in our Nation, have at last made it
their professed business to draw the night upon her, to wipe out Scripture at
one dash, and pronounce all those arguments which the first Champions of
Christianity made use of, unsatisfactory and null, that being thus benighted
even by a fiat lux, we might take up with an implicit faith, and being first
made Atheists, be in a nearer disposition to act the Papist: And lastly, that
finding no sure footing in the Scriptures, we might run unto Tradition for it.

An Appendix containing an Answer to those few passages in Fiat Lux which bear
some show of Reason, and might possibly deceive the unwary Reader.
1. THerefore it is asserted, That the power of appealing to the Bishop of Rome
mentioned in the Council of Sardica was ad Julium Romanum, not ad Papam
Romanum, and so a personvl privilege, which might cease on the death of
Julius, p. 59. that is, quoth Fiat Lux, not to the pope who then was Julius,
but to Julius who then was Pope p. 55. Whereas he should have said not to him
as Pope, but as Julius, i.e. as one deposed and reviled by the Fastern Bishops
against whom this Council did oppose themselves, endeavoring to advance him,
as much as they endeavored to depress, and vilify him, but alas materialiter
and formaliter are terms which the poor man is wholly unacquainted with, and
this answer was grounded upon History which neither his Don Quixot nor Hudibras
would afford him, and therefore 'twas above his shallow capacity.

It Was secondly asserted that the Doctrine stigmatized by Saint Paul as a
Doctrine of Devils was (...), that of those in general that forbid marriage,
not condemn it upon such and such particular accounts. And therefore though the
Encratite and Montanist were deeper yet they also did participate in the guilt.
p. 210. To convince this answer of folly and falsehood it is thus rejoyned,
That if so 'twould follow that the Church of England must be guilty of the
Doctrine of Devils by prohibiting marriage in the times of Lent and Advent, p.
182. A. as if it were all one to forbid the thing, and to restrain the doing of
it at times unseasonable, and S. Paul had been as great a criminal for advising
abstinence from due Benevolence at times of extraordinary prayer and fasting as
they who always thought it necessary to do so, and lastly to forbid flesh in
general, and to forbid it upon days of fasting and humiliation, were things
equivalent; it is I confess the same to forbid it at times unfit, and unto
persons to whom it is so, but never will it be evinced that that marriage which
is honorable in all, be undecent in the Clergy.

3. But do you not acknowledge their fundamentals to be so perspicuous as what
is written with a Sun beam, and therefore such as none but fools can possibly
mistake in, and is it not then justly wondered by Fiat Lux, that any Protestant
writers should affirm that general Councils who have Authority from Christ of
deciding controversies, greater assistance in, and means of finding out the
truth then others should lie under a possibility of erring in what is so
perspicuous and clear.

Ans. 1. This objection does as much concern the Catholic as us, who albeit he
pretends infallible, and so the greatest evidence, for matters of his Faith,
yet cannot, but acknowledge that they are contradicted not only by the Eastern,
but a confiderable part of the Western Church: Does not my Friend, and all his
brother Catholics assert, That the authority of their Church, is such a motive
to belief, that only irrational, vicious and wilfully blind persons can
recede from it by disbelief, S.F.p. 197. and yet have not its definitions been
solemnly condemned by Arriau Councils as great as any they style general? And
by the Provincial Councils of the Reformed Churches, are not these
condemnations, subscribed, propugned and adjusted by far greater multitudes of
learned men then ever did convene in General Councils? and what is incident to
them diffused, why may it not be incident to a far less number when convened?
Nay secondly was not the law of Nature, were not the Notions of a Deity so
manifest and obvious as to render the offender (...) or condemned of his own
conscience? And yet were not the greater part of men such fools for many
hundreds of years together, to act in contradiction to them? Was not the
Doctrine of our Savior confirmed by such Miracles, such Prophecies and other
signal evidenes as rendered it unquestionably true, and the rejectors of it
inexcusable: and did not yet the Sanhedrim and Jew, reject it and Blaspheme it
though convinced of its truth: nay is not the generality of the learned world
(much more the giddy and unruly muititude) so inconsiderate as to run headlong
to that ruin which daily lays before their eyes, and no wonder that it should
be so since the Church story shows too plainly that interest, pride, and
faction, prejudice, false principles, and a mistaken Rule of Faith, have but
too often acted in the Rulers of the Church: yea even Reason and Experience
informs us that such persons have most subtilty to elude the plainest
arguments, and most concluding Reasons, to find out contrary pretenses to
oppose against them, and many other artifices to bind their Faith unto their
interests.

FINIS.

