AN ACCOUNT OF THE ARTICLES Drawn up here in ENGLAND by the East-India-Company
AGAINST THE King of SIAM, And remitted to their Servants in India, as a just
Ground to make War on that Prince; Together with a full Answer to every
Particular; as 'twas prepared to have been Addressed to the Honorable the
Knights, Citizens and Burgesses in PARLIAMENT Assembled: By Samuel White.
And is now most humbly Presented to their Judicious Consideration, by his
Brother George White.
I Have already given a true Relation of some of the dismal Effects of the War
our East-India-Company has made with the King of Siam: And I cannot but suppose
that every Englishman will account himself so much a Party concerned in it, to
be very inquisitive into the Grounds of this Quarrel, and desirous to know what
intolerable Aggressions on the Part of the said King, has provoked the Company
to do violence to that amicable Temper that is genuine to our Nation; and for
which, to my knowledge, we have formerly been so much beloved and esteemed in
all Parts of India: I shall therefore render a faithful Account of this Matter;
engaging my self to prove all I affirm by undeniable Evidence, and then leave
the Merits of the Cause to the Sentence of all Men in the World that can, and
dare, judge impartially and honestly, including in that Number those very
Members of the East India Committee, who deserve that laudable Character.

And first, I Premise (what I suppose will admit of no Objection) That the
favorable Reception, and kind Treatment, which the Merchants of our Nation
have always formerly received in that Country, has not been exceeded; if I may
not say, equaled, at any Place within the Limits of the Company's Charter: Nor
is it less true, that those Courtesies have not sometimes met with
correspondent Returns: For there is an old Story still too new in those Parts,
That in the time of this King's Predecessor, the Factors then Resident there,
did privately withdraw themselves when they were indebted to the King, so
considerable a sum as, ^^^ty Thousand pieces of Eight, on which Account the
Trade was for many Years discontinu'd, till his present Majesty to take of that
Obstruction, and give an obliging Invitation to the renewal of a Friendly
Correspondence and Commerce; did in the Year 1660 freely and fully forgive the
said Debt, by delivering the cancelled Obligations to Mr. Richard Bladwell, who
being then bound on a Voyage from Su^^at to M^ccasser in the Service of Sir
Matthew Andrews, was by adverse Winds forced to take shelter in the chief Port
of that Kingdom; Whereby it appears That it has been in the Nature of this
Benign Prince, to sup^^^trogate in generous Favors: But our present Business,
is to enquire how he has since degenerated, and misbehaved himself, to incur
the Company's Dispeasure in so high a degree, as has engaged them to draw their
Swords to chastise him: And that this may be fairly tried, I will lay down the
very Articles which were exhibited against the King; and examine the Validity
and Justice of each of them particularly. Now their Demands were as follows.

The King of Siam is Debtor to the Honorable East-India-Company, for the
following Particulars:
l. s. d. FOR Richard Burneby's Debt, from the 30th. of Sept. 1681. as by
Siam-Journal H. fol. 5. and Journal I. fol. 13. Cattees 158 04 14. at l. 12 10.
each Cattee is 1984 18 05 For five Years and three Months Interest thereon, at
10 per Cent. yearly, Interest on Interest, 1157 01 07 3140 00 00 For Thomas
Ivat's Debt, from 30 Sept. 1683, as per Siam-Leidger I. fol. 6. Cattees 9. 2.
8, at l. 12. 10. is sterling 0114 01 03 For 3 Years and 3 Months Interest, at
10 per Cent. accounting yearly Interest on Interest, 0000 41 09 0155 02 00 For
Goods lost in the Fire, to the value of Cattees 114. 1. 3. as by Journal I.
fol. 5, 6. Dated 30th. December. 82. is Sterling. 1793 09 00 For four Years
Interest thereon, 0832 04 00 2625 08 00 For Demorage of the Mexico-Merchant
from the time of her Arrival there, being the 1st. of Sept. 1683. till her
Departure, the 9th. of January 1683/4. is 131 days at l. 5. per diem, 0655 00
00 For imprisoning the Companies Factors and Servants, Peter Crouch, John
Thomas, and Abraham Navarro, hindering their Trade by the Ship Delight. 2000 00
00 For the King's Debt, being Cattees 316. 15. 6. and several Debts, in all
332. 00 06. is together Cattees 648,15,12, as by Siam Journal I. fol. 13. Dated
the 30th. Sept. 1683. is Sterling 7999 16 10 For 3 Years and 3 Months Interest
at 10 per Cent. amount, accounting Interest on Interest, 1881 07 02 10791 04 00
For the Charge of the Company's Factors, and imprisoning of their Persons,
beating some with Coffrees, overthrowing their Voyages, preventing their Access
to the King, to make their Complaint, and the insufferable Dishonor done to
the Company, and to our Nation in general, We demand 5000 00 09 23366 14 09

This is an exact Copy of the Charge drawn up here in England against the King
of Siam, and remitted to the Company's Servants at Fort St. George; But I will
by no means do the East-India-Company that Dishonor to call it Their Act; though
this, as many other such unaccountable things, has passed under their Name: For
as I shall always pay a most Profound Respect to those Noble Lords who have
condescended to be of the Committee; But cannot be supposed to give themselves
the trouble of a particular inspection into these Affairs; So I must also do
right to some Honest Gentlemen that sit amongst 'em, who I am well assured
could not be wanting to express their Abhorrence of this Evil thing, if it had
come to be regularly examined and debated in their Court: And after these
Salv^'s, in behalf of those to whom they are due, I must likewise give another
true Character, In declaring that HE or They who were the prime Projectors, or
did with deliberate forethought, approve, or assent to, this Instrument of
Demand; were not only grossly ignorant of the Affairs of India, but even of the
common Notions of Right and Wrong, according to the Sentiments of all the
civilized part of Mankind: Or if the failure was not from want of Sense, I am
sure it lays the heavier load of Guilt on the Consciences of all are concerned
in it; As a brief Enquiry into the Articles will sufficiently demonstrate.

The first is, for Richard Burneby 's Debt, with Interest upon Interest, 3140 l.

This Mr. Burneby, is that very Person I did occasionaly mention in the Account
of the dismal Tragedy at Mergen, who after he returned to Siam by leave of the
Company's Factors then residing in Batavia. My Lord Phaulkon according to his
accustomed kindness to those of our Nation, promoted him to a considerable
Employ in the King's Service, as he continued, till he unhappily lost his Life
at Mergen; And it seems he stands charged with this great Debt to the Company;
which however it happens, unless it can be proved that the King did by Word or
Deed become bound for it; It may with as much reason be demanded of the Great-
Cham, as the King of Siam.

The next is, Tho. Ivat 's Debt, with Interest upon Interest, 155 l. 2 s. Which
is an exact Copy of the former: For Mr. Ivat was one of the Company's Factors
who came to Siam with Mr. Gosfright, and remained there in joint Commission
with Samuel Pots, 'till upon some difference 'twixt them two he left the
Company's Service, and was afterward employed by the King of Siam on a message
to the Governor and Council of Fort St. George, to request their assistance in
procuring some Jewels for his Service: Of which unhappy Affair I shall say more
afterward, having only here to take notice, that Mr. Ivat dyed soon after his
Arrival at the Fort on that expedition: But now how the King comes to be justly
chargeable with his Debts to the Company, it lies upon the Author of the
Articles to give the World some rational satisfaction.

But these two are scarce worth wondering at when we come to the third, which is
for Goods lost in the Fire and Interest thereon, 2625 l. 8 s. And this indeed
is so surprising a Demand, that I confess I know not how to answer it, because
I cannot possibly imagine what should be the meaning of it; for surely it is not
intended for those Goods were destroyed when the Factory was burnt? and yet I
think it must be so, because I never heard of any other Goods the Company lost
there by Fire: Wherefore taking it so at a venture, I will tell the true Story
of that unhappy Thing.

Samuel Pots whom I mentioned in the preceding Paragraph, was left by Mr.
Gosfright Chief in Commission for the Company's Affairs: And though I hear he is
since dead, I must not on this occasion decline giving him his due Character,
in declaring, that no Man could be more unfit for that Employ than he, who was
a public disgrace to the Nation and a vexatious Trouble to all that were ever
concerned with him, as I will prove by sundry credible Persons now in England,
who can ground their Attestations on their own Experience. This Man among his
many other Irregularities took into his protection several lewd Mariners who
had Rebelled against their Commander, entertaining them as his Companions in
the Factory, which was a House of the King of Siams, part of Brick, and part of
Timber, very commodious in all respects, and not contiguous with any other
Buildings, but stood in the midst of a large Yard enclosed with a high Pale of
Bamboes. And on the sixth of December 1682, about Ten at Night, there broke out
a Fire in a Room made of Boards, that stood in the midst 'twixt the Timber and
Brick-Buildings, formerly the Butler's Storehouse; But at that time the
Rendezvous of the foresaid Seamen, whose roaring Revels there, were overheard
by the Neighborhood not above half an Hour before this happened: Mr. Potts was
at a Friend's House near home when it began; And no sooner got into the Yard,
but instantly Armed himself and his Seamen, keeping the Gate fast, under
pretense of preventing any ones coming into steal, till such time the Fire had
got so much head, 'twas


