THE QUAKERS VINDICATION AGAINST FRANCIS BUGG'S CALUMNIES: In his Scandalous
Pamphlet, styled, Something in Answer to the Allegations of the Quakers (in
their Printed Case, Presented to the House of Commons, December 1693.) But his
second Edition, Styled The Converted Quakers Answer. Together with Francis
Bugg's own Vindication of the People called Quakers, since he left them and
turned to the Church of England.
Conveniet nulli qui secum dissidet ipse.
First, It Is not unknown unto you that we are Dissenters from the Church of
England, and as such we enjoy our Liberty by Law under you who are in
Authority, (which we have and do thankfully acknowledge) and consequently not
to be reputed Criminal for being such.

2. That Francis Bugg himself did not account us Criminal for our Principles
two Years after he had left our Communion, and joined himself unto the Church
of England, see his Book.

The Quakers detected, etc. printed 1686. The first point under Consideration
is, how I came to be a Member of their Society.

In the beginning they taught that all Men were Enlightened, according to John
1. 9. And that this Light wherewith Christ had enlightened them, was sufficient,
if obeyed, to lead to Salvation, and that it was the work of the Ministers of
Christ, to turn the Peoples minds from Darkness to Light, and from the Power of
Satan to God, Affirming that this Light was a sufficient Teacher, Leader and
Guide to every Believer, without the help of outward Prescriptions, Forms,
Orders and Decrees of Men; upon these and the like Notions I became persuaded
to make trial of their Doctrine. And when I came to see and observe their
Practice, Conversations and Deportments in the beginning, and what Simplicity
and Plainness attended their Ministry, I was still more confirmed that it was a
Dispensation of the Love of God sent as a Visitation to Mankind; and being thus
persuaded, I was resolved to bear the Cross, and did utterly despise the Shame,
that attended them and their Message, and was not behind any of my Equals, both
in doing and suffering for the Testimony thereof, as some amongst them can
still bear me witness. And in this manner we went on for many Years, and loved
one another with Love unfeigned, and doubtless God blessed our Meetings with
the comfortable enjoyment of his presence.

Thus far Francis Bugg, which plainly shows himself very Inconsistent with
himself, and renders his late Work abusive, malicious, and not to deserve any
Credit, against us.

And although this is enough to Clear us from his Calumnies, from what he now
pretends or alleges against our Doctrine and Conversation with all Impartial
Men.

Yet as F. Bugg has vindicated our Doctrine and Ministry as aforesaid, we
shall herewith give a general Account by many credible Witnesses of our Belief
and Innocence, in opposition to Bugg's great Scandals. So we beseech you to
peruse the following particular Examination of his Calumnies, Partialities and
Perversions of our Friends Writings.

Which Writings be pleased to note, were extant in Print many Years before he
left us, or gave the aforesaid ample Vindication of our Doctrine and Ministry;
and although he confesses he was more than 25 Years a Member of our Society,
Yet in all that time, and some time after he left us, found no fault with our
Doctrine or Testimony but owned and confessed the same as aforesaid. And he
himself must needs then know, that neither he nor we held any such Doctrines as
he would now represent. Upon which we query.

1. Did thou Francis Bugg, when a Quaker, deny Jesus of Nazareth?

2. Did thou Francis Bugg, when a Quaker. 25 Years, account that the Quakers
denied Jesus of Nazareth?

3. Did thou F. Bugg contemn the holy Scriptures?

4. Did thou F. Bugg, when a Quaker, account the Quakers contemned the holy
Scriptures?

5. Did thou F. Bugg disown Magistracy?

6. Did thou F. Bugg, when a Quaker, account the Quakers disowned Magistracy?

Bugg page 5. Concerning his Charge of our denying Jesus of Nazareth, We
utterly deny it: How proves he it,

1. Observe some of his Instances, viz. page 5. Thou must wait to know
something of God in thee, which in thy own Conscience he makes manifest.

2. That of God within us is so, viz. the Foundation, for we know it is Christ,
we know Christ in us, etc.

3. We believe that Christ in us does interceed the Father on our behalf.

4. The very Christ of God is within us -- We dare not deny him.

By these four Instances of his, he endeavors to prove that The Quakers deny
Jesus of Nazareth; but does not he himself hereby deny the Mystery of Christ in
Spirit, and implicity accuse the holy Apostles with denying Jesus of Nazareth
for the same Testimony?

1. Because that which may be known of God is manifest in them, Romans 1. 19.

2. Examine your selves whether ye be in the Faith, prove your own selves; know
ye not your own selves how that Jesus Christ is IN you, except ye be
Reprobates? see 2 Cor. 13. 5.

Query 1. Was this another Jesus Christ than Jesus of Nazareth? No sure, there
was but one Lord Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 8. 6.

3. Query 2. And was it not Jesus of Nazareth whom Saul persecuted in the
Primitive Christians? Yea sure, see Acts 22. 8. I am Jesus of Nazareth whom
thou persecutest.

And though Bugg cannot conceive this Mystery of Christ IN us, and WITHOUT us
also, yet the Apostle says, It was manifest to his Saints.

4. To whom God would make known what is the Riches of the glory of this
Mystery amongst the Gentiles, which is Christ IN you the hope of Glory, Col. 1.
27.

5. God has sent forth the Spirit of his Son into your Hearts, crying, Abba,
Father, Gal. 4. 6.

Another of his Instances to prove we deny Jesus of Nazareth; Is, out of W.
Smith's Primmer, or demonstration of the New and Living Way, viz. They that are
false, preach Christ without, and bid People believe in him as he is in Heaven
above; but they that are Christ's Ministers preach Christ within.

We confess there is one Edition in Octavo, reads it as he quotes it; But the
other Edition in Folio, bound up with his Works. The Paragraph runs expressly
thus in the fourth Leaf of his said Demonstration, viz. Why? they that are
false, preach Christ without ONLY, and bid People believe in him as he is in
Heaven above, in opposition to his being within, but they that are true
Ministers they preach Christ within, and direct People to wait to feel him in
themselves, and so to believe in him as he makes himself manifest in them,
whereby they truly confess his being without also.[Thus far W. Smith.]

And this said Author W. S. is yet more full and express in this point, and
that too in the very Edition quoted by Bugg in his confessing the same Christ
both WITHOUT and WITHIN, viz. We believe all things which are spoken by the
holy Prophets and Apostles concerning Jesus Christ, are true according to the
Scriptures: And that he humbled himself to the Death of the Cross, and from
Death did rise again: And we believe that he is the Resurrection and the Life,
and gives Eternal Life to all that believe in him.

6. Bugg's chief and most remarked Instance to prove the Quakers deny Jesus
Christ, is out of Readiness Errand, page 32. (which was James Nalyer's Answer) viz.

If I cannot witness Christ nearer than Jerusalem, I shall have no benefit by
him; but I own NO OTHER Christ but that (i. e. Christ) who witnessed a good
Confession before Pilate, which Christ I witness suffering in me now, page 6.

Who but a Person blinded with Envy, Malice and Folly would have rendered this a
denial of Jesus of Nazareth? It appears holy Scripture Testimony is not free
from his Reproach.

Bugg, page 6. A Question to Professors, page 33. Now the Scriptures do
expressly distinguish between Christ and the Body (or Flesh) which he took,
saying he can never call the Bodily Garment (or Vail) Christ. But Bugg is very
unfair in this, in leaving out the Author's own explication, viz. We cannot
call the Body (which he took upon him) CHIEFLY and in the FIRST place Christ.
As also F. Bugg is quarrelsome in bringing this over again. It having been
answered before, and to which he has given no reply. So he may see a little of
it again, viz.

We readily grant the Names, Jesus and Christ chiefly belong to him that took
the Body or Flesh, yet the names Jesus and Christ were given to both, jointly
and severally, it was Christ that dyed; but how? as concerning the Flesh, 1
Pet. 3. 18. his divine Life never dyed, nor did the Soul of the Messiah ever
dye. On the other hand the Apostle, Heb. 10 20. calls his Flesh the VAIL, Mat.
27. 28. The body of Jesus; the Psalmist, A Body have thou prepared me. And Dr.
Barnes, Jesus Christ took Flesh of the Virgin. And thus often in Scripture is
each expressed distinct.

To Bugg's Query 5. Whether was the Sufferings of Christ, or the Sufferings of
the Quakers greatest?

1. In the first place, we answer, The Sufferings of Christ, in the Nature of
them, both inward and outward, in Agony of Soul, and pains of Body ^y that most
Cruel Death of the Cross following that of Scourging and Crowning with Thorns.

2. It was both most unjustly and wickedly inflicted by his Persecutors the
Jews and Heathen, yet worse in the Jews, because they might have known better,
and because they prosecuted him upon false witness. And as Christ's Sufferings
were most cruel and unjust, both as to the Nature thereof, and the dignity of
him that suffered: So he was a most acceptable Sacrifice, and sweet smelling
Savor to God, and his Suffering and Sacrifice of universal advantage and
benefit to mankind, in that he died for all men, and gave himself a Ransom for
all, that all might be capable of Redemption and Salvation through him.

We do not accept of what F. B. partially cites for Answer to his said
Question, which was not put unto Edward Burrough's, nor made by him, nor justly
deducible from E. Burrough's intention in his Explanatory Reasons, not cited by
F Bugg. nor the Year when his Reflection was made upon the Arbitrary and unjust
proceedings of those then in Power, being in 1657. too tedious here to recite.

His Reproach of Contempt of Scripture, if he means the holy Scripture, as he
elsewhere says, we utterly deny his Charge herein, as contrary to our
Principle and to our Christian profession of the holy Scriptures of the Old and
New Testament, as being given by Divine Inspiration.

And Bugg has been told That our Friends distinguishing between the Letter and
the Spirit, between the Ministry of the Letter, and that of the Spirit, as
between the Shadow and the Substance, the mere writing in outward Characters
(which will decay and wear out) and the Holy divine Doctrines and Truths
therein contained, (or holy Scriptures) is so Scriptural, that we know no true
Christian will deny such distinction; for the holy Apostle distinguished
between the Letter and the Spirit. 2 Cor. 3. 6. Which has made us able
Ministers of the New Testament, not of the Letter, but of the Spirit, for the
Letter kills, but the Spirit gives Life: This could be no Contempt of holy
Scripture.

Note, That in the very Book, News out of the North, quoted against us in this
point, there is frequent reference had to holy Scripture Testimonies, both of
the Old and New Testament, and accordingly abundantly quoted in the Margents,
which does not bespeak a Contempt thereof, but the contrary, as we think is
undeniable. In the said News out of the North, the Scripture is plainly owned
that the Lord has spoken it by his former Prophets, etc. p. 5.

As for Baptism and the Lords Supper, Scripturally considered in their several
Dispensations, both as in the Figure, and in the Substance, in the Type and
Antitype, we confess and own; but the Substance is more excellent and permanent
than the Shadow, as the Inward and Spiritual Grace is more excellent than the
outward and visible Signs.

About this point Bugg is very partial and unjust in his citation out of E.
Burrough's Works, p. 518. both in varying his Words, leaving out his
explanatory Part, and representing him as writing thus at first, viz. About
Water Baptism and the Sacrament we do utterly deny, and do say it is no
Ordinance of God, but an Institution of the Whore of Rome; and England received
it by a Popish Institution, and your practice of it is Idolatry, and no part of
the Worship of God. [Thus Bugg cites.]

This is very partially and unjustly cited (and in the first Words falsely) E.
Burrough's Answer in the very place is thus, viz. As for Baptism and the Supper
of the Lord, we do own it, and it is practiced of us in the Life and Power of
God: But as for your Baptism, that is to say Sprinkling of Infants, calling it
the Baptism into the Faith, and that they are made Members of the Church
thereby, and that it is a Seal of Regeneration as you say [these foregoing
Words Bugg leaves out] that we do utterly deny, and do say it is no Ordinance
of God, neither was it ever commanded by him, or practiced by his Saints,
etc.[Thus F. Bugg.]

Note, Here he did not say that Water Baptism is a Popish Institution, but
Sprinkling Infants, calling it the Baptism into the Faith, etc. For he knew
that Water Baptism was practiced by John Baptist, and in the Apostles time long
before the Pope was. And now F. Bugg, if E. B. was in an Error herein, we
Query, 1. Why did thou not disprove the same by Scripture. 2. Do thou in
thy Conscience believe Sprinkling Infants to be of divine Institution? 3. Do
thou believe it was practiced by the Saints or Primitive Christians in the
Apostles d^ys? 4. Do thou believe that it is the Baptism into the Faith,
Church, and Kingdom of Christ? 5. If thou believe all these, pray produce us
plain Scriptare-Rule for thy Faith, that we (who believe the contrary) may be
convinced, or else do not impose an implicit Faith upon us.

Reader, observe what the Author (Bugg quotes in this point) chiefly here
opposed was the Popish Notion or Opinion, That no man can enter into the
Kingdom of God, nor into the fellowship of Holy Church without Water Baptism,
as held by the Rhemists; see their Annotations upon John 3, 5. And therein
opposed by the Protestants, as appears in Dr. Fulke's Answer, viz. It is not
necessary in this place by Water to understand Material Water, but rather the
purifying Grace of Christ, as in 4. chapter ver. 11. 14. where it is called Living
Water, whereof (he says) washing with Water in Baptism is an outward Sign.

So that the reformed Protestants did not esteem the outward Element Essential
to Salvation.

And Bugg page 3. quotes W. Smith unfairly also, out of his Primmer, where he
speaks of these things which arose or had their Institution from the Pope, Bugg
leaves out what these things were he meant, viz. Sprinkling Water in a Child's
Face, and signing its Forehead with the Sign of the Cross; and intimating his
not owning Bread and Wine to be the Body and Blood of Christ, or calling the
Bread the Body of Christ broken for them, when (says he) People neither
discern the Body nor the Blood of Christ, page 39. 40. What great Error was
this? Did he not here chiefly oppose Infant Baptism with the Sign of the Cross,
and the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, and Receiving unworthy Communicants to
eat and drink their own damnation? Which we think was not to oppose any Command
of Christ, nor to Contemn his Disciples taking the Bread and the Cup in
Remembrance of him, etc.

As to the Public Ministry and Tithes.
If we could in Conscience have been satisfied with them, we should not have
dissented from them nor suffered by them.

Yet his Charging us with Contempt of the Public Ministry, is too general and
harsh we charitably distinguish between the more moderate sort, and the ridgid
Persecutors. As for those termed Priests of the World, namely the Covetous and
Persecuting sort, mentioned as greedy Dogs, etc. page 4. So the Prophet terms
such, Isa. 56. 11. for which F. B. accuses us with Reproaching Christ's
Ministers, page 8. We do not believe him herein, nor proves he that such were
either qualified as Christ's Ministers, or their Call to be Divine. We confess
some did give them as hard Language, as the Prophets of Old did those in the
same Steps, but their severe Persecution, spoiling our Friends Goods, and
causing many to endure long Imprisonments, some till Death, sometime for Tithe
of a small value, it may be for the value of a Tythe-Pigg, Goose or Hen, etc.
This sure was far harder Treatment. Bugg, page 4. quotes a Brief discovery,
writ by some body, in which he has Collected ten Lines against the Covetous
Persecuting Priests of the World out of 4 Pages, and places them together as
one entire Paragraph, but neither tells us the Author's Name, nor the date of
the Book, nor can we find the Book it self.

F. Bugg, page 4. accuses some body for objecting against paying of Tithes
under the New Covenant, because abrogated by Christ, etc. on which he makes his
Observation.

1. That the Quakers by this have condemned the Martyrs, and all Christians,
etc. but herein he Unfairly imposes on us without Proof, and his Observation
is too general upon the Martyrs, etc. for both John Wickliff, William
Swinderby, Walter Brute, William Thorpe, the Bohemians, with others mentioned
in the Book of Martyrs, and others did bear Testimony against the Corruptions
of the Popish Clergy, and against Tithes and compelled Maintenance. (And were
not these Martyrs Christians?) This was made a Principle Article against them
by the Papists, as more largely appears in the first Volume of Martyrs, in the
Reigns of Richard the Second, Henry the Fourth, and Henry the Fifth,

2. Bugg argues, That if the Quakers are of the same mind still, how can they
have the Face to ask Favor (meaning of the Parliament. So that if we cannot
for Conscience sake pay Tithes, Bugg will neither allow us to seek, nor to have
any Favor from the Government, and consequently our heavy Sufferings,
Imprisonments, Sequestrations, and Spoil, to the Ruining of many Families, must
be continued upon us if his Uncharitable Attempts may take effect. Oh!
Unmerciful Man!

But let it be remembered, that the House of Commons not long since were of a
better mind, and of more tender Inclination, when they passed two Bills for the
more easy Recovery of small Tithes, being without Imprisonment of the Persons,
or Ruining Families thereby.

Bugg's charging the Quakers with contempt of Governors. We sincerely deny,
and we had need to examine his Proofs, seeing in his Observation he gives this
severe and Mandatory order thereupon, viz. Let the Quakers first recant of
their Errors, and condemn their Books, and make a Confession of the Christian
Faith, and all under their Hands, and then, and not whilst then, let Compassion
be shown unto them.

Is not this an Imperious and presumptive Dictator to the Government, trow ye?

How now F. Bugg, thou wast more merciful when a Quaker. but now since thou art
now gotten among the Priests and Levites thou have lost all Mercy and
Compassion toward us.

Now observe, that Bugg quotes Edward Burrough's Works for proof, page 507,
501, 621, 53, 522, 524. here out of six pages thus far remote from each other
he has Picked and Caught up a few Words here and there, to prove the Quakers
Contempt of Governors, which is a very foul Abuse and Perversion for any
Reasonable Man that reads those Passages, may easily perceive that the Author
did not testify against Magistracy or Government it self, nor against
Governors in general, but only against Persecuters and Usurpers over
Conscience who frustrate the just ends of Government. As between Anno 1654. and
1659. as appears in the pages quoted, see what pains this Adversary takes
Unjustly to pick out Words that he thinks make against us, and leaves out at
the same time what more explains the matter for us. As page 501. E. B. speaking
of Arbitrary Usurpt dominion over the Consciences of Men, to which (says he) we
cannot yield our Obedience; within two Lines after he goes on (We) Preach Jesus
Christ alone in the things of God, to be our Lawgiver, and own Magistracy in
civil things. Which last Words Bugg leaves out, basely to infinuate that we
contemn Magistracy. And as for the Power, the said People ascribe only to God,
which they cannot give to Man, or any Earthly Power; it is that Power which God
only has given them in point of Conscience, Religion and Worship, which no
Mortal Man nor Worldly Powers have dominion or prerogative over, it only
appertaining to God's Prerogative; and it is on that account we cannot seek to
Earthly Powers to make or establish our Religion, for if we could, what need
had we ever to have suffered by them? Nevertheless we may seek to Authority and
thereby own Magistracy) to be eased from Unjust Oppressions, and desended from
unreasonable men in our civil Rights and Properties, without infringing God's
undoubted Prerogative and Power over our Consciences.

Note, That the Instances Bugg has chopped out and given in page 7. to prove the
Quakers contempt of Governors, being between the year 1654, and 1659. It Is
evident therein that E. B. testified against the corruption of O. Cromwell and
his Ministers and Magistrates in that day, for which Bugg has past this heavy
Judgment upon the Quakers, not only that they contemn Governors (which is
without exception) page 7. But also that they are Those wretched Impostors who
revile Christ's Magistrates, and reproach his Ministers, page 8. This is sad
indeed! when it is very clear that the Magistrates and Ministers which he has
here instanced, and which Edward Burrough's reprehended were those very
Persecutors and Usurpers over Conscience in Cromwell's days, whereby (to do us
an ill turn) Bugg has at unawares run his own Head against a Wall, and at once
justified those Magistrates or Governors in those days as Christ's
Magistrates; and consequently the Usurpation of that Government testified
against by E. Burrough's, and others.

But we now Query of F. Bugg, will thou indeed stand by it pursuant to thy
Charge?

1. That those Magistrates and Ministers in O. Cromwell's days were Christ's
Magistrates and Ministers?

2. That to testify against, and reprehend them for their Corruptions,
Persecutions, and Arbitrary Usurpations over Conscience, etc. (as E. Burrough's
did) was a reviling Christ's Magistrates, and reproaching Christ's Ministers?
Answer directly and ingenuously, if thou will adventure to stand by thy own
Charge and Instances as proof thereof.

3. Do thou really believe that no Compassion ought to be shown to us,
because E. Burrough's reproved O. Cromwell and his Ministers for their
Corruptions?

Concerning Humbling our selves in Fasting and Prayer.
His Insinuation against us, as slighting Authority is still unjustly to render
us obnoxious; for the Intent, Substance, and end of a true Fast, Humiliation
and Prayer to Almighty God for an universal Humiliation and Repentance through
the Nation, etc. for the Sins thereof, that God in Mercy may avert his
Judgments, and turn away his Wrath; this we are frequently mindful of in our
Solemn Assemblies, and sincerely desire to be manifest unto God in the Spirit
of Grace and Supplication; for the good of our whole Nation, and safety
thereof, knowing also that the FAST that God has chosen and accepts, is
described by the Prophet Isaiah. Is it such a Fast as I have chosen (says the
Lord) a Day for a Man to afflict his Soul? Is to bow down his Head as a
Bull-Rush, etc. Is not this the Fast that I have chosen, to loose the Bands of
Wickedness, to undo the heavy Burdens, and to let the Oppressed go free, and
that ye break every Yoke? Is it not to deal thy Bread to the Hungry, etc? see
Isa. 58. 5, 6, 7.

It Is farther observable that by Bugg's course of chopping, mangling and
perverting, an Atheist may grossly abuse and Injure the best Writings extant in
the World, even the holy Scripture it self, and make them to look with another
Face, than they naturally import, or ever were intended by the first Writers.

F. Bugg tells us of a brief History of the Rise, Growth, and Progress of
Quakerism, which in time possibly you may see,

But who will believe him to be an impartial Historygrapher? Or what rational
man will be so credulous of his partial and perverse Works against a People
whom he has so grossly defamed and abused?

And now suppose any particular Person amongst us have formerly, or at any time
been defective in the manner of some expressions, is it just or ingenuous in F.
Bugg, captiously to take advantage thereat, and then charge his ill
Constructions upon the whole People: When the same Persons in the same Books
have elsewhere better explained themselves, and safely laid down what might
else seem more doubtful?

His accusation That a Spirit of Persecution has been among us from the
beginning, is manifest in the Trial of G. K. etc. Is absurd in him to say.

1. We have not heard the noise of the said Trial till very lately, how then
could that manifest a Spirit of Persecution among us from the beginning? Did
that Trial continue from the beginning? And how contrary is this to his own
confession before cited, that we went on for many Years, and loved one another
with Love unfeigned, etc.

2. The said Trial at Phyladelphia, mentioned by him, is foreign to us, and we
have had no other Account that any such Trial was but from one party.

Nevertheless if any thing turbulent, unwarrantable or Arbitrary on either side
was acted or done, we shall not espouse nor justify the same; when it shall so
appear to us.

It Is observable that Bugg in his Book of Christian Liberty, or Liberty of
Conscience, 2d. part, p. 28. approves of the testimony of those very Authors,
viz. I. Pennington, E. Burrough's. etc. whom he now condemns as blasphemous and
wretched Impostors. So that they were good men and sound in testimony while
alive, but wicked men and blasphemers when dead, such is the Folly and
Contradiction of this Perverter.

Note also, that F. Bugg in his said Book of Christian Liberty. printed 1682.
2d part page 83. affirms THAT CONFORMITY is a Monster conceived by the great
Whore, Mystery Babylon, the Mother of Harlots, a Monster because of its
Deformity and degenerate Birth, it can be no other, for the Devil is the Father
of it (I speak of a forced Conformity upon Men's Consciences) says he. And yet
in about two Years after in 1684. he himself turned about and conformed
contrary to his own Testimony; what credit then can be given to this unstable
and partial man's Scribbling, or pretending to give Account or History against
the Quakers, so grossly Reviled and Calumniated by him?

In Bugg's Q. 4. 2d Edition, That we seemed to embrace the Whore in King James
's Reign, in presenting Addresses to him, but not one to King William; Bugg is
false and envious in both. For 1st, Our gratitude for our Liberty, was no
embracing the Whore. 2 We have more publicly expressed our hearty Thanks
several times even in Parliament to the present Government for the Kindnesses
we have now received by Law, which is more than we could do before.

Bugg page 2. 4. That We (the Quakers) undermine the Christian Religion (and
Principles) to overthrow it, Is both false and Contradictory to Bugg's own
Confession, Of the Christian Quaker's being Innocent, and what they hold SOUND,
and that though they do dissent from the Established Religion, yet they hold the
true Faith, at least for Substance.

Thus Bugg, in his New Rome Unmasked, page 68. printed but in 1692. And yet
those Christian Quakers he mentions declares against Swearing under the Gospel,
and against Tithes, as being no Gospel Ministers Maintenance, Artic. 25. and
27. of the same Book he quotes for his Authority, for the Christian Quakers.

These foregoing Citations were examined and compared by diverse intelligent
Persons.

And further, seeing F. Bugg has shown his Hatred and Revenge against George
Whitehead especially, for discovering his Self-condemnation and Malice, etc. I
(the Person concerned) freely offer, and am willing (with the Lord's
Assistance) to make it plainly appear before any Six, Ten or Twelve competent
Witnesses, who are moderate, men of Sense and common Reason, that F. Bugg has
grossly and wickedly abused and perverted Truth, and wronged the People called
Quakers, both in Charge, Citation, and Observation, in his said Pamph^et. And
that in his late Book New Rome arraigned, he has forged notorious Lies in other
men's Names, to Ridicule, Desame, and Scandalize diverse Citizens of London, and
Men of good Repute* condemning them also to the Pillory as Perjured Persons, in
his pretended Trial, in a way of Judicature unwarrantably acted by himself,
assuming the place of both Judge, Accuser, Jury, Condemner and Executioner;
with a form of a Pillory and Effigies in it, to represent the Persons so grossly
Scandalized by him.

I say for these Ends mentioned, I do proffer (God willing) to meet F. Bugg
before Witnesses, at any convenient Time and Place within the City of London,
that the Persons so defamed by him may be present. To which Proposal I subscribe

George Whitehead.

To the Members of PARLIAMENT; And others to whom Bugg's said Pamphlet has been
delivered.
WE whose Names are underwritten (being in Christian Society with the People
commonly called QUAKERS) Do in good Conscience Declare and Certify all Persons
concerned.

1. That we sincerely believe and Confess, That Jesus of Nazareth, who was born
of the Virgin Mary, is the true Messiah, the very Christ, the Son of the Living
God, to whom all his Prophets gave Witness. And we do highly value his Death,
Sufferings, Works, Offices, and Merits for the Redemption and Salvation of
Mankind, together with his Laws, Doctrine and Ministry.

2. That this very Christ of God, was and is the Lamb of God that takes away
the Sins of the World, who was slain, was dead, and is alive, and lives for
evermore, in his divine eternal Glory, Dominion and Power with the Father.

3. That the HOLY Scriptures of the Old and New Testament are of divine
Authority, as being given by Inspiration from God.

4. And that Magistracy or Civil Government is God's Ordinance, the good ends
thereof being for the Punishment of Evil doers, and Praise of them that do well.

And we know of no other Doctrine or Principle preachead, maintained, or ever
received among (or by) us since we were a People, contrary to these before
mentioned.

Signed in Behalf of the said People, Thomas Lower, William Crouch, William
Ingram, William Meade, William Macket, Philip Ford, Francis Camfield, John
Edge, Thomas Hutson, Charles Marshall, Josiah Ellis, Gilbert Latey, Theodor
Eccleston, Joseph Wassey, Thomas Cox, John Bowater, Benjamin Antrobus, William
Philips, Edward Brook, William Townsend, John Hall, George Oldner, Thomas
Barker, Abraham Johnson, Tho. Twinbarrow, Michael Russel, John Harwood, John
Danson, John Stringfellow, Will. Paul, Fra Etteridge, Benj. Bealing.


The Quakers Vindication and Buggs Testimony against Bugg's Calumnies.


