A Sober Expostulation With some of the CLERGY, Against their Pretended Convert
FRANCIS BVGG His Repeated Gross Abuse of the People called QVAKERS, in his
Books and Pamphlets; viz.

His New Rome Arraigned. History of Quakerism. Second Summons. Picture of
Quakerism.

And other Pamphlets; which may serve to Invalidate the Authority of the Snake
in the Grass, as it refers to his Books.

He that inventeth a Slander, is a Fool, Prove. 10. 18. A Fool rages, and is
confident, Prove. 14. 16. He flattereth himself in his own Eyes, until his
Iniquity is found to be hateful. Psalm. 36. 2. London, Printed for T. Soul, in
White-Hart-Court in Gracious-Street; and at the Bible in Leaden-hall-Street,
near the Market, 1697.

ERRATA.
PAGE 2. l. 23. for Principle read Principal. p. 6. l. 4. r. to his p. 7. l.
28. f. Antimonarchicate r. Antimonarchical. p. 8. l. 14. f. whither r. whether.
p. 30. l. 13. f. Letters r. Letter. p. 31. l. 27. f. for r. so. p. 32. l. 22,
23. (i. e. the first impression) add a Parenthesis. p. 52. l. 11. f. Thundered
r. Thundering. ibid. l. 31. f. in r. to. p. 54. l. 21. f. Nature r. Name. ibid.
l. 24. f. Relation r. Relative. p. 59. l. 7. f. snared r. skared. p. 70. l. 2.
f. Detection r. Detected. p. 76. l. 8. f. Again r. Against. p. 93. l. 14. f.
placed r. places. p. 98. l. 10. add in the Margent, See p. 104. p. 104. l. 20.
add in the Margent, See p. 98. p.108. l. 22. f. Belief r. Relief. p. 115. l.
24. f. who r. whom. p. 120. l. 2. f. 's r. see. ibid. l. 18. f. Witness r.
Wretch.

TO THE READER.
Impartial Reader,
THE Ensuing Answers were severally drawn up, soon after the several Books and
Pamphlets of Francis Bugg (referred to) were Extant, but the Printing thereof
delayed thus long.

1. That we might see what more he would bring forth, be being a Contentious
Scribler against us, that they might be all Remarked, if he brought forth any
more of like Import.

2. His other Books and Pamphlets published before these against us, were
mostly so fully Answered, and his Apostasy, Malice and Abuses so fully and
clearly Detected, that his evil and fruitless Attempts are of so little Credit
with all Sober, Indifferent Persons, that have viewed them, that we thought our
selves the less obliged to use Expedition in the Publication of particular
Answers to each.

3. We finding him not able to Clear himself, from his many Lies, Slanders,
Absurdities and Contradictions Charged upon him in our former Answers, nor to
make any Rational Replies, Answers or Rejoinders thereunto, but rather to
repeat and impose his former Gross Abuses instead of fair Proofs, that the less
Credit they are of, the less we are affected therewith, and the less concerned
to follow him with expeditious Answers or Replies.

And the Reasons why this present Expostulation is divulged, is,

1. Because we have found no Redress upon our Application and Complaints (of
his foul Abuses) to those of the Clergy, whom he seems to Esteem and Affect,
but that they have rather Strengthened and Encouraged him in his perverse
Gainsaying, and injurious Abuses and Misrepresentations of the People called
Quakers, either by their esteeming him an Eminent Convert, or giving
Certificates in Applause of his Work against the said People.

2. Because the said F. Bugg seems to have that Esteem with some of the more
Envious Persons, even of the Clergy, that his Unjust and Confuted Authority is
made use of, and quoted against us, to Reproach us, particularly in that most
Virulent, Malicious and Persecuting Book, styled, The Snake in the Grass.

3. Because he does not only boast and flatter himself in the Commendation and
Encouragement of those his Ministers concerned, but also has most
presumptuously and unwarrantably proceeded to divulge an Impeachment on behalf
of the Commons of England, against our Yearly Meeting; also very imperiously
(from his own Arbitrary, Usurped Authority) given out diverse Summons and
Threats against particular Persons of our Friends, who are the King's Peaceable
Subjects: And that the Abominable Pride, Presumption and Imperiousness of this
Pretended Convert may be the more obvious, I shall here insert one of his late
Summons's, sent in Writing to several Places and Persons named, as follows.

A Third Summons.
TO John Hubbard, Thomas Brewster, John Haws, Edward Dikes, Sen. John Peacock
of St. Ives, John Cranwell, Joseph Carver, Samuel Hallifield, William Mead,
Simon Burgis, Ambrose Friend, John Knight, Hearers among the Quakers, to bring
forth George Whitehead, to stand to his own Proposition in his Printed Sheet
delivered to the Parliament, Anno School. Entitled, The Quakers Vindication,
etc. p. 4. or else your selves to give me a Meeting, and timely Notice thereof,
within Twenty Miles of my Dwelling, and then and there openly and publicly
justify the Books of your Teachers, or if not possible for you so to do, then
to Condemn the Errors contained in them, for the prevention of further
Controversy thereabout, if not, then know that my Hand will be still heavier
upon you, if God permit,

July 20. 1696. Fra. Bugg, Sen.

Now I shall not need to make any long Remark upon this Summons, the Matter
bespeaks it self, and what Pride, Presumption and Insolency it proceeded from
in the Man, thus to assume to himself a Power to Issue out such a Mandatory and
Menacing Summons, to so many Persons in diverse Counties and Places, as London,
Suffolk, Norfolk, Norwich, Huntingtonshire, (where the Persons summoned
severally reside) to bring forth G. W. or themselves, to meet him within Twenty
Miles of his Dwelling, and hereof not to fail at their Peril, that is, of his
heavier Hand upon them

See the Ambitions Presumption of this Imperious Person; he can presume to
Impeach Men in Behalf of the Commons of England; he can Issue out high
Mandatory and Menacing Summons in his own Name to the King's Subjects, to bring
forth such a Person as he has most spite against, or to appear themselves
before his own exalted Highness, upon Pain of bringing them under his heavy
Hand, being threatened that his Hand will be still heavier upon them, but all
this without producing any Parliamentary, or other Legal Authority for such
Impeachment, Summons, or Threat. If F. Bugg, and his Abettors of the Clergy,
had such occasions of Advantage against any of us called Quakers, which thus
affects the Civil Government, tending to Infringe the Liberties and Properties
of the Subjects, I am apt to think we should be rendered highly Obnoxious and
Arbitrary, if not Guilty of High Misdemeanour; but I leave that Matter to the
Impartial and Judicious to judge of; as I owe him no Ill Will, I would not hurt
his Person, or render Evil for Evil, or Revenge upon him. His Commanding the
Persons Summoned to bring forth G. W. to stand to his own Proposition
mentioned, is a mere empty, idle Boast, false and groundless Crack and Vapor;
he knows in his own Conscience, and it is well known to many in this City of
London, how I followed and sought to have a Meeting and Meetings with him, at
sundry places in this City, in the Year 1693. 12th Month, to prove and make
good my said Proposition, but still he shunned it, he shifted and evaded Meeting
with me on that Account, as is more fully evinced in my Answer, Entitled, The
Counterfeit Convert, Preface. Notwithstanding I made diverse Overtures for a
Meeting with him before a few Moderate Persons, to hear and witness what
passed; but his shuffling and shifting, to stave me off from pursuing my own
Proposal fairly made, are too large to be here rehearsed; but my said Proposal
is fully proved to hand in my Answers, which therefore I refer the Reader unto,
for further Information in this Case, viz.

1. The Quakers Vindication.

2. The Counterfeit Convert.

3. The Answer to F. Bugg's Presumptuous Impeachment.

4. By the Two Letters herein to his Teachers.

By a Servant of Jesus Christ, G. W.

The CONTENTS.
Chap. I. A Copy of a Letter to William Smithies, Minister of Cripplegate,
London. II. A Copy of a Letter to Isaac Archer, Vicar of Mildenhall, Suffolk.
III. Another to the said Isaac Archer. IV. A Sober Expostulation with those
Persons of the Clergy, concerned in giving Countenance to F. Bugg, against the
People called Quakers; containing an Answer to several of their Certificates in
his Behalf, and also to several additional and repeated Abuses, in the Second
Edition of his New Rome Arraigned. V. A Brief Answer to F. Bugg's pretended
Brief History of Quakerism, styled, The Quakers set in their True Light. VI. A
Brief Answer to F. Bugg's Two Printed Papers, dated March, 1696. VII. A Brief
Answer and Reply to F. Bugg's Second Summons (as he directs it) to the City of
Abel, on 2 Samuel 20. VIII. An Appendix to the Controversy, in certain Positions
of the sincere Belief and Christian Doctrine of the People called Quakers, in
Opposition to the Misrepresentations and Calumnies cast upon them by Apostates,
and other Adversaries, in their Books and Pamphlets. A Brief Advertisement to
the Reader upon Fr. Bugg's Book, Styled, The Picture of Quakerism, etc.
CHAP. I.
A Copy of a Letter to William Smithies, Minister of Cripplegate, LONDON.
Friend, William Smithies.
BEcause of the Character and Reputation thou have, as a Person of Charity and
Moderation, and also of thy Desire that I might signify my Mind to thee in
Writing, I was the more willing to give thee this following Information and
Advertisement.

The Occasion of our late Proposals and Complaint to thy self, concerning F.
Bugg, was the Encouragement and Strength, which we understand, he has taken
from thee, and some others of the Clergy, to Commit and Persist in his
intolerable Abuse and Scandal of an Innocent People, commonly called Quakers;
and particularly by his being Reputed thy Convert, Some Reasons for this
Advertisement to W. Smithies.
as also by thy Privity to, and Connivance at his Reviling and Scandalous
Pamphlets and Books against us as a People, and by thy promoting the Reprinting
his Injurious Pamphlet, with the New Title of The Converted Quakers Answer:
Which (with another Title) he had before delivered to the Members of
Parliament, to render us both Odious and Obnoxious in the Eye of the Civil
Government; and Consequently to Invalid the Condition of our present Liberty,
and to make void our Liberty it self; which, as it bespeaks great Malice and
Persecution in him, so no great Charity nor Prudence in thy self, either
directly or indirectly, to give Encouragement or Strength to such a Counterfeit
Convert, whose work is not only purely Malicious and Revengful, but Injurious
to the Christian and Civil Reputation of others, if he were but a Person of
Credit or Reputation therein, as he really is not, with the Sober and Judicious.

We have pursued him, in a Christian Method, both with fair and moderate
Answers in Print; the Substance and Principle Arguments whereof he has given
the Go-by unto, and instead of any fair or solid Replications or Rejoynders, he
has partially and unjustly Raked up broken Passages, and Pieces, and Words out
of some particular Deceased Friends Books, making his own perverse
Constructions thereupon to Misrepresent our Principles, and Scandalize us as a
People, without any due Regard to, or Representment of the Author's own
Explications, or the Harmony or Concurrence of their own, or others of our
Friends Testimonies or Writings Demonstrating our Principles, which no
ingenious Man will refuse Persons or People their own Explications and Harmony
of their extant or public Testimonies, to make out their own Principles.

Moreover, we have not thus left the said F. Bugg, but even since his last
coming to London, we have earnestly besought and endeavored to have a sober
and suitable Meeting with him, for a fair Dispute and Disquisition of matters,
chiefly in Controversy between him and us, and that before moderate and
disinterested Persons; and the more, because he pretended over and over that he
accepted of my Printed Challenge in the Quakers Vindication, p. 4. and that he
came 60 Miles to London to accept thereof, and had waited for an Engagement on
equal Terms near Three Weeks; when he himself knows (and others also) how he
has been since followed with Letters, Messages, and fair Challenges in that
Interim, even time after time, for such a Meeting as before; but he has, by his
diverse Dilatory, partial and unequal Terms (as by Letters made out to him,
which he may show thee if he will, about referring the matters in difference to
the Decision of others, and for Retraction, etc.) not only protracted and
delayed time, but at length, after he was Argued out of his partial and various
Terms, and after induced to grant, viz. If before Disinterested Persons, then
no Retraction, which he concluded answered my said Challenge.

Yet for all this, a Meeting hereupon being appointed by some of the Persons
Scandalized by him, as Perjured and Pillored in his New Rome Arraigned, of
which he had sufficient notice aforehand, both of time and place; and
accordingly some of us met, with diverse Disinterested Persons for Witnesses,
nevertheless Francis Bugg came not at the Meeting. He has a conceited boasting
insulting Humor and Clamorous, Deportment at a Distance; but when he is closely
put to it, and pursued for a Trial, and strict Examination of his Clamours,
Charges, and Accusations, before Competent Witnesses and Disinterested
Persons, he shamefully Revolts and timorously Shrinks, as in this case of
Controversy which he has begun against the People called Quakers, and which is
as plainly told himself since by Letter; and I am persuaded (with many more)
that he will bring no Honor to any of you of the Clergy, or the Church of
England, by these his Malicious Attempts; and I wish thou would prudently
Consider it, both for Truth's Sake, and thy own Reputation, to put a stop to
his Injurious Proceedings, Scribbling, and Printing against an Innocent People,
whom he has shamefully Deserted and (in his Self-Contradiction, and
Self-Condemnation) wickedly Reproached and Defamed: A few Instances whereof do
here follow.

Some of Francis Bugg's Principal Calumnies, and Misrepresentations of the
People commonly called Quakers.

I. F Bugg charged us (i. e. at least Twelve of us) as being A Pack of False
Witnesses, and Perjured Persons.

And this from his own Scandalous Mock Trial, Conviction, and Condemnation;
unwarrantably acted by him, in his New Rome Arraigned, Epistle to Bereans, p.
7, 8, 9, 10, 11. and p. 33. And all this for our Negative Testimony against the
matter of his Charge, contained in the Four following Articles of his false
Accusations against us, the said People, viz.

2. That they ( i. e. the Quakers) deny Jesus of Nazareth: See The Converted
Quaker, p. 5.

3. That they call Geo. Fox New Rome Unmasked. Epistle to Ber. p. 2.
the Branch, the Star, the Son of Righteousness, and put the North of England
for the Town of Bethlehem; hereupon Bugg also falsely says, That they did not
mean Christ, but G. Fox.

4. And that the Quakers Prophets give witness to Geo. Fox, instead of this
Christ, p. 82. and Chap. 3. p. 16. they say, That God Man, the Man Christ Jesus
(who was Born of the Virgin) was But a Garment, a Vail, a Vessel, [which is
expressly contrary to our Principles] as Answered in Print: His Converted
Quaker, p. 2.

5. F. Bugg Accuses the Quakers with Contempt of Scripture (i. e. the Holy
Scripture) and (as intending) down with the Holy Scripture, affirming that they
say, the Holy Scripture is carnal Dust, Death, and Kills; New Rome Arraigned
Epistle to Ber. p. 12. New Rome Unmasked. Remark. on Creed, 6. and p. 78.
though we find not that saying in any of our Friends Books quoted by him, and
are sure it is contrary to our Principle, as the foregoing are, yet Bugg is not
ashamed to say, viz. I have not set down one Line or Word as theirs, that is
not theirs, New Rome Arraigned, p. 22. Which is proved notoriously False in our
Answers in Print.


Note, That these Precedent Accusations are, not only expressly contrary to our
Principles, and Concurrent Testimonies, extant in Print both for Jesus Christ,
the Holy Scripture and Divine Authority thereof, but also to F. Bugg's own
Testimony, in his Book Of Christian Liberty, the Second Part, Chap. 1st. Where
he confesses our Principles, Received in the beginning, to be Principles of
Truth; and, in our Name and Person, Testifies unto the Holy Scriptures that
they are good, and a true Declaration of those things which were most surely
believed by the Apostles, and by us ought to be believed [thus far F. Bugg,
when a kind of a Quaker.]

Besides his Contradiction herein to himself, he Confesses that here we agree
( i. e. G. Whitehead and himself) namely, What the Holy Scripture is, That we
do not Ascribe Holiness to the Paper and Ink, or Dead Characters, but to the
Holy Doctrine and Blessed Precepts therein contained, which therefore is called
the Holy Scriptures, New Rome Arraigned, Apol. Intro. p. 6, 7.

Qu. Where then can he Prove, either that the Quakers Condemn the Holy Doctrine
and Blessed Precepts; or Say, that the Holy Scripture is Dust, Death, etc. We
Challenge him, or any of you, his Abettors, to prove such Contempt, or that
Saying, as the Quaker's, or their Principle.

6. F. Bugg's Charging the said People, called Quakers, with Contempt of
Governors, Converted Quakers, p. 6.7.
Reviling Christ's Magistrates, accounting Magistracy a Cumbersome Tree, and
their Principles as being New Rome Arraeigned, Epistle to Ber. p. 12, 13.
Antimagistratical, and Antimonarchicate.

Note, Herein F. Bugg appears Mischeiveously Malicious, unjustly to render us
Obnoxious to the Civil Government, like Judas and the Jews, against Christ, and
rendering him an Enemy to Caesar.

7. His Reproachful Characters to Scandalize the People called Quakers, viz.
New Rome, Rome' s Sister, Rome their Elder Sister, and calls those, their
Brethren, that pretend to Sell-Pardons, and pray Souls out of Purgatory, and
says, that these ( i. e. Quakers) follow The Steps of the Jesuits. New Rome
Unmasked. p. 51.
And withal F. Bugg, in the Title of his Book, in Print, New Rome Unmasked,
Scornfully and Reproachfully Terms G. Whitehead one of her Chief Cardinals.

Remark. Now pray, let it be considered, Whither Bugg's thus wickedly
Misrepresenting the People called Quakers as Papists, does not greatly tend to
gratify the Popish Interest, by thus Magnifying of it, and to lessen and
injure the Protestant Interest, and Consequently to Contradict and Affront the
Government, which has been pleased Legally to Recognize us as Desenting
Protestants.

Qu. Whether F. Bugg's Affront and Contradiction hereunto, be not Seditious? [
i.e. to Sow Discord, Strife, or Contention.]

8. Because of our Solemnly Declaring to the King and Parliament, That we
believe the Holy Scriptures, of the Old and New Testament, were given forth by
Divine Inspiration. And they have accepted this our Declaration, (and Legally
made it a Condition of our Liberty) Bugg passes this Judgment on us, the said
People, viz. The more shame for you to be so Deceitful, to give in a Testimony
so contrary to your Belief: And that the Quakers Pretending to the Parliament
they believed them (namely, the Holy Scriptures) to be given forth by Divine
Inspiration, was to serve a Turn, New Rome Arraigned, p. 40, 42.

Remark. Herein Bugg has not only most grossly. Belied our Belief for the Holy
Scriptures, but also Contradicted the Parliaments Charitable Acceptance and
Belief of our Testimony therein. What Insolency, and Audacious Attempt is this?
Do thou approve or disallow hereof?

Bugg also very unjustly accuses the Quakers, that they Revile Christ's
Ministers, Undervalue Converted Quaker, p. 8.
his Death and Sufferings, Condemn his Laws, Despise his Ordinances; [all which
is Expressly contrary to our Principles, and how proves he those to be Christ's
Ministers, whom our Friends have Testified against, viz. The Covetous Cruel
Persecutors] Here he Imposes and shamefully begs the Question.

10. Moreover he Treats the said People with these Characters, Black-Guard of
Liars, New Rome Unmasked, p. 58.
Horrible Blasphemers, Impudent Imposters, Cowards, Converted Quaker, p. 8. New
Rome Arrained, p. 11, 15, 18, 47
Cunning Sophisters, Juglings Legerdemain, Great Deceivers, Horrible
Blasphemers, Wretched Imposters. That surely Simon Magus never exceeded these
Imposters, Acts 8. With much more such like Outrageous Railery and Defaming
Treatment (too tedious here to recite,) being far Louder in Clamours than
Proof; Barking loud at a Distance, Canes Timidi vehementius Latrant.
but fearful fairly to Engage.

NOW, Friend Smithies, seeing thou have refused to Personate thy Convert F.
Bugg, or to be his Advocate, or Vindicate him in his Charges and Books against
the People called Quakers, as I Proposed to thee, and Offered thee a Meeting
for that End, I desire to know of thee, If thou will please to give a Check to
him, and put a Stop to his defaming the People called Quakers in Print, or if
he refuses thy Advice thereunto: If thou will give public Testimony against
him, by disowning his perverse Work, and tell the World he is Heady and Wilful,
and no real Convert, If neither it will Reflect upon thee. Note, But to this
Enquiry or Letter, I never received Answer from William Smithies as yet. I Hear
he is again Printing against us (supposed as one Bent in his Malice to
Scandalize us) which we resolve, with God's Help, not not to lie under; for we
are assured, he has wickedly Wronged and Misrepresented our Christian Religion
and Principles, and Shamefully and Undeservedly Scandalized particular Persons,
both Living and Dead, and an Innocent People also; As we hope in Christ ever to
approve our selves, both in in the sight of God and Men, with due Honor to
Jesus Christ in all his Works and Sufferings, and tender Respect to the Holy
Scriptures: As by the Harmony and Concurrence of our Ancient Friends
Testimonies is publicly Demonstrated, and we can make appear contrary to thy
Converts Unjust Pretenses and Misrepresentations; and therefore if thou do
not put a stop to his Mischevious Attempts, which severely Affects both our
Christian and Civil Reputations, in Rendering us both Blasphemous Imposters, and
Perjured Persons; his Malicious Mischievous Work, will Affect thee, and some
others, who have Abetted him, and the Cry will be loud, and ascend higher than
to thy self: I hope thou will Charitably accept this Information and
Advertisement, and prudently Consider, and make Use of the same.

London, the 1st of the 1st Mouth, 1693-94. FROM thy Friend and Well-wisher,
Geo. Whitehead.
Expecting shortly thy Ingenuous Answer, etc. But no Answer yet.
CHAP. II.
A Copy of a Letter to Isaac Archer, Vicar of Milden-Hall, Suffolk.
London the 2d of the 1st Month, 1693-94.
Friend, Isaac Archer.
I Desire thee Charitably to accept these Lines, and prudently to Consider
them, for the Truth's Sake, as also for thy own Reputation. I remembering how
Officious thou wast, in Accompanying and Abetting thy Follower and Disciple F.
Bugg, in the public Disturbance he made of our Friends-Meeting at Milden-Hall,
the 30th of the 2d Month, called April, 1691. Contrary to the Intent of the
present Government, and of the Law of our Liberty in the peaceable Exercise of
our Religious Worship toward Almighty God; and how thou, with him, then Deemed
our said Meeting an unlawful Conventicle (because our Friends there had omitted
a Circumstance of Law, in not entering that Meeting House upon Record, as the
Law directs) which did not bespeak a Charitable Disposition on thy part toward
us: And also how thou have Gratified, Encouraged and Abetted the said F. Bugg
(if he writes true of thee) by giving thy Approbation for his Abusive Book,
Which (he says) he has recited only an Abridgment thereof (in his most
Scandalous Book, Styled, New Rome Arraigned) as follows, viz. I do own the
Substance of this Book, as a Defense of those Eternal Truths, by which, I hope
for Salvation, and which are as a Comfort to me in my Pilgrimage; Peace be to
those that own them; and the Lord open the Eyes of them that deny them, Isaac
Archer.

Now, thou having thus far Countenanced F. Bugg, and approved of his Writing
against us, as a People (who are commonly called Quakers) Please to Consider
how far his Injurious Work of Envy and Contention against us; and the
Consequences of it may Affect thy Self and thy Reputation. And therefore, for
thy Information and Caution, I hereby give thee a short Recital of some of F.
Bugg's Notoriously False Charges against the said People, called Quakers, where
he charge them,

1. With denying Jesus of Nazareth.

2. Contempt of Holy Scriptures.

3. Calling us Perjured Persons for our Negative Testimony against his so
charging us; and thereupon acting his Mock Trial, forging our Answers, and
Erecting the form of a Pillory, and therein Scandalizing diverse Citizens and
Tradesmen in and about London, as Perjured Persons (though Persons of good Repute
and Credit, better than himself) thereby Affecting not only their Christian,
but Civil Reputations.

4. Contempt of Governors, and being against Magistracy in Principles, he also
Charges upon the said People, giving them these Characters, viz. New Rome,
Rome' s Sister, the Papists their Brethren, and that they follow the Steps of
the Jesuits.

5. Terming one of their approved Ministers, one of her chief Cardinals (i. e.
New Rome's.)

6. Our Declaration to the King and Parliament, for the Holy Scriptures being
given by Divine Inspiration, he renders Deceitful and Contrary to our Belief,
and to serve a Turn.

7. He Accuses the said People, with reviling Christ's Ministers, Added and
Contemning his Magistrates.
undervaluing Christ's Death and Sufferings [all which is expressly contrary to
the said People's Faith and Principles.]

8. Terming the said people, Black-Guard of Liars, Impudent Imposters, Cowards,
Horrible Blasphemers, Wretched Imposters, and such as Simon Magus never
exceeded, cum multis aliis, etc. With many more such like gross Calumnies and
Raileries are Bugg's Malicious Books stuffed with; all to render us Odious and
Obnoxious in the Eye of the Government and Nation, for which the Righteous God
will Judge him and his Abettors, for such his Intolerable and Mischievous
Attempts.

Please to observe, that though F. Bugg by his Partial Picking Words and Broken
Sentences out of some Ancient Books of George Fox, Edward Burrough's and Isaac
Penington's, he would seem thereby to Color such his false and erroneous
Charges before cited, and Fallaciously cast them on a whole Body of People; yet
the same Books of theirs in other Passages explanatory and more plain, do clear
them and their Principles, as to their sincerely owning Jesus of Nazareth,
highly Esteeming the Holy Scriptures, truly owning Magistracy; and so far from
Popery as that they were in their Day true Witnesses against it, and against
all Idolatry and Superstition, and that our Declaration to the King and
Parliament, for the Holy Scriptures being given by Divine Inspiration, was
sincere on our parts; and, in the sight of God, according to our Belief and
Principle, as by many of our Books and Testimonies is Evinced; as also that we
highly Esteem and Value Christ's Death, Sufferings, and Sacrifice for the
Reconciliation of Mankind unto God; as by the Harmony and Concurrence of our
public Testimonies and solemn Confessions(which have been Extant for many
Years) is clearly and fully Demonstrated,
whatever F. Bugg and his Abettors have Maliciously Suggested to the contrary
against us, whose work of deadly Malice and Persecution therein does not only
affect our Christian and Civil Reputation, but the Civil Government, under
which we Live (and with true Gratitude) enjoy our present Liberty in the
Exercise of our tender Consciences toward Almighty God, in point of Worship:
For,

1. Bugg's Rendering our said Declaration to the King and Parliament (for the
Divine Authority of the Holy Scripture) deceitful on our parts. This is to go
about to Invalidate and Destroy a Principal Condition of our Present Liberty,
and to confront the Government's acceptance of our said Declaration.

2. Bugg's Unjustly and Maliciously Representing the said People, called
Quakers, under these Black and Odious Characters, of New Rome, Rome' s Sister,
and as Brethren to the Papists, following the Steps of Jesuits, etc. And
Consequently no better nor other than Papists. Whereupon I ask thee these
Questions, viz.

1. Does not this greatly tend to gratify the Popish Interest (by his thus
Magnifying of it, far bigger than it is) and to lessen and injure the Protestant
Interest, and consequently to Contradict the Government, which has been pleased
Legally to Recognize us as Dissenting Protestants.

Q. 2. What Ingenuity, Honesty, or Prudence has Bugg, or you his Abettors,
shown in thus Representing such a Body of Protestant Subjects, as being Papists?

Q. 3. What Regard or Respect to the present Government have you therein
Manifested?

Q. 4. What Care of the Protestant Religion or Interest therein, has appeared
on your parts?

Q. 5. And what Reputation, Credit, or Honor to thee will thy Approbation of
Bugg's writing against us be; when further Exposed, to be taken Cognizance of
by Persons under higher Circumstances than thy self, or thy Agent?

Q. 6. Whether Bugg's Contradicting the Government's Recognizing us by Law, as
Dissenting Protestants, by his defaming us as Papists, etc. be not Seditious in
the Nature and Tendency thereof, as tending to stir up Strife and Variance
amongst Protestant Subjects, and consequently to divide and weaken the Interest
of both King and People?

Q. 7. Concerning Bugg's Assuming a Power as a Judge, and in his own Name to
Try, Examine, Sentence, and Condemn Citizens and Tradesmen, etc. as Perjured
Persons to the Pillory; and that in their Absence too, and some of them Persons
he never knew; and, in his Mock Trial, Forging, false Answers in the same
Persons Names, and then Erecting the Form of a Pillory, with Twelve Effigies in
it to Ridecule the Persons thus Condemned and Scandalized by him, and the word
[ Perjury] set over them in the Middle.

Now we Query of thee, and others his Approvers, whether such his Proceeding be
Warrantable, either by the Law of God or Man?

Q. 8. Whether it will be for the Honor of your Church and Clergy, for thy
self or any of you, to Encourage such a Malicious Agent in his Scribbling for
you, to abuse an Innocent People?

Q. 9. And seeing F. Bugg has thy Approbation? I ask thee, If thou Approvest of
this his Doctrine, viz. It was not Jesus Christ for whom the Body was Prepared,
Is was not Jesus Christ that came in the Flesh; but the Word? New Rome
Arraigned, Apol. Introduction, p. 3.

It Is not unknown to many Witnesses here, how earnestly and fairly I have
Endeavored, and made diverse Overtures for a Meeting in this City with F. Bugg,
with others of my Friends (whom he has Scandalized with his Pillory, as
aforesaid, as Perjured Persons) even since his last coming to London, and that
before a few Disinterested Persons, and we followed him with diverse Letters and
Challenges for a Dispute, and for Satisfaction for the Injury he has done us by
notorious Scandal and Defamation; and the more, because he pretended he came 60
Miles to London to accept of my Printed Challeng, amd had waited for an
Engagement (as he alleged) near Three Weeks, Quakers Viudication, p. 4.
Yet for all this, when closely put to it, he shifted and protracted time, with
his Variety of Dilatory Terms, one while to refer Matters in Controversy to
Ministers of Different Persuasions, to be left to their Decission, which was to
Impose an Implicit Faith upon us, by giving away our own aforehand; another
while he was for Preingaging us to Subscriptions. For Conditional Retractions
(which showed his Impertinent Triffling) another while, for meeting and
debating Matters before Disinterested Persons, which last we did not Refuse,
but endeavored to fix him thereupon and gave him Liberty to choose Three or
Four Persons to be his Advocates, who he pleased, and we Appointed a convenient
time and place in London for such a Meeting, and gave him Challenge, and two
Days Notice thereof aforehand, where diverse of us, with several Disinterested
Persons for Witnesses, met and waited several Hours: Yet F. Bugg came not, for
all his Boasting aforehand, so that his shameful Shifting and Evasion, both
then, and before, was Notorious; and we expect no fair Dealing, Satisfaction or
Right from him, but Malicious Scribbling, which, we are Satisfied, no Ingenious
Impartial Men will give Credit to; however I thought meet to give thee notice
of his Malicious Work.

1. Because he is one of thy Flock.

2. Because thou have Apparently Abetted him in his Persecuting and Disturbing
our Meeting at Milden-Hall, as aforesaid.

3. Because thou have given him thy Approbation of his writing against us, of
which he has Recited an Abridgment in his most Scandalons Book, New Rome
Arraigned, Epistle to Ber. p. 12. Being on the Backside of his Pillory.

4. Because F. Bugg pretends thou art not alone in thy Approbation, but another
Divine of the Church of England has also written to him ( i. e. in his
Commendation) as having done a most acceptable piece of Service to his Country,
in Vnvailing of the Falsehoods, Errors and Hypocrisies of the Quakers; and
withal says, he has diverse other Letters of the same Import, both from
Conforming and Nonconforming Ministers.

Now these are to acquaint thee, That we knowing F. Bugg's Gross Abuses and
Scandals are in their own Nature Intolerable, and thou have thus far concerned
thy self in his Approbation, and we can have no reasonable Satisfaction from
him. By all our fair and reasonable Endeavors we do not intend to lie under
his foul Calumnies. But I am persuaded, the Cry will be yet louder, and the
Complaint ascend higher against him and his Abettors therein, and am apt to
think, it will affect thy self, and not tend to thy Honor or Reputation, if
thou do not put a speedy stop to his Malicious Scribbling and Printing against
us, or at least give public Testimony (of thy dislike) against him, if he
refuse to desist, when Admonished. Take this as my caution to thee; So I expect
to hear from thee whether thou will make use of thy Interest and Endeavors to
put a stop to his Malicious Proceedure, that we may not be further Persecuted,
Scandalized, and Rendered Obnoxious to the Government by this Scornful Malicious
and Self-Contradictory Agent, whom the Just God will Reward according to his
Works, with all his Approvers and Abettors,

From thy Friend and Well-wisher, Geo. Whitehead.
Thou may direct to me in Devonshire-Street, without Bishop's gate, London.

CHAP. III.
Another to the said Isaac Archer. London the 4th of the 2d Month, 1694.
Friend, Isaac Archer.
THine, Dated March 19. 1693. I have been so long prevented giving Answer to,
besides what I desired by reason of other Concerns, thy Moderation therein I
take well.

The Confessions I mentioned, Relating to our Christian Belief and Doctrine,
are many, and of the same Import, which I cannot therefore send thee, being
mostly Bound up with other Books, and hard to find by themselves, and therefore
send thee the Enclosed containing our Confession to Jesus Christ and the Holy
Scriptures; about which thy Friend F. Bugg has greatly Misrepresented the
People called Quakers. I Remember thou Advised him against making use of his
Warrant after some Discourse, yet cannot wholly clear thee from taking part
with him in this Disturbing our Meeting in 1691. By thy Accusing the same as
being Unlawful, thy Approving his Book is Apparent. In that Part of the
Certificate, he Recites, by owning the Substance thereof as a Defense of
Eternal Truths, which Implies our Offense against the same, according to his
Misrepresentations; thou wishest our Wrangling at an end, and that thou
could stop me too; I am wholly on the Defensive Part for Truth, and an
Innocent People against that Wrangler F. Bugg. Stop him, and our Controversy
Cease, seeing thou may Diswade him from Writing against us; for his
Writing bitter Calumnies will not be any Credit to thee, or others his
Approvers or Abettors. It Is true, Jesus Christ is the Name of a Mediator, and
so given to him upon his Incarnation; howbeit as the Son of God, who is both
the Savior and the Anointed, was before; even before Abraham was, and was the
Spiritual Rock that all Israel Drank of.

Thou Writes Moderately, in saying thou Believe we mean the same thing, but
my Question was Chiefly to thee about F. Bugg's Doctrine, viz. It was not Jesus
Christ for whom the Body was Prepared; It was not Jesus Christ that came in the
Flesh. This appears not Consistent with the Apostles Doctrine, 1 John 4, 2, 3.
I desire thou may see all my Answers to F. Bugg, and particularly that one
Sheet, Entitled, A Charitable Essay, etc. Though I Charitably think, as thou
say for some Reasons, thou may Dissuade F. Bugg from Writing, yet he has
Divulged another Book, Styled Quakerism, etc. Which is as bad as the rest. But
I excuse thee in my Answers for not preventing its Publication, because I
suppose his was in the Press before mine came to thee,

From thy Friend and Well-wisher, Geo. Whitehead.


CHAP. IV.
A Sober Expostulation with certain Persons of the Clergy, against their
pretended Convert Francis Bugg his repeated Gross Abuse of the People called
Quakers.
Will. Smithies. ^saac Archer. You are Persons concerned in this Expostulation,
and to whom it is particularly (and in the first place) applied, for these
Reasons.

BEcause of the Notice and Advertisements already given you, against our
Convert or Proselyte Frances Bugg's ^ross Abuses and Misrepresentations of the
people called Quakers.

2. Because, of the Approbations or En^^uragement given him therein by some of
^^u, especially by Isaac-Archer and others.

3. Because, since Advertisements given ^^u thereof, he the said F. Bugg, has
pro^^eded, not only to divulge a Second Edition (...) his Defaming and
Scandelous Book, Sti^^d, New Rome Arraigned; but also, in his Additions annexed
thereunto, he does Scornfully Insult and Boast of your Approbation.

4. You being Previously so plainly Advertised of his Abuse, and not Reformed,
having been Encouraged by you, it is thought but Just and Reasonable it should
be thus Publicly Manifest who are his Approvers and Encouragers therein; and
for your farther Trial, whether you will yet acquit and clear your selves of his
Contentious Work of Envy and Persecution.

Now, you may Remember how that, in my Letters to you, I gave you Information
and Caution of your Approved Convert F. Bugg his Notorious False Charges and
Gross Calumnies against the People called Quakers, some whereof I again Recite
to you, as follows.

1. He Charge them, With denying Jesus of Nazareth.

2. Contempt of Holy Scripture.

3. Calling us Perjured Persons, for our Negative Testimony against his so
Charging us: And thereupon Forging his Mock-Trial and Answers in our Names,
with the Form of a Pillory, and therein Scandalizing diverse Citizens and
Tradesmen in and about London, as Perjured Persons (though Persons of good Repute
and Credit) thereby affecting, not only their Christian, but Civil Reputation.

4. Contempt of Governors, and being against Magistracy in Principles, he also
Charges upon the said People; giving them these Characters, viz.

New Rome, Rome's Sister, the Papists their Brethren, and Followers of the Step
of the Jesuits.

5. Terming one of their Approved Ministers, her Chief Cardinal (i. e. New
Rome's.)

6. Our Declaration to the King and Parliament, for the Holy Scriptures being
given by Divine Inspiration, he Renders Deceitful and Contrary to our Belief,
and to serve a Turn.

7. He Accuses the said People, with Reviling Christ's Ministers, and
Contemning his Magistrates, Undervaluing Christ's Death and Sufferings. [All
which are Expressly contrary to our Faith and Principles.]

8. Terming us (the said People) Black Guard of Liars, Impudent Imposters,
Cowards, Horrible Blasphemers, Wretched Imposters, and such as SIMON MAGVS
never exceeded, Cum multis aliis.

With many more such like Gross Calumnies and Rayleries, which Bugg's Malicious
Books are stuffed withal, to Render us Odious and Obnoxions in the Eye of the
Government and Nation; for which the Righteous God will Judge him and his
Abettors, for such his Intolerable and Mischieveous Attempts.

And as to our said DECLARATION to the King and Parliament, For the Holy
Scriptures being given by Divine Inspiration, It was, and is sincere on our
parts, and in the sight of God, according to our Belief and Principle, as by
many of our Books and Public Testimonies is clearly Evinced; as also that we
highly Esteem and Value Christ's Death, Sufferings and Sacrifice for the
Reconciliation of Mankind unto God; as by the Harmony and Concurrence of our
Public Testimonies and Solemn Confessions is clearly and fully Demonstrated,
whatever F. Bugg, and his Abettors have Suggested to the Contrary against us.

As to F. Bugg's Rendering our said Declaration and Testimony ( for the Divine
Authority of the Holy Scriptures) DECEITFVL on our Parts, New Rome Arraigned,
p. 40, and 42. This is to Endeavor to Invalidate and Destroy a' Principal
Condition of our present Liberty: And is it not to Confront the Government's
Acceptance of our said Declaration also?

Now, Isaac Archer, thou may Remember that, in my Letter to thee, upon F.
Bugg's Unjustly and Maliciously Representing the said People called Quakers,
under those Black and Offensive Characters of New Rome, Rome' s Sister, and as
Brethren to the Papists, etc. Consequently no better nor other than Papists, I
asked thee these, with some other Questions.

Q. 1. Does not this greatly tend to Gratify the Popish Interest, and to
Lessen and Injure the Protestants, and Consequently to Contradict the
Government's Legally Recognizing us to be Dissenting Protestants?

2. What Ingenuity or Prudence has Bugg, or his Abettors shown in thus
Representing such a Body (of Protestant Subjects) as being Papists?

3. What Regard or Respect to the present Government, or Care of the Protestant
Religion, have you (his Approvers) therein Manifested on your Parts?

4. And what Reputation, Credit or Honor to thee ( Isaac Archer) will thy
Approbation of F. Bugg's thus Writing against us be, when further Exposed to be
taken Cognizance of, etc.

5. Whether his Contradicting the Government's Recognizing us by Law as
Dissenting Protestants, by his Defaming us as Papists, etc. Be not Seditious in
the Nature and Tendency thereof, as tending to sow and stir up Strife and
Variance amongst Protestant Subjects, etc.

6. Concerning Bugg's Assuming a Power as a Judge, and in his own Name to Try,
Examine, Sentence, and Condemn Citizens and Tradesmen, etc. (who are the King's
Subjects) as Perjured Persons and to the Pillory, and that in their Absence
too, and some of them Persons he never knew, as he has since declared, and in
his Mock-Trial, Forging False Answers in the same Person's Names, and then
Erecting the Form of a Pillory, with Twelve Pictures, and the first Letters of
the Names of the Persons (thus Condemned and Scandalized by him) and the Word [
Perjury] set over them, to Ridecule them with such Gross Forgery.

Now we Query of you, his Approvers, whether such his Proceedings be
Warrantable, either by the Law of God or Man?

With several more Queries and Matters to thee ( Isaac Archer) in my Letters
Relating to F. Bugg's Abuse, and my large and Friendly Letters also to the said
W. Smithies, containing much in Substance of the same Matters, which yet remain
unanswered by you, or either of you, save only a few Lines I had from thee
Isaac Archer, which is not all Answer to the Queries, neither does it yet
appear that you have given him any Real or Effectual Check to stop his Abuse
and Calumnies, as you were Cautioned; but rather he has persisted therein; and
Boasts of your Approbations as follows.

F. Bugg Proceeds (in his Preface) p. 3. thus, viz. Poor Proud Man (i. e. G.
Whitehead) I say this Considered, I shall allow Mr. Archer Room for his whole
Approbation, and Recite the Substance of two or three Letters from some other
Clergymen, and the Request of three others, besides an Independent Preacher,
that so be (G. W.) may see that both Conforming and Nonconforming Ministers are
not ashamed to appear in Favor of what I Write; nor afraid of G. Whitehead,
who acts more like a Lord Chief Justice, than an Humble Quaker.

Answ. 1. If you, his Approvers, are not ashamed so to appear in his Favors,
you may be: I persume you have given your Approbations too Early, before you
could have or see our Answers: And I Question whether either you Conforming, or
Nonconforming Ministers (who have been so early in your Approbations for F.
Bugg) have ever yet seriously Perused our Answers and Confutations of his
Notorious Lies and Calumnies against us, but have rather brought your selves
under great Blemish and Guilt by such your Approbations; and I must tell you,
it was a very Unadvised and Indiscreet Act in you to be so Forward and Early in
your Approbations and Judgments for F. Bugg's Books against the Quakers,
without hearing both Parties Fully and Impartially; such Percipitancy and
Injustice will never Redound to your Honor or Reputation, who are the
Clergymen and Ministers (Conforming or Nonconforming) who have shown your
Favors and Approbations of this pretended Convert, for much Boasted of by him.

His Parish Minister's Approbation, which he chiefly Boasts of, thus Styled and
Cited, viz.
Mr. Archer, Minister of Milden-Hall in Suffolk, the Town where I Dwell, his
Approbation, etc.
As there is Joy in Heaven over a Sinner Converted to God as to his Morals, so
when the Erroneous turn to the true God as to his Intellectuals, Truth and
Goodness, being his Infinite Attributes, the Shadow of them (for in the
Creature they are no better) are Equally Pleasing to their Author. Hence I may
show my Joy, in that my Neighbor Bugg is returned from his Errors (not as to
his Life, for he was Sober ever since I knew him) but as to his Judgment, as a
Sign of which he has Labored to bring over his Seduced Brethren; which, would
they Read his Books, might be done: But I fear most of them are of the Mind of
one of them that told me, Thou may out Argue me, but shall not Persuade me,
However I do own the Substance of this Book, i. e. the first Impressionths, as
a Defense of those Eternal Truths (...) which I hope for Salvation, and which
are a Comfort to me in my (...), Peace be to those that own them, and the Lord
open the Eyes of such as deny them.

Isaac Archer.

By this, the Reader may see what a Great and Eminent Convert F. Bugg is here
Rendered, and what Joy his now Teacher shows in his Conversion, and by such his
Approbation of F. Bugg's Work ( as a Defense of the Eternal Saving Truths) and
his Judgment against the Quakers, as his Seduced Brethren, he has joined Issue
with him therein against us; but herein we deny their Judgment, i. e. the
Judgment and Condemnation of both Priest and Proselyte, it being without Proof
or Conviction. Isaac Archer thou wast too forward in this Point, thou have
given Approbation and Judgment for F. Bugg's Book, (it seems on its first
Impression) and against us, before thou could have our Answers, or
Impartially hear both Parties. Is this thy Justice or Judicial Way of
Proceedure? And do thou think such Malicious Work, as thy Disciple F. Bugg's,
will Convince us of Error (if mistaken) or bring Honor to thee, or Credit to
thy Cause? Surely thou art Accountable to the Just God for thy Encouraging F.
Bugg in his Unjust Attempts; who when he has Recited thy Approbation, then
falls to Boasting Railing, falsely and grossly Reviling, (instead of better
Argument) according to his wonted Course since he became your Convert
pretended, viz. Come G. W. (quoth he) I have found room to Recite my Teacher
Verbatim; but I want both time and room to draw the Exact Picture of G. W. who,
for Audacious Insolency, Pride and Conceit, for Scorn, Contempt and Envy, for
Defaming, Glossing, Perverting and Subtilty, for denying what you know to be
true, and affirming what you know to be false; I say, to set forth your Exact
Picture in these and other the like Crafty Jugglings, and Legerdemain, etc. it
would require a Volumn.

Behold, your Convert's Treatment! Many such Storms of Raillery he Appears in
in his Books and Pamphlets (instead of Sober or Sound Argument) wherein, as I
know in my own Conscience, he has falsely Aspersed me: Being also known to be a
Person of better Fame than he Represents me, so no Ingenuous or Impartial Men
will take his Calumnies upon trust against me or my Friends; but such as are so
Enviously Credulous as to give away their Common Sense and Reason to believe
his Reproachful Lies, and so join Issue with him in his False Judgment against
the Innocent. But he proceeds on with the Approbation given for him, viz,

A Letter from Dr. Burrell.
SIR,
I heartily Congratulate your Return to our Church, which doubtless is the most
Eminent for Doctrine, Worship and Discipline, amongst all the Reformed Churches
in the World; I cannot but highly Commend your Pious Endeavors for this End,
of which I have received an Account from Mr. Gearing, a London Minister; I
shall much Rejoice in your success herein, in order to undeceive them, Poor
Seduced People; having therein Displayed many of the Intreigues of their
Leaders.

Your Real Friend Nath. Burrell.


Observe here how far these Clergymen have Entitled themselves to F. Bugg's
Work against the People called Quakers; taking what he Writes for granted; as
Pious Endeavors, (how Malicious soever) without Regard to our Answers, which
evidently Detect and Refute his Impiety and Malice in his Frequently and
Unjustly Aspersing us as a People: Yet if this Doctor would but be so Impartial
as seriously to Peruse our Answers, he would see cause to be ashamed of his
high Congratulation and Commendation of the pretended Pious Endeavors which he
so Affectionatly has ascribed to F. Bugg, and to Retract the same, if he be not
wronged in the Citation aforesaid.

A Letter from another Divine (so Styled by F. Bugg.)
As nothing is more pleasing to the Eyes than Light, so nothing is more
grateful to the Understanding than the Discovery of Truth; in which Respect you
have certainly done A MOST ACCEPTABLE Piece of Service to your Country, in
Unvailing of the Falsehoods, Errors and Hypocrisies of the Quakers, both because
the Knowledge of the Truth is Delectable, and also because Men being thereby
forewarned of the Dangers of their Hypocritical Insinuations and Pretentions
might else have drawn them into, may be Enabled to avoid the Mischiefs thereof;
for which I think my self Obliged to return you my Thanks, I having received a
particular Advantage by your Discoveries. But seeing, by your Pains, it plainly
appears, that you aim at the Advantage of Mankind, which is both the Duty and
Honor of all Men; I am thereby Encouraged to beg the favor of a little
further Information.

John Milme.


Observe, This pretended Divine seems dipped into F. Bugg's Spirit of Envy; thus
to Condemn a People ( i. e. the Quakers) upon trust, without taking notice of
their Defense. 1st, He Cries up F. Bugg, not only as a great Discoverer of
Truth; but, in the Superlative Degree, as having therein done A MOST ACCEPTABLE
Piece of Service to his Country. 2dly, Then without Proof i. e Cries down the
Quakers, Charging them with Falshoots, Errors, Hyppocrisies, Hypocritical
Insinuations, etc. By all which he has as highly Espoused Bugg's Cause, and
shown as much Envy as any that have taken his part; and deserves as much to be
charged with his Abuses and Calumnies against the People called Quakers, seeing
he so Frankly takes F. Bugg's Bitter and False Invectives against us to be such
a real Discovery of Truth, and so Obligingly returns him his Thanks for the
same; whereupon F. Bugg seems greatly Elevated, and highly Cracks, Boasts and
Vapors on this wife, viz.

Come, Imperious George, that you may see to your Grief, that the Public
Ministry, both Conforming and Nonconforming, are not afraid of your Threats and
Menacings to stand by me in what is Right, etc. Preface, p. 5.
Q. 1. But did you the Ministers, that have thus Approved and Encouraged F.
Bugg in his Work of Envy, give him order or leave thus to Expose your
Approbation and Names in Print?

Q. 2. I desire to know of you, if you will stand by, and vindicate his Books and
Charges therein against the People called Quakers, both as to Matters of
Doctrines, and Matters of Fact?

Q. 3. I desire to know of you, if you Approve of Bugg's thus Bragging and
Boasting of your Approbations in Print?

Q. 4. And whether you did see, and seriously peruse our Answers (or any of
them) to F. Bugg, before you gave him your Approbations or returned your
Congratulations before Cited.

In his Postscript he also Scoffs, Boasts, and Insults, telling me, How smooth
I appear in my Letters to his Mr. Smithies and Mr. Archer (Whereupon he says,
viz.) Methinks I hear you say, Good Gentlemen be so kind to us, the Distressed
and Perplexed Quakers, as to stop F. Bugg from Writing against our Errors, etc.

But he never heard me thus Flatter or Complain in's Days; though I did write to
those two Clergymen, as before, to show them some of his foul abuses and
Calumnies, that they might have Corrected or Stopped him, if they would have been
so just; but instead thereof, concerning them of the Glergy of England, he
tells me, Postscript, viz. As they never put me upon Writing against you, so I
can assure you they are far enough from stopping me; therefore you must get
other Advocates than such who have given me thanks for my Labor and Service
done to the Christian Religion and Protestant Profession:

Now, come Isaac Archer, William Smithies, Nath. Burrell, Gearing and Jo.
Milme, What say you? You may see how F. Bugg Boasts of your Thanks for his
Labor: But what Service can you think he has done, either to the Christian
Religion, or to the Protestant Profession, by falsely Aspersing a Protestant
People and Society, as Papists, New Rome? I hope you will see cause to Retract
such Thanks, Congratulations and Commendations of your pretended Convert's Work
of Envy, Falsehood and Persecution, as it is abundantly proved in our Answers;
particularly, 1st, In that Entitled, Innocence Triumphant over Insolency and
Outrage of a Self-Condemned Appostate. 2. In that Entitled, The Counterfeit
Convert. 3. In that Entitled, The Quakers Vindication against Bugg 's
Calumnies: With diverse others never answered by him.

He now tells me, That neither did Col. Goldwell ever Reprove him, but always
Approved of the Substance of what he wrote, and approved of his delivering the
Sheet to the Parliament, etc.

I am sure (with others) Col. Goldwell told several of us the Contrary, namely,
That when three of us showed him the Injury Bugg had done him ( i. e. by
dedicating his Scandalous Books to him, in hopes of his Patronage) he, the said
Col. Goldwell, signified to us, that he was not made privy to his Dedication,
for he knew not of it before it came forth, and had showed his dislike thereof,
as is more fully related in my Answer, Innocence Triumphant, p. 67, 68, 69, 70.

Now for F. Bugg Contrariwise to Allege that Col. Goldwell did never reprove
him but always approved of the Substance of what he Wrote, etc. This is not
only to Contradict the said Col. in what he Possitively told William Mead, G.
Latye, and my self; but further, to add to his Disrepute and Disparagement, as
an Approver of such Scandalous Pamphlets as those of Bugg's, particularly that
of his New Rome Arraigned, with his Gross and Scandalous Mock-Trial, Sentence
of Perjury and Pillory against diverse Persons of good Repute, both Citizens and
others; but whether Col. Goldwell be to be Credited in his own Vindication of
his dislike, and severe advertisement (as he told us) against what F. B. wrote;
or F. B. in saying, he never did reprove him, but always approved thereof, I
say, which of them to Credit, in such Contradiction, the Reader is left free to
his own choice, as may appear most probable to him, the one being a Member of
Parliament (whose Reputation was the more concerned) and the other proved an
Envious, Self condemned, Grievous Revolier and Blackslider, and Abusive
Scribler, against an Innocent People, after owned by him, and conversant among
them, for above 25 Years, as the People of God, and their Principle, Doctrine,
and Ministry, as being a Dispensation of the Love of God to Mankind, and that
God blessed their ( i. e. the Quakers) Meetings with the Comfortable Enjoyment
of his Presence for many Years as F. B. has more fully declared for us in his
Book styled, The Quakers Detected, Printed 1686. Two Years after he had left
our Communion, and turned to the Church of England.

F. B. his Title of New Rome, etc.] is a refuted Calumny unjustly cast upon the
Protestant Subjects called Quakers.

Foxonian Quakers] is a scornful Nickname, and no such distinction owned by the
said People.

His Charges of dangerous Errors, and pernicious Principles, tending to
Overthrow the Christian Faith, to obstruct the Jews Conversion, to encourage
MAHOMETISM, and to pervert the right way of the Lord; are also Perverse and
Lying Aspersions and Calumnies, which neither are, nor can be proved by him, or
you, his Abettors, against the said People, on due Examination; besides his
dubious Question on his own Charge, renders him the more uncertain and
questionable therein, by his thereupon saying, viz. Which whether so or no,
deserves the Examination and Consideration of the Christian Ministry of all
Protestant Churches, so short and dubious is he in his own Examination and
Consideration; though very loud, clamorous and positive in his Charges, wherein
he does (it seems) but make work for others, which he is never able to perform
himself, nor his Abettors.

Tending to Encourage Mahometism] is a new, as well as undue Charge; what is his
pretended Reason or Proof for the same? In his Preface to the Reader, p. 2.

His supposing, That they do not believe Christ to be distinct from the Saints,
or from his Body the Church, (which he is Head of) herein is a mistake, yet
this can be no proof of his Charges, if by distinct from them, be meant
separate from them, as may be rationally supposed; for Christ and his Saints,
as to their Beings, are distinct, and not confounded, yet not divided nor
separated from each other in Spirit.

That they do not Pray in the Name of Jesus to God the Father, thereby to own
his Mediatorship] is a notorious (and publicly known) Lie, as Thousands can
Testify, consequently far from proving his said Charges.

Nor make Confession of Sin to God in Prayer, nor beg Pardon for the same] are
also two notorious Falsehoods, knowing that many who frequent our Meetings, have
great need of both sincere Confession, Repentance, and Pardon of Sin, for
Christ's sake, and their own poor Souls.

But look at Christ within, the Light within, his Intercession within] and so
did all true Christian Believers, who knew the Mystery of Christ in them, who
believed and walked in his Light, and received the Spirit of the Son of God
into their Hearts, making Intercession, and crying, Abba, Father.

We do not believe this to be any pernicious Principle, either tending to
Overthrow the Christian Faith, or to Encourage Mahometism.

His Crucifixion within; is not this to insinuate, that they do not believe
Christ Crucified without] which is a perverse and injurious Falsehood implied
against them, having often confessed Christ Crucified without on the Cross at
Jerusalem, as the Scripture testifies: And if we should say, that F. Bugg, and
such envious Apostates, do Spiritually Crucify Christ afresh unto (and in)
themselves, and put him to open shame, by maliciously Reproaching his Truth and
People; this is not to deny his being Crucified without. I cannot see any
Mahometism from thence justly Chargeable upon us.

Neither does his following Objection prove us guilty thereof, but himself very
Ignorant of Christ and Christianity; viz.

Object. Yet they have among them many good Exhortations; and they own Christ
to be the Word of God, the Power of God, the Wisdom of God, will not this do?
Supposing they mean all to be within; yea, Heaven and Hell, and all within,
etc. Unto which F. B. the Framer of the Objection has Cited this for Answer,
viz.

The Mahometans hold Abraham to be the Friend of God, and Moses the Messenger
of God, and Christ the Breath of God, and they Punish such as speak against
Christ, whose Religion was not (say they) taken away, but mended by Mahomet;
Heylins Cosmog. Lib. 3. p. 104. And our Savior is called in their Alchoran,
The Word, the Power, the Soul and Strength of God, etc.Quoting the Lives of the
Patriarchs, Printed 1694.

Answ. 1. The People called Quakers do utterly deny Mahometism: It Is not at all
Concerned in their Principles or Religion, being Christian and wholly Opposite
to the Adoration of that Impostor Mahomot. 2. They utterly deny that Christ's
Religion could be mended by Mahomet or any Man or Men else whatsoever. 3. But
if the Mahometans hold Abrham to be the Friend of God, and Moses his Messenger,
and Christ the Breath, the Word, the Power, the Soul and Strength of God, and
Quakers hold the same; this can no more prove that their Principles and
Doctrines tend to encourage Mahometism, than that the Holy Apostles Doctrine
did so, for they held Christ to be the Word of God, John 1. 1 John 5. 7. Rev.
19. The Power of God, and the Wisdom of God, 1 Cor. 1. 24. Yea, The Life,
Strength, and Arm of God, and a Quickening Spirit also, Isa. 53. 1 Cor. 15.
Could this be to Encourage Mahometism? No sure, 'Twere Blasphemy to Assert it.
The Mahometans hold many Truths out of the Law of Moses, corruptly mixed with
their Mohammedan Imposture, and so do many Idolaters, Apostates and Antichrists
in Christendom; does it follow, that because the Quakers own those Truths, that
therefore they are either Mahometans, or Idolators, etc. 2. That Is no good
Consequence, and but ill Argued, at this Rate F. Bugg may as well prove any
true Christian to be of any Religion; and himself also a gross Impostor,
because he holds some Truths which gross Imposters, etc. hold.

Neither can he, Mahometize or Unchristian the Quakers by his False Supposition
viz. If they do not come to this Result to own the same Jesus that was Born of
the Virgin, Crucified, Dead, Buried, Rose again, and in the sight of the
Galileans Ascended into Heaven. Seeing we do Sincerely, and Frequently, and
Publicly, own and confess the same Jesus, both in Print and Public Testimony,
as Thousands are Witnesses, that we Confess Jesus Christ come in the Flesh,
Born of the Virgin Mary; that he was the Word which took Flesh, and Christ also
a Spirit, even a Quickening Spirit, 1 John 1. 14. 1 Cor. 15. 45. But F. Bugg
Falsely adds this more Possitive Charge, viz. And Publicly Condemn their Books,
which Teach the Contrary, Preface, p. 2.

And what is contrary, but that the Quakers disown the same Jesus that was Born
of the Virgin Mary; which is a Notorious Falsehood and Calumny. And therefore I
Challenge him, and you his Teachers, Abettors and Congratulators, to produce
those Books of the Quakers with the Pages and Words wherein the same Jesus is
so disowned; otherwise, for shame Retract and Condemn this his Abuse and
Calumnious Aspersion.

He further proceeds, in Justification of his most gross Forgery and Defamation
against us, viz. But they say I put up a Mock-Pillory; I Grant I did, and that
to show what they Actually deserved from their own Proposals to Authority,
Preface. p. 2.

Which Mock-Pillory, was the form of a Pillory, with Twelve Pictures standing
with the first Letters of the Names of Certain Citizens of London, and other
Persons of good Fame and Repute, with a Forged Mock-Trial, grossly to Defame and
Scandalize them as Perjured Persons, (for denying F. Bugg's False Charge) in
the first Edition of his New Rome Arraigned: And now both his Mock-Trial and
Mock-Pillory left out in his Second Edition: Yet thus Unjustly Justified
therein, as what the Quakers Actually Deserved; Oh! Abominable Falsehood,
Insolence and Slander: But what has he Actually Deserved: Nevertheless, in
Contradiction to this his False Plea, for his Mock-Pillory, his Friend and
Advocate Thomas Crisp, in his Counterfeit Discovered, p. 2. says (as he is
informed) That F. Bugg has acknowledged 10 G. Whitehead, etc. that he was sorry
he had done it; and that if it were to do again, he would not do it; (that is,
set up his Feigned or Mock-Pillory.) But how does his Sorrow for it appear,
when now he tells us, 'Twas to show what they (i. e. the Quakers) Actually
Deserved? Where Is then his Sorrow? What say you his Watchers? Was it a just
Course to Convince us of Error that he took against us by his Mock-Trial and
Scandalous Mock-Pillory? Pray Answer plainly; otherwise, if you do not yet stop
bis Current of Scandalizing and Defaming us, your Encouragement and
Approbations already given him, will the more Affect you, and Render you the
more Culpable of his gross Abuses, as partakers of his great Iniquity which
will be no good Expedient to dignifie your Church, or promote your Interest or
good Fame; I hope you will yet Consider it.

And further, observe some of F. Bugg's Additional Forgery against us, the said
People, in his own Words, Preface, p. 3. viz. Methinks I hear them say, Come
let us say, he (i. e. F. Bugg) is a Pestilent Fellow, a Mover of Sedition, we
must use all the Arts we have to stop him, for he seems to follow the Steps of
M. Luther, that Apostate Adversary of our dear Elder Sister, and if he goes on,
he will so unvail us, that all People will know us and our Intreigues; come let
us Bespa^ter him, and Cover him with some Frightful Beast's Skin; and th^n set
our little Currs to bait and Worry him, to Abuse and Bespatter him in City and
Country, etc. This I have found true: Thus far F. Bugg.

Observe here this Piece of Forgery and Romance to Bespatter us, and Suggest
False Matters against us, which he never heard the Quakers say, but thinks he
hears them so say, which we cannot think he does, unless he Dreams it. But to
show his own Conceited Ambition and Pride, how Puffed up, Swelled and Bigg he is
in his own Conceit, as if he were such a Potent Invincible Antagonist, when we
very well know the Contrary how Feeble, Impertinent and False he is: And his
Comparing himself to M. Luther, as one in his Steps, and Implying the Church of
Rome to be our Dear Elder-Sister: In the one appears his Proud Conceit, and
Vain Fmpty Boasting; in the other, his Notorious Falsehood and Calumny.

As to his Charge of Blasphemous Pretenses of Miracles against G. Fox, whom he
most Maliciously and Slanderously calls, That Imposter, Pref. p. 6. And why so?
But because G. Fox mentioned certain Miracles Wrought by the Power of God: Not
at all Ascribing them to himself, or his own Power, but to the Power of God; in
Answer to the fervent Prayers of his Servants and People among us in certain
places. But, says F. Bugg, not one of them (i. e. Miracles) said to be done in
the Name of Jesus of Nazareth, as in Acts 3. 6. Which (Quoth he) is a strong
Argument of their Disowning Jesus of Nazareth, etc.

Answ. 1. That Miracles, both outward and inward, have been wrought among us by
the Power of God (Consequently by Jesus Christ who is that Power) F. Bugg
cannot Confute.

If wrought by the Power of God, then they must be in the Name of Jesus Christ,
for they are Indivisible and Inseparable.

3. What Sincere and Faithful Regard and Breathings of Soul, those our Friends
Concerned, had in their servent Prayers to the Name of the same Jesus of
Nazareth, F. Bugg is now as wholly Ignorant and now Insensible as his Argument
and Consequence ( of their Disowning Jesus of Nazareth, etc.) is utterly False;
it being by and through him that the Power and Spirit of God has been made
known among us, in its Effectual Operations.

As to his Reciting the Quakers Books, which he Falsely says carry two Contrary
Faces, Contrary Doctrines, Contrary Principles, etc. In two Columns Opposite.
And then Aspersing their Leaders with the Depth of Hypocrsy Couched in them.
It Is to none but to such as his own Evil, Envious Eye, his Dim and False sight
that they appear so Contrary; for to a Single Eye and Charitable Mind such
Pretended or seeming Contrariety is easily Reconcilable.

As under the Title of The Perfect Quaker, he Cites, David 's Enemies
Discovered, p. 7. Thus, viz. And these (the Quakers) do not call the Letter the
Rule, nor Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John the New Testament and Gospel, etc. And
in Opposition, under the Title of The Counterfeit Quaker, he Cites, The Harmony
of the Old and New Testament, and the fulfilling of the Prophecies: But he has
falsely Cited the first to make them seem the more Contradictory for the Words
truly Cited, are these, viz. And these ( i. e. Who witness the Life which spoke
forth Scripture) do not call the Letter the Rule, and the four Books, Matthew,
Mark, Luke and John, the New Testament and Gospel, etc. Here Bugg leaves out [
and the four Books] which he has not Proved to be, both the New Testament and
the Gospel, being not the Books Abstractly, but the New Covenant, and the Power
of God therein Testified unto, which Gospel was before the Books were, and
before Abraham was: Romans 1. Heb. 8. Jer. 31.

Besides we owning the said four Books, to be Books of the New Testament or
Covenant; yet they are not all the Books thereof, there are more Books of the
New Testament, as that of the Blessed Acts of the Apostles, and their
Evangelical Epistles, and the Excellent Apocalips, which also belong to the New
Testament; so that the Harmony of the Old and New Testament relates to the
Divine Testimonies or Doctrine of Christ contained in the Books: Paul and other
Apostles were Ministers of the Gospel; not of the Letter, but of the Spirit;
and of the New Testament, or New Covenant (which are one and the same) yet did
not thereby Contemn or Slight the Scriptures which Testify thereof. And seeing
that I have Confessed that the Spirit or Life of Christ gave forth the Holy
Scriptures, far be it from me to have the least Undervaluing Thoughts or
Disesteem of the Scripture, which proceeded from thence: Therefore F. Bugg's
Observation against the Quakers Doctrine (and against me in Particular) in this
matter, as nothing but Discord and Confusion, and setting the perfect Quaker in
Opposition to the Harmony of the Old and New Testament; and Terming those that
own that Harmony (as J. Tompkins and W. Penn) but The Counterfeit Quakers: Both
which are so Notoriously False and Malicious that we could Enumerate
Testimonies against him herein.

Again, it is as General as Positive a Falsehood, That the Quakers Doctrine
attributes that to G. Fox, which is ONLY due to Christ, Apol. p. 4. For the
People called Quakers do positively disown any such Doctrine as does attribute
that to any other Man which is only proper and due to Jesus Christ, and
sincerely Confess that Christ in all things must have the Pre-eminence in Glory
and Dignity, as the only Potentate King of Kings, and Lord of Lords.

Another Charge against the Perfect Quaker (as he calls him) is from the
Examition and Trial of G. Fox at Lancaster Assize; being thus Cited, viz. And
before I came to the Bar I was moved to Pray, that the Lord would Confound
their Wickedness and Envy, [And what Crime was that?] The Thundered Voice
Answered, I have Glorified thee, and will Glorify thee again. And I was so
filled full of Glory, etc. In Opposition F. Bugg sets John 12. 28, 29. And
'twas F. Bugg's Observation hereupon: But, Reader, here is G. Fox' s Manifest
BLASPHEMY in Assuming a Glorified State, whilst in the Mortal Body, p. 4.

But is not here rather F. Bugg's great Envy, Darkness and Ignorance apparent?
For though G. Fox Assumed not such a Glorified State in that fullness in the
Mortal Body here, as will be in the Immortal hereafter; yet some Degree of
Glory he might witness, as the true Sufferers for Christ partake of here in
this Life: Observe, If ye be Reproached for the Name of Christ, happy are ye,
for the Spirit of Glory and of God rests upon you, 1 Pet. 4. 14. See also
Chap. 1. 8. And were not they Changed in the same Heavenly Image from Glory to
Glory, even as by the Spirit of the Lord: See 2 Cor. 3. 18. And see also John
17. 22. Christ said, The Glory which thou gave me, I have given them.
Therefore it is no Blasphemy to Partake and Testify thereof. And how far that
Reproached Servant of Christ did Partake thereof in his Sufferings (who is now
unjustly Rendered a Blasphemer) is wholly hid from this Blind persecuting
Adversary, who deems that Blasphemy, which is so much agreeable to Holy
Scripture Testimony.

Again, our Suffering Friend G. Fox Testifying, That he was come up in the
Spirit, through the Flaming Sword, into the Paradise of God, and that he was in
Paradise, etc.

Against this, our Adversary thinks he has gotten huge Advantage; he Roars and
Belches out, viz. Thus did he Magnify himself equal with, or above Christ. Oh!
Horrible, etc. (Quoth he.) But soft, stop a little; Is there no such
Paradisical State in Christ attainable in this Life, but it must be deemed
Horrible and Blasphemous, as our bitter Adversary does? May we not Cry out
against his Gross Darkness, and his Teachers Ignorance. Oh Horrible! Did Paul
Blaspheme or Magnify himself, as equal with, or above Christ; when, coming to
Visions and Revelations of the Lord, he declared, That he knew a Man in Christ
above Fourteen Years ago, how that he was Caught up into Paradise, and heard
Unspeakable Words, etc. See the Matter more at Large, 2 Cor. 12. 1, 2, 3, 4.
See also Rev. 2. 7. Therefore it is not a Self Magnifying nor Erroneous really
to Believe and Profess a State of Paradise, or Heaven in Christ Jesus (in some
degree) attainable, even in this Life, Phil. 3. 20.

Our Reproached Friend's declaring that he was Clothed with Righteousness, and
whose Name is not known in the World, Risen up out of the North, which was
Prophesied of, but now fulfilled, etc. These Words our angry Adversary sets in
Opposition to Moses Prophecy of Christ, Deuteronomy. 18. 15. and Acts 3. 22. and to
John 1. 10. Whereupon he makes this Observation, viz. Thus did G. Fox Vye with
Christ, p. 5. But I do not Apprehend any such Vying or Equalizing with Christ;
nor Contradiction to the Scripture Testimony or Prophecy of him: For, 1st. To
be Clothed with Righteousness, is Christ's Redeemed Ones (the true Believers)
Privilege and Happiness. 2d. The Nature not known to the World, was meant the
New Name, pertaining to the New Birth. 3d. Risen up out of the North, which was
Prophesied of [Which] here is Relation to the North, and not the Persons
mentioned; and the Prophecy was of the Seed which, was foretold, the Lord would
gather, and also bring forth out of the North Country, and all Nations where
Scattered: See Isa. 43. 6. and 49. 12. Jer. 16. 15. and 23. 8. Luke 13. 29.

F. Bugg's Observation, p. 5. viz. Thus, Reader, did G. Fox Vye wish Christ,
and Edward Buroughs and Francis Howgil two of his Prophets, Echoed back in
their Epistle, Entitled, This is only to go amongst Friends, viz. Thou, O
North of England, who art counted as Desolate and Barren, etc. Yet out of thee
did the Branch (i. e. G. Fox) Spring and the Star Arise, etc.

Answ. 1. The Parenthesis (i. e. G. Fox) in that Place, is a Notorious Forgery,
as well as Malicious.

2. Here Is no Person Vying or Comparing himself with Christ.

Nor Echoing back to any such Vying.

4. Though our bitter Adversary has often Repeated this Citation, and now grossly
wrests it by Forgery, to prove his False and Malicious Charge against the
Quakers, viz That the Quakers Prophets give witness to G. Fox INSTEAD of
Christ; that they call him the Branch, the Star, the Son of Righteousness, and
put the North of England for the Town of Bethlehem. Yet there is no mention at
all made either of G. Fox, or Town of Bethlehem, in all that Epistle of E. B's,
Quoted, as the Epistle may be seen at large in his Works, p. 64, 65, 66, 67.

And Note, that General Epistle of Francis Howgil's, To the Camp of the Lord in
England, etc. Wherein are the Words, Spare none, neither Ox nor Ass, etc. Is
Printed in his Works, Pages 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33. Which I have also viewed
over, and find not any such Title; as, This is only to go among Friends:
Neither do I find G. Fox or Town of Bethlehem so much as Mentioned in it.

5. Is it not then great Wickedness and shameful I solency in our Adversary,
frequently to attempt Proof of such a Horrid Lie against the Quakers, as is
that of calling G. Fox the BRANCH, the Star, the Son of Righteousness, and
putting the North of England for the Town of Bethlehem: Is it not Horrible
Wickedness in our Adversary to persist in this Notorious Lie and Forgery; and
so much add and heap one Forgery and Abuse upon another? What say you his
Ministers to these things? Will it be for your Credit to Encourage him in his
Work of Envy and Falsehood against us?

6. Our Adversary, in his Introduction p. 6. After he has Cited above a Page
(which he knew in his Conscience, are Allegorical Expressions intending the
Spiritual Weapons and Warfare, and the Saints Testimony and victory) according
to Ephe 6. 12, 17. He puts his own Perverse and False Notes thereupon in the
Margin.

As where Ameleck, the Egyptians and Philistines are Threatened; so as to be cut
off. He makes this Note upon it in the Margin, viz. Which by Interpretation was
all that Professed Jesus of Nazareth, and that called the Scriptures the Word
of God.

Whereby he endeavors to render the Quakers to be for cutting off and
destroying all that profess Jesus of Nazareth, etc. Oh horrible! Did ever more
deadly Malice, bloody Envy and Falsehood appear in any Agent of Satan? And how
evidently against his own Conscience too, who knew the People called Quakers
professed no other Sword nor Weapons for them to make use of, but such as are
Spiritual; and to be actually concerned in no other Fighting, but in the Lamb's
War.

What Fra. Howgill writes of bathing their Sword in the Blood of Ameleck, and
the Egyptians, etc. are Allegorical Expressions, and not Literally to be
understood, but of the Sword of the Spirit, which is the Word of God: And that
War of the Lord's Camp was Spiritual, because of his Power and Presence, and
Angel of his Covenant among them: And the Lord of Hosts is with us, (says he.)
By these and diverse other passages, it is evident he meant no other but a
Spiritual War with Spiritual Weapons, like as the Prophets meant, Isa. 41. 14,
15, 16. Hos. 6. 5.

7. Also on the words, Let not your Eye pity, nor your Hand spare, he has this
Note, viz. Why then should you be pitied or spared? Thus injuriously
restraining the words to a Literal Sense which were Allegorical, on purpose to
render us most obnoxious, and for no pity to be shown us, but as if he would
have us all destroyed at once: Oh most cruel and deadly Malice.

8. On the following words, But wound the Lofty, and tread under foot the
Honorable of the Earth; give unto the great Whore double, etc. he thus Notes,
viz. Meaning both Gentry, and Clergy, and Church of England.

Oh horrid and implacable Malice, Revenge and Falsehood! They did not mean
Literally, as of an outward wounding or treading under Feet, nor of any truly
Honorable, Gentry, or others; but in Testimony against such great Persecutors
as had deeply Drunk of the great Whore's Cup, who has made her self Drunk with
the Blood of Saints: Therefore it is false to say ' it was meant of Gentry, etc.
or without Limitation.

Again, our Adversary in p. 7. repeats his so often refuted Forgery and Lie,
viz. That our Friend's said Epistle, Compared the North of England to the Town
of Bethlehem, and G. Fox to the Branch, the Star, the Sun of Righteousness,
etc. which Falsehood has been refuted over and over, though here he varies in's
Charge from the terms of his first Charge, which was, that the Quakers PVT the
North of England for the Town of Bethlehem. Now, it is COMPARED the North of
England, etc. In the first it was, viz. They call G. F. the Branch, the Star,
the Son of Righteousness; now it is they compared him to the Branch, etc. Thus
mutable he is in his Accusations and Calumnies, yet grossly false in both. Is
this your Defender of Eternal Truths? And are these his Pious Endeavors, for
which you his Approvers have so highly Congratulated him?

10. Farther, to aggravate Matters against us, our Adversary adds, p. 7. viz.
-- Prophecies and Curses, which bear the Figure of your Private Sermons, by
which they snared and frighted me, and many more, from the Public; and now
they have obtained their End, and made Rents and Division in Church and State,
etc.

1. Though here he renders himself but a dark, poor, frightful Creature, as if in
his first leaving the Public or Parish Priests, he did it only upon a Fright,
and as a Non Compos Mentis, and not from a Principle of Conscience or
Conviction; yet herein he does but greatly wrong his Conscience, and deny the
real Truth, by a very slim and false Cover, and that in manifest Contradiction
to his Confessions and Testimonies extant in Print, both before and since his
Revolt to the Public, (as he calls it) as has been often shown him, and made
evident to the World in our Answers to his Envious and Bitter Invectives; as
where he has solemnly confessed, To the Truth of the Principle, Foundation,
Doctrine, Ministry, Faith, Love, Unity, Spiritual Testimony of the People
called Quakers, as in the beginning, and as being the Church whereof Christ
Jesus was the Head and Lawgiver etc. as he confesses far more largely in his
Book, Entitled, De Christiana Liberate, 2d Part, Chap. 1. p. 24, 25, 26, 27,
etc. Printed 1682, before his return back to the Public. Surely he was not
frighted into such Solemn Confessions, nor did he make them in a fright, he was
more deliberate therein, and which said Confessions, in behalf of the People
called Quakers, and their Christian Religion, are largely seconded and
confirmed by him the said F. Bugg himself, even in his Pamphlet styled, The
Quakers detected, Printed 1686. about Two Years after he left us, and turned to
the Public, (as he calls it) wherein he also largely and solemnly confesses,
To the Truth of the said Peoples Principle (as in the beginning) and of their
Doctrine and Ministry, as a Dispensation of God's Love; their Christian Love
and Society for many Years,
and that God blessed their Meetings with the Comfortable Enjoyment of his
Presence, etc. as may be seen more at large in the whole third page of his said
Pamphlet, Quakers Detected.

Now I would Query, 1. Whether F. Bugg made all these solemn Confessions in a
fright? O^ was he scared or frighted by any Man, or Men, or Prophecies, or
Sermons of ours thereunto? 2. Or was he not rather Conscientious in those
Confessions? 3. Was he not rather frighted back to the Priests by Persecution,
and so made his flight in the Winter for Refuge, and shelter among them whom he
had testified against? 4. May he not then be ashamed of such a deceitful Excuse
and false Cover, as that of his being scared and frighted from the Public by
Quakers Prophecies or Sermons?

2. To the latter part of his Charge, I deny it, that the Quakers have made
Divisions not only in Church, but in State?

Q. 1. In what Church have they made Division? If he says the Church of
England, then he renders it a divided Church; which I suppose you its Ministers
will not own, nor thank him for rendering your Church divided.

Q. 2. In what State have they made Division? Is not this an audacious Affront
to the State, and maliciously to render us obnoxious thereto, and so to expose
us to Persecution and Ruin? Oh monstrous Persecution and Cruelty!

Our Adversary's Charge of most horrid Blasphemy upon that Innocent Sufferer
Ja. Parnell, p. 7. for saying, To the end of Disputes, etc. I am come, for
before they was, I am; which he sets in opposition to John 8. 58. Verily,
before Abraham was, I am.

I think he might in Charity (and literally too) have found a better
Construction for J. P's words, than most horrid Blasphemy, that being an
unpardonable Sin. As [either before Disputes was, I am; or before Disputes, I
am, was, or] before] is as well a Comparative Expression of Excellency, as of
Time, or Presence, as Supra before or above; and therefore it is no Blasphemy to
say, above Disputes I am; or I am come into that which was before Disputes. But
suppose Ja. Parnell was short, or failed in Expression; I shall more easily
grant that than that he was a most horrid Blasphemer.

P. 8, 9, That distinction between Christ, and the Body in which he came, and
his being Spiritually in his Saints, and as he is the Seed which bruiseth the
Serpent's Head, he is not wholly excluded out of Man; for the same Christ that
was Crucified being Spiritually in us, this I take to be the meaning of what is
contained in those Citations in p. 8, 9.

I do not see Christ denied hereby, or that the Quakers deny Jesus of Nazareth
to be the Christ of God, as is often falsely charged upon them, and as often
refuted: And if our Opposer will needs have the Body, which Christ took upon
him, to be the imire Christ, how then does he confess on John 1. 10. That He
(i. e. Christ) was in the World, and the World was made by him, and the World
knew him not.

P 5. Intro. Qu. Did that Body which Christ took upon him make the World? Or
Christ the Word which took Flesh, or assumed that Body?

Though I said I may see cause otherwise to word the Matter,
and yet our Intentions be the same. Count. Convert, p. 72. quoted by our
Adversary; I did not thereby intend either to deny Christ, or undervalue his
Death and Sufferings, or to contemn the Scriptures, as he seems unjustly to
suggest, p. 9, 10. seeing they are Imputations and Aspersions which we have
endeavored to wipe off and remove, as we have frequently done.

There Is another great Abuse and Aspersion which our Adversary has again
repeated against us, as one that is implacable, and bent to evade our plain
Answers, and to persist in his Calumnies and Lies, when he has formed the
Query, Whether was the Sufferings of Christ, or the Sufferings of the Quakers
greatest? Then he says Edw. Buroughs says, the Sufferings of the Quakers was
greatest, (wherein he wrongs E. B's words) and then most falsely says, viz. and
G. W. has not yet said, the Sufferings of Christ was greatest; no other word
will do, I still pursue the terms of my Query, and wait to have it answered,
but I find. G. W. pinched, and in a great strait, and knows not which way to
wind him, p. 10, 11. and hereupon he brings forth a great storm of Railery,
Scorn and Calumny against us, as not fit for any Place of Trust, not fit to
have our Yea and Nay pass for an Oath, aspersing the Quakers with new kind of
Popery, with much more insulting Scorn and Contempt, and all without just
cause, from G. W's Answer to his said Query, being directly answered to the
terms of it twice over: 1. In the Sheet, in the Quakers Vindication from F.
Bugg 's Calumnies, which was given to the Parliament. 2. In my Answer to his
Quakerism Withering, Entitled, The Counterfeit Convert a Scandal to
Christianity, p. 36, 37 Now that you, who are F. B's Teachers and Approvers,
may see (that instead of his defending Eternal Truths, or Pious Endeavors, as
you have commended him) how wilfully he has belyed me twice over in this
Matter, and how that I have given him direct Answer to his Query, by confessing
the Sufferings of Christ were greatest, and therefore not pinched, nor in any
such strait to answer him, as he falsely renders me, I shall now give you a
third Repetition of his Query, and my Answer, as they are in Print twice over.

Bugg 's Query, Whether was the Sufferings of Christ, or the Sufferings of the
Quakers greatest?

Answ. 1. In the first place we Answer, The Sufferings of Christ in the Nature
of them, both inward and outward, in Agony of Soul, and Pains of Body, by that
most Cruel Death of the Cross, following that of Scourging and Crowning with
Thorns.

2. It was most unjustly and wickedly inflicted by his Persecutors, the Jews
and Heathen; yet worse in the Jews, because they might have known better, and
because they prosecuted him upon False Witness. And as Christ's Sufferings were
most Cruel and Unjust, both as to the nature thereof, and the Dignity of him
that Suffered, so he was a most Acceptable Sacrifice, and Sweet Smelling Savor
to God, and his Suffering and Sacrifice of Universal Advantage and Benefit to
Mankind, in that he Died for all Men, and gave himself a Ransom for all, that
all might be capable of Redemption and Salvation through him.

Now, pray observe what more direct Answer to F. Bugg's Query could I have
given? The Query is, viz. Whether was the Sufferings of Christ, or the
Sufferings of the Quakers greatest? Answ. 1. The Sufferings of Christ in the
nature of them, ( i. e. the Sufferings of Christ were greatest, for the Answer
is directly pursuant to the terms of the Question).

2. Christ's Sufferings most exalted and esteemed, because of the Dignity of
him that Suffered.

And this was obvious to Bugg's Eyes twice over in Print, 1. In our said
Vindication. 2. In the said Counterfeit Convert a Scandal to Christianity, in
Answer to his Quakerism Withering. With what Conscience then could he say, G.
W. has not yet said the Sufferings of Christ was greatest, and that he finds
G. W. pinched, and in a great strait? What notorious Falsehoods are these?

And suppose, as he would insinuate, such a direct Answer from me, would thwart
some of E. B's Expressions in this point: Or that he was mistaken in some words
unsafe therein, (which I deny not) does it therefore follow, that I am such a
great Offender in esteeming him a Prophet, and that therefore down goes
Infallibility it self, according to our Adversaries Arguing? By such Logic who
may escape his Uncharitable and Unjust Censure of new kind of Popery? For it is
as rare Logic, as to argue, a good Man may be some time mistaken in some
Expressions, therefore he is always mistaken, consequently a false Prophet, or
fallible and mistaken in every thing: But this will not hold, for this were to
condemn both Samuel, David, Elijah, Job, and others, as no true, but false
Prophets, because sometime mistaken. See 1 Samuel 16. 6. 1 Kings 19. 14, 15, 18.
Romans 11. 4: See also Acts 23. 5. And, in the Ancient Approved Bibles, see what
Remark is in the Argument on Job, it is there said, That Job maintains a Good
Cause, but handles it Evil. Again, his Adversaries have an ill Matter, but
they defend it Craftily. Moreover, he ( i. e. Job) was assured that God had not
rejected him, yet through his great Torments and Affliction he bursteth forth
into many inconveniences both of Words and Sentences, etc. yet Job was a holy
and just Man, and true Prophet in many things.

Our Bitter Persecutor would fain fasten Contempt of Holy Scripture upon the
Quakers, with these odious Assertions, viz. That the Scripture is BEASTLY Ware;
that WHAT the true Prophets spoke was false, and WHAT the false Prophets spoke
was true, etc. Intro. p. 13. These are three notorious Falsehoods as well as
gross Errors, maliciously contrived to contradict our sincere Confession, viz.
That the Holy Scriptures, of the Old and New Testament, are of Divine
Authority, as being given by Divine Inspiration, etc. and that we prefer the
Holy Scriptures before all other Books extant in the World.

How sincere we are in such Confession, we can refer to him that knows our
Hearts, to whom we Appeal against our Adversaries contrary, unjust Judgment,
and gross Calumnies, falsely representing us insincere, even in these weighty
Matters, wherein the greatest Tenderness and Conscienciousness toward God
ought to be exercised by us all.

Another gross Abuse our. Bitter Adversary has committed against many of us,
who Signed an Epistle from our Yearly Meeting in 1675. which I must give some
Account of here.

1. He Cites these words out of our said Epistle, viz. It is our Sense, Advice,
Admonition, and Judgment, in the Fear of God, and Authority of his Power and
Spirit, that no such slight and contemptible Names and Expressions, as that
Faithful Friends Papers (which we Testify have been given out by the Power and
Spirit of God) are Men's Edicts or Canons, with such scornful Sayings, be
permitted. Subscribed (says he) by W. Penn, G. Whitehead, and others. Introd.
p. 11.

And what of all this? This Advice related to such Papers and Epistles of
Faithful Friends, as concerned good Order and Discipline in the Church, and for
promoting pure Religion in Life and Practice; and why should they be slighted
or contemned as but mere Human Edicts and Canons? What use does our Scornful
Adversary make of this? Observe what he says, p. 13. viz. But as for what G.
F. etc. wrote, their Yearly Meeting Testifies it was given forth by the Eternal
Spirit; yea,
THE SAME MEN that charged their Disciples in the Name of the Lord not to call
their Papers Edicts or Canons, call the Scriptures Death, Dust, and Serpents
Meat. And what same Men? He has told us before W. Penn, G. Whitehead, and
others who Signed the said Yearly Meetings Epistle, that they so called the
Scriptures, whereby he has greatly abused, and shamefully belied the same Men,
(i. e. W. P. G. W. etc.) for they disown the Expression, and own the Divine
Authority of the Holy Scriptures, as first given by Inspiration from God, and
truly prefer them before all other Books extant in the World. But how can that
be in our Adversary's Account, when he objects against it and us, That G. W.
avouches, that what is spoken from the Spirit of Truth IN ANY, is of as great
Authority as the Scriptures and Chapters are, and Greater? etc. He shows
himself but very dull and impertinent in this Objection, For we may prefer the
Scriptures, even the Bible, before all other Books extant, and yet not before
the Spirit of Truth, or the Immediate Powerful Teachings thereof in Man; for
that Spirit was before the Scriptures Writings, or Bible were, and only can
give the true understanding thereof; and therefore the Spirit of Truth may be
preferred to the Scriptures, and all other Books, without any contempt or
slight to them. This Objection is more fully Answered elsewhere.

To our Adversary's saying, viz. G. W. tells me, I was but a kind of a Quaker,
and I think it is the truest word in his Book, I think I was not above a third
part of one, and that too much too, p. 13.

Thus he would fain wind off from the Reputation he had of a Quaker for 25
Years together; he now miserably shifts and minces the Matter, but manifestly
contrary to his own Confession, in his Quakers Detection, p. 3 as before quoted
to my Question, Whether F. Bugg, when a Quaker, denied Jesus of Nazareth to be
the Efficient cause of Man's Salvation? He Answers, I do believe I then did not
hold the worst part of Quakerism, etc. Yet I do freely Acknowledge that I was
in great Errors, Particularly touching the Point of Justfication: For I then
Expected Salvation through my Obedience to the LIGHT, which the Quakers taught,
was Sufficient to Salvation: But since it pleased God to open my Eyes, I
believe that Salvation is attained, through the Mercy of God is Christ Jesus,
by Faith in the Merits of his Passion and Obedience to his Precepts, p. 14, 15.

Observe here: 1. He now counts it a great Error to Expect Salvation through
Obedience to the Light, without Distinction of What Light.

2. He Opposes the the Sufficiency of the Light for Salvation. And 3.
Attaining Salvation through the Mercy of God in Christ Jesus; Faith in his
Merits and Passion, and Obedience to his Precepts. These he Opposes TO
Obedience to his Light, and Expecting Salvation through the same: These he sets
in Opposition; as one that expects Salvation through the Mercy of God in Christ
Jesus, and by Faith in his Merits, and Obedience to his Passion, without
Obedience to his Light. For that End, Expressly Contrary to Christ's Doctrine;
and his Apostles Testimonies.

1. Christ Commanded, Believe in the Light that ye may be the Children of the
Light. And this Believing in the Light, was a necessary Act of Obedience, in
order to Salvation. 2. Christ says, I am the Light of the World, he that
follows Me shall not abide in Darkness. And the Apostle James Exhorts to a
Receiving the Ingrafted Word which is able to save the Soul: And this Word is
both Light and Life; In him was Life, and that Life was the Light of Men:
Therefore the Light is Sufficient to Salvation. 3. Salvation through the Mercy
of God in Jesus Christ, true Faith in his Merits, and Suffering for us; and
Sincere Obedience to his Precepts, cannot be attained nor performed, without
Faith in, and Obedience to his Light; it was the Mercy of God to us, to afford
us Light to lead us out of Darkness: For Men in Darkness are Blind, and (as
such) cannot see the Mercy of God in Christ Jesus, nor true Faith in his Merits
or Suffering: For it is in Walking in the Light that we know the Blood of Jesus
Christ to Cleanse us from all Sin, 1 John 1. 7. But alas! What sad Confusion
and Darkness is our Adversary in, whilst he concludes God opened his Eyes to
Believe, in the Mercy of God in Christ, and obey his Precepts, and yet not to
expect Salvation through Obedience to the Light.

Oh! Dark and Disobedient Man, can thy Eyes be open to see without Light? 2. Or
can thou attain Salvation in Darkness? 3. Or can thou truly yield Obedience
to Christ's Precepts, either in Darkness, or without Obedience to his Light in
thee? When to Believe in the Light was an Express Precept of Christ? 4. And is
this Obedience to the Light, no Step nor Advance toward Salvation? 5. Seeing
Christ is the Author of Eternal Salvation to as many as obey him; can any truly
obey him, but in his Light? The Steps we make toward Salvation, are in the
Light, and not in Darkness; And Christ being the Author of Eternal Salvation;
it is to those only that believe and obey him; for true Faith in the Light, and
true Faith in Christ, is but one true Living Faith. As Christ in the Heavens,
and his Light in Man are Inseparable.

Here follows some more of our Adversary's Palpable Falsehoods and Aspersions,
cast upon us in his own Words, viz.

You can neither make Confession of Sin to God, nor beg Pardon for Christ's
Sake, p. 15.

2. You do not Pray after that manner.

3. You do not Pray in the Name of Christ (to God the Father) as the Mediator
and Intercessor between God and Man, p. 15.

4. You lay aside the Scripture, as useless, p. 15, 16.

5. You deny the Ordinances of Jesus Christ, as Baptism and the Lord's Supper,
WHICH THE SCRIPTURES TEACH; saying, Go Teach all Nations, Baptizing them, etc.
p. 16.

6. You lay aside the Use of the Lord 's Prayer, etc. The Ten Commandments, and
the Apostles Creed, etc.

7. You Rob Christ of his Divine Attributes, and put them upon your Glorified
G. FOX, calling him the Branch, the Star, the Son of Righteousness, etc. p. 16.

For which, his so often Repeated Blasphemous Lie, he bids us see our Epistle,
This is only to go amongst Friends: Whioh, he says, is Largely Recited in this
his Introduction, etc. To which I again Answer, I have viewed his Citation, and
examined both F. Howgill's and E. Burrough's Epistles in their Works; out of
which he Cites diverse of the Words before, but find not one Word of G. Fox
mentioned in either, much less any calling HIM the Branch, the Star, the Son of
Righteousness,
which great Abominable Lie, F. Bugg would feign some Color of Proof for, to
Justify his seigned M^ck-Trial and Pillory, to Render us Odious for our
Positive Denial of this, and some others of his most gross Lies and sordid
Chlaumnies and Forgeries cast upon us. To which, his said great Lie, he
Impudently and Falsely adds, viz. Which notwithstanding G. W's Denial is plainly
Proved to MEAN G. FOX (Quoth he) Which is a Notorious Falsehood again. Thus
instead of plain Proof of Matters of Fact, as Charged, he Unjustly Imposes his
own False Meaning for Proof. Thus see how hardly this poor Envious Creature is
put to his Shifts, to defend, gloss and cover his gross Lies, Deceit and
Falsehood, wherewith he has been long Laboring and Working hard to cover
himself, but all will not do: Wherefore you who are F. Bugg's Ministers,
Teachers and Approvers, if he be one of your Eminent Agents, one of your
Converts, and Esteemed your Pious Defender of Truth, one of your strong Oaks,
and great Champions to Detect and Convict the Quakers of Errors, you may be
ashamed of your Oaks, etc. Who further adds for Proof of his said Abominable
Lie, viz. Yet to strengthen the said Proof, See John Whitehead 's Small
Treatise, p. 4, 5. After these things in the Year 1648. God, who had Compassion
on his People, did cause A BRANCH to Spring forth of the Root of David, which
was filled with Virtue, and the Covenant of Life and Peace was with him, etc.
And in the Year 1655. I being a Branch of this Tree (meaning G. FOX, Quoth F.
Bugg.) Thus again he is put to his sorry Shifts, but this will not do for
Proof: For,

1. Here Is no mention of calling G. Fox, the Branch, the Star, the Sun of
Righteousness, etc.

2. That God did Cause A Branch to Spring sorth of the Root of David, etc. may
be true of some Eminent Instrument in God's Hand and Work (But observe, it is
here A Branch, not The Branch) and yet not to put the same Instrument for
Christ, because Christ is both the Root and Offspring of David, the Bright and
Morning Star, and the Heavenly Vine also; OUT of which many Branches have
Sprung and brought Forth Fruit in him.

3. All the Trees of the Lord, that Spring from the true Root Christ Jesus,
(who is the Root of David) are full of Sap and Heavenly Virtue, yet all Prefer
the Root that bears them, and the Rock which is higher than they; and do not
put the Branches for the Root, nor instead of him, who is (by way of Eminency)
called, The Branch, the Star, the Son of Righteousness, which no Member of his
(how Eminent soever) may assume to himself, though he has the Morning Star
promised to be given him, Rev. 2. 28.

Thus far to F. Bugg's Additions and Alterations in the first Part of the
Second Edition of his New Rome Arraigned, the rest of his said Book being
Answered before in Innocence Triumphant; except some Passages in his Additional
Sheet in Conclusion, noted in the Sequel. Now touching our Adversaries,
Quakerism Anatomized his Charge and Challenge, in a Sheet added in the end of
his said 2d Edition; though it be a Sheet of Rambling Stuff, and much of it
consisting of his often Repeated Aspersions which have been Answered over and
over, scarce deserving any further notice; yet I may take notice of some
Abusive Passages therein.

Aganist R. Ashby Our Adversary says, It is False, That he should have met G.
W. at Ben. Antrobus his House, according to his Word, but did not; though G. W.
and others waited long for him. This he says is False, for he never gave G. W.
his Word or Promise to meet him there, or any where else, to dispute the Points
in Controversy, unless that he would first engage under his Hand to Retract
what he proved him guilty of, etc. Q. Anot. p. 1.

Answ. Our Adversary knows how Fallacious, Shuffling and Shifting he has been
in this Point: For,

1. Observe his own Letter, Dated Jan. 29. 1693. (In acceptance of my Printed
Challenge) thus, viz.

George Whitehead,

In Answer to your faint Challenge, in your pretended Vindication, to meet me
in any place in London. I DO ACCEPT THEREOF and am come to London, being 60
Miles to meet you.

Was not this his Word and Engagement Sufficient to meet me in London, without
Exception; as for a Convenient Place* which B. A's was esteemed to be, he could
neither except against the Place or Time, when proposed to him at Jacob
Frankling's, the of the Twelfth Month 1693. before several Witnesses. And I did
not propose to F. B. any uncivil, confused, tumultuous or populous Meeting to
Debate Matters; if I had, he might justly have rejected my Proposal, but a
Meeting of a few Sober, Moderate Persons, to be Witnesses only of what passed;
and such did meet with me at several Convenient Places in London, but were
disappointed by F. B's keeping away.

2. The Conditional Retraction, proposed by him, was afterward contrived for an
evasive shift, when he saw I was in earnest, and resolved to meet him before
some Witnesses, as proposed, and appointed several Times and Places in London
so to meet him, giving him timely notice aforehand, and waited for him several
Hours, but he would not Adventure to come and give me Meeting, for a fair
Disquisition of Matters in Controversy, unless I would either submit them to
the Judgment and Determination of Persons of a contrary Persuasion, or
aforehand engage to such a Conditional Retraction; as he proposed; all which
appeared designed shuffles, and shameful evasions, to shun Meeting as
aforesaid, (contrary to his own Word and Acceptance before-cited) as may be
seen more at large in my Answer, Entitled, The Counterfeit Convert a Scandal,
etc. from p. 1, to 9. and yet he has a most insolent and odious Custom of
boasting, cracking, and upbraiding at a distance, and falsely telling the World,
that Whitehead evaded and shuffled (i. e. from Meeting him) p. 2. which was his
own act, not mine, but a notorious and gross Lie, as many then present can
testify how many Hours I waited for him time after time, and my Letters and
Challenges also wherewith I followed him from time to time; if he durst but
produce them in Print, they would manifestly decide this Matter between us,
wherein he most falsely asperseth me with his own Act of evasion and shuffling,
as if he were such a Potent Goliath, and formidable or frighting Adversary: Alas
poor empty, cracking, boasting, insulting Reviler!

Our Adversary again falsely Charges Is. Pennington, saying, he denies Christ,
[which by the way is an abominable Slander on that Innocent Man] and calls Him
that was Born of the Virgin, a Veil, etc. and then says, Yet G. Whitehead, the
Counterfeit Quaker, in his Book, Styled, The Counterfeit Convert, etc. p. ^2.
vindicates him, [What in denying of Christ? Oh horrible Falsehood!] saying, And
though I have evinced Is. Pennington's meaning on his words reflected on about
the Body or Flesh of Christ, it follows not that I make his Expressions mine,
seeing I note them as his, for (says G. W.) I may see cause otherwise to word
the Matter, and yet our Intentions be the same, etc. Then our Adversary goes on
Canting, Taunting, and Abusing us from this passage, as with Equivocating
Jesuitism with a Witness, or Arius risen again under a new form and figure,
etc. But herein our scornful Adversary has insinuated most grievous Lies
against me, and others, 1. As denying Christ. 2. As intending the same. 3. Yet
otherwise word the Matter, to Equivocate, and act the Jesuit. Now pray, you his
Approvers, observe how notorious his Abuse and Calumny is in this very Matter!
That I was dissatisfied with wording that Matter, in some recited Expressions,
I grant, but that Is. Penington's meaning, or mine either, was to deny Christ,
I utterly deny. Observe the passage at large quoted, Counterfeit Convert, p.
72. which is this, viz. I know no Contemptuous Speeches of our Lord Jesus, or
of Scriptures excused, consequently much less owned by me. And though I have
evinced I. P's meaning on his words reflected on, about the Body or Flesh of
Christ, it follows not, that I thereby make his Expressions mine, seeing I note
them as his. I may see cause otherwise to word the Matter, and yet our
Intentions be the same: We have not the same Expressions and Utterance in all
Cases, and yet may aim at, and mean the same thing, but never to contemn our
Blessed Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, (or the Holy Scriptures which testify
of him) in any respect, far be it from us so to do. Therefore T. C. (yea, and
F. B. too) have grossly wronged and misrepresented us in these Matters.

Now, pray observe, here is no such Concession or Grant, as F. Bugg would
insinuate, viz. That either Is. Penington denies Christ, or that I vindicate
any such denial, or him therein, but the contrary; far be it from us, either to
contemn or deny our Blessed Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, or the Holy
Scriptures, for they testify of him, wherein is not the least Equivocation, or
Jesuitism, Counterfeit, Two-fac'd Quakers, as Bugg unjustly and scornfully
brands us, who has not only made eight or nine Repetitions of my words, [about
seeing cause otherwise to word the M^tter, and yet our Intentions the same] but
also impertinently and unjustly applies them to sundry and diverse Matters to
which they were never intended, and that designedly, to render us as odious as
he can; as for instance, he applies the said words of mine aforesaid, as if our
Intentions tended,

1. To a Denial of Christ.

2. To a Denial of Preaching a Belief in Christ, as he is in Heaven above, p.
3. Q. Anat.

3. To a Contempt of Holy Scriptures, contrary to our Confessing the Divine
Authority thereof, p. 4, 5.

4. To what he calls Anti-Magistratical Principles, p. 5.

Implying, that the Quakers intend all these, whatever they seriously confess
or profess to the contrary, whereupon the Nickname of Counterfeit Quaker is
frequently cast upon us by this Implacable Adversary. It would fill a Volume,
to set forth and enervate all his Scurrilous Abuses, Raileries, Absurdities,
Forgeries, gross Slanders and Calumnies, in these and many other Matters.

And further, to pacify our angry Adversary as to what he has noted
Fundamental Errors, Damnable Heresies, etc. (though I cannot in Justice Charge
the Persons accused in their Absence) as, 1. God that died in us, etc. 2. And
that when Christ ascended, he was separated from his Body. 3. And that Faith in
Christ without us, as he Died for our Sins, and Rose again, was not necessary
to OUR Salvation, p. 37. These I do really disown as contrary to my Sense and
Judgment, and to Holy Scriptures Testimony, as sincerely believing, 1. The Only
True and Living God is Immortal. 2. That Christ visibly Ascended in his Body.
3. And therefore that Christ did not only Die for our Sins, but Rose again for
our Justification, and consequently that Faith in him, as he so Died, and Rose
again, and Ascended into Glory, is necessary not only to our Salvation, but to
all others that have certain Demonstration or Proof of the same, afforded unto
them either by an Effectual Living Ministry, or Revelation of the Spirit.

The unbelief thereof, when so demonstrated, I count as real a Sin, and
dangerous, as it was in them who would not believe that Jesus was the Christ,
when on Earth, who therefore were liable to Die in their Sins.

Yet for those Moral and Pious Gentiles, that have not such Discovery of the
Death and Resurrection of Jesus Christ, nor outward Means thereof afforded to
them, we may not condemn them, lest we should reflect upon God, but leave them
to his Universal Grace and Mercy in Jesus Christ, who is given for a Light unto
the Gentiles, and to (...) God's Salvation to the Ends of the Earth; wherein we
hope no Professed Christians will be so Harsh, Uncharitable, or Atheistical, as
to conclude such liable to Damnation or Destruction, for want of Scripture, or
an outward Ministry, when God does not afford the same to them, seeing he has
afforded and given the greater, even Christ himself* to be both the Light of
the Gentiles, and Salvation to the Ends of the Earth, that they believing in
him the Light, may be saved by him, and have Eternal Life; it being the
Condemnation, that Light is come into the World, and Men believe not, but love
Darkness rather than Light, because their Deeds are Evil, John 3. And the Lord
God has not left Himself, or Mankind, without Witness, both immediate and
mediate in his Creation, thereby leaving all them inexcuseable, who persist in
Impenitency and Rebellion against him, and his Light and Grace in them.

Whereas I intimated in my Epistle to The Counterfeit Convert in these words,
viz. I do hereby sincerely declare, That it is not for Controversy sake that I
am so much engaged therein; nor am I the beginner of these Controversies, being
wholly defensive, etc.

And what has our Adversary against this? [I know it to be very true, though the
Devil and all his Agents should say the contrary, and endeavor to outface me
with their Lies]. Our Adversary says, viz. I am willing to let Richard Ashbye
know, that his Brother Whitehead is false in this also: And why so? For (quoth
F. B.) he writ against Episcopalians, Presbyterians, Independants, and
Baptists, before ever they wrote against him. Answer, I deny that, and we have
no proof but his own bare ipse dixit for it. Some of them, (i. e. Presbyterians
in Cromwell's time, when the Episcopal had no Power) begun to Persecute and
Imprison me and others, and also to defame us in Print before ever I was
concerned in Printed Controversy against them; and it was the worst and most
rigid sort that I was so concerned against, and therefore not the beginner of
either of those first Controversies, ( i. e. with some Presbyterians) nor yet
of these with this Adversary, but was and am still wholly defensive.

And suppose (as he says) I had writ Ten Books against others to One Book
against me, of any one Man's Writing, I did not write Ten Books against any one
Man, for only his One Book against me: But suppose Ten Books wrote either by
Ten Persons, more or fewer, either against me in particular, or against me,
inclusively with others; and I had or have wrote Ten Answers to those Ten
Books; this proves me not a Contentious Scribler, as he renders me; but still I
am on the defensive part, and put upon a necessity of being defensive.

Yet, to prove me false herein, our Adversary adds, viz. And in Nine Months
time he wrote Three Books against me, to one of mine against the Quakers; and
Two of them without any fresh occasion given him.

But F. Bugg knows he gave the first occasion, he begun the Controversy, and
that I was wholly defensive therein, by way of Answer to his bitter Invectives,
and foul Aspersions against the Quakers (so called) their Order and Discipline;
for did I begin to be concerned, before his Book De Christiana Liberate came
forth? No; 'twas his foul Abuses in that Book against us, gave me the first
occasion to appear in Print against him, and after that his diverse other
abusive Books and Pamphlets against us, both before and since he turned to the
Priests, and so often falsely accusing us the said People with Contempt of the
Scripture, denying Jesus to be Christ, despising his Ordinances, his Ministers
and Magistrates, making Divisions in Church and State, p. 7. etc. with many
more Calumnies, and all to excuse and cover his own base Backsliding and
Self-condemned Apostasy, and Judas-like to incense both Priests and Rulers
against us by his foul Railery, black and odious Characters which he has
maliciously put upon us; but as to the latter, the Lord has hedged up his Way,
and manifested his Folly, restless Envy, and implacable deadly Malice unto
many; and our God has given us Power and Zeal to withstand and oppose him
therein, and trample upon his great Malice, and such fruitless Attempts to
Inveterate Adversaries.

As to our Adversary's Postscript to G. W. about his aforesaid Letters to
William Smithies and Isaac Archer, which he questions, if he has not rightly
Interpreted the purport of, I must needs say it appears a very idle, silly,
boasting Romance, and scurrilous piece of fictitious Forgery feigned upon me,
and in my Name, and though never so said, nor sayable by me: See how unlike G.
Whitchead, or any other Quaker, he introduces his feigned Story, viz. G. W. I
perceive how uneasy you are, and how smooth you appear, as in your Letters to
Mr. Smithies and Mr. Archer; and, by the tenure thereof, methinks I hear you
say, Good Gentlemen be so kind to us, the distressed and perplexed Quakers, as
to stop F. Bugg from writing against our Errors, etc. with much more such
stuff: Is this like my Language? He never heard me say any such thing: Oh
false! Oh silly! Oh idle Romance.

CHAP. V.
A Brief Answer to F. Bugg's Pretended Brief History of Quakerism; Styled, The
Quakers set in their True Light.
UPON a serious perusal of the said pretended History, and comparing the same
with his other Reproachful Books and Pamphlets against the People called
Quakers, which have been duly Answered, and justly Refuted in Course.

His Title, The Quakers set in their True Light, is very impertinent to his
partial and false History, though very true as to the Quakers, whose True Light
is no other but Christ the True Light, which lights every Man coming into the
World, John 1. 9.

This same pretended History of F. Bugg's appears to be chiefly made up of the
same Abusive and Calumnious Stuff which his other Pamphlets are composed of,
and frequently reiterated by him, though plainly refuted, which being now by him
turned into History, appears a sordid kind of imposing the Credit of his own
presumptuous Authority, as Historian, even in those very things which he cannot
maintain in Controversy, nor support his own Credit in; therefore as a most
impertinent, partial and envious Historian he may be justly deemed.

Please to take a few Instances of F. Bugg's false Stories, and gross
Calumnies, in his said pretended History before clearly refuted, i^ our Answers
to him and other Apostates, etc.

F. Bugg in his Epistle, Dedicated to the Bishop of London, compares the
Quakers to Magicians of Egypt, to Simon Magus the Sorcerer, to Juglers;
rendering them no better than Heretics, Blasphemers, and like Satan himself,
and his Ministers, thus odiously representing them. All which, and much more
such like Stuff, we reject as his own gross and sordid Calumnious Railery, and
hope the said Bishop, on serious Consideration, will not Credit nor Patronize
such gross Railery, nor Esteem it for his Reputation or Honor, to be Credulous
in such Cases against us, from the bare Authority of not only partial, but
bitter and implacable Adversaries, as the said Bugg has notoriously manifested
himself to be.

Here follows F. Bu^g's most general Slanders, repeated and refuted gross
Calumnies, against the People called Quakers, in his said History, with brief
Notes on them.

1. P. 3. Bugg says: That none Preached Murder more than the Quakers.

Note, What he alleges for this gross Calumny, is answered long since in our
Book, Entitled, Christ's Lambs defended from Satan's Rage.

2. P. 4. That they sit at Devonshire-house to null, make void, and repeal as
Unlawful, what the King, Lords and Commons make Lawful at Westminster.

Note, This Calumny is refuted in Answer to him before, and his envious design
therein discovered. See The Counterfeit Convert, p. 46, 47, 48, 49, 50, 51.

3. P. 9. That they pressed into the World with Principles against ALL Rule and
Government.

Note, A loud and most gross Lie; our Principles were always for Christ's Rule
and Government among Christians, and for all Just Rule and Government among
Men, as being God's Ordinance.

4. That the Foundation they went upon was, under pretense of magnifying the
Light in themselves, to deny Jesus of Nazareth, to undervalue his Death and
Sufferings, contemn his Laws contained in the Holy Scriptures, etc. p. 9.

Note, These are notorious and most horrid Falsehoods; the quite contrary is
asserted frequently by us: We magnify Christ's Light and Life in Man for no
such Ends, but the contrary, as thereby sincerely to own and follow the Lord
Jesus Christ through his Sufferings, and according to his Laws: It was by his
Light in us, that we were led to Suffer with him, and to be Crucified with him,
and to Die with him, that we might Live and Reign with him, who tasted Death
for every Man.

5. That G. W. has vindicated this, i. e. that the Scripture was Serpent's
Meat, Beastly Ware, etc. p. 9.

Note, A foul Calumny against G. W. 'twas never my Principle so to term the
Scripture; I have always had from my Childhood a real esteem and great love for
the Holy Scriptures; nor do I know of any among us that ever called them
Beastly Ware, or Serpents Meat; nor do we own the Expressions as applicable to
Holy Scripture, we having also most generally bought Bibles, which I never
heard any call Beastly Ware before, though probably some or other might so term
such Men's perversions on Scripture, as make a Trade thereof for Money, or
filthy Lucre, wherein I suppose they could not intend any contempt of Holy
Scripture, but upon their Unscriptural Preaching for filthy Lucre.

6. That G. W. and his Followers, have published a Journal of G. F's deluding
Charms, on purpose to Bewitch the People like SIMON MAGUS, p. 9.

Note, This is still foul, filthy, and abusive; for, 1. We know no deluding
Charms in that Journal. 2. Nor had we any such purpose in the Publication
thereof, as to Bewitch People. Behold how the Man belches, vomits and foams out
his own shame against us, contrary to his own former Testimonies for us, etc.

7. That G. F. wrought Counterfeit Miracles, and never in the Name of Jesus, p.
11.

Note, This is still enviously to Abuse G. F. and us; we read not, in all his
Writings, that ever he so much as pretended to work any Miracle, either by
himself, or in his own Name, or by his own Power, but that by the Power of the
Lord, (which is no other Name but that which was given to Jesus Christ, Phil.
2. 9.) some Great Things have been wrought, even in Answer to the Prayers (and
fervent Breathings to God) of that Good Man, G. F. and others of the
Church-partakers of the same Faith in Christ with him, wherein they did not
pretend to pray in any other Name, Power, or Spirit, but that of Jesus Christ.

8. That both Fox and Parnell call themselves Christ in W. P's Since, p. 12.

Note, I do not believe W. Penn either gave, or will own any such Sense, it
being contrary to his and all our Sense so to call any Mortal Man upon Earth,
though some may be come to THAT which was before Languages, or Humane Arguments
were, i. e. to the Word and Power of God, and his Son Jesus Christ, which was
only the same G. F. and J. Parnell intended.

9. That the Humanity of Christ the Quakers deny it as clearly, as the
Socinians deny his Godhead, p. 12.

Note, This is a gross and notorious Falsehood, we ( i. e. the Quakers so
called) have often clearly and scripturally Confessed and Asserted both the
Divinity and Humanity ( i. e. Manhood) of Christ Jesus, as many of our Books
manifestly prove.

10. That the Foxonian Quakers say of G. Fox, he is the Power of God, p. 13.

Note, This also is positively denied by us as a gross and foul Calumny: Pray
where do any of the Quakers so say of G. F? I know not, (neither do we own his
scornful Nickname* and Distinction of Foxonian Quakers) for we are sure it is
contrary to our Principle and Profession, to set up any Sect Masters over us,
or to Adore any Mortal Man, or Finite Creature, as

11. God, as is also charged upon G. F's Followers touching him, page 14. which
we deem also a notorious Falsehood.

12. That all the Quakers Prophets being 400 in number, give, Witness to G.
Fox, and Adore him as the Branch, the Star, the Sun of Righteousness. p. 15.

Note, This old Story of Bugg's is a gross refuted Lie and Calumny, G. Fox is
not so much as mentioned in that Epistle, out of which those words, [ viz. the
Branch, the Star, the Son of Righteousness] are taken, directed to the Camp of
the Lord in England, p. 66. of E. B's Works.

13. That Baptism and the Lord's Supper God never commanded, are given forth by
them who are Brazened with Deceit, p. 15.

Note, This is falsely charged and stated in both, and contrary to what we have
frequently confessed with respect to both; for, 1. John's Baptism was by
special Command from Heaven, and had its Dispensation and Time, as 'twas
Typical of Christ's Spiritual Baptism. 2. The Lord's Supper, both as in the
Type, and in the Antitype, in the Figure, and in the Mystery and Substance,
distinctly and truly considered in their placed Dispensations, we have often
Scripturally confessed, and even in Answer to this Adversary, let him review
The Quakers Vindication against F. Bugg' s Calumnies, p. 2. Col. 1. 2.

14. That G. F. was a Blasphemer of the Blessed Trinity, p. 16.

Note, A gross Calumny also: He neither Blasphemed nor Opposed the Scripture
Trinity, (i. e. Three) of the Father, the Word, (or Son) and Holy Ghost, but
objected against some Unscriptural Distinctions and Terms of Three distinct or
separate Personalities, Subsistances, or Substances, Unscripturally by some
supposed or implied in the Deity.

15. That the Quakers count all others, who are not of their Communion, Damned
Persons, p. 16.

This is both false, and too uncharitable for the People called Quakers, to be
of such a severe Judgment, Charitably believing, that many not in outward
Communion with them, under various Forms of Religion, may be sincere to God
according to their Understandings and Belief; as also that there are other
Sheep which are not yet of this Fold, whom Jesus Christ will gather and fetch
home into his Fold; and that in every Nation and People, such as fear God and
work Righteousness, are and shall be accepted of him.

16. That the Jesuit taught them this, That they must not by any means Swear,
p. 17.

Note, A gross Lie, for Jesus Christ taught us not to Swear, Mat. 5. and so did
his Holy Apostle James, Chap. 5. And many of the Blessed Martyrs and Protestant
Reformers, were of the same Judgment with us, whom the Papists Accused and
Persecuted for the same, who imposed Swearing as their Priests taught, contrary
to Christ's Command.

17. That this sullen and dogged Sect, is the Jesuit's natural and undoubted
Issue, though like other Bastards, they are ashamed to own their Father, etc. p.
17.

Note, These are like some of Bugg's false and shameful Raileries, and no such
thing could he demonstrate in all the 25 Years, that he was Conversant among
the People called Quakers, or since, nor what Jesuit was then his Father, or to
whom he was then Bastard; but the contrary he has in Print declared for the
said People, and their Doctrine, even since he left them; witness his Quakers
Detected, Cited in our Quakers Vindication, and other Answers. But it is an ill
and nasty Bird that bewrays its own Nest, as he has done. These last
Aspersions, of the Jesuits Teaching the Quakers, and they the Jesuits Natural
Issue and Bastards, etc. Bugg Credulously pretends to Cite out of a Learned
Divine's Book of the Church of England, but tells not his Name, that his Credit
may be enquired into; but whatever he be, he is of no Credit with us in this
foul Aspersion and Abuse.

18. That the Quakers Allegorize the Death and Sufferings of Christ, his
Passion, Atonement, Resurrection and Ascension to be within, p. 17.

Note, This is a known Perversion and Falsehood; the true Spiritual-minded
Quakers do not Allegorize away either the outward Sufferings, Passion, or
Death, or Atonement, Resurrection, or Ascension of Jesus Christ, (as if all
these were within only) for they really believe and own all these to have been
done and transacted outwardly and literally, as well as they truly believe and
own the Mystery, Spiritual Sense, Influence, and real Benefit and Advantage
thereof, as Inwardly and Spiritually partaken of, felt, and experienced by
every Sincere and Spiritual Believer in Christ Jesus.

19. That neither if you go to a Thousand of their Meetings, shall you hear one
of their Preachers have such an Expression in their Mouths, as Consessing their
Sins, and Begging Pardon for Jesus Christ's sake, p. 18.

Note, This is a presumptuous Prediction, such Confession and Supplication have
been oftentimes in public among us, and may be again for ought F. B. knows,
for them that want Forgiveness and Cleansing from Sin, well-knowing that the
Lord requires both true Confession, and forsaking Sin; though we do not Confess
nor Pray by Book or Lyturgy after the Priest, yet we feel the Spirit of Christ
making Intercession with Sighs and Groans, which cannot be uttered.

20. That the Scriptures are Beastly Ware, p. 21.

Note, This Reproach and Blasphemy F. B. has often most falsely cast upon us;
it is Answered before several times, and more fully hereafter.

21. That the Quakers first rose in the North, breaking all Law, Order, and
Government, p. 22.

That Quakerism flowed over all our Banks, of all Law, Order, and Government,
both Divine and Humane, p. 24.

Note, Both these are gross and very offensive Aspersions, before Answered and
Refuted manifestly by our Christian Conversations.

22. That they have a great Tax Collected, to maintain their Teachers,
Travelers, and Spies, both at Home and Abroad, p. 31.

Note, For which gross Lies, F. Bugg quotes his own Authority, and bids see his
Books, Battering Rams against New Rome, and New Rome Unmasked, wherein we do
not only deny his imposed Authority, but have Refuted and Confuted the same in
our Answers to those his Books quoted by him.

23. That by their Threatened Chronicle, they (i. e. the Quakers) intend to
represent this Nation as a Persecuting, Bloody-minded People, p. 34.

Note, No such Threatening or Intention are we justly Chargeable with, nor so to
Represent this Nation, for it is not so now, nor were the People thereof in
general such, when Persecution was on foot; but the Persecutors in it (many of
whom are since cut off) did openly show their Cruelty, by Imprisoning many to
Death, and by making Havoc and Spoil upon the Goods of many Families, to their
great Impoverishment, and Ruin of diverse, besides those that were Banished out
of the Land by Persecutors; but Blessed be God, and Thanks to the Present
Government, the Case is now altered much for the better on that account, those
Cruel Persecutions being stopped, and the present Persecution we are now under,
being chiefly the vile Misrepresentations, gross Lies and Calumnies of dark and
malicious Apostates and Backsliders, (such as F. B.) and their Adherents.

24. That the Quakers prefer their own Books before and above the Scripture, p.
37. That they prefer their Nonsensical Pamphlets before the Scriptures, being
compared with the Contemptible Expressions they give them as BEASTLY WARE, etc.
p. 38.

Note, These are some of his Old Calumnies and Perversions frequently Answered
and Refuted; for yet again we solemnly say, We prefer the Holy Scriptures of
the Old and New Testament, as contained in the Bible, (and that Book it self)
above, and to all other Books extant in the World, whether our own or any other
Books whatsoever, as sincerely owning the Holy Scriptures aforesaid, not only
to have been given by Divine Inspiration, but most eminently confirmed by
Divine Authority.

25. That G. Keith could not in Conscience clear the Body of the Quakers from
those Errors charged upon them in Pensilvania, in regard he knew them guilty
thereof, p. 40. (i. e. the Body of the Quakers.)

Note, The Body of the Quakers he did not Charge therewith, but a few in
Pensilvania; for the Body of the Quakers there have cleared themselves thereof,
and he has seemed expressly to clear the Body or People called Quakers, and in
particular our approved Writers in England, as Sound in the Christian Faith, as
appears in his own Book, Entitled, A Serious Appeal, etc. Printed Anno 1692.
If he will not stand to this, but contradict himself against us, we cannot help
that, F. B. may take him by the Hand, and give him the Right Hand of Fellowship.

26. That the Principles and Practices of the Quakers, are contrary to those of
the French Protestants, and indeed to all other Christians, p. 41.

Note, Here are two great Falsehoods contained in this Charge, and they are in
general and indefinite Terms too; for, first, as to those Principles of the
French Protestants (as Cited by F. Bugg himself, p. 41, to 47.) they Believe
and Confess,

1. That there is but one God only, whose Being only is Simple, Spiritual,
Eternal, Invisible, Immutable, Insinite, and Incomprehensible.

2. That in that Divine Being, there be the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.

3. That the Father is the First Cause, in Order, and the Beginning of all
things; the Son his Everlasting Word; the Holy Ghost his Virtue, Power, and
Efficacy.

4. That though these Divine Three are distinct or distinguished ( i. e. as to
their Relative Properties of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost) yet not divided, but
of One and the Same Essence (i. e. Being) Eternity, Power, and Equality

5. That the Doctrine contained in the Holy Scriptures, (i. e. of the Old and
New Testament) proceeds from God, from whom only, and not from Men, it derives
its Authority, and that all Matters necessarily required for the Worship of
God, and our Salvation, are therein testified, (they say contained) and
therefore that it is not lawful for Men or Angels to add unto, take from, or
change this DOCTRINE, ( i. e. the Doctrine necessary to God's Worship, and our
Salvation, as they say.)

6. That God, of his Rich Grace, Mercy and Bounty, delivers his Children
through our Lord Jesus Christ, ( i. e. from Sin and Condemnation.)

7. That Jesus Christ, being the Wisdom and Eternal Son of God, took upon him
the Nature of Man, so that he is God and Man; (but one Lord Jesus Christ) and,
that he might be able to suffer in Soul and Body, was made like unto us in all
things, Sin only excepted; so that as to Man's Nature, he was indeed of the
Seed of Abraham and David, Conceived in due time in the Womb of the Virgin
Mary, by the Secret and Incomprehensible Power of the Holy Ghost; and that in
one and the same Lord Jesus Christ, his Two Natures ( i. e. as God and Man) are
inseparably united, yet each retaining its distinct Properties; so considering
Christ in his Deity, as not to deprive him of his Manhood, we having one
Mediator between God and Men, even the Man Christ Jesus.

8. That by that one Sacrifice which Jesus Christ Offered upon the Cross, we
are Reconciled unto God ( i. e. being Reconciled by his Death, we, who believe
in him, shall be saved by his Life, Romans 5.)

9. That the Lord Jesus Christ, by the Power and Spirit of God, was Raised from
the Dead; [to which I add, That he ever lives in his own proper glorious Body,
in which he Ascended into Glory, and wherein he is Head of his Mystical Body,
the Church, which as united to him and his Glorious Body, is One Body, 1 Cor.
12. 12, 20, 27. Ephesians. 1. 23. and 4. 4. and 5. 30. Phil. 3. 21.]

10. That Jesus Christ is so conferred upon us, as to be our Advocate, (with
the Father) and that he commands us in our Prayers to present our selves (or
Pray) to the Father in his Name.

11. That God will have the World Ruled (and restrained) by Laws and Civil
Government, and therefore he appoints Kings and Commonwealths, and other
kinds of Principalities, whether Hereditary, or otherwise, ( i. e. as it
pleases him) and also what pertains to the Ministration of Justice, whereof
he himself is the Author, therefore has he delivered the Sword ( i. e. of
Justice) into the Magistrates Hands, etc.

12. That also much Honor and Reverence ought to be given to them as unto
God's Officers, and due Obedience yielded unto their Laws, and Tribute, and
Taxes paid, and the Yoke of Subjection born, if the Magistrates be Infidels, so
that the Sovereign Government of God be preserved.

Thus I have abstracted diverse of the most material passages out of the
Citation before, of the French Protestants Confession of Faith, which he has
set forth an Abstract of, quoting the first Volume of J. Quick's History,
Synod. in Gal. Reform. p. 6, to 15. Note, that in the second and fourth Article
the word Persons is left out, and that for the more plainness, a few
Parenthesis's (some beginning with i. e.) are added, (and the ninth altered
more into Scripture words) in this Abstract, which I am persuaded (as they are
sincerely owned by me) may be freely owned, assented unto, and signed by most
Quakers (so called) in England, and elsewhere, consequently so far from being
contrary thereunto, or to all other Christians, either in Principles or
Practices, as F. B. has most falsely and slanderously Misrepresented and
Aspersed them; The Lord (if it be his Will) give him to see and confess his
great Injustice and Injury before he Dies.

But a little further, to pursue his base and false Dealing.

27. F. B. again very abusively and falsely quotes E. Burrouogh's Works thus,
viz. About Water Baptism, p. 518. We utterly deny, and do say, it is no
Ordinance of God, but it is an Institution of the Whore of Rome, and England
received it by a Popish Institution, etc. p. 44.

Note, Which base Perversion and Abuse is evidently Refuted in The Quakers
Vindication, p. 2. Col. 1, 2. thus, This is very partially and unjustly Cited,
and in the first words falsely; for E. Burroughs's Answer in the very place is
thus, viz. As for Baptism and the Supper of the Lord, we do own it, and it is
practiced of us in the Life and Power of God; but as for your Baptism, that is
to say, SPRINKLING INFANTS, calling it the Baptism into the Faith, and that
they are made Members of the Church thereby, and that it is a Seal of
Regeneration, as you say, [these foregoing words Bugg leaves out] that we do
utterly deny, and do say it is no Ordinance of God; neither was it ever
commanded by him, or practiced by his Saints, etc. [thus F. B. before Cited E.
B.] But again.

Note, Here he did not say, that Water Baptism (without distinction) is a
Popish Institution, but objected against Sprinkling Infants, and calling it the
Baptism into the Faith, etc. for he knew that Water Baptism it self was
practiced by John the Baptist, (by special Commission from Heaven peculiar to
him and his Ministry) and also in the Apostle's time by some of them, long
before the Pope was.

Wherefore F. Bugg's gross Perversion and Abuse in this and many other things,
(too numerous now to recite) are notorious and shameful; the Lord the Righteous
Judge (to whom we commit our Cause) humble this Adversary, if it be his Blessed
Will; and let all others among us, etc. take warning from his woeful and
lamentable Backsliding and Fall.

Let one most Scandalous and Blasphemous Calumny be yet further Remarked, viz.

Fr. Bugg's repeated Charge against the Quakers, viz. these Contemptible
Expressions, as calling the Scriptures Beastly Ware, etc. as before;
and the like we are Charged with in that most malicious wicked Piece, The
Snake in the Grass, where diverse gross Calumnies are broached from Bugg's
Authority and Credit.

I having examined that Book out of which the said Expressions have been
pretended to be taken, Entitled, A Brief Discovery of a Threefold state of
Antichrist, Printed Anno 1633. p. 9. I find no such gross Expressions as
calling the Scriptures Beastly Ware, but diverse severe Reflections upon the
Covetous, Persecuting Priests in those Days, then writ by some Prisoners at
York-Castle, 1653. and what is there called Beastly Ware is not the Scriptures,
but what Babylon's Merchants sell for a large Price, i. e. a Rabble of Notions
heaped up in their Brain all the Week, and which they sell for filthy lucre's
sake, etc. calling them also, Idol-Merchants, Costly Sermonmakers, who
Persecuted the pure Truth the Saints live in, p. 9, 10. of the said Brief
Discovery; but not a word of calling the Scriptures themselves Beastly Ware;
and I am persuaded such Blasphemy and Contempt of Holy Scripture was far from
the Thoughts of those said Prisoners, and that which they would have abominated
and rejected with Abhorrence, if they had then been Charged therewith.

Thus the Perversion and Injury done by F. B. etc. in this Matter is apparent,
in his putting Men's dark Notions for the Holy Scriptures. The said Prisoners
called Babylon's Merchants Rabble of Notions, Beastly Ware; but F. B. says it
is the Scriptures which they so call; what a shameful Liar and Perverter is
this! He pretends to prove W. Penn a Liar for once, p. 38. Brief History. But
it is more true, that he is more than once, yea, often proved a Liar, and gross
Defamer of others; and that his pretended Pious Endeavors (by you his
Approvers and Ministers aforesaid) are proved very Impious, and you may Answer
for him, and Vindicate him, if you please, or can, since you have given him
such high Approbation and Congratulation, which he has divulged to your
Disgrace; for F. B's Answering by repeating Calumnies and Slanders against us,
will deserve little further notice, since so often unanswerably Confuted
already; and if you his Approvers, will not adventure to attempt his
Vindication, as well as Approbation, nor yet show any public dislike of his
Abuses, scandalous and reproachful Scribbling, but leave him to his own
Vindication, and farther to reproach us, we may take it as an Indication, that
you are Conscious his Defaming Work is not justifiable nor warrantable in the
sight of God, or Just Men, and that you have over-shot your selves in his
Approbation; and the more guilty your selves in suffering Sin to lie upon him,
without just Reproof suitable to his public Offense and Crime against Truth:
But if you will be mute in this Matter, and suffer him to persist in his wonted
Course of Vilifying and Abusing us, without your public Reprehension or
Dislike thereof, then may you be farther justly called in question, and Exposed
thereupon for your neglect of Justice.

CHAP. VI.
A Brief Answer to Fr. Bugg's Two Printed Papers, Dated March, 1696.
TO his Printed Paper unduly Styled, George Whirehead's Oath, unjustly Accusing
the Quakers with Prevaricating about Swearing.

His Story hereupon, both first, As to the Form of the Oath pretended.
Secondly, And as to its being Read to him. G. W. affirms he is wronged in this
Accusation and Story by F.B. and that he is not Conscious to himself thereof,
but (as preferring Truth's Reputation before his own) patiently suffers and
bears it, among many other Personal Injuries, Misrepresentations, and
Detractions cast upon him by this Adversary, whom I ask,

1. F. B. who was thy Informer about this said Oath pretended?

2. Out of what Book was it Read to G. W. and by whom?

3. Suppose I had failed of our Principle in that Case (as I have not) have
thou done either fairly or justly, thence to asperse the Quakers in general
with Prevaricating about Swearing? Must they all suffer for my Fault, if I had
committed it, which I did not, as many can Witness?

As to the Association, and his taunting Insinuations concerning the King and
Government, and our Affection and Fidelity toward them, and forming an Address
for us like an Officious Agent, we hope we have given that Satisfaction, as to
our Innocence, which this and the rest of our most Inveterate Adversaries
cannot extinguish, and the Acceptance and Favors which (as a People) we have
received (through God's Providence) from the Government, no doubt does vex and
fret this our Implacable Adversary, seeing his many Attempts, and strenuous
Endeavors to render us Obnoxious, and to Incense the Government against us,
and by his utmost Endeavors (that way to prevent our Belief) are so manifestly
disappointed and frustrated, Blessed and Praised be our God for Ever, who has
attended our Endeavors. But let it be observed how sordid, brutish and
unnatural it was in F. Bugg, so strenuously to labor to prevent the Quakers
Relief in the Case of Oaths, [since he Married his Son into an Honest Family of
Quakers (so called) and appeared very officious (as I am credibly informed) to
promote the Marriage] as if he would rather have them also Ruined, than
Relieved?

As to our Christian Confession of Christ, his Divinity and Humanity, and his
Glorious Body in Heaven, we have sufficiently and sincerely evinced according
to Holy Scripture, against this Adversary, and other Opposers, which they are
not able to Confute, knowing also that we are not necessitated to give farther
Answer to his Impertinent Questions, especially since his Work is so much
falsely to Accuse and Asperse us with sly and unjust Insinuations, to render us
Offensive and Obnoxious to the Government: Besides, One Fool may ask more
Questions than Twenty Wise Men may Answer.

To F. Bugg's Paper, Styled, A Brief Reply, which with the other
beforementioned, he having delivered at the House of Lords, which one of them
gave me.

His false Charge of our Contempt of Christ, and the Scriptures, being Answered
and Refuted before, in several Answers to his Malicious Books and Pamphlets, he
proceeds in his wonted Course of Perversion and Defaming still, for which he
frequently quotes his own Presumptuous Authority, and Refuted Pamphlets.

As to his offense at the Words he Cites of an Imagined God beyond the Stars,
and their Carnal Christ. We say, First, The True Infinite and Omnipresent God,
though in Heaven above, yet is not confined or limited to beyond the Stars, nor
can the Heaven of Heavens contain Him.

2. The True Lord Jesus Christ who Ascended far above all Heavens, that he
might fill all things, He is not a Carnal Christ, but a Spiritual and most
Glorious Christ, in Soul, Spirit, and Body; therefore to deem or call him a
Carnal Christ, (which I know none among us do) is so far to undervalue his
Glory and Dignity, that it appears no less than Blasphemy; and how F. B. will
clear himself thereof, I know not.

His Charge against the Quakers, That they cannot Sign the Association, and
thereby Declare the King Rightful and Lawful King for Conscience sake.

This Consequence is a Gross and Envious Perversion, and Contradicted by his
own following Confession, viz. And yet they tell you, that their not signing
it, is not in opposition to his being Declared Rightful and Lawful King: But
then to invalidate this, he questions, Who says so? No Body; that is false, for
his words, they tell you, imply some Body; but from what Meeting? Answer, An
Approved Meeting, by the People called Quakers, whom he vilifies to the
Government, and not from Two or Three Quakers under the Hedge, as he scoffs.

That we never made an Address to His Present Majesty, is a known Lie; we have
made several, and that with Real Gratitude too, for the Kindnesses and
Privileges we have Received, and Enjoy by Law.

These Two said Papers of F. Buggs' were by him delivered at the House of Lords
to diverse of them, with manifest Design to frustrate our Relief in the Cafe of
Oaths; but the Lord our God has frustrated his Evil Enterprises, and Design of
Malice, as he has done, and will frustrate the Tokens of Liars, and Malicious
Incendiaries, and Treacherous Judas'S, Apostates, etc. Triumph and Rejoice over
their Malice, ye Lambs of Christ's Fold, who has from time to time defeated
their Mischievous Enterprises and Attempts, and disappointed their Deadly
Malice, and Outrageous Fury, and let them fume and fret themselves in their
Madness and Disappointments, until the Fire of their own kindling (wherein they
labor and toil themselves) devour them, if they will not Repent, and be
Reclaimed.

CHAP. VII.
A Brief Answer and Reply to F. Bugg's Second Summons (as he directs it) to the
City Abell, 2 Samuel 20. To deliver up Sheba the Son of Bichri, that Man of
Belial; by way of Metaphor alluding to the Quakers and G. Whitehead, etc.
HIS Presumptuous Impeachment, and Charge, pretended on Behalf of the Commons
of England, ( i. e. by Fra. Bugg) against the Quakers Yearly Meeting, is (with
Aggravation) repeated by him thus, viz.

I did not Impeach the Quakers for not paying Tithes, though that be Crime
enough, but your Yearly Meeting for Imposing the non-payment of Tithes upon
your People, and that too as a grand Oppression, and Antichristian Yoke; and I
say again, for you to meet Annually by way of Convocation, TO make and
promulgate such Antimagistratical Laws, not only against, but contray to the
Laws of the Land, is both against the King's Prerogative, the Rights of
Parliaments, and Property of the Subject; yea, and of dangerous Consequence.
And I say again, that by these your Canon Laws, you do Actually Absolve the
King's Subjects (if the Quakers may be so called) from their Active Obedience
to the Laws of the Land, which requires them to pay Tithes, etc.

Note, Reader, he has here added the word Antimagistratical, and left out
Fundamental before the word Laws, in his first Presumptuous Impeachment also,
as if he would render us not only guilty of Sedition in our said Meeting, but
of High Treason.

He most maliciously and virulently aggravates his said Impeachment, p. 4. in
Charging the Quakers with A New Jurisdiction, lately Erected by a few Usurpers,
who hold a Convention Annually at London, by way of Convocation, TO make Laws
and Ordinances contrary and repugnant to the Laws and Statutes of the Realm,
which tend to Subvert the Government, and if not timely prevented, may be of
dangerous Consequence.

Which Presumptuous Impeachment (as it is pretended in Behalf of the Commons of
England) contains diverse gross Lies in it: As, 1. That we meet Annually either
with any such Intention or Design, as TO Make, Contrive, Promulgate and Impose
Antimagistratical Laws and Ordinances, either against the King's Prerogative,
Rights of Parliaments, or Property of the Subjects, is a foul, notorious,
bloody, persecuting Calumny, and contrary to both our Innocent Intention, and
Design of our Meeting.

2. A New Jurisdiction lately Erected by a few Usurpers, are both gross and
horrid Lies, for our Annual Meetings have been of many years standing, with the
general Approbation of our People, for the maintaining our Christian Society,
Charity, Order, Discipline and Testimony, which our Lord Jesus Christ has
gathered us into, and requires of us.

3. To make Laws against the King's Prerogative, and Rights of Parliaments,
etc. tending to Subvert the Government, which consequently appears not only
highly Seditious, but highly Treasonable: This is both a highly false,
persecuting and bloody Aspersion, tending also to incense and stir up severe
and bloody Persecution against us. Oh horrid, cruel and inhumane!

But if upon a Judicial Examination of his said Presumptuous Impeachment, as
being in the Name or Behalf of the Commons of England, it be found both
unwarrantable, and a high Misdemeanour, and repugnant to the Rights and
Privileges of Parliaments, in him to Assume such a Power and Jurisdiction,
without any Privilege, either as Member of Parliament, or any Commission or
Power from the Parliament; if to excuse this presumption, he should allege,
That 'twas but a Jest, Romance, or Mock Impeachment, as he has excused his
Mock-Trial, and Mock-Pillory, (as he calls it) whereon he exposed Twelve
Persons, and Citizens of London, of good Reputation and Credit, under the
Character, Reproach and Scandal of Perjury, at this rate he may take the
Liberty to Reproach, Defame and Scandalize any Conscientious and Peaceable
Subjects, with the most Enormous or Heinous Crimes in the World, and that with
the highest Malice and Virulency he can, to Ruin, Destroy, and Murder them in
their Reputations, Persons, and Estates, and then pretend 'twas but in Jest or
Mockery. But then see what Cruel Mocking he takes liberty to, and what a Cruel
Mocker he is; And how unlike a Christian Convert, or Moral Man, he acts, and
yet diverse of his near Relations are called Quakers, and in Society with the
same People, who he has so Presumptuously, Injuriously and Foully Impeached and
Charged, as before: Oh Unnatural, Brutish and Cruel Mocker!

One great Complaint is, That for his Erecting a Mock-Pillory, they Indicted
him at the Old-Bailey, London, p. 3. Who were they Indicted him? 'Twas not the
Persons grossly Scandalized by his Mock-Trial, and Mock-Pillory, for hitherto
they have been very Patient and Merciful to him, in that they have not as yet
entered their Actions of Defamation severally against him, according to his
Demerits, as also in that they did not assent to have him Prosecuted by other
Persons, that would have done it in a Higher Court.

The Advice given in our Yearly Meeting's Epistle to our Friends, That their
Sufferings ( i. e. for Conscience sake) be duly gathered, truly entered and
kept, implies their Passive Obedience to the Government, wherein they cannot
for Conscience sake actively Obey, consequently no Sedition, nor Design of
Subversion to the Government on our Parts, either in the said Meeting or
Epistles. Which said Epistles are no Impositions a^ falsely Charged, being
Recommended to our own Friends, as Concurring with their Ancient Testimony,
received not from Men, Assemblies, or Humane Contrivance, but from Jesus
Christ; as is our Christian Testimony against that known Oppression of Tithes,
as Claimed, (and with severe Persecution) Imposed by diverse of the Clergy,
which renders them not only a Burden or Yoke, but the more against Christ, as
Persecution is; though our great Offense to this Mocker is, to deem Tithes now
Antichristian; we mean, 1. Because Abolished by Jesus Christ. 2. Ab Origin,
(i. e. since ended by Christ) as Imposed by the Pope and his Clergy. 3. As
Imposed and Forced with severe Persecution, Imprisonment, Sequestrations and
Seizures by Pretended Ministers of Christ; contrary also to his own express
Command, Mat. 10 8. as well as to his true Ministers Example. 4. Contrary also
to the sincere Testimony of diverse Reformed Protestants, and their Martyrs, who
were both Men of Good Fame, Piety, and Learning, as was John Wickcliff, William
Swinderby, Walter Brute, William Thorpe, and the Bohemians, with others
mentioned in the Book of Martyrs, etc. did bear Testimony against the
Corruption of the Popish Clergy, and against Tithes, and Compelled Maintenance,
by the Civil Authority, and this of their opposing Tithes was made a principal
Article against them by the Papists, as more largely appears in the first
Volume of Martyrs, in the Reigns of Richard II. Henry IV. and Henry V.

To this the Mocker gives us but a very slim Answer, and poor Come-off, viz. By
which you seem to make no difference between a Popish and Protestant Clergy,
for which the Church of England will not thank you, p. 1.

Pray observe what a silly Argument this is, as if that which is a Sin, and
Antichristian in Papists, were not a Sin in such Protestants who are guilty of
the same Fact; but testified against by true Protestants and Martyrs, and yet
therein no Contrivers of Sedition or Conspiracy to Subvert the Government, as
in effect we are Injuriously Accused by this Cruel Mocker, the principal
Article of his Charge (or Impeachment) being that of deeming Tithes (as now
Claimed by Priests) Antichristian (or against Christ) although for this we
Cited both John Wickcliff in particular, and William Thorpe also more at large,
who expressly says, Those Priests that will Challenge or Take Tithes, deny that
Christ is come in the Flesh, [which to do is Antichristian.] Did not William
Thorpe deem them Antichristian then? And has not this Mocker then, like the
Papists, Accused these Martyrs (and others) Testimony, as tending to Sedition
and Subversion of the Government, as well as he has done by the Quakers? But
the Cruel Mocker mutely gives the Go-by to William Thorp's Testimony, and John
Wickcliff's also, against endowing the Priests with Tithes, and Temporal
Possessions, largely Cited against him in our Answer to his Impeachment, p. 2,
3, 4. All this he silently passes by, and instead of entering into the Merits
of the Cause thereupon, he repeats and aggravates his Impeachment and Charge
with Persecuting Invectives, fleeing to, and preferring the Secular Power to
Christ's Power, and Humane Law to Christ's Law, as what is made Law at
Westminster, is made Unlawful at your Yearly Meeting, yea, a Grand Oppression
and Antichristian Yoke; and as such, you Charge and Command your People not to
pay Tithes, p. 2. But where we do so Charge and Command he shows us not, we
find it not in our Epistles, which he grounds his Impeachment upon: He Argues
not like a Christian, but like a Temporizing Persecutor, in preferring a Humane
Law to Christ's Law: If Tithes were Abolisht by Christ's Law, as the said
Martyrs Argue, who therein were not guilty of Sedition or Treason, by
preferring Christ's Prerogative, and his Law, to all Temporal Power and Laws.

His Accusing me with refusing to meet him according to my Proposal, p. 9. and
saying, I find G. W. will not come forth himself, he fears the Fate of
Hungate the Jesuit against Hall, p. 11. are both notoriously false, the
contrary is well known; first, G. W. earnestly pressed for a meeting with him
according to his own Proposal, which was, To make it appear before any Six,
Ten, or Twelve Competent WITNESSES, who are Moderate, Men of Sense and Common
Reason, that Fr. Bugg has grossly Abused and Perverted Truth, and Wronged the
People called Quakers, both in Charge, Citation, and Observation, etc. (and
this is all fully proved against him, in the aforementioned Answers quoted in
the Preface) and which Proposal G. W. never declined, but F. B has evaded and
perverted it. Instead of so many Witnesses to bear Witness to what passed, he is
for the Judgment and Decision of so many Episcopalians, Presbyterians,
Independents and Bapists, whose Hand (he confesses) is against G. W 's
Impeachment, p. 2. So that F. B. would not be content with their being
Witnesses only, as G. W. proposed, but must have them Judges for Decision, that
he might be sure aforehand to have G. W. Condemned by a Party, against and
contrary to him, even in some Points of Doctrine concerned in the Difference,
yet would have G. W. submit to their Judgment and Decision, or else no meeting
with him.

Witnesses as proposed by G. W. would not be accepted, but Judges for Decision,
which was to pre-engage G. W. to submit, and give away his Religion, Faith, and
Conscience aforehand, to Persons of different Persuasions, (Oh sad! Oh dark! Oh
irreligious Witness!) yet if esteemed Moderate, the more fit to be Witnesses of
the Controversy, than Judges or Lords over G. W. his Conscience and Faith; who
dare trust them with the former, but may not submit to the latter. As also the
Evidence of any Moderate Men, though of different Persuasions, might be trusted
to decide whether F. B. had rightly and truly Cited and Quoted the right Book
and Page; but whether he had thence fairly observed the true Sense thereof,
this would include some Matters of Doctrine and Conscience, wherein G. W. and
all true Christians, refuse to be Imposed upon by opposite Parties.

To pass by many of F. B's foul Aspersions, and cruel Mockings; in p. 4. he
perverts both mine and Isaac Penington's Words and Intentions; as where in
Counterfeit Convert, p. 72. I said, I may see cause otherwise to word the
Matter, and yet our Intentions be the same; whereupon F. B. thus observes, viz.
The English of which is, though Is. Penington deny Jesus of Nazareth to be
Christ, and make HIM but a Vail, a Garment, etc. and G. W. confess him to be
Christ, yet they mean all one thing, ONLY a Garment. And the Light that was
therein Crucified, is the Christ, p. 4.

Answer, Here are Four Falsehoods in this Observation, 1. That Is. Penington
denies Jesus of Nazareth to be Christ; we find not that denial in his Works. 2.
That he makes HIM BUT a Vail, a Garment, etc. This is not so spoken by Is.
Penington of Him, ( i. e. the Entire Jesus of Nazareth, or Son of God) but of
his Flesh which he took on him, called the Vail by the Apostle himself, Heb.
10. 20. wherein he does not call Jesus Christ himself but a Vail or Garment. 3.
That Is. Penington and G. W. mean that Jesus is only a Garment, is a foul
Perversion, and never so intended by either. 4. Or that they mean, ' it was the
Light that was therein that was Crucified, and only is the Christ. This also is
an absurd Consequence and Perversion, for they mean that Christ was Crucified
according to the Flesh, that he was put to Death as concerning the Flesh, 1
Pet. 3. 18. which his Spirit or Light within could not be, therefore the one
thing G. W. and Is. P. Intend or mean, is neither to deny Jesus of Nazareth to
be Christ, nor that he is only a Garment, as both are unjustly Charged; and
it is to be observed how F. B's Friend, George Keith, has Contradicted and
Confuted him in this very Charge in his Serious Appeal, Printed but in 1692.
against Cotton Mather, p. 25, 26. in these words. viz. But because he cannot
fix his false Charge upon me of denying Christ, he Essayeth (but with as ill
Success) to fix it upon my Brethren, as Dear Isaac Penington, whom I well knew
to be a true Believer in the Lord Jesus Christ, and whose Soul I believe is in
Rest in Christ, in Heavenly Glory. And as to his words, we can never call the
bodily Garment Christ, but that which appeared and dwelt in the Body. It is
easy to put a fair and charitable Construction on it, as well as on Christ's
words, when he said, He that has seen me, has seen the Father, and yet many
saw Christ's Body of Flesh, that never saw the Father. But to clear this thing,
I. P. speaks this in opposition to Socinians, and others Tinctured with
Socinian Principles; as if the Manhood of Christ that was Born of the Virgin,
excluding the Eternal Word, was the only and whole Christ, whereas Christ was
before his Body of Flesh, therefore he is said to have come in the Flesh, and
to have taken Flesh; P. 26. Serious Appeal.
and if we consider Christ as he was before the World was, by whom all things
were Created; and in respect of his Godhead, the Body was not that, but the
Garment of it when he assumed it. But when we consider Christ as Man, as every
other Man has both Soul and Body belonging to his Essential Constitution as
Man, so had Christ, and still has, a most Glorious Soul and Body.

Observe now how Charitably and Plainly G. Keith has Vindicated Is. Penington,
both contrary to F. Bugg's and Tho. Crisp's Calumnies and Abuses against him in
this very Matter.

As to F. B's Railing and Scoffing at Women's Meetings, p. 5. falsely Accusing G.
Fox with assuming Divine Attributes to HIMSELF, and the Quakers with Adoring
him, p. 6. These often repeated Calumnious Abuses are Answered and Refuted in
these Answers to F. B. etc. viz. 1. A Just Enquiry. 2. A Charitable Essay. 3.
Innocence Triumphant. 4. The Counterfeit Convert. 5. The Quakers Vindication
against F. Bugg' s Calumnies. 6. The Contentious Apostate, and his Blow
Refelled. 7. The Contentious Apostate Recharged. 8. The Quakers Answer. 9.
Innocence against Envy. Some of which Answers are Sold by Tace Soul, and
others by Thomas Northcott, London. F. B. has not given a fair Reply or Answer
to any of them; but for want of better Matter, Reprints his old Refuted Stuff
over and over.

Among those called Divine Attributes, which he accuses G. F. with assuming to
himself, are these, viz.

1. Who is the Son of God.

2. I was in the Paradise of God.

3. That it was Christ the Eternal Power of God, that spoke in me at that time
unto them.

4. Pretended Miracles wrought in his own Name only, Journ. p. 371, 374.

5. He that has the same Spirit that raised up Jesus Christ, is equal with
God, p. 5.

Which with other pretended Instances partially and perversely picked up, this
Mocker terms a few Instances of Blasphemy. But,

1. To the first, If G. F. said, Who is the Son of God, (which should rather
have been a Son of God) yet therein he did not say, That he himself is the only
begotten Son of God, that Eminent Title belongs only to Christ; for was not
Adam called The Son of God? Luke 3. 38. Was this then Blasphemy? How Ignorant
is this Mocker of Scripture Language?

2. To the second, It was no Blasphemy to say, he was in the Paradise of God,
no more than to say, he was a Man in Christ; for so said Paul, yet no
Blasphemer, 2 Cor, 12.

3. It is no Blasphemy to say, That Christ, or the Spirit of Christ, speaks
in or through his Ministers and Servants, for both he and they so testified.
See Mat. 10. 19. 2 Cor. 13. 3. Mark 13. 11. Luke 12. 11.

4. It Is a notorious Lie also, That G. F. pretended Miracles wrought in his own
Name only; for he ascribed them not to himself, but to the Power of God and his
Motion, to whom he frequently prayed for the Sick and Diseased, upon which the
Lord restored some; to him therefore G. F. returned the Praise. See his Journ.
p. 103, 170, 171, 407.

5. The fifth Instance, as it is worded, is disowned, and we do not believe that
G. F. ever said this of himself, but that he is wronged herein. See what G.
Keith says to it contrary to F. B. Serious Appeal, contra Cotton, p. 60. viz.
And whereas he would in the Conclusion fix it upon G. F. that he thought
himself Equal with God, and that the Soul of Man was God, or a part of him: But
seeing he brings not this from G. F. but from Faldo, a most Partial and
Envious Adversary, it is not to be regarded; and W. Penn has sufficiently
Vindicated G. F. and also G. F. has cleared it in his Book, that he did
Witness both the Son and the Holy Spirit revealed in him, who (as he takes
notice by the Westminster Confessions Acknowledgment) are Equal to God the
Father. What says F. B. to this Vindication? The rest of his Aspersions are
Answered in the aforesaid Answers.

As to the Account, and severe Characters F. B. gives in the Quakers Name
against False Ministers and Ministry, p. 7, 8. this he has scraped, and patched
up, and printed, and reiterated over and over, in most of his Pamphlets against
us, and will needs have it, that therein the Quakers reproach the Ministers of
the Gospel, Christ's Ministers, p. 10. which we positively deny; and it is
wholly without proof, and what he cannot prove, i. e. that we reproach Christ's
Ministers, in Testifying against Covetous Persecuting Priests, who make a Trade
of Preaching, and of the Scriptures, and such whom the Prophet Isaiah called
greedy dumb Dogs, Isa. 56. 10, 11. How will F. B. prove such Christ's
Ministers, or Gospel Ministers? We have but his bare say-so for it, but want
proof for it, wherein he does but merely impose upon us, to Vilify us, and
Ingratiate himself into Favor with that sort of the Clergy, who are most
Guilty of the Sin of Covetousness and Persecution.

The Mocker again repeats his false and empty Boast by way of Question, p. 12.
viz. Why then will you not bring forth Sheba the Son of Bichri, the Man of
Belial, G. W? Is there not a wise Man amongst you? His Cruel Mocking and
Calumny in this unjust Comparison is denied; no doubt his Malice is cruel and
deadly enough to bring G. W. to Sheba's End, if he had Power, or could with any
Color or Pretense bring him under Sheba's Crime of Treason, or lifting up his
Hand against the King, 2 Samuel 20. 21, 22. For does not this Mocker's Language,
Comparison, and Treatment of this kind, bespeak his deadly Malice and Design?

He goes on with his empty boasting, viz. He tells you, That I wrong the
Quakers in Charge, Citation, and Observation. Bring him forth according to his
Proposal, and you will see it proved that I have not.

As it was G. W's part to make good his Proposal or Charge against F. B. so he
has greatly endeavored a Meeting with F. B. in London, before Witnesses, for
the same purpose, but evaded by F. B. on other Terms than were in the said
Proposal, as is before related: Now he has no cause to cry, Bring him forth
according to his Proposal! For that is abundantly proved in the Answers
beforementioned.

Whereas F. B. further boasts, G. W. has wrote to diverse Clergymen, to
prevail with me to desist; they give me his Letters, and wish me good Success,
p. 12.

The Clergymen which G. W. wrote to, were William Smithies of Cripplegate,
London; and Isaac Archer of Milden-hall, in Suffolk; which was to show them
some of his foul Abuses and Calumnies, to try them (as having a particular
Interest in him) if they would stop him: Why did he not Print G. W's Letters to
them, and to himself too also? But thereby his Abuses, and sorry evasive
Shifting, would have been the more apparent. Wherefore seeing he boasts of
their wishing him good Success, these Two Questions are put to you the said
William Smithies and Isaac Archer, viz.

Q. 1. Do you really in your Consciences Approve of Francis Bugg's writing
Books and Pamphlets against the People called Quakers, as he has done?

Q. 2. Do you really Approve of his Books and Pamphlets writ by him against the
said People, as namely of these in particular, under these Titles? viz.

1. The Quakers Detected, Printed 1686.

2. New Rome Unmasked. 1692.

3. New Rome Arraigned; which has in it his Pretended Trial and Pillory;
Printed in 1693.

4. New Rome Arraigned; Second Impression, without the Pillory. 1694.

5. His Impeachment, pretended in Behalf of the Commons of England. 1695.

6. A Second Summons.

7. His Sheet, styled, Something in Answer to the Allegations of the Quakers,
in their Printed Case presented to the House of Commons, December, 1695. But
the Second Edition whereof, styled, The Converted Quaker's Answer to the
Allegations of his Old Brethren, the Quakers, etc.

CHAP. VIII.
An Appendix to the foregoing Controversies, in Certain Positions of the
Sincere Belief, and Christian Doctrine of the People of God called Quakers, in
Opposition to the Misrepresentations and Calumnies of F. Bugg (and other
Apostates) in his pretended History of the Quakers, and other his and their
Books and Pamphlets.
1. WE, the said People, are bound in Conscience and Duty by the Holy Spirit,
and Light of Christ Jesus, only and humbly to Adore and Worship the only True
and Living God, Creator of Heaven and Earth, the Sea, and all Creatures, and
not to Adore or Worship any Mortal Man, or Creature, or any other God
whatsoever.

2. To Believe and Confess the Holy Divine Three (or Scripture Trinity) that
bear Record in Heaven, the Father, the Word, (or Son) and Holy Spirit, and that
these Three are Essentially One in the Divine Being* and Substance, One God,
Blessed for Ever.

3. We are livingly taught and led by the Light and Spirit of Christ Jesus, the
Living Word in our Hearts, (and that according to Holy Scripture) to Believe,
Own and Confess the Incarnation of Jesus Christ, that is, his Real Coming in
the Flesh without us; even the same Jesus of Nazareth that was Conceived in the
Virgin Mary by the Power of the Holy Ghost overshadowing her, and Born of her
in Bethlehem of Judea, Mat. 2. 1. and that he was Crucified, and put to Death,
as concerning the Flesh without the Gates of Jerusalem; and we highly do Value
and Esteem his Sufferings, Death, Precious Blood, and whole Sacrifice for
Sinners; together with his Resurrection and Ascension into Heaven and Glory;
and that he only was and is the Promised Messiah, the Very Christ, the Only
Begotten Son of the Living God: And as for his Divinity, That he is the True
Light, Life, Power and Wisdom of God, and none other, according to plain
Scripture Testimony.

4. The Divinity and Humanity (i. e. Manhood) of Christ Jesus, that as he is
True God, and as he is most Glorious Man, our Mediator and Advocate, we
livingly Believe, and have often sincerely Confessed in our Public Testimonies
and Writings.

5. That as sincere and fervent Prayers to God in the Name and Spirit of Christ
Jesus, is the Duty of all True Believers and Christians professing him, for
whatsoever they stand in need of, especially with respect to the Peace and
Happiness of their Immortal Souls; so all who are truly humbled under a Sense
of their Sins, in order to true Repentance and Conversion, ought to crave
Forgiveness in the Name, and for the Sake of Christ Jesus, which has been our
Practice, both Public and Private, and God in Mercy has accordingly answered
us, who by his Grace in our Hearts, has led many, both to confess and forsake
Sin, that they might find Mercy in Christ Jesus.

6. Though we are bound in Conscience truly to Esteem and Magnify the Divine
Light, the Ingrafted Word, the Spirit and Power of Christ in us, as sufficient
and able actually to save and deliver the Soul, from Sin, Death, and
Condemnation, and thereby we Confess the Man Christ Jesus with respect to his
entire Existence or Being, as without us, as well as we do own him Spiritually
within us; knowing that this Light, Life, and Spirit of Christ Jesus, Testify
of him, and certainly Guides the truly Obedient and Sincere Believers, in his
Name and Power, Inwardly, Livingly, and Experimentally, to partake of the Real
Benefits, Fruits, and Blessed Ends of his outward Suffering, Sacrifice, and
Death for Mankind, to wit, their Repentance, Conversion from Sin, Effectual
Reconciliation unto God, Eternal Salvation, and Complete Redemption, which
Christ Jesus has obtained for us, ( i. e. for all Mankind) through his Mediation
and Sufferings.

7. Our Really Believing and Confessing the Lord Jesus Christ, his Passion,
Sufferings, Death, Atonement, and Reconciliation made for us, and his
Resurrection, Ascension and Glorification, (as without us) according to
Scripture, cannot be to Allegorize all these away, as if only transacted within
us, (as we have been unduly Accused) for they were really done and transacted
without us, by our Blessed Lord Jesus Christ, though our true Knowledge of the
Power of his Resurrection, and Fellowship of his Sufferings, and our being
Conformable to his Death, must be Experienced within us, if ever we Live or
Reign with Him.

8. We sincerely Prefer* and Esteem the Holy Scriptures of the Old and New
Testament, contained in that Excellent Book, commonly* called the Bible, (as
most Eminently Confirmed by Divine Authority, and Faithful Witnesses) before
all other Books whatsoever extant in the World; and yet our preferring the Holy
Spirit (from whence the Scripture came), before the Letter of the Scripture, is
not to undervalue the Scripture, for the Spirit must needs have the Preference
and Pre-eminence, as being the Author, and Original Cause, and Dictator of the
Holy Scriptures, and Giver of Light and Life also, whereby truly to understand
them, and to live accordingly.

9. As for Baptism and the Lord's Supper, they are Scripturally considered by
us in their several Dispensations, both as in the Figure, and in the Substance,
in the Type and Antitype, as the Outward or Literal were Typical or Figurative
of the Inward and Spiritual, we confess and own, considered in their Places,
and proper Dispensations; but the Substance is more Excellent and Permanent
than the Shadow; as the Inward and Spiritual Grace is more Excellent than the
Outward and Visible Signs; and as Christ's Spiritual Baptism, which is the
Saving Baptism, was Typified by John's. And to Eat, and Drink, or Sup with
Christ in his Kingdom, of that Spiritual Meat and Drink which he gives for Life
to the Soul, was Typified or Figured forth by his Outward Supper of the
Passover, Bread and Cup; for the Outward Element of Water cannot wash away Sin
from the Soul, neither can the Outward Bread or Cup, give Life or Nourishment
to the Soul.

The Shadows flee away, but the Sum and Substance remain.

10. We sincerely* Believe, and have often Confessed the Immortality of the
Soul of Man, that was Created in God's Image, and the Doctrine of the
Resurrection of the Dead, according as laid down in Holy Scripture, 1 Cor. 15th
Chapter; and of Eternal Judgment by Jesus Christ, as being Judge of the Living,
and of the Dead, in the Great and Last Day of Judgment, at the Great Harvest,
which is the End of the World, God having appointed a Day wherein he will Raise
the Dead, both the Just and Unjust, and also Judge the World in Righteousness,
by that (Heavenly and most Glorious) Man Christ Jesus whom he has Ordained,
Acts 17. 31. before whose Tribunal-Seat all must appear, to Receive their Final
Judgment and Sentence, according to their Deeds done in the Body, whether they
be Good or Evil.

11. That Christ's Gospel Ministry must be free, without forced Maintenance,
filthy Lucre, or Covetousness.

12. That Magistracy, or Civil Government, is God's Ordinance; the Good Ends
thereof being for the Punishment of Evil Doers, and Praise of them that do Well.

These Things we Sincerely Believe and Own; but, to do F. Bugg Right, we find
not that he has Charged us in the Tenth Particular, about the Resurrection,
though some other Apostates have: And we know no other Doctrine or Principle,
Preached, Maintained, or Received among, or by Us, since we were a People,
contrary to these beforementioned; nor do we Own any contrary thereunto.

Signed in Behalf of the said People, and to Clear my own Innocence in
Particular; By G. Whitehead.

A Brief Advertisement to the Impartial Reader, upon Francis Bugg's last Book,
falsely Styled, The Picture of Quakerism Drawn to the Life.
THat it may appear, that as to Matter of Doctrine, and diverse other things
contained in the said Book, he has frequently Repeated and Imposed the same
Notorious Calumnies and Perversions, Unjustly upon the People called Quakers,
(with other Abuses) which in the foregoing Treatise, and other of our Books in
Answer to him, have been, and are fully Detected; please to take a Brief
Catalogue of some of his Notorious Calumnies, Lies and Abuses, with short Notes
on them, as follows.

1. In his Dedication to the Bishops of the Church of England, whom he flatters
thus, viz. My Lords, I have not leisure to trace them (i. e. the Quakers) in
all their Bypaths from the very beginning of their Rise, and to show, how they
branched forth from the Seeds of the Ranters, Levellers, and other
Latitudinarians.

Observe pray, herein he Imposes a Nototious and Scandalous Falsehood upon the
Bishops, it being well known, that the said People, called Quakers, as to their
Rise, sprung and branched forth from and out of Religious Families of the
Puritans, (so called) and of the most sincere among those called Independent,
Anabaptist and Presbyterian Churches and Families, and others, and not from the
Seeds of Ranters, as he has grossly defamed them, thereby Abusing both Bishops,
and other Readers.

2. Their Contempt of the Scripture, as Beastly Wares, p. 2. Calling them
Beastly Ware, p. 42. That the Quakers have Condemned the Holy Scriptures, p.
48. That our Teachers tell us, that the Scriptures are Dust, Death, Beastly
Ware, etc. p. 61. That their Chief Work in their Meetings, as well as Writings,
was to lower the Power of the Magistrates, Reproach the Ministers, etc. and the
Bible, Beastly Ware, etc. p. 97. He further says, I know, if I had recommended
the Scriptures, ye would have rejected them, as Serpents Meat, Beastly Ware,
your frequent Epithets, p. 121. And Beastly Ware again, p. 125. Hist.

Obs. Thus he still shamefully Abuses the Readers, Bishops, and others, by
these most gross repeated Blasphemous Calumnies, manifestly Detected both in
the foregoing Expostulation, and other Answers to him. So that he shamefully
pleases himself with frequent Repetition of his old, stinking, loathsome Stuff
to defame the Quakers.

3. That possibly our Women learned of my self ( i. e. of G. W.) to call the
Scriptures Dust, Death, Beastly Ware, etc. p. 122.

Obs. My Conscience bears me Witness, he has suggested a horrid Calumny
against me herein, having had a high and reverend Esteem for the Holy
Scriptures, from my Youth upwards.

4. That they (i. e. the Quakers) sprung out of the Dregs of the People, as
Ranters, etc.

Obs. Both which are Abusive Aspersions, before Detected. Query, Did thou
F.B. spring out of the Dregs of the People, as Ranters, when first thou
turnedst Quaker? For shame, for shame leave off such sordid Stuff.

5. That the Quakers deny Christ, and that their Doctrine teaches to deny him
to be Christ, who was Born of the Virgin, and their Contempt of Jesus of
Nazareth, (Contents, and p. 25, and 37.

Obs. We have often cleared our selves of this repeated Calumny, abhorring the
Blasphemy thereof.

6. That they deny Christ to be in Heaven above, at God's Right Hand, p. 26.

Obs. This Perversion has been often Detected: And our Confessing Christ IN us,
by his Spirit, Light and Grace, is no Proof thereof.

7. That they (i. e. the Quakers) Encourage each other to wait in the feeling
of the Spirit of a Deceased Brother, and call it, the Comforter; [therein
comparing them to the Papists] p. 27.

Observe his Dullness and Stupidity in this Lying Perversion: He distinguishes
not between the Saints Comforter, or Spirit of Truth in a Deceased Brother, and
his own Spirit; i. e. between the Spirit of God, and the Spirit of a Man.

8. That it is very plain, that they (i. e. the Quakers) put the North of
England for the T^wn of Bethlehem, and the Branch, the Star, the Sun of
Righteousness, they most Wretchedly and Blasphemously attribute to G. Fox, p.
52. And that the Quakers did BELIEVE, the North of England was the Town of
Bethlehem, etc. p. 53. That the Quakers give Testimony to G. Fox, as the
Branch, etc. p. 57, 58.

Obs. What an Abominable Perversion this Story is, though frequently repeated
by him, and detected by us, as has been made Evident. His Stageing us in his
Mock-Tryal, Arraignment and Pillory, for Solemnly Denying the same, is not
sufficient Abuse for us; but against all Truth and plain Demonstration, he
insolently insists upon the same to defame us, like one hardened in his
Iniquity, and Injurious Work of Darkness and Envy.

9. That Christ, that was Born in the City of David, the Quakers plainly say,
This is not the Christ, p. 58. [For which he quotes the Christian Quaker, and
his Divine Test. p. 98.]

Obs. I have Examined the Page 98. in both the first and second part of our
said Book, Christian Quaker, quoted by F. Bugg here, in neither whereof do I
find the Quakers saying, That this is not the Christ that was Born in the City
of David; but his Divinity Asserted, and his Pre-existence before that Outward
Appearance or Coming of Christ in the Flesh, that he was the Divine Word, the
Seed, the Light, the Life, etc. before he took upon him that Body prepared for
him. See now how plainly and perversely F. B. has Abused the Quakers in this
Matter.

10. He scornfully repeats a known Untruth against me in these words, Dear
George, to save thy Bacon, can now do it, [i. e. Swear] and that an Oath was
read to G. W. in open Court, April 9. 1695. and the Book being put to his
Mouth, he submitted to it without gainsaying. p. 93.

Obs. In good Conscience, I deny this Story again; and many can Witness the
Contrary, as to what Testimony I bore in Court. Whoever was F. B's Informer, I
shall not be much Inquisitive, I know my own Innocence, and can demonstrate it,
if it were not to an Enemy, that labors to Asperse me.

11. That their Teachers in their Travels to and fro, to seduce the People not
only from the Christian Religion, but from their Allegiance to their
Governors, p. 101.

Obs. Which is a Malicious Lying Story, unjustly designed to render us
Obnoxious.

12. He tells a false Story concerning a Bishop and Mr. Whitehead, that the
Bishop said, they must insert a Clause for the Payment of Tithes, etc. meaning
in the Bill for our Relief in the Case of Oaths. Upon which F. B. falsely Drols,
But O Poor George, methinks I see him how he rubbed his Elbow, and scratched
his Head, and looked up as demurely as a Puritan, etc. Hist. p. 117, 118.

Obs. This whole Story, with the subsequent Passages depending upon it, is
wholly false; for the Clause to Recover Tithes, was past in the House of
Commons before it came up to the House of Lords.

I have not time now to go through his Repeated Calumnies, Lies, and Abuses
both in his Monstrous deformed Picture (as I may call it) of Quakerism; and his
pretended Brief History thereof, for they are numerous.

One thing more I may observe, how F. B. presumes to prescribe and dictate to
the Government, from the Example of the FRENCH KING, toward the French
Protestants, in the Year 1644. which he takes out of John Quick's History.

1. As to his Permitting the Protestant Ministry to hold a National Synod, and
ordering them a Commissioner to assist and be present with them in their Synod.
He cites the Writ Signed LEWIS, and the Commissioner's Speech, and Synod's
Answer. P. 97, 98, 99, 100, 101, 102.

From whence F. B. takes upon him to prescribe and dictate to the present King
and Government here, viz. That if the Government think good to bestow that
favor of them (as to have Anniversary Synods) it would be very proper, that
there should be a Commissioner or two, ordered by His Majesty to Reside in
their Counsel. And about 13 Precepts of F. B's to the Government to Restrain
and Limit our Anniversary Meeting, P. 122. to P. 126. Whence 'ti observable,
how he strives and insinuates to persuade our Protestant Government, to imitate
the French King's Example herein. As if the King and Government here were as
much fearful and jealous of his peaceable Protestant Subjects, as the French
King was of the Protestants in France; and what Reputation or Honor has he in
thus prescribing and dictating shown to a Protestant Government in England, to
induce them to learn of a French King, and to imitate him in their Conduct?

2. He also dictates, how to call us in Question before Authority for our
Books, etc. P. 121. O busy Dictator! will nothing serve him but Persecution
(which he does but sorrily define) or some Popish Limitations or Inquisitions
over us, to introduce a new Persecution?

Ah! poor Francis! my Soul pities thee, though I have been plain with thee,
may thou yet be humbled unto Repentance before thou dyest; for thy great
Enmity, thy manifold repeated Calumnies, notorious Perversions, and Persecuting
Invectives!

And you his Ministers, Approvers, and Congratulators, (Expostulated with) J.
A. W. S. etc. what think you of your Convert F. B. his Work? Will it quit the
Cost and Pains, and be for your Reputation, or Church's Service, to encourage
him thus to proceed in Scribbling, and making Books, stuffed with Repetitions of
his old, overworn, threadbare stuff, made up mostly of the same reiterated,
envious, and scornful Aspersions, and Perversions, frequently Refuted, without
any direct or rational Reply from him; but instead thereof silly Histories of
the same repeated Calumnies, etc. imposed upon the World by your Convert F. B.
Alas! poor Man! what a Whirl-pool is he fallen into? Do you think he spends his
Time or Estate well in such invidious fruitless Work? Or do you help him in the
Charge? Pray consider of it, if you please. I have observed, he is very
Industrious for you and your Interest, as he may think. I have in one Sheet
Answered a Book of his, (as I may) and with that set his Windmil going again,
to bring forth another Book, of some Bulk and Charge. But if he still thinks
his said Picture of Quakerism is drawn to the Life, it should then be his
Masterpiece, and save him more Labor and Charge of Limning against us. But if
he can draw Pictures no better than this, or his Picture of Quakers in the
Pillory, he had better give over the Trade, and Study to be Quiet, that he may
Live and Die the more Quietly.

London, the 20th. of the 3d. Month, 1697.
FINIS.

