AN ANTIDOTE AGAINST THE VENOM OF The Snake in the Grass: Or, the Book so
styled. AND THE Christian People CALLED QUAKERS Vindicated from its most gross
Abuses and Calumnies.

In certain Reflections, detecting the nameless Author's Malice, Outrage and
Persecution against the said People.

Unto which is Annexed, A brief Examination of the Author's second Book,
styled, Satan Dis-rob'd.

Also, Some Notice taken of his Discourse for the Divine Institution of
Water Baptism.

Psalm. 83. 3. They devise deceitful Matters against them that are quiet in the
Land. London: Printed for Tho. Northcott, in George-yard in Lombard Street.
1697.

THE BOOKSELLER TO THE READER.
Friendly Reader,
THE so long delay of this Answer to The Snake in the Grass, has been chiefly
the Printers occasion, and partly to have some Answer to his latter Book,
stilled, Satan Disrobed.

So, Reader, that thou may be preserved from the Venom of this Snake, in all
his twistings and twinings, is the desire of him, who wishes the Welfare of
all Men.

T. N.

ERRATA.
PAge 37. l. 13. r. Persecutors l. 38. dele as p. 56. l. 6. r. Kingdoms, p. 81.
l. 1. r. Prosecution, p. 166. l. 30. for them in r. in them, p. 167. l. 12. for
reprobachs r. reproaches, p. 200. l. 25. r. universally, p. 204. l. 7. r. who
rendered, p. 232. l. 4. r. of Sin and Death, l. 5. r. of Life, p. 235. l. 13. d.
60.

Some litteral Faults and Points mis-placed, may be understood by the sense of
the matters.

Impartial Reader,
AFter the perusal of the said Snake in the Grass, seeing the gross and absurd
Aspersions, Calumnies, Perversions and scornful Stuff therein Contained, and
the great Malice of the nameless Author's Spirit against the People called
Quakers; It was slighted by us and laid aside for some Months, being stuffed with
many lying and incredible Stories, as scarce deserving any particular Answer,
except the notice of some few to discredit the Author and invalidate his
fruitless attempts of his foul Envy and Falsehood: But some indifferent Persons
being urgent for an Answer, and the said Book being rendered as an unanswerable
Piece, by some too easily imposed upon, and others in prejudice gave occasion
for the ensuing Reflections to be Exhibited, in order to obviate the injurious
Design of the Author and his Abettors ( i.e.) some wrathful, implacable and
perfidious Apostates, who are of those Cattle he has principally Plowed withal,
and from whom he has chiefly derived his unjust Authority to Defame and
Scandalize the said People, with those old, false and refuted Aspersions and
Slanders, as Possessed with the Devil, Enthusiastic Madness, Blasphemy,
Heresy, denying the true Christ and his holy Humanity or Manhood, real
Sufferings and Satisfaction, and the Resurrection, and Contemning the Holy
Scriptures, Doctrins and Precepts therein contained, with abundance more of
such like Calumnies and Slanders, Abuses and Perversions (of our Words and
Doctrins) frequently answered and refuted by diverse of us in our former and
latter Books. And now because of our present Ease and Liberty, which Mercy our
Gracious God has influenced the present Government to afford us, from our late
grievous and destructive Persecutions, (for which Liberty we are truly
thankful.) For this Cause the Devil and his Agents appear the more enraged and
to have exceeding great Wrath against the remnant of the true Seed, and to
combine together to persecute us, with their most shameful Reproaches, Abuses,
Lies and Slanders, which is the present Persecution we are under. When the
Devil was suffered to employ his Agents to Oppress and Persecute us in our
Persons and Estates, by severe Imprisonments and spoil of Goods, tending to
Ruin us and our Families, then the Pens of his Clerks and Ministers were quiet
toward us: But seeing his and their wicked ends by that kind of open and cruel
Persecution could not be accomplished upon us; now they bend their perverse
Studies and Pens to persecute us with shameful Reproach and Blasphemy, to
Destroy and Murder our Reputations both as Men and Christians, not sparing
either the Living or the Dead. The Lord our God will rebuke their Fury and
Outrage, and confound their mischievous Devices and Confederacies; even the
just and righteous God (who by his power supported us under our deepest
Sufferings and Persecutions, and gave us Faith and Courage then to Face the
severest Storms and Blustering Winds which rose up against us for our Christian
Testimony and Assemblies) he has enabled and will enable us to face and
outface this Storm of envious and outrageous Persecution of our open and secret
Enemies. And it is no small shame and disparagement for such Eminent Church of
England Men (as the Author of the Snake in the Grass would seem one of them) to
be beholding to pretended Quakers, such as, George Keith and Thomas Crisp, for
their Aid or Authority against us; and to F. Bugg's Authority also, who has
been detected of numerous Falsehoods against us, since he left us, and turned to
the Priests and to the Public (as he calls it) and the said George Keith
contrary to his many and frequent Vindications of the People called Quakers and
their Principles, and above thirty Years Conversation among them, now turned an
open Adversary to Revile and Reproach them, and yet a falsely pretended Quaker,
as if he would ingratiate himself into favor with the worst of our Enemies;
the Day will yet further discover him and them.

I confess, where Persons of a contrary Judgment to us, appear moderate and
civil in their Discourse and Treatment, in things wherein they differ from us,
they deserve to be gently and tenderly Answered and Treated; and if such
suppose me mistaken in any thing or circumstance of words, (from which I intend
not altogether to excuse my self in all Controversies from my young and early
Years, and yet be assured by the Spirit of Truth in matters Essential to
Salvation) I would take kindly their civil and friendly Discovery thereof to
me, being desirous that the Truth may be exalted above all Self-reputation. But
when I find Persons like this Author of The Snake in the Grass, maliciously set
in a persecuting Spirit, to defame and reproach Truth and our Christian
Society, which I am concerned in Conscience for.

I confess then, a holy Zeal the Lord raises, and has raised in my very Heart
and Soul, against such bitter Implacable and Persecuting Spirits. And the
Lord's Power I have felt, and do still feel it to accompany and enable me in
Defense of his blessed Truth and People.

And inasmuch as the said Author of The Snake in the Grass, is so very liberal
in his most odious Characters upon us, and has so frequently Branded us, even
diverse Persons by Name with Blasphemies and Heresies, etc. who have been, and
are known to be Persons of good Reputation, both as Men and Christians in Life
and Conversation: It Is pity but this Defaming Author, should be publicly
exposed by Name for his Folly and outrage, especially if he persists in his
Scorn and envious injurious attempts against us, that he may not be suffered to
sculk and hide himself like a Snake under Grass.

And as to the seven Queries, which he upbraids us with, reproaching us, As
putting them all off with one general Answer, etc. as a trick and deceit of
ours, to hide and cover our monstrous Heresies, and a full confession of our
Heresies, Pref. p. 350. Which being monstrous Calumnies, and from which our
general Answer to the unprejudiced, clears us, though we expected it would meet
with such ill Treatment and Mis-construction, as it has from G. K. and this
Author; therefore thought meet to publish the said Answer herewith, for the
information of others more Charitable and Impartial, than this our present
Accuser and unjust Judge. The said Queries appear to be of so little weight,
and some of them so indirect and in unscriptural Terms, and perversely designed
for cavil, that I do not think they deserve to be reprinted here. The following
Answer being positive, plain and scriptural, as well as comprehensive, of
what is necessary to be said to the matters chiefly Questioned.

And though I have long had a more particular Answer to the said Queries ready, I
do not think my self obliged at present, to gratify such imperious arbitrary
Inquisitors as our present Adversaries with the publication thereof; but rather
for farther information in these matters chiefly Queried, refer them and
others, to these our Books, viz.

First, A Testimony of what we believe of Christ, both as he was God and Man,
etc. By G. F. Printed, Anno 1677. And,

Secondly, The Christian Doctrine and Society of the People called Quakers, etc.
And,

Thirdly, The Harmony of the Old and New Testament, concerning our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ, etc. With many more ancient Books, whereby it may appear,
that we were not to seek our Faith, concerning Jesus and the Resurrection,
before the said Queries came to our hands.

G. W.

Lon. 3d day 4th Month called June, 1695. Friend William Lancaster,
HAving received a Paper of great Objections against us, the People called
Quakers, with seven Queries therein, subscribed William Lancaster, directed to
our Yearly Meeting in Whitson-week, 1695. and delivered to some of us very near
the conclusion thereof, and therefore only read in the said Meeting, with not
having any further time to consider the Contents thereof, or to give any
particular answer thereunto: It was by the said Meeting left to a few to
consider and answer, as in the Fear of God and Meekness of Wisdom we should see
Cause. Wherein we observe is noted, great Objections have been made against us,
by those who have departed from our Communion as by others.

To which we reply, that it is true, and they have been answered, to which we
refer. And we observe in the said Paper its said, We would not take an account
of you only from your Adversaries, etc. And we have chosen this solemn Time.
And again, And we have chosen this most proper and convenient Opportunity, etc.
And then states the several Queries, and says, the Questions may be proposed,
and their Answer demanded.

Now the Objections having been public, and our Answers public, we desire to
know, who the We are, that are intended in this Paper, that we may apply our
selves to them, or give such Scriptural Answers, as we hope may tend to
satisfaction. But to repeat Answers in writing or print to we know not who, so
often as demanded, to the same things already answered, We think it not
needful. Therefore have herewith only sent thee a few brief Lines, being grossly
Wronged and Misrepresented in the said Objections, and diverse of the Queries
contain several Questions in them, in different Terms (and some Unscriptural)
so not plain and direct Queries, therefore cannot positively be answered by our
simple YEA or NAY, to each Query as designed. We therefore at present send this
general Answer to the Queries for thy information as follows, viz.

We sincerely believe and profess Jesus Christ and the Resurrection according
to the Holy Scripture Testimony, and to that measure of Understanding which God
has been pleased to give us by his Holy Spirit.

We sincerely believe in Jesus Christ, the only begotten Son of the living God,
both as he is true God, and perfect Man; our Emanuel and Mediator and as in the
fullness of Time, he was Conceived by the Holy Ghost, Born of the Virgin Mary in
Bethlehem of Judea; Suffered under Pontius Pilate, was Crucified and put to
Death; was Buried, rose again the third Day, and visibly Ascended into Heaven,
and was received into Glory; and that this same Jesus Christ that was
Crucified, shall so in like manner come (as he was seen to go into Heaven) in
Power and great Glory to Judge both the Living and the Dead, according to their
Works at the last and great Day of Judgment, in that great Harvest which is the
End of the World.

And that by Jesus Christ there shall be a Resurrection of the Dead, both of
the Just and Unjust unto the righteous Judgment of the great Day; consequently,
that the Resurrection is not past, as Hymeneus and Philetus said, 2 Timothy 2. 18.

And that the Dead shall be raised incorruptible, Every Man in his own order,
and that our low Body shall be changed, and made like unto Christ's glorious
Body: The Resurrection of the Bodies of the Saints ( We Believe) shall be
Spiritual and Glorious, and that the Sons of God, and of the Resurrection shall
be equal with the Angels of God in Heaven, and shine as the Sun in the Kingdom
of their Father; and yet there is such a great Mystery in the Resurrection, as
that Flesh and Blood cannot Inherit the Kingdom of God, neither does Corruption
inherit Incorruption, 1 Cor. 15.

The whole Sacrifice of Christ (whereof his Blood outwardly that was shed was a
part) was of great Price with God for Man's Redemption: Christ's Blood that was
shed without the Gates of Jerusalem, together with the whole Sacrifice himself
both of Soul and Body, was a true Propitiation and Atonement for Man's
reconciliation and peace with God for remission of Sins, through a living
Faith, and true Repentance (in his Name) given and wrought by his Spirit and
Word of Power in Men's Hearts; whose sincere obedience to Christ, and Walking in
his Light, being required of them, in order to experience Christ the Author of
their eternal Salvation, and to wash them from their Sins in his own Blood. For
without this true Faith, Repentance and Obedience to Christ Jesus, Men lose and
forfeit the great Benefit of Christ's Sufferings, and deprive themselves of the
Eternal Redemption and Salvation, which he has hereby obtained for us. Though he
dyed for all Men, tasted death for every Man, and gave himself a Ransom for
all, to be testified of in due time, being a true Propitiation for the Sins of
the World.

From thy Friends and Well-wishers, John Gratton. Samuel Wattson. Thomas
Lower. James Park. John Bowater. George Witehead. John Vaughton.


AN ANTIDOTE AGAINST THE VENOM OF The Snake in the Grass: BEING A Sober
Caution against the great Malice and gross Abuses of the Book so styled; and
the People called QUAKERS defended from the same.
SEeing the nameless Author gives his Book the Title of The Snake in the Grass;
or, Satan transformed into an Angel of Light; which Character he intends for
the principal Leaders of those People called Quakers. It may be observed (by
the way) what other Characters, Charges and Languages he gives the said People,
and treats them with all in his said Book, viz.

Preface, p. 7, 8, 9, 17. False Prophets, mad Enthusiasm, obstinate Quakers,
their Rage, their Folly, rank wild Blasphemy, proud blasphemous Spirit,
Black-mouthed hellish Venom, Coujurers, Witchcraft and Conjuration; p. 19.
whatever the Power of the Devil may be in such cases, etc. There never were
more visible and dreadful Effects of it, no not in any possessed Men mentioned
in the Gospel, than has been among the Quakers, p. 21. even as declared and
witnessed by themselves, and that not only as to the strange and preternatural
Distortions, Quaking and Shaking of their Bodies, past the Power of any to
counterfeit or to act it by their natural Strength, but what is much more
horrible and exceeding all other Witchcrafts and Possessions of the Devil, that
were ever heard of before; these possessed Quakers do impiously blaspheme and
call themselves Christ; and some of them have imitated his Passion, Death and
Resurrection, madly in themselves.

We may hence observe, First, the Authors most unjust and falsely reflecting
these black Characters and Charges upon the Quakers. Secondly, How he shows
Satan transformed into an Angel of Light: When and where did he ever see or
read of an Angel of Light, thus to appear, like a mad Man, a Witch, a Devil, a
Blasphemer? What horrid Madness, Blasphemy and Self-contradiction, does the
Devil and Malice precipitate, such furious Foul-mouthed persecuting Agents
into, at unawares? Thirdly, But if the Quakers were such Madmen, and possessed
with the Devil as he represents them, how well has the Man spent his time, in
bestowing his Wit, Drollery and Raillery (instead of Compassion) on such
Madmen, whose case (if such) were to be lamented, rather than derided?
Fourthly, For this great Madness and being possessed with the Devil, as it is
cast upon the Quakers. His instance (of John Gilpin in 1653. James Milner and
John Toldervy) p. 22, 23, 24, 30, 34. can only prove himself impertinently
malicious, and can no more affect the People called Quakers, nor be any more
valid Argument to prove them Madmen and Blasphemers, (since they have long
since testified against the madness of those Persons he mentions) than if one
should argue against the Church and Clergy of England, thus, viz. That because
many of their Members have run Mad and been put into Bedlam, therefore the
Church and Clergy of England are all Mad, and must be turned into Bedlam (if
they had one big enough:) And many such other absurd Arguments and Consequences
might be retalliated upon this Snake in the Grass, if from a Particular to a
General, shall be admitted as a sound way of Arguing, which no rational Man
will allow. Fifthly, His Instance (against the Quakers) of James Nayler's
failure, and suffering a few mad Women to sing Hosanna to him. This is as
unjustly as maliciously remembered and cast upon us, seeing that Madness was
condemned and testified against by the People called Quakers. And the Lord, in
mercy, made James Nayler himself sensible of the great Temptation and Cloud, he
was, for a time, fallen under; insomuch, that he not only gave out a public
Testimony of his Condition, and of the Lord's dealing with him, which was in
Judgment and Mercy, and publicly exposed under the Title of James Nayler's
Recantation; but also some are yet alive that were both Eyewitnesses of his
many Tears and deep Humiliation, besides his great suffering in Person by the
then Government, who being restored into his right Understanding and Sense of
the Love and Mercy of God in Christ, sometime after innocently ended his Days
in Peace.

And therefore it shows, the more implacable Malice and horrid Injustice, to
reproach us with any personal failing of his or any other. And not only so, but
to reflect personal Miscarriages upon our Principles: As where he thus unjustly
infers, viz. So very susceptible do the Quakers Principles make Men, of the
wild Impressions of Enthusiasm, p. 35. So that by this Inference, all Gilpins,
Milners and Toldervy's strange Whimsies, lying Imaginations and Madness, are
unjustly and blasphemously fathered upon the Quakers Principles, viz. The Light
within, Revelation, the Infalibility, p. 35. (which we intend of the Holy
Spirit's Teaching) and no other.

6. P. 37. As for Quaking and Trembling so much derided; how proves he that
this proceeds from Delusion and Diabollical Possession, p. 44. and not from the
Word and Power of God, at which many good Men, both of Prophets, Apostles and
Primitive Christians, have trembled? And also by the same Power, both wicked
Men and Devils, have been, and shall be made to Fear, Tremble and Quake.

7. As to such strange, preternatural Distortions he talks of, where did he see
them among the Quakers? We know not; unless some have been taken therewith, in
some Convulsion-Fits; which are common to some Persons among diverse sorts of
People; or, when by the Power of our Lord Jesus Christ, some evil Spirit has
been about to be cast out.

8. And how he can discern and judge all outward Quaking and Trembling, which
he derides, to proceed from a being inwardly possessed with the Devil; and not
from the influence and opperation of the Power of Christ, we cannot understand,
unless contrary to his Opinion against Infalibility, he proves his Judgment and
Discerning Infallible, and that even in the Trial of Spirits; wherein we cannot
esteem him such a spiritual Man of Discerning, as judges all things.

P. 34. Again from his dark Stories of Gilpin, Milner, Toldervy, etc. as in an
high degree possessed with the Devil. He farther infers, That there have not
been among so many of all Mankind such a number (a gross Lie) as of these
Quakers that have run quite Mad, for their Principle is little short of
Madness. The Principles he presently mentions, p. 35. Is that of expecting
Revelations, and of the Light within. But granting that some pretending to
Divine Inspiration of the Holy Spirit, Revelations and Light within, and from
thence Infallibility in Matters of Salvation to proceed, and yet some such have
failed and run into Imagination and Delusion. Is this any good Argument against
the Principle it self? If not, this Opposer's Work is only to rake up and set
forth Personal Failings, which can no ways destroy good Principles, from whence
there have been many Revolters and Backsliders, both in the Days of the
Prophets, Apostles and Ours; and some because when they knew God, glorified him
not as God, became vain in their Imaginations, and their foolish Hearts thereby
darkened; others begun in the Spirit, yet would end the Flesh. But where is his
Catalogue to prove a greater number of Quakers have run quite mad, than among
so many of all Mankind? Let him produce it if he can.

Now it is observable, That our Principle of Divine Inspiration, Light within,
the Gift of the Holy Ghost, the Work and Ministry thereof, are plainly confessed
unto by this Author of The Snake in the Grass; as That the Doctrine of the
Church of England allows the same, namely, as constantly teaching that all
saving Graces are wrought in our Hearts by the Inspiration of the Holy Ghost,
and that this Inspiration is as necessary to our fructifying or bringing forth
good Works, as the Influence of the Sun is to the Earth's bringing ing forth of
her Fruits, p. 46, 47. Further discovering, That they do not only Teach, but
also Pray for, and Sing for God's holy Inspiration of the Holy Ghost, and plead
for the necessity of Divine Inspiration, Light within, etc. from page 46 to
page 53. And that according to their Homilies and Liturgy, p. 54, 55, 56. He
also, instead of confuting the Principle, or proving us all Madmen that profess
Divine Inspiration, tells us, What sort of Enthusiasm or Inspiration is allowed
and owned in the Church; and that it is full as much as any sober Quaker can
mean by the Light within, and that it is made necessary to every good Work. And
we are directed to it, to follow and be guided by it; and are assured, that it
will lead us to all Truth that is requisite and necessary for our eternal
Salvation; it is this that opens the Scriptures to us and our Understandings,
rightly to apprehend the true Sense and Meaning of them, and which inclines our
Will to love, and duly to follow the divine Precepts therein contained. If any
Quaker (as I am confident all that are, in the least, sober-minded) will say,
That this is all they mean by their Light within; then where is the difference?
Why do they break off and separate from our Communion upon the pretense of the
Light within, wherein we agree with them? page 55, 56, 57.

Thus far, his Confession to the Principle, wherein he is more Ingenuous than
in his bitter reproachful Language and foul Raillery against us, which he
somewhat minceth, yet confesses, He is forced to a little Raillery now and
then. Second Part, page 12.

The greater shame for him, thus to manifest himself an open Railer and Reviler
about religious Controversies: But seeing he has so largely confessed and
vindicated the Church of England's allowing Preaching and Praying for the
Inspiration of the Holy Ghost, and agreeing with the Quakers about the Light
within, etc. how trifling and fruitless are his Attempts to vilify and make
them odious? as Madmen, Possessed with the Devil, Enthusiastic, Madness, etc.
from the Personal Miscarriages of some Distracted or Whimsical, or Mad, or
loose extravagant Persons. How many of his own Church have run mad? How many
Debauched and Wicked, both of the Clergy and others? Would he take it well to
have a large Catalogue, or Book, writ thereof, as the Cobbler of Gloucester and
others have done, to show the Contempt of the Clergy, and then upbraid their
whole Communion or Society, yea, and their Principles also, therewith? Surely
no, this he would deem very unjust. Then let him peruse his own Work, and
better consider the Nature and Tendency thereof, together with the bitter
Invectives therein, tending to raise a new Persecution; which shows not a
Christian Spirit or Charity in him or his Abettors, Apostates from us, or
others, whose Help (by diverse of of his silly dirty Stories) he appears to have
had.

A Catalogue of some of the great Mistakes, Abuses and Calumnies, in the Book
sliled, The Snake in the Grass; with brief Reflections thereupon.
THat G. Fox's chief Principle was at first to direct Men to the inward
Anointing, Snake, p. 93, 94.
and that they needed no Man to teach them, but as the Anointing teaches them,
and that God is come to Teach his People himself; but that he would not trust
to this, for that he went about Teaching outwardly, and has erected an outward
Church Discipline and Authority to overruled the Anointing, etc.

They keep up outward Ministry and Preaching, which are more inconsistant with
their Principle of reducing all to the Inward, and waiting for the Lord in
silence within.

Reflection. Here are 3 Falsehoods contained in this Calumnious Charge. As 1.
That G. F. would not trust to this Anointing. 2. Church Discipline to overruled
the same. 3. Keeping up an outward Ministry and Preaching as inconsistant
therewith. These are both false and apparent Perversions, reflecting also upon
the Holy Apostles and their Ministry, preaching and writing Epistles and
Instructions to the Churches, relating to both Church Order and Discipline, and
yet directed and referred them to the same Divine Unction (received from the
Holy One) the Holy Spirit, the Word of Faith and Grace of God within them.
Therefore Ministry and Instructions to good Order and Discipline, were not to
overruled the inward Anointing, but (as proceeding from the same) to help
strengthen and confirm them in it; for if the Doctrine of the Church of England
be so much for the Inspiration of the Holy Ghost, the Light within, etc. as he
confessed, what then is their Ministry and Discipline to overruled the same?
How will he reconcile himself to his condemning us in this Case?

Sn. p. 95, 96. These two Madmen, Fox and Muggleton, both their Inspirations
came from the same Author, the Father of Lies, who in that Hurricane of Schism
and Rebellion, got an Act of Parliament for Tolleration and Liberty of
Conscience to sow his Tares at Noonday.

Ref. The first part is a gross Calumny against G. F. whose divine Inspiration
and found Testimony, given him of God, was evident against Muggleton's dark
Spirit, presumptuous and blasphemious Doctrine 2. The latter part is a bold
Calumny and Reflection upon the Parliament, and Act thereof, for Tolleration
and Liberty of Conscience, as if the Devil, the Father of Lies, did influence
the Parliament to make the said Act, which is a most presumptuous and audacious
Aspersion. We know no other Act of Parliament obtained for Tolleration and
Liberty of Conscience, but the Act of Exemption, made in the First Year of King
William and Queen Mary; and which was made for no such end, as for the Devil to
sow his Tares, but for the Ease and Liberty of tender Consciences, from the
Devil's envious Work of Persecution, God having so ordered it, that the Seed of
Christ's Kingdom, his Word and Gospel, may have Liberty, and be sown the more
plentifully: But it appears our present Liberty is greatly envied, by this
persecuting Author, and such scandalous Libellers.

Sn. p. 104. That one of the Orders given forth by their Yearly Meeting, 1693.
commands, That none shall carry Guns in their Ships*

Ref. This also is untrue: We know no such Commands given forth by our Yearly
Meeting, but only a tender Caution to such that have acted contrary to their
former Principle and Practice, to the injuring of their own Souls, and
endangering their own and other Lives, etc.

As touching some Ship-masters, esteemed Quakers, carrying Guns in their Ships
mentioned in the said Meeting, 1693. our Christian Principle and Innocence is
cleared, in the Epistle, in these Words, viz.

Dear Friends,
YOU very well know our Christian Principle and Profession in this Matter, both
with respect to God and Caesar, and that because we are Subjects of Christ's
Kingdom, which is not of this World, we cannot Fight, John 18. 36. yet being
Subjects of Caesar's Kingdom, we pay our Taxes, Tribute, etc. according to the
Example of Christ and his Holy Apostles relating to Christ's Kingdom and
Caesar's, wherein we are careful not to offend, Mat. 17. 27. and 22. 20, Romans
13. 6, 7. being also very glad and much satisfied in the many Testimonies given
at the Meeting of our Friend's Innocence, quiet and peaceable Behavior, under
the outward Government, as becomes our Christian Principle and Profession.


Sn. p. 115. Whatever a Quaker dictates, if it were to depose the King and set
up their Universal Monarch, and to assert, by Arms, their own Heirship to the
uttermost parts of the Earth, if they should abrogate any or all of our Laws,
or any thing else whatever their Arbitrary Enthusiastical Spirit shall suggest
to them, this must not be looked upon as any thing that is human, but as the
very Words of God, etc.

Ref. These are very bitter, invidious and calumnious Suggestions, and cruel
Jealousies of a high Nature, as if this poor Libeller eagerly thirsted after
our Blood: But the Matters thus suggested are so gross, that we need say little
to them, but commit our innocent Cause to him that judges righteously, and
bless his Name we converse with no such Spirit as would suggest or excite to
any such pernicious, wicked hurtful or treasonable Things or Actions as here
suggested against us, as our peaceable Conversation, ever since we were a
People, has demonstrated.

Sn. p. 122. That in the Answer to F. Bugg's Impeachment, they ( i.e. the
Quakers) would persuade us, That all they have said against the Payment of
Tithes, was only meant by them to the Popish Clergy, but by no means against
the Right of the Church of England to their Tithes, etc.

Ref. This is partially and wrongfully stated. Our Answer to F. Bugg plainly
shows our conscientious Dissatisfaction with Tithes in general, and the forcing
thereof now in this Gospel-day by any Clergy whatsoever, as not consistent with
the practice of Christ's. Ministers or Testimony of diverse Martyrs, who not
only testified against the Popish Clergy forcing the Payment of Tithes, but
also against Tithes (and Temporalities) themselves, and against the secular
Power's imposing or forcing them, Tithes being abolished under the New Covenant
and by Christ's new Law. See William Thorp's Discourse, at large, on this
Subject, 1. vol. of Martyrs, fol. 700, 708. in King Henry IV. his Reign, Old
Impression.

Sn. p. 133. Their Principles destructive to all Government, etc.

Ref. This is a general, very gross and invidious Aspersion. Our Principles are
Christian and peaceable, and our Conversation among Men and toward the Civil
Government, is and has been a manifest Indication thereof, as well as our
public and frequent Testimonies and Prayers to Almighty God for Rulers and
People; and when any of us have testified against the abuse of Government and
corruption of Governors, and against them for the same, this could not be
destructive of any just or good Government.

Sn. Highly asserting Tithe, or the Tenth part to be of divine Right, viz. As
God's Tribute, God's Tithe due to the Evangelical Priesthood, to that Order of
Priesthood after the Order of Melchisedeck, as a Tribute to God, a part of
God's Worship peculiar to God, Tithes of God, and to confirm his Jure Divino
Claim of Tithes, p. 175, 176. That several Kings of England, who had then the
sole Right and Property in all the Lands of England, have anew dedicated by
particular Vows, as Jacob, (Genesis 28. 22.) all the whole Tithes of the Lands of
England to God; and signed Charters and Grants of the same tendered upon their
Knees at the Altar of God, in presence, and with the approbation of the Lords
and Estates of the Land, with heavy Curses and Imprecations upon themselves, or
any of their Successors, who should recall the same or incroach in any part upon
the said Tithe of God, and upon all who should receive such Grants from them or
assist them in such Sacrilege, and the same have been confirmed by several
Acts of Parliament.

And he further adds, That to maintain the Sacrilegious Impropriations which
the Pope had made of the Secular Clergy to indow their Monasteries, which Henry
VIII. instead of restoring, did yet more sacrilegiously impropriate to the
Laity, p. 164, 165, 169, 170, 171, 173, 175, 176, 177, to p. 189.

Ref. Pray observe the nature and import of these Passages, as they are thus
truly collected; how like a dutiful Son of the Mother Church (as that of Rome
is called) this Man looks? How strenuously he argues for the divine Right of
Tithes, and how he would renew the sense of the heavy Curses of Popish Kings
denounced upon themselves or any of their Successors, who should either recall
the same or incroach, in any part, upon the Tithes, and upon all Assisters in
such Sacrilege (as he calls it?) But it seems King Henry VIII. would not be
bound by any of the said Curses, no more than by the Pope's Supremacy. I think
the Man has outdone the Rhemists and other Jesuits and Popish Priests in these
Aggravations, to fasten the said Curses not only on Henry VIII. but upon all
the Impropriators and Receivers of such Grants, as aforesaid; though the
Rhemists and he agree as to Tithes, being Jure Divino, as in their Annotations
on Heb 7. They say, That the Payment of Tithes is a natural Duty that Men owe
to God in all Laws, and to be given to his Priests, in his behalf, for their
Honor and Livelihood; and that Jacob promised or vowed to pay them, Genesis 28.
And that Abraham specially giving them to Melchisedeck, plainly thereby
approves them, or their equivalent to be due to Christ and the Priesthood of
the New Testament, much more than either in the Law of Moses or in the Law of
Nature, and for Tithes due to the Clergy of Christ's Church, etc.

See now how exactly this Churchman and these Rhemists agree in this point of
Tithe. But that the Reformed Protestants, and diverse eminent Protestant
Martyrs, were of the contrary Judgment concerning Tithes; hear First, what Dr.
Fulk says in Answer and Opposition to the Rhemist recited Annotation on Heb 7.
viz. The Payment of Tithes as it was a Ceremonial Duty is abrogated, with other
Ceremonies, by the Death of Christ; but as it is a necessary Maintenance and
Livelihood to them that serve in the Church, it may be retained, or any other
Stipend appointed that may be sufficient for their Maintenance, be it more or
less than the Tenth part. But that there is any sacrificing Priesthood to whom
it is due in the New Testament, the old Payment of Tithes does not prove;
neither did Christ himself, our High Priest, ever make claim unto them; nor his
Apostles the Ministers of the Church; but only a sufficient Living by the
Gospel, to be allowed of their temporal Goods, to whom they ministered spiritual
Goods, 1 Cor. 9. 14. Gal. 6. 6.

From all which it is evident, First, That the Protestants in those Days did not
esteem Tithes of divine Right for Gospel Ministers, but abrogated by the Death
of Christ, but indefinitely allowed a sufficient Maintenance for them, without
restricting it to the Tenth.

Secondly, Diverse eminent Martyrs and others, who were both Persons of Piety
and good Fame, are more full and plain in this Point against Tithes in the
Gospel-day and times; as John Wickliff, William Swinderby, Walter Brute,
William Thorp, the Bohemians, with other Christians mentioned in the Book of
Martyrs, did bear Testimony against Tithes and compelled Maintenance by the
civil Authority. This of their opposing Tithes was made a principal Article
against them by the Popish Bishops and Clergy; as more largely and particularly
appears in the 1st vol. of Martyrs, in the Reigns of Richard II. Henry IV. and
Henry V.

And though with those Christian Martyrs and first reformed Protestants, we are
persuaded, That Jesus Christ by his Suffering and Death has abrogated Tithes,
and the Law that required them according to Heb. 7. and that his Ministry ought
to be free and without any forced Maintenance, yet it is not our Business now
strictly to dispute the Merits of that Case of Tithes, being fully opened by
other Hands; as Fra. Howgill in his Great Case of Tithes, and Tho. Ellwood in
his Foundation of Tithes shaken, and R. Richardson's Testimony against Tithing
among Christians; (with diverse others) to which we refer the Reader.

And to show how much this Adversary resembles a Son of the old pretended
Mother Church, in his Contempt and Scorn against some of the Protestant
Reformers, particularly against William Thorp, p. 169. for esteeming their
Priests (or Gospel Ministers) not to come of the Lineage of Levi, but of Judah;
which can intend no other, but as they come of Christ who came of the Tribe of
Judah, and not of Levi; for this William Thorp is derided, as showing what a
doughty Clerk he was: And with Fulsom Stuff, p. 170. our Adversaries saying,
Who told Thorp, or the Quakers, that our Priests came of the Lineage of Judah?
Are they Jews? What fulsom Stuff is this? (quoth he). No doubt William Thorp
meant the true Priesthood of Christ descended spiritually of his Line, and not
naturally: And does not Jo. Fox call him A valiant Warrier under the triumphant
Banner of Christ; and commend him, as that the Might, Spirit and Grace of God,
to a marvel, appeared in him. But this Popish Agent, ironically renders him a
doughty Clerk, a fulsom Writer. What fulsom, popish Stuff is this?

Sn. p. 194. Traitorous Principles and Actions charged against the Quakers from
1650, to 1660. as also Blasphemies and Treasons, Blasphemers and Traitors, p.
196, 197, 198.

Ref. We need but answer these with Negation and Detestation, as being most
foul Raileries proceeding from a Spirit of Persecution and deadly Malice, which
the righteous Lord will rebuke; but has he not heard of some of the Clergy, who
have lately absolved Persons condemned of High Treason? His quoting Bugg's
Authority for these black Charges, p. 199. shows his partial Credulity in not
taking notice of our Answers to him. As also our Answer to John Pennyman on the
like Passages, Entitled, Christ's Lambs defended from Satan's Rage.

Sn. p. 199. He charge G. Fox and E. Borough, with Traitorous abetting of
Oliver and the Rump.

Ref. This is very harsh and denied.

He forgets how the then Clergy abetted Oliver, and highly applauded him and
his Son Richard, as their Moses and Joshua, and shows as little regard to the
Act of Indemnity in these Recriminations, if they were true.

Sn. Yet in p. 204, 205, 206, 207. 208. he not only gives a Recital of a cruel
and bitter Petition and Charge against diverse of the People called Quakers,
directed To the Right Honorable the Council of State, as they were called by
several of the Priests and others in Lancashire, and printed in 1653. but also
takes it for granted that the Persons charged, were guilty of every part of the
Charge, p. 209.

Observe. Thus he has sided with the Persecutors of those Times, who abetted
and sheltered under that Government, which no doubt he now esteems not Loyal;
and not only so, but he appears very partial and credulous of their most bitter
and malicious Charges, which were then designed to stir up severe Persecution.

Sn. One of the Charges, p. 202, 203, 205, 206. That G. Fox professed and
avowed, That he was equal with God. Another, That he professed himself to be
the Eternal Judge of the World.

Ref. Observe here the Man's partial Credulity and Injustice again, in taking
for granted what persecuting Adversaries have long since unjustly suggested
against a conscientious Sufferer, without hearing his Defense; where the said
G. F. being charged by his Persecutors with professing himself to be equal with
God, positively denies the Charge as not so spoken, as that G. F. was equal
with God; but confessed, That the Father and the Son are one; and that Christ
and the Holy Spirit are equal with God; Readiness Errand, p. 5, 6. And so to
Christ Jesus, both as he was of the Seed of Abraham, and also as he was equal
and one with the Father: And do not these confess both the Humanity and
Divinity of Jesus Christ? Vid. Just Inquiry, p. 12.

Sn. p. 212. That the Quakere take the Name of God and Christ to themselves,
because of God's supposed dwelling in them. And p. 213. Their pretense to
Perfection, equal even to the Perfection of God himself, and that they all
pretend to it.

Ref. We the Quakers (so called) positively deny all such presumption and these
Charges thereof in their several Parts: Pray when and where did ever the
People, called Quakers, call themselves by those Names of God and Christ,
either because of God's Indwelling or for any other cause? We deny the Charge
as both blasphemous and confused: God's indwelling in his People cannot render
them God. And though we do sincerely believe and own a perfection of a
deliverance from Sin, and of Sanctification and Holiness, as obtained and
wrought by Jesus Christ, for and in true Believers in this Life, yet we cannot
pretend to any such equality of Perfection as that of God himself, which in
Wisdom and Power, etc. is infinite; seeing we are Men, and not God; finite
Creatures, and not the Creator. Therefore it is a great and gross Lie to say of
the Quakers, They all pretend to such Perfection and Equality.

As it was also likewise answered in the said Just Inquiry into the Libeller's
Abuse, as follows, p. 12. It Is therefore a gross Slander implied against the
Quakers, that it is their Boasting, Doctrine or Principle, that they, or any of
them, are equal with God, because they partake of his Spirit that raised Jesus
from the Dead (and of the divine Nature and Image) they pretend to no such
Equality or Principle, neither does G. F. but the contrary he denies it of
himself, or any other Creature, as that any Creature should be equal with the
Creator; as in his Great Mystery, fol. 127. and we abhor any such Boasting.

Sn. p. 216, 217. That most of all are they enraged against G. Keith, for
Preaching up the necessity of a Christ without; and that the Light within is
not sufficient to Salvation, without something else; that is, Christ Jesus
without us, suffering and dying outwardly for us.

Ref. 1. The first part is not true: We are not offended at G. K.'s preaching
Christ, or his Suffering and Dying without us, truly considered. But 2. at his
undervaluing the Light within, as not sufficient to Salvation, or not
sufficient without something else; seeing G. K. confesses, That the Light
within, in a true sense, is God and Christ, the eternal and essential Word, as
in his Antichrists and Sadducees, p. 23. Surely Christ within and Christ
without, are not two Christ's; Christ without is not another Christ than Christ
within, though his being without and within are in different manners. By the
Light within being sufficient to Salvation, or to bring Salvation, we mean able
to save, as the ingrafted Word is able to save the Soul, yea, even where the
Kingdom of Heaven is compared to a little Leaven which leavens the whole, it
bespeaks its Virtue and Efficacy, surely then God and Christ, the eternal and
essential Word, is all-sufficient and able to save Man from Sin, Wrath and
Damnation; nevertheless God has respect to Christ Jesus his Mediation,
Suffering and Dying for us, in his so saving us; but that God and Christ the
eternal Word of God within (who cannot be divided) are absolutely sufficient
and able actually to save and deliver Men from Sin and the Wrath to come, (and
so do) ought not to be questioned; we being reconciled by the Death of Christ,
are saved by his Life. The Light and Life of Christ within cannot be without
Christ, no more than the Light of the Sun can be without the Sun, or a Stream
without a Fountain; the Light and Life of Christ within us, has livingly made
us Partakers of the Fruit and Benefit of his Suffering, Death and Resurrection
without us; and as much has been asserted of the Light within, and sufficiently
thereof, by G. K. as any of us, in his former Books. How he is shaken and
varied in this and some other Points, we may refer to his Universal Grace and
Immediate Revelation, and other Books; as also, to the Remarks made on them,
and his latter Books by Tho. Ellwood, John Penington, and the Moderate
Churchman.

Sn. p. 218, 219. That Christ's making an outward atonement and satisfaction
for Sin, by an outward shedding of outward Blood, they ( i. e. the Quakers)
turn all this to a mere Allegory, tending only to an inward Christ, that is,
their Light within, to spiritual Blood shed inwardly in their Hearts.

Ref. 1. We are injuriously and wrongfully accused in this Charge: We do not
turn Christ's outward Suffering, Sacrifice, Blood or Atonement made for Sin
thereby, into a mere Allegory, as if there had been no such thing in reality
both outwardly and literally; this is far remote from our Intentions, thus to
allegorize away all these to the Inward, as if no Christ had outwardly been or
suffered for Mankind; 'twas never our Opinion. 2. Yet deny not but it has been,
and still is our sincere Belief and Persuasion (as well as our Experience in
measure) that all Christ's Sufferings and Sacrifice, his Cross, his Blood and
Water shed without, had a misterious and allegorical Meaning and interpretation
(as well as a literal) in them, who are crucified with him, and really washed
from their Sins in his Blood, and there is his spiritual Blood and Water as
well as the outward; for all that is spoken of the Blood of Christ in
Scripture, is not to be taken only in a literal sense.

Sn. p. 219, 220. That this inward Christ they make to be the Archi-Type of
which that Man Christ Jesus was but the Type, Figure, etc.

Ref. It Is a new Notion imposed upon us, that we make Christ as inward the
Archi-Tipe, chief or principal Type, for Christ who is not divided, is the
substance and end of all Tipes and Figures, and therefore it is not true in it
self, nor of us, That the Man Christ Jesus was but the Type or Figure; for it
has pleased the Father, that all fullness should dwell in him, which Tipes,
Figures and Shadows, are far short of.

Sn. p. 220, 221. That this Doctrine ( which he charges against the Quakers)
makes no more of Christ Jesus than a good Example; as a Man who had a great
measure of the true Christ, and that the Body of that Man Christ Jesus he has
now thrown off, and is no more a Man.

Thus, says he, has the Devil in the Quakers, totally destroyed Christ's
Humanity, as in the Socinians he has taken away his Divinity.

Ref. Here are five notorious Falsehoods contained in this Charge against the
Quakers: In opposition to which we say our Belief and Doctrine is, That Christ
Jesus was and is more than a good Example, he was also a most acceptable
Sacrifice and Savior, in whom we have Life and Salvation, through Faith in
him, his Name and Power. 2. He received the Spirit, not by measure but in
fullness, and that he is the true and very Christ of God. 3. That the Man Christ
Jesus has not thrown off his own particular Body, for it is a most glorious
Body. 4. And Christ himself a most glorious heavenly Man in Soul and Body. 5.
The Devil is a great Enemy to all faithful Quakers, and has no place in them,
by the Power of Christ they have overcome that wicked one, and he cannot
destroy Christ's Humanity or Manhood, it is blasphemous to affirm it; though he
persecute the Seed of the Woman and bruise his Heel, this Seed shall bruise his
Head, and has done it, and will destroy the Devil and his Works, from having
any Power or Dominion, where Christ, the promised Seed, is truly received and
reigns.

Sn. p. 222. That they make themselves equal to Christ Jesus (yea) to be
Christ, preferring of themselves before him, p. 224.

Ref. These gross Lies and blasphemous Calumnies are utterly denied, being also
refuted before: We have abundance of such Stuff reiterated in the windings and
turnings of this Snake in the Grass.

Sn. p. 239. That the Quakers will not allow Christ to be the promised Seed, or
that he was more a Man in the Body of Jesus, than in the Body of any other Man.

Ref. These are gross and notorious Falsehoods still: We ever believed the
promised Messiah, the Christ of God, to be the promised Seed, which by the
Power of God should bruise the Serpent's Head; and that he was true and perfect
Man in the Body which he took upon him (which was the Body of Jesus who was
born of the Virgin Mary) as he was and is a quickening Spirit in other Men,
especially in true Believers.

Sn. p. 239. He confesses the Influence and Inspiration of his blessed Spirit
is the ONLY true saving Light within us, but not the Seed; and Christ himself
(as the Quakers blasphemously dream) only a Ray or Communication of his Light
and Life to us. But p. 242. he speaks of Faith in Christ's outward Blood, by
which ONLY there is Salvation.

Ref. If the only true saving Light within us, be the Inspiratiou of the
blessed Spirit and Communication of the Light and Life of Christ to us as is
granted, though this as within be not Christ in his fullness as in himself, yet
it is as truly the Incorruptible Seed the Word, Christ our Life and Light; as
the Life of Christ is Christ, or as the Spirit of the Lord is the Lord; as
where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty; now the Lord is that Spirit:
It is Christ gives us both Life, Light and Spirit, and Christ is our Life,
Light and Salvation. But do not the Words only Salvation by Christ's outward
Blood, exclude any other means of Salvation? And then how is his Spirit the
only true saving Light within us? Though that Blood of Christ be of true value
and esteem, as part of his Sacrifice and Price, it is his Spirit and Power
which quickens and actually saves the Soul from Sin and Death.

Sn. p. 245. He accuses the Quakers with denying any other God or Christ but
themselves.

Ref. This is one of his most horrid and blasphemous Slanders, and solemnly by
us denied with as utter detestation and abhorrence, as any of the rest of his
most gross and absurd Calumnies.

Sn. p. 251. That they expressly disown any other Christ than what is within
them; and that the Quakers do not believe that Christ has any other Body, or
other Humanity, than that spiritual or allegorical Body which, they say, he has
within them.

Ref. 1. To the first part: We own not two Christ's; the true Christ is but one
Christ, and we own him, as he is both without us and within us; though he is not
wholly contained within us, yet he is truly within us by his Spirit, Light and
Life, and dwelling in our Hearts, by Faith* What other Christ does this Man
own, than him who is in true Believers? 2. The latter part of his Charge is not
true: We believe Christ has his spiritual glorious Body without us, like unto
which we also believe our low Body shall be changed and fashioned.

Sn. p. 254. That the Quakers, by a monstrous sort of Transubstantiation, think
themselves to be the Christ.

Ref. This is a monstrous Falsehood and Forgery still to defame and odifie us,
grounded on diverse other false and partial Stories, and is before, in
substance, answered.

Sn. p. 255. That G. Keith, for his most Christian Doctrine of a Christ without,
was condemned by their last Yearly Meeting.

Re. This is a notoriously false Story again, as the two Accounts given of him,
by two Yearly Meetings, may evince, having no such cause assigned in them, for
our conditionally disowning him, but his unchristian Spirit and Behaviovr, as
an Instrument of divisions and disturbance in the Churches of Christ, whereby
he has cut himself off, unless he repent.

Sn. p. 262. Their spiriting away the Letter of the promised Seed, the Humanity
of Christ, etc.

Re. This Charge, with all the hard Consequences depending thereupon against
us, are sincerely and utterly denied by us: As by the Letter of the promised
Seed, he means the Scripture-History of the Man Christ; where proves he that we
spirit this away? Our owning Christ in Spirit and as a quickening Spirit in us,
was never intended, as we know, to deny his real Manhood, Mediation or
Intercession without us, no more than the Apostle did. See 1 Cor. 15. 45, 47.
where the second Man, the Lord from Heaven, is also called a quickening Spirit.

Sn. p. 263. He charges them with running into this Excess, of throwing off the
Humanity of Christ, abusing the Scriptures by the contemptible Names of Beastly
Ware, Dust, Death, etc. and calling the Holy Scriptures by the contemptible
Names of Dust and Beastly Ware, p. 267.

Re. These are still old repeated, shameful Calumnies against us. The first
part is sufficiently answered before, and in many other Books, for our
sincerely and plainly owning the blessed and most-glorious Man, Christ Jesus,
according to plain Scripture. The latter part is some of F. Bugg's calumnious
Abuses and Perversions, and clearly detected and refuted, in several Answers to
his scurrilous Pamphlets; and his Authority will go but a little way, what
Credit soever it is of with this obscure Adversary. It Is far remote from us to
own any such contemptible Names, as to call the Holy Scriptures Beastly Ware,
etc. Though, perhaps, making a Trade upon Scripture, or Preaching for Hire or
Money, has been so called by some or other.

Sn. p. 268. That it is plain they never gave the Scriptures a good Word, but
merely for popularity, when forced to it.

Re. He is a very unrighteous and false Judge in this also; both our
Consciences in the sight of God, and many of our Writings also, testify the
contrary; that freely and without force, for the sake of that divine
Inspiration from whence the Holy Scriptures proceeded; and those blessed and
holy Doctrins and Truths, contained in them, they are highly owned and esteemed
by us.

Sn. p. 285. Judge whether these be sound principled Men, that can turn,
conform and transform to every change according to the Times, whether these be
fit Men to teach People?

Re. These are still deceitful and envious Suggestions: Our manifold Sufferings
in our Persons and Estates, for Consciencesake, by Persecutions (many whereof
being the Temporizers of the Clergy) do manifest the contrary to what is here
suggested against us, that we have not turned, changed nor conformed according
to the Times, in point of Worship, Principle, Faith or Discipline; for could we
have so done, we might have escaped many deep Sufferings and great Losses which
we have undergone, and then have been owned by such temporizing and persecuting
Priests as now reproach us, when they cannot otherwise persecute us as formerly.

Sn. p. 314. The Lord help them, and hear our Prayers for them, since they will
not pray for themselves, etc.

Re. We have no reason to believe that this Person can pray sincerely for us,
seeing he is so full of Wrath and Envy that he notoriously belies us in his
Prayer, in saying, That they (i. e. the Quakers) will not pray for themselves.
He seemingly prays, but rails and reviles as it were with one Breath, both next
before and after his Prayer.

Sn. p. 319. That thus the Quakers say, That he (Christ) dwelt only in the Body
of that Man Jesus, as in a Vail, but took not that Body into his own Person, so
as to become Hypostatically united to it.

Re. We are to seek herein, as not knowing where the Quakers say these things
of Christ and his Body (which he took and dwelt in) as if he took it not into
his own Person, so as to be really or substantially united to it; we never
understood that it did not properly belong to himself, but to some other
Person. The Objection herein against us is not only some Perversion, but
frivilous and impertinent: Though his Flesh is called the Vail, yet 'twas that he
owned as his own Body, being also called the Body of Jesus, which was not a
fantastical but a real Body; and he who is the entire Christ, the Man Jesus, is
not divided in Body or Spirit. Nevertheless Christ the eternal Son of God was
(as to his divine Nature and spiritual Being) as the spiritual Rock, before he
took on him that Body that was prepared for him.

Sn. p. 320. That the Quakers most expressly make Christ's outward Blood the
Type and Figure of inward Blood, shed spiritually in their Hearts.

Re. We know not what Author he has for this Charge. However, the Quakers
really own Christ's outward Blood as a part of his precious and acceptable
Sacrifice; and we deny not but that Blood of his, as well as the Water that
came out of his Side with it, had an allegorical and misterious signification
(as well as an outward and literal) ev^^ of the spiritual Blood and Water of
Life, which Christ, our High Priest, sprinkleth, and really washes our Hearts
and Consciences withal; which we hope no sensible Soul will say is an outward
or literal Sprinkling or Washing, but an Inward and Spiritual.

Sn. ibid. That the Quakers make Christ without but the History, and the Light
within the Mystery or Substance, which the Christ without, as a History or
Shadow of it, only pointed.

Re. The Quakers do not so make Christ; they make him no otherwise than the
Father has appointed and made him to be. He is more than either the History or
Shadow of the Light within; he, as in himself, is the substance of all Shadows,
and fullness of Light and Life, from whom we have received both Spirit, Light
and Life. Pray how proves he that the Quakers call Christ without, but the
History or Shadow of the Light within? We want proof of this Point.

Sn. p. 321. That this the Quakers have done, viz. set up other Scriptures
against those received by the Church, beyond any that ever went before them.

Re. We positively deny this Charge. What other Scripture have they so set up
against those? Let Us have plain Proof, for we are wholly ignorant of any such
thing.

Sn. p. 322. That none ever have so contemned and vilified the Holy Scriptures,
as they have done.

Re. This is still maliciously to reproach and odifie us, with the same old,
reiterated Calumny. We know none that esteem and own the Holy Scriptures more
than we, both in Faith and Practice, by the assistance of the Holy Spirit, from
whence they came.

Sn. p. 323. That a Man bringing a Bible into the Quaker's Meeting House in
Grace Church Street, and reading part of a Chapter, the 14th of St. Luke; it
being the Bible so moved their Indignation, that one of the chief of them
snatched the Bible out of his Hand, and thrust him along the Gallery down
several Steps.

Re. We know no such Indignation or Action shown, by any of us, against the
Bible, nor against any Person because thereof, neither do we believe it; let
the Author prove it if he can. We disown any such Indignation, either against
the Bible or any Person, merely because thereof: Possibly some public
Disturber might, by some or other present, be gently turned out of Doors; not
because of the Bible, but because of some offensive, turbulent Behavior.

Sn. p. 325. That upon pretense of the Light within, the Devil, the grand
Deceiver, drew them away from reading of the Scriptures, etc. discovers their
preference of their own Writings to the Holy Striptures.

Re. We deny both these, as utterly false, scandalous and relative to many more
Lies of the same kind in this Point.

Sn. p. 327, 328. That they give all the threatening Discouragements that can
be, to deter any from reading of them.

Re. This is as gross and notorious a Falsehood as the rest.

Sn. p. 330. I can ( says the Opposer) name those that now stand high among
them, who did, before many Witnesses of the principal Quakers, not stick to
say, That Paul was dark and ignorant, and that they saw beyond him.

Re. We know none, either High or Low, among us, that ever so said of Paul;
therefore let him produce his many Witnesses to prove who those were that so
said, that Paul was dark, etc. or otherwise for ever be ashamed of such odious
Defamations.

Sn. p. 335. That Simon Magus was the Father of the Quakers, Socinians, and all
the rest of the Anti trinitarian Heretics.

Re. A gross Calumny against the Quakers, rendering them a Sorcerer's Children.
But they deny both Simon Magus and all Sorcerers, and the Devil the Father of
Lies, and all such as would persuade People to buy the Gift of God (the Gospel)
for Money. The Quakers are as opposite to such Simony, as Light is to Darkness.

Sn. p. 338. That E. Borough, page 47. determines clearly, That the Scriptures
are not now of any Authority at all to us at this Day.

Re. He perverts E. B.'s Words: We find not such a determination of his; but
where he speaks of that not being a Command from God to me, which he commands
to another; he intends this of special Commands that were to some, as to
Baptize and Preach the Gospel, as he immediately explains it, and not of
general Commands of Duty incumbent upon all, nor against the Authority of the
Scriptures; it being the Holy Spirit that makes them authoritative and binding,
and enables Men to live accordingly who are led by the same Spirit.

Sn. p. 342. That G. Whitehead in his serious Apology, p. 49. prefers not only
their Writings, but their Ex tempore Preachments, and even all whatsoever they
speak, upon any Account, to the Holy Scriptures themselves.

Re. He very perversely wrongs G. Whitehead in all these Expressions; for
there is not a word of preferring our Writings to the Holy Scriptures, much less
of all whatsoever we speak thereto; but a preferring the Holy Spirit and its
immediate Teaching in Man to the Letter of Scripture, and preaching in the true
sense of the Spirit with divine Authority (according as Christ did) to the bare
reading the Letter as the Pharisees did; which was not at all to lessen the
Authority of Holy Scripture.

Sn. p. 343. To prove gross Contempts of Scripture daily found among them ( i.
e. the Quakers) he gives us another particular Instance of a Quaker-Servant
that took the Bible, and in the open Day publicly burnt it against the Church
in Bread-street, to show her Zeal.

Re. Upon a late Enquiry we understand, That there was such a Servant-Maid, who
under some Discomposure and Temptation, attempted such an evil and mad Action;
but was severely rebuked and testified against by our Friends who came to
understand that Attempt or Action, which we utterly abhor, and therefore not
justly chargeable upon us as a People, any more than all the mad Actions of the
People in Bedlam, who belong to the Church of England. Wherefore the great Envy
and Injustice of this Defamer is very remarkable in this Passage, as it is
extended against the Quakers, to prove gross Contempts of Scripture daily found
among them; which is as bad as to say, They daily burn their Bibles. Oh sad and
sordid Stuff!

Sn. p. 346. I assure thee, Reader, that there is no mixture of any personal
Prejudice in this Undertaking; for I do freely own, that I have a real Kindness
and good Wishes for every one of the Quakers, that I have hitherto been
acquainted with, and I never received any sort of Disobligation from any of
them in my whole Life.

Re. 1. We have no reason to believe this Person has no personal Prejudice in
this his reproachful Undertaking, being against a whole People, where every
Person of their Society is concerned, and shamefully defamed by him, under as
gross Terms and Characters as the Devil and Malice could invent, and produce,
through a poor dissembling Hypocrite, as thus pretends such real Kindness and
good Wishes for every one the Quakers of his Acquaintance, while at the same
time he is endeavoring to murder their Reputations, both as Men and
Christians. 2. And yet he has received no sort of Wrong from any of them, to
disoblige him, in his whole Life: More shame for him then, thus sordidly to
abuse the whole People as he has done.

Sn. p. 348. As to the Nature of Christ, they can subscribe the whole Creed,
and yet not mean one word of it, of a personal Christ existing now in Heaven in
his own true human Nature, without all other Men, or that he is now any
otherwise a Man than as existing in his Saints: But that they mean ALL they say
of their own Light within, ONLY which they call a spiritual Christ, and
shedding spiritual Blood, etc. within them.

Re. Here are several Things very perversely and falsely insinuated in these
Passages. 1. As if we did not believe the Man Christ Jesus to be now in Heaven
without us (as well as spiritually within us) which is not true. 2. As if we
did not own Christ Jesus to be entire and perfect Man in himself, or in his own
proper Being or Existence without us, as well as he is by his Spirit in us)
which also is not true, for we really own him in both. And though Christ, being
the spiritual Rock, and as he is the Word of God, the immortal Seed and a
quickening Spirit, he is in us, and livingly felt and known in all true
Believers, yet not to lessen his entire Existence, or limit him the Holy One,
as if he were no where or otherwise in Being than within us. Such limitation we
disown, as well as wholly to exclude Christ out of his Saints, as some have
done under those unscriptural Expressions of a personal Christ existing in
Heaven, wholly without us; which Terms some of us have questioned chiefly
because imposed by some to oppose the Light, Life and Spirit of Christ within,
whereby we can only truly know the Lord Jesus Christ, to our eternal Salvation
and Peace. 3. That Christ is truly spiritual and glorious, we confess and shall
never deny; and that he has spiritual Blood too, spiritual Water, Wine and
spiritual Drink, to sanctify, refresh and comfort our Souls, we must confess
as that we daily experience; as well as he had natural and outward Blood to
offer and shed on the Cross for the sins of the World.

Sn. p. 350. That the Quakers general Answer to the seven Queries of the 15th
of May, 1695. was a Trick and Deceit of theirs, to hide and cover their
monstrous Heresies.

Re. This is a very severe and high Charge, (especially from one pretending
real Kindness for us) and as false as any of the rest of his Railery against
us. But what Proof is offered of these monstrous Heresies, or covering them?
viz.

Sn. They tell of Christ born of the Virgin Mary, who suffered under Pontius
Pilate, etc. but they keep off the whole stress of the Queries, viz. Whether
they believe in such a Christ, as without them? And that he is now this day a
Man without all other Men? No, not a word of this; this pinches too close: And
I think this a full Confession of their Heresy.

Re. Our Adversary appears very much out here: For suppose we did not answer
expressly in all the Terms of the said Queries, being indirect and confusedly
stated, seeing we gave a scriptural, entire substantial and comprehensive
Answer (which he is not able to confute): This could not amount to any
confession of Heresy on our parts, neither does his thinking so prove any such
thing. He judges with very dark and evil Thoughts in this Matter. Where did we
ever say, That Christ being born of the Virgin Mary, and suffering under
Pilate, were not without us? Or, that Christ is not a Man, without all other
Men, as well as spiritually in them? We are to seek for such a Confession by
us, for we know none such; but the contrary, we are bound to believe in Christ
entirely in all respects as he is; both as he is within us, and as he is
without us; both as he is God, and as he is Man, according to Holy
Scripture-Testimony of him; and it is not uncharitable or envious thinking the
contrary of us, that can be any valid Argument to convict us to the contrary,
or of any Heresies whatsoever.

Sn. p. 351. Out of some of their ( i. e. the Quakers) Books, George Keith has
collected their true and genuine Answers to each of the said Queries, etc.
under this HOLY Title, Gross Error and Hypocrisy detected, etc.

Re. The first part is false: For G. K. did partially and perversely collect
diverse Passages, which could be no proper nor direct Answers to those Queries,
nor so intended, nor by us adapted to any such Queries; therefore the greater
Abuse in him, to collect and place them for Answers thereto. 2. His Title and
Charge of Gross Error and Hypocrisy, is blasphemously termed HOLY, for it is
altogether Unholy, as well as Malicious, and G. Keith is accountable to the
just God for scandalizing and defaming us, not only with Gross Error, but
Hypocrisy too. The first intends those Books of ours, quoted by him; in all
which there is Matter sufficient to clear us from his Aspersions, as Thomas
Ellwood (and John Pennington also) have well observed, in diverse Answers to
him, together with G. Keith's own former Vindications of us (as a People) and
our Principles.

The latter ( i. e. Hypocrisy) we may suppose must intend our Answer given to
the said 7 Queries; wherein (as in diverse other things) G. K. has foully
belied us, contrary to our own Consciences, which are clear in the sight ^f God
from Hypocrisy in this Matter, as well as in other things: And seeing G. K.'s
Authority seems to be of some value with the obscure Author of The Snake in the
Grass, he and his Brethren (of the Church of England) may take G. K. for their
Champion, and see what they can make of him, for he shows* himself now no
Quaker, but more near to them; and where he will yet center or settle, in what
Society or Communion, is a great Question. Or rather whether he does not aim at
setting up for himself as Sect-master, if he can draw some sort of People to
admire him in his Notions and reproaching the Quakers (contrary to his former
manifold Vindications of them and their Principles) after above 30 Years
Conversation and kind Treatment among them.

The Second Part.
Here follows a Catalogue of some of the great Mistakes, notorious Abuses and
Calumnies, in the Second Part of the said Book, styled, The Snake in the Grass;
after the Preface, which is bigger than the Book it self.
THE Controversy with the Quaker-Dissenters has not been pursued by the Church
of England, Sn. p. 1. In his Sect. 1.
with the like Zeal and Pains as those against the Presbyterians, Independents,
and other Dissenters, because the Quakers were not so considerable either for
their Learning, or for their Influence upon the public Revolutions, which the
others caused both in Church and State. But their numbers (whether increased by
their being so neglected) are now really formidable, I mean for the many Souls
seduced by them: they not only swarm over these Nations, but they stock our
Plantations abroad.

Re. Though the first part of this Complaint carries no small Reflection upon the
Presbyterians and Independents, etc. rendering them greatly obnoxious in the Eye
of the Government, as not only formidable but dangerous (which is most proper
for them to answer) it is not truly stated as to the Quakers: For the Church of
England, in the two late King's Reigns, has pursued them with more Zeal and
Pains than any other Dissenters, both to stop their Growth and to root them out
also; though not by rationally controverting Matters in difference, but by such
extreme and severe Persecutions, as hard Imprisonments, Banishments, Spoil of
Goods, etc. as no other People of Dissenters have so generally suffered, nor to
such a degree, because they did not stand in a public Testimony, in the Heat
of the Day, as the People called Quakers have. So that it is not through the
said Churches neglect, or want of taking Pains to pursue the Quakers, that they
are so multiplied and increased; but rather, as the first and chief cause of
their Increase was God's Power and divine Providence.

A secondary Cause was their great Oppressions and Persecutions, of which
Israel's Oppression and Increase, when in Egypt, in some sense and degree was
figurative, or resembling (even of the true Churches Sufferings) when the more
they were oppressed, the more they multiplied and grew.

Sn. p. 4. I find them, ( scoffingly telling of the Rabbis of the Quakers) to
inherit the Subtilty, as well as Heresy, of the Arians and Socinians, who were
the most subtle and hardest to be detected of any of the Christian Heretics;
and the Quakers do defend themselves with the same distinctions, and even add
to their Arts.

Re. This Adversary is very much out, and maliciously calumnious in this his
charging the Heresy of the Arians, as well as Socinians, upon the Ministers
among the Quakers: For what was the Heresy of Arius? Was it not that he held
That the Son of God had his beginning of nothing? That there was a time when he
was not; That he had a beginning of Essence; That he had this Essence of
nothing; That the Son of God was of free Will inclined to Virtue and Vice; That
he was a Creature, and made neither like unto the Father in Substance, neither
the true Word of the Father by Nature, neither his true Wisdom; and that the
Word of God was not from Everlasting, etc. These Heresies were charged upon
Arius and his Accomplices, in the Sy^odical Epistle of the Council of Nice and
Bishop of Alexandria, lib. 1. cap. 3. Socr. Scol. p. 215, 216. and p. 225. chapter
6.

Now we challenge this obscure Adversary to prove, where ever the Quakers, or
their Ministers, held these blasphemous and atheistical Notions? Nay, it is
manifest they hold the quite contrary both to Arius and Socinus, for the
Divinity of the Son of God, the Eternal Word, as many of their Writings
testify; and therefore he is a gross Liar who charges us with them; and highly
guilty of Folly and Self-contradiction also, in rendering such mad Folks (as he
deems us) so very subtle in Distinctions and Arts.

Sn. p. 5. Many of them have really gone off from the height of Blasphemy and
Madness which was professed among them at their first setting up, in the Year,
1650. and so continued till after the Year of the Restoration, Anno 1660.

Re. We utterly deny this Charge again as a foul Scandal, That many of us
professed the height of Blasphemy and Madness, or that any in Society with us
have so done. The Man shamefully abuses the Readers, by imposing such lying,
defaming Stories upon them.

Sn. p. 10, 11. Diverse Comparisons made between L. Muggleton and the Quakers,
as denying all Church Authority, making a dead Letter of the Holy Scriptures,
and resolving all into their own private Spirit, etc. That these are
Twin-Enthusiasts, both born in the Year, 1650.

Re. His Comparisons herein are unjust, and Accusations false. 1. We never
owned nor had Society with Muggleton, but always bore our Testimony against his
dark, blasphemous Conceits.

2. The spiritual Authority of the true Church, we always own and esteem.

3. The Holy Scriptures ( i. e. the Holy Doctrine of the Gospel) we do not make
nor call a dead Letter. We distinguish between the dead Letter and the living
Doctrine; and follow not our private Spirits for the understanding thereof, but
the Spirit of God, the Inspiration of the Almighty, which gives the true
understanding.

Sn. p. 12. I desire, before I go farther, to obviate a Prejudice which some
Readers may take as a little Railery, I am forced to use now and then, which
they may think not becoming the Subject in Hand.

Re. His said Book of Four Shillings Price, has more than a little Railery
in it; for it is stuffed with abundance of as shameful Railery, Lies and Slanders,
as ever we met withal: But who, or what has forced him to be such a Railer? Not
the Spirit of Christ, not a Christian Spirit to be sure: If he had apprehended
us such mad Men and silly ridiculous Fools, as he has represented us, he should
rather pity us, than bend his Wits to rail and scoff at us.

Sn. p. 13. Intending chiefly to insist upon some of their more material and
monstrous Heresies; ( thus against the Quakers.)

Re. This Charge looks big, and seems to make a great Noise; but as it is
levelled against us in general, it is as false as the rest. As concerning the
Government his Authority is as invalid; which is, he only refers us to the
Quakers Unmasked, printed 1691. What great Authority is this? but one of F.
Bugg's abusive Pamphlets, which is fully answered, and his Abuses detected over
and over; which this partial Adversary takes no notice of.

That some of these called Quakers, were at first Commonwealth's Men, or for a
Commonwealth, and afterward for a Monarchy, when it pleased God by his
overruling Power and Providence to cause such alterations. We see no monstrous
Heresy herein, any more than was in Samuel. See 1 Samuel 8. 5, 6. chapter 10. 1.

That the Quakers are against their being concerned in Fighting, and destroying
Men's Lives; as believing, that it is not in Christ's mediatory Kingdoms; and
yet grant, that Wars and Fighting are a Judgment from God in the Kingdom of
this World. What Heresy or Fallibility is in this, pray?

This is the true state of the Difference, however aggravated and perverted by
this Adversary and his Author.

Sn. Sect. 3. p. 17, 18. Anno 1650 and 1654. Then it was that Rome was reaping
a plentiful Harvest, which they had long been sowing, by setting up, in that
universal Toleration, multitudes of various Sects, on purpose to divide, and so
confound their only substantial Adversary the Church of England. They dressed
Enthusiasm in several Shapes and Forms of Presbyter, Anabaptist, Independent,
Quaker, Muggleton, and along, etc. which differ only in degrees.

Re. Here the Snake puts his Sting out against all Protestant-Dissenters; and,
as greatly envying their Liberties, makes a very ill Construction of their
former Toleration: And no doubt their present Liberty does as ill please him.
Ishmael like his Hand is against every Man, and no sort of Dissenters (how
conscientious soever) can escape his Blow or Push: He makes Rome the Author,
Patron and Planter of them all, both Presbyter, Anabaptist, Independent,
Quakers, etc. how plainly soever they have approved themselves Protestants,
averse to Popery, and as Dissenting-Protestants are tolerated; it appears how
greatly he envies their Liberties, and is displeased with the Government for
granting the same. Oh rare Son of the Church! Will nothing satisfy this
Incendiary, but Persecution and Ruin to Dissenting-Protestants? May not such
his Work be very grateful to the Popish Interest? What a cordial Friend then
does he show himself to the Protestants?

Sn. p. 19. This Doctrine of Enthusiasm came chiefly from the Church of Rome.
Labadee, a Jesuit, set it up in Holland; and Robert Barclay the Quaker, was
tinctured in his younger Years, in the Scotch Convent at Paris; and John
Vaughton was a Roman Catholic, who is now a great Preacher among the Quakers
in London; and ( he adds in his Errata) William Southby, a Preacher now among
them in Pensilvania.

Re. These this obscure Accuser brings as Instances to make good the Title of
this Third Section, which is, That the Popish Emissaries first set up Quakerism
in England; which is an old lying Story, and his Instances as impertinent. And
1st, We deny that any Jesuit set it up in Holland, and are persuaded many of
our Friends there can testify the contrary. 2. Whatever the Educations of the
said R. B. and J. V. were in their Youth, as to Religion, they were none of the
first Promoters of Quakerism (as he calls it) in England, by many Years. 3. And
suppose the One was tinctured, and the other was a Roman Catholic, this makes
for us; that was not since they were Quakers, but before they turned Quakers;
and then when they did, they turned from Papists and Popery in Testimony
against it, and against human Traditions and Superstitions, and for the Holy
Spirit's Teaching and Worship of God in Spirit and Truth.

Sn. p. 20. The Quaker-Infallibility was contrived on purpose to bring Men back
to the Infallibility of the Church of Rome, by these Steps. First, the
Infallibility was placed by G. Fox and all the Primitive Quakers, in every
single Quaker.

Re. These are envious and false Aspersions, to render us infamous, obnoxious
and offensive. 1. We positively deny any such Contrivance, Design or Purpose.
2. We deny that G. F. and all the Primitive Quakers, place Infallibility in a
single Person, like Papists, or in every single Quaker without distinction, but
in the Spirit of Truth, which assures us in Matters of Faith and Salvation. The
Man often sillily scoffs at the Quaker's Infallibility, but does not truly
state their Principle in that Case.

Sn. p. 38. in Sect 5. They (i. e. the Quakers) damn all the World to Hell; all
since the days of the Apostles, but themselves.

Re. This is a great Untruth: We damn none to Hell; it is Men's own Wickedness
(in hating the Light) which carries them to Hell. We believe there were many
good Men, and saved since the Apostles days.

Sn. p. 40. They pretend to a Perfection even equal with God.

Re. We pretend so of Christ, not of our selves: We desire we may always be
kept truly Humble and in true Fear, out of all Boasting and high Thoughts of
our selves, that Christ may be magnified in us.

Sn. p. 41, 42. in Sect. 5. They give to themselves, and to one another, the
most peculiar Titles of Christ; as that of The Branch, and the Star, and the
Son of God, which are attributed to George Fox, and which he takes to himself;
quoting New Rome Arraigned, p. 33, 34. and The Quakers Unmasked, and New Rome
Unmasked, referring the Reader to those Books of F. Bugg 's, which he has
quoted upon the Margin, as he says, p. 48.

Re. These are F. Bugg's notorious refuted Lies, which this Adversary is so
shamefully credulous of: We positively deny giving those peculiar Titles of
Christ to our selves, or to one another; and Bugg has been charged therewith,
and cannot prove them. G. Fox is not so much as mentioned in that Epistle of E.
Buroughs, out of which F. Bugg takes these Titles, the Branch, the Star, etc.
which are peculiar to Christ.

Sn. p. 51, 53. Sect 6. That G. F.'s Great Mystery, p. 282. endeavors to
prove, That the Quakers are perfect as God, not only in quality, but in
equality, from Christ's words, Be ye perfect, even as your heavenly Father is
perfect.

Re. These are not G. F.'s Words of the Quakers that they are so; his Words are
here perverted: He refers to Christ's Words and the Apostles, and to that which
is of God and from him, and mentions not the Quakers in the place.

Sn. p. 52. Great Mystery, p. 248. again quoted, viz. All THAT have the Son and
the Holy Ghost, have THAT which is equal in Power and Glory with the Father;
and this all the Quakers say they have.

Re. That the Son and Holy Ghost are equal in Power with the Father, and that
the same Spirit that raised Jesus from the Dead dwells in the Saints, we see
not this to be such a monstrous Heresy. Are not the Son and Holy Ghost of the
same Substance with the Father? And have not the Assembly at Westminster,
confessed as much as G. F. says? Yet the Quakers do not say they have the Holy
Ghost in fullness, but in measure.

Sn. p. 53, 54, 55. Sect. 7. Of the Quakers making their Soul of the same
Person and Substance with God; quoting Great Mist. p. 247. and p. 90, 91. and
273. Of Christ's dwelling in the Saints; Of that which came out from the
Creator; Of the Soul that came out of him, etc.

Re. 1. The Case herein is both mis-understood and misrepresented against the
Quakers: They do not so make their Souls of the same Person and Substance with
God. I know no such Expressions used by the Quakers.

2. There Is a misunderstanding also of G. F. in the Case about his
questioning, Is not that a part of God which came out from God, and of his
Being? as God breathed into Man the Breath of Life, and he ( i. e. Man) became
a living Soul; to which Words G. F. expressly refers. We always understood him
to intend, That this Breath of Life, which made Man a living Soul, was that
divine Breath, or Spirit of Life, which came out from God and of his own Being;
for otherwise how should Man thereby become a living Soul? Which clearly
distinguishes the Creature Man to be that living Soul, that was so made by
that Spirit, Breath and Life which proceeded from his Creator, and which some
term the Soul of the Soul. So that the Soul of Man, abstractly considered, was
as truly created as Man himself; though that divine Inspiration, or Breath of
Life, whereby the Soul had its Being, Life and Immortality, be Increated and of
God himself; for we ever distinguished between the Soul of Man, and that which
saves it.

Note, That his 2d, 4th, 8th and 9th Sections are not particularly pointed at,
being in Substance comprehensively and sufficiently answered in diverse Answers
to the rest, and in our Just Enquiry the same things being often repeated in
his Book; as about Carnal Weapons; Damning all the World; the Soul; and
Immediate Revelation.

Sn. p. 69. Sect. 10. As they place Infallibility in every single Quaker, so
they confine it not to Matters of Faith, but extend it to all Persons and
Things, to know all Men's Hearts and all Things in the World by their inward
Light without, being told by any.

Re. Here Is a great Mistake in these Accusations. 1. Such a personal
Infallibility as to know all Persons, States and Things in the World, we
pretend not to; for that were for Man to pretend Omnisciency, which is only
proper to Almighty God: The Man's egregiously out in confounding Infallibility
with Omnisciency. The Infallibility or Certainty owned by us, originally is in
the Spirit and Light of Truth given by Christ Jesus, and not consisting in
Persons, their humane or natural Parts; yet we must confess, to the Glory of
God, that the Spirit of Truth, does infallibly teach and lead them into all
Truth, who truly obey it, and gives them certain knowledge in Matters of Faith
and Salvation.

Sn. p. 81. They turn and wind this Infallibility of theirs at such a rate,
that no Man can (I am sure I cannot) know what they mean by it.

Re. Where Is then the Blasphemy? Here Is manifest Contradiction to what he has
said before, about extending the Quaker's Infallibility to all Persons and
Things, and to know all Men's Hearts and all things in the World, etc. which is
to pretend to Omnisciency, which is only proper to God who only is Omniscient.
Silence had better become this occult Adversary's Ignorance, than to reproach
or vilify us about what he knows not.

Sn p. 83, 84. The Strength which God has given to our Bodies, is as sufficient
to climb up to the Skies, as the Wisdom or Light which he has given to our
Souls was sufficient, of it self, to have found out the redemption of lost Man,
by the Incarnation and Satisfaction of Christ to God's Justice for our Sins; or
if found out, to have paid that Price, and to have accomplished that whole
wonderful Economy of our Salvation by our own Abilities; and then he goes on
thus confusedly) so very insufficient is the Light within us, even though
followed to the utmost by its own Strength to carry us to Heaven.

Re. This is to deny any divine Wisdom, Light, Word or Power to be given to our
Souls, as if they could live and immortally subsist without the divine Logos,
or Word in them, which in Scripture is called, The Ingrafted Word which is able
to save the Soul, and consequently to carry us to Heaven; it is therefore great
Darkness to oppose the sufficiency of this Light, this Word or Christ within,
or to oppose his Incarnation, Sufferings, Satisfaction, or our Redemption
obtained by him, as our Mediator, to this his own inward Light, Power and
Appearance; for as truly as Christ Jesus, as our blessed Mediator, has obtained
eternal Redemption and Salvation for us, so truly does Christ Jesus, by his
Light, Life and Power, make us Partakers of that Redemption and Salvation, and
to know the Economy, Law or Rule of his House and Family, as we obey him
therein, that we being reconciled by his Death might be saved by his Life. The
divine Logos, the Light or Spirit of Christ, is as able now to discover what
Christ has done and suffered for our Redemption, as it was to show the
Prophets his Sufferings, and the Glory that should follow.

Sn. p. 84. And therefore the Quakers preaching up the sufficiency of the Light
within (as all of them but the Separatists do) is not only highly derogatory to
the satisfaction paid by Christ for our Sins, but it is blasphemous, in
ascribing to Our Selves a Power sufficient to work out our own Salvation.

Re. There are two gross Mistakes in these Passages. 1. The sufficiency we
ascribe to Christ, his Light and Life within, is not any derogation to his
Satisfaction, Atonement or Ransom given and paid by him (without us) for Sins
and Sinners, no more than Christ's own exhorting Men To believe in the Light,
that they might become Children of the Light; or the Apostle's, to a receiving
the ingrafted Word which was able to save the Souls, could be derogatory to his
blessed intention and end in his Suffering and Sacrifice for Mankind; but the
contrary, Christ by his Light and Life within leads to know and experience the
same, i. e. our effectual Cleansing and actual Deliverance from Sin and Satan,
etc. which he has obtained for us and for Mankind, by his Sufferings and
Mediation. 2. We never ascribed to our selves a Power sufficient to work out
our own Salvation, that is notoriously known to be expressly contrary to our
professed Principle: We ascribe our sufficiency to be in Christ by his own
Power, Grace and Light in us to work out our Salvation, it being by Grace,
through Faith in Christ, that we are saved, not of our selves; it is the Gift of
God, and without him we can do nothing. And this Heavenly Treasure, though we
have it in our earthen Vessels, the excellency of the Power is of God and not
of us.

After his many Scoffs at our Doctrine of Infallibility, which he knows not what
to make of, he has at length stumbl'd upon an Instance of those he esteems will
be found to have the best Title to it, p. 85. where it is written, Prove. 16.
10. A divine Sentence is in the Lips of the King, and his Mouth transgresses
not in Judgment. We would ask him, If none are endued with a divine Sentence
and unerring Judgment but Kings? Or, if none are Saints and Partakers of the
Spirit of Truth or divine Wisdom, but Kings? What kind of Kings he means that
are thus infallible, he does not distinguish; sure they must be just and good
Kings endued with divine Wisdom: But are none else so but Kings? Do not all
that truly fear God partake of the same Spirit and Wisdom? Is God any respecter
of Persons? What does he think of those very Elect, whom Christ implies it is
impossible to deceive, Mat. 24. 24. Are they fallible or deceivable? Or of them
in whose Mouths was found no Guile? Or of them who have put away all Guile, and
all Malice, and all Lying, and all Hypocrisy, etc. 1 Pet. 2. 1. Are such led
by an infallible Spirit or no? But to proceed, he has some very scurrilous and
abusive Flings at G. W. to prove him not led by an infallible Spirit of
discerning or true Judgment, p. 87. He quotes G. W.'s Charitable Essay, in
Answer to Fr. Bugg, p. 6. his objecting against G. F. That they (the Quakers)
could discern who were Saints, and who Apostates, without speaking ever a Word.
And says that he (G. W.) puts it off ingeniously thus, That they could discern
it by their lofty Looks, wanton and scornful Eyes, envious and fallen
Countenances, and so without speaking ever a Word, p. 87. And then, among
diverse other Scoffs and Flouts, goes on; Is not this very hard Fishing for
Infallibility? Adding, Alas! poor George, Is the infallible Quaker dwindled
down to a mere Gypsy or paltry Fortune Tellers, to nothing but a little Skill
in Physiognomy? Ah! George, what a blessed Spirit would thee have thought
Satan, if thee had seen him when he was transformed into an Angel of Light?
p. 88. 89. in Sect. 10.

To all which it may be safely answered, This Scorner's Abuse and Perversion is
herein very evident; for that we do not place our Infallibility of discerning
of Spirits, only upon those outward Signs in the Countenances of wicked Men or
Women, as their lofty Looks, scornful Eyes, envious fallen Countenances; though
these were in part instanced, in Answer to the great wonderment made of knowing
wicked Hearts when silent, to show there are other outward Signs and Tokens to
manifest them by, than their wicked Words or profane Talk, and even such Signs
as Scripture takes notice of. And seeing this Scorner has unjustly perverted
and minced the Passage quoted, Char. Essay, p. 5, 6. it is meet to recite it
more fully, for the Quakers having a Spirit given to them, beyond all the
Forefathers in the Apostasy, etc. viz. That the very intent and meaning of G.
F.'s Words herein, was not beyond all the Forefathers without exception, but
beyond all in the Apostasy. And further; and they can discern who are Saints
and who are Devils, and who are Apostates, without speaking ever a word; that
is, they that be in the Power and Life of Truth (as G. F. there says) can so
discern between Saints and Devils; and that is possible, as it is for humble Men
to discern wicked Persons, even by their proud and lofty Looks, wanton and
scornful Eyes, envious and fallen Countenances, the show of whose Counteannces
testifing against them: And more especially by the Gift of discerning of
Spirits, given to some in the Church of Christ, Apostates and wicked Spirits
are discernible from Saints; and that a Spirit of Understanding and Discerning
is given among us, etc. concluding with the Saints Right of discerning by the
Power and Life of Truth, between Saints and Devils.

From all which, pray observe how plain it is that discerning of Spirits, which
we assert, is principally placed on (and springs from) the Power and Life of
Truth (that is, from Christ) and the Gift of discerning of Spirits given to
some Members especially, (and still is continued) in the true Church; and from
which discerning, Satan cannot be hid, however he transform himself; although
proud and lofty Looks, wanton and scornful Eyes, envious and fallen
Countenances, are rendered in Scripture as outward Signs or Marks of such wicked
Hearts, which also the Gift and Spirit of discerning perceives; and gives to
see many times through such outward Mediums. And therefore the true discerning
of Spirits, which we plead for, is neither dwindled down to a mere Gypsy nor
paltry Fortune Tellers, nor to nothing but a little Jugler's Skill in
Physiognomy, as this scornful Adversary reflects. And to reprehend his Reproach
and Blasphemy herein, and show him that both God, and good Men divinely
inspired, have also taken notice of such Signs, Marks and Tokens in wicked
Men's Looks and Countenances, as before mentioned, Let him read and consider
these places of Scripture, Genesis 4. 5, 6. Psalm. 10. 4. Isa. 3. 9, 16. and 2. 11.
and 5. 15. Psalm. 131. 1. Prove. 30. 13. and 6. 17. and 21. 4. And he may see
that both God Himself, and his Prophets and Servants, took notice of wicked
Men's Countenances, proud and lofty Looks, and wanton Eyes, etc. and did not
therefore deserve to be numbered among Gypsies and Juglers. Behold the Levity
and Ignorance of this profane Scoffer of the Spirit of discerning and
Scripture!

Who further in's scoffing Humor proceeds against G. W. notoriously to detect
his Infallibility by Signs and Faces, as well as G. Fox 's without speaking
ever a word (as he pretends.) His Story is about one Chr. Athinson 's
miscarriage at Norwich, in the Year, 1655. from Richard Hubberthorn's writing,
That in the wisdom of God we were searching it out, and in his Will waiting for
his Counsel. The Scoffer reflects, That notwithstanding all this, neither G.
Fox, G. Whitehead, nor any other of the infallible Gang could find it out, till
Chr. Atkinson, pricked with the stings of his own Conscience, did freely and of
his own accord confess it, and signed a Paper of Condemnation of himself for
this wicked Fact, p. 90, 91, 92. Sect. 10.

And what of all this? What can he make of it? That the then Quakers could not
find out the Matter of Fact, till upon their searching it out and waiting in
the Will of God for his Counsel, the Offender was made to confess it, from
inward Conviction in's own Conscience? And what is the consequence? Therefore
they were not led by an infallible Spirit; that follows not. That Spirit might
lead them to search and examine the Offender, in order to bring him under
Judgment and Sense of his Evil, which they understood before, and upon
Examination and placing true Judgment upon him, were made instrumental to bring
him under Judgment and Confession; for some discovery of his Crime was made
before, which occasioned their farther Enquiry and Care to prevent the reproach
thereof from falling upon Truth and our Friends that were innocent. Besides, G.
W. was not at Norwich when this Miscarriage happened and was discovered; yet he
affirms, that sometime before, both he and some others perceived that the said
C. Atkinson's Spirit was wrong, and that he did not live in the fear of God,
nor in Humility, and that they were burdened concerning him, and did seriously
caution him; but he was too high to receive their Counsel, insomuch that they
were jealous Truth would suffer by him some way or other, though they pretended
not to know the Grossness of his Miscarriage aforehand, nor till some discovery
was made thereof; neither were they (or are we) desirous to know all private
Conversations and Actions of evil Men. We pretend not to know by Revelation, or
the infallible Spirit, how many drunken Priests are in England, etc. nor how
many of them have had their Misses, and Bastards by their Maids and others; nor
who they all are by Name; but by outward Relation we have had account of a
great many such, though we charge not all, nor any of the eminent ones, who are
more sober than the rest. And if this scornful Adversary shall therefore
conclude that we have not the Spirit of Christ (which is infallible) he might
as well conclude, no Man has it, because not omniscient; which were very absurd
and blasphemous. And then be sure he has excluded himself from having that
infallible Spirit of Christ, and so is none of his, and consequently destroyed
the credit of all his own Work against us; as therein having followed his own
Spirit (dictated by Satan) as the false and lying Prophets did, and not the
Spirit of the Lord God.

To his scurrilous Story of more tender regard showed to some young Women who
had given a Confession in Writing to John Bolton, of their frailty in the
Flesh, as is told in the Spirit of the Hat; but it was hushed up because it
touched many eminent ones in the Ministry, who from Day to Day resorted unto
them, etc. p. 95, 96. Sect. 10.

This is a sligh insinuating way of implicitly scandalizing Persons by such
old envious Stories, and all to cast Dirt not only upon some private Persons,
but even upon many eminent ones of the Ministry, without telling us the Names
either of the Men or Women charged. At this rate many honest Persons, who are
of good Fame also, may be very injuriously brought under suspicion of great
Enormity and Scandal. But let this Adversary, who is so very credulous of such
infamous Stories, come forth and show himself, and be more plain and particular
in his Charge, as of the Persons and Matters of Fact charged, together with the
said Confession of the Women; and probably he may have a more direct Answer:
For his suspicious Charge, as it is exhibited by him, appears a very blind
Story, which we can make neither Head nor Tail of. And the Spirit of the Hat
did then prejudicially and blindly bring it forth; which it is hoped the Author
has repented of long before this time.

But this Opposer should look and examine among his own Brethren, and remember
that the Incontinency of Priests is no new thing; for there is an old penal
Statue-Law, 1 H. 7. 4. made against Priests, Clerks and religious Men for
Incontinency, being duly convicted of Advoutry, Fornication, Incest, or any
other fleshly Incontinency, to be punished by the Ordinary by Imprisonment,
according to the quantity and quality of the Trespass. If this Law be obsolete
and not put in Execution, we cannot suppose it is because all the Priests are
reformed and clear of that Enormity in these Days. However, they would not all
be charged with the Faults of some.

Sn. p. 99. I hope what has been said will be sufficient to cure Men of this
most mistaken pretense to Infallibility, grounded upon the Infallibility of the
Spirit of God, as if nothing could proceed from Infallibility, but what was
infallible.

Re. 1. We know no mistaken pretense to Infallibility, that is grounded on the
Infallibility of the Spirit of God; for it is an infallible unerring Spirit in
all its Gifts, Teachings, Operations and Fruits, and leads the truly
spiritual-minded into all Truth; and no other Spirit can we ground
Infallibility, in Matters of Faith or Duty, upon. 2. As no Lie is of the Truth,
so nothing proceeds from this Spirit of Truth, but what is true and certain, as
all its Ways and Teachings are.

Sn. p. 102. The Case of the Quakers is so hard, that if we can prove but ONE
false Prophet among them, the Infallibility of All and every one of them must
be a Deceit; because (out of E. Burr.) the Infallibility is asserted to belong
to every One of them in particular.

Re. 1. The first part is as good Logic, as to say, If we can prove but one
Drunkard, or effeminate debauched Person, among the Clergy of England, then
they are all Drunkards, etc. and their pretense to be all (and every one of
them) Christ's Ministers, is but a Deceit; but let him better consider on it:
True Prophets were not to suffer, nor to be branded for the false Prophet's
Falsehood and Presumption. See Deuteronomy. 18. 20, 21, 22. 2. Infallibility is no
otherwise asserted to belong to every one, or any of us, than as we are led by
the Spirit of Truth and taught thereby, a Manifestation whereof is given to
every one to profit withal. But we do not therefore grant, that every (or any)
false Prophet, belongs to us or our Society.

Sn. p. 102, 103. To his long Story of a Quaker-Glover in Cheapside who had his
Till robbed, and of a Quaker-Prophet mistaken in the Person, etc.

Re. It Is too long a Story to repeat, and seems designed to render us
ridiculously odious; to which at present take the Answer following, till the
Snake-man appears to bring forth better Proof.

THE Glover replies for himself, thinking it no Favor to have his Name
concealed under a true state of the Case, and minds his Author it is not safe
nor warrantable to publish by Hearsay; for his Account is almost in every part
false, containing at least twelve plain Mistakes at best. A natural Consequence
of being over-officious and meddling in other Men's Affairs; which he is the
readier to let him know, that if he will please to appear Face to Face, and
has two Ears, may be yet better informed by him; who is willing to join Issue
with him in his great many more Instances, as he says.

Nath. Marks.


Among his many repeated Falsehoods, there is something of Truth hinted about
one he calls a Prophet (although never so esteemed by us) who not keeping in
Humility, true Fear and Watchfulness (as the Light of the Lord would have
guided him) the Enemy prevailed to hurry him (by the shrength of Imagination
and a secret discomposure of Mind) wrongfully to charge a Person with the Fact,
for which he has been reprehended and testified against; and we desire the Lord
may truly humble that Person unto true Repentance. Is it just to reproach all
for this one Man's Offense? Would this Accuser be so dealt by, from the gross
Miscarriages of many of his esteemed reverend Brethren of the Clergy? Or
because some of them have run Mad, would he and the rest be so deemed? We trow
not.

Sn. p. 104, 105. These Quaker-Prophets resolved to try their Hands round,
since they had begun, and see if they could terrify some or other to confess
their Infallibility.

Re. What Prophets, and how many, did so resolve? This is a foul Aspersion,
mixed with the other false and partial Story, to defame us, and to invalidate
our Christian Testimony which is to the Spirit of Truth and its Infallibility.

Sn. p. 112. Now it is made apparent that that Spirit which possesses them ( i.
e. the Quakers) is the very Spirit of Lies, which is the Spirit of the Devil;
and consequently that their Light within is Darkness; and then, as our Savior
said, O how great is that Darkness!

Re. What a blasphemous, scornful and defaming Wretch is this? 1. Thus to
defame and condemn a sober religious People, as possessed with the Spirit of the
Devil, from some personal Mistakes, Failings and Weaknesses. 2. Thus to condemn
the Principle ( i. e. our Light within) as great Darkness, because of some
personal Miscarriages, or Darkness prevailing, through their not walking in the
true Light which we profess.

Sn. p. 113. O therefore let those Christians beware, who are led away with
pretenses to the Spirit in any Men, not only against, but beside that which is
written, who break the Unity of the Church (which Christ calls the tearing of
his own Body to pieces) and forsake the Communion of their lawful Bishops, whom
Christ has left as his own immediate Representatives and Vice gerents, and as
the Principles of Unity in their respective Churches.

Re. This Story affects all Protestant Dissenters, how conscientious soever any
of them are, as if they were all led by an ill Spirit, against Scripture, to
break the Unity of the Church of Christ, and tear his Body to pieces, and to
forsake the Communion of Christ's own immediate Representatives and
Vicegerents. Very high Charges indeed, but we deny them; he must produce some
better Proofs than his own ipse dixit, or thus imposing upon Dissenting
Protestants. And suppose some such Dissenters should deny a Church, guilty of
severe Persecution, to be the Church or Body of Christ; and such Bishops as
have countenanced Persecution, to be his Vicegerents; and therefore cannot in
Conscience hold Communion with them, or with that Church; what proof will he
bring to satisfy the Denyers thereof? See what follows.

Sn. p. 115. Sect. 10. Though God sent many Prophets to reprove the Kings and the
Priests, yet they neither rebelled against the Kings, nor set up opposite
Altars against those of those wicked Priests: But AS they paid all dutiful
Obedience to their persecuting Kings, and suffered Martyrdom under them without
resistance; SO did they always keep in the Communion of those same Priests,
whom they had provoked and reproved, and paid all due Obedience to their sacred
Authority.

Re. 1st. That God sent Prophets to reprove the wickedness of Kings and
Priests, and the Covteousness, Idolatry, Profaneness and Persecution of
corrupt and polluted Priests, is true; and that true Prophets patiently
suffered by both. 2. But that the true Prophets did always keep in the
Communion of those same corrupted, polluted and wicked Priests, whom they had
reproved (as asserted) we deny; for the Holy Prophets had a distinct, pure
Communion, from that of the polluted Priests. 3. It Is no better than a piece of
Popery thus to plead for keeping Communion with wicked Priests, and Obedience
to their Authority as sacred (when they have no divine or sacred Authority,)
being debased by their own Iniquity. This is to make People Vassals to a
corrupt Priesthood, such as the holy Prophets testified against, and as God
overthrew, for their Covetousness, Idolatry and Wickedness; the great
Corruption of Priests, is sufficient cause to dissent and separate from them.

Sn. p. 124, 125. Their Churches have censured these Separatists, and
consequently given Judgment against the Light within particular Persons.

Re. The Consequence is falsely deduced; for where the Separation is a
Self-separation, for which no just Cause is or can be assigned, or Corruption
charged upon the Society or Church from whom the Separation is made; it is
unwarrantable, and not arising from the true Light in any particular Persons;
and therefore, the Judgment against such a Self-separation is not against the
Light, but against a Fruit of the Flesh and Darkness: The Lord requires a
Separation from the Unclean; but not from the Congregation of his People, nor
from the Flocks of his Companions.

Sn. p. 128. The Ground of this Persecution against G. Keith, was his preaching
Christ without, or a personal Christ in Heaven, besides the Light within, which
he said was only the spiritual Presence of Christ, by his Light and Life in all
his Children.

P. 130. They do not really believe in any other Savior than their own Light
within, which they call Christ; and so endeavor to amuse us.

Re. 1. We never understood that G. K. was prosecuted for preaching Christ
without in Heaven, and only his spiritual Presence by his Light and Life in all
his Children, seeing this is all still but one and the same indivisible Christ,
and not two Christ's; Christ as in the Heavens and as in our Hearts, is not
divided. There were other Matters charged against G. K. of his turbulent Spirit
and Behavior, making Divisions, Parties, Separations, etc. 2. We do really
believe in the entire Christ of God, who was sent to be the Savior and Light
of the World, that enlightens every Man coming into it; and he is our Light,
Life and Salvation; and this can amuse none but them that walk in Darkness.

Sn. p. 140. That G. K. upon the Text, 1 John 1. 7. said, It ought to be taken
literally, that it was the outward shedding of Christ's Blood The Act of
shedding that outward Blood was by the Spear which the Soldier thrust into his
Side: How proves he that Act cleanses from Sin?
which cleanses from Sin; and that this was not to be resolved into the Light
within, nor to be spiritualized away from the Letter.

Re. Let us be excused, if we cannot take that Text, 1 John 1. 7. altogether
literally; if cleansing from all Sin, be a spiritul and inward Work or Act, as
no doubt it is, there is as much ascribed to the Spirit as to the Blood, in
respect to the Work of Sanctification, Washing and Cleansing from Sin. And
therefore the Blood of Christ may be both taken spiritually and literally; and
this is not to spiritualize away the Letter relating to the outward Blood and
Sacrifice of Christ, seeing we have always believed, both in the Letter, and
receive the Fruit thereof in the Spirit.

Sn. p. 148. Sect. 11. These Men, whose chief Principle is to decry and damn
the Letter.

Re. This is a most gross and foul Calumny. Our preferring the Spirit to the
Letter, as the Apostles did, is no decrying nor damning the Letter, nor so
intended by us, but to bring People to the Life and Substance, and real
fulfilling of Scripture.

To what he says in distinction between Christ the Word of God, and the Book
of Scriptures, p. 151, 152. this makes for us, and against them, who have often
affirmed that Book to be the Word, in opposition to our owning Christ to be the
Word, of whom the Scriptures testify. And this, on our part, is no Contempt of
the Holy Scriptures, nor in their place any deifying of our own Spirit and our
own Scriptures, as this Adversary most falsely accuses us, p. 152.

His most seeming pretense for Proof against us, of Contempt of Holy Scripture,
is in p. 142. Sect. 11. where he quotes a Passage out of a Book, Entitled, The
Quaker's Refuge, etc. thus: viz. Whether the first Penman of the Scriptures
was Moses or Hermes? Or, whether both these are not one? Or, whether there are
not many Words contained in the Scriptures, which were not spoken by
Inspiration of the Holy Spirit? Whether some Words were not spoken by the grand
Impostor; some by wicked Men; some by wise Men, ill applied; some by good Men,
ill expressed; some by false Prophets, and yet true; some by true Prophets, and
yet false --

And here the Accuser breaks off in his Citation, like as F. Bugg used to deal
by us, who has the same Passage to defame us as he has done. Whereas next
after the Words, And yet false, these follow, viz. Is not the Subject of my
Argument at this time. Here it is plain the Author R. R. has cited these
Questions about the Scriptures, not as the Subject of his own Argument, but of
some others; he would not then be concerned to dispute those Questions or
Doubts. For the said Author farther confesses, That such Scriptures and
Prophesies as have been written and prophesied by the Holy Men of God, as they
were moved by his Spirit, treating of the Mystery of God in the Redemption and
Salvation of Mankind by Jesus Christ, and the Duty of Man in his Obedience to,
and Worship of the same God, as his reasonable Service; for the Gift of so
great Salvation are the great Concerns now under our most serious Consideration.

From hence it is clear the Author was no Contemner of Holy Scripture; and it is
clear, the Subject of his Argument was for the Authority of the Holy Spirit, in
judging or discerning the Mind of God in the Holy Scriptures, as truly owned by
the Quakers, thus in the said Book, Quaker's Refuge, p. 17. which could not
intend any Contempt of the Holy Scriptures; much less a deifying either of our
own Spirit (i. e. the Spirit of Man) or our own Writings in their place. We
have rarely ever met with more mad, unlikely and improbable Aspersions than
these, from our most outrageous Adversaries.

To what is objected, p. 155. Sect. 11. viz. That they (i. e. the Quakers)
cannot be bound by any Command in the Scriptures, unless their Spirit anew
require the same. This is falsely stated; it is not our own Spirit ( i. e. the
Spirit of Man abstractly) that we profess to be under the Conduct of, but the
same Spirit which gave forth the Holy Scriptures. And is not awanting to
require of us the performance of its own necessary Commands and Doctrins
contained in the Scriptures, seeing it is the same Spirit which leads it is
sincere Followers into all Truth; consequently not to undervalue any of those
blessed Truths recorded in the Holy Scriptures. And therefore this Adversary's
Consequence intended against us, viz. That the Scripture remains of no
Authority with us, p. 155. is very unjust, being deduced from his own false
Suggestions, supposing us to set the Spirit in opposition to the Scriptures of
Truth, whereas we plead for the divine Authority of the Holy Scriptures, in so
much preferring the Holy Spirit from whence they proceeded and derive their
Authority, and not from Human Tradition. And this is far from spiritualizing
away all the Letter of the Scripture, or Christ's Humanity, as in p. 166. as we
are often unjustly aspersed.

To what he says, p. 168. That Enthusiasts have no Principles; they have no
Rule but their own Fancy, which is strongest in mad Men, and this they mistake
for Inspiration; and then their Madness is at the height.

We say, take Enthusiasm in the truest and best Sense, and then such are
inspired of God; and by his Inspiration, have a true Understanding and right
Principles given them, both Divine and Moral, and do not mistake Fancy for
Divine Inspiration. But to whom does the Man apply this Enthusiasm which he
renders Fancy, more strong in mad Men and height of Madness? In his next Page
it is to the Quakers.

He says, No Quaker can deny but that the Principle of the Quakers is all
Enthusiasm. There never was any Enthusiasm in the World that exceeded it, p.
169. Sect. 11.

Here he seems to take Enthusiasm in the Quaker's Sense, which is Divine
Inspiration or inspired of God; which sure cannot be mere Fancy, much less the
height of Madness (as before.) The Quakers certainly deny this of themselves:
Thus the Man's confused in's injurious Attempts to defame us with the height of
Madness.

His Objection against the Quaker's Enthusiasm, ( as he calls it) That none
that ever called themselves Christians have advanced themselves so high, to
have the same infallible Spirit and immediate Revelation as the Prophets and
Apostles, or as Christ himself, etc. p. 169.

Herein he is greatly out: All true Christians are Partakers of the Spirit of
Christ in some degree or measure; for he that has not the Spirit of Christ is
none of his, and his Spirit is infallible; and a Manifestation of the same
Spirit is given to every Man to profit withal, and the Effusion of this Spirit
upon all Flesh was promised; and we believe the Promises of God, which are all
Yea and Amen in Christ Jesus. Therefore this our Adversary, who is so much
averse to having the same infallible Spirit, and so opposite to Infallibility,
is none of Christ's, consequently no Christian. And he does but follow his own
fallible Spirit, (being prompted on by the Father of Lies) in what he writes
against us, consequently of no Credit therein; so like one of those false
Prophets that follow their own Spirits, and see nothing.

But then severely to aggravate the Matter against us poor Madmen ( in his
esteem) he will needs have it, That the height of our Self-advancement is to be
equal even to God; to be one Person, Substance and Soul with God: And he does
not think that any Human Government can be secure of Men, in whose Power it is
to screw themselves up to such blasphemous heights of Enthusiasm, p. 169, 170.

We Answer; It Is better to be mad Men and Fools, than to be screwed up by the
Father of Lies to such a height of Malice and Outrage, as this insulting and
railing Rabshekah appears to be puffed up in. When did ever the Quakers so
advance themselves, to be one Person, Substance, Soul with God, and equal even
to God? We positively deny the Charge, and the Words themselves (but only as we
are united or joined to the Lord we are one Spirit) and give this Person leave
to secure such Persons in Bedlam, if he can find any among us, that he can
plainly prove to hold the same as he charges. And therefore his insinuating
such presumptuous Blasphemies against the Quakers in general, to render them so
highly obnoxious, and the Government insecure of them; this is highly and
deadly malicious; and he might as well have taken one Step further to have
shown his Teeth, and have told the Government what he would have done with the
Quakers; how he would have them dealt with to be secure of them; whether he
would have them closely Confined, Hanged or Banished; for take our Word, his
Charge is very high against them, and implies no small Reflection upon the
Civil Government, for so kindly suffering and indulging such extremely
pernicious mad Folks, as he has over and over rendered the Quakers; which serves
but to evince the Folly of his own Fury and Madness, against a peaceable
innocent People.

P. 153. Sect. 11. To his ridiculing Women's Preaching and Women's Meetings, etc.

1. We do not institute Women's Preachings as he says, but leave them free to
the Gift and Call of God.

2. Neither has he proved that they are universally and perpetually forbidden
to speak in the Church, by that 1 Cor. 14. 34, 35. The Apostle Paul did not
intend to make void God's Promise of the pouring out of his Spirit upon Sons
and Daughters to prophecy, Joel 2. 28, 29. Acts 2. 17, 18. No, he allowed
Women to Pray or Prophecy, when so divinely endued and inspired thereunto, 1
Cor. 11. 5, 13.

3. Our Scoffer tells us of the Prelacy of Women's Meetings; which he calls an
Invention never heard of in the World, till G. F. cobled it out.

As for the Term Prelacy it is his own, given in his Scorn and Ignorance. As for
our Women's Meetings, what has the Scorner against them or their Services, more
than his own Ignorance and Scorn? We know Them and their Help and Service to be
truly Christian and Charitable, consequently to be of the Lord; their Intent
and Service being to be helpful in their Places, for promoting true Christian
Charity and Religion in Life and Practice, and particularly with regard to
Fatherless and Widows among us, that they may not be neglected, but Visited and
Ministered unto in their Afflictions, for their necessary Relief and Comfort.
And these Meetings are very expedient and convenient for Intelligence among
them, of such Objects of Charity and Compassion. There were Deaconesses, as
well as Deacons, in the Primitive Christian Churches.

4. This Churchman has no reason to deride or contemn our Women's Meetings; we
charge not his Church with our Poor, though we help to Relieve the Poor of his
Church, both Parish-poor and Beggars, to his and their Shame be it spoken, who
blindly ridicules our Christian Care and Charitable Methods in this Matter.

In Sect. 12. concerning the Light within. That the Light which lightneth every
Man coming into the World, being the divine Word the Son of God, is not natural
Reason or Conscience, but above both and enlightneth both, is true, because
divine and universally in every Man; and therefore we do not by Virtue of this
Light, advance our selves above all Mankind, nor damn all but our selves, as is
falsely suggested against us, p. 171. But as we are turned and converted from
Darkness unto this Light, the Lord has advanced us above what we our selves
were in our natural and unconverted State, and above all others who yet remain
in that state. To the Question, Whether a Man can sin while he follows this
Light? p. 172. Answ. No, nor in his truly following it. And that he cannot
leave the Light, without knowing it or being followed with Judgment and
Conviction thereof by the Light, is true also. Whence it does not follow that
there can be no Sin of Ignorance, as is wrongfully inferred, p. 173. For there
are Sins of Ignorance before Conviction and Conversion, whilst Men walk in
Darkness, being ignorant of the Light that shines in it, and their Minds
estranged from it; but after convicted, or Conversion in measure, if they
backslide in Heart and leave the Light, they cannot be left altogether ignorant
of their backsliding, because they shall be left without Excuse, who either
through their impenitent hard Hearts treasure up Wrath to themselves, or
backslide in Heart, or wilfully sin until judicially hardened, after they have
received the knowledge of the Truth. 1. Because of God's universal Call and
Visitation by his Light and Free Grace in Christ to Sinners. 2. Because of his
swiftly pursuing the Wicked, and all them that forsake him, by his Spirit of
Judgment: For these, and other Causes, they are all inexcusable before him, and
the Light will pursue them even to Hell, as it did the rich Man when in Hell he
lift up his Eyes, Luke 16. 23, 28. To what our Opposer objects from these
Scriptures, Luke 23. 34. John 16. 2. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 11. Mat. 6. 23. Acts 3. 17. 1
Cor. 2. 8. thence inferring against the Infallibility of the Light within, and
saying, There can be no such Mistake as our Savior supposes, (Mat. 6. 23.) If
the Light within be infallible, and that every Man has it, and that no Man can
leave it without knowing of it, p. 174. To all which we Answer, That some Men's
Ignorance of their Master's Will, others wrong Thoughts, others being given up
to strong Delusion to believe a Lie, others greatly mistaking Darkness for
Light (and then how great is that Darkness of theirs?) These can be no Proofs
against the Infallibility of the Light it self, nor of the Light within being
fallible, but of their own Transgression, Disobedience and Rebellion against
the Light; Who know not the ways of the Light, because they abide not in the
Paths of it, Job 24. 13. And though there is no Sin against the Light or
Backsliding from it, without some Conviction at one time or other, yet it is
possible for some to presume to sin, rebel and shut their Eyes so long, until
they become stark blind and hardened in sinning and past feeling in Rebellion,
and given over to hardness of Heart and to strong Delusion to believe a Lie,
and so to Damnation and Destruction; yet however clouded all this while, the
Light in them remains in it self pure, certain, and an infallible swift Witness
against the Rebellious, who love Darkness and the Works thereof, rather than
the Light which is come into the World. Men's thinking themselves to be in the
right when mistaken, p. 174, 175. (having their Understandings darkened) will
not destroy all (or any of) the Quakers certainty which they have in the true
Light, as they believe and walk therein.

P. 176, 177. It was hard for Saul to Kick against the Pricks; and that is
against the Power of Christ, which would be too hard for him, if he strove
against it, as is confessed: No doubt that Power reached his Conscience when
awakened and convicted, consequently those Pricks which that gave him were then
in him; and that Power or Holy Ghost which Stephen's Persecutors and Saul also
resisted, (when he kept their Garments while they stoned him and consented to
his Death) was near them to convict and condemn them for their Persecution and
Cruelty, but their Fury, Wrath and Violence, would not permit them to adhere or
submit to the strivings thereof, for they always resisted the same Holy Spirit
as did their Fathers, Acts 7. 51. Which Resistance of theirs implies the
Spirit's secretly striving with them and giving Counsel against their
Wickedness and Cruelty; for how can there be always a resisting that which
either is not, or moves not, or counsels not? O therefore the same Holy Spirit
and Light of it, was in them in some measure moving and striving with them, to
persuade, stop and reclaim them from those destructive Courses and Enormities
they had chosen. And here we may observe how he excuses the Ministry, where
People are not converted by it, he deems it a very bad Argument to blame the
Ministry; for Men's being Evil may proceed from their own Perverseness, and not
from the Fault of the Ministry, Pref. p. 57. May we not retalliate such
Argument for the Light within, That it is a very bad Argument that the Light
within is either insufficient or fallible, because Men are Evil, or blind or
mistaken? Which may proceed from their own Disobedience or Perverseness, and
not from any defect or fault in the Light given them. And when Saul thought
with himself that he ought to do many things contrary to the Name of Jesus of
Nazareth, and was zealous in persecuting and imprisoning the Christians, and
exceeding mad against them, Acts 26. 9, 10. 11. This was in his blind deceived
State, when a Follower of the persecuting Priests, and the more blinded by such
blind Guides as hate the true Light and oppose it; For, as Paul says, I
persecuted this way unto the Death, binding and delivering into Prison both Men
and Women, Acts 22. 4. For many of the Saints I shut up in Prison, having
received Authority of the High Priests, and when they were put to Death, I gave
my Sentence, Acts 26. 10. So that the Priests were very ill Instruments to
influence and misguide him in Persecution and Cruelty, contrary to the Light;
such his Blindness, Madness and injurious Persecution against the Saints, to
Imprisonment and Death, being expressly contrary to the Law of God without them
and within them, in Scripture and Conscience. Will any be so blind, as to
suppose God did not afford them so much Light, as to show them such gross
Iniquities and Injuries to others who were innocent? How impertinent and
senseless then is the Man's Question, viz. Had Paul then any Pricks of
Conscience, or of his Light within against the lawfulness of that wherein he
was fully persuaded and zealous? p. 177. No doubt he had so much Light in him,
as would both have pricked him for, and shown the Unlawfulness of his
Persecution and Cruelty against the Saints, if he would have inclined his Mind
to it for Counsel, and not to the Priests who encouraged him in Persecution
against the Christians, which they persuaded him to, and not the Light. They
helped to make him so mad against the Saints as he was; but Christ the Light,
whose Power pricked him, made him wise when converted; and though it is possible
that in his Hurry and Fury to Persecution, he might not at that very instant
feel the Pricks of the Light in's Conscience, yet it swiftly pursued him and
seized him, when Christ had wonderfully put a stop to him and his Letters and
Errand from the High Priests to persecute the Saints. Though the Candle of the
Wicked may be many times put out, it is lighted again. For how often is the Candle
of the Wicked put out? How often is Destruction upon him? If it be often put out,
it is often lighted. And therefore all these things seriously considered, we do
not see it any hard Matter to make sense of the Quakers Notion (as he calls it)
of the Light within, nor that this Instance of St. Paul can stand as any
irrefragable (or other) Proof against it; or, our Testimony for that true Light
which inlightens every Man coming into the World, John 1. 4, 9. Because many
are blinded by the persecuting and covetous Priests, and many shut their Eyes
against the Light, and many love Darkness rather than Light, because their
Deeds are evil, and the Candle of the Wicked is often put out. But they shall
all find it hard to Kick against the Pricks even in their own Consciences, as
it is confessed even in the English Annotation, in the Margin, on Acts 9. 5. It
is hard for thee to Kick against the Pricks, i. e. to resist God when he
pricketh and soliciteth our Consciences; therefore such prickings are within.

All which truly considered, it is no difficulty to make Sense of the Quaker's
Notion (as he calls it) of the Light within, p. 178. seeing it is according to
the express Sense of Holy Scripture-Testimony thereof, and the Sense which the
Light gives all them that truly regard it, Christ being the Light of the World
that inlightens every Man coming into it, that whosoever believe in his Light
and follow him the Light, might not abide in Darkness but have the Light of
Life, and become Children of the Light. Neither does our Adversary's Instance
of St. Paul (or others) stand as any irrefragable Proof against the Light
within, or the Quakers Notion of it, as he vainly supposes, p. 178. Unless it
be a good Argument, that because some Men are blind, and others shut their
Eyes, there is no Sun in the Firmament giving Light into their Houses. We find
no better Proof or Argument from this Adversary against the Light within, or
our Testimony thereof; and it is far more difficult to make Sense of his Notion
of the Light within, than of our's: For after he has in Words owned and
confessed to Divine Illumination or Inspiration of the Holy Spirit, as that
Enthusiasm or Inspiration of God, which is allowed and owned in their Church,
and that it is full as much as any sober Quaker can mean by the Light within,
Pref. from p. 46. to p. 55, 56. Another while he will have the Light within not
Infallible, but Fallible, because of Men's Mistake, who put Darkness for Light,
p. 173, 174. 2d Part. Another while he will have the Light within no Light, from
Isa. 8. 20. placing this Remark upon it, No Light, George; mark that, p* 251.
But he should have observed the Hebrew Note in the Margin, No Morning, instead
of No Light, which I may return upon him. If they speak not according to this
Word, it is because there is No Morning to them. No Morning! Man; mark that.
But is there no Light before Morning, pray? Now how difficult is it to make
Sense of this Man's Notion of the Light within? One while with him, It Is a
Divine Inspiration; another while, It Is Fallible; another while, No Light: So
that one while it is a divine, good and certain Light; another while uncertain,
not Infallible; another while it is nothing, no Light. Thus confusedly and madly
Envy and Darkness appears against the true Light.

This Adversary, to prove his false, reitterrated black Charge, That the
Quakers take to themselves the very Attributes of God; and make a pretense,
from this Light within, to excuse blasphemous Pride, assuming All the Worship
due to Christ whom they call this Light, upon the account of his or its
Inhabitation in them, p. 178. He refers to G. Whitehoad's Innocence against
Envy, p. 18. Sect. 12. in Answer to F. Bugg, viz. As to his Charge of
idolatrous if not blasphemous Names and Titles given to G. F. How proves he
that they ( i.e. Two Persons in their Letters to him) gave and intended those
Names and Titles to the Person of G. F. etc. This Story, in the first part, is
notoriously false, as it affects the Quakers in general. The last part is a
blind Story, as it is intended for Proof of the black Charge before; those
idolatrous Names and Titles are not mentioned, nor any plain Proof of the exact
Copies of both those Letters could we ever have. And G. W. has further cleared
this Matter in another Answer to F. B. as also in his Just Inquiry, from p. 19.
to p. 30. And in behalf of the People called Quakers, we positively and
sincerely deny; 1. That they take to themselves the very Attributes of God. 2.
That they excuse blasphemous Pride, as that of assuming all Worship due to
Christ, because of his inhabiting in them: These, with Detestation, we solemnly
deny. But this Accuser should have looked at home, and at his Brethren of the
Clergy, what Honor and Attributes do they give to their Bishops, when they go
down upon their Knees to them, as their Reverend Fathers in God, with Your
Grace, My Lord, etc. Do these import Divine Honor and Divine Attributes, or
Earthly, pray? And where did ever Christ's Ministers or Apostles, do such
Homage to Timothy or Titus, or call either of them my Lord Timothy, or my Lord
Titus, and Your Grace, etc? And what thinks he of Godfathers and Godmothers?
Are not these Divine Attributes, and very high ones too? And of their being
Sureties for Infants, for their forsaking the Devil and all his Works, etc. and
keeping God's holy Will and Commandments, etc. Do they not herein take upon
them Christ's Office and Work, who is our Surety? And what Scripture have they
for these? Answer directly.

It Is a notorious Untruth also, That they (i. e. the Quakers) allow of divine
Honor to the Man Christ Jesus, on no other account than as G. W. allows it to
G. Fox; that is, because of the residing of the divine Word in him, p. 180. We
say this is apparently false; for on diverse other Accounts we allow divine
Honor; and far more Honor to the Man Christ Jesus, than to any mortal or
finite Creature whatsoever, as in all things Christ Jesus has the
Pre-eminence, and all Fullness dwelling in him, and all Power in Heaven and
Earth committed to him, and were not all the Angels of God to worship him? And
all Men to honor the Son, as they honor the Father? Therefore this Opposer's
blasphemous Consequences drawn against us, from his black Charge aforesaid, As
worshipping one another with divine Honor, and not grudging to apply all the
Attributes of God to themselves for the Light within sake, etc. p. 181, 182.
with the rest of his Consequences of the same kind, are as false as the other.
We desire ever to walk humbly with God in Christ Jesus, in a holy Reverence and
Worship to him only, to whom all divine Worship, Glory and Honor is due.

In his 13th Sect. Of the Resurrection of the Body. This ( says he) the
Quakers do positively deny, p. 182.

Here he stumbles at the Threshold, and deals disingeniously and falsely with
the Quakers. They deny not the Resurrection of the Body, by denying the gross
and carnal Notions of our former Adversaries, of the self-same carnal and
numerical Body of Flesh, Blood and Bones; no more than the Apostle denied the
Resurrection of the Dead, by affirming, That Flesh and Blood cannot inherit the
Kingdom of God, neither does Corruption inherit Incorruption, 1 Cor. 15. For
proof That the Quakers do positively deny the Resurrection; he says, That Mr.
Penn makes Nonsense of it; and worse, he compares it to Transubstantiation,
nay, to the Alcoran; quoting Reason against Railing, 1673. p. 138. which is a
plain Perversion, and as false as the Charge it self: For W. Penn does neither
make Nonsense of the Resurrection it self, scripturally considered, nor compare
it either to Transubstantiation, or to the Alcoran. But T. Hick's gross Belief
and Apprehension of a Carnal or Fleshly Resurrection of the self-same Carnal
Body; and yet that it shall be so changed, as to be a spiritual glorious Body,
like unto Christ's. This he compares to the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, as
the Papists say, That the Bread and Wine, after Conse cration are so changed as
to be the very Christ, and yet the Accidents remain ( i.e. of Bread and Wine)
so he cannot make better Sense of his Adversary's gross apprehension of the
Resurrection of the Body, being or remaining the same carnal Body of Flesh,
Blood and Bones that is buried, and yet changed so as to be a spiritual and
glorious Body, like unto Christ's, which was not to deny the Scripture-Doctrin
of the Resurrection it self, but rather a carnal Alcoran Notion thereof; for in
the Book quoted Reason against Railing, p. 133. And under the same Head, take
W. P.'s plain Confession of the Resurrection in his own Words, against his
Adversary, viz. Who can have the Confidence to call the Scripture his Rule, and
yet contradict it so egregiously, as when the Apostle tells us, It is not the
same Body that is sown that shall be, to assert that it is the same Body; and
that who says the contrary, denies the Resurrection and eternal Recompense,
(which is a very confident Perversion and Opposition to the Apostle's Doctrine.)
In short, we do acknowledge a Resurrection in order to eternal Recompense, and
that every Seed shall have its own Body, and rest contented with what Body it
shall please God to give us (who gives a Body as it pleases him, 1 Cor. 15.)
But as we are not such Fools as curiously to enquire what? so must we for ever
deny the gross Conceits of T. H. and his Adherents, etc. And in conclusion of
the same Head, Reason against Railing, p. 124. he says, For our parts a
Resurrection we believe, and of Bodies too, unto Eternal Life. What they shall
not be, I have briefly said and proved; what they shall be, we leave with God,
who will give every one a Body as it pleases him; and Thou Fool belongs to the
unnecessary Medler.

Thus it is evident W. P. did not deny the Resurrection it self, nor count it
Nonsense, etc. but the gross Conceits of some Persons about it: Consequently,
this Accuser has charged the Quakers as falsely in this Point, as in the rest.

And we know not Those others (among us he tells of) that suppose the Soul it
self is the spiritual Body mentioned, 1 Cor. 15. 44. and consequently that
there is no other Resurrection than at each particular Persons death, p. 184.
We know none in our Society hold or suppose these things; but the contrary,
that the Soul of every Person shall be invested with its own proper spiritual
Body, in the general Resurrection and last Day. And besides, the true Believers
being quickened and raised out of the Fall in Adam, unto Life, Righteousness
and Victory, in and by Jesus Christ (who is the Resurrection and the Life).
Three things are also observable in that 1 Cor. 15. The Apostle argues, 1. for
the Resurrection of the Dead, from the Resurrection of Christ, against some
that said, There is no Resurrection of the Dead. 2. He argues against some, and
reprehends them as Fools that questioned How the Dead are raised, and with what
Bodies do they come forth? From the Wheat and other Grain that is sown, and the
difference between the Celestial and Terrestrial Bodies, and the Natural Body
and the Spiritual. 3. For those Saints that shall remain alive at the coming of
our Lord Jesus Christ to raise the Dead, that they shall be changed in a
moment, at the sounding of the last Trumpet of God: It Is evident that the
Apostle Paul fully answers both those that said there is No Resurrection of the
Dead, and also those Fools that question With what Body do they come forth? And
asserts the sudden change of those who shall remain alive until the coming of
the Lord from Heaven. So that the Resurrection of the Dead, and final change of
the Living, so as the Corruptible must put on Incorruption, and the Mortal
shall put on Immortality. As this Doctrine was really believed by the Primitive
Christians, so it is by us, who believe that God raised up Jesus from the Dead;
and therefore the Dead, both the Just and Unjust, shall be raised by Jesus
Christ according to Scripture, whatever Prejudice may suggest to the contrary.

But our Adversary will needs have it, That Mr. Penn does understand that long
and elegant Description of the Resurrection of our Bodies, from the 35th Verse
of the 15th Chap. of the first Epist. to the Corinthians, Only of the spiritual
state of the Soul in this Life; and for it quotes, The Invalidity of John
Faldoe's Vindication, 1673. p. 373, and p. 369. He wrongs W. P. in this, i. e.
That he understands that long and elegant Description of the Resurrection, (1
Cor. 15. 35. to the end.) Only of the spiritual state of the Soul in this Life.
I say this is a Perversion and Abuse of W. P.'s Discourse in the Case; for on
verse 44. he utterly denies that this Text is concerned in the Resurrection of
Man's carnal Body; showing, according to Beza, both from the Latin and Original
Greek, that a natural Body is sown, a spiritual Body is raised; that there is
not a Word in either for the Relative It, Inval. p. 369. And in p. 373. W. P.
supposing the Apostle treated of a natural Change, and not only of the
spiritual state of the Soul in this Life. This Supposition is not to understand
the Apostle Paul to treat only of the spiritual state of the Soul in this Life,
in that 1 Cor. 15. from v. 35. For in the place quoted, it is by the Accused
confessed, That though we sow not the Body which shall be, God gives a Body as
it pleases him, from 1 Cor. 15. 37, 38.

It Is observable, That W. P. (in his Answer to T. Hicks and John Faldoe quoted)
is not so unnatural as not to allow the sanctified Soul a suitable Clothing or
Mansion, (when the earthly Tabernacle is dissolved) which is eternal in the
Heavens, according to 2 Cor. 5. 1. wherein it is undoubtedly happy, being in
perfect Peace and Rest with God in Christ Jesus; but he also allows it a
spiritual, celestial, glorious Body in the Resurrection, far excelling the
Terrestrial. And we doubt not but we shall be the same (and as many) distinct
Souls, Men (or Persons) in the Resurrection as we are now, though far better
Clothed with our spiritual glorious Bodies, we hope. The Premises considered,
it is evident our Accuser has as actually wronged us in this Point, even in
Matter of Fact by Perversion, as in his saying, The Quakers have spiritualized
away all the Body and the Being of Christ into their Light within, p. 195.
which is all a notorious Untruth, and answered before.

To his Stories, 1. Of a Quaker Preacher, to whom he urging for a proof of the
Resurrection, Mat. 27. 52, 53. That many Bodies of Saints arose and came out of
the Graves after Christ's Resurrection, and went into the Holy City and
appeared unto many; That he made this Answer, That was not meant of the literal
or earthly Jerusalem; that any dead Bodies arose there, but of the spiritual
Jerusalem which John saw coming down from Heaven. 2. And that others told him,
They heard the same Exposition in a Quaker Sermon at one of their Meetings, p.
196.

Answ. We know not any Preacher among us that gave such Meaning or
Interpretation to the said Text, neither do we own it. And we have reason to
question the truth of these Stories.

3. He says, He can tell of a Preacher among the Quakers that said, He had
already obtained the Resurrection by Christ, having risen in his Heart; and
that he believed no other Resurrection, nor expected any, p. 198.

We question the Truth of this Story also, in the last part of it, viz. That he
believed no other, nor expected any than Christ risen in him, and this also of
no other we disown; for as truly as we own Christ risen in us (and we in him
from Sin and Condemnation) so truly do we believe and expect to be raised up by
him in the last Day, above all Corruption and Mortality; we being raised in
Christ from Sin here, we shall be raised by him to Glory hereafter. And
therefore are not of the Opinion of Hymeneus and Phyletus, who said, That the
Resurrection is past, (or made) already, 2 Timothy 2. 18. For that Resurrection
which Paul (in his converted state when risen with Christ) had not attained,
Phil. 3. 11, 12. we do believe and expect as yet to come after this Life, and
at the last Day.

Another Accusation is, That G. F. says plainly in these Words, There Is none
have a Glory and a Heaven but within them ( leaving out what follows) which was
before Man had a Being, Gr. Mist. p. 214.

This is intended of what the Saints have and enjoy in this Life, in the
Present Tense, (and not of that more full attainment in that which is to come)
who have and enjoy the indwelling of God and Christ, as their God and their
Glory according to his Promise, having of this excellent Treasure in their
Earthen Vessels, according to their measures of degrees of attainment, being
changed from Glory to Glory (from one degree of Glory to another) as by the
Spirit of God. There Is no doubt but all true and spiritual Believers, who are
dead with Christ, and whose Life is hid with Christ in God, when Christ who is
their Life shall at last appear, they shall appear with him in Glory, Col. 3.
Yea, in far more Glory than's here attainable in a mortal State. Though we are
now the Sons of God, yet it appears not what we shall then be; but when Christ
appears we shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is, 1 John. 3. 2.
Heaven, which is God's Throne and Dewlling Place, is no doubt so spacious, and
the Heavens which declare his Glory so wonderfully extensive, that we cannot
suppose they should all be contained in the narrow compass of our Hearts,
though our Conversation be now in Heaven, and we come to a heavenly state in
Christ Jesus. Therefore we do not confine all our expected Seize of
Heaven and Glory to within us in this Life, but the way to attain more thereof
in that which is to come, is to partake of some share thereof in Christ Jesus,
even in this Life, and where Christ is enjoyed, there Heaven and Glory is in
measure spiritually enjoyed, there being spiritual and inward Heavens, as well
as natural and outward.

Note, For the spirituality of the Resurrection, Bodies, and the nature of the
Body of Christ after his Resurrection and Ascension, Our Opposer may peruse H.
Moor's Search into the nature of a glorified Body, Apol. chapter 3. p. 494. Of his
Modest Enquiry into the Mystery of Iniquity. And compare the same with what we
have written on that Subject, and then let our Opposer answer him, having been
a Doctor of his own Church, and Philosopher also of Repute in Cambridge, etc.

As to his 14th Sect. Of the Sacraments, (as he terms them) but without
Scripture Proof of the Term Sacrament, as applied to the outward Elements,
Signs or Shadows, which end in Christ the Substance, who livingly represents
himself beyond them, by his Spirit in the Hearts and Souls of spiritual
Believers, who have attained unto the spiritual Communion of the Body and Blood
of Christ, and to partake of his spiritual Supper with him, Rev. 3. 10.

The difference between us and our Accuser in this Point, is about the Text, 1
Cor. 11. 26. of showing forth the Lord's Death till he come, as he says By the
Celebration of his last Supper, Whether this coming of Christ be spiritually in
our Hearts, or at the Resurrection at the last Day, which ends the time limited
for the Celebration thereof? We believe it of the first (if that may be owned
as any real coming of Christ) He of the last. His Reason is, That Christ was so
come in the Hearts of the Holy Apostles and of the purest Primitive Christians.
The Apostle's condescending to diverse Things that were Shadows and Figures for
sometime; it follows not that therefore, we are bound to imitate them in all
things they did. Neither were the Corinthians the purest of Primitive
Christians when Paul writ his first Epistle to them; nor had they then so far
attained to the coming of the Lord Jesus Christ, as to confirm and make them
blameless as in his Day, but then waited for such his coming, 1 Cor. 1. for
there were diverse Disorders among them, and many of them carnal and walked as
Men. And therefore they were not then of the purest of Christians; though they
had good Gifts, yet they had then great need to wait for the coming of Christ
to make them better, to bring them into a blameless state. The Apostles
themselves were come to higher Seize in Christ Jesus, which they labored
to bring their Hearers to, as is evident from Paul's desiring That the
Corinthians might not be ignorant how that all the Fathers, who were baptized
unto Moses in the Cloud and in the Sea, did all eat the same spiritual Meat and
drink of the spiritual Rock which followed them or went with them, which Rock
was Christ, 1 Cor. 10. And told them the Cup of Blessing which we bless, is it
not the Communion of the Blood of Christ? And the Bread which we break, it is
not the Communion of the Body of Christ? For we being many are One Bread and
One Body, being all Partakers of the One Bread, ver. 16, 17. and doubtless the
knowledge of this Mystery was what he received of the Lord, which was above the
Sign, Shadow or Figure thereof. Yet it is not to be questioned, but there was a
good Intention in the first Proposal and Practice of those outward Memorials of
Christ's Death among the Corinthians, in the capacity they stood in, to
remember and show forth Christ's Death thereby, until they knew and had more of
his Life to show forth, in a holy and unblameable State and Conversation in the
Day of the Lord Jesus Christ, for whose spiritual coming they waited, for that
end, 1 Cor. 1. 6, 7, 8. And also that they might flee from Idolatry and keep
out of it, and forbear eating in the Idols Temple, which he warned them
against. As to Christ's Celebration of his last Supper, it is strange that
should be so much urged as obligatory upon us, until Christ's last coming again
at the Resurrection in the last Day; seeing we find none of the Urg^rs thereof
so much as in a true imitation of the last Supper of Christ, where he eat the
legal Passover with his Disciples, according to his own appointment, this part
of the Supper being laid aside as Jewish, fulfilled and ended by Christ. And
therefore to us that last Supper of Christ appears to be a Consummation and
fulfilling of the Jewish solemn Feasts, under the Law, See T. Godwyn's Moses
and Aaron, treating of the Passover, etc. and Christ's answering the same in
his Supper, Exodus 12. Mat. 26. 18, 19. Luke 22. 8. to ver. 15.
as John's Baptism was, of the diverse legal Washings (or Baptisms) imposed,
until the time of Reformation, when Christ blotted out and nailed the
Handwriting of Ordinances to his Cross. After which, they were not legally
obligatory, though condescended unto for a Season, by reason of the Weakness of
diverse, and Respect many had unto them in the Churches Infancy. And though too
many now are very formal and superstitious in those outward Observations and
Shadows, laying so much stress for Salvation upon them that they neglect the
Substance; yet others being more conscientiously tender in the observation
thereof, we are the more tender to these, so as not to censure or condemn them
merely for practicing that which they believe is their Duty, either in breaking
of Bread or Water Baptism, yet desire they may see further, and come under that
higher and evangelical Dispensation of the spiritual Communion and Bread of
Life, and Cup of Blessing from Heaven (which can only nourish the Soul unto
eternal Life) and of the spiritual Baptism of Christ, which only is the Soul's
sanctifying and saving Baptism; so that this One Baptism and this One Bread,
which is the Substance, they may livingly partake of unto eternal Life.

We do hitherto want Proof that Paul either received of the Lord the Bread and
the Cup, or the real Supper of the Lord in the Figure or Type (but the Mystery
thereof;) or that to observe the Figure was an Institution of Christ to
continue in the spiritual Church: And though he fulfilled the Command of the
Passover at his Supper, we have no reason to think that was his own Institution
to continue in the Christian Church, no more than the Passover, Legal
Offerings, Circumcision, etc. We confess, That the neglect and abuse of the
Holy Mystery, p. 207. (which is the Substance, Christ the living Bread) did and
does incur Damnation and grievous Diseases, as among the Corinthians; He that
eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks Damnation to himself, not
discerning he Lord's Body, 1 Cor. 11. 29. If you rest or stick in the Shadow,
and neglect the Substance or Mystery, so as you discern not the Lord's Body,
you discern not that whereby your Souls should live and be nourished unto
eternal Life: It Is Matter of Condemnation, you are but eating and drinking
Damnation to your selves. The main end and drift of the Apostles laboring with
and writing to them at Corinth, was to bring them to Life and Substance to the
spiritual Rock, the spiritual Meat and Drink, which is Christ, 1 Cor. 10. 14,
15, 16, 17. and 2 Cor. 13. 5. that they might be blameless in his Day; which
it is evident the outward Figure or Shadow did not bring them to, but they were
blameable, and blamed for the Carnality, Divisions and Disorders which were
among them, 1 Cor. 3. 1, 3.

Now as to the outward Supper, so little being said for it by our Opposer, we
are not willing to enlarge or enter into any strict Controversy about that
Subject; but for further Explanation, refer him to what our deceased Friend
Robert Barclay has writ upon it, in his Apology, from p. 493 to p. 514. And if
we were convinced that it is our Duty to receive Bread and Wine as an outward
Memorial of Christ's Death, we should never own this our Accuser (who has
shamefully reproached us) or any such Enemies, to be our Administrators, nor
hold Communion with them.

For Baptism, he alleges Mat. 28. 20. Go teach all Nations, baptizing them. --
And here the Man breaks, leaving out, In the Name of the Father, and the Son,
and the Holy Ghost; and then brings in, And lo I am with you always, even unto
the end of the World: Taking it for granted, that this Commission must intend
Water Baptism; and the continuance thereof, as well as Teaching or Preaching,
even unto the End of the World. Hence saying, They (i. e. Christ's ministerial
Officers) indeed were empowered, as John, to baptize with Water, p. 205. But is
this Adversary really for John's Baptism, or for baptizing as John did? He Is
not express nor plain in this Point. Though he would seem an eminent Advocate for
the Church of England, we may greatly question his Sincerity herein. If under
this Pretext he means Infants Baptism, or Sprinkling them, he should not take
up the Anabaptist's Arguments for that which they oppose as a scriptureless
Thing, and at the same time deem them Schismatics, Enthusiasts, and number
them among the various Sects set up by Rome, under universal Tolleration, as
before, p. 17, 18. 2d Part. He Is very disingenuous in this as well as in many
other Things: He should have plainly told us what Baptism he aims at; and who
the Subjcts of it, whether Infants or Believers; before he had either upbraided
or threatened us for the neglect of it.

However, pray observe the great Stress he lays upon this outward Baptism with
Water, viz. That it was an Ordinance instituted as a means of Grace, whereby
the inward Baptism with the Holy Ghost was conveyed; therefore the Form
appointed, of admission into the Society of the Church, and thereby giving a
Title to all the Privileges and Promises annexed to it, p. 206. whereby Persons
are daily baptized into Christ's death, p. 209. And tells us of Outward Signs
and Seals, Pledges and Means of Grace, which he judges the Enemy has deluded
Men into a neglect of.

Now observe, 1. He makes Water Baptism (whether of Infants or Believers he
resolves not) not only an Institution, but a Means of Grace, whereby the inward
Baptism of the Holy Ghost is conveyed.

2. Such a Form appointed of admission into the Church, as gives a Title to
all the Privileges and Promises, etc.

3. That it is the Baptism into Christ's Death.

4. A Seal, Pledge and Means of Grace.

In all which he does but upon his own Authority impose upon the Reader,
without Scripture Proof: And his Impositions herein are liable to many
Exceptions.

1. They suppose all Persons under Grace and the Baptism of the Holy Ghost, who
are come under Water Baptism, without Exception of Infants or others; when the
contrary is evident in many wicked Persons, and even in Simon Magus the
Sorcerer, who was baptized and yet wicked; and wanting the Gift and Baptism of
the Holy Ghost, would have bought it for Money, Acts 8.

2. It also supposes all to be void of Grace, and of the Baptism of the Holy
Ghost, and of the Promises, who are not baptized with Water; consequently, that
many thousands are Damned because they are not so baptized: Which is highly
uncharitable.

3. We deny that by Water Baptism Men are baptized either into Christ's Death,
Body or Church; or that it is a Seal or Pledge of Grace: For it is by one Spirit
that true Believers are baptized unto Christ, and into Christ's Death, and into
One Body; there being One Faith and One Baptism, which is that of the Spirit's,
which is the Soul's saving Baptism, typified by that of Water. See 1 Cor. 12.
13. Romans 6. 3, 4. Gal. 3. 27. Ephesians. 4. 5. 1 Pet. 3. 21.

In the next place we may observe, this censorious, uncharitable Man will not
allow Christ's Commission, Mat. 28* 19. To intend spiritual Baptism, or the
Baptism of the Holy Ghost; because he says, Christ only is he who could
baptize with the Holy Ghost. To say that Man could bestow God (which the Holy
Ghost is) is the highest Blasphemy, p. 203, 204.

And further to aggravate the Matter against us, he says, If the Quakers
Interpretation of Mat. 28. 19. do hold, it will follow that the Apostles and
their Successors, have power to baptize with the Holy Ghost; which is Blasphemy.

Reply, He is highly mistaken in his superlative Charge of Blasphemy in this
Case; for if our Interpretation of the Text does hold, That Christ's Apostles
and Ministers had Power given them by him (being present with them even in his
own Work) to baptize with the Spirit, as well as to convert Men to God; then
our Interpretation isd not Blasphemy, because it holds. This severe Judge
against us is quite out here: For though Christ be the great and efficient Cause
both of giving and baptizing with the Spirit, yet his true Ministers, who were
endued with his divine Power, were instrumental in his Work of baptizing with
the Spirit, yea, and of ministering the Spirit, and he was with them in his own
Work; Lo, I am with you always to the end of the World, says he; What for? To
enable them to baptize with Water. No, that many can do without him, or the
least sense of his Presence; but lo Christ was with them to empower them to Go
teach all Nations, baptizing them into the Name of the Father, Son and Holy
Ghost. It is not Go teach, and then baptize them with Water; but Go teach all
Nations, baptizing them, etc. There was a divine and spiritual Baptism,
immediately attending (and present with) their Ministry, (and it was to such as
were docible too, and not to Infants who are not capable of Teaching;) and this
spiritual Presence of Christ and his Baptism, accompanying their Ministry, is
evident according to St. Peter's own Relation, Acts 11. 15, 16. And AS I began
to speak, the Holy Ghost fell on them that heard, even as upon us at the
beginning. Then I remembered the Word of the Lord, how he said, John baptized
with Water, but ye shall be baptized with the Holy Ghost. What Is more plain,
than that here was Teaching and Baptizing with the Holy Ghost, accompanying his
Ministry?

Query, But were Christ's Apostles instrumental in ministering the Spirit? Yes,
they being Ministers of the Spirit, and not of the Letter. See Gal. 3. 2.
Received ye the Spirit by the Works of the Law, or by the hearing of Faith
preached? And ver. 5. He therefore that ministers to you the Spirit, and
works Miracles among you, does he it through the Works of the Law, or by the
hearing of Faith preached? Their Speech and Preaching being not in the enticing
Words of Man's Wisdom, but in plain Evidence of the Spirit and of Power, that
the Faith of the Hearers might not stand in the Wisdom of Men, but in the Power
of God, 1 Cor. 2. 4, 5. For (said he) our Gospel was not unto you in Word only,
but also in Power, and in the Holy Ghost, and in much Assurance, 1 These. 1. 5.
But contrariwise, this imposing Judge has promoted Water Baptism above the
spiritual, powerful Ministry of the Gospel. He Will have the spiritual Baptism to
go along with that of Water, duly administered and received (as he says p.
205.) But by no means will he allow the spiritual Baptism to go along with the
Gospel Ministry or Teaching, as commanded Mat. 28. 19. No by no means, that he
deems Blasphemy; which bewrays his no small Ignorance both of the Scriptures
and of the Power of God and true Gospel Ministry in this case; and therefore
he will not allow Inward Baptism to supersede the Outward: Though John Baptist,
who had a peculiar Commission for the Outward, allowed it, he preferred and
exalted Christ's Baptism above his own, saying, He must increase, but I must
decrease, John 3. 30 I indeed baptize you with Water unto Repentance, (or
amendment of Life) but he that comes after me is mightier than I, whose Shoes
I am not worthy to bear; he will baptize you with the Holy Ghost and with Fire,
Mat. 3. 11. Mark 1. 8, Luke 3. 16. John 1. 26, 27.

That John as to this his outward Ministry of Baptism should decrease, implies
not an immediate or present end thereof, upon the entrance of Christ's
Dispensation or Baptism, but that John's should gradually decrease and wear out
as Christ's Ministry and Baptism do increase and grow, as the Heat of Fire or
Sun dries up the Water, and causes it to decrease by Degrees, and not suddenly
all at once. For John and his Ministry being of great esteem with many both
Jews and Greeks (no doubt) his Baptism was condescended unto and allowed, when
the Apostles were gathering diverse of the Churches of Christ to a higher
Ministry. And that this of John's Baptism was an Act of Condescension and not
of Commission to the Apostles, Paul is very plain in this case, 1 Cor. 1. 14,
15, 16. after he says, I thank God that I baptized none of you, but Crispus
and Gaius, lest any should say that I had baptized in my own Name. I baptized
also the Household of Stephanus, etc. He gives a more general Reason for his
thanking God he baptized no more, ver. 17. For Christ sent me NOT to baptize,
but to preach the Gospel, etc. And doubtless Paul's Commission from Christ was
as large and extensive as any of the Apostles had; therefore their Commission
in Mat. 28. 19 was not to baptize with Water, but with the Spirit, wherein
their Gospel Ministry came.

His supposing that If the inward Baptism must supersede the Outward, then must
Inward Teaching, p. 203. This supposes the outward Baptism of equal Authority
with Teaching or Preaching the Gospel, and as necessary to continue, which we
do not believe; yet we deny not but the inward and immediate Teaching of the
Holy Spirit is more excellent and permanent than the Outward, as the Holy
Spirit is the Original and Spring from whence the true outward Ministry arises
and flows, and unto which it leads; and the more People come to know an
Introversion and joining of their Minds to the Inward, the less need they will
have of the Outward, though we bless God for both.

But how proves this Adversary, That the visible Representation of the Lord's
death, by the Bread broken and the Wine poured forth, and also Water Baptism,
are the Body or outward part of Religion which ( he says) the Devil has stolen
from us; so that the Soul soon disappeared, and left a noisome Carcass of
Religion? p. 209, 210.

What a strange, confused Whimsie is this? How has the Devil stolen from them
the Body of Religion, and left a noisome Carcass behind? It Is more likely that
he has stolen away the Soul of Religion from them, or rather their Minds from
it; and left them only a Carcass behind^ who are so much doting about and even
idolizing the Shadow (which is far short of the Body of true Religion) and
neglecting the Life, Soul and Substance thereof; so that their outward
Observations are dead, empty and fruitless, as those Observers are who are void
of Christian Humility, Love or Charity.

Those repeated known Falsehoods, 1. That Christ's outward dying and shedding of
his Blood, many of the Quakers have turned to mean nothing but his spiritual
Suffering within us, etc.

2. To spiritualize AWAY the literal Humanity and Sufferings of Christ, p. 208,
209. These Falsehoods being fully answered and denied by us already, we need but
persist in our Negation thereof.

To conclude this Head of Baptism with an Argument or two from the Terms of the
Commission, Mat. 28. Go teach all Nations, baptizing them in the Name of the
Father, Son and Holy Ghost.

Arg. 1. If the Commission intended baptizing them with Water, then the
Apostles must have followed and used the Terms of the Commission in the
Execution thereof, to manifest their Authority for it.

But they did not follow nor use the Terms of the Commission in baptizing with
Water; therefore, that Baptism was not intended in the Commission.

The first part of the Argument is undeniable, from the Sanction and Authority
of the Commission it self, which is expressly, Go teach all Nations, baptizing
them in (or into) the Name of the Father, and of the Son and Holy Ghost.

The second part of the Argument is proved by the following.

Arg. 2* Christ's Apostles and Ministers did Teach and Preach in the Name of
the Father, Son and Holy Ghost; but they did not Baptize with Water in the Name
of the Father, Son and Holy Ghost;

Therefore baptizing with Water was not intended in that Commission.

The second Proposition is proved by their baptizing only in the Name of the
Lord, or in the Name of the Lord Jesus, when they baptized with Water as John
did.

We do not find in all the Acts or other Scripture, that the Name of the
Father, Son and Holy Ghost, were used by any of the Apostles of Christ in
baptizing with Water. Let him peruse W. DELL's (...), Or, The Doctrine of
Baptisms; and T. Lawson's (...), Or, A Treatise concerning Baptisms: Whereunto
is added, A Discourse concerning the Supper, Bread and Wine, called the
Communion.

To his 15th Sect. Concerning the Satisfaction of Christ.

Herein ( he says) the Quakers are direct Socinians; for they positively deny
the Satisfaction.

Here he stumbles at the Threshold again; this is a positive Untruth in Fact.
They are neither Socinians, nor do they deny the Satisfaction of Christ it
self; for God was ever well pleased and so satisfied in his dear, innocent Son,
but never with Sinners continuing in their Sins. That therefore which we deny,
is the Unscriptural, Sin-pleasing and Sinner-soothing Notions of our former
Adversaries about it, as that of Christ suffering under Vindictive Justice,
from the Father, and making such a rigid and strict Satisfaction and Payment in
our Stead; thereby to acquit and justify the guilty Offender, though
persisting in Sin all his Days. This Notion of Satisfaction, as severely and
rigidly stated, as vindictive upon the dear Son of God, and thus indulging to
Sinners, both the Quakers, and even a Bishop of the Church of England, have
opposed.

It Is also such a Notion of a rigid Satisfaction and strict Payment, held as a
Notion of Law, in the strictest and severest Sense, that W. P. opposes God's
Compassion unto, in pardoning Iniquity, passing by Transgression and Sin, and
forgiving our Trespasses (which we ever own to be for Christ's sake, but upon
true Faith and Repentance) from these Scriptures, Mica 7. 18. Mat. 6. 12, 14.
and chapter 18*

Therefore this Adversary mistakes and misrepresents W. P. in this Point, as
blaspheming and arguing against the Satisfaction of Christ, p. 212, 213. when
he argues against that kind of Satisfaction held ( as a rigid Notion of Law)
that admits not of Forgiveness of Sins past; which we consess Christ's
Sufferings and Sacrifice has made way for, upon true Repentance on the
Offenders part, which Christ's great Sufferings (under the Burden of the
World's Iniquities) do call for, and require universally of them.

And as to the Praise of the great Love and Grace of God to Mankind, we must
confess, that it was by the same Grace Christ tasted Death for every Man, and
was really an Offering and a Sacrifice of a sweet smelling Savor to God,
Ephesians. 5. 2. and our only Mediator; and in that Sense sincerely own what was
really his Satisfaction to the Father, to stay the Execution of his Wrath and
obtain our Pardon, giving us Repentance by his Light and Grace in our Hearts,
yet such a kind of rigid Satisfaction and strict Payment to vindictive or
revenging Justice, as if God poured out his just Indignation or Wrath (merited
by Sinners) upon his innocent Son (as some of our Adversaries have affirmed no
less.) This we confess we cannot reconcile either to God's divine Justice or
Mercy, or to Christ's Mediation and Intercession for Transgressors. And little
short of this, is our present Adversary's Notion, That Justice cannot remit the
least Farthing, else it were not Justice; speaking of divine Justice even of
God, as being not only just, but Justice it self in the Abstract, the highest
and most adequate Notion of Justice, p. 214. All which duly considered, borders
upon the most rigid and extreme Notion of Satisfaction; as if divine Justice (
i. e. God himself in his Sense) could not remit the least Farthing, but Christ
must strictly pay every Farthing of the Debt of Offenders; whereas there is a
divine Justice or Righteousness (that is truly Evangelical) which is declared in
the Forgiveness of Sins that are past, through the forbearance of God, Romans 3.
25. and ver. 26. to show at this time his Righteousness; that he might be Just,
and the Justifier of him that believes in Jesus. It was for this end that God
set forth his Son Jesus Christ, to be a Propitiation through Faith in his
Blood, to declare his Rightoousness for the remission of Sins past, etc.
Wherefore the Quakers do not make one of God's Attributes fight with or conquer
the other, nor one to subdue and beat down the other; or his Justice to quit
the Field to his Mercy; as is ignorantly and unjustly suggested, to make us
guilty of great Nonsense and Blasphemy, p. 214, 215, 216. For all God's
Attributes in himself are in Concord, Union and Harmony; and in his Creatures
concur and agree, in order to its Reconcilation to himself; as when he brings
Man to taste of his Justice and Displeasure for Sin, it is still in Mercy, to
humble him by his Chastisement and Judgment unto Repentance, that he may find
Mercy, so as Judgment and Mercy may meet in the same Soul. And God's Wisdom is
truly magnified in finding out the means of our Redemption, by our great and
only Mediator Jesus Christ, through his Mediation, Suffering, Sacrifice and
Atonement* and his Goodness and Mercy are equally magnified, in affording
those means: But this proves not that adequate Satisfaction to vindictive
Justice, which our Adversaries have contended for.

And though we sincerely own Jesus Christ as we ought to do, both for our
Example, Intercessor, Light and Teacher; yet this is not all our Notion, or
rather Knowledge, wherein we receive him; neither do we in these, deny the
necessity of his Death, or exclude any rational account thereof, as is unduly
supposed, p. 216. For there was great reason for Christ's Death and Sacrifice
for Sinners (because all in Adam were dead and under Condemnation) that they
might live by and unto him, so as to be truly capable of really knowing and
owning Christ Jesus, in Spirit, Life and Power; and in all his Offices and
Works, both as King, High priest and Prophet, our great Mediator, Example,
Captain, Leader; Light and Lawgiver.

But to draw toward a Conclusion of this point of Satisfaction, seeing it is so
numbly and impertinently stated by our present Antagonist, let us observe a
little further how rigidly and severely he states it, to the Dishonor of God,
divine Justice it self, and his beloved Son. He first puts the Queston.

What room then is there for God's Mercy? If he be all Justice, where is his
Mercy? Then he Answers: God's Attributes do not fight or contradict one
another, they magnify and exalt one another. ( True thus far; but how?) Thus
God's Justice is magnified, in that it exacts full and adequate Satisfaction,
paid to God's Justice for our Sins, in the Sacrifice and Death of Christ; which
because of his divine Nature, was full and adequate Satisfaction. And by his
humane Nature, the Satisfaction was paid by the same Nature, which offended, p.
214, 215.

All which considered, this is to assert Satisfaction as a Notion of Law (as
Dr. Owen called it) in the highest, rigid and most severe Sense exacted* that
any of the Prebyterians, etc. have asserted it. And to save us the Labor of
drawing the Consequences and Answers here, we may here (I hope without Offense)
give him a Recitation of a more ingenuous Person's Answer (and Objection
against this Notion) than himself, namely, Dr. Stilling fleet, (since Bishop of
Worcester) in his Discourse concerning the true Reason of the Sufferings of
Christ; pages 269, 270. Printed 1669. Out of which take the following
Discourse, viz.

The state of the Controversy has been rendered more obscure by the Mistakes of
some, who have managed it with greater Zeal than Judgment; they have shot over
their Adversary's Heads, and laid their own more open to Assaults. It is easy
to observe, That most of Socinus his Arguments are levelled against an Opinion,
which few who have considered those things do maintain, and none need to think
themselves obliged to do it; which is, That Christ paid a proper and rigid
Satisfaction for the Sins of Men, considered under the Notion of Debts, and
that he paid the very same which we ought to have done; which in the Sense of
the Law is never called Satisfaction, but strict Payment. Against this Socinus
disputes, from the impossibility of Christ's paying the very same that we were
to have paid, because our Penalty was eternal Death. And that as the
consequence of inherent Guilt, which Christ neither did nor could undergo. If a
Mediator could have paid the same, then the Gospel had not been the bringing in
of a better Covenant, but a performance of the old, p. 271. But if there be a
Relaxation or Dispensation of the first Law, then it necessarily follows, that
what Christ paid was not the very same which the first Law required; for what
need of that, when the very same was paid that was in the Obligation? But if it
be said, That the Dignity of the Person makes up what wanted in the kind or
degree of Punishment; this is a plain Confession, that it is not the same, etc.
Besides, if the very same had been paid in the strict Sense, there would have
followed A Deliverance, ipso facto, for the Release immediately follows the
Payment of the same; and it had been Injustice to have required any thing
further in order to the Discharge of the Offender, when strict and full Payment
had been made of what was in the Obligation. But we see that Faith and
Repentance, and the Consequences of those Two are made Conditions on our parts,
in order to the enjoying the Benefit of what Christ has procured, so that the
Release is not immediate upon the Payment, etc.

P. 272. We are to consider that these very Persons assert, That Christ paid
all for us, and in our Name and Stead, so that the Payment by Christ was by a
Substitution in our room: And if he paid the same which the Law required, the
Benefit must immediately accrue to those in whose Name the Debt was paid; for
what was done in the Name of another, is all one to the Creditor as if it had
been done by the Debtor himself. But above all things it is impossible to
reconcile the freeness of Remission with the full Payment, etc. Neither will it
serve to say, That though it was not free to Christ, yet it was to us, for the
Satisfaction and Remission must respect the same Person; for Christ did not pay
for himself, but for us; neither could the Remission be to him, etc. It is
impossible the same Debt should be fully paid and freely forgiven, much less
will it avoid the Difficulty in this Case to say, That it was a refusable
Payment; for it being supposed to be the very same, it was not in Justice
refusable, etc. p. 173. But this whole Opinion is built upon a Mistake, That
Satisfaction must be the Payment of the very same; which while they contend
for, they give our Adversaries too great advantage, and make them think they
triumph over the Faith of the Church, when they do it only over the Mistake of
some particular Persons. But the Foundation of this Mistake lies in the
Consideration of Punishment, under the Notion of Debts; and That Satisfaction
therefore must be by strict Payment in Rigor of Law. But how great that Mistake
is, will appear in the subsequent Discourse. Thus far the Citation.

The subsequent Discourse he mentions, is from p. 273, 274. to the end of the
said Discourse of the Sufferings of Christ.

Now I would advise our Accuser to compare his Notion of a full and adequate
Satisfaction paid to God's Justice (which he has told us cannot remit the least
Farthing) with the aforesaid Discourse, and then see how he will reconcile his
Notion thereunto.

In Sect. 16. Concerning the Holy Trinity, he says:

The Quakers and Socinians acknowledge a Three, but deny a Trinity; which is to
confess the same Thing in English, and to deny it in Latin; for Trinitas is
only Latin for Three.

He mistakes the Quakers: They do not deny the Three either in Latin or
English, but really own the holy, divine Three in Heaven; though their being
rendered distinct and separate Persons, by some of our former Adversaries, we
have conscientiously questioned, as unscriptural Terms.

Our Adversary adds, They cannot tell what Three they are, if not Three
Persons, p. 219. This is a Mistake; we can safely tell what to call them in
Scripture Language: That they are Three that bear Record, or Three witnessing,
(...), (i. e. Witnesses) in Heaven, the Father, the Word and the Holy Ghost,
and these Three are One, John 1. 5. These are the Father, Son and Holy Spirit,
which are essentially One, or One in the Divine Being.

Our Adversary further says: The Quakers, who own the Divinity of Christ, are
under greater Difficulties than the Socinians, who deny the Divinity of Christ,
p. 219.

It Is well he now grants the Quakers own the Divinity of Christ: But how well
this agrees with much of his Book against us, let the serious Reader judge. And
we know no Difficulties we are under herein: The Man imagins, and would obtrude
Difficulties upon us, from his own Terms, which are none of ours; as that there
is but One Person in the Godhead; which are none of our Words. Much less his
Muggletonian Consequence, That God died, and that Christ was his own Father to
whom he prayed upon the Cross. We know no real occasion given by the Quakers,
for him to draw such Absurdities upon them, or to be afraid of such
Distinctions and Salvo's at the bottom of the Quaker-pretences, as
impertinently he prates against them, exposing his pretended Fears instead of
Proofs.

And what if G. F. opposed Chr. Wade's calling The Holy Ghost a Person? And if
he said, The Scriptures do not tell the People of Three Persons, etc? And yet
confessing the Father, Son and Holy Spirit to be always One? Does it follow,
That the Quakers do not acknowledge that there were Three in Heaven before
Christ was born, as (he says) it seems? p. 220. And then to aggravate the
Matter against G. F. That he means One Person, as Muggleton does, p. 220.

What if the Quakers think the Term Three Persons, too low an Epithet or
Character to put upon the most Glorious, Blessed Three that bear Record in
Heaven? Can they be to blame herein? When they aim at giving more Honor to
them, in a true Scripture sense, than they think the Term Persons imports, yet
still owning the Holy, Divine Three in Heaven, and that they were before Christ
was born; contrary to what is unduly suggested against us. For the Father, the
Word and Holy Spirit, were concerned both in Divine Wisdom, Power and Goodness,
in forming, preserving and governing both the Old Creation and the New; By the
Word of the Lord were the Heavens made, and all the Host of them by the Spirit
of his Mouth, Psalm. 33. 6. So here is the Divine, Holy Three forming and
completing the first Creation. And the Gospel was commanded to be preached in
the Name of the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, that Men might truly believe and
know the Work of God by his dear Son and Holy Spirit, unto their everlasting
Salvation, Peace and Comfort. For God so loved the World, that he has given
his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him should not perish, but
have everlasting Life, John 3. 16. And Jesus answered and said, If any Man love
me he will keep my Word, and my Father will love him; and we will come unto
him, and will dwell with him, John 14. 23. And ver. 26. The Comforter, which is
the Holy Ghost, whom the Father will send in my Name, he shall teach you all
things, and bring all things to your remembrance, which I have told you. And
Chapter 15. 26. But when the Comforter shall come, whom I will send unto you from
the Father, even the Spirit of Truth, which proceeds of the Father, he shall
testify of me.

And 1 John 4. 13, 14. Hereby know we that we dwell in him, and he in us,
because he has given us of his Spirit. And we have seen and do testify, That
the Father sent the Son to be the Savior of the World. All which may evince
how scripturally we own a Trinity, or Holy Three in the Deity.

Our Accuser tells of what unimaginable Excesses Enthusiasm may drive Men to;
and that all should beware of that desperate Shelve, upon which both our Church
and State have suffered miserable Shipwreck, p. 221, 222. Here he disparages
his own Church, whereby we may beware of embarking in such a ^raz'd, wrecked
Vessel, as here he represents her.

He excepts against the Words not distinct, from which G. F. intends, in a sort
of common Acceptance, That the Son is not divided or separate from the Father,
p. 222, 223, 224. Though it is true in one Sense, the Father, Son and Holy Ghost
are not essentially distinct as to their divine Being, which is but One, they
are but One God; but in respect to their Properties of Relation, as Father, Son
and Holy Ghost, as such they are distinct; but not divided nor separate, either
in themselves or Work of the Old or New Creation; yet not Three Gods, nor Three
distinct Cre^tors, but One God, and One Creator.

Passing by diverse Impertinencies and Absurdities under this Head, to conclude,
We know no People professing a Deity in Christendom, that more sincerely and
livingly believe and confess a most glorious Scripture-Trinity (or Holy Three)
the Father, the Word (or Son) and Holy Ghost, than we the People called Quakers
do believe and confess; to the Praise and Glory of the Father, Son and Holy
Ghost.

Our Accuser's 17th Sect. Concerning the Divinity and Incarnation of Christ, is
full of Falsehoods, Perversions and Misconstructions.

1. He begins with this Falsehood, viz. The Quakers Heresy in this is taken
from the Socinians: They say, Christ took Flesh; but no otherwise, as they
explain it, than as Angels assumed Bodies, etc. Which is notoriously false
against the Quakers, who confess and believe, That Christ, the Word, took real
Flesh, a real Body, and not a mere Apparition, nor a Fantastical Body; and so
they have often declared both in Print, and Preaching.

2. That they allow (not always) that Christ did inspire the Person of that Man
Jesus, in an higher measure than other Men. False and perverse again: God did
inspire the Man Christ Jesus higher than all other Men; he received the Spirit
not by measure, but in fullness; he was anointed with the Oil of Gladness above
all his Fellows: All other Men, even the best, are inspired only measurably.
This is always allowed by us.

3. False again, That they deny any proper Incarnation of Christ; that is, that
he was made Flesh. For the Word was made Flesh, John 1. 14. And he took not
upon him the Nature of Angels, but the Seed of Abraham; and part of the same
Flesh and Blood which the Children had, Heb. 2. 14, 16. and Christ Jesus is one
entire Christ and Savior. We do not divide nor confound Jesus and Christ, nor
take the Name Christ to our selves, but Christians, as anointed by him, and
Partakers of Christ, and only so far have an Interest in his Name, Power and
Life.

4. False also, That they say not that Christ did carry up (i. e. the Body of
Jesus) with him into Heaven. Whose Body then but his own, when he was visibly
seen to ascend, so as a Cloud received him out of their sight? Acts 1. 9, 10,
11.

5. Seeing we confess, That Christ is now in Heaven; when did ever we refuse to
confess, that there is any Jesus now in Heaven, or any elsewhere? This is an
absurd Accusation, as if we divided Jesus and Christ, or denied Jesus to be
Christ; which is far from us.

6. That they know not what is become of him, (Jesus) is also false. He ascended
far above all Heavens, that he might fill all things; and we know him in us by
his Spirit.

7. That they say there is no Christ without them; is false also.

8. No other Christ but what is within them. There Is not Two Christ's: It Is one
and the same Christ that is without us and within us, though in different manners.

9. That they allow him no other Body but their own; is false. They allow him
his own proper glorious Body, in which he is their Head, and they united to
him; so as the Body (in general or comprehensively) is but one Body, even so is
Christ, 1 Cor. 12. 12.

10. That they spiritualize ALL his Life and Death to his spiritual Living and
Dying within them; which is a reiterated Falsehood. The same Christ that was
crucified in the Flesh without, is spiritually within known in true Believers:
It Is not another Christ, but another Manifestation of one and the same Christ.

11. Our Friend G. F. (in the places impertinently and perversely quoted, Gr.
Mist. p. 210, 211, 254.) does not dispute against saying, That the Man Christ
that was crucified, his Body is now in the Presence of his Father: But against
their saying, Christ is absent from the Saints and People; and against their
professing a Christ without them and another within them, (i. e. Two Christ's)
There being but one Lord Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 8. 6.

12. It Is neither impious nor blasphemous in the Quakers to affirm, That the
One Lord Jesus Christ does influence, inspire and enlighten us by his Life and
Spirit in our Hearts, (this is the true state of the Case) to guide us; and
that he is the only Christ and Savior that so does; and that Christ, and his
Spirit and Light, are not so divided: Being still but One Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ, who suffered for us, and reigns both in Heaven and Earth, in
which he has all Power committed to him.

13. Our Adversary refers to one Rob. Gordon's Authority against us, in his
pretended Testimony to the true Savior, or Jesus of Nazareth, printed 1670. In
which there are many Abuses, Misrepresentations and Contradictions answered and
detected by G. Keith and G. Whitehead, in their Book, Entitled, The Light of
Truth triumphing over Darkness, Ignorance, Error and Envy. G. Keith then
vindicated us and our Principles against R. G. and other Opposers; however he
be now declined and turned against us, he has not retracted his Answer to the
said R. Gordon, whose Authority we deny, and it will not support our present
Opposer against us.

14. What he quotes of S. E. 's Challenge, What was said of Christ, the World
was made by him, and the World knew him not, so it may be said of this true
Prophet G. F. p. 232. We the Quakers, so called, disown the Comparison, any
otherwise than as it relates to the World knew him not, for so far Christ
himself allows his own, They are not of the World, as I am not of the World,
John 17. And the World knows you not, because it knows not him, 1 John 3. 1.

15. His repeated false Charges of making our selves equal with God, and
preferring our selves before the Man Christ, making him and all he did and
suffered to be BUT a Type or Shaedow of what is really performed in us by the
true Christ, p. 233. These Falsehoods and Perversions are answered, denied and
detected, partly before in this, and in our Just Enquiry, and also in an Answer
to Dr. Ford, Entitled, The Christianity of the People commonly called Quakers,
etc.

Some of his other Falsehoods he quotes and credits out of R. Gordon, are viz.

16. Crying up a Light within, to cry down the Blood without.

17. To preach him (Christ) as an Example, to cast out the Atonement.

18. Denying him to have any real, outward, individual, glorified, bodily
Existence in his Fathers Kingdom.

19. That the preaching of a Christ without them, they call old beggarly Stuff.
Adding viz.

20. And those who formerly preached him as without us (though Prophets or
Apostles) to be low and carnal in their Day, according to their Cant, which he
there repeats, p. 235.

These foul and odious Lies, Calumnies and Perversions he credits and repeats
against us, which we utterly deny (and his Authority also quoted by him) as
malicious and injurious.

21. His next Authority against us is T. C. i. e. Tho. Crisp his Animadvers.
and F. Bugg's Quakerism Withering; both which are fully answered, and their
manifold Falsehoods and Calumnies justly detected and reprehended, particularly
in G. W.'s Answer, Entitled, The Counterfeit Convert, and T. C. by Edward
Pennington. As to those offensive Words Your carnal Christ, your imagined God,
we do not affect the Terms, neither are they proper to the true Christ* or
omnipresent God.

22. In p. 236. the Snake unfairly cites G. F. in two places, Gr. Mist. p. 250.
leaving out the very reason of his Reflection upon Chr. Wade, his recording
himself a Reprobate, which was his Ignorance of the Mystery of Christ within
him. And Gr. Mist. p. 183. The Imputation to a Believer is owned, and this
Imputation is within; for he that believes is born of God, and has the Witness
in himself. Abraham believed and the Romans, and to such the Imputation was
spoken in the Belief, etc. All these Words left out (as seems to us) with
design to render us as wholly denying Imputation on any account, which is a
manifest Perversion; though G. F. in the place cited, esteems the inward
Enjoyment of Christ Jesus, and his Righteousness, to be beyond any Imputation
only, in the first Belief, as true Believers, in Union with Christ, are nearer
to him than when they first believed.

23. It Is false, That the Body which Christ assumed, we do not call the Body of
Christ, as a Man's Body is called his Body; but only as when an Angel assumes a
Body. For the Body which Christ assumed was his real Body, and he really
suffered in it; and therein was made a little lower than the Angels, Heb. 2 9.
who were not capable of such Sufferings as his, yet he was dignified, crowned
with Glory and Honor far above them.

24. Again the Snake perversely quotes, F. Bugg's New Rome Arraigned; That the
Quakers can never call the bodily Garment, Christ; thence inferring, His Body
to be but only as a Cloak or a Garment which a Man wears, which he may throw
off or put on again without any alteration in his Person or Nature, p. 237,
238. In this he perversely strains the Simily (a Man's Cloak has no feeling to
suffer with him when he is bruised or wounded) and he is partial still, in not
taking notice of the Answer to F. Bugg even in this very Point. See Charitable
Essay, p. 2. thus given, viz.

As to J. P.'s Words chiefly objected, That we cannot call the Bodily Garment,
Christ. The word Garment I take to be only a figurative manner of speaking, as
the word Vail, which is his Flesh is, Heb. 10. 20. An Ingenuous Man would allow
him his own meaning as he explains it; namely, That we cannot call the Body
(which he took upon him) Chiefly and in the First Place Jesus Christ. It not
being first, nor the entire Christ, because he was the Son of God, and
consequently Christ, before he took upon him that Body, even when God created
all things by. Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 3. 9. He made the Worlds by his Son, Heb.
1. 2.

And after several Arguments in p. 3, 4. proving the Divinity and Pre-existence
of Christ the Son of God, before he assumed the Body, the general Consequence
deduced from the Premises, is, That the Names Jesus and Christ chiefly and
primarily belong to Him that took the Body, though sometimes given to each and
to both.

25. False again, That the Quakers say or make the Flesh of Christ of an
earthly, perishing Nature, p. 238. from F. Bugg 's, saying (against J. P.) That
which he ( Christ) took upon him ( i. e. his Body) was our Garment, even the
Flesh and Blood of our Nature, which IS of an earthly, perishing Nature; falsely
adding, and is perished by their Account, p. 238. Thus from Bugg 's Authority
and Citation against us; but takes no notice of the Answer in the said
Charitable Essay, p. 4. in these Words, viz.

He (i. e. F. B. and now his Disciple the Author of the Snake) has here
notoriously wronged the People called Quakers, by imposing a false Creed upon
them. Where do they say, That Christ's Body either was or is of an earthly
perishing Nature? I utterly deny the Charge, and F. B. also to be our
Creed-maker, Construer or Expositor, who has unjustly inferred this upon us
from Is. Pennington's saying, He took upon him the Flesh and Blood of our
Nature, which is of an earthly perishing Nature. Whereby neither he nor the
Quakers say, That Christ's Body either was or is of an earthly perishing
Nature; for his Flesh saw no Corruption, therefore did not perish; though our
Nature, our Flesh and Blood be of an earthly perishing Nature, so is not
Christ's. I cannot rationally suppose that J. P. ever intended that Christ's
Body (which on Earth did not corrupt) is of an earthly perishing Nature now in
Heaven as ours is now on Earth; (take his Words also Grammatically) for it is
such an absurdity as I cannot think ever entered into Is. Pennington's Heart,
being a Man both of Learning* Sense and Conscience; [The Flesh and Blood of our
Nature] being antecedent next to [which is of an earthly perishing Nature]
Therefore [perishing] appears only relative to Flesh and Blood, as it is ours
and in us, and not to Christ's Body which is incorruptible and glorious.

26. The People called Quakers neither account that the Body of Christ
perished, vanished or was annihilated, as said, p. 238. but that 'twas changed
so as to be a glorious, celestial Body.

27. It Is not true in his Sense, That the Quakers think that the Name of Christ
does belong to every one of them, not only more than to that Body now, but as
well as to it while upon the Earth; quoting Bugg 's New Rome. Again, Does not
the Name Christ belong to the whole Body, and to every Member of the Body, as
well as to the Head? A Question, p. 27.

Thus one Adversary credits and promotes the Authority of another to reproach
us, without taking notice of our full Answers already given. Oh! disingenuous,
as in this very Point. In the said Charitable Essay, p. 4. in these Words, viz.

Object. Does not the Name belong to the whole Body, etc. So that there are as
many Christ's, by their Doctrine, as believing Quakers.

Answ. No, that is not our Doctrine; there is one Body, and so but one Christ, 1
Cor. 12. 12. But turn the Question into F. B.'s contrary Doctrine implied, and
then it is The Name Christ belongs not to the whole Body, Christ's Body (i. e.
his Church) is not Anointed; it therefore has no right to his Name nor any
Member thereof; but then does not this appear contrary to the Apostle's
Doctrine, viz. For as the Body is one and has many Members, and all the Members
of the Body, which is one, though they be many, yet are but one Body; even so
is Christ, 1 Cor. 12. 12. The Protestant Annotations in Queen Elizabeth's Bible
are, That we might be one Body with Christ, and the whole Church one Christ.
And on Ephesians. 1. 23. The Church is also called Christ, 1 Cor. 12. 12. (What
says our Adversary to these Annotations? Dare he judge them horrid Blasphemy?)
And he that establishes us with you in Christ Jesus, and has (...), Anointed
us, is God, 2 Cor. 1. 21.

Quest. But does not the Name belong to the whole Body (and to every Member
therein) as well as to the Head?

Answ. 1. Not Equally, because he is the Head. 2. Not Literally to be so named,
but vertually and spiritually ( i. e. as by inward Participiation) and so
truly, with respect to that divine Power and Spirit, whereby both the Head and
the Body are Anointed (and united) and each Member partakes thereof in some
measure. But Christ, the Head in all things, has the Pre-eminence, he was
Anointed (more eminently) in Fullness, his Members in part or measure by the
same Spirit and Power; he was Anointed above his Fellows, implying their being
anointed in degree. (...), Christ, signifies Anointed, as being the very Christ
the only begotten Son of God, which I know no Member of his Body assumes to
himself; but (...), Christian, which has relation to Christ the Anointed; for
where Christ's Church, which is his Body, is said to be the Fullness of him that
fills all in all, Ephesians. 1. 23. it is not of the Church as distinctly
considered from the Head; but (as in Union therewith) Christ the Head is
included in that Fullness, though his proper Existence be entire, complete and
most glorious.

I think this Answer to F. Bugg, may fully Answer his Disciple the Author of
the Snake.

28. From G. Fox's saying, Christ is the Elect; our Adversary infers, And the
Elect are Christ, they make them convertible Terms, p. 239. They are not so
made by us nor by G. F. in the place quoted, Gr. Mist. p. 88. but the contrary;
though there he says, Christ is the Elect whom God upholds; He also says,
Christ knows his, and said he had other Sheep, and he knew All the Elect; and
who receive him and are in him, are the Elect. There Is no such Words in the
place quoted as that the Elect are Christ. Thus the plain Scripture is
perverted which G. F. refers to, Isa. 42. 1.

29. He again quotes Gr. Mist. p. 207. That God's Christ is not distinct from
his Saints. Here the Man unfairly leaves out what follows, viz. For he is
within them, their Spirits witness him, etc. Wherein it is plain, he means
Christ is not divided or separate from his Saints. He takes distinct from, in a
kind of common Acceptance, for divided or separate from. Here he cavils about
Words or a Mode of speaking, and then draws his hard Consequences. As

30. The grossest Absurdities, highest Blasphemies, and that G. F. could find
no difference, no distinction at all betwixt Christ and himself: Which appears
a perverse and presumptuous Calumny. As does the next,

31. That All the divine Attributes should be given to G. F. as well as unto
Christ; and that G. F. does assume the Style and Names of Christ to himself,
etc. The Man here quoting his own Authority in his Sect. 5. and there F. B.'s,
both which we deny. They have injuriously abused G. F. and others in this
Matter, who neither calls himself The Door that ever was, nor the same Christ
yesterday, to day, and for ever; (he speaks this of Christ, not of himself;)
neither did the Quakers call him the Branch, the Star, etc. as Bugg and the
Snake have basely asperst him and others, Sect. 5. p. 41, 43. etc.

These Calumnies and perverse Abuses are sufficiently detected in several
Answers to F. Bugg, and in Just Enquiry into the Libeller's Abuse. And though we
deny that those divine Attributes given to Christ may be given to any mortal
Man, yet diverse Names given to Christ are given to Saints also; as the Son of
God, the Sons of God, Luke 3. 28. John 1. 12. Romans 8. 14 The Light of the
World, John 8. 12. Mat. 5. 14. The Salt of the Earth, Mat. 5. 13. The
Righteousness of God, 1 Cor. 1. 30. 2 Cor. 5. 21* Kings, Priests, Prophets,
Apostles, Ministers, The Seed, The Good Seed, Anointed, Elect, given both to
Christ and his faithful Followers. But it may be said, These are not all
properly divine Attributes: However, they are such as are given both to Christ,
and his Brethren and Members the Saints, and true Followers of God: But The
Image and Glory of God, I presume will be assented to be no less than divine
Attributes, or importing the same, and yet without Blasphemy or Idolatry, Man
(whose Head Christ is) is called The Image and Glory of God, 1 Cor. 11. 7* and
not in any Dishonor to Christ, though the same Epithets or Characters do
properly belong to him, Heb. 1. 3. 2 Cor. 4 4. Col. 1. 15. yet given also to
Man, because endued with (or participating of) God's Image in Christ Jesus; but
we confess some divine Attributes and Names are given, as only proper to
Christ, and not to Men or Saints; as, The Wisdom and Power of God, The Word of
God, A Quickening Spirit, The only begotten Son of God, The Messiah, The very
Christ, The Prince of Life and Peace; The Mighty God, The Everlasting Father,
etc. these are only intended and proper to Christ.

32. We do not find Blasphemy or Idolatry excused, or any fair pretense used
for the same by W. P. in the place quoted ( i. e, 11 Chapter Of the Invalidity of
John Faldoe 's Vindication) as is defamingly alleged against him, p. 242.
which is about the Soul of Man, etc. which W. P. there fully Answers.

To Sect. 18. which the Author styles, Some Remarks upon Geo. Whitehead's
Creed, relating to some of the Particulars before-going.

The nameless Author of the Snake in the Grass, having vented his and others
Venom and great Spite against the People called Quakers in general, and diverse
Particulars by Name; now, to complete his Design of great Envy, he must put
forth his Sting in the Tail of his Work, and have a fling and sit of Hissing
like an angry Snake, or as one that whispers out of the Dust, Isa. 29. 4.
against the said G. W. I being the Person aimed at, may now briefly answer for
Truth and for my self, as concerned.

1. The word Creed he imposes upon me: 'Twas no formal Creed or Summary of our
Faith, though real Truths by way of Positions in the affirmative, as a Christian
Testimony, in direct Opposition to F. B.'s great Abuse, false Charge and
Perversions, which with a negative Testimony against him therein, are both
adapted to answer his own Terms, Words and Phrases, that our Testimony and
Positions might be the more apparent against his Abuse and Perversions; for I
know no Adversary that I find Fault with, but I can freely and in good
Conscience assert my own Sense in the Matters in Controversy, as well as
oppose his, though it be not in the manner of a formal Creed, yet true in it
self; for we should have numerous Creeds, if all Positions we write in
Opposition to Opposers, must be esteemed Creeds, or Summaries and Confessions
of our Faith; nevertheless, we believe what we assert and vindicate in each
particular.

My Accuser presently shows his Prejudice and Enmity against me without cause,
As with a new Confession of Faith, in such dubious and general Terms, as may at
first sight deceive the unwary Reader; though I gave it in as plain and as much
in scriptural Terms as I could, and as the Matters concerned would admit of.
And I know my own Sincerity therein better than my Accuser, who insincerely
calls me Honest George, whilst he is aspersing me and casting Dirt at me, as
Deceiving, keeping off contradicting the Heart of the Heresy, still preserving
it safe and untouched; and not only so, but often with a slily, insinuated
Excuse and Defense of it, p. 244. So that my confessing Jesus to be the Christ,
and both his coming in the Flesh and in the Spirit, according to holy
Scripture-Testimony, and also to the Holy Scriptures of the Old and New
Testament, namely, the Holy Doctrine and divine Precepts therein, as given by
divine Inspiration (on which much of my said Confession against F. Bugg
depends;) this has no better Acceptance or Resentment with my Accuser, than as
no Contradiction to the Heart of Heresy, but as still preserving it safe and
untouched; and which is worse, a slily insinuated Excuse and Defense of it. Oh
sad Stuff! Whither will not Pride and Envy precipitate some Men? What
scripturally to confess Jesus Christ and the Holy Scriptures (as above) is this
no Contradiction to Heresy? But to preserve, excuse or defend it? What Is
Heresy than, pray? Is it to confess Jesus Christ come in the Flesh, etc.
according to holy Scripture-Testimony of him? Oh! for shame, leave off such
blind Envy and blasphemous Abuse.

And now to come to the Point, How or wherein have I slily insinuated Excuse
and Defense of it ( i. e. of the Heart of Hersie, as before?) p. 244. Thus (
says my Accuser) in his first Article he confesses Jesus to be the Christ,
even the same Jesus Christ who was born of the Virgin Mary at Bethlehem, etc.

I confess this is part of my Confession, but cannot believe this is either not
contradictory to the Heart of Heresy, or that it is any Excuse or Defense of
it. Nor that our confessing God or Christ to be our Light, can be any such
Excuse or Defense. Neither do we attribute the Name Christ to any (much less to
every one) of our selves, as we are often falsely accused, as here, p. 245.
Whence he also most unjustly infers, That then this will appear that this
Confession of Whitehead 's is a mere Fallacy, while it attributes no more to
Jesus Christ than to G. W. p. 245.

Which is a very foul and absurd Falsehood and notorious Lie in Fact, and
contradiction to my said Confession (even so far as it is cited by himself as
before) which is, 1. We sincerely own, profess and confess Jesus to be the
Christ, even the same Jesus Christ who was born of the Virgin Mary at Bethlehem
in Judea, Mat. 2. suffered Death upon the Cross without the Gates of Jerusalem,
was quickened and raised again by the Power of God, and ascended into Heaven
and Glory, according to the Scriptures.

Now have I herein attributed no more to Jesus Christ than to my self, as he
says? Where did I ever attribute this to my self? Where Is the mere Fallacy?
Not in my Confession to Jesus Christ, but in this horrid Abuse and gross
Perversion thereof. Did I ever say that I am Jesus Christ? Or, that I was born
of the Virgin Mary? Or, that I suffered Death upon the Cross at Jerusalem? etc.
Oh! for shame, who cannot see such Malice and Madness as my Adversary has
vented against me in this Matter?

Again, I find no Fallacy in my Confession to Christ, as without; nor is there
any, unless I had denied the Virgin Mary (of whom Christ was born) to be
without, or Bethlehem, and Judea and Jerusalem, to be without us; nor does
Christ, being without, prove him not to be our Light within; for the same
Christ said, I am the Light of the World; therefore he is our Light, yea the
Quakers Light (as he calls it) they being included in the World. Does not the
Sun shine in our Houses, because the Body and Fullness of it is without them?

My Accuser quibbles and quarrels with Art. 10. of my Confession, viz. Our
Ministers do not teach that the Name of Jesus and Christ belong to every Member
in the Body or Church, as amply as to Christ the Head. And here he leaves out
all the following explanatory part of the Article, (as he calls it) and
scornfully descants upon the Word amply being in a different black Character,
lest (quoth he) you should mistake and think that George was Christ as amply as
Jesus. And then goes on scoffing, That was modest indeed; but then George thou
art Christ as well as Jesus, though not so amply: Which is both a false
Implication, and foreign to my intention. The word amply in that place, was
only used and intended in direct opposition to F. Bugg's falsely saying, The
Quakers teach, That the Name Jesus and Christ belong to every Member in the
Body, as amply as to Christ the Head, New Rome, Ar. p. 47. But even in the same
10 Art. quoted against me, I do not allow any Member to be called Christ, but
expressly dissallow it, though I confess how Christians have some Interest in
his Name, but not to be called Jesus, but Christians. The explanatory part of
my Confession in the said 10th Article, disingenuously left out by this
Scoffer, is in these Words, viz. But that the divine Anointing (to which Name
Christ has relation) virtually is in some measure or degree afforded to every
Member of his Body, but not so amply as to him the Head; nor for any Member to
be called Christ, but a Christian; because Christ received the Anointing the
Holy Spirit not by measure, but in fullness; and because he is the Head of the
Body, the Church.

And this very Matter is more fully explained in my Charitable Essay, in Answer
to F. Bugg, p. 4. as before. It was far from my Thoughts or Intention to imply
any such thing, as That I am Christ as well as Jesus; for I have often written
my self A Servant-of Christ; and so I am, I humbly bless his Name that is above
every Name. Therefore I am still very unjustly accused with rank Sophistry,
dodging and deluding, and casting a Mist before the Eyes of poor deluded
People, or leading them into the Mystery of Iniquity, or of any Equivocating or
Jesuitical Confession of Faith, as foully and unjustly accused, p. 246, 247. I
have a Conscience toward God in what I confess, and in good Conscience
testify, That thou my scornful, lurking Adversary, have cast manifold false
and gross Defamations upon me, and many others of my Christian Persuasion.

And in the true Sense of Scripture, I have both confessed Christ's coming in
the Flesh, and as he the Word was made (or took) Flesh, Jo. 1. 14. And more
than the Socinians, I do still confess, That as the reasonable Soul and Body is
One Man, so He that is God and Man is One Christ. And whether this will give
Satisfaction to an implacable Adversary or no, I value not; knowing my
Conscience clear in the Sight of him who judges righteously, which I am sure
this my unjust Judge and false Accuser is not, who presently after he has
styled me Honest George, unjustly brands me with Infamy, as Sophistry,
Delusion, Depths of Satan, Mystery of Iniquity, Equivocation, Jesuitical
Confession, etc. Oh! rank Malice, bitter Envy, etc.

As for my Confession in the 7th Art. alleged against me, it stands good and
true, viz. We own no such saying, as that the Holy Doctrine or Divine Precepts
of Scripture, is either Dust, Death, or the Serpent's Meat, but truly
profitable to us by the Assistance of God's Holy Spirit given to us, etc. And
this was in direct opposition to F. Bugg's saying, These Quakers, who pretend
to own the Precepts and Doctrine of the Bible to be holy and blessed, yet say
it is Dust and Death, the Serpent's Meat, etc. Apol. Introd. p. 18. to his New
Rome. [We do not believe any of these Quakers ever so said of the Precepts and
Doctrine, nor do they own any such Saying, I wholly disown it.] But then to beg
the Question, What was it you called Dust and Serpent's Meat? Was it nothing
else but the Ink and Paper? Did any Body ever say, That these were not Dust?
Or, Is that any part of the Controversy betwixt us? Snake p. 249. Here he
yields the Point; he grants the Ink and Paper to be Dust. I said, Will decay
and turn to Dust; but so will not the Word, the Gospel, nor the Holy Doctrine
contained in Scripture. And it has been confessed by F. B. and others, That
Holiness is not ascribed to the Paper and Ink (or Inky Characters) that will
decay, but to the Holy Doctrine and Precepts which will not decay, but be
permanent and endure, and therefore called the Holy Scriptures, with respect to
the Holy Matters therein contained. That the Books and Writings in Ink and
Paper will wear out, so will not the Word, is evident. Jehoiakim King of Judah,
could burn Jeremiah the Prophet's Roll or Book, writ with Ink by Barach, but
not the Word of the Lord, nor properly the Words thereof; for the same Word
caused all the former Words to be written again, after the Roll was burnt, Jer.
36. If then the Books, the Paper and Ink be combustible, or will decay and turn
to Dust, but not the Word, nor the Doctrine; where is then the Controversy
indeed, when the same thing is granted on both sides?

He quotes Gr. Mist. p. 302. Sect. 11. p. 146, 147. as saying, Paper and Ink is
not infallible, that will come to Dust; unto which the Word, Christ and the
Spirit is preferred, in the same place quoted. And in the said Gr. Mist. p. 78.
by Letter, he there means Paper and Ink; but the Scripture, the thing it speaks
of, is spiritual, the Word is Spirit. And further, p. 127. the Scripture (or
Writing) it self, without the Spirit that gave it forth, is a dead Letter in it
self. The Spirit is that that gave forth the Scriptures.

For my part, as I am not in the least conscious to my self of the least
Contempt of Holy Scripture, nor yet of the Bible; for I have always preferred
it to all other Books extant in the World, and more affected Reading therein
than any other Book, even from my Childhood; and often bless divine Providence
for preserving to us the Scriptures: So I know of none among us guilty of
contemning them: Neither is what is said, from any Contempt of Scripture, no
more than it is of the Earth and the Heavens, to say, They shall wax old and
perish, but the Word that made them endures, Psalm. 102. 25, 26. Heb. 1. 11,
12. But say what we can in this Case to clear our selves of any Contempt to the
Holy Scripture, this our uncharitable Judge and Accuser will not believe us:
He Is bent to asperse, he has swallowed down so much of the sour Leaven of the
Malice of a few false Brethren, Persecutors and Apostates, from whom he derives
much of his Authority; and thus scurrilously and most falsely imposes upon me,
viz. And therefore George, notwithstanding all thy meally Modesty, it is; it is
indeed George, it is the very Doctrine of the Scriptures which you blaspheme as
Dust, and Death, and Serpent's Meat, on purpose to bring Men off from trying
your pernicious Heresies by those saecred Oracles, p. 250. This is a pernicious
Abuse and Calumny, against my self and others of us (to outface us against our
very Sense and Consciences) and in good Conscience I testify against it; it
never entered into my Intention or Thoughts so to blaspheme the Doctrine of the
Scriptures, as to term or deem it Dust, Death or Serpent's Meat: The Lord
rebuke this lying; envious Spirit.

Neither do I vilify the written Doctrine and Precepts of God, in comparison of
our New Light (as he falsely calls it) p. 250, 251. but reverently esteem them:
The Man makes no Conscience of defaming us. Neither do we quarrel with the Law
and the Testimony, nor yet with Writing or Scripture, as it is in Ink or Paper,
but distinguish between the Writing and the Things written, which is no
Contempt to either. We are thankful to Divine Providence for both the
Scripture, or Writing, and the Holy Doctrine and Divine Precepts therein
written; for they testify unto Christ our Light, and our ^ight to the Truth of
them.

And to what he says,-If any do not teach the same, i. e. according to the Law
and the Testimony, or written Word, it is because there is no Light in them,
Isa. 8. 20. And then puts this Emphasis upon it, No Light, George! Mark that:
Your false Pretenses to the Light within are here overruled, p. 251.

I deny that our Pretenses to the Light within is either false or here
overruled; if they speak not according to this Word, it is because there is no
Morning to them. If he will see the Note from the Hebrew in some Bibles, he may
see no Morning in the Margin over against no Light: Then let him Mark that. But
is there no Light in the Creation before Morning, either inward or outward,
pray? Did not the Light shine in Darkness, before it shined out of Darkness?
And had not the Believers a more sure Word of Prophecy, whereunto they did well
to take heed, as unto a Light shining in a dark Place, until the Day dawned and
the Day Star arose in their Hearts? 2 Pet. 1. 19. And are not many reproved by
the Light them in, for telling Lies and speaking contrary to the Word? etc. And
therefore there was some true Light in them, before the Morning appeared to
them.

And though my Accuser says, These, and suchlike Texts, detect and explode the
miserable. Ignorance and Blasphemy of these Pretenders to Light. For which we
have his own ipse dixit, and much such Raillery, but know no plain Texts of
Scripture yet produced by him, that so detects us; but his own Falsehood and
great Ignorance about the Light, is very apparent.

Again, he falsely defames and reprobaches me, from p. 28. Of Innocence
Triumphant, with excusing and justifying Diabolical Suggestions in the
Quaker-Refuge ( he says) against the Authority of the sacred Scripture, by
saying, That it questioned but some, not all, p. 252.

This Accuser has a most odious, injurious course of defaming and perverting,
as well as curtalizing our Words, wherein he has taken part with his famous
Author F. Bugg, to whom the Answer was given, on which he grounds his black
Charge against me, Of justifying Diabolical Suggestions, etc. In which Answer I
expressly declare thus, viz. His Accusation that the Quakers insinuate, in a
Book called The Quakers Refuge, That What the true Prophets spoke was false,
and What the false Prophets spoke was true, p. 47. New Rome Vnm. p. 23. We
disown these Expressions, and I think they are not duly inferred from the said
Book, questioning whether Some Words were not spoken by wicked Men, some by
wise Men, ill applied; some by good Men, ill expressed, etc. Now, at my saying,
Yet this questioned but of some Words in Scri^ture, not all; he takes occasion
to Rail fearfully against me, as a Justifier of Diabolical Suggestions. When my
Answer was not with the least intent to oppose or lessen the Authority of the
Sacred Scriptures; but in direct opposition to F. Bugg's Calumny, in these
general, odious and false Expressions, viz. That the Quakers insinuate, that
What the true Prophets spoke, was false. Which Expression we utterly deny, as
both in themselves grossly false, against the true Prophets, and falsely charged
on the Quakers, to defame them.

And as to the Questions cited out of the Quak. Refuge, at which Offense is
taken, 1. They are not mine. 2. I do not believe they are the Author's of that
Quak Refuge, though cited by him. 3. It is apparent he does not espouse them as
his own Judgment, nor make them the Matter in that present Controversy, nor
resolve them in the Affirmative; but seems to recite and wave them, as
Originally proceeding from some other Person, as I understand. The furthest
that can be drawn from my said Answer to F. B. that may seem offensive (which I
should be sorry for, if 'twere really so) is my seeming to grant the Question,
That in some Words some true Prophets were mistaken. And if this be made an
Offense, I think it is no real one, for I designed none: However, I still
confess, I believe the Record of Scripture to be true. Good Men, and some true
Prophets also, have been and may be mistaken in some things, and have had their
Weaknesses and Failings truly recorded in Scripture; and also their
Deliverances, for good Ends and Admonition to others. Was not Samuel a good Man
and a Prophet, and yet mistaken, when he took Eliab for the Lord's Anointed? 1 Samuel 16, 6. 7. And in the Argument upon Job in the ancient Bible, is marked,
That Job maintains a good Cause, but handles it evil. Again, his Adversaries
have an evil Matter, but they defend it craftily. Moreover, he was assured that
God had not rejected him; yet through his great Torments and Afflictions, he
burst forth into many Inconveniences both of Words and Sentences. See the
Argument at large.

And was not the Prophet Elijah mistaken when he thought himself alone, or none
in Israel but himself, that was zealous for the Lord God of Hosts? But what
says the Answer of God unto him? I have reserved unto my self seven thousand
Men, that have not bowed the knee to Baal, 1 King. 19. 10, 18. Romans 11. 3, 4.
And to say but little of the Old Prophet that persuaded the Young Prophet,
contrary to the Word of the Lord, 1 King. 13. I could instance Jonas, David,
and several others that were good Men, who had some Weaknesses and Mistakes in
Words and Actions, yet the Lord was good to them and helped them, according to
the Integrity of their Hearts toward him. And these Things being truly
recorded in Scripture for Instruction and Admonition, we truly esteem the
Scripture-Record thereof. And even where the Words, Lies, Blasphemies and
Actions of the Devil, wicked Men and Persecutors, and the Judgments which befell
them, are recorded in the Scriptures, we own the Record or History thereof to
be true, and highly esteem it for Instruction and Warning to Men. And to
distinguish between the Words of God in Scripture, and the Words of the Devil,
is but what the Scripture it self does, which can be no Contempt to it; for I
have known some stumbled, by some of the Priests making no distinction, but
calling all that is written in Scripture the Word of God; as one that was the
Mayor of Thetford near 40 Years ago, told me, That a Priest wanting Induction
into the vacant Benefice, and preaching there for Approbation, took his Text
out of the Words wherewith the Devil tempted Christ, Mat. 4. And bidding the
People hearken to the Word of God, as they should find it written in such a
Chapter and Verfe; whereupon this Person that told me of it was so offended,
that he would not give his Voice to choose the said Priest, because he had told
them, That was the Word of God, which was the Words of the Devil. Now let none
be so disingenuous as to take this as in Contempt of Holy Scripture, Doctrine or
Precepts therein; for where either the Words, Blasphemies, wicked Actions or
Persecutions of the Devil or Men, are therein mentioned, the Record thereof is
true, and in Testimony against them, and the intent of such Record holy, just
and good.

Farther my Accuser tells me, Nor is my Salvo more ingenuous in the Eleventh
Article. And why so? It is really, say I, contrary to our Faith and Principle,
to make Christ Jesus himself Only a Figure, a Veil or Garment, p. 254. Which
was in direct opposition to his Author F. Bugg 's falsely saying, The Quakers
would make Christ Only a Figure, a Veil, a Garment, implied by way of Question,
p. 58. New Rome Ar. Here he quarrels with the word Only as with the word Amply,
and accuses me with Equivocating, and that this is but a Negative Confession:
But really George (quoth he) this is not re-assuming your Christian Testimony
in the Affirmative, as thou did promise, etc. still hiding your self in the
Dark in Negatives: But we would know affirmatively, what it is you do profess;
and this thou did promise, and this thou have not performed, p. 255, 256.

Here he accuses me with breach of Promise; but very falsely, as in the said
11th Article is plain, that my Confession of Christ Jesus himself, is not only
Negative but Affirmative, namely, He being the Substance and End of all
Figures, Types and Shadows. Is not this Affirmative, pray? And as remote from
Truth is his accusing the Quakers Books of calling Christ Jesus a Type or
Figure of their Light within, p. 263, 264. I know no such Books of the Quakers
that so call Christ Jesus A Type of our Light within, but that he is our Light,
which has inlighten'd us among the rest of Mankind.

It Is implied by way of Question, That Christ clothed himself in Flesh and
Blood, and that he took Flesh, etc. for so ( quoth he) it may be said that our
Soul is clothed with our Body, as with a Garment or Veil. It is not Words; but
the meaning that we contend about, says he, p. 257.

We know best our own Meaning, being well satisfied that it is according to Holy
Scripture. Where Is then the difference? He then quarrels with our Meaning, not
with the Words here, but elsewhere; he does as his Author F. Bugg has done with
the words Veil and Garment, in J. P.'s Question to Professors: But this Author
yields the Point, he assents to both; As our Soul is clothed with our Body, as
with a Garment or Veil; and so of Christ. Which warrants J. P.'s Question
against his Author F. B. and himself, at least so far as not to make it a
Subject of any further Contention against us.

Again, my Accuser brings a heavy, black Charge upon me in these Words, viz. In
this same 11th Article we are now upon, after your full and Affirmative
Declaration ( before he would have it Negative) you subborn Two Texts as
Favorers of your damnable Heresy before-told, yet (say you, slily) his Flesh
was called the Veil, Heb. 10. And he took upon him the form of a Servant, and
was made like unto Men, and was found in the (...), Shape or Figure of a Man,
Phil. 2. 6, 7. And then exclaims, Ah George! George! I could forgive thee any
thing but this: What* put upon us at this rate!

It seems my citing those Two Texts, and alleging them to prove that the word
Veil was applied to Christ's Flesh which he took upon him, and the Word (...),
Shape or Figure of a Man, to the form of his Manhood or outward Man, though I
intended no other than that, without the least Contempt to Christ: Such Words
might be used as they had been by some of our Friends. For this it seems I have
committed such a heinous and unpardonable Crime or Sin, as this my severe Judge
cannot forgive. This is represented as my highest Offense; and truly I shall
not need to seek to him for Absolution or Pardon, nor to be my Confessor: I
have a merciful and faithful High Priest to apply and appeal to; I need not go
to unmerciful and implacable Ones for Pardon; especially such a one as has so
shamefully calumniz'd me with subborning Two Texts as Favorers of damnable
Heresy. How comes this Accuser, in his Fallibility or Uncertainty, thus
severely to condemn me, when he cannot refute Matter of Fact about the Two said
Texts, being alleged in behalf of my Friend's meaning, and not at all with the
least Intention to lessen the Dignity or Glory of the Son of God? No, far be it
from me. And where is my unpardonable Sin in the Application of the Text, Phil.
2? Why he says, George Whitehead brings in the word Figure, which is not in
the English Translation. And what then? But let him have it, he himself makes
it synonimous to Shape, p. 263. And he is forced to let me have it, because he
cannot well deny it, without Disparagement to himself. But herein he would
place on me a Mis-application of the Words, [Who being found in the Shape or
Figure of a Man, etc.] And therefore says, what relation has this to the
calling Christ Jesus a Type or Figure of their Light within, which I have shown
above out of the Quakers Books? And I have denied this as a Falsehood before,
and now declare against his manifest Perversion and Injury to me, and my Words
herein. For as I sincerely disown the Words charged, viz. The calling Christ
Jesus a Type or Figure of our Light within, I could not apply the Words before
in the Text, Phil. 2. to have any relation thereto; much less as proof of that
which I never held: And I know none of us that does so call Jesus Christ A Type
of our Light within, he being the Fountain thereof. Nor that Christ is Only a
Figure, as falsely charged by F. Bugg. Which Perversion, so far as I can find,
was first forged from these Words, in the Book Readiness Errand; viz. Christ in
the Flesh without them, is their Example or Figure; which is both one. For his
being their Example, 1 Pet. 2. 21. and 4. 1. and 1. 15. and John 13. 15. are
quoted. See also Luke 2. 31. he was called a Sign. Now hence to say he was Only
a Sign, were a gross Perversion; Christ was our Example. Now hence to say he
was nothing else but an Example, were an Abuse and to lessen his Dignity, and a
variation from the Sense; as our Adversary has done upon Trust of his Author F.
Bugg; upon his false Report, which is besides all Justice, Morality and
judicial Proceedings. Now the Question is, Whether Figure may be made
synonimous to Example, for the words Example or Figure, as before? I conceive
it may. For Type or Figure sometimes points at a thing to come, as in Romans 5.
14. who was the (...), Figure of him that was to come. And sometimes Type or
Figure denotes a present Example or Pattern, as in Phil. 3. 17. Mark them which
walk so, as ye have us for (...), Example. And the same Word is used in 2 These.
3. 9. and 1 Timothy 4. 12. and Titus 2. 7. and 1 Cor. 10. 11. only in different
Cases, or Terminations. And the word (...), an Example or Type, John 13. 15.
Heb. 9. 23. Thus Example or Type are made synonimous in T. C.'s Lexicon, and
the like in Crit. Sacr. but more fully explained; for there (...), i. e.
Exemplum, Exemplar, Triplicem habet in Scriptura significatum. 1. Significat
Typum seu Figuram, rerum, vel praeteritarum, Heb. 8. 5. vel futurarum, Heb. 9.
23. 2. Exemplum imitationis, John 13. 15. 1 Timothy 4. 12. Titus 4. 7. 3. Exemplum
Monitionis, sive Cautelae, ut 2 Pet. 2. 6.

i. e. Exemplum, Exemplar, has a threefold Signification in Scripture. 1. It
signifies a Type or Figure of Things, either past or to come. 2. An Example of
Imitation. 3. An Example of Warning or Caution.

Now see how synonimously the Terms Type, Figure, Pattern and Example, are
rendered in Scripture, and of what extent, not only in relation to the Types
under the Law, but in some respect to Christ and his Ministers, though he be also
confessed to be the Antitype, Substance and End of all Legal Shadows, Types and
Figures. But I have not called Christ himself a Type of our Light within, nor
justified the same.

As to my Accuser's Offense at my saying Christ's Flesh is called the Veil,
Heb. 10. 20. it was to remove an Offense taken against my Friend J. P. for
using the same. And it would have become this Adversary to have forborne his
blasphemous Scoffing at my Light; as; George if thy Light has hitherto forgot
to tell thee* etc. I bless the Lord my God, who is my Light, Life and
Salvation; he has shown me the new and living way of the New Covenant, which
our blessed Lord and Savior Jesus Christ consecrated, prepared or set open
through the Veil, that is to say, his Flesh; yea, through his Sufferings and
Death, as being the Testator, he has enforced that New Testament or second
Covenant; he took away the first, that he might establish the second; and so
has opened the Passage into eternal Life, into the Hollest of Holies within
the Veil, and beyond all the Shadows and Veils under the Law.

It was in the most holy Place within the second Veil in the Tabernacle, which
was called the Holiest of all in the Old Covenant, that the golden Censor and
Ark of the Testament were put, and the golden Pot which had Manna, and Aaron's
Rod that had budded, and the Tables of the Testament, and over the Ark the
Cherubims of Glory shadowing the Mercy-seat, Heb. 9. Exodus 26. So the most
excellent things were within the Veil, though there was a Beauty and Glory also
without it.

All which, I doubt not were Shadows of the New Covenant, and the spiritual
Dispensation thereof in Christ Jesus, in whom the most holy place of that
divine Service and Worship (in the New Covenant Sanctuary which the Lord has
placed in the midst of his People) is in the Spirit and in the Truth. And all
our spiritual Blessings and heavenly Treasures are in Christ Jesus, who is our
Sanctuary and Hiding Place.

And it is in the inmost, or most inward and spiritual Dispensation of the New
Covenant, that Mercy and Forgiveness is received, and Christ most livingly and
effectually known to us and enjoyed; and in him the most holy and heavenly
Places, wherein the true spiritual Believers sit down with him; and as being
washed from their Sins in his Blood by his Spirit, are his Church and Sanctuary
also, and thereby have boldness to enter into the holy Place, even by that new
and living Way (which Christ has prepared for us through the Veil, that is to
say, his Flesh, Heb. 10.) that we may follow him therein into Heaven it self.
And what entrance through Christ our Mediator we have here in measure received
into this new and living Way, and holy and heavenly Places in him, we doubt not
but it is to us an Earnest of a more full Enjoyment of Heaven and Glory
hereafter, with Christ Jesus our Forerunner, Leader and Captain of our
Salvation, we continuing faithful to the end in this his new and living Way, as
true and constant Followers of him.

God in his great Love and Wisdom has afforded several Dispensations, one
higher and more glorious than another, in order to bring Man nearer and nearer
to himself; as that of the Law, and of Shadows and Types; that of the Prophets;
that of John the Baptist; that of Christ in the Flesh, and that of Christ in
the Spirit and New Covenant, which is higher, more powerful and more glorious
than the former, and therein a more clear knowledge of Christ than in all the
former, wherein there was some Sight of him through Shadows and Veils, but by
his divine Light shining in our Hearts God is pleased to give us the Light of
the knowledge of his Glory in the Face of his dear Son Christ Jesus, that we
all with open Face, as in a Glass, may behold the Glory of God, and be changed
into the same Image from Glory to Glory, as by the Spirit of the Lord, 2 Cor.
3. 18. and Chapter 4. 6, 7.

Now, though our Adversary has made a deal of Dispute and Quarrel with us about
calling Christ's Flesh the Veil, as in Heb. 10. yet he is fain to grant, That
Christ's Body is called a Veil in relation to its Type, the Veil of the Temple,
p. 262, 263. but he will have this not to be in the Quakers Sense. They call it a
Veil; that is (says he) a Garment, in contradistinction to its being Christ's
Substance, and of his Nature, p. 262. Whereas its rather in contradistinction
to its Being, his Divine Natnre, or to its being in the first place, or
principally or chiefly Christ himself (who is the Son of God) for whom the Body
was prepared, because he did pre-exit it, or was in Being before he took upon
him that Body, even in his Father's Glory before the World began, wherewith he
is glorified. However, the Veil, which was Christ's Flesh, (through which he
set open the new and living Way) we never deny to be Christ's Body, or to be a
real Body, but own it was; and never believed it to be a Fantastical Body, as I
have often said; but that Christ the Son of God took upon him real Flesh and
Blood of our Nature, yet pure and incorrupt in him. And as his Flesh was called
the Veil, it answers its Type or Figure, i. e. the Veil of the most Holy Place,
or Oracle where God gave Answers, 1 Kings 6. 20. and 8. 6, 8. and 2 Chronicles. 3.
10, 16. And these most Holy Places in the Tabernacle and Temple, being Places
of divine Service, then peculiar to the High Priest to enter into, their
Antitype is in Christ Jesus, the New Covenant, where in the Spirit and in the
Truth, God is truly worshipped, and meets with (and speaks to) his People, even
by Christ Jesus their High Priest, who is present in the midst of his Church
and Assemblies of his People, the true and spiritual Worshippers, who meet in
his Name, Spirit and Power, whose Light and Truth brings its Followers unto his
Holy Tabernacles, Psalm. 43. 3.

And as to Christ's Substance and Nature, what does our Opposer mean thereby?
How has he distinguished in this Point? Christ has in him a divine Nature, as
well as that of Man, which he has also in the purest Sense. But which is the
greatest? Is not the divine Nature, the Deity in him, greater than the Manhood?
As he said, My Father is greater than all, greater than I, John 10. 29.
Nevertheless, as our great and only Mediator and Intercessor, it was necessary
he should be Man, as he is the most glorious, heavenly Man; and as the Christ
of God he is spiritually in us, in his Saints and Members, in some measure, by
his Spirit, Light, Life and Power, even as the incorruptible, immortal Seed in
Man is of the Father, Son and Holy Ghost; and therein all true spiritual
Believers do in measure partake of the divine Nature, being born again of this
incorruptible Seed.

The gross Calumnies, cruel Mockeries, false Stories and Perversions of the
Author of The Snake in the Grass, are therein so numerous; together with his
partial picking, nibling, mincing and carping at our Books, which is so
perverse, and much on it so silly, that I confess many of them are waved in this
Answer, as not worthy of spending more precious time about them; and I shall
leave the said Author to the just Judgment of him that judghth righteously,
wishing his Repentance before it be too late.

And though he sculks and hides himself, as if he were afraid or ashamed to own
his Work with his Name to it; so am not I of my Name or Vindication; though I be
(and expect to be) reproached and misrepresented for Christ's sake, whose
Servant I am,

George Whitehead.

A BRIEF EXAMINATION OF Some Passages, IN THE Second Book of the Author OF The
Snake in the Grass: FALSELY STYLED, Satan dis-rob'd from his Disguise of Light:
Or, The Quakers last Shift to cover their monstrous Heresies, laid fully open.
WHEN I looked upon the Title of the said Book, styled, Satan dis-rob'd from
his Disguise of Light: With this additional reproachful Title; Or, The Quakers
last Shift to cover their monstrous Heresies; and being By the Author of the
Snake in the Grass, I did suppose it to be the Second Part to the same Tune, or
much of the same Nature with the former, full of Bitterness and Scorn, by the
reviling Title, and no fair Reply to T. Ellwood's Answer; and so it appears;
and I expect will be made farther appear, if T. Ellwood deems it worth the
while to undertake it. But that which appeared most strange to me and some
others, was, in the Title of the said Book, it is thus declared; Which also may
serve for a Reply (as to the main Points of Doctrine) to Geo. Whitehead 's
Answer to the Snake in the Grass; to be published the end of the next Month, if
this prevent it not.

Which appeared very strange to me, and the Man's presumptive Falsehood the
greater, I having a great part of the Copy of my Answer to The Snake in the
Grass in my Hands, when I first saw these Words in Print; and the rest of my
Copy then in the Printers Hands, which we did not hear they lent him to make
Reply to; and when I looked over his Book, I neither found any repetition of my
Answer, nor Reply thereto. However he is so confident and boasting in his own
Work, that he takes it for granted, That not only the Quakers are put to their
last Shift, but also that this pretended Reply to T. Ellwood's Answer to G.
Keith's Narrative, may also serve for a Reply to G. Whitehead's Answer to The
Snake in the Grass: Which would seem a cunning Piece of Divination indeed, to
Reply to a Book before he sees it or knows it. But if he will still have his
said Reply a sufficient Reply thereunto, he may go on in's own Conceit, and
save himself a further Labor of Replying, lest he give himself the Lie, by
giving the World to understand that what he has said may serve for a Reply to
Geo. Whitehead's Answer, may not serve for a Reply.

However, he seems to have taken upon himself a heavy Task, in being an
Advocate for George Keith; and more heavy, to reconcile the Contradictions
charged upon him by Tho. Ellwood, John Pennington and his Brother Edward, and
partly for Baptists and Presbyterians, and all against the Quakers in his
Reply; but very partial in carping at our Words and Answers in many places,
without taking notice of the unwarrantable Expressions, Absurdities and
Contradictions of our Adversaries, and yet in general Terms excuses them; but
in no small Contradiction to himself, and the sad Account and ill Characters he
has given in his Snake in the Grass, 2nd Part, Sect. 3. page 17. 18. both of
Presbyter, Anabaptist, Independent, Quaker, etc. as all under Enthusiasm, of
Rome's dressing in several Shapes and Forms, and as a plentiful Harvest of Rome
's reaping, etc. But now he can advocate and take part with any of them against
the Quakers, like some mercinary Soldier of Fortune.

I do not intend to spend much time here to Answer his said Reply, though it is
no great Difficulty to do; but to take notice of a few Passages in it, wherein
I and some others are concerned, and injurionsly dealt with therein.

1. My excepting against that made Expression Co-creator, as used by the
Baptist, telling of God being Co-creator with the Father; I confess I am no
more reconciled to the Expression now, than I was when first I questioned it as
unscriptural; whereby I never intended not to allow the Word to be God, or to
the Son of God, as I am most injuriously accused, p. 2. For diverse of my
ancient and first Writings in Print show the contrary, that I own the Word to
be God, and Creator too. But the Phrase God Co-creator with God, I think still
implies Two Creators, and consequently Two Gods. It Is not the Particle co with,
in this Case, will excuse the Matter, for co or con is simul together, as
Co-workers, Copartners, which are more distinct Agents than one: But the
Creator is but one God, one Word, one Spirit, and so one Creator. But this
invented word Co-creator was brought by the Baptists for proof That the Light
in Man, wherewith the word God as Co-creator lights every Man, is the Light
of Reason, the Light of Nature, etc. consequently but a created Light; which I
deny. Seeing that it is the same Life that was in the Word, that was the Light
of Men, John 1. 4. What good Doctrine or good Sense were it then to say, That
the word God was Co-creator with the Father of his own Life, Light and Power:
And no better Sense can I make of the Baptist's Notion of the Light in this
Case, nor of this Man's excusing him. Besides, a learned and more moderate and
ingenuous Person, has lately made the like Exception against the word
Co-creator in a printed Paper, called, Reflections upon some Passages in G.
Keith 's Narrative; where he says,

It seems to me that the word Co-creator might justly be rejected by G.
Whitehead, being a word neither used in the Holy Scriptures, nor by any of the
ancient Councils; and it seems to import a Conceit that there are Two
Efficients of the Creation, one having a creative Power distinct from the
other. Yet, withal, he is pleased to give this gentle Reflection on me by the
way. Though G. W. has not spoken with that Caution and Accuracy which he should
have used in a Matter of so grand Importance; which I do the more easily bear
from him because of his Moderation.

Suppose that in some Passages, in some of my former Writings, as to the
Circumstance of Words or Expressions, there may be some Deficiency, or want
some Explication or Distinction, or something dubious, and the Particulars
thereof were shown me, I hope I should not be wanting to give my Explication to
the Satisfaction of the Moderate and Ingenuous. As to the Matters intended by
me, I know the Lord gave me a true Sense and Sight, by his Power, in my young
and early Years, he having inclined my Heart after him from my Youth, I bless
his Holy Name.

The same Person whom I cited before, goes on, viz. I do not conceive that he,
( i. e. G. W.) denies either the Divinity or Humanity of our Lord Jesus Christ:
The Father is Creator, the Son Creator, the Holy Ghost Creator; and yet they
are not Three Creators, but One Creator. Thus he: Consequently, not properly
called Co-creators; for that would imply Three Creators.

And I think I might more warrrantably oppose the same than my Adversary imply
Three intelligent Beings in the Godhead, by his definition of a Person, that
every intelligent BEING is a Person; that is the meaning of the word Person
(says he) p. 5.

Whence it follows, That if there be Three distinct Persons in the Deity, they
are Three distinct intelligent Beings; unless he will argue as one of his
Brethren did; They are not Three Substances, therefore* Three Persons. Another
having given Aquinas his definition of a Person, as being an individual
Substance of a rational Nature, which is neither the part of another, nor
upheld by another. But now if they be not Three Beings, nor Three Substences,
how well have these Men defended a principal Article of their Faith? Seeing the
Father, the Word and Holy Ghost are owned by Christians to be One Being; One
Substance; therefore not Three Beings nor Three Substances.

My speaking of Christ as the only begotten of the Father; and for his
Divinity, as he was the Brightness of the Father's Glory, and express Image of
his divine Substance, and thereupon questioning T. Danson, where does the
Scripture say, That his Soul was created? This Question is no Determination
that it was, or was not. Christ, as God, his Soul was increated. As Man, his
Soul or Spirit was not the Deity, but formed and assumed by the Word. The Word,
or Son of God, who made the Worlds, was not a Creature, because he made all
Creatures. Though he took upon him a most pure and perfect Soul and Body, he
took upon him the Seed of Abraham, that he might in both Soul and Body suffer
for Mankind, and sympathize with us in bearing our Sorrows and carrying our
Griefs; and that his Soul might be in Travel for us, and made an Offering for
Sin, and poured out unto Death, Isa. 53. By my said Question I chiefly eyed his
Divinity, considering him as he proceeded and came out from God, and as he was
glorified with the Father, before the World began.

Upon the whole, my Adversary's Charge of Heresy upon me and the Quakers,
against the Incarnation of Christ, p. 2. as also his Author G. Keith's public
Aspersions, That G. W. disowns Christ to be God, and denied him to be Man,
Narr. p. 16. These are to tell the World, That we own no Christ at all:
Wherein, as they have both grossly wronged my Intention, Principle and public
Testimony, I am persuaded G. K. has wronged his own Conscience, and that he
must needs know the contrary of me, in this and some other things, for which he
is accountable to the just God.

For by questioning the Words created or human Soul, I did not thereby intend
to deny Christ to be truly Man, as is unduly insinuated against me, p. 2. but
rather to own, That though Christ was truly Man in Soul and Body, yet that his
Soul was more divine than any other Man's or Men's; and therefore he may be said
to be a most divine Man, and more of the divine and increated Life in his Soul,
than in any other Man's whatsoever; and that therefore the word human, as it
relates to the Ground or Earth, from which the Body of Man was taken, I might
suppose was too low or mean a Character or Epithet to give to the Soul of
Christ, or to his spiritual glorious Body either; and I hope I deserve not
blame in this, while I was careful not to lessen the Glory or Dignity of the
Son of God, (as he is the Lord from Heaven) by not allowing him to be from
beneath or Earthly, either in Soul or Body in his glorified State; and I am
persuaded that some so much insisting upon the word Human Soul and Body of
Christ, gives the Socinians more advantage than my pleading for his Divinity
and Heavenly glory both as God and Man.

To my Question to Robert Gordon, I think there is no real Cause for Offense to
be taken at it, if the Occasions ministered by him, were Impartially taken
notice of, which they are not by this partial Adversary. As R. G.'s great
Ignorance both of the Light and Saving-work of Christ in Man; excluding
Christ's work of Salvation and Justification, etc. as all done and finished
without Man, even when no good is wrought in Man; and pleading for Imperfection
and Sin in Man, in so much that Geo. Keith charged the said Gordon with 18
corrupt Doctrins, and above 20 Lies and false Accusations, in the conclusion of
my Book, Entitled, The Nature of Christianity in the true Light asserted,
Printed Anno 1671. And yet this officious Adversary takes his part, excusing
him, in defense of G. Keith against us, as he has done also in his Snake in the
Grass, which is such a piece of confused Mixture and Medley, as I have seldom
ever met withal.

My Question to R. Gordon as Cited: Do thou look for Christ as the Son of
Mary, to appear outwardly in a bodily Existence to save thee? If thou do,
thou may look until thy Eyes drop out, before thou will see such an
appearance of him?

And what proof is made of this against me? But that I do not acknowledge that
Christ has now the Body of a Man, or will come in that Body to Judge the World.

Answ. Neither do I deny it. If I do not acknowledge it in this Passage, I do
in many others, namely, that Christ as the Heavenly Man has his own proper
glorious Body, wherein he will come to Judge the World at the last day. And
therefore do not hold that Christ has no bodily Existence (or being) without
us, as G. K. accuses me, Narr. p. 16. He wrongs me in this, as in diverse other
things.

But upon R. Gordon 's pretending a perfect Justification and Redemption of
Sinners without them, when no good is wrought in them; and yet granting that
Christ's appearing the second time is without Sin to Salvation.

But then his deferring this till the Resurrection of the Body, this I confess,
was so offensive to me, that I put the said Question; the reason whereof
appears more at large in my said Answer, Nature of Christianity, p. 29. It
being always my Judgment, with many others, that Salvation from Sin should be
expected in this Life, and Christ's second appearance for that end also,
mentioned Heb. 9. 28. That this ought not to be put off till the last day, but
expected even in this Life as in the Apostles days. There were those then that
looked for him to whom his appearance the second time without Sin unto
Salvation was promised, and the true Believers were not disappointed of their
expectations in that weighty matter. As many have been who have expected to see
Christ's outward coming in Person (with their carnal Eyes) to save them.
Besides, it is true in Fact, that those carnal Eyes of many fail them, drop out
or rot, before they can see Christ's outward appearance, or coming in the last
day to Judgment. And G. Keith himself, as well as I, have charged false and
corrupt Doctrine upon Robert Gordon, particularly in his asserting, That
Redemption, Justification and Reconciliation, is finished and completed by
what Christ did and suffered outwardly, and not in our Persons, and without the
help of any thing to be wrought in us. Artic. 6, 8, 12 of his Charge against
Gordon, Nature of Christianity, p. 70, 71, 72.

And why now I should be accused by G. Keith or his Advocate, for the words
before to R. G. as if I denied Christ to appear in, or to have a Bodily
Existence or Being, I see no just Cause, but rather that G. K. does therein (as
in many other things) interfere with himself and his own former Testimony,
which is directly agreeable to what I have said, and more severe and positive,
as in his Help in time of need, p. 78, 79. In these words, viz.

And now whether ye will hear or forbear, this I do declare unto you, in the
Name and Power, and Authority of the living God, the day of the Lord is of a
truth broken up among us, and ye shall look till your Eyes fail you, and rot
within your Eye-holes, e're ever you see another day, or appearance of Jesus
Christ to your comfort, than what we the People of the Lord called Quakers, do
witness come, and yet more abundantly coming, and if ye will not hear, my Soul
shall mourn for you in secret places, and weep before the Lord on your behalf.

Quere, Was this to deny Christ to have any Bodily Being? If G. K. may be
cleared herein, I may be clear from and against his own Judgment unduly given
upon me.

I see no vehement (or any) denial of Christ's being either Bodily (or
Spiritually) at God's right hand, as I am accused, p. 3. by Questioning the
Words and Terms of R. G. What Scripture proof has he for these words, That
Christ existeth outwardly bodily without us at God's right hand? And what, and
where is God's right hand? Is it Visible or Invisible? Within us or without us
only? And is Christ the Savior as an outward Bodily Existence, or Person
without us distinct from God; and on that consideration, to be Worshipped as
God, yea or nay? And where does the Scripture say, he was outwardly and bodily
glorified at God's right hand? etc.

These Questions are no conclusions nor any positive determinations, and they
carry in them the reason thereof, namely,

1. Our then Adversary's excluding Christ as to his being out of his People and
Saints, because at God's right hand; which has been the common Argument of
diverse of them. 2. Their neglect and opposition to Christ's inward spiritual
appearance, and saving work in the heart, under pretense of his outward and
bodily Existence at God's right hand; which expressions I did the more
Question, because of the common and gross sense wherein many are apt to take
them, as a bodily Being, like their own earthly Bodies of Flesh and Blood,
which cannot inherit the Kingdom of God, 1 Cor. 15. 50. And because they
commonly have opposed his being at God's right hand, to his inward and
spiritual appearance, asserting the one in opposition to the other, having
expressed very gross and carnal conceits of Christ's outward and bodily
Existence at God's right hand; thence inferring that the true Christ is not in
Men, which Argument and Inference I deny; the reason whereof may farther appear.

As for instance, John Newman whom G. K. and his Advocate has sided with
against me, argues thus.

Christ cannot dwell in Man, for Christ is perfect Man, as well as perfect God,
in his Book styled, The Light within, p. 61. Again,

If Jesus Christ be with the Father, then he is not in Man, and that therefore
it is a feigned Christ and Light within, p. 47, 66, 72.

I deny the Argument, both of the first Proposition and Consequence; Christ
being with the Father, or at God's right hand, is no reason or proof that he is
not in Man.

To which I then Answered J. N. Christ ascended, p. 20, 21. Does Christ's being
with the Father, or at his right hand, hinder him from being in his People?
This is gross Error, and contrary to plan Scripture, 2 Cor. 13. Know you not
how that Jesus Christ is in you, except ye be reprobates; and this is neither a
feigned Christ, nor a feigned Light, as Blasphemously and Scornfully he words
it: And what does J. N. think or imagine concerning God, his right hand and
being? And Christ at God's right hand, that he thus would exclude, limit and
seem to confine them out of all Men? Does not this oppose the Infiniteness and
Omnipresence of God and Jesus Christ, and bring them under the limitation of
finite Creatures? With much more upon this Subject in the places Quoted.

I do not find that my Answer to J. N. is a denying Christ's outward appearance
at the great day, as accused, p. 4. But rather a Questioning such a manner of
appearance, as he and others carnally expected to be seen with their carnal
Eyes; as having declared that Jesus Christ Rose and Ascended Flesh and Blood,
and those that pierced him in his Body, shall see that Body visibly come again.
I Answered, These are not the words of Scripture, but added; and for Answer to
him, I referred to Rev. 1. 7, 8, 13, 14, 16. In none of which is Jesus Christ
called (or represented as) a Body of Flesh, Blood and Bones, visibly to come
again, etc. The words Blood and Bones, G. Keith has in recital hereof
injuriously left out in his Gross Error and Hypocrisy, p. 3. And yet makes use
of the place to defame me with unbelief in a fundamental Doctrine of Christian
Faith; and the same words, as Body of Flesh, Blood and Bones, he has likewise
left out in his injurious Citation and Construction in his Nar. p. 17. He has
also left out this following Passage on the same Subject: Howbeit His
(Christ's) appearance shall be universal, seen both to the Joy of the
Righteous, and universal Conviction and Condemnation of the Wicked, who have
rejected his Light within, and his saving appearance thereby made manifest; yea
every Eye shall see him both of Good and Bad, both those that have waited for
his second coming without Sin to Salvation, and they also which have Pierced
and Crucified him, etc. Christ Ascended, Printed in 1669. p. 22, 23.

I never heard before, That it is a Fundamental Doctrine of the Christian Faith,
That Jesus Christ either consists of a Body of Flesh, Blood and Bones, or is
in such a Body to come again visibly, to Men's carnal Eyes they now have; which
was the very thing I Questioned in the places Quoted against me by G. K. Light
and Life, p. 41. Printed in 1668. And Christ Ascended, p. 21, 22, 23. Wherein,
in the first, he has left out the Question, Did John see him with carnal Eyes,
on Rev. 1? And of the glory of the Father, wherein the Son of Man shall come,
Mat. 16. 27, 28. Luke 9. 26, 27. Is it visible to the carnal Eye? left out; and
in the latter, after in none of which, (i.e. Scriptures Quoted) is Jesus Christ
represented as a Body of Flesh, here Blood and Bones are left out, which is
very unfair, and more unjust, to render me an unbeliever thereupon; like as if
one should deal thus by a Quotation out of G. K.'s Way cast up, p. 131. After
[it being no more a Body] to leave out [of Flesh Blood and Bones] and then how
would [but a pure Ethereal or Heavenly Body] stand or co-here? which he speaks
of the glorious Body of Christ.

Though I have always opposed the Gross and Carnal conceirs of many about the
Resurrection, I do not believe that Christ's glorious Body and the Saints
Resurrection Bodies, (which must be like unto his,) shall be all shut up in
Invisibility, so as not to be seen or known one of another, But that in
Christ's Kingdom of Glory hereafter they shall as truly see and know one
another, as the Angels of God in Heaven do, to whom they shall be Equal.

Note, That our present Adversary's granting, Christ's Body to be glorified in
Heaven, and much changed from the condition it was in upon the Cross, p. 4. And
also, That such a gross Notion of the Resurrection, no Christian ever held, as
if the Body were to rise in the same Grossness and Carnality that it has in
this Life. And that G. K. has sufficiently explained himself, and that the Body
when raised, shall be the same as to substance, but not as to the Grossness and
Carnality as now; and did Illustrate it by the Chemical Extraction of Spirits
out of Herbs, etc. p. 26. As G. K. says, How much more ought we to acknowldge
the Wisdom and Power of God who not only can, but will change the Bodies of the
Saints from all gross and terrestrial Qualities, to be Heavenly and Spiritual;
the Husk or drossy Part, (that is no more the true Body, than Dross in a lump
of rich Oar of Gold is Gold) being excepted, Gross Er. p. 13. and p. 9. We must
needs think ( says he) That Christ's Body was really Terrestrial, i.e. had
Terrestrial Qualities when it was upon Earth; But now it is Heavenly endued
altogether with Heavenly Qualities, as the Bodies of the Saints will be at the
Resurrection, etc.

But to be more full and plain, observe what he says in his Way cast up, p.
131. That Body that was crucified on the Cross at Jerusalem, and is now
Ascended and Glorified in Heaven, which remains the same in Substance that it
was on Earth, although it be wonderfully changed as to the Mode and Manner of
its being: It being no more a Body of Flesh, Blood and Bones; but a pure
Ethereal or Heavenly Body, like unto which the Bodies of the Saints are to be
at the Resurrection.

Now observe this great and wonderful change of Christ's glorified Body, and of
the Saints Resurrection Bodies, was not heretofore granted by our former
Adversaries, as T. Elwood truly observes, though very untruly charged with
horrid and senseless Imputation, and notorious Falsehood, p. 4. for saying, It is
well known that many of the Baptists, as well as others of other Professions,
do hold the Body of Christ now in Heaven, to be as really and materially a Body
of Flesh, Blood and Bones, as it was when it was upon the Cross.

That many have so held both of Christ's glorious Body and the Resurrection
Bodies, has been notoriously known to us and many others, as my said Answer to
the said Newman partly shows, p. 17. 18. And our answers to Tho. Hickes and
Matthew Caffin and T. Grantham rendered Christ's Body Heaven, such a one as his
Quakers Ref. p. 40, 41. And Thomas Vincent (and others) his gross conceits may
be seen in his Illustrations about the Resurrection, noted in our Book
entitled, The Christian Quaker, in folio, 2d. part p. 161, 162, 163, 164, 165.
etc.

The most that ever I discoursed of those our former Adversaries, have held the
Resurrection in that gross sense mentioned, by T. E. except Jer. Ives, though a
contentious Adversary, yet in that Point more ingenuous than most of his
Brethren in those Days. At a public Dispute between some of us and some
Baptists at Chersey in Surry, when a Question about the Body of Christ in
Heaven, was Ignorantly obtruded by William Burnett; his Brother Jer. Ives in
answer to my speaking of Christ's various appearances, as in diverse Forms,
after he rose, said, What change or alteration His Body might have, we cannot
determine, nor what Glory he is in; for to enquire with what Body the Dead are
raised is absurd, Christ Ascended, p. 19, 20.

Now it is observable in our former controversies on this Point, The Question
put to us was not, Whether the Saints shall come forth in the Resurrection,
with their Bodies of such a Spiritual, Pure and Heavenly Extract, as to be free
from all Carnality, Grossness, Dross, Husk and Terrestrial Qualities; even so
as no more to be Bodies of Flesh, Blood and Bones, but Pure Ethereal or
Heavenly Bodies, like unto Christ's glorious Body? According to G. K's and his
Advocates confession. I say, this was not the Question we controverted then:
But, whether the same numerical Body, of Flesh, Blood and Bones that dies,
shall be raised? This we have objected against, and the same Substance; that
is, the same gross Substance and Bodily Existence of Flesh, Blood and Bones;
this we have excepted against. But Resurrection Bodies of such a refined
Extract and Celestial Substance, as is not Flesh and Blood, but free from that
Dross and Husk, as is now proposed, was not in controversy, that ever I
remember between us and our former Adversaries. However G. K. should be so
ingenuous as to tell the People, what he means by the same Body for Substance,
that shall rise, that it is not the same Body of Flesh, Blood and Bones; but a
pure spiritual ethereal heavenly extract Body, and then see how that will take:
And I think he will gain no more popularity in that Point, than those of us he
Quarrels with, without just Cause.

Otherwise it is very disingenuous to hide himself under general and indefinite
Terms, by telling the People, the same Bodies that dye shall arise the same in
Substance, and not tell them what Substance that is, that is not Flesh, Blood
and Bones; for under those general Terms they may take him to mean in the
common and gross sense of the same Flesh and Blood, who understand nothing of a
Celestial Seed or Ethereal substance hid in these gross Bodies, or in their
first Elements which they are to be dissolved into, whether in the Earth, Fire
or Water, wherein many Bodies have been destroyed, dissolved and consumed.

That Scripture, Jo. 14. 19. Yet a little while and the World sees me no more:
(which G. K. thinks he better translates, as yet or not as yet) Nar. p. 17.
However I did not allege it to prove, that Christ has no Body at all, as in
Nar. p. 17. herein G. K. wrongs me; but that the World should see Christ no
more in that manner wherein they then saw him: That which they then saw of him
with their carnal Eyes, they should see no more, i.e. as in the Flesh. And how
should they, if his glorified Body be no more a Body of Flesh, Blood and Bones,
but a pure Ethereal or Heavenly Body, they must have other Eyes to see him
withal, as such than these same Eyes of Flesh they now have.

Again, I am manifestly misrepresented by G. K. Narr. p. 18. As thinking all
Anthropomorphites and Muggletonians, who believe that the Man Christ has any
bodily Existence in Heaven; which was none of my Answer or Argument: But upon
J. Newmans excluding Christ out of all Men, because at the right hand of God as
a personal Being, and calling Christ within only a feigned Christ, as his terms
were; this Argument I opposed, and still do, as no sufficient reason to exclude
the true Christ out of all Men, and therefore gave this Answer, i.e. This
manner of excluding God's right hand, and Christ to a limitation (as wholly)
out of his People in a Personal Being, (which are no Scripture Terms) still
implies him to be such a Personal God or Christ, like the Anthropomorphites;
etc.

Now I say again, If any one should argue in better Terms, that Christ is a
glorious Intelligent Being at God's right hand, without all Men, Ergo, he is
not in Men, no not in believers; I deny the Consequence, for this is to limit
the Omnipresent God to a remoteness as well as Christ, and tends to gratify
the carnal imaginations of such as have formed an Idea or Imagination of God
and his right hand, like a Person or Man remote and without all Men, under such
limitation as the Anthropomorphites did, and that according to the common
speaking, when we say such a Person, we mean such a Man whom we call a Person,
(as we do a Woman also) and my Adversarie's also more finely defining a Person
to be a Spirit, p. 5. will neither help the Argument for the Baptist against
us, nor amend some Men's carnal Imaginations of a Personal God like themselves;
for who are most carnal in their Thoughts about God, are most apt to imagine
carnally of him; and suppose any should argue in this Man's Terms, That Christ
being at God's right hand, who is a Spirit, Ergo, not in believers or any Men,
this would bespeak as much Ignorance as the former, and more Absurdity, to
suppose God a limited circumscribed Spirit, not Infinite nor Omnipresent, which
is to oppose his being the true God, as he is an Infinite Omnipresent Spirit,
Power, Life, Light and Wisdom.

Besides, my Animadversion is very plain to J. N. in this case, Christ
Ascended, p. 69. If the indwelling of God and Christ be such in his People, and
the Saints in such near Union and Conjunction with Christ, as the Branches with
the Vine, and the Members with the Body; (as in contradiction to himself he
confessed) then it is false and a lying Imagination, to imagine either Christ,
God, and his right hand so remote as not to dwell in any Man, no not in their
own People. And I may add, it is also contrary to God's own promise, to dwell in
them and walk in them, and to his saving and upholding them by his own right
hand. Christ's being set at God's right hand, bespeaks his Exaltation, Dignity
and Glory, obtained through his Humiliation and Sufferings, but not an
exclusion of Christ, of God or his right hand, as if each were limited or
circumscribed wholly without all Men, and as not to be in any Men, as they are
in a true Spiritual and Scripture sense.

p. 6. My telling J. Horn and T. Moor, That the Nature of Christ is pure, but
theirs filthy, therefore not in Christ, as they said it was, whilst pleading
for Sin as their natural Heritage during this life.

This was simply in Opposition to the Antinomian Sin-pleasing Notion, of their
being justified and pure in Christ, when in themselves filthy and actually
Sinful, which was all one, as if I had told them, you are not in Christ nor
Heirs with him, whilst in your selves filthy and Sin your natural Heritage,
which is far from any such false Notion, as that Christ could not take on him
Man's nature, except he took on him the pollution of it. It Is none of my
Notion, nor intended in the Passage before, but unjustly cast upon me by G. K.
Narr. p. 7. and his Advocate, Satan Disrobed, p. 6.

To my Adversary's confidently asserting, That J. Faldo, nor any other did ever
oppose this, That they should Preach ONLY the Incarnation and Sufferings of
Christ at Jerusalem, i.e. without Preaching likewise the inward operations of
his Spirit in our hearts, Satan Disrobed, p. 7. And that if W. P. or T. E.
cannot name one single Man, much less any of those Communions which he disputes
against, that ever thought Christ's outward appearance would ever save them
without his inward appearance in their Consciences, then against whom have they
disputed? p. 8.

Answ. Yes I can name one single Man whom he has vindicated against us, (in G.
K.'s behalf) who has both thought and said as much as, that Christ's outward
Appearance and Sufferings has saved them, without his Appearance or Work in
them, and that is the said R. Gordon, and it is Charged against him, among his
many other corrupt Doctrins by G. Keith, in my and his Book, Entitled, The
Nature of Christianity, p. 70, 71. Artic. 1. That Christ without us upon the
Cross, has already subdued all things, finished Transgression, made an end of
Sin, abolished Condemnation and Death.

Art. 8. That Redemption, Justification, were finished and completed in the
Crucified Body in Christ for us, not in our Persons.

Art. 12. That Redemption and all things are wrought; purchased for us, without
the help of any thing to be wrought in us.

These G. Keith Charged upon him, with many more as corrupt Doctrins. So that
here was one Man, ( i.e. R. G. and too many more) that has laid the whole
Stress and Work of Man's Salvation, only upon Christ's outward Appearance and
Suffering, without his inwarad appearance and operations by his Spirit in us.
Which is corrupt Doctrine and repugnant to that of the necessity of
Regeneration, and being born again, without which no entrance into God's
Kingdom.

Another Passage by the way I observe, Whereafter this Advocate for G. K. has
represented T. Ellwood, as telling how little of difficulty there is in barely
and historically believing this, (i.e. that God sent Christ to dye for Sinners,
and to reconcile God to Men by his Death) the common Faith of all that part of
the World called Christian shows, etc. p. 11. He grants, That though that
Belief alone will not do, yet that it is not so easy a matter, truly to
believe this, even historically: But that it is a hard Task with the Quakers,
and opposed by the Socinians, (i.e. the satisfaction by Christ's outward Death)
and by all the Deists open Debauchees, and among the Profligate and Profane of
the meaner Rank, few if any of them do really believe it, even historically, or
forget it and never think of it, otherwise it would have a greater influence
upon them, p. 11, 12.

He might have been so charitable or just, as to have ranked the Quakers among
better company, and not to thus scandalize them, who sincerely believe the
sacred History of Christ's Death for Sinners, and Reconciliation thereby, but
do experience the influence and fruit thereof, by his holy Spirit, according to
their growth in Grace, who faithfully follow him in his Light. The Passage I am
to observe (as his Reason for what goes before) follows, viz.

For the Historical Faith must be inseparable from the saving Faith, and indeed
the saving Faith is the Historical thoroughly digested and applied, p. 12.

Which is to conclude that none have the saving Faith, but those who have the
Historical; consequently, that all must be damned who have not the historical
Faith of Christ dying for Sinners, whereby he has at once condemned all Nations
or Peoples, both Infants dying in Innocence, and all others who have not the
History or historical Faith of Christ's sufferings and Death, though it was
really for mankind in general, and may and does for ought he knows influence
many who have not the historical Faith or knowledge thereof, otherwise the
universal good and end thereof intended for all, is frustrated, to many
thousands for want of the History or Preaching of Christ's Death to them;
unless G. K. can demonstrate and resolve, that the twelve Revolutions of humane
Souls will make it all up: That all that are Deceased or have Dyed without the
historical Faith or Knowledge of Christ Crucified, shall return and have
opportunity to have Christ so Preached unto them; which he has no divine
Revelation for, but rather a long exploded Hypothesis or Supposition, (as in
the first part Heathenish) and therefore the more difficult Task to give any
certain demonstration of the same.

It Is farther observable, what uncertainty as well as inconsistency, this
Advocate for G. K. is in, even in this Point. He says, viz. How God will deal
with the good moral Heathen, who never heard of Christ, I will not determine,
nor enter into the Secrets of Providence, p. 12. When he has determined
already, that if they have not the historical Faith, they have not the saving
Faith, if they be inseparable as he has asserted: For it is certain without some
saving Faith, they cannot be saved, as without Faith it is impossible to please
God.

But he appears as pinching and partial, in his following objection against the
Light, as he is uncharitable in the Premises, viz.

But that they, ( i.e. the good moral Heathen) have the Christian Faith by
believing their Light within, Or that there is any object of the Christian
Faith without the outward Jesus who suffered at Jerusalem, is a Quakers Dream,
and opposite to the whole Tenure of the Gospel, p. 12.

Hence observe. 1. This is to deny the Gentiles any Christian Faith, who
believe in the Light given them according to God's promises to them; yea though
they be good moral Men, who so believe, as if they could be good or pious
without any Christianity in them: Which is to oppose the blessed end of Christ
being so given for a Light of the Heathen, and Salvation to the ends of the
Earth. 2. It is to deny the Light of Christ, or Christ as the Light within, to
be any object of the Christian Faith; contrary to Christ's Doctrine: Believe in
the Light that ye may be the Children of the Light. 3. The last part of the
Objection implies, that either Christ as without, and Christ as within is
divided, or that there are awo Christ's, an outward Christ, and an inward
Christ, whereas there is but one Lord Jesus Christ. And his Light within cannot
be without or divided from him, who is the Fountain of Light and Life. 4. It Is
not opposite (but according) to the Tenor of the Gospel, to believe in the
Light or Word of Faith, ( i.e. Christ as within nigh in the Heart;) which has
both Law and Gospel, Judgment and Mercy in it to Minister, suitable to Men's
states and conditions. And in this Light or Word, we meet with the great Ends,
Benefits, or Fruit of Christ's suffering and Mediation, which are manifest and
come to be fulfilled in all, who truly believe in and obey the same Word,
whereby the Gospel is preached in every Creature under Heaven, yea even in many
thousands of Souls who have not the outward History of Christ's suffering and
Death; though both the sacred History and sincere Preaching thereof by the Spirit
of Christ, be of great use and advantage, and in no wise to be rejected where
God is pleased to afford them. But seeing, He that believes not in the Son of
God is condemned already, and the wrath of God abides upon him, because he
obeys not the Son of God, John 3. 18. consequently the Son of God is offered
unto all, and his Grace is given and appears unto all mankind that they may
believe in him and thereby lay hold on him for Life and Salvation. Christ
plainly gives the reason of Men's condemnation when he there says, This is the
Comdemnation that Light is come into the World, and Men loved Darkness rather
then Light, beeause their Deeds were Evil, John 3. 19. Otherwise to represent
God to condem and bring his Wrath upon Men, for not believing in that they
never had, or which was never afforded nor appeared unto them.

This were Blasphemously to render God Unjust, Unmerciful and most cruel to
Condemn and bring his Wrath upon Men for an Impossibility; for how should they
believe in, or obey the Son of God, if no saving Grace or Power of believing be
afforded unto them? This were like as to bind their hands and feet, and lock
all Food from them, and then bid them walk and work or else starve. But our
good God is no such hard Master, who wills not the Death of Sinners, but
rather their return to him that they may live, and for this end has sent his
Son to be the Savior of the World.

As for innocent Infants, or little Children who dye in Innocence, Divine
Providence has provided for their safety, by Christ Jesus, his Meditation and
Seed of eternal Life in them; and their Angels, who see the face of God
continually, are ready to carry their Souls into the Heavenly Kingdom, when
they dye in that State.

My Objecting against W. Burnet, about the Blood of Christ that was shed on the
Cross, was first and chiefly, upon his holding, That the shedding of the Blood
of Christ upon the Cross, that was let out by virtue of the Spear being thrust
into his side, to be meritorious, or the meritorious cause of Man's
Justification, which his Brother Ives could not stand by him in; but supposed a
meaning for him. Secondly, That the same Blood that was shed, does both purge
and sprinkle their Conscieuces, sanctify and justify them, and yet that it is
not in Being, but cumpared to a price lost, as more at large in my Answer,
Light and Life, p. 7, 8. and p. 64. together with their contradictions about
it, referring to W. Burnet's Book and their Discourses. But now to excuse his
saying, That Blood is not in Being, this Advocate will have it, that he only
gives way to this supposition of the Quakers, by way of Concession, not as his
own Opinion, p. 16. It Is a wonder the Man's not ashamed to use such a slim come
off and false cover for him, when 'twas a real Confession, and not forced from
him as a mere Concession for Argument sake, why should he compare it then to a
price lost? And another Baptist, Thomas Brown, confessed that the Blood that
was shed, is not in Being, it sunk into the ground, Light and Life, p. 66.

The occasion of my Questioning them so much about this matter, was because
they seemed to place the great stress of Man's Salvation upon the outward Blood
of Christ and the act of shedding of it, as if it were the present agent
operating in them, Purging, sprinkling their Consciences, Sanctifying and
Justifying, without making the Spirit the Operator or Efficient thereof;
whereas both Sanctification, washing and cleansing from Sin, Regeneration,
Justification, and so Salvation, are more principally ascribed to the Spirit,
the Grace, the Word of God, yea, to Christ himself, than to the act of shedding
that Blood, or to that Blood it self; yet I never opposed that as being a part
of the Sacrifice of Christ, offered for Sinners, in order to a Pacification,
Atonement and Reconciliation. And farther, to his comparison between the
Baptists declaring the Blood shed on the Cross not in being, and the Agonies
and Passions of Christ upon the Cross, as not now in being, I do not therefore
dissolve all the merits of his Sufferings or Death to our Justification
thereby. I do not so Argue, (as employed against me) that because his Passion
was Temporal and Finite, therefore not Meritorious; for the Merits or
disserving on Christ's part, is placed upon his Obedience in humbling himself
to Death, even to the Death of the Cross, wherefore God has highly exalted
him, etc. Phil. 2. 8, 9. whose Exaltation and Dominion is for our Salvation, if
we submit to him as our Leader, Commander and King.

But my distinction for Argument is this, Though that Blood and Sacrifice were
offered as a price in order to Man's Redemption, it is the Power and Spirit of
Christ, that inwardly operates and quickens the Soul to God, purifies and
sanctifies the Conscience, and so effectually saves us from Sin and Pollution.
The Price is already paid, but the Work is yet undone in many; we value the
Price, but must not neglect the Work of our Redemption and Salvation in us; for
Christ's Sacrifice will not save, justify or acquit any in a State of
impenitency or unbelief; they must know the work of his Grace and Good Spirit
in their hearts unto Repentance and Obedience of Faith in Christ, or else they
perish in their impenitency and wilful unbelief, whereby they make both the
Cross and blood of Christ of none effect unto them.

Except a Man be regenerate and born again, he cannot see, nor enter into the
Kingdom of God. And I conceive I am not to be blamed, much less ranked among
Ranters (as G. K. has, Narr. p. 25.) for ascribing the saving work of
sprinkling the Conscience, sanctifying and justifying principally to the inward
Grace and Spirit, more than to the Blood shed upon the Cross.

I say again, I see no necessity of directing Men to the Type for the Antitype,
to Jerusalem or the Temple, p. 17. either for Jesus Christ or his Blood there,
but that such direction is contrary to what the Righteousness of Faith says,
To. 10. 6, 7, 8. compared with Deuteronomy. 30. 11, 12, 13, 14, 15. Though we also
Preach Christ as he was Crucified and Dyed at Jerusalem, and raised from the
Dead, and I do not say that is contrary to To. 10. as G. K. wrongs me several
times over, Narr. p. 26, 27. But to direct Men either to go to the material
Temple at Jerusalem, or to look to Jerusalem for Jesus Christ the Antitype of
that Temple, etc. This I deemed contrardictory to To. 10. above quoted; but
they are to turn and look to the Word of Faith nigh in the Heart, where they
may Livingly find, feel and know Christ in Spirit and Power, even in the Power
of his Resurrection, so as to be enabled both to confess with the Mouth the
Lord Jesus, and believe in the Heart, that God raised him up from the Dead. And
this word of Faith and of God is confessed unto by G. K. himself to be the
Object and Foundation of true Faith; and that this is Christ in them, and that
from the same Scriptures I quoted, Deuteronomy. 30. 12, 13. To. 10. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. As
more fully appears in his immediate revelation, p. 3. and p. 64, 65. Print.
1668. Therefore it is not to destroy nor allegorize away the Object of Faith, to
direct People to Christ as the word of Faith nigh in the Heart, as the Object
thereof, nor is it Antichristian Doctrine, as G. K. has unjustly accused me in
this Point, Narr. p. 27. contrary to his former confessions.

And suppose any one in deep distress for want of Christ to free and save him
from Sin should earnestly enquire, where shall I find him? Whither will you
direct me to find Christ? And one should answer, I direct thee to Jerusalem, to
the material Temple, to the Type for Christ the Antitype; and should again say,
I direct thee to Christ as above the Clouds, and not to Christ as the Light
within, and then call the Light within an uncertain Guide, (as the Baptist did
whom I answered in this Case) How would this answer the distressed Soul? Or
agree with the Testimony of Moses, or of Paul the Apostle of Jesus Christ, in
Deuteronomy. 30. 11, 12, 13, 14. and Romans 10. 6, 7, 8, 9. As for what the
Righteousness of Faith says? I should rather answer the Question according to
the Testimony of Moses and the Apostle, Whither shall I be directed to go to
find Christ? Answer, Say not in thine Heart, who shall Ascend into Heaven, that
is, to bring Christ down from above? Or, who shall Descend into the Deep; that
is, to bring Christ again from the Dead? But what says it? The Word is nigh
thee, even in thy Mouth and in thine Heart; that is the Word of Faith which we
Preach. And this Word of Faith will bring thee to know the great benefit and
fruit of Christ's Death at Jerusalem for thee, and the power of his
Resurrection, that thou may thereby be enabled livingly to confess with thy
Mouth the Lord Jesus, and believe in thine Heart that God has raised him from
the Dead, so as thou may be saved by him. But I yet say, to preach Christ as
a remote outward Christ only in opposition to his Light and Word of Faith
within, (as in the Heart) is to keep People in unbelief, remote from the true
Faith and Knowledge of Christ, either as without us or within us; which
opposition ought not to be to Christ in either respect.

As concerning Sol. Eccles saying, That the Blood that was forced out of
Christ's Side with the Spear after he was Dead, being no more than the Blood of
another Saint. p. 19. and Nar. p. 28. Concerning which I said, I do not make S.
E. his Expressions therein an Article of our Faith, for I own that in one sense
the Blood shed was more than that of another Saint, (though not in the visible
matter of it) more, in that it had a peculiar signification for Christ, the one
offering was the Man peculiarly ordained and appointed of God, both to bear the
Sins of many and to end the many offerings under the Law, and in all his
Example and Sufferings that were permitted to be laid upon him, he both
Answered, Fulfilled and ended the outward part and administration of the Law
and Shadows, and performed the Father's Will therein, and was particularly Eyed
and Prophesied accordingly by the Holy Prophets; and through all his sufferings
in the Flesh he gave an universal Testimony, and Consecrated a New and Living
way, even through the Veil, that is to say his Flesh; that the way into the
most Holy might be manifest, Light and Life, p. 58, 59.

In the first place, I did show a dislike of S. E's Expressions before cited,
in not allowing them as an Article of our Faith: though I was willing Charitably
to improve his own explication, so far as it would bear a Charitable
Construction, with respect to his own declared Estimation of the Blood of
Christ, it is Value and Virtue.

2dly, I showed in part my estimation of the Blood and whole Sacrifice or
Offering of Christ, both in respect to the Blessed Testimony, Value and
Efficacy thereof; more than that of any other Saint or Saints, which manifestly
differs from S. E.'s Expressions before cited.

However, if I have not been thought plain enough in this matter, let me be
allowed so much candor, as to be credited, in being more full and plain
therein; I disown his said comparison of the Blood of Christ, with that of
another Saint; and believe he was not in the Counsel or Wisdom of God therein,
though I did charitably construe his meaning, with respect to the sincerity he
had toward God, and his self denying crucified Life, and Testimony he bore for
Truth, in diverse sufferings and respects, (and I believe he dyed in Peace) though
in some things he in his zeal was not guided in true Wisdom, which was his own
weakness and personal Failure, not justly chargeable on us as a People, much
less on our Principle or belief of the Spirit of Truth; or, the infallible
guidance thereof. Howbeit this Adversary appears so eagerly bent against us as
a People, that he is willing to take any occasion to Defame and Brand us; as in
this very Passage which he calls, The Broad and Impious Blasphemy of Sol.
Eccles. He Scornfully yet Bitterly reproaches us as a People, and my self in
particular, in these Words, viz. There never was surely such a Company of good
natured forgiving People! They can slip over, cover and excuse the Lewdest
Blasphemies in a Charitable way, etc. They can see no faults in their own
Friends. G. W. says of this very Passage of Sol. Eccles. That it was so
harmless as might have satisfied any spiritual or unbiassed Mind, p. 21. And
that this is in his Light and Life, before quoted p. 58. Wherein he notoriously
wrongs me and perverts my Words; I did not call this very Passage (or
comparison of S. E's) harmless, but his Words declaring his high esteem of the
Blood of Christ, and of the new Covenant which was not his comparison of the
Blood of Christ with that of another Saint, which I have disowned.

In my answer to W. Burnet, quoted, but lamely and partially cited, p. 22. 23..
5. I did not call Christ's outward material Blood a Type of the mystical Blood
or Light within, as my answer is perverted, but closely pursued his Argument,
with exceptions which he is not cleared from by this Advocate, his Argument is
this, viz. All things under the Law in the Type were purged with Blood, and
this Blood was material Blood and not mystical; and that Blood that Christ shed
in order to the effecting the Salvation of Man must needs be visible and
material Blood.

Which is to Argue thus, that because all things under the Law were purged with
material Blood, and not mystical, Ergo the Blood of Christ which purges the
Conscience and Effects the Salvation of Men, must needs be Material, and not
Mystical. I still deny the inference, and my answer shows where and against
what my Exceptions lie. The Types and Shadows under the Law, did both point at
what was Material and what was Mystical in Christ: If the legal Sacrifices,
were Types of Christ and so Mystical, as is confessed p. 23. contrary to
Burnets asserting them Material, not Mystical. As in his asserting, That 'twas
Material Blood, not Mystical, whereby all things under the Law were purged; but
now contrariwise those Sacrifices are granted to be Mystical, because Types of
Christ, the Substance and Mystery of them.

My Answer to Burnet's Argument, even in the first part, left out by this
Adversary, is plain and clear, viz. As if one should reason, That because the
Type was Material, visible, and not Mystical, therefore the Antitype or
Substance must needs be Material and not Mystical; by this all Mysteries of
divine things are excluded from being either spiritual, the Antitype, or
substance. Whereas it was the Heavenly things themselves that are in Christ, in
which consists the substance and end of Types and Shadows.

And my subsequent exceptions against the said Argument are as plain and
unanswered; That if the Antitype was Matterial and Mystical, because the Type
or Shadow was Material, then this is like as to argue, That because
Circumcision which was a Type, was Material or outward, therefore the
Circumcision of the Spirit which is the Antitype of it, must needs be outward
too, and not Mystical; and thus he might as well reason touching all other
Types and Shadows under the Law, and the Heavenly or good things to come
Prefigured or Shadowed by them, That because the Priests under the Law, (at the
outward Tabernacle or Temple) were Ministers of outward or Temporal things,
Carnal Ordinances, Shadows, etc. Therefore those good things to come, which
Christ was said to be the High Priest of, must needs be Temporal and not
Mystical; which to assert were absurd, etc.

And I farther proceed in my Answer, about the Heavenly and Spiritual things
which the Law had the Shadow of, viz. Whereas both the Heavenly and more
perfect Tabernacle and Altar, with the Heavenly things, are all Mystery and
Spiritual, the Offering and living Sacrifices are Spiritual, the Passover
Spiritual, the Seed Spiritual, the Bread, the Fruit of the Vine, the Oil, the
Flesh and Blood which give Life to the Soul, yea, the Water and Blood which
washes and sprinkleth the Conscience are Spiritual and Mysterious, as the New
Covenant it self is, which they belong to, and these things known in. And this
is the New and Living way, which Christ set open through the vail of his Flesh,
Heb. 10. Let him receive this who can.

And if our Adversary and his abetters know no more of the Mystery of Christ's
Blood or Work of purging and sprinkling the Conscience, than their profession
and application of the Material Blood, without the sanctifying Spirit and
Operation of it; they may remain long enough with defiled Consciences, and full
of Envy and Malice. That precious outward Offering and Blood of Christ
outwardly shed, has long been greatly abused by misapplication, and the holy
design and ends thereof perverted, by carnal Professors, to indulge themselves
in Sin and Disobedience against Christ during Life. Now laying aside the
Baptist's Argument aforesaid, I do grant that the Material Blood (whereby all
things under the Law were purged) as it had the very Image of the Material
Blood of Christ that was outwardly shed, it was Typical thereof. And that Blood
of Christ including his whole Sacrifice, argued by the Apostle to the Hebrews
as the Antitype, answering and fulfiling the Types thereof, and which were not
only Types of that Blood and Sacrifice as outwardly offered, but also a shadow
of the inward and spiritual sprinkling, purging and sanctifying of the
Conscience, by Christ our High Priest, with his Blood and Spirit of Grace.

The good things to come, which the Law had the shadow of, but not the very
Image of them, were Heavenly and Spiritual things, Heb. 10. 1. But the Law had
the very Image or Resemblance of the Material Blood of Christ that was shed, in
that it had material Blood of Sacrifices, one Blood resembles another;
therefore that Material or Natural Blood outwardly shed, was not those
Spiritual and Heavenly things which the Law had the shadow, and not the very
Image of.

The Material and Typical Blood whereby all things were purged under the Law
was sprinkled on them by Moses and the High Priest, therefore it is Christ our
High Priest, who sprinkles and effectually purges the Conscience, which he
does not Literally, but Spiritually, in which work his Spirit and Power is
livingly concerned, as the efficient Cause, and his Blood and whole Sacrifice
in preparing and making way for, and obtaining Redemption and Remission of
Sins, received upon true repentance on our parts. It Is said, How much more
shall the Blood of Christ, who through the eternal Spirit offered himself
without spot to God, purge your Consciences from dead works to serve the living
God, Heb. 9. 14. The value, efficacy and fruit of his offering himself without
spot to God, is greatly or principally placed upon the eternal Spirit; and so
is the work of Sanctification and effectually purging the Conscience, both from
dead works and the pollution of Sin. That which inwardly and effectually
purges the Conscience, and sprinkles the heart from an evil Conscience, is the
Spirit, the spiritual Virtue Blood and Life of Christ, that actually purges
and cleanses them from all Sin, who truly walk in his light, which has the
sanctifying life and virtue in it.

There was a kind of expiation and purging by way of Sacrifice under the Law
and old Covenant, yet the Consciences thereby not purified nor made perfect.

But the Expiation or (...) Purgation or Cleansing, Heb. 1. 3. That Is made and
prepared by Christ himself and his Sacrifice, and the Covenant of Grace and
Mercy (wherein that work of Grace is fulfiled) Sealed with his own Blood; this
reaches the Conscience to a real purifying and perfecting thereof by the
Spirit and Power of Christ. By one Offering he has perfected for ever them
that are Sanctified, whereof the Holy Ghost also is witness to us, Heb. 10. 14,
15. Therefore that Expiation made by that most excellent Offering without us,
is fulfilled by the Spirit in the work of Sanctification within us. We are
delivered from the outward Law and the Curse of it by the Body of Christ, but
are made free from the Law and Sin of Death by the Law of the Spirit and Life
in Christ Jesus, To. 7. 4. and 8. 2. To that of Act 20. 28. The Church of God
which he purchased with his own Blood.

Hereupon the Man has some slight flings at me, but makes very little work
on it. As to my saying, The Blood of God (which is God's own Blood, and whereby
his Church is purchased) must needs be spiritual, and the Covenant of God is
inward and spiritual, and so is the Blood of it, consequently both Mystical. I
did not hereby hold that God is either Material, or has a Material Body or
Blood, but the contrary, that his own Blood whereby his Church is purchased is
more than the Material or Natural Blood of Christ that was shed, though that
was a part of the Sacrifice offered for Man's Redemption; neither dare our
Adversary say that Blood could be properly called God's own Blood (unless he
holds that God has a material Body and Blood) no more than the Annotation
thereupon, which says, Of God's own Blood, that which appertains to Christ's
humanity, is attributed to his Divinity, because of the Communion of properties
and union of the two Natures in one Person. Which Notation or the Terms of it,
I shall not now dispute.

But I Will take leave to explain my self farther for the spiritual virtue and
mystery of God's own Blood (and the Blood of his everlasting Covenant, the
Blood of sprinkling therein, etc.) wherehy God has purchased his Church.

God's own Blood, was no less than his own dear Son, Christ himself: It was a
manner of speaking, the Blood put for the whole Offering, the innocent Blood
that Judas betrayed, was Christ himself, Mat. 27. 4. And the Ransom or Price
given for Man's Redemption was Christ himself, who came to give his life for
the Ransom of many, Matt. 20 28. And he gave himself a Ransom for all Men, to
be testified of in due time, 1 Timothy 2. 6. God spared not his own Son, but
delivered him up for us all. There Is a twofold work in the Redemption, that is
by Jesus Christ, 1. By the Sacrifice and Mediation of Christ, general for all
Men. 2. By his Power, Spirit and Life, actually freeing and delivering the
truly believing Soul from Sin and from the Nature and Being of Sin and
Condemnation, because thereof, in which sense God's Church was purchased with
his own Blood, and in which last and special sense my Answer was intended, as
not only by the natural or outward Blood shed, but principally by the spiritual
Blood or Life of Christ Jesus.

God's sparing not his own Son, but delivering him up for us all, includes the
whole Sacrifice of Christ in Soul and Body which were offered; therefore God's
own Blood, is such an high and elegant Phrase, as bespeaks the great love of
God in Christ, as the whole Ransom and Price of Man's Redemption, both
outwardly and inwardly, outwardly by the Ransom given by Christ's Sufferings
and Sacrifice, and inwardly, by the operation of his Life, Power and Spirit,
which Mystically is that precious Blood, that is opposed to all corruptible
things, which redeems from the vain Conversation, from all Iniquity, and
effectually washes and clcanseth us from our Sins, purges and sprinkles our
Consciences, etc.

And farther, to Answer to Types and Shadows under the Law, of shedding Blood
and sprinkling, etc. That God according to his Mercy saved us by the washing of
Regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost, which he shed on us abundantly,
through Jesus Christ our Savior, Titus 3. 5, 6. And I Will sprinkle clean water
upon them, and wash them from all their filthiness, says the Lord.

And the Blood of sprinkling which the spiritual believers were come unto, has
the same effect.

And if the name of Water be attributed to the Spirit, as it is, Jo. 7. 38, 39.
Light and Life, The name of Blood may also; which is not to Allegorize away or
invalidate the outward Blood or Sacrifice of Christ, or any part thereof; yet
the Mystery thereof, we may not deny, but confess. And according to the answers
I have given for the Blood of Christ, and the Mystery thereof, our deceased
Friend and Brother Robert Bercley expressly agrees, whose Testimony therefore I
am the more willing to cite, because G. Keith has approved of his Works, p. 60.
R. B's Testimony in his Works, p. 10. follows in these words, viz.

This Blood (speaking of the Blood of Christ that is healing, etc.) is known
and felt within to wash and purge the Conscience; for Christ as he is within is
not without his Blood which is Spiritual, even the pure Blood of the Vine, and
is that Wine of the Kingdom which is inwardly felt to wash and to refresh,
which he gives to them who know not distinctly the outward shedding of his
Blood, as it was many hundred years ago, and which many are ignorant of, who
have heard much of the outward shedding of his Blood, but know not the Blood as
shed and poured forth in them, to sprinkle their Consciences from dead Works;
for it is a Mystery, sealed up from all who stand in opposition to his Light
within. But there mark thy own Words (says he to his Opponent) The Plaster
must be applied er'e the Sore be healed. Must not then saving Grace be applied
er'e the Soul be Converted or Healed?

And R. B. treats much more largely concerning the Flesh and Blood of Christ,
to the same purpose as before cited; for the Blood of Christ, as it is Spiritual
and Mysterious etc. p. 494. 495, 496, 497, 498. upon his thirteenth Proposition
of his Apology, and in page 494. He has recourse to Agustin, viz.

II. The Body then of Christ which Believers partake of, is Spiritual, and not
Carnal; and his Blood which they Drink of, is Pure and Heavenly, and not Humane
or Elementary; as Augustine also affirms, Ps. 98. Except a Man Eat my Flesh he
has not in him Life Eternal: And he says, The Words which I speak unto you
are Spirit and Life, understand spiritually what I have spoken: Ye shall not
Eat of this Body which ye see, and Drink this Blood which they shall spill that
Crucify me. I am the living Bread which have dscended from Heaven; He called
himself the Bread who descended from Heaven, exhorting that we should believe
in him, etc.

Unto which I further add for Illustration, That the pure Blood of Grapes
promised to Judah and Israel, Genesis 49. 11. Deuteronomy 32. 14. was Typical of this
spiritual Blood and Fruit of the Heavenly Vine Christ Jesus, which truly
relieves and comforts the afflicted and sorrowful Soul that comes unto him.

And also the Milk and Honey, the Butter, Oil, and Wheat, and other Temporal
Blessings which were in the promised Land, were all Types of Christ and the
spiritual Blessings received in him, in his Kingdom and Heavenly Canaan.

And the Oil and Wine which the Compassionate Samaritan poured into the Wounds
(of the Man that was wounded by Thieves and left half Dead) Luke 10. 34 were
also Typical of the healing Virtue, Life and spiritual Blood of Christ Jesus,
which he graciously pours into many wounded Souls.

As concerning the word Personality and Personal Existence, as applied to God
and Christ; I have sometimes questioned, as also the word Humane, as ascribed
to the glorified Body of Christ, (which is spiritual) and also to his Soul or
Spirit, for these reasons. 1. Because imposed on us by some Adversaries without
Scripture proof of those terms, and not to Question Christ's glorious Manhood;
(for in that sense I admit of, and sometime may use the word Humanity; either
for Man, or for the Good Nature and disposition of Man, as of the word Trinity
for Three, being not willing to maintain contest about Words, but to mind the
thing intended thereby.) 2. Because false Arguments have been drawn thence
against Christ and his Light in Man. 3. Because of the carnal Imaginations of
too many thereof, who under pretense of expecting Christ to come again in the
Flesh, in the same manner as he was on Earth, and to be seen with their carnal
Eyes, neglect the introversion of their Minds to Christ's inward appearance in
Spirit. 4. Because whilst Men feed upon such Notions and Imaginations of
Christ, excluding him out of their Hearts, they exclude the living and
Heart-purifying Faith of Christ, so that their Faith is but Dead and Fruitless,
whilst such seem to adore. Christ as only an outward Christ, or as wholly
without them, and not in them, instead of opening the Door of their Hearts unto
him to let him in, they harbor and indulge their own Corruptions, Pride,
Scorn, Envy and Covetousness, etc. in their Hearts, out of which proceed all
these bitter Reproaches, Revilings and Calumnies, which we meet with this Day,
as heretofore.

In all my former questioning their unscriptural terms (who profess the
Scriptures to be their only Rule) ascribed to God and Christ, I never designed
to deny his being our Mediator as Man, nor to oppose his coming in Power and
great Glory, in his gloryfied spiritual Body, to Judge the Quick and the Dead
in the last Day; tho I have sometimes shunned controversy on that Point, and
about the Resurrection and last Day of Judgment; Urging not to put the day of
the Lord afar off, nor to neglect the present day of their Visitation and
Judgment of Christ, by his Spirit and Light within them.

The Question how are the Dead raised and with what Body come they forth, I
have often waved as unnecessary as well as unwarrantable, being reprehended in
some, 1 Cor. 15. 35, 26. I being willing to acquiesce in the will of God in
that matter, to give a Body as it pleases him, and to every Seed its own Body
as proper thereunto, ver. 38.

One thing I would be better understood in, Not having fully explained a
Passage in that Book, Christ Ascended, Pref. and p. 67. Where it is implied that
we do not affirm Christ is in every Man, or that every Man has the Son, but a
measure of his Light, Grace or Heavenly Gift in all.

Whereby is meant Christ in his fullness is not in any Man, nor revealed in
every Man, nor is every Man in Christ.

Neither is Christ in every Man, as he is in them in whom the Body is Dead
because of Sin, Romans 8. 10. But as a Light, as an Immortal Seed, as the Word,
he is in some degree in every Man, but every Man is not in Christ as the new
Creature is, and all true Believers who walk in his Light, are in him, and he
in them.

And for our endeavors to draw Peoples Minds off, from their carnal
expectations of Christ's outward coming again in the Flesh; or from resting
upon a fleshly knowledge of him as come in the Flesh without them only, that
their Minds may be turned to his Light and Grace within them, to know his Power
and Work in them.

This cannot be truly deemed any Antichristian Doctrine or Ministry, and we are
sure G. K. did not so deem it heretofore, but the contrary; see his Help in
time of need, p. 22. This is the Antichrist who denies Christ the Son come thus
in the Revelation of himself in the Heart, for that comeing of Christ in his
Bodily appearance at Jerusalem, Antichrist will not, does not deny it, being he
knows it will never harm his Kingdom, so to confess him come, provided Christ's
Kingdom be not set up in the Heart.

So that Antichrist's work nowadays, is to oppose Christ's spiritual Coming
and Kingdom; and yet pretend to own his coming in the Flesh: Yet this greater
subtility of Antichrist's work now than formerly, will not cover his evil
designs; but the true Seed Christ will prevail, and his Power reign over that
Spirit of Antichrist, and Son of Perdition. Glory to God, and to the Lamb that
sits upon the Throne.

Some of the Author to the Snake in the Grass, his notorious Lies and
Perversions, gleaned out of his said Book, Satan Disrobed.
THat they ( i.e. Quakers) have thrown off the Baptism of his ( i.e. Christ's)
Death, 1. p. 20.
having renounced the benefit of his Death it self.

Note, Which are both false; Christ's Baptism into his Death, and the benefit
thereof are very precious to us.

2. p. 24. That G. W. makes the Righteousness of God to be of the same kind and
nature with ours, which is Blasphemy.

Note, This is not true: Christ who is made of God unto us Righteous, has
brought us to deny our own Righteousness.

3. p. 28, 29. That heavenly Body which they ( i.e. Quakers) talk of, most of
them understand nothing by it, but the Soul it self, or an heavenly frame or
disposition of the Soul, which they think they have attained already.

Note, These are not true, the heavenly Resurrection Body is not the Soul it
self, but a Body which God gives as it pleases him.

4. p. 29. Innumerable instances might be given of lying Prophesies, the
rankest Treasons and Blasphemies pronounced in the name of the Lord. And this
against the Quakers, these are outrageous Aspersions and Slanders.

5. p. 30. That the coming ( i.e. of Christ) to the future judgment, this he (
i.e. G. W.) utterly denies.

I take this to be an utter Falsehood: I am not conscious of such denial, by my
questioning such a manner of coming again in the Flesh, as they carnally
expected, to see with their carnal Eyes, who I answered about this point.

6. p. 30. That they mean that there is no visible coming of Christ, to be now
looked for outwardly. What they mean by a glor^fied heavenly Body, not any
thing either visible or intelligible.

This is not true: The coming of Christ to Judgment in the great and last Day,
will be both seen and understood, and so will the glorified Bodies of his
Saints, I really believe.

Pray observe what a storm of furious Rayleries and Falsehoods this Author to
the Snake, etc. vents against us and other Dissenters, as follows, viz.

7. p. 33. The Year 1650. when our new Light arose in our Hemisphere, when (the
Church being pulled down) the vilest and most monstrous and numerous Spawn of
Multifarious Sects, that ever the bottomless Pit spewed forth at once, were
with a thousand other Devils let loose among us! a just punishment for our
Schism and Rebellion! And we are yet left to War with the Tail of this Hydra,
which is gathering new life, and if it should (for our Sins) prevail, our last
State would be worse than the first. Who can refrain from indignation, to see
such a conceited, senseless, most ignorant and blasphemous Crew, destitute of
common modesty or shame, wipe their mouths, and gravely set up themselves above
all the glorious Light of the Church Confessors and Martyrs, ever since the
Apostles, whom they damn as Apostates. [Which is a gross Lie.]

I forbear Answer to these Passages, because of the grosness, outrage, ralery
and notorious Falsehood thereof.

8. p. 34. Denial of these four great Essentials (so called) 1. Faith in
Christ, as he outwardly suffered at Jerusalem to our Salvation. 2.
Justification by his Blood outwardly shed. 3. The Resurrection of the Dead. 4.
The future Judgment, unjustly charged (and perversions alleged for proof.)
It Is mis-construction and mis-application of Christ's Sufferings and Blood
without the Spirit and Operation thereof within, that we deny and not the real
living Faith in Christ, concerning any of these Points, which his Spirit
reveals according to holy Scripture.

9. p. 35. He says, And it is an horrible scandal that such should be suffered
under the name Protestant.

As it is the People called Quakers, he chiefly smites at; this appears to us a
bold reflection upon the Government, for so esteeming and recognizing the said
People by Law, as being Protestants.

Whereas G. F. Questioned about the Soul, partly in the Terms of his Adversary,
i.e. Is not that a part of God and of his Being, which came out from God? (
viz. the Breath of Life) God breathed into Man the breath of Life, and he
became a living Soul, gr. mist.

This I have more fully spoken to before, and I see no great cause the Man has
to quarrel with the Passage, if rightly quoted [only the words part of God, may
seem somewhat uncouth, but they were first an Aposer's words, and admitted of
as from him. The breath of Life, which God breathed into Man, whereby Man
became a living Soul was intended by G. F.]

Seeing he who now quarrels with us, confesses, Man's Soul was breathed from
God, and made a glorious Image of him, and partook of many excellencies and
endowments which were communicated by God unto it, all this the usual opinion
does ascribe to the Soul, p. 40. of Satan Disrobed, That Man's Soul was
Breathed from God, etc. I think this Confession, and that we are his
Offspring, Act. 17. 28. is much of the same import, or near as high as what G.
F. said or intended, if rightly considered; and therefore this opposer might
have spared his many Reflections in this Point.

Some gleanings of Lies, Slanders and Perversions, out of the Some Gleanings of
the Author to the Snake in the Grass, returned and recharged upon him; with
brief Remarks upon them.
1. GReat Ignorance charged on the generality of the Quakers and that many of
them do at this day plainly own the most Blasphemous and Heretical Doctrins,
that have been objected against them. And that such Heresies have been taught
among them, and are still so understood by their People, and that vehemently,
p. 1, 2.

These superlative Charges of Blasphemous Heresies, as owned and taught among
the said People, are denied as most gross Calumnies and Abuses against them.

2. That a present Preacher of theirs, ( i.e. Quakers) This very Year being
pressed to acknowledge the Man Christ without us, and the necessity of Faith in
him. Answered, The Man Christ, a F -- rt. Horrid!

This we suspect, and question the Truth of it, however we deny the expression
with abhorrence, and the unjust injurious improvement he makes of it, and the
subsequent stories, as

3. That the said Preacher of the Quakers denied that Christ's body rose out of
the Grave, that our bodies should rise, that there would be any general
Judgment, or that the Scriptures were all true. The improvement made of these
stories questioned by us, is, This is a Teacher, thus he has been Taught, and
thus he Teaches others. And it is no wonder, that they who are thus Taught, to
believe no outward Christ now in being, should use him with the utmost
contempt, and his Worshippers with the greatest severity, as being the grossest
sort of Idolaters to worship a dead God, p. 2.

Note, 1. We question the Truth of the particular stories, and deny that the
Quakers have, or own any such Preachers, as are justly chargeable with such
contempt of the Man Christ without us, or denial of his Resurrection or general
Judgment. 2. We neither own nor know, any such Doctrine among us, as to deny any
outward Christ, or Christ without us now in Being, or to use him with contempt.
These we look on as gross Lies, which seem somewhat generally to affect us as a
People, i. e. the Quakers, their Faith in an inward Christ, viz. their Light
within, being thereupon reflected on, as in opposition to the Man Christ
without; when he can neither demonstrate nor disprove their Light, nor their
Faith therein.

4. That they ( i.e. the Quakers) reckon their own Blood to be the Blood of
Christ, and to be that Blood, which cleanses from Sin, p. 3. Which is a gross
Falsehood.

5. Their ( i.e. the Quakers) frequent Idolatries to G. F. giving him the
Titles and Attributes of God, falling prostrate before him, and adoring him
with these Appellations, Thou art the Son of the everlasting God, the King of
Israel, all Nations shall worship thee, etc. p 3.

We question these stories, we denying all Idolatry, and all such Attributes
and Adoration to any Mortal.

6. That the Quakers had vilely cast away the great Fundamentals of the
Christian Religion, p. 5.

7. The Quakers fasly charged with rage against G. K. p. 5. Which are both vile
Lies.

8. That they are forced at last to a feigned compliance with the Doctrine that
he Teaches, i.e. by the Truths which he contends for prevailing against them.

Which is falsely stated against us, the Truth's prevalency upon us, has not
been by his contradiction, neither can we own all for Truth which he contends
for. His great instability, and late contradictions to his former and latter
Testimonies, both in behalf of the People called Quakers and their Principles
are very Notorious to every rational person, that reads the Collections
thereof, in Tho. Ellwood's, John Pennington's (and others) Answers and Replies
to him.

9. A Blasphemous bantring Paper, ( he tells of i.e. G. F. 's) turning the
Christ to the Light within, which will bring you off all the Worlds teachers
and ways, etc. but shows not wherein the Blasphemy is.

And we know no such Phrase as turning the Christ to the Light within, but that
Christ is the Light of the World, etc.

10. If he ( i.e. W. Rogers) had said Christ was no more than another Man, he
had come off and been excused by the whole fraternity and reverenced, as well
as Sol. Eccles. p. 8. [What a Lying imagination and gross piece of Forgery is
this!]

They ( i.e. Quakers) refrained not to Print and Publish every day, most
virulent Invectives against other Protestants, and dispersed them by order of
the yearly Meeting, p. 9. These are notorious Lies.

12. That the Quakers are not concerned at the intolerable and blasphemous
contempt of the holy Bible, ( which he charged a profane Papist A. S. withal,
as calling that Book, their unjust, corrupt and perverse Bible) which was
grossly Blasphemous indeed, but then unjustly to hang this upon the Quakers. He
says J. Cole declares, That they are not at all concerned. He insults,

This is a strange story and incredible, That ever Jos. Cole insulted in any
such Blasphemous contempt of the Protestant Bible, as to our being not at all
concerned, so we are not in any such contempt, no, far be it from us.

Josiah Cole is so far from joyining with the said A. S. that he Writes in
Testimony against him, by way of Answer to his Pamphlet, as finding him therein
smiting at the People called Quakers, and endeavoring to render them odious,
by affirming, That they are led by a deluding Spirit, etc. So that Josiah Cole
had no reason to join with him, or take his part against any sincere
Protestants, Whore unvailed, p. 57.

Our Accuser proceeds farther upon the said story, which he would turn upon the
Quakers, viz.

13. p. 9, 10. Now why should these Men be reputed Protestants, they count
themselves none of us, who are not concerned on our part, no, not against the
Church of Rome; but draw their Arms against us, who join with them, not only
against our Ministers, but our Bibles. [Here are Lies, and gross Calumnies
accumulated against us] Why should these be reputed as Christians? Can they be
Christians who Blaspheme the Bible? Answer No, but these are horrid and gross
slanders against the Quakers, who have approved themselves both better
Protestants and Christians than their Persecutors, and such a Persecuting,
Sculking Adversary as this our Accuser, who seems strenuously to seek our ruin,
by endeavoring to murder our Christian and Civil Reputations; but to us it is
no more than the hissing of The Snake in the Grass, or like one that whispers
out of the ground. And his next Charge is also grossly false, as it is intended
against us, viz.

14. Surely their Light within is Darkness, who join with the most ignorant and
bigoted of the Romish Emissaries against our Bible, p. 10.

Quere, When, or where, do the Quakers so join with those Emissaries? I take
this to be a most gross and foul piece of Forgery and Calumny.

15. Our Accuser gives high, and superlative commendations of John Pennyman, as
an ancient, worthy and most sincere honest Gentleman, who ( he says) had been
inveigl'd with their false show and pretenses to Piety, remained zealous in
their Communion, and suffered with them, till he discovered the grossest
Immoralities among them, lying, cheating and foul uncleanness, which having
complained of, and otherwise represented to their superiors, though the fact
could not be denied, yet they would not censure any that continued in their
Unity, for which reason, he (after long struggling with them, to amend their
scandalous vices) at last left them, p. 10.

As his Character of the said J. P. in the superlative degree, appears a piece
of flattery, insincere and unmerited, his scandalous stories on his behalf, and
reason of his leaving us, appear neither true nor impartial: I never heard of
any undeniable proof of the matter of fact from J. P. and I am sorry, that in
his old Age, he should give such occasion to such malicious, persecuting
Adversaries as this, to reproach us, in this manner, as if we did indulge and
hold unity with such Persons guilty of the grossest Immoralities, lying,
cheating and foul uncleanness. Will J. Pennyman adventure to stand by these
stories and aggravations against us? I question it: And he knows better the
reason of his leaving us, than the account before, and what offense he took at
our Friends Paper, that was published to clear us from the great Offense and
Reproach he gave by his notorious unwarrantable attempt at the Exchange, and
how he was committed thereupon, I am not willing now to repeat it upon him. I
would not have him think that I am in any Revenge or Rage against him (as we
are unjustly charged) neither would I have him dye in enmity or
uncharitableness against us. And suppose he has espied out any particular
miscarriages, that is no just cause of his leaving our Communion, much less of
turning open Enemy against us: Or if such miscarriages have not been judicially
proved before those called our Superiors, their not Censuring the parties
accused to Excommunication, for want of such proof, was no just cause of his
leaving our Communion, or turning Adversary to defame us.

16. That we recommend the most virulent of Rome's invectives against the
Protestants and their Bible too, p. 10. Is a gross Falsehood; we know no such
Recommendation.

17. How tame is the Church of England that suffers Fox 's Journal to be newly
Printed and presented to the University of Oxford, and many other of the Quaker
Prophets to be printed, etc. p. 11. Which unjustly implies some great Crime and
Iniquity in the said Journal, and a great offense to this Persecutor, that we
are not held under severe Restraint and Persecution, that he and such
persecuting Incendiaries may have liberty without control to Asperse and
Misrepresent us, and we none to defend our Innocence, which is high Injustice.

18. That the Quaker Prophets cast the utmost contempt upon the Person of Jesus
our God, p. 11. Which is a most odious Calumny.

19. That by the Register of their Sufferings (i.e. Quakers) they hope to make
their Sufferings for the Truth (as they call it) to exceed all the Ten
Persecutions; and to be more undeserved than the Sufferings of Christ himself,
or of the Apostles, p. 11. These are gross and notorious false Suggestions, we
have no such hopes. He cites E. B. unfairly and partially in this Point, and
yet the Comparison about the Sufferings of the People of God in this Age, as
greater or more unjust than in the Days of Christ, or the Apostles, or since,
is a mistake, we shall not stand by the Comparison; whether 'twas so first
verbally stated by E. B. himself, or by some mistake since, I shall not
undertake to determine, unless I see his original Copy. However we are cleared
from either magnifying our Sufferings above Christ's or his Apostle's, etc. For
we do prefer Christ's Sufferings before all other Men's, and that he was wholly
Innocent, and unduly and unjustly Prosecuted and put to Death by wicked Hands,
who were justly charged with Murder therein. This Point is farther cleared on
our parts, in The Quakers Vindication against F. Bugg's Calumnies, p. 2. Col.
1. One Sheet. But I think this Author of The Snake in the Grass has more
justified the Act of Christ's Persecutors and Murderers (and consequently
undervalued his Innocence in his Sufferings) than ever the Quakers did, where
he reflects upon G. Whitehead's Argument, That Killing of Christ outwardly
being the Act of wicked Men, could be no meritorious Act, Satan Disr. Glean. p.
5. This he retorts as my Argument, but does not answer or refute it, and I am
of the same mind still, that the Merit, and what was Meritorious was in
Christ's Obedience and Humility in his suffering to Death; and not in the Act
of wicked Men in Killing and Murdering him, Acts 7. 52 and Acts 2. 23. And if
this Adversary be of the contrary opinion let him speak out and plainly tell
us, if he believes that the Act of wicked Men in Murdering the Just one, was a
meritorious Act.

20. Many of them (i.e. Quakers) suffered (not so much as they deserved) for
open and notorious Blasphemy, p. 12. Which is a gross Calumny and Scandal,
undeserv^dly cast upon them, and is a plain indication of this Accuser's great
malice, cruelty and persecuteing Spirit.

21. That the hardship of Imprisonments (which many of the poorer sort of them
(i.e. Quakers) did suffer; was the greatest of their Sufferings, p. 13. Which
is a great Falsehood. Imprisonment was not the greatest of their Sufferings, or
of their Hardships. But the strait and close confinements duress and hardships
which many suffered in noisome Goals, whereby many lost their Lives, and many
their Healths impaired, besides spoil of Goods ruining Families, and diverse
banished out of their native Countries into foreign Islands and parts beyond
Seas, as also cruel Whippings, Beatings, Stonings and other Barbarities which
many have suffered from Persecutors, pretending for the Church; these hardships
were more than mere Imprisonments: To the shame of this Persecutor and the rest
of his cruel Fraternity be it Spoken. His contemning and undervaluing our
Sufferings will not extenuate their Cruelty and Persecution.

22. That Isaac Pennington in his considerations concerning Israel, p. 3. gives
that (i.e. the Light within) the preference to the dispensation of M^ses or of
Christ, p. 14. Which is false in the last; for Christ and his Light within are
not divided, nor is his Light preferred to him, nor do we prefer any other
Light than that of Christ to Moses's or any other dispensation or Ministry.

23. That our Friends leave out whole Baskets full of hideous Blasphemies and
Treasons, i.e. out of the reprinted Works of their Prophets ( p. 14.)

Which is a most hideous and sordid Callumny.

24. That Edw. Borough in his Epistle prefixed to G. F 's Great Mist. (p. 7.)
extends this (i.e. Infallible discerning Spirit) to all and every of the
Quakers; To us (says he) every one of us in particular. And this Light gav^ us
to discern between Truth and Error, between every false and right way, and it
perfectly discovered to us the true state of all things, p. 20. Upon perusal of
the place quoted in the said Epistle, I do not find that E. B. extends the gift
of discerning, to all and every of the Quakers, nor the discovery of the true
state of all things; herein are his words and intention perverted, though he
confesses that every one has a true Light given by Christ, but not that every
one has attained to the same gift of discerning of Spirits and States, Observe,
1. E. B. personates the converted and faithful among the Quakers, who walk in
the Light which gives to discern between Truth and Error, the Right and the
Wrong way; for whatsoever things are reproved are made manifest by the Light.
2dly, The perfect discovery of the true state of all Things, He does in the
place quoted, restrict to the discovery of the Fall and restoration of Man, and
to what is needful for Man to know ( i.e. in respect to Salvation.) Epis. to Gr.
Mist. (p. 7, 8.) We are not to suppose that By discovery of the true state of
all things, he intended to ascribe Omnisciency to us Creatures, no more than
the Holy Apostle John did in the like Expressions. 1 John 2. 20. But ye have an
Unction from the Holy One, and ye know all Things. And verse 27. But as the
same Anointing teaches you of all Things, and is Truth and is no Lie. These
were all things needful for their Salvation and preservation in Christ Jesus.
And herein in this divine Unction, and the teachings thereof stands the
Infallibility, Certainty or assurance we plead for, and not in Man's Will,
Wisdom, Parts, or Acquirements. And as we keep in this Anointing received from
the Holy One, we receive its Teachings which are true and certain, and so fa^
partake of Certainty or Infallibility in what it Teaches, being Truth and no
Lie. But if any go from this Anointing into the Will or Wisdom of Man or carnal
Reasonings, they go into uncertainty and so become fallible and subject to fall
into Error; erring from this certain Principle produces Error both in Judgment
and many times in Practice. For it is He that abides in Christ that sins
not, 1 John 3. 6. And those in whom this divine A^ointing did abide who were
taught by it, As it taught them they did abide in him, i.e. in the Son of God,
chapter 2. 27. Who says, abide in me and I in you, John 15. 4.

I find this Author to the Snake in the Grass, is very apt frequently to
misrepresent our Friends Words, which I cannot impute so much to his Ignorance,
as Envious design to make us as Infamous and Odious as he can. As he had dealt
by E. B. in the passage before, he has in like manner served Francis Howgil in
his Preface to the Snake in the Grass, (p. 244.) Which I did not so much search
or remark in the foregoing Answer, as since. He charges F. H. with Blasphemy,
quoting, p. 232. of his Works, entitled, The Dawning of the Gospel-day, where
he says, He that has the Spirit of God, is in THAT which is Equal ( i.e. as
follows) he that is joined to the Lord, is one Spirit, there is Unity, and the
Unity stands in Equality it self. Hence (and on some other words curtaliz'd and
mangled) the said Author infers, viz.

25. Having thus made themselves Equal to God in very Nature, it is not strange
to see them denying any other God or Christ but themselves; they pull God out
of Heaven, etc. Snake, p. 245. These Blasphemous and general Inferences against
the Quakers, as they are utterly denied by us, I find no just occasion for
them, from F. H' s Words, if truly cited and considered, where he places the
Equality between the Father, Son and Holy Spirit: That which is Equal, he
plainly speaks of the Spirit of God in the place quoted, and by the Unity
[stands in Equality it self] he means no other, than that the Saints Unity
stands in Christ, who is Equal with the Father, according to Christ's own
Prayer, John 17. 21. That they all may be one, as thou Father art in me, and I
in thee, that they also may be one in us. And verse 22. And the Glory which
thou gave me, I have given them, that they may be One, as we are One. And
verse 23. I in them, and thou in me, that they may be made perfect in one.

That F. H. places the Equality in the Son of God, and on his part, is evident
by his following Words, (left out by the said Author) viz. He that is born from
above, is the Son of God, and he said, I and my Father are one; and when the
Son is revealed and speaks, the Father speaks in him, and dwells in him, and he
in the Father.

Now, though the Saints cannot claim to themselves that Equality the Son of God
(who is their Head) has; yet who can in Truth deny their being made Partakers
of the Divine Nature and Union in Christ Jesus, and holy Spirit with the Father?

The account which this Author of the Snake has given against Tho. Curtis, p.
20, 21, 22. which he says, he has seen under the hand of W. Clark, I do
somewhat Question the Truth of diverse Passages in it, as whether T. C. is not
therein misrepresented; though I cannot from my own knowledge refute them, yet
it is very strange that T. C. should be represented so very grossly Ignorant, as
in that said Account, (but I am sure it is a gross Lie, that the Quakers do
hold, or have always held these Heresies charged on him) or that G. Keith
should suffer him to be so foully exposed in print; if he was privy thereto, I
am apt to think 'twas a piece of great Incivility, as well as Ingratitude and
Treachery against T. C. to serve him such an ill turn.

26. That he would not lessen the Sufferings of the Quakers, ( p. 13.) is a
notorious Falsehood, as his scoffing at, and vilifying them, and rendering many
of them to have suffered for open and notorious Blasphemy ( p. 12.) does evince.

27. That Mary Fell, after she was Married to G. F. became the Mother of the
Quakers Church, (p. 17.) is a scornful Falsehood, we have not given her, or any
other Woman that Title; though she and many more faithful Women have been owned
as Mothers in Israel; but Jerusalem, that is above, the Mother of us all.

28. That many of the generality of the Quakers do stick in the very bottom of
that sink of Heresies, which they have been taught; and that their Leaders go
about to justify, excuse and pallitate them, ( p. 18) These proceed from the
Sink of his gross Calumnies and Malice.

29. That the Quakers yearly Epistle, directed to all Quakers throughout the
World, is their supreme Law, (p. 18.) is false again, we know no such Epistle,
that is so esteemed our supreme Law; but rather Epistles proceeding from our
supreme Law of Love.

30. That it is only for placing their Faith in the outward Jesus, that the
Quakers have so condemned them, (i.e. the Priests) (p. 19.) This is not true
again, it is not for placing their Faith (if it were really so) in an outward
Jesus, or rather Jesus without them; but for their dead Faith without Christ,
and without Works and Fruit; and their many Corruptions, as Pride,
Covetousness, Persecution, etc. as justly Chargeable on many of them.

His story about one Archer in Wilts, questioning, whether he was not among the
Quaker-Bishops, who composed this last general Council? (p. 19.) is very
scurrilous and false, as it is turned to affect the Quakers. We don't
understand he was here at London, the last Yearly Meeting.

The other story thereupon concerning the said Archer, That the Knaves of that
Country [after his Wickedness] forced him to shift his Quarters, and that then
he came up to London, to which the other Quakers gave the right hand of
Fellowship; and that there he Preached and exercised his Talent with great
Approbation, p. 19, 20. Though we have heard of such an one's miscarriage, yet
I have inquired, and am persuaded, the latter part of the story is a great
Forgery, to scandalize the Quakers, that either they gave him the right hand of
Fellowship, or that he preached at London with great Approbation, after he fled
upon discovery; this is a very unlikely story, basely designed to cast Dirt
upon us; for the World well knows our Christian care to expunge such from our
Society, upon the knowledge of their Enormities; but whether there be the like
care and practice in this Authors Church, he may consider if he will.

Reader,
I Have in this precedent Examination, passed by a great many more false
Aspersions, Calumnies and Perversions cast upon my self and diverse others in
the said Book, Satan Disrobed; being not willing to undertake a full Answer to
it, nor to spend more time in raking in such dirty Kennels of Lies and Abuses,
as the Books of the said Author are stuffed withal against us, etc.

There are also many Falsehoods, foul Perversions, Charges and Reflections, in
The Snake in the Grass, not particularly Remarked in the foregoing Antidote,
and in particular diverse Passages, relating to the Revolution of Governments in
the Nation; the substance whereof, I long since fully Answered to John
Pennyman's Invectives. My Answer is Intitul'd, Christ's Lambs defended from
Satan's Rage, Printed for Tho. Northcott in George-Yard, in Lumbard-street,
London.

It Is observable, that the said Author of The Snake in the Grass, values
himself much upon that Title to several of his Books against us; but upon the
Readers perusal of these already Answered, it will appear, that Title will be
his great Disgrace and Infamy; seeing that he has merited the Character of a
Hatcher of Cockatrice Eggs, as well as the Author of The Snake in the Grass:
Which Title, he may be as horribly ashamed of, as afraid to expose his real
name and place.

Some notice taken of the said Author's Discourse for Water Baptism.
HAving lately seen and received a Book styled, A Discourse proving the divine
Institution of Water Baptism, etc. By the Author of The Snake in the Grass, and
finding these Passages after the Contents, viz.

That there will be published a Discourse by the same Author, showing, whom
Christ has ordained to Administer the Sacraments in his Church. And another,
wherein is proved, that the chief of the Quakers Heresies, were broached and
condemned in the days of the Apostles, and in the first 150 Years after Christ.

To the latter part whereof, I must tell him, and Advertise the Reader, that
this officious Author should have spared his other Discourse, thus Charging the
Quakers with Heresies, so long since broached and condemned, until he had seen
an Answer to his Snake in the Grass, wherein he has most unjustly and falsely
Charged the Quakers with numerous Heresies and Errors (as also he has in
diverse things very falsely aspersed them in this Discourse.) And if he repeat
the same again upon us, (as it may be suspected) to prove them so long since
broached and condemned; this will add nothing of proof, that we the People
called Quakers are guilty thereof, but only serve to show his own Malice and
Impertinency and gross Calumnies already confuted* Upon the viewing his said
Discourse for Water Baptism, I find nothing material, but what is mostly
answered in the foregoing Antidote, and Book therein referred unto in page 126.
Besides, I find him very much imposing and begging the Question in his said
Discourse, 1st. Pleading for Infant Baptism in his Preface, as being the
outward Seal of Christ's Covenant, (but without Scripture proof) and then flees
to the Baptists Arguments, for Baptizing Believers or People Docible, from Mat.
28. and other Scriptures, which they use to urge in opposition to sprinkling
Infants.

He miserably imposes in placing upon outward Baptism, all these Privileges,
viz. Regeneration, or being Born into the Church, Baptizing into the Christian
Faith, (p. 9, 10.) The Promise of the Inward Baptism of the Holy Ghost, (p.
12.) Calling the outward, The means whereby we are made partakers of the
inward, and whereby the inward Baptizm of the Holy Ghost is given, p. 34, 60.
All this he places upon outward Baptism with Water: But then it must be upon
the duly receiving thereof, (p. 12.) wherein he has before included Infants as
well as others, but all this without Scripture Proof. Now if all those Infants
that are Sprinkled or Baptized be Regenerated and Born again and Baptized into
the Faith, and partakers of the Holy Ghost and the Baptism thereof; How will
this agree or consist with their Preaching the necessity of Regeneration, and
the new Birth to such when docible, seeing he says, a Man can be but once
Regenerated, (p. 9.) I find that when he pleads for Baptizing Believers, (p.
23.) he cannot escape the Baptist's Arguments, although he has reviled them as
badly in a manner as he has done us, as is before showed.

I find that Text, 1 Cor. 1. 17. does Puzzle him, esteeming it an obscure Text,
p. 22. Which is, Christ sent me not to Baptize, etc. and he is very
impertinent, and begging the Question in his Answer to it.

But while he Argues with the Baptists Arguments for Believers Baptizm, I take
it for granted, that he Argues for that, which he and his Brethren the Clergy
are out of the practice of, and therefore insincere, and consequently his Works
deserves to be rejected whilst Infants are the Subjects chiefly intended.

He bitterly exclaims against both Presbyterians, Independents, Anabaptists,
Quakers, Socinians, Unitarians, Latitudinarians and Deists, etc. in his
Preface, as being the Spawn of Rebellion and multifarious Schism, (and
especially against the Presbytery in Scotland) either for their Indifferency or
disuse of Water Baptizm, etc. See what a busy Agent this is, as if he would
have his Hand against every Man: But I must leave him for others concerned to
deal with him, if they see it worth their Time and Labor: I having bestowed
more for the Truth sake (and for the sake of many more sincere than himself)
than he or his Works deserve.

G. W.

The Contents of the foregoing Treatise.
WHat Characters are given against the People called Quakers, by The Snake in
the Grass, examined. Page. 1 to 12. A Catalogue of some abuses against the said
People. 13 to 49. Concerning Tithes, and a Popish Plea for the same, confuted
by Martyrs and primitive Protestants. 17 to 23. A false Charge against G. Fox,
etc. Examined and Answered. 25, 26. Of the Man Christ, his Body and Blood. 29
to 35. Of the holy Scriptures, how owned by the People called Quakers, and they
cleared from Calumnies in that point. 35, 36. 40, 41. Our Accusers Hiporitical
Prayer. ^ 37. Of Christs' Body, Flesh (the Vail) and Blood. 38, 39. For the
divine authority of the H. Scriptures. 42, 43. Our Adversarys false pretense of
kindness. 44, 45. Christ's existence or being, and how he is in us. 45, 46. Of
the Quakers general Answer to the seven Queries, and of G. Keith's abuse
thereupon. 46 to 49. The second part begins, with Reflection upon the
Presbyterians, Independents and the Quakers, rendering them all obnoxious, etc.
50 51. The Quakers cleared from the Arians Heresy. 52 53. An unjust comparison
and railery against the Quakers 54, 55. Both Presbyter, Anabaptist, Independent
and Quakers, scandalized, and their liberty envied, by the Author of The Snake
in the Grass. 56, 57. Popish Emissaries no promoters of Quakerism, 57, 58. Of
the more peculiar Titles of Christ not given to us. 59, 60. Of the Soul of Man
being created, and the divine breath or Spirit of Life, which God breathed into
Man. 61, 62. Of Infallibily and Omnisciency 62 63. Of the Light given of God to
our Souls. 63 to 66. Of discerning of Spirits, how a gift. 67 to 72. Occasion
given us to reflect on the incontinency of Priests. 73, 74. The said Authors
general and false Charge about one false Prophet, and Story of a Glover in
Cheapside, etc. 75 to 78. His Reflection upon all dissenting Protestants, and
pleading for Bishops, wicked Priests and persecuting Kings. 78 to 80. Our
Friends misrepresented about G. K. and of the Text, 1 Jo. 1. 7. 81, 82. Of our
preferring the Spirit to the Letter, no contempt of Holy Scripture. 82 to 86.
Of Enthusiasm as charged against the Quakers. 86 to 89. Of Women's Preaching,
and Women's Meetings. 89, 90. Our Doctrine concerning the Light within,
vindicated and opened. 90 to 99. The Quakers vindicated from several
Blasphemous Charges, as assuming divine Attributes, divine Worship, divine
Honor. 99 to 101. Of the Resurrection, Heaven and Glory, how Scripturally
confessed and believed by us. 102 to 111. Of the Sacraments so called, first of
the Supper, second of Baptism. 111 to 126. Concerning the satisfaction of
Christ. 127 to 135. Concerning the holy Trinity. 135 to 140. For the Divinity
and Incarnation of Christ also. 140 to 155. Some Remarks by the Author of the
Snake against G. Whitehead, examined, as about Christ, the holy Scriptures, the
Word, the Light, etc. 155 to 178. The words, Type, Figure, Shape, Example,
Vail, most holy places, both in the old and new Covenant opened. 174 to 182. A
brief Examination of some passages in the second Book, stilled, Satan Disrobed.
185. Some reasons for excepting against the Term Co-creator. 188 to 191. Of the
Soul and Incarnation of Christ. 191 to 193. A question about the manner of some
Men's carnally looking for Christ to Salvation, who neglect his inward
appearance; and for what end his spiritual Appearance is truly expected. 193 to
197. Of Christ as at God's right hand, and in his People. 197 to 199. Of
Christ's Appearance at the great day in his glorious spiritual Body, and of the
Resurrection Bodies. 199 to 207. Of Christ's existence in Heaven, as at the
right hand of God, and of God's Omni-presence, and indweling in his People. 207
to 209. Of the pure Nature of Christ, and of some sin-pleasing notions
repugnant thereto, and to his inward Appearance and Operations of his Spirit.
209 to 212. Of the Historical Faith of Christ's death for Sinners, and the
saving Faith in his Light. 212 to 217. Christ's obedience unto death for us
Meritorious, but not the Act of wicked hands, either in murdering him, or
sheding his blood by the Spear upon the Cross. 217 to 220. The price and work
of our Redemption by Jesus Christ. 220 to 221. Of the Object and Foundation of
true Faith in Christ, and of his blood that was shed; an unwarrantable
comparison disowned concerning the same. 221 to 225. Of the material, and
mystical blood of Christ, and the Type thereof, and shadow of Heavenly things
which the Law had. 227 to 231. Of God's own blood, Acts 20. 28. And Redemption
explained with respect both to the Sacrifice and Work of Christ. 232 to 237. Of
the words Personality, Personal, Existence and Humane, as ascribed to Christ,
etc. why questioned, Christ's coming to Judgment, the Resurrection, etc. how
owned. 237 to 240. Some notorious Lies and Perversions, gleaned out of the said
Book, Satan Disrobed. 241 to 245. Some gleanings of Lies, Slanders and
Perversions, out of the some gleanings of the Author to The Snake in the Grass,
recharged on him. 246 to 263. Some notice taken of the said Author's Discourse
for Water-Baptisn. 266. etc.
FINIS.

