THE True Ministers Living of the GOSPEL, Distinguished from the False
Ministers Living upon Tithes and forced MAINTENANCE. With a Word of Reproof
(preceding the distinction) to the Ministers of the Nation, whose Kingdom is
already shaken and divided against it self. And the Iniquity and
Antichristianism of that Ministry which is upheld by forced Maintenance,
briefly discovered according to the Scriptures of the Old and New Testament. In
a brief Reply to a Book styled, An Answer to a Quakers seventeen Heads of
Quaeries, by John Bewick, who calls himself a Minister of the Gospel, and
Rector of the Parish Church of Stanhop in Weredale in the County of Durham.

Ye eat the fat and ye clothe you with the wool, ye kill them that are fed,
but ye feed not the flock, the diseased have ye not strengthened, neither have
ye healed that which was sick, neither have ye bound up that which was broken,
neither have ye brought again that which was driven away, neither have ye
sought that which was lost, but with force and with cruelty have ye ruled over
them,

Ezekiel. 34. 3. 4. London, Printed for Thomas Simmons at the sign of the Bull
and Mouth near Aldersgate. 1660.

A Word to the said John Bewick and the rest of his Brethren the hireling
Priests who are in his way.
VVHither are you now run for a refuge and defense for your Tithes and set
maintenance? does all your old grounds fail you that formerly you have pleaded?
are you driven out of Scriptures of Christ and his Apostles, out of all the Law
of God there, and out of Law of Nations and Countries, and would you now fly to
Melchisedek for help? what is there no scripture command that will own you in
your yearly stipends, and are you afraid of men's Laws failing you, and are you
now fled from all your former pleas, and think you to find help from
Melchisedek? did you not formerly plead Divine Right, and told us by Scriptures
you would prove it, and then being driven out of all commands or examples in
Scriptures, then you pleaded the custom of the Country, and National Law, and
by that in Olivers time you took men's goods, and cast them into prison, and
made havoc and spoil abundantly, and then many of you would not plead
scripture at all, but by custom and humane Law you would have it? and dare you
no longer depend upon that, and dare you now think Melchisedek will stand you
in stead, or own you in your work and trading, any more then the Prophets and
Apostles? what are ye of the Order of Melchisedek now, who but a while ago must
needs plead the order of Levi; and then when that order and your manners will
not stand together, then you pleaded the order of the Nations; and now thou S.
B. in thy book would make people believe that you are after the order of
Melchisedek, and that Tithes was yours before they were given to Levi, and that
he had them but for a time by a special command, till you came, and then you
were to come up after the order of Melchisedek, and so you must now enjoy them
for ever, etc.

But now you must be tried in the light whether you be of that order or no, as
well as you have been tried with the order of Levi; And if you be found of his
order, then we will grant you to have right to his maintenance, (if you will be
but content with it) for we must needs think it meet, that Children should
inherit the right of their Father; so if you be Melchisedeks children, you will
do his works, which was to relieve the weary Soldier with his own bread and
wine; so you may expect his reward, if they be free to give it you, as Abram
was of his spoils; For we never read that it was the order of Melchisedeck to
ravine about after outward things, nor sued people for hire, nor spoiled their
estates, nor cast them into prison, nor any way sought after gifts or rewards,
nor do we read that he ever required or received any yearly tithes of any
people or Parish, either ^^eaves, beasts, swine, fowls or the like, which was
to relieve their families, from any creature, but as he was the Priest of the
most high God, not called nor made of men, so he was maintained by him, and not
by men, and he was like to him that called him, a bountiful man, ready to give,
ready to bless, and to relieve others in their way, as appears in what he did
to Abram and his Army in the way, he met them with bread and wine, and gave
them freely, and asked them nothing again, and so he received freely tithes of
Abrams spoils, but never can any of you prove that he had the tithes of Abrams
Estate, stock, or tillage, nor ever demanded or sued, or took by force any part
of any man's goods upon any pretense whatsoever.

So here is Melchisedecks order, if you be of it and his children, then you
will own it, and it will own you, and we shall own it also in you; And in this
order we find him who was of that Priesthood, Christ Jesus, a Priest for ever
after his order, who to us is an example for ever, and all that walk contrary
we deny, who said, it is more blessed to give then to receive, who was
bountiful in feeding others, but for himself he had not where to lay his head,
this was after the order of Melchisedeck, and all his are after him for ever,
and therefore none of his Ministers did ever require any thing for themselves
but what was free, not coveting any man's gold, money, or apparel, nor ever in
the least did mention tithes to themselves, or make any yearly bargain about
carnal things whatsoever, but preached freely and received freely, or nothing.
And this in Scriptures we find to be the order of Melchisedeck, and the order
of Christ and of his Apostles, if you can receive it.

But on the contrary, when we see a sort of men who never heard Gods voice,
running and enquiring who can get the greatest yearly stipend, Tithes, or
augmentation, and tearing peoples bodies and estates if they get it not,
according to the havoc that has been made by the Priests of this Nation in
these late years, this was never the order of Melchisedeck, Christ, or his
Apostles, nor the order of Aaron neither, who had a law for Tithes, but the
order of Eli's sons, who was sons of Belial, who knew not the Lord, And
therefore sent their servants to take it by force, as now has been done, to
the spoiling of many families.

So you are found further from the order of Melchisedeck, Christ, and his
Apostles, then from the order of Levi, as far as the Priesthood and
ministration of Christ exceeds in bounty and freeness the ministration of
Moses, so far are you come short in your orders and manners, in this covetous
practice, after earthly things. And you are seen to be after the order of those
that minded earthly things, which the Apostles foretold of, who were coming up
in their time, who served not the Lord Jesus Christ, but their own bellies, and
made merchandise of people in their times, through covetous practices, and this
has been the order and manners of you, as your practices has proved it in
these late years, to the ruining of many families, and so your manners has
declared your order and descent, none that ever was from above doing such
things.

So it is in vain to seek to cover that with words which is so monstrously
broken out into contrary actions; The Sheeps clothing can no longer cover your
various natures, and for this end has God left you to your selves, that your
practices may exceed, and so make you manifest to the full, and thus has he
left you, that the more you seek to cover your selves with deceitful words,
the more you give occasion for people to mind your unanswerable lives, which
are become so boundless in covetousness, pride, and oppression, That neither
Christ, Melchisedeck, nor Moses, can own you therein, nor will answer what you
do, so that when you have done what you can, you must be driven back to her
that brought you forth, who rides upon the beast, for no other power will own
you, nor bear you in your practices. O unreasonable men, what unreasonable work
have you made in these late years in this Nation? what begging and petitioning
have you made to every several power, to enlarge your benefits? what thrusting
out one another out of great livings to get in your selves, And when you have
got in, what havoc have you made of the peoples Estates, and still cried to
the earthly powers for more maintenance? what sueing and casting in prisons of
poor people? how have you cursed the great ones that was over you, when they
would not serve your turn? and stirred up wars against them, till all has been
as heaps by your means? how have you flattered such as would feed you while
they had power, and when they fell, then you have reviled them, and crept under
the next, and flattered them also? and all for Tithes, and augmentations and
the like, which thou call the golden oil; And yet you would have us believe
you are not covetous, nor preach for lucre; And you do deceive with your fained
words such as are not able to judge between your words and your practice, and
so the blind lead the blind, and you hate the light that discovers you, and we
can truly say that it is not because we have wronged, or falsely slandered you,
that you thus hate us above all men, but for the light that is in us, and the
truth that makes you manifest; And we have Gods witness with us, and in us,
that we hate not your persons, but your ungodly practices, and so much the more
are we made to testify against you, as you seek to cover your selves with
wresting the Scriptures, and taking the name of Christ's Ministers upon you, but
walk in such ways as none of his ever walked in; And in faithfulness to God
and godly men, we cannot allow you neither Melchisedeck, Christ, nor his
Apostles, nor any of their words to cover you, until you come into their
lives, and leave your devouring covetous practices.

And could thou blush, thou had never had a face to have quoted such
Scriptures in this thy Book, and laid them upon the false Prophets and false
teachers of old, whilst thy self is found in the very same steps; so that
modesty cannot but admire how thou could pass through them, and not be
wounded in thy Conscience and made ashamed, what a forehead have you got?

Or that ever thou should so much as mention one Scripture of the Apostles,
or any Ministers of Christ since the Law, to prove Tithes due to a Minister of
Christ under the Gospel, a thing which none of them ever owned, or so much as
mentioned, otherwise then as to deny them; what a reprobate sense is some men
now given up to, or was ever truth so perverted, contrary to the life and
practice thereof?

And as for Melchisedeck, whom thou would make thy refuge, he will not own
you, nor serve your turn, who only received Tithes of the spoil, of what was
taken by the sword, and that but once, and that not by command nor demand, but
by a free gift, upon his feeding the Soldiers first with bread and wine,
freely; how this will afford you an everlasting Law, to demand the tenth of
peoples labors and estates, by which they should relieve their families, and
not finding them free therein, to take it by violence, they are blind indeed
who sees you not therein, your false ground, and false covers.

And whereas you Teachers use your tongues for your great Tithes, and set
maintenance, and the more to prevail upon doubtful minded people, you take
the Apostles words, and by putting your meanings on them, make some people
believe, that when they spoke of living on the Gospel, they meant Tithes, and
augmentations etc. We say alas deceived men, you cannot deceive us therewith,
for we in plainness tell you, that the practice of the true Prophets and
Apostles, gives the true and open meanings of their teachings and writings, and
to that must you come before their words can own you, or we allow you their
words, as to have part or possession in them, for we know the true Ministers of
Christ preached not for their bellies, nor their Master-ships, nor sought
themselves, nor ever named Tithes as belonging to them in any case, nor was
ever augmentation in the bargain to any people, as to their preaching and
gospel, nor did they claim a great house to dwell in, but in all things
labored to follow their Lord and Master, who had no possession in the earth,
for which they left what they had of their own to be as he was, and preached
freely as he did, and this testimony is given of them in the Scriptures of
truth, that they wandered to and fro, in hunger, cold, and nakedness, having no
certain dwelling place, and this was their reward, namely to make the gospel
without charge, that it might be as free to others as they had received it of
God, and they never handled the word for gain, nor taught for filthy lucre, nor
made merchandise with it, as what will you give me, Judas like, nor had they
great houses to live in, and great Tithe barns to lay up earthly treasure, nor
any way exercised covetous practices, but had whole Churches, to which they had
not been chargeable at all.

Now for men to take such men's words, to cover their covetous cruel and
ravinous spoil and Imprisonments, would be as the taking a Sheeps skin to put
on a Wolfs back, and then say he is a Sheep, which might deceive the Sheep, but
could not change the Wolves nature; wherefore we cannot see the holy men of God
so abused, and be silent, as to have their words so wrested quite contrary to
the life thereof, and their godly innocent lives so wronged, as to be presented
as men of such manners and behavior; So let them alone, and their holy words
and godly innocent lives, abuse them not by taking them into your mouths, so as
to represent them to be men of your order or behavior.

And Melchisedeck, and Christ, cause not their names to be evil thought on, by
making people believe them to be fathers or authors of such spoil and bondage
to poor people, or of the true gospel being so chargeable, this is charged upon
you all, as you will answer him in his day, when he comes in all his holy ones
whom wicked men have belyed, and in the mean time be ashamed of your comparing
your selves with them, and confounded in your abuse of the holy Scriptures, and
of holy men's lives, for the light is come from on high, and guile is found in
your mouths and earthlinesse in your minds.

And you that call your carnal maintenance of tithes and augmentations the
golden oil, (as thou do in thy book) are seen in the light of God to be
wholly ignorant of the true anointing, which should give you sight in your
selves, and so cannot lead others out of the world; And it is no wonder that you
so oppose the true light, your lamp must needs be darkness when earthly things
is your oil, your gold must needs be dross, and your prize below the mark of
election, and corruption carries the draught in your balance, whose golden oil
is earthly things, you are seen to be the men who have in you the false
measure, and bag of deceitful weights, how is the holy one prized in you, how
is the invisible disallowed, and how have you put the price upon carnal things,
whose gold is become dross, and corruption counted gold, are you the lights of
these days? and Honor, and Glory, and Blessing, Revel. 5. 12. so that they
might as well have scoft at the Angels of God, who spoke these words, as at us;
and have said that the Power that reaches to the seed is Christ, and then
Christ is worthy to receive Christ, as also they have done in like manner in
their scorn, in page 63. wherein they have showed their gross ignorance of the
several manifestations of Christ, the seed in his People, who are of the seed
of Abraham, which Christ took upon him to redeem his own, and to bring to his
own Power and promise, which he receives of the Father. And our saying that
this Seed which is Christ where he suffers, and is burdened in man by
corruption, there he desires to be free from the burden of sin, does not argue
as falsely as these men infer, that it cannot be said of the Seed of God that
in it is no sin, for Christ has suffered by men's sins and been pressed with
them, and born them, Amos 2. 13. Ezekiel. 6. 9. and yet in him is no sin; and if
these men were not past feeling, they might feel how the Spirit of the just in
them, they have often grieved, burdened and afflicted by their own sins, and
yet in that Spirit there is no sin, but in them who resist it.

J. Horn and Thomas Moor, say their Christ by that his death once suffered, and
in his Resurrection in that his Body, etc has overcome Death and the Devil,
slain the enmity, and taken out of the way all that was contrary to them,
redeemed them from the Curse of the Law.

I Answer, Herein have they stolen the Saints words, which they are out of the
like of, for if the enmity were taken out of the way, Sin would not be their
natural heritage as they have pleaded for it, and they would not have uttered
so many lies and falsehoods as they have done, for one of which, I. Horn has
craved forgiveness; and if all that is contrary to them be taken out of their
way, then its evident that sin and the Nations pollutions are not contrary to
them, for they have confessed themselves too much to have a share in them, and
that they are abusers of the Truth.

And to that, 1 John 4. 17. as he is so are we in this World, I. H. and T. M.
give their meaning, and say, as Christ is unknown; despised, hated, persecuted
in his Doctrine, and judged by any of the World so are we.

Answ. In this have they apparently lied, for Christ was persecuted to Death of
the World, but so are not I. Horn nor T. Moor, neither are they unknown of the
World as Christ was, for Christ was never known to Preach in a Steeplehouse by
an Hourglass for Tyths, or so much in the Year in Leiw of them, like the Parish
Priests and Deceivers, who are out of the steps of the true Ministers, who
walked after Christ's example, and not after the hireling Priests example, who
Preach for hire, and gifts, and reward as these men do: And rather than I.
Horn will freely suffer by the World as Christ did, take heed that he fall not
to the Common Prayer Book.

And to our calling I. Horn a Priest, he says, if we mean he is a Priest of
the order of Aaron, a Levitical Priest, we say evidently false.

Answ. If he be not a Priest of the order of Aaron, then he plainly appears to
be a false Priest, seeing that in Page 70. he has pleaded for his taking
Tyths, as neither repugnant to Gods Law nor Man's; as also his practices therein
he instances, that the Priests had their several Subburbs and Quarters, when as
they that had these were of the Levitical Priesthood, Numb. 35. Which
Priesthood I. Horn has plainly denied himself to be one of, and yet pleads
for Tyths which pertained to that Priesthood which Christ ended, and disanulled
the commandment which gave the Tyths, Heb. 7. So what hypocrisy is this I. H.
in, who claims a right to Tyths as both being according to the Law of God and
Man, and yet upon that account denies to be called Priest, when as the Law of
God calls them Priests that took Tyths, and does not the Law of Man the like?
And does not the Book of Common Prayer call them Priests?

So that upon this account may I. Horn be called a false Priest, he claiming a
right to Tyths as by the Law of God, when as the service of the Tabernacle (for
which they were given to the Prists of Levy) he is out of Numb. 18. As also he
is guilty of the false Priests practices, who Preached for hire and divined for
money Mica 3. 11.

I. H. and T. Moor the elder and the younger, say, that the false Apostles (it
seems by what the Apostles writes of them 2 Cor. 11. 12.) they use to boast of
their free Preaching, and in Page 71. They say, that the false Apostles were
never the better for their Paeaching freely but the worse.

Answ. Herein have they plainly perverted that of 2 Cor. 11. 12. for there is
no speech of the false Apostles Preaching freely; see the malice and envy of
these accusers, how they envy the practice of the true Apostles and Ministers,
which was to Preach freely and not for filthy lucre, (Mat. 10. 1 Pet. 5.) Which
they have not yet proved the false Apostles did, as they have affirmed, for
they ran into covetousness, and were deceitful workers, having the form of
godliness, but denying the Power, 2 Timothy 3. And in their affirming that the
false Apostles Preached freely, here they have set the false Apostles above
themselves; for neither I. H. nor Thomas Moor Senior have Preaching freely to
boast of, whilst they are settled in Parishes, and taking Tyths and Gifts as the
other Priests do, whom they have called greedy dumb dogs, strong to appetite,
etc. in their Pamphlet called a Brief Discovery, etc.

T. Moor's Principle Page 2. That sin is in the believer as a natural heritage
from Adam while he is in this mortal body; and to prove it, he brings, Romans 7.
17, 20. for I know that in me that is, in my flesh dwells no good thing; and
that it was not he that did sin, but sin in him, and says there is his natural
heritage.

To which I Answer, Herein has he wrested the Scripture, for Paul did not say
that sin was in him as a natural heritage from Adam while he was in the mortal
body, neither did he own it as his natural heritage, for while it was in his
flesh it was his burden, (after that he was turned to the Spirit) so he waited
till it was done away, that he could witness the Creature delivered from sin
and become new in Christ Jesus, who redeems out of the first Adams state and
nature.

And where we laid down this as T. Moors Principle, that their nature is
restored in Christ, and that their nature is a filthy nature, and Christ took
upon him their nature, this they say is falsely expressed and perverted, and
yet I. H. and T. M. a little after say thus, viz. That our nature, kind or
being, as in us, not in Christ, is corrupt and filthy in it self, yet Christ
took upon him our nature, not as it is filthy in us by sin in it, etc. and they
say that we might as well have taxed the Apostle of confusion for saying men by
nature do the things contained in the Law. Romans 2. 14. And yet by nature are
Children of wrath, Ephesians. 2. 3.

To which I say, we may justly tax these men with confusion indeed, but not the
Apostle; for here they cannot discern between the sinful nature and the pure
nature; for the nature of Christ is pure, so that its not their nature, for
their nature is filthy, and therefore it is not in Christ, and their bringing
that of Romans 2. 14. and Ephesians. 2. 3. together to prove their confusion,
shows, that they cannot discern between that nature, by which men do the
things contained in the Law, and that nature by which men break the Law, and
are Children of wrath, but make as if it were all one: But be sure they are out
of that nature by which some did the things contained in the Law since their
nature is filthy, and by it they cannot do these things contained in the Law
but plead against that state, and for sin to continue in them as their natural
heritage while in the mortal body.

Again J. H. and T. M. Say, that the Apostle says not, that Christ in them is
the mystery, but the riches of this mystery is Christ in men which is as much
as to say, not Christ in them, but Christ in men; and that his riches is not
the possession, what folly is this?
the hope of glory not the possession of glory, which is not to be enjoyed till
his glorious appearing, when these mediums now in use will cease.

Answ. So herein would these deceivers put Christ the possession of glory a far
off, as a thing not to be enjoyed by the Saints till after their decease, till
which time also we know they put Christ's glorious appearing afar off: But then
how was Christ all and in all his believers, and how were they changed from
glory to glory, and had the heavenly treasure in earthen vessels, 2 Cor. 4. 7.
and 3. 18. if they did not possess his glory, when the riches of the glory of
this mystery was Christ in the Saints the hope of glory? What was not these
riches the possession in them too? How grossly do these men wrong the Saints and
their words in counting them not possessors of the glory before their decease,
when as the Saints even when they were in the pure hope, then rejoice they with
joy unspeakable and full of glory, 1 Pet. 1. 8. and again after these men
aforesaid have so wronged the Saints in counting them not possessors of the
glory while here, they go about to prove their corrupt Principle, viz. That sin
is a natural heritage in believers so long as they are here; so that by these
men's account, the Saints had not Christ in them as their possession, but sin as
their possession, or natural heritage while they lived, which no where the
Scripture says; how sadly have they herein wronged the Saints, and blasphemed
against the Tabernacle of God, which is with his people in whom he dwells.

J. H. and T. M. Tell of an instrumental and outward Object, or a medium of
faith which they say, is the holy Scriptures, and then they say the last and
most in most. and absolute Object is God in Christ, 1 Timothy 4. 10. Romans 4. 24.
And so they say the Object of faith is one.

I Answer, If the Scriptures be the outward Object or medium of faith, and God
in Christ be the most inmost and absolute Object of faith, then how is the
Object of says one? What is the Scriptures without and God one? Or are the
Scriptures God? Here Is confusion indeed, and where does the Scripture say it is
the outward Object and medium of faith? Here these men are come under that
confusion they have charged us with (as according to their own account) for in
Page 59. they charg us with counfounding the Author with the medium, which they
call a piece of confusion, when in Page 6. they confess that Jesus Christ is
both the Object of faith, and living and enlivening medium by which any comes
to God and believe in God, Heb. 7. 25, 1 Pet. 1. 21. so that in Page 8. they
say true in saying that we did wisely to say that their darkness and confusion
may easily be seen, for so it may, who after in their false inference are
telling of some being guilty of the imperfection of wit-lesness, because they
have in them their guts that be wit-less, and thus the in lightness and folly
appears.

I. H. and T. M. accuse us that the true Christ we say p. 10. we desire not the
knowledge of; In which they have shamefully belyed us, for our words are these,
that you look for a Christ like your selves, but that he has no blood in his
Body, as you imagine whom we desire not the knowledge of, for such a Christ
they look for, as they cannot prove the true Christ to be, in their Affirming
him to have a Body of Flesh and bones in the Heavens without blood in it, as
many have heard them Publicly. Affirm, which now they would deceitfully deny
that they so Affirmed and say. p. 26. that they determined not that his Body is
a Body of Flesh and bones, in Heaven without blood, and so they have Preached
and published that which they determined not, but were doubtful of; what deceit
and confusion is here? And how do they leave men in uncertainties; I. H. and T.
M. p. 11. say; That a man may be a sinner by having sin in him, and yet not
sin, and to prove it bring Romans 7. 20. Paul did not the Evil, etc. To which I
say, that their words are as much as if they had said, that a sinner sins not;
What folly is this? which that of Romans 7. 20. proves not, for though there was
that in Paul which was of God that sinned not, yet when he did the Evil which
he would not, then he sinned in doing it. Again these Diviners who are thus
Confounded say, he that does Righteousness is Righteous, as God is Righteous,
yea as Christ is Righteous, not because there is no sin in him, but because
Christ is made to him of God his Righteousness, and in him he is Righteous, as
Christ is Righteous.

Answ. What then, has Christ sin in him if a man be Righteous as Christ is
Righteous when he has sin in him? this their Assertion would charge both
Christ and them that are in him, to have sin in them, which is Blasphemy
against Christ; For in him is no Sin, and he is made manifest to destroy Sin.

And to our Question, which was, what one Sin or Sins can they lay to Paul or
James or John's charge, or to any of them, that they were not perfectly freed
from before their Decease; Let them prove some sin which was not destroyed in
any of those, before their Decease, or for ever be silent from pleading for
sin, or accusing the Righteous as they have done; as also we asked them what
sin can they prove that Nathaniel had in him, when he had no guile in him? To
which I. Horn, and T. Moore Reply page 13. That it is enough that we believe
Paul, James and John that they had Sin, and did in many things offend, though
we cannot name their Particular offenses, as it is to believe multitudes to
have dyed, though we know not of what Particular Diseases, etc. and in page 20.
They tell us we may as well say, seeing the Scripture Witnesses that the
Children of Korah dyed, not in the Judgment that befell Korah and his Company,
what Disease they dyed of, and if they cannot prove that they dyed of some
Disease, then they are Confuted if they believe and hold that they dyed, they
say.

Answ. Here any Impartial Reader may see how these men are Confounded, who have
accused the Saints to have Sin in them, and to offend in many things while they
lived upon Earth, and now cannot prove any one sin, that they were not
perfectly freed from before their Decease, or which was not destroyed in them
before their Decease, so that here all may see how Ignorantly they have accused
the Saints, and how far short of proving their Assertion they are, for any of
the Saints confessing any of their present states or failings, does not at all
prove that they were offenders, or had sin in them, so long as they lived, as
these said accusers would have it: and as to their saying, that multitudes have
dyed though they know not of what Particular diseases, and if they cannot prove
that they dyed of some disease, then they are consuted if they believe that
they dyed; to that I say, thus, their comparison will not hold but is foolish,
neither will it follow from what we propounded, for it is evident that
multitudes have dyed, as it is appointed for men once to dye: But they have not
so proved that all the Saints were Sinners, or had sin in them, so long as they
lived according to their Assertion. And to their saying that David implies Sins
in them though forgiven and covered in whose Spirit is no guile, Psa. 32. 1, 2.
here they have added their own words unto David's, for he spoke of such unto
whom the Lord imputes not Iniquity, whose sin is covered and in whose Spirit
is no guile, nor can any say that their sin is thus covered when they sin, or
that it shall not be imputed to them while they are guilty of it, for does not
the Light of Christ discover in man his sin and reprove him for it, when he is
guilty of it? They that know it can tell though its hid from these said
accusers.

Again I. H. and T. M. say David says no man living is so free from sin as to
be justified, if God enter into Judgment with them, and to prove it bring, Psa.
143. 2.

Answ. This is a lie against David, for these are not his words, he said not
that no man living is so free from sin as to be justified, etc. For when the
enemy had persecuted David's Soul, and had Smitten his Life down to the Ground,
he said enter not into Judgment with thy Servant O Lord, for in thy sight shall
no man living be Justified: Which relates to that state wherein the Enemy has
Power, that the life is Smitten down to the Ground, and man cannot be
Justified, but through the death to that which Judgment is to: So this Scripture
they have brought proves no more that the Saints are not freed from sin in this
life, then it does that they are not Justified in Gods sight, while in this
life, when as the Saints were Justified from that which the Judgments of God
was to, and such could say its not I that live but Christ in me.

To our saying touching Christ's Body that the Body is one, and has many
Members, 1 Cor. 12. 12. I. H. and T. M. answer that is said both of a Personal
and Mistical body or Society in different senses, and then they say true; also
that the body of Christ either Personal or Mistical is not Carnal but Spiritual.

REP. Here they darken the minds of the simple by words which they have no
Scripture for, for the Scripture no where speaks of Christ having a Personal
body, and a Mistical body, and yet both Spiritual. For if he has two Spiritual
bodies, wherefore do they say the one is Personal, and the other Mistical, as
if then both were not Mistical; and whence came that distinction in these words
from the Papists? What is not that which is Spiritual Mistical? (according to
their own words) but Paul says as the body is one and has many Members, so
also is Christ, and now are they many Members yet but one body, 1 Cor. 12. 12,
20. and there is one body and one Spirit, Ephesians. 4. 4. but I. Horn, in a Paper
to me says, that Jesus has a humane Body and Soul That which is humane is
earth'y, as humanus and homo are of humus the ground from whence man was taken;
so that a humane Soul is an earthly Soul, what then has Christ both an earthly
Soul and a divine Soul in him?
(and where does the Scripture say that Christ's Soul is humane? For his Soul is
divine and immortal) and men's natural or earthly bodies are humane, and the
Apostle distinguishes between them and the Spiritual bodies, 1 Cor. 15. 40,
44. so that Christ has a glorious Spiritual body in Heaven which few can
discern, distinct from men's terestrial or natural bodies, which are humane; now
if Christ has a natural or humane body, and a Spiritual body, and his Church
too, which is his body, which they call his Mistical body, may they not as well
say he has three bodies? And then why not as well four or five bodies? But
their Ignorance about the natural and the Spiritual bodies is so plainly
discovered in our Book entitled a Brisf Discovery of the Dangerous Principles,
etc. in which the Truth is so clearly


