A Brief ACCOUNT Of some of the Late and Present SUFFERINGS Of the People
called QUAKERS For Meeting together to Worship God in Spirit and Truth.

Being prosecuted by the Statute of the 22th Car. 2. Cap. 1. Entitled, An Act
to prevent and suppress seditious Conventicles.

By the Prosecution of which Act many Families have had their Estates wholly
Wasted and Ruined, contrary to the Law of God, the Ancient Laws of the Kingdom,
and to Nature it self.

Together with a particular Account of such of the above said People who have
dyed Prisoners, from the Year 1660. to 1680.

I. For Meeting together to Worship God, etc. II. For refusing for Conscience
sake to Swear in any Case. III. For not going to the Parish Church, and not
paying to the Repair of the same, and not paying Offering Money, small Tithes,
etc.
Humbly presented to the King, Lords and Commons in Parliament Assembled.

London, Printed by Andrew Soul, and are sold at his Shop in Devonshire
New-buildings, without Bishops-Gate, 1680.

TO THE King, Lords and Commons, IN PARLIAMENT Assembled.
THe daily Accounts we receive of the great Oppressions of our Friends in
several Counties, upon the prosecution of the Statute 22th Car. 2. cap. 1.
Entitled, An Act to prevent and suppress Seditious Conventicles, constrains
us yet further to make our Complaint to you, hoping, that upon your weighty
Consideration thereof, some way to relieve us may be found by you. In the
perusal of the following Accounts you may see what Destruction and Spoil has
been made upon our Estates within these two or three years last past, many poor
Families being wholly ruined, and Tradesmen that helped to employ and relieve
others, are now so impoverished, that they are fain to shut up their Shops, and
be helped themselves, and the industrious and laborious are become a prey to
the rapine of dissolute idle Informers, and others, who after they have
devoured all they could find in one County, have gone to the next, hunting from
Meeting to Meeting, nothing satisfying them till they have devoured all our
outward Substance, all which Oppressions we have endured with much patience and
long-suffering, knowing, that our assembling is in good conscience toward God,
and that we have always endeavored to exercise a Conscience void of Offense
toward men; and in such case where we could not obey what the Law of men
required, we have yielded our selves patiently to suffer the Penalties
inflicted on us, and have never Plotted nor Contrived to disturb the Peace of
the Kingdom, or sought Revenge under our Sufferings, though they have extended
not only to the Spoil of our outward Estates, but to Imprisonment, Banishment,
and loss of Life it self, and that of some Hundreds of us since the King's
Restoration, as in the Relations following will particularly appear, and that
chiefly for our peaceable Meeting together to Worship God, a Duty so incombent
upon us, and so conscientiously performed by us, that if the Law had been made
to take away our Lives, as it was to destroy our Estates, we could not have
forborne our assembling together, except we should have been Treacherous to God,
and our own Consciences.

And further, we desire you to consider the inequality of the aforesaid Act,
the mercinary Informers, who Swear against us, gain part of our Estates to
themselves; and we are convicted by the Arbitrary Determinat^on of one Justice
of the Peace, who in our absence is both Judge and Jury. And whatever wrong is
inflicted on us, our Appeal must not lie in any other Court, but only before
the Parties themselves, complained of to do us the wrong, who are many times
sole Judges in their own cases, the Juries being often overawed by them, so
that they are afra^d to act or speak their own Reason and Sense, but forced to
bring in such a Virdict as pleases our Judges, which Proceedings are conceived
to be expressly against the Constitution of our English Government, and the
ancient fundamental Laws of the Kingdom, which did expressly forbid the seizure
of men's Liberties and Estates, without a lawful judgment of their Peers.

How repugnant these Severities inflicted upon us are to the Indulgence
formerly promised to us by the KING, you may judge, when you call to
remembrance the many Declarations he was pleased formerly to make, for the
Liberty of tender Consciences, that should not disturb the Peace of the
Kingdom. And also, we shall leave i^ to your Impartial Judgment, Whether we
have done any act or thing whereby we have justly incurred the forfeiture of
such Indulgence?

If the Lord shall put it in your Hearts to relieve us from these our great
Oppressions, we humby propose to you Consideration the repeal of the Statutes,
22th Car. 2. cap. 1. made against Conventicles, and the Statute 13th and 14th
Car. 2. by which last Statute so many of our Friends suffered Imprisonment till
Death, for conscientiously refusing to Swear in any case, and for their
peaceable Meeting to Worship God.

Signed on the behalf of the Sufferers, by us, George Whitehead William Gibson
Jasper Batt Alexander Parker William Penn Richard Mew John Etheridge James
Claypoole William Mead Ezekiel Wooley Clement Plumsted James Brains George
Watt Willi^m Shown John Dew Thomas Rudyard E^lis Hooks

London, the 20th day of December, 1680.
A Particular Account of these Distresses following in each County, upon the
said Act of the 22 Car. 2. Cap. 1. were Printed and given to the late long
Parliament, and therefore are only herein summed up in short; and there was at
that time much more leavyed upon that Act, of which an Account could never be
procured.
L. S. D. BErkshire, 0190 00 00 Bedfordshire, 0357 00 00 Bucks, 0040 00 00
Cumberland, 0344 13 00 Cheshire, 0409 08 00 Cambridgshire, 0608 16 00 Cornwall,
0497 13 00 Devonshire, 0222 10 06 Dorsetshire, 0163 05 04 Derbyshire, 0397 14
10 Durham, 0865 19 00 Essex, 0494 11 07 Gloucestershire, 0799 08 00 Hampshire,
0077 15 06 Hartfordshire, 0770 10 00 Huntingtonshire, 054^ 15 06 Herefordshire,
0330 12 04 Kent, 0191 13 00 Leicestershire, 0569 18 ^8 Lincolnshire, 0497 13 08
Lancashire, 0428 15 11 Nottinghamshire, 0707 01 06 Norfolk, 1244 07 05
Oxfordshire, 0223 12 06 Sumersetshire, 1459 03 08 Surrey, 0380 03 04 Sussex,
0066 00 00 Suffolk, 1294 01 07 Sall^p, 0051 00 00 Staffordshire, 0075 04 00
Westmorland, 0270 17 00 Wiltshire, 0434 09 00 Worces^ershire, 0081 03 00
Warwickshire, 0069 06 10 Yorkshire, 2384 18 00

A Breviate of the most Remarkable I^stances of Injustice and Cruelty contained
in the ensuing Treatise.
WHen an Appeal was made at the Sessions, the Justice that prosecuted, pressed
the Oath of Allegiance might be tendered to the Appealants, Page 2. In^ormers
Persons of no Estate, but live upon the Spoil of others, feeling Goods for what
Price they please, and taking what, and as much as they please, never
accounting for any Overplus, Page 8. The Justice bid the Officers break open
the Doors to make Distress, and he would stand by them, Page 10. A poor Widow
had her Bed taken from her, and nothing left her to lie on but the Boards, nor
any thing left to cover her from the Cold, Page 14. Convicted in their absence,
and without summons to appear to Answer for themselves, Page 17. Officers
refusing to show their Warrants, when they distrained, and the Justice
forbidding them to show their Warrants, Page 18. An ancient Widow, near eighty
Years of Age, turned out of her House late at Night, and kept out of her Bed in
violent Frosty Weather, Page 19. A Warrant being directed to a wrong Constable,
and the Informer knowing not how to come by his Prey, altered the Warrant and
directed it to the right Constable; and himself broke open a door with a
Smith's Sledge, Page 30. A Justice beat several, pulling them by the Hair of
the Head, and drew his Knife in a great Passion, but was restrained by his
Servant from doing Mischief, Page 31, 32. The Justice bid the Officers that
distrained, to take all they could find, and that which was not worth carrying
away to Burn it, Page 32. Several stripped so bare they had not a Bed left them,
but were fain to lie on Straw: One blind man and his Wife lay eleaven Months
on Straw. Page 32. The Informer coming to a Meeting, where because there was no
Preaching, he used what provoking words he could to stir them up to speak, that
he might Swear there was a Preacher, Page 36. The Justice bid the Officers sell
the Goods, if it were but for the thirtieth part of the worth of them, Page 39.
Goods sold to the Informer for half the worth, Page 39. Upon trying an Appeal,
Jury threatened to be fined, if they did not bring in their Verdict for the
King, Page 44. A Child taken out of the Bed, and laid upon the bare Floor, and
the Bed taken away, Page 46. Great Violence used to some at their Meetings,
several Women have been dragged in the Streets by the Necks, till they have
been near stifled, Page 48. Men sorely beaten, drawn and dragged out of the
Meeting, some by the Heels, some by the Hair of the Head, some tr^d upon till
Blood gusht out at their Mouth and Nose, with many more such Cruelties, see
Page 48. A few Persons being assembled to look after the Necessities of the
Poor, they were fined for the House and for the Preacher; when there was never
a one there: And when in this case they would have appealed, the Court denied
it, except the Appealants would first take the O^th of Allegiance, Page 49.
Persons Convicted, and fined twice for one Meeting, Page 52. The Informer
asks a Question, and being answered by one in the Meeting in a few Words, he
Swears against that Person, That he was the Speaker or Preacher, Page 54. A
Person agrieved appeals, the Justice takes Money for entering the Appeal, but
puts him off from Sessions to Sessions, and at last told him, it was too late
to try it: and the Appealant could never get the Money he deposited to this
day, Page 57. Two Persons appealing, deposited the one 40 l. the other 30 l.
and a Virdict, b^ing given for the Appealants, the Justices ordered them to
have the M^ney deposited again; but the Justice that received it, has refused
to return it (except 10 l.) to this day, Page 58. The Informer Swore there was
a Meeting on Sunday the 26th of November, 1674. when there was no Sunday on the
26th of November that Year: However, the Justice encouraged the Informers and
Officers to proceed, and granted them a Warrant to distrain, and said he would
justify them in it, Page 62. The Officers telling a Justice they had been to
make distress, but there was little left in the House but the Bed the Man's
Wife lay sick on, and was like to dye, and did dye that Night: The Justice
said, he cared not, Take the Bed from under her, Page 63. The Justice affirmed,
it was suffi^ient cause of Conviction, if Persons were but seen going to the
House where they used to meet, Page 64. Visiting a sick Person made a
Conventicle, and the sick man fined 20 l. for the House, and for one spe^king
four or five Words that came to visit the sick man; several were fined for the
Preacher, 20 l. Page 64. Thirty two Persons fined for being at a Burial, it
being judged to be a Conventicle, and had Goods taken away to the value of 82
l. the Widow of the deceased fined 4 l. for being at her Husbands Burial, Page
73, 75. Giving Thanks before Meat made a Conventicle, and Persons fined for the
same, Page 74. A Dog being thrown into a Meeting by rude People one spoke a few
Words, desiring the People to show Moderation; for which he was fined 20 l. for
Preaching, and had Goods taken worth 22 l. Page 76.
Cheshire.
THere being a Peaceable Meeting, at the Meeting House of William Gandy the
24th of the 4th Month, 1677. One Sr. Peter Leicester, called a Justice, came
there, (Informer himself) and being accompanied with diverse Soldiers, lighted
off their Horses, and some with their drawn Swords, pusht those that were out
of the Doors into the House, and clapped to both Doors, and set Guards upon them,
giving very Uncivil and Scornful Language; and the Justice took a List of two
Hundred Names, and upwards, and in a few days Convicted and Fined all, viz.
Margaret Fox and Thoma^ Dockery 20 l. a piece for Preaching, which they levied
upon others of the Meeting then present; pretending, that they were Strangers,
and fled; though it is well known they have Estates of their own: And T. D.
told them, he had an Estate, and where it lay; and said, He had rather suffer
himself, than that it should be laid upon others for his supposed offense. He
also levied 20 l. upon several of the Meeting, for the House; although he said,
He knew the Owner, which is contrary to the Act: For the Owner of the House
ought himself to be Fined, except in the Case of Poverty; which could be no
Reason in this Case.

Further, this Sr. Peter Leicester's Injustice was manifested, in threatening
the Constables, That if they did not execute his Warrants to the utmost, he
would bind them to the good Behavior, and such like Expressions; bidding them
sell a Cow for 5 s. rather then fail, and take enough for themselves: And when
the Constables told him, the Persons were poor, and had not whereon to make
Distress, he laid six or seven Fines upon one Person that was judged able,
besides their own Fine; and this did not satisfy neither, for he said, The Act
was made to short, and that he would have had it made, that they should go to
Prison for want of payment, and there lie till they rotted, except they would
pay the Fines. And being thus oppressed, several appealed at the Sessions: for
which Sr. Peter Leicester, to be revenged on them, pressed to have the O^th of
Allegiance tendered to t^em at the Bar, and he stirred up the rest of the
Justices to join with him against them, except Sr. Thomas Manwaring, who openly
refused to join in judgment against the Appealants, for that he said, the
Record was not right; nevertheless, the Jury being Persons chosen for the
purpose, brought the Appealants in Guilty: The said Peter Leicester having
issued out his Warrants, and for that one Meeting, took away Goods and Cattle
to the value of above two Hundred Pounds; a particular Account of which may be
produced, if required.

There being a peaceable Meeting at the House of Deborah Bushel of Alvandly
the 9th day of the 3d Month, 1678. Ralph Rutter and Robert Harper, two of the
baser sort of Men, and John Davis, Priest of the Parish, joining with them,
informed Sr. Phillip Egerton, called Justice thereof, who fined several Persons
upon their Information, and issued out his Warrants to make Distress, viz.

Elizabeth Ashbrooke of Frodsham, Widow, and one that has six Fatherless
Children, fined for her self, the Preacher, and for two of her Children, though
one of them was not fifteen Years of Age, the sum of seventeen Pound and seven
Shillings; for which Fine the said Justice directed his Warrants to the
Constables of Frodsham, but more especially to Ralph Rutter, the Informer, and
to Richard Dobson and Lawre^ce Billington, Bailiffs, in Northwith; which
Bailiffs went to her House, and with a Bar of Iron forcibly broke down her
Cow-House Door, and took from her five Cows, worth seventeen Pounds, one of
which was returned.

John Cheshire of Overton, for being at the same Meeting, and at a Meeting at
Newton, the 17th day of the 9th Month, 1678. was fined 4 l. for which they
distrained his Corn, Hay, a Cart and Wheels, in all to the value of 9 l. and
upwards.

Mary Trafford for being at the same Meeting, and also at a Meeting at Helsby,
the 12th of the 3d Month, 1678. had a Cart and Wheeels taken from her, worth
50 s. and upwards: She asked the Officers, who sent them to take away her
Goods; they answered, Parson Davis sent them, whose Mare they also brought to
draw the Wheels away.

John Brown for being at the Meeting at Newton, was fined 8 l. for the
Preacher, and 5 s. for himself, had four Cows, and two young Beasts taken from
him, worth 15 l. which Rutter the Informer sold to John Smith and John Tue, two
other Informers, for 9 l.

John Hodgskin for being at Helsby-Meeting, in the 3d Month, 1678. was fined 4
l. for the Preacher, and 10 s. for himself; and for being at another Meeting
was fined 15 s. for himself and his Wife; for which Fines he had taken from him
by the aforesaid Bailiffs, by Warrant from the same Justice, four Cows, worth
13 l.

The said John Hodgskin having a Kinsman that had nine Cows taken away for
being at a Meeting, and being proffered to Sale, because J. Hodgskin related to
a Butcher that they were distrained Goods upon the Act against Meeting, Rutter
the Informer in a great Rage went to Sr. Phillip Egerton, and got a Warrant,
and threw the said J. Hodgskin into the Common Goal, where he remained a
Prisoner until the next Sessions.

Richard Orme for being at the Meeting at Deborah Bushells, had Leather taken
from him worth 12 s. for a Fine of 5 s.

Jane Lownes, for the same cause had taken Goods worth 12 s. for a Fine of 5 s.

Richard Ashbrook and Peter Hatton of Frodsham, for being at the Meeting at
Newton the 17th of the 9th month, 1678. fined 1 l. 15 s. and had taken from
them Goods worth 6 l.

Richard Sarrat for being at a Meeting at Helsby, find 8 l. for the Preacher,
and 5 s. for himself, and for being at the Meeting at Deborah Bushells, fined
10 s. for which Fines the aforesaid Bailiffs took five Cows from him worth 16
l. the 7th of the 9th month* 1678.

Deborah Bushel, at whose House the Meeting was, the said Justice Egerton find
her 20 l. 5 s. for her self and her Son, for having the Meeting in her House.

Thomas Titley of Helsby, for having the Meeting in his House fined 20 l. for
which Rutter the Informer, George Whitly a Soldier of the Trainbands, and
Arthur Brother Constable, went into his Pasture Ground, and drove up nine Cows,
worth 27 l. to the Gate, which being locked, Rutter the Informer, with a Hatchet
forcibly broke the Chain; and though he pretended he had an Order so to do, yet
would show none, but drove away the Beasts to the Market at Chester, where the
Constable was not willing to sell them under the value of 27 l. but because he
did not sell them, Rutter threatened him, and made him leave them till next
Market day, and then the Constable not selling them, returned them Home again;
but on the 12^h of the 9th Month, the Bailiffs, R. Dobson, and one L.
Billington, by Warrant from the said Justice Egerton, took the same nine Cows,
worth 27 l. and sold five of them for 14 l. and one for 1 l. and the Informer
had two himself, and the Priest one.

And when these Cattle were put to Sale, Rutter the Informer and Davis the
Priest being present, viewing the Cattle and promoting the Sale, one Randol
Malin spoke to the Priest to this effect, viz. John Davis, will thou take upon
thee to be a Preacher of Righteousness, and put men upon taking away and
selling their honest Neighbors Goods? Do thou believe this will cause an
adding to thy Church daily, such as shall be saved? At these words the Priest
fell into a Passion, calling him, Pitiful Rogue, threatening, he would take a
course with him; and said, he could find in his heart to break his Pate: And
because he spoke to the Butcher* to whom the Cattle were offered to Sale, he
got a Warrant for him also, who was then present with the aforesaid J.
Hodgskings, and committed him to the common Goal.

The said Randol Malin having some Liberty to go Home to his Family, was on the
17th of the 9th month, 1678. at a Meeting in Newton, and for speaking a few
words in Prayer to God was fined 20 l. 5 s. for which the said Justice Egreton
granted a Warrant to make Distress upon him, and Billington the Bum Bailiff
went into his House, and said, In the Kings Name, he would have the
Furnace-Pan, and all the rest of the G^ods in the House; and went out and
distrained upon the Corn, and the Hay also.

On the 3d day of the 10th month, 1678. for the Fine of 20 l. charged on
Thomas Titley, as af^resaid, the Bailiffs took from him Goods to the value of 7
l. and upwards, the nine Cows they said being not sufficient to discharge the
Fine imposed on him; and in a few days after they came and strained one Cart
and Wheels worth 50 s. to carry the Goods away with.

Arthur Wilcoxon of Manley, for being at the Meeting at Helsby the 12th of the
3d Month, 1678. was fined for part of the Preachers Fine, and for himself 8 l.
5 s. for which they took from him two Naggs and one Mare, which after they had
kept some time, and could not sell them, were returned Home again, for which
the Officers were sadly threatened by the Justice, to be fined, for neglecting
their Duty, as he said.

The chief Instrument in prosecuting the aforesaid Persons, was the aforesaid
John Davis, Priest of Fro^sham, who when others refused to buy the Goods, would
take the Spoil into his own hands, threatening, He would break the Quakers, or
they should break him; and that they should never meet quietly, for he would
pursue them, or cause them to be persued, whilst he had Breath in his Body.

Arthur Wilcoxon of Manley fined 8 l. 10 s. but being not at H^me when the
Bailiffs went with a Warrant from Justice Egerton to distrain, the Constables
would have had them not to make distress, and they would pay the Justice,
thinking thereby to save what they could of Arthur's Goods, which the four
Bailiffs would not consent to, except the Constable would pay them 12 d. a
piece, and promise to pay the Fines to Rutter the Informer, and not to the
Justice, which the Constable refused to do; so they took one Nagg, one Mare
and three Beasts, worth 11 l. and delivered them to the said Ralph Rutter the
Informer, who sold three Beasts, viz. one Cow and two Heisers for 2 l. 10 s.

Richard Sarrat, for being at a peaceable Meeting at Newton the 17th of the 9^h
month, 1678. fined 8 l. 15 s. for the House, the Preacher and himself, by the
aforesaid Justice, for which Fines Thomas Jones and George Bennet of Chester,
Bum Bailiffs, took two Horses and a Mare from him, worth 16 l.

Thomas Stretch of Overton, for being at a Meeting had two Pots taken from him,
valued at 1 l.

Richard Orme of Frodsham, Shoemaker, for being at a Meeting at Newton, the
20th day of the 10th Month, 1678. fined 20 s. by Philip Egerton, called a
Justice, and had Goods taken from him, worth 26 s.

Richard Orme aforesaid for being at a Meeting, the 22d day of the 11th Month,
1678. at the same place, was fined by the said Philip Egerton 9 l. for the
Preacher, notwithstanding the Person that spoke was able to pay the Fine, if it
had been laid on him; and for this Fine of 9 l. Lawrence Billington and Richard
Dobson, two Bum-Bailiffs, without any Officer, forcibly broke open R. Ormes
Shop-Door, and took away in Shop Goods, and other Goods, to the value of 8 l.
15 s.

Richard Greg of Barrow, for being at a Meeting at Newton, the 11th Month,
1678. was fined 8 l. by the said Philip Egerton, for which Ralph Rutter the
Informer, and Lawrence Billington, took a Cow out of the said Richard Gregs
Pen; but said, she was ten Pound too light, and therefore went to the Past^re
Ground, and took a Mare and six Reerlings, all worth 13 l. This was done
without making any demand, or showing any Warrant, or any of the House having
any Knowledge what was done, till informed by Neighbors that heard and saw
them; and they were gone a Mile and a half with the Cattle, before they were
overtaken, and then refused to show their Warrant; the next Morning the
Informer sold the Cattle at Fr^dsham, boasting he had a quick Market: and
though they were worth above 13 l. and a Mare they had taken from Richard
Sarrat, worth 4 l. they sold all for 4 l. 5 s. as the Man that bought them
related.

Arthur Willcoxon of Manley, for being at the Meetings at Newton aforesaid, was
fined 27 l. 10 s. for himself and the House, for which Fine Philip Egerton
aforesaid, granted a Warrant to the aforesaid Ralph Rutter and John Tue, two
Informers, and Lawrence Billington, Bailiff, Persons of no Estate, but live
upon the Spoil of others, who sell the Goods they take at what price they
please, and taking what, and as much as they please, never accounting for any
overplus; and the said Justice Egerton telling them, He would justify them,
if they sold Cattle for Twelve Pence a piece: And for the Fines aforesaid, they
distrained fifteen Cows and a Bull, one Yoke of Oxen, and a Nag and a Mare,
better worth than 70 l. but the Neighbors were greatly disgusted to see the
Cattle drove away, and a Woman and several Children stopped the Cattle, and
endeavored to stop them; at which the Informer being enraged, cried out, Kill
them; and Billington the Bailiff, with his Pike-Staff, ripped a young Girls Lip
in a cruel manner, that it bled extremely; and People cried out, Shame of them.
And the Informers seeing the Constable present, informed the said Justice
Egerton against him and the rest, and the Justice bound him over to his good
Behavior, and said, He should not only pay the Fines, but be fined himself at
the Sessions for his neglect, in not assisting the Informers to Strain: The
Constable being terrified at the Justices threats, was forced to pay the Fines,
and take the Cattle in lieu thereof.

The said Arthur Wilcoxon had taken from him before, for the said Fines a Nag,
a Mare, and two Heifers, worth 11 l. which were sold by the Informers for 4 l.
10 s.

Thomas Peckoe of Stanthorne, for having a Peaceable Meeting in his House, the
12th day of the 12th month, 1678. was informed against by William Torkington
and John Hussy, Informers, to Peter Venables, Justice, who gran^ed them a
Warrant to distrain; and the aforesaid Informers, accompanied with William
Kensey, Constable, came to Thomas Peckoes's House the 13th of the 1st Month,
1679. but his Cattle was seized by his Landlord before; however, they
distrained, and would have taken away one Mare and three Calves, had not the
Landlord happened to be there present, and prevented them for carrying them away
for that time; but the Informers being not willing t^ go away empty-handed,
searched the Cow-House, and finding a Mare, which the Wife of Alexander
Laurence had ^id upon to the Meeting that Day, (he being a Pris^ner for
Conscientiously refusing to Swear) they took the Mare, refusing upon demand, to
show any W^rrant for their so doing, but said, they had her, and would keep
her. About two days after, the same Informers and Const^ble went again to
Thomas Peckoe, and to^k the Mare and two Calves away, and searched every Room
in the House for Cheese; but took no more away at that time, the Constable
being moderate.

On the 13th day of the 1st Month afo^esaid, the same Informers and Constable
went to Thomas Vernons of Stanthorn, and the Gate being Locked, the Informer
heaved down the Gate, and without making any demand for any Fine; but hearing
the Gate break down, the Girl went forth and found them driving away three
Cows, worth 12 l. and two young Beasts, worth 4 l. for a Fine of 10 s. But the
Constable and Neighbors seeing their Unreasonableness, passed their Words for
the Fine, and took the Cattle into their Custody.

James Cleaton fined for himself and his Wife being at the Meeting, 1 l. for
which Fine the Informers aforesaid went to his House, and broke down his Door,
took five Cows and three Heifers, worth 26 l. but they restored the Cattle, all
but one, upon the Constable passing his Word, that the other should be forth
coming.

The same Informers took from Roger Dickes of Occleston, for a Fine of 15 s.
one Mare of his, and another of his Sons, worth 6 l. which they sold for 1 l.

Upon the Oath of the same Informers, that there was a strange Preacher that
preached at the Meeting at Thomas Peckoes, the 12th day of the 12th Month; And
though indeed there was no Preacher nor Preaching; yet the aforesaid Justice
fined William Woodcock 5 l. Thomas Bookly 5 l. Samuel Burrou^hs 5 l. and Ralph
Plumly 5 l. though he was not at the Meeting, nor had not been for three Years
before at any Quakers Meeting. The Informers coming to Thomas Bookly to make
Distress, finding the Cow-House Door fast went away, but meeting with Sr.
Jessery Shackerly, he asked them, Whether they had Strained to the purpose? and
bid them to their Duty, or he would Fine them; they told him the Door was fast;
he bid them break it open and he would stand by them, which they did: But what
distress they then made, for the aforesaid Fines, no Account is as yet returned
up.

Cornwall.
AT Loveday Hamblyes House, in the Parish of Austill, there being a Meeting the
1st day of the 2d month, 1677. for which she was fined 20 l. for the House, by
Joseph Saul, Justice (so called) and on the 3d day of the 7th month, 1677.
John Hodge, Francis Opie, Tristram Carlian, with John Arthur, Matthew Bond and
Henry Young, took away from the said Loveday Hambly two H^rses, three Bullocks,
twenty three Sheep and one Lamb, all worth 16 l.

For part of a Fine of 20 l. laid upon a Preacher, which the Warrant says was
fled, and for 10 s. for Ambross Gross of Luxillian, Goods were taken from him
well worth 10 l.

For a Fine of 10 s. upon John Trefry and his Wife, for the same Meeting, and
for part of the Preachers Fine, were Goods taken from the said John Trefry
worth 4 l.

For a Fine of 5 s. upon Peter Godfrey for being at the said Meeting, and for
part of the Preachers Fine, and for the Poverty of others, was Goods taken from
him worth 3 l.

For a Fine of 5 s. upon Philip Ellot, for being at the said Meeting, and Part
of the Preachers Fine, and for the pretended Poverty of others, had Goods taken
from him to the value of 4 l.

For a Fine of 10 s. imposed upon Joseph Growdon and his Wife, for the said
Meeting, and for the pretended Offenses and Poverty of others, had Goods taken
from him by Ralph Jenkin, John Hodge and John Hicks worth 5 l. 11 s. 9 d.

For a Fine of 5 s. upon Anne the Wife of Thomas Salthouse, for being at the
said Mee^ing, was taken by Tristram Corlian, Francis Opie and Edward Baker,
Goods worth 1 l. 3 s.

For a Fine of 5 s. upon John Hayes of Fewy, for being at the said Meeting, he
had Goods taken worth 1 l.

For a Fine of 10 s. upon John Ellott and his Wife, for being at the said
Meeting, and for the pretended Poverty of others, Goods were taken from him
worth 2 l.

For a Fine of 5 s. upon Joseph Ellott, for being at the said meeting, and for
the pretended Poverty of others, Goods were taken from him worth 1 l. 10 s.

Mary Samble of Enedor, a poor Widow, for being at the said Meeting was fined
5 s. and for that and the pretended Poverty of others, had Goods taken away to
the value of 1 l. 10 s.

The 8th day of the 2d Month, 1677. being the First day of the Week, Justice
Saul come to the Meeting at Tregongeeves with Constables, and several others,
where finding serveral Persons peaceably assembled, took their Names, and fined
Loveday Hambly 20 l. Thomas Salthouse for speaking in the said Meeting was
fined 20 l. and Anne his Wife 5 s. for part of which Fines of 20 l. and 5 s. on
the 9th day of the 5th month, 1678. John Hex, Edward Baker and Samuel Julian
seized on an Acre of Hay of the said Thomas Salthouse's, when it was ready for
carrying, which was sold to Anne Came, Widow, for 13 s. though the Hay was
worth 2 l.

Joseph Growden for being at the said M^eting and for refusing to tell the
Names of others, he being then Overseer of the Poor, was fined 5 l. and for
himself and his Wife 10 s. and for the pretended Poverty of others had Goods
taken from him, for the same Meeting, worth 9 l.

The 12th of the 8th Month, 1680.
There being a peaceable M^eting at Wynor the 12th day of the 7th mon^th, 1^8^.
there came two Informers, viz. Thom^s Lander and J^hn Treble of Wynor
aforesaid, and with them a Clerk, t^ one William Sil^y, called a Just^ce, who
took the Names of such as were assembled, and had them before the said Justice,
who fined several and grant^d a Warrant for to distr^in their Goods; and the
next Morning the Informer, and Humphry Guy Constable, took from John Peter a
Cow, which was all he had to give his Children Milk; which Cow they sold for 3
l. though it was worth 4 l.

Sampson Cosgrave had for the same Meeting a M^re taken from him worth 10 l.
which they sold for 5 l.

Nicholas Emett had distrained for the same Meeting one Table, one Creek, one
Kettle, besides some Pewter, also, they took from under his Wife a Chair she
sat in by the Fire, having been in a weak condition for near half a year, and
not having another Chair to sit on.

Henry Williams had a Mow of Wheat seized, which was sold for 20 s. though it
was worth 5 l.

Thomas Hicks, Constable, and one of the Informers came to the House of Anne
Hendor, a poor Widow, to leavy her Fine, but finding the Door fast, and no
body at home, they lay close, and watched their opportunity when she opened the
Door, and thrust in upon her, and took away two Beds with Boulsters, Pillows
and Coverlets, Blankets, Sheets, and some Pewter, taking all away, leaving her
no Bed to lie on, but the Boards, nor any thing to cover her from the Cold.

This is but a hint of what has been of late in this County; their Sufferings
formerly upon the Act against Coventicles, having been very much to the loss of
many Hundred of Pounds.

Darbyshire.
FOr a peaceable Meeting at Whittenton, the 17th of the 12th Month, 1677. at
the House of Francis Davenport, several Persons were fined by Franc^s Bur^on
called Justice, John Naylor and Richard Lindly Informers; for which Fines these
several Persons had Goods taken from them as follows;

Godfrey Beard, Goods to the value of 1 l. Francis Davenport, Goods to the
value of 8 l. 10 s. William Storr, Goods to the value of 7 s. 6 d. Anthony
Allen, Goods worth 9 s. Thomas Burbeck, Goods worth 11 s. 6 d. Susanna Frith,
Goods worth 10 s.

For a Meeting at Tupton, the 29th of the 7th Month, 1678. several Persons
were fined by Thomas Gladwin, called a Justice, John Stoppart and Gilbert
Linker Informers, and had Goods and Cattle taken to the value as follows;

John Allon of Tibshelfe had taken Goods worth 5 l. 5 s. Thomas Fowke of
Holmgate fined 10 s. for himself and his Wife, and 5 l. for an unknown
Preacher; had for the said Fines the most p^rt of his Goods distrained; a Sale
of which Goods b^i^g proclaimed at two Markets, and none being willing to buy
them, the Officers acquainted the Justice therewith, and desired to know what
they should do; he told them, If they did not raise the Fines, he would Fine
them fi^e Pound a piece: Whereupon they had a Cow to Market the second time,
but could not sell her, wherefore the Justice still threatened to Fine them; so
that John Marryot the Constable was constrained to sell the Goods at a low
rate, viz. for 3 l. to stop the said Justices Mouth, which he did by paying the
Money to him. Matthew Hopkinson, Junior, fined 5 s. for being at the said
Meeting, and 5 l. for an unknown Preacher, had two Cows taken from him, which
being had to the Market, would not sell, and therefore were returned to him,
but had some Money stopped that was owing to him for the said Fine.

Some others were fined for the same Meeting, some of which being not yet
levied, a further Account cannot be given.

Durham.
FOr peaceably Assembling to Worship God at St^ckton and Norton, in the Year
1678. these Persons following were fined and distrained, by Warrant from George
Morland of Wineyard and ^ames Pennyman of Ornsby in Cleaveland in Yorkshire,
called Justices; upon Certificate from the said Morland, who first Convicted
them. The Informers, William Wake and Richard Halliman, both of Thorpe Fewlers:
The Goods taken by William Adamson Constable, Overseer and Warden; Thomas
Hodgson, Warden, Ralph Tindal Overseer, all of Stockton; Thom^s Austin, spec^al
Bail^ff John Manuel, Thomaes Thompson Constables, Robert W^lson Constable, and
others in their several places, by virtue of the Warrants from the Justices
aforesaid, and for the Fines imposed for the Meeting Houses, and for Richard
Watsons Preaching; although Richard Watson, so soon as he understood Warrants
were granted against others in his Name, did in the presence of many Witnesses
offer unto the said George Morland, That if he would call in such Warrants, and
give them out against him, he would sufficiently make appear that he had Goods
and Chattels within the Township of Norton, liable to be taken by his Warrants,
to the value of one Hundred Pounds, and upwards: But the said Morland (except
he would pay the Money) refused to call in the said Warrants.

The 9th of the 9th Month, 1678. Taken as follows, in Goods and Cattle, to
the val^e of
From L. S. D. Simon Townsend, 00 10 00 Robert Pattison, 13 00 00 John
Blackeston, 04 00 00 Thomas Chipchase, 04 00 00 Christopher Crosby 5 Cows, 22
00 00 James Peacock, 05 10 00 William Harrison, 06 10 00 Cuthbert Hunter, 07 00
00 Christopher Crosby, 04 00 00 James Peacock, 05 00 00 William Foster, 03 00
00

Money paid upon appeal by Edward Fleatham of Yarme in the County of York,
Merchant, 20 l. 15 s. Twenty Pounds of which the said Edward Fleaetham was
charged with, for a Fine for the Meeting House at Stockton; he being Convicted
in his absence, and without summons to appear, neither being fined for the
Poverty of any other, nor being the sole Owner of the said House himself, but
joynt-Tenant with others, one of whom was also present at the said Meeting; and
although the Judge and several of the Justices of the Sessions, unto whom he
appealed, did confess it was contrary to Law that any man should be Convict
without hearing, or summons to appear; yet nevertheless Judgment was given
against him.

From L. S. D Benjamin Lindly, 00 10 00 John Langstaff of Howlish near
Auckland, 10 05 00

Ten Pounds whereof was part of a forty Pound Fine for Richard Watson's
Preaching and Teaching; although Richard Watson did make appear he did but only
Pray.

From L. D. S. William Smith, 12 00 00 James Peacok, 04 10 00 Robert Herron, 05
00 00 Zachary Herron, 06 00 00 Cuthbert Hunter, 06 10 00 William Harrison, 09
00 00 Richard Watson, 05 00 00 Thomas Chipchase, 02 00 00 Richard Watson, 10 00
00 William Smith, 01 05 06

From L. S. D. Giles Calvert, 00 05 00 Elinor Wheldon, 00 17 00 Daniel Toes, 00
06 00 William Jeckell, 02 06 08 William Laurence, 00 08 00 Robert Hartburn, 01
09 00 John Ushaw, 00 10 00 William Smith, 02 00 00 James Peacock, 04 10 00
Robert Corney, 02 07 06

All the aforesaid Sufferers were convicted in their absence, without any
Summons to appear to make answer for themselves before the Face of their
Accusers, upon whose Information, whether true or false, they have suffered;
and for the most part are ignorant of what Sum or Sums they were charged with,
for whose Offense or Offenses, (when committed) or what the Offense or Offenses
were, for which their Goods have been taken; the Officers usually refusing to
show their Warrants, the Justice forbidding them; And the Justice himself
confessed, in the presence of many Witnesses, That he commanded them not to
show their Warrants.

Distresses upon several belonging to Darlington-Meeting, by Warrant from the
said G. Morland, Thomas Gathorn and Robert Fowel, Informers.
From L. S. D. Edward Fisher, 00 10 00 Joshuah Middleton, 00 10 00 Margaret
Crawforth, 00 05 00 Michael Collin, 00 05 00 Robert Truman, 00 06 03

From L. S. D. Edward Fisher, 05 10 00 Cuthbert Tompson, 00 11 06 John Truman,
00 05 00 John Shaw, 00 09 00 Robert Truman, 14 13 00 Thomas Nickson, 00 07 00
Laurence Appleby, 00 06 06 William Dobson, 00 05 00 Michael Collins, 02 10 00
Frances Confitt, 00 08 00

These Ten prosecuted on the Information of William Wake of Thorpe Fewlers,
Farmer, and Richard Halliman of the same, Labourer, Informers, by the same
Justices Warrant.

Frances Confitt, from whom they took a Kettle worth eight Shillings, is a poor
Widow of near Eighty Years of Age, whom the Officers turned out of her House,
after the eight Hour at Night, and kept her out of her Bed in violent Frosty
Weather, threatening her in such manner, that she was out of hope of Enjoying
her House, though she had a Lease of it: And said, They had order for what they
did from Justice Morland.

Cuthbert Goldsborrough Blacksmith, Watchman with John Foster, Constable of
Darlington, at the eleaventh or twelfth Hour in the Night, called to the said
Widow to open her Door, and let them in to look for Jesuits; and she being a
single Woman, and none in the House but her self, told them, she durst not; for
she feared they were Drunk, and would abuse her: Whereupon they got Stones, and
as it was judged, after an Hours knocking and bouncing, they broke the Lock,
and burst open the Door, and sorely affrighted the poor ancient Woman; and the
Neighbors that heard their Threatenings, their Children were sorely affrighted
with the noise they made in breaking open the Door.

William Hodshon of Cockerton, near Darlington, Yeaman, fined for being at two
Meetings, 15 s. and his Son fined for being at one Meeting 5 s. And
notwithstanding it has been made appear to the said Justice Morland by several
Witnesses, that the said William Hodshon was not at the first Meeting, for
which he was fined 5 s. and therefore was not liable to be fined 10 s. for the
second Meeting, because in strictness it could not be accounted more then the
first time; however, there was taken from him a Heifer, worth 3 l. 15 s. And
when the Constable went to pay in the Money, he treated with George Morland to
abate the 15 s. Because, said he, our Neighbors know that William Hodshon, was
not at the first Meeting; and for his Son Thomas, we know he was then sick of
an Ague, and is still; And I have driven a Heifer, but cannot get her sold, for
no Body will buy her. To which George Morland answered, He may take his Remedy
against the Informers; and here is a Man that will buy the Heifer; meaning
William Wake, one of the Informers, saying to him, Lay down the twenty
Shillings, and take thou the Heifer. But the Constable answered, He shall not
have her. So the Constable was forced to pay the twenty Shillings for the whole
Fines.

1680.
By Information made by Richard Keenlyside Skinner, George Thompson Blacksmith*
George Stubbs Cooper, John Proud Shoemak^r, and several Informations by
Cuthbert Shadforth and George Joblin Shoemakers, all of Durham, Warrants were
granted forth by John Moorland, Ralph Davison, John Sudbury Dean, Dennis
Greenvill Archdeacon, Isaac Bassire, Cuthbert Hutchison Mayor, for a Meeting
the 27th of the 12th month, 1679.

Robert Fisher of Durham, Fuller, had taken from him, for a Fine for the
Meeting being at his House, and other single Fines, two Mares, six Oxen and
three Kine, worth 32 l.

Martin Nicholson, Grocer, had taken from him at several times, for several
Fines, Goods out of his Shop worth 76 l.

Robert Hethrington, Shoemaker, had taken from him, (for Fines amounting to 3
l. 5 s.) Goods, viz. Shoes and Boots worth 4 l.

William Heighington, Shoemaker, had taken from him, for a Fine of 10 s. Goods
wor^h 10 s. 6 d. and Charges of an Appeal, in the recovering of his Goods,
taken for his Fathers Fine, and another 10 s. Fine for himself, amounts to 4 l.
10 s. 6 d.

Robert Wallas, Shoemaker, had taken from him several times, all the Goods of
any value in his Shop, he being but lately set up, for several Fines, worth 7
l. 6 s. 6 d.

William Hickson of Shinkley near Durham, Farmer, for a Fine of about 4 l. had
taken from him two Oxen worth 7 l..

Richard Hall of Rhamside fined 5 l. 5 s. and his Household Goods seized on to
the value of 10 l. which his Father would not suffer to be taken away, but paid
the Fine of 5 l. 5 s.

Richard Hopper of Wellsprings near Durham, had taken from him at several
times, for several Fines, two Cows, Pewter, Bedding, and other Household Goods,
worth 16 l.

James Hall of Monck Hasledon, had taken from him, for a Fine of 10 l. 5 s. for
being at a Meeting in Durham, five Kine worth 17 l.

George Hall of Stockton, for being at the same Meeting had taken from him
three Cows and a Steer, worth 12 l.

By Information made unto Robert Eden of West Auckland, and Cuthbert Caire of
Eller Auckland by John Ande and James Dickson, Constables of Market Auckland,
and Warrants granted by them unto the said Informers, for several Meetings,
Goods were taken from Friends at Auckland, as follows.
Zachariah Murthwaite, Shoemaker, had taken from him, for Fines of 15 s. six
pair of Shoes, worth 17 s.

William Spencely, Dyer, had taken from him, for several Fines, Pewter and four
Cows, 15 l. 10 s.

Anthony Hodgshon, Farmer, had taken from him, for several Fines amounting to
about 5 l. three Cows, one of which came back into his Ground, 9 l.

Edward Tonstall had taken from him, for the Meeting being at his House, one
Horse, one Cow, twelve Pewter dishes, and other Pewter, twelve Rushy Leather
Chairs and one Chest of Drawers, worth 18 l. 10 s.

John Trotter, Tanner, had taken from him, for several Fines amounting to about
5 l. one Hide and two Cows, worth 7 l. 6 s.

James Trotter, Dyer, had taken from him, for several Fines amounting to about
5 l. two Cows worth 7 l.

Note, These with several Fines not yet leavyed, and the Informers giving out
to distrain again, for some of the same Fines already leavyed, with their
selling of the Sufferers Goods in private, much under their real worth, not
bringing them to the open Market within their Liberties, with insulting
Language, which they suffer from them, their threatening to break Locks, their
summoning some of them to appear before them at their Houses to give an Account
of their Debts, as if they were Justices of the Peace; their several false
Oaths in their Informations. All which may be made appear, if desired: And
some have been stripped so bare, they have not left them a Cow to give the
Children Milk.

The value of the Loss of our Goods and Cattle for Meeting.
L. S. From the Year 1670. to 1676. amounts to 730 19 In the Year 1677. the
Loss amounts to 120 00 In 1678. 208 16 In this Year 239 15 Total 1299 11

Ralph Nicholson Martin Nicholson Emanuel Grice John Heighington William
Heighington Robert Wallas Robert Hethrington Edward Tonstall Richard Hopper.
Devonshire.
Borough of Plymouth, the 5th of the 2d Month, 1677.
UPon Information given to the Mayor, Andrew Horsman, by a Soldier of the
Garrison, came the said Mayor and three Justices more, and three Constables,
and they forcibly dispersed the Meeting, and fined one Richard Samble, who was
then speaking, twenty Pounds.

The next Meeting after being the 7th day of the Month, and the first day of
the Week, we were gathering together in our Meeting House; upon further
Information of two Soldiers of the Garrison to ^he Mayor, he with two Justices
more came to the Meeting, and when they had taken our Names, the said Mayor and
Justices with violence haled us forth the Meeting House into the Street, and
then set a Guard upon the Door to keep us out; and the said Richard Samble
being there again (whom before, as above, they had fined 20 l.) they took him
away with a Guard, and so kept him till Evening, and convicted him, and fined
him again 40 l. for speaking. So, from the 7th of the 2d month, to the 30th of
the 7th month following, we were kept out in the Street, out of our
Meeting House three times a Week, and then that day we had a peaceable Meeting
within the H^use, and it was the first day of the Mayralty of William Tomes;
but afterward the said Mayor kept us out of the Meeting House, and we met in
the open Street, as before, three times a Week, enduring the Extremity of the
Cold, and Bitterness of the Storms all the Winter, as well as the Heat of the
Summer, receiving much Abuse of the Rabble and Rude Multitude that gathered
about us; and sometimes the Officers and Soldiers of the Garrison throwing
Squibs of Fire, and hot burning Coals from the Hearth out of a Window upon us,
and Glasses of Beer, Wine, and nasty filthy Excrements, with Punshings and
Railings, which were too tedious to relate

The 30th of the 10th Month being the first day of the Week, we being met in
the Street, the aforesaid Richard Samble being at the said Meeting, and being
on his Knees at Prayer, John Martyn called a Justice, coming by, the said
Martyn came amongst us, and haled the said Richard Samble from his Knees,
calling him Rogue; and saying, Are you come again? and took him and committed
him to a Guard, and then in the Evening he and the Mayor convicted him, and the
next day laid a Fine upon four of us that was at the said Meeting, for Forty
Pounds, for the said Richard Samble's Fine, to each of us Ten Pounds a piece,
yet kept the said Richard Samble one whole night and part of a day in Prison,
and then released him. At another time, one declaring in the Street, came a
Soldier and beat him with great Violence. And thus with great Disturbance we
kept our Meetings in the Street, from the 5^h of the 2d month, 1677. to the
1st of the 3d month, 1678. being more than twelve Months.

Many Warrants were given forth for Distresses upon some of us, but the
Constables being moderate, little of Distress was taken, only from Robert Carry,
there the Constables forced into his Shop, and took from him in Goods, in Sugar
and Strong Waters, by Computation to to the value of Twenty Four Pounds, and
carried it away, and the said Officers sold it at a public Survay in the
Street, and it was sold for four Pound thirteen Shillings; but two moderate
men, his Neighbors bought it, in kindness to the said Robert Carry, without his
knowledge; and after they had taken out from the Sugar so much as they had paid
out for the said Goods, did return all the rest again to the said Robert Carry;
but in all this time we had very little of Distresses taken from us besides
this. This very bri^fly is the substance of our Sufferings, but the whole
manner, if it written, would contain several Sheets. The Truth of which is
testified in the behalf of the rest of the Sufferers, by

Arthur Cotton.
1678.
Cullumpton-Meeting.
THe 25th of the 12th month, 1676. came Anthony Salter, Informer, to our
Meeting, who went from the said Meeting, and Informed the Justices of the said
Meeting, namely, William Walrond and Samuel Sainthill, who gave forth their
Warrants for Distre^s, upon such who were at the said Meeting, as follows.

The 11th day of the 2d month, 1677. came Thomas Axe, John Mudford, William
Fowler, Robert Coleman, William Richards (Constables) Anthony Salter, Informer
and Warden, and Thomas Barron, Warden, to the House of Thomas Stampro, who
being not at h^me, they unlocked the Door of his House (the Key being in the
door) went into his House, and took from him, for a Fine of 15 s. 2 l. 10 s.

The same Officers came to the House of Grinvell Yeo, and for 5 s. took 14 s.

The same Officers came to the House of Abel Down, and for 1 l. took 1 l. 10 s.

The same Officers came to the House of Robert Ellicott, and for 1 l. 10 s.
took 3 l.

The same Officers came to the House of Thom^s Fry, and for 3 l. took 4 l.

The same Offi^ers came to the House of Richard Old, and for 5 s. took 10 s.

The same Offic^rs came to the House of Richard Seach, and for 1 l. took 2 l.

The 24th of ^he said month came George Rutson Constable, William Hellmon and
William Hill, Wardens of Kentish Beer, to the House of Anthony Henson, and
for 5 s. took 15 s.

Alexander Richards Witnesses. Thomas Fry Witnesses. Robert Elicott Witnesses.
Grinvell Yeo Witnesses.

The 19th of the 6th Month, 1677.
For a Meeting at Cullumpton, the 25th of the 12th Month, 1676.
Robert Gudridge of Helcomb Regis fined for the House 20 s. for two others 10
s. and for himself 5 s. for which he had taken from him seven Sheep, worth 35
s. by Kerslake Constable, and others* by Warrant from William Walrond and
Samuel Sainthill, Justices.

Robert Guddridge for being at another Meeting at Cullumpton the 7th of the 1st
Month, 1676. was fined for the House or Preacher 10 l. and for himself 10 s.
And by Warrant from Samuel Sain^hill aforesaid, had distrained and taken from
him seven Bullocks, three of them sold, worth 13 l. 1^ s. and four returned
again.

Joseph Paul of the same place, for being at the same Meeting, fined 20 s. for
himself and others; had distrained by the same Justices Warrant, and by the
same Officers executed, Goods worth 18 s. 6 d.

George Smith of the same, fined 10 s. for being at the same Meeting; had
distrained by the same Officers, by the same Justices Warrant, one pair of
Worsted Combs worth 5 s.

John Richardson of Bradniuch and his Wife for being at two Meetings at
Cullumpton, and one at Bradniuch, fined 1 l. 5 s. for which, by Warrant from
that aforesaid Justice, he had distrained and taken from him Goods worth 33 s.
6 d. taken by Richard Coggan, Michael Nex and William Bendel Constables, and
others.

Robert Pottle of the same, for being at two Meetings at Cullumpton aforesaid,
and one at Bradniuch, was fined for himself, Wife and Son, 4 l. 5 s. and by the
same Justices Warrant, and the same Officers had distrained and taken from him
five Pewter Platters worth 10 s. the Officers not finding Goods sufficient to
answer their Ends.

Kingsbridge, the 21st of the 8th Month, 1677.
Upon the Information of Paucars Cook, Sexton of Dodbrooke, William Cook his
Son, and James Matthews, all of Dodbrooke, to John Bear, and one Kelland,
called Justices, that there was a Meeting at Woodhouses in the said Parish,
several were fined by the said Justices, who also granted Warrants to make
Distress as follows.

William Hingstone of Kingsbridge, fined 20 l.

John Brooking of the same 1 l.

Michael Lee of Bridge-Town near Totnes 1 l.

The 13th day of the 9th Month, 1677. the Officers, viz. Michael Martin, John
Bunker, Robert Bull, Anthony Putt, John Dyning, Constables; Thomas Two, Thomas
Teede and Thomas Adams, Overseers for the Poor, distrained, viz. of

Michael Lee to the value of 1 l. 9 s.

Samuel Jarvis had taken, the 29th of the same Month, by Jonas Holdish, Goods
to the value of 7 s. 6 d.

Samuel Jarvis had taken to the value of 13 s. 10 d.

William Hingstone had taken by the Officers of Kingsbridge, in Timber, and a
whole Reek of Wood, which eight Men were from nine in the Morning till five at
Night, throwing out of his Court over a Neighbors Wall, in all to the value of
35 l. 15 s.

Cullumpton, the 23d of the 4th Month, 1679.
William Leach of the same place fined for being at a Meeting there the 7th day
of the 1st Month, 1678. 3 l. for which the Officers having a Warrant to make
distress, viz. Hugh Hole, Robert Westcombe, John James, Constables, and others,
took from the said William Leach, Brass and Pewter to the value of 4 l. 9 s.

Dorsetshire.
FOr a Meeting in Bridport in the said County, the 8th of the 8th Month, 1680.
several Persons, called Quakers were fined, Thomas Bagg of Bridport 9 l. 10 s.
Daniel Tailor of the same 9 l. 15 s. Humphry Sprague of the same 8 l. upon the
Oath of Thomas Nossiter a Lawyer, and William Bond a Bum-Bailiff, two
Informers, by Joseph Bishopp, and Thomas Ellis, two called Justices, and are
Bailiffs of Bridport, who also granted Warrants to make Distress of their
Goods; and one Robert Ironside Constable of Bridport executed the said
Warrants, and took from Hum^phry Sprague of Bridport two Brass Pots, two
Caldrons, one Posnet Skillet, one Warming-Pan, one Pewter Dish, to the value of
about 3 l.

James Jacobs had taken from him a piece of Sole Leather, one Shoe, and his
Working Tools.

Thomas Bagg had taken from him eight pieces of White Linen, some of it
Ossingbrigs, some broad Dutch Dowlass, and broad Hamborrough Cloth, two pieces
and a half of Woolen Cloth, worth Sixteen or Seventeen Pounds.

Daniel Tailor had taken from him for the same Meeting five pieces of White
Ossingbriggs, and three pieces of Woolen Cloth, worth about Eleavn or Twelve
Pound; the Constable threatening he had not enough, but must come again and
again. William Smith of Kingcomb in the said County, for being at the aforesaid
Meeting was fined 9 l. 10 s. for his own, and the pretended Poverty or Offenses
of others; in order to leavy which Fine, the Bailiffs of Bridport aforesaid,
sent a Certificate to two Justices, living near the said William Smith, who
granted a Warrant to make distress; but the Warrant being directed to a wrong
Constable, he would not execute it, and the Justices that granted it being gone
to London before the Warrant was Executed, Thomas Nossiter the Lawyer, and one
of the Informers aforesaid, knew not how to come by his Prey, altered the
Warrant himself, directing it to the right Constable; and when he had so done,
orders the Constable to meet him at William Smiths House, where, when he came
and found the Door shut got a Smith's Sledge and broke it open, (though the
Constable was against it) and took away a parcel of Bodice Tick, Stockens,
Cloth and Searge, to the value of about 9 l. Though the said William Smith is
but a mean Man, and has a Wife and several small Children.

For a Meeting in Bridport, the 13th of the 9th Month, 1680.
Daniel Tailor of Bridport, for a Fine of 9 l. 10 s. for being at the said
Meeting, the 19th of the 9th Month, had taken from him one piece of gray Cloth
twenty two Yards, and seventy eight Yards of Gray Searge in five pieces, most
of them being cut, worth in all 11 l. 17 s.

Thomas Bagg of Bridport the same time, for a Fine of 7 l. 10 s. for being at
the same Meeting, had taken one piece of good brown Ossingbriggs, fifteen Yards
of broad White Callice, one half piece Black Worsted Baratine, and part of four
pieces more of sad-coloured Worsted Baratine, being about sixty six Yards of
Baratine, in all worth 8 l. 10 s. Taken by Robert Ironside, Constable, by
Warrant from Thomas Ellis and Joseph Bishop Bailiff, and Justices for the Town
of Bridport.

Gloucestershire.
AT a Meeting of the People of God at Frenchay, the 13th day of the 4th Month,
1677. one John Merideth, called a Justice, fell upon William Bennet and beat
him sorely, and also beat William Wade: And the 20th day of the same Month, at
the same place, in the High Way near the Meeting House he found John Silcock,
and he took him by the Hair of the Head, and plucked him into the Meeting House
Yard, and then drew his naked Knife, and said, He would m^rk him; but his own
Clark and others stepped in and prevented him, otherwise it was verily thought
he would have done the said Silcock some great Mischief. The 23d of the same
Month, coming to the same place, he demanded of George Peace what his Name
was; and because he gave not his Name suddenly, the said Justice drew his Kife
upon him; but one of his Servants restrained him from his wicked purpose. The
27th day of the same Month, at the same place, the said John Merideth took
John Bawn and pulled him by the Hair of the Head, and after that finding him in
the Highway the same day, he fell upon him and beat him after a very Cruel and
Barbarous manner.

And the said Justice Merideth did beat John Friar and Joseph Glover, two
Officers, because they refused to pull and hale People, as he would have them;
Several others were also sorely beaten by him; and he broke five Glass Windows
with his Staff, not leaving so much as one whole Quarrel, and caused the
Benches and Fourms to be cut in pieces.

John Boy of Luckington, for three several Fines for being at Meetings, had
Goods taken from him worth 11 l. by Warrant from Gabriel Low, called Justice:
And the Officers, when they seized upon the Sufferers Goods, belonging to
Bodmanton Meeting, did say, They were charged by the said Gabriel Low to take
all they could find, and that which was not worth a carrying away, they should
burn it, or break it to pieces; insomuch that Thomas Holbrow, an old Blind man
and his Wife, and several other poor People had not a Bed left them, but their
Lodging was on Straw for several Weeks; and the Blind man and his Wife had lain
above eleaven Months on Straw, when the Account was sent up; and when Clothes
were lent them by their Friends to keep them warm in the cold Season, the
Officers took part of them away; And this Cruelty and Spoil did not suffice,
but the poor Blind man, and one Henry Ashby of Hawksbury Upton, were Indicted
for not going to the public Worship, and by a Sessions process were
apprehended and carried to the Goal.

Goods and Cattle taken for Meeting to worship God at Frenchhay, by Warrant
from the said John Meredith, under a pretense of Breach of the late Act against
Conventicles.
1. From Thomas Hill, eight Cows worth 30 l.

2. One Yoke of Oxen from him, worth 10 l.

3. Two Heifers of his Childrens (his own Cattle being all taken) to the value
of 7 l.

4. One Wagon and one Wane worth 11 l.

5. Twelve load of Barley worth 25 l.

From Richard Tiper the worth of 5 l. 11 s.

For Meetings at Olveston, several Persons were Fined, and Distresses were made
by Warrant from Francis Fane, called Justice, for the last Year, and this Year,
being 1678. as follows.
Walter Summers had four Cows taken from him worth 20 l.

Francis Puinell four Bullocks and six Cows worth 34 l.

Thomas Wyther four Cows worth 16 l.

Richard Adams one Horse worth 8 l.

William Peasly two Cows worth 8 l.

William Culliford one Mare and Colt worth 10 l.

John Pocker two Cows worth 8 l.

Samuel Thurston two Horses worth 8 l.

Edward Hill, one Horse, four Yearlings, two Calves and eight Sheep, worth 14 l.

John West two fat Cows worth 10 l. 10 s.

Jonathan Russell five Beasts worth 20 l.

John Hollister Goods sold for 3 l.

John Orchards Goods sold for 2 l.

Nathaniel Thurston had Corn distrained; but the Officers not finding Sale at a
reasonable value, and seeing the Severity of the Justices in Fining others who
had not sold the Distresses, were constrained for fear to lay down the Fine,
viz. 10 l.

John Edmunds had also Corn distrained, and the Officers for the aforesaid
Reason did the like, and laid down 10 l.

These several Officers following were fined, under a pretense of neglecting
their Duty; when in reality the occasion was, because they brought not to the
Justices the Fines imposed; though they did allege, and could prove, that they
had made Leavies, and the Goods remained in their Custodies for want of Sale,
Officers Names that were Fined. L. S. D. John Seager fined 05 00 00 Thomas
Stephens fined 00 05 00 Robert Hancock fined 02 00 00 William Richards fined 02
00 00 William Hollister fined 02 00 00 John Hancock fined 05 00 00

An Account of further Distresses for Meeting in Olveston by VVarant from the
same Justice, 1678.
From L. S. D. Joseph Comings, 16 00 00 John Cooksey, 01 16 00 William Pichard,
07 00 00

From L. S. D. Edward Parker, 03 00 00 Samuel Th^rston, 02 04 00 Philip
Mansell, 02 00 00 Richard Adams, 09 00 00 William VValkins, 06 00 00 William
Rogers, 12 00 00 Maurice Smith, 14 00 00 Christopher Young, seven Cows taken
worth 25 00 00 William Smith, 15 00 00 Thomas Sturge, taken from him in Cattle
worth 18 00 00 Jonathan Russell, 10 00 00 Walter Summers, 09 00 00 Thomas
Perryman, 05 00 00 Edward VVyther, 05 00 00 John Griming, 10 00 00 Edward
Budding, 05 00 00 Joseph Sturge, in Cattle 05 00 00

Herefordshire.
THere being a peaceable Meeting at Hereford the 19th of the 3d Month, 1678.
one William Russell went to Thomas Matthews, the Mayor, and informed against
them, who fined James Ext^n of Burghill, and John Barber of Hereford City,
twenty Pounds a piece (as Owners of the Meeting House) for a second default,
for which Fine James Exton had taken from him out of the Market one Horse and
Pad, and other Furniture, worth 5 l. 10 s. and John Barber had taken from him
to the value of 5 l. by John Jones, one of the Mayors Serjants. John Carver
then fined, and had taken from him Goods worth 4 s. Robert VVoodliff fined, and
had taken from him Goods worth 15 s. 6 d.

Leicestershire.
UPon the 22d day of the 4th month, 1679. there being a Meeting to wait upon
and worship God at the House of Edward Erbye of Broughton; John Smith of Remson
in the County of Nottingham, an old Informer, who had been the Ruin of many
Families in that County, and finding his Prey began to fail there, he comes
into Leicestershire, and in the Meeting aforesaid finding the Persons assembled
(being about sixteen in number) sit silent, he used some uncivil words to
provoke them to speak, that so he might Swear there was a Preacher; but not
prevailing, he went out and fetched in his Companion Thomas Simkin of Thornton
(a Person not long since in the Goal for Felony) John Heel, Constable, being
present, gave the Informers the Names of all he knew, and the rest they took
before one Justice Cole, who showed great Injustice in endeavoring to fine for
a Speaker or Preacher, when there was no Preacher there, but that failing, he
fined Edward Erbye, the man of the House, 20 l. notwithstanding he was a
Prisoner at that time for Conscience sake (being committed to Prison several
months before, with John Swaun, junior, of little Peatling, and one Thomas
Pittsoe for refusing to Swear, which Imprisonment of theirs was occasioned by
the Instigation of William Cotton, Priest of Broughton aforesaid. The Informer
came with the Officers, and broke open the House of the said Edward Erbye, and
took away all his Household Goods that were worth taking, to the value of much
more than the Fine, and sold them to Thomas Cotton, the Priests eldest Son; not
leaving Edward Erbyes Wife, (who was an ancient weakly Woman) so much as a Bed
to lie on.

At another Meeting the 29th day of the same month, at the Widow Townsends at
Broughton, there came John Smith, Informer aforesaid, who finding several
Persons sitting Silent, Informed the aforesaid Justice Cole thereof, who
immediately directed his Warrant to the Ofcers of the said Parish who, for 8 l.
Fine imposed upon the Widow Townsend, took away all her household Goods,
except one hanging Press and one Bedsteed, which Goods were valued at 23 l.
they also took away the Daughters Wearing Clothes and Apparel for the Mothers
Fine.

Sarah Hilton of Sapcott, an ancient poor Widow, and her two Daughters, and
Alice Griffin of the same Town, were all fined 3 l. for being at the Meeting at
Broughton aforesaid; and the said Sarah Hilton had Goods taken from her to the
value of between four and five Pounds, by Warrant from the said Justice Cole.
J^hn Smith Informer.

Richard Bailey of Broughton Fined for being at a Meeting, by the said William
Cole, 7 l. 10 s. for which John Heel Constable, took from him seven Heifers,
worth 12 l.

William Brooks fined 10 s. for which they took Goods worth 19 s.

James Parker of Dunton, riding by when they were carrying out Edward Erbyes
Goods, for refusing to assist the Officers, was fined 5 l.

Nicholas Pawley of Whetstone, for being at a Meeting at Broughton the 6th day
of the 5th month, 1679. was h^d before William Cole aforesaid, with eleaven or
twelve Persons more, by the said John Smith Informer, who t^ld the Justice he
had brought them from a Meeting at Broughton: Nicholas Pawley said, there was
never a word sp^ken; the Informer said, That was True. Well (said William Cole)
then you save 20 l. for a Preacher; but you must pay 5 s. a piece for hearing;
and proceeded to Fine Nicholas Pawley 10 l. 5 s. The next Morning the Informer
came to Whetstone, and threatened the Officers to have them fined, if they did
not distrain; and Nicholas Pawley having but one Cow, the Constable took her
and sold her to a Butcher for 20 s. and aft^rwards broke open his Barn door,
and set men to thresh out all his Corn, though he had nothing but what he got
by his Labor; the Corn and Pease they thresht, they sold for 10 l. so the
whole they took was 11 l.

William Allen of Whetstone, in the same Year, through the Information of the
same Informer, by the said William Cole fined 10 l. 5 s. which a Kinsman, no
Quaker, paid.

Thom^s Shenton of Cosbey, fined for himself and his Wife 5 l. 10 s. for being
at the Meeting at Broughton, and by Warrant from the aforesaid William Cole,
the Officers distrained and took from him two Cows and five Ewes and L^mbs,
which the Constable Francis Saunt could not sell presently; wherefore William
Cole fined him 5 l. for a Neglect in the Execution of his Office, which he was
fain to pay; and then William Cole gr^nted a Warrant to other Officers, who
broke open T. Shenton's Doors and took all the Goods in his House and about his
Ground; but his Neighbors being grieved to see all his Goods like to be made
Havoc of, paid the Fine, and took part of the Goods for their satisfaction.

The 16th day of the 9th month, 1679. John Evatt of Castle Dumington, in the
said County, having a peaceable Meeting at his House, was Informed against by
John Smith, and one Whittle, to Thomas Lord Beamsunt, Robert Lord Ferrers and
Henry Kendall, called Justices, who issued forth Warrants for Distresses as
follows.

John Evatt, for a Fine of 10 l. 5 s. was distrained by Michael Pim, Constable,
and two other Officers; and because the Goods were but of a mean value, Thomas,
called Lord Beamount commanded the Officers to sell them, if it were but for
the thirtieth part of the worth of them; so they sold all his Goods they
distrained for 7 s.

William Howett for being at the said Meeting fined 5 s. for himself, and 10 l.
for the Poverty of John Evatt, and had his Goods distrained, and part sold. And
four Officers, viz. John Bradshaw, called Churchwarden, Henry Pim Overseer,
John Gettly Thirdburrough, and Michael Pim Constable, were fined 5 l. a piece,
for neglect of their Offices; but they proving the Informers had given false
Information against them, with much cost and trouble got their Fine^ remitted.

Thomas Glover fined 5 s. which his Son paid.

William Marshall of Wimswould, for having two peaceable Meetings at his House,
one being the 14th day of the 10th month, 1679. and the other on the 15th day
of the 12th month, 1679. through the Information of John Smith was fined 20 l.
by Justice Pochen, and had a Cow taken from him worth 2 l. 13 s. 4 d. which was
sold to the said John Smith Informer, for 1 l. 6 s. 8 d.

John Fox of Wimswould, through the Information of the said John Smith, was
fined by the said Justice Pochen Twenty Pounds for being at the same Meetings,
for the Poverty of the abovenamed William Marshall, and 15 s. for himself; for
which Fines he had taken from him Goods to the value of 23 l. 15 s. his House
being broken open to take the said Goods; and the said John Smith bought most
of the said Goods for 7 l. so they said they must come again and distrain for
more, to make up the Sum; and in the 7th month, 1680. they did come again, and
distrained for more, and took from him two Brass Pans, and one Brass Pot, for
the same Fines, worth 30 s.

Elizabeth Shepherd was fined 5 s. for being at one of the said Meetings, and
had a Hog taken from her, worth 10 s.

William Wait was fined 5 s. for the first, and 10 s. for the second Meeting,
for his Wife's being there.

Edward Belton was fined 5 s. for his Wife being at one of the said Meetings.
It is supposed the Money was paid, they being no Quakers.

Note, Some of the Officers being unwilling to make the Distresses, the
Informer got Warrants against them, to two chief Constables, who made Distress
of the Officers Goods, so that they were forced to pay above Twenty Pounds to
have their Goods again; and afterward the said Smith, the Informer caused them
to be sent to Goal, and to be bound over to the next Sessions to execute their
Warrants.

The 28th day of the 1st month, 1680. John Smith Informer, came into the House
of John Evans of Wigston, when the Meeting was breaking up, and several Persons
were gone out of the house, and neither any Preaching nor Teaching,
nevertheless William Cole fined him 20 l. and the Officers made a Distress of
his Cows, and sold three of them.

The same John Evans for being at a peaceable Meeting at Kinghton the 4th day
of the 2d mone^h, 1680. was fined by the said William Cole 30 s.

And for having a Meeting at his own House the 11th day of the 2d month, 1680.
Henry Beamount, Justice, fined him 5 l. notwithstanding there was no
Information of any Preaching or Teaching in any of the three Meetings. And on
the 1st day of the 3d month, 1680. the Officers came and made distress of five
Beasts and two Swine, and at Leicester sold two of the Beasts, and the two
Swine; and on the 5th day they took twenty five Sheep out of his Fold, and the
6th day they sold them; and on the 18th day of the 3d month, 168^. the
Officers came again, and took away two of his best Horses, and fetched Hay out
of his Yard.

The same John Evans, for being at a Meeting at Kinghton the 30th day of the 3d
month, 1680. was fined for himself 10 s. for his Wife and his Sons 20 s. and
for being at a Meeting the 13th of the 4th month, 1680. was fined 20 s. and
for the Poverty of others he was find 3 l. 10 s. for which Fines they took away
from him two Cows worth 3 l.

Francis Broughton of Wigston and his Wife, for being at some of the Meetings
were fined, and they took away from him a Pigg worth 8 s.

Samuel Pauley for the same Offense (so called) was fined, and they took from
him a Pot and a Pan worth 20 s. they also seized of a Table and Coffer, for a
Fine of 5 s.

Anne Mould of Wigston was fined 25 s. for being at three of these Meetings;
her Husband not being a Quaker paid it.

John Vittall and Richard Chamberlain of Killby for being at a peaceable
Meeting at the House of John Evans of Wigston the 28th of the 1st month, 1680.
were fined 20 s. by the said William Cole, through the Information of John
Smith the Informer; and also for being at a Meeting at Kinghton the 4th day of
the 2d month, 1680. at the House of Anne Wells; they were fined by the same
William Cole 4 l. John Smith the Informer.

And also for being at a Meeting at the house of John Evans in Wigston the 11th
day of the 2d month, 1680. John Smith the Informer had them, the said John
Vittall and Richard Chamberlain before Henry Beamount aforesaid, who fined them
17 l. 10 s.

And for the said Fines the Officers took away from Rich^rd Chamberlain seven
Beasts worth 12 l.

And for the Fines aforesaid the Officers took away from John Vittall five
Beasts and a three year old Colt; worth 14 l. Notwithstanding William Paybody
the Constable, and the other Officers took these Goods as John Vittalls, they
cannot be proved to be his, his Mother and he living together, and what they
have is jointly together.

Samuel Wilson of Leicester for being at a Meeting at the House of Anne Wells
in Kinghton, on the 30th day of the 3d month, 1680. was fined for himself 5 s.
and for his Daughter 5 s. and for the Poverty of several other Persons he was
fined 6 l. more. For the Fines aforesaid Th^m^s Grant, the Constable of
Braunston Gate, took from him one Mare, two Cows and one yearling Heifer, worth
about 11 l. by Warrant from the same William Cole, by the Information of the
same John Smith.

John Penford of Branston Gate near Leicester, being in Kin^hton Town Street
with some Friends, the 13th day of the 4th month, 1680. the same Informer,
John Smith, with his man, came, who to^k him, the said John Penford, with
several others to Justice Beamounts, he being not at home left them; afterward
he went to the aforenamed William Cole, who fined him, for himself 5 s. and for
the pretended Poverty of nine more fined him 4 l. 10 s. more, and granted his
Warrant to Thomas Grant, Constable of Branston Gate, who distrained three of
his Cows, to the value of Ten Pounds; but he putting in Appeal, cast the
Informer at the next Qu^rter-Sessions.

Samuel Wilson of Leicester, for being at the same Me^-was fined 20 s. for
himself and his Wife, and had taken from him a Horse laden with Malt, to the
value of 5 l. but a Neighbor of his paid the Fine; and Thomas Grant Constable
took 2 s. 6 d. for distraining: This was done by Warrant from the same William
Cole.

Godfry Smith of Burton for being at a peaceable M^eting on the 11th day of the
5th month, 1680. at the House of William Marshall, junior, was Sworn against
by John Smith the Informer, and Edward Rickett his man (for being at an
Assembly under pretense of Exercise of Religion, in other manner than according
to the Litur^y of the Church of England) before Christopher Pack, called
Justice, who granted a Warrant against him to leavy the sum of 10 l. 5 s. by
distress and sale of his Goods, viz. 10 s. for himself and Wife, and 9 l. 15 s.
f^r an unknown Person (whom the Informers Swore took upon him to Preach or
Teach) Thomas Norris, Constable of Burton, took from him seven Beasts worth 20
l.

Note, Th^re was but three men at that M^eting, besides the Informers and
Officers; and n^n^ of them t^^k upon him to Preach or Teach. So because the
Informers Swore falsely, he appealed to the Sessions; but the Jury did not agree
of their Verdict, although there was much striving and threatening to fine Two
Hundred Pounds, to make the Jury to bring in their Verdict for the Informers.

John Fox of Wimswould was fined for being at the same Meeting 10 l. 10 s. One
pound for him and his Wife, and 9 l. 10 s. for the unknown Preacher, though
there was no Preaching nor Teaching, and but three men in the Meeting besides
Informers and Officers.

William Marshall, Senior, for being at a Meeting Fined 21 l. One pound for
himself and his Wife, and 20 l. for the House, though he neither owned it, nor
dwelt in it, but because William Marshall, Junior, was not at Home, they caused
the Fine to be laid upon his Father.

Elizabeth Shepherd for being at a Meeting was fined 10 s. for her self, and 5
s. for her Daughter Bridgets being there.

Elizabeth Freeman of Leicester, Widow, that comes amongst us, was prosecuted
on the Statute of 20 l. a month, and for Non-payment of it, was committed to
Prison by the Town-Session at Leicester, on the 27th day of the 7th month,
1680.

Elizabeth Wale of Leicester, Widow, for being in the Town Street at Kinghton
the 8th day of the 6th month, 1680. there being no Speaking, was fined 10 s.
by Thom^s Stavely, called Justice, through the Information of John Smith the
Informer, the Officers distrained of her Pewter and Brass to the value of 2 l.
5 s. A Neighbor paid the Fine and redeemed the Goods.

At the same time Samuel Hefferd was fined for the same Meeting 10 s. Not yet
distrained.

John Evans of Wigston for being in the Street at Knighton the same day, there
being no Speaking, was fined for himself and others 3 l. his Cart was
distrained, the value 3 l. 15 s. Justice Stave^y, so called, granted the
Warrant; the Informers were John Smith of Remson, and his man.

Note, The Informer at this Meeting, in the Street, did endeavor to Ride over
some Friends, made another Nose bleed, bit another by the Arm; pushed and
haled about several, who did not in the least oppose him.

Margaret Townsend of Broughton, Widow, for having a peaceable Meeting at her
house, the 22d day of the 6th Month, 1680. was fined 20 s. by William Cole,
called Justice, and had Goods taken from her to the value of 40 s. and upwards;
John Smith of Remson the Informer.

Richard Bailiffe for being at the same Meeting was fined 20 s. by the same
William Cole, and had Goods taken from him to the value of 30 s. and upwards.

Edward Erbye for his Wife fined 10 s. by the same William Cole, and had a load
of Hay taken out of his Barn by the Officers.

This same Edward Erbye, of the Parish of Broughton, was through the
Instigation of William Cotton, the Pri^st of Broughton, committed to Prison
with John Swaun, Junior, of Little Pealting, and one Thomas Pittstow, almost
two Years since, and still remain Prisoners, only because they for Conscience
sake could not Swear.

William Brooks of the same Parish, for his Wife being at the same Meeting,
was fined 10 s. and had Goods taken from him to the value of 25 s. by Warrant
from W. Cole; John Smith the Informer.

Note, that these four abovenamed, had their Goods spoiled, some Months
before, only for peace^bly meeting together to wait upon God.

William Tilley for the same Meeting fined 5 s. his Kinsman, no Quaker, paid it.

Thomas Pole for being at the same Meeting, was fined by Warrant from William
Cole; the Officers Richard Winfield, Ralph Winfield, Robert Tyler and William
Coye, came the 4th of the 8th Month 1680. about the ninth or tenth Hour in the
Night, and took away his Beddings, and his other Goods, to the value of 7 l.
They went so near, as to take Childrens Cradles, Dishes and Spoons, even to old
Hose and Shoes, he being a poor Man; also took a Child out of the Bed, and laid
it upon the bare Floor, and took the Bed away.

Rich^rd Read of Syleby for being at the same Meeting was fined 10 l. 10 s. by
the same William Cole, through the Information of the same John Smith and his
man, the Informers; and upon the 30th day of the 7th Month, 1680. the
Constables and other Officers, being threatened much by the Informer, and the
Justice both, to be fined for not doing their Office, they then broke open his
Doors, and took his Houshold-Goods, Bedding and Loomes, and other Goods, to the
value of 10 l. they took all, insomuch that they left him neither Bedding nor a
Chair to sit in; so that he and his Family were forced to seek their Loding in
the Town.

John Ward, Junior, of Kinghton, for being at the same Meeting at Broughton,
was fined by the same William Cole, called Justice 10 l. and upwards; the
Officers distrained his Goods (b^ing his C^pper and working Tools) to the value
of 20 l. and upwards.

And John Ward, Senior, of Laire, for being at the same Meeting was fined 10 l.
5 s. his Cattle were distrained; but he being no Quaker, a Neighbor paid his
Fine and redeemed the Goods; and he paid his Sons Fine. John Smith and his man
Edward Ricket, Informers.

The 4th of the 2d Month, 1680.
Anne Wells, Widow, for having a Meeting at her House was fined 20 l. by
William Cole, who had taken from her seven Cows, seven Swine, two Mares, worth
26 l. 10 s.

The 30th of the 3d Month, 1680.
The said Anne Wells, Widow, was fined for a Meeting at her House the sum of
20 l. and had taken away two Mares, three Heifers, one Cow and Calf, seven
Quarter of Malt, and six Strike of Wheat, worth 23 l. their being no Preaching
or Teaching at either of the Meetings.

Some Remarkable Notes of the great Cruelty in this County, executed under
pretense of Prosecuting the said Act against Conventicles.
IN the 4th Month in the Year, 1675. there being a peaceable Assembly to
worship God at Long ^laxton, William Guy of the same Town, Constable, and about
six Red Coat Soldiers, with others, their Assistants, who kept the Persons
assembled in the House, aforesaid, afterward carried them to Melton to R.
Lister, W. Hartopp and G. Villers, Justices for that County, where not
suffering them to make their just defense; upon Information of the Constable
and Red Coats, were four of them sent to Prison, after which the Priest,
Constable and Soldiers continued to attend the Meeting Weekly, where they not
only Convicted and made Distresses, to the spoiling of many of all they had,
not leaving a Cow to give Children Milk, taking their very Bed Clothes, wearing
Clothes: But that which agravates their Severity and Cruelty, several Women
have been dragged in the Streets by the Necks, till they have near stifled
them; some have had their Clothes rent and torn off their Heads and Backs; one
Woman that nursed her Child, so beat and bruised on her Breast, that it
festered and broke, and she endured many Weeks of sore misery and torture with
it; a poor Widow Woman (who had six Children) dragged by the Neck till the
Skin came off; an Aged Women of seventy five Years of Age violently thrown down
upon the Gound, by the Constable; The Men sorely beaten, drawn and dragged out
of the Meeting, some by the Heels, some by the Hair of the Head; some so
bruised that they have not been capable to follow their Harvest labor; some
Whipped over the Face till Blood followed; some trod upon till Blood gusht out of
their Mouth and Nose.

Several of the People of God, called Quakers, being met together at the House
of John Penford at Kirby Mukloe to consider of the Necessities of some Poor
a^ongst them, and of a supply for them, John Dixon Priest of the Parish
informed against them, by Letter to Wenlock Stanly of Branston, who speedily
sent three of his Servants to inspect into the Meeting; and though they found
they were only met to consider of the Necessities of the Poor, and looked into
the Book they had before them, in which they did enter their Charitable
distributions; yet several were fined by one called Lord Beamount, and one
Justice Roberts: John Penford fined 20 l. for his House, and 10 l. for the
Preacher, when there was never a one there; seeing these irregular doings, John
Penford and Richard Woodland were resolved to appeal: but the Court possitively
denied their Appeal, except they would first take the Oath of Allegiance and
Supremacy; and they showed further Injustice, in that when they had denied them
a hearing of the matter, they gave trebble damage against them.

Lincolnshire.
THe 30th day of the 1st month, 1678. by force of a Warrant from Christopher
Nevell of Harmstone, to leavy 20 l. of the Goods of Thomas Robinson of Brant
Broughton in the said County, for being at a Meeting at Beckingham the 24th day
of the 1st month, 1677/8. Thomas Kelsey, Constable of Brant Broughton, and one
Thomas Robinson, Overseer for the Poor, took from Thomas Robinson aforesaid
four fat Bullocks worth -- L. S. 34 10

William Stillingfleet (a Coroner, and Brother to John Stillingfleet, Priest
of Beckingham) and Thomas Burketts Parish-Clerk, Informers.

The Fifth Day of the Second Month, 1678. by Force of another Warrant from Sir
Christopher Nevell aforesaid, to leavy 40 l. of the Goods of the said Thomas
Robinson, for being at another Meeting at Beckingham the 31th day of the 1st
month, 1678. the aforesaid Thomas Kelsey Constable, John Langworth Warden, and
Thomas Robinson Overseer, took from him 18 of his best young Sheep, one pair of
Steers, and four Drought Bullocks from the Plough, all worth -- L. S. 44 11

The four fat Bullocks were sold by Thomas Kelsey the Constable, to one John
Capp, a Butcher of Caterup, for 27 l. 10 s. who hearing how they were taken,
was touched in Conscience, and gave up his Bargain: Then all the ten Bullocks
were driven to Grantham, but could not be sold; thence to Sleaford, where one
Parker bought the four Fat ones for 27 l. (but afterward knowing they were
Cattle taken away by the Act) he threw up his Bargain also; thence the whole
ten were driven to Lincoln, where no Body would buy them. Then Kelsey the
Constable drove them all to Sir Christopher Nevell, by whose Warrants they had
been taken, who kept them about Fourteen days, but not coveting his Neighbors
Goods, and having done his endeavor to execute the Law, and being satisfied
that the same Goods, or the like value should be at any time upon the Land, he
restored the Bullocks to the right Owner. But the eighteen Sheep worth about 14
l. were sold privately out of the Market, to a poor man of Grantham for about
10 l. 7 s.

Lancashire.
1679.
FOr a Meeting in Bickerstaff in the said County, seveveral Persons were fined
by John Entwisle, Peter Andrews of Ormskirk, and William Moss Bailiff of the
same, Informers, and Goods were distrained as follows.

The 3d Month, 1679.
Roger Horsnep of Aughton, Husbandman, for 5 s. Fine, had Goods taken worth 8 s.

Richard Beesly of Aughton, Mason, for 5 s. Fine, Goods taken from him worth 8
s.

Richard Cubban, at whose House the Meeting was, fined 20 l.

John Bispham of Bickerstaff fined as Preacher, and Warrants are out to make
Distress; but as yet no account given of any Distress, but is daily expected.

The 31th of the 1st Month, 1679.
There being a peaceable Meeting in the Borough of Macklefield in the County
of Chester, Thomas Row Mayor, Henry Barber and Thomas Rode, Justices of the
said Borough, came to the Meeting, and took the Names of some of the Persons
assembled; and the Meeting continuing, in a short time they came again, and
took what notice they pleased and went away; and the 20th day of the 3d month
following did Convict and Fine James Harrison of Bolton in the County of
Lancaster, Shoemaker, 20 l. for the first Offense, so called, but pretending
the said James Harrison was a stranger, laid that Fine upon Henry Burges, and
one Hugh Butler; and for the second Offense, finding them still together at
their second coming, they fined James Harrison 40 l. which Conviction and F^ne
they certified to John Hartley, Justice near Manchester, in the County of
Lancaster, who sent his Warrant to the Constables of Bolton, to leavy for the
said Fine; upon the Warrant, the Officers of Bolton took away from the said
James Harrison Goods to the value of about 4 l. not leaving so much as a
Skillet to boil the Childrens Milk in; but before they could take any more
Goods, some Persons appealed on his behalf to the Quarter Sessions, who judged
the second Conviction unlawful, and that it was but one Meeting; whereupon
Request was made to the Justices, that his Goods might be returned to him
again; but to this day they are not re^urned.

The 9th of the 9th Month, 1679.
There being then a peaceable Meeting at the House of James H^rrison aforesaid,
Thomas Townley and Daniel Hemingway of Bolton, Constables, came to the said
Meeting, accompanied with several other Persons, and finding James Harrison
speaking, plucked him down, and haled him away, and took the Names of as many as
they pleased. For speaking at this Meeting James Harrison was fined 20 l. by
Thomas Leaver of Bolton, and William Holme of Kersley, Justices, and by their
Warrant distress was m^de upon James Harrison as follows.

Officers that distrained were Daniel H^mingway, John Cronke and Alexander
Bradshaw, who broke down his Chamber door, and took away several Hides and
pieces of Leather, to the value of 9 l. one Fustian End, 13 s. a Weigh-Beam, 1
l. 6 s. In all taken Goods worth Eleaven Pounds.

Note, At the Meeting for Conviction of the Persons assembled at Bol^on, as
aforesaid, the Justices, their Men, the Informers, and Witnesses, and the Train
they had about them, eat and drunk in one Afternoon above 2 l. 10 s. which the
Constables engaged to pay James Holland, Innkeeper, for: There was one Thomas
Russell, senior, a Sub-Bailiff so Drunk at that time, that he was found in the
Street, wallowing in his Vomit, about three a Clock in the Morning, and since
is suddenly Dead.

Phineas Pemberton for a Fine of 10 s. for himself and his Wife being at the
said Meeting, had taken from him one Cow, one Saddle and Bridle, and forty
pound of Candles, worth 4 l. 15 s. 4 d.

Note, The Cow pined, and would neither ear nor drink, and dried up her Milk in
one Weeks time, so that they turned her out, and she went home again.

Remarkable Instances of Injustice and Cruelty, acted by Informers and others,
in their prosecution of diverse Persons in this County, by the Act made against
seditious Conventicles.
THe 30th day of the 6th Month, 1671. a peaceable Meeting being at the House
of James Smithson of Beercliff, and there in Silence waiting upon the the Lord,
John Parker of Extwisle (called Esquire) and others, took the Names of the
Persons assembled, among whom was one John Moore, a Man that had been then
Blind eight or nine Years, having lost his sight in Service under this Captain
Parker, the Informer: Parker asked him, What he did there? but Moore was silent
^ill he asked the third time, and then he said, I am here to worship the Living
God; and said no more: Then Captain Parker bid them set down John Moore for a
Speaker, and accordingly gave Information to Laurence Rawsthorn, called
Justice, who imposed Fines, and issued out Warrants thereupon, which were
executed.

Al^xander Nowell, called a Justice, who fined several for meeting, etc. after
Distress was made, and the Goods sold; when the Officers paid him the Money,
they asked him for the Third part for the Poor; but he answered, That he was
poor enough himself (as some of the Officers said) nor is it unlikely that he
said so; for when the Officers brought him some wearing Apparel (which they had
taken from a poor Day-Labourer) the said Nowell took the poor man's Breeches,
and searching the Pockets found therein one Shilling four Pence, which he took
to himself, but gave the Officers the Clothes again to sell.

In the 5th Month, 1670. there having been a quiet Meeting at the House of
Henry Birtwisle in Rossendale, and being peaceably departed thence, were met
upon the Way, above a quarter of a Mile from the House, by James Heapgrave of
Rossendale, Edmund Mills Bailiff, Henry Nuttill and Thomas Bridge Soldiers,
who took their Names, and went to Henry Birtwisles House, where they found but
two Women besides the Family: Notwithstanding Edmund Mills informed that there
was a Meeting, and three Persons Swore to it; although two of the Witnesses saw
no Meeting there, and the third was not within two Miles of the place all that
Day: Yet upon this Information and Evidence, Laurence Rowsthorne, Joshua
Ratcliffe and Thomas Bradnell, gave out Warrants to distrain for 20 l. Fine for
the House; hereupon the Sufferers went to the Justices, and complaining,
desired a Copy of the Information; but it was denied them, as was also their
Appeal, for some time, viz. till the third Quarter Sessions after, at which
time they had a hearing at Preston before Edward Rigby of Preston, and others
the Justices, where the said Edward Rigby, in open Sessions declared, That
though the Witnesses could not prove it a Meeting, yet the Quakers had
Meetings; and if they saw them coming from a House, which was suspected to have
Meetings, it should be a Meeting. Whereupon the Officers went on to make their
Spoil, and took as much Goods away as were worth 36 l. 10 s. 4 d. for that
Meeting.

Nottinghamshire.
The 9th of the 3d Month, 1679.
WIlliam Hudson of Little Gringley, for having a peaceable Meeting at his
House, 1677. was fined 20 l. and had Goods taken to the value of 22 l.

Jarvis Harrison of Rampton for the same, was fined 10 l. 5 s. and they took
away Cattle to the value of the Fine, or upwards; distrained by Warrant from
John Millington, Justice; the Officers Names are Robert Baxter, Edward
Southworth, Thomas Hill, Thomas Redmall, Matthew Richardson, Gilbert Sampson;
Informers, John Smith, Obadiah Autory and Edward Horner.

William Watson of Farnsfield, for being at a peaceable Meeting in the House of
Ralph Bateman in the same Town, was fined, and the Officers seized and sold
what Goods he had.

Ralph Bateman for the same was fined 20 l. and the Officers seized of his
Household Stuff, B^ef, Cheese, and Barrils of Beer, to the value of 12 l. and
one of the Officers bought the Victuals and Beer of the rest in pity, to leave
them for his Relief.

Edward Aslin and his Wife for the same was fined 6 l. and had all his Goods
taken and sold by the Officers, valued to be worth about 14 l. Distrained by
Warrant from Penniston Whaley; the Officers Names are Robert Brown, William
Stacy, Edward Brown, Thomas Swindin, John Cooper, John Hering, John More, etc.
The Informers, John Smith and Thomas Sharp.

1678.
Robert Bradshaw of Oxton for being at a peaceable Meeting, was fined 20 l. and
the Officers seized of his Goods, and locked up his Barn Doors, and sold all
for 40 l. but the Officers not giving the men that bought them security to
their liking for the enjoyment of them, the Money is yet unpaid, and the Person
that suffered is departed this Life; Robert Thoroton who granted the Warrant,
being dead also: The Officers Names, Robert Smith, Thomas Watson, Thomas
Bladerick; Informers, John Smith, Obadiah Autory.

1678.
Samuel Marriot for being at a peaceable Meeting, at the House of Edward Aslin
in Edingley, was fined 5 l. 10 s. and they took his Cart from him.

John Ouldham of Calverton for the same, was fined 25 l. and the Officers sold
all that ever he had for 8 l. and gave the Informer the Money.

Thomas Worth of Oxton for the same, was fined 10 s. for himself, and 5 l. for
the Poverty of the Preacher; for which Fine the Officers locked up his House
Door, and sold his Bees in the Garden, and other things, to the value of 30 s.
But what they will do with his Household Goods, is not yet known.

John Bar for the same, was fined 10 l. 10 s. and the Officer not knowing his
own Goods, by reason of some Partnership, took his Hat, and did no more;
distrained by Warrant from George Nevill of Thorney; the Officers Names, John
Cooper, Simeon Carrington, Thomas Gramer, William Martin, etc. the Informers,
John Smith, Obadiah Autory.

George Graves of Blithe having several Warrants granted out against him, by
Doctor Thoroton, for being at several peaceable Meetings; the said George found
himself grieved, and entered his Appeals according to Law; but Robert Thoroton
would not try them, although he promised the said George that they should be
tried, and that he should have Justice when he entered them, but drove him off
from Session to Session, until at last he told him, they were out of date, and
so distributed the Money according to his own pleasure, to the manifest wrong
of the said George Graves, who never had on^ Penny of his Moneys again,
although the Sum was very considerable that he deposited, before he could be
allowed to have his Appeal tried.

Remark^ble Instances of Injustice of some called Justices, and Informers in
this County.
UNder pretense of prosecuting the Act against Conventicles, Penniston Whaley,
called a Justice, Colgrae^e a Bum-Bailiff, and one Walker, both Informers, have
Ruined many poor Families in this County, having taken or caused to be taken
from several Persons about Seven Hundred Pounds, never returning any Record of
Conviction (as is reported) into the Sessions, except forced by Persons
appealing. John Gooderick and William Hudson of Little Grengly appealing to
the Sessions, John Gooderick deposited 40 l. and William Hudson 30 l. into P.
Whaley's hands, until the Determination at the Sessions; which said Appeal
being Tried at the Sessions at East Retford, before the Earl of Ogle, Sir
William Peirp^int and Sir William Hickman, Justices, and others, where a
Virdict was brought in open Court for the Appealants, and an Order of the
Sessions was directed to the said P. Whaley, for the Re-payment of the Money,
viz. 40 l. to J. Gooderick, which as yet he has not done, al^hough he was much
importuned thereunto by J. Gooderick in his Lifetime, and by Margaret his
Widow since his Death; which 40 l. the Widow and Fatherless yet wants.
William Hudson received, with much ado, 10 l. of his 30 l. but the other 20 l.
still remains Unpaid him, although he has often desir^d the said Penniston
Whaley to pay the same.

And this Penniston Whaley in his Charge at the Sessi^ns at Nottingham the
11th of the 11th month, 1670. speaking chiefly concerning the Quakers, as he
called them, encouraged the People to prosecute them without pity, and bid them
harden their Hearts against them; and speaking of the Laws made in Queen
Elizabeth's time, viz. that in the 35th year, etc. said, It was not made
against the Papists; for (said he) the Church of Rome is a true Church, as well
as any other Church: And these Quakers are Erroneous and Seditious Persons; and
therefore pressed the People much to prosecute them without pity. And when an
Appeal was tendered to him upon the late Act, and Justice desired, he denied the
Appeal, and said to the Person complaining, You shall have Justice, but no
Mercy: And indeed none he showed, where it lay in his Power.

Norfolk.
AT a peaceable Meeting the 1st day of the 7th Month, 1678. in the City of
Norwich, Thomas Murford being in Prayer, there came in Paul Hartley, Constable
and Informer, with two young Lads, Clarks to Attorney Brereton, who swore
before Francis Bacon Recorder of Norwich, that Thomas Murford was Teaching and
Preaching, (notwithstanding the said Informer found him on his Knees at Prayer)
whereupon a Warrant issued out to leavy 20 l. upon his Goods and Chattels; and
Thomas Elvin Constable, Joseph Brooks, Thomas Wortley and Henry Toller, Parish
Officers, entered forciably his House, Thomas himself not being at home, and
took away four pieces of Broad-Cloth, containing eighty Yards, to the value of
above 20 l. and twelve pieces of Linen Cloth, containing 320 Else, which cost
above 17 l. in all near the value of 40 l. When Thomas came home, he made his
Appeal to the Quarter Sessions, but the Recorder being Judge, having a
Pr^judice against the Quakers, (so called) and having a Jury for his purpose,
carried the Case against the Appealant, and from the Court committed Thomas to
Prison; and Thomas asking wherefore he was sent to Prison; the Recorder
answered, He should know that afterward, and was kept a close Prisoner
eighteen Weeks.

Anthony Allexander for the same Meeting, fined for the House 10 l. And on the
13th day of the 11th Month, 1678. Samuel Stennet and Anthony Baggish,
Constables, Richard Brown and one Cardner, Overseers, by a Warrant signed by
the aforesaid Recorder, took from the said Anthony Allexander Goods to the
value of 16 l.

Sufferers at Fakenham upon the late Act.
For a peaceable Meeting at the House of Joseph Harrison, Butcher, (against
which William Watt, the old Informer, Swore that it was on Sunday, the 14th day
of July, 1678.) by Warrant from John Hillyard a Priest and Justice, several
Persons were fined, viz. Joseph Harrison 20 l. for the House, for which Fine
they made distr^ss upon his Beef, Tallow and Hides, which they sold, Beef worth
two Pence a pound, and good Tallow worth thr^e Pence a pound, for little more
than a half Penny a pound: They took in all to the value of above 20 l. and
counted that would not suffice to pay the Fine.

Edmund Peckover for being at the same Meeting, fined 5 s. for himself, and 5
s. f^r his Wife; and the Officers said, they must have 5 s. more of him for
their Son Walter, though he was not mentioned in the Warrant, nevertheless, for
15 s. Fines, they took from him five pieces of Demity; and for a Fine of 33 s.
they took Goods worth 7 l. And for a Fine of 10 s. for a former Meeting, by the
said Justice Hylliards. Warrant, they took from the said Edmund Peckover a
piece Holland worth 3 l. 8 s. 3 d.

Note, Edmund Peckover was this Year chosen Overseer for the Poor; and though
he being Ancient, and could not see well: Yet the Poors Book being left in his
Shop, he told them, he was willing to do any Good he could, and to be helpful
amongst his Neighbors; but not long after he was in this Office, he was
required to sell the Beef taken from Joseph Harrison, which he was not at all
willing to be concerne^ in; and when he was asked to go help sell it, he told
them, He was Lame, and could not sell his own Goods: Though this was all he
said, yet two bold Women, to wit Wat the Informers Wife, and one Howmans Wife,
one of which Persons was a bold Strumpet, and had been twice Whipped for Theft:
Yet upon these two Persons Swearing before the said Justice Hylliard, ( That
when Edmund Peckover was required to go help sell the Beef, he refused; saying,
He would not sell Stolen Goods) he granted a Warrant to bring him before him;
and when he came before him, threatened him to bind him over to answer it at the
Assizes, and to Fine him 5 l. besides; But ( said he) being you are an Old man,
I will not bind you to appear at the Assizes: And I will remit this your
neglect in executing your Office as an Overseer, provided you will promise to
leavy the next Warrant. To which Edmund Peckover replied, I cannot do my
Neighbor that Injury. Then said the Justice, I must Fine you five Pound. And
so he did, and gave out a Warrant to make distress on hia Goods; and since,
Thomas Bretland and Robert Sheldrake Wardens, Francis Page Constable, for the
said five Pound Fine, took from the said Edmund Peckover Shop Goods, worth 24
l. 3 s. 6 d.

Remarkable Notes in this County of the Cruelty and Injustice of Magistrates
and Informers, in the Prosecution of the aforesaid Act.
WIlliam Watt grand Informer, Swore before Christopher Beddingfeild, Justice,
that there was a Meeting at Joseph Harrisons on Sunday the 26th of November, in
1674. Upon which a Warrant was granted for to distrain; when as it may be
observed, this Warrant was grounded upon a false Oath; for there was no Sunday
the 26th of November in that Year, as was made appear by some of the Persons
fined; however, right or wrong, the said Justice encouraged the Informers and
Officers to proceed in the Prosecution, and to make Distresses, and to execute
the Warrants to the utmost, and he would justify them in it: And Joseph
Harrison being fined 20 l. upon the said false Warrant, and having lost most of
what he had before, some of the Officers, in pity to him and his Family, were
loath to meddle, but one Hill a Constable, said, Right or wrong he would make
distress; and at two several t^mes took as much Beef off Joseph's Stall as was
worth 27 s.

And further, the said Joseph Harrison being greatly Impoverished through the
Losses sustained on the said Act, the Officers seeing the Justice still
encourage the Informers, some of them complained, and said, What would you have
us do? We have taken what we can; We have been at Joseph Harriso^s House and
there is little in the House but the Bed, that he and his Wife and six Children
lies on. The Justice rep^y^d, I care not; if he has but a Bed, take it; ta^e
all he has in his Possession, and watch at his Gate when his Horse goes to
Water, and take it; and if any Man lays any Meat on his Stall, take it, let it
be who^e it will. The Offic^rs also told him, They had been at Francis Landers,
to d^strain for his Wives Fine, and there was little left in the House but the
Bed she lay S^ck on, being more like to Dye then Live: And indeed she did Dye
that Night toward the Morning. He said, He cared not; Take the Bed from under
her. The Officers being thus forced on by this Justice, took Joseph Harrisons
Bed, and all that belonged to it, his Horse and Hay, in all to the value of 8
l. And afterward, he and his Wife and Children were fain to lie on Straw,
though in the Winter time.

And now Mary, the Wife of Francis Lander, being dead and buried, and
Wickedness and Cruelty being thus encouraged, one Thomas Bretland, and
Elizabeth his Wife, caused their Servant, and one Robert Bloome, to take up her
Body again, which they did in a very Inhumane manner, breaking the Coffen, if
not the Body, insomuch that they borrowed a Line to tie it together, and
brought it upon a Pole, and so set the Corpse in the Marketplace, near Edmund
Peckovers Shop Door, to the great amazement and trouble of many People who
beheld it, she having lain some time in the Ground before: So that it appears
these People were neither willing to let the poor Woman lie quiet in her sick
Bed nor in her Grave; she being threatened to have her Bed taken from under her
while living, and thus torn out of her Grave, when dead: O, Horrible Impiety!

In the same Year, some of the People of God being assembled at the House of
Robert Last, of Great Ellingham, some Informers being at a distance from the
House, where the Meeting was, saw some going to the House, and coming from the
House, whereupon, several Weeks, if not some Months after, diverse of the said
People were Convicted of being at an unlawful Assembly, by Justice Fisher and
Justice Pots; Fisher asserting, That it was sufficient proof to Convict them,
if they were but seen to go to the place where they used to meet; and Robert
Last was fined 20 l. for the House, and several others fined 20 l. for one
Robert Smith Preaching there, though he did not speak above five Words; for
which Words speaking, Francis Dix had his Barn of Corn seized.

Robert Tillet of Old Buckenham, a very weak Consumtive Man, being not like
long to continue, was desirous to see as many of his Friends as he could,
before his departure; whereupon several in Christian Love went to visit him,
and there being about fourteen Persons at most, there came in two Informers
into the House, upon whose Information, it was by the Justice, reputed to be a
seditious Conventicle, and Robert Tillet (the poor sick man) was thereupon
fined 20 l. for having the said Meeting in his House, for which the Officers
distrained and carried away six Cows; and because Robert Smith spoke five or
six Words, he was reputed the Preacher: For which several others then present,
were fined 20 l. more, and had their Goods and Cattle distrained to answer the
said Fine.

Further, the great Spoil, upon some, and Ruin that has been brought upon
others, upon the Prosecution of this Act in diverse other places in this County,
as at Tivitshal, Thetford, Cockly Clay, Norwich, etc would be a great Book of
it self, if all were inserted: And therefore for Brevity sake, shall only
insert one more Instance, and then conclude this County.

William Barber of Gissing for having a peaceable Meeting at his House, was
informed against by John Gibbs, Priest of the Parish, who turned Informer, and
procured a Warrant from Peter Glean, called a Justice, to make seizure, and
went with the Officers himself to leavy the 20 l. Fine upon William Barbers
Goods; and for the 20 l. the Priest and Officers took four Cows, two Swine, a
Cart, Plough and Harrows, and Twenty Pounds worth of Hay, in all to the value
of 50 l. And though the Priest had got all this, it did not satisfy him, till
he had got William into the Goal, and within a few days after, the said Priest
sent him to Norwich Castle upon a Significavit for 9 s. which he said was due
to him for Tithes, where he was kept close Prisoner near three Years.

Sussex.
THere being a peaceable Meeting at Shoreham at the house of Joan Apse the 10th
of the 5th month, 1677. upon the Information of Samuel Turner and William
Harris, Bailiffs, Informers to Henry Goreing, senior and Henry Goreing, junior,
John Alford and Edward Blaker, Justices, That there was a Meeting at John
Jefferyes in Sh^reham; which was a Mistake, for it was at Joan Apses aforesaid:
However, several Persons were fined, and Distress^s taken as follows.

John Martin fined 10 l. 5 s. for himself and the Preacher, for which he had
Shop-Goods taken by Richard Tailor, Constable, to the value of 13 l. 16 s. 4 d.
as they cost; but this did not satisfy this unreasonable Constable, but about
a Week after he came again to John Martin's Shop, and rifled and took some
pieces of Silk, to the value of 4 l. 2 s. as they cost, which makes the Sum
before 17 l. 18 s. 4 d.

Richard Newman of Wiston fined for being at the same Meeting, and for the
Preacher 2 l. 15 s. for which Fine the said Constable took a Heifer worth 3 l.

W. Parker of Stening fined for the same Meeting, and for the Preacher 2 l. 15
s. for which Fine the said Constable took away as many Sheep and Lambs as were
worth 2 l. 15 s.

Henry Vaggar for being at the said Meeting fined for himself and the Preachers
2 l. 15 s. for which Fine the said Constable, with other Assistance, took from
him a Cow worth 3 l.

Jacob Knowles fined 5 s. and Goods were taken from him to the same value, or
more.

Suffolk.
FOr meeting peaceably to worship God, several Persons have been fined, and
their Goods and Chattles distrained in and about Bayton, about the 5th month,
1677. by Warrent from Justice Burwell of Rougham, and Justice Bright of
Pakenham; Thomas Bally of Bayton, a Cripple, and William Sladman a Bailiff,
Informers.

John Hayward, Wheelright of Bayton, had taken from him, to the worth of, in
Cart boot, 11 l.

More taken from him in House Goods, 4 l.

More taken from him in Timber, 14 l.

Edmund Bally of Bayton had taken from him 12 l.

More taken from him for a Fine of 5 l. all the Goods in his House, viz.
Chairs, Stools, Brewing Tubs and Furnace; and they plucked down a little House,
built up to work in, and carried away the Timber of it to the Cripples, the
Informer, who burnt it.

The said Edmund Bally had also a Mare taken from him, which he had sold; and
the Person that owned her was advised by Counselor Clark of Bury, to take
Witness with him, and demand his Mare, and if they refused to deliver her, he
might take her where he found her; and finding her in Pasture, where the
Constable and Informer had put her, took her Home; but Justice Burwell sent out
his Warrant to apprehend the Owner of the Mare, who being brought before him,
threatened him with the Goal for Felony, or Stealing the Mare; and so
affrighted the poor man, that he got him and another with him to be bound to
himself to pay him 5 l. and 20 s. into his hand; and for this the said Justice
Arrested the Surety and made it cost them both 9 l.

And within this eight Months the said Edmund Bally has been distrained five
times, his Goods been all taken both within doors and without, being left to
lie on Straw; and yet the Cripple is not quiet, but came not long since in the
Night, being armed with Pistols, and broke open Edmund's door, threatening to
destroy him; and though he for his Cruelty and Wickedness has been checked by
the Neighbors and some Magistrates, yet receiving encouragment from the said
Justice Burwell, he still persists in his Rage and Folly.

More Goods taken by Warrant from the same Justice, in the same Year.
John Bally of Bayton had taken from him Goods worth 2 l. 8 s.

Thomas Lucas a poor man, having four small Children, had a Cart taken from him
worth 2 l.

Several Persons visiting a poor sick Widow, that had lain on her sick Bed and
Blind diverse years; it was made a Conventicle, and they were fined, and
Warrants issued out by the aforesaid Justice to make Distress on their Goods,
as follows, viz.

On John Bally, taken Barley (for 5 l. Fine) worth 8 l.

John Haywood had taken from him, for visiting the said Widow, for a Fine of 5
l. all the Good he had.

Thomas Lucas for the same cause had Goods taken from him worth 1 l.

For a Meeting at Bayton the 2d of the 12th Month in same Year, these Persons
following were fined and distrained by the same Justices Warrant.
John Ransum of Felsum, for a Fine of 40 s. had taken from him two Todds of Hay.

Widow Adkin had taken from her a Hog and a Cupbord, for 15 s. Fine, worth 1
l. 15 s.

Thomas Judy had two Cows taken worth 7 l.

Thomas Woods had two Cows taken, 7 l. 10 s.

Thomas Judy fined 35 s. for a Meeting at Bayton, had a Feather-Bed and Rug
taken worth 4 l.

George Gibson had a Mare taken worth 4 l. 10 s.

Sufferings for a Meeting at Woodbridge.
John Rallet for declaring the Truth at a Meeting at Woodbridge the 17th of the
9th month, 1678. was by William Porter, Duncon Burgin, John Parker and others,
Officers of Woodbridge, by Warrant from William Batty, (a Priest and Justice, a
great Persecutor) taken out of the said Meeting and carried before Thomas Bacon
of Woodbridge, Justice, who had committed him to Prison, but that two
Neighbors being present, offered of their own accords, to be bound for his
Appearance at the next Sessions; but this the Justice thought not sufficient
Punishment, but fines him 20 l. for Preaching, which Fine, and a Fine of 20 l.
on the House, he imposed on several others that were at the said Meeting,
without having any of them before him, legally to convict them, and took Goods
as follows.

Joseph Fuller had seized a Haystack and a Horse, worth 12 l.

John Smith had Goods taken to the value of 3 l. 10 s.

Robert Cullington had a Mare taken worth 5 l. and a Haystack and Woodstack
taken from him worth 11 l.

Peter Cross of Woodbridge had taken in Cloth worth 3 l. 13 s.

Richard Woods Goods worth 3 l.

John Laurence Goods seized to the value of 3 l. 10 s.

John Bennet of Woodbridge had his Gate broken open by Bailiffs, at the command
of Parson Batty, without the Constables order, and had Goods taken from him to
the value of 10 l. 12 s.

At a Meeting the 5th of the 11th Month, 1678. several Persons following were
fined by the said Justice Bacon, and had their Goods and Chattles seized, as
fol^oweth.
Peter Cross of Woodbridge had taken Cloth to the value of 6 l. 1 s.

William Bedford of the same had taken Cloth worth 2 l. 19 s.

John Nathan of the same had Goods taken worth 4 l.

Clement Carter of the same, Goods worth 2 l. 10 s.

Thomas Lynd of Melton had Hay seized to the value of 2 l. 10 s. Note, These
two ar^ only seized, the Officers being moderate the goods are not taken away.


William Skinner seized on to the value 3 l.

Edmund Broom, Priest, was the chief Instrument in stirring up this
Persecution, who employed one John Geston a poor Alms-man, to be Informer, who
dared do no other but please the Priest, who had power to put in or out
Alms-folks into the Alms house, at his pleasure.

Somersetshire.
THere being a peaceable Meeting at Glastonbury the 25th day of the 10th
month, 1678. several Persons were fined for the same by John Bailey Doctor of
Laws, and called a Justice; and for the Fines he issued out Warrants to make
Distress, and Sale of their Goods, as follows.

Officers that Distrained.
Robert Plumton, Constable. Richard Aplin, junior, and Wardens. John Provice,
junior, Wardens. Edward Bolton and Overseers of the Poor. John Hodges,
Overseers of the Poor.
Nathaniel Bryan living in the liberty of Doulting, fined for himself 5 s. and
4 l. toward the Preacher and Meeting House, had distrained and taken from him
by the sa^d Offi^ers, four Heifers worth 9 l. 2 s. 10 d. seized the 6th day of
the 11th month, 1678.

Jon^s Nicholls of the same place, for being at the same Meeting fined also 4
l. 5 s. had taken from him by the aforesaid Officers Goods worth about 5 l. 15
s.

Abraham Clothier for being at the same Meeting fined 4 l. 5 s. had distrained
and taken from him fourscore Yards of Woolen Cloth.

Thomas Heath of Doulting fined 3 l. 5 s. for the same Meeting, had taken from
him one Cow worth about 4 l.

Thomas Dickinson of Pilton fined 3 l. 5 s. for being at the same Meeting, but
could not come at any of his Goods to make Distress. Several others were fined
5 s. a piece, but were Poor, and the Officers forbore distraining on them.

Peter Goole of Mark for being at the same Meeting at Glaston fined 5 s. for
himself, and 40 s. toward a Fine laid upon Jasper Batt, for which Stephen
Crocker, Constable of Bemston, Edward Duckett of Mark, Tything-man, and other
Officers, by the aforesaid Justice Bayly's Warrant, took from the said Peter
Goole one Heifer worth 3 l.

Richard Goole for being at the same Meeting was fined for himself and the
Preacher 2 l. 5 s. and had for the said Fine one Heifer taken from him by the
aforesaid Officers.

William Harris of Mark aforesaid, fined 5 s. had a Crock taken from him worth
14 s.

John Clark of Grenton fined for the said Meeting 3 l. 5 s.

Robert Clark of Grenton fined 3 l. 5 s. for being at the said Meeting. But as
yet no account is given of what Distresses are made upon them.

Remarkable Notes in the County of Sommerset aforesaid, of the Cruelty and
Injustice of several Magistrates and others.
SEveral Persons being at the Burial of one Samuel Clothier, the 29th day of
the 6th Month, 1670. at Alford, one Robert Hunt, called a Justice, made it a
Conventicle, and fined some of them; though nothing was spoke at the Grave, but
all silent and quiet.

Thirty two Persons were fined for being at the Burial of Philip Tyler of
Walton, 1675. for which they had taken from them in Cows, Corn, and other
Goods, to the value of 82 l. and upwards, by Warrant from Francis Paulet,
Justice, who when none else would buy the distrained Cattle, he sent men to buy
them for himself.

One Margery Osmond, who was not at the Burial, and yet was fined by F. Paulet;
went to him to know the Names of them that had Sworn against her, and desired
Justice of him; he said, It was a mistake; by which it did afterward appear,
he was willing to excuse the Informers, howbeit, he then read in a Book, in the
hearing of several Persons, in which Bayner and Wythey were recorded Informers
against the said Assembly at the Burial, and said withal, that she should
Prosecute them for Perjury at the next Sessions, and that the Record at the
Sessions should be evidence against them, or to that effect: Bu^ he was not so
good as his Word; for at the Sessions Witnesses were present, to testify that
she was not at the said Burial; but Francis Paulet (in favor to those
Informers) left Wythey's Name out of the Record, and put in another Name who
was not present, and also left out her Name: So there could be no proceedings
against the Informers for their Perjury, albeit he had issued out his Warrant
to leavy the Fine imposed on her.

Further, the said Justice Paulet fined several Persons 24 l. for an unknown
Preacher; yet sent a Certificate to the Mayor of Bridgwater, to distrain 20 l.
on the Goods of John Anderdon, for Preaching at the Burial that day: So he
would have 44 l. in all (Note, That is 24 l. more then the Rigor of the Law
allows of, admitting it had been a Conventicle) for the Preacher known, and one
unknown; when in Truth, there was none spoke but John Anderdon, that
Christianly exhorted the People to consider their later end: And when Mary
Tailor, the Widow of the deceased, (who was fined 4 l. for being at her
Husbands Burial, and had Goods taken for it) spoke mildly to him, to show him
his Injustice; he told her, It did not become Women to go to their H^bands
Burials. Witnesses,

John Cluff, Henry Clothier, George Tailor.


Worcestershire.
JOhn Watts of Draitwich, in the said County, having two of his Friends at
Supper with him, viz. John Cartwright and John Stanley: Because John Cartwright
gave Thanks before Meat, was informed against to Bailiff Stainer and Bailiff
Berrot, who made it a Conventicle, and for the same committed John Cartwright
and John Stanley to Prison: And further, fined John Watts for the said Meeting
20 l. for which Fine the Officers seized upon his Team: and three more they
fined (although they were not in the Room, but in a Room by) viz. John Tylar,
Richard Woodward, Thomas Hayward, and for their Fines, they had Goods taken
from them to the value of 20 s. by Warrant from the same Bailiffs, Stainer and
Berrot; Stainer being not long after found dead with a fall from his Horse.
This was done soon after the Act against seditious Conventicles came forth, in
the Year 1670. In which Year, for assembling peaceably to worship God in this
County, many Persons had great Spoil and Havoc made upon their Goods and
Chattels, as well as in other Counties; all which for Brevity sake is omitted,
only the aforesaid piece of notorious Injustice could not be passed by.

Bromsgrove, the 29th of the 9th Month, 1679.
There being a Person buried in the Grave-Yard in Bromsgrove aforesaid, and
Robert Hill of the same place being present at the said Burial, and speaking a
few Words to the People, by way of Exhortation to Repentance and Amendment of
Life, Thomas Willmot, Parson of Bromsgrove, and his Man Thomas, and Matthew
Cartwright a Baker, informed the Justice thereof, and it was judged to be a
Conventicle, and Robert Hill was fined 20 l. and a Warrant was issued forth
from Leonard Simpson, a Justice, dated the 29th of the 9th Month, 1679. to
distrain for the said Fine; and Thomas Elkins of Bellbroughton, in the said
County; Constable, distrained and took from the said Robert Hill a Wagon worth
5 l. 10 s. which they sold for 3 l. 2 s. And Houshold-Goods they took, which
Goods with the Wagon were worth in all above 20 l.

Westmerland.
FOr a peaceable Meeting to worship God at Bownasse, in the Parish of
Windermere, the 15th day of the 7th Month, 1678. several Persons were fined by
Daniel Fleeming and Christopher Phillipson, two called Justices, and Warrants
were issued out to distrain the Goods and Chattels of these Persons following;
which Warrants were executed by John Birket of Trontbeckbridge, and John Birket
of Limesit Constable, and other Officers.

Thomas Williamson had taken from him two Cows, one Steer, twenty nine Sheep;
and on another day four Heifers, and one Cow more, all worth 28 l. sold for 21
l. 8 d. This was for preaching Truth and Righteousness, which is against all
Sedition, Plotting and contriving Insurrection.

William Rawes fined 20 l. 5 s. had Cattle and Goods taken from him worth 23 l.
sold for 15 l. 14 s.

Isaac Dixon and George Dixon fined 10 s. had Goods taken worth 18 s. About a
Week after, the Officers went again to George Dixons, and though he was not at
home, they demanded 10 l. for two Strangers being at the Meeting, for which at
that time they took twelve fat Sheep worth 4 l. 10 s.

Christopher Dixon had taken to the value of 12 s.

George Williamson Goods worth 10 s.

Richard Braithwait fined for himself, his Wife and two Strangers, had taken to
the value of 6 l. 19 s.

William Wilcosoun had taken 4 l. 15 s.

Martin Sewert had Goods taken to the value of 6 s. 8 d.

Miles Sawrey had Goods taken to the value of 7 s.

Thomas Grave of Hugill had taken the worth of 12 s.

John Tompson of Creek being at a Meeting at Bownasse aforesaid, seeing Boys
and People rude, (who threw a Dog into the Meeting) he only exhorted the People
(in Love) to Soberness and Moderation, for which he was Fined 20 l. for
Preaching; One of the Justices thinking it too hard, would have mittigated the
Fine; but the other said, it was Preaching, and it could not be passed by: For
which Fine, the Officers took Cattle from him to the value of 22 l. which were
sold for 19 l. 5 s.

Peter Bateman and Miles his Son had taken to the value of 10 s.

Taken from Richard Crudeson, Goods worth 7 s.

From George Tompson 12 s.

Richard Birket 5 s.

Robert Tomson Goods worth 18 s.

Thomas Braithwait had taken Goods worth 1 l. 13 s.

William Garnet had taken Goods worth 13 s.

John Parson Goods worth 7 s.

At a Meeting the 13th day of the 8th Month, 1678. at the House of Edward
Cragg of Attouthwait in Heversham Parish, Edward Wilson, called Justice, sent
several Informers, upon whose Evidence he and another Justice Convicted several
Persons, (without being brought before them) and gave out Warrants to make
Distress, as follows.

Joseph Gregg fined 10 s. for himself and his Wife, had Pewter and Brass taken
from him worth more then the Fine; yet it did not satisfy the Officers nor
Justice, who bid them take all they could see, and thereupon they took more
from him, a young Cow worth 3 l. 10 s. sold for 2 l. 12 s. 1 d. And returned no
Overplus.

Officers that distrained for this Meeting, were Richard Cornthwait Constable,
Richard Cook Warden, and Gabriel Croft Overseer.

William Walker fined 5 s. for which the same Officers took from him a Mare
worth 4 l. 5 s. sold for 3 l. 6 s. and returned no Overplus.

Edward Cragg had taken to the value of 2 l. 16 s.

Simon Tompson had taken Goods worth 12 s.

George Wharton had taken Goods worth 18 s.

Dorothy Lorrimer had taken Goods worth 10 s.

Thomas Hugginson had taken the worth of 9 s. 10 d.

Richard Thompson of Preston had taken from him a young Heifer worth 1 l. 5 s.

Arthur Borrough fined 5 s. for which the same Officers took from him a Horse
worth 3 l. 6 s. 8 d.

Hugh Cornthwait fined 5 s. had taken a Heifer worth 2 l. 16 s. and nothing
returned.

Thomas Camm of Camsgill in Preston-Patrick, for declaring the Truth at the
aforesaid Meeting, was fined 20 l. but Thomas Sell the Constable, and Richard
Cragg Wa^den, being moderate Officers, were unwilling to make distress, until
threatened and frightened thereto by Edward Wilson aforesaid, whereupon they took
two young Oxen, one Steer and one Heifer, worth 11 l. 10 s. And on the 28th
day of the 10th Month, 1678. took more, one Cow, one Steer, and three young
Heifers, worth 11 l. In all 22 l. 10 s. sold for 15 l. 8 d.

And when the Officers complained to the aforesaid Justice Wilson, That they
could not sell some of the Cattle; he charged them to sell them, whatever they
got for them, and fetch more until they had enough; and bid them have them from
Market to Market, and be sure to offer them cheap enough, and some or other
would buy them; and threatened them, if they did not sell them, and make up the
sum, he would make them make it up themselves.

On the 18th day of the 2d Month, 1679. the aforesaid Thomas Sill Constable,
and Richard Cragg Warden, and Geo^ge Hatton Overseer, came again to Thomas Camm
for 5 l. 4 s. 4 d. more, which they pretended was wanting of his Fine of 20 l.
5 s. and went into his Ground and took twenty five Ewes snd twenty five Lambs,
some of which were none of his own, however they drove them away, taking no
notice of that Plea, and sold them with much ado (People being shie in meddling
with them, when they understood upon what account they were taken away) for 4
l. 5 s. although they were really worth 7 l. 10 s.

The 26th day of the same Month, the same Officers came again to Thomas Camms,
and took five of his best Weathers worth 1 l. 10 s. which they sold for 19 s. 6
d.

The 23d of the 2d Month, 1679. John Waller Constable, Martin Moore Warden,
and John Hatton Overseer, took from John Hudson, for a Fine of 10 s. for
himself and his Wife being at the said Meeting, one Cow worth 3 l. 5 s. which
they sold for 3 l.

Robert Waller fined for the same Meeting 5 s. had a Cow taken from him by the
same Officers worth 3 l. 12 s. which they sold for 3 l.

About the middle of the 2d Month Th^mas Preston Constable, William Park
Warden, John Moore Overseer, for a Fine of 5 s. imposed on Richard Atkinson,
for being at the said Meeting, took from him three Cows worth 10 l. 10 s. and
sold them for 7 l. 6 s. 8 d. to a Neighbor of Richards, who sent the best
home, and sold the other two for 7 l. 5 s.

John Preston for a Fine of 5 s. for being at the same Meeting, had aoken from
him by the same Officers, one young Steer worth 2 l. 10 s. which they sold for
1 l. and returned no Overplus.

Yorkshire.
An Account of the Sufferings of the People called Quakers for Meetings in
Cleaveland North- Riding since the 3d Month, 1677. until the 11th of the 2d
Month, 1678.
BY a Warrant issued forth from the said Edward Trotter of Skeleton, called
Justice, the 6th of the 3d month, 1677. against Tobias Hoope of the same, for
20 l. 10 s. for suffering a Meeting at his House, and himself and Wife being
there; the said Tobias Hoope had Goods taken from him worth 23 l. and more, and
sold by the Constable and Overseers in Kirbymoreside and Stocksley for 16 l. 9
s.

Likewise Joshua Hoope for himself and Wife being at the said Meeting was fined
10 s. being no Quaker, the Moneys paid.

Philip Scurth of Hinderwill for declaring at the said Meeting was fined 20 l.
and the Moneys leavyed and paid.

Cuthbert Broderick of Rowsby, for another Friend called Robert Robinson
declaring at the said Meeting, and himself being there, was fined 10 l. 5 s.
the Penalty paid and leavyed.

John Pennit of Guisbrougle fined for the said Declaration 5 l.

William Jow^y of Scugdaile near Guisbrougle aforesaid, for the like, 5 l. and
for himself and Wife being present, 10 s. All which were leavied for.

John Proud of Moresone for John Robinson fined 5 l. and for himself 5 s. and
had two Oxen distrained worth 8 l.

George Robinson of Lazinby for the Preacher fined 5 l. and his self and Son
being there 10 s. and had Goods taken from him and sold worth 8 l.

George Wright of the same Town, for the like, fined 5 l. 5 s. and two Oxen
sold worth 8 l. and more.

John Jackson of Lazinby aforesaid, for the Preacher fined 5 l. and his self
being there 5 s. The Penalty paid and leavyed.

William Atkinson of Moresone was fined, and had leavyed on him 5 s.

John Chapman of Stangab, the like, 5 s.

John Pennet aforesaid, William Stamper, Edward Hunter, James Burkilt, William
Radcliff, John Reedhead of Guisbrougle were in like manner fined 5 s. a piece
by Edward Trotter, and all these abovesaid for one Meeting the 6th of the 3d
month, 1677.

The Reader may take notice, That the Minister (so called) of Skeleton, whose
Name is Thornton, is reported, and indeed may be well supposed to have been
urgent with the Churchwarden (as they term him) of the same, about the said
Information, who with other three poor Labouring-men of that Town were
Informers; their Names James Linas, Richard Westland, George Smith and James
Hawman.

For a Meeting at Skugdaile the 19th of the 6th month last past, Goods were
taken as follows, by Warrant from James Bennyman (called Justice) of Ormsby
in the the said Riding, upon the Information of Samuel Crosthwaite of
Lofthouse, and William Nelson of Skeleton.

William Jowey of Skugdaile, senior, for s^ffering (as they recorded it) a
Meeting at his House (though he was absent) was fined 20 l. and had his Goods
distrained on.

William Stamper, Edward Hunter, Ralph Hunter, John Reedhead and his Wife, and
Elizabeth Jackson, all of Guisbrougle, for being at the said Mating fined 5 s.
a piece.

Tobi is Hoope of Skeleton aforesaid (for himself, and for William Flunders of
Ormsby) fined 10 s.

Robert Cook of Upleatham for himself and Christopher Flunders of Ormsby
aforesaid, fined 10 s.

William Barker of Wilton for himself and Mark Lisle of Kukleatham, fined 10 s.

George Robinson of Lazinby, aforesaid, for himself and Robert Corney Master of
a Vessel, then riding in Tease, fined 10 s.

Likewise, by Warrants from Constable Bradshaw (called Justice) living at
Nunthrorpe, upon the Information of Samuel Crosthwait and William Nelson
aforesaid, for a Meeting at Skugdaile the 22d of the said 6th month, Gilbert
Natson of Broughton, Thomas Masterman of Nunthorp, Elizabeth Robinson of
Lazinby, George Wright of the same, and John Robinson of the same (although he
was not there) were all fined 5 s. a piece, and William Stamper of Guisbroug^e,
and Edward Hunter of the same, were fined 10 s. a piece for the second
Conviction, there being others at the said Meeting, whose Names they knew not,
as appears by their false Swearing against John Robinson, being laboring with
his Work-folks in the Field all that day, as he made appear before them and the
Justice by four Witnesses, before the Fine could be taken o^f.

The said Informers did inform upon Oath the said Justice Bradshaw, that John
Proud of Moresone the 25th of the 9th month last past, had a Meeting at his
House, though they found none but some Neighbors met to consider of providing
a House for a poor Widow, and some Maintenance, whose Husband was lately dead,
and left her two Children, and the Landlord had seized of all her Estate; and
they likewise Swore, That Thomas Porvit's Wife of Liverton, and Robert
Tuplady's Wife and Daughter of the same, were there assembled, which said three
Persons were not there; and those they found there were eating and drinking.
But Appeal was made to the Sessions, and the said John Proud and other Persons
cleared.

Notes of the Injustice of Informers and Magistrates in this County of York.
MAry Todd a poor Widow, for having a Meeting at her house one Francis
Driffield, called a Justice, sent a Warrant to bring her before him, but she
being Aged, was not able to ride nor go on foot so far; then he gave order to
distrain 20 l. 5 s. on her Goods: The Informers told him, Her Goods were not
worth so much Well (said he) take all she has; which they performed as near as
they could, not leaving her a Bed to lie on, taking her very Clothes, though
she was but a poor Widow, Aged, and in Debt.

Wllliam Thornaby the Younger, and John Allison both of Richmond, grand
Informers, searching for a Meeting at a Widows House, where they found three
Persons visiting the Widows Daughter, who lay very weak, not likely to live;
and whilst they were searching, there came in two other Persons accidentally,
one of which was a Kinswoman, and no Quaker, as was afterward proved;
nevertheless Thornaby set down their Names, and went to James Metcalfe, called
a Justice, who fined the Persons, and granted a Warrant to distrain; but the
Sufferers appealing, the most moderate Justices judged this hard measure and
illegal, and ordered the Money to be returned.

This is only noted to show the Wickedness of these Informers and Justice, and
what a Prey they would have made upon Innocent People, if they had not been
prevented.

A further Account from the County of Somerset. For a Meeting at Glastonbury,
the 12th Month, 1679.
TAken from John Clothier of East Lidford on the 22th of the 7th month, 1679.
by Edward Chapman the elder, and Edward C^apman the younger, and Thomas
Lynterne, two fatting Oxen worth near 15 l. and since sold; For a fine (as its
said) of 10 l. 10 s. upon a pretended Conviction made before Bishop Mew, or
John Baylie hi^ Chancellor.

Taken from Henry Gundry of Streat, by Warrant of D^stress from John Baylie the
Bishops Chancellor, two young Oxen worth about 7 l. for a fine of 3 l. 5 s.
laid upon his Wife for being at a Meeting at Glastonbury, Henry Gundry himself
being a Prisoner. See the Injustice and Ignorance of the man, how he acts
contrary to Law and Justice, to lay a Fine of 3 l. 5 s. upon a man's Wife for
being at a Meeting, and leavied upon her Husbands Goods, and he not at the
Meeting, when the utmost for her being there could have been but 5 s. or 10 s.
to be leavied upon her Husbands Goods.

Taken from William Hulett of Streat, for a Meeting at Glastonbury, two Pots
worth near 1 l. 10 s.

Thomas Dickerson of Pilton fined 5 l. for Jasper Batt and Elizabeth Olliffe
for a Meeting in the House of Vincent Boldy in Glastonbury (as charged) and 10
s. for himself, for the second Offense, by Warrant granted from Peter Mew,
Bishop of Bath and Wells, and John Baylie his Chancellor and Brother-in-Law;
and several other Fines laid, and Warrants issued out, but no certain Account
thereof yet given.

BREWTEN.
Taken from John Martin of Brewten on the 9th day of the 12th month, 1679. by
Warrant from Maurice Berkly, called Lord Fitz Harding, and Francis Paulett of
Wells, for a Meeting at Thomas Whitheads in Brewten, a Horse worth about 3 l.
for a fine of 2 l. 5 s. laid on the said John Martin's Wife; the Horse was
taken by Edward Chicke and Henry Albin, Wardens, and Thomas Patter, Constab^e,
and sold, which since is rid about by Jane Berkly the said Justices Daughter.

For a Meeting at Gregory Stoak in the 5th month, 1680.
John Cuffe of Aishill fined 10 l. and odd Money, and his Goods seized to a
considerable value, by Warrant from Henry Walrond, a Justice of Peace, so
called, who has made much spoil upon Friends, even to his own undoing, as many
think.

John Pinny fined 10 l. and odd Money, and seizure made upon his Goods by
Warrant from Henry Walrond.

Francis Scott of Hambridge fined 10 l. and odd Money, and Warrant issued for
leavying the same, from the said Henry Walrond.

John Coat of Kingsbury fined 10 l. and odd Money, and Warrant issued to leavy
the same upon his Goods and Chattles from the said Henry Walrond; and several
other Fines laid and Warrants issued by the said Walrond, but no certain
account thereof yet given.

September, 1680.
Robert Abbott an Innkeeper in the Town of Ivelchester, fined 40 l. and by
Warrant of Distress from the said Henry Walrond leavyed on his Goods and
Chattles by Robert Morris and Giles Bale, for two Meetings (as the said Walrond
alleges) at one and the same hour, and in one and the same house, the one of
men and the other of women, they being several of them the said Robert Abbotts
Guests, and lodged in his House, and did meet to confer about Provisio^ for the
Poor, Fatherless and Widows, which they account a Christian Duty and a good
Work, and were never questioned for such Meetings before this time; and now
most sober People do judge, That its done only for Gain and Advantage by the
said Captain Walr^nd, and the Broomes, his assistants and adherents, who have
made much spoil upon the Country, and out of Envy to the said Robert Abbott,
because he would not vote for such Persons as he and many others thought not
fit to be chosen to sit in Parliament; and as its reported part of the said 40
l. distributed to several Persons of Ivelchester, who are not the Poor, but
paid as a Gratuity or Reward for their Service, in voting against the present
Members of Parliament for that Town.

Mention being made before, page 73. that the Widow Tyler was fined 4 l. for
being at her Husbands burial, it may be noted, she had two Cows taken from her
for the said fine, worth 9 l.

AN ACCOUNT Of Such as Dyed in Prison AND PRISONERS FOR THE Testimony of Truth
and a Good CONSCIENCE; From the Year 1660. to the Year 1680.
Berkshire.
ANne Hatt of Reading, Widow, taken out of a peaceable Meeting in Reading the
15th of the 2d month, 1666, and committed to Prison by William Armorer, called
a Justice, for six Months, for being at the said Meeting; and being kept close
in Prison in the heat of Summer, and the Prison being thronged with Prisoners,
she finished her Testimony to the Truth in Prison by Death, the 19th of the 6th
Month, 1666. being found Faithful in her day, in which she walked in Gravity,
Sobriety, and the Fear of the Lord.

William Tomson the 22d of the 11th month, 1664. taken out of a Meeting of the
People of God at Reading by the said William A^morer, Both Dyed Prisoners,
committed by William Armorer at Reading.
and detained a Prisoner until he Dyed.

Walter Emmerton the 12th day of the 1st mon^th, 1665. taken out of a Meeting
at Reading by William Armorer, and remained a Prisoner till he dyed.

William Matth^ws and three more, summoned to appear at the Quarter Sessions at
Abingdon the 14th of the 5th month, 1663. where Humphry Hide sat Judge, who
caused an Indictment to be read against them, for not being at the Church, so
called, four Months past: The Court asked them, If they would go to Church and
conform? Their Answer was, They could not go thither, for that they had never
enjoyed the Presence of God in that place. Whereupon the Court fined them 20 l.
a piece, by an old Statute made against Papists, and for refusing to pay the
Fines they were committed to Goal, where William Matthews finished his
Testimony by Death.

Dorothy Clarke taken out of a Meeting in Reading the 1st of the 3d month,
1664. by William Armorer, and sent to Prison, finished her Testimony by Death
the 3d of the 12th month, 1670.

Joseph Coal apprehended the 13th of the 5th month, 1664. the manner of his
taking was thus: The aforesaid William Armorer coming, according to his usual
Practice, to take such as were assembled in the fear of God at the House of
Thomas Curtis of Reading, he found only seven Women and Maids, and caused his
Clerk to make their Mittimus presently, and to send them to Prison; in the mean
time his man John Venture opens a Door, and goes into Thomas Curtis's House,
where meeting the Maid, he asked her, If there were any in the house more than
the Family? She answered, No; whereupon he went out and she locked the Door; but
presently after W. Arm^rer knocked again at the Door, the Maid b^ing in a fear,
her Master, Mistress and Manservant being all in the Goal, did not open the
Door; whereupon VV. Armorer plucked some kind of Instrument out of his Pocket,
and picked the Lock, and searched from Room to Room, till he found Joseph, who
being a weakly man, had taken something that Morning; after some Questions, he
took Joseph by the Arm, and said, He must come with him. J. C. said, Whither
must I go? Said he, To Goal. To Goal! said J. C. What have I done? W. Armorer
said, I will tell you what. And being pulling him down Stairs said, Will you
take the Oath of Allegiance? and so made a Mittimus, and sent him to the House
of Correction, for refusing the Oath of Allegiance, and afterward he was from
thence sent to the common Goal, where the 26th day of the 2d month, 1670. he
laid down the Body, and dyed a Faithful Witness to the Truth.

William Dobson of Brightwell was Arrest^d for Tithes at the suit of Ralph
Whistler, and carried to Read^ng G^al the beginning of the 7th month, 1675.
and dyed a Prisoner the last day of the 3d month, 1677.

Bedfordshire.
John Rush of Kempston Hardwick Imprisoned at the Suit of Priest Wells of
Wilkhamsted, because for Conscience sake he could not put into the Priests
Mouth, and give him Tithes, though he did no work for him: After a Years
Imprisonment he laid down the Body (bearing a Faithful Testimony until Death)
the 1st day of the 11th month, 1661.

Bristol.
THe 7th day of the 6th month, 1664. being the first day of the Week, John
Knight, Mayor of Bristol, and Alderman Creswick went to a Meeting of the People
called Quakers, and sent One Hundred Ninty Four of them to Prison, upon the Act
made for Banishment, amongst whom these three Persons following were committed,
and finished their Testimony by Death.

Lydia Tovy, one of them, was committed to Newgate, being a Young Woman big
with Child, and as she was put within the door of the Goal the Noisome Scent
struck her very much: She abode in the Prison till the 7th day of that Week, in
which time she grew very ill; and on the Second day following she took her Bed,
her hearing and seeing being taken from her, and her Child came dead from her
that Night, and the next Morning being the third day of the Week she dyed also,
and her Child and she were both laid in the Ground together; yet the Mayor put
her in the Warrant with the rest, to be detained in Prison till the 6th day of
the 7th Month following.

Alice Peachy, the Wife of William Peachy, a young Woman big with Child, was
taken out of the same Meeting; the Officers that took her out of the Meeting
haled her rudely along before the Mayor, bidding her come along, one being
behind her putting her forwards, which being beyond what she was able to do, it
hurt her, and in her Face it was discovered presently, so she went home ill,
and was delivered the next day, and never was well aftewards, but continued ill
till the 14th day of the 6th Month, on which she dyed, her Husband being then
a Prisoner in Bridewell.

Mary Knight was also committed on the same day to Bridewell, and the next day
being very ill, was suffered to go home to her Masters House, where she dyed
about twelve days after of a violent Feavor, her Body being brought to
Bridewell, from thence to be buried, being a Prisoner, there she bled afresh at
the Nose for about an Hour together.

Cumberland.
LAncelott Wilson of Tallentrie in Bridkirk Parish in the 6th month, 1662.
being served with a Warrant to appear before John Lamplugh, Francis Salkeld and
Richard Tolson (called Justices) at Dovenby, for being at a Meeting, the
Justices demanded Bond of him to appear at the next Quarter Sessions, and for
refusing to give Bond, he with some other Friends were committed to Prison, and
at the Assizes they were all Indicted for Meeting, etc. and because they could
not then give Bond to appear, etc. at the next Assizes, they were still
detained Prisoners; but before the next Assizes Lancelott Wilson, being a
weakly man, finished his Testimony by Death.

Cambridgshire.
1661.
MAry Prior of Over, an ancient Widow, and a Grave Honorable Woman in the
Truth, being summoned to the Sessions, for not going to the Steeple-house
Worship, the Justices at the Sessions cast her into Prison, where they kept
her, till she by Death finished her Testimony against the false Church, Worship
and Teachers; she was buried in Cambridge Castle-Yard the 5th of the 10th
month, 1661. it being her desire as a Witness against them.

1663.
Thomas Richardson the 16th of the 2d month, 1663. was taken out of a
peaceable Meeting in Ely at the house of George Thorowgood, by Warrant from
William Holder and Henry Bruncell, two Priests, and also called Justices, who
committed him to Wisbich Goal, where, though he was an ancient man, near Sixty
Years of Age, he was very hardly used in the Goal, and went through great
Hardships, his Friends and Relations being not suffered sometimes to come at
him to bring him necessaries but what they could put through a Hole in the
Door, and kept a whole Winter without suffering him to have so much Wood was
would make one Fire; and he lodged on Straw. Whilst he was in Prison it pleased
God to visit this his Faithful Servant with Sickness, and on the 13th day of
the 8th month, 1665. he dyed in Prison for the Testimony of Jesus and Word of
God.

1670.
One called a Justice in the Isle of Ely, perceiving, after much Cruelty used,
they could not prevail to make the People called Quakers forsake their
assembling themselves together, he was much enraged, and went and beat several
of them very much, and knocked down Steven Clarkson to the Ground, in so much
that the Standers by said, So, there is one knocked on the Head; but he came to
himself again, and lived about five months after, but complained of that blow
to his dying day.

John Feast of Sutton Imprisoned by John Marshall, Priest in the same Town, for
Tithes, dyed a Prisoner on the 11th day of the 4th Month, 1674.

John Addams of Haddenham dyed a Prisoner for Tithes, being buried the 27th day
of the 2d Month, 1674

John Beadles of Chatteris, Imprisoned by Owen Fan of Ramsey, dyed a Prisoner
for Tithes.

Peter Hill of the same Town, Imprisoned by William Strong Priest in the same
Town, dyed a Prisoner for Tithes.

Cornwall.
EDward Anger of Minster-Parish, Imprisoned the 17th of the 3d Month, 1675.
(by John Austis prosecuted, being Register of the Archdeacons Court) because
for Conscience sake he could not pay toward the Repair of the Church (so
called) and dyed a Prisoner the 9th day of the 4th Month, 1676.

Thomas Deeble Imprisoned for the same cause, by a Writ De Excommunicat^
Capiendo, at the Suit of the said John Austis the 7th Month, 1676. and dyed a
Prisoner in the 11th Month, 1677.

Devonshire.
Jonathan Collier of the Parish of Culleton Rawleigh, Imprisoned in Stoak
Cannon the 30th day of the 5th Month, 1669. being prosecuted by John Pope and
William Tricky, Wardens of Culleton, for not going to the Steeple-house, and
for not paying to the Repair of the same, for which he was Excommunicated by
Edward Master, called Doctor of Law, and Vicar general to the Bishop of Exon in
Spiritual things; and upon that Excommunication the said Jonathan was
apprehended by a Writ De Excommunicato Capiendo, and imprisoned, and remained a
Prisoner until the 15th day of the 1st Month, 1670. and then finished his
Testimony by Death, bearing a faithful Testimony to the Lord and his Truth.

Thomas Burgan of Artacton, Tailor, was Imprisoned by a Writ De Excommunicato
Capiendo, for not going to the Steeple-house, and for a Contempt of the Bishops
Court, in not appearing, prosecuted by Richard Cr^ssen Priest, and Andrew
Slathen, Warden of Artacton. The said Thomas Burgan was brought to Prison to
the Sheriffs Ward in Thomas Parish in Exon, the 9th of the 2d Month, 1676. and
was continued a Prisoner until he dyed, which was on the 19th day of the 4th
Month following; and all the time both in Health and Sickness whilst a
Prisoner, witnessed a good Confession, and left a good Testimony behind him.

William Woolcott of Bridford Parish, Weaver, a laboring man, having a Wife
and two small Children, and their dependancies was on the Labor of his Hands,
was presented to the Bishops Court, through the Instigation of Bernard Gillard,
Priest of the said Parish, stirring up his Parishoners, and gathering Money to
pay the charge of a Writ De Excommunicato Capiendo, to Imprison him for having
Meetings at his House, and not conforming; by which Writ he was apprehended and
sent to Prison, and after he had been there eighteen Months, the Bailiffs
said, They must have 20 s. of him: Being a very poor man, the Keeper took pity
on him, and let him have Liberty to go forth to Work; but the Bishops Officers
hearing of it, threatened the Keeper to have him fined, and put out of his
place; whereupon this poor Man was kept from working, and was forced to be
relieved by his Friends, his Wife being a sickly Woman, and in a distressed
condition: And the said William Woolcott was continued Prisoner till the 27th
of the 3d Month, 1676. and then departed this Life a Prisoner, being a good
Savor to the Truth all the time of his Imprisonment.

Witnesses, John Gannicliffe, Robert Welsh.

Durham.
RIchard Errington of Gretham near Stockton, Farmer, taken from a Meeting a^
Thomas Yooles the 9th of the 7th Month. 1665. and had before Ralph Davison and
Joseph Naylor, Justices, and by them committed to Durham Goal, upon the Act for
Banishment, at the Quarter Sessions, the 4th of the 8th Month following, being
brought to the Bar, Samuel Davison Judge of the Court, past Sentence on him,
viz. to be banished to Barbados, and to be kept Prisoner in the House of
Correction till he could be Shipped, where he remained until he became weak in
Body; and being not likly to recover, his Friends moved for a removal of him to
a Friends House, for better Conveniences, but it was denied; so that about the
beginning of the 6th Month, 1667. he laid down the Body for the Testimony of
the Truth, after he had suffered Imprisonment near three Years.

Gloucestershire.
UPon the 10th day of the 5th Month, 1670. there being a Meeting of the People
of God, called Quakers, in Cirencester, there came one Thomas Masters, called a
Justice, with others, to break up the Meeting, he asked them, what their end in
Meeting was; one replied, We meet in the fear of the Lord, and for no Evil end,
the Lord knows, but to wait upon him. And to worship him too, Do you not? said
he: To which Answer was made Yes. That Is enough, said he, we need no further
Evidence. But proceeded to Fine them, and in a Rage laid Hands on them, calling
his Company to help him pull them down Stairs, the Meeting being in an upper
Room, John Cook, one of the Officers, a wicked man, cried, Clear the Stairs:
And thereupon Robert Jenkins, one reported to be a Hangman, threw several down
Stairs, and amongst the rest the Widow Hewlings, an Ancient honorable Woman,
who by the Violence of the fall was lamentably bruised, and her Shoulder
separated, so that she could not be recovered, but dyed within a Month after,
a Woman greatly beloved in those parts, and much missed, being a skilful
Midwife, and ready to do good unto all.

John Webly of Brockworth, a Man about fourscore and seven Years of Age, for
the value of about 20 s. Tithes, was by Christopher Guy, Impropriator, in the
Year 1660. cast into Gloucester Goal among Thieves, where he lay a full Year,
and there dyed the same day was a twelve Month that he was committed; Henry
Guy, Brother to the said Christopher, asked his Wife, when he was sick in
Prison, Whether she would pay or not? she denying the payment, he told her, If
her Husband dyed, he should not be buried, but carried up to the top of the
House, and the Walls should be beset, and the Fowls of the Air should eat him.
This he spoke in the hearing of their Son and Daughter, John and Hester Webly.

Richard Wetmore for not Conforming, Imprisoned by an Excommunicato Capiendo
Writ, sued by the Chancellor of the Bishops Court at Gloucester; soon after he
was put into the Goal dyed.

Hampshire.
1661.
WIlliam Rutter of Portsmouth, in the 12th Month, 1660. for being at a
peaceable Meeting in the said Town, was committed to a stinking close Prison by
Richard Lardner, Mayor of the said Town, and not suffered to go forth to take
the Air, where he took much Cold and fell Sick, and upon the 14th day of the
1st Month, 1661. dyed a Prisoner.

Henry Streater of Bramshot (being in the Year 1660. at a Meeting at his
Brothers House at Alton) was by Humphry Bennet and others, called Justices,
committed to the Common Goal at Winton, and there remained until the 1st day of
the 2d Month, 1661. and then dyed.

Thomas Willis of Totton was with other Friends committed to Prison in
Southampton, by William Stanly Mayor, upon the 14th day of the 7th Month,
1662. for being at a Meeting, and was there detained Prisoner until he dyed,
which was on the 18th day of the 2d Month, 1663.

Humphry Smith a faithful Servant and Labourer in the Work of the Lord, being
taken at a peaceable Meeting in Alton, was by Warrant from John Norton and
Humphry Bennet committed to Winton Common Goal, the 14th day of the 8th Month,
1662. and there remained until he died, which was on the 6th day of the 3d
Month, 1663.

Thomas Penford, a poor Blacksmith, having a Wife and three Children, on the
3d day of the 8th Month, 1664. being Excommunicated by the Bishops Court, for
not paying three Pence toward the Repair of the Steeple-house, and for no
other cause, was Imprisoned in the common Goal in Winton, where after he had
remained a Prisoner three Years and a half, he dyed a faithful Witness for the
Lord against such Oppression.

Nicholas Complin, in the last day of the 3d Month, 1663. and several others
were taken up (upon suspicion that they were intended to meet near Ringwood)
and had before Henry Br^mfeild, called a Justice, who though he said, he did
believe they were not at a Meeting; yet he said, he did believe they did intend
to meet together, and made a Mittimus and sent them all to the common Goal in
Winton, and at the Assizes they were fined 10 l. a Man, and ordered to be kept
in Prison till payment, where they were detained close Prisoners for above half
a Year, and the said Nicholas Complin dyed then a Prisoner; He was an Upright
Just man, and had a good Repute in the County where he lived, by all that knew
him.

Hartfordshire.
WIlliam Pratt and Thomas Leavens about the 5th Month, 1664. were taken at a
Meeting at the House of Robert Pryor, in the Parish of Hatfeild, and had to the
Prison in Hartford, and at the next Assizes were tendered the Oath of
Allegiance, by Orlando Bridgman Judge of the Court; and for refusing for
Conscience sake to Swear, were again returned to Prison, where after a long
Imprisonment, they both dyed Prisoners.

John Winchester and Thomas Harris committed to Prison for meeting to wait upon
the Lord, about the 4th month, 1661. continued Prisoners until the 14th day of
the 5th month, 1662. and then being brought to the Quarter Sessions, the Oath
of Allegiance was tendered to them, and for refusing to Swear for Conscience
sake, and in obedience to the Command of Christ Jesus, were recommitted to the
County Goal, where they remained Prisoners until they dyed.

Huntingtonshire.
SImon Sandford Imprisoned at the Suit of John Morton, Priest of Aukenbury Cum
Weston, and was kept in Prison near a Year and a half; and being released, was
after Imprisoned with Francis Lamstead, when many were cast into Prison for
Meeting, and refusing to Swear, in the Year 1660. they both fell sick, and
Francis dyed the 7th day of the 1st Month, and Simon the 18th day of the 12th
Month, 1660.

Herefordshire.
CHarles Joxes of Bishopp Standford, taken from his Employment in the 11th
Month, 1660. and had before a Magistrate, who tendered him the Oath of
Allegiance, and because for Conscience sake he could not Swear, he was
committed to Prison, where he fell sick, and on the 20th day of the 2d Month,
1661. finished his Testimony by Death, leaving a sweet and good Savor behind
him.

Thomas Longvell taken out of a peaceable Meeting waiting upon the Lord, and
carried before the Bailiff of Lemster, the 22d of the 11th Month, 1660. who
tendered him the Oath of Allegiance, and because he Conscientiously refused to
Swear, he was committed first to Prison in Leominster, and from thence sent to
the County Goal in Hereford; in the second Month in the Year 1661. he finished
his Course by laying down his Life for the Truth in the Go^l; and when he was
dead, the Jailer would not let his Friends have the Co^ps to Bury, because they
would not pay the Coroner his Fees; but after he had kept the Corpse a Day and a
Night, buried it without the Coroner sitting on it, and carried it in an
undecent manner; for the Hangman tied the Coffen upon a Ladder, and four
Fellons carried the Corpse, and the Hangm^n went before, and the Go^ler behind;
and when they put him in the Grave, the H^ngman said, He lived like a Hog, and
should be buried like a Dog: And said, But that it is wet Weather, he would
have made a Grave under the Gallows, and have buried him there, and have drove
a Stake through him.

Kent.
WIlliam Watcher and Mary his Wife, going to the B^rying Gro^nd wi^h the Body
of Samuel York^on their K^nsman, and being at the Grave whilst John C^op the
Pries^ was reading his Form, Mary spoke these Words, sayin^ The Blind lead the
Blind, until both fall into the Ditch. ^ which the P^iest was in great Rage,
and stirred up the Magistra^es to send for William and Mary before them, and to
require Bond of them for their good Behavior; for refusal of which, they were
both committed to Maidstone Goal, (though William sp^ke not to them) where they
lay both about ten Weeks, and then William laid down his Life in Bonds, after
which M^ry was soon delivered by the Judge of Assize, though much contrary to
the Will of the Pri^st, who said, She (...) lie t^ere till she dyed also.

Henry Wicken of Sutton Valence committed about the 11th Month, 1663. for not
paying Tithes or Church-Scot, so called, remained a Prisoner until the 13th of
the 11th Month, 1664. and then laid down his Life in Bonds for the Truth's
sake.

Joseph Stonehouse, John Day, Mark Feilder, John Purdy and Rebecca Elkinton,
all dyed in Prison for their Testimony to the Truth since the Year 1661.

Nicholas Homewo^d of Swingfeild, an Innocent man, and yet a great Sufferer,
for his faithful Testimony against Tithes, the 28^h day of the 9th Month,
1665. was taken by a Common Law Writ, at the Suit of Edward Wildish an
Impropriator, for refusing to pay him Tithes, and carried to the County Goal at
Canterbury: And though this Prosecutor had this Poor man's Body in Prison, he
did in a very unreasonable manner take and carry away his Corn at his Pleasure;
from Canterbury Goal he was removed to Maidstone, and from thence his Adversary
removed him to the Kings Bench, where he remained a Prisoner until the 19th day
of the 7th Month, 1676. which was about eleaven Years Imprisonment, and then
finished his Testimony by Death.

Thomas Friend of Allington in the County of Kent, sued by Priest Slaiton of
Seventon, for not paying him Tithes, and Imprisoned in the Common Goal in
Dunstons near Canterbury, the 14th of the 8th Month, 1678. where he remained
Prisoner until the 5th of the 10th Month in the same Year, and then laid down
his Body in Peace, bearing a faithful Testimony to the last against the
Hi^eling Priest: In his Imprisonment he was hardly used by Henry Landman the
Jailer and his Wi^e, who put him in a bad place amongst Fellons and Murderers,
and when he was sick, would not let him have any Fire, and sometimes his
Friends kept from him; and the Day he departed, it was earnestly desired of the
Goaler's Wife, to grant a few Charcole in a Chaffendish to warm something for
the sick Man, telling her how weak he was; which Request she denied as one void
of any Pity or Compassion.

Leicestershire.
1661.
EDward Muggleston of Whitwick Parish, sued in the Exchequer by Priest Bennet,
for not paying Tithes; After several Years Imprisonment falling sick, and after
two or three Weeks Sickness, ^on the 4th of the 9th Month, 1661. he was
released from the Cruelty of his Prosecutors, for he finished his Testimony in
sweet Peace with the Lord, against the corrupt Priesthood, and dyed a faithful
Witness to the Truth, and left a good Savor behind him.

Lancashire.
1665.
OLiver Atherton Imprisoned in Lancaster Castle in a bad smoky place, at the
Suit of the Countess of Derby for Tithes, fell sick and dyed in Prison in the
Year 1665. leaving a good Savor behind him; and a little before he dyed, he
sent her Word, That if nothing would satisfy her but his Blood, it was like
ere long she might have it; and in a little time after he dyed.

John Saeterthwait and William Sands, both Imprisoned in Lancaster Castle for
Conscience sake; both dyed about the same time, and finished their Testimony
for the Truth.

London and Middlesex.
On the Prosecution of the first Act, 14 Car. 2.
DAniel Abraham being Imprisoned in Newgate, with about three Hundred more, for
refusing for Conscience sake to Swear; in the 12th Month, 1660. fell sick and
dyed.

Walter Bellamy being at the same time (and for the same cause) Imprisoned in
Newgate, and there being one Hundred imprisoned in that Room where he was; it
was judged that so many being together for want of convenient Air and Lodging,
he fell sick, and in the 3d Month, 1661. he dyed a Prisoner.

John Stanton having a Wife and several Children, was taken out of a Meeting by
rude Soldiers, and committed to Newgate; and falling sick the 21st of the 4th
Month, 1661. dyed a Prisoner.

Thomas Kirby a Young man, a Habberdasher by Trade, being newly out of his
time, was taken out of a Meeting, and committed to Prison to Newgate, where he
fell sick, and on the 1st day of the 5th Month, 1662. he finished his
Testimony by Death.

Richard Hubberthorne, a faithful Minister of Christ Jesus, being declaring the
Truth at the Bull and Mouth Meeting, was taken by Soldiers, and carried before
Richard ^rown, who as soon as he came before him, took hold of the Brim of his
Hat and lugged it upon his Face, and committed him to Newgate, where he and two
more lay in a dark close Hole, and falling sick on the 17th of the 6th Month,
1662. he laid down his Life for the Testimony of Truth.

Anthony Skillington being at a Meeting of the Lords People the 30th of the 5th
Month, 1662. was by the rude Soldiers taken out of the Meeting, and brought
before R. Brown, who sent him to Prison, with many more; and they demanded a
free Prison, and so the Jailer put them in th Hole, which is the place they put
Fellons in after they are condemned to dye, and ^here a eleaven of them
remained two Nights, and then were had out, and put in a stinking Hole amongst
the common Fellons, and Anthony often complained of the bad Smell, before he
fell sick; and by reason of want of Ai^ and such a stinking Smell, he and
several more fell sick and dyed, and the Jury that viewed his Body, concluded
that they did believe his close Imprisonment and the stinking Smell furfeited
his Body, which was the cause of Death, it being in the heat of Summer.

John Giles, a faithful Minister of the Truth, was taken out of a Meeting,
where he was ministering the Truth, and committed to Newgate by Richard Brown,
where fall^^g sick the 29th of the 6th Month, 1662. he laid down his Life for
the Truth's sake.

William Watson of the Parish of White-Chappel, was taken from a Meet^ng, and
commi^t^d to the common Goal in Newgate, where he fell si^k, and on the 25th of
the 6th Month, 1662. dyed a Priso^er.

William Eldridge and John Shoot were both committed to Newgate by Richard
Brown, for Meeting to Worship God; and they fell sick, and the latter end of
the 6th Month, 1662. both dyed, and were carried from Newgate together.

Richard Bradlay for the same cause was committed to New-Prison, where he fell
sick, and the 1st day of the 7th Month, 1662. he laid down his Life for the
Truth's sake.

Henry Boreman being committed to Newgate for selling Books, written by the
People called Quakers, fell sick and dyed in Newgate the 17th of the 8th
Month, 1662. and left a Wife great with Child, and three small Children behind
him.

Thomas Austee and William Hawks being committed to Newgate by Richard Brown,
for Meeting to Worship God fell sick, and both laid down their Bodies in the
Prison for the Truth's sake.

Thomas Rogers, a Young man, was also taken out of a Meeting of the People of
God, and committed to the common Goal, in Newgate, where he fell sick about the
10th Month, and dyed in a short time a Prisoner for the Truth of God.

Mark Close and Gabriel Shaller being committed by Richard Brown, for the
Cause aforesaid, to the common Goal at Newgate, both fell sick, and about the
latter end of the 10th Month, 1662. both dyed.

John Cooper was by Richard Brown committed to the common Goal in Newgate, for
the same Cause, where he finished his Testimony by Death, the 30th of the 10th
Month 1662.

Thomas Hankler, William Pryor and Samuel Petchett, being committed by Richard
Brown, for Meeting to worship God; about the 6th or 7th of the 11th month,
1662. dyed in the common Goal in Newgate, William P^^or leaving a Wife and
Children behind him; and Samuel Petchett was a Young man, newly come up out of
the Country about Business.

John Trowell being at a Meeting at the Bull and Mouth the latter end of the
6th month, 1662. was dragged out of the Meeting by rude Soldiers, and one of
them knocked him down for dead in the Street, and then trampled upon him in the
Street, and he lay sick ten days, and then dyed, and his Body was carried to
the Bull, where he received his Bruises and Blows, and the Coroner and Jury
viewed his dead Body, who judged him to be Murdered, his Body being black with
Bruises, and even Rotten like a Jelly: It cannot well be expressed what
griveous Blows he received, one of the Officers having a Club in one hand about
a yard long, which seemed to be as much as he could well handle for bigness and
weight, with which he laid on about him without mercy, as did the most of his
party, regarding neither Age nor Sex. One was knocked down five times. and the
Blood lay in the Streets, and ran down men's Faces and Shoulders.

Humphry Bache and ^umphry Brewster were both committed to Newgate for Meeting,
and by the Closeness of the Prison, their Bodies were corrupted, so that in a
short time after they were released, they dyed.

Humphry Leaver, Richard Davis, Robert Cross, Thomas Wingreen and John
Ratcliff, were all Imprisoned in the common Goal in Newgate by Richard Brown,
for Meeting to worship God; and as it was judged, through the Smoke and Noisome
Smells their Bodies were corrupt^d, so that soon after they were released they
dyed.

Edward Buroughs a Faithful Labourer and Minister of the Lord, being
Imprisoned in Newgate for declaring the Truth to the People at the Bull and
Mouth; he remained a Prisoner near three Quarters of a Year; and
notwithstanding the King sent an Order under his Secretary's Hand and Seal to
Release him, yet Richard Brown would not Release him. The beginning of the
12th month the said Edward Buroughs fell sick, and the 14th day of the same
month he finished his Testimony by Death.

An Account of such as Dyed by reason of their Imprisonment; Prosecuted upon
the Act for Banishment, 1664.
John Clark John Lewis Hannah Trigg Hannah Drewry John Wilkinson John Hales
William Tomkins Robert Twinn Henry Haslam John Palmer John Cook Edward Baker
Joseph Stonehouse Mary Draper Andrew Andrews John Willbore Richard Twinn Mary
Davis George Hide Hannah Cook Mary Mile Henry Woodward Richard Audley Mary
Travers Roger Evans Benjamin Greenwell
Since the prosecution of the Act for Banishment all these Persons sealed their
Testimony with the loss of their Innocent Lives, which was occasioned by reason
of their being crowded by great Numbers into one Prison, viz. Newgate, where
for want of Prison-Room and convenient Lodging, having not room to lie down one
by another, so that many were constrained to walk upon the Leads in Newgate in
the Night-season, which was very high and open both to Wind and Weather, and
with the Infections and Noisome smells that were in the Prison, they fell sick
and dyed, some in the Prison, and others in a few days after they were let
out, many of them being sentenced to be Transported.

Elizabeth Pike Jane Powell Peter Penington John Fox John Hors^y Dorothy Hall
Vincent Gerrard William Newman Richard T^mp^on Thomas Clarke William Matthews
John Gabb Bartholomew Hall Matthew Jackson Christop. Dickenson J^hn Noble J^hn
^haplin Henry Tailor Arthur Baker Deborah Harding Anne Royley Nathaniel Harding
Edmund Berkly Rachell Jackson Laurence Aplyn Edward Walker Edward Lee.
The Sickness being in Newgate, there was One Hundred Forty Five of the People
of God called Quakers then Prisoners, being sentenced to be Banished; Fifty
Five of which were forced on Board a Ship to be Transported, after their long
Imprisonment; and the Sickness being in the Ship into which they were put, they
were thronged all the men together in one place between Decks, where they could
not stand Upright, so that the Distemper being once amongst them, it occasioned
most of them to be infected, so that all these Persons abovenamed dyed on
Board, some at Bugbyes hole, and the rest beyond Gravesend.

Robert Hayes being sentenced to be Banished, was taken out of Newgate with two
more of his Friends, and put in a Boat to be carried to Gravesend; and the said
Robert being taken fasting out of Newgate, and having been in a course of
Purging Physic, was in that case, (upon scarce any warning given) early one
Morning hurried from Newgate, and having no outward Refreshment till he came to
Gravesend, took cold and fell Sick, and in a short time after he was put on
Board he dyed.

1665. About the same time that the aforesaid Persons dyed on Board the Ship,
there dyed these Fifty Two Persons in Newgate, who lay Prisoners, most of them
being sentenced to be Banished, and the rest upon the third Conviction.
Edmund Ward John West Edward Bull Thomas Wicks John Frith Thomas Davis John
Somerfeild John Sammon George Pryor John Smith John Tesdell Mathias Gardner
Richard Lambert Joshua Clare George Tailor George Evans John Crane Nicholas
Blye Thomas Kemsey Hugh Carter Margaret Welsby Bethiah Marloe Edward Harvy
Daniel Read James Sweet James Portsmouth Ambross Cock Mark Beecroft John
Wiggins Hugh West John Rotten Cuthbert Harle Benj. Laurence Geo. Hellingsworth
J^hn Cowdry Henry Wilkinson Malachy Dudly Aug. Th^rrowgood Christopher Nicholls
John Howard Richard Spackman James Williams Daniell Hawkins John Bates Francis
White John Francis Robert Thomas Joseph Haugh Mary Powell Martin Crosh^e John
Fitz Gerrard Sarah Leigh.
About this time there were eight Persons taken out of a Meeting in the Liberty
of Westminster* and committed to the Gate house by the D. of Albemarle, where
four of them dyed, viz. Stephen White, William Avelin, Robert Towerland and
Samuel S^onh^use

Somersetshire.
RIchard Adams dyed in Prison the 17th day of the 8th Month, 1660. for not
paying Tithes to Priest Bryan of Limington, which Priest was afterward almost
Distracted before he dyed.

John Comb of Brent dyed in Prison the 22d day of the 10th month, 1660. for
not paying Tithes to James Blacklock and Thom^s Gold, Farmers of Tithes; since
Blacklock dyed, and Gold decayed.

Thom^s Lockier dyed in Prison for not paying Tithes to Priest Horsey ^f East
Lydford, who would not suffer him to be buried, but forcibly took him from the
Bearers, 1661.

Hugh Willmington of Barwick dyed a Prisoner the 4th of the 10th month, 1661.
after he had been several months a Prisoner, for not paying Tithes to Thomas
Compton, Impropriator.

Thomas Deane of Kingsbury dyed the 24th of the 2d month, 1661. for not paying
Tithes to William Strode, Impropriator.

George Adams dyed in Prison the 26th of 6th month, 1663. being committed to
Prison (for Meeting to wait upon the Lord) by Francis Paulet and Thomas Carry,
and fined 3 l. 6 s. 8 d. by Judge Terrill (without hearing him at Charde)
twelve Miles from Ilchester, where he then lay Sick.

John Evans the younger, having been a Prisoner for some years, being taken at
a Meeting of the Lords People, and committed by one called Sir John War, and
afterward had the Sentence of a P^aemunire past upon hi^ by Judge Foster, to
be Imprisoned during Life; the 14th day of the 1st Month, 1664. was set at
Liberty by Death.

John Wall of Eddington being taken at a peaceable Meeting of the Lords
people, and brought before William Ball, called Justice, he was scornfully
entreated by him, and his Hat and Cap violently struck off his Head by one
White, the Justices Clark, in his Masters presence, who disdainfully bid him
give the man his Nightcap again, and sent him to Ilchester Goal, where at the
Sessions he was brought out into the cold Air (being sick and languishing)
before the Justices at a Tavern, where he was badly entreated, and his Hat and
Cap again taken off his Head, when he had been in a sweat just before. The
Justices, after some scornful and reproachful Language (without showing any
pity to his person or principle) returned him to Prison again, where his cold
increased, and he daily grew weaker, and on the ^th of the 9th month, 1665.
finished his Testimony by Death.

William Hodges, after six years and ten weeks Imprisonment dyed in Prison the
23d of the 6th mon^th, 1667. committed by Francis Paulett and Thomas Curry, for
Meeting and refusing to Swear.

Henry Leverick taken out of a peaceable Meeting, and committed to Prison to
Ilchester, where he had a^terwards the sentence of Praemunire past upon him by
Judge F^ster, he dyed a Prisoner the 3d of the 1st month, 1668. being
well-nigh eighty years of Age.

Richard Council dyed in Prison for not paying Tithes to Priest Smith's Widow
of Badgworth; the Goal-keepers, for not feeding them with Money, were hard to
him.

Samuel Clothier of Alford, an Honest, Faithful and Upright man, who suffered
Imprisonment at several times, at the Suit of Thomas Earl, Priest of Alford,
for not p^ying Tithes, Samuel looking upon it to be an Antichristian
Imposition, and contrary to the Testimony of Christ Jesus and the Word of God,
chose rather to suffer, than to make Shiprack of Faith and a good Conscience;
and after about ten years and three m^neths Imprisonment in all, upon the
account aforesaid, he finished his Testimony by Death, being a Pri^oner at
Ilchester the 26th day of the 6th month, 1670. and went to his Grave in Peace
with God, and has left a good favor behind him.

William Kent of Purlock for Conscientiously refusi^g to go to Church (so
called) and conform to hear Common Prayer, was Excommunicated at the Bishops
Court at Wells, at the Suit and by the Promotion of Haumet Ward, Priest of
Purlock, called, Dr. in Divinity, but in truth an Actor in Iniquity, and upon
Significavit was taken upon the first day of the Week by Edward Stout and
Robert Holbourn, Deputy Bailiffs, and on the 26th day of the 1st month, 1667.
was had to Ilchester Goal, and in Testimony for God, against the false
Worshippers of the World, he finished his Testimony by Death at Ilchester the
1st of the 11th month, 1670.

Thomas Budd on the 22d day of the 4th month, 1670. departed this Life after
he had been Prisoner at Ilchester about eight Years and four Months, for
Meeting, and not Swearing, being under the Sentence of a Premuni^e. Some hours
before his Death he dec^ared to this effect; That he had renewed his
Engagements and Covenants with God, and was therein satisfi^d, and d^d hope and
believe, the Lord would sustain him in Life and Death with the Ri^ht Hand of
his Righteousness; and did greatly rejoice and bless God that all his Children
were Engaged in the Way of the Lord, etc.

Thomas Parsons of Portishead dyed a Prisoner the 25th of the 1st month, for
meeting with the Lords People to worship him, and refusing to Swear, according
^o the command of Christ, who says, Swear not at all; c^mmitted by Hugh Smith,
Edward Gorges and Hugh Tyute, Justices, so called.

^ucy Travers, an ancient Widow, the 25th of the 1st month, 1674. dyed, being
prosecuted to Death for two pence offering Money, by Priest Kittley of
Queen-Camell, she being not an Inhabitant, but came to visit her Daughter, who
lived in that Parish.

Surrey.
THomas Patchen of Binscomb an upright man, although he was weak and ill in Bed
in his own House, in the Year 1660. was taken and had before a Justice, who
committed him to the White Lion Prison in Southwark, which is above twenty
seven Miles from his H^use, because he refused to Swe^r; and though he was a
man of a considerable Estate, they drove him twenty five Miles on foot, and
were very cruel to him; and when he came to the Goal the Jailer set the Thieves
to Rob him for their Garnish, and they took from him in Clothes and Money
(which through the violence of his Distemper he was forced to c^nse^t to let
them have) 5 l. 15 s. And being thus cruelly dealt with, in a few days after
he was committed, he dyed in the Prison a faithful Witness to the Truth.

Thomas Birkly, Henry Bromly, John Whitlock and William Snooke, were all four
committed to the White Lion Prison for Meeting to Worship God, and falling
sick, for want of Air and Conveniences of Lodging, there being many more of
their Friends and Brethren at the same time in Prison with them, fifteen of
whom were sick at one time; these four Persons finished their faithful
Testimony for the blessed Truth, in the 9th month, 1662.

John Dison, John Wostenholm and Richard Page being committed to the White Lion
Prison for the cause aforesaid, and about eighty more were kept in three little
Rooms, where, by reason of the closeness of the place, they fell sick, and in a
short time, (being on the 6th of 10th month, 1662.) they there finished their
Testimony for the Truth by Death.

Samuel Fisher a faithful Minister and Labourer in the Work and Service of the
Lord, taken out of a Meeting of the Lords People in Charliwood in this County,
and committed to Pri^on to the White Lion, where he remained a Prisoner until
he dyed, which was on the 31th of the 6th month, 1665.

Joseph Fuce taken at the same Meeting at Charliwood, and for no other cause
but declaring the Truth to edify and build up the People of God in their most
holy Faith, he being also a faithful Servant of the Lord, whose Mouth was
opened by the Gift of God, to declare and publish his Truth, for which he was
committed wi^h S. Fisher to the White Lion Prison, and after he had remained a
Prisoner several Years, he finished his Testimony by Death.

1665.
John Shield another of the Laborers in the Work and Service of God was taken
out of a Meeting at Horse-lie-down, and committed to Prison to the White Lion,
where he remained a Prisoner till about the 6th or 7th month, 1665. and then
finished his Course as a faithful Witness for the Lord and his Truth.

John Fothergill was taken out of a peaceable Meeting of the People of God at
Glinford, and was had before one called a Justice, who committed him to Prison
to the White Lion, and being twenty five Miles from London, he was unwilling to
put the Constable to so much trouble to guard him to Prison, but went himself,
the Constable giving him his Mittimus; and after he had remained some Months
in Prison he fell sick of a Feavour, and about the 6th month, 1665. he
finished his Course, and was taken away from the many Trials and Troubles that
the Righteous suffer in this World.

Henry Day of the Parish of Magdalens Bermonsey in the County of Surrey,
Tailor, Imprisoned in the County Goal, upon a Writ of Excommunicato Capiendo,
prosecuted by George Nutkins, William Brown, John Arnold and Richard Burgin,
Wardens and Overseers of the said Parish, for not paying toward the Repair of
the Church (so called) after he had lain some time in Prison, fell sick, and
dyed the 20th day of the 7th month, 1677. a Prisoner for the Testimony of a
good Conscience.

John Farmer of the same Parish, Carpenter, Imprisoned by the same Writ, at the
same time and for the same cause, prosecuted at the same men's suit, remained a
Prisoner until he dyed, which was the 12th day of November, 1680.

Suffolk.
THe 22d day of the 10th month, 1678. Robert Tomson of Broadfeild, and several
of the People of God being assembled in a Yard (being kept by the Officers out
of the house they used to meet in at Woodbridge) there came Thomas Bacon,
called Justice, and Edmund Broom, Priest, and some Officers to break up the
Meeting, and the said Justice committed eleaven of them to Prison to Melton
Goal, where the said Robert Tomson soon after he was in Prison dyed a a
Faithful Witness to the Lord's Truth, and for assembling with his People to
Worship the Righteous God.

Northton.
JOhn Samm of Howend in the Parish of Haughton Conquest in the County of
Bedford, a faithful Minist^r and Labourer in the Lords Work, William Lovel of
Hardingston, and Joseph Gamage of Buggbrook being with several others assembled
in the fear of God, to worship him in Spirit and Truth at Nuskutt the 23d day
of 6th month. 1663. were apprehended by Warrant from John Willoughby, called
Justice, who committed them to the common Goal, where there were above (...)
tha^ lay in the low Goal, twelve steps below the Ground and in the night they
had but little Air, being locked d^wn betimes, and so kept close until the
seventh hour the next Morning; and John Snart the Wicked Jailer would not
suffer their Friends to come at them; with this hard Usage several of the
Prisoners fell sick and dyed; the said John Samm dyed the 26th day of the 1st
month, 1664. William Lovel dyed the 11th day of the 2d month, and Joseph
Gamage dyed the 2d day of the 2d month.

William Carr of Kislingberry committed to Prison upon the false Oath of
Richard Harris, Priest of Kislingberry, who Swore, That William Carr gave a
Treasonable Paper to one William Law, but he being present before the Justice,
offered to take his Oath, That it was given him by another; nevertheless the
Justice committed William Carr, under a pretense of spreading Treasonable
Papers, in which Paper there was indeed no Treason, but was written by a
faithful Servant of the Lord; and though William Carr was had to the Sessions,
where instead of trying him about the Paper, the Oath of Allegiance was tendered
to him, a Snare the Justice knew would hold him, for that for Conscience sake
he could not Swear; and for refusing to take an Oath he was sent to the Goal
again, where, after eleaven Weeks Imprisonment in the low Goal, on the 25th day
of the 1st month, 1664. he dyed.

Richard Ashby on the 6th day of the 7th month, 1662. was taken out of a
Meeting, where diverse were assembled to Worship God at the House of Joseph
Gamage at Buggbrooke, and being carried before John Willoughby, called Justice,
he tendered him the Oath of Allegiance, and because for Conscience sake he
refused to Swear, he was committed to the common Goal, where, on the 26th day
of the 1st month, 1664. he dyed in the true Faith, and bore a good Testimony
to the Glory of God.

Thomas Arnold of Heyford Imprisoned at the suit of Priest Seller of Stow,
because for Conscience sake he could not pay him Tithes; he patiently took up
the Cross and followed the Lord, and forsook his Wife, Children, Houses and
Land freely, and laid down his Life willingly for the precious Truth's sake;
after a Year and a halfs Imprisonment, he dyed on the 1st day of the 2d Month,
1664. And note further the Cruelty of this Priest, he was not satisfied with
the Blood of Thomas Arnold, but on the 30th day of the 5th Month following,
sent T. A's tender Wife to Goal, because she could not pay Tithes.

William Ewins of Farthingstone Imprisoned in the County Goal, at the Suit of
Thomas Hogg, Priest of the said Town, for not paying him Tithes; he was
Prisoner for the same one Year and a half, all which time he was kept in the
patience of the Lamb, until he dyed, which was on the 1st day of the 2d Month,
1664. and his Wife dyed at home soon after; and his Son and Daughter were both
Sick of the same Disease, being infected in the nasty Hole where William dyed:
And after the Young man recovered, because he refused to pay Tithes, the Priest
cast him into Goal also in the same Year.

Norfolk.
EDward Shooter being at a peaceable Meeting in the fear of God in Lyn, on the
7th day of the 12th Month, 1663. was with others taken by Soldiers, and put
into a nasty noisome stinking place, called a Cage, where they were kept for the
vulgar Rabble to deride, till toward Night, and then were had before the
Mayor, who tendered them the Oath of Allegiance; and because for Conscience sake
they refused to Swear, they were all sent to Bridewell, where they were kept
two or three Nights and Days, and then sent them to the Goal, where they were
severely used and kept most of them to l^dge on the hard Boards for a long
time; the Jailer being so Cruel, that he would suffer neither Fire nor Straw to
be carried in to them, but what a poor Woman privately brought in, as if it had
been Victuals in a Basket; and in this condition they continued four or five
M^neths, the Jailer also boarding up the Windows so close, that he deprived
them what he could, both of Light and Air, and often denied their Friends to
come at them. In these deep Sufferings the aforesaid Edward Shooter fell sick
and finished his Testimony to the Truth by Death.

Mary Mawley of Wor^well, in the County of Norfolk, Widow, committed Prisoner
to Norwich Castle for the Tithe of a Goose, by Priest Mingly, then Priest of
the said Town, who kept her a Prisoner in Norwich Castle till she dyed there.

John Norris Imprisoned in Norwich Castle, upon the Writ De Excommunicato
Capiendo, and there detained a Prisoner until he dyed.

Francis Gardner, late of Tivitshall, in the Year 1675. was subpaened into the
Exchequer by Chistopher Burrel, Priest of Pulham, for not paying Tithes; and
the said Priest caused him to be kept close Prisoner in the Castle at Norwich,
and while he was so kept, the said Burrel went himself with Servants, Horses
and Cart into the Fields of the said Francis Gardner, and carried away what
Corn they pleased, and yet continued the said Francis in Pris^n: And in the
time of the Imprisonment of the said Francis he had very great Sickness, with
which the said Barrel was acquainted, and was desired to give the s^id Francis
some Liberty in that Sickness; but the Priest denied it, and endeavored that
he might have no more Liberty than the Prison afforded him; so he was
straightly kept unto his last, where he finished his Testimony, and laid down
his Life the 7th of the 10th Month, 1678. having lain in Prison three Years
and some Months.

Oxfordshire.
RObert Willet, being with several others at a peaceable Meeting in the Year
1662. was for the same Indicted at the Sessions, and when they appeared there,
the Oath of Allegiance was tendered to them; and for refusing for Conscience
sake to Swear, the Judge of the Sessions fined them 5 l. a piece, and
recommitted them: And of Robert Willet, they required Bond for his Good
Behavior; but knowing his own Innocence, and that he had not mis-behaved
himself, he denied to give any Bond, and so was kept in Prison till he dyed.

Richard Clenton of Woosum Mill was Imprisoned at the same time, and fell sick
in Prison; and suddenly after he was released, he laid down the Body.

1664.
Thomas Reins of Great Tue Imprisoned upon a Writ De Excommunica^o Capiendo,
being prosecuted in the Bishops Court at Oxford, in the 12th Month, 1664. and
after he had remained six Years and a half in Prison, he laid down the Body,
bearing a faithful Testimony to the Truth to the last; and notwithstanding he
was in Prison, the Priest of the Parish still prosecuted him for Tithes, and
took away two Horses from him (for the same) worth 6 l.

The 28th day of the 2d Month, in the Year 1679. William Staple of Hooknorton
in the said County sued in the Exchequer, by Thomas Wise of the Town aforesaid
Impropriator, for 4 l. 12 s. Tithes, and Imprisoned in the County Goal, where
he was Prisoner until the 6th day of the 5th Month, 1679. and then dyed
Prisoner, and finished his Testimony for Truth against Tithes.

Thomas Deane of Hooknorton aforesaid, Imprisoned the 28th day of the 2d Month,
1679. at the Suit of the said Thomas Wise, for Tithe, valued at 2 l. 2 s. 6 d.
in the County Goal at Oxford, where he continued Prisoner the space of three
Months, or upwards, and then dyed a Prisoner.

Pembrookeshire.
HUgh Loyd of Haverford West, Clothier, Imprisoned for not taking the Oath of
Allegiance, and dyed a Prisoner, 1666.

Westmorland.
1663.
FRancis Howgill about the latter end of the 5th month 1663. being at the
Market at Kendall about his ordinary occasions, was summoned by the high
Constable to appear before the Justices then present at a Tavern, who tendered
him the Oath of Allegiance, as as they said, and committed him to Prison until
the Assizes at Appleby, where he had the same tendered in Court by the Judge,
and for not taking of it (being against his Conscience to Swear at all) was
indicted, only had liberty to answer to the Indictment next Assizes after, and
in the mean time a Goal delivery being at A^pleby, he was required to enter
into Bond for the good Behavior, only to ensnare and to bring him into further
B^nds, and for denying was committed Prisoner; he was brought before the Judges
at two several Assizes after, and had the sentence of a Praemunire past upon him
by Judge Turner, but the chief Persecutor of him was one called Sir Philip
Musgrave. The said F. Nowgill continued a Prisoner till the day of his Death,
which was the 20th day of the 11th month. 1668. at the common Goal in Appleby,
where he made a blessed End, having been a faithful Labourer in the Lords Work
and Service.

Warwickshire
1660.
PEter Buckston committed Prisoner to the Goal in Warwick, by a Writ of
Excommunicato Capiendo, and after two Years Imprisonment dyed a Prisoner.

Mary Page of Wellingburrough, in the County of Northamton, in the Year 1663.
going to Warwick to visit some of her Friends and Brethren in the Truth, who
suffered for Conscience sake in Warwick Goal; and being at an Inn with some
others that came thither on the same account, and having newly supt, and were
paying the Reckoning, in came one Kirby the Bailiff, and a Beadle; and in a
great rage would have sent them to the Goal that Night, had not the Innkeeper
past his Word for their Appearance next Morning; and when they appeared, the
Oath of Allegiance was tendered them, and four Men and two Women were sent to
the Goal, of which number this Mary Page was one, where she and the rest
remained from Sessions to Sessions, and from Assize to Assize, until Mary Page
fell sick; in which Sickness she finished her faithful Testimony by Death,
about the 9th Month, 1665.

WALES. Montgomeryshire.
EDward Evans committed to Prison, for refusing for Conscience sake to Swear
(the Oath of Allegiance being tendered to him) he was Imprisoned the 20th day of
the 9th Month, 1662. and being a tender man, and a Father of many Children;
after a Year and halfs Imprisonment, he fell sick, and in his Sickness he
complained of the badness and dampness of the close Prison; and in a short time
after he was taken ill, he finished his Testimony by Death.

Humphry Wilson taken from his House the 14th or 15th of the 10th Month, 1662.
and the Oath of Allegiance tendered to him, and for refusing for Conscience sake
to Swear, committed to be kept strickly in Prison; and by reason of the
coldness and dampness of the Prison he got a great Cold, and after about three
Years Imprisonment dyed a Prisoner.

Wiltsshire.
1660.
WIlliam Bartlet of Market Lavington, for refusing for Conscience sake to pay 1
s. 6 d. small Tithes was committed to the County Goal, where he remained until
he dyed.

Worcestershire.
1662.
RIchard Walker, a peaceable man, taken out of a House at Broadway, by one
Major Wild and his Soldiers, by whom he was forced to go to Worcester beyond
his strength (having been for twenty Years, or more, a sickly weakly man, but a
man of good Repute among his Neighbors) part of the way they made him go on
Foot, but being weak and soon wearied, and not able to Travel so fast as their
Horses, one of the Soldiers took him by the Arm and drew him along by force;
the said Wild also rode up against him, and run him down with his
Horse-brisket, and plucked out his Pistol, and threatened to Pistol him: In this
fall the poor man's Head was much bruised; at last they set him upon a Horse,
and whipped the Horse up Hill and down Hill, without pity to his Weak condition;
and being brought to the Goal, being far from his tender Friends, he was soon
taken out of the reach of these Oppressors, and finished his Testimony by Death.

Witnesses, Robert Baylyes, William Webb.
John Jenkins of Clifton in the said County Imprisoned upon a Writ De
Excommunicato Caepiendo, dyed a Prisoner about nine Years since.

Anne Heming of Bromsgrove Imprisoned for not paying Tithes, at the Suit of
Priest Glin of Bromsgrove; about seven Years since dyed a Prisoner.



Yorkshire.
BEnjamin Nicholson of Tickhill, and Abraham Decow of Fish Lake, both of the
West Riding, committed to Prison for refusing to Swear, (the Oath of Allegiance
being tendered to them) where, being thronged, there being five Hundred and five
in Prison in York Castle at that time upon that account, and for Meeting to
worship God: The said Benjamin and Abraham both dyed Prisoners 1660.

Robert Barwick, for refusing to Swear, was sent to York Castle the 24th of the
11th Month, 1660. and on the 28th day of the 1st Month he dyed a Prisoner.

Peter Caiph of Wyton, was taken out of a peaceable Meeting by Constables,
without any Warrant, and he and several others for refusing to Swear, were sent
to York Castle, the 13th of the 12th Month, 1660. and the 2d day of the 2d
Month, 1661. Peter dyed a Prisoner.

Robert Sto^r of Hilston for the same cause was Imprisoned in York Castle, and
on the 25th day of the 1st Month, 1661. he dyed a Prisoner.

James Dunninge Imprisoned by John H^tfeild and William Sherwood of the West
Riding, for not paying Tyth^s; after he had suffered eight Months, dyed a
Pri^^ner, 1662.

George Croft Imprisoned by John Armitage of the West Riding, for Meeting to
worship God, dyed a Prisoner the 6th of the 7th Month, 1662. having been two
Months a Prisoner.

John Crabtree Imprisoned by Roger Portington of the East Riding, for Meeting
to worship God, dyed a Pris^ner the latter end of the 7th Month, 1662. having
been above two months a Prisoner.

William Towle Imprisoned for meeting to wait upon God, by Richard Robinson of
the West Riding, dyed a Prisoner in the 10th month, 1662. having been a
Prisoner near five months.

Samuel Barber and William Hawksworth Imprisoned for the same cause by William
Hawksworth of the East Riding, dyed Prisoners in the 10th month, 1662.

John Rawson Imprisoned by the said William Hawksworth, for the same cause,
dyed a Prisoner in the 11th month, 1662.

John Deuell Imprisoned for the same cause, by Robert Euthobie of the West
Riding; after three months Imprisonment dyed in Prison in the 11th month,
1662.

James Burnley Imprisoned for the same cause, by Edward Atkinson, Godfrey
Lawson and Richard Armitage, dyed a Prisoner in the 11th month, 1662. after he
h^d been Prisoner nine Months.

William Carnby and William Broadhead, both sentenced to be banished for
Meeting, etc. dyed both in Pris^n.

1665.
John Nicholson of the East Riding committed to York Castle, by Warrant from
the Deputy Lieutenant, being taken from his House without any just cause of
Offense: In the Year 1665. after he had been some time in Prison fell sick and
dyed.

Note, he was prosecuted by Henry Latly and Francis Cobb, the one of which fell
Distracted, and the other Killed himself.

John Brookbanck committed the 30th of the 11th Month, 1673. for not paying
Tithes, (being a Servant to his Mother) and dyed in Prison the 8th of the 5th
Month, 1675. and for want of the Goal Fees was buried by the Jailer on the
backside of the Castle.

Richard Leng dyed a Prisoner in York Castle, for his Testimony against Tithes,
the 25th of the 3d Month, 1676.

John Green dyed in Prison the 12th of the 5th month, 1676. being Imprisoned
for Nonconformity, not going to hear divine Service, (so called) and not
receiving the Sacrament (so called.)

1678.
William Daughty of Balne prosecuted in the Court of Common Pleas, upon the
Statute of the 23 of Queen Elizabeth, for 20 l. per mensem for eleaven Months,
viz. 220 l. by one A^thony Atkinson, a Prisoner in York Castle for just Debt
(^n Informer) for the which sum, the said William Daughty was cast into York
Castle, where he dyed a Prisoner for the Truth's sake.

Nicholas Raw sued for small Tithes in the Spiritual Court (so called) and
committed by Justices Warrant the 8^h month, 1674. and dyed the 11th of the
12th month 1678. a Prisoner for the Truth's sake.

Thomas Swailes, near Hemsly in Blakamore, Husbandman, committed by an
Exchequer process, for not paying small Tithes, in the 6th month, 1677. and
dyed a Prisoner about the latter end of Harvest, 1678.

A TABLE to find the Counties.
Berkshire, 85. Bedford, 88. Bristol, 88. Cheshire, 1. Cumberland, 89.
Cornwall, 11.91. Cambridgshire. 90. Darbyshire, 14. Durham, 15.93. Devonshire,
23.92. Dorsetshire, 29. Gloucestershire, 31.94. Huntingtonshire, 98.
Hartfordshire, 35.97. Hampshire, 95. Herefordshire, 98. Kent, 99.
Leicestershire, 36.101. Lincolnshire, 49. Lancashire, 51.101. London and
Middlesex, 102. Monigomerishire, 122. Nottinghamshire, 55. Northamton, 115.
Norfolk, 59. Oxfordshire, 119. Pembrookshire, 120. Sussex, 65. Surrey, 112.
Suffolk, 66.115. Sommersetshire, 70.109. Worcestershire, 74.123. Warwickshire,
120. Wiltsshire, 123. Westmorland, 75. Yorkshire, 80.
THE END.

