PROPOSALS FOR Subscriptions OF MONEY, etc.

The Ensuing Proposals having the 19th of May last been Reported to the Right
Honorable Sir William Hooker, Lord Major of this Honorable City of London, the
Aldermen and Commons of the same City in Common Council assembled, and by them
duly considered of, and well approved, they have thought fit to order the same
to be Printed and published in their names, and have appointed a Select
Committee, to manage the same on the Cities behalf.

LONDON, Printed for Nath. Brook, at the Angel in Cornhill. 1674.

An Advertisement and Demonstration concerning the Improvement of Moneys to the
great Benefit and Advantage of all Persons, of what Nation, Sex, Age, Degree or
Quality soever; willing to advance any Sum or Sums, according to the Method
herein after-mentioned, propounded to the Right Honorable, the Lord Major,
Aldermen and Commons in Common Council assembled.
1. THE Sum to be advanced by any Person is not to be less than Twenty Pounds
for one Life; but any Person or Persons may advance as many several Twenty
Pounds as he, or she, or they please; upon any one Life; or upon so many
several Lives as they shall name, whether their own or others: The Profit and
Annuity of the Moneys to be at the disposal of such Person or Persons (his or
their Heirs, Executors or Assigns) who advances the same; although in the
Names of other Persons, during the Natural Lives of such Persons as are by them
named.

2. When any Person or Persons of the respective Rank wherein he, she or they,
is, or are named or registered shall happen to die, then the Profit and Annuity,
formerly claimed in the name and names of the party or parties deceased, shall
afterward, by right of Survivourship, belong to the rest of those that have
advanced Money in the same Rank in proportion to their Sum advanced; and so
successively, as any Person or Persons named or registered shall happen to die,
the whole Profit and Annuity accruing, to be still divided amongst the
Survivours, and so until the last surviving Person named or registered in the
Rank; the whole Profit and Annuity, to be enjoyed or disposed of, by such
Person or Persons advancing the Money, during the Natural Life of the party
named or registered; and after his or her decease, so named or registered, then
the payment of the whole Annuity of or in that Rank, as also of or in all the
other Ranks, in like manner to cease and determine.

3. The Annuity, to be paid to the Advancers of Money, is to begin after the
Rate of six per Cent. and so to be yearly paid to each advancer of Money during
the Natural Lives of the Persons named or registered, together with the increase
of the Annuity, which by casualty of Death from time to time will happen, to
the surviving Advancers; so that the Longest Livers will have a yearly
Augmentation of Annuity; and some of the last Livers will infallibly receive a
most considerable Revenue; so long as they live, for so small a Sum as Twenty
pounds to be advanced.

4. All Persons inhabiting within any of his Majesty's Dominions, or in any of
the Parts beyond the Seas; who shall desire to advance Moneys in all or any of
the Ranks, as is herein after-mentioned, may authorize any Person or Persons,
or his or their Correspondents in London, to advance such Sum or Sums of Moneys
in such Names as they shall think fit; and in so doing may have and enjoy the
same benefit, as those that dwell in London.

5. This extraordinary Gain being not only Lawful, but very Advantageous, there
can be no other way proposed whereby, in laying out so small a Sum as Twenty
pounds, there can be produced so great an Increase, as by Survivourship will
most certainly accrue to many Persons, and especially to the Longest Liver of
this Rank.

6 Such as will advance several Sums of Twenty pounds in all or in any of the
several Ranks, in the Names of such persons as are of the Age agreeable to each
Rank, the party advancing the Money may receive the Profit and Annuity, arising
thereby, to themselves, during Life; and their Executors, Administrators or
Assigns during the Natural Lives of those in whose Names the said Sum or Sums
of Money is or are advanced; so that such as will spare Money to Advance, for
five, eight or ten Lives, more or less, in each Rank; some one of these Lives
in all probability may happen to be the Longest Liver of the Rank, wherein they
are interessed; whereby a most considerable Revenue, may be obtained, even
beyond what can be expected (without any trouble or pains) from any other
Adventure whatsoever.

7. All Persons who shall be willing to subscribe to advance Twenty pounds, or
more, upon the advantageous Conditions aforesaid, shall have Security, to their
own contentment and satisfaction, at the time of paying in their Moneys.

The Parties subscribing may take their Election, which of the Ranks herein
after-mentioned they will be interessed in; whether in all, or so many of them
as they please, and may nominate any Persons of the Age agreeable to such Rank,
or Banks, as they shall judge most expedient for their own advantage.

The first Rank or Classis is to consist of Children, from one Month old to
seven years old. The Second, for such as are from seven years to fourteen years
old. The Third for such as are from fourteen years to twenty one years old. The
Fourth, for such as are from twenty one years to twenty eight years. The Fifth,
for such as are from twenty eight years to thirty five. The Sixth, for such as
are from thirty five to forty two. The Seventh, for such as are from forty two
to forty nine. The Eighth for such as are from forty nine to fifty six. The
Ninth for such as are from fifty six to sixty three. The Tenth for such as are
from sixty three to seventy years old and upward.
8. The time for Subscriptions being determined before, payment of any money,
the Subscribers in every Rank, or so many as shall please, after notice given,
shall meet and Elect by Scrutiny or Lots, Ten persons out of each of the seven
eldest Ranks, to be Trustees and chief Directors for the managing and ordering
of such matters and things, as from time to time shall be found most conducible
to the the benefit of each Rank; as to the Profit and Annuity thereunto
respectively belonging, and that every every one concerned may have his just
due.

And until there shall be persons found of twenty five years of Age, in the
three first Ranks, out of the Seventy which shall be chosen to govern the Seven
other Ranks, there shall be Twenty one chosen to be chief Directors for the
three first Ranks; Seven in each Rank for managing and ordering the Affairs of
the said Ranks: and when any of the Directors happen to die, another shall be
elected as above, by Scrutiny or Lots, out of the same Rank to succeed in his
place. And all the Directors of each Rank shall preside yearly by Turns, and
meet once in every Month at the least, or oftener if need require: and that at
every Meeting five of the Directors shall be a sufficient Number, to Act to all
intents and purposes, as if they were all met together; Mr. Philip de Cardonnel
Overseer, or his Deputy or Deputies, to be assisting at all Meetings, for
Registring and Signing all Matters agreed upon, without which the same shall be
null and void.

9. At the time of the payment of the Money subscribed, the Names of all and
every the Persons, for whose Life or Lives the Moneys are advanced, shall be
entered in Registers, to be kept for that purpose of all the several Ranks: And
Certificates are likewise to be produced, of the Age of the respective Parties;
either from the Parish-Church-Register, where the said Parties were baptized:
and in default thereof by such authentic Certificates as shall be satisfactory
to the chief, Directors of the Truth thereof, with the Names of their Parents,
and their Additions, Trades and Callings and Places of Residency; and in case
of Removal, notice to be given to the chief Directors or Overseeer that the
same be Registered.

10. Such further Directions, as are necessary for disposing the Money to be
paid in, and also for the chief Directors of each Rank for the well-managing
and ordering the public Advantage thereof; are prepared by the Author hereof
to be communicated to the Directors, so soon as they shall be elected by the
Subscribers.

11. The Time appointed for the Subscriptions is to commence from the 24. of
this instant June, and so to conclude upon the 25. of March following: To which
purpose, attendance to be given every day in the week (Sunday excepted) both
Forenoon from Nine of the Clock until Twelve, and in the Afternoon from Three
of the Clock until Six of the Clock; at the old Treasury-chamber, right over
against the Chamberlains Office in the Guild Hall, London; where the Office is
to be kept: in which Place, Books for all the several Ranks aforementioned,
will be kept ready, to enter the Subscriptions of all such Persons as shall
please to send or repair to the place aforesaid, where these printed Books are
to be had at three pence a piece, or at the Angel in Cornhill near the Royal
Exchange.

12. Parents will hereby have opportunity with so small a Sum as Twenty pounds,
to raise considerable Portions for their Sons and Daughters; and the longer the
Children live, the less chargeable will they be to their Parents, by reason of
the Increase of the Annuity, to be paid them during their Natural Life; so that
considering a constant and growing Annuity yearly to be paid during Life, What
is the hazard of losing Twenty pounds, in comparison to the great advantage
that may be obtained by Survivourship? considering also, that before a Child
may attain to the Age of twenty one years, he or she may come to reap the
Benefit of twenty pounds per Annum, for twenty pounds only advanced in his
Name: Yea the benefit of Survivourship may be so successful, that the annuity
of the whole Rank may fall to his or her share: in so much that advancing for
two or three Lives for any Child, either Son or Daughter, the Annuity may arise
to a plentiful Maintenance for any such Child or Children, so long as they
live; or be a good Preferment for a Son or Daughter, at the time of his or her
Marriage. And as the Increase of their Annuity depends upon their Lives,
Parents will not therefore be wanting to cherish their Children the more; and
so reciprocally every Relation, interessed in any of the Ranks, will cherish
one another, in taking the greater care of preserving their mutual healths: and
by this way and means, there will be a yearly increase of Annuity, without
Care, Danger or Usury.

13. All persons who are in Expectance of any Estate in Reversion, after one,
two or three Lives; as Gentlemen who are younger Brothers, Lords of
Copy-hold-mannours, or other Persons, who have contracted to pay Annuities for
Life or Lives, or such like, may hereby have opportunity to make themselves
gainers, by advancing Twenty pounds or more, in the Name of such Life or Lives,
as they are in expectations to have any benefit of, by survivourship, whether
the parties live or die who have the Estate in possession, for the parties
advancing so small a Sum as Twenty pounds for a Life, from whom may be expected
one hundred pounds per Annum, more or less: If the Party live long, the Annuity
of the Twenty pounds advanced may improve by Survivourship, to a greater
Annuity than the Reversional Estate may amount unto; or if the Estate in
Reversion by the death of the Party come to the hands of the Person advancing
Money, then the loss of twenty pounds only will be sufficiently recompensed.

14. For Example, thus; C. D. younger Brother of A. B. who has one hundred
pounds per annum, which will descend to C. D. at the death of A. B. Now C. D.
advancing twenty pounds in the Name of A. B. shall receive the Annuity of the
same annually during the Natural Life of A. B. and the increase of Annuity
which may arise by his Survivourship: so that if A. B. prove a longer Liver,
although C. D. by that means may reap no benefit of the Reversional Estate of
A. B. yet he shall thereby have the Benefit of the improvement of the Increase
of Annuity, which by casualty may more and more increase, by how much the
longer A. B. continues alive; so that A. B. living or dying, C. D. his
Executors, Administrators or Assigns will be gainers.

15 Also by way of Example; A Lord of a Manor has a Life remaining upon an
Estate of an hundred pounds per annum, for which he has received one thousand
four hundred pounds for three Lives, now if the Lord of the Manor advance
Twenty pounds in the Name of the Tenant, that has the remaining Life upon his
Estate; the Lord may be a gainer whether his Tenant live or die: for if the
Tenant live long, the Annuity may soon arise to one hundred pounds per annum or
more; or if the Tenant die, the Lord of the Manor will not have any cause to
repine at the loss of Twenty pounds, when by that means his Estate of one
hundred pounds per annum will return again into his possession, and so he may
grant a new Estate for three Lives, and receive a Fine for the same, and may
again advance Twenty pounds for each Life, and thereby become a gainer (all the
while the Tenant lives) without any great Stock; which otherwise than by such
means as are here proposed cannot be effected to so great advantage.

16. Also for Example; E. F. for five hundred pounds, settleth an Annuity of
fifty pounds per annum upon G. H. during life* now if E. F. advance Twenty
pounds in the Name of G. H. he will be thereby ascertained, either to receive a
more considerable Annuity for his twenty pounds, than is paid to G. H. if he
continue to live long; or if G. H. die, then the fifty, pounds per annum
ceasing, he will thereby become gainer; but without such Means as are hereby
proposed, E.F. has no opportunity of reaping of any such Benefit as may arise
by advancing twenty pounds upon the same Life.

17. Masters and Mistresses of Men and Maidservants may have a good
opportunity, by this means, to reward and prefer their Servants, and to
encourage them to be more faithful in the performance of their duties, by
advancing Twenty pounds in their Names; always reserving the Annuity to
themselves during their own Lives, if they please; and when they come to die,
then to leave the same for a Legacy to their Servant, if they shall find it
expedient, or to dispose thereof to any other, if the Servant prove undeserving.

18. All Persons charitably inclined, may advance twenty pounds in the Name of
some Person of a temperate and sober Conversation, and give the Annuity thereof
to such pious and charitable Uses, as are most agreeable to his intention,
which may in some years amount to a greater Annuity than the twenty pounds
advanced; whereby much good may be done in placing forth poor Children, and
relieving aged and impotent poor; Orphans and poor Scholars.

19. The Nobility and Gentry and other Persons, may save out of their
superfluous expenses several Sums of Twenty pounds to be advanced in the Name
of their younger Children; by which means, the longer they live, the better
they will be provided for; and against the time of their Age of twenty one
years, they may enjoy a considerable Annuity, and that raised insensibly for
them, without hazard, charge or trouble.

20. All such, Person or Persons, as would convert his, her or their Annuities
into ready Moneys, may do the same by disposing thereof at so many years
purchase as a Life is worth; whereas if the Parents and Benefactors should be
to furnish them with so much at once, to be taken out of the main Stock,
perhaps it might not easily be compassed, or at least may prove to be very
incommodious for them, but with a Portion thus to be raised, from a small sum
of twenty pounds thus to be advanced, younger Children may be competently
provided for, to undertake such Professions or Trades as may best agree with
their Inclinations and Educations.

21. Widows, Fatherless Children and Aged persons, who are subject to many
Infirmities and Casualties, and often prove burthensom to those who expect some
benefit by their death; if they do advance twenty pounds upon their Lives, then
their long Lives will be wished for, and their Relations will not neglect to
take care of them, it being apparent, that the longer they live, the greater
their Annuities will be: And such Widows, Fatherless Children and Aged persons,
who are least able to help themselves, or manage their Estates, much less to
improve the same, will find great advantage hereby, and be freed from all hard
usage, hazard, trouble or care.

This Lawful way of improving Moneys, may exceed any Benefit to be expected by
any Trade or Traffic yet discovered: for such as shall have the benefit of
Survivourship, or happen to be some of the longest Livers in that Rank, wherein
they shall be interessed, may by this means, namely by advancing twenty pounds,
grow rich, which Money probably otherwise might be Dormant in Cash,
unprofitable to themselves and the Public: And by this means also, all persons
cencerned, will be more studious of prolonging their days, by Sobriety and
Temperance.

22. All Corporations, Colleges, Commonalties, Towns, Villages and
Fraternities, may enjoy benefit hereby, namely by advancing Moneys in the Names
of such particular persons as they shall please, for the Use and Benefit of
their Respective Societies; it being not improbable, that amongst many persons,
some one or more may live long enough to receive so considerable an Annuity, as
may far exceed the Money advanced by such Corporations, Colleges, Towns,
Villages, or Fraternities, etc.

23. All Persons, who by Intermarriage have made, or hereafter shall make any
Joyntures; may by this means have opportunities to advance Money in the Name of
the Joyntress; whose Annuity the longer she lives, the more it will increase,
and may arise to equal the Jointure; which will be a great advantage to any
Heir, if the Joyntress should prove a long Liver.

Wagstaffe.

FINIS.

