THE Divinity of Christ, AND Unity of the Three that bear Record in Heaven.
WITH The blessed End and Effects of Christ's Appearance, coming in the Flesh,
Suffering and Sacrifice for Sinners, confessed and vindicated, By his
followers, called Quakers. And the principal matters in Controversy, between
Them, and their present Opposers (as Presbyterians, Independants, etc.)
Considered and Resolved, according to the Scriptures of Truth. And more
particularly to Remove the Aspersions, Slanders, and Blasphemies cast upon the
People, called QUAKERS, and their Principles, in several Books, Written By Tho.
Vincent Will. Madox
their railing Book, styled, The Foundation, etc. Tho. Danson, his Synopsis,
John Owen, his Declaration,
Which are here Examined and Compared by G. W. And their Mistakes, Errors, and
Contradictions, both to themselves and each other, made manifest. As also, A
short Review of several Passages of Edward Stillingfleet's (D.D. and Chaplin in
Ordinary (so called) to his Majesty) in his Discourse of the Sufferings of
Christ; And Sermon preached before the KING; wherein he flatly Contradicts the
said Opposers.

Mark 14.56. For many bare false witness against him, but their witness agreed
not together.

Coll. 2.8. Beware lest any man spoil you through Philosophy and vain deceit.

1 Timothy 6.3, 4, 5, 20. If any man consents not to the wholesome words of our
Lord Jesus Christ, etc. he is puffed up, or proud, etc.

Acts 24.14. After the way which they call Heresy, do I Worship the God of my
Fathers, believing all things which are written in the Law and the Prophets,
etc.

London, Printed in the Year. 1669.

An Epistle to the Presbyterians and Independants, and their Rough Hearers, who
profess the Scriptures to be their Rule, whereby they are examined and tried,
and their ways discovered.
1 st. WHether do the Scriptures speak of Three Persons in the Godhead,
according to your own Rule, in these express words; let us see where it is
written? Come do not shuffle, for we are resolved that the Scriptures shall
buffet you about, and that you shall be whipped about with the Rule.

2 dly. Where does the Scripture speak of Christ's Righteousness imputed unto
Unrighteous men, who live in their sins; and that in their Unrighteousness and
Sins they shall live and die? seeing that Faith purifies the heart from
unrighteousness; And he that believes passes from Death to Life, and so from
Sin that brought Death. And he that receives Christ, receives Righteousness it
self by Faith in him, the Lord, the Righteousness, this is Scripture.

3 dly. And where does the Scripture say, That a man shall not be made free
from sin? and that it is not attainable in this Life? Let us see where ever
Christ, or the Prophets, or Apostles, preached such Doctrine? Give us plain
Scripture, without adding or diminishing, for Christ's, bids men be perfect;
and the Apostle spoke Wisdom among them that were perfect.

4 thly. You that deny Perfection, do ye not deny the One Offering, Christ
Jesus, who has perfected for ever them that are Sanctified? Do you not deny
the Blood of Christ Jesus, in trampling it under your feet, and the Blood of
the new Covenant; which Blood of Christ cleanses from all sin; and whose
garments are made white by the Blood of the Lamb; and he thoroughly purges his
floor with his Fan, and gathers his Wheat into his Garner.

5 thly. And did Christ make Satisfaction for the sins of men, that they should
live and die in their sins? for he came to save his People from their sins; and
so he Died for them, that they should not live to them, but to God through him.

6 thly. Where do the Scripture speak of a Trinity of distinct Persons, from
Genesis to the Revelation? give us plain Scripture for it, without shuffling,
adding or diminishing, you that talk so much of Scripture to be your Rule; for
the Father, Word, and Spirit, this is owned according to Scripture, and they
agree in One. And we charge you to give us a plain Scripture that says there
are three separate Persons; let us see Scripture, we will have Scripture for
it, or otherwise be silent.

7 thly. And where do the Scriptures say, That Christ the Light of the World
(which enlighteneth every one that comes into the World) is not sufficient to
guide men to Salvation? Christ says, Believe in the Light, that you may become
Children of the Light, and Children of the Day; and who walk in the Light,
there is no occasion of stumbling; And this is the Condemnation that Light is
come into the World, and men love Darkness rather than Light, because their
deeds be evil; And is not the Light sufficient, that lets a man see whether his
deeds be wrought in God, read John 3.

8 thly. Where does the Scripture say, from Genesis to the Revelation, That the
true Faith of God is without Works? Has not Faith works that purifies the
heart? Does it not give Victory? Will you deny the Works of Faith, because the
Works of the Law was denied by the Apostle?

9 thly. Where does the Scripture say, That it self is the Word of God? Do you
not belie the Rule here? For, does not the Scripture say, That Christ is the
Word? and the Scriptures are Words: read Exodus 20, and Revelation 22. He that
adds to these Words, and takes from these Words, the Plagues of God are added
to him. So see whether you are not adders to these Words, as it is made appear
before? And Christ says, My words that I speak unto you, they are Spirit and
Life, etc. And in many places of Scripture God says, My Words: Does not
Scripture signify Writing? For all your high Schollar-ship, you may go to the
English Schoolmaster, and it will tell you what it signifies; What is all the
writing in Peoples hearts? Is Paper and Ink in Peoples hearts? Come, do not
cheat People, but confess truth; you affirm Scripture to be the Rule, but are
found contrary to the Rule. But, what is all the Scripture the Rule, from
Genesis to the Revelations, to walk by and practice? Or, what part of Scripture
is the Rule? are Herod's words, Pharoahs words, Nebuchadnezars words, Judas
words, the Jews words, Jobs Friends words, the Devils words, the Offerings and
the Sacrifices? etc. Come, what part of Scripture is your Rule? Distinguish:
For you say the Scripture is your Rule? Is it all a Rule for practice? Must we
obey every tittle of it? for we own the Scriptures more then you do, which Holy
Men of God gave forth, Christ Jesus, and the Apostles and Prophets; and they
made a distinction, but you make none: Do not go with your Malice and envious
minds, to possess the People, and say, That we dis-esteem the Scriptures, for
we esteem Scripture more than you do, that have kept People under your
Teaching, that they might be paying of you, and so make a Trade of them.

The Scriptures speaks plentifully concerning Christ being the Word of God: God
is the Word, is not this Scripture? And in the Beginning was the Word, and all
things were made by the Word: and, were all things made by the Scriptures? --
And we say the Scriptures are a better Rule than your Directory; for if the
Scriptures be the Rule, why do you set up a Directory to be your Rule? What!
will you bore out Peoples eyes, that they shall not see how you dissemble: And
why did you make a Church Faith at Savoy in eleaven days time, if the
Scriptures be your Rule? But it seems the Scriptures are not a sufficient Rule
for you; but your Directory and your Church Faith, it seems, is your Rule;
Scriptures are not sufficient to be your Rule. And, why do you deny Common
Prayer, and set up a Directory and a Church Faith of your own making? And
there, in your Directory, do you not set up your Imaginations and Meanings
above Scriptures? Come, People will not sell their Wits, Reason, and
Understanding: Come, People, you all know that when you come to discourse with
these Presbyterians or Independants about Scriptures, who say it is their Rule,
they will presently fall, and give it a meaning, and say it is their Opinion
and Judgment, and conceive it to be so. -- And so then the Presbyterians and
Independants Meanings, and Opinions, and Thinkings, and Conceivings, and
Imaginations, and Judgments; this must be the Rule, and not the Scripture:
then you must not take it as the Scriptures speak The Quakers will take it
Literally, cry they, and these have been the Presbyterian, and Independent
tricks, this long time. -- What think you, do we not know your tricks? And so
you would make People believe what an Esteem you have of Scriptures; when it is
nothing but Meanings, and old Directory, and Church Faith! Do you think we have
forgot your old Malice and Envy, when you haled above three thousand of us to
Prison in the other Powers days, and persecuted to Death about thirty three,
which stands upon Record to this day, whose Blood you have drunk, and mingled
with your Sacrifice, and whose innocent Blood lies upon your heads; Was the
Scripture your Rule to do thus? Nay, Christ bids you love Enemies, let
Scripture be your Rule! Have you not been like Judas, and the Persecuting
Jews, and the Heathen, that Persecuted the true Christians? You have banished
the Rule which is to love Enemies, and love one another: And Christ says,
Freely ye have received, freely give: But you will not give freely, for you
have not received freely; You will have the Club and the Bagg; For, what havoc
have you made of them that could not put into your mouths! what Imprisoning and
spoiling of Goods did you make when you had Power! this is not Gospel; this is
besides the Rule: You are worse than the outward Jews, for where did they ever
take trebble damages of them that did not hire them? It was time for the Lord
to bring you down, who are judged by your own Rule.

10 thly. And why do you belie the Quakers, with saying, That your good Works
(that is of self) are the Meritorious Cause of Justification.

Answ. Christ Works all our Works in us, and for us, who is our Justifier; S.
F. has sufficiently cleared this matter, and answered you.

11 thly. And where does the Scripture say, The Works of Faith, and the Works
of Grace, and the Fruits of the Spirit, are sinful?

12 thly. And where do the Scriptures hold forth the Sprinkling of Infants, and
call it an Ordinance; and tell of a Sacrament, and call it an Ordinance. Let us
see Scripture for these things, and that the Apostles practiced them as you do;
and whether your practices were according to theirs? And have you the same
Power and Spirit as they had that gave forth Scriptures? Answer plainly in
plain words of Scripture, that you do not err from the Words and Rule which you
say is your Rule. -- But do you not remember, you Presbyterians and
Independants, what havoc you made of the Goods of the People of God, whom in
scorn you called Quakers, because they would not pay for the Bread and Wine you
eat and drunk; you drunk it your selves, and eat it your selves, and made them
Pay for it; did the Apostles ever do so, to spoil any ones Goods, because they
would not pay for their Bread and Wine they eat and drunk? Come, let us see
your Scripture, your Rule, which you boast so much of for these things, who
make People believe it is your Rule; let us see a Rule for this: But you
grumble, because you have not Power to fall upon the Quakers, to make them pay
for your Bread and Wine you eat and drink, as you have done formerly; and then
when you have done, boast that Scripture is your Rule, and you say this is
Gospel, this is Glad Tidings, is it? and then you spoil their Goods for your
Bread and Wine. Where were you in the time of Persecution? we could see but few
of you then; for then you slunk into Holes and Corners, and had out your
Scouts; and now when you have a little Liberty, what a bawling you make against
Quakers? You are a little hungry bitten, because you have not Tithes, and
Easter Reckonings, and Midsummer Dues, and Money of the Quakers for your Bread
and Wine; will you avenge your self of the Quakers?

13 thly. And do you not say, That your Sanctification, and Justification, and
your Prayers, and Graces, and Faith, all are imperfect? (as manifest in you) Is
not Christ Justification, and Sanctification? And must you not Pray in the
Spirit of God? And is it not perfect? What darkness is this! Must not Christ be
in you? And, is not he in you? and Faith in you? and the Spirit of God in you
to Pray by? And so if it be imperfect, then it is your own Praying, and your
own Justitication, and Sanctification, and Faith, and Application; it is of your
own making, and not Christ's; for Christ is perfect, who Sanctifies and
Justifies, and his Spirit is perfect.

Priest Danson, Presbyterian, how now! Do thou not bring Cardinal Pool, and
Aquinas, and Aristotle, to prove thy Assertions, and thy Imaginations? it seems
Scripture is not sufficient: Thou would make People believe, that the
Presbyterians were against the Papists and Heathen both; but now they must be
the Presbyterians Patrons, and yet could make People believe that the
Scriptures were their Rule; but this must be their Rule, the Papists and the
Heathen: Read Danson's Synopsis of his Quakerism, what a bundle of Lies he has
drawn up together; he may take them home to himself.

14 thly. And why do you Presbyterians cry against the Quakers Light, which is
Christ, as being but an Heathenish light? and now to oppose them, you are fain
to run to the Heathen, and to the Papists, to find Arguments; and then tell
People the Scripture is your Rule (O Deceit!)

15 thly. Where does the Scripture speak of an Humane Nature of Christ in
Heaven? Is not Christ and his Body Glorified, and he the Lord from Heaven; for
is not Christ's Nature Divine, and his Soul Divine, which comes out from God?
And where is his Soul called Humane? Come to the Accidence again, thou that
professes thy self to be a great Scholar, tell us what Humane signifies.

16 thly. Thou speaks of Three Persons; and a man is a Person; What do thou
infer from this? Is God a Man? No, he is a Spirit, I tell thee the Scripture
says so: Is the Holy Ghost a Man? It is called the Holy Spirit; and Christ was
a man, the man Christ Jesus. -- So it seems the Presbyterians can say little of
himself, but he has learned something of the Learned Wotton, in page the
second, but he does not tell us what he is, whether a Papist or an Heathen.

17 thly. Thou say the Soul is part of man's Nature; Where does the
Scripture, thy Rule, say so? For the Scripture says, God breathed into man the
breath of Life, and man became a Living Soul.

18 thly. Thou say the word Person cannot properly be attributed to the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost: Why does the Presbyterians rage so against the
Quakers? It seems you cannot agree among your selves; because the Quakers speak
as the Scriptures do, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit; and say the Scripture does
not speak of Three Persons, as thou thy self in thy third page says the word
Person cannot properly be attributed to the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost: See
how this man is in Confusion, who says sometimes there are Three separate
Persons; and another while, the word Person cannot properly be attributed to
the Father, Son, and Holy Chost: But we do charge Danson, and his Brethren, to
make this good by Scripture in plain words; -- For the Scripture says, The
Father is in the Son, and the Son is in the Father, and the Holy Ghost proceeds
from them. -- So how can you say they are separated, when they are one in
another? but it shows you have little knowledge of God, or Scriptures either.

19 thly. The Priest says concerning that distinction in the Godhead, it
cannot be apprehended by us; -- and yet he will call them Three separated
Persons, and a Trinity; and gives them Names which are not apprehended by you;
you might have been silent then in what you did not apprehend: And yet you will
lay Principles down concerning God, the Son, and Spirit, which you do not
apprehend your selves, but presume above what is written, and so go contrary to
your Rule. -- Should you not call the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, as the Holy
Men did call them in the Scriptures?

20 thly. In the 4th page thou say, The Father, the Son, and the Spirit, are
said to be Three, yet but one God; and yet thou say we do not know what to
call those Three, but Three Persons; and there is that ascribed to them (thou
say) Properties, which agree not simply.

Answ. The Father, Son, and Spirit agree; but that which you do ascribe, do not
agree with Scripture with them, nor among your selves about them. -- And if you
do not know what to call the Father, Son, and Spirit, but Three Persons, you
might have holden your Tongues then, till you did know, who calls them and
gives them Names contrary to Scriptures, and the Holy Men of God, who called
them Father, Son, and Spitit, who were wiser Men then any of you.

21 thly. And again, in thy 4th page thou say Three Subsistents (that is
Persons, though not strictly, yet proportionably, or Anologically so called) in
the Godhead.

People! Did you ever hear such a Mash? We do charge this Presbyterian to make
these words good by plain Scripture, viz. Three Subsistents, Three Persons, and
Analogically; Is this a Scripture word People? Where did the Apostles use any
such dark words? Had thou not this word from the Heathen? Well, Mark Reader,
he says there are Three Persons, and Three Subsistents in the Godhead; and
has not he made Four here? If there be Three in the Godhead he has made
Four; for, what is the Godhead? God is One, and he has made Three besides;
see page 4. of his Book. -- And so, in the Title of his Book, he speaks of
Three Persons in the Godhead; Are there not Four then? And in the said 4th
page, he says, he thinks he has answered all the Arguments of the
Antitrinitarians; he does but think so, it seems.

Answ. The Scripture says, 1 John 5.7. That there are Three that bear Record
in Heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost; and these three are one.
But he does not say that they are separated nor distinct, neither does call
them Persons. -- And thus we call them, as the Scriptures call them, Father,
Word, and Holy Ghost; and the Apostle does not say they are separate, nor
distinct; and we are not to presume above what is written. --

We charge you, Presbyterians, to give us printed Scriptures for these
following words; and let us see in what Chapter and Verse they are printed;
Come to the Rule, and do not presume above what is written: Concreet, Abstract,
Predicate, the Relative, Co-eternity, Co-essentiallity, Co-equallity,
Communication of Properties, Co-essentiallities, Modallities,
Suppossitallities, Incommunicable Subsistances, and Hypostatical Unions. --
Come, are these words spoken in the Rule, the Scriptures? let us see the
Chapter and Verse, that we may see where such terms are spoken of the Father,
Word, and Spirit, which are one; Had you not them rather from your old Logical
and Philosophical Books? And have not they been your Rule for such words, and
not the Scriptures, which the Holy men of God spoke forth.

Thou say in the 12th page of thy Book, That we must not take Man here for a
Person, but a Nature, as you do God, etc. And yet before, thou said, That Man
was a Person; and so it is the Nature that is a Person, and not the Man, nor
God: but thou have not defined to us what a Person is, nor what the word Person
signifies, for all thy Schollar-ship. -- And thou say, Ye mean no more then
the Name Man to be attributed to Peter, James, and John; because the same human
Nature specifically agrees unto them; and so is the Name God attributed to each
Person, because the same Divine Nature subsists in each of them.

Answ. This is a dark thing, to whom will you liken me, says God? [like Peter,
James, and John, or like unto some corrupt person] The Saints were partakers of
the Divine Nature; What do you say of them therefore; And where do the
Scriptures speak that the Nature of God is so simple, etc. where learned you
this word? And where does the Scripture use these words Accidents and Integrals
of the Godhead? and this is your Conceptions and Notions of God, and the Word,
and the Spirit, as it is said in the 13th page of Danson's Book; It Is a
Conception and Notion indeed: -- For you say in the same 13th page, The
Conception or Notion that we have of the Father, etc. so it is but a Notion and
Conception, it seems, that you have of the Father; -- and then says (suppose)
as a subsistent, or Person, etc. But which of these terms it is, this Notionist
has not declared to us in his 13th page; -- And this Notionist goes on in the
said 13th page, and says, Nor can we say that the Notion of the Father, as one
Person in the Godhead, includes the Son; nor the Notion of the Son, as one
Person in the Godhead, includes the Father.

Reader, Did thou ever hear the like! This is but a Notion of the Father, and
a Notion of the Son indeed. -- And are these Presbyterian Priests like to
interpret Scripture with their Notions, Conceptions, and Suppositions; no, no.
No one knows the Father but the Son, and he to whom the Son reveals him; -- Nor
none knows the Son but the Father; and to know God, and Jesus Christ, is Life
Eternal; and none can call him Lord but by the Holy Ghost. -- And so this
Knowledge is beyond all your false Conceptions, Suppositions, and Notions; And
if the Holy Ghost, the Saints bodies be the Temple of it, which Holy Ghost
leads them into all Truth: And if the Holy Ghost be a Person, then have not the
Saints a Person in their bodies? And why did not the Apostle say, That their
bodies were the Temples of a Person, according to your Doctrine and Rule, --
the Holy Ghost is a Spirit, -- and so let us see that Scripture which gives the
Holy Ghost the Name of a Person.

And he speaks again in his 14th page of Three distinct Persons are one with
the Godhead; -- Now Reader, is not here Four? to wit, Three Persons and the
Godhead; But Reader, we charge him to give us Chapter and Verse for this
Doctrine, for we must order him with the Rule.

And then he tells us of a Notion of the Father and including the Son, it is but
his own Notion; -- for if he had known him he would have spoken in a form of
sound words, whereby he might not have been reproved.

And again, the Presbyterian says, the Three Persons are distinct, and the
Rule is to be understood that they are One among themselves only in respect of
that, wherein they agree not simply.

Answ. Reader take notice, he says, The Father, and Son, and Holy Ghost, which
he calls Three Persons, does not agree simply; Is not this contrary to
Scripture? What agreement is this which is not simply? What! separate distinct
Persons, not agreeing simply! -- Come, what is this agreement then, if it be
not an agreeing simply? Tell us what it is by Chapter and Verse; thou says the
Scripture is the Rule?

Where does the Scripture say, That the Father, Son, and Spirit does not agree
simply? -- Did thou not say, That God was so simple, that he admitted of no
parts; what agreement is this if it be not simple? What is it then? tell us.

Do thou not abuse the Father, Son, and Spirit, and Scriptures? clear thy
self; and make this good, That the Father, Son, and Spirit does not agree
simply; if not simply, then tell us how; and give Chapter and Verse for it out
of the Scriptures, or else acknowledge thy self to be of a Sandy Foundation.

Seeing thou say, A Man is a Person, and God is a Person; and the Scripture
says God is a Spirit, and Christ was conceived by the Holy Ghost, the begotten
of the Father.

Was Christ the Image of the Father, as he was of the Generation of Abraham, or
David, or Adam? or according to the Spirit? -- Whether of these was he the
express Image of his Father's substance, because thou calls the Father a
Person; -- And the Scripture says, He suffered according to the Flesh, --
which he did not die as he was God; and the Scripture calls him Son of Man, and
Son of God, and he being the express Image of his Fathers substance; see the
Old Translations.

And do thou not, in thy 16th page of thy Synopsis, bring the Greek
Philosophers to prove the Persons? Yes: How now Presbyterian Priest, thou have
run beside thy own Directory and Scripture both, but the Greek Philosophers
must be thy Rule, and Leader; surely People will not always have their Eyes
blinded by you, Christ is come to open them.

And in the 17th page of his Book, the Presbyterian says, that Hypostasis must
be rendered Person, or Subsistent, or some word to that Effect, he says. --

So People see it must be some word, but what it must be he knows not; and so
in this manner they are giving Names to Christ and God, besides the Rule of
Scripture; we charge thee show us a Verse in Scripture that speak such
Language, and where one word may be put for another by Metalepsis? and so leave
People in Doubts and Questions; you are going beside your Scripture and Rule,
that at last People shall not know what to call God and Christ. -- So the
Presbyterians and Independants must give us Scripture; For we will not be
satisfied with your Notions, and Whymsies, and false Conceptions, which you
have from Aristotle, and the Greek Philosophers, and the Papists, and
Cardinals; We do command you to give us Scripture, Chapter, and Verse,
Presbyterians and Independants, for these things plainly, -- seeing you are of
late perked up in a way of scolding against us (not like the Holy Men of God,
Patient and Meek, and apt to Teach) as you may see in the latter end of your
Brother Vincent's Book; Is that the Language of a Christian? No; He has
declared what spirit you are of, Rabshecha's spirit, railing, and speaking evil
of the way of Truth; he thinks to overcome by Railing, and complaining, not by
Love; nay, the Lamb must have the victory.

Whether or no was Christ's Blood shed for All men, and by it Justifies All
men, they living in their sins, and not believing in it; are they saved by
their saying they believe in the Blood, and not believing in the Light (which
Christ Commands) and become Children of the Light; and they say they believe,
and yet not pass from Death to Life, and from sin that brings Death? And
whether or no any are cleansed from all sin by the Blood of Christ, but such as
walk in the Light of Christ, as in 1 John 1. And so whether or no are those
Justified who believe not in the Light of Christ, nor passes from Death to
Life, nor walks not in the Light, whether or no are those Justified by Christ's
Blood, and have not the Testimony of Justification in them, as in the account
to God Christ's Blood was shed for All men; but for a man to come to partake of
this Justification, is it not to feel the Blood sprinkling the Heart and
Conscience? -- For the outward Jews in the Figure, had Blood sprinkled upon
them in the outward Offerings; -- Come answer us by Scripture? Do not daub up
People with untempered Mortar; do you know the Mortar that is tempered?

Whether or no was Christ an Offering for the sins of the whole World, and died
for the sins of the whole World?

Whether or no all the sinners and ungodly of the whole World are Justified by
his Death, and by his offering up once for all? answer in plain words.

And whether or no you will make a Sect, that he died for some ungodly and some
sinners only; for the sons of Adam were the sinners and ungodly: But he that
believes, is born of God, and they receive Christ, and he gives them Power to
become the sons of God, and they know he died for them, and have the Testimony
of it, and have the Benefit of his Death and Resurrection.

And what was the Light that shined in the Darkness, and the Darkness
comprehended it not?

What was the Spirit that the Wicked grieved, vexed, and quenched? Where is it?
and what is the Spirit of Truth that reproves the World of sin? Where is it
that leads the Saints into all Truth? Come, we must have plain Scripture for
these things.

What is the Law that God will write in the Heart, and put in the Mind, that
all shall know Him from the greatest to the least, that they shall not every
one teach his Brother; and shall all know the Lord?

What is that Light that shines in the Heart, to give the Knowledge of the
Glory of God in the face of Christ Jesus? 2 Cor. 4.

What is the Word of God in the Heart the Apostle Preached, and the People was
to obey it, and do it?

And what was that Rule that Adam had, and all the Holy Men in the Old World?

And what was the Rule of Enoch's Faith, by which he was translated? And
Abraham's Faith, who obeyed God, and forsook his Country? -- Answer these
things by Scripture, because you say, The Writings (the Scriptures) are the
Rule of Faith.

And Presbyterians and Independants, have you forgotten all your Petitions and
Addresses you Petitioned and made to the other Powers against the Quakers? If
you have forgotten them, read William Caton's Book of your Petitions and
Addresses gathered up and down the Nation. What you said of Oliver and Richard,
and how the People of God, in scorn called Quakers (the first beginning of
calling them so, was at Darby, by one Bennet an Independent, about 19 year
since) and then when the People called Quakers were gathered together in diverse
places to Worship God, then you said they were Plotting together against Oliver
(whom some of you called the Light of your Eyes, and breath of your Nostrils)
to bring in King Charles; and Oliver said, We would not hurt a Mouse, at that
time, though he did cast many of us in Prison, through you, after that; and
then you Baptized us in your Prisons by cruel sufferings. Of all men -- you
should hold your Tongues in bawling so against us, seeing the Light of your
Eyes, and breath of your Nostrils is gone; -- And what, was it not through some
of you, That the Act against Sturdy Beggars came forth? upon which, Friends at
that time could hardly travel three or four miles from their own Houses, but
they were Whipped, men worth three or four-score pounds, or an hundred a year,
were Whipped for Beggars and Vagrants; -- -- And then did you not get another
Act, That we must not speak to you in going or coming from a Steeple-house? And
how Friends were thronged in Prison up and down in the Nation by you? Answer
these Queries.

And thus you may see what a Havoc you made in your Day; but when Persecution
came, you durst hardly look out with your heads your selves.

And was there ever the like known, or seen, how your Brethren turns from North
to South, and from South to North; and there they can turn, and chop, and
change; -- And yet you could tell us then, That the Common Prayer was Hell, and
Egyptian Bondage. -- And we could hardly have a Meeting, but you were incensing
the Rulers against us, That we were Plotting to bring in King Charles; and how
many in those days were put in Prison upon that account by you, because we
went to Meetings? We can tell you, we have a List of them; -- And yet the
Quakers were House Creepers (said you) when you had gotten the Mass-houses, and
Tithes, and your Easter-Reckonings, and Midsummer-Dues, and straining our Goods
for your Bread and Wine; -- And who are become the House Creepers now? -- Then
you had gotten the old Mass-houses. Oh! your filthiness comes to be made
manifest to all men, and you have made your selves ridiculous; who are fighting
against an innocent People, that wishes hurt to no man, but the good of all
men. And do you think that the Lord will nor remember and reckon with you for
all these things? Dare you look into the Book of your Actions and Consciences,
and see what is written there, and see if they be not Recorded.

How now Presbyterians, High Priests! What, is this your Doctrine that you now
Preach up, for your Hearers, to go to a Bawdy House, as Thomas Vincent speaks?
What Liberty here, do you give to Youth, and your Hearers? who says, It Is
worse to go to the Quakers Meetings, than to a Bawdy House: You pleaded for a
body of sin as long as you live, but now it is com'd out indeed, when you plead
for a Bawdy House rather than Quakers Meetings; it is like the Presbyterian
Priest knows where they are, it appears, as if he thought more of a
Bawdy House, than of Christ and Virtue.

So it is clear here, you are Them that turn the People to Vice, and from the
Lord and his Truth ( Ellimas like) seeking to pervert; For the Quakers Meetings
are in the Fear, and Power, and Spirit of God, who meet together in the Name of
Christ Jesus: so it is like you love Meetings at Bawdy-houses, more then the
Meetings of the People of God? who meet to Worship God. And if this be your
Doctrine, then you must enlarge your Brothel and Bawdy-houses, as they do at
Rome, Legorn, and Venice, and other parts in Italy; and then they will give you
Tithes, and Easter-Reckonings, and Midsummer-Dues; For, have you not called
Bawdy House People, good Church Members? And have you not taken Tithes of them?
And would you not say, The Peace of God to them, for paying you Tithe?

Who would have thought that we should have had such Unvertuous Expressions
from the Presbyterians, that this stinking savor should have lain covered
under their Weeds; -- Well, the Quakers must Declare against all your
Bawdy-houses, which thou, Vincent, says, Thou had rather thy People should
go to, than to the Quakers Meetings, where the Word of God is Preached; -- And
so Presbyterians, if this be your Doctrine to your People, to send them to
Bawdy-houses, rather then to send them to a Meeting of the People of God; we
utterly deny you, and your Bawdy House too.

And is it not a shame to put in Print, to tell the World, That thou would
rather have thy People go to a Bawdy House, than to a Quakers Meeting? For it is
like, if thou will set up that House, thou may have a yearly Revenue (like
thy Father the Pope) out of your Bawdy-houses; it is like, if you were there,
you might get some gain, if you had Bawdy-houses; but if you go to the People
of God's Meetings, then you will get no gain. Well might William Pen say the
Priest prayed whiningly, and looked pale, when you had lost your
Easter-Reckonings, and Midsummer-Dues. -- Is not the Great Basin holden at
Door? What, this is a new way? Is it? Whether brings in more profit to the
Priests mouths, Tithes, and Easter-Reckonings, and Midsummer-Dues, or the Great
Platter? Now do you not cry up Bawdy-houses, or any way, so that you can get
gain?

I wonder for all this idle time you have had, that you could not Answer Samuel
Fisher's Book amongst you, for it stands upon your heads; he has Answered all
your Principles, and more then you have questioned: Have you forgot your
Regiment of Fighting Priests? and how the Presbyterians and Priests beat the
Quakers? Read the Book of Fighting Priests, how they tore the Clothes off
Lasses and young Men, and drew their Rapiers upon them, and broke their heads,
and shed their blood, and yet you must have the Title of Gospelers, but more
like unto raging Heathens, who imagine vain things against God, and Christ, and
his People; but the Lord has broken your horn, the wild beast, and put him
under a chain: So we looked you would have given out a Book of Repentance for
all your wicked Actions in the other Powers days, and showed forth a work of
Reformation; Do you not remember how you came with your Drums and Fiddles?

Independants and Presbyterians, Is it not clear here to all People, That you
deny God, and Christ, and the Doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles, in your
saying, That God has ordained some Persons to be damned, when God says, Ezekiel.
18.32. He desires not the death of him that dies. And in Isa. 1.18. it is said,
Come let us reason together, says the Lord, though your sins be as scarlet,
they shall be as white as snow; and though they be red like crimson, they shall
be like wool: And, verse. 16. Wash ye, make ye clean, put away the evil of your
doings from before mine eyes, cease to do evil, learn to do well. -- And the
Apostle says, in 1 Timothy 2.4. God would have all men to be saved, and to come
to the knowledge of the Truth; And Christ has given himself a Ransom for all,
to be testified in due time; And Christ tasted death for every man, and is a
Propitiation for the sins of the whole world. And his Blood was shed for all
men. And the Gospel is to be Preached to every Creature; And, Go and teach all
Nations, Matthew. 28. Now is it not clear, That these Presbyterians and
Independants, who say, That Christ died but for some, and offered but for some;
Have they not denied Christ's Blood for all men, and his Propitiation for all
men? -- And in doing this, they deny God's Will, who would have all men to be
saved, and to come to the knowledge of the Truth. And would they not lay the
fault in God, when the fault is in man by not believing? And do they not make
Sects here, in saying he died but for some, and would have but some to be
saved, and he shed his Blood but for some. -- And the Scripture says, That all
are gone astray, both Jew and Gentile, that he might have mercy upon All: See
Romans 11.32. And they say, That he will not have mercy upon all; and do not you
say, That he will have mercy upon some? contradicting the Apostle and the Rule.
-- For the Scripture says, Christ enlighteneth every man that comes into the
World; and you say that he enlighteneth but some. -- And the Scripture says,
That the grace of God that brings Salvation, has appeared to all men; and
you say, The Grace of God that brings Salvation, has appeared but to some, and
all have not received Grace. And the Scripture says, God so loved the World,
that he gave his only begotten Son into the World, that whosoever believes in
him should not perish, but have everlasting life: -- And do not you say he gave
him but for a few, and loved some of the World? And, do not you Contradict
Scripture, and God, and Christ, and the Prophets and Apostles words, and so are
found in an Erronicus Principled Spirit? -- And so, is it not clear, that you
deny Christ, who died without the Gates at Jerusalem, whose Blood was shed for
all men, and denies the Propitiation and Atonement for all men, and denies
Jacob's Prophecy, who prophesied, That the gathering of all Nations shall be to
Shilo. -- And you say, That some of the Nations shall be saved, not all; and
here, do you not deny the very Scripture it self, and God, and Christ, and the
Prophets and Apostles words, and denies their Doctrine? And also, Is it not
clear that you deny the true Faith of God's Elect, that the Just lives by? And
is not Faith the Gift of God? And do you not say, That Faith is not perfect? Do
not you hold Justification without, and that it is without Man and Woman? And
does not Faith heal? See Matthew. Mark, Luke, and the Acts. And was not the
Church Established in the Faith? Acts 16.5. Is it not called the Righteousness
of Faith? Romans 4.13. And how that the Saints are Heirs by Faith, and it is
called the Word of Faith, Romans 10. -- And it is called the Spirit of Faith, 2
Cor. 4.13. Gal, 5.6. and Faith that works by Love. -- So it is clear, that you
are out of this Faith, that lives in malice and hatred. -- And the Scripture
speaks of one Faith, one Baptism, Ephesians. 4. and the Unity is in the Faith, and
Faith gives Victory over that which has separated from God. -- And Faith is
the Shield. -- And the Saints was to strive together for the Faith of the
Gospel, 1 These. 3. Remember your work of Faith, and put on the brestplate of
Faith, 1 These. 5.8. The work of Faith with Power; and holding Faith and a good
Conscience, 1 Timothy 5.19. And have not you made shipwreck of this Faith in
Christ Jesus, and God, to say Christ's Blood was not shed for all men, and God
would not have all men to be saved; and has ordained some to damnation? Is not
Faith called a Mystery, 1 Timothy 3.9. Were not the Saints to fight the good Fight
of Faith, 1 Timothy 6.12. -- Are not you among them that have erred concerning the
Faith, and have overthrown the Faith of some in not believing the one Offering
once for all, his Blood for all, his Death for all, and so are become
Reprobates concerning the Common Faith, Tit. 1.4. -- And without Faith it is
impossible to please God, who is the Author and Finisher of our Faith; -- which
you made yours at Savoy in eleven days time, in Oliver's days. -- And the
Just shall live by his Faith, Heb. 2. and hearts purified by Faith, Acts 15. --
and Sanctified by Faith, Acts 26. Romans 3. a man is Justified by Faith. -- So
it is clear, Reader, that Faith Justifies, Sanctifies, -- and Faith purifies the
heart, and so this Justification is within, and the Mystery of Faith is held in
a pure Conscience, and the Conscience must be within, must it not Reader? And
so here thou may see how these Presbyterians and Independants have erred from
the Apostles Doctrine. -- And in Romans 5. and being Justified by Faith, -- by
whom we have access to God by Faith, and Justified by Faith in Christ Jesus,
Gal. 2. And the Apostle says, I live by the Faith of the Son of God, -- and
the Just lives by Faith, -- by grace you are saved through Faith, Ephesians. 2.8.
Luke 2.5. thy Faith has saved thee.

And do not the Presbyterians and Independants deny Christ's Doctrine who deny
Perfection, -- both the Doctrine of God, and the Command of Jesus Christ, and
the Ministry of Christ Jesus, and makes void all the Apostles Exhortation? --
For God said to Abraham, Walk before me and be thou perfect, Genesis 17. -- And do
they not deny the way of God which is perfect, Psalm. 18.30. And the Law of the
Lord is perfect; and Christ says, Every one that is perfect, shall be as he
is; -- And, be ye perfect as your heavenly Father is perfect, Mat. 5. And Noah
was a perfect man, Genesis 6. Thou shall be perfect with the Lord: He has made my
way perfect, 2 Samuel 20. Job was a perfect man, and one that feared God, and
eschewed evil, Job 1.1. God will not cast away the perfect man. --

-- Now, do you not say there is no Perfection? Do you not give the Scripture
the lie? God made my way perfect, Psalm. 18. Mark the perfect man, Psalm. 37. And
the Wicked may shoot at the perfect, Psalm. 64. And are not you them that shoot
at the perfect with your dirty Arrows? And Christ prayed, That they may be
perfect in one, Joh. 17. Is not Christ's Prayer to be fulfilled, or did he pray
in vain? Will you deny his Prayer you vain men? Is not Christ's Prayers
available? -- The Apostle said, He spoke wisdom among them that were perfect.
-- ye false Ministers say there are none perfect. God comforts his People, and
Ministers, and says, His strength is made perfect in their weakness. Herein is
encouragement to Perfection by God's Ministers, Be perfect, be of good comfort;
but you say none can be perfect, and so you are miserable Comforters. -- And
the Work of the Ministry, Ephesians. 4. was to bring People to the knowledge of God,
to a perfect man, and to the measure and stature of the fullness of Christ; --
And are not you false Ministers, and evil workers, who say there is no
Perfection, you cannot bring them, it seems, to a perfect man, you cannot bring
them to the measure of the stature of Christ, -- but runs up and down, and
fetches all the weaknesses of the Saints, and applies them to People to hold up
Imperfection to them, as Paul, Peter, John, and some others. 2 Cor. 13. We wish
your Perfection, and Heb. 6. let us go on to Perfection. -- And Col. 2. the
bond of Perfectness. -- So is it not clear here whose Ministers you are? --
neither according to God, nor Christ, nor according to the Scriptures, nor
according to the Prophets nor Apostles. -- By one Offering, he has Perfected,
for ever, them that are Sanctified. -- And what He, is this, but Christ Jesus?
-- And now it is clear, That you deny this Faith that Sanctifies, -- and that
you deny this one Offering (mark) for ever, them that are Sanctified. -- And so
it is clear, That you deny the one Offering of Christ Jesus without the Gates of
Jerusalem; -- and says, That none are perfect, and no Perfection here: -- You
may as well say there is no Faith here. -- And you that say also there is no
Overcoming here, you may as well deny Belief here; for, he that believes is
born of God, and he that is born of God overcomes the World; -- and greater is
he that is in you; than he that is in the World. So it is manifest, That you
have not this greater Birth in you to overcome the World; and here you stand
against all the Believers, and all the household of Faith, which Faith gives
Victory; -- And you say there is no Victory here; -- And so, what can you cry
up but sin, and Bawdy-houses? And you would rather have your People go into
Bawdy-houses, then to go to the household of Faith, which preaches down Sin, and
Imperfection: -- For God is perfect, his Way is perfect; and he bids, be
perfect: -- And the Ministers was to present every man perfect in Christ Jesus,
see Col. And you Preach up Imperfection for term of Life, so Ministers of
Satan; -- for the Devil made man imperfect, Christ makes them perfect; and God
made them perfect, and said, Be perfect. So are you not all the blind Guides
that leads into the ditch, which is a corrupted place, that People are
corrupted, not perfect; but the true Ministers presented them perfect in Christ
Jesus. -- And so, is it not clear, That you deny the Blood of Christ, and
trample it under your feet? -- For, Christ Sanctifies his People with his own
Blood, Heb. 10. The Blood of Christ Jesus cleanses from all sin, 1 John 1. and
Rev. And he has washed us from our sins in his Blood; And they overcame by the
Blood of the Lamb; And, whose Garments were made white by the Blood of Jesus.
And do you not give the Apostle, and the Scriptures the Lie, and makes Christ's
Blood of none Effect; -- And says, They are not made white, they are not
cleansed from all sin, and that they must have a body of sin and death as long
as they live, and that they are not Redeemed to God. -- Do you not make the
Blood of Christ of none effect here? -- which is to wash and to cleanse away
that which is brought into Adam by the Serpent, and deny Christ's Purchase, who
purchased his People, and Justifies by his Blood, and Redeemed through his
Blood; And what Redemption is this, and Purchase is this, and Justification is
this, if they be not Redeemed out of sin, and evil, and old Adam; Christ has
Redeemed us to God through his Blood, Rev. 5. Ephesians. 1. Are not you them that
have counted the Blood of the new Covenant of none effect, Heb. 10. and trodden
it under foot, wherewith he Sanctifies, and so are they that have done despite
against the Spirit of Grace; for do you not say, the Spirit of God is not given
to every man to profit withal; -- only some have the Spirit say you; -- Who are
they then, that vexes it, and quenches it, and grieves it? -- And were not they
wicked People whom the Lord gave his good Spirit to, to instruct them, Nehem.
9. they were such as rebelled against Nehemiah. And here it is clear, That you
make Sects, and denies the Prophets and Apostles Doctrine. -- And you say, That
Christ does not enlighten every man that comes into the World; Do you not here
deny John's Doctrine, and Scriptures, and Christ himself, who says He is the
Light of the World. -- And deny that which People should believe in, -- believe
in the Light, that you may become Children of the Light, as in Joh. 14. -- And
deny that which should give People the Knowledge of the Light that is in their
hearts, the Light of Jesus, 2 Cor. 4. -- And so People see what these men can
Preach, that deny true Faith, true Belief, true Apostles, and Scripture, and
the Blood of Christ, and the Offering; and so denies God, and Christ, and his
Commands; and Preach up Sin, and Imperfection, and the Bawdy-houses; and would
have his Hearers rather go to a Bawdy House, than to go among the People called
Quakers, that Preaches up Perfection, and the Blood of Jesus, the One Offering,
that makes People perfect, and Sanctifies them; and must not People have Faith
in them, and Christ in them, and the Blood in them sprinkling their Hearts and
Consciences? Reader, I pray thee read the Scriptures, for they were given forth
to be read, and believed; and not for Presbyterians and Independants to make a
Trade of them, and keep People always to be hearing them, and paying of them;
the Holy Men of God did not give forth the Scriptures for that end, that
suffered many of them, to death, for giving them forth: And so I pray thee,
Reader, do not fell thy Wit and Reason any longer; for they will put it up all
in their Pokes and Bags, and then lead them into a ditch, and barren Mountain,
and so feed themselves of you, and not feed you: But the Lord is come to gather
his People from off the barren Mountains, and from their mouths that have fed
themselves and not the Flock, and sought themselves and not the Flock; and made
a Prey upon you, and sought for your wool, and has bit you when you put not
into their mouths; and have sought for handfuls of Barley, and a piece of
Bread; and has born rule amongst you by their means; and has been the greedy
dumb Dogs that could never have enough, -- who have been slumbering. -- Read
Jer. 5. Isa. 56. Mic. 3. Ezekiel. 14. and so read how Christ marks out those false
Teachers, Mat. 23. And the Apostle to Timothy and Titus. -- So no more, but my
Love, that you may all come to know the Freedom in Christ, from all the blind
Guides.

G. F. Jo. Stubbs.


If that the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost be three distinct separate Persons,
not simply One, or agreeing simply, as the Priest says, then how far distance
are they from one another? show us Chapter and Verse for this, and make it good
by Scriptures.

And let us see through all the Scriptures, where ever the Holy Men of God did
give such Titles or Names to God, and Christ, and the Holy Ghost, as the
Presbyterians and Independants have done, as may be seen in this Book.

The Scripture says, That God, and Christ, and the Holy Ghost will dwell in
Man; and then you Independent and Presbyterian Priests, Whether then that there
is not three Persons in a Man (dwelling in him) that is a Person? for the
Apostle says, That your Bodies are the Temples of the Holy Ghost, and that
your Bodies are the Temples of God, and that Christ is in you, except ye are
Reprobates?

The DIVINITY of CHRIST, Confessed by us called Quakers; -- And, What we own
touching the Deity or Godhead, according to the Scriptures.
THat there is but one God, the Father, of whom are all things, and we in him,
and our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are all things, and we by him.

That there are Three that bear Record in Heaven, the Father, the Word, and the
Spirit, and that these three are One, both in Divinity, Divine Substance, and
Essence; not three Gods, nor separate Beings.

That they are called by several Names in Scripture, as manifest to, and in the
Saints (for whatsoever may be known of God, is manifest in man, Romans 1.) and
their Record received as the full testimony of three, by such as truly know and
own the Record of the three in Earth; and yet they are Eternally One in Nature
and Being; One infinite Wisdom, One Power, One Love, One Light and Life, etc.

We never denied the Divinity of Christ, as most injuriously we have been
accused by some prejudiced spirits, who prejudicially in their perverse
Contests have sought occasion against us; As chiefly because (when some of us,
were in Dispute with some Presbyterians) we could not own their unscriptural
distinctions and terms, -- (touching the Father, the Word, and the Holy Spirit)
to wit, Of their being incommunicable, distinct, separate persons, or
subsistences, whereas the Father, the Word, and Spirit are One, not to be
compared to corruptible men, nor to finite Creatures or Persons, which are
limitable and separable.

For, the only Wise God, the Creator of all, who is One, and his Name One, is
infinite and inseparable, Deuteronomy. 6.4. Zec. 14.9. And the Father's begetting the
Son, and the Spirit's being sent, we witness to and own; as He said, Thou art
my Son, this day I have begotten thee, Psalm. 2.7. Heb. 1.5. And he has sent
his Spirit into our hearts, Gal. 4.6. And that the Father is in the Son, and
the Son in the Father, yea, in the bosom of the Father, Joh. 1.18. and chap.
17.21, 23. so that they are neither divided, nor separate, being One, and of
One infinite Nature, and Substance; Christ being the Image of the invisible
God; the first born of every Creature, by whom all things were Created, both in
Heaven and in Earth, Col. 1. -- Yea, the Son of God is the brightness of his
glory, and the express Image of his substance, Heb. 1.3. (...), And that it was
in due time God was manifest in Flesh, 1 Timothy 3.16. As in the fullness of time.
God sent his Son, Gal. 4. And the Son of God was made manifest to destroy sin,
1 John 3.8. And a manifestation of the Spirit is given to every Man to profit
withal, 1 Cor. 12. -- So the manifestation of the Father, of the Son, and Holy
Spirit (we confess to, and own to be in Unity (and so the only true God)
according to the Scriptures.

And that Jesus Christ being in the Form of God, thought it no robbery to be
Equal with God, and yet as a Son, in the fullness of time, was sent of the
Father, and took on him the form of a servant, Phil. 2.6, 7. in which state he
said, My Father is greater than I, 1 John 14.28. And he learned Obedience
through Suffering, and was made perfect, and is become an everlasting High
Priest, after the Order of Melchisedeck, and is the Author of Eternal
Salvation, unto all them that Obey him, Heb. 5. -- And God has given us
Eternal Life in his Son: And unto us a Child is born, and a Son is given to
Govern, whose Name is Wonderful Counselor, The Mighty God, The Everlasting
Father, The Prince of Peace, Isa. 9.6. And he is over all, God blessed for
ever, Romans 9.5. Even the true God, and Eternal Life, 1 John 5.

So that the Deity or Divinity of Christ, in his Eternal, Infinite, Glorious
State, we really confess and own; having known his Virtue and Power to redeem
us from our vain Conversations, and to save us from wrath to come.

And our knowledge of the only true God, and our Faith in, and concerning him,
and his Name, unto our Salvation, does not consist in the traditional Names,
humane Inventions (nor in Philosophical terms, and nice School distinctions,
derived from Heathenish Metaphysics; which since the Apostles time, men have
put upon the Godhead) but in the living sense, and feeling of his Divine
Power, Life, and Love, revealed in us by the Spirit of the Son of God; whereby
we have (in his gift of Divine Light and Spirit) received Life and Salvation,
from sin and death; see Matthew. 11.27. Luke 10.22. Matthew. 16.17. Romans 1.17. chapter
8.18. Gal. 1.16. Ephesians. 3.5. 1 Pet. 15.12. chapter 4.14. chapter 4.13. chapter 5.1. 2 Pet. 1,
3. Matthew. 1.21.

Also we judge, That such Expressions, and Words as the Holy Ghost taught the
true Apostles, and Holy Men mentioned in the Scriptures, are most meet to speak
of God, and Christ, and not the words of man's wisdom, or humane inventions, and
devised distinctions since the Apostles days.

Finally, We have received an Unction, or Anointing, from the Holy One, which
as it does teach us, we know a continuance in the Father and in the Son, 1 John
2. And for whom we know the Father is well pleased, and in him we know the true
Satisfaction, Justification, and Peace, which all that abide in him, enjoy and
witness.

Now unto the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, the One Eternal Word, The Only
Wise, Pure, Perfect God, who is Infinite, Omnipotent, Incomprehensible, who
gives unto all Life and Being, and is the Life of all, and the Being of
Beings, who fills all in all with his Presence, Unto whom be Glory now and
evermore, [saith our Souls.]

G. Whitehead.


And for Definition of a Person, or what a Person is, we shall not need to go
to Popish and Heathenish Authors, as Thomas Aquinas, Aristotle, and others; as
some of these Presbyterian Teachers, and others, have done, when they have gone
about to demonstrate their Doctrine of a Trinity of distinct Persons in God;
And yet in Contradiction, for a cloak, they pretend the Scriptures to be their
Rule, wherein there is no proof of their calling the Father, the Word, and the
Spirit, three distinct Persons, while the Scriptures be full and plain enough
to prove, define, or show what a Person is; as namely, a Man or Woman; sometime
the body, the face, or visible appearance of either, etc. But the Infinite God
is not like unto corruptible man. See first in the Old Testament (so called) as
to Person;

Esau took his Wives, his Sons and Daughters, and all the Persons of his house,
Genesis 36.16. Joseph was a goodly person, Genesis 39.6. The Number of your persons,
Exodus 16.16. No uncircumcised person, Exodus 12.48. The person of the poor and
of the mighty, Levit. 19. The guilty person, unclean person, Numb. 5.6. A clean
person, Numb. 19.18. Thirty two thousand persons in all, of Women, etc. Numb.
31.35. Whosoever kills any person, verse. 19. Numb. 35.11, 15, 30. Josh. 20.
3, 9. Abimelech, the son of Jerubbaal, hired vain light persons, and slew his
brethren the sons of Jerubbaal, being threescore and ten persons, Judge. 9.
[Note here that persons dyed, or were slain. But can it be said of the Immortal
God, whom they distinguish into three several Persons, that he ever dies? And
though Christ, as concerning the Flesh, or Person, was put to Death, so was not
his Divine Life or God-head] And again, Not a goodlier person than Saul, 1 Samuel
9.2. David a comely person, 1 Samuel 16.18. When wicked men have slain a
righteous person, 2 Samuel 4.11. They shall come at no dead person, Ezekiel. 44.25.
Or will he accept thy person, Mal. 1.8. (These places before cited, with many
more, are according to the English) God accepts not the person of Princes,
Job 34.19. which in the Hebrew is (...) Phene Sarim, i. e. facies Principum,
the faces of Princes. And the same word (...) Phene, is (in Genesis 1.2.) for the
face of the deep. See likewise, Genesis 4.14. Job 38.30. with many more places in
the Old Testament; so that the same word which is translated person, having
also relation to the outward face of men and things; how can it be either
proper, seasonable, or good Doctrine to Preach the Invisible, Incomprehensible
God, under these terms of three distinct or separate Persons? And whether it
does not render God, or represent the Deity, to be like visible men, or finite
creatures, that are comprehended in time, yea or nay? And has not this kind of
representing the Godhead, produce those vain Conceptions and Imaginations in
the minds of the Ignorant, from whence they have formed the Images and Pictures
of God, and Christ, and Holy Ghost, made by men of corrupt minds in the night
of Apostasy, and Popery, to the great reproach and abuse of the Name of God,
and Profession of Christianity in the World?

See also more Scriptures touching Persons, to the same purpose, as before:
Judge. 20.39. 1 Samuel 9.22. and 22.18, 22. 2 King. 10.6, 7. 2 Chronicles. 19.7. Psalm.
26.4. Psalm. 82.2. Prove. 12.11. Prove. 24.23. Jer. 52.29, 30. Lam. 4.16. Ezekiel.
17.17. Chron. 27.13. Joh. 4.11. Zeph. 3.4. Mal. 1.9.

And 2dly in the New Testament (so called) it appears, that the word Person or
Persons is mentioned with the same acceptance, as before in the Old: As for
instance, Thou regardest not the person of men, Matthew. 22.16. Mar. 12.14. Luke
20.21. In the Greek it is (...), i. e. faciem hominum, the face of men; In the
Hebrew it is (...) phene haadam. Does not this still relate to the outward or
visible appearance of man? See also, Matthew. 27.24. 1 Cor. 5.13. Gal. 2.6. Ephesians.
5.5. Heb. 12.16. 2 Pet. 2.5. Luke 15.7. Act. 10.34. and 17.17. Romans 2.11. Jude
16. 2 Cor. 1.11. Ephesians. 6.9. Col. 3.25. 1 Timothy 1.10. Jam. 2.1, 9. 1 Pet. 1.17. 2
Pet. 3.11. In all which it is evident, That the word persons is attributed to
men, etc.

And as to that of 2 Cor. 2.10. where some of our English Copies have it, To
whom I forgave it, for your sakes forgave I it, in the Person of Christ; The
words in the Greek (...) are translated in facie Christi, in the face of
Christ; And some of the Latins have it, in conspectu Christi, in the sight of
Christ. And that in Heb. 1.13. where speaking of the Son of God, In some of the
English we have it thus, -- Who being the Brightness of his Glory, and the
express Image of his Person: In the Greek it is (...), i. e. Et character
substantiae ejus, and the Character of his Substance: It is not (...), of his
Person. As also in Heb. 11.1. Faith is the substance of things hoped for. The
same word (...), is used for Substance, as before in Heb. 1.3. and not Person.
It would not be proper to say, Faith is the Person of things hoped for, but the
Substance. Also the same word is in 2 Cor. 9.4. (where we have it Constant, or
Confident) In Greek (...), in Latin Substantia; Substance, not Person. And so
the Son of God is the express Image or Character of his Substance; which cannot
be severed (as a distinct Person) from his Substance; he being also the
brightness of the glory of God; which expresses or shows the transcendent
Glory of his Divine Substance, beyond all visible Appearances, Faces, or
Persons; and is only seen and revealed in the Light and Life of God, and his
Son within, revealed only to such in whom the Image of God is renewed, whose
minds and eyes are so spiritual, as to look and see beyond all the fallen
Inventions and Imaginations of corrupt ignorant men, who are groaping in the
dark, and vainly imagining to know, comprehend, and declare the Immortal,
Invisible God, in such invented Names and Terms, as they have but merely by
Tradition from men without, which do most suite their dark thoughts, and carnal
conceptions, whereby they can never know God, nor perceive Divine or Spiritual
things; but thereby have greatly darkened both themselves, and others.

CHAP. I.
Of the Answer, wherein Thomas Vincent's railing and sinful Doctrines for Sin
and Imperfection, are Refuted, and his Contradictions discovered.

IN Tho. Vincent his Title Page, and Introduction, a storm of bitter railing,
aspersing, and slandering the Innocent People of God called Quakers, has
proceeded from him, as Blackmouths, most hideous Blasphemies, Socinian and
damnable Heretical opinious Doctrines, and the like; with several false
accusations and slanders cast upon G.F. I.N. and others, which has been long
since Answered and Refuted, both in verbal Testimonies and in Print; And the
envious ridged Spirit of several Presbyterians against us therein plainly
discovered. And let the impartial Reader judge, Whether suchlike railing
Language against us, as T. V. has vented, does become one pretending to be
Christ's Minister, or one that would have People believe he has built upon the
Rock, or has Christ Jesus for his Foundation; whereas they that learn of
Christ, learn meekness, lowliness, humility, and not railing, reviling, and
slandering, which proceeds from bitter envy in the heart, which where it is,
there is confusion, etc. as plainly appears in T. Vincent and his Brethren's
Work, which proceeds not from the Wisdom which is from above, which is pure and
peaceable, but from that which is earthly, sensual, and devilish. So let the
unbyassed judge, whether T. V. be a competent man to write about such high
Mysteries, about God and Christ, which are concerned in our Controversy, yea
or nay, when he has showed himself to be in a contrary Spirit to that of
Christ and his Ministers?

And whereas T. V. scornfully reflects upon the People called Quakers, touching
W. P. saying, He being counted among them one of their chief, (this is false)
because of some smattering of Learning which they conceit he has. This is also
both false and scornful, for we lay not such a stress upon smattering of
Learning, nor on natural Learning it self, as to make that the supereminent
virtue to make men chief amongst us, our esteem does depend upon that which is
of a higher nature than either men's Natural parts, Arts, or Learning, even upon
the Spirit and Power of God, which gives the right understanding, and is not
limited or tied to men's Traditional Learning and Knowledge, but gives
Understanding and Wisdom unto the simple, to see beyond all their corrupt
Knowledge and beggarly scraps of Learning and Inventions of men, wherein they
are puffed up. But so far as W. P. has a discovery both of the envious Spirit,
and Babylonish Confusion, and dark un-scriptural Doctrines of T.V. and others
of his ridged fraternity; I am confident he does not impute that discovery to
his Natural Learning nor Parts, but to the gift of God's Power and Spirit, and
desires to magnify that over all the other.

And as for T. V. his going to shelter himself with a pretense of those
Doctrines which Protestants generally believe to be essential; this will
neither cover his weakness and confusion, nor hide the envy of his heart, that
has vented its self in his Pamphlet against an innocent People; Neither do I
believe, That any of the unbyassed Protestants (that are accounted competent in
these matters) will either own many of T. V. his Principles, or his shallow way
of managing those that are owned amongst them. And as to his accusing us of
more grossly erring in the Fundamentals of Religion than the Papists
themselves. It may be justly charged upon himself, as in diverse things
hereafter will appear; and T. V. has more absurdly than the Papists, argued
for Three distinct separate Persons, subsistents or subsistences, or rather
subsistants, says T.D. in one single divine Essence; but more of this
hereafter.

One of T. V. his main Accusations against our Doctrine is, That two Quakers
asserted the Perfection of Saints in this Life, and that the proof was 1 John
3.9. Whosoever is born of God does not commit sin; To which T.V. answered, That
the words (...) signify, He does not make it his business to sin [whereas it
is only, He does not do, or commit sin. But he should have read a little
further (...), he cannot sin,] The meaning, says he, was, that such as are
born again did not make a trade of sin, did not go on in a course of sin, did
not commit sin with the full bent of the will as the wicked do, but that it
could not be understood of not committing sin at all, from chapter 1.8. If we say
we have no sin, etc. there he speaks of himself, and others, that were born
again, etc.

Reply. Let every impartial Reader judge, whether T. V. his meaning, contrary
to the plain words of the Apostle, Joh. 3.9. be any sufficient proof to evince
that our Doctrine of the Perfection of Saints in this Life, is either damnable
or heretical.

1. For, first; whereas John says, Whosoever is born of God does not commit
sin; for his seed remains in him, and he cannot sin, because he is born of
God. Now T. V. his Doctrine and meaning speaks as much, as that he that is
born of God does commit sin, (shall we believe John or him?) but not so as to
make a trade of sin, not go on in a course of sin, with the full bent of his
will, as the wicked does: How has he herein accused the Child of God, whom
John says cannot sin, because he is born of God; his being born of God (and so
being related to God in his Spirit, Nature, and Image) is made the reason that
he commits not sin; but if a man should say, He commits sin, but not to make it
his business, or to go on in a course of sin, with the full bent of his will as
do the wicked, because he is born of God; Does not this reflect upon that pure
Relation he has with the Father, and so upon the Nature of God for begetting
and bringing forth such an impure birth? And is not this to frustrate the end
of the Son of God, in being made manifest to destroy the works of the Devil;
whereas, he that abides in Christ sins not; see further, 1 John 3.5, 6, 7,
8, 9, 10 verses.

2. Whereas T. V. his contrary meaning to plain Scripture, accuses the Apostle
John, and others that were born again, with committing sin, from that chap. 1.
verse. 8. that does not prove it against John, and such as he has so accused
(whereby he has rendered John to be of the Devil, for he that commits sin is
so, 1 John 3.8.) no more then James his saying, With the same Tongue bless we
God, and curse we men, does prove himself to be one that so cursed, which he
said ought not to be; for John writes to diverse states and degrees of growth,
as to them that had sin to be cleansed from, that they might walk in the Light,
to know the Blood of Christ to cleanse them from all sin, verse. 7. As also he
said, If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins,
and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness, verse. 9. Surely John was come
further then a Confession of sin at that time; besides, having sin, may relate
either to a former state, or to its besetting the Creature in the temptations
when it is warred against, and in the Faith withstood in its motions, in order
to a Conquest, when the Creature does not commit sin, but withstands it, as
Paul said, Its not I that sins; so that having some sin, and committing sin,
are two things; for it does not appear that the beloved Disciple or Apostle
John was a committer of sin in that state when he wrote that Epistle; for he
says, verse. 10. If we say we have not sinned, we make him a liar, and his word
is not in us; which relates to a state that was past: If we say we have not
sinned, is not all one as to say, if we say we do not commit sin, etc. Yet he
says, chap. 2.1. My little Children, these things I write unto you, that ye
sin not: Now had John been of T. V's persuasion, that such a state of
Perfection, or not Sinning, is not here attainable, why should he exhort them
not to sin, and so plainly show the difference between him that is born of God,
and him that is of the Devil? See 1 John 3. throughout.

And then as to T. V. his supposed Consequence from our Doctrine of Perfection,
That whoever found any sin in them, were not born of God: which, I say, that
its neither our Assertion, nor the Consequence of our saying, That he that is
born of God does not commit sin, for having sin, when it is withstood and
warred against by that which is born of God, and committing sin, are two
things; yet we know that that which is born of God overcomes the World; and
this is the Victory, even our Faith, and the end of Christ's manifestation is
to destroy sin, that it may not have a being, so long as we live, in us.

And T.V. further adds, That if they should die with any sin remaining, they
would certainly go to Hell, and so none there, yea, none in the World would be
saved he says; Hereby he still takes it for granted, That there is no such
Perfection here as a freedom from all sin, but that all God's Children die with
sin remaining in them; I then ask, How long after death shall sin remain, and
when and where is the time and place of being fully cleansed after death, is it
in the Grave, or is it in some Purgatory? For if God's Children must be
cleansed after death, they must be cleansed somewhere, and then in the mean
time, betwixt death and this supposed time and place of cleansing and purging,
where lies the sin, and pollution, and the stain of it, is it in the Soul, or
in the Body? Surely not in the Body when dead, neither can the Soul go to God
with sin or pollution in it, for no unclean thing can enter into his Kingdom,
or dwell with him; so then the Question still remains, where the Soul is after
death, and where is the place of its purging and fully cleansing? If T. V. and
his Brethren are not Papists, let them answer, and clear themselves and
Principle, from the Popes Purgatory.

T. V. his reviling and calling us, Audacious Quakers, who have not the least
degree of true Grace, because of damnable Opinions. This his harsh language,
and railing, signifies little to us for any proof against us, or what we hold,
but only shows his own peevishness and implacable enmity, as one vexed and
fretted in his mind, and so not fit to intermeddle with things of so high
concernment, as he has presumptiously attempted to stir in, as about
Perfection, and the Deity, and Satisfaction of Christ, and Justification,
Righteousness, etc. nor yet to call and exhort others, whilst he himself had
need to be called and exhorted to repent of his hard and uncharitable speeches
and censours, and to come to meekness and moderation, which would better become
his Profession. And his confidence, that we have not the least degree of true
grace, is both a false and uncharitable confidence, and charge against us; as
also his flaunting and jearing W. P. as having but some smattering of Learning,
and being but little of a Scholar, never to have read nor understood Logic, or
to have forgot, or laid it aside. Herein has he manifested himself both
scornful and ridiculous, to make so much use of his own pretended Learning,
Arguments, Logic, Demonstration, etc. to such as he reckons has neither true
grace, nor Learning; it appears T.V. had a mind to show himself in a vain
flourish and boasting over such whom he has endeavored to render
contemptible, mean, and ignorant, as he has done us; all which does but the
more manifest the pride of his heart, vain-glorying etc.

And then he adds, I told them that all true Believers were perfect in a sense,
they were Evangellically perfect, but not legally, not absolutely perfect; they
had perfection of parts, but not of degrees.

I Answer, What confusion is here, and what contradiction to his former
Doctrine of Imperfection and Sin in this Life; for first an Evangelical
Perfection he grants, but not a Legal; as if either the Law, or the state under
it, were above the Gospel; or else that the state of the Gospel is not a state
of Perfection exceeding that under the Law, but rather inferior; both which
are false and absurd. For this Doctrine does not only charge Imperfection upon
the Creature under the Gospel, but upon the Gospel it self, whilst Evangelical
Perfection is deemed either Imperfection, or not a Freedom from sin or
transgression of the Law, whilst here; and then judge whether Imperfection and
Sin be Evangelical. Surely all, who have any true spiritual knowledge of the
Law, Gospel, and new Birth, may easily see beyond this man, and also see his
Ignorance and Contradiction to himself: for the state of the Gospel is so far
from being inferior to that under the Law that it exceeds; for God finding
fault with his People under the first Covenant, saw it needful to establish a
second, in which forgiveness of sin, destroying sin, and the Devil's works;
taking it away, and making an end of it, and remembering sin no more; (and so
Perfection) are to be known by the enjoyers and subjects of this Covenant; as
also the Gospel is not short of the Law, nor the Righteousness of it, for
Christ came not to destroy the Law, but to fulfill it; and the Righteousness of
Faith is so far from coming short of the Righteousness of the Law* that true
Believers do not make void the Law through Faith, but establish it; and the Law
of the Spirit of Life in Christ, makes free from the Law of Sin and Death. So
that the Righteousness and Obedience brought forth in the true and living
Faith, which stands in the Power of God, does answer the righteous Law of God
in the heart, and exceeds and surpasses all self-righteousness, and all men's
outward immitations of the Law in the letter of it; but this none knows but
those who comes to own the Light and Spirit of Faith inward, and the Law of it.
It is not known to such as these men, who count the Light within an Idol, and
reckon that it guides contrary to the Light of the Word and Spirit, as in their
pages 15. and 53.

But as to his Perfection of parts, but not of degrees, this is strange
Doctrine; for if it be a Perfection of parts, but not of degrees, what parts
are they, and wherein consists their Perfection not of degrees? but if he had
said there is a Perfection of kind but not in the full height or highest degree
of it, then he had said something, though to his own contradiction: But where
he adds, That in this sense the work of Grace, though the work of God, was not
perfect in regard of our selves, but by degrees was carried on unto further
Perfection. Now in contradiction to himself, he has confessed the Work of God by
degrees carried on unto further Perfection; which if so, here is both
Perfection in its degrees, which vary not the property or kind, as also the
work of Grace, in its carrying on unto further Perfection; so then there is a
time of perfecting or working the work of Grace in order to Perfection, and a
time wherein it comes to be wrought and perfected. And now the kind and nature
of that Perfection which we believe and plead for, is that which God requires,
and Christ works, who does the Father's Will therein in all that truly
believe, the which consists in Righteousness and true Holiness, not in any
imagined, conceited, or self-righteousness brought forth in man's will, which
is not real nor perfect either in man's will-worshipping, self-performing, or
applications, which are neither from living Motions of true Faith, nor Evidence
of the Spirit of God within, but from men's self-will imaginations and
traditions.

And whereas T. V. tells of some that were established in the ways of Truth,
intending by his Ministry; Herein again he has contradicted himself, for
Establishment in the ways of Truth, is a high state of Perfection; and such
admits not of his Preaching up sin, nor of moving from any of Truth's ways,
which his Doctrine for Sin and Imperfection, term of Life does not at all tend
too, but rather to keep People in thraldom and captivity, and in a wavering
tossed estate in the ways of sin, which are all contrary to the ways of
Truth, for the ways of Truth do not admit of a continuance in the ways of
Error, either in Principle, or Practice.

And whereas T. V. complains so sadly, That two of his Friends, Mother and
Daughter, that went off to the Quakers in his fortnights absence. It appears
that they were not Established by him, as also that he has led his Hearers to
depend more upon himself, than upon the Teachings of God, or his Light within,
which is the cause of many's wavering and uncertainty who have followed him, so
that if their Teacher or Shepherd T. V. remove into a corner, or if upon
Persecution he should flee, or hide himself for fear, as many of them have
done, then his flock (or at least many of them (would be liable to be
scattered; but who comes to wait upon God in his Light and Spirit, to know him
their Shepherd and Leader, their Teacher will not be removed into a corner, nor
their Shepherd flee from them.

And whereas T. V. further adds, in an angry reviling manner, against the
Mother and Daughter, That the Mother should so much indulge a perverse Will in
her, unbefitting a Parent, that it is like to prove the destruction of Mother
and Child, etc. His thus openly reviling of them in Print, may tend to set them
further against him then ever; and now they may see more of his Spirit than
before, and if they abide in the Light, to which their minds have been
directed, and by which their understandings have been opened since they came
amongst us, they will further feel, and see cause for ever to bless the Lord
for bringing them out from amongst such false Teachers and Ministers of Sin and
Imperfection, as T.V. and his Brethren have manifested themselves to be; as
also seeing what follows from his corrupt Heart and unclean Spirit, it may set
all sober minds, and modest Persons against him and his Doctrine more than
ever, as they take a view thereof, which most sordid reviling of his was the
chief cause and occasion of these Controversies between us.

T. V. I acknowledge I did say it was worse to go to the Quakers Meettings than
to a Bawdy House, because the defilement of the Soul with their damnable
Errors, was more deep and more hard to be washed off, than the defilement of
Whoredom or Adultry.

Answ. To which, I say, let all sober-minded Readers but mark the wickedness
and grosseness of this man's Doctrine, thus to set an esteem of Bawdy-houses
above our Meetings! What but Impudence and Wickedness could have vented such
Doctrine publicly! It is no marvel that he can so plead and contend for Sin
and Imperfection, whilst he deems it worse to go to our Meetings (where Sin,
Wickedness, and Uncleanness is openly Preached against) than to go to a
Bawdy House where it is committed; What abominable Doctrine is this! and Infamy,
and a ground of suspicion against himself has he given hereby, and how
contrary to the Spirit and Doctrine of the true Ministers this of his is, for
they were so far from such Doctrine, that they reckoned such things not meet to
be named amongst them, as becomes Saints, Ephesians. 5. And how corrupt and gross
is T. V's reason for his wicked and unsavory Doctrine before, in saying,
Because the defilement of the Soul is more deep and more hard to be washed off,
than the defilement of Whoredom or Adultry; As if they did not defile the Soul,
but the Body only; this is a Doctrine that may gratify Whoremongers and
Adulterers, and not only to reject the wholesome Warnings and Reproofs against
all such Wickedness, which both in their own Consciences, and in our Meetings,
is declared and Preached against; but also, it tends rather to encourage them
to go to Bawdy-houses, than to our Innocent and Godly Meetings, wherein the
Truth, Righteousness, and Power of God, which cleanses and frees from sin and
unrighteousness, is exalted, and born witness to.

T.V. having so manifestly discovered his Spirit, he had now better go and sit
down under the Common Prayer, and confess himself a miserable Sinner among the
rest, and not remain in a separation with his whewling and whineing Prayers,
feigning himself as one more Holy and Humble than they: What sober People could
have thought that such foulness should lie under these Presbyterians coverings,
as is mentioned before, and after!

And T. V. further adds, to explain his gross corrupt Doctrine, these words,
viz. I told her, if there stood a Cup of Poison in the Window, I would rather
drink it, than drink in their damnable Doctrines; because poisoning of the Body
is not so bad as poisoning and damning the Soul. By which the Reader may
further see how his prejudice and envy has blinded him thus to imply, as if
Persons might commit either Whordom or Murder upon their Bodies, and their
Souls not be defiled, or damned thereby; and then what actual wickedness may
not People commit, and their Souls not be damnified nor prejudiced by it from
this Doctrine; whereas the wicked slays his own Soul; lifts up his Soul to
vanity; the Peoples lusting after evil things, caused leanness to enter their
Souls; tribulation and anguish is to come upon every Soul of man that does
evil: And it is only the Power and Life of God which purifies the Soul,
sanctifies the Creature throughout, in Body, Soul, and Spirit, and so leads
into Righteousness, and thereby saves and brings the Soul to God, and gives it
Life, and indues it with the Image of the Heavenly.

But after this, T. V. has uttered such corrupt Language and Doctrine as
before, he is so bold as to justify himself in these words, viz. I am sure I
neither did, nor spoke any thing unbecoming a Minister of the Gospel. That I
refer all modest and sober Readers to judge of, Whether T. V. has spoken Truth
herein, yea or nay? and, whether or no it had not been more prudence for him to
have studied quietness, and quietly to have followed his Devotion with
thankfulness for the Liberty they are permitted to enjoy, then thus to have
showed himself in outrage with clamorous reproaches and reviling against us
(who mean him no harm) to the great disgrace both of himself and his Religion,
and them that adher to him therein.

And as for his accusing me with confused Discourse, and indirect Answers to
his Arguments, and with filling my Mouth and the Peoples Ears with a multitude
of words, wherein was so much ambiguity and obscurity, that the sentiments of
my mind were not easily to be perceived as he says. Wherein I have as much
cause to complain of not having direct Answers from him, as he seems to have
against me, whilst he was so puzzled and put to it with what I said, though I
answered them in plain Scripture Language; And wherein their Questions, or
pretended Arguments, were either indirect, or in terms, which accorded not with
Scripture Language, I did not judge my self engaged so far, to admit of the
stating their matters (as being infallible in the manner and terms of them) as
to be tied to Yea or Nay denial of Major or Minor, without further scruple.
Their Arguments appear hereafter.

And whereas T. V. pleads for using some words in explaining Scripture which
are not in the Scripture, saying, That the Quakers (in their Books) use many
words which are not in the Scripture.

I Answer, We neither contend with words or matters which are not contrary, or
do not tend to vail or darken the Truth's (or simplicity of the innocent
language) contained in Scripture; neither do we go about to impose one manner
and form of expression upon others, or limit them therein whilst they speak the
Truth, or what is in, or according to Scripture; We are not of Kin to the
narrow Spirit of the ridged Presbyters, that will count a man a blasphemous
Heretic, Socinian, Arian, and what not, if he cannot repeat his Creed of the
Deity, or Father, Word, and Spirit, in their invented School-terms, although he
really believes and confesses according to Scripture, unto the only true God,
the eternal Word and Spirit; or, the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, and that
they are One, and in Unity inseparable.

And whereas T. V. says, That W. P. puts forth the sting of the Serpent in
tearming his Prayers strangely affected Whines, what more opprobious terms,
says he, would the Damn-me Blades of the Times have used, etc.

Answ. To which I say, That he did not only use a strange affected way of
Whineing in his feigned Praying, but also therein most falsely accused us for
Blasphemers, in telling God, That we compared Him, and his Son, and Holy
Spirit, to three finite Creatures, which more justly, was charged upon himself
and his Brethren, from their distinction of Persons in the Deity. T. V's lie to
God was so apparent in this matter, that some that were by, said, The next time
he Prayed, he had need to ask God forgiveness for telling him that Lie; for our
comparison was to evince the natural consequence of their own distinction, and
the gross tendency of it, as further is mainfest; and not to represent the
infinite God like unto man, or finite Creatures, as they have done about their
Personalities; And his comparing W. P's words to such terms as those use he
calls The Dam-me Blades of the Times, he should rather have began at home, and
judged himself for his own wicked opprobious terms, in saying, It was worse to
go to the Quakers Meetings, than to a Bawdy House; what more gross terms could
the Damners and Sinkers have used! but evil words corrupt good manners.

And as for his Confidence that it is a falsehood that they did use such words
as impudent villain, and that there was striking among some of T.V's Hearers.
There are Persons of repute and credit, who can testify both against them; and
to my knowledge an honest sober Women did affirm, That one of his Hearers
thumpt her on the Breast when we were about that Dispute with them; besides the
malice, envy, and rudeness that appeared amongst them, in clamouring, railing,
and reviling us (like the Billings-gate folks) though without any just cause,
both then, and when we were afterward at their Meeting, to clear our selves
from T. V's and W. M. their malicious and slanderous accusation of Blasphemy;
yea, even in the time when I sat silent amongst them, some of their Hearers,
both Men and Women would be railing and clamouring against me, when I gave them
no seeming (much less real) occasion at all, I being silent. So that of all the
Assemblies I have been in, I never met with any that showed less Christianity,
Civility, or good Education.

And whereas T. V. is neither so honest, nor yet so ingenious, as to
acknowledge his apparent and palpable Contradictions in his Sermon, set down
and observed by W. P. but rather would outface us and the Readers, as though
they were no Contradictions. Let the Reader therefore take a short review of
them; as first, T.V. his Contradictions.
That a Person that is born of God overcomes the World, and yet the Victory in
this Life incomplete. Is not here an evident inconsistency and contradiction is
his Doctrine, and ignorance of the Child of God, and the Saints Victory, which
was their Faith, 1 John 5.4. For if he have always enemies or sins unsubdued
in this Life, how are they overcome and victory obtained? Or, is there a
Victory over Enemies, and they not overcome? What false glosses would he set
upon his Contradictions? And his instance of the Canaanites among the Children
of Israel, being like Thorns, doing them mischief. This was when they did not
as God commanded; drive them out before them, which is no proof in this case to
him that is born of God, for the wicked one cannot touch him, much less
mischief him.

And T. V. his saying, That such as are in Christ, and cast off the old Man,
and known a change altogether New, and yet worldly Lusts cannot be extirpated
out of God's People in this World; Do but mark his plain Contradiction again
here, and how does he clear himself by questions, May not, Have not, Worldly
Lusts a being, and some power to oppose in God's People, where they have lost
their rule? But how then are they in Christ, and have cast off the old man, and
known a change altogether new, what must the old worldly Lusts still remain
unextirpated, in this Life in Christ? Where then is the newness of Life
altogether, or the Grace of God in its teaching to deny those things, obeyed?
And how then are such as be in Christ new Creatures? Or, how have they that are
his, crucified the flesh with the Affections and Lusts? Which to accuse all
God's People of worldly Lusts all their life time, what an abuse is it to them?
Did not Paul see and attain a state beyond that wherein he had seen a Law in
his members warring and leading him captive, etc. Did not he see the Law of the
Spirit of Life in Christ, to make him free from the Law of Sin and Death, when
through Christ he became more than a conqueror? And could he be in all those
states he mentioned to the Romans then, at one and the same time (to wit)
carnal, sold under sin, led captive, having a will to do that which was good,
but knew not how; and also to be freed from the Law of Sin and Death, by the
Law of the Spirit of Life in Christ Jesus; one dead to sin that could not live
any longer therein, and more than a conqueror, etc. could these states be
consistent, or all his at one and the same time? viz. To be Carnal, Wretched, a
Captive, ignorant of his Duty, and yet a Delivered, Freed, Spiritual man, more
than a Conqueror, and an Apostle that then knew how to write that Epistle,
Instruct others, and Preach to them in the Fullness of the Gospel? Were not
these Latter his Seize at that time wherein he shows his deliverance from
the former Bondage, Servitude, and Thraldom under the power of Sin, and the Law
and Body of it, which is not to remain always, but to be ended, abollished,
and destroyed, by the Power and Operation of Jesus Christ in them that believe;
For if Christ be in you, the body is dead because of sin, but the Spirit is
Life because of Righteousness. And where the old man is crucified, with him, it
is to the destruction of the body of sin, that henceforth sin should not be
served, Romans 6.6. chap. 8.10. And Paul speaking to the Romans, after the manner
of men, because of the infirmity of their flesh, chapter 6.19. And his so
condescending to speak of several states that he had passed through, was not to
encourage any to plead or contend for sin term of life, as most injuriously his
Intention is perverted by these Ministers of Sin and Antichrist, whilst that he
also shows his Deliverance and Conquest; but rather that men should believe as
he had done, in order to their obtaining perfect Victory and Conquest by the
same Power and Spirit of Christ, in which true Believers confide and trust,
against all the powers of Darkness, Temptations, and evil Motions, knowing that
Christ's Power is stronger than the Devil's power. And it is for Christ's Power
and Work, that we contend both against the Devil, his Work, and Messengers, who
dispute and contend for sin term of life, which is their great injury both
against Christ, his Work, and People, and that which has greatly strengthened
the hands of evildoers.

And T.V. his telling, That Sin may tyrannize over Believers, and yet not have
Dominion, but be in Captivity, in Chains.

Who is so blind that cannot see his Contradiction herein, and his silly come
off, in instancing that a Slave in Chains may sometimes break loose and
Tyrannize; what then is this Captivity and these Chains under which the sin is
held, and how does it tyrannize, and yet not have dominion, what silly work is
this? But his saying, You must kill or be killed, either you must overcome the
world, or the world you: What must they kill but sin and worldly lusts? Surely
this is further than an incomplete Victory, and further than an Enemy breaking
loose if he be killed; for if he be slain, he has neither power to break
loose, lead captive, and much less to tyrannize over Believers. It is strange
how T.V. can so far shut his eyes, or endeavor to blind others, as to seek to
gloss over these notorious Contradictions, as if they were in unity; and then
lightly to say, Can you forbear smiling at the man, he calls these
Contradictions? How shallow and ridiculous has he rendered himself herein!

CHAP. II.
In Answer to W. Madox, together with several Contradictions between him, and
his Brother T. Vincent; and their Absurdities manifested and detected; which
shows also their ignorance of the True and Living God, etc.

W. Madox.
THese men having prostituted themselves to an Idol of their own brains, The
Light within; which is their Christ and Savior, count the Doctrine of the true
God a strange Doctrine.

Answ. The Light within which we do own, witness to, and obey, is the Light of
Christ, which witnesses against all sin, against all Idolatry and
unrighteousness, and leads us in the Doctrine of the true God, which we receive
in the Light, and not men's Traditions and corrupt Doctrines and Inventions,
whereby People have been kept in the dark, by such perverse and prejudiced
Spirits, as thus blasphemously deem the Light within, an Idol of our own
brains; whereas it is the Light and Life of the Eternal Word, which enlightens
every man that comes into the World; that we testify unto, against all the
dark opposers and gainsayers, whose ways are dark and crooked, as thine W. M.
is, who thus falsely and blasphemously have represented the Light within (like
those that put Light for Darkness, and Darkness for Light.) And now let the
Reader judge, Whether such dark envious Persons (as thou herein have showed
they self) are fit to be Judges in these things of Controversy, about such
high matters, touching the Three that bear Record in Heaven ( viz. The Father,
The Word, and The Spirit) when thou in thy earthly sensual wisdom never came
there, neither can thou till thou countest it loss unto thee, and come to
loose it, that the Babe's state that enters the Kingdom be known, in which the
Light and Life of the Son of God is manifest, which discovers the hidden things
of darkness, and reveals the Mysteries of God's Salvation to them that obey it,
but not to such as count it an Idol; and now what may we expect but darkness
from such an one as calls the Light within an Idol; and they that look into thy
following work against us, may see the gross darkness thereof, yea, darkness
that may be felt.

W. M. By their three Persons, you mean the three increated Persons of the ever
blessed Trinity, the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost.

Three increated Persons are thy own words and terms; but the Father, Word, and
Spirit, we really own, and bear witness to, both as mentioned in the Scripture,
and as knowing the absolute Testimony and Eternal Power thereof manifested,
where that which may be known of God is manifest (even within) both in
creating, begetting, and quickening us again to God out of death and darkness.
And these Three which are One, which bear Record in Heaven, to wit, The Father,
the Word, and the Spirit, as I could not own the title of Three distinct and
separate Persons to be put upon them, as thy Brother Erroniously did (being not
Scripture Language) so it was never my intent, nor Principle, to compare them
to three Apostles, or finite Creatures, as most falsely and injuriously thou
accusest me. But to endeavor to make the People understand both the grosseness
and falseness of Tho. Danson's and Tho. Vincent's Principles of three distinct
separate Persons in the Deity, you naming each Person God, which renders them
Three Gods (whilst but One God) by showing the Consequence of this your
Principle; After I had from Scripture showed how inseparable the Father and the
Son were, and the Oneness of the Father, Word, and the Spirit; but if I had
simply compared them to three Apostles, who were distinct and separate Persons,
then had I owned your own Terms and Principle, and then the Controversy had
fallen between us: But instead thereof, I am accused for opposing your Doctrine
of distinct separate Persons; and thus you confound your selves in wronging of
me; for were not the three Apostles, Paul, Peter, and John, three distinct
separate Persons (did I ever deny that they were) how like then to finite
Creatures does your own Doctrine render the Eternal God, his Word, and Spirit;
which to show, was my end in instancing three Apostles, for we never believed
the Eternal God to be like to corruptible man, since we knew any thing of his
Divine Power. But T. Danson in his Synopsis, page 12. plainly instanceth three
Apostles, Peter, James, and John; as also his instance of David and Solomon for
their Trinity, or three Persons in one nature; Was not this an instance of
finite Creatures, and such an indignity put upon God as I never intended: How
can such men but blush for charging that on others, which so evidently they are
guilty of themselves?

Madox. We call the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, Three Persons, or He Is,
according as they are held forth in the Scriptures.

Answ. Nay, had you stood to Scripture Language, there had not been any
Controversy between us therein; but it would not satisfy you, but you must
obtrude your Popish unscripture-like terms and distinctions, or rather worse,
in telling not only of distinct but separate Persons, which being plainly
refuted from Scripture, you may remember I several times called to T. D. and T.
V. to confess their Error, I showing how inseparable the Father and the Son
were, reflecting chiefly on the words separate Persons, which, how you come off
about, will appear hereafter. And as for their being Three He Is, thou W. M.
durst not keep to any Argument from thence; or to make that any Cause, or
Reason, why we must own them to be Three Persons, though here thou seem to
make the terms equivolent, viz. Three Persons, or He Is; so then it appears
that either will serve, if the Three that bear Record in Heaven be but owned
under the Name of Three He Is, it will serve instead of Three distinct Persons;
but then, are all He Is or Males, Persons; and all She Is or Females, no
Persons? What strange Logic is employed here? And where does the Scripture
mention three increated Persons thou tell of, are they three distinct
increated Persons? If so, then may thou not as well say they are three
distinct Infinites, three Eternals, and so three Gods. Where is now the
blasphemy, and blasphemer? And Christ's speaking of another Comforter, which
was the Spirit of Truth, Joh. 14.16. was not another Person distinct from him,
for that Spirit was then in him; neither does he use those words, for the same
Comforter, or Spirit, was in him, and was that divine Life that then spoke in
him, when he was personally present with them; He does not say, he would send
them another Person to Comfort them, but speaks more spiritually, for though
they had been Comforted in his outward Presence and Ministry, yet his spiritual
Presence was that other Comforter, for ever to abide with them; for in that
Joh. 14.17. Christ speaking of the Spirit of Truth, or that other Comforter,
says, he that dwells with you, shall be in you, verse. 18. I will not leave
you comfortless, I will come unto you; which clearly explains his former words,
which to say this Comforter was a Person distinct from Christ, is all one, or
as absurd as to say the Spirit or Life that was in him, was a distinct. Person
from him, or that he was a Person distinct from himself; for, I will not leave
you comfortless, I will come unto you; or were it not gross to say, That Christ
in his People, is a Person distinct from Christ, or the Eternal Word.

And as to thy telling of another Comforter, i. e. Another as to subsistence,
or manner of being: What manner of being, and wherein can it differ from
Christ's spiritul manner of being? Had he another manner of being distinct from
his own? Who cannot see the ignorance and confusion of thy blind distinction?
For it appears, that thy distinction of three distinct Persons, subsistences,
or manners of being, is attributed to the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, before
Christ's Bodily or Personal Appearance in the form of a Servant, thou telling
us ( they being of an infinite nature, are three persons) Is this a good
Argument for thy turn (whereas T.V. says, Christ, as man, was not fifty years
old, page 31.) whilst thou argues from John 14.16. for their being three
distinct persons, subsistences, or manners of being; For, were they three
distinct Comforters of an infinite nature? Or, three distinct separate persons
of an infinite nature? And was Christ's manner of being in the Flesh of an
infinite nature? Or was he therein a Fourth Person? Surely when Christ had
taken upon him the form of a Servant, and that he said, My Father is greater
than I; (now W.M. confesses, that the form of God was his divine nature, which
is above the form of a Servant) and he being in the likeness of sinful flesh,
made a little lower than the Angels in respect of his Sufferings, humbling
himself to the Death of the Cross. In this manner, and in these capacities he
was not declared to be from Eternity (but as he was equal with God in his
Glory, before the World was Christ's Divinity owned.
; neither can three coeternal, coequal distinct persons, be argued from thence;
for the Controversy runs higher, as before, they being of an infinite nature,
are three increated persons; he should rather have said, are one divine
substance, or being, which is of an infinite nature. But in plain Contradiction
these Presbyterians tells us, in their 45. page That in the abstract,
infiniteness is not aplicable to the subsistence; what then is become of their
three infinite increated persons, or subsistences? Are they now changed from
infinite to finite? What sad work is this! Where are the Blasphemers now? Are
they not herein found guilty of that, which most unjustly they have charged on
us, viz. Of that which is plainly derogatory to the Glory of the Infinite God,
by going to fasten the limitations of finite Creatures upon him? For, if there
be a subsistence, or personallity, or manner of being (as he defines
subsistence) in the Godhead, which is not infinite; then something finite is
in God which is no less than blasphemy to affirm. And if there be three such
distinct subsistences in the relative Property of the Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost, as W. M. says, page 19. to which infiniteness is not aplicable: Then
have they denied the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost to be Infinite; and by this
the Reader may see what their unscriptural distinctions of Persons and
Subsistences in the Deity amount to, and how most derogatory to the Glory of
the Infinite God they are. But the remarkableness of their gross Contradictions
is so obvious, that he that runs may read it; for one while the Father, Son and
Holy Ghost, being of an infinite nature, are three distinct persons three
increated persons; which renders them three distinct Infinite and so* Three
Gods. Another while infiniteness is not aplicable to them as such, or as
subsistences, which renders them under the limitations of finite Creatures. Do
you think that the wiser sort, either among Papists, or Protestants, or Church
of England, own these men's management of this matter; or will their Work stand
them in any stead, or be to the advancement of the Christian Faith in other
Nations? If these men should go into Turkey, and also among the Indians, and
pretend to Preach the everlasting God, or the Father, the Word, and Spirit,
under such Names, Terms, and Distinctions, as being three distinct and separate
persons, or subsistences, to which infiniteness is not aplicable; what would be
the effect and consequence of such Preachings do you think? Would it not bring
a reproach upon the Name and Profession of Christianity, and render the
Christians as believing and expecting Salvation from finite Persons, or
Creatures? Or else, if they should Preach them to be three distinct or separate
Persons, as being of an infinite nature, might not they reasonably conclude
that they were Preaching three Gods? Would not this kind of Preaching more
stumble the Jews and Turks from believing in Christ, than ever; and the more
strengthen the Heathen in their Idolatrous Imaginations (especially whilst they
oppose the Light within as an Idol) for whilst a Doctrine is Preached implying
three Gods, may they not suppose many more? As also, how have many ignorant
People, in the time of Darkness, been begotten into vain Imaginations touching
the Godhead, by such Doctrine aforesaid (contrary to Scripture Language) as to
think God to be like unto a Man, or Person; whereas he is a Spirit, he is
Invisible, even that Eternal Word, or Spirit, which made all things, and Christ
is the Image of the Invisible God, not divided nor separate from him whose
Image he is The Unity of the Deity and Divinity of Christ, Asserted.
. And though in the World there are Gods many, and Lords many, yet to us there
is but One God, the Father, of whom are all things, and we in him, and One Lord
Jesus Christ, by whom are all things, and we by him, 1 Cor. 8.6. So that it was
never any Design, or Plot of ours, to endeavor to prejudice the minds of any
against the Deity of Christ, and the Holy Ghost, as falsely and blasphemously
we are accused by this our prejudiced Opposer.

W. M. What you mean by separate, I know not; if you mean so separate as to
destroy the unity and simplicity of the divine Essence, I own no such
separation; if you take it to be all one with distinct, then it was no begging
the Question. And in their 39. page it is said, viz. The word Separate Person I
disown any further then we may conceive it to signify no more then dictinct.

Answ. It appears then, that T. D. and their using the word separate persons,
was to explain their meaning of distinct persons, for it was used after
distinct, viz. distinct and separate persons; which word separate persons, they
know I chiefly reflected upon at the Dispute, I proving the contrary from
Scripture, viz. both the Oneness and Inseparability of the Father, Word, and
Spirit; but seeing they own no such separation as to destroy the Unity of the
Divine Essence, why did they make use of the word Separate at all in the case,
telling us, the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, are three distinct and separate
persons, which they confess are of one divine Essence. Now they disown separate
any otherwise then it signifies distinct; but they should not have owned it at
all in this case. Is it not sad Doctrine that supposes any Separation,
Finiteness, or Limitation, in this Divine Being? But if the separation relate
to the Personallity, or their distinctions of persons, and not to the Essence,
then does not this tend to divide God, or to separate Father, Son, and Spirit,
who are in each other, and how then are they three distinct, coeternal,
coessential, coequal Persons? Or how are they three distinct increated persons
of an infinite nature, as before? but another while not infinite in the
Personality; what wonderful confusion and gross contradictions are here! and
what strange boldness is it for men, so dark in their understandings,
discomposed in their minds, confused and incongruent in their Principles, thus
ignorantly to attempt to define or demonstrate the infinite Power, or Godhead,
which is out of their sight, and beyond their earthly capacities, who are so
ignorant of God who is Light; they count the Light within an Idol of our own
brains, as W. M. has blasphemously done; whereas it is the Light by which God
has shined in our hearts, to give us the knowledge of his Glory, in the face
of Christ, 2 Cor. 4.

W.M. Read also Job 35.10. God thy Makers. Heb. consult Mr. Carril on the
place. Eccles. 12.1. Remember thy Creators, etc. Isa. 54.5. Thy Makers is thy
Husband; in all which Texts, the Trinity of Persons is denoted by words of the
plural number.

Answ. Upon which, I query, is the distinction of three Persons derived from
three Makers, or three Creators? Or dare they say, That the Father, Word, and
Spirit, are three distinct, severed, or separate Creators, and does not this
bespeak three Gods? And what sense is it to say, thy Makers [is] thy Husband?
from Isa. 54.5. where it is said, Thy Maker is thine Husband, the Lord of Hosts
is his Name; Is not this truly rendered? See Pagnine's Versions, (...) Osiik;
i. e. factor tnus. It Is neither sunt (nor est) factores tui: And Eccles. 12.1.
it is (...) Borecha Creatoris tui, in singular; it is not Creatorum tuorum. And
Job 35.10. it is Osai, factor meus; not factores mei. But whilst one God and one
Lord is confessed, how is it consistent that a plurality of severed Persons be
in him as Makers, Creators, etc. What ground have we to believe either Carryl
or Madox herein, more than Pagn. and our English Translation, with many others.

And notwithstanding this great stir they have made with their distinctions of
separate persons, incommunicable properties, etc. yet W. M. has confessed, That
the Names, Properties, or Attributes, Works and Worship of God, are frequently
in Scripture given to each of these Three Persons, so that they are one and the
same perfect and infinite Essence, one God by Nature, etc. (but if he should
distinguish personal Attributes from Attributes of God, I ask what they are if
not of God) which if so, how is infiniteness not applicable to them, nor
ascribed to them? And how have you gone with your vain unscriptural
distinctions to darken Counsel, to darken Scripture, to darken the minds of
People by words without knowledge, thereby going to demonstrate that to others,
which you cannot clear to your selves by demonstration; As T. V. in his 26 page
says of the Trinity, touching which he would have us Assent unto your terms
and traditional distinctions upon Divine Authority, which he cannot demonstrate
by reason. But how then shall we receive your bare Assertions upon Divine
Authority, when we have neither Scripture, nor Reason, nor yet any immediate
Revelation from you for them, must we pinn our Faith upon your sleeves? or will
you supply the places of so many Popes, by Imposing an implicit Faith in those
matters which you cannot demonstrate, nor clear to your selves: which then, how
can you clear them to others? Which if this be the course you take to convince
gainsayers of your Doctrine, you might have spared a great deal of labor in
going about so confusedly to demonstrate your case to us, and only have laid
down your Doctrine of three distinct separate Persons in the Deity, to which
infiniteness is not ascribed as you have said in page 45. And so you might as
well have said, That we T.V. W.M. and T.D. do affirm it, and therefore you must
believe it, or otherwise you are blasphemous Heretics, and so damned. But we
must have better ground for our Faith, and a better Authority than
Affirmations, Revilings, and Threatenings of men, that are untaught themselves
in those things which they presume to teach others.

W. M. I called them three He Is, to try A poor Trial.
if you would own the Deity of Christ, and the Holy Ghost, under any title. As
the subject of this Trial is very mean and weak (to wit) the calling them three
He Is to prove the Deity; so his trying of us hereby, was altogether
groundless, since that we never disowned the Deity of Christ, or Holy Ghost, as
falsely and injuriously is insinuated against us. And since that three He Is
will now serve instead of Persons, (he saying they are three Persons, or three
He Is) to prove the Deity of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost: Why have they made
such a pudder for their distinctions of Persons? But would it be a strong
Reason to induce Infidels to the belief of the Deity of each, because they are
three He Is as he says; for, are all He Is either God, (or yet Persons) or
Divine? But I need say little to the shallowness of this Work; Let the
ingenious Reader judge of it. But when he thinks he mends the matter, by
calling them three divine He Is, his intent is, that the Father is called He,
the Son is He, the Spirit He; which neither proves them three separate, nor
incommunicable Persons, distinct subsistences, or bottoms; whilst both the
Father's a Spirit, the Lord is that Spirit, Christ a quickening Spirit; all
inseparable.

W. M. You by refusing to call them Three Divine He Is, have made it manifest,
that your Quarrel is not with the word Person, as some then apprehended; but
with the Doctrine or Fundamental Truth, expressed by the three Persons, viz.
the Modal Distinction, and Essential Union; or Oneness of the Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost.

Answ. It Is manifest, that some of the Hearers that were present at our
Debating this matter, had a better apprehension and understanding of us than
you prejudiced Teachers and Opposers had: for some of them apprehended that we
opposed your unscriptural terms and words put upon the Deity, and not that we
opposed either the Divinity or Union of Father, Son, or Holy Ghost; neither did
we in the least go to quarrel with any Fundamental Truth, as most grossly and
slanderously we are accused and misrepresented by thee W.M. who have showed thy
self (so far from either Truth, Moderation, or Reasonableness in this matter)
as one swallowed up with Envy and Prejudice: And thy taking for granted, that
thy Model distinction and terms, are Fundamental Truth, and joining them with
the Oneness of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, is but a begging the Question,
and presumption in thee, especially whilst by your vain Philosophy some of you
have either rendered them as Three Gods, or denied them to be Infinite, as in
page 45. Yea, and it was evident to many, The Father, the Word, and the Spirit,
truly confessed by us, according to the Scriptures; but these Priests
mis-calling them, denied.
That we found fault with your mis-calling and mis-representing the Father, the
Word, and Spirit; and never in the least opposed nor questioned their being
Three such as mentioned in Scripture, viz. The Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, but
there openly confessed to the Fundamental Truth of them in Scripture terms. And
when you fell into your needless Questions, and Philosophic terms of
incommunicabl properties, subsistences, etc. I (to bring the matter to be more
obvious to the People, to shorten and mittigate the Controversy, and to abate
your heat) did tell you, That if you meant by incommunity of properties, the
Fathers begetting the Son, and the Spirits being sent; state your Question so,
in plain English, Whether the Son was begotten, and the Spirit sent of the
Father, and it would quickly end the Controversy. But nothing would serve you,
but an Answer to your vain babbling and School-terms, with such a limitation as
Aye or No; as if the Scripture terms and expressions were in this to be waved
and slighted as insufficient, and your confusion, vain ^hilosophy, and deceit,
must be set up above the Scriptures of Truth, though you profess them to be
your Rule, at other times But here in plain Contradiction, you have gone about
to obscure Divine Mysteries under your Traditional terms of Heathenish
Metaphysics, and laid such a stress upon them, as if all were to be deemed
Blasphemers and Heretics, and so to be damned, that cannot confess, own, and
be tied up to your terms, nice and confused distinctions, which you
presumptuously put upon the Father, Word, and Spirit.

And as for W. M. his accusing us with rejecting the Son, and so the Father. It
is a gross slander, as many more of his accusations are; and never was it in
our Intention nor Doctrine so to do, whilst the Oneness of Father, Son, and
Spirit, we really confess to, but disown your blind distinctions, which deny
them Infiniteness.

And as for W. M. his so much talk of three He Is, each of which (he says) is
by nature God: We do not read in Scripture, that God is called three He Is, or
three distinct He Is; and therefore three distinct separate Persons (indeed
Children in the Accidence call He the third Person singular) But that both the
Father and Son speaking of themselves, use the word He, as I am He; and he
that is with you, shall be in you; Christ speaking of his own manifestation
(which was that other Comforter) I will not leave you comfortless, I will come
unto you. But each of these three He Is he tells of, he has told us is by
nature God; so then they are One, as God, the Word, and Spirit, are.

And as to his charge of Ignorance of Philosophy about Subsistence, which he
says, is not a form of a He, but the manner of his being.

His Charge of Ignorance, of his kind of Philosophy, and such nice distinctions
(as this between manner and form) we can easily bear, and pass by, and leave
them to feed upon it, who will choose such chaff for their food, knowing that
the knowledge of God and Jesus Christ, consists not in such trifles.

W.M. The form of God the Father is his Divine Nature, but his Subsistence is
his manner of being in the relative Property of the Father; and so he speaks of
the Form and Subsistence of the Son and Holy Ghost (as his terms of them are.)
Now touching these distinct Subsistences, or manners of being, wherein stands
their Model, distinction of Three distinct Personalities, to which they say, in
page 45. See our Opposers blasphemous Distinctions, and Contradictions.
That infiniteness is not applicable, and that there be three distinct
Personallities, unto which infiniteness is not ascribed: Here they have given
People to understand what their meaning is about their three distinct
Subsistences, or Personallities, that they are not Infinite. What then! Is the
Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, Finite? What gross darkness is this? Let the
impartial Reader judge, whether we have not sufficient ground and cause to
oppose them and their vain Philosophy in this so high a matter, and whether
herein their Doctrine does not blasphemously oppose the Divinity of Father,
Son, and Spirit; and they go about to eclipse (and detract from) the Glory of
the infinite Godhead, whilst at other times, in contradiction, they confess
each to be God, and tell of the Eternal Son of God, and say, That in the
concret, every subsistent is infinite, but not the subsistence or personallity
in the abstract. What darkness is here? Is God divided, or Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost, separate or abstract from their Essences? and where then is this
finite personallity so much contended for? Is it in God, yea or nay; or
relating to his Divine Being, or Substance? But if these distinct
personallities or subsistances, which they say are not infinite, be the
relative Properties of the Father, Son, and Spirit, then I ask, Has not this
Doctrine denied both Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, to be infinite? Let the
unbyassed Readers judge. And yet in Confutation of themselves again, there is
God the Father the first Person, God the Son, a Person distinct from him; God
the Holy Ghost, a Person proceeding from both. How to make sense of these three
distinctions, comparing them together, or how to make them hang together
without rendering them Three Gods, and not only so, but such as are not
Infinite, does not yet appear to me. And whether my comparison of not
understanding Paul, Peter, and John, could be three Persons (each of them an
Apostle) and yet all but one Apostle, was not suitable to detect these men's
unscriptural Doctrines and Distinctions, and to show the absurdity of the
consequences thereof, which whilst this railing angry man, W. Madox, does so
often take it as a comparing the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, to three
Apostles; herein he has grossly wronged and abused me, and his own
understanding. And his Charge of Blasphemy against me (for that he intimates
that I should say) That God is but equal with man. I return back upon him as a
most malicious horrid slander, and an apparent Lie against me. It was never my
intent nor saying; for if I had said, That God is but equal with man, or
compared the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost to three Apostles, then had I and
these ridgid Presbyterians accorded nearer than we did, for then had I owned
their Dostrine and terms of three distinct and separate persons in the
Godhead, which are not infinite; which I can never own, nor believe, nor
depend upon any God, or thing, which is finite, for Salvation. Besides, I never
denied finite man, nor three distinct Apostles (as Paul, Peter, and John) to be
distinct and separate Persons; so if I had really compared the Deity to such,
we had not differed about the distinction of separate Persons, or finite
subsistances in the Godhead, which is no less than Blasphemy. But then, how
poorly, maliciously, and falsely this W. M. comes off in so positively deeming
their Doctrine and terms in these matters, to be Scripture Truth; and charging
us with designing to blast and overthrow the Deity of Christ, and the Holy
Ghost; upon which, W. M's Railing.
Blasphemers, and blasphemy, and damnable speeches, are hideously cast upon us,
but most unjustly, and falsely; for no such design ever had we, as either to
blast or overthrow the Deity of Christ, or Holy Spirit, we having openly
professed and declared the contrary, both in words and writings. As also his
accusing us with boldly spitting in the face of God, is a gross and malicious
slander, and a presumptuous taking for granted, that our opposing their corrupt
unscriptural distinctions, and vain babbling, was a spitting in the face of God;
as if we must believe all what these men say, in this matter, to be as true as
God is, and his Glory to be so deeply concerned in their vain Philosophy: Judge
whether they 'herein are competent Disputants, yea or nay? and whether these
our opposers, or we, have compared God, or the Father, Son, and Spirit, to men;
let the Reader judge by what follows.

In their Answer to that Argument of W. P's, viz. The Divine Persons are either
finite, or infinite; if finite, then something finite is in God; if infinite,
then there would be three distinct infinites, and consequently three distinct
Gods: thus far W. P. Touching which, after they have denied infiniteness to be
applicable or ascribed to them (as to their subsistences or personallities, as
they call them, they bring a comparison of the subsistence of a man, page 46.
saying, It would be improper to ascribe the property that belong to him, unto
his subsistence, to say that his subsistence in the abstract is either a
learned or unlearned subsistence, a great one or a small one, a white one or a
black one Presbyters vain and profane babbling, confusion and blaspphemous work.
. What vain babbling, and a blind instance is here) And so they say, It is
improper to say, that either of the Persons, in regard of the personallity or
subsistence, are finitie, or infinite; but in regard of their Essence in the
concrete, are infinite.

Now the Reader at length may see what is become of their distinctions of three
distinct subsistences, or persons in the Godhead, or Divine Essence, wherein
they having here undertaken to demonstrate that which Reason cannot demonstrate
to them, nor they clear to themselves by demonstration, as in page 26. they
have run themselves as into a Wood and Labyrinth, as persons bewildered and
confounded; so as now the subsistences or distinct persons in the Deity, they
so much contend for, are such as are neither learned nor unlearned, neither
great nor small, neither finite nor infinite; what are they then? what Gods are
they that these men would have us believe in? before they were not infinite,
now neither finite nor infinite. Contradictions.
What gross Confusion and Contradiction is here; for if not infinite, then
finite; but the God whom we serve and believe in is infinite, the only Wise
God, and nothing relating to him, or his, being finite. Howbeit since these our
Opposers are contending for that which they cannot by Reason demonstrate, nor
clear to themselves, page 26. It is very unreasonable in them to Impose it upon
others to believe, without either reason or demonstration, or to pronounce them
Blasphemers who cannot own their Doctrine and distinctions therein, to be
according to the Scriptures, whilst they cannot clear them (by Reason) to
themselves, but both a mis-calling, and grossly mis-representing of Father,
Son, and Holy Spirit, as one while with being not infinite, another while
neither finite nor infinite; instancing in the case the subsistence of a man,
which they say is neither learned nor an unlearned one The Pit they have dug
for others, they are fallen into themselves.
. They have accused W.P. with Blasphemy, who never denied the infiniteness of
either Father, Word, or Spirit; but what greater Blasphemy can there be than
their own? And now let the indifferent Reader judge what effect this kind of
their vain babbling would have in the minds of an Auditory, if thus, God should
be Preached in their blind confused terms; and if one of them should exhort
People to believe in a Trinity of separate persons or subsistences, which are
infinite in the concrete, but not infinite in the personallity, or subsistence
in the abstract: Another while they are neither finite nor infinite; and what
they are they cannot tell; for, by reason they cannot clear this their Mystery
to themselves; Another while they are three He Is that People must believe in,
and therefore three persons or subsistances with incommunicable properties, by
all which they go to demonstrate the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, who are
infinite in the Essence, but not in their Personallities: They say another
while, neither finite nor infinite as they say, what effect would this kind of
Preaching have with People do you think! and where ever did the Apostles, and
true Ministers of God Preach in this manner, or allow of such Philosophy in
Preaching the Mysteries of God? Nay, did they not Preach in the simplicity of
the Gospel, and Exhort in simplicity, as of the Abilitiy that God gave? And did
not Paul absolutely forbid such Philosophy and vain deceit? And to avoid
opposition of Science, falsely so called, Coll. 2.8. 1 Timothy 6.20. And are there
not words sufficient in the Scriptures of Truth, to Preach God and Christ in,
according to the plainness and simplicity thereof; but men pretending to be his
Ministers, and Scripture their Rule, must thus run themselves into confusion
and darkness by Humane Inventions and Traditions both of words, terms, and
blind distinctions of man's fallen wisom, which neither knows God, nor can
rightly speak of him, but has obscured the Glory of his Appearance from very
many; but the Light is risen, and the Day dawned, which has not only
discovered, but will expel those thick Mists and Clouds of men's Inventions,
that the simple may come to be undeceived and unvailed, and so be delivered
from such as these confussed Babel builders that have made a prey upon them.

CHAP. III.
Something farther Observed, in Answer to Tho. Vincent.

NOw let us a little observe some Passages and Arguments in Tho. Vincent's
Work; For their distinctions about Trinity of Persons (as they call them)
distinguished one from another by incommunicable personal properties. But such
kind of distinctions and terms he has not learned from Scriptures, but from
humane Inventions; by which they have darkened the simplicity of Truth; as also
he has appeared as one in self-contradiction, when he says, That one should
be in another; the first should be in the second, and the second in the first,
and both in the third, and all one and the same individual Essence. Now if they
be in each other, they are not separate Persons as at the Dispute was affirmed;
and if one be in another, where are the personal incommucicable properties,
wherein they are not Infinite as they have told us? Is there finiteness in each
person, and yet each person God; what gross darkness and blasphemy is this? But
then to mend the matter, T. V. tells us, This is such a Mystery as does exceed
the weak and narrow understandings of most enlightened and clear sighted
Christians fully to comprehend; Some by gazing too long upon the Sun, become
blind. Surely then, if it be such a Mystery as exceeds the understanding of the
clear sighted, it must needs exceed the dark understanding of T. V. and his
Brethren; And seeing, as appears, he was conscious to himself of his own
dimness or darkness herein as by what follows; also, he should have let it
alone and not troubled his head with things beyond his reach, for he has
confounded and marred his cause, and not at all mended nor cleared it; but if
he has assayed to demonstrate this Mystery, as he calls it, as one more clear
sighted than the most enlightened, his Work does manifest the contrary; And that
God cannot represent himself otherwise than he is; It Is true: but where does he
thus represent himself as these men do, with such invented terms, vain
tautologies, and confusion? We do not read such in all the Scriptures of Truth:
howbeit T. V. takes the boldness to Assert his Doctrine herein to be of Divine
Authority, and to be the Truth of God revealed in his Word; and that if the
Scriptures have revealed that there are Three distinct Persons in one Divine
Essence, it is a certain Truth, etc. This is sooner said, than proved; if that
Word of God, and Scripture could be produced that does so reveal their
Doctrine, and say, there are three distinct Persons in one Divine Essence:
Produce us such a Scripture among all the Writings of the Holy men of God (in
all the Bible) and it shall end the Controversy; otherwise let T. V. be
ashamed of his Asserting it to be revealed in the Word of God. And of his
saying that in his Sylogism, page 13. There is not a word but what is to be
found in the Scripture; whereas neither the matter, manner, nor expressions of
his Arguments are to be found in Scripture.

As for Instance his Argument;

Page 13. The Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost, are either three
Substances, or three Manifestations, or three Operations, or three Persons, or
something else; but they are not three Substances, nor three Manifestations,
nor three Operations, nor any thing else; therefore they are three Persons.

To the first part; Indeed they must be something; to the Minor, if they be
neither three Substances, Manifestations, etc. nor any thing else, this renders
them nothing, and contradicts both the Major and Conclusion where they are
something else, which is three Persons (he says) so the tenor of his Argument
runs thus, they are something; but they are nothing (he meant nothing else but
three Persons) therefore they are three Persons. It would have held better
thus, but against himself, If the Father, the Word, and Spirit, be not three
distinct Substances, then not three distinct Persons; but they are not three
distinct Substances, Ergo. unless he can show us a distinct person without its
own substance: But his Brother T.D. says, A person is rationalis naturae
individua, substantia, an individual substance, of a rational nature; see how
flatly T.D. and T.V. have Contradicted one another herein; one affirming they
are three Persons, because not three Substances; the other, That a person is an
individual substance: But if T. V. by saying, There is not a word in his
Syllogism, but what is to be found in Scripture; intends that every word
particularly is to be found in Scripture; the word Substance, the word
Manifestation, Operation, Person, etc. abstractively, what proves this of his
matter? for the contrary may as well be asserted from bare words; I never met
with more silly kind of Arguing before: And if so be his other Argument from
the Property of the Father to beget, of the Son to be begotten, of the Holy
Ghost to proceed from them both, etc. be an Argument sufficient to prove Three
distinct Persons in the Godhead, with three incommunicable Properties, etc.
Then does it not follow as well, That every spiritual perfect Gift that
proceeds from God to man; must needs be a Person, and then so many Gifts, or
manifold Graces as proceed from him (or are begotten by him) are so many
Persons in him, which would be numerous indeed, and amount to a Plurallity of
Trinities; for the Spitit is given variously, and in diverse Manifestations, and
the graces and gift of God are many and manifold; but the shallowness of this
man's arguing, who is it cannot see? besides that Christ being the express Image
of the Fathers substance, and the Spirit the Life of both; it is neither
scriptural nor reasonable to say that the Image and Life of One and the same
thing, should be either Two distinct and separate Persons from it, or from
their own substance; so that still it follows, that if the Three bearing Record
in Heaven, be One divine substance, and not Three substances; then not Three
distinct or separate Persons: As also, God is called both the Word and Spirit.

Farther, Mark the manner of T. V. his expressing his Doctrine, viz. The
Trinity of Persons in the Unity of the Divine Essence, and the Unity of the
Divine Essenee in the Trinity of Persons, that three should be one, Here you
may see T.V. his invented un-scriptural riddle.
and that one should be three; that three should be distinguished but not
divided, that one should not be another; the first should not be the second,
nor the second the third, nor the second or third the first; and yet the first
second and third the same that the first should be in the second, and the
second in the first, and both first and second in the third. Thus far T.V. for
his separate persons.

Reader, Do but mark his Jigg here, and what a whirling he has made like one
distempered; but where is his Scripture for all this? see how he manages it,
page 26. he says, Reason it may be will leave us in our search after the Deity
in the Trinity, and the Trinity, etc. but where Reason fails, Faith must
supply its room: And then tells us of Mysteries which Reason cannot demonstrate
to us, and that in this Mystery of the Trinity we must Exercise our Faith,
though we cannot clear it to our selves by demonstration, etc. But sure whilst
Reason has so much failed T. V. and his Brethren in this matter, that thereby
they cannot clear it to themselves by demonstration, its very strange and
unreasonable they should make such a stir in the dark, as they have done, to
Impose it on the Faith of others; and what tends this to, but to force People
to Exercise an implicit Faith, whilst they have neither Scripture, Reason,
Demonstration, nor Revelation (for that is ceased they say) to ground a Faith
upon in this matter, as he argues, viz. If the Divine Essence, or God head, can
be but One, and the Father is God, the Son God, the Holy Ghost God, and they
three distinct Subsistents, or Persons, then they are three distinct
Subsistents or Persons, in the same single Divine Essence, but the Essence can
be but One, and the Father is God, the Son God, etc. and they are three
distinct Subsistents or Persons; therefore there are three distinct
Subsistents, or Persons.

Let the moderate Readers but mark this Argument, and whether it carries any
matter or weight of any proof or Argumentation along with it any more than an
Empty Assertion: (Tautologies) begging the Question in the sequel of the Major,
and so along still, taking the matter in Controversy for granted, which cannot
be without better proof, and more convincing Arguments than T.V. has patched
up and produced; But as for the beginning of his Argument, That the Divine
Essence, or Godhead, can be but One, and this in each of the Three, we never
denied; and T. V. has confessed it is not denied by us, page 28. But as for the
rest of his Argument, it runs in the substance of it thus; If they be three
distinct subsistents or persons, then there are three distinct subsistents or
persons; But they are three distinct subsistents, therefore, etc. Or, if they
be so, then they are so; but they are so, therefore they are so. I shall not
need to say much, to show what mean Logic this is, since it is from a Person
whom Reason has so far failed, that he can neither clear nor demonstrate that
to himself, which thus pitifully he has assayed to demonstrate to others: And
so let the Readers judge if he be not such an one as he tells of, that by
attempting to bring that Mystery to the Modal of his Reason, has lost the
sight, and sunk into gross Apprehensions.

And as for his fierce Railing against W. P. and calling him, wretched
Blasphemer, accusing him with denying that the Lord Jesus Christ is God, and
with denying the Divinity of Christ and Holy Ghost, and with thrusting the Lord
Jesus Christ off from the Throne of his Godhead, etc.

I have not yet perceived any strength or weight of Argument from either T.V.
or his Brethren, that has convicted W. P. as guilty herein; but rather the more
they strive with him, and thus grossly revile him, and rail against him, the
more their Folly, Confusion, and Weakness appears: And indeed if W. P. be
supposed to be so grossly Erroneous as he is represented, it must be more
Competent Antagonists than T. V. or such Railers as he, that must Convince him:
But his showing the absurdity of T.V. his Doctrines, and both unscriptural and
unreasonable Distinctions; and his denial thereof, is neither a denial of the
Son, nor Spirit, nor the Divinity of either; but the apparent falseness of
these railing and slanderous Accusations before, with the Consequences thereof
against W. P. in this thing, touching the Divinity of Christ, etc. appears in
his own Book, page 14 Of Christ being the only God, and the Divine Nature being
inseparable to each (whom they call) Person, have the whole Divine Nature, the
Son in the Father, and the Spirit in the Son, unless the Godhead be as
incommunicable to the Person (so called) as they are reported to be among
themselves, says W.P. Does not W.P. herein own the Divinity of Christ and Holy
Spirit, let the indifferent judge how T.V. has wronged him.

And then W. P. his Admonition, page 15. says, Apply thy mind unto the Light
and Grace which brings Salvation; that by obedience thereunto, those mists
Tradition has cast before thy eyes, may be expelled, and thou receive a certain
knowledge of that one God, whom to know is Life Eternal, not to be a divided,
but ONE pure, entire, and eternal Being; who in the fullness of time sent forth
his Son, as the true Light which enlightneth every man; that whosoever followed
him (the Light) might be translated from the dark Notions, and vain
Conversations of men, to this Holy Light, in which only sound Judgment and
eternal Life are obtainable; (he) testified the virtue of it, and has
communicated unto all such a proportion, as may enable them to follow his
Example. [thus far W.P.]

Now mark, whether herein he has not owned the Divinity of the Son, when thus
plainly he has confessed to his Light, both as to its Extent and Virtue. And
so as for T. V. his railing against us so bitterly, calling us, black-mouthed
Blasphemers; accusing W. P. with Heathenism, abominableness, foulness; falsely
comparing him to Arius etc. These are but mean Arguments to Convince W. P. and
does but show the malice and rancor of T. Vincent's Spirit; and what an
implacable persecuting Spirit appears among these Presbyterian Priests? What
cruel work would they make if they had power in their hands to persecute such
as cannot be tied up to their narrow Spirits and Principles, which is the same
old persecuting Spirit that cried for Fire and Faggot, after it put these
names, Blasphemer and Heretics, upon the Martyrs: And indeed, if any should be
so disingenious and drowned in their understandings by prejudice, as to think
that the Absurdities that W. P. draws from his Adversaries Principles, are his
own; they may be apt to charge him with Blasphemy, and what not, though
falsely: But farther, how evidently has W.P. in his 18, 19, 21 page owned and
confessed Christ the Son of God, and his Light, and Grace, both for Remission
of sins, Reconciliation, Salvation of men, Life Eternal; and as he is the only
begotten of the Father, the Gift and Expression of Eternal Love for Salvation;
Now can any thing have (or work) these Effects that is not Divine? Is not
Christ's Divinity, Virtue, Divine Light and Power, plainly confessed by W.P.
herein, as also to his being God, page 21. How grossly have these angry
Presbyterians wronged him in so hidiously charging the contrary upon him; and
are not they rather justly chargeable herein, with denying the Divinity of
Christ, in setting so slight by his Light in every man, as they have done, one
calling it an Idol; another Cautioning not to follow its guidance; But the
Divinity of Christ, and the Honor due to him, far be it from us to deny, as
these men have done; and the Scripture-instances in that case, we both know and
own, Joh. 3.13. Romans 9.5. Phil. 2.6. Heb. 1.8. Joh. 2.17. Heb. 1.3. Joh. 14.1.
Phil. 2.10. Col. 1.16, 17. Joh. 8.58. But we are not convinced, that men's
invented distinctions put upon Christ, does add any thing to his Honor, but
rather diminish from it.

And where in page 31. it is said, In regard of his humane Nature, the Jews
spoke true, Thou art not yet fifty years old; as Man, he was a Son of Abraham,
and born many generations after him, etc. Now I ask if he was not a Person as
Man, and so born? And if there were three Coeternal Persons before, whether
this does not make a fourth? For as he was not fifty years old, this had not
reference to his Divine Nature, as is confessed; But then, where in page 36.
The generation of the Son must be Eternal, the Son being so: (they say) How is
his Personallity, with reference to his being begotten, denied to be Infinite?
in page 45. What gross and apparent Contradictions are these?

And as to his instance, Matt. 3.16, 17. how that Jesus went up out of the
Water, and the Spirit descended like a Dove, and lo a Voice from Heaven, to
prove a distinction of all the Three Persons; the Son was clothed in Flesh,
the Spirit in the shape of a Dove, the Father was in the Voice, he says, etc.
Let the Reader but mark how far short of proving his Distinction, this instance
is: Surely he will not say, That the Son was clothed in Flesh from Eternity,
nor the Spirit in a bodily shape like a Dove from Eternity; for if their
Personallities did consist in these visible Appearances, how were they
Coeternal, Coessential, Coequal with God, etc? And surely Personallity does not
consist in the shape of a Dove, neither do we read of the Person of a Dove,
besides the Spirits appearing in a bodily shape like a Dove, does not prove
that the Spirit was a distinct or separate Person from Jesus, for he had the
Spirit in him, and was not separate from the Spirit, though that appearance
like a Dove, was for a Confirmation to John's belief of him, John 1.32, 33.

T.V. (Isa. 6.3.) Holy, holy, holy, is the Lord of Hosts: the three Holies,
signifies the three persons; the Lord of Hosts, the One God.

I must confess I never heard this Argument before; if each Holy signify a
Person, how then are they spoken to the One God? And if so many Holies as are
given in praise to him, do signify so many distinct Persons in him, then they
will amount to a great many Trinities; for it is said, Rev. 4.8. They rest not
day nor night, saying, Holy, holy, holy, Lord God Almighty, etc. Now if all the
Holies they give day and night to him, be so many Persons, then they will
amount to Persons ad infinitum; but the absurdity of this Argument who cannot
but see? As also his Argument from the distinct Names, is little better; for
God is denominated under many Names more than Three; And also his arguing from
John 14, 15, and 16. chap. from personal Acts, as he calls them, as sending the
Comforter, his speaking and guiding, etc. Where does the Scripture call them
Personal Acts? Were they not Spiritual Acts of the Divine Spirit and Power of
God? And was there any Act but what was brought forth in time? And was the
Father's begetting the Son a Personal Act? (however was it not an Act in time)
if so, how says T. V. That the Generation of the Son must be Eternal? What
distracted confused work is here!

And as to that Cavil in page 40. at the word ONE, as not being in the Hebrew,
in all those Scriptures, Isa. 40.25. chap. 48.17. Psalm. 71.22. where Holy One
is mentioned in the English, which to Cavil at, shows little prudence; whilst
Holy One, and the Lord being One, and the Only Wise God, is often mentioned
elsewhere; see Zac. 14.9. which W. P. quotes, is it not (...) Jehovah echad
ushemo echad: i. e. Dominus unus and nomen, Ejus unum, One Lord, and his Name
One. And see Deuteronomy. 6.4. how its (...) Jehovah echad One Lord; but where the
word Echad is not expressed, whether it be not understood? Besides, T. V.
himself, page 33. uses these words, The Lord of Hosts the One God: so that he
might have spared his Contradictory Cavil about it; And if their distinctions
be in regard of the Personallity and not of the Essence, then I ask, Are they
three Persons both distinct among themselves, and also distinct from the
Essence or Being of God? and so not infinite; or neither finite nor infinite,
as most Absurdly and Contradictorily is laid down in their 44, 45, 46, pages,
as before, has been mentioned.

And as to W. P. his Cloudy Brain Conceptions (as it is called) which is so
difficult to find out (as they say) and his Phrases so uncouth, and his
Reasonings so odly joynted together: Indeed, neither T. V. nor T. D. have
shown any such Brightness, nor strength of Argument as to expel or drive away
these cloudy Conceptions; if they be such, it must be another thing that must
unvail him, and overthrow what he has said, than their gross Confusion, and
many apparent Contradictions, which I am certain that W. P. is so far unvailed,
as to have a sight and discovery of, though this dark ridged Presbyterian
Spirit has sought by Persecution, false Reports, and Slanders, to vail and
obscure both him and others, in whom any degree, breakings forth, or glimerings
of true Light have appeared; where they could not do it by slandering, grossly
villifying, and traducing them, they would endeavor to bring Persecution, and
Cruelty, and outward Restraint upon them, to their Power.

And as for their taxing W.P. for instancing Irenaeus, Justin Martyr,
Tertullian, Origin, Theophil. and others, as appearing foreign to the matter
in Controversy, etc. they telling us, The Doctrine of the Trinity is plainly
enough to be gathered from several passages in Irenaeus lib. 1. chapter 2. Ecclesia
accipit fidem quae est in unum Deum Patrem Omnipotentem and in unum Christum
filium Dei incarnatum and in spiritum Sanctum qui per Prophetas praedicavit:
And then our Opposers ask, Do not these words hold forth a distinction of those
three persons? To which I say, However he gathers or imagines such a
distinction of their being three Persons, he does but beg the Question in
calling them three Persons, which their words no not prove, nor so call them;
but God the Father Omnipotent, Christ the Son of God, and the Holy Ghost (in
whom the Faith of the Church is) Neither do the latter words prove any thing
for this purpose, which mention the God of all things, making and governing all
things by his word and Spirit: If he had asserted no otherwise herein then
Irenaeus has done, there had not been this Controversy between us, and them.
And as for the rest of the Authors they mention, I do not find that they called
them three distinct separate persons (as T. D. did) in all these Passages
mentioned and quoted by them; And its known that W.P. his Controversy was
principally against them for unscriptural Doctrine of the Godhead subsisting
in three distinct and separate persons; which also their own Instance of
Theophil. lib. 1. Com. in Evang. does contradict, viz. Margarita pretiosa est
Sancta Trinitas quae dividi non potest nam in unitate consistit; the Holy
Trinity is a precious Jewel, which cannot be divided, because it consists in
Unity: To which I say then, the Glorious Three that bear Record in Heaven, are
not three separate Persons; howbeit we are not bound to believe the
determinations of Fathers and Councils any farther than they accord with the
pure Language of Scripture.

And whereas T.V. and his Brethren, supposing that they have detected the
weakness and absurdity of W. P; thereupon go to Caution People, Not to follow
the guidance of the Light, which W. P. (truly) says is communicated unto all,
and forsake the true Light of the Word and Spirit, which alone can guide men
into all truth. This is a groundless Caution, and false as it reflects upon the
Light; for suppose W.P. were in Weakness as they say, yet the Light is not the
cause thereof; however his Weakness (as they call it) has brought forth much
of their Folly; for the Light which is communicated unto all, which People
should follow the Guidance of, is the Light of Christ, which inlightens every
man coming into the World; and therefore to render weakness, absurdity,
falsehood, and folly, as the Products of it, is both gross Ignorance and
Blasphemy; for the Light never changes, however the Creature may; neither is
this Light contrary to the Word, Spirit, or Scripture.

And as for their so much Railing against the Socinians and Arians, and
maliciously comparing any of us with them, it is no reasonable way to Convince
either us or them, if we were as ill as they render us; for they have gone the
way to animate and encourage both Socinians, and others, against them, and
their absurdities, and ridged inveterate Spirits, and Railing against many that
are of better Spirits (as men at least) than themselves. As for the Socinians,
they have given ground to some to think the better of them, because they have
shown so much hatred and reviling against them; howbeit Socinians (if there be
any that own themselves by that Name) may answer to their Accusations, it is
not my work to maintain another Quarrel, nor yet to reflect upon their
Persons, nor either to accuse or excuse them, to gratify such incompetent
Judges as these our Revilers.

I am not going about to gratify Parties, or private Opinions (or man's
Wisdom) on any hand, but to vindicate the naked Truth; yet, it is true, I have
heard of some, beyond the Sea, that went under that Name Socinians, who were
accused with denying the Divinity of Christ; but I know of none here, that
either deny the Divinity of Christ, or Him to be of one Substance with the
Father; if our Opposers do know of any such, they may tell them of it, and not
accuse the Innocent with the Guilty, as they have done to us. However, it is
but a mean way of Arguing, to accuse or miscall any for owning any Truth that
any sort (if they do Err in some things) do hold; for by that way, I may as
well be reckoned a Papist, a Jew, or a Turk, Episcopal, or Presbyterian, or
what not? because some Truths are held by them all, in words: But we had not
our Principles either from Arius or Socinias, neither did we ever deny the
Divinity of Christ (or his being of the same Substance with the Father) as
Arius, Socinias, and others, are accused; so that therein we are very unjustly
compared and misrepresented, for which I can say, The Lord forgive these our
prejudiced Opposers. But it is no strange thing for us to be called by
Nicknames one after another, by these and such false Accusers and incompetent
Judges; for one while they were wont to Revile us for wanting Learning, being
Illiterate, Laymen, Preachers, etc. Another while they Railed against us, and
falsely accused us for Papists and Jesuits. Another while they accused us
falsely with being Free-Willers, Arminians, etc. because we plead for the Free
Grace of God to all men: And now we are falsely reckoned Socinians, and most
injuriously accused with denying the Divinity of Christ the Son of God, which
we are ever always clear of, still Confessing him according to the Scriptures,
both in his Sufferings, Dominion, and Glory, who is the same yesterday, to day,
and for ever.

CHAP. IV.
Touching the Love of God in Christ, the One Offering, and how his being a
Sacrifice for Sin is owned by us, according to the Scripture, and for what end
construed or applied by these our Opposers, and their corrupt Doctrines, and
Inferences to cover and maintain Sin and Imperfection term of Life, under the
notion of Satisfaction and Imputation, etc.

SOme Presbyterian Priests, and Professors of other sorts also, affirming, That
man having transgressed the Righteous Law of God, and so exposed to the Penalty
of Eternal Wrath; It Is altogether impossible for God to remit, forgive, or save
men without a plenary Satisfaction, both by full Payment and Punishment laid on
Christ the same that sin and sinners deserved, Yet [in Contradiction] they
other whiles state it as an Act of Law, and Contract between Creditor and
Surety, depending on Christ as a second Person; but [in Contradiction again]
it is as God-Man, (as their words are.)
which (they reckon) extends for sins past, present, and to come; So that
though People live in sin, all their days (as Priests plead) yet they sooth up
themselves in sin, under this opinion, that all is done for them at once. But
whether it be for all men, or but for some, T. Vincent has not discovered, nor
ingeniously opened the extent of their Belief and Principle in this matter, but
has catched and snatched here and there, and then gone to his wonted course of
grinning and snarling, by Reviling and Railing, having not Asserted, nor yet
minded the End and Intent of his Opposer's Reasons (from Scripture) and
Cautions in this matter, on the behalf of God's infinite Love, Mercy, and Grace
toward lost man, which is judged (and not without cause) these Priests
Doctrine does eclipse and lesson [which we do not concerning the Sacrifice of
Christ, as T.V. falsely thinks] as their laying an Impossibility on God in the
case; against which many Scriptures were urged, as Exodus 34.6, 7. 2 Chronicles.
30.9. Isa. 55.7. Isa. 31.31. Mica. 7.18. Matt. 6.12. Joh. 3.16. Act. 10.34.
Romans 8.31, 32 2 Cor. 5.18, 19. Ephesians. 1.7. 1 Pet. 5.10. 1 John 4.9. whereby, with
many others, is proved;

1. The Lord God to be Merciful, Gracious to forgive Sin and Iniquity, and to
pardon Transgression upon man, return and forsaking of his evil way, and that
he retains not his anger for ever.

2dly. That it was Gods free Love and Grace to the World, to give his only
begotten Son, that none should perish, but have everlasting Life, who believed
in him.

3dly. That it was God's Work to Reconcile the World unto himself, in Christ
Jesus.

4thly. That the Benefits and Effects of Free Grace, and Love in Christ Jesus,
as Pardon, Remission, Reconciliation, Redemption through his Blood, etc. are of
the nature and riches of this Grace, to all that truly receive it.

5thly. That this Free Grace of God, with its blessed Effects in the true
Receivers, are not of Debt, Purchase, or Merit on the Creatures part, but Free
according to the nature of Free Grace.

6thly. That the Love, Kindness, and Goodness of God is perfect and infinite in
him, and so in its self not be added to, or diminished from.

7thly. That the Goodness of God where it takes impression, or is received in
man in the free tenders of it in Christ Jesus, it is the principal inducement,
or cause of Repentance, and forsaking of Sin.

8thly. And the Tenders of Grace and Salvation in Christ, are free to all, so
that man's rejecting and slighting of it, and of God's Kindness therein, is the
cause of his being rejected of God. O man, thy destruction is of thy self, but
thy help is in me, says the Lord.

9thly. Seeing that many of their own Brethren have confessed God to be
infinite in his Power, and in all Perfections, and to his Divine Attributes (as
their term is) and that he is free in them, and so his Love, Goodness, and
Mercy, which attend his Judgment, being felt in the way thereof, by them that
wait therein upon him; Why should any Doctrine or Supposition be brought forth,
that does at least seem to diminish his Love and Good Will, by either
mis-representing it in its self, or render it partially in its extent, as only
designed (or but free) for a few, and that upon full payment, and also the same
full punishment and wrath that sinners deserved, by a Person distinct and
separate from himself as Jesus Christ has been misrepresented, He being One
with the Father, who said, Hitherto the Father works, and I work, and the Son
does nothing of himself, but what he sees the Father do, that he does.

10thly. Christ being the Brightness of the Glory of God, and the express Image
of his Divine Substance, as also truly called the Son of his Love; by him is
expressed, and clearly signified, God's Free Love, Goodness, and Mercy toward
Mankind, both in his Life, Ministry, and Sufferings, in the days of his Flesh.

11thly. It being the Love, Patience, Long-suffering of God, and Riches of his
Grace that leads to Repentance, Romans 2. all which were truly expressed,
signified, and bore Testimony unto, by Christ Jesus, both in his Ministry,
Suffering, and Death on the Cross, as also by his Resurrection, and most
Glorious Ascension. The Almighty Power of God, which is unto Salvation to the
true Believers, was showed forth, and born witness unto; and blessed are they
that receive the true sense thereof in its operation and effects.

12thly. I also know, and confess, That it was in God's Infinite and Free Love,
that Christ gave himself a Ransom for all, to be testified of in due time.

And that in the same Love he has given himself for us, an Offering, and a
Sacrifice to God, for a sweet smelling savor, Ephesians. 5. and therefore God is
to be followed, and Christ obeyed, by all that receive his Love.

But now to T. V. his Terms and Assertion; seeing he has not been plain, nor
given any ingenious nor satisfactory Answer; I ask and Query;

1st. WHere does the Scripture say, That it is impossible for God to pardon or
forgive without a plenary Satisfaction, as an act of Law, made to his offended
or vindictive Justice by another?

2dly. And if this Satisfaction depend upon a second Person, or God equal with
the Father, as ( T.V. says) Christ is proved to be, and not upon any finite
Creature, Is not this all one as to say, that God satisfied God; and then what
non-scence is it to lay it upon a second Person distinct from him, and yet
coequal with him? where does he prove these words in Scripture? Does not this,
like the former Doctrine, either render them two distinct Gods, differing
between themselves, the one abounding in Judgment, the other in Mercy; or else
God to differ from himself, and so to give Christ for his own Pacification, and
not Man's real Reformation; whilst the Notion of plenary satisfaction is made a
cover or pretense for Peoples continuing in, an imperfect, sinful, polluted
state, which the Priests Plead for the continuance of, in all, term of Life?
And does not this their Doctrine lead People to trample the Blood of the New
Covenant under foot, and this is to deny the one Offering?

3dly. And was that the end of Christ giving himself a Ransom, being an
Offering, and Dying for All, that men might live in sin all their time, and say
they are Pardoned and Redeemed, whilst they are still in Bondage?

4thly. Is God fully satisfied that any should live in sin, or is his infinite
Justice satisfied so, as not to lay hold on them in the sinful state?

5thly. If the Wrath of God be revealed from Heaven against all ungodliness and
unrighteousness of men, and every disobedience shall have a just Recompense of
Reward; How then is Divine Justice fully satisfied and answered for All in that
state, without their coming under the sense of it in themselves? For if so,
then nothing is to be done within them; and then how did the Believers know the
terrors of the Lord, the sentence of Death in themselves, the Law that
Ministers Wrath, the Ministration of Condemnation, which in his time was
Glorious, and the Righteousness of the Law fulfilled in them by Christ Jesus,
who came to condemn sin in the Flesh for that end, wherein still, we confess to
the one Offering, and the blessed effects thereof.

6thly. And if All must live in sin all their time, does not this tend to
settle People upon their Lees, and set them at ease in a false security in Sin
and Transgression, and so to deny the one Offering and Sacrifice that puts away
sin?

7thly. And if such a plenary Satisfaction (as it is called) be made for some
in that sinful state, why not for all? Do ye not here render God partial,
whereas Christ died for All, tasted Death for Every man, gave himself a Ransom
for All, which you Presbyterians (to wit, T. D. and others) have denied (and so
you make Sects) and therein have opposed Scriptures, and the Extent of God's
Love and Good Will to all men; but we Testify to it, and own Christ's Death
and Sufferings, and Effect of his Righteousness to be manifest within by the
Spirit, to every one that believes.

8thly. Why does T. V. so vilify a man for Confessing according to Scripiture,
to the infinite Love and Mercy of God toward Mankind, and his reasoning for it
from Scripture; seeing that he himself confesses the impossibility of any
finite Creature to make any plenary satisfaction to his offended Justice; And
many of his Brethren have confessed the Divine Attributes to be in God, and he
free in them, as infinite Love, Goodness, Mercy as well as Justice. As also he
may find in the Common Prayer Book, That the Graciousness and Mercifulness of
God, is confessed unto more then he has done.

And whereas T. V. accuses W.P. with seeming to insinuate, that he denis only
the impossibility of Gods pardoning sin without satisfaction, but that his
Arguments are against Satisfaction it self, he says: Whereas W. P's own
Testimony stands against him in this matter, in Page 32. which T. V. to his own
Contradiction is also made to confess, that W. P. confesses, That Christ
offered unto God a satisfactory Sacrifice, etc. yea, a most satisfactory
Sacrifice; but not to help God as being otherwise unable to save men.

However it is evident that W. P. has, according to Scriptures, confessed to
God's Power, Omnipotency, Infiniteness; and also, That Jesus Christ in Life,
Doctrine, and Death, fulfilled his Fathers Will, and offered up a most
satisfactory Sacrifice; so that he has been wrongfully accused concerning this
matter.

And whereas T. V. says, That God's Righteousness and Truth, obliegeth him to
take vengeance upon all that have transgressed his Law; and his will to punish
sin and sinners according to their desert, his Justice does engage him, etc.

Answ. How then is God free in his Attributes, as they confess? and his Good
Will showed by Christ unto men for their good, in order to Salvation; or has
God two contrary Wills, the one obliging him to take Vengeance, or execute
Judgment to the uttermost upon All; Where then is his absolute Power and
soveraignity so much professed?
and the other, to Exercise Patience, Forbearance, and show Mercy, and so not
to Will the Death of Sinners, but rather their Return that they may Live: Is
there any variableness or shadow of Change in God, or rather, is not the Love
and Good Will of God held forth in Christ to all men in the first place, and
that then when he Chasteneth, Corrects, and Reproves any for sin, it is not in
Vengeance or Fury, but in Love and Good Will; for his Vengeance is to fall upon
his Adversaries, that have rejected and turned against him, and the free
proffers of his Love in Christ Jesus, and who have Crucified Christ unto
themselves a-fresh, and trampled upon the Blood of the Covenant, and so
despised the one Offering which was offered up once for all, as a real Witness
of God's Good Will, Patience, Forbearance, Long-suffering toward all.

And now to T. V. his saying, That Sinners must have Divine help to enable them
to their duty, or in doing good; and when they have done their duty, their
works are but imperfect, and they unprofitable servants; and for it brings Luke
17.10. When you have done all the things commanded, say we are unprofitable
servants, our Righteousness is as filthy rags, Isa. 64.6.

Answ. If you, Presbyterians and Professors, were come to know a Divine help in
what you do, and to do all the things Commanded, you would give us a better
account of those Works and Performances brought forth by Divine help, than to
compare them to filthy Rags: Divine help would cloth you with better Garments
than filthy Rags: What sad Doctrine is this, to say the Good that is done by
Divine help, and that doing all things Commanded of God, are but as filthy
Rags? What darkness is this, not to distinguish between self-Righteousness,
which are but as filthy Rags, and the good that is done by Divine help, that
has a beauty and splendor of God's Righteousness with it: Is this the
construction you make of Christ's Satisfaction, or being a Sacrifice to God,
that you must be clothed upon, all your Life time, with your own filthy Rags
of self-Righteousness. And then to cover over all these your Babylonish Brats,
with a pretense of Christ's Satisfaction, paying your Debt for you, imputation
of his Righteousness, deceitfully and feignedly applied by you to your selves
in your filthy Rags, whilst you have no share in it, nor feel in you the
Effect of his sufferings, as if you were only to believe, and apply, and sin
all your time, you are far from the state of the unprofitable Servant that did
all that he was Commanded: You are daily breaking the Commands of God, and
Plead for it: much more farther from the state of those whom Christ called no
more Servants, but Friends.

T. V. That God never does, nor will, nor can pardon any sinner without
satisfaction made to his offended Justice for their sins.

Reply. But then in Contradiction to himself, he says, I shall not concern my
self to inquire what God could, or might do, if he pleased; Why then does he
say, he never will, nor can; and seem to lay such an Impossibility upon God in
the case, as if he could not freely Pardon; whereas he could do whatsoever he
pleased; and certainly, he could both please and satisfy himself.

And then I Query, How is this Satisfaction made by Christ?

T. V. It depends upon him as the second Person in the Trinity, page 54.

Query. Does it depend upon him as Man, or as God and Man?

T. V. It was necessary that the Person that should make Satisfaction should be
Man, because none but a Creature could suffer: But then he adds, It were
necessary he should be God, othewise the sufferings and satisfaction would have
been but finite.

Query. What then, were the Sufferings Infinite that the Wicked inflicted upon
the Body of Christ, seeing nothing but a Creature could suffer, he says, and
yet as a Creature could give no proportionable Satisfaction to Infinite
Justice: What Confusion is here? For as God, he could not Suffer nor Die, as is
confessed; but God did strengthen the Manhood to bear up under such opressure
of Wrath: But where does the Scripture say, That Christ the second Person in
the Trinity, did suffer under infinite Wrath, either as God or Man, or both? He
should have produced his plain Scripture, for Scripture we own, and Christ's
Satisfaction as rightly stated, and what a most acceptable Sacrifice he was to
the Father for All; yea, his Suffering as Man, or in the Flesh, without the
Gates at Jerusalem, was all acceptible to God; his Soul was also made an
Offering for sin, and that he was a Lamb slain from the Foundation of the
World; the Mystery, Virtue, and Effects of his Sufferings, none knows but they
that believe in his Name, and receive the Righteousness of Faith. But indeed
the manner of T.V's stating the business, I do not see that sense can be made
of it, whilst he makes it a Payment of a second Person distinct from God, and
yet not as a Creature; for as such the Sufferings were finite as he faith, that
could not bear a proportionable Satisfaction to infinite Justice, and then it
being as God united that did bear up and strengthen the man under opressure of
Wrath that made this Satisfaction, as he has stated it, etc.

Obs. What amounts this to, that God made a satisfaction to, and paid himself
either by inflicting infinite Wrath upon Christ as God (which cannot be) or
else that he satisfied himself by the finite Suffering of Christ as man,
Confusion and Distractions.
when as that which was finite could not satisfy infiniteness (they say) And
as God-man can, they say he was the subject of Wrath or vindictive Justice (as
their term is) How these things should be reconciled, I leave to the ingenious
Readers to judge.

Answ. Yes still we know that God was ever satisfied and well-pleased in Christ
Jesus and in all his Works, and it was God that was in him reconciling the
World unto himself, and Christ is the Son of his Love; and it was out of his
Free Love that he sent him into the World: His sending Christ surely was his
own Free Grace, and no man's Purchasing, and then his Love was openly testified
of, when Christ was come, who came in that Free Love of God which was testified
and held forth in Christ Jesus to man, and he gave himself a Ransom to Redeem
and Purchase man out of Transgression, and not to let him lie in sin and
imperfection all his life time; the Good Will of God in sending Christ, in
delivering him up for man, and giving him for a Propitiation for the sins of
the whole World, and his tenders of Free Pardon, Remission, and Redemption in
him, was, that man might receive Christ, and come into the Living Faith, and be
partaker in himself of those precious benefits, and Heavenly Privileges
tendered in Christ, and not that man should live in sin For a life in sin, is
not God's terms.
all his time; for an Act of Free Pardon is not granted, that men may take
liberty to live in Sedition and Treason all their life; but for those Offenses
past: Nor that men should Plead, that all Offenses past, present, and to come,
are Pardoned; therefore they cannot be free from Rebellion, Sedition, and
Treason all their Life time; this were a sad Consequence and not to be born;
then you that plead a Satisfaction made to God, extending thus far your sin and
imperfection term of Life, being in you the ground of this Plea, and also that
which you cover and maintain by it, and then when God and Christ require true
Repentance, perfect Obedience, Righteousness, etc. you tell God the Debt is
paid, and all satisfied by another without you; How then do you Answer the pure
Law and requirings of God within?

Priests and Professors their Answer, viz.

We endeavor and strive and press after perfection as much as we can, but we
don't believe it is attainable here.

Reply. Then your endeavoring and striving is all in the unbelief, How do you
endeavor and strive?

Priests. We Pray, and seek God in Ordinances, and perform Duties.

Query. But what does all your performances amount to, while Perfection is
denied, and Sin contended so much for by you?

Pr. All our best performances are sinful, we had need to ask forgiveness for
the sins of our best Duties; of our Prayers, and all other Performances; See
our Directory, Catechism, etc. So that all our Righteousness, in our best
state, are but polluted and filthy Rags, Dross, Dung, etc.

Query. How now Professors, Do you thus requite God for his Love? and is this
the use you make of your Plea for a full Satisfaction and Debt paid for you? do
you thus requite the Lord, and answer his requirings, will he accept of these
things at your hands?

Pr. God looks not upon us as we are in our selves, but upon Christ's
Righteousness in his Active and Passive Obedience, whereby he fully satisfied
for us.

Query. What then, Do you think that God will be satisfied on your parts with
your filthy Rags, rotten Clouts, Dross and Dung, which you offer to him; or
will he not rather take it as a mockery or wrong at your hands, thus meanly to
requite him? what do you signify for him? Was this the end of Christ's
suffering for Man, and his being a Sacrifice well-pleasing to God, and a
Propitiation for the sins of the whole World; did he appease Wrath, fulfill
Righteousness, bear the Sins, or the burden of them, in his own Body, that men
might take this liberty to Sin, Pollution, Rebellion term of Life, and so live
all their time in Disloyalty, and without subjection to him; and then, when he
requires Obedience of you, and to answer his pure Law in the heart, you go and
offer a few rotten Clouts, filthy Rags, Dross and Dung, and such nauceous
stuff to him; will not he return it upon your own faces as a mockery and
contempt done to him? Behold, I will spread Dung upon your faces, even the Dung
of your solemn Feasts, Mal. 2. So it may be justly said, Even the Dung of all
your best Performances, feigned Humility, feigned Confessions, feigned Prayers,
feigned Pretenses, feigned Applications, feigned claiming an Interest in the
Satisfaction and Imputation of the Righteousness and Obedience of Christ,
whilst you are out of it, clothed with your own rotten Clouts, and filthy
Rags. And if a People should deal thus with their Prince, after he has granted
and given an Act of Free Pardon and Indemnity, that they should both take
liberty to Rebellion and Treason, and not only so, but Plead for it as you do
for sin term of Life, and tell People, they must lay hold, and apply this
Pardon; but they must not expect to be free from actual Rebellion against their
Prince while they live; How would this be taken, and what ungratefulness and
unworthiness would this import on their parts? How would they be acquitted
before him? Nay, if they should go to requite their Prince by spreading a deal
of rotten Clouts before him, and a deal of Dross and Dung under his Nostrils,
every day, upon his Table; and not only so, but publicly in the sight of the
People once or twice a Week at least (as you do your sinful Prayers and
Performances) would not this be taken as an high Affront and Indignity put upon
a Merciful Prince? Judge what would be the effect hereof? Nay, if you should
present an Oblation before him mixed with Poison and Infection, and he know it
to be so, what would be your recompense! And do you not present your sinful
Prayers and Performances before the Lord, from your sinful polluted hearts,
which are deceitful, and desperate wicked above all things, and therefore full
of deadly Corruption and Poison; will your feigned Humility, feigned
Applications stand you in any stead herein? Bring no more vain Oblations before
the Lord, go offer it to thy Prince, and see if he will accept thy Person, Mal.
1.

That the Son of Man came to give his Life, a Ransom for many, and that he is
the Propitiation through Faith in his Blood, and that in due time he died for
the ungodly, bare our sins in his own Body upon the Tree, that he was wounded
for the Transgressions of the People, that he has loved us, and given himself
for us an Offering and Sacrifice to God for a sweet smelling savor: See Matthew,
20.28. Romans 5.6. 1 Pet. 2.24. Isa. 53.5. Romans 3.25. yea, we own and confess to
Christ in his Suffering, being an Offering dying for the ungodly, more than you
Presbyterians do. First, as to the Universal Love of God showed forth therein.
Secondly, As to the Virtue, Power, and Effects of his Death, Sacrifice, Blood,
etc.

First, In that he Died for All men, for the Ungodly in general; tasted Death
for every man, gave himself a Ransom for All, to be testified of in due time;
that he is the Propitiation for the sins of the whole World, which you say is
but for a few, only, for a select number, the World of Believers, etc. as both
T. D. and other Professors, both Presbyterians and Independants, both in Words
and Writings; and T.V. brings 1 Timothy 2.6. and mentions only gave himself a
Ransom, and leaves out the words for All; page 56. And thus minces, as if he
had no mind to hear that Grace is free for All as well as himself, but only for
a few perhaps Presbyterians, and suchlike, whom there is no reason or
equallity for God to take such special notice and regard of, more than others;
for their Spirits and Hearts are as perverse and corrupt as others, if not more
ridged and envious; and their Garments of Self-Righteousness, are as polluted,
ragged, and filthy as others, or worse; Thus much they will acknowledge in
their Prayers; but perhaps they will take it ill that another should tell them of
it.

Then Secondly, The Power of Christ and his blessed Effects in his Death,
acceptable Sacrifice, etc. we own more than they; for he gave himself to Redeem
Man from Sin and Transgression, and the servitude of it; and his Blood purges
the Conscience, cleanses from all sin; his Flesh is given for the Life of the
World, that Man may come to rise out of sin, and live again to God in perfect
Righteousness; God has set him forth to be a Propitiation, through Faith, in
his Blood, to declare his Righteousness for the Remission of Sins past, through
the forbearance of God, Romans 3.25. He does not say, for sins past, present, and
to come; and that all must be sinful and imperfect all their days, and yet all
forgiven, God being satisfied in Christ for all, whilst he is not satisfied in
them, but his Spirit daily grieved, where as Christ's Appearance was to put away
sin by the Sacrifice of himself; and if it was to put sin away, to cleanse man
from it, and not that he should say, that only the Guilt is done away, but not
the Act and Pollution of Sin, which is the gross corruption and false
construction of Presbyterians, and others.

And as to T.V. his wonder at W.P. his challenging any Person to give him one
Scripture phrase which does approach the Doctrine of Satisfaction. But T.V. has
deceitfully left out his following words, viz. Considering to what degree it is
stretched (the degree whereto it is stretched by these Priests, is mentioned
before) not that we do deny, but really confess, that Jesus Christ in Life,
Doctrine, and Death, fulfilled his Father's Will, and offered up a most
satisfactory Sacrifice, but not to pay God (as otherwise being unable to save
men (he says.) And further adds, And for a Justification by an imputative
Righteousness, whilst not real, it is merely an Imagination, not a reality, and
therefore rejected; otherwise (that which is real, which is the Righteousness
of Faith really received and enjoyed in the true and Living Faith) is confessed
and known to be justifying before God, because there is no abiding in Christ's
Love, without keeping his Commandments; I therefore, says he, Caution thee in
Love, not longer to deceive thy self by the over-fond embraces of Humane
Apprehensions for Divine Mysteries, but rather be informed, that God has
bestowed a measure of his Grace on thee and me, to show us what is good, that
we may obey and do it; which if thou diligently wilt observe, thou shall be led
out of all unrighteousness, and in thy obedience shall thou receive Power to
become a Son of God, in which happy estate God only can be known by Men, and
they know themselves to be justified before him, whom experimentally to know by
Jesus Christ, is Life Eternal.

So that the infinite God, in his infinite Love, Good Will, Kindness, Patience,
Forbearance, Long-Suffering, fully expressed, declared and signified by Christ
Jesus, the Son of his Love, and express Image of his Divine Substance (not a
separate Person from him) and Gods good Pleasure and real Satisfaction in him,
and all for the regaining, restoring, redeeming, and saving of lost man to
himself, out of the fallen estate, out of sin and corruption, and from Wrath to
come; this we know, really own, and confess in the Light and Life of the Son of
God bestowed upon us, which is that alone that can give the true knowledge of
the blessed Effects of Gods Love in Christ, and of the Righteousness of the
true and Living Faith in his Name and Power; as also of their true Peace and
Satisfaction, receiving the Atonement, Reconciliation and union with God in
Jesus Christ, who is the Way, Truth, and Life, to all that truly believe in him.

T. V. In the Scriptures he alleges against Christ's Satisfaction.

W. P. Not that we do deny, but really confess, that Jesus Christ in Life,
Doctrine, and Death, fulfilled his Fathers Will, and offered up a most
satisfactory Sacrifice.

Obs. This clears him from alleging Scripture against Christ, or what was
really his satisfaction, as he is falsely accused.

T.V. God proclaims himself to be gracious and merciful, whereby be declares
what he is in his Son, whom he had before promised to give, and in whom alone
all Nations of the Earth, that ever should obtain his favor, were to be
blessed.

Reply. His giving his Son, and his Favor, and Blessedness in him, proceeds
from the Graciousness and Mercifulness of God; How then does this agree with
that of Impossibility freely to Pardon; and with that of his being obliged to
take Vengeance upon all, and yet ready to forgive? and that he has engaged
himself to do it; page 60. Can this be deemed to be of the Nature of Debt, full
Payment, etc. by the rigor and punishment of Law. Secondly* If that it be in
the Son of God alone, in whom God declares what he is, and in whom alone his
Favor and Blessing is obtained, then in him is the knowledge both of his
Judgment and Mercy; and if blessed in Christ, it is not blessed out of Christ,
nor merely for what he has Suffered in the Flesh, without being in him; for we
are accepted only in the Beloved as is confessed; and God is well pleased with
us, only in Christ, then not with us in sin: And if so be God proclaims himself
to be Gracious and Merciful in his Son, how was God's infinite Wrath, that
sinners deserved, inflicted upon him, as a Person distinct from him? Where does
the Scripture say so? Or were it good Doctrine to say, that God so loved the
World, that he hated his only Son? How then was he the Son of his Love, who
freely gave himself to bear the sins, sorrow, and burden of all?

T.V. ( Page 62, 63.) I grant that God's Love of Benevolence, or Electing Love,
is not the Effect of Christ's Satisfaction, from whence it was that he sent his
Son into the World for our Salvation; but his Love of Complacency was the
Effect of Christ's Satisfaction, Matthew. 3.17.

Reply. Where does the Scriptures use these Expressions, or this distinction of
an Electing Love, and Complacing Love in God? Is there any Love in God that is
not well pleasing unto himself? or that is not of his Good Will, or
Benevolence, which is confessed to be saving? Or if this Love of Complacency (so
termed) was the Effect of Christ's Satisfaction, and not the other, then was it
not in Being in God before? But if you say his Love of Benevolence (so called)
or Good Will; was only intended for a few, or a certain select number, and for
them only he received Satisfaction, or was Pacified, does not your Doctrine
herein render him partial and unequal in his ways? whereas he wills not the
Death of sinners, but rather their Return, that they may Live; and God's Love,
Good Will, Patience, Long-suffering, Forbearance, and Goodness is toward all,
in the first place, till men reject it, and is manifest in Christ toward
Mankind, and evidently testified both in his Sufferings, Dying for all men, and
giving himself a Ransom for all, to be testified of in due time, and that by
his Righteousness the free Gift of God came upon all men; It Is not said in
Scripture, that God's Love of Benevolence was to the Elect only, or that Christ
died for a few only, or was given a Ransom for Believers only, but for All,
though All do not accept of the Good Will of God toward them, nor of the
Offering or Price which would purchase them to God, out of their sins, and
thraldom.

T. V. Whether is it any absurdity, to say, that God should be at the Charges
of his own Satisfaction? Job 33.24. I have found a Ransom.

Reply. In that place cited, he should have set down all the verse, where it is
said, He is gracious unto him, and says, Deliver him from going down to the
Pit; I have found a Ransom, (or an Atonement.) So that it is manifest, that
this Ransom was all from the Graciousness of God, manifest in God's delivering
Man from going down to the Pit, after that Man is chastened with Pain, verse.
19, 20. and his Flesh consumed under the sense of God's Judgments, then a
Ransom is found through God's Graciousness to him, who delivers his Soul from
going into the Pit, that his Life shall see the Light, v. 28. Lo all these
things oftentimes works God with Man, to bring back his Soul from the Pit, to
be enlightened with the Light of the Living, verse. 29, 30. Surely Elihu knew
more of God's dealing, and of his inlightnings thereby, than they do who put
his Work a far off from them, and oppose his Light within, being neither
willing to wait under his Corrections, nor bear his Judgments, till they feel
his Graciousness, and partake of a Ransom thereby, from the Power of Sin,
Death, and Hell; and to tell of God's being at the Charges of his own
Satisfaction; how does that agree with the former Doctrine, That he never will,
nor can Pardon, without Satisfaction made, etc. If the Graciousness and
Satisfaction was in himself before, surely what was performed by Christ for
man, was an effect of God's Graciousness to bring man to himself; and it is
without Controversy, that all that is in God, and all the Gifts and Benefits
proceeding from him to man-wards, as also all his Works are acceptable and well
pleasing to himself; but his Works man ought not to put a far off from himself,
since that those things which are for man's deliverance, and preservations of
his Soul out of the Pit: God works with man, and he has wrought all our
works in us, Isa. 26.

And as for Believing and Obeying his Precepts, as a Concurring Cause of
Remission; T.V. calls this Rank Popery, as importing Justification by Works.
But J. Owen confesses otherwise, That God requires Faith and Repentance in
Sinners antecedently to their Participation of Pardon.


Reply. What was said in that case, was sufficiently proved from Scriptute, and
not at all refuted by T. V. when upon man's Return to God, forsaking his evil
way, and believing in Christ, the Lord has promised Pardon, not to turn away
his face, but to show Mercy, etc. 2 Chronicles. 30.9. Isa. 55.7. Jer. 31.31, 33, 34.
Joh. 3.16. Acts 10.34. This is no Popery at all to assert Scripture, and to
confess the receiving of Remission through Repentance, and Justification
through Faith, and that God has wrought all our works in us, and this we
confess to, and truly own, though unjustly we are accused for Popery.

And if Grace and Justice be very well consistent, as is confessed from Romans
3.24, 25, 26. I ask how this consists with your sense of Vindictive Justice
else where? And the Lord says, I am a just God, and a Savior, there is none
beside me, Isa. 45.21. So he that is a just God, is a Savior, and in this was
manifest the Love of God toward us, because God sent his only begotten Son
into the World that we might Live through him, herein is Love; not that we
loved God, but that he loved us, and sent his Son to be a Propitiation for our
sins, 1 John 4.9, 10. Now we knowing the Life and Power of Christ, and having
partaken both of the saving Virtue, and blessed Effects of his Sufferings in
the fellowship thereof in Spirit, as also of the benefit of his Mediation and
Intercession; we must needs Confess him in all, and the Love and Graciousness
of God through all.

And whereas T. V. accuses W. P. That his enumerating some of the Ends of
Christ's mission into the World, does reach no higher then by his setting him
forth as a perfect Example.

Reply. Herein he has wronged and belyed W.P. For in his Book page 9.16, 17,
18, 19. W. P. brings several Scriptures, both to prove God's Love and
Graciousness in giving Christ, as also the benefit of Christ to man for his
Reconciliation, Redemption through his Blood, Salvation, and Eternal Life,
through him, which is higher, or more then being a bare Example; for hereby its
evident, that he was not only a perfect Living Example of Good to Man, but a
Minister and Giver of it; as also the Worker and Author of man's Salvation.

As also W. P. in his 19. page Confesses, That Christ, as being Attributed, in
his Doctrine, Life, Miracles, Death, and Sufferings to God, as the Gift and
Expression of his Eternal Love for the Salvation of men.

1. In abolishing that other Covenant which consisted in External and shadowy
Ordinances, and that made none clean as concerning the Conscience.

2dly. In promulgating his Message of a most free and universal Tender of Life
and Salvation, unto all them that believe and follow him (the Light) in all his
Righteousness; the very end of his Appearance being to destroy the works of the
Devil, the which every man comes to experiment, as he walks in a holy
subjection to that measure of Light and Grace, wherewith the Fullness has
enlightened him.

3dly. In seconding his Doctrines with Signs, Miracles, and a most innocent
self-denying Life.

4thly. In Ratifying and Confirming all, with great Love and holy Resignation,
by the offering up of his Body to be Crucified by wicked hands, who is now
ascended far above all Heavens, and is thereby become a most complete Captain,
and perfect Example.

Obs. Here Christ is confessed to, as the Gift of God's Eternal Love, for the
Life and Salvation of men that come to receive him, and his Appearance to
destroy the works of the Devil, which his own Light and Grace makes manifest,
as it is believed and waited in, and so Christ is the Leader and Captain of
such, and is made unto us Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification, and Redemption.

And I ask, who are those T.V. says, That the Lord extends his special
Mercies to? And, whether is Mercy extended to All, in sending his Son into the
World; and what more special Mercies can there be than the only begotten Son of
God who is given for a Light, for a Leader, for a Covenant, for Life and
Salvation, that whosoever receives and believes in him, might receive the
blessed End and Privilege of his Coming and Manifestation, to wit, Life and
Salvation in him, from Sin, Death, and Destruction.

And whereas T.V. in page 65. brings an Instance, That the Soul cannot see
without the Body for want of an Organ, and that therefore tho God separately
cannot satisfy, because he cannot suffer; and man separately cannot satisfy,
because the satisfaction would not be of infinite value; yet as God-Man he
satisfied, etc.

Reply. Do but mark what an Instance and Comparison he has here brought in
Competition with the Infinite, Omnipotent God; to show us, that God separately
cannot satisfy any more then the Soul can see without an Organ: And who is it
that God cannot satisfy? Is it himself? Can he not satisfy or please himself?
Is he ever divided or displeased with himself? What gross darkness appears in
this Comparison, Instance, and Assertion, to say God cannot satisfy, etc. and
thus to bring the Infinite God, and his Infinite Power under the Limitations of
finite Creatures; Is this any less then Blasphemy? let but the indifferent,
judge in this case: Have not these our Oppossers been ready to call us
Blasphemers but for bringing an Instance to show the absurdity of their
Doctrine, whereas this is an Instance from a finite to an infinite, tending to
lessen the infinite Power of God.

And as to his telling, That the Soul cannot see without an Organ: in one sense
that is not true, though he meant outwardly, yet it has a spiritual sight.

As to his saying, That God cannot suffer, is in one sense not true, though he
intended as to Death, yet the Spirit of God has suffered, and has been
grieved by man's Transgressions: The Rebellious Jews grieved and vexed his Holy
Spirit, until he became their Enemy, and fought against them, Isa. 63.10.

And did not the Lord say, Behold, I am pressed under you as a cart is pressed
that is full of sheaves, Amos 2.13. So did not he suffer in being pressed by
them then, and did not he say, My heart is turned within me, my repentings are
kindled together, I will not execute the fierceness of mine anger, I will not
return to destroy Ephraim, for I am God, and not man, the Holy One in the midst
of thee, Hos. 11.8, 9. Did not herein his Suffering and Forbearance declare him
to be God, the Holy One, and not man, rather then the Execution of the
fierceness of his Anger? And was not God's being grieved by the rebellious Jews
a Suffering, when they hardened their hearts, and provoked him in the
Wilderness; for he said, Forty years long was I grieved with this generation,
Psalm. 95. therefore to day if ye will hear his voice, harden not your heart:
And did not God suffer long by the old World before he destroyed them, seeing
when he saw their wickedness, it grieved him at his heart, Genesis 6.6. Also he
said, His Spirit should not always strive with them, verse. 3. So that his
Spirit did suffer, and was grieved by them before they were destroyed. Again,
How often did they provoke him, and grieve him in the Desert? Psalm. 78.40. And
did not he Complain against the People when they were Rebellious and Polluted,
saying, Your new Moons and your appointed Feasts my Soul hates, they are a
trouble to me, I am weary to bear them: Was not this trouble, and being weary
with them, matter of Suffering? and was not this his Suffering for some time
before he did ease himself of his Adversaries, and avenge him of his Enemies:
See Isa. 1. And also it is said, Chap. 7.13. Hear ye now ye House of David, is
it a small thing to weary men, but will ye weary my God also? And Chap. 43.24,
25. Neither have thou filled me with the Fat of thy Sacrifices, but thou have
made me to serve with thy sins, thou have wearied me with thy iniquities; I,
even I am he that blotteth out thy transgressions for my own sake, and will not
remember thy sins. (Mark) for my own sake; So then surely God could satisfy
himself, seeing it was for his own sake that he blotted out Transgressions; and
here the infinite Value, Ransom, and Satisfaction was in himself, and what
Patience, Forbearance, Long-Suffering, and Forgiveness, as was signified by
Christ (and testified of by his outward Suffering and Death) was really in
being in God before, and in the fullness of time a signal testimony thereof
given to man (...) induce him to receive the free Love and Grace of God, and
Life and Salvation in the Son of his Love.

T.V. Who do ascribe more Grace and Mercy to God than we, who do apprehend it
in his Son, page 65.

Reply. Indeed your apprehensions in that matter, are sufficiently manifest
before; had T.V. added, Who do apprehend more Grace and Mercy in God, then we
that say he cannot Satisfy himself, and Christ as man, could not satisfy him
by finite Suffering; and the Grace we ascribe, we apprehend it, only to extend
to a few, a select number, etc. Had T.V. spoke this plainly together, People
might the more easily have judged, whether he has truly ascribed or apprehended
concerning the Grace of God, and whether many thousands do not ascribe more
Grace and Mercy to God, that own it in the free and general Extent of it to all
men, than he has done.

Again his confessing, That God does execute his Justice freely, as he does
love his Image in his People freely, yet both are necessary, because Natural,
and neither forced nor compelled by any External Agent.

Reply. So, here is a better Confession then much of his Work before, and it
contradict much of it: For, 1st. If his Love be as free as his Justice, and
neither compelled, neither fotced by any External Agent, how then is he obliged
to take vengeance upon all that have transgressed, when upon Repentance he
readily pardons and passes by former offenses; and how then is it impossible
for God freely to Pardon. 2dly. What is that Image in his People he loves
freely, is it perfect or imperfect? if perfect, then how do they deny the
perfection of any thing within, or that is inherent in the Believers; and if he
loves his Image in his People freely, then he is satisfied in his own Image,
and that which brings to know and enjoy this Image, and the renewing of it
within, is that which brings into Love and Union with God, which is his Divine
Spirit and Power, that renews man into the Heavenly Image and Righteousness of
the Everlasting God, which they that enjoy, have the acceptable Sacrifice, and
from thence can present Living Sacrifices unto God, to his Eternal Praise.

And to T. V's saying, That if Christ were not punished for us to satisfy
God's Justice, it would follow from W. P 's words, that Christ should be a
sinner, and that he was punished for his own sins.

Reply. That Is a blasphemous Consequence indeed, but not truly charged upon W.
P. for he never intended by his words to render Christ a sinner, nor that he
was punished for his own sins, for he never sinned, but he was Punished and
Suffered by sinners, who by wicked hands (and so by their injustice) put him to
Death, and under the buden and weight of their Transgressions he Suffered, as
also his tender Spirit that made Intercession, and suffered for Transgressors,
from a foresight of the Wrath that should come upon the Rebellious; and was
not the Wicked the Instruments that wounded, bruised, and afflicted him, and
that oppressed his Righteous Soul? And did not his Innocent Life, and Righteous
Soul, suffer under a great oppression and weight of man's Transgression, when
he was in his Agony, and sweat drops of Blood, before his being Crucified? And
so was not his Suffering twofold, both Inward and Outward? And then if so,
that the pure Life and holy Spirit suffered, as bearing the burden of their
sins, and if the Godhead being in Christ so nearly united, as to bear up the
Manhood under the Suffering (as is confessed) How then can it be deemed that
God inflicted the punishment of Eternal Wrath or Vengeance on his Son? Surely
his permitting wicked men, by their wicked hands, to punish him with a Temporal
Suffering and Death, could not be his Eternal Wrath or Vengeance, which is
supposed to Answer and Satisfy Divine Justice for man, and so to acquit man
Living and Dying in sin (a great Error) from Eternal Wrath; whereas Christ
Jesus was the Son of his Love; were it not inconsistent to say, That God's
Justice did punish or execute Wrath upon his Love? Seeing that it is confessed,
That Grace and Justice are very well consistent, and that there is a free
Exercise both of Justice and Love, without force or compulsion: How does T.V.
his matter hang together! let the moderate, judge. But had he stated it in the
Language and sense of the Scriptures of Truth, there had not appeared this
Contrariety nor Opposition, either between us, or with himself: For
Scripture-accounts concerning Christ and his Sufferings (for sinners) both
inward and outward, I do own, and Confess to, and have a reverend Esteem of all
his Sufferings, and the worth thereof; and do greatly prize his Meekness and
Humility, who has freely condescended according to the Good Will and Pleasure
of God (not from Wrath nor Compulsion) to offer himself a Lamb without spot to
God, to bear our griefs and sorrows; yet (says the Prophet Isaiah, chap. 53)
we did esteem him stricken, smitten of God, and afflicted; but he was wounded
for our transgressions, he was bruised for our iniquities, the chastisement of
our Peace was upon him, and with his stripes we are healed; he was oppressed,
he was afflicted, yet he opened not his mouth, he was brought as a Lamb to the
slaughter; he made his Grave with the wicked, and with the rich in his Death,
because he had not done no violence, neither was any deceit in his mouth; yet
it pleased the Lord to bruise him, This being God's Pleasure in both, where do
the Scripture, call it his Vindicative Justice upon him, as T. V 's words are;
which J. O. and T. D. call Vindictive Justice; but by what Scripture we know
not; for the Scripture calls it, the Chastizement of our Peace that was on him.
he has put him to grief, when thou shall make his Soul an Offering for sin,
he shall see his seed, he shall prolong his days, and the Pleasure of the Lord
shall prosper in his hand. This is he that has been despised and rejected of
men; This is he who has been as a Lamb slain from the Foundation of the World;
This is he men have evilly entreated, and evilly requited, for his kindness and
good Will that he has showed forth toward them; This is he whom they have
caused to suffer by their iniquities, and so thereby have showed great
unworthiness and ingratitude toward him and his Father, whose Pleasure and
Good Will he came to perform, both in his being delivered up to undergo
Afflictions, and Bruises, and many hard Sufferings for Mankind; and surely God
was in him Reconciling the World, even in, and through that low and suffering
state, which the Righteous Seed, and renowned Plant of the Lord has undergone;
but now what effect has all this Love, Tenderness, and Compassion of God, in,
and through Christ, upon and in man, whilst Sin, Transgression, and
Imperfection term of Life is pleaded for by the Priests? Surely they herein do
not make a right use of Christ's Suffering, but both reject him, and the End
thereof; and this was not the use that the true Ministers did make thereof; for
they witnessed that he died for all, that as many as lived should not live unto
themselves, but unto him that died and rose again, 2 Cor. 5.15. and his own
self bare our sins in his Body on the Tree, that we being dead to sin, should
live to Righteousness; this was not a living to sin, nor pleading for
Imperfectiom, as T.V* has done; who farther adds, viz.

The 7 th Consequence is childish, and a shame that a man that pretends to
any brains, should mention it, That though Christ has satisfied for us, the
Debt remains still to Christ, page 66.

Reply. Is this such a childish, shameful, or brainless Consequence, that the
Debt remains still to Christ? Has not T.V. herein showed his Ignorance of
Scripture? for ought nor Christ to be obeyed who is the Author of Eternal
Salvation to them that obey him, Heb. 5. and we are not under the Law to God,
but under the Law to Christ; and to what end is his spiritual Law written in
the Heart, and his Spirit in the inward Parts, but to be obeyed; and we are
Debtors not to the Flesh to live after the Flesh, Romans 8.12. to what then, but
to live after the Spirit, and through it, to mortify the Deeds of the Body,
verse. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. The Apostle was far from pleading for
sin and Imperfection as Priests do, for which God will judge them by Jesus
Christ, to whom all Judgment is committed, who has Power to proclaim the Day
of Vengeance, as well as the acceptable year of the Lord.

The truth of it is, T.V. has Confessed to what W. P. has writ in many places,
but to his own Contradiction; but here he falls a Railing, and vilifying him
with such terms, as Abominable Worm, etc. He has not at all dealt fairly or
honestly by him, having left out, and not stated his Arguments, and then rails
against his Consequences; whereas he, and his Brethren, would not be so dealt
by.

T.V^ Take away Satisfaction, then the Word, and Spirit, and we are false
Witnesses; then is our Preaching vain, and you are all yet in your sins; then
you must all of you, of necessity, be damned and punished Eternally.

Reply. Truly so they are like to be, for all the help they are like to have
from your Preaching, especially if their being yet in their sins be a sign of
it; and that you are false Witnesses, and your Preaching vain; for so they are
like to be in their sins all their Life time, if they believe and drink-in your
sinful Doctrine for sin and Imperfections remaining in all, term of Life.

And as for T.V's bitter storm he brings forth, of accusing and charging W.P.
in the same words that Peter said to Simon Magus the Sorcerer, or Witch, Acts
8.9, 21, 22, 23. and as having no part in Christ's Satisfaction, and his heart
not being right in the sight of God, and to be in the gall of bitterness, and
bond of iniquity: And further adds these words, to render him worse, viz.
Wicked Blasphemies, and Abominable and Heretical Assertions.

I hope W.P. will easily bear such vilifying without reviling again, there
being no matter of Argument nor Proof in them, either to Convince, or terrify
him; and for the matter of Judgment against him, he can Appeal to more
Competent and Moderate Persons to judge in the case, than T.V. has shown
himself.

T.V. Page 67. God has engaged to keep Believers out of a Course of
Disobedience; and if they do transgress in some particulars, he has threatened
to chastize them, which is not inconsistent with Christ's satisfying his
Justice for their sins, since chastizing is not an Act of Vindicative Justice,
but Fatherly Love.

Reply. Here observe, 1st. That Chastizement, and Revenge, are two things.
2dly. If they be to be Chastized for Transgression, it is to bring them into
more subjection to God, and conformity to Christ, and not to leave them in sin,
and Imperfection, term of Life, under a Plea of the Debt being fully paid, and
full Satisfaction being made for them, by Christ's under-going Wrath and
Vindictive Justice; which, how do these stand with Free Grace, Goodness,
Pardon, Remission, etc. upon Repentance? 3dly. How does T.V. suppose Vindictive
Justice, or Eternal Wrath incurred by man's Offenses, to be laid on Christ,
which is not Chastizement as confessed; and so he makes full Satisfaction the
Effect of God's full Revenge on his Innocent Son; as if one should say, That
God could not command Wrath, but were bound thereby till he had Executed the
Extremities of it upon Christ (for so it has been deserved by sin and sinners)
as if he had not absolute Power to show his Love, Good Will (and Satisfaction
therein for his own Names sake) And is not this to render God more cruel than
man, or his Prerogative below that of Earthly Princes, which is best known in
showing Mercy and forgiveness: God can do whatsoever he will, and his Will is
chiefly to that which he most delights in, to wit, Goodness, Mercy and
Forgiveness, that he may show himself Gracious for to restore man to himself.
And he says, I will not contend for ever, neither will I be always wroth, for
the Spirits should fail before me, and the Souls that I have made, The Souls
that he has made, his Justice does not withold pity from them to gain upon
them.
Isa. 57.16. And T. V. stating it, as God's Revenge, or Vindictive Justice on
Christ (and the Chastizement only on the Transgressors) is not Scripture, Is.
53.5. for it says, He was bruised for our Iniquities, and the Chastizement of
our peace was upon him; (Mark) He was bruised, and the Chastizement of our
peace was upon him: It is not said, Vindicative, or rather Vindictive Justice,
or the Revenge of our Peace was upon him; for T.V. has Confessed a difference,
and Chastizement comes in Fatherly Love, and not Revenge; O Lord correct me,
but with Judgment, not in thy Anger, least thou bring me to nothing, Jer.
10.24. And now this Correction, or Chastizement from the Lord is known by his
People in the time of their spiritual Travel and Warfare, that they may be
partakers of his Holiness and perfect Righteousness, Heb. 12.9, 10, 11.
as they have partaken of Christ's Sufferings, and known the Fellowship
thereof; But, and if men continue in Rebellion against Christ, rejecting his
Love, and Grace; his Sufferings, and Satisfaction, will not free them from the
severity of God, nor from the Execution of his Judgment, which is given to
Christ to do, who has also Power and Authority to Execute Judgment, because
he is the Son of man that has suffered, and is that man by whom God will Judge
the World in Righteousness, Joh. 5.22.27. Acts 17.31. and by whom the secrets
of men shall be judged according to the Gospel, which he and his Ministers have
proclaimed, which is the acceptable year of the Lord (to them that receive it,
who have thirsted after it) and the Day of Vengeance of our God to them that
reject the Love of the Truth, and hate to be Reformed, how highly soever they
may boast of Satisfaction, and Imputation, etc.

CHAP. V.
Touching the Presbyterian Priests (and Professors) Doctrine of the
Justification of the Ungodly, by an imputed Righteousness; and T. V. his Plea,
and Proofs for it, Examined.

FIrst, he brings 2 Cor. 5.21. for his Proof, viz. He has made him to be sin
for us, that knew no sin, that we might be made the Righteousness of God in
him; (to which he adds) as Christ was made sin for us, though Innocent, by the
imputation of our sin to him, for which he was condemned and punished; so we
are made the Righteousness of God in him, though guilty, by the imputation of
his Righteousness unto us, whereby we are Justified.

Reply. Here T.V. has given us their sense of Imputation, viz. That Guilty
Persons are made the Righteousness of God in Christ, and so Justified, whilst
in their sins, by the Imputation of his Righteousness; as much as to say, when
they are really unrighteous and actively sinners, yet imputedly Justified, and
made the Righteousness of God in Christ, which is a false and corrupt meaning
put upon the Apostles words; for there is no Unrighteousness, no Guilt, nor
Impurity in Christ, for in him is no sin, It was Christ's Persecutors that
charged, or imputed Sin, Guilt, and Blasphemy to him; and so such they are that
impute Righteousness to wicked or sinful Persons.
and he that abides in him sins not; besides, as Christ was made a Curse, or Sin
for us; the Scripture does not say So we are made the Righteousness of God in
him: For if these words, As he, So we, which are added, were true, the
Consequence would be As he was made to be sin for us, who knew no sin, nor ever
could sin, So we are made the Righteousness of God in him, who never knew
Righteousness, nor ever can be Righteous: What a gross corruption and
perverting of Scripture is this, and how contrary to the Righteousness of God,
to suppose guilty, and sinful Persons to be Righteous, whilst such; as if God's
Righteousness, or Workmanship, were impure: This Doctrine has led many in the
way to Hell and Destruction; But T.V. in 2 Cor. 5. should have read verse. 17.
If any man be in Christ, he is a new Creature; old things are passed away,
behold all things are become new. Which is a real change in that man that is in
Christ, from sin and transgression, and not a Justification therein; for the
Spirit of God both discovers to man his sin, and reproves him as a
transgressor, and one Guilty whilst therein; and surely God does not accept of
men, as his own Righteousness, and in Christ, whilst his Spirit in them judges
them to be both unrighteous and out of Christ; for if he did, that were to make
God contradict himself, and to speak quite contrary to his own Spirit, which
were very absurd, and blasphemous to assert: But had T.V. rightly minded and
understood that of Romans 8.1, 2, 3, 4* he might have seen how contrary it is to
his Doctrine before, and himself therein confuted: For, 1st. They that are in
Christ Jesus, walk not after the Flesh, but after the Spirit; and its to such
only to whom there is no Condemnation, therefore Justification; and this is not
a sinful, imperfect, or guilty state. 2dly. The Law of the Spirit of Life in
Christ Jesus, has made such free from the Law of Sin and Death. 3dly. God
sending his Son to condemn sin in the Flesh, was not to look upon man Justified
in the sinful state, or whilst he walks after the Flesh. But, 4thly. That the
Righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in such who walk not after the
Flesh, but after the Spirit; and this does absolutely confute T.V. and his
Brethren. And whereas for the proof of his Doctrine of Guilty Persons being the
Righteousness of God, he cites Romans 4.6, 7. where it is said, David described
the blessedness of that man to whom God imputes Righteousness without Works;
to which I say, not without the Works of the True and Living Faith in Jesus,
nor yet without a subjection to the Law of Faith, but without that, the Works
or Deeds of the Law of Works, chap. 3.19, 20, 21, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28. the
Apostle did not exclude the Works, Obedience, or Righteousness of the true
Faith, from a justified state; for if Paul had so done, it had been contrary to
James his Testimony, who said, Was not our Father Abraham justified by Works,
when he had offered up Isaac? See Jam. 2. And Abraham believed God, and it was
counted to him for Righteousness; We say, That Faith was reckoned to Abraham
for Righteousness, Romans 4.3, 9. which Faith was not without its own Works,
although it be not the Works of the Law, as Circumcision, and others, that were
Types or Signs, wherein the Righteousness of Faith does not consist, which they
that are in the uncircumcision (as the Gentiles that were the ungodly, spoken
of, Romans 4.5, 11. chap. 3.29.) do receive through Faith in Christ, and become
really partakers thereof, being Justified from all those things from which they
could not be Justified by the Law of Moses. And so such are Justified or made
Just, or truly so Accepted of God, not in sin, or ungodliness, but as Redeemed
out of it, and Sanctified from it. See 1 Cor. 6.11. And blessed are they whose
Iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins are covered; Blessed is the man to whom
the Lord will not impute sin; This is no Proof for T. V. his sinful Doctrine;
for them whom the Lord does bless, and imputes not Iniquity to, are in the way
of God, and partakes of his Righteousness through Faith, and cannot feed upon
an imagined Imputation or Justification in sin; for in Psalm. 32.2. David
describes the blessedness of such in these words, Blessed is the man to whom
the Lord imputes not Iniquity, and in whose Spirit there is no guile: These
words ( in whose Spirit there is no guile) the Priests use to leave out in
their talk of Imputation, but as their Faith without Works (or a real Obedience
on the Creatures part) is but a dead, empty, and feigned Faith: So their laying
a claim to, and pretending a Justification by the imputed Righteousness of
Christ, whilst they are sinners, and polluted, pleading for Imperfection whilst
here, it is but a false imagination of their own; for, though we confess that
Justification is in the Righteousness of Christ, by Faith in him, and that this
True and Living Faith, and the Righteousness of it, is reckoned to the true
Believer; yet we do not therefore grant that Sinners, or Polluted Persons in
that state, are clothed with this Righteousness, nor that it is imputed to them
as theirs, whilst they are out of it; for they that have put on Christ, are
translated from sin and unrighteousness, and so are made partakers of the
Righteousness of Faith, which T.V. says is without us, and so puts it a far
off, and yet cites Phil. 3.9. which plainly Contradicts his Doctrine; for Paul
having confessed Christ Jesus to be his Lord, and suffered the loss of all
things, that he might win Christ, it was that he might be found in him, not
having his own Righteousness, but that which is through the Faith of Christ,
the Righteousness which is of God by Faith, that (said he) I may know him, and
the Power of his Resurrection, and the Fellowship of his Suffering, being made
conformable to his Death, verse. 9, 10. (Mark) his winning Christ, being found
in him, his not having his own Righteousness, but that of Faith extends to a
real enjoyment of Christ, and his being in him, and not to an imagined
Imputation in sin, but to his knowing Christ, and the Power of his
Resurrection, Fellowship of his Suffering, and Conformity to his Death; this
was a blessed estate, which all you that plead for Sin, and Imperfection, and a
Justification, whilst you are out of Christ, or strangers to him, being both
unacquainted with his Power and Fellowship of Suffering, and never came ye so
to be conformable to his Death, you being yet alive in your sins.

And as to T. V. his Argument, or Syllogism, it proves nothing of his Doctrine
of impure or guilty Persons being Justified by Imputation, for Justification by
Faith in Jesus Christ, and his Righteousness we never denied; but this Faith is
not a dead Faith, nor without its own Works, for it purifieth the heart, but so
does not your Faith, who plead for sin, by which you apply Christ's
Righteousness, whilst you are out of it, and it without you, as T.V. confesses
page 17. How has he, and the rest of you that own this his Doctrine, soothed
and daubed People up in their sins, flattering them with a Pretense of
Imputation and Justification therein, when your Faith is but dead, and empty,
as a body without a Spirit is dead.

That we are Justified by Faith, without Works; By what Faith, and without what
Works, is mentioned and manifest according to Scripture, both in that to the
Romans, as also in that to the Galatians: See Romans 3, and 4. chap. and Gal. 2,
3, 4, and 5. chap. that they were the Works of the Law (and not the Works of
Faith) without which they were Justified. And as of his telling of the
Deficiency of Righteousness inherent; I say, that Christ's Righteousness
within, is not Deficient, who works both perfect Sanctification and
Righteousness in true Believers; and what is the end of seeking for a
Righteousness without (as T.V. says) if they must not really enjoy Christ's
Righteousness within? And where do the Scripture say, That they may seek for
Christ's Righteousness Imputed without themselves? How proves he this by
Scripture, etc. his saying they can be Justified only by Faith, whilst he
excludes (its Works) it is contrary to the Apostles Doctrine, Jam. 2. Faith if
it has not Works is dead being alone, and ye see how that by Works man is
Justified, and not by Faith only, verse. 17.24.

T. V. Which Faith he puts in opposition to all Works, not only of the
Ceremonial and Moral Law, but also to all Works wrought in Faith, which are
works still, such as Abraham's Works, and David's Works were, page 70, 71.

Reply. The Justifying Faith which is Living and Real, was never put in
opposition to its own Work (by either Christ, his Apostles, or Ministers) nor
to all or any Works wrought in it self, by any, but Antichrist, and his
Ministers, such as T. V. and his Brethren have manifestly shown themselves to
be, in this and other particulars. For the Apostle Paul was so far from putting
Faith in opposition to all Works wrought in it, that he says, Do we then make
void the Law through Faith, God forbid; yea, we Establish the Law, Romans 3.31.
And if while we seek to be Justified by Christ, we our selves also are found
sinners; is therefore Christ the Minister of sin, God forbid, and I through the
Law am dead to the Law, that I may live unto God, Gal. 2.17. Now this Living
unto God, being Crucified with Christ, was by the Faith of the Son of God,
which Living unto God, was in the Righteousness of Faith, and not in sin, for
Christ is not the Minister of sin; so that he does not set Faith in opposition
to its own Works, as most falsely is affirmed; but to those Works, whether of
the Law, or other self-Works, or Righteousness, that were out of the True
Faith, which purifies the heart, gives Victory, Sanctifies, and Justifies; and
the Saints knew the putting off the body of the sins of the Flesh by the
Circumcision of Christ (so that they did not carry a body of sin all their time
about with them) and a being buried with him in Baptism, wherein also they they
are risen with him through the Faith of the operation of God, who haith Raised
him up from the dead, Col. 2.11, 12. And that God would fulfill the Work of
Faith with Power, 2 These. 1.11. This Paul prayed for; so he did not set Faith
in opposition to its own Work; As also Heb. 11. how amply is the true Faith
(without which it is impossible to please God) demonstrated by the many Works,
and blessed Effects of it, which did attend it in God's People, in their
acceptable obedience and subjection to him, both in Doing and Suffering,
concerning which, both Abel, Enoch, Noah, Abraham, Sarah, Isaac, Joseph, Moses,
and many others, are instanced for their faithful obedience and subjection.

As also the Apostle James, chap. 2.20, 21, 22. plainly Contradicts T.V. his
putting Faith in opposition to its own Works, wherein he might as well have put
it in opposition to it self: Who farther adds, from Romans 4.2, 5. touching God's
Justifying the ungodly, T.V.
That no Persons, being the subjects of the Gospel Justification, but as
ungodly.

Reply. Herein again he has wrested Scripture; for the Apostle does not say, he
Justifies them AS ungodly, but he that believes on him that Justifies the
ungodly (it is not as ungodly) which were the believing Gentiles that were so
ungodly (there intended) before they came into the Work of Faith, and to
partake of its Righteousness within, for they were not Justified in
ungodliness, but from it; Justifies is not Justified; the one being the Work a
doing, the other done; which where it is so Effected by Faith, that purifieth
the heart, therein the real Subjects of Gospel Justification are manifest, not
as ungodly, but as Righteous, being Washed, Sanctified, and Justified by the
Spirit of our God, and that in the Name and Power of the Lord Jesus, 1 Cor.
6.11.

Moreover, T.V. has Confessed, That God does not leave them ungodly; where he
removes the guilt of sin, he removes also the filth of sin; Justification and
Sanctification being inseparable companions, and that Justification is never
without Sanctification, page 70.

Reply. It Is well he has somewhat inclined to Confess to Truth, though to the
manifest break-neck and overthrow of his own Cause; For now, What Is become of
his Justification of the ungodly, of the Guilty as ungodly, etc. by the imputed
Righteousness of Christ? (as his words are) And when was that performed or
wrought? Now, not till Sanctification be known, that the filth of sin is
removed; Justification and Sanctification being inseparable companions, and the
one never without the other. And surely people are not the subjects of
Sanctification, or Sanctified, as ungodly, or as in the filth or pollution of
sin; let the Readers but mark here how flatly this T. Vincent has overthrown
and contradicted himself, and his corrupt Doctrine; for an Imputation of
Righteousness to the Unrighteous, and a Justification in Sin and Transgression,
as ungodly, etc. whereas he that Justifies the Wicked, and he that Condemns
the Just, they both are abomination unto God, Prove. 17.15. And of this our
Adversary is greatly guilty.

And as for Tho. Danson's Synopsis, which he so highly commends, as that the
use of it may be great, for the Establishing of Christians in the Truths, etc.

By this he does but show his own shallowness and weakness, to Commend thus
highly of such a silly confussed piece (which has also many Lies and Falsehoods
in it) as that sorry Pamphlet of T.D's, as it will further be manifest; and how
apparently both T. V. and T.D. have Contradicted themselves, and each other,
even in their principal Points.

And as for his putting off S. E. his Challenge to Fast and Watch, as a
Tempting of God, and a God provoking sin, to endanger self-murder: And judges
him, as being Mad, and numbered amongst distracted People.

Indeed this is as smooth a put off, and excuse, as he could readily have
imagined, to excuse himself from Fasting, etc. so that his Accusing S.E. as
being Mad, Distracted, etc. does neither prove him to be so, nor does it
destroy either S.E. his Confidence or Motion in the matter, but sets it the
more over T. V. and his Brethrens heads, who are afraid their God should fail
them, and to enter upon this Engagement; especially whilst T.V. Confesses,
That the Scripture Instances of Fasting many days together were Miraculous:
And surely, whether S. E. had not Power, or a particular Motion (not Imitation)
to have Answered his own Proposition in that case, of Fasting (if he had been
tried) T.V. does not know, because he durst not put it to the trial.

And as for T. V. his Railing and Reviling the Quakers, and Charging them with
being, Black Mouthed, Blasphemous Heretics, with damnable Errors. These are no
proofs against us, but do manifest his Enmity; as also his Answers to his
feigned Queries against us, are but his own Forgeries, without either Reason,
or proof of any of them; therefore returned back upon his own head, and denied
by us.

His Queries and Answers against us, runs thus; viz.
Query 1. Do you know what you are?

1st. You are Strangers to Christ, whatever your fancy be of Christ within you.
2dly. You are Enemies to Christ, and I believe that Christ has scarcely
greater Enemies under the Sun, than you. 3dly. You are Children of the Devil,
and the Works of your Father you do, and will do. 4thly. You are Serpents, and
a generation of Vipers, full of deadly Poison, Poison in the Head, the Poison
of damnable Errors; you are Serpents putting forth your stings.
Query 2. Do you know where you are?

1st. You are in the Devils School. 2dly. You are in the Devil's Arms, he
huggeth you so fast that it is more difficult to pluck you from thence, than the
most wicked and profane. 3dly. You are in the Devil's Chains.
Query 3. Do ye know what you are doing?

1st. You are dishonouring God. 2dly. You are murdering your own Souls,
imbruing your hands in your own Blood, you are some of the greatest Soul
murderers of any that live upon the Earth.
Query 4. Do you know whether you are a going? You are going the certain way to
Hell.

Thus far T. V. in answer to himself; but his outrage, and big words against
us, does not at all terrify us; nor are his bare Assertions any Proofs: And
whether he has not shown great wrath, bitterness, and enmity, and put forth a
Serpents sting here in the tail of his Pamphlet, let the moderate Reader judge:
And whether T.V. in this his outrage, be a Person to be believed, yea, or nay?
Or his severe Judging, harsh Censuring of us, to be taken as for one in
Christ's stead and Judgment Seat, whom partly he presumes herein to personate,
as he says, If our Savior were on Earth, he would style us as he did the
Pharisees; but in this he has presumed in Christ's Name, and in his Name
uttered his own slanders against the Innocent, for which a day of account will
come, which will be heavy upon him, and such false Accusers, if they do not
Repent; and if his eyes were open, he might see himself guilty of the same
things, whereof he has accused and judged others: Who in the end of his Book
repeates again what he did before Assert, That it were better for you to drink
a Cup of Poison, than to suck-in the Quakers damnable Opinions, etc. If People
will be such silly Women, as to be affrighted with T. Vincent his Railing and
Slanders against us, and his swelling words of vanity, so as to think the worse
(or be more afraid) of the Quakers; It will be the way to keep them in slavery
and bondage under him, and such as he is, thereby to be made a Prey upon; for
he, and such, seem more offended, when some of their Hearers, that have
gratified them with Rewards, or are somewhat Rich, are like to forsake them and
turn to the Quakers, then with all the threatenings they can devise, they will
endeavor to detain them, as this Tho. Vincent has published, That it was worse
to go to the Quakers Meetings, than to a Bawdy House. What think you, his
Hearers, and the rest of his Brethren, Were these words savoury, and did they
become his Profession, yea or nay? What says Joh. Owen, Tho. Danson, and
William Maddox to it? Let Honesty and Truth in All, arise and judge.

Ah! poor passionate T. Vincent, thou have brought such a blot and brand of
Infamy upon thee (by thus peevishly busying thy self against the Quakers) that
will not easily be wiped off: Consider thy ways, and what thou art a doing,
before it be too late.

ERRATA.
PAge 10. line 23, 24. read as if infallible. p. 25. l. 10. for Essences r.
Essence. p. 21. l. 4, and 11. r. see Arias Montanus. l. 5. f. Os-iik. r.
Osajik. p. 30. l. last. r. gifts. p. 33. l. 9. r. Persons. p. 36. l. 3. r.
(...) p. 37. l. 4. f. no r. do. p. 40. l. 9. r. man's return. p. 45. l. 32. and
p. 46. l. 11. f. oppressure r. a pressure. p. 48. l. 20. f. that they r. if
they. p. 52. l. 14. r. complacent. l. 36. f. whether r. neither. p. 57. l.
last. r. Contradicts. p. 60. l. 28. f. not under the Law to God, r. not without
Law to God.

The Errors and defects of the Press, whether they be Words, Letters, or
Points, the moderate Reader may easily see, and Correct, by the Import of the
Discourse.

An Answer to Thomas Danson's Synopsis of Quakerism, as he falsely and
scurrilously calls it.
BEfore I come to treat about the many particulars mentioned in Tho. Danson's
Pamphlet that relate to matter of Doctrine, I may not omit some passages of his
to the Reader as to matter of Fact wherein he shows his prejudice and peevish
spirit against the Innocent People of God, called Quakers.

As first, and chiefly, where he accuses W. P. of attempting to shake the Rock
Christ Jesus in his Godhead and Offices, which is an absolute falsehood and
slander, as has been proved over and over; the Divinity of Christ being still
owned by W.P. so that what can we expect from such a one as begins his work
with a palpable Lie, as T.D. has done, and all to render the Quakers as odious
as he can; he adding, how well he (W. P.) has immitated the Leaders of his
Party in their respects to other like truths, that so the Christians of these
Parts may no longer be imposed upon by the Quakers seeming innocence. Hereby he
has added to his falsehood and slander before, and struck at the Innocence of
the Quakers, which he scornfully and falsely counts but seeming; as also the
Leaders of his Party (as he calls them) never denied the Divinity of Christ,
nor ever held any Principles tending thereto since they were raised up to be a
People, and to preach the Name of Christ: and if so be that Innocence be not
really found among the Quakers, why are they so hated, persecuted, and brought
under Sufferings and Reproaches by such as be in the Woolfish nature tending,
and tearing whilst no real occasion has been given them by Quakers? who have
patiently suffered both under the ridged spirit of the Presbyterians, and
since; and as to their Principles. T. D. is no competent judge over them,
whilst he has perverted them, both in the former Powers days* and now also;
and whilst in those days he did endeavor to insinuate into the Powers that
then were, against the Quakers, he was plainly manifested, and his Errors and
Falsehoods detected by those faithful Servants of Christ Samuel Fisher, Richard
Hubberthorn, (and my self) he might now have been silent from raking over his
old silly confused stuff, so long since answered and confuted, since that from
the ample Confutation, and just reproof and discovery given against him by
Samuel Fisher he could never yet clear himself, nor has essayed a Replication
thereto, but only a slight put off, as will appear, without either Truth or
Reason: and as for his commendation of the pains of his worthy Friend Master
Thomas Vincent, as he calls him, he has little ground to applaud his pains; for
he has sufficiently manifested his envy, errors, confusion and shallowness, as
any unbyassed may see; as also the palpable contradictions both to himself and
T. D. so that they should first have studied to see a reconciliation and
harmony between their own Principles before they had come thus publicly to
engage; but it is the Judgment of God upon them, and such giddied spirits,
that one should oppose and contradict another, till they are both overturned
and broke to pieces in their war; but if his worthy Friend Thomas Vincent has
done so worthily against the Quakers, why does T. D. take so much pains again
after him? why does he actum agere, as he says? his Answer is, because of some
reflections upon him, also that as experience has showed there is a great deal
of difference of intellectual gifts, and that the Method, Phrase, and Notions
of scarce any one man are acceptable to all* he says; by which it appears that
he was conscious, or at least jealous that his worthy Master Vincent's work
would not be so acceptable as his own, but would give distaste; and therefore
he has endeavored to smooth it over, and to new moddel it in another phrase,
according to what he has imagined and learned out of Writers and old Authors,
both Popish and others; but what says he for not answering Samuel Fisher's
Book against himself, Jo. Owen, Baxter and Tombs, Entitled Rusticus ad
Academicos (which they were never able to answer, nor to reply to) T. D.
excuses himself as follows, viz. If any Quaker shall demand why I do not
answer. Samuel Fisher 's Book against me, instead of writing against a new man?
I answer, that I am guided in my neglect by the judgment of abler Persons then
my self, that that Book is but a Bundle of impertinent cavils, etc.

Indeed this is a very easy way of answering, which, if we should deal so with
T. D. what would he say to it, and to such neglect? but this does not clear
himself from Samuel Fisher's Answer, but it stands over his head; and if he was
guided by abler persons then himself in not answering S. F. those abler persons
for ought as appears might see T. D. so baffled and confuted, that it was in
vain for him to strive any further; and if abler persons then himself did
advice him* in that case he should have followed the example thereof, so as not
to have meddled, as he has done, to the further manifesting his weakness and
folly; and as for his instance of Biddles twelve Articles against the Holy
Ghost's Diety, it is no president nor instance for us, as is most falsely
insinuated against us, whilst we never denied the Diety or Divinity of either,
Father, Word, or Holy Ghost* And how does he advise the Reader to be at pains
to understand the positive grounds of the great Truths opposed by the Quakers,
as he falsely says; what must give the understanding thereof, if not the Light
of Christ within? and how must sacred mysteries be known? and what must bring
to the right use of reason, and to understand the Scriptures, if immediate
Revelation or Inspiration be supposed not attainable in these days? Can the
natural man with his natural understanding know the things that are spiritual,
(surely no) or know the right use of the Scriptures without the guidance of
that infallible Spirit that gave them forth? no sure; for it is the Inspiration
of the Almighty that gives understanding. And Seeing also that T.D.
confesses, that Reason tells us the Nature and Works of God are above our
reach, and that God were not Gof if he could be comprehended by a Creature;
which, if so that the Nature and Works of God are above his and their reach and
comprehension, why has he essayed so much by his natural understanding to
define and distinguish the Godhead into three distinct Persons, which he has no
Scripture for, nor yet Reason to demonstrate, nor Revelation to ground a Faith
upon in that case, whilst the Presbyterians were wont to affirm Revelation to
be ceased? and to be sure God will not put the Seal of his immediate power to a
falsehood, as is confessed, so that whilst we have neither Revelation,
Scriptures, Reason nor Seal of immediate Power for their Doctrines and
distinctions put upon the Diety, we have ground at least to question them, if
not positively to oppose them as unscriptural, irrational, implicit Doctrines
and Traditions, which has tended to vail both the glory of God, Christ, and
holy Spirit (which we confess) from people.

And now to T. D's definition of the word Person; first, from Aquinas as being
an individual substance of a rational nature; but his worthy Friend Tho.
Vincent has denied the Father, the Word* and the Spirit to be three
Substances; then I ask how they can be three distinct Persons* whilst a Person
is an individual Substance? what contradiction is this! But then T. D. says,
Some think it* (viz. Aquinas his Explanation of Person) liable to some
exception, and therefore he chooses to borrow that of learned Wotton on 1 John
1.2. page 2. that a Person is an individual Subsistence or Subsistent, rather
in an intellectual nature, or a several or singular thing that subsists by it
self, etc. A Man we call a Person; a Person notes some one endued with Reason
and understanding; which is several and distinct from another; a Person is
entire of it self, etc. page 1, 2.

Concerning which I query first, whether the Father, the Word, and holy Spirit
be three several and singular things, that subsist each by himself, each one
from another yea or nay?

Secondly, whether a man being a Person is a competent instance for proof of
his Maker being three several Persons? and whether a man subsists by himself?

Thirdly, whether Christ be several and distinct by himself from God* and the
holy Spirit several and distinct from both? If yes* where, or in what place of
the whole world (or out of it) is the one entire and severed from the other?
and how far distant one from another?

Fourthly, And if the Father Son and Holy Ghost, do not subsist in a several
and distinct nature of the same kind (so as they are not three Gods) as is
confessed page 3. how are they three distinct or separate persons, subsisting
each by himself?

These things being considered by the impartial Readers, the absurdity of the
Presbyterians Doctrine and Comparison, touching the Deity, will easily appear.

And what was this Aquinas* quoted as T. D's Author, so much cited and
commented by him, as a wise Observant, page 19? Was not he a great Writer for
the Romish Religion, and the Pope's Doctrine of Transubstantiation; and so a
promoter of Popery in his time, and canonized (...) Saint among them? see his
large Volums, his Sums, and others; he is highly applauded by the Papists, as
being an industrious Promoter of their Faith and Religion: and was he not a
Dominican Friar? To whom it appears that T. D. is very much beholding for his
Doctrine, [of three distinct (or severed) Persons in the Godhead] more then he
is to Scripture; for that is silent concerning it; but I have of late Read it
in Aquinas his Sums, who is Tho. Danson's wise Observant.

And further (mark) that after T. D. has confessed, that the word Person cannot
be properly attributed to Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, and that the Names
common to God and the Creatures do signify something wherein the Creatures
bears some anology to God, and three Persons, not strictly, yet anologically in
the Godhead, page 3, 4. Where proves he this by Scripture? and wherein does man
bear a proportion or likeness in his Person with his Maker? this is strange
Doctrine, importing that the Diety has the resemblance or likeness of persons,
but not properly; which, if improperly, why do they stand so much upon their
improper distinctions in the Godhead?

Yet, says T. D. may this word Person be used by us to distinguish the Father,
Son and Spirit in the Godhead, and one from another.

Answer, So it appears he pleads for a liberty to put improper names upon God
from his pretense of anology; the Scripture he mentions Hebr. 1.3. makes
against him, it being, the express Image of his Substance, (...); but as it is
in some English Copies, express Image of his Person; however, it is not the
express Person of his Person, much less the express singular Person, or
rational Substance, subsisting by it self, distinct from the Father; For I and
my Father are one, said Christ, and the Son does nothing of himself, but what
he sees the Father do; and the Father is in the Son, and the Son is in the
Father; and if so be that the Soul separated from the Body cannot be called a
Person, as T. D. says, page 2, 3. how can he presume to call the Spirit, which
is the Life or Breath of God a Person distinct from God, whilst God is never
distinct and separate from his own Life? But then it appears that T. D. is
necessitated to call the Glorious Divine three in Heaven something; and
therefore he says, that distinction in the Godhead cannot be apprehended by us
by any other notion or resemblance, (then Person) and says he, we know not
what to call these three, but Persons, page 4. For the conception or notion
that we have of the Father (suppose) as a Subsistent or Person is, in
adaequatus conceptus in respect of the Divine Essence, etc. page 17.

Reply, But by what does he and his Brethren apprehend this concerning God,
surely, neither by the Scripture not by immediate Revelation or Inspiration,
nor yet by reason for that has failed them in this matter; as also the nature
and works of God is above their reach and the comprehension of the Creature; so
that their conceptions and notions being unscriptural, we have no ground to
believe them, whilst we have but their conceptions, words and notions for what
they say derived from Popish and Heathen Authors, and not from any immediate
Power, Revelation or Scripture: and his saying, they do not know what to call
these three, but Persons; shows, they were hard put to it, as being
necessitated to call them something: but, what are they ignorant of the
Scripture? or would not the Scripture satisfy them, and yet profess it their
Rule? they had better search the Scriptures instead of Aquinas and Aristotle,
and see what they are called there; viz. The Father, the Word, and Holy Ghost,
which are One; besides these three bearing record in Heaven, T. D. has
elsewhere called them Witnesses, page 5, 7, and 10. and thus he contradicts
himself; one while he knows not what to call them, but Persons, and another
while calls them three Witnesses, (...). Three Witnesses.
from their bearing Record; and thus in contradiction he knows what to call
them besides Persons: but then he says, all Witnesses (properly so called) are
Persons: How proves he that? Are not all things that bear record Witnesses? Are
Heaven and Earth Persons? and are the Water and the Blood Persons, seeing they
bear record in the Earth? and is Conscience in a man a Person distinct from the
man, seeing Conscience bears witness? if it be, how then, is the Soul
distinct from the Body no Person, page 3, 5.

T. D. upon 1 John 5.9. the Witness of God is greater referring to the Witness
concerning Christ, verse 7. not to verse 8. for none of those Witnesses are God.

Reply, And yet those Witnesses verse 8. are the Spirit, the Water, and the
Blood; herein T. D. has denied the Spirit to be God contrary to their former
pretense; and so is come under that they have so unjustly charged us withal;
but we own the Divinity of that Spirit that bears record in the Earth, and know
the Water and Blood which agree in one with it, to be therefore Spiritual, and
of this water and Spirit a man must be born, or else he cannot enter the
Kingdom of God, Joh. 13.5. and by this Blood his Conscience must be sprinkled
from dead works, who ever comes to enter the Heavenly Sanctuary.

And we may further observe how dubious T. D. in his Work has appeared from
what he says page 83. viz. If my Answers seem not so clear as the Objections,
which I hope I need not fear, unless in the point of the Trinity, that being a
Mystery; so by that it rebates the sharpest edge of humane understanding, etc.
By which the Reader may take notice, that he was conscious to himself, that his
Answers in this case might not seem so clear as the Objections, and that he has
but made use of his humane understanding (and not of Scripture) therein, the
Edge of which is so rebated, and grown so dull, that it will take very little
impression upon any that are in a right mind and understanding; even none at
all upon such who rely not, nor lean to their own understandings, but upon the
guidance of the Spirit of Truth, which leads into all Truth; which it appears
he has refused and gone from, whilst he is now fain to make use of his humane
understanding, and his own notions and conceptions, which are not grounded on
Scripture; and therefore we may not have our Faith imposed upon by them, as to
accept of his humane conceptions and notions (which cannot reach the nature of
God) for divine verities.

And how says T. D. That infiniteness being a property of the Divine Nature,
agrees to each Person subsisting in that Nature; contrary to his worthy Master
Vincent's saying, that infiniteness is not ascribed unto the Personality? but
such like confusion and conrradiction we have enough of from them.

And indeed such nonsensical stuff, as is in both their Pamphlets, I have
seldom met withal; as one while T. D. says, We do not affirm the Person in the
Godhead to be finite but infinite; another while T. V. says, infiniteness is
not ascribed to them: Page 14.
another while T. D. says page 14. That they are one among themselves, only in
respect of that wherein they agree not simply: What kind of oneness or
agreement does he reckon is in the Diety, if it be not simply? Was there ever
such darkness and confusion uttered? and what blind Sophistry, and silly Logic
and babbling do these men use, and put upon the Immortal God? whom with all
their inventions, airy notions and vain conceptions they can never reach the
knowledge of; neither will, nor can their Heathenish Philosophy, terms of
Aristotle, nor apostate Christians and Papists demonstrate or discover the
Knowledge of either Father, Page 16.
Word, or Spirit to any people that want the knowledge thereof, but make them
more dark and ignorant, and shut them up in more blindness, as they have a long
time done.

And his saying, that (...) may by a metalepsis, yea must be rendered Person, or
Subsistent, or some word to that effect; and so tells that Just. Martyr applies
(...) and (...) to Father, Son and Spirit* page 17.

Reply, Surely T. D. is put very hard to it to word his Doctrine by his Anology
and Metalepsis for his distinctions of Persons, and his thereby rendering (...)
Person of necessity: Where proves he this, (and those terms by Scripture?) and
if they signify one and the same thing, why is not (...) in Hebr. 1.3. and
Chap. 11.1. as well as (...)? As in Hebr. 11.1. Faith is the Substance of
things hoped for; it is not Person of things hoped for; the same word that is
for Substance in that, is Hebr. chap. 2. verse 3. where it is [speaking of the
Son of God] who being the brightness of his Glory, and the express Image of his
Substance: Besides, what ever Authors or Fathers (so called) did put names,
distinctions and terms upon the Godhead which were either improper or
unscriptural, we must believe the Scriptures rather then them. And do they
count all Justin Martyr wrote One hundred and fifty years after Christ to be of
equal Authority with the Scriptures of Christ and the Apostles? Or might not
(probably) Justin bring in some of his Philosophy, which is not Scripture? And
we do not read in the Scriptures either of three distinct Substances in God, or
three distinct Persons; for, where are they so rendered either in the Hebrew,
Greek, Latin or English, in Scripture from the beginning of Genesis to the end
of the Revelations? But if they be not three Substances, as Tho. Vincent says;
how does T. Danson make (...) and (...) equivolent, or apply both to Father,
Son and Spirit? Is not here a manifest contradiction between these two Brethren
unto themselves, and their own Doctrine in this matter?

As for T. D. his Discourse about satisfaction, there needs not much to be said
unto it, for that the matter has been answered before; as also in part he
assents to W. P. in what he has said; for he T. D. does not affirm any
impossibility of forgiviness without a plenary satisfaction made, [as in the
sense and notion some of them have] etc. And though he knows some worthy
Persons do deny W. P's Affirmative, yet he cannot join with them therein: He
says also, God is free in his determinations what attribute he will manifest,
and in what degree and manner, and that between* Justice and Mercy, and their
effects, and all of his mere will interveens, etc. By all which, in a great
measure, he has confessed to what W. P. has writ in that case, though in
contradiction to his Brother Vincent, as is evident.

But where he speaks of Vindictive Justice that God might only have
manifested, when man fell, as he does upon the reprobate Angels or Devils, etc.
Now I query then, Is this Vindictive Justice, that which Christ under-went at
God's hand, (and satisfied according to their Doctrine?) if they say it is;
where do the Scriptures say so? or that God inflicted the same revengefull
justice (as I think they mean) upon Christ, that he does upon the reprobate
Angels or Devils, and then make this the means and manner of full satisfaction
for mankind? let us have plain Scripture for this Doctrine; was God's Love to
man purchased by such revenge upon his innocent Son as he lays upon reprobate
Angels or Devils? or is it not rather blasphemous to suppose that Christ could
ever be so far out of Gods favor, as to construe his Sufferings to the height
of revenge as goes against reprobate Angels and Devils? and does not this also
accord with T. V. his Doctrine? whereas Chrit was the beloved of the Father,
even his only begotten, the Son of his Love, in whom his Soul delighted, and
was always well pleased, both in his works and Sufferings, both in his life and
death for Sinners; but angry with the wicked, such as persecuted him and
crucified him afresh unto themselves, as he was also crucified in Spiritual
Sodom and Egypt; such Adversaries God will be avenged of: but his pleasure
shall prosper in the hand of his Anointed Seed Christ; but these things T. D.
his weak judgment (as he confesses it to be, page 18.) cannot reach. And
indeed in much of his Discourse about this matter, he has talked more like a
Lawyer then a Divine; and has brought several similitudes which will not hold
in matters of such high concernment: But I shall not need much to take notice
of his dark kind of reasoning in this particular, which proceeds but from his
weak judgemnt and private conceptions, since the matter is answered elsewhere,
and the extent of his and their Principles therein is further manifest, and
handled about his (and their) Doctrine of Imputed Righteousness, and his
Arguments for Sin and Imperfection in all, term of life: yet a little to some
particulars I may observe by the way (of this point) after he says, he shall
give us his sense, confessing that Satisfaction is not a Scripture phrase, page
19. However, we will choose Scripture phrase rather then T. D's weak judgment
and conceptions therein; having plenty of Scripture Phrases for pardon,
forgiveness, remissions, (upon a true Repentance.) And I query what Scripture
he has for his explanation of Satisfaction; viz. a compensation made to God
for our sin by Christ doing or suffering, or both, Justice that is Vindictive?
p. 19. What Scripture has he for these words and this Doctrine? Is not this a
confirmation to what is queried before concerning this he calls Vindictive
Justice? the same that God punishes the reprobate Angels or Devils with, the
same he reckons Christ to have suffered; and so has numbered Christ among
reprobate Angels and Devils; but yet another while Christ's being under the
Law, Gal. 4.4, 5. T. D. construes, as not lying barely in the smart of sense,
but in the brand of infamy thereby set upon us, page 20. But then how was it
the same revenge or punishment that reprobate Angels and Devils undergo, and
Sinners deserved, which surely is more then the brand of infamy? is not here
manifest contradiction? and did the brand of infamy proceed as revengefull
Justice from God, or rather from the envy and injustice of the wicked against
him.

Again, he was not ashamed to call us Brethren, Hebr. 2.11. that is (says T.
D.) Fellow Subjects, for being one in nature with us, he becomes one with us in
an obligation to the same Law; to which I say, if we are fellow Subjects, and
one in nature with Christ, and he one with us in obligation, etc. and that the
brand of infamy he underwent be set upon us; then it is to be minded, first
that such as be Christ's Brethren one in nature, and fellow Subjects with him
are Sanctified, and not remaining in a polluted nature, nor yet in a sinful
imperfect state all their life time; seeing both he that sanctifies, and they
who are sanctified are all of one; for which cause he is not ashamed to call
them Brethren, Hebr. 2.11.

Secondly, Fellow Subjects with Christ that are bound with him, and partake of
his Sufferings, are not rebellious, nor disobedient to him or his Law, but
faithful followers of him, by whose Power, Aid and Assistance they are
encouraged in their obedience and faithfulness to him; and this is the effect
both of Christ's Manfestation, Obedience and Righteousness to and in every one
that believes.

Thirdly, If Christ's condescension and union with his Followers, and their
being Fellow Subjects with him be the thing that Christ tenders to God for
Satisfaction, as T. D. in his Answer intimates, then, if he had held to this we
should not much have differed; but how this agrees with their Doctrine for the
continuance of Imperfection and Sin in all, (covered over with a pretense of
full satisfaction being made for them, which still leaves all in sin) I do not
yet understand, nor does it appear how he and his Brethren can be reconciled
herein.

But whereas T. D. confesses that Christ both by doing and suffering did
satisfy, and that the satisfaction may be made as well Agendo as Patiendo;
therein has he contradicted many of his Brethren, who lay it upon his
Suffering and Death only; another while upon his under-going Vindictive
Justice, as they call it, the same that is laid upon Devils.

But then, if his Satisfaction be as well agendo as patiendo, whether or no he
did do all in the days of his Flesh, in his own person, that was to be done
for man? or whether his work is not experimentally to be known and wrought in
every man, for the destruction or ending of Sin and Trangression, before full
satisfaction and peace be enjoyed with God? seeing his coming in the likeness
of sinful flesh, was to Condemn sin in the flesh, that the righteousness of
the Law might be fulfilled in us, that walk not after the Flesh, but after the
Spirit; and is not this Law Spiritual which we are bound to obey? for can it be
supposed that all mankind (or the Nation of the Gentiles) were bound under the
Law that was given to the Jews outwardly. And then would it be good Doctrine to
say, that we, or all Nations, were Fellow Subjects with Christ bound under the
Law of the Jews, which had the Shaddows of good things to come? or is it not
more meet to say that all ought to be subject unto the Law of Christ, the Law
of Faith, the Law of he Spirit of Life in him, and that he was made a surety (
Hebr. 7.22.) therein of a better Testament, which is Spiritual, and the
Righteousness of the Law which he fulfils within, is also spiritual and
inwardly known; its judgment, sentence and condemnation known inwardly, where
sin is condemned in the Flesh; seeing that the Commandment that was ordained to
Life the Apostle found to be unto death in him, as it is in all that come to
Life; and is not this the effect of Christ's Coming, Obedience, Sufferings,
etc* and how can these things be experienced but by waiting in his Light and
Spirit within? and if Satisfaction consists as well Agendo as Patiendo; are not
Christ's inward and spiritual operations included in his doing or works for
man's Salvation? how then can man exclude them, and think himself wholly
acquitted (and yet in his sins) by the Suffering and Death of Christ without*
as a full compensation and satisfaction in his stead* And for whom was Christ a
Propitiation, for the appeasement of wrath, relaxation of the Law, purchase of
freedom from punishment, page 23. If it consist in his Personal Obedience and
Suffering only, without the knowledge of his work within? then are not all men
so free and acquitted for whom he did suffer? and does not this extend to all
that were dead? for he is a propitiation for the Sins of the whole world; but
this Presbyterians deny; Here they deny the full satisfaction (or plenary, as
they call it.)
what effect then do they put upon Christ's Sufferings; viz. that he suffered
any otherwise then for a small select number; (accordding to their Doctrine)
whereas his Suffering was for all men, both Jews and Gentiles, (who were dead
in sin) in regard of his confirmation of that Spiritual and Living Dispensation
and Testament which extends both the Jews and Gentiles, which was promised to
Abraham, which is to be believed and obeyed. But to T. D's matter (for these
things are out of the reach of his carnal conceptions.)

As concerning the precious Blood, which he confesses to be the real Price
that has made a Purchase, 1 Pet. 18, 19. I ask, if the effects of that Blood
are not known within, in its purging the Conscience, and cleansing from all
sin, etc? And seeing he confesses it to be the Blood of God, page 26. What
Scripture has he then to call it humane? and does the Satisfaction consist in
humane Blood? how then does it satisfy Infinite Justice? Is not humane Finite,
according to T. D. and T. V. their Doctrine? But if this Blood of God, which
was shed for all men, have an inward effect in the Conscience, in order to the
answering of Gods will, and his pure Law within, and thereby being to his
satisfaction; how can men continuing in their sins, truly plead they are fully
acquitted at once without them, and they only in the implicit belief thereof,
received from the ridged* Presbyters, rest satisfied in their sins all their
life time?

And where does T. D. prove his Doctrine of Christ's being holy by a true
inherent righteousness of the humane Nature? page 25. what Scripture has he
for this, or these Expressions? was not his Righteousness from the Divine
Nature? and was it not Everlasting? but is not that which is humane Finite?

And T. D. saying, that the Socinians vomit, the Quakers have now lickt up*
Here T. D. has shot at us in the Devil's Bow* as formerly he confessed he did.
page 27. herein has he spoken scornfully and falsely against us, which will
not at all tend to convince Socinians, if they were as bad as rendered, but to
that they can answer him.

And his saying, the Elect, whilst Sinners in state: where proves he this, that
the Elect are Sinners in state, seeing the state of the Elect is a sanctified
and chosen state out of the World, and its ways, chosen in Christ through
sanctification of the Spirit and belief of the Truth, 2 These. 2.13. the
impossibility of deceiving the Elect is signified Matthew. 24.24. where the
Calling and Election is made sure, they shall never fall, 2 Pet. 1.10.

And that Christ was made surety of a better Covenant, Heb. 7.22. And came to
do his Fathers Will, Hebr. 10.7. And that his being a Surety is an Act of
Grace, page 28. This we confess and own more then you that contend for Sin, for
the Will of God is our Sanctification, and the better Testament and Covenant
which Christ is the Surety, Mediator and Establisher of, is that of
Righteousness, Life and Peace, wherein Sins and Transgressions are done away,
and wherein true Believers live to God.

And as for T. D. his so often comparing God to a Creditor, Christ to the
Surety, and Sinners as the Debtors; telling of God being considered as a
Creditor, and as a private Person, page 32. But where does the Scripture so
call him.

Reply, He does not speak from a true sense of God or Christ, or of Gods
Covenant, but a Notion he has learned by Tradition; and as to Sinners, their
case is worse then merely Debtors; they not only owing obedience to God and
Christ, but are disobedient and rebellious, as the case of Fellons, Traitors
and other Malefactors is worse then that of Debtors; yet Christ is our Surety,
Mediator and Intercessor, to make agreement between God and man, and to deliver
man from the Punishment and Wrath to come, [by delivering from Sin, the cause
of it, and destroying the Devil the Author of Sin;] not for us still to live in
Sin, and daily both contract more Debt, and incur tribulation and anguish upon
our Souls: Howbeit, the Ways of God extend beyond T. D's comparison; his Ways
are not as man ways, nor his Thoughts as man's thoughts: for as the Heaven is
higher then the Earth, so are my Thoughts higher then your thoughts says the
Lord, whose graciousness also to poor deceived lost man, for his restoration,
is infinitely beyond man's legality and exactions; as the Lord said, I will not
execute the fierceness of mine Anger, I will not return to destroy Ephraim; for
I am God and not man, the Holy One in the midst of thee, Hosea 11.9.

But is there not perfect obedience now for men to perform? must they all live
in Sin and Imperfection term of life, and say all our Debts is paid? and if
all their Debts be paid, why are they not out of Prison? But man in the fallen
state is worse then merely a Debtor; for he is a Malefactor, guilty of high
Offenses and Crimes against the pure Law of God, for which he must feel Justice
in the Ministration of the Law and Sentence of death inwardly upon the
Transgressor, before he receive and enjoy the atonement, ransom and peace with
God.
Are not all that are in Sin and Bondage of Corruption in Prison? and would it
be glad Tidings to tell them that though Christ has paid all their Debts, and
procured their release, and ransomed them, that they must not expect personal
freedom out of Prison, nor out of their Chains and Fetters so long as they
lived here? or if one should tell the Slaves in Turkey that they are ransomed,
and yet they must not expect personal freedom from their Vassalry and Slavery
so long as they live here, would this be glad tidings? no sure, but rather sad
news; and is just like these Presbyterians and Independants preaching to
people, and the tendence of their Gospel, and pretense of Satisfaction,
Redemption, Ransom, etc. whilst they hold none of them in Truth nor
Righteousness, nor in the same Spirit that gave forth the Scriptures of Truth,
and Testimonies of Christ or his Apostles.

T. D. page 29. He is satisfied, and the debt paid too, by his Intercession,
which being grounded upon his Satisfaction, supposes it to be what it pretends,
full and complete.

Observe. Here it is to be observed, that notwithstanding this his Assertion of
the Satisfaction [both by payment and punishment] being completely made, and
the debt fully paid; yet he confesses to Christ's Intercession: but what does
he ever live to make Intercession for, if all be fully done, paid, satisfied at
once by Christ's personal subjection and obedience; Though God was always well
pleased and satisfied in Christ, in his doing and Suffering, and as he was a
Sacrifice for Sin; yet this is not enough for us to profess and believe,
without knowing the Work of Christ, and Effect of his Sufferings and
Righteousness within, and his Spirit to make intercession, etc. Romans 8. Phil.
3.9.10.
must there ever be an intercession for that which is already so fully and
dearly paid for, (as they reckon Christ has done) and God has granted? how
will this hold consistent? But then it appears, it supposes it to be what it
pretends full and complete, says T. D. page 30. So here is now supposition and
pretense put upon Christ's Intercession and Satisfaction; what sorry shallow
work is this; but it appears. But to proceed from one that has followed his
own conceptions, notions, weak judgment and humane understanding; as also one
that by his Logic and Traditional borrowed Notions and Doctrines goes about to
make People to believe that from him, that he has no Scripture phrase for, as
that of God being a private person, and other things. And therefore like a
Lawyer is fain to patch up his work as well as he can, though in many things it
be very inconsistant and repugnant to it self.

And whereas our confessing Christ both in Life and Suffering to be a perfect
and real Example, is so much struck at by these Priests and Professors; (we
still withal confessing both to his Power and Living Effects through all) and
of all his Sufferings, Afflictions, Death and Life, which we reverently esteem;
touching which I testify, in the Lord, that if Christ be not really owned and
confessed, as he was a real Example, both in Life, Conversation, and in Patient
Suffering; neither the Fellowship of his Suffering, nor the Power thereof, is
truly known or experienced; for they who would partake of the Benefit and
blessed Effects of Christ's Death and Sufferings, and yet will not own him for
their Example, shall never enjoy him therein; seeing that Christ also has
suffered for us, leaving us an Example, that we should follow his steps, who
did not sin, neither was guile found in his mouth, 1 Pet. 2.21, 22.

Again, Forasmuch then as Christ has Suffered for us in the Flesh, arm your
selves likewise with the same mind; for he that has sufferred in the Flesh
has ceased from sin, that he no longer should live the rest of his time in the
Flesh to the lusts of men, but to the Will of God, Chap. 4.1, 2.

Now the ceasing from Sin, and following of Christ's steps in the harmless
sinless state, is the right use and end of his Suffering for man, and his
Example to man. But then mark T. D's Doctrine as follows, what an example and
subject of Wrath and Vindictive Justice (so termed) he renders Christ, viz.

T. D. page 36.4. Christ when he suffered was not innocent, and when God
required satisfaction of him, it was due from him; Christ was guilty of our
sin, when he suffered for it; for guilt is but obligatio ad paenam, an
obligation to undergo punishment, which Christ was under by contract, Hebr.
7.22.

Answ. Its no wonder that these Presbyterians, and those of their affinity
accuse all Christ's Followers of being Sinners, and imperperfect all their life
time, since that T. D. (one of their Leaders or Chieftains) has accused Christ
not to be innocent when he suffered; saying also, Christ was guilty of our Sin
when he suffered for it, which how false and blasphemous this charge is against
Christ, I appeal to all sober and moderate Professors of Christianity, who have
any real esteem and reverence to the Name of Christ and his Glory, and how
contrary to plain Scripture-testimonies plentifully given of him, as being a
Lamb, yea, the Lamb of God, which declared his innocence and purity, being
without sin or guile, who offered up himself by the Eternal Spirit, a Lamb
without spot to God, 1 Pet. 1.19. chap. 2.22. Hebr. 9.14. Isa. 53.7. Acts 8.32.
Now his being a Lamb without spot, and without blemish, manifests him to be a
perfect Offering, and Sacrifice for Sin; as also how guilt is more then barely
an obligation to undergo punishment, being always imputed to the Transgressors
and disobedient for sin, and not to Christ, Romans 3.19. Jam. 2.10. 1 Cor. 11.27.
Deuteronomy. 19.13. and 21.9. Exodus 34.7.

Although it is true those chief Priests, false Witnesses, and Persecutors of
Christ among the Jews, and such as accused him for a Blaspemer, they said also
that he was guilty of death, Mat. 26.65, 66. Mark 14.64. whose example T. D.
has followed in accusing Christ of being guilty, and not innocent. But if T.
D. should say he meant not that Christ was really, or inherently, or personally
guilty of sin, but by imputation, and so not innocent, but guilty of our sins;
by this we may perceive then what he means by imputation; that on the one hand
an innocent person is made guilty, and is not innocent whilst he has no sin,
nor guile or evil in him: and so on the other hand, by their own rule of
contraries ( contraria contrariorum ratio) persons are to be reckoned
imputatively righteous and innocent in God's sight, whilst there is neither
righteousness nor innocence really in them, which is both unreasonable,
unscriptural, and apparently false. It was a false imputation of the
persecuting Jews and Tho. Danson to impute guilt of sin to Christ, and to
accuse him with not being innocent, when no sin, evil, nor guilt was in him;
and it is as false an imputation of theirs to impute Christ's Righteousness to
sinful persons, who are not in it, nor partakes of it, in them; so its neither
God's imputation nor Christ's; for had Abraham no righteousness really in him,
when his Faith was reckoned to him for righteousness? where then was his Faith,
and the righteousness and obedience of it, if in reallity he was not a partaker
and an enjoyer thereof within? from whence did his acts or works of real
obedience proceed and flow, if not from his living Faith, and its righteousness
within? Surely they are of very mean capacities that cannot see T. D's
absurdities ignorance in these matters; And his vain imaginations and conceits
about imputation further will appear, and that the stress and drift of all his
and his Brethrens work in these invented Doctrines ^s to keep people* in their
sins and imperfections all their days, and so their work in rendering Christ
the subject of guilt, and so of vengeance that belongs to Devils, and their
rendering people the subjects of his Righteousness and Justification by
imputation, whilst unjust and sinful in themselves; it all centers in their
sinful Doctrine for sin and imperfection term of life.

Page 37. As to T. D's telling of the Son of God's Incarnation, the creation of
his Body and Soul, the parts of that nature he subsisted in, etc.

To this I say, if the Body and Soul of the Son of God were both Created, does
not this render him a Fourth Person? for Creation was in time, which
contradicts their Doctrine of Three distinct Increated, Coeternal,
Co-essential Persons in the Deity; seeing that which was created was not so:
but herein whether does not his and their ignorance of the only begotten of the
Father, and their denial of Christ's Divinity plainly appear yea or nay? where
does the Scripture say that his Soul was created? for was not he the brightness
of his Fathers Glory, and the express Image of his Divine Substance? But
supposing the Soul of Christ was (with the Body) created in time; I ask, if
from Eternity he was a Person distinct from God and his holy Spirit, without
either Soul or Body? and where does the Scripture speak of any Person without
either Soul or Body? lets have plain Scripture.

Page 38. Whilst T. D. grants our actual freedom from sin and wrath depends on
what Christ did and suffered, as on and upon its means; what becomes of his
Doctrine and Pleas for sin and imperfection which they that continues in term
of life cannot be truly said to be Actually freed from sin, nor yet
imputatively righteous in Gods sight, whilst actually and really sinful: And
if Christ's obedience was not intended to exempt us from a personal obedience
to the Law, as is confessed in page 38. then its contrary to the end of his
Obedience to live in sin and disobedience term of life, and for any to be
reckoned imputatively righteous, when actually disobedient.

Secondly, And if we be only so far made righteous by Christ's Obedience, as
unrighteous by our own disobedience: how far is that? have we not been actually
unrighteous, and shall we so far be made righteous by Christ's Righteousness?
Is not this more then your Doctrine of Imputation (whilst personally sinful)
amount to; but your flat contradictions in these matters are evident.

Page 39. And though Christ is our Surety, this does not exempt us either from
following him, or walking in the Way of God; but the more engage us therein;
and herein we know acceptance in the Beloved of God, in that holy conversation
which his pure Law within enjoins, without obedience to which God is not well
pleased, nor satisfied on man's part, though he was even well pleased and
satisfied in his own Son, both in his doing and suffering; the benefit whereof
they only receive who believe in, and obey him in his Light within: and to such
only he is the Author of Eternal Salvation, as do obey him; though the free
proffers of Gods Love in him toward all mankind, God commended his Love to us,
in that whilst we were Sinners Christ died.

So that we do faithfully acknowledge the Love and Goodness of God in Christ,
and would not at all have it diminished or suspected, nor yet have Christ's
Offices, Works, or end of his coming brought into question; however we do
oppose men's confusions and misapprehensions concerning God, Christ's
Righteousness, Faith, etc. which none rightly know, or apprehend, but they who
are led by the Spirit of God.

And now touching Justification by Imputed Righteousness, where it is known in
reallity, Of Justication.
we never denied or opposed, seeing that where God imputes or reckons
righteousness as he did to Abraham, and still does to his Seed of Faith, that
has a real sense and enjoyment of it, as every one has, that is in the
exercise of the true and living Faith: But we do still oppose and deny the vain
Conceits and Imaginations of the Presbyterians, Independants, and all of their
affinity touching their false Imputation and Justification to sinful and wicked
men, (whilst such) which he that justifies is abomination to the Lord, as he
is that condemns the Just.

Page 39. But whilst T. D. grants that the word Justify (...) and (...), To
Justify, what it is.
and the Hebrew Hitzdik signifies Justum facere: By this he has contradicted
himself, and much of his Brethrens work; for Persons being justified whilst the
Subjects of Sin and disobedience; for if (...) Justify be to make Just, then
it is a real work effected by the Spirit of God, Sanctification and Justification
being inseparable Companions, as T. Vincent has confessed, which is not their
imagined Justification, nor pronouncing men righteous whilst they are really
unrighteous; for whilst such the Spirit of God does both condemn and accuse,
and not justify them in any thing contrary to its own nature; neither is it
truly said that men are made Just while they continue unjust and Sinners.

Secondly, if the word Impute (...) properly signify to cast account; and the
Hebrew Chashab signifies to think, imagine, and reason, etc. as T. D. says.

Then first, if it has relation to Gods imputing righteousness to the
Believer, the account he casts therein must needs be true; for he does not
account wicked men righteous.

Secondly, If Impute signifies to think, imagine and reason: as to imagining,
it cannot have relation to God, for his Account is beyond Imaginations, and his
thoughts above man's thoughts; and then it is not safe nor true in man to depend
upon his own thinking, or imagining, or imputation; for where God accounts a
man righteous, his Spirit does evidence it beyond thoughts or imaginations; for
many imagine and think themselves righteous, when they are unrighteous; as
there is a Generation that is pure in their own eyes, yet are not cleansed from
their filthiness: and when Christ's Righteousness is esteemed any ones, it is
not without the works of her own, as it is falsely asserted page 39. no more
then Abraham's Faith was without its own works or obedience.

Page 40. T. D. Argues first from the proportion which our justification by
Christ's Righteousness bears to our condemnation by Adam 's sin; but our
condemnation was by imputation of Adam 's sin; therefore our Justification is
by the imputation of Christ's Righteousness Romans 5.19.

Reply, This Condemnation that is come upon all men, is because all have sinned
and partaken of the fall, being in Adam in the Earthly state, really bearing
his Image, and this is not a thinking or imagining a condemnation from, or for
an imputation of Adam's sin, (according to their notion of it) but really a
partaking of the disodience of one upon all; every man shall die for his own
iniquity, the Soul that sins, it shall die, etc.

And if our Justification by Christ's Righteousness bears a proportion to our
Condemnation, then must we as really partake of Christ's Righteousness, being
converted, as we have of sin being unconverted; and this is not a thinking or
imagining our selves righteous, but a true enjoyment and bearing his Image, and
being conformable to it, as really as we have born and been conformable to the
Image of the Earthly, 1 Cor. 15.47, 48, 49.

T. D. Argues secondly, from the proportion of our being made righteous bears
to Christ being made sin; but Christ was made sin by imputation; therefore so
are we made righteous, 2 Cor. 5. ult. for he was made sin for us, who knew no
sin (i. e. by an experimental knowledge of its operation in himself he did no
sin, 1 Pet. 2.21.) that we might be made the righteousness of God in him.

Reply, Here T. D. has but brought over his old Arguments long since answered
and confuted by that Servant of the Lord S. Fisher, as may be seen at large in
his Book Rusticus ad Acadaemicos; which T. D. J. O. and their Brethren could
never answer; this I mention, that people may perceive his matter to be neither
new, nor more profound then it was many years ago, when it was confuted by
Truth: And if our being made the Righteousness of Christ bear^^ proportion to
his being made to be sin for us, when he knew no sin by its operation in
himself, nor did sin; then it follows by this proportion that we are made (or
rather thought or imagined) to be the Righteousness of God in Christ, whilst we
neither knew his Righteousness, nor experienced his work in our selves, nor did
righteousness; which is altogether false, and contrary to the Apostles Doctrine
and intent, seeing that it is Christ in whom is no sin, that we are made Gods
Righteousness, having experienced the new Creatures state in Christ, which in
him is created unto good works, which God has ordained we should walk in them,
2 Cor. 5.17, 18. Ephesians. 2.10. and this is more then thoughts or imaginations of
being righteous, or in Christ; for it is in truth and reallity, which admits
not of your imagined* applications, or claiming an interest in that which you
are out of, and which is none of yours in the true enjoyment.

And if the word Impute, has relation to Justification and Justify, signify
Justum facere, then W. P's definition thereof is true, being that which
expresses what is personally enjoyed, and not imagined, and this was no Cavil,
as Tho. Danson falsely says page 41.

T. D. God admits of what Christ did on our behalf, as if it were our Personal
Act, page 41.

Reply, This is his apprehension of the Sureties payment of the Debt, as
appears before, which is a very easy put off, to evade personal, or real and
perfect obedience on the Creatures part; but it will not be so accepted of God,
as the end of Christ's Obedience; seeing that it was to make man righteous, as
his condemning Sin in the Flesh was, that the righteousness of the Law might be
fulfilled in us that walk not after the Flesh, but after the Spirit; which
righteousness fulfilled in us T. D. formerly said was to be meant in Christ's
Person, and not in ours, by which likewise he has both excluded man from the
real enjoyment of Christ and his Righteousness, and from that obedience and
sanctity which he requires, and answers the end of his coming and
manifestation; and by this means the Professors have made the Law and Commands
and Teachings of God ineffectual as to the Creature, whilst Christ only is made
the subject of them, and not man; and this gives a liberty to people to live in
sin all their time, and to pervert Gods Laws, and neglect the teachings of his
Grace, and vainly to excuse themselves in their disobedience, like as T. D.
has done; as where the Grace of God and his pure Law requires perfect
obedience from us, and that denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, and that we
should live godly, righteously and soberly in this present world; now if any
man should say, that this was not intended to us, but to Christ, as if God did
require him to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, to forsake all sin, and live
righteously, when he never did nor could sin, nor had the Prince of the world
any thing in him; this would be a strange put off, and gross perversion of the
Law of God, to lay it all upon Christ, and put it from themselves: whereas
Christ's Example is perfectly to be followed, and where he is manifest, and his
Life brought forth in man, there is a conformity to his Heavenly Image, and not
a living in sin, nor to the lusts of the world, but to the Will of God.

Page 42. But as to T. D's confessing to the Creditors cancelling the B^nd,
letting the Debtor out of Prison, giving a legal Discharge upon the Sureties
payment of the Debt, as he could have done upon his personal payment.

First, Hereupon I do enquire, if man that has been in Prison and bondage
under sin and corruption be let out of that Prison upon Christ's Obedience? if
he be, then he must not remain in personal bondage all his life time, from
partaking of Christ's Righteousness and Obedience; for if he be released from
the servitude of sin, and be let out of that bondage, then he is made free from
it by the Law of the Spirit of Life, to serve, obey and walk in the Law of
Righteousness by Faith; and this is not an imagined fixion or conceit of
Freedom or Justification, whilst people are in real bondage, which your
Doctrine tends to keep people in.

Though it be true, as amongst men, that the Act of one Person may by contract,
or Act of Law become the Act of another, as the Sureties payment of the Debt is
accepted for the Debtor; yet in this case it does not reach the real and full
intent of Christ's Coming, Obedience and Righteousness, which is to bring man
into his Image, and to fulfill the righteousness of the Law in man, that he may
follow his Steps, and have the same Mind, Spirit and Righteousness in him that
was in Christ, that he may walk after his Example in all purity and holiness of
conversation.

Yet so far as releasement out of Prison is imported in the comparison, or any
thing tending to a real Deliverance of the Creature out of Sin and Corruption,
and so from Condemnation, it may be admitted of so; for then it contradicts
their pleading for sin and imperfection term of life: and surely God does not
legally declare any to be righteous, whilst his Spirit and Law within reproves
them for sin, and declares them unrighteous; for God and his Spirit do not
contradict one another; neither does God declare people to be out of Prison,
whilst they are really in bondage to their sins, lusts and vanities, as the
carnal Priests and Professors have falsely done; but the Liberty which Christ
proclaims to the Captives is really to be enjoyed and received by every one
that believes, and receives him, his Message and Testimony.

And this is not a false Imputation, or an imagined Application of
Righteousness and Freedom to People in their personal bondage of Sin and
Corruption, such as T. D. and such false Guides have led people into.

And that of Ezekiel. 18.20. the Son shall not bear the iniquity of the Father,
T.D. says, Imports Gods gracious recession from his right, because of their
more then ordinary Audacity in charging his Ways with inequality: This is his
false construction.

For God shows his Way to be equal verse. 25, 26, 27. which is no recession
from his right, as his condemning such as turn from righteousness, and
Justifying and giving Life to such as turn from wickedness; for both
Graciousness, Mercy, and Judgment are his right, and he rewards every man in
Righteousness according to the Equality of his Ways.

T. D. Nor does God Justify what is opposite to his pure Nature in Justifying
a person who in himself is impure upon the righteousness of another imputed to
him.

Reply, Is not a person that is in himself impure opposite to God's pure
Nature? Surely purity and impurity are opposite; and whilst the impure Person
is rendered the subject of Justification upon another's righteousness imputed,
he then it seems is accounted pure by T. D. and not opposite to God's pure
Nature, though he be personally impure* but surely God does not then account
him pure, whilst in impurity; for God cannot lie, nor account as the Wicked and
Hypocrites do, who are pure in their own eyes, though not washed from their
filthiness; and here we may see T. D. and his Brethrens false notion and
conception of Imputation and Justification, and how contrary it is to Justum
facere, which the word Justify signifies, as by him before confessed, (viz. to
make Just;) when now he falsely renders an impure person not opposite to the
pure Nature of God, from his notion of Imputation and Justification in that
state.

Page 44. Arg. 3. Sin came not by Imputation, but by actual Transgression,
[This is laid down as the Quakers.]

To which T. D. Answers, The sin of Adam was made his Posterities by
Imputation, Romans 5.12, 14. Adam was a common Root of Mankind by nature.

Reply, Herein has he perverted the Scripture, which does not say that the Sin
of Adam was made his Posterities by Imputation; neither does he hereby prove
his notion of Imputation of Righteousness to impure persons; for sure he cannot
prove that all Adam's Posterity were pure, and sin not actually theirs, but
only imputed to them whilst not partakers of it; this is contradictory, and as
false as their Imputation of Righteousness and Justification to men whilst
unjust; but the Scripture he mentions Romans 5.12. says, As by one man Sin
entered into the World, and Death by Sin; so Death past upon all men, for that
all have sinned; (mark that) for until the Law Sin was in the World, but Sin is
not imputed where there is no Law, verse 13. But now (mark) there is a Law
transgressed, whereby Sin and Transgression is imputed to them that are guilty
of transgression, as all in Adam, in the earthly state and nature are; and
therefore on the other hand righteousness is not imputed to persons out of
Christ, or to such that are not partakers of his righteousness.

Page 45. Arg. 4. Quaker. A man cannot be said to be actually sinful, and
imputatively righteous; he may as well be said to be actually damned, and
imputatively saved.

To which T. D. answers; Why not? as well as to say a man is actually poor
and not worth a groat, but imputatively rich, as having by Surety paid his debt
of thousands.

Reply, Here he has plainly discovered their notion of Imputation, and the
falseness of it, (viz.) that a man is imputatively righteous when actually
sinful, or actually damned and yet imputatively saved: what gross Corruption
and Ignorance is this? and what an improper Comparison does he bring to back it
(let the wise judge) and we do not admit of it in this case; as that a man
should be actually damned and imputatively saved, or actually guilty and yet
imputatively innocent, but that such to whom righteousness and true riches are
reckoned as being theirs, have right therein and are partakers thereof; and
what he asserts herein by his simile is but a beging the question, and taking
that for granted which is still opposed as both unscriptural and unreasonable;
viz. men being actually damned and imputatively saved, or actually guilty and
imputatively innocent; by the same reason he might as well say, persons really
Thieves are innocent, or persons really and actual treacherous and rebellious
are true and good Subjects; or actually Devils and imputatively Saints: But
Christ being or becoming our Suerty was not to impute righteousness to men in
transgression, but to bring them into Covenant and Peace with God, which stands
in everlasting righteousness, and not in sin; for he was also a perfect example
to be followed as well as professed; and he is the Surety of the new Testament
and Covenant which is spiritual, and is manifested and enjoyed in his people.
And T. D's instance [ that nine men throughout a mutinous Army are actually
guilty, and yet imputatively innocent; when the tenth man is admited to sustain
the punishment due to the rest] is as sottish and impertinent as the rest
before, for neither is a mutinous Army innocent, nor is Christ any of the
mutinous or guilty Persons.

And where proves T.D. that Imputation is an Act of Law and makes a Relative,
and not a real change? I ask what Law it is an act of? is it real or true, or
no? if it be of God it must be true; if not, then false; and it is a false
imputation which is not real, and contrary to the Apostles Doctrine, who knew
that Abraham's Faith was imputed or reckoned to him for righteousness, and to
that state to which there was no condemnation (but justification) which was a
state of being and walking in Christ, and not a walking after the Flesh, but
after the Spirit; and this they that experience and witness, know a real change
from death to life, from condemnation to justification, from sin to
righteousness, from the ways of death and darkness to the ways of Life, Light
and Peace.

Page 45. T. D. says, There is no need of inherent Righteousness for
Justification, bu^ yet there is need of it for other ends, as to make us meet
for Heaven, Col. 1.12.

Answ. It appears that he means by this inherent righteousness that of
Sanctification, (or the work of Gods Spirit within) which he afterward calls
personal righteousness; and is there no need of this for Justification? what
darkness is here! as if men were justified while in the unsanctified state;
this is like the rest of his sottish stuff* quite contrary to the Apostles
Doctrine, which is, But ye are Sanctified, but ye are Justified in the Name of
our Lord Jesus Christ, and by the Spirit of our God, 1 Cor. 6.11. And also what
contradiction has T. D. brought to himself herein, whilst he has confessed,
that the word Justify signifies to make Just; as also he has confessed that
inherent Righteousness, as he call it, gives a fitness of enjoying the Heavenly
Inheritance, it lying in Communion with God, page 46. then it follows, that it
gives a fitness for Justification, whilst Justification and Sanctification are
unseparable Companions; and God loves his Image in his People freely, says his
Brother T. V. Thus without Washing, Clensing and Sanctification men are not
Justified, seeing the unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of God, and
they that live in unrighteousness cannot be accepted of him; It being not the
Hearers of the Law, but the Doers that shall be Justified.

Page 46. And now concerning good works that are acceptable to God, which T. D.
accuses us with placing Merit for Justification, or as a deserved cause
thereof, etc.

Concerning this particular, that faithful Servant of the Lord S. Fisher has
very fully answered T. D. and his Brethren; and it has been manifest how he
did wrong and abuse S. Fisher about this point; and how contrary to his intent
he construed good works, as being ours, relating to self works, or imperfect
obedience, which S. Fisher never intended, but with Relation to those works
which are perfect, which Christ is the Author of, (which if Christ's Works be
not deserving, whose are?) and to those which God has wrought in us, who
having ordained Peace for us, has wrought all our works in us, Isa. 26. now we
never placed a merit upon self-acting, nor upon man's best works in the fallen,
sinful and corrupt state; so that there is not a correspondency betwixt us and
the Papists in this particular, as falsely we have been accused; see S. Fisher's
Rusticus ad Accademicos, where the point is fully explained, which you
Presbyterians and Independants are never able to answer.

Where did we ever profess or hold forth, that we were able, or could fulfill
the Law our selves, or merit or deserve Salvation by any thing that we could
do? but we do profess and witness, that through the Power of Christ we are
enabled to faithful and sincere obedience, not of our selves, knowing, that
good works (how ever rejected and undervalued) are ordained of God, and without
them your faith is dead, as a body without a Spirit is.

And it is true enough, as T. D. says, That you are averse to obedience
through corruptions; who plead for sin term of life, and yet would cover over
all your filthy rags with a pretense of Christ's Righteousness, Satisfaction,
Imputation, Justification and Merit, whilst you are yet in your sins and
corruptions, and in the weakness of your flesh, but as under the Law of works)
wherein you are in no perfect obedience.

Page 47. Seeing the Law of Faith is acknowledged, I ask, how far it extends,
whether to enjoin to the perfect obedience of Faith, yea or nay? seeing sin and
corruption is so prevalent amongst you, and so contended for, surely where the
exercise of the true and living Faith is experienced, there is obedience to
the Law of it; or else what does it signify whilst persons remain in
disobedience?

Further, T. D. confesses, that we have an immediate dependancy upon God in
our operations, John 15.5. without me ye can do nothing, (Siorsima me) separate
or apart from me.

Its well he has at some time assented to the Truth; but how does this
contradict the greatest part of his own and his Brethrens work elsewhere, in
their pleading for imperfect obedience, and their imagined imputation of
Righteousness and Justification to the unrighteous and unjust? for those
operations which have a relation to an immediate dependence upon God, which he
that is in Christ does experience and bring forth, do accord with the mind and
will of God, which is the Sanctification of those that believe, and with that
most holy Faith which purifies the heart; and these are not imperfect, nor to
be slighted as undeserving, according to the vain notions of Priests concerning
Faith, its works and inherent Righteousness, as they term it.

Page 47. T. D.. Their dependancy upon Christ in all the good they do, is as
near and intimate, as the Branches upon the Vine by virtue of their natural
union in bearing Fruit.

Answ. This is also a Truth that grants a perfect obedience in them that have
such a near intimate dependency upon Christ, as the Branch has that grows upon
the Vine, by virtue of the natural Union thereof; this also contradicts their
pleading for imperfection and sin in all obedience and works, which also shows
that they do not flow nor spring from Christ the true Vine, as also, that they
have not union with him, nor are Branches of him; and indeed how they have not
immediate dependency upon God in Christ whilst they deny Immediate Teaching,
Revelation and Divine Inspiration to be attainable in those days.

But seeing without, or apart, or separate from Christ men can do nothing; how
then can they be any thing without him, as righteous, or acceptable, or
justified? For men must be something in that Relation before they can do any
thing acceptable; and it is the Spirit and Power of Christ which sanctifies
and makes just, and brings into the true Obedience, Works and Righteousness
of Faith, and to live by Faith, as the Just does.

Page 48. But Faith as a work is not opposed to (nor excludes) it self, as T.
D. says, because in one sense it is opposed to the deeds of the Law; for true
Faith, as a Work, is the Work of God, which is not opposed to it self; besides,
it being the work of God, to believe in Christ, this has not relation to those
deeds of the Law that the Jews wrought out of him, and out of, (or besides)
that Faith wherein they fell short of the Righteousness of the true and living
Faith, and of the perfect Obedience or Righteousness of the Law.

Now seeing he confesses page 49. to a righteousness bestowed upon men by
Faith; I ask, if that man is not a partaker and enjoyer of that righteousness
by Faith? Surely Faith and its Righteousness are not separate nor divided. Also
he confesses, Faith in God, through the Messiah is called a walking humbly
with God, Micah 6.8. To this I say, whilst he thus considers Faith as such a
walking; were it not very gross nonsense and contradiction to say that it
excludes it self, as before? or that those works or effects of Faith, (viz.)
Walking humbly with God, were opposed to the Faith it self, which is the Root
thereof? But this is even like T. Vincent's affirming Faith to be opposite not
only to the works of the Law, but to its own Works.

Page 51. I find T. D. upon James 2.24. does not distinguish betwixt the Works
of Faith, and the Works of the Law, and so talks like an ignorant blind Guide,
with his vain babbling, and perverting of the Scripture to exclude perfect
Obedience and Perfection from the Believers.

And seeing he grants, that Justification imports the Absolution of Sinners,
and the Approbation of a Believer; which he distinguishes betwixt: Then it is
to be minded, that a Believer, that is approved of, is absolved, being
Justified* and what from, if not from Sin and Transgression? Otherwise Faith
that stands but in a bare profession, without a living work of purifying the
heart, overcoming the World, etc. is but a dead Faith, as T. D. in fine
confesses.

And we are Justified by works, as our Faith is made perfect by works, James
2.22. but these are not the works of the Law, but the Works of the Living
Faith, which manifests Fruit to God, and demonstrates the nature of the
Living Faith: But his telling of a Sinner being Justified in the sight of God;
where does the Scripture say so? he quotes Rom 3.23. to prove it, but it does
not; but only that a man by Faith is Justified without the deeds of the Law,
which deeds of the Law a man may be Justified without, and yet not a Sinner,
nor without the Obedience, Works or Righteousness of the True and Living Faith
which Purifieth the heart, and Justifies from all those things from which they
could not be Justified by the Law of Moses.

And as to his saying, That we are made free meritoriously, by the Law of the
Spirit in us, from the Law of Sin and Death: (The word meritoriously, he
adds) But the freedom of the Law of the Spirit in us from the Law of Sin and
Death, we do confess; and that it is the same Law of the Spirit of Life that is
in Christ and the Saints, according to the Apostles Doctrine; the Freedom of
which we testify is of Everlasting worth; for that it is not wrought by our
selves, but by Christ and his Law and Spirit.

Page 52. T. D. says, That we observe that the righteousness of the Law is
fulfilled in the Persons of the Saints.

Indeed we do observe it, believe it, and experience it, and do not wholly put
it off from us, to be fulfilled in the Person of Christ, as T. D. and some of
his Brethren have corruptly done; though we do confess that the Righteousness
of the Law was fulfilled in Christ's Person; but not therefore to exclude it
out of us, since that he was a faithful Example to be followed, as well as a
Captain and Leader to guide in all the Ways of Peace and true Holiness.

Page 52. And as we do observe that the Righteousness of the Law is fulfilled
in the Persons of the Saints, contrary to T. D. and his Brethrens observation,
and thereupon not only suppose, but really assert a state of Freedom from Sin
attainable in this life; we do not place the Merit of Justification upon the
Creatures imperfect obedience or works; but origionally on the Spirit of Truth,
and its perfect work, in which Spirit Christ perfectly obeyed, offered up
himself a Lamb without spot to God; and we know that it is the Law of the
Spirit of Life in Christ that makes us free from the Law of Sin and Death,
Romans 8. which Freedom is effected with in.

Page 53. If there be a connection between Justification and Sanctification; and
that the same Christ Jesus that Justifies by his Blood, Sanctifies by his
Spirit, as is confessed, (from Calvin, etc. in Loc. 2.) then men are not
Justified whilst in an unsanctified state, seeing, that it is also evidenced by
a holy life; but then herein T. D. seem doubtful, as rather enclining to lay
it upon the active obedience of Christ; but then is not he that is Sanctified
and Justified, being in an holy life, a partaker of Christ's Righteousness,
Obedience, and Subjection in the Spirit of Life* and the pure Law of it? seeing
that makes free from the Law of Sin and Death. But then he wavers again to the
understanding of some who suppose the end of Christ's coming into the World is,
that God's Righteous Laws might not be absolutely contemned, but might be
observed (though imperfectly) by Believers; others, (says he) of the
Imputation of Christ's Surety, Righteousness, etc. This imperfect observation
of God's Righteous Laws is that he would fain center in, and which indeed the
tenor of most of his discourse amounts to, though it be not the end of Christ's
sending into the World, nor yet the work of the Spirit and Law of Life within;
for the end thereof was to destroy sin, and to work man's perfect freedom from
it, which they that experience are only the true and real subjects of Christ's
Righteousness, and know the true imputation thereof, and effect and real
benefit of his being a Surety of the new Testament, wherein the Promises of God
are fulfilled to and in man, and man brought under the obligation of that Law
and Covenant which tends to the exaltation of Truth and Righteousness in the
Earth, and the bringing the Creature into a perfect and peaceable subjection
unto its Maker: So Christ's being both our Surety, Advocate, Intercessor and
Mediator betwixt God and man, is to make both Unity, Reconciliation and Peace
betwixt them; a Mediator being not a Mediator of one, but betwixt two, etc. to
bring into mutual agreement.

T. D. Our good and our evil works are not perfectly contrary, for our evil
works are perfectly evil, for, malum fit ex quilibet defectu, any one defect
make our works evil, but our good works are but imperfestly good.

Answ. If good works and evil works be not perfectly contrary, where and what
then are the good works, whilst defect and imperfection is pleaded for, which
makes them evil? Surely good and evil are perfectly contrary; but by this man's
consequence, there is no good works whilst defects and imperfections remain in
them; and then why does he call them good works? It appears he gives them that
name which is improper to them; but if good works be really acknowledged, as we
know they are in Scripture, and that they that are truly so, are wrought in the
Light, and so in God, these are perfectly contrary to evil; but such T. D. and
his Brethren with their sins and imperfections are strangers to, whilst they
show themselves to be out of the Light wherein the good works are wrought: and
as to the condignity he speaks of, (or worth) as with relation to the infinite
reward, we do, as before, place it in that Heavenly Image, Spirit and Life
which brings forth the good works which were ordained of God, and it is that
Spirit which leads its Followers to the infinite reward of Life and Salvation.

Arg. 4. Romans 2.13. Not the Hearers of the Law are Justified before God, but
the Doers of the Law shall be Justified; to this T. D. says; The words give a
reason of the Jews perishing who had the Law, (viz.) the old Covenant.

Reply, The reason of their perishing was their Disobedience unto the Law; but
this, of the Doers of the Law, wherein both the Just and Justified state is
intimated, according to the Gospel, verse 14, 15, 16. relates to those Gentiles
which had not the Law outwardly, and yet did by nature the things contained in
the Law, which the Apostle renders as a reason and proof of their
Justification, who showed the Work of the Law written in their hearts, which
Law was pure and Spiritual, converting the Souls, and here it is also evident,
that the matter or things contained in the Law, they had both in Power and
Operation, who had it not in the Letter of it; but the extent of this is and
has been much opposed by T. D. and such as he, who have grossly perverted the
Scriptures for their own sinful and corrupt ends to their own and others
destruction.

And now that a state of Freedom from sin is attainable in this life, Of
Perfection.
this T. D. erroneously sets down as an Error, and argues against it as
follows.

Arg. 1. If no mere man ever attained to any such state, then it is not
attainable, but no mere man ever did, etc.

Answ. His term mere man is his own, and not ours; what he means by mere man,
is a question; for it may be taken variously, as first, he may be deemed a mere
man, that is, without God, Christ or the guidance of his Spirit, who lives to
himself; in which state we never said that freedom from sin was attainable by
any mere man; for without Christ we can do nothing. Secondly, if mere man be
taken singly, as purus homo, or man purely or entirely without mixture of those
things which are either contrary to him, as Man, or not proper to his being
Man, (as sin and transgression were improper to him) for so he was in his first
Creation in Innocence and primitive Purity; as so considered, to deny him
Perfection, or Freedom from sin, were to deny him that which God did invest him
with whilst he was in his Maker's Image, which was proper to him, and to which
Christ comes to restore man again out of the Fall: But then T. D. explains what
he means by mere man; viz. such as the eminently holy Persons in the
Scriptures, whom he denies to have ever attained a state of Perfection; by
which he has accused all the holy Men of God at once, as but mere men, in the
worst sense; and such were they that were carnal, and walked as men, 1 Cor 3.3.
and he has therein both opposed God's Commands, Promises, and Works, as also
the end of Christ's manifestation, which was perfectly to restore man out of
sin and unrighteousness unto God, see Genesis 3.15. Romans 16.20. Deuteronomy. 6.5. and
10.12. and 11.1. and 13.18. and 19.9. Matthew. 22.37. Mark 12.30. Genesis 17.1.
Deuteronomy. 18.13. 2 Samuel 22.33. Psalm. 18.32. and 37.37. and 119.1, 2, 3, 4. Isa.
1.16. John 13.8. Isa. 4.4. and 60.21. Ezekiel. 36.25, 26, 27, 33. Jer. 33.8. Hebr.
8. and chap. 10.13, 14, 15, 16, 17. Zeph. 3.13. Hosea 14.3. Joh. 17.11. Tit.
2.24. Ephesians. 5.25, 26, 27. 1 John 3. 1 Cor. 2.6. Col. 1.28, 29. chapter 4.12. 2 Timothy 3.17. James 1.4.

But what sin or sins he can charge upon either the holy Patriarchs, Prophets
or Apostles that they were not freed from perfectly before their decease, this
he has yet to show and evince to us, concerning all them that died in the
Faith, who finished their Testimony with Joy and Peace.

T. D. Arg. 2. That there is a continual need and use of Faith and Repentance
in th^s life; therefore, etc.

Answ. That there is a continual need of Repentance, this I deny; for true
Repentance, where it is wrought, and the fruits of it brought forth, this is
unto Salvation never to be repented of, and is attended with a real forsaking
of sin and transgression, this is beyond your fained repentance humility, which
is still to be repented of, as the sins of your best performances are: also
True and Living Faith purifies the heart, and is the Saints Victory, and the
exercise of it through that Divine Power and Love by which it works against
temptations and the fiery darts of the Devil, after the mind and heart is
cleared from sin and pollution: it being one thing for man to sin, and another
Only to be tempted to sin; so that it is a falsehood to say, that there is a
like reason for a continual need of Repentance in this life, as there is for
the use of Faith; neither does that 1 Cor. 13. ult. prove that Repentance
abides with Faith, Hope and Charity, as falsely T. D. reasons; might he not as
well say, there is the same reason for repentance to abide, that there is for
Charity to abide, seeing that Faith, Hope and Charity abide; whereas Charity is
the Bond of Perfection, Col. 3.14. and Love is the fulfilling of the Law; and
the end of the Commandment is Love out of a pure Heart, which positively
opposes T. D's sinful Doctrine for sin and imperfection, which tends greatly
to pervert people, and to keep his Hearers in unbelief, whilst he does not only
deny that ever any attained to perfection but affirms Freedom from Sin not
attainable in this life, which is his gross ignorance and unbelief of Christ
and his Power, which is greater and stronger then the Devil and all his
attempts, and is able to overcome him, and to destroy his works; and in this
Power of Christ the Faith of the Righteous stands, and this we contend for
against the Devil and all his sinful Agents, who thus manage and maintain his
work.

And how falsely is it for T. D. page 56. to say, that Charity or Love suits our
present imperfect state; [as he also says, Faith and Hope does,] whereas
Charity or Love which is the Bond of Perfectness, and is known in the pure
heart suits that State which is of its own nature, as Perfection and Purity is,
which is also effected through the true Faith that purifies the heart, and that
hope which he that has purifieth himself even as he is pure, 1 John 3. which
admits not of sin and imperfection term of life; for he that abides in Christ
sins not. And as to that of Phil. 3. Not as though I had already attained,
or were already perfect; to which T. D. says, He denies in one verse what he
affirms in another; if the word perfect be in both places understood in the
same sense, verse 12.15. To verse. 12. I say, that Paul did not say that
Perfection was not attainable in this life; neither does it appear to be his
judgment, for then why should he follow after, reach forth, or press forward
unto those things before, and plainly say, Let us therefore, as many as be
perfect, be thus minded? Whereto we have already attained let us walk by the
same Rule: Brethren, be followers together of me, and mark them which walk so,
as you have us for an Example, verse. 15, 16, 17. Surely he was not an Example
of sin and imperfection, but of purity and holiness; yet notwithstanding he
then both expected and believed a growth in the Spiritual and Divine
Understanding and Apprehension of that for which he was apprehended of Christ;
so the Perfection he had not already (then) attained, relating to such an
apprehension as he speaks of, does not exclude that state of Perfection and
integrity that he was then brought and apprehended into of Christ Jesus, as to
the Purity and Righteousness which he was a partaker of in Christ; for the
Child of God its growth in Strength, Wisdom and Spiritual Understanding does
not render it sinful or impure in the nature and properties of it, but rather
shows its Purity and Innocence the more in that its truly capable of such a
growth.

Page 56, 57. But then, when is this freedom from Sin, or state of Holiness
(which T. D. says will be in a proper sense perfect) attainable, if not in
this life?

T. D. The Saints shall be invested with it at the Resurrection, called, The
Resurrection of the Dead, Metonimically, in the Life to come indeed we shall be
like God.

Reply, By this we may understand that he has put off Freedom from sin from all
Gods People till the life to come* and not only so, but till this Metonimical
Resurrection (according to his terms) which he may understand is not as yet to
any of the deceased, though the Life to come that is Everlasting, (as intended)
is by the Righteous enjoyed after this life. I do not intend here to dispute
his terms of the Resurrection, but admitting it in his sense, my end is to show
how he has excluded all the Saints both deceased, and yet remaining, from a
state of freedom from sin, as not being yet attained to it, if this
Resurrection he intends be yet to come; and then, where are they in the mean
time? where are their Souls? where are their sins and pollutions and
imperfections, if all be yet uncleansed and not freed from sin? will not T. D's
Doctrine herein mere, and be one with the Popes touching a Purgatory; for if
none be perfectly cleansed here, and yet none come to God, or into his Kingdom
unclean, they must be cleansed somewhere; he should have told us the Place of
Purging, which is not in the Grave, not in Hell, not in the Pit; and it must be
before Heaven be entered into; what place then between both, if T. D's Doctrine
must be owned for Catholic on Authentic? but, who is it that are not mere
Papist, or that have nor drunk up his corrupt Doctrines, that cannot see him,
his Popery, Ignorance, Confusion and Error herein. And what Popery he has at
unawares run himself into, is now obvious.

And Matthew. 5.48. Be ye therefore perfect, even as your Father which is in
Heaven is perfect; to this T. D. says, Such Commands are the Measure of our
Duty, not of our Seize in this Life.

Reply, Thus he perverts and diminishes the righteous Commands of God, as if
God had either required a thing not attainable; or as if being perfect, as he
is perfect, were but the measure of our Duty, and so to be put off till the
Life to come, wherein the Saints had not such Commands given to them, seeing
they are not capable of sinning in the Life to come; but John said, As is he,
so are we in this world, 1 John 4.17. And herein they knew their Love made
perfect; and this is more then either the small resemblance of Children to
their Parents which T. D. speaks of, and beyond his imperfect sinful state and
Doctrine; for the perfect Love which they had, was in them a perfect
resemblance of God, who is Love, verse 16. But this way of T. D. his slighting
and diminishing, and falsely interpreting the Commands of God, which require
such perfection, only as the measure of our Duty, is like his Brethren, saying,
That a Child of God, his not committing Sin is to be meant, he does not make a
trade of Sin; which indeed is a very easy way they have taken to pervert the
Commands of God, and to give ease and liberty to the Transgressors in their
sins; as if when a thing is absolutely required of them, they should put it off
with this, It is meant only as but in part to be obeyed; and so if they should
deal thus with God, and say, Lord, then requires us not to Steal, or not to
commit Adultery, or not to Covet; but we are to understand it, as that we
cannot altogether abstain from Stealing, Adultery or Covetousness, only we are
not to make a trade of these things, nor wholly make it our business to be
employed in them; what acceptance do they think such a Plea would have before
the Lord? and what Answer would he make them to this their corruption? and what
resentment would such Doctrine have in the minds of sober people, if they
should preach them, and give such meanings to the Scriptures; and tell them
that where Stealing, and Adultery, and worldly ^usts and Covetousness are
forbidden, that they are not to go to the extent of the Commands, but only not
make a trade or a common practice of Stealing, or these things etc? for thus
they have dealt with many of God's Commands enjoining perfect Holiness and
Righteousness; but then they have an easy way to lay all upon Christ, as
having paid their debt, and fulfilled the Righteousness of the Law in his
Person in their stead, so that they must not expect its fulfilling in their
persons; for where the Scripture speaks of its being fulfilled in us, we are to
understand by in us, that it is in Christ's Person; and this is the manner of
their course from time to time, both to shut Christ his Works and Righteousness
out of People, so much as in them lies.

1 John 3.9. Whosoever is born of God does not commit Sin. T. D. says to this,
We may interpret it, as he is born of God he does not sin; every Child of God
is mixta persona, (Page 57.) as our Law says of the King, consists of an old
and new nature; and so his new nature is Principium quo, the Principle from
which he acts graciously; and the old nature, the Principle from which he acts
sinfully.

Reply, Here again he has palpably perverted plain Scripture, and contradicted
the Apostle John, as may be seen in that 1 John 3. For he that is born of God,
who does neither commit sin, nor can sin, because he is born of God, has put
off the old nature, and is not acted by that Principle which leads to act
sinfully, because he cannot sin, and that gracious Principle in him has
overcome the sin, and the nature of it; and so to tell of his being mixta
persona is T. D's gross blindness: For first, that which is born of God, that
overcomes the World, is not mixed with sin, nor with the old sinful nature.
Secondly, He, or whosoever is born of God, whose Seed remains in him, who
abides in Christ is not acted by that old sinful nature, because he is born of
God, and abides in Christ, in whom is no sin, neither is man's having diverse
parts, as Body and Soul, etc. or his being liable or not liable to death, any
reason to show that he that is born of God does act sinfully from the old
nature; for the Bodies of the Saints were the Temples of the Holy Ghost; and
their Bodies were sanctified, and so brought into subjection unto the Divine
Spirit or Principle in them, so as they might glorify God in their bodies, and
in their spirits, which were his.

Again, T. D's meaning to that first of John 3.9. is, That it may intend the
manner of sinning, so the 8 th verse seems to limit it; be that commits sin
is of the Devil, for the Devil sins from the beginning; the Comparison
(quoth he) is not between the act simply, for then it should have been said
only, for the Devil sins, but from the beginning, implies a Comparison
between the manner of man's sin and the Devils, in respect of which he is said
to be of the Devil, because he immitates his example, who from the day he began
never ceased to sin, nor ever did one truly good action.

Observe. By this we may gather T. D's limitation put upon that of 1 John 3.9.
and the Comparison he makes between not the act simply, but the manner of man's
sin and the Devils, still taking it for granted that he that is born of God
does sin, and acts sinfully from the old nature, but not in that manner as he
that is of the Devil, who intimates his example; so that his meaning and
comparison seems to amount to this, that he that is born of God does sin, but
not always, or not as the Devil sins, he is somewhat better then the Devil,
in that he does some good actions, but the Devil does none.

Reply, Surely our opposer has come off but very poorly in his arguing for the
Devils work, contrary both to the state and testimony of such as were born of
God, whom he has here very meanly debased, and sadly abused the Scriptures,
misrepresenting Gods Children whom he by his Eternal Power has delivered from
the power of Sin and Satan, and given them a Heavenly place in Christ, where
the Devil cannot come, and in whom the Prince of the World has nothing, nor
his sinful Ministers any part or interest whilst they plead against God's
Promises, holy Commands, and against the very end and purpose of Christ's
manifestation, as T. D. and his Brethren have done, wherein they have shown
themselves to be Antichrist's Agents and Ministers, and not the true Christ's.

Now touching Christ's Enlightening every man, whose Light we affirm to be
saving; Of the Light within.
this is set down as an Error by T. D. he and his Brethren denying the Light of
Christ, in every man, to be Saving in its own nature and property, which we do
affirm it to be; but that he enlightens every man to Salvation, I do not
remember these to be our words, as T. D. lays them down, who also begins with a
mere falsehood against us, saying, That the word Christ is a mere blind to
delude the ignorant; for the Quakers denying Christ to be God, they cannot own
him for the Author of Illumination.

Answ. This is an apparent Slander cast upon us, as our Books and Writings do
show, that we never denied Christ to be God, or his Divinity; still affirming,
That in the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was
God, and that in him was Life, and the Life was the Light of men, and that was
the true Light which lights every man that comes into the World, as in John
1.1.4, 9. Now to detect us as being in an Error herein, T. D. urges Ephesians.
2.12. that at that time ye were without Christ, having no hope, etc. which is
no proof that they had none of Christ's Light in them, though they then did not
experience him their Hope; nor were come to the Covenant, being without God in
the World; in which state they were Strangers and Enemies in their minds, the
mystery was hid from them, the Light was obscured from their understandings, it
shined in darkness, and the darkness comprehended it not; but it does not
follow that the Light was not in them, because they were without God in the
World, no more then it follows that God is not in the World, because the World
knows him not; whereas its plain, that he was in the World, and the World was
made by him, and the World knew him not, John 1.10. and seeing Christ as God is
acknowledged to be the Author of Illumination, his illumination is Divine and
Spiritual, and therefore saving to them that believe in it; and God's Presence
fills Heaven and Earth; neither can Darkness it self, nor the Deep, nor Hell
hide or cover man from the Presence of God, nor yet obscure him from the reach
of his Spirit; Whether shall I go from thy Spirit, or whether shall I fly from
thy Presence; if I ascend up into Heaven, thou art there; if I make my Bed in
Hell, behold, thou art there; if I take the wings of the Morning, etc. Psalm.
139. Yet still I grant that there is a state in which all are ignorant of God,
and in which the Mystery, to wit, Christ within, the hope of Glory, has been
hid from Ages and Generations, but is showed, revealed and made manifest to the
true Believers in his Light, who said, Believe in the Light, that you may be
the Children of the Light; and Christ said, I am come a Light into the World,
that whosoever believes in me might not perish, but have Eternal Life; and
this we testify to, against all Opposers of his Light, as it is in every man.

Page 59. And where T. D. argues that the Gentiles for a time had no Promises
of Christ; therefore knew of none, and consequently had not a Light, or
Knowledge sufficient to bring them to Salvation.

Reply, What time was that the Gentiles had no Promise of Christ and how long
was it? Was not the Promise of God after the Fall (that the Seed of the Woman
should bruise the Serpents head) of a general extent, as well toward Gentiles
as Jews? For was not Adam and Eve the first Parents of both, to whom this
Promise was made? Secondly, The Promise that was made to Abraham whilst in the
uncircumcision, did not this relate to the Gentiles as well as the Jews, see
Romans 4. and Galat. throughout? And thirdly, Was not Christ's Death for all,
still a confirmation, or evident Testimony to the foregoing Promises and
Covenant of God toward both Jews and Gentiles? but, and if there was some time
or Ages in which the Gentiles had no Promises of Christ, and therefore not a
Light sufficient to Salvation, according to T. D. then it follows that none of
them in that time, or those Ages could be saved; and why? but because God did
not afford them a sufficient Light, which assertion and consequence lays the
blame upon God; but the falsehood thereof, who is it that know the Scriptures
that cannot see? Again, where he puts Light for Knowledge, herein he does not
reach our Principle, for many have a true Light in them, that are not come to
the true Knowledge; for it is the Light that shines in the heart that gives the
knowledge of the Glory of God, 2 Cor. 4. so the Light is there before the
Knowledge is given; and in that its able to give that Knowledge, it is
sufficient to save.

And where he brings 1 Timothy 3. ver. last, for proof, That the Gentiles neither
had, nor knew any Promises of Christ for a time, where (he says) God
manifested in the Flesh, and as such, preached unto the Gentiles, are made two
parts of the Mystery of Godliness, which in other Ages was not made known unto
the Sons of men, as its now revealed to his holy Apostles and Prophets, by the
Spirit, etc. Where note, first, that this manistation of God in the Flesh, and
preaching unto the Gentiles, is no proof that either they had no promises of
Christ before, or that they had no Light in them sufficient to salvation; for
if so, then all Gentiles in all Ages before that time were condemned for want
of saving Light being given to them; which were a gross error to assert. 2dly,
As to the manifestation of the mystery of God and Christ, I grant that it was
more large and open in the Apostles days then for Ages before, as also, that
was made manifest then, which was hid for Ages and Generations; yet still it
does not follow that the Gentiles before had not a Light sufficient to save, or
to manifest the mystery of Godliness in some degree. 3dly, But yet T. D. his
arguing against the Gentiles having a sufficient Light before Christ's coming
in the flesh; however, if we could grant him his plea (which we cannot) it does
not follow that now the Gentiles, or the whole world, has not a Light
sufficient given them, since Christ is so come manifestly, testified as God's
Salvation, prepared before the face of all People, being a Light to the
Gentiles, and his Testimony so signally confirmed, as it has been also both by
his works and sufferings.

But yet the better to inform our Opposers of the Light, let them read John 1.
where speaking of the Word that was God, that made all things, its said, In him
was Life, and the Life was the Light of men, verse 4. and this Light and Life
of men which proceeds from the Word, though it was before Christ's coming in
the Flesh, yet it was still the Light and Life of Christ born witness of, and
more fully manifested through his coming, or being sent in the fullness of time.

Page 60. T. D. The Father is said to hide the object, because he did not
enlighten the subject, i. e. to hide the Gospel, because he did not enlighten
their minds with the saving knowledge of it.

Answ. This his Because is grounded upon his former Error, for the cause of
hiding the mysteries of God's Salvation and Kingdom, is men's opposing and
resisting his Light and Spirit in them; so the cause is not originally in God,
though he gives men up to their darkness and unbelief when they have rejected
his Light; but it is the god of the World that has blinded their minds from
^^eing the Light of the glorious Gospel of Christ, 2 Cor. 4. and the natural
man's not receiving the things of the Spirit, 1 Cor. 2.14. does not prove that
he has no Light of the Spirit given to him, or in him though he, as such,
cannot know the things of the Spirit, his knowledge and discerning being but
natural, yet that a man in that state may be changed in his mind and
understanding by that which is Spiritual, is evident; for if he were not
convertable, what would preaching to him signify? and what is it in him that
can answer to, and receive the Spiritual Testimony of Truth and Salvation?

Page 61. To Jo^. 1.9. That was the true Light which lights every man, etc.
T. D. answers, Christ being spoken of before, as the Messiah, we must therefore
understand the place, I think* not of natural Light, but supernatural; not of
the Light of Reason, but of the Light of the Gospel, etc.

Reply, This is enough, he has confessed sufficient to break the neck of his
own Cause, and his Brethrens, who have affirmed the Light in every man to be
insufficient, as but the Light of Nature, of Reason, of Natural Conscience,
etc. but now he thinks it is not Natural; but Supernatural, the Light of the
Gospel etc. which must needs be saving: Its well that at length, after his dark
oppositions against the Light, both at the Dispute we had with him, about ten
years ago, at Sandwich, as also in his silly confused Pamphlet, styled, The
Quakers Folly; but it were well if he would retain those better thoughts of the
Light in every man its being Supernatural, the Light of the Gospel, etc. and
then he will not oppose the Quakers, (...) he has done, but that whilst he
follows his thoughts, and does not come to be directed by this Light in him, he
proves wavering and uncertain in his thoughts; for in his following distinction
between being Lighted and Enlightened, he renders Inlightning, as to the Eyes
of the Understanding* from Ephesians. 1.18. but Lighted, as when Candle is carried
before us, as a Blind man, P. 62. which Comparison is impertinently, and very
improperly brought in this matter; for he was not speaking before of an outward
Light, as that of a Candle before a Blind man; for it is absurd amongst men to
offer a Blind man a Candle to light him, or show him his way into a Room, when
he is out of all capacity of seeing or receiving any benefit by it; but thus T.
D. renders Christ's lightning men, when before he granted it to be
Supernatural, the Light of the Gospel, wherewith the Mesias enlightens men;
which as it is not outward and natural, so it is only seen and known inwardly
and spiritually: But then T. D. to come off says, The meaning can be no more
then this, that whosoever are enlightened are enlightened by him: What a silly
shuffle and evasion is this, from his former granting that it was every man
that comes into the World that he enlightens, when now, but in the very next
page it is, whosoever are enlightened are enlightened; and a little before that,
many that are lighted are not enlightened, but are like a Blind man, so lighted,
that sees never the better when a Candle is carried before him; so, by this he
makes God's offering men Light neither to be of any effect to them, nor yet
like to be, if they can have no more benefit by it then a Blind man has by the
Light of a Candle. What then can be God's end in lightning them? what does it
signify to them, if they be so wholly incapable of seeing ever the better? Does
he then bid them look, bid them walk aright in the strait Path? and does he
condemn them for not walking therein, when they are altogether incapable of it,
as from Sight or Light sufficient, as his Comparison before implies? Alas,
alas, what a cruel unjust and unequal Master would this render God? and how
unlike to himself does it represent him whose Ways are equal, Love universal,
and Grace free; (who first gives Light within, and opens the Eye within, before
man can walk aright) however his Light within be gainsayed by such Blind
Guides, as T. D. who are but in their thoughts, vain imaginations, and notions,
knowing what they know naturally, and preach for Doctrine men's Traditions.

Page 62. Romans 2.15. T. D. says, touching those Gentiles that showed the Work
of the Law writ in their hearts, That it cannot be understood of a Saving
Knowledge; and it is not the Law in their hearts, etc. (but yet a little after
confesses) that the Law may be said to be in their hearts, in their
understandings, etc.

Reply, How then were they excused according to the Gospel? and how then did
the Apostle bring them as a Proof of Justification? verse 13, 14. Could they be
Justified without a Saving Knowledge? But of T. D's ignorance in this much have
been manifested both by S. Fisher, and some others. And how says he in page
63. That the Gentiles in this sense had not the Law in their hearts; (viz.) a
suitable disposition to the Law, as his words are? what nature was it by which
they did those things contained in it? how was it unsuitable to the Law? or how
could that do those things contained in the Law without a suitable disposition
to it? Surely, a mean understanding may perceive T. D's ignorance and Error in
this particular as well as in the rest; for the Law of God in their hearts was
Spiritual, and so was its effects in them; and that nature by which they obeyed
it, was not opposite to it, but in unity with it; which nature was contrary to
that in the Jews which led them to break and violate the Law of God; But as for
those Gentiles that liked not to retain God in their Knowledge, Romans 1.26. and
those that said to God, Depart from us, we desire not the knowledge of thy
Ways, Job 21.14. These Instances do not at all prove that those Gentiles which
obeyed the Law of God wanted a surable disposition to it; for this was in the
rebellious state that they said, depart from us, and liked not to retain God in
their knowledge; howbeit, this proves (against our Opposet) first, that some
knowledge of God was afforded even them that liked not to retain it. And
secondly, that God was nigh them that said to him, depart from us; and that
also he would have afforded them the knowledge of his Ways; and also it is
evident that they were troubled, condemned and reproved by his Witness in their
Consciences, or else, how should they say depart from us, if he never came nigh
them, nor ever touched their Consciences? or why should they say, we desire not
the knowledge of thy Ways, if the knowledge thereof was not tendered to them?

And further, If so be that the Gentiles (as confessed) were those in whom that
which might be known of God was manifested and showed unto them from the
Creation, to the being of God and his Eternal Power, which discovery did leave
them without excuse; what was it that brought them to this understanding of the
Eternal Power and Godhead from and through the Creation? was it Spiritual yea
or nay? surely this clear sight and discovery in them did rise from that which
might be known of God, that was manifest in them: and if this had not a
sufficiency in it to save, how were they left without excuse? surely the fault
was not to be laid upon God, nor on his Light in them, but to and upon
themselves for disobeying it, and not liking to retain him in their knowledge.

And seeing Christ is confessed, page 63. to be set for a Light to the
Gentiles, Isa. 49.6. which, says T. D. is but a Prophecy of the Gentiles
mercy in the time of Christ's actual exhibition in the Flesh.

However, this Mercy is of a large extent, and for ever to be prized, as in the
fullness of time it is more manifest then before; and now especially since it is
thus openly declared and manifested, it ought not to be thus opposed and
slighted by men of corrupt minds which affirm it is an error to say that Christ
enlightens ever man that comes into the World, and yet at length are forced to
confess it, as in these words; viz. That it is Supernatural, the Light of the
Gospel, of the Messiah, etc. And thus they are confounded and broken to pieces,
and their wisdom turned backward by this convincing Light, this stumbling
stone, this Rock of offense, which they cannot avoid stumbling at, and falling
upon and breaking to pieces, who set themselves against it, and bring forth
their vain imaginations to eclipse its glory, as too many of this Generation
has done.

And now touching the Scriptures being a Declaration of the Word of God, Of the
Scriptures.
but not the Word, nor the only Rule of Faith and Life; which T. D. sets down
as an Error, wherein he has no less then accused the Scriptures themselves
with being Error. For, first, we in calling them a true Declaration, we call
them what they call themselves, Luke 1. as also that they are Writings given
forth by the holy men of God; and that which they call the Word, we do also,
the Word was in the beginning with God, John 1. and his Name is called the Word
of God, yet both the Doctrinal part, and Historical part of the Scripture,
contained in the Books of the Old and New Testaments we own, and never
slighted nor denied; yet if we should look upon them as the only Rule of Faith
and Life, this would exclude the Rule and guidance of the Spirit (for the only
Rule must be infallible, certain, incorruptible, obvious, etc.) which leads
into all Truth, as either not sufficient so to guide, or not to be owned as the
Rule of Faith and Obedience to God, etc. and this would be contrary to the
Testimonies of the holy men of God concerning it, who followed it, and directed
others to it, and to walk in this Spirit, and therein they knew their several
seize and measures, and herein was the Rule of the new Creature, who
worshipped not in the oldness of the Letter, but in the newness of the Spirit,
Romans 7.6. 2 Cor. 10.13, 14, 15. Phil. 3.15, 16. Gal. 6.15, 16. And we know that
without the guidance of this Spirit of Truth men can never come to a right
judgment nor understanding of the holy Scriptures, or Spiritual things.

And how then does T. D. go to prove the Scripture to be the Word, and the only
Rule of Faith and Life, whilst he has granted, that to bring a testimony of
Scripture concerning it self, were petitio principii, a begging the question,
and were insignificant for their conviction which deny its Divine Authority.

What course then will he take to convince such? seeing he himself does but
follow his notions, conceivings, and humane understanding, while Divine
Revelation, and immediate Inspiration are laid aside and opposed in these days
by such as he: Page 65. he says he will give a taste of our Arguments, and
leave our tenants to the judgment of the understanding, etc.

What understanding and what Judgment must be the Guide and Rule of men's
judgments and undertandings, if the Light within must not be the Rule? for
after he has asserted the Scriptures to be the only Rule of Faith, presently
he has put himself upon a Hanck, and shakes his own Foundation, in confessing
the Scriptures insufficient for the conviction of such who deny its Divine
Authority; otherwise, its but a begging the question, to go to prove the
Scriptures by themselves; and now what he will erect as a Rule instead thereof,
for the conviction of such, whilst he has opposed the Light within, and
asserted the insufficience of the Scriptures (showing them not to be the only
Rule) is questionable whether he knows himself, if he does, let him tell it
to them that desire it.

And Page 66. It is to be observed, one while he tell us of the Judgment of the
Understanding; another while the matter contained in the Scriptures was the
Rule before it was committed in writing, and that the Gospel was preached to
Adam. And again, when they affirm the Scripture to be the only Rule; its
intended to them who have the Scriptures, and not to them that have them not,
Page 67. And presently after we must understand this point with connection with
the former, the Light within: So do but mark what confusion here is: First,
it is his own confession that the matter contained in the Scripture was before
it was written: Secondly, That to them who have not the Scriptures something
must be the Rule; and what, is it the Light within, having no other way as he
says? Now, if the Light within and the matter contained in the Scriptures be a
sufficient Rule to them which have them not in the Writing, surely, its
sufficiency is not diminished by the writing, but rather testified unto;
neither is it the intent of the Scriptures to draw people from either the
matter, or Light within, which opens them, nor to set up Scriptures as the only
Rule instead thereof.

But then says T. D. that very Scripture, Romans 10.8. speaks not of the Light
within, but of the Scriptures.

Answ. It speaks of the very same Word which Moses and the Prophets spoke of
which was before the Scriptures were written; in Moses's time much of them was
unwritten, and yet he directed the people to the Word; and the Apostle called
it the Word of Faith which was nigh them in their mouths, and in their hearts:
but says T. D. It is not the Light within, but the Scriptures, as if he should
say the Scriptures of the Old and New Testament were in their mouths and
hearts; but this Word of which they give testimony, was in the hearts of all
the holy men of God, that gave forth the Scriptures before they writ them; and
it was a Lamp to David's feet, and a Light to his path; and he hid it in his
heart, that he might not sin, etc. Psalm. 119.11* and verse 115. and the Word is
for ever settled in Heaven, verse 89. this was that which quickened sanctified
and saved the Righteous in and through all Generations, and of this the
Scriptures or Writings do testify; in which are words of God, but the Word was
before they were spoke or writ.

And T. D.'s accusing the Quakers for not owning the Authority of the
Scriptures, is false, for we are in the Spirit that gave forth, and opens,
and brings to the right use and end of them, and in the same Spirit can and do
make use of them, not only to prove our Tenants, and to Confute our Opposers,
but also to obey and practice the things contained in them (which are truly
moral and Christian) as the Spirit of Truth does direct and enable.

T. D. We are not now to expect any new discovery of Truth, as to the matter
revealed, but only as to the person whom God enlightens gradually to discern
the evidence of what is revealed in Scripture.

Answ. First, If no new Discovery, then what is in Scriptures; then no need of
Popish and Heathenish Authors to prove distinct and separate personal
Subsistances in God, nor any other such traditional distinctions which obscures
the simplicity of Scripture Truth, and darkens the minds, of People, but people
should rather be referred singly to the Scripture Phrase and Language, and to
search them in the Light of Christ within.

Secondly, if the discerning of the Scripture is from God's enlightening them,
people ought to be recommended to God, to wait in his Light to know his Counsel
and direction therein, or otherwise they will remain ignorant of the Scriptures
and Revelation of the things declared.

Again, its well that T. D. confesses that there are Prophesies and Histories
of things done before the Pen-mens birth, as also personal experiences, etc. So
now at length he does a little assent, to Truth, as if he were a little
convinced by S. Fisher's Answer to him, that he does not now bind up all to the
Scriptures, but confesses that Prophesies, Histories, and personal experiences
to be before the Pen-mens birth: But herein he has but manifested his
uncertainty and wavering to and again, one while opposing the Sufficiency of
the Light, and placing all upon the Scriptures as the only Rule, another while
upon the matter contained in the Scriptures, which was before the Scriptures
were written, and was written on the heart of the Gentiles; another while the
Light within he seems to assent unto, as in page 67. for them that have not
Scripture; another while Prophesies and Experiences where before the Scripture;
and thus at length the Spirit or Light that gave forth the Scriptures must be
preferred as the most certain and universal Guide and Rule; as indeed it is to
all them who follow, obey and believe in it; and this Light the blind, corrupt
imaginary Teachers (whose knowledge and profession is but natural and
traditional) cannot corrupt, as they have done the Scriptures by their false
glosses meanings and private interpretations contrary to the intent and end of
the Spirit of God which gave them forth, and which leads into all Truth and
Righteousness: for a further Answer to T. D. touching this matter, I do refer
the Reader to S. Fisher's Book, titled Rusticus ad Accademicos.

And as for his accusing Quakers with error touching Baptism and the Lords
Supper, Of Baptism and the Lords Supper.
(as to their ceasing) and setting up the appearance of Christ within, etc.

Answ. The one Baptism, Ephesians. 4.5. into the one Body, 1 Cor. 12.13. and the
eating, drinking and supping with Christ at the table of the Lord in his house
and Kingdom we own and experience; but what Baptism it is he intends, whether
sprinkling Infants, or John's Baptism, he has not discovered; neither indeed
does it concern him now to make such a frivolous pudder against the Quakers
upon this account; for indeed, we do not look upon him either as a true
Minister, nor as having a call either from God or man, as one empowered to
impose things he calls Ordinances; its probable, when he was Parish Priest at
Sandwich in Kent, in Cromwell's time, he could show a greater force for his
impositions then now he can in Houses and Corners, where he and his Brethren
can creep, and not only so, but be ready to obscure and hide themselves, if but
a little Storm and Trial come: He styles himself sometime Minister of the
Gospel at Sandwich; Rather Hireling at Sandwich.
but is not rather that report of him true, that there he was given to Gaming,
Bowls, and Nine-pins, etc? But as to the appearance and enjoyment of Christ
within, we do confess him to be the Substance, and the Living Bread, and in him
we are kept not only in a Living remembrance, but also in a real Possession of
the Power and Virtue of his Life, having known a conformity to his Death, which
is more then a remembrance of it; and we know him to be the enduring Divine
Substance, which ends all Types, Shaddows and Figures, and his Coming, and
Appearance in the Flesh, wherein he went through the Types and Shaddows; as
Circumcision, John's Baptism, observing the Passover at his Supper, and his
Sufferings, did make way for his coming in the Spirit, as he consecrated a new
and living way through the Vail, that is to say his Flesh: now the coming of
Christ, until which, his Dispiples were to show forth his Death in the
observation of the figure; this coming they did not put afar off, as our
Opposers yet do, how long they know not, it being already above Sixteen hundred
years since; and yet this his coming is still put off: whereas the Disciples,
after they were with Christ at his last Supper, were Witnesses of his coming
after his Resurrection, and also of his Spiritual Coming and Revelation in
their hearts, and now to suppose that what the Disciples did to show his Death,
was till a third Coming, not yet manifest, is to overlook the two former as no
Comings, as also to render Christ's own words and Promises ineffectual, who
said, Verily I say unto you, there be some standing here which shall not taste
of Death till they see the Son of Man coming in his Kingdom, Matthew. 16.28. Mark
9. Luke 9.27.

And as to 1 Cor. 11.23, 24, 25. wherein the Apostle repeats what Christ did
the same night he was betrayed, in giving the Bread and Cup to show his Death
till he came, etc.

However T. D. construes this, it does not prove the figurative or outward part
or sign to be imposed as of absolute necessity upon all. Believers, till some
other coming of Christ, not yet come; for his coming in the Spirit T. D. owns
not to be the end thereof; but where then is the mystery and inward and
Spiritual Grace signified by the outward Sign? (so much talked of in your
Catechisms) but its evident T. D. is ignorant of the Mystery of the Body and
Blood of Christ, and Cup of the new Testament in his Blood, which the outward
Bread and Cup was but the sign and figure of; we oppose the Popish opinion of
Transubstantiation.

And however, as to the Corinthians at that time, among them there was strife
and division, contention and disorder, one being hungry, another drunk, another
asleep; one being of Paul, another of Apollo, another of Cephas, which the
Apostle reproved therein, as being carnal, walking as men, so that he could not
speak unto them as unto Spiritual, but as unto Carnal, 1 Cor. 3.11, 16, 17, 18,
20, 21, 30. Now suposing that wherein the Apostle might or did condescend to
their low capacity, as not grown to that Spirituallity, so as to see through
the outward Shaddows, this their Example was not to be a President, not could
it in Reason or Truth be enjoined to all other that succeeded, who were come
truly to know the glory of Christ's appearance in Spirit, and Spiritually to
enjoy the Communion of the body and Blood of Christ, where none of these
disorders aforesaid have any place.

Now Paul in his second Epistle to the Corinthians, Chap. 13.15. bids them,
examine and prove themselves, saying, Know ye not your own selves, how that
Jesus Christ is in you except you are Reprobates; So here was the Bread he then
referred them to, which indeed was always the intent and end of his Labor and
Travel, to bring those that were weak to a Living and Spiritual sense even of
this Spiritual Bread; however, because of their weakness, and low capacity he
might condescend unto them, as in some things he did.

And whereas T. D. pleading for his Ordinances, as before; says, Page 72. They
do not cease as to our need of them, because it is not to be supposed,
consistant with Christ's Wisdom to continue an obligation upon us to the use of
a means, when the end is obtained; viz, the appearance of Christ within, that
is a full appearance or state of Perfection (says he) but we having proved
that there is no such state attainable in this life; then if those Ordinances
oblige till we be arrived at perfection, they oblige, and so are of use during
term of life.

Answ. Where observe, first, however, he has granted that they are not
obliging where the end is attained, or not continued by Christ as an obligation
where this his appearance is Witnessed which brings to a state of Perfection.
Secondly, T. D. having not proved that such a state is not attainable on this
side the Grave, but the contrary being proved before against him and all his
Brethrens sinful Pleas, Doctrines and Arguments for Sin and Imperfection in
this life; therefore this Spiritual appearance of Christ brings man beyond all
men's Traditions and outward Ordinances, (so called) and indeed who do know a
beginning in the Spirit ought to wait for this Spiritual Appearance and Coming
of Christ according to the Spirit's direction which is most perfect, and not to
turn back again into the Types, Shaddows and Figures, nor into the weak and
beggarly Elements of the World, Galat. 3.4. Chapters.
nor yet subject themselves to men's Traditions, carnal Commandments, imposed
Doctrines and Preceps, but to wait upon God in Spirit, to serve and worship him
in the newness of the Spirit, that thereby they may know the Spiritual Washing,
the Baptism into Christ's Death, and be Baptized by the one Spirit into one
Body, and so come into the House of God, and to feed at his Table, and partake
of the Living Bread which comes down from Heaven, and to drink of the Fruit of
the Vine with Christ in his Fathers Kingdom, which Kingdom he promised to his
Disciples should come with Power even in their Age, or before some of them that
stood by should taste of death, Mark 9.1. Luke 9.27.

And as for T. D's saying, The Apostle calls the Doctrine of Baptism a
Foundation; (these are not the Apostles words, neither did he teach Sprinkling)
Infants) for, says he, but leaving the Principles (or beginning of the
Doctrine of Christ, let us go on unto Perfection, not laying again the
Foundation of Repentance from dead works, and of Faith toward Gods, and the
Doctrine of Baptisms, etc.

Now if Perfection which was the end of those Baptisms was the thing they were
to go on unto, as he exhorted; surely, then it was attainable; for the Apostles
exhortation was in the Faith, and did not oppose Perfection, as T. D.
erroniously has done, but directed and led them forward out off and beyond the
Shaddows and Figures unto the Substance, and preached to present men perfect in
Christ.

And whereas T. D. has charged us yet further with a great Error, Of the
Resurrection.
which is, that there is no Resurrection from the Dead; and to prove us guilty
hereof, he mentions a Letter of one R. Turner, (which Letter I have not seen,
nor do I know the man) as also G. W. in his late Answer to William Burnet; and
G. F. junior in his Books bound up together.

Answ. How apparently T. D. has belyed, slandered, and abused us, in accusing
so positively that we hold there is no Resurrection from the Dead, is evident
in many printed Books of ours; and he has neither mentioned my words, nor G.
F's; I say his slander and false accusation herein against me in particular may
be plainly detected out of that very Book of my own, wherein Page 67. I have
expressed these very words; But the Resurrection according to the Scriptures of
Truth, and Testimonies of Christ and the Apostles we do believe and own, as
Recorded in John 5.21, 24, 25, 28, 29. and Chap. 11.25. Matthew. 22.30, 31, 32. 1
Cor. 15.34, 35, 36, 37, 38. and so on 2 Cor. 5.1. Many other places might be
cited. These very words and Scriptures are thus set down in my Answer to
William Burnet, after which are some passages of a Dispute I had upon the same
subject with that busy (yet sorry) Contender Matthew Caffin the Baptist; whose
impertinencies and ignorance at the Dispute was fully manifested, as others of
his Brethrens have been when they have appeared in the same unprofitable work
against us.

And as concerning what G. F. the younger says (in his Books collected) clears
him also from T. Danson's impudent slander of holding there is no Resurrection
from the Dead; for G. F. affirms the contrary in page 209, 210. in these very
words, Touching the Resurrection, its a Mystery which the carnal mind can never
comprehend, but they that come to witness a part in Christ Jesus the Light of
Life, they in his Light may come to perceive the Mystestery of the
Resurrection; but if Truth can be received and understood, then it will appear
that I do not deny the Resurrection; for I do verily believe that the Hour is
coming, in which all that are in the Graves shall bear the voice of the Son of
God, and shall come forth; they that have done good unto the Resurrection of
Life, and they that have done evil unto the Resurrection of Condemnation; but
to Fools that say that this Body of natural Flesh and Bones shall be raised; I
say, that body which is sown is not that body that shall be, 1 Cor. 15.35, 36,
37, 38.
but God gives a body as it pleases him, yet to every Seed its own body, Thus
far G. F. junior; by all which T. D. his slander is detected; and his false
spirit discovered, as not fit to meddle with the Mysteries of God, which are
out of his sight and reach. God will sweep away the refuge of Lies and Liars.

Some Observations upon John Owen's Book, [Entituled, A Declaration, etc.]
including a brief Answer and Reply to the same.
AS We the People of God, called Quakers, are but little concerned in John
Owen's Declaration, we need concern our selves the less; and let them that are
chiefly concerned in his Accusations make him answer. But in that he has in
some few places hinted, and falsely insinuated against us as being one with the
Socinians, (as he calls them) or seduced into Socinianism: Lest any should give
credit to these and such like insinuations, and thereby be prejudiced against
us, or the Truth professed by us, merely upon John Owen's overly Reports, I
judge it meet a little to appear in Truth's Vindication, and our clearness in
answer to some particulars in his Book.

As first, where in his Preface Page 6. he says, There is now a visible
accession made by that sort of People whom men will call Quakers, from their
department from the first erection of their Way long since desertted by them.

Answ. We have not made any accession contrary to the Truth first received by
us; nor have we deserted its Way, which so long since the Lord God by his Power
gathered us into out of the corrupt Ways, Inventions, Traditions, and false
Worships of the World, to worship him in the Spirit and in the Truth, wherein
we have been gathered to be a peculiar people to God, being delivered from the
many Sects, Ways, and Professions set up since the days of the Apostles.

AS to Socinianism, as he calls it, we are neither Discipled in it, nor
Baptized into Socinus his name, neither do we own him for our Author or Pattern
in those things which we Believe and Testify; nor yet do we own several
Principles which John Owen relates, as being from Socinus, and principally that
of Christ's being (God, but) not the Most High God, page 54, 55. It was never
our Principle; for though we do confess to his condescension, humility and
Suffering in the days of his Flesh, wherein he appeared in the form of a
Servant, being made in fashion as a man; but his being in the form of God, in
the Divine Nature of God, wherein he was equal with God, and being glorified
with the same glory he had with the Father before the World began, and his
being God over all blessed for ever; these things we professed and believed in
the beginning, and do the same still, it never being in our hearts, in the
least, to oppose or desert them; therefore, as to the Conjunction J. O. ^ell of
betwixt both these sorts of men in opposition to the holy Trinity, with the
Person and Grace of Christ.

Herein he has charged a double falsehood upon us; first, such a Conjunction
and Opposition either to the Person or Grace of Christ which we absolutely
deny; neither is our opposing of men's corrupt meanings of Scripture and
invented names and terms put upon the Deity any opposition either against God,
Christ, or Spirit, nor yet against the Grace or Love of either.

J. O. Page 6. However they may seem in sundry things as yet to look diverse
ways, yet like Sampson 's Foxes, they are knit together by the tail in these
firebrand Opinions, and jointly endeavor to consume the standing Corn of the
Church of God, and their joint management of their business of late, etc.

Answ. I suppose he intends Quakers and Socinians, wherein both his Accusation
and Comparison are false and scornful, for there is no such conjunction, nor
joint endeavors between them; neither ever was it the Quakers intent or
principle, in the least, to endeavor to consume the standing Corn of God's
Church, (as we injuriously are accused) but such vain and false imaginations,
corruptions and perverting Scripture, as J. O. and his Brethren are guilty of,
which have no growth nor reception in the Church of God; for his Church is in
him, and led by his Spirit into all Truth, which no Lie nor Deceit have any
part in. Besides, as for Sampson's Foxes, they were not set to destroy the Corn
of the Church or Israel, but of the Philistines; neither can we believe that
the Presbyterians and Independants are the true Church, till we see better
Fruit appear among them then is yet: for look into their Assemblies, and see
what pride and vanity they are gotten into in their apparel; behold also, how
gaudy in their habits their women are; and what an example of pride and pomp
they show to the profane, to the shame of their profession; certainly God has
yet Viols of Wrath unemptied* to pour down upon that proud and persecuting
Spirit, which has so much showed it self in many of them.

But what he means by those words holy Trinity, he further explains in page 26,
27. in these words, viz. Now the sum of the Revelation in these terms, is, that
God is one, that this one God is Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; that the Father
is the Father of the Son, and the Son the Son of the Father; and the Holy Ghost
the Spirt of the Father and and the Son: Now had this Doctor Owen and his
Brethren but kept to these, and such like expressions, and have left out their
unscriptural scholastic terms and distinctions about Trinity, distinct
Subsistances and Personalities, we should not need to have had such
controversies with any of them about them, but have taken their confession that
God is one, and that Father Son and holy Ghost are God; and that the Father is
Father of the Son, and the Son the Son of the Father, etc. according to this
great Doctors Relation, who pretends very much to Scripture, and makes many
large Repetitions of Scripture to prove his matter, counting them the
Revelation; but then being again not willing to keep to the terms, expressions
and phrases of Scripture, but writes his own conceivings, senses and meanings,
as men of his Coat and Fraternity use to do; as in Page 31. he pleads for
making use of other words expressions and phrases, that neither are literally
nor formally contained in Scripture, and so makes use of his conceptions and
apprehensions of what is contained therein, see page 30, 31.

But then again another while he says, Let us nakedly attend to what the
Scripture asserts, as in page 42. And in page 110. he tells us of manifesting
what was revealed expressly in Scripture concerning God the Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost; so that many times he would make people believe, as if he would
nakedly and, exactly keep to the Scriptures; but then at other times his
notions, conceptions, meanings, and odd invented terms must be put upon them,
and men must either confess to those, or else be liable to his and his
Brethrens censures of being Socinians, Heretics, Blasphemers, and what not?
And though he has appeared a little smother then his Brother Tho. Vincent has
done in his railing Pamphlet, yet he has wronged us by his false insinuations
against us, as if we denied the Divinity of Christ, and deserted our former
Principles; also he has represented us as being in conjunction with those whom
he accuses of opposing or denying the oneness of the Deity, and the Grace of
Christ, or the Father, Son, and holy Ghost to be God, which we are not at all
concerned in, nor guilty of; and our Books and Writings now, and from the very
beginning evince the contrary.

But then in Page 129. he confesses, That the objections these men principally
insist upon, are merely against the explanations we use of this Doctrine, and
not against the primitive Revelation of it, which is the principal object of
our Faith etc.

Now if by these men he intends us, called Quakers, as is apparent he does by
his present discouse, he has then very much cleared us from other of his and
his Brethrens Accusations, and thereby has also plainly contradicted both
himself and them; for here our objections are merely against their
explanations, and not against the primitive Revelation or principal object of
Faith; so whilst the Revelation which is according to the Scriptures, and the
principal object of Faith is not objected against, but owned and professed by
us according to the Scripture, it is very unjust and injurious either in him or
his Brethren to insinuate against us, as if we denied either the Divinity of
Christ or the holy Spirit; though as to their distinctions about Personalities,
Subsistances, Modallities, and the like invented terms and names which they put
upon the Deity we must needs except against as not scriptural, nor proceeding
from any naked attention to what the Scripture asserts, (which J. O. does but
pretend to) but from men's conceptions and traditions which are upheld by the
wisdom which this world teaches, and not that which the Holy Ghost teaches.

And then in Page 89. he goes to accuse and vilify us in these words; viz. Our
Quakers for a long time hovered up and down like a swarm of Flies, with a
confused noise and huming, (what falsehood and scorn is here for such a Doctor
to express) begin now to settle in the Opinions lately by them declared for;
(this is a false insinuation again) what their thoughts will fall to be
concerning the holy Ghost when they shall be contented to speak intelligeably
and according to the usage of other men, or the pattern of Scripture, the great
rule of speaking or treating about spiritual things, I know not, and I am
uncertain whether they do themselves or no. Thus far J. Owen.

To which I say, in the first of these expressions he has scornfully and
falsely accused us, as also with beginning now to settle in Opinions, for we are
neither so beginning, nor so to begin, but are settled in the Truth out of and
above men's invented Opinions, about which are so many Divisions and Sects among
them; but if by Opinion he intends Socinianism, (as he calls and represents it)
his own testimony shall testify against him as a false Accuser of us herein,
as in page 129. where he confesses our objections to be merely against the
explanation they use, and not against the primitive Revelation of it; so then
we are not guilty of such Opinions, as either deny the Divinity of Christ, or
that tends to lessen him in any respect or offices relating to man's Salvation;
for our desire is, and our endeavor has been the exaltation of his Name,
Power and Glory over all; neither have we been hovering, nor in confusion, as
falsely he has represented us; and if he knows not what our thoughts will fall
into concerning the Holy Ghost, but is uncertain whether we do our selves or
no, he should therefore have been silent of accusing or reviling us, as he has
done, because it appears it is in his ignorance and uncertainty that he has
thus vilified us, and insinuated against us; he should have received a better
information and knowledge of us before he had thus reviled us; and not to have
gone and bespattered and vilified a whole Body of People, to render them odious
from his own uncertain thoughts of them; for he would not be so dealt by
himself: and the Reader may take notice that a great part of his Book, (wherein
he goes about to prove the Divinity or Deity of Christ and the Holy Ghost) in
which he appears as one opposing some great Enemies, (among whom we are
numbered) we are unconcerned therein, having never denied Christ's Divinity; and
if his own testimony may be of any value, we are cleared by it (as before) in
page 129. Alas! poor man, J. 0. has missed his mark in shooting thus
uncertainly, and at random against the Quakers,

And where he adds touching the Holy Ghost, Whether he may be the Light within
them, or an infallible afflatus, is uncertain.

Though it be uncertain to J. O. it is certain to us that have the Testimony
and evidence of the holy Spirit in us, which gives us both Life, Light and
Power, and we know him to be infallible, how deridingly soever he speaks of it,
as also according to the precious Promises of God which hereby we know in a
large measure the fulfilling of; we experience Christ to be in us, and in that
the Father Word and Spirit are confessed to be one Power, Wisdom and Love, and
to be of one Divine Substance, Nature and Essence; this we neither do nor ever
did deny: and God is in his People, and dwells in them, and walks in them, and
the Spirit is sent into our hearts; so they are not divided, distinct and
separate persons, etc. as may be read in John 17.21, to the end, where Christ
said, that they may all be one, as thou Father art in me, and I in thee; that
they also may be one in us, that the World may believe that thou have sent me;
and the glory which thou gave me I have given them, that they may be one,
even as we are one; I in them, thou in me, that they may be made perfect in
one, etc. And God said, Let us make man in our own Image after our likeness,
Genesis 1, 26. Now, if by us, here is intended Father, Son and Holy Ghost (which
is called Trinity) then it follows that he was made in the likeness of all
three, and yet we do not read that God did consist in three distinct Persons,
nor that man was made in the Image of three Persons, nor yet that three
distinct and separate persons dwelt in him, though God did promise after the
Fall to dwell in his people: and he and his Son and Spirit we do really own,
confess to, and have a living sense and experience of to our Souls Comfort and
everlasting peace; So when we cannot well resent, nor accept of men's invented
terms put upon the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, it is unreasonable and injurious
to accuse us with opposing any of them, or denying their Divinity, and the
Unity of the Deity.

And where John Owen in page 91, 92. to prove the Holy Ghost a Person, and an
existing Substance, which he calls also a distinct and divine Person, he quotes
many Scriptures, as Genesis 1.2. the Spirit of God moved upon the face of the
waters; Psalm 33.6. by the Word of the Lord the Heavens were made, and all the
Host of them by the Spirit of his Mouth; these, with many he urges for proof
of the Personallity of the Holy Ghost. So according to his Principle and terms
which he puts upon the Holy Ghost (as a distinct Person, etc.) and according to
J. O's meaning we must read the Scripture thus, the [ Person] of God moved upon
the face of the Waters: By the [ Person] of the Lord were the Heavens made, and
all the Host of them by the [ Person] of his mouth: and so likewise upon Job
26.13. by his [ Person] he has garnished the Heavens, and in like manner upon
the rest of the Scriptures he brings in this case: Now let the Reader judge
whether such a meaning and alteration put upon the Scriptures does either look
clear, or sound well; and whether it be not a corrupting Scripture, and
addition, contrary to the plain innocent Language thereof; and if such
corruption and alteration upon Scripture may be admitted of, how are they the
only Rule, or great Rule of speaking and treating about spiritual things? J.
Owen and his Brethen had better refer people to the Scriptures, and leave them
to a naked attention to what Scripture asserts, rather then thus to pervert
them, or puzle and darken peoples minds with their humane inventions, and
Scholastic terms imposed in the time of Apostasy and Popery.

And concerning the Son of God, and some accounting him the Light within men;
this J. O. numbers among the monstrous imaginations, page 87.

Wherein he has not only struck at us who testify to Christ, as the Light of
the World, that lights every man, and as being in the true Believers both
their Light, Life and Salvation; but also J. O. has herein opposed both the
former Saints and Scriptures of Truth, who testified unto Christ the Light as
we do; as also he owned himself, to be come a light into the World, and to be
in his Followers, He that is with you shall be in you; I in them and they in
me, etc.

Page 103. J.O. queries how can the Power of God, or a quality be said to be
sent, to be given, to be bestowed on men?

Answ. Yes, very well it may be so said, Christ gave them power to become the
Sons of God, who believed on his Name; and was not this God's Power? had Christ
any thing but what was Gods? and the Saints knew the Power of God to work
mightily in them* so that this Doctor has showed himself very ignorant of the
Power of God, and its work, which does beget and restore man into the Image,
Righteousness and true Holiness of God, and this is given and bestowed on such
as believe in the Light within, the Light of the Divine Power of God, which
gives unto us all things appertaining to Life and Godliness.

And now touching their distinctions of Persons or Personal Subsistances in
God, J. O. says page 114. The distinct apprehension of them, and their
accurate expression is not necessary unto Faith, as it is our Guide, etc. nor
are those brief explanations before mentioned so proposed as to be placed
immediately in the same rank or order with the original Revelations.

Answ. If they be not necessary unto Faith, nor yet to be placed in the order
with Revelations, (meaning Scripture) why then are these men so strict in going
about to impose their terms, expressions and explications which they have not
in the Scripture upon peoples Faith and Conscience, as if it were a matter of
damnation not to receive a Faith concerning God under their traditional notions
and terms: However we believe what the Scriptures says both of God, Christ and
holy Spirit, who are one; laying aside all these men's invented confused amusing
Sophistry, Cavils, and their darkning terms (as distinct and separate
Personallities, Substances, Subsistances, Modallities, etc. of which they
themselves are guilty, though J. O. accuses others therewith page 116.

And whilst these pretended accurate expressions are not necessary unto Faith,
why does J. O. press them as proper expressions of what is revealed to increase
our light? page 115.

What apparent contradiction is this; not necessary unto Faith, as our Guide,
and yet proper to increase our light, as if the increase of light had not a
necessary relation unto both Faith as Guide and Principle, both in and unto
religious worship; but to be sure that instead of increasing light, their dark
invented scholastic Heathenish and Popish terms have increased much darkness
in the minds of people, and kept many in great ignorance both of God and the
mystery of godliness.

And whereas J. O. gives order or instruction, that they that deny or oppose
their explications, are to be required positively to deny or disapprove the
oneness of the Deity, or to prove that the Father, or Son, or Holy Ghost are
not God, before they be allowed to speak one word against the manner of the
explication, page 115.

Answ. A very unreasonable imposition and requiring, to require any to deny the
oneness of the Deity, or to prove the Father Son or Holy Ghost not to be God,
because they may except against such invented explications as J. O. and his
Brethren have brought out of their Heathenish Storehouses, and Chambers of
Imaginary; and has not he herein imposed upon the Objecters? and begged the
question, taking it as granted that their explications are as true as the
oneness of the Deity, or as true as that the Father Son and Holy Ghost are God;
as if he had told us it is all one, as true that they are distinct severed
Persons, as it is that they are God; which it is not: we have not ground to
believe their explications herein to be equal; for the Unity of the Godhead or
Divinity of Christ (or his Spirit) we never denied nor scrupled; Therefore for
J. O. to require any that except against their terms and inventions positively,
to deny the Unity of the Deity, is both sad Doctrine and unreasonableness, as
also shows an imperious lording spirit; though its probable among the
Independants and Professors he can make a show of more humility then he did
formerly; for he now wants Cromwell to promote him.

However, he and others of his Fraternity might by this time have in reallity
learned more lowliness and humility, then yet appears in them toward such as
cannot be screwed up to their way and method of expressing the Invisible things
of God, which are Heavenly, Divine and Spiritual, as his being and properties
are absolutely above the comprehension of J. O's reason, as is confessed page
128. We cannot by searching find out God, we cannot find out the Almighty to
perfection: And yet vain man would be wise and employ his natural reason and
fallen wisdom, both to find, and set out God, to evince him and his things unto
the natural reason of others which still falls short both of any true knowledge
and spiritual understanding; for vain by nature is every man, and ignorant of
God. It is the spiritually minded who are begotten to God, who are spiritually
and immediately taught by his Spirit, that have a true and spiritual
understanding of Divine Matters and Mysteries.

Page 118. J. O. Every person has distinctly its own Substance, [But then in
contradiction he adds] for the one Substance of the Deity is the Substance of
each Person; but each Person has not its own distinct Substance

Reply, A strange Riddle and invention, that each person has distinctly its
own Substance, and yet not its own distinct Substance; what Scripture has he
for this Critic and nice distinction? how is a person then an individual
Substance of a rational nature, that is not upheld by another, if it has not
its own distinct Substance, whilst yet it has distinctly its own Substance?
but the Divine Substance of the Deity of the Father, the Word and Spirit is but
one, as often has been granted; so then the Holy Ghost, though confessed to be
a Substance, page 101. yet; I say, not a Personal Substance distinct from the
Father and the Son, as there is ignorantly asserted.

But then J. O. to tell us page 118. That all Divine properties, such as to be
infinite is, belong not to the Persons, on the account of their Personallity,
but of their nature, etc.

Observe. Then it appears they are not three Infinite Persons, but one Infinite
God; and yet those Persons are the Father, the Son and the Holy Ghost; were it
not both Blasphemy and contradiction to say they are finite; and what better
have our Opposers said? but at other times they are Eternal; God Eternal, the
Eternal Son and Eternal Spirit; and thus they wheel about, and say and unsay.

Answ. It were better for them nakedly to apply themselves to the plain
Language of Scripture, and keep to it, to lay aside and avoid confusion, and
absurdities about distinct finite personallities, which the Scripture does not
put upon the Infinite God, in whom there is neither finiteness nor
variableness. I am God, I change not, says he; the Lord is one, and his name
one; from Everlasting to Everlasting he is God unchangable. And the Father Son
and Holy Ghost being one Divine Infinite Substance, are one Infinite God. Away
with your vain babbling, and invented erroneous distinctions of finite Persons
in him who is infinite; you are not worthy therein to talk of God, nor to take
his holy, precious and pure Name in your mouths, who are in your sins and
pollutions, corrupting your selves in your carnal conceptions and imaginations
about those things that you know not; who are gone a whoring after humane
inventions, invented words, names, terms and distinctions, such as neither the
Holy Ghost, nor the Scriptures ever taught you.

Page 117. And as for them that will keep to their Cavils and Sophisms about
terms and expressions; I know not who J. O. may intend hereby; but if he intend
us, called Quakers, because we do not own, but oppose his and their dark
unscriptural terms and expressions, which darken both counsel and knowledge, we
do reject his Accusation and Charge herein, for Cavils and Sophisms are rather
his and his Brethrens, who have been trained up in Sophistry and School-craft,
in order to be furnished to a Trade of Preaching, to make a Trade of the
Scriptures, corrupting them by their dark meanings, and School-terms, and
Philosophic distinctions, by which poor people have been kept even learning,
that they might be always paying them.

Page 117. But then J. O. adds against such as he supposes will keep to
their Cavils and Sophisms, That all further debate or conference with them, may
justly, and ought both conscientiously and rationally to be refused and
rejected.

Reply, If herein he may intend us, as its probably he may, as well as others
among whom he has numbered us (though unrighteously) as his debating or
conference is of little value or esteem with us, whilst it proceeds neither
from a sense of God's Divine Power, nor from any Living experience of God, or
his work within, but from humane inventions and traditions: So J. O. and his
Brethrens work in these matters, whether they go on in it, or stop from further
debate, it will be of very little weight to us, since we see to the far end of
their subtilty, and beyond their spirits and confusion; however, J. O. laying
it as their duty not to debate any further with such as he censures, (as
before) he has brought himself, and those that own him under a Law and
Limitation, that if they further contend with us, they must either not accuse
us with Cavils and Sophisms, or else not debate nor contend any further with
us; for if they do so accuse and censure us, and yet further debate or contend
with us, they transgress their own Law, so strictly here urged by J.O. and by
the same reason, when he and they are found guilty of Cavils and Sophisms, may
not others as much slight him and them therein? But however he or they judge or
censure us, I hope we shall not be backward nor negligent to vindicate the
Truth, and clear our innocence from reproaches and scandals of men of perverse
and envious spirits, when we have occasion given us thereby.

J. O. These sacred Mysteries of God and the Gospel, are not lightly to be made
the subject of men's contest and disputations.

Observe. It is very true, that sacred Mysteries of God and Gospel are not
lightly, nor yet slightly to be made subjects of contests, nor yet ought they
to be meddled with by light airy minds, nor by perverse and prejudiced spirits,
which are apt to bring forth perverse disputes, as it is too common to men of
corrupt minds, who are destitute of the Truth: But why then do Presbyterian
Teachers give such occasion by their light and vain contests, confusions and
contradictions to stir up the minds of people into such disputations about
things which both they themselves are yet to seek in, and by which they do the
more darken the Enquirers? J.O. should seriously review and examine his Bro.
Vincent and T. Danson their contests in their late Pamphlets, and see how
lightly and sorrily they have contended, and how they have contradicted
themselves; and whether such as they be fit Champions in the management of
their Cause? it concerns them to pause upon their work, and examine it, and
compare their Books together, for they have very palpably contradicted one
another in diverse passages of principle concernment; and if several of them
write Pamphlets again against the Quakers, they had need to compare them very
diligently, for otherwise, in all probability, they will contradict one
another; as they have done, as is the nature of Babel's Builders so to do.

Page 150. J. O. For the term of Satisfaction, the right understanding of the
word it self defends on some notions of Law, that as yet we need not take into
consideration.

Answ. It appears J. O. and his Brethren's understanding of their Doctrine
herein depends on notions of Law not yet taken into consideration, and not on
any living experience of the Gospel of Gods Divine Power wherein the
Righteousness of Faith is revealed, and the living and blessed effect of
Christ's suffering and death; and here they bring us their notions instead of
Gospel, so that what they tell us in this matter it is not from a saving
knowledge or sense of the work of God in themselves, but notions received by
tradition from one another, though they intermix many Scriptures among their
notions, and therefore would have all go for Gospel that they divulge; but who
knows the Power of God within, and the fellowship of Christ's Sufferings will
own the Scriptures of Truth as we do, and not rely upon their uncertain
notions, about which so much of their confusion and contradiction amongst
themselves does appear, that little of their work can certainly be laid hold
on, as with any confidence of their stability; howbeit, J. O. has in several
things consented to the Truth in words which we do own, though we do not
believe that he or his Brethren do experience the Life and Power of what they
profess, as where J. O. Confesses,

That God out of his infinite Goodness, Grace and Love to mankind sent his only
Son to save and deliver them; viz. from their sins, Page 156, 157, and 160.
and that this Love was the same in the Father and Son; and that Christ gave
himself a Ransom for all, to be testified in due time, 1 Timothy 2.6. And gave
himself for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity, Titus 2.14. And to
finish Transgression, and to make an end of Sin; to make Reconciliation, to
bring in Everlasting Righteousness, Page 163. and 176.
Dan. 9.24. And that God had provided himself a Lamb for a Sacrifice; And God
does not pardons Sins freely, without requiring Faith, Repentance and Obedience
in them that are pardoned; and it is certain that the prescribing of Faith and
Repentance in and unto Sinners antecedently to their participation of it, etc.
We are to be discharged upon Gods terms, Page 178. and 180.
and under a new obligation unto his Love, etc. Thus far J.O.

Observe. In all which observe that J. O. has confessed unto the Truth, much
more then some of his Brethren.

For first, to the infinite Goodness of God, and his Love the same in Father
and Son, which declares the freeness of both toward man kind, and their union
therein for man's deliverance from Sin, Death and the Curse.

Secondly, That God sending his Son, was to save and deliver from Sin, to
redeem us from all Iniquity: Its well if J. O. truly believes what he says
herein; for his Brethren T. V. and T. D. have pleaded the contrary in their
contending for Sin and Imperfection in all Believers term of Life.

Thirdly, Christ giving himself a ransom for all, to be testified of in due
time; instead of For All, Presbyterians and Independants were wont to say, it
was but for a few that he died, only for a certain select number, wherein they
have denied the universal Love and Grace of God in Christ to mankind.

But what a strange instance is that of J. O. that God cannot lie, he cannot
deny himself, etc. to prove that he cannot freely pardon sin, etc. page 178. as
if the one were as much contrary to his nature as the other, and yet upon Faith
and Repentance (which are his gifts) he does pardon his Creature man. Note also
that J. O. to the Reader says of his Authors, that many of them do expressly
blame some of the Schoolmen, as Aquinus Durandus Biel Tartaretus, for granting
a possibility of pardon without satisfaction, as opening a way to the Socinian
error; See here J. O's Authors, and great able learned defenders, how they
censure and contradict one another, yet he would have men be wary how they
censure them notwithstanding.
Fourthly, His coming to finish Transgression, to make an end of Sins, and to
bring in Everlasting Righteousness, is both beyond and contradicts their
sinful Doctrine for sin and imperfection, and their notion of imputation of
Christ's Righteousness to sinful persons, whilst they are not at all really
partakers of Christ's Righteousness, Holiness or Purity in them, no more then
Christ was guilty of sin, when he knew no sin, according to T. D's instance and
erroneous Argument, for a proportion in that case.

Fifthly, And seeing that without Faith, Repentance and Obedience on the
Creature's part, God does not pardon sins freely, it appears it is not peoples
bare application and belief of what Christ has done and suffered for them that
will free and acquit them, without the knowledge and sense of his Power which
works living Faith and Repentance, and makes willing to obey the pure Law of
God in the heart, and the new Covenant in the inward parts; for as J. O.
confesses, it would altogether unbecome the holy God to pardon Sinners that
continue so to live and die in their sins, page 179. this is a truth which he
and his Brethren had need to look to, that they be not found guilty both in
Principle and in Practice, as namely both contending and preaching up a
continuance in sin and imperfection all their days, as T. D. and T. V. has
done; and as its said by many, some of the Presbyterian Teachers do more of
late revile the Quakers for holding Perfection and Freedom from Sin attainable
in this life, and to persuade people against the belief of such a state more
then they have done heretofore; wherein they work, as if they would hasten
people to Hell and Destruction, and do but strengthen the hands of the
Evildoers, that they may not forsake their sins, by promising them life, as
the false Prophets did, and promising them pardon and peace on the account of
all being fully paid and satisfied for them, they living and dying in sin, or
telling them that perfection is not attainable till after death, as namely,
till the Resurrection, as T. D. and others of them have affirmed; but they had
little need to preach up such Doctrine, for their Hearers and Followers are
prone and apt enough to run on in sin and transgression without their Leaders
tutering them in it; they had not need to drive them on to Hell and
Destruction; the Devil can lead them fast enough thither, who continue Sinners,
to live and die in their sins, wherein it does not become the holy God to
pardon them, as is confessed.

And now touching your Explication, Declaration and Confession concerning the
Terms and Conditions whereon Sinners may be interested in the Satisfaction made
by Christ; J. O. says page 167. It may also be farther evinced that there is
nothing asserted in them but what is excellently suited unto the common notions
which mankind has of God and his Righteousness, and that in their practice
they answer the Light of Nature and common Reason exemplified in sundry
instances among the Nations of the World.

Answ. First it is to be observed that a great stress is laid upon these
Explications, Declarations or Confessions of yours, as relating to the terms
and interest you claim in Christ's Satisfaction unto the determination of God's
Will and Confirmation of Divine testimonies according to J. O's words, wherein
no less then Salvation appears to be concerned; for without an interest in
Christ and his Righteousness men cannot be saved. Secondly, Your Assertions
herein being suited unto the common notions of mankind, and as answering the
Light of Nature and common Reason (as it is called, and as J. O's words are)
whether herein has he not rendered this Light and common Reason, together with
the common notions mankind has of God, to be of a saving property, since it so
suits those things wherein Salvation is so deeply concerned, according to J. O.
but then if he does not reckon men's common Notions, Light or Reason which is
natural to be saving (as indeed we do not believe that any thing natural, as of
man in the Fall can save) then may we not reasonablely look upon J.O. to have
asserted and declared those things wherein Salvation is not concerned, or which
we are not to look upon as answering that Light which is Spiritual and Saving,
but only common Notions and natural Reason, whilst he and his Brethren keep not
to plain Scripture Language, and but run into notions, terms distinctions,
which they have by Tradition from men and men's inventions, more suiting common
and corrupt reason then Divine Light. But and if the Light in men be Divine
which manifests divine Revelations and Testimonies relating to Salvation, (such
as J. O. would have us believe his matter to be grounded on) then it follows,
that such a light is common or universal in mankind, and not only given to a
few, nor natural, as it has been often rendered by such as J. O. Who with his
Brethren were fully manifested and confuted by Sam. Fisher in his Book styled
Rusticus, etc. never yet answered by them, nor like to be.
and what does this spiritual or divine Light teach concerning God and his
Righteousness, but that he is to be feared, obeyed and honored, and that all
sin and iniquity should be forsaken, and God's Righteousness, Power and Image
(which is Christ Jesus) lived in, obeyed and followed by man; for herein is God
well pleased and satisfied in beholding his own Image and birth renewed and
brought forth, which admits not of sin nor imperfection, much less of either
pleading, contending, disputing or preaching for its continuance in all term of
life; and this Light of Christ within (however any miscall it) is that which
gives the knowledge of God's Love in Christ, and of the virtue and efficacy of
his Suffering, and so of his Blood, and to eat of his flesh which is given for
the Life of the World, wherein we partake of him, as the one Offering, at the
Altar of God in his Sanctuary, which the carnal Professors, both among Jews and
pretended Christians, were and are ignorant of, and in this Light are we come
to know and receive Christ, and reconciliation through his Death, and also the
glory of God through him in whom we have received the Atonement, Peace and
Union with the Father in the Son, which all you that either slight, oppose or
deny this Light within, and say its but natural, are ignorant of, being but in
your dark notions, natural apprehensions and conceivings, which you intermix
with Scripture, so that the Dignity, Glory, Power and Virtue that is, and ever
was in Christ, you do but talk of, without the real sense, discerning or
enjoyment thereof; but every one that truly waits upon the Living God in his
Light and Life within, whereby their minds and spirits being subjected unto his
Will, and their hearts truly broken before him, such know the Ransom and
Atonement which the Righteous and redeemed of the Lord knew and witnessed in
all Ages, and have that to offer unto God, and such Sacrifices to present
before him, wherein he behold of his own glory and beauty, and savours of his
own virtue, which is truly acceptable and well pleasing unto him, who
delights in his own Image, Seed and Royal Offspring, which none truly know
but who come into the Light to receive Christ the promised Seed, which bruiseth
the Serpents head; and to eat his Flesh, and drink his Blood, without which you
have no Life in you, for all your talk and notions.

Page 185. J. O. The Sacrifice denotes his Humane Nature; whence God is said to
purchase his Church with his own Blood, Acts 20.28. For he offered himself
through the Eternal Spirit, there was the matter of the Sacrifice, which was
the Humane Nature of Christ, Soul and Body; his Soul was made an Offering for
Sin, Isa. 53.10. his Death had the nature of a Sacrifice, etc.

Answ. These Passages are but darkly and confusedly expressed, as also we do
not read in Scripture, that the Blood of God by which he purchased his Church,
is ever called the Blood of the Humane Nature, nor that the Soul of Christ was
the Humane Nature, or was put to death with the Body (for the wicked could not
kill the Soul) though his Soul was made an Offering for sin, and he poured it
out to death, (he bore the sin of many, and made intercession for
Transgressors) but what death (and in what manner) was it is a mystery truly to
know; for his Soul in his own being was Immortal, and the Nature of God is
Divine, and therefore that the Blood of God should be of Humane (or earthly)
nature appears inconsistent; and where does the Scripture call the Blood of God
Humane, or Humane Nature? Neither do we read that the Blood which bears
record in the Earth, and agrees in one with the Spirit (and which purges the
Conscience, washes and cleanses the Believer in the Light from all sin) was
ever called by the Apostles the blood of the Humane Nature; nor do we read that
the Saints did eat and drink Flesh and Blood that was of a Humane Nature to
receive Divine Life in them thereby; for the Water of Life, and Blood of Christ
which are said to wash, sanctify and justify, which agree in one with the
Spirit, in those works and effects, we never read that they are called in
Scripture by the name of Humane Nature; for the Spirit that quickens is divine;
and it is the Spirit that gives Life, the Flesh profits nothing, John 6. And
the Soul of Christ is Immortal, and did not die with the Body, though its
deemed as being of the Humane Nature with the Body, and so as of the Sacrifice
in Suffering and Death; whereas, though his Soul was made an Offering for sin,
he having offered himself through the Eternal Spirit, yet his Soul or Spirit
did not die For it was committed into the hands of the Father, and was that day
in Paradise.
with the Body, though J. O. has ignorantly made no distinction, but joins
both as being but Humane Nature, (which was Sacrificed to death) but yet its
evident, that though his Soul and Spirit did not die with the Body, yet his
Soul was offered for sin, for the sins of men were laid upon him, or did meet
on him, as is frequently confessed; and so he suffered, and his Soul traveled
under the burden of them, so that his Sufferings were twofold, both inward and
outward; and which were the greater, suppose ye, Professors? Whether his Soul's
travel and suffering under the burden of Man's Transgression, also, even till
he was in an Agony, or his Body suffering under the violence of the wicked
hands to death, and the shedding of his Blood, etc. And why have thou forsaken
me? Mat. 27.46. implies a deep suffering for Sinners under a cloud of
Affliction; yet not the Infinite Wrath, or Eternal Death that is due to the
Wicked who reject God's Love and good will that is tendered in Chirst; we desire
all may have as good an esteem of Christ in his Sufferings, as may be; but
methinks you Professors do ascribe very mean honor to Christ and his
Sufferings, who therein reckon him not innocent, but guilty of your sins; and
therefore that he suffered the same Vengeance, or Vindictive Justice due to
Reprobate Angels and Devils, is this the Dignity you confer upon Christ? Oh
Miserable!
and whether there be not a mystery to be known in the Sufferings, Death and
Blood of Christ, beyond what could be seen or perceived with the carnal or
outward eye, since that he is truly and savingly to be known after the Spirit,
as the Apostles knew him, who experienced the Fellowship of his Sufferings, and
a conformity unto his Death, and bare in their bodies the Dying of the Lord
Jesus; that his Life might be manifest in them: And Christ being touched with
the feeling of their Infirmities, was able to relieve them that were tempted;
and as Paul says Colos. 1. You that were sometimes alienated and enemies in
your minds through wicked works; yet now has he reconciled in the Body of his
Flesh through death, to present you holy and unblameable, and unreproveable in
his sight, if you continue in the Faith grounded and settled, and be not moved
away from the hope of the Gospel which you have heard, which is preached to
every Creature which is under Heaven, whereof I Paul am made a Minister, who
now rejoice in my sufferings for you, and fill up that which is behind of the
afflictions of Christ in my flesh, for his Body sake, which is the Church,
verse 21, 22, 23, 24. where mark, that the reconciled state was not that of
enmity in their minds, and the end of this reconciliation through his Death,
was to present them holy and unblameable, and unreproveable in his sight, which
does not admit of sin and imperfection term of life, nor yet of Professors
arguing or pleading for sin as they do; and was there any of Christ's
afflictions or sufferings then to be filled up in the Apostle for the sake of
his Church? how do Professors resent this Doctrine? and what meaning will they
give to it? can they say that Christ's suffering was all at an end or fulfilled
at once whilst yet some was behind, to be filled up in his Saints, and that
for his Churches sake? although still he was the one Offering, Ransom, and
Sacrifice for sin, and was offered once for all, as both being opposed to, and
ending the many Offerings under the Law, and consecrating a new and Living Way,
and establishing an Everlasting Covenant of Life and Salvation; as also that in
what he did and suffered, be set us an Example, bare Testimony unto, and
confirmed the Truth; this J. O. confesses page 199. And as to his being a
perfect High Priest, and discharging the Office thereof, and all other the
Father required of him, these we never opposed nor went about to slight or
lessen, as some injuriously represented us.

Neither would we have any unreverent and slighty Contests entertained on any
hand about the Sufferings, Afflictions and Death of Christ, in the least, to
lessen or undervalue them; nor yet ought you to meddle and tamper about either
God, Christ, or Holy Spirit, or about the Suffering and Sacrifice of Christ
with your pitiful sorry confused School-terms and distinctions, and beggarly
scraps of men's Traditions and Rudiments of the World, etc. wherein you have
labored more to fill your heads with airy notions, invented words, and brain
knowledge, rather then your hearts and souls with a saving Knowledge, and
experimental sense and feeling of the Life and Power of Godliness, or of the
Virtue and Efficacy of Christ Jesus, and his Reconciliation as the one Offering
and Sacrifice which puts away sin, and whose Blood both remits and cleanses
from all iniquity: But to evade these blessed Effects, which are only known to
them that walk in the Light, 1 John 1.7. many of you Professors have found out
a very easy way and notion of all being fully satisfied and paid for you,
both for sins* past, present, and to come, and of all being suffered and
perfectly obeyed for you by Christ in your stead; (though you deny his dying
and being a Propitiation for all men in the whole World) so that you can plead
and wrangle for sin, imperfection and body of sin all your life, and say Christ
has fully paid all, and perfectly obeyed for you; as also you can easily
evade or refuse to suffer either with him, or for him; if but a little Storm,
Trial or Persecution does arise, you and your Leaders can secure your selves,
and creep into corners, though now you can make a show and bluster in this time
of calm; and some of you make a boasting and insulting against W. P. and a
hidious reviling of him now he is in suffering, and you at liberty, thinking
probably that you may get your selves some credit and repute with those in
power by your railing Pamphlets which you bring out one after another, like
cowardly base spirited men, so many to go to trample upon a man that is already
underfoot, as to the outward man, in regard of his confinement, which some
report that some of you Presbyterians were the Instigators and occasion of; (by
such invective Clamours and Complaints, as some of you are accustomed to) clear
your selves as well as you can; but yet withal you do but befool your selves in
so many of you going to war against, and reproaching a poor man in Prison (who
freely offered up himself, to suffer which the most of you would be loath to
do) For if but a little Storm or Persecution comes to try you, its probable the
Back-doors, Back-wayes, Closets, Cole-holes, Garrets or Cock-lofts, with the
Back-leads, etc. may stand you, Professors, in some stead, as they have done
many of you; otherwise, if there be no such By-ways to make an escape, and run
away; the Table spread with Victuals, or Beer and Tobaco may stand for a color
and pretense in your Meetings (as they have in some of them) to delude those
that shall oppose you, and make them believe a lie, and discover what spirit
and religion Independants and Presbyterians are of.
for by that your so great stir and noise you make against him, you render him
(how mean soever he be in himself) such a potent Antagonist, (contrary to your
many slighty and scornful Characters of him, in your Books) that you make many
momoderate people the more enquire after him, and to have the better conception
of him because of your enmity and outrage, but such who wait upon the Lord, and
in his Light stand still can see beyond you all, and your spirits and work,
which the day has declared.

More Errors escaped the Press.
IN the Epistle, Page 2. Line 12. for agree in, read are. p. 23. l. 2. blot out
1. l. 23. for for, r. in. p. 25. l. 10. r. produced. l. 35. for 13, r. 3. In
the Answer to T. V. p. 65. l. 1. blot out that. In the Answer to T. D. p. 2. l.
24. for gifts, r. gusts. p. 5. l. 18. for in, r. on. p. 7. l. 5. for 13, r. 3.
l. 11. for by, r. high. p. 9. l. 10. for and all, r. an act. p. 12. l. 2. for
he, r. the. p. 17. l. last, r. invented. p. 18. l. 25. for on and, r. an end.
p. 19. l. 1. r. amounts. l. 13. r. is toward. p. 21. l. 27. r. It is in
Christ. p. 27. l. 6. r. deserving. p. 39. l. 35. for whether, r. whither. p.
45. at l. 26, 27. the Reader may add, or understand, [ as given by divine
Inspiration, not men's fallable Judgments and Mistakes upon them] p. 49. l. 17.
(being (...)) for and, r. or. p. 55. l. 18. dele which. p. 73. l. 7. (in the
Apendix) r. principal. p. 74. l. 33. for T. V, r. T. D. p. 76. l. 16. dele
three. p. 77. l. 12. for 1, r. 5. p. 81. l. 16. dele and.

Sometimes such defects have escaped, as misplacing has for have does for do,
was for were, are for is, it for they, says for say [and so on the contrary:]
Such are not material faults to any, but such as are critical, who do not
soberly weigh the intent of the matter.

An APPENDIX:
Wherein are some of the manifest Contradictions of Thomas Vincent, William
Maddox, Thomas Danson, and John Owen, both to themselves, and one against
another: With brief Animadversions or Observations upon their Contradictions,
which are about Principle Matters.

1. Touching their distinction of Three Persons.
W. M.
I Am sure from the Scriptures, that the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, being of
an infinite Nature, are three Persons (three increated persons) subsistences,
or manner of beings, page 16, 17, 18, 19.

Contrad. T.V. (In Contradiction to his Brother Maddox) says, Infiniteness is
not applicable to the Subsistence, it cannot be properly ascribed to the
Personality, though there be three distinct Personalities, to which
Infiniteness is not ascribed, page 45.

Obs. See here is as much inconsistency between these two, as between infinite
and finite; one making their being of an infinite Nature, a proof or reason of
their distinct Personalities or Subsistencies; And the other says,
Infiniteness is not applicable, nor properly ascribed to them; what gross
contradiction and blasphemous stuff is here!

W. M. Each of these three persons, is God; his subsistence is his manner of
being in the Relative property of the Father (and so he speaks of the Son and
Holy Ghost) page 18, 19.

Contr. T.V. It is improper to say, that either of the persons, in regard of
their personality or subsistence, are finite or infinite, page 46.

Obs. This latter Contradiction then would have neither Father, Son, nor Holy
Ghost to be either finite or infinite; what gross nonsense and apparent
Contradictions are these!

Contr. T.V. Christ is the Eternal Son of God by Eternal Generation, page 36,
47.

Obs. He is now the Eternal Son of God, before not infinite; but -- again
neither finite nor infinite in his Personality, and yet the Eternal Son of God;
what mad distracted blasphemous work is this these men do make with their vain
babbling!

T.V. They are not three substances, etc. therefore three persons, p. 13.

Contr. T. D. The usual definition of person, is an individual substance of a
rational Nature, which is neither the part of another, nor upheld by another:
which Aquinus defends, Sum Par. 1.9.29. art. 2. a man, we call a person, etc.
page 1, 2.

Obs. See again, how apparently these two Brethren contradict one another, one
saying a person is an individual substance, etc. yet the other says, They are
not three substances, therefore three persons (whereas it follows) therefore
not three persons. --

Contr. J.O. We must acknowledge the Holy Ghost to be a substance, a person,
God; yet distinct from the Father and the Son, page 101. -- a personal
subsistence, page 114.

Obs. Where note, that this Doctor Contradicts T.V. his saying they are not
three substances; as also that he seems to make both substance, person, and
subsistence to intend all one thing, contrary to T. V. again. But these words [
a Person, God, yet distinct from the Father and Son] I cannot make sense of,
though they are from a Doctor, for God is not a Person distinct from himself.

W.M. I called them three He Is, to try if you would own the Deity of Christ,
etc. according to the Scriptures we call them Persons, or He Is, in respect of
their manner of Subsistence, page 18, 20.

Contrad. T. V. The word Person cannot properly be attributed to Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost, because they do not subsist in a several and distinct Nature of
the same kind; for if each of them had a several and not one individual Nature,
then they should not be only three Persons, but three Gods; Synopsis, page 3.

Obs. It Is very evident here, that Thomas Danson has Contradicted both himself,
and the rest of his Brethren, seeing the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost cannot
properly be called Persons. --

W.M. (says) His comparing the three increated persons to three Apostles,
Paul, Peter, and John, is blasphemy, page 20.

Contr. T. D. A man we call a person, a person is entire of it self, page 2. if
Peter, James, and John, each person be man, etc. -- Take man here not for a
person, but the Nature, as we do God, See his shuffle here, for neither Nature
nor Man simply can be called Three distinct separate Persons, as Peter, James,
and John were; and as they say, the Father, Word, and Spirit, are.
and it is evident, that we mean no more that the name Man may be attributed to
Peter, James, and John, page 12. David was a man, and Solomon was a man, they
two agree in a third thing, etc. page 14, 15.

Obs. What less do their own distinctions and comparisons concerning them
amount to, than to Three Apostles, or men? (that is each entire of himself as a
Person is* T. D. says) who has apparently spoiled his own and his Brethrens
Cause.

T.V. The Trinity of Persons, -- the first in the second, and the second in the
first, and both in the third, page 25.

Contr. T. D. A Person notes some one endued with reason and understanding,
which is several and distinct by himself from another, p. 2. (and in the
Dispute) ( they are three distinct and separate Persons in the Deity) -- A
person is entire of it self, etc.

Obs. If the Father, the Word, and the Spirit, be in each other, and so
inseparable, then not three distinct (nor separate) Persons, neither can one be
several by himself from another.

T.V. That the Father, Word, and Holy Ghost, are three persons, page 13. is to
be found in the Scriptures, God has revealed it in his Word, -- the Scriptures
has revealed, that there are three distinct persons in one Divine Essence,
page 26. Is Scripture truth, page 4. great truth.

Contr. T.V. In this Mystery of the Trinity we must exercise our Faith; Though
we cannot clear it to our selves by Demonstration (Reason cannot demonstrate it
unto us, page 26.) it is such a Mystery that does exceed the most enlightened and
clear-sighted Christians.

Contr. T.D. For Person, Aquinus defends, -- I choose to borrow that of the
Learned Wotton, -- the Trinity's a Mystery so high, that it rebates the
sharpest edge of humane understanding, p. 83.

Obs. If this Mystery be so apparent in Scripture, why can they neither
demonstrate it, nor clear it to themselves? We should desire no clearer
demonstration then clear Scripture; surely whilst they cannot clear it (and
their distinctions) to themselves, they are not like to clear them unto others;
but instead of Scripture proof and demonstration, we must either aquiesce with
what their humane understandings can produce from Aquinas, Wotton, and
Aristotle, etc. or else we are like to be most bitterly railed against, by
these our Opposers.

T.V. The three Holies, Isa. 6.1. signify the three persons, (Contradiction)
the Lord of Hosts, the One God, page 33.

Contr. J. O. Contradicts T. V. page 45. where he says, That of Isa. 6.1, 2.
three Holy, Holy Holy, is the Lord of Hosts, the whole Earth is full of his
glory, applied unto the Son, Joh. 12.41, 42.

Obs. How palpably one Contradicts another; one saying the three Holyes
signifies three Persons; the other (viz. J.O.) says, They are applied to the
Son, who is but One. This Doctor Owen should correct his Brother Vincent.

T.V. The Son being Eternal, this Generation must be Eternal, the personal
property of the Son is to be begotten, page 36.

Contr. T. V. They are three distinct persons from their distinct personal
Acts, -- (Contradiction again) Infiniteness is not applicable to the three
distinct personallities, page 45. The Son of God is God, is infinite in Power,
in Wisdom, and Goodness, and Eternal, page 30.

Obs. Here manifest Contradiction to himself, shows it self; as much as to say,
That either the Son of God is eternal, and yet not infinite; or else, That the
Son of God being eternal, is not a person distinct from God; if a Person be not
infinite; but yet the Son of God is infinite in Power, Wisdom, Goodness, etc.
How ever these can be reconciled, I leave to the ingenious to judge.

T. V. The Father, Word, and Holy Ghost, are three subsistences, page 13.43.
not three substances, page 13.

They are three distinct subsistents, page 27. A person is one individual
subsistent rather, T.D. page 2.

Obs. Here they are now put to it what to call them, being not three
substances, as T. V. says, they call them three subsistences. But now it must
be subsistents rather. But then in Contradiction to both, Doctor Owen says,
Contradict.
The Holy Ghost is a substance, -- a personal subsistence. What differs now
between substance and subsistence?

T. D. What the Scripture has revealed to us, concerning that distinction in
the Godhead, cannot be apprehended under any other Notion or Resemblance;
which therefore we attribute to God, page 3. We know not what to call those
three but persons.

Contr. T.D. Of the Father, Word, and Spirit, etc. (from 1 John 1.7.) Now all
Witnesses, properly so called, are persons, page 5. -- Then these Witnesses
must needs be distinct, page 7.

Obs. Why is not that Scripture produced all this while, if there be such, as
reveal your distinctions and notion of persons in God? And, why do you not know
what to call those three in Heaven but Persons, when T.D. knows how to call
them Witnesses; What ignorance and Contradictions are here!

T. V. From Matthew. 3.16, 17. Herein is a distinction of all the three persons;
-- The Son clothed in Flesh; The Spirit in the shape of a Dove; The Father in
the Voice, etc. page 34.

Contr. W.M. The Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, being of an infinite Nature, are
three Persons, -- Co-essential, Coequal, Coeternal, page 29.

Contr. T.V. The Son being Eternal, his Generation must be Eternal; the
personal property of the Holy Ghost is to proceed from the Father and the Son,
page 36.

Obs. Quest. But was Christ, being clothed with Flesh, or the Spirits
appearing in the shape of a Dove, or being sent, from Eternity? are these
pertinent proofs of their distinct personalities, which are reckoned
Coeternal? etc. And whether, or to whom was the Spirit sent from Eternity?

T.V. The Holy Ghost is God which W.P. does deny, page 32. his denial of the
Divinity of Christ is plain, page 28.

Contr. T.V. The Unity of the Godhead is not denied by the Adversaries I have
to do withal, page 28.

Obs. So here the same person that is accused for denying the Divinity of
Christ, is in these latter words cleared, as not denying that Unity of the
Godhead, and to be sure he does confess the Father, the Word, and the Spirit
to be One, being one Divine Substance, and so One God.

T. V. The Son is God co-essential, coequal, coeternal with the Father, --
Christ is infinite in power, wisdom, and goodness, eternal, page 29, 30.

T. V. In regard of his humane Nature, the Jews speak truth, Joh. 8.57. Thou
art not yet fifty years old, as he was a Son of Abraham, and born many
generations after him, page 31.

Obs. Quest. And was not he a Person as he was a Son of Abraham, not fifty
years old, if he was (as I never heard any yet deny, and your Doctrine supposes
a Trinity of distinct Persons, as being coeternal, coequal, etc.) does not
this then render Christ (as a Son of Abraham) to be a fourth person?

2. Touching Pardon and Satisfaction.
T. V. That God never does, nor will, nor can pardon any sinner without
Satisfaction made to his offended Justice for their sins, because his Holiness,
Righteousness, and Truth obliges him to take Vengeance upon all That was not
Christ.
that have transgressed his Law, page 54.

T. V. Christ the eternal Son of God, the second person of this glorious
Trinity, -- the Doctrine of Satisfaction depending upon this person, -- The
Lord Jesus Christ proved to be God equal with the Father, page 54.

Contrad. T. D. Many of us do not affirm any impossibility of forgiveness
without Satisfaction; and for my part, though I know some worthy Persons do
deny W.P 's affirmative, yet I cannot join with them therein, for to me it is
evident, that God is free in his Determinations, what Attribute he will
manifest, page 17, 18.

Contrad. T. V. God proclaims himself to be gracious and merciful, page 60. He
is exalted upon the Throne of his Mercy, ready to forgive Where then is the
Impossibility in him for it? see Matthew. 19.26. Luke 1.37.
sinners, page 60, 61. God was at the Charges of his own Satisfaction, Job
33.24. page 62.

Obs. Then it appears, That God had Power to show himself Gracious (he wills
not the Death of sinners, but rather their return) and Merciful, ready to
forgive sinners; (upon Repentance) he being at the Charges of his own
Satisfaction (as is said) in giving his Eternal Son; who is confessed to be God
equal with the Father; all which in the best sense amounts to this, That God
satisfied himself with his own Gift, and without performing his own Will, he
could not be satisfied; And who ever doubted, or made question or Controversy
of that, if it were so taken; but this proves not their unscriptural terms,
phrases, and notions of Law supposed in the case, nor yet that God took
vengeance on Christ instead of all Transgressors, and they to go free, and yet
still sin.

T. V. It was necessary that the Person that should make Satisfaction should be
a Man, Contr. to the former
because none but a Creature could suffer, page 55.

Contrad. T. V. It being impossible for any finite Creature to make plenary
Satisfation to the infinite Justice of God which requires an infinite
Satisfaction, page 54, 55. If Christ had not been God as well as Man, the
Sufferings and Satisfaction would have been but finite.

Obs. First, This Person that should make satisfaction by suffering and death,
it seems now is counted a Creature, which yet as such, could not satisfy
infinite Justice (as Contradictorily is confessed) But as before it is said, He
was the Eternal Son of God, proved to be God, equal with the Father; but now
(in Contradiction again) it was as God and Man that he satisfied, whereas it
was not as God that he suffered and died; but we confess that God was in Christ
reconciling the World to himself.

T.V. Christ did bear the punishment of our sins (viz. the curse and punishment
our sins deserved) that he might give Satisfaction unto God's Justice, page 57,
58.

Obs. Query. But did God undergo that punishment? surely nay: Or, did Christ as
man, undergo that eternal Punishment, Death, and Curse due to sinners? Could
Christ's Death, or Temporal Sufferings be Eternal? Yet still we confess, That
God both had, and has still full satisfaction and pleasure in his Son Christ
the Anointed, the Lamb that was offered without spot to God, a Sacrifice for
sin, though your abuse of Christ, confusion and darkness in stating your Matter
we cannot own as proceeding from any sense or savor of Christ, either as a
Sacrifice or Savior.

T.V. His Righteousness obliges him to take vengeance upon all that have
transgressed Not upon his beloved Son Christ.
his Law, page 54. Our righteousness are as filthy Rags.

Contrad. T. V. He does Exercise his Justice freely as he does love his Image
in his people freely, page 65.

Obs. Then your filthy Rags cannot cover you from his vengeance, for therein
you are not in his Image, which he loves freely in his People, and yet you
would be accounted his People, where you are, it is high time for you to Repent,
and no longer cover your selves with such Rags, polluted Garments, -- For God
will lay you bare and naked.

3. Of Justification.
T.D. There is no need of inherent Righteousness for Justification, --
(Contradiction) -- But yet there is need of it to make us meet for Heaven, Col.
1.12. page 45.

Contrad. Inherent gives us a fitness for the enjoying of it; (it lying in
Communion with God) without likeness of disposition, there can be no liking of
each other, page 46.

Obs. What then are persons in a Justified state while they are neither meet
for Heaven, not fit to enjoy it? nor yet partakers of that which makes like to
God, and brings into Communion with him? Which is this inherent Righteousness
of Christ (as it is called) which T.D. has shut out as not needful for
Justification, -- contrary to plain Scripture, 1 Cor. 6.11. Romans 2.13. Jam.
2.21. Heb. 12.14.

T.D. Satisfaction is a compensation or recompense made to God for injury done
him by sin, which may be both by doing and suffering -- Vindictive Justice.

Contrad. T. V. Godliness is enjoined upon all, page 67.

Obs. How then did Christ undergo infinite Wrath from offended infinite
Justice, that sinners and sin deserved, when he never sinned? For here every
one is to obey, and answer the pure Law of God, viz. by Godliness; and if
Godliness be enjoined upon all, I ask, must all remain in a sinful ungodly
state? and Commands to Perfection be construed but as the measure of our duty,
according as T. D. says, page 57. who formerly affirmed also, That the
righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us, was meant in Christ, and not
in our persons; so, then must we look on Christ as his being Godly, Righteous,
Obedient to Death, for men, fully to satisfy and take off the Righteous
Injunction laid upon them to Godliness, perfect Obedience, etc. That it is to
be meant, Christ must be perfect for us, he is to be only the subject of all
those Commands enjoining perfect Obedience, Righteousness, and Holiness, and
not we, which is as absurd, and all one as to say, That when God Commands us by
his Grace not to sin, but to be perfect, (or perfectly to deny ungodliness and
worldly lusts, and to live godly, soberly, etc.) -- That he all this while
intends his Son Jesus Christ as the subject of these Commands; And whereas he
never said, Son Jesus Christ, Do not thou sin, be not thou ungodly, do thou
deny worldly lusts, live thou godly, soberly, be thou perfect for all, and it
shall satisfy me fully, instead of Perfection or Righteousness in men, seeing
none can be perfect or free from sin in this life, etc. But this absurd Course,
is the current, tenor, and intent of our Opposers Doctrine; And yet they must
confess, That Christ never sinned, nor could sin, neither was there guile found
in his mouth; so their presenting him only as the subject of perfect Obedience,
and not Men, or Believers; is all one as to say, That all those Commands
directed to us for that end, was only intended to Christ; for T.D. construes
his Satisfaction and Payment [in men's stead] to consist in both Doing and
Suffering, viz. Both in Christ's Obedience and Subjection to the Law, and God's
Precepts; as also to its Penalties and Curses, page 19, 20. But T. V. lays it
upon his Death in their room; and thus they manifestly Contradict themselves,
whereas God was always well pleased or satisfied in Christ, both in his active
obedience, and also in his passive subjection to suffering death (as man) even
in all his whole Conversation, Ministry, Life and Death for Mankind, he being a
perfect Sacrifice for sin, but God is not therefore satisfied with man out of
Christ, or out of obedience to the Law of his Spirit, but as he comes to be
found in Christ, having and possessing his Righteousness within, and the Life
and Effects thereof, which does not admit of sin and imperfection term of life,
seeing as is Confessed by T.D. and T.V. That God loves his Image in his People
freely, and without likeness of disposition, there can be no likeing of each
other; And surely the Image, likeness, and disposition of God in his People, is
pure and perfect, which sin and imperfection bears no resemblance of.

T.V. No persons being the subjects of Gospel Justification, but as ungodly,
that is, as having sinned.

Contrad. T. V. Where he removes the guilt of sin, he also removes the filth
of sin; Justification and Sanctification being unseparable Companions, --
Justification is never without Sanctification.

Obs. See the apparent Contradiction here in this latter to the former; for
here note then, That no Persons are the subjects of Gospel Justification, as
ungodly, or as in their sins; but as being sanctified, and the filth of sin
removed; so then justified not in sin, but in the Truth and Righteousness of
Christ; they being washed, cleansed, and sanctified; and only such are they
that are Justified in the Name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of God, --
1 Cor. 6.11.

T. D. Satisfaction is not a Scripture phrase, but the thing is found there, to
wit, a Compensation made to God for the injury done him by our sin, which may
be by doing, or suffering, or both, Justice that is Vindictive, page 19.

Contrad. T. D. Those places that speaks of the turning away of Divine Wrath by
Christ's Obedience, which Wrath is but an Inclination to punish, page 22. --
Christ's Obedience cannot properly work upon God's Will. [Contradiction again.]

Contrad. T.D. The Deliverer undergoes that Evil in kind or equivalently, which
he that is Delivered, should have undergone, page 24.

Obs. What Evil was it that sinners deserved or should have undergone? do you
not confess it was the Wrath and Vengeance of God, Hell, Everlasting Damnation,
and Punishment from his just hand? And did Christ the Deliverer undergo all
that! What a strange Object is he here rendered? and yet he was both God and
(innocent) Man? But how does this hold with that before, That it was but an
Inclination to punish? What apparent Ignorance and Contradiction is here! And
is this the great Glory, Power, Sovereignty, Divine Love, Mercy, and Goodness
that you ascribe to the infinite God, to lay such a limit upon him, as that he
could not forgive, pardon, or pass by former offenses, without exacting not
only full Payment, but Revenge and Punishment upon the Surety ( viz. his
innocent beloved Son) even the same in kind due to the Transgressors; whereas
the Scripture says, The Chastizement of our Peace was upon him: which is not
the same with Everlasting Wrath and Vengeance from the immediate hand of God
(which I cannot believe was so laid on Christ) whose Mercies are over all his
Works, and particularly mankind, but his Wrath is revealed against all
ungodliness.

T.D. Upon actual Faith he lays aside his anger quite, and becomes our
friend, page 33.

Obs. Then it appears his Anger is not quite laid aside, nor Friendship with
him obtained till Actual Faith; How has T. D. overthrown and given away their
Cause herein? Faith and Repentance must be Experienced, or else Anger is not
quite laid aside.

T. D. Though the thing be true and owned by us, viz. That Christ could not
satisfy God's Justice as Man, -- or as God singly, p. 34.

Obs. Could not God satisfy himself! What a strange limitation is here laid
upon the infinite God? And surely as God-Man, (as your term is) he was not
under the same Evil, Wrath, or Everlasting Punishment, which was due to the
Transgressors. For God did not deal so with himself, but he commended his Love
to us in that while we were sinners Christ died for us, he died for our sins,
but was raised for our Justification; it was Christ that died, ye^, rather that
he is risen again.

T. D. The Father's gift of the Son for our Redemption depends on nothing but
himself, -- Our Doctrine represents not the Son kinder than the Father, -- The
Father and Son as God, are equally kind to man, and equally angry at man's sin,
p. 36, 37, 38.

Obs. If equally kind to man, then why did T.V. lay such an Impossibility on
God of freely pardoning? [But then does T. D. think he amends it, by
considering God as a Creditor, and so as a private Person? page 32. Where
proves he this in all the Scriptures?] And if the Father and Son be equally
angry at man's sin, then man must Repent, and forsake his sins before their
anger be wholly removed, or either fully pleased, or satisfied concerning man;
For where was there a third Person substituted to pacify the Anger of both?
Howbeit God was well pleased, and fully satisfied in Christ, and concerning all
his Works, Sufferings, and Sacrifice, in order to man's Salvation; and we are
accepted in the Beloved of God, for whose sake, and in whom we have received
Remission, Righteousness, Life, and Peace with God, having received Christ (the
Righteousness of God) for that end.

T. D. A state of freedom from sin is not attainable in this life, and yet
commanded, Matthew. 5.48. and that no man ever did attain a state of Perfection,
page 55.57.

T.D. Christ was not ashamed to call us Brethren, All which Contradict their
Doctrine of Imperfection, and prove our Principle; and then their filthy Rags
of self-Righteousness, and best Performances, which are sinful, are shut out of
both Union and Intimacy with Christ, as not proceeding from any true dependence
upon him, or that Spirit and Truth wherein the True and Living God is
Worshipped by all such as are of the true Circumcision.
Heb. 2.11. that is fellow subjects, for being one in nature with us, he becoms
one with us in an obligation, etc. page 20.

J.O. Christ gave himself for us, that he might Redeem us from all iniquity, 1
Pet. 1.18. page 160. -- It would altogether unbecome the Holy God to pardon
sinners that continue so to live and die in their sins, p. 179.

T. D. That Mystical Union betwixt Christ and his People, by their dependence
upon him, in all the good they do, -- is as near and intimate as that of the
branches upon the Vine, by virtue of their natural Union in bearing fruit, page
47.

Some Passages out of Edward Stillingfleet's Discourse of the Sufferings of
Christ; which are evidently Contradictory to John Owen, and Tho. Danson.
In the Margent are J. Owen and T. Danson 's Doctrines.
PAges 269, and 270. The state of the Controversy has been rendered more
abscure by the mistakes of some who have managed it with greater zeal Jo. Owen.
For the term of Satisfaction, -- the right understanding of the word it self,
depends on some Notions of Law, that as yet we need not take into
Consideration, page 150.
than judgment; -- they have shot over their Adversaries heads, and laid their
own more open to Assaults. It is easy to observe, That most of Socinus his
Arguments are Levelled against an Opinion, which few, who have considered those
things do maintain, J. O. He (Christ) bare our sins, or the punishment due unto
them, page 160. He answered the Law, and the penalty of it, page 161.

T.D. The deliverer undergoes the evil in kind, which he that is delivered
should have undergone, page 24.

Obs. Here is as much opposition between these men and Dr. Still. as if J. O.
should say, It was the very same punishment, etc. but E. S. Nay; It was not the
very same, etc.


and none need to think themselves obliged to do it, which is, That Christ paid
a proper and ridgid Satisfaction for the sins of men, considered under the
notion of Debts, and that he paid the very same which we ought to have done,
which in the sense of the Law is never called Satisfaction, but strict Payment;
Against this Socinus Disputes from the Impossibility of Christ's paying the
very same that we were to have paid, because our penalty was eternal death, --
and that as the consequence of inherent Guilt, T. D. Christ when he suffered
was not Innocent, and when God required satisfaction of him, it was due from
him, etc.
which Christ neither did, nor could undergo. -- If a Mediator could have paid
the same, then the Gospel had not been the bringing in of a better Covenant,
but a performance of the Old, page 271. But if there be a Relaxation J.O. God
as supreme Ruler, dispenses not with the Act of Law, but the immediate object,
and substitutes another Sufferer in the room of them who are principally liable
unto the sentence, etc.
or Dispensation of the first Law, then it necessarily follows, That what
Christ paid, was not the very same which the first Law required; for what need
of that, when the very same was paid that was in the Obligation. J. O. The Son
of God -- was upon the account of the Dignity of his Person, able to Answer the
Penalty which all others had incurred.
But if it be said, That the dignity of the Person makes up what wanted in the
kind or degree of punishment, this is a plain confession, That it is not the
same, etc. J.O. That God -- did so lay our sins in and by the sentence of the
Law upon him, etc. page 166.
Besides, if the very same had been paid in the strict sense, there would have
followed a deliverance ipso facto, for the Release immediately follows the
payment of the same; and it had been Injustice to have required any thing
further, in order to the discharge of the offender, when strict and full
payment had been made of what was in the Obligation* T. D. God admits of what
Christ did on our behalf, as if it had been our personal Act, as the Creditor
Cancels the Bond, lets the Debtor out of Prison, and gives him as Legal a
Discharge upon the Sureties payment, etc.
But we see that Faith and Repentance, and the Consequences of those two, are
made Conditions on our parts, in order to the enjoying the benefit of what
Christ has procured; so that the Release is not immediate upon the Payment,
etc.

Page 272. Observe T.D's words below, whereupon, 1. I ask if refusable Payment,
how then is God bound to take Vengeance, in T. V. his sense? 2. If another
thing be paid, How agrees this with J. O? For,
We are to consider that these very Persons assert, That Christ paid all for
us, and in our name and stead; so that the payment by Christ was by a
substitution in our room; and if he paid the same which the Law required, the
benefit must immediately acrue to those in whose Name the Debt was paid; for
what was done in the Name of another, is all one to the Creditor, as if it had
been done by the Debtor himself; But above all things, it is impossible to
reconcile the freeness of Remission, with the full Payment, etc. -- Neither
will it serve to say, That though it was not free to Christ, yet it was to us:
for the Satisfaction and Remission must respect the same person, for Christ did
not pay for himself, but for us; neither could the Remission be to him, etc. --
It is impossible the same Debt should be fully paid, and freely forgiven; much
less will it avoid the difficulty in this case to say, That T. D. Supposes,
That Satisfaction to be Solutio recusabilis, Refusable payment; -- dum alius
solvit, aliud solvitur; -- When another Person then what was obliged makes
payment, -- another thing is paid, then what the Law required. --
it was a refusable Payment, for it being supposed to be the very same, it was
not in Justice refusable, etc. page 173.

Thus when our Adversaries Dispute against this Opinion, no wonder if they do
it succesfully; but this whole Opinion is built upon a Mistake, That
Satisfaction must be the payment of the very same; which while they contend
for, they give our Adversaries too great an advantage, and make them think they
triumph over the Faith of the Church, when they do it only over the mistake of
some particular Persons, As J. O. T. D. and T. V. they being the Mistakers.
p. 275. They make the right of punishment merely to depend on God's absolute
Dominion, and that all Satisfaction must be considered under the notion of
Compensation for the injuries done to him, -- T.D. That Christ made a
Compensation to God, for the Injury done him by our sin, which may be both by
doing and suffering Justice, that is Vindictive. --
But if we can clearly show a considerable difference between the Notion of
Debts and Punishments, if the right of Punishments does not depend upon mere
Dominion; and that Satisfaction by way of Punishment, is not primarily intended
for Compensation.

It is lawful for a man to forgive all the Debts which are owing him, --
althoug they assert, That the Justice of God does never require Punishment in
case of Repentance; but withal they assert, That in case of Impenitency, it is
not only agreeable, but due to the nature and decrees, and therefore to the
rectitude and equity of God not to give Pardon: If this be true, then there is
an apparent difference between the notion of Debts and Punishments, etc.

Thus far Edw. Stillingfleet.

Obs. Hereby the Reader may see how contrary to Dr. Owen and T. Danson's
Notions of Law, Dr. Stillingfleet has reasoned, and has seemed to show more
Moderation, and offer more Reason (in his way and method) than they have done
in these matters: These Passages I was willing to Relate, that the World may
see how Inconsistent and Opposite these Doctors, and Learned men, (so
accounted) are in their Notions, and how they cannot agree among themselves,
and also what Confusion men are apt to run into, when they keep not to the
plain language of the Scriptures; Besides had the despised Suffering Quakers
but appeared (as from themselves) after this method against J. O. and his
Brethren, as E. S. has done, what an offense would it have been unto them, and
how ready would they have been to muster up their Forces, and send out their
reviling Books For which -- see their railing Language [as Black-mouthed
Blasphemers, hiddeous Blasphemers, with Socinian and damnably Heretical
Opinions, etc.] used by T. V.] They may receive a Check from Dr. Stillingfleet,
to the Reader, viz. It may be some will be dissatisfied, that I give our
Adversaries no harder Names, but I never found any men convinced by ill
Language; and those we have to deal withal, are too subtle, not to distinguish
between loud Clamours and Demonstrations. I leave that Method of Confuting
them, to those who have greater Abilities in that way. I think it very
Incongruous for us, while we Magnify the Patience and Meekness of Christ in
his Sufferings, to discover our Passion, in Disputing about them.
against us, hoping thereby to gain the more favor and esteem, as, Defenders
of the Faith of the Church, etc. whereas, it is not the Faith of the Church
they defend in their mistakes, whereby they have obscured the state of the
Controversy, by managing it with more Zeal than Judgment, according to E. S.
his words: Now they may Answer themselves in their Contradictions, and see if
they can Reconcile their own Work, before they further meddle against others;
for in the state they are in, the more they strive, the more they will Confound
themselves, and work their own overthrow. As for their Reviling and Nicknames
they give men, that differ, they are but poor Arguments for Confutation, when
they are rather to prejudice the Ignorant, than to manifest Truth. Howbeit,
whatever men's Notions, or Opinions be, touching Christ or his Sufferings, we
have not our Religion and Experience thereof from them, they being uncertain,
and weak, in comparison of the Living Truth it self, which in Christ and his
Light, is received; and not in men's Traditions and Notions: And that all may
come to know the certain Principle or Light of Christ within, to wait in, to
know the Power of Godliness, and those things which concern Life and Salvation:
This is the desire of my Soul, for all such as feel a want of true Satisfaction
and Peace in their own Souls.

Some Passages of Edward Stillingfleet's Sermon Preached before the King, March
13. 1666/7. which was Printed by his special command.
T. Danson. Christ when he Suffered was not Innocent, and when God required
Satisfaction of him, it was due from him; Christ was guilty of our sin, when he
Suffered for it, Synopsis page 36. Christ was made sin by Imputation,
therefore, so are we made Righteous, page 40.
HE who has appointed the Rewards and Punishments of the great Day, will then
call the Sinner to Account, not only for all his other sins, but for offering
to lay the Imputation of them upon himself.

We have the greatest reason to lay the blame of all our Evil Actions upon our
selves, as to attribute the Glory of all our Good unto himself, page 16, 17.

[b] That God had designed (they are ready to say) That man should lead a life
free from sin; Why did he confine the Soul of man to a Body so apt to taint and
pollute it? But, who art thou, O man, that does find fault with thy Maker? etc.
page 17.

T.D. A state of freedom from sin is not attainable in this life; -- No man
ever did attain a state of Perfection (viz. none of the eminently Holy Persons
in the Scripture) page 55. Yet Perfection is commanded, -- Be ye therefore
perfect as your Heavenly Father, etc. Mat. 5.48. Such Commands are the measure
of our Duty, not of our Seize, page 57.
He has offered us the assistance of his Grace, and of that Spirit of his,
which is greater then that Spirit which is in the World; He has promised us
those Weapons, whereby we may withstand the Torrent of Wickedness in the World;
we have not only sufficient means of Resistance, but we understand the Danger
before hand, page 19.

T.D. A state of freedom from sin is not attainable in this life; -- No man
ever did attain a state of Perfection (viz. none of the eminently Holy Persons
in the Scripture) page 55. Yet Perfection is commanded, -- Be ye therefore
perfect as your Heavenly Father, etc. Mat. 5.48. Such Commands are the measure
of our Duty, not of our Seize, page 57.
Their Consciences still rebuke them sharply for their sins, then in a mighty
rage and fury, they charge God himself with Tyranny, as laying impossible Laws
upon the Souls of men. But if we either consider the Nature of the Command, or
the Promises which accompany it, or the large Experience to the contrary, we
shall easily discover that this Pretense is altogether unreasonable; for, what
is it that God requires of men, as the Condition of their future Happiness,
which in its own Nature is judged Impossible? Is it for men to live Soberly,
Righteously, Godly, in this World? for that was the end of Christian Religion,
etc. Is it to do as we would be done by? Is it to maintain a Universal Kindness
and Good Will to men? That indeed is the great Excellency of our Religion, that
it so strictly requires it; but if this be impossible, farewell all good Nature
in the World, page 21, 22.

T.D. A state of freedom from sin is not attainable in this life; -- No man
ever did attain a state of Perfection (viz. none of the eminently Holy Persons
in the Scripture) page 55. Yet Perfection is commanded, -- Be ye therefore
perfect as your Heavenly Father, etc. Mat. 5.48. Such Commands are the measure
of our Duty, not of our Seize, page 57.
Their own mouths will Condemn them, when they charge God with laying
impossible Laws upon Mankind. -- Yet such is the unlimited Nature of Divine
Goodness, and the exceeding Riches of God's Grace, that he makes a large and
free offer of Assistance to all those who are so senseable of their own
infirmity, as to beg it of him: And can men then say the Command is impossible,
when he has promised an assistance suitable to the nature of the Duty, and
infirmities of men? page 23. -- Has he not made use of the most obliging
motives to persuade us to the Practice of what he requires, by the infinite
discovery of his own Love, the Death of his Son, and the Promise of his Spirit;
and what then is wanting, but only setting our selves with a serious Obedience
to them, to make his Commands not only not impossible, but easy to us, page
24. Thus far E.S.

Obs. Here observe, That E.S. has Asserted Truth, contrary to the
Presbyterians and Independants:

1st. On the behalf of the Freeness and Sufficiency of God's Grace to Mankind,
for the Fulfilling or Obeying of God's Commands.

2dly. In his Asserting the Possibility of man's Obeying them thereby, which
amounts to Perfection and Freedom from Sin, as being attainable by those Divine
Helps that God affords man for that end.

3dly. In Reproving them, that being sharply rebuked in their Consciences for
sin, do charge God with laying impossible Laws on men, which is no less than
to charge him with Cruelty, or Tyranny.

The CONCLUSION.
The sum of the Controversy between us and our present Opposers, consists in
these following Heads.

1st. FIrst, I Affirm, That their distinguishing the Deity, or Godhead into
Three separate (or finite) Personalities, and to reckon the Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost not Infinite, is Anti-scriptural, Erroneous, and Blasphemous.

2dly. That their Affirming Christ not to be Innocent but Guilty of our sins
when he Suffered (is Blasphemous) and so their deeming, that the Suffering he
underwent, was the same Revenge or Vengeance from God (which they term
Vindictive Justice) that is due to Wicked men, Reprobate Angels, and Devils
(this is false also) and that upon that ground, their stating the matter of
Satisfaction to Divine Justice, as otherwise, It being impossible (...) God to
Pardon, etc. All this is to charge God with Injustice and Cruelty against his
Innocent Son, and is, in the first place, Blasphemous against Christ; and in
the next, its Impious, to the dishonor of both Father and Son.

3dly. Their Affirming Christ but to have died but for a few, and not for all
men; and that his being a Propitiation, or Sacrifice, is but for some of all
sorts (of Jews and Gentiles) and not for the sins of the whole World, is
contrary to plain Scripture, and repugnant to the free Grace and gift of God to
all.

4thly. Their Affirming, That Christ does not enlighten every man with a
spiritual saving Light, but with a natural insufficient Light; is an Erroneous
Doctrine of Darkness, and Antichrist, and repugnant both to Christ, and God's
free Grace, and Love in him to Mankind.

5thly. Their Affirming Perfection, or freedom from sin, not to be attainable
in this Life; and so their arguing for sin term of Life, is Antichristian, and
of the Devil; being against the Commands and Promises of God, and against the
Power and Coming of Christ, and frustrates the end of his Suffering, Sacrifice,
and Manifestation.

6thly. Their Notion of Imputation of Christ's Righteousness, to impure,
sinful, rebellious Persons, who are not partakers of it in themselves, nor yet
in that Faith which purifies the heart; and thereupon their reckoning them
Righteous in God's account, is a false Notion, and none of God's, nor Christ's
Imputation; but as Gross, Erroneous, and Impious, as their imputing sin to
Christ as not being Innocent when he Suffered, but Guilty, etc.

7thly. And their Affirming men to be Justified, or in a Justified state, by an
Imputed Righteousness, whilst actually sinful and unjust; is as false, and as
great abomination, as he that Justifies the Wicked, and he that Condemns the
Just; or as they are that Condemn Christ as not being Innocent, and Justify
sinful men (or Hypocrites) as being Righteous, whose Faith is but empty, dead,
and feigned.

8thly. So their Affirming men to be Imputatively Righteous, when inherently
and actually sinful; or Imputatively saved, when actually damned: And all their
Doctrines that tend to dishonor God, or Christ, and to give People ease and
liberty in sin, are to be denied as Erroneous, Antichristian, and Devilish.

And here in opposition to our Ridgid Opposers, both those of Presbyterians and
Independants (concerned in these Doctrines) I further Affirm as follows;

First, That the Three that bear Record in Heaven, the Father, the Word, and
the Spirit (or the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost) are One, and inseparable; no
where in Scripture called Three separate Persons, nor finite in Personalities;
though three [in manifestation] and so testified of (as Three Witnesses) for
the Confirmation of the Testimony of the Gospel.

Secondly, That Christ was Innocent and not Guilty when he Suffered (he was
Just that Suffered for the Unjust) seeing he freely, in the Love of God to man,
gave and offered himself, by the Eternal Spirit, a Lamb without spot to God; so
that he was an Offering well pleasing, a sweet smelling savor, and so a most
acceptable and satisfactory Sacrifice to God for all men. -- It being also
possible for God, and he does Pardon men upon Repentance for Christ's sake,
without either accounting Christ not Innocent or Guilty of men's sins, and
without either exercising the same Rigor of Punishment, Eternal Death, or
Vengeance upon him, that is due to Reprobates and Devils: For it was in one and
the same Love, mutual Condescension, and a Spirit of Compassion and
Forgiveness, both in the Father and in the Son, toward Mankind, that Christ
was given a Ransom, or in which (as it is said) God sent his Son, and Christ
gave himself, etc.

Thirdly, That Christ gave himself a Ransom for all men, and by the Grace of
God His tasting Death, was not the Revenge that the Wicked have incurred;
neither is Grace Revenge.
tasted Death for every man, being a Propitiation for the sins of the whole
World, to show forth, and give Testimony of God's Love and Grace toward all
Mankind.

Fourthly, That Christ inlightens every man that comes into the World, with a
spiritual saving Light, which they that believe in, and follow, do receive Life
in him the true Light (however Darkness oppose or deny it) and they that
reject, or hate his Light, are condemned, and left without excuse before the
Lord by it.

Fifthly, That Perfection and freedom from sin, is attainable in this Life to
all that believe in the Power of Christ for that end, what ever the Devil and
his Ministers say to the contrary.

Sixthly, That while Persons are impure or sinful, not experiencing the Work of
God in them, nor the Living Faith in it is Operation, nor Sanctification in
them, God does not impute Christ's Righteousness to them, nor reckon it theirs,
they being out of it in the Unregenerate state, not come to know the Image of
God renewed in them; for men are not imputedly Righteous when actually sinners
(as impiously has been Asserted) nor imputedly saved, when actually damned* no
more then imputatively Saints, while actually Devils.

Seventhly, Neither does God account men Justified, or reckon them Righteous,
whilst they are really unjust, being reproved and judged as Unrighteous by his
Light and Spirit in them; for God's accounts and reckonings are true and
Righteous, and he Just and True in all his ways, and his Judgments are Right,
and he can no more therein Contradict his own Light, in Man, or it is Judgment
and Testimony, than he can oppose or deny himself.

Eighthly, The Unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of God; and the Wrath
of God is revealed from Heaven against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of
men; they that are (or continue) actually sinful and polluted, are neither
acquitted nor Righteous in God's account, but must bear their Iniquity, which
will be their ruin, unless they Return and be reconciled in their minds to the
Light of Christ within (which reproves them of sin and evil) and so except men
Repent and forsake their sins, they shall surely perish; they that neglect the
great Salvation, cannot escape Condemnation. -- If I sin against thee, then
thou markest me, and thou will not acquit me from mine Iniquity, Job 10.14.
Psalm. 32. God imputes sin to none, but them in whom it is in being; so he
imputes nor Righteousness to any, but them in whom it is; as the blessed man,
to whom God imputes not sin, etc. in his Spirit there is no guile.

Finally, All that profess to be Ministers of the Gospel, and Teachers of
others, ought to Preach or Teach nothing but what may make, or tend to the
Glory of God, and Honor of Christ Jesus, in the Exaltation of Truth and
Righteousness in the Earth, and all the Contrary (as all sin and sinful
Doctrines, with all sin-pleasing and sinners-soothing Principles) to be
abhorred, rejected, and opposed by all professing Christianity, that tender the
Honor of Christ, and desire the Exaltation of his Kingdom, which stands in
Righteousness.


