THE AUTHORITY OF THE True Ministry, In Baptizing with the SPIRIT; and the
IDOLATRY of such Men, as are doting about Shadows and Carnal Ordinances, and
their Ignorance of the Sprits Baptism ( of which, Water Baptism was but a
figure) discovered.

And herein is showed, That Water Baptism is neither of necessity to Salvation,
nor yet is it now Practiced either by Authority from Heaven, or by any
New-Testament-Law that is in force upon Believers; seeing the Substance, and
the End of things abolished is come and enjoyed, wherein the Types, Shadows and
Figures, are ended.

Being a short Return to a Book Entitled, A Reply to a Scandalous Paper,
subscribed by one Samuel Bradley, a Baptist Teacher, as concerning a dispute
that was between some of the people called QVAKERS, and some BAPTISTS in
South-warke.

Act. 11. 15, 16. And as I began to speak, the Holy Ghost fell on them, as on
us at the beginning, then remembered I the Word of the Lord, how that he said,
John indeed Baptized with Water, but Ye shall be Baptized with the Holy Ghost.

1 Pet. 3. 21. The like Figure whereunto, even Baptism does also now save us;
not the putting away of the filth of the flesh, but the Answer of a good
Conscience toward God, by the Resurrection of Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 4. 5. There
is one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism.

LONDON, Printed for Robert Wilson, at the Sign of the Black-Spread-Eagle and
Windmil in Martins l' Grand, 1660.

The AUTHORITY of the True MINISTRY, In Baptising with the Spirit, and the
IDOLATYR of such men, as are doting about Shadows, and Carnal Ordinances, etc.
SUrely the said Samuel Bradley has had time sufficient to have studied and
brought forth far more sound matter than he has done in his pretended REPLY,
it being above one year and a half since the paper touching our dispute went
forth; when as his pretended REPLY to it came but lately abroad as to our
hands, and exceeding darkly, as a false cover to his folly and Confusion, which
so long since was discovered, and reproved by the Spirit of Truth in us; and in
this his pretended Reply, has he often Reproached and belyed us, called
QVAKERS; even in a time, in which the foggy mist is risen out of the pit, to
darken the Air, and the Sun also if it were possible, and the multitude of
slanders and lies is gone forth against us, and among them is this S. B. and
his work found, which shall return back to perdition; who has sought to guild
and smooth over his former cause, as if he thought we had either forgotten his
former folly that he vented at the dispute, or else, that he did not intend
that his work should come forth to the Light to be tried, he sending it so
hidenly in manuscript among his hearers: Therefore note his matter as
follows, and seriously read the Answer.

Samuel Bradley the Baptist, to the Reader, says these words, viz. I must
needs write my self less than the least of all Saints, and altogether unworthy
to engage in any work for Jehovah; much more altogether unworthy to engage in a
work so weighty, and so such public concernment as this is.

Answ. Then its evident, that this S. B. is not in Gods work, but in his own
work, he being altogether unworthy to engage in any work for JEHOVAH: so note
that what he has done, both in his opposing the people called QVAKERS, and in
his writing against them, was not any work of JEHOVAH, but of his own; done in
darkness, and the enmity of the wicked one, against JEHOVAH, and his work. And
what profit can you that are the hearers of the said Samuel Bradley reap from
him, since he is altogether unworthy to engage in any work for JEHOVAH? as also
the sequel hereof will further discover; and this S. B. professes himself to
be a poor labourer in the Vineyard of Christ, and in the service of the Lord;
and thus has he played the hypocrite, and confounded himself; for how can he
be either a Labourer in the Vineyard of Christ, or a Servant of the Lord, when
he is altogether unworthy to engage in any work for JEHOVAH? So its plainly
manifest, that he is one of them that runs, and the Lord has not sent him; and
one of the false prophets, that steal the words from their neighbors, and say,
Thus says the Lord, when God has not spoken to them: But all the true
Ministers and Laborers in Christ Vineyard were in JEHOVAHS work, which S. B.
is altogether unworthy to engage in; and therefore he had better been silent,
and have done nothing than have uttered so many words without knowledge as he
has done; if he had been silent, his folly had not so much appeared as it now
does.


S. B. says, I shall count it a mercy, that God has given me such a fit
opportunity to contend for the faith that was once delivered by Christ.


Ans. In this have thou S. B. spoken falsely; for to contend for the faith which
was once delivered unto the Saints, is a work for JEHOVAH, but thou art
altogether unworthy to engage in any work for him, as thou have Confessed.


S. B. Those people who are known by the name of QVAKERS, undertook to prove
two things, 1st. That the Disciples of our Lord Jesus Christ were Commanded to
Baptize with the Spirit. 2d. They undertook to prove that New
Testament-Ordinances were abolished.


Answ. As for the former of these assertions upon the QVAKERS, (so called) we
did say something in order to it, ( and proved it also.) viz. That the
Disciples of Christ were in his work, and had power given them to Baptize
people into the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, which was with the
Spirit, as hereafter is further discovered: And as for the latter of them, its
exceeding false; for we never affirmed that New Testament-Ordinances were
abolished, nor undertook to prove it; but we opposed the Baptists affirming
water Baptism, to be in force as a New Testament-Ordinance, from Mat. 28. 19.
when there is no water mentioned, but Baptising them into the Name of the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, (as it is in the Greek (...) into the name) which
Name, Baptising or plunging people in outward water, does not Baptize men into;
for the outward baptism was but a figure of the inward baptism, ( and so had
relation to the Law, and that state under it, which had the Figures and
Shadows) and is not by these Baptists proved a New Testament-Ordinance, as in
force by any New Testament Law; for New Testament-Ordinances, as Preaching,
Praying, Baptising into the Name and Body of Christ, and other Ordinances which
the Spirit of Christ leads to, we own, and are in the Life and Practice of
them, as Christ has called us.


S. B. Water Baptism is an Ordinance of Christ still in force, and to continue
till the second coming, and Glorious Appearing of our Lord Jesus.

Answ. Then in his pleading for Water Baptism, to continue till the end of the
World ( according to his account) he has denied that the Saints are yet come
to the second coming of Christ to Salvation: wherein he has discovered his
ignorance, of Christ's appearance and Salvation, and so would keep the Saints
under shadows, and from the Substance all their life time: When as the coming
of Christ in the flesh, ( wherein he was offered to bear the Sins of many, Heb.
9. 28.) was one coming; and his appearance in Spirit, to save his people from
sin, is another coming, which they that truly looked for did receive; and they
that yet have that his coming to look for, and wait for it, he shall so appear
to their Salvation.

Sam. Bradley says of the QVAKERS, The first thing they mention, as the
Captain General of their manifold untruths, that Sam. Bradly a Baptist Teacher
affirmed, That the Baptism of the Spirit was Metaphorically spoken of in that
place, 1 Cor. 12. 13. and that the baptism of water was intended. To which I
say, herein has he wronged our words, and falsified our sayings; for we said,
that S. B. affirmed, touching 1 Cor. 12. 13. That the baptism of the Spirit
(there spoken of) was metaphorical, but the baptism of water was intended. And
S. B. then Replies thus, viz. I did not, nor do not affirm, that the Baptism of
the Spirit was metaphorically spoken of in 1 Cor. 12. 13. And that the baptism
of water was there intended: Therefore, I would advise these men for to learn
to speak the Truth.


Answ. We have affirmed no untruth against thee S. B. for what we said of thee
in that particular mentioned, was, that thou said that the Baptism of the
Spirit was metaphorical, but the baptism of water was intended: and this is
notoriously known by many that thou affirmedst it upon our urging that 1 Cor.
12. 13. and one of thy brethren sought to vindicate thee in it, when thou wast
baffled about it, as counting that the Apostle spoke metaphorically in that 1
Cor. 12. about the body and the members, ( which was nothing to the purpose)
also, it was several times upon thy assertion asked thee, What the Baptism of
the Spirit was a Metaphor or a Figure of, if it was Metaphorical as thou
said? about which thy mouth was plainly stopped, and it was so often in the
Meeting cast upon thee; that thou discovers an exceeding impudent lying spirit
in thee, now to deny it, and to say, that what we said of thee about it is
altogether untrue, as thou say: About which I could produce several
witnesses, who know that thou have spoken absolute falsehood in this thing; and
let the Reader mark thy silly shuffling in this thing, thou say, Thou did
not, neither do affirm, that the baptism of the Spirit was metaphorically
spoken of in that place, 1 Cor. 12. 13. which implies then, that thou have
counted it metaphorical in some other place, though not in that place; but
where ever any true Minister counted the Spirits baptism metaphorical, and
water baptism intended, that thou have not shown so its evident, that in thy
blindness thou have set water baptism, above the baptism of the Spirit; and so
have made an Idol of it, as also does appear, where thou say thus, viz.


S. B. I did say the Apostle in Ephesians. 4. Spoke of one Lord, one Faith, and one
Baptism; which these men brought in opposition to water baptism; to it I made
this Answer, thou say, This is not exclusive; for there be Lords many, as
you may see 1 Cor. 8. 5. And yet but one Lord Jesus, and we read of diverse
Baptismes, as of affliction, Luke 12. 50. 2dly, The Baptism of the Spirit,
which is spoken of in Acts 2. 3dly, The Baptism of water, as in Acts 8. and 10.
and yet there is but one properly so called, to wit that of water: Also thou
say, we instance three Baptismes in Scripture, and prove one properly so
called.


Ans. If there be so many Baptismes, and yet but one propely called baptism,
which is the Baptism of water; then from this it follows that the baptism of
the Spirit, or the baptism by which the Saints were saved, was not properly
called Baptism; and this would charge the Apostles with speaking improperly, or
falsely, when they spoke of the Baptism by which they were saved, or of their
being all baptized by one Spirit into one Body And thus this said Baptist's
falsehood and folly appears, who here also counts the one Baptism spoken of in
Ephesians. 4. the Baptism of water; and so has shut out the baptism of the Spirit,
as not properly called Baptism, and Idollatrously has set water baptism above
it; when as the baptism of the Spirit was that which water baptism did but
shadow or figure forth; for by one Spirit were the Saints baptized into the
body of Christ, which the baptism of outward water does not baptize any into;
for such as uphold water baptism now are in the strife, and much in devision,
when as they who are baptized into the body of Christ are in unity. Though thus
far we say of water baptism, that in its time it was a Command from heaven to
John, which was in the time of the Law, and the least in the Kingdom was
greater than John, who decreased; and in the time of that baptismes decreasing,
it was used by some of the Apostles in their freedom, for the sake of some
that were weak or young in the truth, and not wholly redeemed out of the state
that such carnal or weak ordinances related to, which were upheld in the time
of the Churches infancy: But when the carnal minds of some ran into these
outward things, and something got up in the minds of the Corinthians to lead
them too much to stick in them, the Apostle Paul tells them, That Christ sent
him not to baptize, but to preach the Gospel, 1 Cor. 1. 17. and yet Paul's
Commission was as large as any of the Apostles was, for he was not behind the
very chief Apostles, and shunned not to declare all the council of God Act.
20. 27. And whereas S. Bradley instanceth as his parallel, That there be Lords
many, and yet but one Lord Jesus, for the diverse Baptismes he speaks of, as of
affliction, the baptism of the Spirit, the baptism of water, and yet but one
properly so called, to wit that of water. To this I say, herein has he
discovered his gross darkness, and false comparison which will not hold
parallel; for it is as if he had said there be Lords many, and Gods many, yet to
us but one true God; and so there are many baptismes, as the baptism of
affliction, the baptism of the Spirit, and the baptism of water; yet to us
there is but one true baptism, to wit the baptism of water; and the other, as
that of affliction, and the baptism of the Spirit are false baptismes, and not
properly so called: For the many Gods and many Lords ( or that are called Gods)
are in the world, where the false Gods are. And thus S. B's. folly and
Idolatrous Spirit is seen in his so confusedly setting up water baptism above
the baptism of the Spirit, and so he is not at all fit for Jehovah's work
indeed.


S. B. Says. The ordinance of water baptism, was Commanded to be performed in
so sollemne a manner, as no ordinance in all the new Testament; In the Name of
the Father, Son and holy Ghost; which notes the great honor Christ puts upon
this ordinance.


Answ. I tell you this Baptist does make an Idol of water baptism, when he
has said all he can; for he has here set it above all the ordinances of the
New Testament, but he has apparently in this preached false doctrine; for
preaching the Gospel, was an ordinance of the New Testament, and it was done in
the Name of the Father, Son and holy Ghost, as well as baptising; seeing the
Disciples were commanded to teach ( or disciple) all Nations baptising them
into the Name of the Father, Son and holy Ghost: so that Teaching was commanded
to be done in as sollemn a manner as Baptizing, for both Teaching and Baptizing
into the Name of the Father, etc. were performed by the power of God, which the
Disciples of Christ were endued with, and which wrought by them, who were made
instruments in that work of baptizing into the Name of God and Christ, etc. And
whereas I charged S. B. and his brethren with being ignorant of the baptism of
the Spirit, he to prove that he is not ignorant of that baptism, answers thus,
viz.


S. B. I do demand what they mean by the baptism of the Spirit, etc. If by the
baptism of the Spirit, they mean the Spirit that does bear witness that we are
the Sons of God, we do experinence it, and are not ignorant of it.


Ans. What is this man but ignorant of the baptism of the Spirit, when you may
see here he cannot distinguish between the Spirit and the baptism of it? for if
by the baptism of the Spirit, we mean the Spirit that does bear witness, they
do experience it, he says. Did you ever hear such a doctrine before, that the
baptism of the Spirit is the Spirit? as if he had said, the work that is
wrought is the worker of it: and thus whilst they are doting about outward
shadows and signs, they are confounded and blinded, that they see not the
substance, nor understand the work of the Spirit, which baptizeth into Christ,
and into his Name, which is his Word, by which salvation comes; which is a
working of men into the power and life, to which they are discipled, and led in
the preaching of the Gospel.


S. B. -- The gift of tongues is called in Scripture the baptizm of the Spirit,
see Act. 1. 5. again he says, we do not deny, but acknowledge that we are
baptized by one Spirit into one body.


Ans. In this he has rested the scripture, and spoken falsely; for the gift of
tongues is not called the baptism of the Spirit, but the gift of it; now the
baptism of the Spirit was a work of it, by which the Saints were all baptized
into one body, many of whom had not the gift of tongues, for it was only a
proper gift to some: and as for the baptists saying they are all baptized by
one Spirit into one body, and yet has called the gift to tongues the baptism
of the Spirit, which he has acknowledged they are ignorant of: herein he would
make two baptismes of the Spirit, when as the Apostle said, there is one Faith,
and one Baptism Ephesians. 4. 5. and thus he shows his ignorance of the baptism of
the Spirit, and so is not worthy to engage in any work for JEHOVAH, as he has
confessed.


S. B. -- We need not require an immediate Call or Authorithy from heaven to
preach and baptize, in as much as we have a sufficient call or warrant granted
us by Christ himself on earth, which does plainly appear in the Commission it
self, the Disciples being Commissioned, etc.


Answ. What falsehood and confusion is here? For both the Papists and the
hireling Priests, and others ( whom the Baptists themselves have declared
against) do pretend as much for their call to preach and baptize as this
baptist has done; who has pretended the Commission which the Disciples of
Christ had, to be his warrant or call to preach, and baptize: when as he never
had any immediate Call or Authority from heaven to either ( and so he never had
any Call or Authority from God, either to preach or baptize: Which is like as
if that the false Prophets had said the Commission which the true Prophets had
to preach, did Authorize and warrant them to preach also; What deceiver cannot
get such a deceitful cloak as this? so it is evident that this S. Bradley is
one of these deceivers who runs, and the Lord never sent him, and speaks when
the Lord has not spoken to him; and that commission, Mat. 28. which the
Disciples of Christ received from him, was given by Authority from heaven (
upon which this S. B. does so much build and falsely argue) and it does not
warrant them to baptize with water neither, for it was to baptize into the Name
of the Father, Son and holy Ghost, which Name many do profess in words, who
are yet out of it as this Baptist is.

And whereas I said to these Baptists, that they practice baptism by
immitation, and carnal tradition, without a command from Christ's mouth for it:
To this S. B. Replies in these words, viz.


S. B. Let those men put a stop unto their lying tongues, for fear vengeance
suffer them not to live, etc. I demand then the meaning of these precious words
that drop out of the sweet lips of our Lord Jesus in the Commission that he
gave unto his Disciples, Go teach all Nations, baptizing them, etc.


Answ. Oh! how Ignorant and full of gross darkness it self art thou S. Bradley?
Surely thou may read these words to the Disciples (in the Scripture) Go
teach all Nations, baptizing them, and yet never had any command from Christ's
mouth for to baptize with water, as the Jews read the Scriptures without, who
had neither heard the voice of God at any time nor seen his shape and such art
thou, who have neither any immediate Call or Authority from Heaven to preach,
and, therefore have neither Call nor Authority from God, either to Preach or
Baptize, (and yet thou would be counted a Minister of Christ) so its time
for thee to stop thy mouth, for thou art one of them who are presumptuous, who
take upon them to speak in the name of the Lord, whom he has not sent, nor
commanded; and such God will cut off, Deuteronomy. 18. 20.


S. B. -- I do affirm that the Baptism spoken of in the Commission in the 28.
of Matthew and the 16. of Mark, is the Baptizm of Water, and for proof, S. B.
Argues thus, -- It is not the Baptizm of the Spirit, because this Baptism is
Commanded, but the Baptizm of the Spirit was never Commanded, nor was it any
man's sin, not so to be baptized, therefore it cannot be meant the Baptizm of
the Spirit, and to this S. B. adds this Lie That we did not answer at al to
this Argument.


Ans. This Argument is both False and Grounded upon a falsehood, and in it he
has confuted himself, for mark, that he has owned, That they lay no stress
for Salvation upon water Baptizm, neither is it of necessity unto Salvation,
But that Baptism which Christ Commanded in Mat. 28. and Mark 16. is of
necessity unto Salvation; for by it they were to Baptize men into the Name of
the Father, Son and holy Ghost: Now without being Baptized into this Name a man
cannot be saved, for by no other Name under heaven comes Salvation, but by the
Name of Jesus; who is a Savior of the people from their sins, Mat. 1. 21. Act.
4. 12. and Christ said, he that believes and is baptized shall be saved, Mark.
16. 16. So that there is stress or necessity upon this Baptism which Christ
commanded for Salvation; but so is there not upon water baptism as these
Baptists confess; and therefore it was not water baptism but the spiritual
baptism, which was an effect of the Gospel which is the power of God, which
the Disciples preached; for thereby they turned people from Darkness to Light,
and from the Power of Satan unto God, which is known in the Baptism of the
Spirit: And the Baptism by which the Saints were saved, was not the putting
away of the filth of the flesh, but the answer of a good Conscience, 1 Pet. 3.
21. And whereas he says That it was not any man's sin not to be baptized with
the Spirit, in this he has spoken falsely; for when men resist the Spirit of
God, and refuse to be led or baptized by it, when it is tendered to them; then
it is their sin, as it was the Lawyers sin to frustrate the Council of God
within themselves, not being baptized of John when his Baptism was (in its
time) a Command from heaven, much more is it a sin in men now to to resist the
spirit of God, and thereby to reject it is baptism.


S. B. If any should be so weak to say this baptism here ( viz. in Mat. 28.) is
meant the baptism of the Spirit; I demand once more of them to show me when and
where the Disciples did obey this Command.


Answ. They did obey it, when they Discipled and Baptized men into the Name of
the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; when they Ministered the Spirit, and turned men
from darkness to light; and a Testimony of this was manifest, when the Holy
Ghost fell on them that heard the Disciples Preach; who were Instruments with
whom God wrought, when they had received power from on high, and they were sent
into the world, as Christ was sent into the world, Joh. 17. 18. who baptized
with Fire and with the Holy Ghost; and in the same Power and Spirit they went
forth, Preaching and Baptising people into the Word of God, which is the Name
of Christ, Rev. 19. 13. And moreover Peter said, as I began to speak the Holy
Ghost fell on them, as on us at the beginning, then Remembered I the Word of
the Lord, how that he said, John indeed baptized with water, but ye shall be
baptized with the Holy Ghost, Acts 11. 16. which does plainly evidence, That
that Power or Holy Ghost, accompanied the Disciples Ministry, that did so
baptize men ( which was the end of John's Baptism) in which work, the True
Ministers were Instruments, not of themselves, but by Christ the power of God
in them; so that their Gospel went forth in Spirit and in Power.


S. B. We can prove that some were baptized with water after they had received
the Holy Ghost, Acts 10. 46. And if these poor Creatures were not hardened in
their Apostasy, how might such a plain example or instance as this engage them
unto obedience.


Answ. How poorly do these Baptists Argue for Water Baptism to Continue? who
having denied any immediate Call or Authority from Heaven, either to Preach or
Baptize, as this Baptist has done, now would make an Example a Law, to engage
us to be baptized ( when as there are many Examples that are no Laws) so that
you may see these Baptists do not baptize by any Authority from Heaven, and so
serve not in the newness of the Spirit, but merely Act by Tradition, and their
Carnal Imitations without; and then why do they not as well Circumcise, keep
the Passover, Purify in the Temple, all abstein from Blood and things
strangled, and command men to keep the Law, and shave their Heads, etc? For
there are as plain examples for the observing and doing these things from some
of the Apostles Command and example, ( after that baptising with water was
spoken of Acts 10. 46.) see, Acts 15. 2, 6, 7, 20, and 16. 3. and 18. 18. and
21. 24, 25, and 24. 18. and the Apostles example of observing these things for
a time, hinders them not from ending in Christ, as S. B. falsely intimates that
water baptism ends not in Christ, because it was practiced after his Assention;
in like manner might he as well have pleaded for Circumcision, outward
offerings, purifying in the Temple, and the like to continue because they were
practiced after Christ's Assention: But as people ( who had a zeal for these
outward Figures) grew into the Substance and Life wherein they ended, that they
were able to bear the denying of them; the Apostles Preached the end of them,
and refused to be in bondage to them again.


S. B. There be two things to be considered. 1st. That he must be a Teaching
Disciple. 2d* No more is required but a Teaching Disciple.


Answ. Which is all one, as if he had said, the two things required, is* 1st. a
Teaching Disciple, and 2d* a Teaching Disciple, ( what no^cense is here?) this
is but one thing. And again, if no more be required but a Teaching Disciple,
then it is not required that a Disciple should baptize with water: and thus he
throws all his other Doctrines for the continuing of water baptism in the dust
and confounds himself.


S. B. Let these men know that water Baptism is a lively Representation of the
Death, Burial, and Resurrection of our Lord Jesus.


Answ. Where provest thou that S. B? this is sure an Imagination of thy own;
for how can your plunging people in water be a lively Representation of the
Death, Burial, and Resurrection of Christ? sure you are not so long dead in the
water when you are plunged in it as Christ was dead as concerning the flesh,
who was raised the third day by the Power of the Father; and it is that power
that baptized his people into his death, and raises them up in the likeness of
his Resurrection, and not outward water: touching which, that which this S. B.
has affirmed, it is as foolish as a Baptist Teacher's affirming to me, that
the Baptism of water did baptize men into the death of Christ. Again, if what
thou say were granted ( which it is not) that which you Baptists do so
greatly strive for, in your contending so hard for water baptism, ( which you
trake such an Idol of) is but to bring people into a Representation of things;
which while there minds stick in that, they come short of the Power and Life,
whereby the one baptisms into the body is known of, which the outward baptismes
at the most were but shaddows or figures, which were to end in the Substance.


S. B. Where did the Disciples of Christ give the Spirit unto any, seeing it
was the work of Christ alone to baptize with the Spirit?


Answ. In Answer to this I alleged, John 14. 12. He that believes on me, the
works that I do, he shall do also, and greater works than these, says Christ;
and Gal. 3. 3, 5. to prove that the Disciples Ministered the Spirit, who were
Ministers of the Spirit, to this the Baptist Replies in these words, viz.


S. B. I humbly conceive that some Scriptures are not to be taken literally as
they are laid down, as for instance, in the 13. verse of this Chapter, it is
said, That whatsoever ye ask the Father in my Name, that will I do; yet God
intends to give us the answer of no Prayer, but that prayer that comes up
according to his will.


Answ. If Christ's Words in John 14. 12, 13. be not to be taken as they are laid
down, as this Baptist plainly Intimates; then from this it follows, that Christ
spoke not right or true, and therefore this S. B. with his own conception ( who
is but in his conceivings) would amend or correct what Christ has said; and
yet he has no Authority from Heaven for it: Who is it that will believe his
deceit and absurdity herein? again, his Instancing Christ's saying, Whatsoever
ye ask the Father in my Name, that will I do, as not to be taken as it is laid
down, and for his proof, saying, that God intends to give us the Answer of no
Prayer, but the Prayer that is according to his will: This also Implies, that
Christ spoke not truly, as if something the Disciples might ask in his Name,
which was not according to the will of God, and which was not to be answered;
when as* it was the Disciples of Christ that asked in his Name, and they asking
in that Name, they asked in the Word of God, Rev. 19. and this could not be
contrary to the will of God. Again the Baptist (to prove that Christ's words in
John 14. 12. are not to be taken as they are laid down) says.


S. B. Christ speaks generally, he that believes on me, the works that I do,
he shall do, and greater works than these; this cannot be understood in this
sense, that these men bring it for because there be some works that Christ did,
as he was the only Son of God, which we cannot do; Christ did perfect and
complete the work of Redemption for us by his death, and Sufferings upon the
Cross.

Rep. To this I say, what a silly shift is this, as also what falsehood is in
it? for Christ said these words, in John 14. 12. ( That he that believes on
him should do the works that he did) before he suffered on the Cross; and how
was the work of Redemption perfected or completed by that his suffering, for
thee S. B. and such as thou art, when you are yet in bondage to your sins and
to the Spirit of delusion, which leads you to pervert the Scriptures, as thou
have done? But had thou proved that Christ's work of baptising with the Spirit
( or any work tending to lead to it) was by Christ excepted, as not to be done
by them that believed on him, then thou had done what thou aimedst at, and
desired to do; but that thou could not do, seeing thy folly is so greatly
manifest already in thy assaying it.


S. B. If water baptism be an Indifferent thing, it may be done, or it may be
left undone.


Answ. What is it else but an indifferent thing, when there is no stress for
Salvation laid upon it, neither is it of necessity to Salvation as these
Baptists Confess? And how can water baptism be of absolute necessity to
obedience, as this Baptist affirms, when he cannot produce any express Law, or
Commission in force for it? for where there is no Law, there is no
Transgression; and Paul, who was not behind the very chief Apostles, whose
Commission extended as far as theirs, He was not sent by Christ to baptize; but
to Preach the Gospel.


S. B. If the Church of Ephesus, was a Church of Christ in Gospel order, than
they were baptized with water, and we must be plunged or dipped in outward
water, if we do intend to walk according to the Rule of Christ, and the Pattern
of his House.


Answ. So then this Baptist Judges all to be out of the Church of Christ, and
out of the Gospel Order, and out of the Rule of Christ, who are not plunged or
dipped in outward water: and thus he owns none to be of the Church of Christ,
or in Gospel Order, but a company of Baptists, and yet they lay no stress for
Salvation upon their water baptism, so that men may be saved without it: Now
then the People of God that are saved, who are not plunged or dipped in outward
water, has this Baptist judged to be none of the Church of Christ, nor in
Gospel Order; as if the Gospel Order consisted in peoples being plunged or
dipped in outward water; or as if that were the way to bring them into the
Church of Christ, and yet men may be saved without it. Oh! what confusion and
darkness has this Baptist about this uttered? And as for S. B's. accusing us,
with casting dirt in the Face of Christ (as he did) and to be led into a
desperate Condition, for to fly in the very face of God, in his Holy
appointments. To this I say, besides the falsehood of these two charges upon
us, what absurdity is intimated in them? which is as if our opposing their
baptising with water, (which they have no Authority from Heaven for) were a
flying in the very face of God; as if the face of God were in water baptism,
which he counts the Holy Appointment; wherein he shows that he never saw the
Face of God: for as the Lord is departed from water baptism, since it was
practiced in men's wills without any Authority from God, and it has been, and
is made an Idol of, neither the Face of God, nor his Power is seen in it; and
where the Face of God is seen, there is a further State enjoyed, then that
state which the outward Figures Related to; for there the thing that was
figured forth is enjoyed, but the Face of God they see not, who are seeking it
in Carnal or Shaddowy things, for it is spiritually discerned with a Spiritual
eye.

And whereas Sam. Bradley says, They dare not Administer the Baptism of water
unto any as fit Subjects of such a blessed ordinance as that is, till they can
perceive that they have, and enjoy the Spirit of Adoption.

To this I say, how does this Assertion agree with some of these Baptists,
saying, (at the dispute as this S. B. has also related) That for people to
make a visible confession of their faith, is enough to entitle unto water
baptism? When as many can make such a confession of their faith, who enjoy not
the Spirit of Adoption, being out of that Spirit: And thus these Baptists
Confound themselves, one while saying that men must have and enjoy the Spirit
of Adoption, before they be fit Subjects for water baptism; another while
saying that a visible confession of faith is enough to entitle unto water
baptism. Which is like the Baptists saying, that men must Repent, and be
baptized with water, that they may receive the holy Ghost; and for it they
instance Act. 2. 38. and Act. 8. 16. Another while saying they dare not admit
people to water baptism, until they can perceive they have the holy Ghost or
Spirit of Adoption; and for that instancing Act. 10. 47 and thus we see their
confusion and uncertainty, which is like the Baptists, one sort of them
pleading for water baptism from John's baptizing; others of them deny to plead
for it from John's Baptism, but set their baptism above John's, saying, as that
they do it by the example of Christ's Disciples baptizing, Joh. 3. 22. and 4.
2. And so they call their's Christ's baptism; when as John's baptizing with
water, and the Disciples baptizing with water, Joh. 3. was of one Nature or
Kind; and as it was a figure of the inward baptism, so it had Relation to the
State that was under the Law, before the Adoption of Sons was attained to,
wherein the Redemption from the weak Elements which the world is in, is known:
And in the time of John's Administering water baptism, Christ had not fulfilled
his Testimony upon Earth through suffering, by which he blotted out the
Handwriting of Ordinances, and Nailed it to his Cross, that one new man in
him, and the Peace might be made which could not be done by John's Baptism, nor
such Types, Figures, and Shadows; for they being imposed since the
Transgression entered, and being changeable, they do not reach the Seed (which
must inherit the Peace and the Promises) but the changeable or earthly part in
man which they have Relation to. And did not all Types Figures, and Shadows end
in Christ the substance? Again, how should these Baptists perceive who do enjoy
the Spirit of Adoption, when they have no immediate Call or Authority from
heaven to Preach and Baptize according to S. Bradley's confession? From which
it follows, that these Baptists who have no Authority from Heaven to Teach or
Baptize, (and who are altogether unworthy to engage in any work for Jehovah, as
S. B. is) they do set themselves to be Teachers and Baptizers of such as they
say have the Spirit of Adoption; as if he had said, they that have not the
Spirit or Authority from heaven, must be Teachers and Ministers to them, who
have the Spirit or Authority from Heaven: and so in these things all may see
their blindness, and what a Babel they have Builded in their Confusion.

And now Samuel Bradley, to Thee I say, seeing that Thou art altogether
unworthy to engage in any work for Jehovah; and have showed thy ignorance so
much, touching the baptism of the Spirit, having counted it Metaphorical, and
have set water baptism so much above it, that thou have accounted no baptism
properly so called, but that of water, and have not any Call, nor Authority
from Heaven to Preach or Baptize: it is high time for thee to be silent, and
proceed no longer in thy folly, and intruding into things which thou have not
seen, and cease from slandering us, as thou have done in many things which I
have upon Record; as also much more of thy confusion, falsehoods, and
absurdities, I have herein omitted to mention.


Here are Samuel Bradley's Arguments, (which he has made great account of,)
for the continuance of water Baptism; and an Answer to them.
Argu. 1. WHatsoever the Apostles were Commanded, that they did practice; but
they were commanded to baptize with water, and therefore they did practice it.


Answ. The Minor proposition of this Argument being grounded upon his supposed
assertion, that it was water baptism that Christ commanded, in Mat. 28. Mark
16. Its already confuted; and however it being Universal, its false; for Paul
who was one of the chief Apostles, was not sent to baptize with water, but to
preach the Gospel.


Argu. 2. That which was commanded by Jesus Christ, the great Prophet of the
New Testament, and never repealed by him, is still in force, and to continue;
but water baptism never repealed by him, is still in force, and to continue;
but water baptism the Lords Supper, with the rest of the institutions of
Christ, were commanded by Christ, and never repealed by him; therefore they are
still in force, and to continue.


Ans. I deny the minor proposition again, so far as it relates to water
baptism, for where provest thou by Scripture that water baptism was commanded
by Christ, and never repealed by him; certainly if it had been so commanded,
and never repealed by Christ, but still in force, it would have been in force
by the same command upon the Apostle Paul; but he says the contrary 1 Cor. 1.


Argu. 3. As long as teaching is in force, and to continue, so long is baptism
in force; but that teaching is in force; and to continue to the end of the
world all men will easily grant: therefore baptism, and all the rest of the
Appointments of Christ, the Scrpture says expressly they are to continue to
the end of the world, Mat. 28. 20.


Answ. The Major proposition of this Argument is false, as the baptism of water
is intended in it to be in force, as long as teaching; for teaching was of
force, where that baptism was not, as Paul was a witness; who was sent to the
one, not to the other; also Teaching is of force to many who are not plunged in
outward water, and by true teaching are converted to Christ, when there is no
stresse for Salvation upon water baptism, neither is it of necessity to
Salvation, as S. B: has confessed: And where he concludes that baptism, and
all the rest of the Appointments of Christ, are in force, and to continue to
the end of the World, and for proof says, that the Scripture says expressly
they are to continue to the end of the world, and quotes Matthew. 28. and 20. I
say this conclusion is as false as the major, and herein has he perverted the
Scripture, Math. 28. 20. For neither does it expressly say that teaching and
baptizing with water, are to continue to the end of the world, nor yet does it
prove water baptism a command of Christ to his Disciples* But he says, Lo I
am with you always, even unto the end of the world: And not that water baptism
is to continue unto the end of the world.

And as for the rest of thy Arguments for the continuance of water baptism,
which are grounded upon thy asserting, that it was water baptism that Christ
Commanded, in Mat. 28. and Mark 16. They are herein confuted, in that the
ground of them is overthrown.

Here follows some Reasons or Arguments relating to the aforesaid Answer, to
prove that in the Commission which Christ gave to his Disciples, in Mat. 28.
19. Mark 16. 16. Water baptism was not intended, but the baptism of the Spirit.

1. If the baptism which Christ commanded in Mat. 28. 19. and Mark. 16. 16. was
a Baptism without which a man cannot be saved, then it was not the baptism of
outward water (for water baptism is not of necessity to Salvation, neither is
there any stresse of Salvation laid upon it,) But it was that baptism without
which men cannot be saved; which Christ commanded, Mat 28. Mark 16. Therefore
not water baptism. I prove the Minor proposition thus, No man can be saved
without being baptized into the Name of God, and his Son Christ Jesus; for his
Name is the Word of God, by which Salvation comes, and by no other Name; and
the Lord is one, and his Name one, and it was into this Name that the Disciples
were Commanded to baptize people.

2. He that believes and is baptized, shall be saved, Mark 16. 16. Which
implies that this Baptism which Christ commanded is of necessity to Salvation;
but so is not water baptism; for the Saints were saved by that Baptism which
was not the putting away of the filth of the flesh, but the Answer of a Good
Conscience, 1. Pet. 3. 21. Therefore it was not water baptism which Christ
Commanded in Mat. 28. and Mark. 16.

3. If the Apostle Paul had as large a Commission given him by Christ, as any
of the Apostles had; then the commission which Christ gave to the Disciples
Mat. 28. was not enjoining them to baptize with water; But Paul had as large a
Commission as any of the Apostles had (for he was not behind the very chief
Apostles) Therefore that Commission in Mat. 28. did not enjoin the Disciples to
baptize with water. As both these propositions are clear according to
Scripture; so the conclusion of each is as clear from Paul's own words, where
he absolutely does declare, That Christ sent him not to baptize, but to preach
the Gospel ( notwitstanding he had baptized some as before he mentioned) And
Paul does not say as the Baptist falsely intimates, that baptizing was some of
Paul's work that he was sent to, but preaching the chief, as if he had said:
Paul was not only sent by Christ to baptize, but also to preach, which would
render Paul's words, in 1 Cor. 1. 17. both false and defective.

And now you, whose hearts are simple, who are yet held in Bondage under
outward Shadows, and Figures; which do decrease, wax old, and have an end; To
you I say come to the Light of Christ in you, and muddle no more in the dark,
nor dote any longer about Shadows, and Elementary Things; neither be ye in
bondage to men, nor to their Doctrines, and Sleights, which tend to keep you in
Shadows from the substance; for it was the Jews without, whose minds stuck in
the Figures and Shadows, many of whom came so far as the baptism of John, who
decreased, and yet they stumbled at Christ the Substance: but now he is not a
Jew, that is one outward, but he is a Jew, that is one inward: and so it is not
the outward Circumcision, nor the outward baptism that avails any thing to
Salvation, but a New Creature. So wait you in the Light of the Lord in you,
that with it you may be led unto Christ, who is the Substance; and the one
Bread, which he that cares of, shall live for ever; and receiving Christ, you
come to feel the water of Life in you, and the one Baptism of the Spirit: of
which things, the outward bread and the outward water, were but Figures, when
as he that believes, as the Scripture says, (to wit in the Light of Christ,
Joh. 12. 26.) Out of his belly shall flow Rivers of the water of Life, and he
shall possess the end of the things abollished, and have a part in God, who is
Light, by whom the vail comes to be destroyed, and the shadowy part removed,
that the Shadows fly away, and the Lord God is become the Light and the Life of
his people, and from his Throne comes the water of Life which waters his holy
City, where the enduring substance is enjoyed.


From a witness of that substance, who waits for the Redemption of the
Captivated Seed: George Whitehead.

The End

