A Just Enquiry INTO THE Libeller's Abuse OF THE People called QVAKERS, In His
Scandalous Pamphlet, falsely Styled, Some of the Quakers Principles, Doctrines,
Laws and Orders, etc.

They Shoot in Secret at the Perfect, etc. But God shall Shoot at them,

Psalm. 64. London, Printed, and Sold by T. Soul, at the Crooked Billet in
Holywell-Lane, Shoreditch, 1693.

A Just Enquiry into the Libeller's abuse of the People called Quakers, etc.
There Is two or three Falacies in the very Title of the said Pamphlet.

1 st, In charging what is contained therein upon the Quakers in general, as
being their Principles, Doctrines, Laws and Orders, etc. Whereas in truth,
diverse of them are neither the Quakers Principles, Laws, nor Orders, but
disowned by the said People, though this Nameless Author has unjustly
represented them, as if they were some Principles all entirely Transcribed, and
that from the Quakers in general, without exception, which is a notorious
abuse; For it is also very Obvious, That many of them are very Partially,
unfairly and injuriously cited, minced, curtalized, Picktpach't, and scraped
up, thereby wronging some former Ancient Writings of particular Persons
deceased, and not here to answer for themselves (as George Fox, Edward
Buroughs, Francis Howgill, John Burnyet, William Smith, John Audland, Josiah
Cole, and others, and some yet alive abused) Others very falsely represented,
being taken on Trust on an Implicit Faith, out of our Long-since Refuted
Adversaries Books and Pamphlets.

2 dly, That those pretended Principles and Doctrines etc. of the Quakers (at
least many of them) are Rendered to be of dangerous Consequence; When we can
easily make it appear that Many of them, even as cited by this Obscure Accuser,
are agreeable to the holy Scriptures, and Testimonies of Holy Men, consequently
not of any dangerous Consequence (though in many things the Libeller appears
very Injurious as well as Envious.) Whereupon I enquire.

1. What dangerous Consequence can be in our Knowing or Believing our Election
( i. e. in Christ) before the World began? page 1. Ephesians. 1.4.

2. Or what dangerous Consequence in our believing or Testifying that Christ
has given us Discerning and Judgment? Or that we are of God, and they that own
God will own us, or any who are his Children?

3. Or in our Believing the Tabernacle of God to be with us, that is with all
his People whom we include as of us, or with us, who are not against us (nor
Envious, nor exalted in Pride, or Self-conceit) but looking toward the Lord,
as in every Nation and People they that truly fear God and work Righteousness,
they are accepted, and so far of us.

4. What dangerous Consequence can be in asserting, That Christ's Ministry or
Teaching, is to Bring up the Hearers to Perfection, to the measure of stature
and fullness of Christ? page 2.

5. Can none ( Quakers or others) in these Days, truly declare that they are
or may be moved by the Immediate Spirit and Power of God to Write or Preach
without dangerous Consequence? page 2, 3.

6. What dangerous Consequence can be in asserting, That they that have the
Form and not the Power, and that are not Infallible in their Counsel and
Judgment in their Ministry, are none of Christ's Ministers? page 3.

7. Is not the Spirit of Christ Infallible, and the Ministry thereof
Infallible? And are any Christ's Ministers who have not his Spirit to Instruct
them? page 3.

8. The distinction between the Letter, and the Word or Spirit, and between the
Ministry of the Letter, and that of the Spirit, page 3, 4. as between the
Shadow and Substance, the mere Writing in outward Characters, and the holy
divine Doctrines and Truths therein contained, (or holy Scriptures as intending
the same) Is so Scriptural, that I know no true Christian will deny such
distinction, muchless deem it of dangerous Consequence: (We never esteemed or
called the Holy Scriptures (that is the Holy Doctrines, or Precepts thereof)
but a Dead Letter, etc. This Matter is fully answered and explained in a late
Treatise, entitled, Antichrist in Flesh Unmasked; and in many others. But yet
further.

Section 8. Touching the Scriptures, implying that we call them the Husk, the
Letter which Kills, Earthly and Carnal Letter, etc.

This is not Justly nor truly stated, and may Cause mistake and
Misapprehension, as if the Divine and Christian Doctrine and Testimonies
contained in the Scriptures were included in the Term Letter, Husk, etc. which
could not be the Intention of any of our Friends in that case, but of the mere
outward Writings, as in Paper, and Ink, the Shadows and Types, the Legal and
outward Ministration as Distinguished and Separated from that of the Spirit,
Life and Substance, Cor. 3.6, 7. Romans 2.29. Please also to take G. F's
Explanation and Sense, that by Letter, he means Paper and Ink, but says the
Scripture the thing it speaks of is Spiritual, the Word is Spirit, Great
Mystery, fol. 78. And further he Explains, viz. the Scripture it self without
the Spirit that gave it forth, is a dead Letter in it self; the Spirit is it
that gave forth the Scriptures; Gr. Mist. fol. 127.

Wherein he distinguishes between the mere Letter and the holy Scripture,
between the Letter and the Doctrine, between the Writings and the Gospel or
Word declared of, because the one will decay, the other is permanent, the Books
and Writings in Ink and Paper will wear out, so will not the Word: Iehoiakim
King of Judah could Burn Jeremiah's Roll, or Book writ with Ink by Barach, but
not the Word of the Lord, nor the Words thereof; for the same Word caused all
the former Words to be Written again after the Roll was burnt, Jer. 36. This is
no contempt of the Scripture, no more then it is of the Earth and the Heavens,
to say they shall Wax Old and Perish. But the Word that made them, Endures,
Psalm. 102.25, 26. Heb 1.11, 12.

Dust, cannot properly be said of the holy Scriptures, or Doctrine; but that
the Letter or Writing will decay, and some pervert it; and in setting the
Shadow above the Substance, and the Letter above the Spirit, and thinking to
have eternal Life therein, will not come to Christ, that they might have Life.
The Devil and Serpents have perverted and abused the Scriptures, and turned the
Truth thereof into a Lie. But the Truth remains, the Truth is Truth still,
and the holy Scripture it self (or Doctrine of Truth therein) cannot be broken.

The Husk, that intends no contempt upon the holy Scripture, but thereby
intending the mere Letter or Writing, it is not the Kernel, the seed, the
Living Word, Spirit or Life which the Scriptures testify of.

Those Repeated Stories and Reflections insinuated concerning Governments
Monarchy, Rulers Laws, etc. page 4.5, 6, 7. Enviously and perversely Raked up by
Patches, Mincings and piecemeal out of old Books, the most part writ in the
Commonwealth's Days, are plainly answered, and our Innocence cleared in
several late Books, one Entitled, Christ's Lambs defended from Satan's Rage.
Another, Some Reflections on some Remarks upon the said Christ's Lambs
defended. Another Entitled, Innocence against Envy. Another, The Quakers
Answer to a scandalous Libel, styled, A Letter to the Quakers.

All these Printed, and Sold by Thomas Northcot in George-Yard in
Lumbard-street, London. So that much more time need not be spent to Answer the
Libeller over again in these matters.

As for outward or Civil Governments, our Peaceable and Christian Conversation,
as a People, is so well known under all from first, that we need not fear
secret Smiters and Libeller's unjust attempts to blast or cloud our Christian
Reputation on that account, well knowing that when we have suffered great
wrong, and been sevearly persecuted by any in outvvard Power for our tender
Conscience tovvard God, he would be ready to Plead our Innocent Cause, as he
has many times done. And as for such Rulers or Persons in outvvard Power, as
have abused their power either by Injustice, Oppression or Persecution, they
were all accountable to God, who is no Respecter of Persons; and for any of his
Servants to warn such against their Evil Ways, and of their Destruction or
Overthrow, when God requires them; this is so far from any act of Rebellion or
Sedition, or unkindness either, that I think such kind of Pious Plainness and
Caution seasonably given, is a token of the greatest Kindness can be expressed
to the Great Men or Potentates of the Earth; though such Friendship is rarely
well resented or accepted except by such Princes and Rulers whose Hearts are
tenderly inclined, as was David's, Josiah's, Hezekiah's, and such Kings of
Judah, etc. as had some tender Fear toward God, and regard to his Laws in
their Hearts.

I do grant that several among our Friends at first and in the Commonwealth's,
days had no great affection to some sort of Monarchy, and the more doubtful
thereof, because they were Jealous that thereby, such Bishops would be set up
again as would renew or cause Persecution upon Conscientious Dissenters again;
For many of them came of Puritanical Families, who had deeply suffered by the
former Bishops, and their Courts (their Star Chamber, and high Commission
Court, etc.) This caused the greater Aversness (in many heretofore) to such
Monarchy thus considered; But what then? is it Just to upbraid us always as a
People, and to agravate the same against us as Criminals? Or to render us as
disaffected either to Just Government or Monarchy in General without Exception?
when as good Kings and Governments we had no reason to dissafect or oppose; and
though we like not bad ones, who are for Persecution and Oppression, etc. we have
always been true and Constant to the Doctrine of Non Resistance, and Passive
Obedience, ever since we were a People; and learned quietly to submit as
Christians to the Overruling Hand and Providence of God in the Revolutions and
Change of Governments, (which have Eminently happened even in our days) as
Samuel did, though he was as much a Republican and averse to Monarchy as some
called Quakers were at first, as when Israel's Requiring a King, like other
Nations displeased Samuel, 1 Samuel chap. 8. Yet when a King was given them, he
granted him to be the Lord's Anointed and Chosen, 1 Samuel 10. which is something
suitable to the Case of those our former Friends, for whose sakes in this
Concern we are by these Apostates implicitly (yet very unjustly) rendered
Obnoxious to the Civil Government.

Some of the Libeller's false Charges and notorious abusive Perversions.

1. That the Quakers have a Spirit Given them beyond all the Forefathers
(since the days of the Apostles in the Apostasy) and they can discern who are
Saints, and who are Devils, quoting G. F's Great Mystery, page 89. Answ. This
is a notorious Perversion, this Parenthesis before being a Forgery, and not in
G. F's Answer: The truth of the matter is thus, viz. Magnus Byne said, The
Quakers knows a man whether he be a Saint or Devil -- and they are beyond all
our Forefathers, etc. G. F. answers, viz. Here thou have showed that the
Quakers have a Spirit Given them beyond all the Forefathers (since the days of
the Apostles) in the Apostasy. G. F's Parenthesis being Only [Which we do
Witness.] His words do not intend nor import a Spirit or Attainment among the
Quakers beyond all the Forefathers, true Apostles, and others without
exception (as the Libeller makes them look) but beyond all such Forefathers as
were in the Apostasy since the days of the true Apostles; And what dangerous
Consequence can follow thence, Pray? Can it be of dangerous Consequence not to
believe a ^^tter Attainment than Apostates had? who th^^ will Credit this
Obscure Smiter to be any better than an Old Apostate? And of what validity is
his Work then?

Sect. 4. page 2. He attempts to prove the Quakers guilty of High Boasting, by
accusing G. F. with saying he is the Son of God; I suppose he intended a Son of
God; but take it as it is, was not Adam called the Son of God? Luke 3.38. G. F.
preferred Jesus Christ as the only begotten Son of God we are sure, and owned
himself to be a Servant of Christ (as he truly was, and a Son of God too) in
his Work and Service in his day. Christ the only begotten Son of God in all
things must have the pre-eminence; though as many as are led by the Spirit of
God are the Sons of God, and now are we the Sons of God, etc. 1 John 3.2.
Again, we are charged with saying, He that has the same Spirit that raised up
Jesus Christ, is Equal with God. For which Readiness Errand, page 8. 1654. is
quoted, We deny the words as there printed; The words [ he that hath] should be
left out; and have reason to suppose the mistake has happened either in the
Printing or Transcribing, (for it is very carelessly and badly printed) and that
contrary to G. E's. and our Principle, and to his own very words and confession
a little before in the same Book, where being charged with Professing himself
to be Equal with God, he possitively denis the Charge but confesses The Father
and the Son are One, and that Christ and the Holy Spirit are Equa, with God,
page 5, 6. and to Christ Jesus both as he was of the Seed of Abraham and also
as he was Equal with God ( i. e, both to his Manhood and Divinity.)

It Is therefore a gross Slander employed against the Quakers that it is their
Boasting, Doctrine, or Principle that They or any of them are Equal with God,
because they partake of his Spirit that raised Jesus from the Dead (and of the
divine Nature and Image) they pretend to no such Equality or Principle, neither
does G. F. but the contrary he denis it of himself, or any other Creature, as
that any Creature should be Equal with the Creator, as in his Great Mystery,
fol. 127. And we abhor any such Boasting.

Charge. Sect. 22. Some of the Characters they give to other Ministers that are
not of them. This by the way is a notorious falsehood, importing (without
exception) that the Quakers in general give the Subsequent Characters to all
other Ministers that are not of them (here is no exception) this appears an
Envious Forgery to sow Discord, and stir up ill will and prejudice in all other
Ministers and their Hearers against us, which appears no better than a devilish
Design, and a great Abomination to sow Discord among Conscientious Dissenters
and others.

And what Characters do they give to other Ministers, as he pretends, but such
as these, viz.

The Priests of the world are Thieves and Robbers, Antichrists, Conjurers,
Devils, Liars, a Viporous and Serpentine Generation, Babilons* Merchants,
Whited Walls, and Painted Sepulchers, Ravening Wolves, Greedy Dogs, Ambitious
Pharisees, Hunting after their Prey, never satisfied, raging like Sodomites,
Quoting a Brief Discovery, Printed 1653. with five Names to it.

But stay, soft a little; 1. Were these Characters given in general, or to all,
other Ministers that are not of us, or not in Society with the Quakers (so
called?) No sure, they seem to be directed to such Priests of the World then
(mark) as were both very Covetous, Proud, and Envious Persecutors, and there
were too many such we know right well, and have, many of us deeply suffered by
them, many both severe Imprisonment (some till Death) and spoil of Goods; it is
true to compare such to Vipers, Serpents, Wolves, greedy Dogs, etc. may seem
hard Characters and Comparisons, yet they are not unscriptural; but their Cruel
Usage of many of us, has been far heavier and harder than such Scriptaral
Characters, which never were intended to all other Ministers that are not of
us; nor to any of them who are men of Moderation, Gentleness and Sobriety;
therefore the Libeller has shamefully misrepresented us in this matter. Which
is fully Answered in our Treatise, Entitled, The Contemned Quaker and his
Christian Religion defended against Envy and Forgery, etc. page 55. to page 66.

In Sect. 30. under the Title, Hear a few of the Execrations THEY Give, etc. Is
inserted a mistaken prediction against John Story, viz. This Year shall thou
dye. dat. 1. 1. Mon. 1677. Though he lived several Years after. This the
Libeller has very unjustly charged (under his general Title and Words THEY
Give) on the Quakers, for [ They] is falsely made relative to the Quakers
without exception, according to his Title, when as the said mistake, was but
one man's (i. e. S. E's) and as such condemned, by the Quakers, and in himself
also who committed the Error as to the time. Thus immorally and unjustly has
the Libeller dealt by the Quakers, such Injustice, the Common justice, Laws and
Custom of England allows not of, even in Criminal Cases; a Fellon after he has
answered the Law by undergoing the Condign Punishment thereof, may not
afterward be upbraided as being a Thief still, much less may others that are
Innocent be branded or Reproached for his Fact, but this kind of Injustice we
meet withal from Lying Spirits, and malicious Apostates, who regard neither
Truth nor Common Justjce in such injurious dealing.

And the like measure we have in Sect. 39* about a few inconsistent and indeed
unsound Expressions (or Agreement) alleged against the Quakers, dated
December 23. 1680. about Giving up ones whole Concern (if required) unto the
Judgment of the Spirit of God in Men's and Women's Meetings, rather then any
particular Measure in my self, etc.

Our obscure Accuser was not so ingenious nor just here, as to tell the World,
that the said Agreement was only of a few in Barbades; nor to tell the Reader
the Quakers in England long since disowned it, and that those Persons
themselves (or most of them) concerned in it have seen and retracted their own
Mistake and Error therein. As in our Paper, entitled, Some Reflections on some
Remarks, page 6. This account is given, viz.

How immoral and unjust is it to upbraid us with a pretended Order from
Barbados? seeing when it first came over it was disowned by us, and our
Friends in General, especially wherein it imports a Contra-distinction or
Division between the Spirit in a particular Member, and the same Spirit in the
Church, or opposing the particular measure thereof in my self to the Spirit of
God in Meetings, which we cannot make Good Sense of, for the same Spirit Cannot
be divided; And the Judgment that rises in the Church of God from the Spirit of
Truth in any matter, comes from the same Spirit in particular Members, before
it be received in the general. And we have understood that the aforesaid
pretended Order was then disowned by some particular Friends even in Barbados,
and afterward revoked by them in general, and therefore not Justly to be made
a Charge against them or us.

Pray do but observe how implacably Envious, Unjust, and Injurious these our
secret Smiters and Adversaries are; what Reiterate (and Charge) particular and
personal Revoaked and Exploded Mistakes and Errors upon a People wholly
Unconcerned therein? Oh! Horrid Injustice and gross Injury! If men should deal
thus by them after they have paid their Debts, as to recharge them over and
over with the same Debts, and never be satisfied, they would conclude at this
rate there would be no living one by another. Or if God should deal so by you
(our secret Adversaries and Smiters in the dark) as never to forgive nor blot
out your Offenses, but should always remember them against you after
Repentance, Pray what would become of you? What would be your End? But God is
both Just and Merciful, though you are neither, you bear no resemblance of Him in
this your Injustice and Implacableness. However we doubt not but our just and
good God will plead our Innocent Cause with you implacably envious Persons and
our injurious Enemies and Apostates.

In the 31. Sect. Some nonsense, Longsince writ by S. E. about G. F. and denied
by the Quakers, is again not only reitterrated, but G. Whitehead (i. e. my
self) unjustly accused with Excusing the same, for which my hidden Accuser
Quotes Serious Search, page 58. etc. And also Innocence against Envy, page 18.
Wherein he has dealt very unfairly and falsely by me, for in neither do I excuse
S E's words in that case, but deny them in the first, as unsafe. In the second,
as being both Nonsense, and not to be stood by. How did I herein stand by S.
E's. words or challenge? What in deeming them unsafe and Nonsense, and not to
be stood by? See Serious Search, page 58.59. And Innocence against Envy, page
18. Which plainly clear me from the accusation before. All impartial Readers
may take it for granted that these secret Smiters will make little Conscience
of wronging the dead (many whereof being Reproachfully accused in the said
Pamphlet) when they can thus wrong the living, as the Libeller has done by me
in a case so notorious as this is, by charging me to excuse that which I
plainly declare to be Nonsense and not to be stood by; but only excused the
intention of the Writter on his own Explanation as declared in our Friends Book
Judas and the Jews, page 75. And not the Nonsense of his words in his
challenge, but corrected the incoherence by his own declared intention
accordingly, as where he applies [ The World was made by him] only to Christ.
Innocence etc. page 18. Wherein I aimed at nothing but Truth and Justice on all
hands, which I prefer to all Personal fame and interests, and through the
Lord's goodness have long resolved not to decline or conceal Truth to vindicate
or excuse Error or mistake in any; Concerning the Charge against several
Ministers of some divine Attributions to G. F. in two Letters pretended, the
first said to be from Josiah Cole, in 1658. (above thirty four years ago.) The
other from John Audland, and dated from Bristol, 1665. Whereas in Thomas Camm's
account, (who was much conversant with John Audland in his last Sickness) It Is
declared (in his Testimony) That J.A. finished his Course here in the 1st Month,
1663. And the same Account in a late Letter to me, Tho. Camm confirms according
to their Register of Burials, etc. in Westmorland, That John Audland was buried
the 24th of the 1st. Month, 1663. being the very last day of that Year,
according to the usual beginning of the Year on the 25 th of the same; so that
John Audland dyed about two Years before the date of the said pretended Letter
from him to G. F. How could he then write the Letter (to G. F.) two years after
he was dead?

That pretended to be from J. C. our Adversary says, Is vindicated by W. P. and
other Chief Quakers in Judas and the Jews. page 44.45, 46. Is it so? Yet does
he not attempt to refute that Vindication; which though it was of the Substance
of it only; Supposing the Copy for granted as cited, yet I still question the
Copy whether true in all parts as I have done, therefore shall not undertake to
Warrant it in every part^clar or word in it, as it has been diverse times slung
at us, both by F. Bugg, and some Baptists, and yet each apparently vary in
their own Recital thereof, in their Pamphlets, as F. B. has done in his One
Blow more, page 7.1691. And in his Battering Rams, page 29.1690.91. Wherein
though I have cause still to Question the Verity and Authority of his Copy, yet
cannot find nor see that he can justly infer either Idolatry or Blasphemy on
Josiah Cole in particular, muchless against the Quakers in General from any
thing as yet reiterated out of his pretended Letter, by -- Bugg, Baptists or
the Libeller,. 31.

But further to clear Josiah Cole, and his Friends from their Reproach of
Idolatry and Blasphemy (in relation to G. F. or any other Creature) as utterly
contrary to his Christian Principle and Profession. We Will have recourse to his
own plain Testimonies on Record, for and in behalf of the same Lord Jesus
Christ, of whom the holy Scriptures testify, in his positively declaring No
other Name under Heaven to be saved from Sin by, but HIS who preached himself
the Light of the World, and who Lights every Man that comes into the World,
John 1.9. and against the Pope and Church of Rome and the Pope's Headship,
affirming that Christ never ordained a Visible Head to his Church, but that
Christ is the Head and Foundation, and that Prophet whom Moses prophesied of,
whom the People are to hear in ALL things, Deuteronomy. 18.15. and that Christ is the
Governor and Head of the People called Quakers, and their Church. And that
Christ is the Word which was in the Beginning with God, Joh. 1.1. And that
Christ was the Spiritual Rock which followed Israel, and which they all drunk
of, 1 Cor. 104. And that Christ ascended far above all Heavens, that he might
fill all things, Ephesians. 4. Thus far Josiah Cole in the Collection of his Books,
page 36.60.94.100.105.320, 321, 332. where more at large he magnifies our
Blessed Lord Jesus Christ in his divine Being and Offices. Therefore our
Adversaries that have reproached him and us on is account with Idolatry and
Blasphemy, or wresting Christ's Scepter out of his Hands (as some have done)
have very grossly defamed him and others, and shown their inveterate Malice and
Persecuting Antichristian Spirit, which the righteous Lord will rebuke.

And as for G. F. who was an Eminent Instrument in the Lord's hand for the good
of many; he was so far from opposing or denying Christ, or his divine Offices,
Dignity, Divinity, (or Blessed Manhood) and so far from accepting or assuming
to himself any such Dignity or Honor only peculiar, to Jesus Christ, That he
did own himself a Servant of our Lord Jesus Christ, and did Preach and Pray in
his Name, and to him, and not in his own, as many Thousands can Testify.
[These last Lines the Libeller has very unfairly omitted and concealed in his
recital of my words, in his 33. Article against me, page 13. out of Innocence
against Envy, page 18. Thus it has been the Common Course of our most Envious
Adversaries to conceal what ever in our Writings tends most to clear us.] And
G. ^. is more fully Cleared from ^hese Adversaries Reproach in this matter by
his own naked and innocent TESTIMONY of WHAT we believe in behalf of Christ,
both as God and Man, (according to the Holy Scriptures) and of His Miraculous
Conception by the holy Ghost, and being Born of the Virgin Mary, and of his
Sufferings, Death, Resurrection and Ascension, etc. Printed, 1677. Farther
testifying to his Divinity, Great Mystery, fol. 254 That by Christ (the Light)
all things were made and created, and that he was Glorified with the Father
before the world began, Of whom the Scriptures testifies; And that this Christ
is the same to day, yesterday and forever, that the Saints came to Witness
WITHIN them, Not another Christ, nor many Christ's. With many more sincere
Confessions (to the true and very Christ of God) of the same import, which
would fill a Volumn to recite; a few whereof being sufficient to clear both G.
F. and us from the false and foul imputations of Idolitry and Blasphemy, or
denying the One true and ever Blessed Lord Jesus Christ, (of whom the Holy
Scriptures Testify) and from promoteing or adoreing any other Man (or
Creature) in Christ's sted, as we have been most unjustly defamed, and the
Righteous God knows and will plead our Innocence and Clear us in this matter,
we doubt not.

And as to that pretended to be John Audland's Letter to G. F. Sect. 32.
There Is 16. or 17. lines of Matter added in it; more than are (in F. B:'s Copy
One Blow more page 7. Thus confused and varied Transcripts are cast upon us to
defame and brand us with Idolitry, etc. without either Produceing us the
Original Leters pretended to be from I. C. and I. A. or any Credible Authority
to prove the verity of their differant Copies, though demanded both of Bugg,
Baptists and Athenians (so called) since we both questioned their broken
Printed Copies, with their dashes -- and etc's. And now I still Question the
Truth of this as enlarged against John Audland, and we disown it as it is; let
the Libeller Produce the Original Letters or sufficient Authority of Credit
(and no parties against us) to prove his Copy exactly true in all parts and
perticles thereof, where there is any stress of the Sense concerned; for the
Charge is high, and requires strict proof in all Essential points (as common
Law and Justice does of Indictments in Criminal Cases) otherwise our
Adversary's Copy of the said Letter, may be of as much Credit, as that J. A.
writ it two Years after he was dead (as before.) Both J. A. and J. C. were well
known to many, and still remembered to be sincere upright hearted Men, fearing
God, and eschewing Evil, who truly honored and preached Jesus Christ the only
begotten Son of God, our blessed Lord and Savior, as their own Testimonies on
Record do still plainly Evince; And that John Audland was a man of more Wisdom,
and of a more sensible Christian Spirit than to detract from, or lessen the
Honor, Glory or Dignity only due and peculiar to Jesus Christ, or to attribute
the same to any other, or to prefer G. F. or any Man or Creature else (as the
Fountain of Life) in Christ's stead, but only as an Instrument in God's hand,
for the Turning of many from Darkness to Light, even to Jesus Christ, the true
Light, for Life and Salvation: Besides, it is no new thing for sincere
Christians to praise the Lord God, and to pray to him, and to confess to the
Power and Goodness of God in Christ Jesus, the Fountain of Life, even in a
Letter or Epistle to a Friend or Friends, as the Martyrs (diverse of them) did
in their Letters, which if such their Confessions, etc. had been (by their
Adversaries,) turned and applied to the Persons or Friends they writ unto, it
had been a very foul abuse and perversion of their Letters and Intentions; and
so may this be to defame J. A. and his Friends for his sake, for any thing yet
appears to the contrary; His confessions to Jesus Christ as the Fountain of
Life and Strength, and to his Power, etc. may possibly be wrongfully turned and
attributed to another; If we might see the very Letter it self from J. A. we
could say more to it, to manifest and clear the Truth.

To conclude this Point; 1 st. I find not that the said Letter is directed and
applied by John Audland himself unto G. Fox. 2 dly, I do not approve thereof as
cited and directed by our Adversaries (with the date of 1665.) unto G. F.

As for John Audland's Christian Principle and clearness in behalf of Jesus
Christ, we have reason Charitably to credit his own Testimonies, rather than
Libels, or any thing his and our Adversaries enviously suggest, and turn or
throw upon him (or us) to defame him and his Christian Reputation. Now they
know he is gone, he is not here to answer for himself, therefore his own
Innocent undoubted Testimonies on Record shall speak for him (and his holy
Respect and Honor as is only due to the very Christ of God) and against his
Enemies. In behalf of Jesus Christ, according to the Holy Scriptures; John
Audland thus writes, The Lord our Righteousness (by whose Grace we are saved)
has chosen us in Christ Jesus, who has all Power and Authority committed unto
him, and upon whose Shoulders the Government is laid, page 116. Of the
Collection of the Books and written Epistles of John Camm and John Audland. And
further,

Christ Jesus, since the Fall of Adam, has perfectly fulfilled the Law of God,
and there is Salvation in NO OTHER, page 117. ibid. Again, (of Christ) The true
Shepherd laid down his Life for the Sheep, and he is the Door where no Thief
can enter, etc. page 120 Christ is not born by the will of man, page 122. That
Christ expounded the Scriptures, was never denied by us, he opened their
Understandings to understand the Scriptures -- and the Spirit of Christ is one
in all his Saints, page 124.

Dear Hearts, other Foundation can no man lay, then that which is laid already,
which is Christ Jesus the Light of the World, the Way to Life and Everlasting
Rest, etc. page 157.

Let nothing separate you from the Love of God in Christ Jesus our Light, our
Life, and our Redeemer, page 161.

I must walk according to the Commands of Christ and his Apostles, p. 180.

Walking in the Spirit which mortifies the Deeds of the Flesh, being subject to
the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ; here is rest to the Soul, page 188.

We see the Way of Life to all that believe in the Name of the Lord Jesus, p.
190.

The Jews had a Law, by which they Judged the HOLY ONE that he ought to dye,
page 202.

Christ said, Love your Enemies, Pray for them that Persecute you, p. 203. --
We find acceptance with God through Jesus Christ, p. 222. -- You are washed,
sanctified, and justified in the Name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of
our God, page 250. -- The Seed of the Woman which all the Promises are unto,
Yea and Amen in Christ (by which the Serpent's Head is bruised) is but one,
which Seed is Christ, page 269.

Dear Hearts* walk in the pure Eternal Love and Light of God, that so you may
come to the pure Life of God, to follow the Captain of your Salvation, who was
made perfect through Sufferings, p. 275 -- They ( i.e. the holy Prophets)
prophesied of Christ, who was born not by the Will of Man, supposed to be the
Son of Joseph, which was the Son of God, page 287.

These Passages are (as many more might be) truly Collected out of John
Audland's Works and Writings to show.

1 st, That he truly owned and honored the true Christ, the only begotten Son
of God according to the holy Scriptures.

2 dly, That therefore no divine Attributations, Confessions, Honor or Worship
(only due and peculiar to our Lord Jesus Christ) could he ever intend to any
other besides him.

3 dly, These of J. A. his Free and Voluntary Confessions to the very Christ of
God, and his Light and Life, etc. are plain Indications of his clearness from
the gross and absurd Imputations of Idolatry and Blasphemy wickedly Insinuated
by his and our Adversaries.

4 thly, And how easily may such Apostate Adversaries wrong the Dead, when they
make no Conscience to wrong the Living, as they have done in plain matter of
Fact? and what Credit then can their Scandalous Pamphlets, or their Envious and
defaming Suggestions and Reproaches (many whereof are omitted here) be of, to
any impartial Readers, or Persons indifferent?

There are diverse of those other Articles exhibited by the said Libeller in the
said Pamphlet (which are truly cited, and owned by us) which I need not
vindicate, until the Libeller come forth, and make his Objections, and own his
said Pamphlet, styled, Some of the Quakers Principles, etc. and subscribe his
Name thereunto.

George Whitehead
London in the 1 st Month, 1693.
THE END.

