A Rambling Pilgrim, OR Profane APOSTATE, EXPOSED: BEING An Answer to Two
Persecuting Books, Falsely Entitled,

I. The Pilgrim 's Progress from Quakerism to Christianity.

II. A Modest Defense.

WITH An Epistle Dedicatoryto his Bountiful Benefactors.

By G. W. a Servant of Christ.

Let the lying Lips be made Dumb, which Cruelly, Proudly and Spitefully speak
against the Righteous, Psalm 31. 18.

LONDON, Printed and Sold by T. Soul, in White-Hart-Court in Gracious-Street,
1700.

AN Epistle Dedicatory.
To those of the Clergy, and of the Two Universities, whose Kindness and Bounty
Francis Bugg boasts of, in his Pilgrim's Progress, Chap. 15.
WHereas the said Francis Bugg appears highly to value himself upon the
Countenance of some of the Clergy, in his Contests against the People called
Quakers, sounding a Trumpet of the Clergy's Kindness, and being very Bountiful
to him; and particularly of the Bishop of Norwich, upon his Request to him,
giving him a Certificate in his Recommendation (together with his Bounty, which
he says was very Considerable.) Giving also this Account of the Improvement he
intended to make of the said Certificate, viz. I was minded to make Application
to my Lords, the Bishops of the Church of England, the two Universities, and to
some particular Clergymen. All which I no sooner asked, than he granted me;
and it pleased God so to open the Hearts of my Lords the Bishops, and Reverend
Clergy, that I found help in time of need.

These his Encouragements considered, this Epistle is therefore Dedicated to
you, who are concerned therein. Friends, Do you design to promote Christianity
indeed? You must use better Instruments for it than Fra. Bugg, the Author of
the said Pilgrim's Progress, whose Progress is apparently from Christianity
into Apostasy; from Truth, and true Charity, into Falsehood and Envy: As has
been evinced in diverse Answers extant, which he could never wipe off; and is
also further manifest in the Sequel. It Is no small Offense to God, or Injury to
Men, to encourage such Agents, as can Forge, Lie, Calumniate and Asperse, under
pretense of Contending for the Faith of Christ, and promoting Christianity;
Profanation of the Sacred Name of God and Christ, in idle Romance and Fiction,
is no small Dishonor thereto; I hope your Profession does not allow thereof,
or of taking Liberty thereunto; as this Agent, F. Bugg, is proved to take very
largely; and if you can either Connive at his so doing, or Indulge him therein,
how will he and you answer it in the great Day of Account, before the
Tribunal-Seat of Christ, the Righteous Judge of Quick and Dead? What Account
will be given for the Violation of these Two Commandments, Thou shall not take
the Name of the Lord thy God in vain; for the Lord will not hold him Guiltless
that takes his Name in vain: And, Thou shall not bear false Witness against
thy Neighbor; Both which he has notoriously violated in his forged Sermon in
my Name, and many other Fictions and Forgeries: Do you allow thereof, or
gratify him for the same? Or is it his own officious, heady Act and Device
only? For what then have you been so very Bountiful to him, and Contributed
such Considerable Sums of Money to him? Is it for his just Demerits, more than
others, in devising how to bring Contempt upon the People called Quakers, by
Forgeries and Calumnies; Falsely forming a Judicature, Trial, ridiculous
Answers, Pillory, Cage, etc to scandalize honest Men, of good Report, as a Pack
of Perjured Persons, (as in his New Rome Arraigned) for denying his Calumnies
and false Accusations? How should ever Christianity be promoted by such
Mockers, who act more like Stage Players, Merry-Andrews, Jack-Puddings, etc.
than sober Christians, or Persons designing to promote Christianity? And 'twill
be no Honor for you to promote or abet such Agents; but procure you great
Disgrace, if you glory in such shameful Treatment and Abuse, as this of F.
Bugg's, against us. Besides, it will be an Indication of your own Weakness, to
manage your Cause (if not of the Cause it self) for you to be beholden to such
scornful Agents to manage it. What may People think of you? Has all your
Learning failed you, that you must needs contribute large Money to a busy
Body, for his Scribbling against the Quakers? Never complain against Illiterate
and Lay-Preachers, or Mechanic Ministers, if such an one must be your
Champion, who, whilst his great Pretense is to Contend for Christ and the holy
Scriptures, can take Liberty to Contradict both, in Practice; if to Lie,
Misrepresent, falsely Vilify and Reproach, be contradictory to both; as we are
sure, no Lie is of the Truth. And we are not only for Confessing with the Mouth
the Lord Jesus, and sincerely Believing with the Heart, that God raised him
from the Dead, (Romans 10.) but also for a Christian Life and Conversation,
agreeable to such Confession, and Believing, as is unto Righteousness; well
knowing, that to make good Confessions, to speak good Words, and live bad
Lives, to confess Christ in Words, and deny him in Actions, will not commend or
prove any to be true Christians. The Sincerity of our Belief in, and Confession
to, the true Messiah, the very Christ of God, (to whom all his holy Prophets
gave witness) together with the Verity and Divine Authority of the holy
Scriptures, as being first given by Divine Inspiration, I say, our Sincerity
herein is known to Him who searches and knows our Hearts, however we be
misrepresented in these Two main Points, by some ill-affected Persons,
perverting, cutting, mangling, and altering the Words, Sayings and Sense of
both deceased and living Authors; which this Agent has been and is proved
notoriously guilty of, as a Person not Conscientious in his Writing, and
frequent Repetitions of the same Refuted Calumnies, still imposing the same
over and over, without making Defense thereof, by any serious Answer,
Replication or Rejoinder; his Course of Scribbling being to repeat the same
Fallacies and Misrepresentations under diverse Models, Titles, Forms and Shapes;
as sometime to make them in Form of a Creed; another, in the Form of a Trial,
in a Court of Judicature; another while, in the Form of a Dialo^gue; another
while, in the Form of Queries; another while, in the Form of History; another
while, in the Form of a Sermon: Together with his Scoff: and Jeers, Flouts,
Boasts, Challenges, intermixed; and thus he can make up numerous Books, filled
with Repetitions of the same Stuff, in diverse shapes, without taking any
serious notice of Answers or Confutation: And according to his crooked perverse
Manner of Writing, picking, mincing, clipping, forging and perverting Words and
Sentences. Ill minded Persons may easily abuse, and make the best of Writings
look ill. And now, how bitter and envious, and how full of cruel Mocking this
Agent is turned against us, the said People called Quakers, and with what
Contempt he has writ, concerning the Light within, or in Man, and our Doctrine
thereof, that his Self-Condemnation and Apostasy may therein the more appear,
please to observe his own solemn Testimony, how expressly contrary it is to his
present Treatment of us, the said People (as it is in his Book, styled, The
Quakers Detected, etc. printed 1686. about Two Years after his leaving our
Communion, and Conforming to the Church of England) as it is in his own words
following, viz.

The first Point under Consideration, is, how I came to be a Member of their
Society, etc. (i.e. of the Quakers) In the beginning they taught, That all Men
were enlightened, according to John 1. 9. and that this Light, wherewith Christ
had enlightened them, was sufficient, if obeyed, to lead to Salvation; and that
it was the Work of the Ministers of Christ, to turn the Peoples Minds from
Darkness to Light, and from the Power of Satan to God: Affirming, That this
Light was a sufficient Teacher, Leader and Guide to every Believer, without the
help of outward Prescriptions, Forms, Orders and Decrees of Men: Upon these and
the like Notions, I became persuaded to make Trial of their Doctrine; and when
I came to see and observe their Practice, Conversations and Deportments in the
Beginning, and what Simplicity and Plainness attended their Ministry, I was
still more Confirmed, that it was a Dispensation of the Love of God, sent as a
Visitation to Mankind. And being thus persuaded, I was resolved to bear the
Cross, and did utterly despise the Shame that attended them and their Message;
and was not behind any of my Equals, both in doing and suffering for the
Testimony thereof, as some amongst them can still bear me Witness: And in this
manner we went on for many Years, and loved one another with Love unfeigned;
and, doubtless, God blessed our Meetings with the Comfortable Enjoyment of his
Presence, (p. 3.)

From which solemn Confession thus made by Fra. Bugg, after he forsook our
Communion, and went to the Public (as he says) it follows naturally, that he
did not forsake us because of our Christian Principle or Profession of the
Light, or because of our Doctrine, Conversation, Communion or Meetings, or any
Dislike had thereof; but because he deemed us guilty of Apostasy from our first
Principle and Profession; and that (by his own Confession) he did not thereby
make his Progress from Egypt into Canaan, appears by his applying to himself
the words of Joseph, when in Egypt, viz. But (I) can say as Joseph did to his
Brethren, Genesis 50. 20. But as for you, ye thought Evil against me, but God
meant it unto Good: And Chap. 45. 5. Now therefore be not grieved, nor angry
with your selves, that you sold me hither, (Quakers detected, p. 8.) How came
F. B. to apply these words to his State, when turned from us to the Public, if
he did not think himself then in Egypt, or turned from the true Light into
Darkness? But we sold him not thither; he fled in Winter, when he had let in
Unbelief and Fearfulness, because of Suffering and Persecution, which he had
felt something of; but fell into Impatiency and Quarreling under it; and,
having lost Sincerity and Truth, turned Envious Temporizer. And because he has
so frequently and falsely charged the said People with denying Jesus of
Nazareth, and Contempt of holy Scripture, I may acquaint you with One or Two
Passages more, which concern himself, as recited in my Answer to his New Rome
Arraigned, entitled, Innocence Triumphant over Insolency and Outrage, printed
1693. p. 25, 26. as follows, viz.

And to his saying, The Names Jesus and Christ are given to the Mediator, etc.
[True, but what follow?] Therefore (quoth F. B.) it is no Absurdity to say, It
was not Jesus Christ for whom the Body was prepared; it was not Jesus Christ
that came in the Flesh, but the Word: John 1. 1. (Apol. Introd. p. 3.]

And yet he has confessed, it was the Son of God, that took the Body, p. 4.
What Confusion and Self-contradiction does the Man blindly run into? And how
contrary to the Apostle John's Testimony is his Doctrine herein? See 1 John 4.
2, 3. Every Spirit that confesses, that Jesus Christ is come in the Flesh, is
of God; and every Spirit, which confesses not that Jesus Christ is come in the
Flesh, is not of God; but this is the Spirit of Antichrist. What Spirit is
this in our Adversary, which says, It was not Jesus Christ that came in the
Flesh? Who was it then? It was the Word, the Son of God: As if Jesus Christ
were neither the Word, nor the Son of God: O horrible Anti-Christianism! And
contrary also to that Martyr, Dr. Barnes his Confession, as cited by F. Bugg
himself, p. 4. 5. viz. I believe, that without Man's Will or Power, Christ
Jesus was conceived by the Holy Ghost, and took Flesh of the blessed Virgin
Mary. Acts and Mon. p. 610. Now, If Jesus Christ took Flesh of the blessed
Virgin Mary, then it was Jesus Christ that came in the Flesh: But it was Jesus
Christ that took Flesh; Therefore 'twas Jesus Christ that came in the Flesh.
Consequently F. Bugg's Doctrine, That it was not Jesus Christ that came in the
Flesh, is Antichristian, Anti-Apostolical and Contradictory to the said
Martyr's Doctrine.

In his Book, styled, De Christiana Liberate, Part 2. Chap. 1. he confesses
in the Name and Person of the People called Quakers, That we told them (i. e.
the said People) that the Scriptures were good, and a true Declaration of those
things, which were most surely believed by the Apostles, and by us ought to be
believed; yet not the only Rule, but still the Spirit of God, which was the
first Principle, etc. And many more Confessions he has given to the Truth of
our Principles, both with respect to Jesus Christ, his Light, and the holy
Scriptures.

Now I recommend you to the faithful Witness of Truth in all your Hearts, which
will Judge Righteously; and desire you seriously to peruse the following
Treatise, and hear us in our Answers and Defense, as well as our Adversary in
his Accusations; remembering that common Maxim, To Condemn no Man, before he be
heard.

By a Servant of Jesus Christ, and real Friend to your Immortal Souls, G.
Whitehead.
London, the 30th of the 4th Month, 1699.
The CONTENTS of this Treatise.
PART I.
OF Francis Bugg's Fictitious, Profane Sermon, in G. Whitehead's Name. From
Page 1, to p. 16. Of our Yearly Meeting. p. 1, 2. Of the Scriptures. p. 2, 3.
Of one only God, the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, and the Holy Scriptures. p.
3, 4. Of Confession of Sin, and Prayer to God. p. 5, 6. Of the Ten
Commandments, and Moral Law. p. 7, 8. Of his gross Fiction against the Holy
Scripture, and the Light within. p. 9. Of his resembling the Mockers, Psalm 35.
21. and 40. 15. p. 9. His Forgery against, William Bingley; and Ben. Bealing's
Certificate. p. 10, 11. His repeated Forgery about G. Fox, touching the Branch,
the Star, etc. p. 12, 13. Of his Counterfeit Court, and Condemnation. p. 13.
His Forgery and Frofaneness, about our Light and Exaltation. p. 14. Of Sam.
Fisher's Prophecy, and F. B.'s Malice, and injurious Construction. p. 14, 15,
16.
PART II.
Of the Light of Christ, the Spirit's Authority, the Holy Scriptures, Ten
Commandments, Silent Meetings. p. 17, 18, 19, 20. Of F. B's offense against
Light and Conviction; and his Self-Contradiction, about the Light, Lawgiver,
and Head of the Body, the Church, etc. p. 20, 21, 22. Of his notorious Abuse
about the Ten Commandments. p. 22, 23, 24. How to charge F. B. if he will not
behave himself, quietly. p. 24. Of his Falsehood, Envy, Contradiction and
Insolency against the Light, and the Ministers thereof. p. 24, 25. Of his
Calumnies, and accumulated Lies and Perversions, against the Quakers,
compaering them to Jesuits, to be distrusted in all they say. p. 26, 27. A
Certificate on G. Whitehead's behalf, against F. B's idle Detractions. p. 27,
28. Of his Trumpeting out his Hospitality, and upbraiding our Ministers. p. 28,
29. Of his blasphemously comparing the Pope of Rome, and the Quakers Light; and
of our Meetings, etc. p. 30, 31. Of his Fallacy and Abuse in a Quotation out of
G. Keith's Way cast up. p. 31, 32. Of Praying for the King, and our plain
Testimony against Plots and Conspiracies, etc. p. 32, 33. Of F. B's exposing in
Print, a Passage of Two Clergy-Men's, against the Liberty granted and Legally
confirmed. p. 33, 34. Of his Pillory and Cage, idle Mockery, Contempt and
Folly. p. 34. Of his horrid Calumnies, about a most Damnable Plot, charged
against our Meetings, etc. p. 35. Of his Hypocritical Asseveration, and
presuming to dictate to Authority unjust Restrictions and Limitations, to
prevent the Growth of Quakerism, (as he calls it) p. 35. 36, 37. Of his silly
and insolent Boasting and Challenging; and of our Discourse in the presence of
the Bishop of Norwich, and some Members of Parliament. p. 37, 38. His Spirit of
Envy, Falsehood and Persecution still appearing in other things. p. 38, 39. A
Catalogue of my Answers (to F. Bugg's Books) extant in Print. p. 39, 40. A
Brief Answer to Francis Bugg's Book, falsely styled, A Modest Defense, etc. p.
41.
THE Rambling PILGRIM EXPOSED.
PART I.
THE principal Notice I am concerned to take of Francis Bugg's Pilgrim's
Progress, from Quakerism to Christianity (as he falsely terms it) is, of his
Chap. XIII. Entitled, The Quakers Conversion, G. Whitehead 's Sermon,
explaining their ancient Testimonies; (of above two printed Sheets) which G.
Whitehead utterly denies, and in good Conscience solemnly testifies against, as
a Sermon never preached nor owned by him; and which Fr. Bugg also knows in his
own Conscience, is a Fictitious Romance, presumptuously contrived and invented
by himself, to ridicule, defame and scandalize both G. W. and the People called
Quakers, and their Yearly Meeting, which he calls their Convocation, and The
Quakers Synod; also calling it a Sermon for G. W. to hold forth at their
Convocation. He is positive in his first Title, that it is G. W's Sermon; and
as idle, self-contradicting, and false in the other, that it is For him to hold
forth; consequently not G. Whitehead's Sermon, but F. Bugg's Forgery. And as
the said fictitious Sermon is composed of base Forgery, ridiculous Romance,
foul Perversions, gross Lies, idle and sordid Stuff, with many curtailed and
abused Citations out of our Books; besides his presumptuously Profaning the
sacred Name of God and Christ, and the Light within, in his said Forgery. And
that it may evidently appear such, I may recite some Passages out of it under
the Title of Forgery, and show,

1. His invented Cut of Pictures about a Table, to represent the Quakers Synod
(as he calls it) some having their Names over their Heads, and others Deputies.
And on the Table two Books Pictured, the one styled, The Journal of G. Fox; and
the other, Church-Canons, on the outsides: Which is a mere Fiction of his own.
And in the same Cut, or Figure (which he entitles, The Quakers Synod) he feigns
G. Whitehead to say, Are the Doors shut? And W. Bingley to answer, Yea, the
Doors are locked. And he feigns W. Penn to say, Call over the List: Are none of
Truth's Enemies here? Then over one he has set B. Bealing, the Scribe. Which
are fictitious Inventions of his own. And yet I heard, this Cut has been of a
considerable Charge, to ridicule us with such a piece of lying Vanity.

2. He feigns me (G. W.) to Preach a Sermon in the said Synod; some Passages
whereof do follow (with brief Observations thereupon) viz.

Forgery. Beloved, You see what great Mistakes are happened to this People of
England, who by following the Doctrine of their blind Guides, have taken
Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John, for the Gospel; that is, Glad-Tidings. No, no,
it is Beastly Ware; yea, Dust, and Serpents Meat: And this I can prove by two
Books, wrote by our Apostle George Fox, etc. (p. 108, 109.)

Observe. This is a horrid piece of Forgery; I never preached this Doctrine in
my days, nor do I own it, but abhor calling either Matthew, Mark, Luke and
John, or their Gospel-Testimony, or holy Scripture, Beastly Ware, etc. nor did
I ever read those Expressions in any of G. F's, or other Friends Books. And for
this gross Lie and Calumny, Fra. Bugg has been several times reprehended in
Print, and yet still persists in the Repetition thereof; see my Sober
Expostulation, p. 104, 105. and p. 67, 98, 137. and other Answers to him, etc.

Forgery. Moreover the Scriptures are so uncertain, that it is questionable,
who was the first Penman thereof, whether Moses or Hermes; yea, either or
neither, p. 109.

Observe. I deny this to be Part of any Sermon of mine, or ever so asserted by
me; There is not only Forgery against me in this, but also a Perversion and
Abuse against some other Friends: The Questions were not their own, but arose
from some others; as evidently appears in their Book, entitled, The Quakers
Refuge, etc. p. 17. and it is Answered in my Antidote against the Venom of the
Snake in the Grass, page 83, 84.

Forgery. I still affirm the same, and do tell you, That it is according to our
ancient Testimony; and you know, we cannot change nor alter, being as
Unchangeable, as our Light within, p. 109.

Obs. I utterly deny, that I did so tell them in any Sermon of mine, That we
are as Unchangeable, as our Light within: This is not only a Forgery, but also
a scurrilous Abuse of the Light within.

Forgery. We our selves use many words not Scriptural; as these of calling the
Scriptures Death, Dust, Beastly Ware, etc. The Reason why we call them so, and
translate the Words of Christ, John 5. 22. from the Son of Man, to the Light
within, etc. is, because we believe there is no other Son of Man, than the
Light in us, p. Ibid.

Obs. Thus he falsely feigns me to Preach, and to repeat his own gross Lie over
and over, of calling the Scriptures Beastly Ware, and as if we used so to call
them. O Abominable Abuse! And I positively deny, that we so translate the Words
of Christ, John 5. 22. as F. B. says, as if we believed no Son of Man without
us, but only the Light within us (which is as falsely Charged as the rest)
though the Son of Man, which is Christ, the Son of the Living God, be the true
Light; yea, the Light of the World, the Sower of the good Seed of Life and
Light in the World.

Forgery. Notwithstanding we call the Scriptures Death, Dust, Beastly Ware, etc.

Obs. Note, Upon this often-repeated Falsehood is grounded much of his idle and
wicked Romance, which he calls George Whitehead's Sermon. Oh F. B. repeat this
Lie no more!

Forgery. Now my Friends, though this Confession be as contrary to our ancient
Testimony, as Light is contrary to Darkness; as by our Books quoted you may
see. [And what Confession that is, he relates just before, viz.] I believe with
my Heart, and confess with my Mouth, the sacred Scriptures to be Divine, left
us by Men inspired of God, etc. And I profess to believe in one only God, who
is the Father; and in Jesus Christ his Eternal Son, very God and very Man; and
in the Holy Spirit, one and the same God with the Father and Son, blessed for
evermore.

Observe, How he most falsely and ridiculously feigns me to Preach this
Connfession, to be as contrary to our ancient Testimony, as Light is contrary
to Darkness; and consequently to make me Preach us all guilty of gross
Dissimulation and Blasphemy: What horrid, absurd Folly is this Agent guilty of!

Forgery. And therefore I exhort you this day, to stand Faithful to your
ancient Testimony, which is to throw down the Scriptures, and exalt our own
Books; and so will the Work of your Light prosper in your hands, p. 113.

Observe: Thus he represents me to Preach, expressly contrary to my known
Principle and Testimony, for the preferring and exalting the holy Scriptures
above all other Books extant in the World. So far am I from Preaching to throw
down the Scriptures, and from Fathering any such Doctrine upon our Light, as I
am wickedly misrepresented, in contempt against the Light also; contrary to
this Man's former serious Testimonies for the Light. And the Preference I have
ascribed to the Spirit of Truth, and its Immediate Teaching (either in or
through its Ministers) to the Scriptures, or Chapters, was not any Preferring
of our own Books thereto, as I am often misrepresented: But allowing the Spirit
its due Preference to the Scripture, Letter or Chapters. For the Spirit was
before Scripture; and I never heard any assert, the Division of Chapters and
Verses to be of Divine Authority; though the holy Doctrine (contained in
Scripture) be. This Point is more fully explained in my late Just Examination
of the three Norfolk Priests, entitled, Truth and Innocence vindicated, etc.
p. 16, 17, 19, to 23. and p. 57, 58.

Forgery. My tender Lambs, You see first, that we are the true Church of
Christ; next, that you are to believe as the Church believes; and there lies G.
Fox' s Journal on the Table, etc. For as our Brother Mead has expressed
himself, It is the best Book in the World, for our keeping up our ancient
Testimony, yea, better than the Bible, said he. And now, to conclude this Head,
look into the Book of Canons, which lies before you on the Table, p. 114.

Observe, Thus to ridicule me, he forges such Stuff in my Name, which I never
owned, preached, or asserted; neither did I ever hear W. Mead so express
himself; as, That G. Fox' s Journal is the best Book in the World; yea, better
than the Bible; but expressly the contrary, and denies that ever he said so; but
gives the Bible the Preference to all other Books.

Forgery. Friends, I am now come to the last thing proposed to speak to on this
solemn Occasion, and it shall be by way of Use and Application, for your
Comfort and Consolation, etc. First, respecting Confession of Sin; showing your
Exaltation above the Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, Primitive Christians,
Saints and Martyrs, and all the Christian Churches to this day, p. 114. -- And
p. 115. You being the True, Ancient, Apostolic Church of Christ, and as
Quakers elected thereto, etc. have no need to make any Confession of Sin in our
Prayers to God; as our Practice for near Fifty Years does confirm, etc. Our
Adversaries cannot prove from any one of our Books, wrote by my Self, G. Fox,
E. B, F. H, Father Penn, S. Fisher, etc. that ever we made Confession of Sins,
and asked pardon for Christ's sake, nor that ever we recommended such a
Practice to our Disciples, etc. Now Friends, what Cause have we to rejoice, and
to magnify our Light within, which has led us to such a State of sinless
Perfection?

Obs. Thus F. Bugg represents me preaching such Stuff, as I never preached in
my Life, nor ever owned any such Flattery or Deceit, as to exalt any Auditory
above the Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, etc. or to dissuade any from making
Confession of Sin, or asking Pardon for Christ's sake, who have need of both,
or who have not received forgiveness of Sins.

And my known public Practice, both in Ministry and Prayer, often times
testify the contrary: To the True Witness in all, who know me and my public
Exercise and Travel for the good of Souls, I do Appeal, to clear me in this
Matter, against this Man's absurd and abominable Forgeries, which he terms
George Whitehead's Sermon. And he goes on still with his Forgery, as my Sermon,
viz.

Forgery. Now Friends, what a happy thing is this, that you need not trouble
your selves with any Confession of Sins, since you are not like other Men, nor
like these Publicans? And therefore I exhort you to keep to your ancient
Testimony in all the parts of it; make no Confession of Sins, nor be sure you
do not recommend the Practice of it by Word or Writing; but keep to our ancient
Practice. Nor is there any need for our Hearers to follow those Christian
Precepts, viz. And whatsoever you do in Word or Deed, do all in the Name of the
Lord Jesus, giving Thanks to God the Father by him (Col. 3. 17.) Whether ye Eat
or Drink, or whatever ye do, do all to the Glory of God, 1 Cor 10. 31. Matthew
15. 36.

Observe. Where did ever F. Bugg or any other hear me, or any of us, Preach
such a Sermon as this, to exhort the Hearers to make no Confession of Sin; or
ever tell them, there is no need for them to follow those Christian Precepts
cited (as before) out of Col. 3. 17. 1 Cor. 10. 31? Oh poor Francis, What will
become of thee! What will be the End of this thy Liberty and Profaness! How
will thou Answer the great God in the Day of Judgment for such presumptuous
Forgery and Profanation of the Sacred Name of God, and Abuse of me his Servant,
who have been many times sorry for thee, under a Sense of the Lamentable
Desperate State! How dare thou thus proceed to Sin against Light and
Knowledge, to Invent such a Scurrilous Sermon in above two large Sheets in
Print, and Call it George Whitehead's Sermon; when thou know, it is a
Defaming, Counterfeit Device and Romance of thy own, having also given thy self
the Lie, by saying, It Is a Sermon for G. W. How binding are God's Commands to
thee, viz. Thou shall not take the Name of the Lord thy God in vain; for the
Lord will not hold him Guiltless that takes his Name in vain! Thou shall not
bear false Witness against thy Neighbor, Exodus 20. Yet thou audaciously
proceedest in thy Forgery, and False-Witness-bearing against me and our
Friends, and in my Name, as thus Preaching, viz.

Forgery. You know that we our selves, to be seen of Men, do make a kind of
Prayer to our Light within, when we are at their Tables, when Company is
present; but if alone, either at home or abroad, we seldom give Thanks for our
Food, and seldomer with our Eyes toward Heaven, as Christ did, as Stephen did,
or as the Martyrs did; no, you know we are of another, yea, of a different
Faith and Practice from all the ancient Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs
and holy Confessors, and all Christian Churches to this day, being exalted
above them, for we sit in heavenly Places, singing the Songs of Sion in the
Beauty of Holiness, without Sin or any Imperfection, p. 117, 118.

Obs. I challenge F. Bugg and all his Abettors, and other Adversaries in the
World, to prove, when and where, ever I, or any of us, preached such a Sermon
as this, importing such Dissimulation in Prayer public, or Neglect of it in
Private, or any such Self-exaltation above the ancient Patriarchs, Prophets,
Apostles, Martyrs, or all Christian Churches, etc. No, I abhor such vain
Ostentation, foolish and false Boasting, and Professing or Preaching up a Faith
and Practice different from theirs. And it is as notoriously false, That we pray
to be seen of Men, and seldom give Thanks at home or abroad, if alone; and that
we so make Prayer to our Light within, as having our whole God within us, as
safely as the Papists have their Crucifixes in their Pockets, p. 117, 118. This
also is an ignorant contemning Scoff and Flout, as well as Forgery, and a
Slight also put upon the Light within; which though God and Christ is our
Light, Life and Salvation, yet we do not limit, nor confine him, as the whole
God within us only; he being an Omnipresent and All-seeing God, whom the Heaven
of Heavens cannot contain.

Forgery. My very Doctrine show it to be the Ten Commandments, first, by
telling the Priests, they might as well carry the Ten Commandments to Christ;
the Consequence of which is, that Christ had as much need to learn them as we,
p. 118.

Obs. Though he unjustly makes this a part of my Sermon, it is none of my
Doctrine or Preaching; neither are the Words mine, as cited. He refers to Truth
Defending the Quakers (printed 1659. p. 18.) but falsely quotes the Words. I did
not tell the Priests, They might as well carry the Ten Commandments to Christ,
much less, that Christ had as much need to learn them as we; I disown such
Blasphemy. But the Question being put, Is the Moral Law or Ten Commandments a
Rule to the Christian's Life? The Answer was, Thou might as well ask, if the
Moral Law be a Rule to Christ? For the Christians Life and Rule is Christ, who
is the End of the Law for Righteousness; who came not to destroy the Law, but
to fulfill it. Therefore my Intent was not to make void (or to break) the Moral
Law, or Ten Commandments, but to refer them to Christ, the true Christian's
Life, Way and Principal Rule; and that Christ is their Life, who live to him,
is Evident; see Col. 3. 4. For ye are dead, and your Life is hid with Christ in
God; when Christ, who is our Life shall appear, then shall ye also appear with
him in Glory: Now this Divlne Life of a Christian, which is Christ, cannot be
under the Law, as a Rule to him, though the Law was our Schoolmaster to bring
us unto Christ, that we might be justified by Faith; but after that Faith is
come, we are no longer under a Schoolmaster, Gal. 3. 24, 25. And if ye be led
by the Spirit, ye are not under the Law, Gal. 5. 18. Therefore being in the
Faith of Christ, their Life, their Lord and Master, they were grown past the
State of such Children, who were under such a Schoolmaster as the Law, being
no more under the Law, but under Grace, For what the Law says, it says to
those who are under the Law, that the whole World may become Guilty before God,
which his Children are not.

Forgery. That we never recommend the Ten Commandments to our Hearers, that
they should teach them to their Children, etc. This therefore may confirm you
in our ancient Testimony, which has been to lay them by as a dead Letter,
Dust, Death, Serpents Food and beastly ware, etc. p. 118, 119.

Obs. This is not only a gross and repeated Forgery, as it is made a part of my
Sermon; but also in it self containing two gross Lies: 1. That our ancient
Testimony has been To lay by the Ten Commandments. 2. As Beastly-ware,
Serpents food, etc. Where did I, or we, ever give such Testimony of the Ten
Commandments, as to call them either Beastly-ware, Serpents food? etc. I
utterly deny (with abhorrence) any such Testimony concerning the Ten
Commandments, being all comprehended in that great Commandment of Love. And for
me, or any of our Friends, preferring the Spirit before the Letter, the Gospel
above the Law, and the Ministration of the Spirit and Life, above the
Ministration of Death, and exalting it above the Letter of the Scriptures, I
know no spiritual Christian will blame us for that, or for any such Doctrine;
which is so evidently agreeable to the holy Apostle Paul's Testimony and
Distinction in that Case, as between the Letter and the Spirit, between the
Ministration of Death written and engraven in Stones, and the Ministration of
the Spirit, which was much more Glorious: As more largly he distinguishes, 2
Cor. 3. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. The Apostle using the very words, The Letter
kills, but the Spirit gives Life; and if the Mininistration of Death written
and engraven in Stones, etc. which could neither be in Contempt of the Holy
Scriptures or Ten Commandments, much less to lay them by, as Beastly-ware, etc.
Now F. Bugg repeat these Lies no more; and you of the Clergy concerned,
encourage F. B. no more in's work against us.

Forgery. Beloved, I cannot but allow, that if the Scriptures were of greater
Authority, than our Sayings, or that the Words of Matthew, Luke and Paul, were
of greater Authority, than are our Sayings, I should be on the Christians side,
etc. But Friends, in the beginning we were Convinced by G. Fox, that Matthew,
Mark, Luke and John, were Death, Dust and Serpents Meat, that the Scriptures
were heastly-ware, etc. [This Passage (by the way) is a gross Forgery and
notorious Lie still; I never thus preached, nor ever were we convinced by G.
Fox, or any other, that either the Doctrine of the holy Evangelists were
Serpents Meat, Dust or Death, or the Scriptures, Beastlyware, as it is
frequently repeated by F. B. Unto which foul Abuse he farther adds, as my
Sermon, viz.] And therefore I warn you all to take heed of Apostatising from
our ancient Testimony, as you have it in my Text; for what we were Convinced of
by our Light in the beginning to be Evil, to be Death, Dust, Serpents meat,
it is so still; to be Beastly-ware and Conjuration, it is so still. p. 120.

Obs. This is a blasphemous Fiction, not only against the Holy Scripture, but
against the Light, which he calls Your Light: For neither did the Light ever so
Convince us to call the Scriptures Beastlyware; nor did I ever Preach such
blasphemous Doctrine of the Light, as here I am grossly misrepresented, but the
Contrary. As no Man speaking by the Spirit can Blaspheme, or call Jesus
Accursed; so no Man speaking by his Light, can Blaspheme or Reproach his holy
Scriptures, which Testify of him. The Book Bugg quotes for his so
often-repeated Lie, of calling the Scriptures Beastly-ware, is styled, A Brief
Discovery of a threefold Estate of Antichrist, printed 1653. Page 9. I have
that Book by me, and I have searched both Book and Page, and I find no such
words, as calling the Scriptures Beastly-ware, But Babylon's Merchants selling
Beastly-wares for a large Price, all the Week time heaping up a Rabble of
Notions into the Brain. So that the Beastly-wares intended, was their Rabble of
Notions, and not the Scriptures.

Obs. Again, How scurrilously F. Bugg makes me to come to a Stop in this
Insolent and Presumptuous Romance, which he calls George Whitehead's Sermon,
after this manner, viz. And therefore keep up your ancient Testimony, my Dear
Lambs, in all the part of it; Ha, ha, ha; hme, hme, hme; silent, p. 120.

Thus this Scorner forges a ridiculous Tone, as my Conclusion or Stop in that
place, somewhat resembling the Mockers of Old, whom the Psalmist complains of,
Psalm 35. 21. Yea, they opened their Mouth wide against me, and said, Aha, aha!
And Psalm. 40. 15. Let them be desolate for a Reward of their Shame, that say
unto me, Aha, aha! And Psalm 70. 3. Let them be turned back for a Reward of
their Shame, that say, Aha, aha! And then (after a little Silence) he most
absurdly represents William Bingley, as preaching in Confirmation of his
Confused and Absurd Romance, aforesaid, which he calls George Whitehead's
Sermon.

In W. Bingley's Name thus, viz. Friends, Friends, I am filled, I am filled, as
with new Wine; I am ready to burst at the Joyful News I have heard to day,
respecting our Ancient Testimony; And O magnified be our Light within, which
has thus exalted us above the Prophets, above the Apostles, above the Martyrs,
and above all Christians, as our dear Brother G. W. has most excellently made
it out; first, in opening his Text, and also in the two Branches proceeding
from it; but more especially in the Use and Application, where he has
confirmed me in not making Confession of Sin, nor regarding the Ten
Commandments, nor those two Ordinances of Baptism and Supper, p. 120, 121.

Obs. How shamefully he personates W. B. to asperse and abuse him, as if he
were highly Elevated, and magnified our Light within, because of what F. Bugg
has most falsely feigned G. W. to Preach in Contempt of Scripture, and for
Exalting our selves above the Prophets, Apostles, etc. Thus he presumptuously
adds Sin to Sin, Lie to Lie, Forgery upon Forgery, such sordid Stuff as we
never heard W. B. preach, but he utterly disowns and testifies against the
same, with Abhorrency to such Abuse of him and others. And not only so, but
Bugg wickedly represents W. B. as making our Light within the Author of his
foregoing Absurd Forgery and Romance in G. W's Name, against the holy
Scriptures, Ten Commandments, etc. Consequently to blaspheme our Light within,
which is the Light of God, and his Dear Son, as if that opposed its own
Testimony in holy Scripture, and as if that led to Self-Exaltation above the
Prophets and Apostles, etc. O wretched Man, F. B! How will thou appear before
the Tribunal-Seat of Christ! What a sad Account will thou have for such
Profanation, designed Deceit and Wickedness! Who further proceedest in W.
Bingley's Name, viz.

Forgery. But yet I have a short Testimony to bring in, touching the Priests,
which I think our Friend G. W. left out unawares; for I take it to be as
necessary an ancient Testimony to be kept up, as any other, only a little more
privately and prudently; for they are as great Enemies to our design of
Supplanting Christianity, as any the World affords, p. 121.

Observe again: Oh shameful Folly and Falsehood! Where and when did ever W. B.
thus Preach, That our Design is the supplanting Christianity? Whenas our Design
is well known to the contrary, to such as truly fear God, and to be for the
Promoting of Christianity, both in Spirit, in Faith, Life and Conversation.

Forgery. Benjamin Bealing Clerk, Let us sing an Hymn of Praise and
Self-Exaltation, and to the Confusion of our Adversaries; as you will find it
written in the Epistle of that Son of Thunder, Edward Borough, prefixed to our
Apostle G. Fox' s Great Mystery, printed 1658.

The Waters have I seen dried up, the Seat of that great Whore,
Who has made all Nations drunk with her enticing Power.
Observe. Now F. B. do not thou Glory in thy Shame, in such Invention as
this? Where did ever any in the World hear Benjamin Bealing set or sing such a
Hymn as this in the end of a Meeting, or any time else? Observe his own
Testimony, viz.

These are to Certify all sober Readers, That Francis Bugg's Representing me,
as calling to the Yearly Meeting, To sing an Hymn of Praise and
Self-Exaltation, etc. and making some Verses (out of Edward Burrough's Preface
to G. F's Great Mystery) to be that Hymn: It Is all an idle false Invention and
Forgery of his own; for I never was concerned in any such thing in my
Lifetime; and I am heartily sorry that this poor Man should be so given up in
his old Age to serve the Father of Lies, with whom, in the Lake, he may expect
to have his Portion, without he unfeignedly Repents.

Witness my Hand, Benjamin Bealing.
London, the 4th of the 5th Month, called July, 1699.
Oh F. B. thou appearest one of that sort, who are arrived to that ill Habit of
Iniquity and Hardness, that they know no Shame! And thy presumptuously
Profaning the sacred Name of God, and of his dear Son, and of his Light
within, using the same among thy manifold Repeated and Refuted Forgeries, Lies
and Falsehoods, is an ill Sign, and bespeaks an ill Omen against thee, and that
thy Day hastens. Thou have almost run thy Rope-length; the Lord shall laugh at
thee, for he sees that thy Day is coming; the Pride of thy Heart, and thy
abominable Presumption, and wicked Designs of Contempt and Persecution against
His Heritage, has reached unto Heaven; and for thy great Iniquity and Apostasy,
thou have got a secret Wound, which is not cured (if cureable) but will
increase to greater Anguish, under a Gnawing Worm that will never die, but
Augment thy Torment, if thou persistest in thy Impenitency to defame, and make
Lies and Forgeries thy Refuge. Remember, thou have been often warned in thy
Lifetime, and thou shall witness me to have been thy Soul's true Friend, when
thou shall not be able to make me the Subject of thy Reproach, nor the Object
of thy Malice and Fury.

Forgery. You may conclude, Friends, that he (i. e. G. Fox) was the Branch, the
Star, the Sun of Righteousness, spoken of in Scripture; but mark, This
(Epistle) it is only to go among Friends, p. 123.

Observe again: This Forgery, (which he now makes part of my Sermon) has often
been detected, and charged upon him, as it is a very foul Abuse and Calumny;
that either I, or our Friends, did so call G. Fox, the Branch, the Star, the
Sun of Righteousness, or preach any such Doctrine, as here he represents me. O
Abominable Forgery! I yet challenge him, and his Abettors, to produce that Book
or Epistle, of any of our Friends, which so terms G. Fox, the Branch, the Star,
the Sun of Righteousness. For though I have found the words, the Branch, the
Star, the Sun of Righteousness, in E. Burrough's Epistle, To the Camp of the
Lord in England, (in his Works, p. 66, 67.) yet not applied to G. Fox, nor his
Name so much as mentioned in that Epistle. And Bugg knows, he has been told of
this over and over in Print, and particularly in my Sober Expostulation, p. 5.
and p. 54, 55, 56. but never had Answer or Reply from him, to clear himself in
this Point (and many other Lies) but a Repetition of the same Forgery over and
over, like a wilful, impertinent, scornful Scribler, that will be still
Imposing the same Refuted Calumnies, and odious Defamations. This is his course
of writing and scribbling Books, with the same Abuses still over and over,
without regarding any Answer, how plain so ever, to his Confutation: Which is a
most silly, brutish Method he has enured himself unto, still Idem per idem for
Proof, and that with a great deal of insolent show of Confidence. And withal,
he has so much studied the Art of idle Romancing, Forgery and Detraction,
Scoffing, Taunting, Flouting, Boasting, Cracking and Insulting, that he is
arrived to a great Height of Impudence therein. For which I may repeat this
one Instance: Twelve of our Friends in and about London, giving Certificate
against four principal Calumnies and Falsehoods cast upon the People called
Quakers, by F. Bugg, in his New Rome Unmasked (as they are related in my
Charitable Essay, p. 8. in 1693.) This being one of his four said Falsehoods,
viz. II. That the Quakers Prophets give witness to G. Fox, instead of this
Christ; that they call him (G. F.) the Branch, the Star, the Sun of
Righteousness, and put the North of England for the Town of Bethlehem: Epistle
to the Bereans, and p. 81.

Now, Observe further: For our denying of this, and other Calumnies, in our
said Twelve Friends Certificate, the said F. Bugg counterfeits a Court of
Judicature, feigns a Jury, pretends Proof out of Books perverted by him, calls
the Certifiers against him into Examination; then forges their Answers, and
counterfeits the Jury, to bring them in Guilty of Perjury. Then has a Form of a
Pillory, and ugly Pictures to represent the Persons Condemned standing in it,
and the first Letters of their Names over their Heads, and the word Perjury
over them (as may be seen in his New Rome Arraigned, Epistle to the Bereans,
printed 1693.) to the Scandal and Defamation of the Persons thus Reproached and
Staged by him.

By all which it may appear, what Proficiency Francis Bugg has attained to, in
his Invention of Forgery, to Defame, and make Men Ridiculous: But when since he
met with some Check for such his Audacious Abuse and Scandal, and might have
cause to fear the Issue, then he could slily excuse the Forgery and Defamation,
and put it off, as only a Mock-Trial, and a Mock-Pillory (and consequently a
Mock-Sentence, and a Mock-Perjury) as if Persons may Defame, Scandalize, Steal,
Rob, Kill and Murder Men, either in their Reputations, Livelihoods or Persons,
and then (to excuse themselves from having their Demerits) allege, That it was
all but in Jest, or in Mockery. And so F. Bugg may say of his idle and profane
Romance, which he calls George Whitehead's Sermon, that it is but a Mock-Sermon;
and consequently that he uses the Name of God and Christ, etc. therein, only in
Mockery. But this will not Excuse his presumptuous Profaneness, no more than
his Forgery and Defamation. Have not some of the Priests owned this Man for
their Convert, even an eminent Convert of their Church? And do they not make
use of him, gratify and reward him, as their Agent and their Tool? But will it
redound to their Credit or Honor, or Promotion of the Christian Religion, to
abet, promote and assist such a profane Scorner, to act for them in their
Cause, more like a Stage Player, a Merry-Andrew, or Jack-Pudding, than a Person
of any Seriousness or Sobriety in Religion?

Forgery. Again in G. W's Name, viz. In the Application I have showed, how our
Light within has exalted you above the Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, holy
Confessors, and all Christian Churches, to this day. -- Our dear Brother W.
Bingley has well remembered our ancient Testimony against the
Hireling-Priests, etc. Benjamin Bealing has found out a very suitable Hymn of
Praise, even a melodious Song of Triumph; setting forth our Exaltation, and the
Downfall of the Christian Churches, under the Notion of the False Church, etc.
p. 125, 126.

Observe. Thus he persists Forging such Stuff in my Name, and as my Sermon,
like a silly Scorner, playing the Fool against me, to make me as ridiculous a
Fool, as he can. What Stage Player durst ever have adventured to profane
Religion, and the sacred Name of God, Christ, and the Light, in their
Interludes or Comedies, as this Person has done? Who is accountable to God, for
casting such Contempt upon the Light of Christ, as if it led to such
Self-Exaltation (i. e. of our selves) as he has scornfully related? For such
his Scorn and Contempt against the true Light, which we profess, he is
Accountable to the righteous Judge of all; and his own more serious Confession
to the Light, Recited in the Epistle, will rise up in Judgment against him.

Forgery again, in the said pretended Sermon in G. W's Name. I have also closed
my Discourse with the Prophecy of Sam. Fisher, which you need not doubt of, but
will come to pass, it may be sooner than you are aware of, etc. only for the
present we must be content to stay, and patiently bear: For as yet we cannot
think, we shall be made to handle the Sword. But when the time does come, I
have showed you the Testimony of two of our Prophets, and early Champions, what
we shall do, how we shall kill, cut off, and destroy, and bathe our Swords in
the Blood of Amaleck, and lay waste fenced Cities, and tread down the
Honorable of the Earth, and spare neither Old nor Young, p. 126.

Observe his evil Design, by inventing and framing this in my Name, as part of
my Sermon; as if I prophesied, that we should be made to handle the Sword,
kill, cut off, and destroy, etc. and spare neither Old nor Young, etc. Which he
would have understood in a literal Sense, to make me and our Friends as
Obnoxious and Criminal, as he can; which bespeaks, not only an evil Design, but
premeditated Malice and Injury. And I am apt to think, the Man Sins
knowingly against Light and Conviction, in taking up and representing such
words in a literal Sense, as are in Sam. Fisher's Prophecy to O. Cromwell, in
1656. and in Fra. Howgil's and E. B's, in the same Year; S. F. having these
words: I will beautify my Meek Ones with Salvation, and I will put my
High-Praise into their Mouths, and a two-edged Sword into their Hands, and they
shall execute Vengeance upon the Heathen, etc. And the other have these words,
viz. Out of thee (i. e. the North of England) Kings, Priests and Prophets did
come forth in the Name and Power of the Most-High, which uttered their Voices
as Thunders, and laid their Swords on the Necks of their Enemies, etc. Gird on
your Sword upon your Loins, put on the tried Armor, etc. My beloved Brethren
and Fellow Soldiers, make all plain before you, Thresh on with a Threshing
Instrument, which has Teeth; beat the Mountains to Dust, let the Breath of the
Lord scatter it, etc. p. 124. Now that F. B. renders these, and such like
Passages, in a literal Sense, observe his Notes in the Margent, i. e. Are not
these Fifth-Monarchy-Men? Retract these bloody Books, and horrid Principles.

Hereupon I would ask him, and those Priests who abet him, 1. If the Psalmist
meant Literally in Psalm 149. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9? Let them read it at large; and
therein Samuel Fisher's words, concerning the Saints High Praises of God in
their Mouths, and a Two-edged Sword in their Hands, etc. and the Honor they
have. And Isaiah 41. 15. Behold, I will make thee a new sharp Threshing
Instrument, having Teeth; thou shall thresh the Mountains, and beat them small,
and shall make the Hills as Chaff. 2. If he really thinks, our Friends meant,
that God's Prophets, in this Gospel-Day, should go forth with outward Swords of
Iron and Steel, and with an outward Threshing Instrument, having Teeth of Iron
or Steel, and that they were therewith to beat down and lay level the great
Mountains of Stone and Earth (some of them a Mile or Two high, as they are in
the North of England, and other parts?) No, I cannot think that Francis Bugg
believed thus Literally, either of the Prophet David, Isaiah, or of our
Friends, in the places recited by him for part of my Sermon, p. 122, 123, 124,
125. Therefore the more fallacious and deceiful he, to represent them in such a
literal and gross Sense, to make us Obnoxious to the Government, as a People of
Bloody Principles: Whereby he has shown, what a Bloody, Persecuting Spirit
lodges in him against us. There are many more Forgeries, Lies, and perverted
Quotations, in the said Romance (falsely styled G. Whitehead's Sermon) which for
Brevity's sake are here pretermitted and waved.

And this Point, concerning S. Fisher's Message to O. Cromwell, and other
Passages relative thereto, quoted by F. B. is more fully spoken to in the
Answer to the Three Norfolk-Priests, Entitled, Truth and Innocence vindicated.
p. 36, 37, 38, 39, and p. 62, 63, 64.

THE Rambling PILGRIM EXPOSED.
PART II.
AFter F. B. has made such a large Confession to the Light of Christ within,
and to the Dispensation of God to Mankind, and to the comfortable Presence of
the Lord our God attending our Meetings, it is very ill-becoming him now, to
speak so slightly and contemptuously of both, as he does in his Chap. III. p.
5. where he says: All were exhorted to adhere to the Light within, to obey the
Light within, and to follow the Teachings thereof, as a Guide sufficient to
lead us to Salvation; yea, above Scriptures, above Fathers, above Councils, and
above Churches: This I now confess (quoth he) was a Paradox, not Orthodox, but
absolutely Heterodox.

This Confession of his, is, since he disobeyed the Light, and turned his back
of it; otherwise he would still confess, that Christ, the true Light, the Head
and Lawgiver to his Church, is above Scriptures, Fathers, Councils and
Churches, and was before them, and is the Light of the World, which whoever
follows, shall not abide in Darkness, but shall have the Light of Life.
Consequently this Light of His is a Guide sufficient to lead us to Salvation,
and to Understand, Believe and Practice according to Holy Scripture, and not to
oppose it.

It is a wicked Calumny against our Silent Meetings, to say, That they were
designed to wean us off from so much as the Remembrance of all External
Religion, and also to prepare us to receive the false Notions of Quakerism, p.
5.

Our Externally Meeting together to wait upon God, and our living Experience of
his Presence and Power, and Spiritual Ministry, to our great Comfort and
Edification in those our Meetings, do testify the contrary to F. B's
Aspersions against them and us.

He has unjustly quoted me, about the Authority of the Spirit and the
Scriptures, p. 6. as the Three Norfolk-Priests did; as I have shown p. 16, 17.
of my Just Examination (of their two Books) Entitled, Truth and Innocence
vindicated; leaving out the very Explanatory Words, relating to the Spirits
Immediate Teaching, being of greater Authority or Efficacy, than the Letter of
the Scriptures, as divided into Chapters; my Explanation being, viz. As
Christ's Words were of greater Authority, when he spoke, than the Pharisees
reading the Letter; and they in whom that Spirit speaks not, are out of the
Authority of the Scriptures, etc. See the Matter further explained in my said
Examination referred unto. For here we own the Divine Authority and Efficacy of
the Holy Scriptures, as spoken by Christ; but the Division of Chapters and
Verses, and the bare Letter thereof, not to be of the same Authority and
Efficacy.

I deny his Consequence, That any little Pamphlet of Our's, is of greater
Authority than the Bible, or of as great; for I never asserted, the holy
Doctrine in the Bible not to be first given forth from one and the same Spirit
of Truth, from which we have given forth Writings and Religious Books, which
contain many Doctrines in the Bible; and by referring thereto, they prefer the
Bible, and the Divine Authority of the holy Scriptures contained therein. And
we still prefer the Bible before all other Books extant in the World: For even
the Statute-Book is of greater Authority than all the Abstracts made of it, how
true so ever.

And whereas he takes Occasion against me, about an Answer given to a Priest's
Question, viz. Is the Moral Law or Ten Commandments a Rule to the Christians
Life? (The Answer, is) Thou might as well ask, If the Moral Law be a Rule to
Christ? For the Christians Life and Rule is Christ [to which F. B. adds,
Meaning their Light within] And suppose I meant so, as I did mean, That Christ
was and is the Christians Light and Life (Col. 3. 3, 4.) it is not Christians
Lives and Conversations in the Question, but Christian's Life, in the Singular;
to which the Answer was adapted, that the Christian's Life is Christ; when
Christ, who is our Life, shall appear, (Col. 3. 4.) Can we suppose, this Life
or Light to be under the Law, (which was added because of Transgression, till
the Seed came) or under those Prohibitions in the Ten Words or Commandments? Or
is it meet or proper, to apply them thereunto, and say to Christ, or his Light
in Christians, Thou shall not take the Name of the Lord thy God in vain: Thou
shall not bear false Witness? etc. Or is it good Doctrine to suppose, True
Christians in Christ to be literally under the Law of those Prohibitions, and
thereby only restrained from Idolatry, from taking the Name of God in vain,
from Killing, from committing Adultery, from Stealing, and bearing false
Witness against their Neighbors? Or are they not rather redeemed by Christ,
from that Depravity and corrupt Inclination, from whence those Evils proceed;
and consequently under a higher Restraint (from those gross Inormities
prohibited) even by his Light and Grace dwelling in their Hearts, than only the
Letter of the Law, as outwardly written? The Substance whereof God first writ
in Man's Heart, and after writ it in the Two Tables, Exodus 31. 18. Deuteronomy. 9. 10.
Exodus 34. 1. before Moses writ the Law. And Christ, the true Light and
Lawgiver, writes his Laws of the New Covenant in Men's Hearts; and he it is,
who came not to destroy the Law, but fulfils the Righteousness of the Law in
them, that walk not after the Flesh, but after the Spirit, Romans 8. Christ being
also the End of the Law for Righteousness (not for Transgression) to them that
believe: This Point is spoken to before, though here farther Explained.

And further, F. B. bitterly inveighs against our Silent Meetings, which in
Derision he calls Silent Universities, tending only to empty the Mind of all
true and solid Notions of the Christian Religion, and only to prepare them to
the wild Notions of Quakerism; and this he affirms from an Experimental
Knowledge, (he says) p. 7. and calls them Schools of Ignorance, and that they
had strange Effects upon us, and how we thereby became not only levened into a
Temper to throw off all Instituted Religion, but to a degree higher, even to
throw Contempt both upon the Scriptures, Ordinances and Ministers, and all
things Sacred, p. 8. And by their Silent Meetings, weaned and drawn off from
the Principles and Practices of the Christian Churches in all Ages, p. 10.

Answer. Whither art thou now run F. B? Thy own Confessions condemns thee, and
shall rise up in Judgment against these Envious, Evil Reports of thine against
those Meetings of our's; for which thou have confessed (even since thou left
them) That God blessed our Meetings with the comfortable Enjoyment of his
Presence: Which could not tend to any such ill Effects, as before rehearsed; as
either To Empty our Minds of the Knowledge of the Christians Religion, or To
make our said Meetings, Schools of Ignorance, or To Throw Contempt upon the
Scriptures, or To draw us off from the Principles and Practices of true
Christian Churches: How have thou herein blasphemed against the true Light,
against the comfortable Presence of God, wherewith he blessed our Meetings? And
how have thou Given thy self the Lie, and belied thy own Conscience, in thus
contradicting thy own solid Confessions, made to our Doctrine of the true
Light, Ministry, Dispensation of God's Love, our Sufferings, Love unfeigned,
blessed Meetings? etc. As also that We told People, That the Scriptures were
Good, and a true Declaration of those things which were most surely believed by
the Apostles, and by us ought to be believed; yet not the only Rule, but still
the Spirit of God, which was the first Principle, etc. As more largely thou
have confessed in thy Book, De Christiana Liberate: Or, Liberty of Conscience
upon its true and proper Grounds, asserted and vindicated, printed 1682. Part
2. Chap. 1.

And thy Offense against Light, Conviction and Conscience, and thy
Self-contradiction and Condemnation, may farther also appear. 1st, From thy own
Account and Consideration, How thou came to be a Member of our Society: The
Reasons thereof thou have given in thy Quakers Detected, printed 1686. (two
Years after thou left us, and Conformed) wherein thou have given solemn
Confession to the Truth of our Principle, the Light, and the Sufficiency
thereof, our Ministry, Conversation, Love, Society, blessed Meetings, etc. 2.
And then placing the Cause of thy being Weary of our Society, and turning to
the Church of England, upon the Quakers Apostasy (as thou judgedst) i. e. from
our first Principles of Union; see thy Quakers Detected, p. 3, 4. 3. Now to go
round again, Thy Great Work is, to Expose our ancient first Principles and
Testimony, to as much Derision and Contempt, as thy loose Invention can
Produce: Witness thy idle Romance, and false Fiction (which thou falsely
termest, George Whitehead's Sermon) detected; but especially thy profane
Contempt against our Testimony of the Light within, or in Man, which now
instead of owning it to be that True Light, testified of, in John 1. 9.
wherewith Christ has Enlightened Men; the Treatment and Characters this Light
meets withal from thee, is, That 'twas a Parodox, not Orthodox, but absolutely
Heterodox, to exhort to the Light within, to obey the Light within, and to
follow the Teachings thereof, as a Guide sufficient to lead us to Salvation,
etc. (Pilgrim's Progress, p. 5.) opposing their (i. e. the Quakers) Light
within to the Christians Life (which is Christ) p. 6. to the Man Christ, as if
Christ being Man without us, hindered him from being our Light as he is the
Word in us; which were Ignorantly to suppose him divided. And F. Bugg
perverting Josiah Cole's words on John 5. 22. All Judgment is committed unto
the Son, (i. e. the Light) (J. C's Works, p. 93.) This (say thou) Is a bold
Attempt, this is most Horrible, if not Blasphemy, thus to subvert the Gospel,
to serve their Corrupt Ends. How wary then had People need be of receiving the
Quakers Doctrine? Is it so, that People being thus caught in a Snare, and
brought over to their silent Meetings, etc. (thus thou p. 10.) Thus contrary to
thy former solid Confession to the Light, have thou appeared against it;
instead of Christ the Light, or the Light of Christ, the true Light, which
enlightens Men, now (with thee) it is Their Light, the Quaker-Light, p. 46, 48.
Thus and much more in Contempt of the Light, like that profane Great Lying
Libel, The Snake in the Grass, whose Pupil thou F. B. appearest to be, in this
thy Dark Enmity against the Light, and the Children of the Light, as also in
thy high Commendation of the Author of that Snake, as having been, and still
is, a Gentleman, a Man of Great Learning and Piety, clothed with Zeal as with
a Garment, for the Christian Religion, and well accomplished every way, etc. p.
31. but thy Contempt and Profaness (like his) against the Light, as well as thy
gross and horrid Ignorance and Scorn in this Point, is plainly detected, and
justly reprehended by Edmund Elys (though one of the Church of England) in his
late half Sheet in Print, entitled, Some Reflections upon Francis Bugg 's Book
entitled, The Pilgrims Progress, etc.

F. Bugg his opposing the Light in the Body, to the Light in the Particular (p.
12.) is such a blind Contradiction, as well as Contradistinction, as is neither
Scriptural, nor ever allowed by us; the Light (Christ) being but one pure
Indivisible Light in himself, and in every Member, and in his whole Body; nor
do we know of any Council held in London, either in the Month of May, 1666. or
any Time else (of our Friends) who decided, That the Body should govern, and
the Light in the particular should submit to the Body, as F. B. falsely relates:
But Mendacem oportet esse memorem; A Liar has need of a good Memory; which
this seems to want. For in Contradiction to himself herein, he other-whiles
accuses us with saying, All Power in Heaven and Earth is committed to our
Light, p. 10 and That the Light in every Man is the higher Power, to whom all
must submit and obey; and that this Light is one in the Male and in the Female
(p, 23, 24.) and their President (i. e. the Quakers President in their
Convocation) being their Light within, p. 38. How then should the Body govern
the Light? Or how should we make any such Decision, as he has told us, That the
Light in the particular should submit to the Body, and the Body be without a
Head, like a Monster, as F. B. Scoffs blasphemously! For Christ the true Light
is our Light, and he is the Head of the Body, and the Government is laid upon
his Shoulders; who is Lord of Lords, and King of Kings. And none can truly
Persuade, Counsel, Judge, or (in such Gospel-way) Rule, or Govern for Christ in
his House and Family, but in and by his Light and Power, for no other is
allowed among us, so that Christ in all things must have the Pre-eminence.

It is also an Impudent Falsehood, that any Council among us Resolved, That G.
Fox must be the Head of the Body, and not the Light in the particular (p. 11,
12.) Where have we ever so Concluded or Asserted? But ever the contrary;
namely, that Christ is the Head of the Body (the Church) the Light and Lawgiver
thereof.

Again, F. B. perverts my words, and wrongs me over and over, in saying, (p.
16.) So Proud is G. Whitehead, that he tells you, The Jews might as well have
carried them to Christ in the days of his Flesh, (viz. the Ten Commandments)
for him to learn, observe and obey them, as for the Christians to carry them to
the Quakers to learn them, observe and obey them. (And to this effect he has
many times over perverted my words, quoting Truth Defending the Quakers, p. 18.)

Where did ever I say, The Jews might as well have carried the Ten Commandments
to Christ, for him to learn, observe and obey them, as for the Christians to
carry them to the Quakers to learn them, observe and obey them? I deny the
words and Comparison; and they are not in my Answer he refers unto; wherein my
saying [The Christians Life and Rule is Christ, who is the End of the Law for
Righteousness; who came not to destroy the Law, but to fulfill it.] I neither
make void the Ten Commandments, nor render Christ to have as much need to learn
them as the Quakers. Oh for shame, F. B. repeat these Lies no more. I cannot
but observe, what a Habit of Perversion and Abuse this Adversary is arrived
unto!

Again, it is a notorious Abuse and Forgery in F. Bugg, p. 16, 18. to Accuse the
Quakers with making the Commands of God, of none Effect, setting the Ten
Commandments of Moses, and Ten Commandments (which he has framed, patched up
and numbered) in G. Fox's Name, opposite one to another in two Columns; his
Design therein being, to make the People called Quakers as ridiculous absurd
and silly as he can. He feigns Ten Commandments in the Quakers Language,
instead of the Ten Commandments of God by Moses, and places them in Opposition
thereto, to make the Commands of God of none Effect. Though the Man's perverse
Invention against us herein, deserves not Repetition; yet that his profane
Forgery in this may appear, I here give the Reader some Instances of the Method
he has Invented against us, viz.

The Commandments of God by his Servant Moses, etc. Exodus 20. The Commandments
of G. Fox, the Quakers Second Moses, etc. I. Thou shall have no other Gods but
me. II. Thou shall not make to thy self any Graven Image. -- III. Thou shall
not take the Name of the Lord thy God in vain; for the Lord will not hold them
guiltless, that takes his Name in vain.
I. Thou shall not pay Tithes to the Covetous Priests, nor to the Antichristian
Impropriators. II. Thou shall not Marry by or with a Priest. III. Thou shall
not put off thy Hat in respect to thy Superiors.


These F. Bugg forms in Opposition to the other, to show that the Quakers make
the Commands of God of none Effect; wherein his idle Impertinency, as well as
Injustice, appears; as also in the following:

VII. Thou shall not commit Adultery. VIII. Thou shall not Steal. IX. Thou
shall not bear false Witness against thy Neighbor. X. Thou shall not covet thy
Neighbor's House, thou shall not covet thy Neighbor's Wife, nor his
Manservant, nor his Ox, nor his Ass, nor any thing that is his, etc.
VII. Thou shall not wear Lace, nor Ribbons, nor Skimming-dish Hats, nor short
Aprons, etc. VIII. You shall have a Woman's Meeting distinct from the Men, etc.
IX. Thou shall call the Days of the Week, first, second, third and fourth Day,
etc. and the Months, first, second, and third Month, etc. X. I charge you all
in the Presence of the Lord God, That you Judge not one another, i. e. Those
that be in the Unity of the Ministry, and Elders in the Church, lest you fall
into the Condemnation of the Monthly, Quarterly, Six-Week, Second-Day, or
Yearly Meeting. Amen.


Thus F. B's invented Method of forming Commands; how Idle and Impertinent does
the Man appear herein? And how does he Profane and take the sacred Name of the
Lord God in vain? For which God will not hold him guiltless. And when F. B.
will not demean himself quietly toward any of our Friends, but be Challenging
of them in the Countries, or elsewhere, and will be Charging them out of
Books, they may Charge him: First, To prove his Trial and Condemnation of our
Friends to Perjury and Pillory (as in his New Rome Arraigned) to be a Real and
True Trial and Condemnation, Judicial and Warrantable by the Law of God, and of
the Nation. Secondly, To prove his Sermon, which he calls George Whitehead's
Sermon (in his Pilgrim's Progress, from p. 107, to p. 126.) to be a Real Sermon
preached by G. W. Thirdly, To prove where G. Fox, or the Quakers, did ever
endeavor to make the Commands of God (Exodus 20.) of none Effect, by those or
such positive Commands, as he has impudently formed in opposition thereto, in
his Pilgrim's Progress, p. 16, 17, 18? Now, if F. B. will not learn to be quiet
toward our Friends, etc. that he might the more quietly go to his Grave (now
he grows Old) they may very well Charge him on these Three Forgeries last
proposed (as many more I could charge him withal, and have proved against him)
upon his own Calumnies and Occasions, so manifestly given by himself; and let
him be held to the point in Charge, or any other who dare undertake to Advocate
for him therein (which I could never yet find) if he and they are not minded
otherwise to study to be quiet.

And now, that F. B's Falsehood, Envy and Contradiction may yet farther appear
to his own Condemnation, seeing he has given plain Testimony and Confession to
the Truth of our Doctrine and Ministry; First, With respect to the Universality
and Sufficiency of the Light of Christ in all Men. Secondly, To our Ministry,
that it was a Dispensation of the Love of God, sent as a Visitation to Mankind,
Thirdly, To our bearing the Cross, and suffering for the Testimony thereof.
Fourthly, To our Love unfeigned one to another. Fifthly, To our Religious
Meetings, as being blessed with the Comfortable Enjoyment of the Presence of
God: According as the said F. Bugg is more fully before recited out of his Book
styled, The Quakers Detected, printed 1686. being Two Years after he had left
our Communion, and joined himself to the Church of England in 1684. So that his
Conviction and Testimony for the Truth among the Quakers (even when he had
deserted them) pursued him into the Church of England. But now being grown more
hardy, and so far hardened against Conviction and Conscience, he can outface
both, and give himself the Lie in his forecited Solemn Testimony and
Confession; as appears in his envious Contradiction following, in his own
words, viz.

Having by this time showed first, how our Teachers, in order to bring us over
to them, and to decoy us, told us, The Light within was a sufficient Guide,
Teacher and Leader, even sufficient to lead to Salvation; yea, above
Scriptures, above Fathers, above Councils, and above Churches: I have in the
last Instance showed the Fallacy of their so early and smooth Pretenses, and
that from the beginning they have been a false, perfidious and treacherous
Tribe of Deceivers, as ever the World produced, (Pilgrim's Progress, p. 15.)

To such a degree of Hardness and Insolency is this poor Creature now arrived,
that he can now thus scribble in Opposition to the Sufficiency of the Light
within, and Contempt of the Ministers thereof, expressly contradictory to his
own Testimony for the Light (wherewith Christ has enlightened Men) and to the
Sufficiency thereof, if obeyed, to lead to Salvation (without the help of
Decrees of Men:) And to his own Testimony also, for the Simplicity and
Plainness which attended our Ministry; which did not import any Design to decoy
or deceive Men, nor any Falsehood, Perfidiousness or Treachery, as F. B. has
falsely and treacherously Scandalized Us and our Ministry, and thereby
notoriously given himself the Lie, and shamefully Belyed his own Conscience,
and solemn Confession and Testimony, in his Quakers Detected aforesaid. And the
Light, now so much slighted by him, will pursue him (as it did Judas, and other
Apostates) to his great Vexation and perpetual Torment, if he persists in his
Enmity, Perfidiousness and Treachery against the Light, and the Children of it.
Oh F. B! If I may yet persuade thee, Repeat thy Lies and Scandals no more.

His Accusation against W. Mead, That he said to one W. Harris, I will give
thee one of George Fox 's Journals, it is a very good Book, yea, better than
the Bible: Which Accusation he has many times over (p. 22, 23, 24, 25, 29.) but
various in it, viz. That it is better than the Scriptures of the Prophets and
Apostles, p. 23. This Accusation W. Mead positively denies, as contrary to his
Principle, which is to prefer the holy Scriptures before all other Books in the
World: For I asked him seriously about this matter. And I am sure, it is a base
and shameful Abuse of F. Bugg, that It is the Heart of Quakerism, in saying, G.
Fox 's Journal is better than the Bible, p. 23. This, I must tell him, is a
foul, notorious Lie and Calumny against the Quakers (so called) It Is neither
the Quakers Mind, Heart nor Mouth, so to speak, but the contrary, i. e. To
prefer the Bible to all other Books extant in the World, as has been often
testified. Wherefore F. B. repeat this Lie no more against us.

Again, as it is F. Bugg's common Course to add one Calumny after another, and
to accumulate Lies and Perversions upon us, he falsely says, The Quakers stand
upon the same bottom (i. e, with the Jesuits) and therefore they ought to
distrust them in all they say, as the Protestants did the Jesuits. We do not
expect he will trust us, who has belyed his own Conscience, Conviction and
Testimony, as before evinced. And to add to his Iniquity, and aggravate his
Calumnies against me, he says, Many of their Hearers, of the honest sort,
begin to think G. Whitehead little better than a Jesuit already; he has been
so False in Fact, such a Glosser and Defender of every Error the Quakers hold:
I have (quoth he) a Letter by me, which my Cousin Ann Docwra sent me, dated 26.
12th Month, 1682. viz. G. Whitehead has sent me one of his Books, etc. I was
asked by an honest Friend, If he was not a Jesuit? I answered, Nay, it is not
solid enough for them to own, especially when they write to a solid People
(with more Reflections in her Name.) And then, to defame me, he infers, viz.
Thus it appears, how long the honest sort of Quakers have taken G. W. to be
little better than a Jesuit, and my Cousin Docwra was of the same mind too,
else she would not have given me her honest Friends Judgment, p. 25. I leave A.
D. to answer for her self in this matter, she knows me better. But for this
Defamation, of being little better than a Jesuit, thus insinuated against me
by F. Bugg, he is Accountable, as he is for his Trial, Condemnation and
Pillory, forged against us under the Pretense of Perjury, and as a Pack of
Perjured Persons; making no Conscience how Criminal and Scandalous he renders
us, and highly defames us. But I challenge him and his Abettors, to manifest
and produce those many of our Hearers, of the honest sort, who either begin to
think, or have taken G. Whitehead to be little better than a Jesuit: Let him
bring forth and manifest that honest sort of Quakers, that so think, or have
taken me to be such an one; for I utterly deny the Accusation, as a false
Aspersion and Defamation. As I also testify against his other Calumnies, as
these following, viz. That G. W. can vindicate or excuse any Blasphemy,
Idolatry, Contempt of the Scriptures, Contempt of Magistrates, of the Ministry,
the Person and Sufferings of Christ, etc. p. 26. I am not conscious to my self
of any such Vindication or Contempt, but have often testified the contrary in
public, both in behalf of the holy Scriptures, Magistracy, Christ's Ministry,
his Person and Sufferings; and abundantly answered the same in Print. Wherefore
(F. B.) repeat these foul Slanders no more.

It Is a wonder F. B. should so much, by Insinuation, endeavor to represent G.
W. like a Jesuit, or little better, and yet upbraid him, as one so Illiterate,
that neither writes true School-Learning, nor one Page good Grammar-English, as
well as some part mere Nonsense (i. e. in Jacob found in a Desert Land.) Yet
he will not call him Fool, nor yet nothing of a Scholar, for perhaps he might
be then entered in his Accidence, p. 30. Thus F. B. upbraids and detracts
against G. W. but to exalt his own Endowments, as having both a Competency of
Learning, and Judgment afforded him to deal with the Quakers (p. 30.) It Is a
wonder I should be such a Proficient in Learning now, as to be compared to a
Jesuit, seeing I never went to Learn at School, since the time I writ that
which he deems so foreign to true School-Learning, or good Grammar-English;
although I learned a considerable time after I entered my Accidence. But I am
sure, all his Writings are not true Syntax, nor true Concord, but sometimes
both Person and Number confounded. But how comes F. B. such a Proficient in his
Competency of Learning now? When in his New Rome Unmasked (in his Apology) he
more submissively confesses thus, viz. I am not accomplished with Parts and
Learning sufficient to grapple with such Scholars, as are some of the
Chieftains of the Quakers.

Against some others of his silly Detractions, please to read the following
Ceretificate, viz.

Whereas Francis Bugg, in his Pilgrim's Progress, printed School. Page 32. after
a contemning and detracting manner against George Whitehead, has these
Expressions, viz. You came from Penury to Plenty; from Labor and Toil, to Ease
and Pleasure; you came from your Father's poor Cottage, which I have been told
by them that saw it, that it was not worth 50s. to Houses worth 500l. And in
his Quakerism Exposed, printed 1699. he also says, Do Gentlemen live in a poor
Cottage, standing on Mud-Walls, not worth 50s. as G. W. did; as I am credibly
informed by a Person of Note that saw it? -- We, whose Names are hereunto
Subscribed, do Certify the contrary to this Information of F. Bugg's; namely,
That we have been Lodged, and kindly Entertained, both Horse and Man, at the
House that was George Whitehead's House (the Father of this George Whitehead)
at Sunbigin, in the Parish of Orton, in Westmorland, from whence his Son, the
said George Whitehead came, and where his own Sister Ann Pratt, and her Husband
and Family do now Reside; and the House is a Large, Substantial and Commodious
House, after the manner of that Country, and of Stone-Walls; and no such thing
as Mud-Walls pertaining to it: Neither do we know of any Houses standing on
Mud-Walls in those Parts, being greatly replenished with Limestone and
Quarries, meet for strong and durable Building, both for their Mansion-Houses
and Barns; and therefore no need of Mud-Walls for their Buildings. And also,
that the said George Whitehead's Kindred and Relations, and the Families from
whence he came, were and are generally People well Esteemed of, and of good
Reputation, as we have understood; and he well Educated, and needed not be
exposed to Penury or Want, either when at his Father's House, or when he was
put to Board and Free School in Cumberland, as (on credible Information) we
verily Believe.

Joseph Baines, George Knipe, John Thompson.


I do not think it worth my time to repeat or answer all his Detractions,
Aspersions or Calumnies against my self; however I Am sure, he wrongs me, in
rendering me a Covetous, Worldly-minded Person, as none exceeds, p. 32. and our
Ministry the Chargeablest this day in England, (but to come off here, he says)
to some particulars. But to what Particulars they exceed all other Ministries
in being Chargeable, he instances only himself, viz. That the Ministry of the
Quakers has cost me as much in Three Months time, nay, much more, than the
public Ministry have cost me this Fifteen Years (p. 24.)

I do not know what Account he keeps of the Charge our Ministry has put him to;
yet I do not believe, his Hospitality to any of them made him either Break or
Fail in the World: However he is very apt, not only to sound a Trumpet of his
Hospitality, but also to upbraid such as he has afforded any Entertainment at
his House, in the time of his Prosperity, among the People called Quakers; as
he upbraided me in Print, with his Entertainment of me: To which I gave him
this Answer, As for being Fed at F. B's Table, I think 'twas not very often,
whether Three or Four times I remember not (which was but seldom in 25 Years
time) and I suppose it was not without some Invitations by him. Did not thou
F. B. invite me to thy House sometimes? Surely 'twas not then intended to
upbraid me in Print with feeding at thy Table; thou wast then more a Man, and
of more Civility. It Is pity thy Conversion to the Priests and Levites should so
much deprive thee both of Compassion, Natural Affection, and Civility! However,
since it is thy pleasure thus to upbraid Me, I offer thee reasonable
Satisfaction; let me have a true Bill, how often I have fed at thy Table, and
what each Meal comes to (according to the usual Rates of Ordinaries) and I will
pay it, or cause payment to thee, God willing. How much less the public
Ministry has cost him these 15 Years, (that is, since his Conformity) as it is a
Question, so there may be a Fallacy in it, in that some of his Ministers have
been some of his Benefactors, and given him considerable Sums of Money (as we
have heard) since he failed, and got the Bishop's Certificate (to go a begging
withal) 'twas not likely the public Ministry should be Chargeable to him, when
he has proved Chargeable to them; I doubt, more Chargeable than Judas was to
the Chief Priests. And pray what has the Public Ministry cost him these 15
Years time, since his turning to them? May not his Gain by them overballance
all that Cost supposed, if ever they put him to any all that time? But is it
not to be supposed, that the great Joy of some of them, over such a Convert, or
Proselyte, might save him that Cost or Charge, which otherwise they might have
put him to, under such a Chargeable Ministry?

His Perversions, Lies, Calumnies, Sarcasms, cruel Mockings, Boastings,
frequent and manifold Repetitions of the same things, idle Romances, and gross
Forgeries, are so numerous, both against Meetings and Persons (and particularly
against our Second Days Meetings, Chap. XI. which, he falsely says, all Books
Printed and Reprinted pass the Trial of, etc.) that I design not to spend much
time in the Recital of them, or to trouble my Reader therewith; but to take
notice of a few more of his Abuses and persecuting Invectives in this Treatise.

P. 48. He blasphemously brings the Pope of Rome, and the Quakers Light (as he
scornfully calls it) in their Body assembled in Council, in Comparison, so as
to be suspected to undermine the Government, but the latter most dangerous, and
thereupon ought to be prevented from holding such Councils (as he says.) And
also p. 55, 56. against our Monthly and Quarterly Meetings he inveighs
bitterly, insinuating, What need there is to suppress these Meetings; that (he
falsely says) thus alienate the Obedience of the Subjects from their lawful
Sovereign, and his Laws, etc.

Here he shows his persecuting Spirit of Envy and Reproach against our
peaceable innocent Meetings, which are for the Exercise of Christian Care, and
promoting the Practice of pure Religion, Love and Charity; according as is
fully explained in my Examination (of the Three Norfolk -Priests two Books)
Entitled, Truth and Innocence Vindicated, p. 39, to 44. and p. 66, 67, 68.

In his Chap. X. he undertakes to Treat of the Quakers Six Weeks Meeting in
London, falsely charging the same with Pernicious Consequences; of which Meeting
he says, viz. This Six Weeks Meeting of theirs is chiefly to Consult about,
and defend their own Members throughout the Kingdom of England, and Dominion of
Wales, from the Penalties of certain Laws, etc. 2. This Meeting of theirs is
one of the most Ancient Meetings for Government, and is made up of chosen Men
amongst them, expert in the Laws and Customs of the Nation, well skilled in the
Courts of London and Westminster, and other his Majesty's Courts of Records,
etc. p. 65.

Herein F. Bugg has grounded his Chap. X. upon false Suggestions, which he is
very apt to make (as he has stuffed his Chap. XI. against our Second Days
Meetings, with abundance of false Stories) For 1st, Our Six Weeks Meeting in
London is not a Meeting of such Import, to Consult such Defense, as he relates.
2dly, Neither is this Meeting one of the most Ancient Meetings for Government,
neither is it made up of Chosen Men, for many Sober Women are also concerned in
it: Therefore this History-Writer is greatly out in his Calculation, and thus
foolishly runs on to form History upon false Suggestions, unjustly to make our
innocent Meetings Obnoxious to the Civil Government.

Upon which Falsehood he further goes on, pretending to show, how our Six Weeks
Meeting is Authorized by an Anniversary Epistle, printed 1693. which he recites
part of, in which Recital of his, are these words, viz. And being sensible of
the great Care of the [Six Week] Meeting for Sufferings, still leave it to the
said Meeting for Sufferings to continue their Care, etc. p. 66.

Obs. Thus he runs on headily in his Falsehood and Forgery; for the words [Six
Week] are not in the Yearly Epistle and place quoted by him, of 1693.

To his often quoting William Rogers against us, and against me in particular,
as if he were of great Authority with him, I shall say little now, but am
sorry, for W. R's sake, that ever he ministered such occasion for such a
persecuting Apostate (as F. B.) now to glory in against us. However I have
cause charitably to hope, that W. R. is now of a better Mind concerning us,
than to put any such Weapons again into the hands of such Implacable
Persecutors, as F. B. and his present Abettors, or now to compare us with Rome,
or deem us Rome's Sister, etc. as p. 57.

And his Commendation for G. Keith, and quoting him so often against us, and
upbraiding G. W. with what he wrote lately to him, that G. W. could further
expose him, etc. p. 36. I say F. B's Commendation will add nothing to G. K's
Reputation, nor redound to his Esteem in the Eyes of any Sincere, Conscientious
Friends among us, or Friendly People toward us. But his intimacy with F. Bugg
and some Envious Priests, and Confederacy with the Author to The Snake in the
Grass, show how readily he can close with any Inveterate Adversaries against
the People called Quakers; which tends to verify that Proverb,

Nosciter ex Socio, qui non cognosciter ex se. There is one remarkable and
severe Quotation, which F. Bugg seems to Summon me, as the Author of -- viz.
Come, smooth George, I have seen another of your Books, wherein you say, p. 52.
Some of the Presbyterian Non-Conformists Preachers are fled beyond Sea; others
lurk in Corners here and there, and keep private Conventicles, where many times
they Preach Sedition against their lawful Prince, by Instigation of whom, that
Insurrection happened in 1666. Again, p. 53. And some of them have printed Books
in Defense of the Lawfulness of making War against the supreme Magistrates,
etc. Again, p. 23. And how many Garments were rolled in Blood, by the
Instigation of the Presbyterian Teachers, the whole Nation was a Witness; so
that many Thousands were made Widows and Fatherless by that War, they stirred
up the People unto. P. 54. And in very Truth, the Presbyterian Church will
never be able to purge her self of the Iniquity of Killing many Thousands in
the Three Nations, by the Occasion of a most Bloody War, raised up through the
Instigation of the Presbyterian Teachers, etc. (p. 81.) On which he quotes in
the Margent, The Way cast up.

Now, pray observe his Fallacy in this Quotation: He names not the Author of
the said Way cast up; but calls, Come, smooth George, I have seen another of
your Books, etc. So that the Reader, that knows him not, may take it to be G.
Whitehead's: And this looks like a Fallacious Design to incense the
Presbyterians against me. He was loath to tell them, his beloved Friend and
Associate George Keith was the Author thereof (as indeed he was) and of all
those severe Charges against the Presbyterians, etc. in it; for I have the said
Book (entitled, The Way cast up) by me to show. Now F. B. how much Envy and
Revenge so ever thou have conceived, and long since harbored against me, thou
may be horribly ashamed of this thy fallacious and deceitful Device and
Dealing against me, when it is thus evidently detected. I would ask thee,
(Francis) Did thou show G. Keith this Passage, which thou have cited out of
his Way cast up, before it was printed? And if thou did, did he approve of
thy thus exposing it in Print in this Form thou have done, without letting the
World know who is the Author of the said Way cast up?

Again, it is a manifest Falsehood, That they (i. e. Quakers) will not pray for
King William III. p. 79. And again, That they refuse to pray for King William
III. p. 80. And the Reasons he gives for this Lie, are: 1. Unless they make
them Justices, or Commanders. 2. If he would not stand by and support
Quakerism, etc. The contrary is well known; for K. William and the Government
has been often prayed for among us, as well as the preceding Kings; though F.
Bugg has often had this false Accusation against us, thereby designing to make
us Offensive, contrary to the Primitive Christians Practice, Of making
Supplications, Prayers, Intercessions, and giving of Thanks for all Men, for
Kings, and for all that are in Authority; that we may lead a quiet and
peaceable Life, in all Godliness and Honesty, 1 Timothy 2. 1, 2.

That many of the People called Quaker's, both Ministers and others, drew up a
Paper against Hellish Plots, and Traitorous Conspiracies, as Works of the Devil
and Darkness, even since the late Plots against the present King and
Government, as well as against all Plots and Conspiracies in the time of the
preceding Kings Reigns, may be truly declared; though, like a furious
Incendiary, F. B. eagerly endeavors to stir up Jealousy in the Government,
not only against particular Persons, but against Us, who are (and I hope, ever
shall be) a People Innocent and Quiet in the Land, whatever mischievous Devices
are, by such Incendiaries and wicked Ones, devised against us. Only he has done
us some Right, in reciting the Ancient Testimony and Principle of the People
called Quakers renewed, with respect to the King and Government, Against all
Plotting Conspiracies, and contriving Insurrections, against the King or the
Government, and against all Treacherous, Barbarous and Murtherous Designs, as
Works of the Devil and Darkness, etc. p. 93.

But F. B. has devised a false Information again, That at their Second-Day
Meeting, March 23. 1695/6. their Teachers assembled together, and no doubt,
great Consultings there were, and particularly about these words, Lawful and
Rightful King, p. 92.

What Ground has he for [No Doubt] in this Case? I know no such Consultings
among our Teachers, or that they assembled together to consult about those
words. Thus F. B. vents his own false Imaginations, to expose us to the
Displeasure of the King and Government, if he could. But, thanks be to God, F.
B. and his Confederates are disappointed of their invidious Designs and Ends.
And suppose the Name of King William was not mentioned in the said Testimony,
(yet in p. 95, 96, it is twice mentioned in another, as it is recited by
himself) and there is enough in it to show, that King William was really
intended, particularly in these words, viz. And we sincerely Bless God, and are
heartily Thankful to the King and Government for the Liberty and Privileges we
enjoy under them by Law; esteeming it our Duty to be true and faithful to them.
Whereby we could mean no other King than K. William III. because no other King
confirmed to us that Liberty by Law, which now we enjoy, as that of our
Consciences, in the free Exercise of Religion and Worship, as we are persuaded
of God. However this Toleration and Liberty of Conscience, legally Confirmed,
appears greatly grudged by our Persecutors, such as F. Bugg, and a few Priests,
who are his Abettors. For in opposition thereunto he assumes the Boldness to
promote in Print, an Abstract of Two Letters from Two worthy Clergymen (as he
calls them) to their Acquaintance in the City, wherein (as related by him) is
this Passage, viz. I pray God open the Eyes of our Governors, and cause them
to take into Consideration this too much and too deplorable, unlimited and
unbounded Toleration (especially as the Quakers both claim and use it) which,
notwithstanding all the Care and Indefatigable Labor and Pains of the Watchmen
of Israel, will certainly (if not timely prevented) be the Overthrow of our
Church, and Christianity it self, etc. p. 84, 85.

Was it not a piece of Insolent Confidence, to expose this in Print, and thus
openly to oppose the Liberty granted and legally Confirmed by the King and
Parliament, and thus to render our Governors Blind in allowing it, and praying
God to open their Eyes, etc. and inveighing against this Liberty, as too much
and too deplorable, unlimitted and unbounded? Are not these bold Aspersions,
reflecting on the Wisdom and Conduct of both King and Parliament, to term the
said Liberty Deplorable? etc. But why so? The Watchmen are afraid it should be
the Overthrow of their Church; they should rather have said, Of their gainful
Trade: For their former Severities and Persecutions against Conscientious
Dissenters (which now it seems some of them would have renewed again) have been
more Prejudicial and Injurious to Them and their Church, than ever either the
Toleration was, or any Moderation or Lenity shown by the more Moderate among
them; there being many now ashamed of Persecution, that were formerly concerned
in it.

To his Accusing me with Malice, and calling me Mercenary Whitehead, (p. 98.
Margent.) This is like the rest of his scornful, abusive and false Detractions:
But I shall not need to insist much further on Bugg's Abuse and gross Scandals
cast upon Me, and many of Us, to Reproach the People called Quakers with his
invented Figures, as that of a Pillory, The Quakers Synod, and his Cage, to
represent us among every unclean and hateful Bird, as in Babylon, with 34 Names
in it, set cross-wise, p. 130. (the greater part of them being deceased) which
Cage he has in many of his Books: Which is all sorry Stuff, mere idle Mockery,
Contempt and Folly, and as Contemptible in the Eyes of every Serious, Religious
Reader, and Sober Spectator. And he is in the very Way himself, to be left in
the Cage of every unclean and hateful Bird in Babylon, the Habitation of
Devils, and Hold of every foul Spirit; which he unjustly applies against us.

It is a loud and horrid Calumny to say, That we are in a most Damnable Plot
against the Christian Religion, p. 166, 167. When we seek daily to promote it,
in its Purity, both in Faith and Practice, Life and Conversation: For it stands
not in empty Talk, and barren Profession. And as foul a Calumny it is against
the People called Quakers, That such Hellish and Damnable Plot is the main
Business of their whole Body, in their Convocations, both in their Monthly,
Quarterly, Six-Week, Second-Day and Yearly Meetings, which (he says) ought to
be taken Care of, at least Inspected, p. 168.

The Poor among us, if they understood these his wicked Invectives against our
said Meetings, might see cause to Exclaim against this Incendiary, for seeking
to Incense the Government against those very Meetings, wherein our Poor are
taken Care of; as in the most of the said Meetings.

And as for the Growth of what he calls Quakerism, which he excites all
Christians to take Care of, he undertakes to prescribe Methods to prevent it:
Wherein he presumes to dictate to Authority such Restrictions and Limitations,
as he and his Two or Three Norfolk-Priests have aimed at, in Soliciting their
late Petitions to the Parliament; and yet Hypocritically pretends, he would not
have us persecuted; he would not have the Government fall upon us to destroy
us; no, by no means, he would not be understood so: For (quoth he) this I
solemnly declare in the Fear of God, and as I hope for Mercy at the great Day
of Account, when both they and I shall appear before the great Tribunal, I do
desire neither; (i. e. Fire from Heaven to consume them, nor the Government to
fall upon them, etc.) I would not have a Hair of their Head hurt, p. 169.

Has not F. B. here made a great Asseveration, As he hopes for Mercy, etc. to
show himself thus demure and innocent toward the Quakers? No, he would not
have a Hair of their Head hurt. And yet bitterly Asperse their Convocations, or
Meetings, Monthly, Quarterly, etc. as if their main Business were for carrying
on a hellish and damnable Plot, consequently to be suppressed. O horrid
Falsehood, Hypocrisy and Envy, that a Person should thus presumptuously Swear,
with Imprecation included, As he hopes for Mercy at the great Day, he desires
not our Destruction; he would not have a Hair of our Head hurt; yet would have
our said Meetings put by, which are to promote Christian Charity, and the
Exercise and Practice of pure Religion and Christianity, (and wherein we have
Divine Worship also) and yet he reckons Suffering the ready way to increase
them, (i. e. the Quakers) for they glory in nothing more (says he) than to be
thought great Sufferers, (p. Ibid.) So that he pretends to be against that
Cause: No (says he) let them have Liberty in their Licensed Meeting Houses, to
preach, pray, and exercise their Talent, equal with others, if the Government
think fit, (p. Ibid.) So that these are no Meetings to carry on any horrid
Plot; they are Licensed Meeting Houses to preach, pray, and exercise our Talent
in. But F. B. does not think fit we should have our Monthly, Quarterly
Meetings, etc. though they be in the same Meeting Houses, and have both
Preaching, Praying, and Exercising our Spiritual Talent in them; as also our
Care of the Poor, Fatherless and Widows: But F. B. will have the main Business
in these to be the carrying on of a hellish, damnable Plot against Christ and
Christianity, etc. consequently the Quakers to be limited only to Preaching,
Praying, and Exercising their Talent in their Licensed Meeting Houses; at this
rate our Poor must starve, and our Christian Profession be scandalized by any
loose and disorderly Walkers, and false Pretenders to it, without Reprehension:
No Care nor Christian Discipline in such Cases to be exercised, if no Meetings
may be allowed for these good and necessary Ends. And I dare say, he wrongs
other Dissenters, in saying, This is all they desire or expect, namely, Liberty
in their Licensed Meeting Houses, to Preach, Pray, and Exercise their Talent;
for I am persuaded, many of them are so Conscientious, as to allow the Extent
of Religious Exercises to Practice Acts of Charity, Discipline and Order among
them, as well as in Preaching and Praying, etc. Again, in his Pretense to let
us have Liberty equal with others, he appears very Insincere and Contradictory
to himself: For p. 171. he dictates this Restriction for a firm and lasting
Cure, To admit each Congregation of Quakers to have their Teacher, or Two, if
One will not do; and likewise, that those Teachers may attend only their own
Flock, and not to range all the World over; at most, not above Five or Ten
Miles, to hold forth, etc. Thus he dictates to Authority for Restrictions to be
put upon our Ministers, not only to confine them to several Congregations, but
also from Traveling in the Work of the Ministry above Five or Ten Mines
(somewhat like the Oxford-Act, upon which many suffered Imprisonment for six
Months, etc.) So that this presumptuous Dictator's Work still tends to renew
Persecution, and to confront the Liberty of Conscience already Graciously
Granted by the King and Government. And I don't believe, that other Dissenters
from the Church of England are contented with such Restrictions as F. Bugg has
dictated in this Case, viz. That their Ministers should at most not Travel
above Five or Ten Miles to Preach, as he would insinuate, (p. Ibid.)

His dictating to Authority against us, to stop the Growth of Quakerism, (p.
169, 170, 171.) appears empty, silly and boasting, as well as envious and
interfering with the Liberty granted. For as one swelling in his Pride and
empty Boasting, First, (he says) Let G. Whitehead, and some other of the
Quakers chief Leaders, and Fr. Bugg, be summoned by Authority to Appear; as if
he were such an Eminent Champion, that none were fit to appear to meet him, but
some Chief Leaders (as he calls them.) One would think the Man should be
ashamed of such Dictating and Boasting; as also of his Challenging of G. W. and
others, when he knows in his own Conscience he has been so often detected of
horrid Falsehoods and Forgeries, particularly in that part of my Charge against
him, (which he leaves out in his Challenge) viz. That in his late Book, New
Rome Arraigned, he has forged notorious Lies in other Men's Names, to ridicule,
defame and scandalize diverse Citizens of London, and Men of good Repute;
condemning them also to the Pillory, as Perjured Persons, in his pretended
Trial, in a way of Judicature, unwarrantably acted by himself, etc. as it is
charged in Quakers Vindication against F. Bugg 's Calumnies: Which part of the
Charge he skips, and is afraid to touch with it in his Challenge: And the other
part of his wronging the People called Quakers, both in Charge, Citation and
Observation, is abundantly proved against him, not only in that Sheet, but in
other Answers of mine; and therefore his Cracking, Vapouring, Boasting and
Challenging, looks most silly and insolent, and deserves to be slighted and
contemned by all Peaceable, Serious and Religious Persons. His Norfolk-Priests,
who abetted him, have greatly labored to acquit themselves from being the
Challengers of our Friends, and labored to cast the blame of first Challenging
upon the Quakers in Norfolk, as if it were a Crime to Challenge; but let them
read what an insulting, vapouring, daring Challenge their Tool and Agent F.
Bugg makes in his Appendix, (p. 171, 172. Taunting against the Quaker Teachers
(as he calls them) viz. You may Challenge them long enough, but cannot get them
out of their holes; they see and know they are discovered, this makes them
timorous; Fearfulness surprises the Hypocrite, etc. p. 171. And, The way to
deal with such cunning Sophisters, G. W, etc. is, still to pursue them with
Challenges, to call them into the Field; and thereupon I will pitch my Standard
here, in behalf of the Christian Religion, and Protestant Profession, against
Quakerism, head and tail, andC. and let us Dispute it out fairly, and above
Board; and thereupon I shall renew my Challenge, and let it stand here as a
Monument of the Quakers Cowardice and Self-condemnation, andC. p. 172.

Now F. B. may thou not be ashamed, thus to brag and vapor, and thus basely
to fling Fearfulness and Cowardice upon us? What Earnings did thou make in
our late Discourse before the Bishop of Norwich, and Four Members of
Parliament, at the Bishop's House, near James' Square, Westminster? Do thou
not remember how soberly thou wast answered, both by me and the other two
Friends present? And how I discovered thy repeated Falsehoods, Forgery, Deceit
and Wickedness, in diverse matters wherein thy Quarrel much depends against us?
And how thou wast confounded, when Matters were closely urged and argued upon
thee, both about the Holy Scriptures, and thy charging the Quakers Prophets
with giving Witness to G. Fox instead of Christ, and calling him (G. F.) the
Branch, the Star, the Sun of Righteousness? etc. Which notorious Falsehood often
charged upon thee, thou could never produce Proof for, though thou have
often repeated it against us after an insolent manner; as in p. 121. and as
thou have partly done, by way of Question, in this thy Pilgrim's Progress, p.
135. viz. Do they not all agree in the main, That G. Fox was the Quakers Branch
and Star, yea, their All in All; the Bottom, and Corner, and Top-Stone of their
Building?

Answer. We deny any such Agreement; and thou could never yet prove it; nor
have thou shown us any Book of ours, wherein G. Fox is so called or esteemed by
us, no more than thou can prove, that the Quakers speak so contemptuously of
the Scriptures, as to call them Beastly Ware, etc. which old refuted Lie thou
have again repeated over and over, (p. 172, 173.) as also, that they say, The
holy Scripture is Carnal, Dust, Death, etc. as in thy New Rome Unmasked, see
Cr. 6. p. 78. And also thy fictitious Sermon, which again thou falsely termest
George Whitehead's Sermon, p. 168. wherein thou have grossly abused and belyed
him and W. B. and profaned the Sacred Name of God, (with other Abuses and
Defamations) as it was evinced before the said Bishop of Norwich and Members of
Parliament, to thy shame and confusion. What Ground have thou then to Boast of
our being Timorous to meet thee? Or to Accuse us with Cowardice? I told thee
there before them at the Bishop's House, That I would not go over the
Door-Threshold to meet thee, nor spend so much time then in Discoursing with
thee, if it were not for their Sakes and Information, who were present, (i. e.
the Bishop and said Members of Parliament.)

Thy dictating lastly, That they (i. e. the Quakers) may not be permitted to
teach School publicly, (p. 171.) This still shows a Spirit of Envy and
Persecution in thee, like those Papists that would not suffer Protestants to
Educate their own Children, or to discharge their Duty, as Parents, toward
them, according to their Consciences. Thy many bitter Invectives, and false
Clamours, against us, as also thy ambitious, presumptuous way of Dictating to
the Government, to Incense them, does all bespeak a foul Persecuting Spirit in
thee, and that thou art fallen, and caught in the Cage which thou have
feignedly formed a Figure of, unjustly to represent the State of those Persons,
whom thou have defamed and branded therewith.

As I am not bound to trace all thy numerous Lies, Calumnies and Perversions in
thy Pilgrim's Progress, (not herein touched) so I therefore refer the Reader to
other Answers of mine extant in Print, Entitled as follows:

1. Judgment Fixed, Printed 1682. Chap. 7. from page 203, to page 259. 2. The
Quakers Answer to a Scandalous Libel, styled, A Letter to the Quakers, in 1690.
One half Sheet. 3. Innocence against Envy, 1681. Two Sheets and a half. 4. The
Contentious Apostate, and his Blow Refelled, 1691. Four Sheets. 5. The
Contentious Apostate Recharged. One Sheet. 6. A Charitable Essay, in order to
Allay the Outrage of a Contentious Apostate, 1693. One Sheet. 7. The Quakers
Vindication against Francis Bugg' s Calumnies, 1693. One Sheet. 8. Innocence
Triumphant, over Insolency and Outrage, 1693. Five Sheets. 9. A Just Enquiry
into the Libeller's Abuse, 1693. Two Sheets. Which Answers much of Bugg's
Stuff, though that has not his Name. 10. The Counterfeit Convert, a Scandal to
Christianity, 1694. Six Sheets and a half. 11. An Answer to Francis Bugg' s
Presumptuous Impeachment, 1695. One Sheet. 12. A Sober Expostulation with some
of the Clergy, against their pretended Convert Francis Bugg, his repeated gross
Abuse of the People called Quakers, 1697. Twelve Sheets: In Answer to several
of his Books.
Now, Reader, whoever peruses these Books, or but Six or Seven of the last of
them mentioned, and compares F. Bugg's Books therewith, may find that they
contain full Answers to his principal Objections, frequently repeated in his
Books against us; and what chiefly concerns Doctrine is comprehensively
Answered in the 6th and 7th, viz. A Charitable Essay, and The Quakers
Vindicated; which, though but one Sheet a piece, I could never yet find any
Reply to either, from F. Bugg. And the 8th, i. e. Innocence Triumphant, is so
plain a Discovery and Confutation of his Forgeries, Perversions, Falsehoods, and
notorious Self-Contradictions, that the same is made obvious to every Impartial
Reader. So that our Innocence stands still Triumphant (in Christ Jesus) over
our Adversaries Outrage, Boasting, Scorn and Contempt. Glory to our God, and to
the Lamb, who shall have the Victory, and Reign in Glory, and Triumph for Ever
and Ever.

A Brief Answer to Francis Bugg 's late Book, falsely styled A Modest Defense,
etc.
HAving traced and observed the numerous, bitter and accumulated Calumnies, in
the said pretended Modest Defense, and in many more of the same Author's Books,
Scurrilous Pamphlets and Fictions against the peaceable People called Quakers,
to incense the Civil Government against them; and he being therein often
Refuted, I am concerned herein to take notice only of a few of his notorious
Abuses, Misrepresentations and Perversions, viz.

1st, In his Dedication to the High Court of Parliament, (p. 10.) he tells
them; The Quakers tell you, They own the Scriptures to be given by Divine
Inspiration, but mean not a word of it, like other Christians.

2dly, They tell you, they own a Scripture-Trinity, but mean not a word of it;
and that Your Honors will find it as difficult a thing to gain the true
Meaning of the Quakers, touching the Divine Authority of the Holy Scriptures,
and their Belief of a Scripture-Trinity, as Constantinus the Emperor found it
in the Examination of Arius, the Heretic, to get his true meaning, touching
the Faith of one Substance. And he would have them believe, The Quakers are
such Enemies to the holy Scripture, as that they say, It is a rotten
Foundation, Ibid. p. 11. And that with them it is Beastly Ware, etc. part 2. p.
29. And that they render the holy Scriptures to be of no more Authority than
Aesop 's Fables, part 3. p. 40.

Such abominable Falsehoods this Incendiary presumes to Dedicate and Present to
the Parliament, expressly contrary to our sincere and public Confession to the
Divine Authority of the holy Scriptures, as Eminently given by Divine
Inspiration; and our Estimation and Preference of the Bible to all other Books
extant in the World; though many of them may be given by a Degree of the same
Divine Inspiration, yet the holy Scripture, contained in the Bible, have not
only the Priority, but more Eminently and Signally Confirmed by Divine
Authority, more Comprehensive, and more Generally accepted, than other Books or
Commentaries thereupon; the holy Penmen of the Scriptures of Truth having also
a higher Degree of Illumination and Inspiration, in many things, than other
Writers in after-Ages: And Christ himself, whose blessed Testimonies are from
him Recorded, received the Holy Ghost or Spirit not by Measure, but in Fullness;
and to be sure, we are bound in Conscience highly to prefer the Authors of Holy
Scripture, i. e. Christ, his Apostles and Prophets, above our selves, or any
other Writers whatsoever; therefore we have cause to allow the Bible the
Preference (as well as Priority) before other Books.

But our embittered Adversary, to render us the said People Incredible, or not
to be Believed, and such a difficult thing to gain the true Meaning of the
Quakers, he thus treats us with his wonted Course of Defamation and Calumny,
giving this pretended Relation, viz. That the honest Quakers (for some such
there are amongst them) have suspected G. Whitehead to be a Jesuit, at least
like them: This Witness is true, (quoth F. B.) Pref. p. 18. And farther, he
proceeds with this Outcry, viz. By which Evidence we may know, that the
Quakers, like the Cretians, were always Liars, evil Beasts, slow Bellies; but
not only so, but Liars, Forgers; and, to speak comparatively, Knights of the
Post, Jesuits, and dangerous to the Government, etc. Pref. p. 19, 20.

Thus furiously he runs on, and clamours, like one without Eear or Wit; he is
Accountable for such odious Defamation; and the Righteous Judge of all (I doubt
not) will rebuke him for such his Folly and Outrage. He strives, in his
Persecution against us, as if it were for Life, even for our Lives, in not only
defaming G. Whitehead for a Jesuit, but the Quakers in General; and yet some of
them Honest Quakers too: Such Confusion Envy produces. But who these Honest
Quakers are, that suspect G. W. to be a Jesuit, at least like them, we are to
seek; he tells us not who is his true Witness in this Case. G. W. utterly
denies the Defamation against himself, and the rest of his Friends, called
Quakers; being known to be as wholly and absolutely Averse to Popery as any
People in Christendom, and more than all Persecutors whatsoever; Persecution
being a principal Prop and Pillar of Popery, commonly raised by such Clamor
and Outrage, as, Away with them, Heretics and Schismatics, they are
Seditions, and Dangerous to the Government; and then Imprisonment, Havoc,
Exile or Death, must follow, etc.

To his other odious Calumny, viz. That the Quakers Church agrees with the
Papists, That our Bible is a Brazen-faced Book, an unjust, corrupt and perverse
Bible, part 1. p. 4.

Oh Horrible! The righteous Lord rebuke this Lying Spirit, which possesses this
Poor Creature! How like a furious Incendiary, in his boundless Outrage, does he
Defame, and most unjustly Asperse the Innocent! Are not the Bibles we
frequently use in our Houses and Families, the same used by other Protestants,
and allowed by Authority? Pray let this be observed, and further inquired into,
that the notorious Lies of this Adversary may more manifestly appear to the
World, to his own and his Abettors shame and disgrace.

And as I have often urged plain Proof from him, that the Quakers call the
Scriptures Beastly Ware, but never yet could obtain it: So I now demand Proof,
that they say, The Scripture is a rotten Foundation, as before (Ded. p. 11.)
For Proof of this Lie, he has quoted a little Pamphlet, or Book, which he has
raked up and Reprinted, Entitled, Ishmael and his Mother cast out, (first
printed in 1655.) Upon the Margent, on the 14th page, he repeats the same gross
Lie again thus, viz. The Holy Scriptures, they say, are a rotten Foundation:
This is their ancient Testimony, from which they have not varied. This is F.
B's Annotation against the People called Quakers; but where is his Proof still?
It Is upon these words, viz. With the Light thou art seen to be a Wrester of the
Scriptures; and thy rotten Foundation being ready to fall thee, etc. Here is no
such word, as the Quakers saying, The Holy Scriptures are a rotten Foundation;
but the contrary, viz. Against that Adversary for Wresting the Scripture, and
that he was judged thereby. And that the Scriptures of Truth proceeded from the
Life and Power of God, were spoken by holy Men, as moved thereby; as also, a
true Declaration of God, the Words of God, who with his dear Son Christ Jesus,
and Holy Spirit, and the Baptism thereof, are also confessed in the said Book
quoted; but falsely noted on the Margent, as before, quite contrary to these
Confessions unto the Truth, and Divine Authority of the Holy Scriptures. They
that writ the said Book, Ishmael, etc. did judge that pretended Pastor, S.
Townsend (their then Adversary) neither to be built upon Christ, nor upon the
holy Scriptures, and that therefore neither of them was his Foundation, but a
Spirit of Enmity, when he enviously writ and aspersed those of us, that were
then Prisoners for Conscience sake in Norwich Goal, which was in the year 1654.
being 45 Years ago: He then, more like a busy Incendiary. than a Minister of
Christ, with his envious, defaming Pamphlet, did Persecute us by Reproaches, to
add Affliction to our Bonds, which then were severe, and we under Hardship in
the depth of Winter, wherein my self (with the rest) had my share: Though I
then was but weak and young, being but about 18 Years of Age, yet was in my
Heart truly tender and sincere to God, and his Presence I often felt to
strengthen me in that and diverse other hard Imprisonments (in Cromwell's time)
and by his Special, Divine Providence, I was supported in his Work and Service,
blessed be his Name for ever! Who also has made me to Triumph in Christ, over
Reproaches and Aspersions of This, and all other my most Implacable
Adversaries. F. B. may think, he has found out a deadly Weapon against me, by
his raking up, and reprinting the said Ishmael, etc. (printed in 1655.) But he
does very ill, and very dis-ingenuously, in upbraiding me and my Friends, with
some unwarrantable Expressions, which I have positively disowned and disclaimed
in Two Books, as he knows. And yet from thence he unjustly asperseth the
Quakers, That they dissemble the Doctrine of the Trinity, when they pretend to
own it; whilst in their Books, they damn it to the Pit and Lake, Ded. p. 11.
And part 2. p. 22. (Margent) This is their ancient Testimony, to damn the
blessed Trinity to the Pit of Hell, (the like in Part 3. p. 35.)

I say, This is not true, it is neither the Quakers Ancient nor Modern
Testimony; and the passage, upon which he makes this Note in the Margent,
though never intended against either God, his Son, or Holy Spirit, or this
Scripture-Trinity (as I may say) Yet I say, as to the said Passage, noted upon
on the Margent, I have positively disowned, those offensive Expressions,
publicly in Print, in Two Books: The 1st Entitled, The Christianity of the
People called Quakers, Vindicated, 1690. p. 28. The 2d, Truth and Innocence
Vindicated, 1699. p. 51. Besides many Years since I corrected them, where I met
with that Answer. And though I writ some Passages therein, yet I still affirm,
I was not the Author of the said Unwarrantable Expressions, nor of diverse other
sharp ones; but C. Atkinson, who miserably fell into Pollution and
Condemnation, after my self and my other Fellow Prisoners had left him in
Prison, being discharged before him. I was sorry my Name was to that Answer,
without distinction between my own Words and his. For though I was then but
Young, Weak and Low, yet I still believe, and am satisfied, I had a Measure of
Understanding given me of the Lord, and a Sense of his Power and Presence. And
I do not deny but I writ some Part, or Paragraphs, in that Book aforesaid, by
reason whereof (I suppose) my Name was to it; and the Substance of what I writ,
I cannot disown to this day, namely, 1. Asserting the Word, which was in the
beginning, to be God, Christ, the Light, and the Foundation of Faith. 2. And
that the Word was before the Scripture, or Writing, or Letter thereof was. 3.
That Jesus Christ was the true and only Foundation, 1 Cor. 3. 11. This was in
Opposition to our then Adversary's Asserting the Scripture to be the only
Foundation of Faith, etc. And I cannot in the least believe, that there ever
could be any Intention of Contempt, or Contemptible Expressions, designed
against God, or his Dear Son, or Holy Spirit, among us, or that we could be so
grossly dark and ignorant, as to think to confine him in Darkness, who is an
Omnipresent God, and he being Light, in whom is no Darkness at all; this has
been our Principle from the beginning.

But to fasten the whole Book, Ishmael, on G. W. F. B. says, he owns the Book,
viz. in Truth Defending, 1659. 1. From Tho. Smith's calling it G. Whitehead's
Book. 2. From the words, Our Book. Part 1. p. 31, 32.

Answ. How far I then owned it, I have signified: 1. As having writ some part
of it. 2. But not then espousing the very words chiefly objected by F. B. and
disowned by me, as before; but my own Construction then given, partly in these
words, viz. And he that Dreams, and tells Lies, contrary to the Scriptures of
Truth, which we own, he with his Imaginations and Dreams is for the Lake, Rev.
21. 8. Yet what the Scripture says of the Godhead, the Father, the Word, and
the Spirit, which are one, 1 John 5. 7. we own; Truth Defend. p. 1, 2. Though I
confess, I there questioned the Notion of Three Distinct or Divided Persons, as
not Scripture, but an Imagination. And in our Disputes at Cambridge, in the
same Year, 1659. My Opponents then Arguing, They (i. e. the Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost) are Three He Is, therefore Three Persons; and that because Christ
was under the Water (when baptized) and the Holy Ghost then descended upon him
like a Dove, therefore Three Distinct or Separate Persons; I then thought such
Arguing as much beside true Scripture-Divinity, as good Logic. However I
cannot call to Mind, That (at those Disputes I had with Tho. Smith, the
Library Keeper, etc. in Cambridge, 1659.) I either did own or defend that very
Passage, now objected against us out of Ishmael, which I have disowned and
disclaimed, as before: If I were now Conscious thereof, I should be sorry for
it.

To conclude this Point about the Trinity, I refer the Reader,

1. To a Catechism, in the Words and Phrases of Scripture, with this
Imprimatur; Guil. Sill. R. P. D. Henr. Episc. Land. a Sacris Domesticis,
printed 1693. wherein are these Questions and Answers, viz.

Q Is there any more than One God?

A. There is none other God, but one, 1 Cor. 8. 4.

Q. What is said of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost?

A. It is said, That these Three are One, 1 John 5. 7.

Note, Here they confine themselves to Scripture Language.

2. It Is worthy of Observation, what Dr. Burnet, now Bishop of Sarum, in the
Life of John, Earl of Rochester, p. 104. speaking of the Trinity; says, Which
for want of Terms fit to express them by, we call Persons; and are called in
Scripture the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.

Besides the false Printing, and bad English in the said Ishmael, (as F. B. has
exposed it) there is another Defect; after the words [The Lake is thy Portion,
which is the Portion of Lyars] the words [except thou speedily Repent] are
omitted there, and in some other places.

The Old Impression I have not seen for many Years, nor do I know where to find
it, though it seems F. B. has industriously sought it out, and reprinted it
(after a fashion) with his perverse Annotations in the Margent, to reproach
Quakers withal.

And now, let us a little observe F. B.'s Definition of Person, part 1. p. 18,
19. viz. From the words [ God, Christ, the Light, the Word, the Spirit, the
Truth, the Kingdom of God within me, and these are one] F. B. infers; viz.
Reader, here is in the Quakers Essence Septem Personas. -- Also from the words
[Stumble not at the Light, for if thou do, thou stumblest at God, at Christ,
at the Door, the Way, the Truth, Life, the Rock, the Elect Stone; and all these
are but One] Here again (quoth he) is One added; here is Octo Personas in the
unity of their Essence.

Hence observe (by the way) what rare Syntax he makes, viz. Here is Octo
Personas, instead of, Here are Octo Personae; but chiefly, how he has defined
Person, which is not our Term for those Names given to Christ, for to make so
many Persons of Christ, as Names are given to him, as those in Metaphors,
Parables and Similitudes, which are numerous in Sacred Scriptures; may he not
then, by such Logic or Dofinition, render Christ to be an Hundred Persons in
One Essence? What silly Conceits float in this Man's giddy Head! What think his
Friends of the Clergy of him? Is he a fit Champion to undertake to defend both
Theml, their Church, and the Protestant Religion?

Moreover, I do confess, That although I have often seen it my Duty, to explain
some of our Christian Friends Meanings, when mistaken or perverted by our
Adversaries, I really believe, I have truly Construed their Intentions, and
that I have cause to understand the same better than our Adversaries, or
Enemies. And as for my own part, I have learned that Humility and Self denial,
that I am not Conscious of being Pertinacious against Light, true Conviction,
or holy Scripture Testimony. And I hope also this Advertisement may satisfy
every Charitable and Ingenuous Reader, having been Sincere and Conscientious
toward God from my Youth upward to this day, according to the Measure of Light
and Understanding he has bestowed upon me; humbly hoping, and verily
believing, he will so preserve me in Christ unto the End.

It Is observable how insulting and boasting this F. Bugg is in his Dedication
to the Parliament, comparing himself, in his Work of Darkness against the
Light, with Daniel his bursting in sunder the Baby lonish Dragon: Even so
(quoth Bugg) have I been instrumental, and burst in sunder the Quakers great
Idol, their Darkness within, which they call the Light within. Thus
presumptuously he Boasts and Blasphemes, contrary to his former Confession to
the Light, which we (called Quakers) profess, according to John 1. 4, 9. There
is a Woe to such as put Light for Darkness, and Darkness for Light.

He proceeds in his empty Boasting and Insulting thus, viz. I have cut down the
lofty Weeds and tall Cedars, Pref. p. 27. The Sting of Quakerism being taken
out, and the Bowels thereof ripped up, and their Inside turned outward, Part 2.
p. 31. And having taken this Snake, Quakerism, out of the Grass, and laid her
on the Table, and taken out her Sting, Ibid. p. 27. But Reader, I have not done
with this Snake, but must have the other blow at her, and smite off her Head,
lest she get into the King's High Court of Parliament to do mischief; for she
is a mischievous Beast, and full of deadly Poison, and begins to stink all the
Nation over, Ibid. p. 30. Thus far F. B.

Now let the serious Reader judge, what a presumptuous, reviling Boaster this
is, as if the High Court of Parliament were much beholden to him, for his
Defense of them, by thus shamefully Reviling the Quakers. But how helpless,
mean and indigent, does he Imply the Parliament to be, to have need of such a
Physician to prepare them Antidotes! And then, what lofty Weeds and tall Cedars
has he cut down among the Quakers? What great Execution has he done, by his
bitter Invectives, Scorn, Railery, and Profanation of the Sacred Name of God
and Christ, as before is manifest? Have not his mischievous Attempts (tending
to a New Persecution) made him stink in the Nostrils of all Moderate, Serious
and Unprejudiced Readers, and Observers of his Works of Revenge and Malice,
thereby making himself (and Abettors) Infamous, while he seeks to make himself
Famous? But God will debase his Pride and Presumption!

Although he would render himself an Eminent Champion, as having Cut down and
slain Quakerism, yet eagerly endeavors to Influence both King and Parliament
against us; he presumes to Dedicate his bitter and scurrilous Invectives
against us to the King's High Court of Parliament, superlatively stiling
himself, Your Honors most Humble and most Obedient Servant; and arrogantly
presumes to write an Address to his Majesty King William the Third, therein
also stiling himself, One of the Meanest, yet most Dutiful Subject, Francis
Bugg; therein notifying G. Whitehead in particular; and in pretense, Most
humbly Praying in the Name of the Church of England, and other his Dissenting
Protestants, that Care may be taken to suppress the same; i. e. the Quakers
Doctrine and Books, (viz. such as he writes against.) In which he would also
encourage the King to Judge, who is in the Wrong, and to punish accordingly.
And in this Case (says he) let not the King respect Persons in Judgment, etc.

Hence observe the Presumption of this silly Creature, thus to presume to be
the King's Dictator, and that in the Name of the Church of England, and other
Protestant Dissenters too, to Influence and Incense him against his Peaceable
Subjects, called Quakers, as if nothing short of Punishment, Persecution and
Suppressing, would pacify his Revenge against us!

But how comes F. Bugg thus confidently to Address King William in the Name of
the Church of England, and other his Majesty's Dissenting Protestants, as if
they had set him on Work, so bitterly to Inveigh against the People called
Quakers, as he has done? Seeing in his Dedication to the Parliament he tells
them, He can with good Conscience say, That from first to last, no Clergyman
in the Kingdom ever asked or desired him to write one Book, Page or Line,
against the Quakers; nor have any one Man, Clergy or Laity, seen this Book,
till printed. If this be true, then both the Clergy, Laity, and all others, are
so far Excusable, as to this Book of his, unjustly styled, A Modest Defense:
But then, has he not wronged the Church of England, and Dissenting Protestants
too, by his Addressing the King in their Names against the Quakers, seeing they
neither asked nor desired him to write one Book, Page or Line, against the
Quakers; no, not one Clergyman in the Kingdom? etc. If none of the Church of
England, nor any other, set him at work, how durst he Address the King expressly
in their Names? If he writ Truly to the Parliament, how could he so write Truly
or Honestly to the King? What an officious Agent was he then, so peremptorily
to Address the King against the Quakers, their Doctrine and Books, in the Name
of the Church of England, and other Dissenting Protestants, and that for
Punishment too? He seeks to Incense both King and Parliament, and Church of
England, and other Dissenting Protestants, against the peaceable People called
Quakers, as if he aimed at their sole Ruin and Destruction. For which End they
shall not want his Exclamations of Heresy and Blasphemy, Cheats, Impostors,
Jesuits, etc. ay, to Incense the World against them, if he could. But God's
Power is above the Devils! Glory to our God, and to the Lamb, that sits upon
the Throne for Ever and Ever!

I conclude with this Scripture, as applicable to our Persecuting Adversary.
Psalm 36. 1. There is no Fear of God before his Eyes. (v. 2.) He flattereth
himself in his own Eyes, until his Iniquity be found to be hateful. (v 3.) The
words of his mouth are Iniquity and Deceit. (v. 4.) He devises Mischief upon
his Bed, etc.

FINIS.

