THE Conscientious Cause OF THE SVFFERERS, called QUAKERS, Pleaded and
Expostulated with their Oppressors in this Nation of England, and particularly
in and about the City of London.

And those in Power that go about to Transport, Banish, or suppress them for
their Meetings, Innocently informed, and impartially cautioned, from the
Innocent and Oppressed Seed of God, which herein calls for Justice and Equity,
and utterly exclaims against Severity and Persecution for matters of Conscience
or Religion.

Wherein first and principally is showed, The Use and End of the Public
Assemblies of the said Sufferers, in Answer to several Objections against them.

1. With respect to their Conscientiousness, as it being their duty to meet.

2. With respect to their Innocence and peaceable deportment both to the Nation
and Government therein.

By G. W.

London, Printed in the year 1664.

The Conscientious Cause of the Sufferers (called Quakers) pleaded, etc.
WHereas it is asserted by some in Authority, and such as have a hand in
persecuting us and some others, That we might keep our Consciences clear and
enjoy the Liberty thereof, if we would reduce our Meetings into small numbers,
as to meet four together besides the Families, so as not to come under the
penalty of the late Act. And some charge it upon us as obstinacy or wilfulnes^
for meeting in any considerable or great numbers publicly; and thereupon
conclude that our Suffering is not upon a Conscientious account in this Case;
And to others, it is a question whether or no we may with a clear and safe
Conscience reduce our Meetings into such small numbers as mentioned, since that
we have appeared so publicly to hold forth our Testimony.

To which I answer. We have a Record in Heaven and amongst men, which does
clear and justify us in this Case, and therein our Consciences bear us
witness, as to our intent and end in our meeting and assembling our selves
together, That it is singly in tenderness, conscienciousness and obedience unto
the living God in the leading of his own Eternal Spirit, for the glory and
advancement of his Name and Truth. And this our practice of Assembling together
in the Worship and Service of the living God, must needs be a matter of
Conscience to us, because we know it to be our duty as he requires, and
according to the practice of the former Saints and Christians, who did not
confine or limit themselves to meet only four or five together; because the
Truth of God among them, and his Gifts were free, and not to be limited to man's
will, either in respect of time or place; and the Gospel was not to be bound,
but as it was manifest in the Universal Love of God, which is of a general
extent to all, so it was not to be stopped or tied by man, but all ought to be
left free to have the benefit of it; and this we know is manifest in and
amongst us, and in our Meetings have been those opportunities which the Lord
God has made use of many times, to publish and make known his Name and Power
in; which has been evidently known and experienced by the blessed effects
thereof. As,

1. In that many in our Assemblies have been effectually convinced of the Truth
as it is in Christ, by the Testimony of God held forth amongst us, and turned
from the gross pollutions and wickedness which formerly they lived in, and so
from Satan's power to God, and from darkness to Light; and have known Repentance
unto Life, and come to live Godly and soberly in this present world, as his
Grace teaches.

2. In that many of the dear Children of God and Lambs of Christ have often
felt the Lord's Presence accompanying them in that duty of Assembling together
in his Worship, and that many times to their great Refreshment and mutual Joy,
Comfort, and Edification; and therein we have had opportunities to stir up the
pure minds in one another, and to communicate what the Lord has given us to
declare, to the building up of each other in the most holy Faith, against sin
and temptations; and the Life and Power of God has had its course and flowings
forth amongst us in our Meetings, as through one body, to our refreshment,
enlivening, renewing and rejoicing of our souls, both when the ministration of
words in the Spirit of Holiness has been published amongst us; and when we
have waited upon the Lord in silence, and so the Rivers of living Water, which
flow out of his belly that believes, as the Scripture says, John 7. 38. we
have often drunk together of; and this living Water, which our God has opened
the Fountain of, must run in its own course and channel, and must not be stopped
nor limited, nor driven back, nor have its course altered by man's will, or by
the persecuting spirit; because the Lord has sent it forth, and made it as a
broad River.

And it is the more evident and apparent, that the Lord's Power and Presence is
in our Assemblies, and that he has made use of them for the spreading of his
own Name and Truth, and for the furtherance of his own work of Righteonsness
(that many might be turned from darkness to Light, and from Satan's power to
God) because that the enmity, wrath and malice of Satan in his instruments and
unrighteousness among them, so highly appears against them; and Satan is so
strongly at work against them, whose work was and is, to cast the Saints into
Prison for the Testimony of JESUS, Rev. 2. 10. as knowing, that if this
Testimony of Truth go on (which greatly is concerned in our Meetings) it will
weaken and overthrow Satan's Kingdom in men: But he is not troubled, nor
disturbed at the many profane and ungodly Meetings in this Nation, at which
wickedness is stirred up and increased, such as Fools with their antic and
brutish postures upon Stages, in the great Fairs, and other places, do gather
People to; where they have their foolish Plays, Sports, Fidlings, Dancings,
etc. for both these and many other profane Meetings and Gatherings of People,
do please Satan, and make for his Kingdom.

And as it is objected against us for meeting so publicly, that we might
reduce our Meetings into small numbers, and meet more occultly, and yet be
clear in our consciences, etc. In like manner it might as well be objected
against the Prophet Daniel, that he might have prayed more privately, and not
with window open, and three times a day as before, after that King Darius had
sealed a Decree, that none should ask a Petition of any God or man for thirty
days, save of the King, upon the penalty of being cast into the Lions Den;
when yet for all this, Daniel in obedience to God, prayed and praised God as
before, Dan. 6. And so our Meetings being in obedience to the Lord God, and
according to that Liberty which he has given us, we must not lose our
Testimony which is for God therein, but be faithful in holding it forth as he
requires, and gives us Liberty, whatever we suffer for it; it being neither
men's threatening us, nor inflicting their Severity or Cruelty upon us (how far
soever it extends) that must make us deny the Lord herein, or be ashamed of
Christ before men, lest he be ashamed of us before his heavenly Father. And
Christ Jesus in the days of his flesh had Meetings of Multitudes, that he
preached to in Mountains, Deserts, and such like places; yea, of five thousand
at one time, Mat. 5. and chap. 14. Mark 6. Luke 9. which appears was not such
an offense in those days, as now Meetings are, which are for the same end: for
though the Jews had a Temple and Synagogues to meet in then, yet we do not
read, that they made any Law or Statute to Punish, Imprison or Banish Christ
or his Followers and Hearers for meeting above the number of four, apart from
their Assemblies; for that to be sure, would not have admitted Christ and his
twelve Disciples to meet together, but only he, and three of them [for now, are
we liable to Suffer, if we meet in the Worship of God to the number of five, or
above, from our Habitations] Howbeit, after the Apostle Peter had preached
Christ to such a great number of People, that there were about three thousand
souls added in one day, Act. 2. 41. The Priests and Rulers among the Jews were
offended, and commanded Peter and John that in no wise, they should speak or
teach in the Name of JESUS; but they chused rather to obey God than men, and
said, We cannot but speak the things that we have both seen and heard: And the
Apostles and Primitive Christians met often in houses and other places: And the
Hebrews were exhorted not to forsake the assembling of themselves together, as
the manner of some was, but to exhort one another; and these sought a City to
come, Heb. 10. 25. and 13. 14. And in the same case with the Saints of old are
we engaged in the same Spirit, both in our meeting together in the Name of
Christ, and in owning and bearing witness to his Name and Testimony therein;
which they that would debar us of our liberty in the one, do thereby endeavor
to stop us from the other, that we might not witness forth the Name of Jesus in
that duty of meeting together; which how contrary this is to the very mind of
Christ, and opposite to his and his Followers practice, is very apparent; and
the endeavoring by Persecution and carnal Force to reduce our Meetings into
such narrowness and small numbers, how contrary and oppugnant it is to the very
nature of that Universal Spirit, Testimony, and Love of God, which is of a
general extent, and which we bear witness of, is also evident: As also, how
does it infringe the liberty of the True Church, which desires the good of all?
(and is not a persecuting Church against any for their Cousciences) the state
of which Church (after the Apostasy) is truly represented in the New Jerusalem,
whose Gates are open continually, and shall not be shut neither by day, nor by
night, Rev. 21. 25. Isa. 60. 11. so as both the City and Church of God, and his
Light and Truth which shines in it, are free; and this Truth ought publicly to
be held forth, and appear without being limited by man's will, who by
Persecution and Compulsion would shut up the Gates of Sion and Jerusalem, which
the Lord God in his Free and Universal Love has set open; and it was promised
that In the last days the Mountain of the House of the Lord should be prepared
in the tops of the Mountains, and exalted above the Hills; and Nations should
flow unto it, Isa. 2. Micah 4. Now who shall attempt to put a stop to the Work
of God (which he is now bringing to pass as he has determined) or to hinder
multitudes from flowing to his Mountain, and not to be found striving against
God?

So that would you Rulers, Magistrates and Officers, who persecute us for this
our conscientious duty of meeting together, seriously consider your ways, and
what you do in this case; and how that it is evidently for our consciences that
so many of us are imprisoned, and cast into nasty holes, only for our
performing that duty which God requires.

Herein you might see, that you are striving against God and his Work which he
is bringing to pass amongst us in this Nation, whatever color, pretense or
gloss you put upon your proceedings to the contrary, though you may pretend it
for the preventing of dangerous growing mischiefs that you seem to suppose or
imagine, may arise or follow from them; which you never yet had any real ground
to surmise of us; so that it were more prudence and Equity in you, to examine
what evil or unlawful Act we ever did or contrived in our Meetings? or what
evil consequence they have ever been of, either to the Nation or Govrenment?
rather then to cast Innocent men and women into Prisons and nasty Holes, and
prosecute them in order to Banishment upon a mere groundless surmise, and
supposition of what danger or mischiefs may arise from them.

And you that sit to judge any of us, called Quakers, in this matter (who
should by your own Oath do equal Law, and execution of Right to all) ought not
upon such groundless suppositions or surmisings against our Meetings, to go
about to incense Juries, or the Countries against us, when they have no
evidence nor proof of any evil or injury done by us against any man whatsoever
[as some have done] for if you do, God will call you to an account for it:
Therefore beware how you either entertain prejudice, or breath forth
threatening, or such evil surmisings against us who are Innocent, or pass
Judgment upon Innocent men for matter of Conscience or Worship (which is the
very thing we are concerned in, and suffer for) as you will answer it before
the Righteous God of Heaven and Earth in the day of Account; for you should
judge for God, and not for man, and mind his just and righteous Principle of
Light in you, to direct you; which calls for Equity and Righteousness, and not
to be biased by any man whatsoever, to act as men pleasers, nor to gratify
the prejudiced spirits of such as are in emnity against us, though they be
never so high or great, Nor to punish the Righteous, but the wicked: for the
Law was not made for the Righteous, but for the Wicked; neither are Magistrates
to be a terror to good works, but to evil. And to be sure, if you knew, or
could prove our Meetings seditious, or for any evil intent or design; as either
to contrive Insurrections, or to conspire against the Government or Peace of
the Nation (as some have seemed to surmise) you would not admit of four besides
the respective Families to meet; seeing that if but three meet upon an unlawful
design, or to do an unlawful act, it is an unlawful Meeting: but thanks be to
God, you have no such thing of any criminal matter against us in this case,
whatever you pretend; for it is evident we suffer for a matter of Conscience
toward God, and for his Worship, though you would not be seen to persecute us
upon that account; but some of you would surmise some criminal matter, or
heineous things against us, which you had never any proof or evidence of, but
only your suppositions of what may be; So let the Righteous God and his Witness
in your consciences judge between you and us in this matter, [but we see that
such as persecute tender consciences are no competent judges in conscientious
matters.]

And it will neither be the pretense of Law, or of Order from the King, or of
doing his Service, (as some have pretended) that will excuse you in
Persecuting, or going about to Exile an Innocent People: For as you ought to do
Justice, equal Law and Right, and to judge for God, and not for man, so not to
impugn the Law of God by any Law or Order from man, whatsoever; for Gods Law
has no man, of what estate or degree soever, power to dispense withal, nor
ought any Law (or proceedings) of man to oppose or contradict the Law of God
(which we own) and this has been owned as a maxim both in Law and Divinity,
that whatsoever Laws are Contra Verbum Dei, be void.

As also the Judges, or King's Justices (so called) ought not to proceed
against Innocent men, either to banish or otherwise to oppress them, either
under pretense of obedience to him, or otherwise, but truly to counsel and warn
the King for the best, both for his own and the Nations good, and not to join
or assent to him in any thing or commandment, which may turn to his damage, or
debar the Subjects of having Justice or Right done them, but lawfully to
counsel him to the contrary, (if they shall have occasion therein from him) and
this is according to their own Law, see the King's Judges Oath, Anno. 18. Edw.
3. Stat. 3. viz. Ye shall swear, That well and lawfully ye shall serve our
Sovereign Lord the King, and his People in the Office of Justice, and that
lawfully ye shall counsel the King in his business; and that ye shall not
counsel nor assent to any thing which may turn him to damage or disherison by
any manner, way or color -- And that ye shall not know the damage or
disherison of him whereof ye shall not do him to be warned by your self or by
other: And that ye shall do even Law, and execution of Right to all his
Subjects, Rich and Poor, without having regard to any person.

And Stat. 20. Edw. 3. c. 1. We have commanded all our Justices, that they
shall from henceforth do even Law, and execution of Right to all our Subjects,
rich and poor, without having regard to any person; and without letting to do
Right for any Letters or Commandment which may come to them from us, or from
any other, or by any other cause.

As also according to the Petition of Right which K. Charles the first Anno 3.
fully assented to the Parliament (or Nations) Request, for Right to be done
(upon their complaint of some violation done against the Fundamental Laws of
the Land) Is it not apparent therein, that according to Magna Charta, or the
great Charter of the Liberties of England, provision is made, That no Freeman
shall be taken or Imprisoned, or Disseised of his Freehold, Liberties or
Free-Customes, or be Out-lawed, or Exiled, or in any manner destroyed, but by
the lawful judgment of his Peers, or by the Law of the Land, etc. As also in
the said Petition, mention is made, that in the 28th year of King Edw. 3d. it
was declared and enacted by Authority of Parliament, That no man of what Estate
or condition that he be, should be put out of Land or Tenements, nor taken, nor
Imprisoned, nor disherited, nor put to death, without being brought to answer
by due Process of Law, etc. Complaint hereupon was, That diverse of his Subject
were Imprisoned without any cause showed, but when they were brought before his
Justices, to undergo as the Court should order, no cause was certified of their
detainer by the Keepers, but that they were detained by his Majesty's special
command, etc.

And now but compare the present proceedings against us, with Magna Charta, the
Petition of Right, and the Fundamental Laws of the Land, and the Reason thereof
(which they are said to be grounded upon) and see how they will hold parallel.

For how many of the harmless Innocent People of God, particularly in and about
this City of London, are haled by violence out of their peaceable Meetings, and
sent to Prison for certain days, many times without any further Trial, till
they be tried for the third supposed Offense that they are accounted to deserve
Exilement or Transportation without any just cause or criminal matter being
showed against them, of any injury or offense done by them, or proof of any
transgression of any Just or Righteous Law whatsoever; but a late Act which is
said in the Title and Preamble, to be made to prevent and suppress Seditious
Conventicles; and for the providing speedy remedies against the growing, and
dangerous practices of such, who under pretense of tender consciences, do at
their Meetings, contrive Insurrections, etc. Which does not at all reach us,
nor ought, in either Equity or Reason to be prosecuted against us; for seeing
the Law of the Land is said to be grounded upon Reason, and to receive
principally its grounds from the Laws of God, and the Law of Reason, and Reason
the life of the Law, [See 28. Hen. 8. chapter 7. and Prisot. Doct. and St.: lib. 1.
chapter 6. Co. 3. 46. Fi. 3. and Dalt. Just. Pas.] and nihil quod est inconveniens
est licitum, [as also] nihil quod est contra rationem est licitum. See Cooks
Commentaries upon Littleton, p. 106. Confider, can that be truly said to be the
Law of the Land, which in the prosecution contradicts both Reason and Law,
and [on that consideration especially] is repugnant to the Fundamental Laws
(and debars the Subject of having due Process according to the Ancient Law) of
the Land, which requires, that No Freeman shall be Imprisoned, Exiled, etc.
without due Process, fair and legal Examination and Trial, and lawful Judgment
of his Equals, (or Verdict of twelve lawful, honest and competent men, etc.)
See 37. Ed. 3. chapter 8. and 28. Ed. 3. chap. 3. and 42. Ed. 3. chapter 3. and Cook 2d
part Inst. page 49. and 50. But this manner of proceeding (as is now) against
Innocent men and persons, to imprisoning and banishing them out of the Nation,
is both inconvenient and prejudicial to the Nation many ways, though they
whose hearts are hardened in sin and emnity, will not see it; but whilst our
Plea for Right by the Law, as Subjects, may not be heard, I shall say the less
upon that account, and refer our Case to men's Consciences in the sight of God.
And we find, that those chiefly set themselves against us (as to profecute and
sentence us) are so far from being impartial and competent in their
proceedings, or our Peers or Equals, that they are both in prejudice and emnity
against us, and want the Moderation and Reason as to suffer us to have a fair
trial according to the very reason, form and letter of their own Law: who
reckon they have enough proved against us for conviction, if it be proved that
there was any Religious Exercise in our Meeting, as Preaching, Praying, etc.
(not questioning whether the Exercise was true according to the Scripture or
Saints practices in it self, Yea, or Nay) and yet when it is laid home upon
them, that we suffer for worshipping God according to our consciences, and his
requirings, they would not hear of that, but charge us with Obstinacy,
Sedition, Rebellion, or the like, in our Meeting, wherein we are apparently
injured; as also, sometimes when there can be no proof made of any exercise of
Religion, nor color or pretense thereof in our Meetings, but we are taken in
silence (wherein our minds are often exercised toward God, simply without any
such outward color or pretense, as they would accuse us of;) Thus our being
taken simply in a Meeting in silence, they proceed against us for, in order to
Banishment. Let the Prudent judge of these things.

And whereas sometimes the Soldiers (or Red-coats) and sometimes Halbert-men
and other persons (who have violently haled us out of our Meetings, and guarded
us with Muskets and Halberts, etc. to Prisons) and of late some of Newgate
Goalers are made use of to inform and give Evidence against us. These, and such
mercenary men, we cannot look upon to be any competent or impartial Witnesses:
And some of the Magistrates so far debase themselves, as to come in person to
Meetings (as the Mayor, R. Brown, etc.) to break them up, from thence supposing
their seeing us met, to be the notorious Evidence of the Fact; and thereupon
causing Innocent persons to be driven, both men and women, to Newgate, or other
Prisons, like Sheep to the slaughter, when no evil, harm, or prejudice they
could ever yet prove by our Meetings that ever they produced; yet
notwithstanding they hasten their work to rid the Nation of us; and so bring
peaceable honest men into competition with Thieves, Felons or such like, who
sometimes after they are condemned, are reprieved to be sent over Sea to save
them from hanging. And many others of our Friends upon their Imprisonment,
being crowded up so many together in a noisome Prison, have been so stifled and
oppressed in their natural spirits and vitals, not having room enough to lie
down in, [and many have been forced to walk all night without upon Newgate on
the Leads diverse times, the Prison being crowded so full] that presently after
they have been let out of Prison, have sickened and dyed, as did many, both men
and women in this year, 1664. (and some in Prison) besides many that died
Prisoners in the year 1662. And now you that are so eager or forward in sending
so many innocent persons to Prisons, without either respect to sex, or showing
so much as natural affection; Is it not high time to lay this Oppression to
heart? Is this the Privilege of Freeborn Englishmen and women that fear and
worship God, thus to be oppressed, stifled or destroyed, or any of them exiled
or banished? Do you do as you would be done by? What, is all Tenderness,
Compassion, and bowels of Mercy lost amongst you, that such inhumanity, and
cruelty it self appears against your fellow creatures, who when you have cast
them into Holes and Prisons, into the hands of hard-hearted men (who can cast
them into what holes they please, either among the rude Felons to be abused, or
into as bad as they can find to put men into, as some of us have sometime been
used, when we could not gratify the Goalers covetous and unreasonable demands)
then some of you care not, or take no notice what becomes of these innocent
Sufferers; though some others in Authority that are more moderate may be a
little touched sometime when these things are laid before them: O! what a
blemish is this Cruelty to this Nation, and this Persecution, and grievous
Oppression to the profession of Christianity! Oh! the Righteous God takes
notice, and will visit for these proceedings: O you that persecute the Innocent
(in this wise) whom you have nothing against but what concerns the Law of their
God, (as the more it will appear and be sounded out, the more we suffer for the
same, and the louder will the cry of this grievous Oppression be) Repent,
Repent, and remember your latter end, who have a hand in this work against us;
for you must dye like men, and your Pomp must come to the grave, you being but
men, and not God, who ought not to assume his Prerogative upon you, as to seek
to lord and rule over men's Consciences by carnal Force or Impositions, by
pretense of penal Laws or otherwise. And this Hard-heartedness, Cruelty,
Persecution, Oppression and inhumane proceeding, and going about to exile or
destroy a People or Persons for their Religion and Conscience, is never the way
to persuade or make us believe that you are Members of the True Church, nor to
induce any that are rational to comply with you, or conform to you in your way
or worship; neither will Violence, Oppression, Take him away Jailer, Banishing,
or threatening Hanging against men that are conscientious toward God, ever
prove any effectual Argument for you to end the Controversy that is now in
hand; nor ever to make your Church glorious or renowned: for we cannot believe
that a Persecuting-Church is a True Church; for from whence sprung and broke
forth this Imprisoning, Persecution and Hatred for matters of Religion and
Conscience, but from Devil, Cain, false Prophet, Antichrist, Whore, Beast and
Dragon, and not from the Christian Spirit in the true Church and Saints. And
the like proceedings as are now we find mentioned in the large Volumn of the
Book of Martyrs, page 431. in King Richard the 2d's time, from Pope Gregory in
his Bull against John Wickliff (where, in several things, he dissented from the
Church of Rome) where the Pope in his Bull, directed to his Sons, the
Chancellor and University of Oxford, Commanding them that they should not
suffer his pestilent Heresies, and subtle and false Conclusions and
Propositions (as he called them) any longer to be disputed or brought in
question, and that they apprehend immediately the said John Wickliff, and
deliver him to be detained in the safe custody of the Pope's welbeloved
brethren, the Archbishop of Canterbury and the Bishop of London, or either of
them, etc. and in like manner to apprehend those that were corrupted with his
Errors, that should obstinately stand in them (as he said.)

And is not this the manner of the present proceedings against us, or such as
are reckoned to be in Error and Heresy, that instead of suffering them to
dispute, or to have those things fairly discust, wherein they are by the
Bishops and Clergy deemed erroneous and Heretics from the Church of England,
their mouths must be stopped, and they cast into Holes and Prisons; some from
their Ecclesiastical censures and proceedings in their Spiritual Courts (so
called) against them, after they have excommunicated men, and procured those
called Significavier's and Writs of Capias against'them; And others are
imprisoned and proceeded against in their Temporal Courts, some to a
Praemunire, others sentenced to Transportation or Banishment (as if they were
Thieves or Felons that deserved death) and not to return within the time
limited, upon pain of being proceeded against as Felons and Murderers; and many
of them taken by Soldiers and Armedmen out of their Peaceable Meetings and
haled to Prisons; and thus the Innocent are made a prey upon. And what do such
severe and unchristian-like proceedings against us tend to, where both Bishops,
Priests, Rulers, Officers, [and so both the Spiritual and Temporal,
Ecclesiastical and Civil (so called) and the Military Forces also] are thus
severely at work against us, but to destroy us, if the Lord did not sustain us?

And moreover, It was said in the Law of God to Israel of old, Thou shall not
do injury to a stranger, neither oppress him; ye shall not trouble any Widow
nor Fatherless-Child: if thou vex or trouble such, and so he call and cry unto
me, I will surely hear his cry, says the Lord; then shall my Wrath be kindled,
and I will kill you, etc. See Exodus 22. 21, 22, 23, 24.

Now (mark) if God would hear the cry of the Stranger, Widow and Fatherless
that were wronged and oppressed, and be avenged on their Oppressors; what will
become of you that have a hand against us, if you go on oppressing your
Neighbors, or those of your own Nation, who are Freeborn English-people? And
if you go on to separate and and banish Innocent men from their Wives and
Children, and so by that means you make them Widows and Fatherless, and expose
them to ruin outwardly; How will you answer this before the Righteous God of
Heaven and Earth, who will assuredly hear their Cry against you; (yea God will
hear them, even as they are his creatures, that cry and groan under the
Oppression and Injury done them) for Justice at his hand, being that they ought
to have their liberty and interest in the Creation as well as your selves, or
others of their fellow creatures; and then will the Just God bring Woe upon all
that decree or act unrighteously, to keep back the poor from Judgment, and to
take away Judgment or Right from his People; that Widows may be their prey,
and that they may spoil the Fatherless, Isa. 10. And then, what will ye do in
the day of Visitation and Destruction? to whom will ye flee for help? and where
will ye leave your glory? ver. 3. Will your joining hand in hand, or your
forces together, secure you from the stroke of Gods Justice? No sure; for if
you go on without Repentance, mark the end of these harsh, severe, and cruel
proceedings.

And mark the end of Oppressors, and of the Wicked whose Rod and Scepter the
Lord will break, See Isa. 14. as that of the King of Babel the Oppressor, for
whom Hell beneath was moved to meet him, and whose Pomp and sound of his Viols
was brought down to the grave, that worms might cover him: Or that Lucifer, who
said, he would ascend into Heaven, and exalt his Throne above the Stars of God,
[as such now in effect say, who in a Lucifer-like spirit; would rule over the
Consciences of God's People, and so set themselves above them, who are his
Stars which he has fixed in the Firmament of his Power] but he who thus
exalted and presumed, was to be brought down to the Grave, and to the sides of
the Pit; who opened not the house of his Prisoners; and he was to be cast out
as an abominable branch, for he had destroyed his Land and slain his People; he
was of the seed of the wicked which was never to be renowned. Mark these
things, and consider your ways and actions and what they tend to.

And if they who did not visit nor minister to Christ in Prison (in that they
did not visit those that believed in him) were to depart into everlasting fire,
Mat. 25. What will become of you that imprison Christ (in his Members) inasmuch
as you do it to his little ones that believe in him, which he that shall offend
any of them, he had better never have been born?

And where will you hide your selves, or flee for refuge in the great day of
the Lamb's Wrath? (which assuredly will come upon them that make War against
him and his Followers) When the Kings of the Earth, and the Great men, and Rich
men, and the chief Captains and Mighty Men, and every Bondman, and every
Freeman shall hide themselves in Dens, and in the Rocks of the Mountains; and
say to the Mountains and Rocks, Fall on us, and hide us from the presence of
him that sits on the Throne, Rev. 6. Then both the Masters, and Servants or
Bondmen in this work of Persecution, and oppressing and injuring their-fellow
creatures, will not be able to clear nor excuse themselves before the Lord God;
nor the subordinate Ministers or Officers, saying, they do their Superiors or
Kings service in what they do, acquit them from the reward which they must have
from the Righteous God according to their deeds; who have had many Informations
and Warnings, in which the Spirit of the Lord God has striven with this
Nation, but will not always; Which had not these things been laid upon me
thereby, I had not sent them forth.

Part of this was written in the 7th month, 1664. in Southwark.
THE END.

