October. 18. 1694.
Imprimatur,

Gul. Stanley Procan. Jos. Beaumont. Joh. Mountagu. Jo. Eachard. Joh. Covel.


A DISCOURSE UPON I Peter IV. VIII. Wherein the Power and Efficacy OF CHARITY.
As it is a Means to procure the Pardon of Sin, Is EXPLAINED and VINDICATED,

By the Reverend Mr John Whitefoot, Sen. of NORWICH.

CAMBRIDGE, Printed by John Hayes, For William Graves, and are to be sold by
Samuel Oliver, Bookseller in NORWICH. 1695.

TO All Good Christians, whose Faith is made Effectual by CHARITY, The AUTHOR
Dedicateth this DISCOURSE; Wishing Them Increase of that most Divine, most
Christian, and most Spiritual Grace.

1 Pet. 4. 8. And above all things have fervent Charity among your selves, for
Charity shall (or will) cover a multitude of Sins.


AS in the Ethnic Theology of the Greek Poets, we read of a Famous Triade of
Graces, reported to be the Daughters of Jupiter: So the Apostle St Paul makes
mention of a certain Trinity of Christian Graces, all special Fruits and
Daughters of the Holy Spirit. 1 Cor. 13.13. And now abides Faith, Hope, and
Charity, but the greatest of these is Charity. And that may duly be esteemed
the greater, (...), or greatest of the Three, in many respects, besides that
which the Apostle seems specially to aim at, in that Text, viz. That of
continuance and duration in another Life, after the Expiration of the other
Two. For Charity is a Virtue of the greatest Perfection that can be, and most
highly deserving the Name of Grace. Gratia gratis data, and gratia gratum
faciens; As freely given as any other and most grateful to God and Man. This
Charity is the Root, Ground, and Foundation of all Christian Piety, as is
intimated by the words of the Apostle, Ephesians. 3.17, 18. (...). Radicati and
Fundati.
That ye, being rooted and grounded in love, etc. It is indeed the end, and
fruit of the other Two. Faith teaches it, Hope excites and cherishes it. It is
also of greatest Extent, extending both to God and Man; All Men, our selves,
our Friends, and Enemies. Faith and Hope will be antiquated by possession,
sight, and fruition, but Charity is a thing that we shall carry with us into
the other World, where we shall improve and keep it for ever. It Is the end of
the Commandment, 1 Timothy 1.5. and the fulfilling of the Law. Gal. 5.14. For all
the Law is fulfilled in one word, even in this, Thou shall love, etc. That one
little Monosyllable Love, is a perfect abbreviation of the whole Code and
Pandects of the Divine Law. The first and the great Commandment is this, Mat.
22.37, etc.
Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart and with all thy soul,
with all thy mind, and with all thy might. And the Second is like unto it, Thou
shall love thy neighbor as thy self: On these two Commandments hang all the
Law and the Prophets.

He that truly loves God, will not break any of his Commandments wilfully; and
he that does not love him, cannot keep any of them. 1 Jo 5.3.
It Is this love that keeps us from transgressing the Law, and so prevents sin,
and (as I shall show hereafter) the same is useful to cover sin, and to
procure the pardon thereof. It keeps us from injuring, or offending our
neighbor, and inclines us to forgive his offenses against us.

It Is the bond of perfection, both of Nature and Grace, of Humanity and
Divinity: A loving Disposition is that which we call Good Nature, the most
Ingenuous, Noble, and Amiable. Whereas the want of it, and especially the
contraries to it; an envious, malicious, peevish, froward, rigid, cruel,
covetous, and penurious mind, is Ill Nature, Disingenuous and Hateful.

Therefore the extreme opposite to Love, bears the name of Wickedness in an
Emphatical Sense, in the Greek and Latin, as also in our own, and other
Languages, that have any Derivation from them. So the words (...), malitia,
malice, are generally used. And the Spirit of wickedness, or the wicked Spirit
is called by the name of Satan, which signifies an absolute privation of all
Love to God or Man together with the opposite to both, consisting in his enmity
to both.

But Charity is Goodness it self, in the Common Sense of that Word, and without
it there is no such thing as Goodness truly so called. And whereas there are
diverse sorts of Goodness, noted by the ordinary distinction of Bonum jucundum,
utile, and honestum; the pleasant, profitable, and honest Good, Charity
comprehends them all in the greatest Perfection: nothing so pleasant both to
the Lover, and the Beloved, nothing so Profitable to both, nothing so
Honorable.

It Is the Perfection of Righteousness in the Sense of Holy Scripture, where the
word Righteous, Mat. 6.1. some Copies read (...), for (...), Righteousness for
Alms.
and Righteousness do most frequently signify (especially in the Psalms) more
than mere innocence, or common Justice. Nor is the Sense of them to be
contracted into the short and scanty measures of the Cardinal Virtue in the
Ethick Philosopher, or the Definition of Justinian. Justitia est constans, and
perpetua voluntas suum cuique tribuendi.
Though even that might pass for a Definition good enough, with a Christian
Gloss, borrowed from St Paul, and our Saviors command, Romans 13.7, 8. Render to
all their due, where Love is one (and the chiefest of all) made so by the
Common Law of Nature, and by the express Precept of our Savior of loving our
Neighbor as our selves, which makes it a general debt, so interpreted by the
Apostle, Owe nothing to any man but to love one another. And if this Obligation
of debt, could be dispensed with, or abstracted from this Act of Charity in
men, as it is in God, it would have so much the more of Divine Perfection, as
being more free. St Paul calls it Piety, or Godliness, 1 Timothy 5.4. St James
makes it Pure Religion, (...). To show Piety at home, he means Charity.
Ja. 1, 27. Pure Religion, and undefiled before God, and the Father is this; to
visit the fatherless, and the widows in their distress. And the same Hebrew
word (...) signifies both Charitable and Godly.

It is the Energy, Life, and Perfection of Faith. These are all Apostolical
Titles. vid. Gal. 5.6. (...). Jam. 2.18, 21, 26. I do not add the Scholastic
Notion, that it is the form of Faith, because that is liable to some Quarrel.

I shall conclude the present Encomium of this Grace, in Three Words: showing
that it is the most Divine, the most Christian, the most Spiritual Virtue.

1. The most Divine, For God is Love, says the most Loving, and beloved
Disciple twice over in one Chapter, 1 Jo. 4.7, 8, 16. Beloved let us love one
another, for Love is of God, And every one that loves is born of God, and
knows God. He that loves not, knows not God, for God is Love. And we have
known and believed the Love that God has to us: God is Love, and he that
dwells in Love, dwells in God, and God in him.

So did some of the oldest of the Greek Poets call the Supreme Deity, and the
Original of all Beings by the name of (...), Love. And so Plato and his
Disciples call the First Person in their Trinity (...), self goodness. It Is by
this Virtue of Love, that we are made partakers of the Divine Nature most
eminently, that being the Highest Perfection of the Image of God, that we are
capable of: For God is Love, not causally only, but essentially. Other Graces
are from him, Quicquid in Deo est, Deus est.
but this is in him; and whatsoever is so, is himself. Other Graces of
Humility, temperance, and even those two mentioned by the Apostle together with
this, Faith, and Hope, do connotate something of imperfection, incompetible to
the Divine Nature: But Love is Pure, and Perfect Goodness. Our English Name of
God comes from Good. And it is observable from Exodus 34.6. where the name of God
is proclaimed by himself, most of the Royal Titles that make up the Dignity and
Perfection of that Great Name, are no other than a Comment upon this simple and
Essential Attribute of Love; The Lord passed by before him (Moses) and
proclaimed, The Lord, the Lord God, merciful, and gracious, long-suffering,
and abundant in Goodness and Truth, keeping mercy for Thousands, forgiving
iniquity, transgression, and sin.

And it is this Virtue of Love that makes us partakers of the Name of God in a
qualified sense, Homo homini Deus, one man is a petty God to another, as he is
a Benefactor. Such only were the Hero's, and minor Deities of the Heathens:
Such as had been Eminent Benefactors to their Country in their Lives, and were
therefore Deified after their Death. Such were all earthly Gods, Kings, and
Princes, they were called (...) Benefactors. Luke 22.25. So the word (...) used
for a Prince, and rendered by the Septuagint (...), and (...) does primarily
signify a Liberal Magnificent Benefactor.

I say therefore, that Love is the most Divine Grace, as having most of the
Name, and Nature of God in it. On the contrary, those Vicious Dispositions,
which are most directly opposite to Love, are the most Satanical and
Diabolical, malice, hatred, envy, etc.

2. Charity is the most Christian Virtue, most strictly charged by Christ
himself, by his special Command, and signally expressed in his Singular
Example, Jo. 15.12. This is my Commandment that ye love one another, as I have
loved you. The Pronoun my, is Emphatical, signifying the Special Weight that he
puts upon this Commandment. And this is the reason, (as St Hierom reports) that
was given by the Beloved Disciple St John, when the question was put to him by
his Auditors, why he did so much in ulcate that Precept in his Preaching,
Filioli diligite alterutrum, Little children love one another; he answered.
quia est preceptum Domini, because it was the Command of his Lord, meaning the
Special and Principal Commandment, and that, which being obeyed, would secure
the fulfilling of all the rest, that concerned humane society; and was most
necessary for the Constitution, and the Preservation of the Church. Indeed all
Societies are maintained by the common Cement of Amity, nor can any subsist
without it. But the Christian Society was designed to be the most Perfect of
any that was possible to be amongst men and therefore was necessary to be most
strictly obliged to this Bond of Perfection. And therefore,

This precept of Charity was by Christ perfected in the proper measures and
significations thereof, and to be extended to all Mankind without exception of
enemies, which by no other law of Heathens or Jews had been expressly required.
Amicos diligere omnium est, inimicos solorum Christianorum, Tertul. To love
friends was a common acknowledged obligation and practice of all men, but to
love Enemies too, was a pure Christian law, Joh. 13.34. Mat. 5.44.
A new commandment I give unto you, that ye love one another, as I have loved
you. He calls it a new Commandment, notwithstanding it was as old as any other,
as old as Moses or Adam, as to the matter and substance of it: but almost
antiquated by the manners of men, and not well understood by the Jews, and
therefore was renewed by him, who was the great Reformer of the world, by his
precept and example. And this mutual love and amity was assigned by Him, to be
the badge and cognizance, or mark of his Disciples, whereby they should be
known and distinguished from other People. Joh. 12.35. By this shall all men
know that ye are my Disciples, if ye love one another. And accordingly this was
observed in the primitive times, as the signal mark and distinction of
Christians, as is testified by Tertullian or Minutius Felix, Vide, inquiunt, ut
invicem se diligunt.

3. Love is the most Spiritual Grace. It Is the first fruit of the Spirit in St.
Paul's Catalogue, Gal. 5.22. The fruit of the Spirit is Love, etc. And the rest
that are added, are no other then the known effects, and symptoms of Love. The
fruits of the Spirit are Love, Joy, Peace, Long-suffering, Gentleness,
Goodness, Meckness, etc. It Is the distinct character and proper attribute of
the Holy Spirit, as that name signifies the Third Person in the Blessed
Trinity. The three Primalities, or signal properties noted in the Trinity of
Persons, are Power belonging to the Father Almighty, Wisdom to the Son, the
(...), in whom are hid all the Treasures of wisdom and knowledge; Col. 2.3.
and Love to the Holy Ghost, which is that which consummates the perfection of
the Divine Nature, rendering it infinitely good, as well as great, powerful and
wise. And this Infinite Goodness is the flower and ultimate glory of the Divine
Nature, crowning his wisdom and power. So that as the First Person in the
Trinity may be esteemed the most Excellent, in as much as it is the fountain
and basis of the whole Deity, and of all Being: And the Second Person
represented by the title of Wisdom, called (...), Ratio prima est
substantialis, is the first natural Emergency, or advance of the same Being,
and therefore called the Son: So the Third Person which is expressed by Love,
and is the immediate principle of all communication of Being and Goodness, may
in that respect be said to be flos and gloria Deitatis, the flower, and glory,
and perfection of the whole Deity: as the word Glory does properly signify,
the manifest ation and illustration of any Excellency.

CHAP. I.
NOW the Text that I am treating of is an Exhortation to this most Divine, most
Christian, most Spiritual Virtue, emphatically expressed as a matter of
greatest Concern. Above all things have fervent Charity among your selves; And
then urged with a strong argument or motive drawn from a special Effect and
Consequent thereof, For Charity shall cover a multitude of sins.

The Design of my present Discourse is chiefly upon this particular Argument or
Motive; which being well understood, and firmly believed, may be enough to save
me the labor of adding many more found in other Texts, some of which have been
briefly touched in the foregoing Chapter, and all, or most of them amply set
forth by others, Dr. Is Barrow.
especially by a late worthy Person in his excellent Sermon upon the Subject of
Charity. Whereas that particular Argument which is alleged in this Text
(though it may have been mentioned by others) has not, to my knowledge, been
so distinctly and largely discussed, as the Weight and Efficacy of it seems to
deserve. There being no argument or motive to the practice of this Virtue, more
like to prevail with persons, sensible of the multitude and danger of their
sins, than this, if it may be admitted in the Sense hereafter declared. For
this is most notoriously known to have been the greatest, and most effectual
Motive to that one common and eminent branch of this great Virtue, that has in
vulgar Speech monopolized the name of Charity, viz. that of Alms and
Beneficence. This one simple Motive specified in this Text, has (I believe)
prevailed more to this effect in all parts of Christendom, with all sorts of
Persons, in their life time, and at their death, than all the rest. And this
especially with such People, as being much sensible of their sins, have desired
to verify the truth of their Repentance, by bringing forth fruits worthy of
it. Amongst which there is none to be compared to the works of Charity.

Though indeed there be many other Fruits worthy of repentance, in a just
sense, but not equal to this. Such are all acts and works of extraordinary
Devotion, all practices of Penance and Mortification, which the Apostle calls
judging of our selves, 1 Cor. 11.31. And Revenge, proceeding from a Godly
sorrow, 2 Cor. 7.11. The Schoolmen from the Latin Fathers, especially St.
Cyprian, express them by the word Satisfaction, an innocent word, if rightly
interpreted. These are such as do chiefly consist in Fasting, Watching, and
Afflicting the body by abstinence from lawful Enjoyments, with various
expressions of penetential Sorrows for sin, and Subjugation of carnal lusts:
(...).
which the Apostle calls keeping under the Body, and bringing it under
subjection, 1 Cor. 9.27. Not sparing the Body, Col 2.23. (...).
Bodily Exercise he calls it elsewhere, and acknowledges it to be profitable,
though but a little in comparison of true Godliness, 1 Timothy 4.8. Hereunto
belongs all that (...), hard usage of the Body, practiced by the Asceticks in
the ancient Church, especially in the East, where the severities of Monastic
Life began, and most prevailed, in their course Diet, hard Lodging, and
Clothing of Sackcloth and Haircloth. The (...), Humicubation, lying upon the
ground, etc. which things have been overacted, and still are in the Greek and
Roman Churches.

These things being cleared from that Superstition, which they are liable to,
in the kinds and measures of them, as also from such Hypocrisy as was
practiced by the Pharisees, and is notorious in the later Ages of the Church,
are not to be rejected, or denied to be proper and reasonable fruits and
testimonies of Repentance, as exercise of Self discipline, and judging our
selves that we may not be judged, 1 Cor. 11.31.

There are a multitude of Texts in the Old Testament, wherein such Afflicting
of our selves, in testimony of repentance, are not only approved, but expressly
enjoined by God himself, Lev. 16.29, 31. cap. 23.27, 32. Numb 29.7. Ezr. 8.21.
Isa. 58.3.
as may be seen in the Texts quoted in the Margin, and many others that might
be added. And that this was no point of mere Jewish and Ceremonial Discipline,
may be confirmed from the Examples before quoted, particularly from St. Paul,
in his own practice, and the approbation of it in the Corinthians, 2 Cor. 7.17.
and the express precept of St. James, Cap. 4.9. Be afflicted, and mourn, and
weep. Such affliction, as naturally agreeable to the affection of Sorrow,
whiles we are mixed Creatures, consisting of Body as well as Soul, may be either
imposed for satisfaction of Scandal, and testimony of Repentance, or
voluntarily undertaken and practiced by true Penitents to express, before God,
their Humiliation and Godly sorrow.

But none of these things are in their kind such worthy fruits of Repentance,
or so acceptable to God, as the special exercises of Charity: Because none of
them have any such intrinsic Goodness in them, as is opposite to the Evil
repented of, or can be reasonably presumed to balance it, none so available as
Charity for the remission or expiation of the sin (pardon that Word for the
present, which I shall interpret afterward in such a Sense, as will appear to
be nothing prejudicial to the Expiation by the Blood of Christ.) Charity is
therefore most acceptable to God, because most beneficial to Men, and most
agreeable to his own natural and essential Goodness. Therefore does God prefer
Mercy, which ^s but a branch of Charity, before Sacrifice and all manner of
outward Worship, not Ceremonial only, but also Moral and Natural, as of Prayers
and Praises. Vid. Isa. 1. v. 11. to the 19. To relieve the oppressed, to judge
the fatherless, and to plead for the widow, are named for things so acceptable
and prevalent with God, that he promises an entire pardon of the grossest
sins, to all them that join these things with the Essential duties of
Repentance, expressed ver. 16. Wash ye, make ye clean, put away the evil of
your doings from before mine Eyes, cease to do evil, learn to do well, seek
Judgment, relieve the Oppressed, judge the Fatherless, plead for the Widow;
Come now let us reason together, says the Lord, though your sins be as
scarlet, they shall be white as snow, though they be like crimson, they shall
be as wool; that is, the deepest dye and stain of them shall be quite taken
out. But of this more hereafter.

Come we now to the express Doctrine o^ the Apostle in the words of the Text
Charity does, will, or shall cover a multitude of sins. Such a variation of
Lection i^ found in the Greek Text, (...) alias (...), but the difference is
not considerable.

Now concerning the nature of Charity, with the Extent and various Effects
thereof. Though I might presume them to be so well known to any Reader, that
will be capable of understanding the future Discourse, (designed to be as plain
as I am able to make it) as makes it unnecessary to give any large Description
thereof, yet do I not judge it altogether needless to give any Account at all
of it.

Briefly then, Charity, or Love relating to our Neighbor (as by the express
words of the Text it does) is not to be confined to that one eminent Branch
thereof, which consists only in Alms, or works of Beneficence, because these
are things, which possibly may be done without any true Charity, as the Apostle
says, 1 Cor. 13.8. Though I give all my goods to feed the Poor, and have not
Charity (which Supposition were absurd, if it were simply impossible) it
profits me nothing. Vainglory, carnal and worldly Ends and Interest, may
utterly destroy the notion and virtue of Charity in such Works. And it is
possible for a man to exercise some acts of pretended Charity, to such ends as
are utterly repugnant to the Nature of it, as when they are done of purpose to
corrupt the Minds and Manners of them, upon whom they are bestowed, to entice
them to Iniquity, and to serve the ends of the Donor, to the prejudice of the
Receiver.

And where none of these things are designed, a man may yet be otherwise as
destitute of true Charity, as the Devil is, and as much tainted with those
Viciosities, that are most contrary to it; Malice, Envy, Pride, Cruelty, etc.
and yet seem to be Charitable in his Alms. On the contrary, a true and
acceptable Charity may exist without them: I mean without the outward Works,
and that only in case of Inability to afford them, or want of Objects to
receive them; for otherwise the Disposition and Preparation of mind to afford
them according to Ability, and opportunity, is in separable from any true and
real Charity.

This possible Mistake, grounded upon a vulgar use of the Word, being
prevented, I say, That Charity in the due extent of its Notion comprehends all
the Good, and excludes all the Evil that our Neighbor is capable of receiving
from us; or that we are capable of intending or extending to him. Charity
signifies all the benefit that is reasonably desirable from one Man to another.
All that can profit or reasonably please him, all that can any way better his
Condition, present or future: The Acts of it are as various and numerous, as
are the needs, or capacities of advantage and benefit by our Neighbor in any
kind. To conclude, Romans 13.10.
Charity imports an aversion or declining of all manner of Evil to him in
Thought, Word or Deed, all Misaffection to him, all Mispeaking of him, or to
him, and all Misdoing. And not only all sorts of Injuries, but all
Unkindnesses, inward of will and affections, and outward of words, actions and
gestures.

He that desires any more Particular Character of this Virtue, may find it set
forth in that known Chapter of St Paul's first Epistle to the Corinthians, Chap.
13. And all that most exactly abridged by that General Precept of our Savior,
of doing to others as we would be done to: only the word do, is therein to be
extended as well to thoughts, and words, as to any sort of outward actions:
agreeable to the common use of the same word in our Language, applied to
thoughts and words, as well as deeds, whilst we say, we do think, and we do
Love, and we do speak. Col. 3.17. Whatever ye do in word, or deed do all in the
name of the Lord Jesus, etc. Indeed thoughts and words are the most Peculiar of
Humane Acts. This Precept, I say, in the due extent of it, rightly interpreted,
by the Rules and Measures of a reasonable will (which only can be understood in
the sentence) is the most Perfect Rule of Humane Equity, that can be given in
words, comprehending also the utmost Perfection of Christian Charity.

Having now premised this brief Description of the Virtue of Charity, I come to
the Particular Argument, or Motive, whereby it is urged by the Apostle in this
Text. Charity shall cover a multitude of sins. And here I am to speak by way of
Explication and Confirmation.

By way of Explication, I shall make these three Inquiries,

First, Whose sins they are which the Apostle means will be covered by Charity?

Secondly, What Is meant by the covering of sins?

Thirdly, What sort of sins will be covered by Charity, and under what
Limitations?

After I shall have given a Competent Explication of the Proposition, in the
resolution of these Questions, I shall Confirm the General Doctrine from other
Texts of Scripture, with some Allegations of Reason, and then answer some
Objections, like to be made against that Interpretation of the Text, which I
shall pitch upon, and against the General Doctrine thereby asserted.

CHAP II.
. 1. I Am to begin with the first Question, viz. Whose sins they are, which
will be covered by Charity? And here I find Interpreters differing: some
understancing the sins of others, to whom the Charity is extended: which is the
sense accepted by most Protestants, and some Pontificians: And some, the sins
of the Charitable Person, which (for the Reasons hereafter to be advanced)
seems to me most probable, and specially intended by the Apostle in this Text.
Some also taking in both senses, not without reason, because so the Sentence is
undoubtedly true: Charity, especially, if it be servent, will cover a multitude
of sins, both in the Charitable Person (as shall be afterward confirmed) and in
other men to whom it is exercised. And so both Senses are but distinct
Verifications of the same words, taken in the greatest amplitude of
signification, and containing in each Sense a strong motive to enforce the
preceding Exhortation, Above all things have fervent charity, for, etc.
Wherefore although I do in my own judgment prefer the second Sense, as most
specially intended by the Apostle, and that is the main Argument and Design of
my Discourse; yet I shall not wholly neglect the other Sense importing a
special Effect, and Branch o^ that Charity, which is here recommende^ to all
Christians, with the promise, o^ declaration of so great a Reward, as the
covering of a multitude of sins in him than has it; which is that Sense of the
word^ that I insist upon, not only as the stronges^ Motive to enforce the
Exhortation, but also as most agreeable to the Context i^ this place.

I. This Sense, if it may be allowed in the matter of it, to express a certain
truth (as I doubt not to prove, past all doubt, from other Texts) affords a
Motive to the inforcement of the Apostles Exhortation, so much more strong and
effectual than the other Sense, as the covering of a multitude of a man's own
fins, is a greater Benefit to him, than the covering of any multitude of other
men's sins can be; and therefore the hopes of it, must needs be most prevalent
with any man that has not more Charity for his Neighbor, than he has for
himself. Whereas therefore the scope of the Apostle in these words (as appears
by that Causal Particle, For) is only to press the foregoing Exhortation, it
seems not reasonable to abate the strength of his Argument, by excluding the
most persuasive Sense of his words, and confining it (without necessity) to any
other of less concern, and weaker efficacy, as most clearly that is which
respects only the sins of other men.

But that which most strongly confirms this to be the special Sense of the
Apostles words, is to be collected from the Connection of this Verse with the
foregoing, wherein he forewarneth the Jewish Christians, to whom the Epistle is
directed, of a Fatal End that was near at hand: and thereupon advises them,
what they should do to secure themselves in that event The end of all things is
at hand, be ye therefore sober, and watch unto prayer. And above all things
have fervent Charity among your selves, for Charity will cover a multitude of
sins. Whether by the end of all things be meant the End of the world, according
to the common Interpretation, and that said to be at hand in a certain Latitude
of sense, because it was now the last time, the last hour, the last days, as
was elsewhere frequently declared by himself and his fellow Apostles, 1 Pet.
1.5. and 2 Pet. 3.3. Heb. 1.2. Jam. 5.3. 1 Jo. 2.18. Jude 18. Meaning the last
Age of the World, whereof, although the duration was not to be so short, as
might then be imagined from such words as these: yet it was not to be long in
the eyes of God, with whom a thousand years are but as one day, as he
advertiseth them in his second Epistle, Chap. 3.8. I say whether it be the end
of the World, or (which is more probable to be the Apostles meaning) the Fatal
Destruction of the obdurate Jews, their Nation, Polity Royal City, and Temple,
foretold by Christ himself, and often spoken of by his Apostles, which was then
very near indeed: This being the ground, and occasion of the Apostles
Exhortation to fervent Charity, leads us to the most reasonable Interpretation
of these latter words of the verse: For Charity will cover a multitude of sins;
That is, when the end of all things, which is near at hand, shall come, fervent
Charity, added to, and joined with Repentance, signified by the foregoing
expressions of Sobriety, Watching and Praying, is the likeliest means to
propitiate the wrath of God, deserved by a multitude of sins, and to save you
from the formidable judgment of God, which is to be expected. I appeal to any
indifferent Person, whether this coherence of the Apostles words does not
determine his meaning to relate to the sins of the Charitable Person, much
rather than the sins of others. For although it be no less true, that the same
Virtue of Charity will cover a multitude of sins in other men, in such a sense
as shall be declared afterward: yet how that should be referred, (as by the
Context in this place it is) to the end of all things: That is, how Charity
should cover a multitude of sins in other Persons, when the end of all things
is come, is hard to conceive; but easy enough to understand, how it may then
cover a multitude of sins in the Charitable Person, as shall be showed in its
due place.

The most rational Objection against this Interpretation and Argument for the
preference of the other Sense, is raised from a parallel Text, Prove. 10.12.
Hatred stirs up strife; but Love covers all sins. And if the Apostles
words, seeming to be borrowed from that Sentence, must receive the same
Interpretation with that, it must necessarily be understood of other men's sins;
by the two contrary effects of Love and Hatred, set forth in that Text, the one
stirring up strife, the other preventing it, by covering the faults of other
men, by not taking notice of them, or looking favorably upon them, in order to
a peaceable and friendly living with them

But to this Objection it may be answered. 1. That it is not evident that St
Peter did intend any quotation of that Proverb, there being no such intimation
in the Apostles words, as usually there is, when any Text of the Old Testament
is cited in the New, by those words, as it is written, or other like, not found
in this place. But to this Objection, together with some others, a fuller
answer shall be made afterward.

. 2. The probability of this Sense, being thus declared from the Context, the
Truth of it remains to be further confirmed from many other Texts of Scripture:
but I suspend the addition of them, till I have answered the second Question,
viz. Supposing the sins spoken of in this Sentence to be the sins of the
Charitable person, the question is, what is meant by the word Covering, or in
what Sense they may be said to be covered by Charity? The Answer to this
Question is to be collected from the ordinary use of the same Phrase in other
places of Scripture; wherein it is frequently used to express the pardon or
forgiveness of sin, as Romans 4.7. quoting Psalm. 32.1. Blessed are they whose
iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins are covered. So Psalm. 85.2. Thou have
forgiven the iniquity of thy People, thou have covered all their sins. In these
Texts, I suppose, no doubt can b^ made, but that the Covering of sin signifies
the same thing with the Forgiving. So Neh. 4.5. Cover not their iniquities, an^
let not their sin be blotted out, i. e. let i^ not be forgiven. And because
Covering a^ thing is one way of hiding, therefore ou^ Translators have rendered
the same Greek word used in another Text of like signification by the word
Hiding. (...).
Jam. 5.20. He which converteth a sinner from the error of his way, shall save
a Soul from death, and shall hide a multitudes of sins, i. e. shall procure the
Pardon of them (as the words are commonly interpreted) or shall obtain the
Forgiveness of a multitude of sins in himself, as the learned Grotius and Dr.
Hammond interpret them, agreeable to the fore-given sense of the same Words in
our Text. The converting of a sinner from the error of his Way is an eminent
act of Charity, whenever it is industriously sought and intended, whatever
the success be. Nor is there any appearance of Incongruity, to say or suppose,
that to endeavor the Conversion of an other man, and thereby to procure the
Pardon of his sins, should be available toward the obtaining of a pardon of
sins in the charitable Procurer. For if that Sense, which I have given of the
words of St. Peter, be admitted to import a certain Truth, (as I doubt not to
evince from many other Texts afterward) the like Sense of this of St. James
(whether by him intended or not) will necessarily follow to contain the same
Truth. The Converting of a sinner, or the sincere and earnest Endeavor
thereof, being (as before was said) an eminent act of Spiritual Charity. But
for the probability of that Sense of St. James his words, I must at this time
refer the Reader to the Notes of the forenamed Doctor upon the Text, because it
would be too great an Excursion to undertake the Confirming of it in this
place. But whether this be the true Sense of St. James or not, no doubt can be
made, but that the particular Phrase of Covering of sins does very fitly
express the Pardon of them, when it is attributed to God, as in the Texts cited
before: And when it is attributed to Men, or to any act or virtue in them, as
it is in this Text, it may very fitly signify the obtaining or procuring of
such a favor (as the Pardon of sin) from God.

The Metaphor may be borrowed from the Covering of Nakedness, to which sin is
often compared, or to the Covering of a Sore with a Plaster, or the Covering
of a Debt charged in a Book, by way of Obliteration or Blotting out, which is
another Synonymous phrase, signifying the Pardon of sin. Both Phrases
signifying the Pardon thing with the Hiding of sin from the face or the eyes of
God, Psalm. 51.9. Hide thy face from my sins, and blot out mine iniquities. Not
that God should not see them, but that he should not impute them, as the same
Words are interpreted by the Psalmist, Psalm. 32.1, 2 and by the Apostle, Romans
4.7, 8. Blessed are they whose iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins are
covered, Blessed is the man to whom the Lord will not impute sin. As Men are
said to hide their own sins, when they will not acknowledge them, nor admit
themselves chargeable with the imputation of them: So does God cover sin, by
his not imputing, or charging the guilt of it upon a man. And this is one way
amongst others (as shall be hereafter declared) whereby Charity, or the
Charitable Person does cover a multitude of sins in his Neighbor, according to
the other Sense of the Text, that is, does forgive and excuse them, and so
cover them from his own eyes, either by not taking notice of them, or not
imputing them to the Offender.

But to discharge this Question; If by the multitude of sins spoken of in this
Text, be understood the sins of the Charitable Person, it is sufficiently
evident by the Use of the Phrase, what the Covering of them means, viz.
nothing less than the Pardon or Remission of the said sins.

. 3. But then for a clear understanding of this Effect, it will be necessary to
enquire what may be understood by the Pardon of sin? A Phrase not so plain, but
that it has afforded matter of more Controversy, than I am willing to take
notice of in this Place: intending to discharge my self and my Reader of all
the puzzle of Distinctions about the nature and signification of this easy
Word, and take up with that only Meaning, which is most agreeable to common
Sense and Vulgar apprehension: Namely, that by the Pardon or Remission of sin
is meant a Discharge of the sin from the punishment, or obligation to
punishment; For that the Remission of the Fault, without the Remission of the
Guilt, which Bellarmine, and Others of his Order contest for, is to me a
Riddle, a senseless Notion, and the Effect of it a real Nullity. Not but that
there may be a true and effectual Pardon of the fault, without an absolute and
total Remission of all punishment, as shall be shown hereafter. But then the
Remission of the fault, is no more then the Remission of the punishment, and no
more of the Fault is remitted, then is of the Punishment, or the Fault is no
otherwise remitted than the Punishment is. But to imagine a Fault to be entirely
or perfectly remitted, without any Remission of the Punishment, is either a
perfect Contradiction, or a very uncomfortable sort of Pardon, and such as I
think, the Devils would not much envy any part of Mankind to obtain.

I shall therefore take it for granted, that all Pardon of sin does import some
Remission at least of the punishment, I say some Remission, because, as there
is a great Variation in the nature, kinds, degrees, extent and duration of the
Punishment; so may there be an answerable Variation and Difference in the
Pardon of sins, (signified by the phrase of Covering of them in the Text) as to
the matter, measures, degrees, and duration thereof. And so Sin may be truly
said to be covered or pardoned, not only when all the Punishment is remitted or
removed, but also when any sort, part or degree thereof is taken off or abated;
as also when the remainder of Punishment is relieved, or balanced by some
advantages to the Patient. But of this more is to be said in the following
Discourse, concerning the Punishment of sin in general.

. 4 The punishment of Sin, importing all evil consequences thereof, is as
various as the sin, both in its kind and degrees. And as in the general Notion,
all sin does consist in some repugnancy or opposition to the Will of God: 1 John 3.4.
So all Punishment consists in something that is repugnant to the reasonable
will and welfare of the Sinner. And this is most just, that he that will not
obey the Will of God, should be crossed in his own Will; if Men be so wilful,
as not to submit to the Will of God, they shall never have their own will, do
what they can. For the natural and necessary Object of man's Will is nothing
less then a true and real Happiness, consisting in a perfect freedom from Evil,
and in the enjoyment of all the Good that he is capable of. But the only
Qualification for this Happiness is Holiness, which consists in the Conformity
of our wills to the Will of God. He therefore that is not, at least in some
measure Holy, can never be in any measure Happy. But to be completely or
perfectly Happy, no man is, or can be capable, till he be perfectly Holy; that
is, till there be a perfect Conformity of his will to the Will of God. There is
no way to obtain a full and perfect Satisfaction to our own wills, but by
submitting them to the Will of God. So shall we infallibly at last have our own
will, and fill of Happiness: though for the present we do miss of our own
carnal and foolish will, and must stay for the accomplishment of our most
reasonable Desires, till we be capable of it. The true, substantial, final, and
perfect Object of our will, (supposing that it be conformable and obedient to
the Will of God) we cannot fail of at last; but must not look for it, till we
come where it is to be had, that is, in Heaven, (for Earth is not capable of
it) where all our ignorant, unsatisfying Volitions, Wishes and Desires will be
utterly extinct, and our whole will and affections will be satisfied with the
utmost Felicity they are capable of: So that we shall have nothing further to
wish, but the unchangeable Continuance of that State; And that also we shall be
so well assured of, as that the Will, and Desire in that respect shall be
abundantly satisfied. Whence one has fitly called Happiness Pax Desiderii, a
rest or peace to all Desire. When Desire shall give place to Joy, and stir no
more, whereas here it is restless, and never can cease, till it be fully
satisfied.

But to return from this digression, to the Discourse that occasioned it. I
said before, that all sin is a transgression, or opposition to the will of God,
and all punishment consists in something opposite to the reasonable Object of
our own wills. But here it is to be noted, that as men may be mistaken in the
Object of the Divine Will, thinking that to be agreeable, which is contrary
thereunto: So may they be deceived in the right Object of their own wills,
which in the true Notion is something that is good for them, and tending to
their safety, welfare, and happiness. But this apprehension is very liable to
error, and nothing more common then for men by such error, to call evil good,
and good evil, to put darkness for light, and light for darkness, to put bitter
for sweet, and sweet for bitter, as in things that relate to the Will of God,
so in things relating to the right Objects of their own will, and happiness.
But this error cannot change the nature of the things in either case. The bare
thinking of a thing to be good, or evil, does not make it so, either in a
Moral, or in a Physical sense: Men may be punished in the enjoyment of their
own blind and infatuate wills: and they may be blessed, and rewarded in the
want of such enjoyments, and in things contrary thereunto. A reputed good,
though it gratifies the deceived will, may be a real punishment; and a sensible
evil suffered against a man's will, may be a signal Blessing: To be punished by
Prosperity, and blessed by Adversity, is no contradiction. Pharaoh was hardened
to his destruction, by the cessation of the Plagues; and Manasses was saved by
his Captivity, and the Fetters of his Prison. And many a man may say,
periissem, nisi periissem, I had perished eternally, if I had not been undone
for a time.

It is not necessary to the punishment of sin, that men should be at the
present sensible of it. And though he must needs be unhappy for the present,
that thinks himself so, because that thought is enough to make him so, as being
inconsistent with his present happiness: yet he is not necessarily happy that
accounts himself so: otherwise men might be happy when they are out of their
wits: and made miserable in recovering them. As the man in the Poet complained.

-- Pol me occidistis amici
Non servastis, ait, cui sic extorta voluptas,
Et demptus per vim mentis gratissimus error.
Horat. Epist. 2. Lib. 2. But to hold to the Analogy between the Will of God,
and the will of Man, in the nature of sin and punishment, I say further, that
as the Will of God is transgressed by omission, or commission, by leaving
undone something which he requires, or doing something which he forbids: so the
punishments of sin are either Privative, or Positive, consisting in the loss,
or want of something that is Good and Desirable by a reasonable Will, or in the
sense and suffering of something which is Evil and grievous to the Will. And
both these sorts of Punishments, are such as befall Men in this Life, or in
that which is to come, and so are temporal, or Eternal: Some of them also are
natural and necessary, and some contingent and avoidable, as being ordered and
appointed by the just Will and Providence of God, without any natural or
absolute Necessity of their Event. I say, some sorts of Punishment of sin are
Natural and Necessary, as being the Natural Effects and Consequents of the sin,
and so, necessary and unavoidable, and that either absolutely, or without a
Miracle. Absolutely unavoidable the Punishment must needs be, when the
Separation of the Penal Event imports contradiction to the sinful act, as is
evident, not only in the case of Self-murder (which being nothing else but the
depriving a man of his Life, cannot without Contradiction be separated from the
privative Punishment) but also in all other sins, whereby Men do deprive
themselves, at least for the present, of the enjoyment of Health, Honor,
Friends, or any other good thing. And as every act of true Virtue does in a
just sense reward it self by its real and moral Goodness; Virius est sui ipsius
merces.
so does every sinful Act punish it self by its turpitude or evil deformity,
which in the School Language is called the Macula, or stain of sin And this
Punishment is in the nature of the thing inseparable from the sin. Other
punishments are not so absolutely necessary, as to imply any Contradiction in
the avoidance or evasion of them, and yet are really unavoidable without a
Miracle, as is obvious enough to conceive without any Instances.

Now in such cases the covering of the sin, as it signifies a total Remission,
or perfect Exemption from all Punishment, is either simply unpossible, as in
the case of such absolute necessity of the Event, as implies a contradiction to
the sin in the avoidance, or else is not promised, or to be expected (though
possible by Miracle) upon any condition. I say such a covering of sin as
imports a total Remission of Punishment, is either impossible, or unexpectable:
Yet may the same sin in some other sense be many ways covered, viz. by
abatement of the degrees of the Punishment, which is not wholly avoidable; or
by deliverance from some other Punishment, which might be added in this Life,
and that which is to come: or by sundry manner and measures of Support, Relief,
and Comfort in the Suffering, or by other ways, whereby the Punishment may be
converted to the Advantage of the Sufferer, especially in his Spiritual Estate;
which Advantages are so far from being inconsistent with the nature of a
Punishment, that they are ordinarily designed, as the main end of it, both by
God and Man, as in all castigatory Punishments; whence God is said to chasten
us for our Profit, Heb. 12.10. And a Punishment cease not to be so, by being
converted to a Blessing. Thus may the sins of a Charitable Person be covered,
without any absolute Remission, or Exemption from Punishment, which may be in
it self necessary. And where it is not so, but contingent at the Will and
Providence of God; it is more easy to conceive how the sin may be covered by
Suspension, or Remission of Punishment, in whole, or in part.

Here a question may be moved, viz. How far that Remission of sin, which is
signified by the Term of covering in this Text, may be expected to extend? i.
e. Whether only to the Temporal Punishment, which a sinner is liable to in this
Life, or to that also which is to come in another World?

Toward a full Answer to this Question, it will not be amiss to reflect upon
^he words of the Apostle immediately preceding the Text which I am treating
upon, wherein I conceive a convenient hint ^s offered, for the Resolution of
this Question, from a double Interpretation which is given of those words (the
end of all things is at hand.) the one relating to this Life, the other to that
which is to come.

1. Some Modern Interpreters of Good Note for their Learning and Judgment, Dr.
Hammond, Mr. Jos. Mede, and others.
do understand those words, not to be meant of the end of the World, or the day
of Judgment, but of the end of the Jewish Commonwealth, by the Destruction of
the Temple, and the City of Jerusalem, together with the General Calamity of
that People by their Captivity and Dispersion throughout the World, by the
Power and Victory of the Romans, often foretold by our Savior, and called the
abomination of desolation: For the avoiding of which Calamity, the Apostle
advises the Christian Jews, to whom he directs this Epistle, to be sober, and
to watch unto prayer, as hopeful means to save them from the extremity of that
Calamity: Adding further, in this verse, another special Point of advice to the
same end, to wit, the exercise of a fervent Charity. If this sense of the
Apostles words be allowed, supposing the end of all things so near approaching,
as was the time of that Public Calamity (which sense by the forementioned
Interpreters is also applied to many other Texts of our Saviors and the
Apostles speaking of the end of the World, as very near) I say, if this be the
Apostles Sense in this place, no doubt can be made of this effect of Charity,
procuring Deliverance from Punishments of sin in this Life.

On the other side, If by the end of all things must be understood that General
End which is to come at the day of Judgment, according to the more ordinary
Interpretation of the words, it is evident, that this benefit of Charity will
extend to another Life. But because the Punishment of sin (as has been said
before) is both in this Life, and that which is to come, without Determining
the true Sense of the foregoing Verse, I doubt not to conclude, that the
Remission of sin, expressed by the covering thereof, declared by the Apostle,
is not to be limited to this or the other Life, but may be understood of both,
and will be verified either in both, or at least in one of these two Lives;
that is wheresoever this Virtue of Charity is found, it will be available by
the Mercy of God at least to some kind of Remission of sin, i. e. of the
Punishment thereof, either in this Life, and that which is to come too, or else
in one of them more or less, according to the sincerity and degree of the
Charity.

If the Charity be the Fruit of an unfeigned Faith accompanied with Repentance,
(as it must needs be, if it be sincere) it will undoubtedly be available to the
Remission of sin in the other World, if not also to the Remission of Punishment
in this World; which is very hopeful, though not so certain in all Respects,
as is the Remission of future Punishment in the Life to come: Because there are
some sorts of Punishments of sin in this Life, which (as was showed before) are
in themselves necessary, and inseparable Consequents of the sin, and so
unavoidable in their Nature, as Shame and Dishonor in sins known to the World,
privation of Benefits consequent to other sins, sorrow and remorse of
Conscience, common to all sins, whereof a sinner is convinced: Besides some
other sorts of Punishments in this Life, not so necessary in their kind, may be
consequent to the sin, by the Justice and Wisdom, and also by the Goodness of
God: which therefore he may refuse to remit in this Life, where he intends a
full Remission in the Life to come. This is plain in the Case of David, 2 Samuel
12. Many severe Punishments are threatened by Nathan the Prophet, to be executed
upon David for his scandalous sins of Adultery and Murder, which were never
remitted, but punctually executed upon him, notwithstanding, that upon his
Repentance, testified by his humble Confession, the Prophet assures him, that
God had put away his sin, and that he should not die. Ver. 13. And David said
unto Nathan, I have sinned against the Lord; and Nathan said unto David, the
Lord also has put away thy sin, thou shall not die.

His repentance expressed by extraordinary testimonies of his Sorrow and
Humiliation, set forth in that Psalm, Psalm. 51.
which was penned and published by himself for that end, was not sufficient to
deliver him from all Punishment of his sin, although it was accepted for his
Deliverance, not only from the punishment of eternal Death, but also of such a
temporal Death, as he was justly liable to by the Law; which though it could
not be executed upon him by any Human Authority, by reason of his Sovereignty,
yet might have been executed by the Hand of God, who had threatened by Himself
to revenge and punish such presumptuous sins, as the Magistrate could not, or
should neglect to punish, Lev. 26.14. But did not thereby deprive himself of
liberty to forbear such Execution of punishment according to his Wisdom and
Goodness.

By this Example, and several others that might be alleged (if it were
needful in this place) it appears, that a Part of the punishment of sin may be
remitted, where the whole is not, which I take to be the common Case of
Mankind, fallen under the guilt and punishment of Adams sin; for it is
experimentally evident, Genesis 3.
that the whole Punishment is not remitted to any Man, because all are known to
suffer many Penalties threatened in this Life, besides that common one of
Temporal Death; whilst that of Eternal Death is remitted to many, and promised
to all that repent.

But to return to the Point in hand, I say, sincere Charity proceeding from a
true Faith, and accompanied with an unfeigned Repentance, will certainly
deliver the Charitable Person from the Everlasting punishment of another Life,
and may also be available either to save a man from all Punishments in this
Life, or to abate the Degrees of them.

But if the Charity be not fincere, nor accompanied with any such Repentance,
as will render the sinner capable of Salvation in the other Life, yet it may
be, and doubtless will be available for the Deliverance of the person from
Punishments in this Life, either in whole or in part. For as other temporal
Rewards are given by God to partial and infincere Virtues, and good Works, so
may this of Deliverance from temporal Judgments. And this perhaps was sometimes
the only meaning of those words of our Savior, recorded in the Gospel, to have
been spoken to diverse Persons that came to him to be healed of their bodily
Diseases, expressing thereby some kind of Faith in him, and his Power. And he
said unto them, thy sins are forgiven thee, i. e. the Punishment of thy sins
which lies upon thee is taken off, and remitted, Mark 3.34. cap. 10.52. Luke
7.50. cap. 8.48. cap. 18.42.
and thou shall be healed. Which seems to be the sense of another Phrase often
used by our Savior in like cases to them that came to him, for the healing of
their Diseases. (...), Matthew. 9.22. Thy faith has saved thee, i. e. has made
thee whole, as it is there rendered in our English Translation, agreeable to the
following words, (...), and the woman was made whole from that hour. Not that I
suppose this to be all the Benefit, that he ever intended to any Person, to
whom he uttered those words, (thy sins are forgiven thee) amongst whom, it is
more than probable, there were some, whose Faith did qualify them for a better
remission of their sin. But it is not evident, that every one of those Persons,
that were cured of their bodily Diseases by him, were endued with such an
unfeigned Faith, as did render them capable of an absolute Remission of all
their sins, as to another Life: For to think as some Divines have said, that
our Blessed Savior never cured the body of any Patient, but he cured their
souls also, seems to be but an improbable opinion.

But supposing this Remission of sin, as relating only to Temporal Punishments
in this Life, to be granted, as a Reward of an Insincere Charity: the Question
may be moved, whether the like Charity, or any works thereof may not be
available also to some degree of Remission, or covering of sin, in the Life to
come, at the last Judgment?

To this Question I shall not presume to answer dogmatically, as not remembering
at present any particular Testimony of Scripture, whereby that Question may be
determined, either in the Negative, or Affirmative: notwithstanding my Opinion
inclines to the Affirmative, viz. that although such an infincere Charity can
avail nothing toward a total Remission at the last Judgment, or the Salvation
of the Person; whereof no man can be capable, whithout an unfeigned Repentance,
and such a true Faith as works by sincere Love to God and his Neighbor yet
that even such Good Works, as do indeed proceed from Charity, and are not done
hypocritically, for self Interest, Worldly ends, or carnal Motives only, may
abate the Degrees of the future Punishment in another Life.

My reason for this Opinion is grounded upon that Fundamental Principle of all
Religion; That all men shall fare in the life to come, 2 Cor. 5.10.
according to the things done by them in this Life, whether they be good, or
whether they be bad. Which Rule is understood not only of the respective states
of Salvation, and Damnation, but also of the degrees of Reward and Punishment
in that state. As for the state of Punishment, no question has been, or can be
made, concerning the difference of its degrees, expressly declared in
Scripture, signifying that it shall be more tolerable for some, Mat. 10.15.
chap. 11.22. Luke 12.47, 48.
than for others in that day; wherein some shall be beaten with many stripes,
and some with fewer. And the Question that is made about the degrees of Glory,
is but a novel one, none of the Ancients (that I know of) and very few Modern
Divines have embraced the Opinion, that asserts the equality of that state.

The Catholic Doctrine founded upon Scripture supposes as much disparity of
degrees of Glory and Happiness in Heaven, as of Punishment in Hell, and that
the respective measures of each condition will be allotted and assigned,
according to such proportion of Good and Evil, as upon an exact and infallible
Evidence before an Impartial Judge, shall be found in the Persons to be judged,
with Relation to the bodily Life past So is that Judgment described by St
John, Rev. 20.12. And I saw the dead, both small and great, stand before God,
and the Books were opened, and another Book was opened, which is the Book of
Life, and the dead were judged out of those things, which were written in the
Books, according to their Works.

And that among all sorts of Good Works, those of Charity to our Brethren will
then have a special Confideration, is sufficiently intimated by the words of
our Savior in his own Description of the last Judgment. Mat. 25.31. to the
end of the Chapter, I was an hungered, and ye gave me meat, I was thirsty, and
ye gave me drink, I was a stranger, and ye took me in, naked, and ye clothed
me, etc, A Text which I shall have occasion to speak more largely of afterward,
in the Confirmation of this Doctrine. And as by this Declaration of our Savior
himself, who is to be Judge at that day, it is evident, that Works of Charity,
proceeding from an unfeigned Faith, will then be specially considered, as a
qualification for the General Reward; so that the Degrees and Measures of that
Reward, will be proportioned to the Measures of Charity, seems no less evident
by the words of the Apostle, speaking also of the same sort of works, 2. Cor.
9.6. He which sows sparingly shall reap sparingly, and he which sows
bountifully, shall reap bountifully. And in the words of our Savior, in the
forementioned Text, it is likewise added, as a Reason of the Sentence of
Condemnation to be denounced against them on the left hand, verse 41. Depart
from me ye cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels,
For I was an hungered, and ye gave me no meit, I was thirsty, and ye gave me no
drink, etc. Signifying, that one just cause of that just Sentence, will be the
neglect of this great Duty of Charity; whence it will follow, upon a reasonable
account, that look how much that sin of neglect, or omission shall be found to
be abated, by any thing done by the Person to be judged, and condemned for that
fault, so much will be abated of the Punishment; And though some Works of
Charity, bearing no proportion to the ability of him that does them, may be
reckoned as none, in the Sense of our Saviors words, and in reference to a
man's discharge from the Substance of the Sentence; yet it cannot be said, that
he that has done some Works of Charity, is altogether so guilty of the
omission of that Duty, as he that has done none: And consequently, cannot be
equally liable upon that account to the same degrees of Punishment: And
therefore his Charity, how defective soever it was, will save him from some
degrees of Punishment in that state: Besides all the validity it had to exempt
him from Punishments, and to procure any Temporal Reward in this Life.

What other Consideration may be had, by the Judge at that day of Works of
Charity done by any Person, that then shall be found (...), Reprobate (and so
fall into condemnation) toward any counterpoise of his other sins, or of the
abatement of the degrees of their Punishment, I cannot tell. But this is
certain, that what ever can be equitably plended for the abatement of
Punishment, will be considered by that Judge, who is infinitely Wise and Just,
knowing exactly the Merits and Circumstances of every man's case, that is to be
tried before him; and who will be Advocate, as well as Judge, for every sinner,
as far as his case will bear. And therefore, as in humane Judicature, or
Exercise of distributive Justice amongst men, when a Criminal is to be judged,
although his case be such, as can neither admit of a Justification, nor yet of
a Plenary Pardon, yet it is thought no more than reasonable, that some
consideration should be had of the rest of his Life, especially, if there be
any Good Evidence of any Special Laudable Actions done by him, they may be
considered, toward the abatement of utmost severity in the Penalty, where any
such abutement is possible, as in Punishments which are not Capital: So,
(though I cannot assure any man, that it shall be so, in the case of any
Persons falling under the necessary Sentence of Condemnation, yet) I think
there is some Reason to hope, that he that has showed Mercy to Men in this
Life, though he be not saved, may find some Mercy in the degrees of his
Punishment; And that not only upon the account of such an abatement of his
Guilt, as was before signified respecting his sins of omission, but also with
respect to his sins of commission. That there will be some kind of
Counterpoise, or Balance of Good and Evil Works in the Divine Judgment, and
execution of Justice, is not (in my opinion) to be rejected as a mere Rabinical
or Platonical conceit, Mal po^se, qui ne contre poise. Is the French Prove.
though it be so too, but seems to be in some measure probable, as it is
agreeable to the nature of Justice, exercised amongst men, privately and
publicly.

The Sum of what I have said in the Explication of that Sense of the Apostles
words, which I here maintain, is this: That Charity if it be sincere as the
Fruit of an unfeighed Faith and Repentance, will be available toward a plenary
Covering or Remission of a man's sins, at the last Judgment; If it be not so,
yet it will procure him some Remission at least, if not Exemption from temporal
Punishment in this Life, (besides other positive Rewards, ordinarily given to
the practice of this Virtue) and may also be available toward the Abatement of
the Degrees of positive Punishment in the Life to come. I say, of Positive
Punishment, commonly called Paena Sensus, Pain or Punishment of Sense, because
the Privative Punishment, Poena Damni, the Punishment of Loss, can admit of no
degrees of Abatement: For the loss of Eternal Life will be equal to all that
are not saved, and can be no other from the Nature of the thing, though the
sense and affliction of that Loss may differ much, according to the different
capacities Men were in to obtain that Life, and the inequality of the Means
thereof received, and rejected or neglected. For in this respect the Loss of
Eternal Life will be more tolerable (as our Savior says) for Sodom and
Gomorrah, for Tire and Sidon, that never had the like means of Salvation
(though they were not excluded from all means or possibility thereof) then it
will be for Bethsaida or Capernaum. And so it will be proportionably, for all
People under like Inequality of the means of Life; neither is it possible for
any Person, that never had any such Means, as some other had, and therefore
cannot be guilty of Rejecting or Neglecting them, I say, it is not possible for
any such Person to fall under the same Degrees of that necessary Punishment of
the never-dying Worm, as that is supposed to signify, the anguish and torment
of the guilty Conscience. This natural punishment of the Afflicted, or
afflicting Conscience, for the same Reason must needs be abated also to him,
that has done some Good works of Charity in this Life, because his Conscience
cannot charge him, at the same rate, as it must needs do him, that has totally
neglected them, under an equal or larger Ability.

Whether the substance of this Interpretation of the Text, either necessary or
most probable, must be left to the judgment of the Reader, but that it is
neither Popish, nor Singular (as some may be ready to charge it) I must take
leave to challenge, whiles I find that this Sense of the Words has neither
been received by all Papists, nor rejected by all Protestants: Some of the
Pontificians baulking this Interpretation, as Estius, Tirinus, and others.
which I insist upon, do give the same, which is given by most Protestants,
namely, That Charity will cover the sins of other Men (not the sins of the
Charitable Person) in such a Sense as is hereafter to be declared. And some
Eminent Protestants do admit that other Sense, which I prefer, as most
probable. And that not only in this Text, but also in that of St. James,
wherein the same Phrase is used, Jam. 5.20. He which converteth a sinner from
the Error of his ways, shall save a Soul from Death, and shall hide a
Multitude of sins. The origiginal Words are the same in both Texts, and are
thus Paraphrased by a Learned Doctor of our own Church. Dr. Hammond.
It is a most excellent glorious Work, which he has wrought, the Effect of
which is, that God will free him, on whom this Change is wrought, from Death
eternal, and perhaps, from present temporal Death, through Sickness fallen upon
him for that sin, vid. v. 15. And besides he will accept, and reward the
Charity of him that has wrought that good Work, with the free Discharge of
whatsoever sins he has formerly been guilty of, but has now repented of. See
the same Authors Annotation upon the Text. This Sense is agreeable to the words
of the Prophet Daniel, Dan. 12.3. They that turn many to Righteousness, shall
shine as the Stars for ever, viz. in Heavenly Glory, which necessarily implies
a Remission of their sins. And why the zealous Endeavoring to convert sinners
from the Error, i. e. evil of their Way should be available to procure the
Covering of a multitude of sins, in him that makes it his care and study so to
do, a very good Reason may be given from the nature of the Act, which imports
one of the best Testimonies of Repentance that can be. In that Penetential
Psalm, wherein David sues to Almighty God, for the Pardon of his gross sins of
Murder and Adultery, he urges this as a Motive toward the obtaining of his
Request, Psalm. 5.13. Then will I teach Transgressors thy Ways, and sinners
shall be converted unto Thee. And surely no greater Reparation can be made by
sinful man to Almighty God for the dishonor done to his Majesty by his own
sins; than when the penitent sinner, together with his own Hearty repentance
and amendment of Life, shall endeavor also, as much as lies in his power, the
Conversion of other sinners unto God. So did Abner design to make his peace
with King David, after his professed Enmity and Rebellion first by Promising to
serve him for the time to come in his own Person, and then to bring over all
Israel with him to the Obedience of the King, 2 Samuel 3.10.

And that the Practice of this great virtue of Charity, in other Instances, as
well as this of endeavoring to Convert sinners from their evil Ways, is the
best Means of Satisfaction to God, or appeasing his Wrath for sin, may appear
by these two Reasons.

1. Because it is in it self most pleasing and acceptable to Him, as most
agreeable to his own Goodness.

2. Because it tends to the procuring of much Glory to his Name, as otherwise,
so by the Thanksgiving of many (engaged by the Benefit of Charity extended to
them) redounding to the Glory of God, 2 Cor. 1.11. and 4.15.

If a Man has incurred the just Displeasure of any Man, what better means can
be used to recover his Favor, than by doing of such things, as he knows to be
most pleasing and acceptable to him; or if he has any way Dishonored him,
what better Satisfaction can be done him, toward the repairing of that Injury,
than by Endeavoring to promote his Honor effectually some other way.

CHAP. III.
HAving thus sufficiently illustrated that Sense of the Text, which seems to
me most probable, I am sensible of the Necessity of a further Confirmation
thereof. Wherein I think this Demand should not be denied me by any Indifferent
Judge; namely; That if the Doctrine collected from this Interpretation, be
proved to be True; and sufficiently Confirmable from other Scriptures, this
Interpretation has a fair advantage of Preference before the other, from the
before noted Scope of the Context, and the far greater Validity of the Argument
thus understood, to enforce the Exhortation that precedes it. And therefore
toward the better satisfaction of some prejudiced Readers (whose Objections
shall be considered in due place) it will be necessary to show the undeniable
Truth of this Doctrine, from other Texts of both Testaments, which for their
Number are far more than are absolutely necessary for the Confirmation of any
Doctrine. Nor should I think it reasonable to quote so many of them, as I shall
do, were it not, that by the same Labor, I hope, not only to demonstrate the
Truth of this Doctrine, but also to promote the Practice of the Apostles
Exhortation upon this singular Motive, added to many others, which fall not
within the compass of this Text. I say, that by the many Texts (by which I hope
to make it appear, that Charity to our Neighbors for Gods sake, and with
respect to his Will and good Pleasure, is so much conducible to the Pardon of
our sins,) the Practice of this Virtue, will also appear more advisable to
them, that are least disposed to it, than perhaps has been formerly considered
or understood by them. And whereas most of the Texts, which I shall allege to
this Purpose, do seem to speak of a full and final Remission of all sins at the
Day of Judgment I suppose it will be easily yielded by the Argument from the
Greater to the Less, that if Charity be available for Deliverance from the
Eternal punishment of the Life to come, it may well be concluded, it may also
avail for a Redemption from Temporal punishments in this Life, (which are
justly to be feared) or for an Abatement.

The first Argument which I shall produce for the Truth of this Doctrine, shall
be taken from those Texts, which speak of such an Act of Charity, as is more
commonly understood in this Text; namely, That whereby we Cover the sins of
others, by Forgiving them their Trespasses against our selves. And the express
words of our Savior, Mat. 6.14, 15. are, that if ye forgive men their
Trespasses, your Heavenly Father will also forgive you: but if ye forgive not
Men their Trespasses, neither will your Heavenly Father forgive you. By which
Text it appears plainly, that the Truth of that Sense of St. Peter's words,
which I plead for, is no other then a just Consequence of the other, more
commonly received. That if it be true, that Charity will cover a Multitude of
sins in other Men, it will also procure the same Effect to the Charitable
Person, that is, cover a Multitude of sins in him, he that forgives shall be
forgiven. And in another Evangelist we find our Savior expressly directing us
to this Work of Charity for the same End, namely, that our sins may be
forgiven, Mar. 11.25. When ye stand praying, forgive, if ye have ought against
any, that your Father which is in Heaven may forgive you your Trespasses: But
if you do not forgive, neither will your Father which is in Heaven forgive your
Trespasses. That which our Savior himself directs us to do for this End, may
it not be done by us to that End? And is it not confidently to be believed to
be Effectual and Available thereunto? And is not the same Effect as manifestly
employed in that Prayer which our Savior has taught us? Forgive us our Debts,
i. e. our sins, as we forgive our Debtors, i. e. them that trespass against us,
Luke 11.4. Where the Particles As, in the one Evangelist, and For, in the
other, do signify the same thing, namely, A Motive used by our Saviors
direction to promote the Effect of our Petition, confirmed by an express
Promise, Luke 6.37. Forgive, and ye shall be forgiven. Add to this from the
beginning of the same Sermon of our Blessed Savior, Mat. 5.7. Blessed are the
Merciful, for they shall obtain Mercy, and as Mercy in us is a Branch of
Charity; so the Covering or Pardon of sins is an eminent Part of that Mercy
that is to be obtained thereby. These Sentences of our Blessed Savior,
together with diverse others to the same Purpose, I suppose might be alluded to
by St. James in that Saying, Jam. 2.13. For he shall have Judgment without
Mercy, that has showed no Mercy, and Mercy rejoices against Judgment. Mercy
in the Text comprehends all works of Charity, as well in the latter as in the
former Clause. They that would have the latter Clause to be understood only of
the Mercy of God triumphing over his Justice, seem not to consider the Context,
before and after these Words, which apparently speaks of such Mercy and
Charity, as is to be exercised by Men toward their Brethren, which being also
the undoubted Meaning of the Word in this Verse; the plain sense of the whole
Verse can be no other than this, that the Unmercifull man shall find no Mercy
in the day of Judgment. On the contrary, that Mercy, or the Merciful man,
shall have his Judgment so tempered with Mercy, as to give him cause of
Rejoicing in that Day for Deliverance or Salvation from the Judgment of
Condemnation, or the Fear of it. This Goodness or Mercy found in Men, (if it be
true and sincere) being the Effect of Gods Grace, does dispose and fit Men for
Divine Mercy. Mercy in the Person to be judged qualifies him for the Mercy of
the Judge. Not that any such Charity or Mercy can be found in a Sinner, as is
sufficient in it self to justify him, or expiate his sin in strictness of
Justice or Merit, but that by the Goodness and Mercy of God, for Christ's Sake,
it shall obtain this Effect in the last Judgment.

And as in this first Branch of the Text, the word Mercy twice used does
plainly signify the Mercy of God, as well as the mercy of Man; He shall have
Judgment without Mercy, i. e. from God, that has showed no Mercy to men. So in
the second Branch, the same word Mercy, may have respect both to the Mercy of
God (as many Good Divines have interpreted it) and to the Mercy of men. It is
Mercy in God rejoicing over Judgment or Justice, that gives men Cause of
Rejoicing; and Mercy in men, that by Divine Acceptance qualifies them for that
Mercy of God.

This Sentence of St. James, in both Parts of it, stands fully confirmed by
that (...), or Representation of the last Judgment, which is given by our
Savior, Matt. 25. from the 21 ver. to the end of the 41 ver. Then shall he say
to them on the Left hand, depart from me ye Cursed into Everlasting fire,
prepared for the Devil and his Angels. There Is Judgment without Mercy, and the
Reason of it follows, For I was an Hungered and ye Fed me not, I was Thirsty and
ye gave me no Drink, Naked and ye Clothed me not, etc. In as much as ye did it
not to these little ones, ye did it not to me. That is, ye showed no Mercy, for
my Sake to them that needed it. So is the first Part of the Apostles Sentence
confirmed, and exemplified by the latter Part of our Saviors: They shall have
Judgment without Mercy that showed no Mercy. The second Part of the Apostolical
Sentence is likewise abundantly confirmed by the first Part of our Saviors.
Then shall the King say unto them on the Right hand, come ye Blessed of my
Father, receive the Kingdom prepared for you from the Foundation of the World;
For I was an Hungered and ye gave me Meat, I was Thirsty, and ye gave me Drink,
etc. That is, by his own Interpretation, ver. 40. In as much as ye have done it
unto one of the least of my Brethren (being also your Brethren) you have done
it unto me. Where it is to be noted, how the Merciful Man has not only his
sins covered, for which he might have been Condemned, but is advanced to a
state of Glory, and Triumph in the Kingdom of Heaven. So does Mercy not only
escape but triumph over Judgment.

In each part of this Description of the distributive Justice, or Judgment of
God in the latter day, a common Synechdoche of the Part for the Whole, must be
understood, that is, in the Assignment of the respective Reasons of the
contrary Judgments of Absolution and Condemnation. For neither will Charity be
respected as the only reason, or condition of the Reward, but therewith also
all other Christian Virtues, and Good Works, especially that of an unfeigned
Faith, as the Root of them all. Nor will the want of Charity, or the Vices most
contrary to it, be the only reason of the Sentence of Condemnation; but all
other sins against the known will of God, will be jointly respected in the
awarded Punishment. But since it has pleased our Savior, who is himself to be
Judge at that day, to specify these two opposite Practices as the only
Instances of the reason of his future Judgment, we have sufficient ground to
conclude, that they will be especially, though not only, considered by him in
that Judgment.

The same Synechdoche of the Part for the Whole, necessary to be understood in
the words of our Savior, which we have last mentioned, is no less necessary to
be understood in all Promises of the same Reward to any particular Virtue, or
sort of Good Works, of any kind. Partly because no single Virtue, that is
sincere and genuine, can exist without a Connection of all other Virtues, as
has been often notified in the Doctrine, as well of Heathen, as Christian
Virtues. And partly, because no single Virtue, in the want of the rest can be
enough to qualify a Man for the State of the Heavenly Life, or render a Man so
much as capable thereof. Because that Life does require, as an Indispensible
Preparative for it, such a Principle of Divine Life, or Holiness, as
comprehends the Habit and Disposition at least of all Goodness, and as is
perfectly inconsistent with a total privation of any Real Virtue. So that if it
were possible for a Man to have any such Virtue in him, as Charity, with a
total privation of Sobriety, Humility, Temperance and Piety toward God, he
could not be capable of that Benefit, or Reward, which the Text speaks of, that
is, of having all his sins covered, or perfectly discharged from all Punishment
at the last Judgment. Although that single Virtue, however imperfect, and
insincere, might possibly abate the degrees of Punishment, for the want of the
rest, as has been inti^^^^ed before.

But although in the promises of this reward to any particular Virtue, or sort
of Good Works, there be a necessity of the foresaid Synechdoche, yet in the
Threatenings of Judgments to particular Vices, there is no necessity of any such
Figure. Because, as there is no such necessary Connection of all sorts of Vices,
(as there is of Virtues) some of which are contrary and inconsistent with some
others; so it is certain, that any one Vice, notwithstanding any freedom from
others, is enough to reader a Man liable to the Sentence of Condemnation: As in
Humane Justice, one Capital Crime renders a man liable to death,
notwithstanding any possible Plea of Innocence, as to other Crimes: And one
Mortal Disease will kill a Man, notwithstanding any freedom from other Diseases.

So in the last judgment, if a Man be able to plead, (as many will be) that
they were no Idolaters, Whoremasters, Thieves, or other sorts of Criminals: And
that they are not guilty of starving any body, or depriving them of their
bread, robbing or oppressing, or casting into Prison, or other like breaches of
Charity; no such Plea will hold before the Righteous Judge, which will never
change any thing upon a Man that he is not guilty of; nor does he instance in
any such practice in this Monitory Description of his last Judgment. He says
not, ye robbed me of my Meat, Drink, or Clothing, or ye wronged me by Violence
or Fraud; but ye fed me not when I was hungry, ye clothed me not when I was
naked, ye relieved me not in my Necessities neither did ye visit, or comfort me
in my Distresses: Go therefore ye cursed, etc. not for your Injustice or
Injuries, but for your Uncharitableness. What could our blessed Lord mean by
this negative manner of describing his future Judgment but to warn all People
of that vulgar Deceit, which they are so apt to fall into, that not being
guilty of doing any body any wrong or harm (wherein also they judge very
partially, upon gross and false Accounts, without any regard to the many and
great Injuries of the Heart and Tongue,) they must needs be excused at the Last
Day. As if it were Charity enough to cover other sins, not to have done any
Wrong in matter of Fact to any Body, and not to take the Meat out of another
man's mouth, were to Feed him, not to strip him, or take away his Garment were
to Clothe him I know no Plea of Common People so frequently alleged as this,
nor any so Deceitful, or so contrary to the Express meaning of our Saviors
Description of his own Judgment.

I have insisted something more largely upon this Testimony of our Savior, as
one that alone is sufficient to confirm the Doctrine here treated of.
Nevertheless I shall proceed to the Allegation of a competent number of other
Texts to the same purpose, which I judge to be partly necessary for the
Conviction of a strong Prejudice against this Doctrine in the minds of many
Good People amongst us, and partly useful for the more effectual persuasion of
all People to the study and practice of this Virtue, which the Apostle
recommends to us with such an Emphatical mark of Efficacy. (...), etc. before
all things have fervent Charity: For Charity etc.

And because the Texts already quoted have been taken out of the New Testament
only, and chiefly from the Mouth of our Savior himself, I shall proceed to add
some others of the same Authority, before I mention any out of the Old
Testament. But before I produce any particular Text, I must demand the
Concession of this undeniable Proposition, viz. That all Promises of entrance
into Everlasting Life or of Reward in Heaven, made to the exercise of this
Virtue, do necessarily suppose and imply the Covering or Remission of sin,
because all sin uncovered, i. e. unpardoned, is an invincible Bar to a man's
entrance into that State, and renders him incapable of any place or reward in
Heaven; because a Man must first be justified from the Guilt of sin, before he
can be Glorified. Romans 8.30. Whom he has justified, them he has glorified.
And it is no more possible for a Man to be Glorified without being Justified,
than it is to enter into the Kingdom of Heaven without being saved from Hell.
Whatever therefore is, or can be available toward the Glorification of a
sinner, must needs be available toward his Salvation, or Deliverance from
Condemnation, which imports such Remission or Non-imputation of sin, as is
specially signified by the Covering of it. Therefore all Promises of Salvation,
Entrance into Heaven, Heavenly Treasure, Everlasting Life or Rewaid, made by
our Savior himself, or by his Apostles in his Name to the habit or exercise of
Charity, do necessarily imply the Covering of sin, to be hoped for upon the
same account.

For to say as some Divines do, that Charity and Good Works are necessary to
Salvation, but not to Justification, seems to me no less than a real
Contradiction. For so it must needs be, if it be spoken concerning the Final
and ^udicial Justification, which certainly is the most complete and perfect
Signification of that Word, Justification in S^ripture phrase, being generally
(though not always) opposed to Condemnation in sensu forensi. As Romans 8.33, 34.
It is God that justifies, who shall condemn? and Prove. 17.15. He that
justifies the Wicked, and he that condemns the Just, etc. To be Justified is
not to be Condemned, and what is it to be Saved, but not to be Condemed in the
last Judgment? But if to be Saved, be not to be Condemned, and not to be
Condemned is to be Justified; to say that Charity and Good Works are necessary
to Salvation; or not Condemnation, and yet not necessary to Justification is a
perfect Contradiction, equal to the Saying, that Charity is necessary and not
necessary to Justification; but this by the way, only to answer a common
Subtersuge from the Doctrine of the Text.

Having thus premised this undeniable Postulate, I shall now proceed to allege
the particular promises of Salvation, Eternal Life, and entrance into the
Kingdom of Heaven, with the Possession of Everlasting rewards in that State,
made to the habit and exercise of this Grace of Charity.

In the Sermon upon the Mount, (besides the Texts already cited from thence) I
shall instance in two others, Mat. 6.3, 4. But when thou do thine Alms, let
not thy Left hand know what thy Right hand does, That thine Alms may be in
Secret, and thy Father which sees in secret, shall reward thee Openly. That
this open Reward promised to the Alms-giver, is to be understood of the
Heavenly Reward, I presume will not be questioned. And ver. 20. of the same
Chapter, Lay up for your selves Treasures in Heaven, where neither Moth nor
Rust does corrupt. Where, that our Savior speaks of the same practice of Alms
giving is evident by comparing the Text with its Parallel, Luke. 12.33. Sell
all that you have, and give Alms, providing your selves Baggs which wax not
old, a Treasure in the Heavens that fails not, where no Thief approaches,
neither Moth corrupts. Agreeable to the like words, Mat. 19.21. Jesus said
unto him, if thou wile be perfect go and sell that thou have, and give to the
Pope, and thou shall have Treasure in Heaven. To which Speech of our Savior
St. Paul does undoubtedly allude, 1 Timothy 6.17, 18, 19. Charge them that are
Rich in this world, that they do Good, that they be Rich in Good Works, ready
to Distribute, willing to Communicate, laying up for themselves a good
Foundation against the time to come, that they may lay hold on Eternal Life. By
which words the Apostle plainly signifies, such Good Works as he speaks of, to
be a good Foundation of the Hope of Eternal Life, but so they could not be,
unless they were also a Foundation of Hope of the Pardon of all sins, because
the want of this Pardon destroys the Foundation of all Hope of Eternal Life.

Another Text of the same importance is Luke 16.9. I say unto you, make to your
selves Friends of the Mammon of Unrighteousness, that when ye fail, they may
receive you into Everlasting Habitations. Mammon is a Syriack word (the
Language used by our Savior) signifying Riches or worldly Wealth; and of the
Reason, why they are called the Mammon of Unrighteousness, or the unrighteous
Mammon, ver. 11. a double Account may be given from the Context antecedent and
consequent. The antecedent Context is a Parable of the Unjust Steward, that
provided for his future Maintenance (when he was warned out of his Office) by
cheating his Master, and making himself Friends of his Masters Debtors, by
Defaulking what he pleased, from the just Accounts of their Debts, and putting
them upon his own Interest, by such an unrighteous Obligation. Now the Words of
our Savior in the Text cited, being the application of that Parable, may seem
to imply the reason of that Phrase, the manmon of unrighteousness, or the
unrighteous mammon, to be taken from the unrighteousness, which is frequently
used in the gaining, holding and using of Worldly Riches. But another and
better account of the same Term, may be collected from the (...) verse; where
the same (...) is rep^ated and interpreted. If therefore ye have not been
faithful in the unrighteous Mammon; who will commit to your trust the tra^
riches. Where the unrighteous Mammon is opposed to the true Mammon, or Riches.
For the word Riches is not in the Greek, but understood in the Adjective,
(...), the true, from whence it appears, that the reason of that te^m
unrighteousness, is not to be drawn only from the manner of gaining, or using
Riches, but also from the proper nature, and just Value thereof, which being
compared with the only true Riches, is found to be false, vain and deceitful.
The only true Riches is that which is Spiritual and heavenly, consisting in
true righteousness, and the Reward thereof, in the Heavenly Treasure: therefore
the Riches of this World are not the right, or true Riches, but are rather apt
to deceive Men, and hinder them from obtaining the true Riches; whence our
Savior calls them the deceitfulness of riches, and Mark 4.19. the
deceitfulness of riches choketh the seed of the word. And yet, so as they may
be used, they may prove useful toward the gaining the true Riches, which is
the thing signified by our Savior in that Text; make to your selves friends of
the mammon of unrighteousness (the false, and deceitful Riches of the World)
that when ye fail, i. e. (...).
When ye fail of holding them, or they fail you (as they must needs do, when ye
come to die) they may receive you, i. e. you may be received: The word they,
not relating necessarily to the word friends, but the Verb (...) is rather to
be understood impersonally, they may receive you, i. e. you may be received, as
Luke 12.20. Thou fool, this night shall they require thy soul, so it is in the
Greek, (...), but well translated, thy soul shall be required of thee. Into
everlasting habitations, i. e. into Heaven, Now although in this Text no
express mention is made of the practice of Charity, yet that that is the thing
meant (principally at least) by the first words, make to your selves friends of
the Mammon of unrighteousness, no doubt can be made. And that being supposed to
be the true Sense of those words, the thing which I observe is this, that the
practice of Charity is directed by our Savior, to be used to the end, that a
Man may be received into the Heavenly Habitations, and therefore, that it must
needs be some way available to that end (as I shall afterward show more fully,
in answer to the Objections made against this Doctrine) It being grossly absurd
that any means should be directed to be used for any end, without supposing
that it can be some way available thereunto. And because the entrance into the
Kingdom of Heaven, does necessarily suppose the covering, or remission of sin,
which being uncovered, is an Invincible Bar to that entrance, I infer, that
this Charity must be also available to the removing of this Ban, that is, to
the covering of sin.

Another saying of our Saviors, which I take to be very agreeable to this, is
in Luke 6.38. Give, and it shall be given unto you, good measure, pressed down,
and shaken together, and running over, shall men give into your bosom, for with
the same measure that you mere withal, it shall be measured unto you again.
The word Men is not in the Greek Text, but the Verb being the third Person
plural, (...) signifies no more then they shall give, and is to be interpreted
by the Passive Vercle of the singular Number, used in the beginning of the
verse, (...) it shall be given unto you. Which does not signify so much what
shall be done by Men to the Charitable Person in this Life, as what shall be
done by God for him, not in this Life only, or so much, as in that which is to
come. For to confine the Sense of the Text to the kindness of Men, or of God,
to the Charitable Person only in this Life, is to abate the Liberality of the
Promise, so emphatically expressed. Now although some Reward in this Life may
be given by God to particular Good Works, without a plenary Pardon of sin, yet
so it cannot be in the Life to come, where a Man must first be discharged of
his sin, before he can be capable of any Reward of his Good Works. And even in
this Life every temporal Reward afforded to a sinner, implies some Exemption
from the extremity of temporal Punishment, because it is inconsistent with it.
Temporal Punishment, as well as Eternal is partly Privative, and partly
Positive, consisting as well in the privation or want of temporal Good things,
as in the suffering of sensible Evils. And temporal Reward must needs consist
in the Enjoyment of some temporal Privilege, or Benefit which imports
Coutradiction to the Privation thereof, which is part of the Punishment
deserved by him.

I shall mention but one Text more from the Mouth of our Savior, and that, is
Luke 11.41. But rather give Alms of such things as you have, and behold all
things are clean unto you. The scope of which words most agreeable to the
Context appears to be this, That whereas the Pharisees, by a superstitious
Tradition did imagine, that it was necessary for them to wash their Hands before
they did eat, to purge themselves from any Pollution, that might render them
Unclean, and so unfit to partake of the Blessing of God in the use of their
ordinary meat: our Savior reprooving that Superstitious Conceit, instructs
them to a better way of purifying both Themselves and their Meat: and that was
by giving of Alms of what they possessed. That being a special testimony and
fruit of Repentance, which is necessary and effectual to the Purgation of all
Spiritual Pollution. A thing which by its Acceptance with God was fifted to
procure his Parcon of all sin, that might render them unworthy of partaking of
any of his Benefits. The only thing that could pollute them and those
Creatures, which they were to receive, by Depriving them of the Blessing of God
in the use of them was sin. And to think that that could be cleansed, or purged
away by the outward Washing of their Hands, was a gross piece of Superstition:
Although it wanted not some appearance of Foundation from the Ceremonial
Precepts in Moses's Law; for several Washings were enjoined to cleanse the Jews
from a sort of Legal and Ceremonial Pollution: but never were defigned for any
Purgation from any Moral uncleanness or sin. But the giving of Alms, according
to the Ability of the Giver (signified by the (...)) does indeed import
something of a true and real Purification of the Heart, as it is an effect of
Charity, which is the best Fruit of an unreigned Repentance, whereby the soul
is cleansed from the guilt and pollution of sin.

For there are two Parts of Repentance: the First is to cease to do Evil, and
the Second, to learn to do Well. As it is described by the Prophet Isay, Chap.
1. v. 16, 17, 18. A Text which I am to urge afterward, as a pregnant
Confirmation of the Doctrine asserted in this Discourse. John the Baptist
preaching the Baptism of Repentance for the Remission of sins, presses this
upon his Auditory, that they should bring forth Bruits worthy of Repentance. So
did St. Paul in all places where he preached, Acts. 26.20. exhorting them to
repent, and turn to God, and do Works meet for Repentance; such indeed are all
manner of Good Works and Abstaining from Evil: And works of Mercy and
Almsgiving being most eminent amongst Good Works, are by a common Synechdoche
of the Part for the Whole, put for all Good Works. And the whole business of
Repentance is sometime described by them, as shall be shown from several Texts
of the Old Testament, which remain to be quoted in their due place.

But as to the Sense of that Speech of our Savior, which I am yet speaking of,
it seems to agree with that of St. Paul, Tit. 1.15. Unto the Pure all things
are pure, but unto them that are defiled and unbelieving, is nothing pure, but
even their Mind and Conscience is defiled. Where St. Paul speaks of all sorts
o^ Meats, and other Creatures of God (as our Savior does in this Speech)
declaring the Use of them to the Pure, i. e. to all penitent Believers (opposed
to them that are defiled and unbelieving, whose Mind and Conscience is defiled
with sin unrepented of) are pure. The only Difference of these two Sayings
seems to be this: That whereas St. Paul speaks of a general Purity, our
Savior expresses the same thing Synechdochically, by a particular eminent
Instance of Good Works, supposed to proceed from a common principle of
Sanctification and Purity of Heart.

To conclude my Animadversion upon the Text, that which our Savior means is,
as if he had said, to go about to cleanse the Body, without regard to the Soul,
is vain and unprofitable. But on the contrary, the Soul being cleansed by
Repentance, testified by such an eminent Fruit of it, as is the giving of Alms
(supposed to be considerable in their Measure, and proportionable to the
Ability of the Giver) all things (not forbidden by God) are clean, and free to
be used without fear of Pollution, and with confidence of his Blessing.

If this be not the Meaning of our Savior in this obscure Text. I know not
what it should be. But if it be so, it plainly and fully confirms the Doctrine
which I have in hand, viz. that Charity is a special and effectual means for
the Covering of sin, which is all one with the Cleansing from the Guilt of it.

But some Protestant Expositor prejudiced against this Doctrine, have utterly
changed the Sense of our Savior in this Speech, which they will not allow to
be designed by him for any Direction or Declaration of the means of Cleansing
men from the Guilt of sin: But to be spoken Ironically in reference to a common
Opinion and Doctrine of the Jews, See Dr. Lightfoots Horae. Hebr.
viz. that Alms is equipollent to all the precepts of the Law, and enough to
purge away sin, and save from Hell; and this Sentence to be cited from them by
way of Irrision and Reprehension, rather then with Approbation, and so not to
be uttered as his own words or meaning; but this Interpretation seems to be
forced, as having no other Foundation, then the Prejudice of the Authors
against the Doctrine which we are treating of, confirmed by this, and the
forementioned Saying of our Savior.

I shall add but one Text more out of the New Testament; viz. that of St. Paul,
Hebr. 13.16. To do good, and to distribute forget not, for with such Sacrifices
God is well pleased: Where I shall not insist upon the Latin Translations,
which may seem more expressly to favor our Doctrine, by the words promeretur,
vulg. placatur, vel conciliatur, signifying God to be appeased, reconciled and
made friends by works of Charity: But content my self with our English
Translation, most literally agreeable to the Greek Word (...), God is well
pleased. Which word does as truly, though not so expressly confirm our
Doctrine, as any of the Latin Words forementioned, used by Learned
Interpreters, do. For whatsoever Good Works God is truly pleased with, must
needs be profitable to the averting his Displeasure, from the Person that does
them, if he be any ways liable thereto, and whatsoever tends to the Averting
his Displeasure, tends equally to the Averting the Punishment of sin, which is
the Sense that I assert of St. Peter's phrase of Covering of sins. Nor can God
be well pleased with any Action of a sinner, till he be in some measure at
least reconciled to him, and disposed to the Pardon of his sin. Other Texts out
of the New Testament will be alleged afterward in Answer to the Objections
against the Doctrine

At present I shall only add a few more of equal Authority out of the Old
Testament, beginning with that of Solomon Prove. 14.21. He that despises his
neighbor sins, but he that has mercy on the poor, happy is he. The English
Annotation upon this Text, commonly attributed to the Assembly of Divines, is
remarkable in these words. He that will not give to the poor, shall be punished
as a sinner, although he takes nothing from them, or because it is the
Propriety and Privilege of Charity to cover a multitude of sins, Jam. 5.20.
and 1 Pet. 4.8. He that despises his neighbor sins, may be also, and is by
some interpreted, shall be found a sinner, all his sins shall be reckoned unto
him, and he shall be punished without any mitigation. So 1 Kin. 1.21. I and my
son shall be sinners, that i^, shall be proceeded against as offenders, sin
will be imputed unto us. Where we find the same Interpretation of the Text, in
St. Peter, which is given by us, allowed by these Annotators, who are far
enough from all suspicion of favor to any Popish Doctrines. Notwithstanding
the same Interpreters do give the other Sense of St. Peter's words only in their
Notes upon that place, making them to relate to the sins of others, thereby
making peace. But this Interpretation is grounded only upon the parallel Text
of the Proverbs cited by them, and as they think, by the Apostle, which
Objection has been answered before. Now the forementioned Sense of the first
Branch of the Text, Prove. 14.21. given by the Annotator, does determine the
second, by way of opposition to the first, to signify that Happiness which is
promised to him that has mercy on the poor, to consist in the non-imputation,
covering, or remission of his sins.

But a more indubitable Testimony out of the same Book, to confirm this
Doctrine, is in Chap. 16.6. by mercy and truth iniquity is purged. The vulgar
Latin reads redimitur, is redeemed, Junius and Tremellius, expiatur, is
expiate^, agreeable to the proper signification of the Hebrew word (...), from
(...), placavit, expiavit, so the meaning of the words is, that by the practice
of these Virtues, the Pardon of sin is impetrated, or obtained. And one would
think this Exposition of the wise man's words, should be past all doubt. But
because the admission of it imports an irrefragable confirmation of the
Doctrine, which we labor to defend, some Interpreters out of mere prejudice
against that Doctrine, have found out another meaning of the words, affording
no manner of favor to this conclusion. Namely, that the Mercy and Truth,
spoken of in this Text, are to be referred to God only, and not at all to Men*
making the Sense to be, that iniquity is purged by the Mercy and Truth of God,
without any respect to those Virtues, as practiced by Men.

But whether this Interpretation be not forced to comply with the opinion of
them that advance it; or to be preferred before the other, which is so obvious
and plain, must be left to the judgment of the Impartial and Ingenuous Reader,
because I am not willing to trouble him with a tedious confutation of it.

Another Text to this purpose is that of Daniel 4.27. Wherefore O King, let my
counsel be acceptable unto thee, and break off thy sins by righteousness, (or
by Alms, Vulg. Latin, Septuagint, Munster. Syriack, Arabic, de Dieu. etc.
as the word is there rendered by many learned Translators, and as the same word
is often used in the Old Testament) and thine iniquities by showing mercy to
the Poor: if it may be a lengthening to thy tranquillity, or a healing of thine
error, as it is in the Margent: where to let pass the contest about the
Translation of the Verb, (...), whether it ought to be as we have it, according
to other Protestant Translations, break off, or as it is in the Septuagint,
vulgar Latin, Syriack, Arabic, and very many other Translators, redeem thine
iniquity, it is evident that the Prophets counsel to the King was given to the
end, that he might obtain some remission of his sin, and avoid the extremity of
the threatening declared in the foregoing verses. And the matter of that counsel
consisting in the practice of Charity, it is likewise evident, that in the
judgment of the Prophet, such Charity is a thing available to that end,
otherwise his counsel was vain, and unprofitable.

The like counsel is given by the Prophet Isaiah Chap. 1.16, 17, 18. verses, to
the people of Judah, after a severe remonstrance of Gods displeasure,
threatening their Destruction, and rejecting their hypocritical services. He
tells them what they should do, to escape that Punishment of their sin, and
gain a full remission thereof. Wash you, make you clean, put away the evil of
your doings from before mine eyes, cease to do evil, learn to do well. seek
judgment, relieve the oppressed, judge the fatherless, plead for the widow;
come now, and let us reason together, says the Lord, though your sins be as
scarlet, they shall be as white as snow, though they be red like crimson, they
shall be us wool. If these words uttered by the Prophet in the name of the
Lord, do not confirm that Sense of the Apostle which we contest for, I know not
what words will do it. He that is not abundantly satisfied with the Evidence of
these Texts of the New and Old Testament, may see more to the same purpose,
Psalm. 41.1. Isai. ^8. from the 7t^ verse to the 12th. Ezekiel. 18.7. Mic. 6.8.
Luke 19.8, 9. And when he has considered these Canonical Texts, he may cast
his eye upon two or three Apocryphals, Tob. 4.7, 8, 9, 10, 11. and Chap. 12.9.
For Alms does deliver from death, and shall purge away all sin. Ecclesiasticus
3.30. Water will quench a flaming fire, and Alms makes an Atonement for sin.
The authority of these Texts, does not so much test upon the particular
Authors, as upon the general Sense of the Jewish Church, which they are justly
presumed to deliver especially while their Doctrine is found so agreeable to
the Canonical Scriptures, which were the Rule of their Faith. To transcribe all
the Texts, which are to be found in the Bible to this purpose, and make such
particular Remarks upon them, as we have done upon those few, which we have
cited before, would swell the Discourse, and be a Work of Supererogation, by
which we cannot hope to merit so much of the Reader, as perhaps we may do by
sparing his pains, and our own.

CHAP IV.
HAving now sufficiently (as we think) confirmed the General Doctrine, founded
upon this Text of St. Peter: we are to proceed according to our promise to the
answering some Objections, which have been or may be made against this Sense of
the words. And I shall begin with that which seems to be most considerable,

I. Objection. Namely, that these words of the Apostle are quoted, or borrowed
from a Proverb of Solomon's, Prove. 10.12. Hatred stirs up strife, but love
covers all sins. Where by the Antithesis of the two parts of the Sentence, it
is past all doubt, that the sins to be covered by love, must be the sins of
others, and not of the Charitable Person.

Answer. To this may be answered. 1. That it is no way evident, that the
Apostle did intend any quotation of that Proverb, there being no such
intimation thereof in this Text, as is usual in other quotations out of the Old
Testament, by those words, as it is written, or the like, used by this same
Apostle in this Epistle, Chap. 1.16. Because it is written, be ye Holy, as I am
Holy. And as it is evident, that he does not quote the whole Proverb, whiles he
leaves out the first part, Hatred stirs up strife; so, that he does not cite
the second part verbatim, is plain, by comparing the Texts. Whereof one says,
love covers all sins, the other only a multitude of sins. But in the
Septuagint, which is generally followed in quotations out of the Old Testament,
in the New, a far greater difference is found, (...). So it is in the
Septuagint; not agreeing so much as in one word with St. Peter's supposed
quotation, (...). The Hebrew Text indeed is something more agreeable to St.
Peter's words.

But then 2ly. Suppose that the Apostle did allude unto the words of that
Proverb (as is not improbable) it does not therefore follow that he intended
the same Sense, it being very usual with our Savior himself, and the
Evangelists and Apostles, by way of accommodation, to make use of Texts and
Sayings in the Old Testament, in a different Sense from that which did belong
to them there. As in Mat. 2.15. and 23. 2 Cor. 8.15. and elsewhere frequently.
And this Answer I take to be sufficient for this first Objection against our
Interpretation of St. Peter's words.

2. Objection. But another main Objection, and that which is most like to be
insisted upon against this Interpretation, is, that it seems to favor the
Popish Doctrines of Merit, Satisfaction and Justification by Works, and to be
repugnant to the Evangelical Doctrine of the most full, perfect, and sufficient
Expiation, and Satisfaction for the sins of the whole World, made only by the
Sacrifice of Christ's death, and applied only by Faith. The covering and pardon
of sin, is the Effect of Gods grace granted only upon the consideration of
Christ's death, upon condition of a true Faith in him wrought by the Spirit of
God through the hearing of the Gospel.

Answer. To this Objection I answer.

1. That although some Papists interpreting this Text as I do, may be found to
allege it among other Texts, for the confirmation of some of the Doctrines
mentioned in the Objection; yet neither is this Sense vouched by all
Interpreters of their Profession; nor can any of those Doctrines be further
evinced, or confirmed from this Text, so understood, then it may be from other
Texts before alleged for the Confirmation of the Doctrine, against which the
Objection is made. Nor is the free grace of God, or the sufficiency of that
Expiation, or Satisfaction which was made by the death of Christ, any more
abated by this Doctrine, than it is by that which all the forementioned Texts
import.

2. The words Merit and Satisfaction, are known to have been familiarly used,
in reference to Good Works, by the most ancient of the Latin Fathers, and
particularly by St. Cyprian (one of the most Primitive) in a Catholic Orthodox
Sense. Both the words are Innocent in the Sense of the Fathers, though they
have been perverted by the Schoolmen.

And Justification by Works is certainly as true in St. James's Sense, as it is
false in St. Paul's. The late Controversies that have been concerning these
Points, do not so much respect the words, as the extravagant Sense, that has
been put upon them by the Schoolmen, who have entangled and corrupted a great
part of Christian Doctrine, by their misinterpreting the Fathers: determining
the simplicity of their Popular Expressions, by their own Capricious and
Litigious Conceits, into such Dogmatical Sense, as was never thought of by the
Ancients. But in the particular Controversies about Merit, Satisfaction, and
Justification by Works, there has been so much of Logomachy, or word-bate, as
might (in my opinion) be fairly compromised, or accorded by Judicious
Arbitratours, whose minds were free from all prejudice, but that against
Contention and Division: and were more zealous for Unity and Concord, than for
disputable and opinionative Truth. But for to undertake that task in this place
would not be reasonable.

That all Pardon of sin is founded upon the Expiation, or Propitiation made by
the Blood of Christ, and granted, or obtained only by the Free Grace of God, is
not denied by any Sect or Party of Christians, that I know of. Although some
Differences have been about the Conditions of this Grant. For to say, that this
Grace is granted without any Condition or Qualification of the Receiver, is, in
my Judgment, to deny a great part of the Scriptures, as well of the New
Testament, as of the Old, destructive as well of the New Covenant, as of the
Old: no more Antinomian than Anti-evangelical.

Doubtless it is of Free Grace that God will pardon a sinner, upon any
Condition, Nor is it possible for us to do any thing, sufficient to make
Satisfaction for our sins, or to merit the Forgiveness of them, in rigor of
Justice, because all that is in our Power to do, is no more then our Duty, if
God requires it. And all that we do, is much less. And as the duty of Well
doing in the utmost Extent, is a just Debt of Thankfulness at least, if not of
Preceptive Obligation to Almighty God, to whom we owe our selves, and all that
we have or can do. So the Punishment we are liable to for neglecting our Duty,
or acting contrary thereunto in our Evil doings, is another Debt, by our
Saviors account signified to us in that Form of Prayer which he has taught us
to use: Forgive us our Debts, as we forgive our Debtors, Mat. 6.12. But it is
altogether unreasonable one Debt can be discharged by the Payment of another,
especially when the Payment falls so much short of the old Debt, as it does in
any thing we do. Besides that upon a due account Charity it self, and every
Good Work that can be done by us; does increase our debt to God, because it
cannot be done without his Grace.

Nevertheless God of his Free Grace has promised the Remission of sin, upon
certain Conditions declared in his Word, amongst which, this of Charity is one,
that by a common Synechdoche of a Part for the Whole, includes all the rest.
And whereas in the New Testament Faith in Christ is more commonly propounded,
as the Condition of Justification, importing the Remission of sin, it is to be
considered, that this Faith is so far from excluding Charity, that it is
expressly said to include it, by St. Paul himself, the supposed Author of the
Doctrine of Justification by Faith without Works, Gal. 5.6. For in Christ Jesus
neither Circumcision avails any thing, nor Uncircumcision, but Faith which
works by Love. (...), whether the word (...), be to be understood in a
Passive sense, (as most commonly it is elsewhere in Scripture, and in other
Books: and as it is here rendered by the Syriack Translator, and so meaning that
Faith is actuated, perfected, and made effectual by Love) or in the Active
sense, as our English Translation gives it, signifying the Efficacy, Energy or
Operation of Faith only. The Meaning of the Apostle by the Addition of these
Words, can be no other then to limit, and distinguish the nature of that Faith,
which is available to Justification, from an hypocritical, dead, and
ineffectual Faith, which is altogether invalid, availing nothing at all to the
Effect of Justification. The Active sense of the Word, as well as the Passive,
serving to declare the true Nature and Notion of a Justifying Faith to be
Energetical and Practical, i. e. producing such effects of the Will, as are
agreeable to the entire Object of it: that is, to the Authority of Christ, his
Doctrine and Precepts, as well as such as respect only the Effect of
Redemption, or Expiation of sin by his Death. And such is the necessity of this
Charity, by the Doctrine of the same Apostle, that he elsewhere says, Though I
have all Faith, so that I could remove Mountains, and have not Charity, it
profits me nothing, 1 Cor. 13.3. Where by all Faith, undoubtedly is meant,
all the Faith that can be had without Charity, and needs not to be restrained
to the particular (...), or extraordinary Gift of the Faith of Miracles,
whereof he speaks in the former Chapter ver. 12.

To this Purpose St. James Chap. 2.22. says, Faith is made perfect by Works;
not excluding any sort of Good Works, but specially treating of the works of
Charity, as appears by the Context, from verse the 13. to the 18. And whereas
he says, Faith is made perfect by Works, he speaks not only of a Gradual
Perfection, or of the Consummation or Preservation of Faith, or of the
Ornament, Demonstration, or signal evidence of Faith, as some would have it;
but of such an essential and formal Perfection, as is necessary to the nature
of Truth, and sincerity of Faith, as appears by that repeated Sentence, both
before and after these Words, ver. 17. Faith without Works is dead, and ver.
26. As the Body without the Spirit is dead; so Faith without Works is dead
also. Whether by the Spirit he means the Breath (as some take it, because the
word (...), Spiritus, sometime signifies no more) or rather the Soul, which is
the most usual Sense of the word in Scripture, the Meaning comes all to one,
signifying, that an idle or fruitless Faith has no more of Spiritual Life or
Reality in it, than a Body can have without Breath, or without a Soul: and
therefore is no more a true and unfeigned Faith, than a dead Carcass is a human
Body.

Indeed the true justifying, saving Faith in the practical Notion, which is the
only true Notion of it, includes Charity, together with all other Good Works,
as I have elsewhere largely showed: So that if Faith be necessary to the
Covering or Remission of sin, Charity is so too. But the common Answer to
these, and all other Texts produced to evince the Necessity of Charity and Good
Works, to the Salvation of a sinner, is, that they prove only a necessity of
Presence and Concomitancy, or at most a necessity of Consequence, not of
Efficacy, that is, that this Necessity does not respect the End or Effect of
Faith, in the Justification or Salvation of the Believeer, but proceeds only
from the common nature and principle of that Faith, which is an effect of the
Spirit of God: the necessary Fruits whereof do consist in Love, Joy, Peace,
Long-suffering, etc. which distinct Virtues, with their proper Works, do not
contribute any thing to the Effect of our Justification, but are mere
Concomitants, or at most but grateful Effects of that Faith which justifies
us. Which uses to be illustrated by a Similitude borrowed from the natural and
animal Life, wherein the particular faculties of Seeing, or taking hold of a
thing by the Touch, do necessarily imply such a common Principle of sensitive
Life, as does also comprehend the powers and faculties of Hearing, Smelling and
Tasting, yet none of these Faculties, or any act of them do, or can contribute
any thing efficiently to the effect of Seeing, Apprehending, or laying hold of
an Object: So the Grace of Charity, or Love to God, and Man, together with all
those other Fruits of the Spirit, which are mentioned by the Apostle, and all
the Effects and Works, which do proceed from them, are indeed necessary
Concomitants of such a Faith, as justifies or saves a Man, but do contribute no
more, nor have any more Efficacy to this effect of Justification and Salvation,
than the distinct Faculties of other Senses, do to the effect of Seeing. This I
take to be a true Account of their Sense, that assert the Doctrine of
Justification, and Pardon of sin by Faith only, as that imports a habit, or act
really distinct, though not separated from other Christian Virtues.

In opposition to this Opinion contradicting the Doctrine which I maintain to
be the Sense of the Apostle in this Text, confirmed, as has been seen, by many
others, I am engaged to prove that Charity, and Good Works are necessary to the
Justification of a sinner, that is, to the Remission of his sin, not only by
way of Concomitancy, or joint Presence with Faith, or consequent to it, but
also by way of moral Efficacy as a Condition or Means to obtain that Effect.

This I hope will be sufficiently done by the following Arguments, this one
postulate or conclusion (which I suppose will not be denied) being first
granted me, viz. That if any thing else beside the habit or act of Faith,
considered as really distinct from other Christian Virtues or Acts, be
effectual or available to the Remission of sin, then Charity is, or may be so,
in as much as that is one of the most Excellent of Christian Virtues, most
agreeable to the Nature of God, and consequently most pleasing to him. So that
if that be not available to this End, nothing else besides Faith, can be so.
This Proposition being granted, I argue as follows.

1. Argument. If it be certain from Scripture, and we be bound to believe, that
nothing which can be done by us besides such a Faith, as is supposed to be
really distinct (though not separate) from all Good Works, can be of any
Efficacy toward the remission of our sins, then ought nothing else to be done
by us toward that end, because every such other act done to this end, would by
this supposition be perfectly vain and unreasonable, and not so only, but also
contrary to our obliged belief. And then to pray for the forgiveness of our
sins, that being an act distinct from Faith, would be not only needless and
useless, but unlawful; especially if it should be acted with any opinion, hope,
or belief, that such a prayer could avail us any thing in order to this end, or
that this end could any way be promoted by our Prayers. But this is directly
contrary to our Saviors Precept in that Form of Prayer, which he has taught
us to use, wherein we are directed to pray, that God will forgive us our
trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us. And contrary to the
advice of St. Peter to Simon Magus, Acts 8.22. Repent therefore of this thy
wickedness, and pray God, if perhaps the thought of thine heart may be forgiven
thee.

Where also it is to be noted, that the Apostle advises him not only to pray
for the forgiveness of his sin, but also to repent of it in order to the same
end. The same advice is given by the same Apostle to the Jews in the first
Sermon which he made unto them, after the reception of the Holy Ghost, Acts
2.37, 38. Having convinced them of their heinous sin in the murder of the Lord
Jesus, and made them sensible of it: Now when they heard this, they were
pricked in their hearts, and said unto Peter and the rest of the Apostles, men
and brethren, what shall we do. Then Peter said unto them, repent and be
baptizid every one of you, in the name of Jesus Christ, for the remission of
sins. Where it is observable, that whiles two other things are prescribed by the
Apostle to be done, in order to the remission of sin, viz. to repent, and to be
baptized, no mention is made of Faith, other then is included in those words,
be baptized in the name of Jesus Christ, which do indeed necessarily imply the
act of Faith. But besides this Baptism, which is one thing required to be done
for the remission of sins, Repentance also, which is another thing, is
expressly required, as necessary to this end: not in that Text only, but in an
hundred others of both Testaments, from whence it is that this remission of sin
is mentioned as the signal effect of Repentance, Mark 1.4. Luke 3.3. John is
said to have preached the Baptism of Repentance for the Remission of sin. And
in the Conjunction of these two things, the Sum of the Gospel to be preached to
all Nations, is comprised by our Savior in St. Luke, chap. 24.47. That
Repentance and Remission of sin should be preached in his Name to all Nations.
Hence also is the same called Repentance unto Life, Acts. 11.18. and Repentance
to Salvation, 2 Cor. 7.9.

From which Texts it does sufficiently appear, not only that Repentance is
necessary unto the Remission of sin, and to Life and Salvation, as a Condition,
or Causa sine qua non, but that it is also effectual, and really available to
these Ends: For to call that Repentance unto Life, and Repentance to Salvation,
which contributes nothing at all, nor has any manner of Efficacy to these
Ends, is an absurd Form of words. And if the Preposition (...), unto, does not
signify some kind of Efficacy, or Qualification for these Ends, it signifies
just nothing. But if it does signify any manner of Efficacy to this End, one
of these Things must needs be true: either that Repentance is the same thing
with that Faith, which abstracts from Works, as an Act really distinct from
them all, which is a plain Contradiction: or that something besides Faith, and
really distinct from it, is effectual and available to the Remission of sins,
which is the thing that was to be demonstrated.

Thus I have named two Things besides Faith, which are generally necessary to
Remission of sin, viz. Prayer and Repentance. Whereunto might be added the
practice of Fasting, Mourning, Humiliation, and Confession of sin, as things
frequently mentioned in Scripture, with prescription to their use, in order to
this end. I forbear to cite the particular Texts, wherein these things are
prescribed; because they are all but appendages, or parts of the general duty
of Repentance. Nor are these things necessary to this effect barely, and only
by their antecedent presence, as meet and convenient preparatives for this
Grace of Pardon, but also by, and in respect of such a Moral Efficacy, and
Prevalency, as they are justly presumed to have, by their declared acceptance
with God, which is all the Efficacy that can be reasonably attributed to Faith
it self. And if upon the stress of this Argument, it should be said that Faith
in the practical Sense, as a living energetical operative habit, does include
Repentance, with all the proper fruits thereof, the whole Question is yielded.
For then to say, that Faith is available for the remission, or covering of sin,
is to say, that Repentance, Prayer, Charity, and Good Works are so too, which
is all we contend for. It being far from our meaning to exclude Faith from any
necessary concurrence to this effect of Charity, that is to say, that Charity
without Faith can cover sin. For neither can Christian Charity be without
Faith, nor if it could, would it be any wise effectual to this end. The only
thing that we assert is, that Charity together with Faith, and as a proper, and
most Excellent Fruit of it, is available to this end. And the sum of the
Argument, which we have here urged to confirm this Assertion is this,

1. That if nothing but Faith can be available to this end, then ought nothing
to be done in order to it, but believing. And Prayer, Repentance, Humiliation,
and Confession of sin (notwithstanding that in Scripture they be all
prescribed, as means to be used to this end) are not only useless, or needless,
but unlawful to be practiced with respect to this end. Or secondly, that if
any of these things be available to this purpose, so also is Charity. This is
our first Argument.

2. Argument. If Charity and Good Works of any sort be not available toward
the obtainment of remission of sin, Eternal Life, and Salvation; then do all
promises of these Benefits made to the use and exercise of these means,
signify nothing, or at least they must needs lose all power and signification
of Motives to any of these Duties. For how can that be considered as a
reasonable Motive to any act, which does no way promote it. Whereas the General
Design and end of all conditional Promises, is to encourage, persuade, and move
the Persons to whom they are made, to the performance of those Conditions and
Acts which are recommended by the respective Promises, upon the hope of
obtaining the promised Benefits, by those means. But this hope can have no
foundation, without the believing, that the performance of those Conditions
will be some ways effectual to the obtainment of these Benefits. But if the
performance of such Acts and Conditions must be believed to contribute nothing
at all to the obtainment of these Benefits, the forementioned Faith in the
Promises, which is the only foundation of the hope, is utterly destroyed. And
by consequence the said Promises are deprived of all Virtue, or power of
Motives, to the practices whereunto they are annexed.

3. Argument. All Precepts, Exhortations, and Counsels (such as that in our
Text) to the practice of Charity, or any other Christian Virtue, beside Faith,
urged by such Motives as are no ways promoted by the Acts whereunto we are
exhorted, are vain, and delusory. Were such Precepts and Exhortations delivered
simply and absolutely, as only declarative of our Duty, or designed only to
move Men to their Duties, as Testimonies of Gratitude or Thankfulness for those
Benefits, which we receive only by Faith (as some late Divines would have them)
they would indeed be reasonable upon that account. But when they are expressly
urged, as in this Text, and many others they are, to move Men to the Practice
of particular Duties, as means to obtain the proposed Benefits, what can they
signify, but a plain imposing upon us, or abusing our minds, and perverting
our Faith, supposing that the doing of those things, whereto we are exhorted,
can nothing avail us to those ends? What can such Exhortations signify more
then if a man should be persuaded to stretch forth his hands to behold the
Glory of the Heavens, or to open his eyes to hear the sweet Melody of Music.

But the force of these Arguments is by many late Divines thought to be
sufficiently avoided, by alleging, that although it be true, that Faith is the
only thing, that is effectual to Justification, or remission of sin, and that
no other Act or Virtue can contribute any thing to this end, yet neither are
the forementioned Promises, nor the Exhortations void, or useless in reference
to this effect.

1. Because there is a Necessity of presence, though not of efficacy, of those
other Acts and Virtues, which are mentioned in the Promises and Exhortations.
And so Charity amongst other things may be a causa sine qua non, of Salvation
and remission of sin, in respect of its necessary presence together with Faith.

2. Because the same things are necessary to the verification of Faith, i. e.
to manifest the Truth of it, though they have no concurrent efficacy with
Faith, to the Justification or Salvation of the Believer.

3. Because the practice of these Virtues is necessary, or at least useful for
the assurance of a man's Justification, Pardon of sin, and Salvation, though it
be no ways effectual to any of those ends, considered in themselves. Heb. 6.10.
For God is not unrighteous to forget your work, and labor of love, which ye
have showed toward his name, in that ye have ministered to the Saints, and do
minister. And 2 Pet. 1.5, 10, 11. And besides all this giving all diligence,
add to your faith virtue, and to virtue knowledge, and to knowledge temperance,
and to temperance patience, and to patience godliness, and to godliness
brotherly kindness, and to brotherly kindness, charity, i. e. an universal
Charity, extended to all men, as well as Christian Brethren. Wherefore ye
rather give diligence to make your calling and election sure ((...), as it is
in some Greek Copies, and though these words are left out in our own, and other
Translations, because they are so in ordinary Greek Copies, yet the Sense of
them is confessedly included in all readings) for so an entrance shall be given
you abundantly, into the everlasting kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ. And 1 John 3.18, 19. My little children, let us not love in word, nor
in tongue, but in deed and in truth. And hereby we know, that we are of the
truth, and shall assure our hearts before him; So 1 Jo. 3.14. We know that we
have passed from death unto Life, because we love the brethren. By these Texts,
and many more of like Sense, it is evident that Charity is useful to procure a
man's assurance of those Benefits, which are supposed to be obtained by Faith
only.

Another verbal evasion of all the Arguments which are produced for the
effectual concurrence of Charity and Good Works to the attainment of the great
Benefits of final Justification and Salvation, has been vulgarly expressed by
that trite saying of the Latin Father, Bernard. Bona opera sunt via ad regnum,
non causa regnandi, Good Works are indeed the way to the kingdom of Heaven, but
not the cause of reigning. Which words applied to the Doctrine by us grounded
upon the words of the Apostle, must have this Sense, viz. That Charity is the
way to obtain the covering, or non-imputation of sin, but no cause of it, i. e,
a means, but not a cause; a very nice distinction, to be considered further
hereafter.

This I take to be a just account of the chief Answers, that have been made to
the premised Arguments, from the Promises and exhortations of Scripture, for
the efficacy or validity of Charity and Good Works, unto the remission of sin,
and the Salvation of a sinner.

Now in order to a sufficient reply to these Answers, I think it necessary in
this place to say something by way of explication of the Question (tending to
the clearing of the true Sense, and meaning of the Doctrine) what is meant by
that Efficacy, which any act, that can be done by men, may have toward the
remission of their sins, their Justification and Salvation.

It is evident, that all these things are the proper and peculiar Acts and
Effects of God himself, who is the agent of efficient cause of them all. And
therefore it is impossible that any Humane Act should have any direct or
immediate influence, or efficiency upon these Effects. Who can forgive sins,
but God? And it is God that justifies, and saves actively. And therefore all the
Efficacy that can be in Humane Acts toward these effects, can be no more than
preparative or passive. And what can that signify more, than that they are
certain Dispositions and Qualifications of the Patient, or Subject to receive
these Effects of Divine Grace. Nor can Faith it self have any other influence
or efficacy upon these Effects, any more than Charity. Faith it self does
neither pardon our sin, or contribute any thing to that Divine Act, by which we
are pardoned. Neither does qualify or save us, any otherwise then by making
such a Change or Qualification in us, whereupon this Grace of Justification to
Life, is freely given us of God.

But against this Explication of the Efficacy of Faith, to the Grace of
Justification, it has been alleged, that Faith in Christ does not justify as
an act or qualification found in us, but as it has a peculiar Virtue, not
common to Charity, or any other Act of ours; and that is of apprehending and
receiving Christ, or uniting us to him, and so making us Partakers of his
Righteousness imputed to us, by means whereof we come to be Justified, our sins
Covered, and our Souls saved.

Whereunto I answer. 1. By allowing an union of Believers with Christ the
common Savior, to be indeed the true ground and foundation of the Benefits
which we receive by him. And that this Union is not barely Relative or
Political, such as is betwixt a King, Lord or Husband, and their respective
Subjects, Servants and Wives. Nor only Pactional, imputed and founded upon the
Promise or Covenant of the Gospel, to them that believe in him; but a true and
real Union effected by the Medium of the Holy Spirit, communicated to them that
believe, and are baptized into the Faith of Christ. 1 Cor. 12.13. For by one
Spirit we are all baptized into one Body: and 1 Cor. 6.17. He that is joined
unto the Lord is one Spirit, ver. 11. of the same Chapter, But ye are washed,
but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified, in the Name of the Lord Jesus, and
by the Spirit of God. Romans 8.12. If any man has not the Spirit of Christ, the
same is none of his. This Spirit of Christ is ordinarily called the Spirit of
God, abiding or dwelling in all true Believers, whereby they are partakers of
the Divine Nature, (as St. Peter speaks) as Christ also was, 1 Cor. 3.16. 1
Cor. 8.19. 2 Pet. 1.4.
though not in the same measure and manner. Such a real Union there is between
Christ the Head; and all true Believers, Members of his Body, as there is
between the head and members of a natural Body, partaking of one and the same
natural Spirit. Nor do we deny but that Faith is the first Act that disposes a
Man to the Receipt of this Divine Spirit dwelling in him, whereby it may be
said to effect, or procure our Union with Christ, whereby we partake, both of
the Nature, and the Effects and Benefits of his Righteousness.

But the imputation of Christ's Righteousness to us is no Scriptural Phrase, but
differs very much from that of St. Paul, asserting not the Righteousness of
Christ, but Faith (working by Charity) to be imputed for Righteousness to them
that believe, Romans 4.5, 24. But if it be the act or habit of Faith, which is
imputed to us for Righteousness, according to the express literal Sense of the
Apostles words, then it is not the Personal Righteousness of Christ, that is
imputed to us; for our Faith is no part of his Righteousness. But because the
Phrase of Christ's Righteousness imputed to us, has been commonly used by
Divines of very good Note, amongst Protestants, (though no man can be obliged
to admit it in a strict Sense, it being not found in Scripture) yet I think,
for Peace sake, it should not be absolutely rejected, much less with any
reflections of Reproach or Disparagement to them that have used it, but rather
admitted in such a Candid Sense, as it may fairly bear. As if the Son of a
Prince, or some other Person of Great Merit and Favor with him, should
undertake to be Mediator for some Rebel, that had justly incurred the
Displeasure of his Prince, and rendered himself obnoxious to the highest penalty
of Law, should of his own Good Will, by the Appointment and Will of the Prince,
act or suffer something for, and on the behalf of the Delinquent, and thereby
obtain, by the Grace of the Prince, a free Pardon for him, under some equitable
Conditions required of the Delinquent. In this case the Merits, Act and
Sufferings of such a Mediator might, in a reasonable Sense, be said to be
imputed to the Redeemed Person. Such an Interpretation of this Phrase of
Christ's Righteousness imputed to us, I think should not be quarreled, but may
fairly agree with the Scripture phrases of Propitiation, Expiation, and
Atonement of Christ made for us, and with the Discourse of the Apostle, Romans
5. from the 15 Verse to the end of the Chapter. Other Senses there are of this
Phrase insisted upon by some Divines, which cannot be maintained without gross,
and absurd Consequences, as has been showed by some that have lately written
sharply concerning this Point.

This Explication of the Question, what is meant by that Efficacy, which any
act, that can be done by us, toward the Remission of our sins, or our
Justification can have, being premised, and cleared from the most usual
Objections against it; I proceed in my Reply to the forementioned Answer to
the Arguments, for the Confirmation of the Doctrine in hand, drawn from the
Promises and Exhortations of Scripture, as follows.

To the First part of that Answer, alleging only the necessity of Presence of
Charity and Good Works, together with Faith (in order to the obtainment of the
Benefits propounded) as a sufficient Account for the use of those Motives,
contained in the said Promises and Exhortations; I reply, by demanding whether
the Charity and Good Works, supposed to be necessary, do concur to the
Qualification of the Person that is to receive these Benefits or not: If they
do concur, as any Part of the Qualification of the Person, for the Receipt of
those Benefits, it cannot be denied by the Explication of the forementioned
Question, but that they are as truly available to the Obtainment of those
Benefits, as Faith, or any thing else can be. If they do not concur, as any
Part of Qualification for these Benefits, the bare necessity of their Presence,
upon any other account, can be no reasonable ground of Exhortations to such
Actions, in order to the Advantages thereunto promised. Nor can those
Advantages, or Benefits be any reasonable Motives to such Actions, whiles they
are supposed to contribute nothing at all to the Obtainment of them. And
consequently, the only design of propounding those Motives to such Actions,
would be utterly frustrate. For all Exhortations, Counsels, or Advices, to any
Act or Practice, do include this general Supposition to common Understanding,
that the things advised, or exhorted to, are of some Use and Validity, to the
End that is propounded, either by removing some Impediment, or by some kind of
Causality or other; else the Advice is altogether vain, and a Man should be
never the nearer his End by following it.

And therefore it has been said, that although Charity and Good Works, be in
themselves of no Validity, or Efficacy to the Covering of sin, Justification,
or Salvation of a sinner, nor do contribute any thing toward the Obtaining of
these Benefits, yet they have the nature of a Causa sine qua non, that is, of
something, without which a thing is not to be effected or gained, but if that
Something has no manner of Causality at all in it, it cannot be called a Causa
sine qua non, without a real Contradiction in the Terms. For to be a Cause,
without which a thing cannot be, and yet to have no manner of Causality, in
reference to the Effect, is to be a Cause and no Cause.

But suppose the design of the Holy Ghost in the forementioned Promises, and
Exhortations had been (as we really suppose it was) to instruct men what they
should do, or what things possible to be done by them, would be available to
the ends propounded. I demand how such a Design could have been expressed, more
significantly then it is by the Terms used in the Exhortations and Promises
alleged. And as for the bare necessity of presence of Charity and Good Works,
together with Faith in the Persons which are to be justified and saved, that is
no more then is equally true of the faculties of Life, Sense, and Reason, there
being a perfect necessity of the presence of all these things to the act of
Faith, which is supposed to be the only thing that justifies a man. But would
it therefore be reasonable to exhort men to take care to preserve these
faculties in order to their Justification, or might the Promises of Pardon of
Sin, Life, and Salvation be reasonably annexed to such a care of preserving
these Faculties, upon the bare account of their necessary presence, or
concomitancy, with a justifiing Faith.

Now where it has been said, that Charity and Good Works are necessary to the
verification of that Faith, by which we are justified, i. e. to declare and
manifest the truth of it, but have otherwise no concurrent Efficacy to the
Justification of the Believer, and that is a sufficient account of the
reasonableness of all Promises made to the habit and exercise of this Virtue,
as also of the Exhortations before mentioned. I answer, that if indeed these
things be necessary to the verification of that Faith that justifies us, so as
to constitute and make up the Truth and Validity thereof, and thereby to
declare the Efficacy thereof, the Question is really yielded; And these things
must be acknowledged to have a concurrent Efficacy to the forementioned Effect,
which is all that is contended for.

But if by the verification of Faith no more be meant, then a bare
manifestation of the truth of it, by the Signs and Fruits of it, that is the
same thing with the former allegation, concerning the necessity or usefulness
of these things, for the Assurance of a man's Justification or Salvation. But
whether this be the true intent, or only meaning of the Promises, and
Exhortations made to these Practices, I appeal to the Judgment of any
Unprejudiced Reader, that shall review, and consider the express Terms and
Forms of Words used in them.

When we pray for the Forgiveness of our sins, must this be the only Meaning ^r
not that God will be pleased to forgive us, upon any consideration of our
Prayers, but that he will give us an Assurance, that he has forgiven us? I
appeal to the Conscience of any of them, that make this Allegation (to serve an
Hypothesis, which they have unwarily espoused) whether this has been, or is
their own Sense in their Prayers for the Pardon of their sin. Which is no
other, then if a Criminal, petitioning a King for his Pardon, should thereby
intend not to obtain it, but only to be assured that it was granted. When our
Savior promises, that if we will forgive Men their Trespasses, our Heavenly
Father will also forgive us our Trespasses, is that his only Meaning, that our
Forgiving others shall be to us a sign, and evidence that we are forgiven, but
no Means to obtain that Forgiveness? When we are exhorted to Repentance for the
Remission of our sins, which was the common Doctrine of the Prophets, of John
Baptist, our Blessed Saour and his Apostles, and particularly of St. Peter in
answer to the Question of the Jews, what they should do to be saved, Acts 2.30.
was this their Meaning, not to teach Men to repent, to that end that they might
be saved, and their sins be forgiven them, but that they might be assured that
their sins were forgiven them? I desire any Indifferent Reader, that is not
pertinaciously bent to maintain a Prejudice against all Appearance of Reason,
to apply this Meaning to the Promises, Exhortations, and Assertions of
Scripture, which have been before alleged to this Purpose, and then to judge,
whether all, or any of them be to be interpreted to this Sense. And if they be,
I demand why the same promises of Justification, Salvation, etc. made to the
act of Faith, may not, or should not admit of the same Interpretation (as some
of the Antinomians have contended) viz. that Faith it self contributes nothing
at all to any of these Effects or Benefits, that are thereunto promised, or is
any Means or Condition of obtaining them, but only a sign or means to assure us
of our Interest in them.

Lastly, I demand, whether any thing possible to be done by us, does serve to
qualify us for the Reception of those Benefits, by the Grace of God, or be of
any Validity, or moral Efficacy toward the Obtainment of these Ends? If not,
then Faith can be of no more Efficacy to this purpose then Charity. But if any
Act or Condition, that is possible to be performed by us, be any ways effectual
or available to these Ends, why may not Charity, (especially as a fruit and
effect of Faith) be conceived to have a concurrent Efficacy with Faith, or
subordinate to it, agreeable to the many promises of the same Benefits made to
Charity and Good Works, as well as to Faith? And seeing that it is, and must be
ever acknowledged, that it is only of the free Grace of God, that Faith is
accepted as any condition, qualification, or means of obtaining these Benefits;
Seeing also, that Charity, in the proper nature of it, is the most Excellent,
and most Divine Virtue, most conformable to the nature of God himself, and
therefore said to be the greatest of the three Christian Graces, 1 Cor. 13.13.
Is it not very reasonable to believe that such a quality most Divine,
expressing both the Nature and Image of God, and being also the Effect of his
own free Grace, should be accepted as part of that disposition in us, that
qualifies us for his Favor and Reconciliation, merited only by the Expiatory
Sacrifice, and Obedience of his Son, always acknowledged by our Faith in him,
renouncing all confidence in any thing that we can do, as acceptable upon any
other account, then of his Meritorious Meciation?

Other reasons are given by Modern Divines of the Protestant Party, concerning
the necessity of Charity and Good Works, exclusive of this we contend for;
alleging that these things are necessary necessitate praecepti, non medii, i.
e. necessary parts of our Duty, in obedience to the Law, or Will of God, not
necessary means of Salvation, or obtaining the Benefit of remission of our
sins, necessary to be practiced, in order to the pleasing of God, the
Glorifying and Honoring of his Name, to express our Thankfulness to him for
all his Benefits, especially for his Free Grace of Redemption and
Justification, procured by the merits of Christ: As also necessary to adorn our
Holy Profession, the Honor of Christ and his Gospel, to give Good Example, and
avoid Scandal, etc. All which are without Exception to be acknowledged, for
just Reasons of our Duty: But do fignifie nothing to the Question in hand, in
as much as they do not severally, or jointly make any reasonable account,
either of the promises of Pardon, Eternal Life, and Salvation, to the
performances of these Duties, or of the Exhortations to the practice of them,
urged by such Promises. These Reasons are indeed just Motives to the Duties of
Piety and Charity, and urged as such, in other Texts of Scripture. But of a
different sort and nature from those which are propounded in the Promises and
Exhortations alleged by us. These Reasons with others of like import
(exclusive of that which is urged by us) alleged as the only account of the
necessity of Good Works, do utterly destroy and make void the validity of the
Motives, in the forementioned Promises.

And here (with as little disparagement as may be to the Author) I think it
lawful for me to mention the great dissatisfaction, not to say Scandal, which
I long since took from the common outlandish Catechism set forth first by
Zachary Vrsin, and afterward by David Paraeus, Anno D. 1623. who intitles the
third part of his Book, wherein he undertakes to give an account of the
necessity of Good Works, and all the practical part of Christian Religion, de
Gratitudine, of Gratitude or Thankfulness to God for our Deliverance from the
misery of the Natural State, and our Liberty recovered by Christ, which are the
titles of his two former parts. This General Title and Account of Good Works,
does plainly suppose a negation of any antecedent necessity of Conversion and
Repentance (which are the two first things which he treats of under that Title
of Thankfulness) unto the Effect of our Justification and Salvation; unless it
be reasonable to say, that a man is obliged to be thankful for a Benefit
before he has it, or to the end that he may receive it. Conversion unto God,
and Repentance by this man's Doctrine, must be looked upon as a thing not in it
self necessary to our Justification or Remission of sin, but as a Duty of
Gratitude, for this Grace given unto us, either before, or without respect to
our Conversion. And we are to repent, and turn to God, not that our sins may be
forgiven, but because they are so; not that we may be saved, but because we
believe, and are confident that we shall be saved. So the whole practice of
Christian Piety, Holiness and Righteousness before God, must proceed upon an
account of Thankfulness to him, for his free Grace that requires none of these
things at our hands, as conditions of our Pardon or Reconciliation with his
offended Majesty.

Not but that some other Ends and Reasons, and particularly those which we
mentioned before, are also named by the same Author, as part of the necessity
of Good Works. But all are reduced unto the general account of Thankfulness,
and exclusive of any Moral causality, or condition of Justification and
Salvation. How well this Doctrine agrees with Natural Religion, the Scriptures
of the Old Testament, or even with the design of the Gospel; I must leave to be
judged by indifferent Readers. Because I hold not my self obliged in this place
to engage any further in the great Controversy, about Justification by Faith
alone, or to take particular notice of the Texts of St. Paul commonly alleged,
for the Solifidian Doctrine; which have been exactly considered by so many of
our own Divines; and my own Sense of them elsewhere delivered in brief. Besides
that the covering of sins attributed to Charity in the present Text, though it
extends to the Effect of Justification in the most Eminent Sense of the Phrase;
yet is not by our Interpretation, limited to that signification, but extended
(as has been said) to the removal of punishments in this life, and to the
abatement of them, both in this Life, and that which is to come, which are the
Benefits that may be obtained by Charity, without any perfect Justification of
a sinner.

Now if any Person that reads this Discourse, having not been prepossessed with
any Prejudice against this Doctrine, or doubt of the Truth of it, shall think
that the Work is over-done, by the Allegation of so many Texts and Arguments
for the Confirmation of it, and so much pains taken in answering Objections
against it, and shall therefore charge me with loading the Readers with a
tedious Accumulation of superfluous Arguments, thereby abating the Perspicuity
of the Matter, as Cicero speaks, upon occasion of his long Discourse,
Perspicuitas enim argumentatione elevatur, -- Remque mea sententia minime
dubiam, argumentando dubiam facis. Tull. de Oratore Lib. 3.
to prove the Existence of a Deity. I must answer, that this Objection, can
only be made by him that is ignorant of the contrary Doctrine, commonly
asserted and contended for, not only by Lutherans and Calvinists abroad, but by
several of our English Divines (till of late years) going that way. And 2.
Although the bad Consequences of that Doctrine have been strongly averted by
the Authors thereof, in some of their Discourses, yet the Event and Effect
thereof has, to my own Knowledge, in a multitude of Persons, with whom I have
had Occasion to converse, notoriously abated the exercise of Charity, and the
Zeal or Conscience of Good Works, supposed by this Doctrine, to be neither
absolutely necessary, nor available to the Salvation of a Christian. Many
Persons I have known, who upon this only Ground, have neglected and slighted
the practice of Charity, not only in their Life time, but also at their Death,
comforting themselves against all fear of Peril by this Neglect, from a
mistaken Notion, and Confidence of Justification by Faith alone, without Good
Works.

The Sense of this dangerous Error, was one thing that moved me to the Pains
of this Plain Discourse. Having visited diverse Persons in their Last sickness,
earnestly moving them (according to the Injunction of our Church Liturgy in
that Office) to Liberality toward the Poor, with little or no Success, upon a
Misperswasion of the no Necessity, and as little Validity of such Works to the
safety of their future State.

And though I have known Some, and do believe there are many of that
Persuasion, that upon other Considerations, and better Principles, have been
very Charitable and Forward to Good Works; yet I have also had a particular
Opportunity of observing, and Knowing something more than other Men, concerning
the Neglect of this Duty, from the Place of my late Habitation for some Years,
belonging to an Office of Registry, kept for the Probate, and Custody of Wills
and Testaments, made within the Jurisdiction of the Archdeacon of Norfolk:
wherein I have observed this last Record and Testimony of Charity, which should
have made up the Neglect and Defects of that Duty before; to have been either
wholly omitted, or very penuriously, and disproportionably expressed in many,
and indeed most Wills of Considerable Estates.

But to take off all appearance of Scandal to our Religion, upon this Account,
it has been, or may be made Evident, upon a just Reckoning, that the Public
Good Works, and Donations of Protestants to pious Uses in this Nation, since
the Reformation, have been more than Equal to any that ever were done by
Papists, within the same Compass of Time, in any precedent Age: This personal
Apology for the present Discourse, might perhaps have been spared; but was
piously intended to the best Advantage, and greatest Concern of all Persons in
the time of their Life, and at their Death. There being certainly no possible
Use to be made of Worldly Goods so Acceptable to God, or so Advantageous to the
Owners thereof, both in their Lives, and at their Death, as that which I am
laboring to promote from this Text.

FINIS.

