RELIGION AND REASON Mutually corresponding and assisting each other. FIRST
ESSAY. A Reply to the vindicative Answer lately published against a Letter, in
which the sense of a Bull and Council concerning the duration of Purgatory, was
discust. By Thomas White Gent.

Vinc. Lir. cap. 27. Intelligatur te exponente illustrius, quod antea obscurius
credebatur. Per te Posteritas intellectum gratuletur, quod ante Vetustas non
intellectum venerabatur. Eadem tamen quae didicisti ita doce, ut cum dicas
nove, non dicas nova. PARIS MMLX.

THE AUTHOR TO THE JUDICIOUS READER.
I Suppose you have perused the Book I here pretend to Answer; And, how do you
like it? has he done his work? I dare not say, demonstrated, for sure he will
not offer at what he thinks impossible; but has he proved, which is a modest
word, and he must not be offended at it? has he solidly proved, That the
position he sustains is a Truth traditionarily delivered from the Apostles to
us as a point of Catholic Faith? Or, secondly, That It is Defined either in
the Bull or Council? if he had done this, I should heartily rejoice in his
Victory, though over my self: But if, as to the first branch, he have only
proved it the common persuasion of later Ages; and that, without clearing in
what quality it is held, whether as Faith or Opinion, even by the Moderns: If,
instead of the Consent of Fathers he bring but One, above Exception, and out of
that One, the first and chief testimony is indifferent both to him and me, and
the only difficulty of the rest objected and answered by my self, and
unreply'd to by him: If, of the three passages he cites out of the public
Liturgyes, one only bear any show of difficulty; the other two being either
plainly neutral or grossly abused: And, if in the second branch, he have only
proved that it was supposed, or, as their Title Page warily calls it, Contained
in the Bull and Council, and not Determined, I cannot see my case so desperate
as he imagins. Scripture it self oftentimes proceeding upon Suppositions
conformable to the fore-entertain'd apprehensions of those it speaks to,
without engaging that every such supposition is a revealed Truth. But, on the
other side, if I have plentifully alleged both Scriptures and Fathers, and
Liturgyes, and Reasons too (of which me thinks a little does well even among
Divines) and to none of these has he given the least satisfactory answer; I
cannot see but my case is hopeful; and when you have read this little
Treatise, I cannot doubt but you will see it so too.

But all this engages only a particular Controversy, the next is of a far more
high and universal importance, of a far different strain from other single and
ordinary Questions. For in this, we agree that what the Church says is the
truth; we agree in the words wherein the Church delivers us that truth, our
only dispute is about the sense of those words; or rather what ought to be the
means to come to the knowledge of that sense. We find by daily experience the
same Creed recited in the mouths of children, of men, and of the learned: We
cannot doubt but the apprehensions of children and men are different, and that
our young thoughts are to be corrected by Age; but whether the Learned and the
Prudential make the same apprehensions, is the great Controversy between us. My
Antagonist seeing the largest part of the Church consist of this degree of
Prudential men, persuades himself, that not only their Belief, but their very
apprehensions are uncontrollable and unamendable: I conceive, God has given
that privilege to Learning, to make us understand the truth of our Faith
better, then by vulgar and popular conceptions. On my side stand the endeavors
of the whole Schools, whose direct Profession it is, to explicate and declare
the true sense of Scripture, and the words in which Faith is left us. On his
side stands the multitude of the common People, whose fancyes are not elevated,
nor their judgments improved by Study: this Multitude he loudly calls the
Church, All Christianity, and such brave names: but be not astonished at his
great words, for he distinguishes not between the Church, and the weaker part
of it which he follows; nor offended at me that I observe not a grave and
regular Progress, where I am set to catch a bird that hops up and down from
twig to twig, chirps upon this a little, and then flies immediately to another;
but rather pity the condition of an old clumsy man too slow and heavy for so
wild a Chase. Wherein, yet, by the help of God, I am resolved to follow him, as
fast as I can. As the whole Book in a manner is made up of little else but
boutades and flashes, so you are only to expect from me short hints of what
might be said more dilatedly, which I hope may suffice to counterblast those
sudden gusts. If any other, as is threatend, come out with stronger Ordnance, I
shall endeavor to oppose stronger Bulwarks. I hope he will write hereafter
more closely and with less distemper; especially, since now, as I understand,
he intends to read my Books; I would he had done so before he had written
against them; for then I might have hoped a few hours would have sufficed to
make my Answer, which now has cost me all my spare time of a whole fortnight.

Tho. White.

INDEX.
A
EVery Act (even a sinful one) has some perfection, as to what is positive in
it, page 132. That Affections got here are not distinct from the Soul, no
singular Opinion, p. 131, 132. Antiquity not favoring ante-judiciary Delivery,
shown from the miscarriage of his best Testimonies thence, p. 105, 106, 107.
Arraignment of the Author feebly attempted. p. 90, 91, 92.
C.
CEnsuring of Doctrins, and who may lawfully do it, p. 6, 7, 8. Controversy, in
what manner to be handled, p. 5, 6. Corporeal Affections remain after
separation, p. 137, 138, 141, 142, 143. Best Corporeal pleasures most
conducive to Beatitude, from p. 133. to p. 137. The Council of Florence,
examined. p. 49. It (and the Bull) wrongly descanted on by his eminently
learned Divine, p. 53. not holding ante-judiciary Delivery a material point,
nor of Faith, p. 58, 59, 60, 61. Councils, how held by the Author, how by some
other Divines, p. 64, 65, 66. Infallible in things necessary, and proceeding
advisedly, p. 68, 69. Their Errability, speaking in common, and abstractedly
from all matters and manners of proceeding, held by all, p. 121, 122, 123.
Fewer, easier, and less deceivable requisites to their Infallibility in the
Authors Doctrine than in others. p. 71. 121. 123. The Council of Trents Doctrine
concerning Remission and Satisfaction exactly observed by the Author, p. 177,
178, 179.
D.
DEfinitions may proceed upon Suppositions only probable, p. 96. 97. Delivery
so speedily expected by Priviledg'd Altars, diminishing the care of assisting
our dead Friends, p. 88, 89. and our amendment here, p. 184, 185. The opinion
of ante-judiciary Delivery never taught as certain, p. 83, 84. 87. Its
beginning and progress, p. 77. to 81. True Discourse in Angels following from
the Vindicators tenet, p. 162, 163. Distinguishers between Faith and Opinion
must neither be illiterate nor meanly learned, p. 76, 84, 85, 87. Divinity
grafted on the stock of our natural speech; and, so, on Philosophy, p. 24.
E.
EYmericus his mistake, p. 47, 48. His censoriousness p. 39, 40.
F.
FAith not endangered by true Science, p. 12, 13. but its objects better
understood by it p. 9, 10, 14, 15. not diversified according to the several
Apppehensions of the Faithful. p. 9, 10, 11. 14. 191. 198. 199. So^e
False-dealings and disingenuities touched at, p. 22, 23. 27, 28. 31. 48, 49, 50,
52, 61. 93, 94. 112, 113, 115, 120, 121, 125, 126, 174. Father and Son spoken
of God metaphorically, 102, 103, 104. That Foundations contradict
ante-judiciary Delivery, p. 79.
G.
THat a Governor dispossessed ought to be restored when the common Good requires
it, the professed and express Doctrine of the Author, p. 116. S. Gregory not the
Author of those Dialogues which gave us the first news of an ante-judiciary
Delivery, p. 77, 78. Hence, the origin of that Opinion much later, p. 107.
I.
I Dentification of the Soul and Body necessary for a Body's action on her, p.
153. 155. Identity of the Soul and Body, p. 154, 155. Infallibility, when
certainly found in decrees of a Pope and Council, p. 72, 73. Inquest not
necessary to find our Faith p. 73. Interpretation of the Bull and Council by
the Vindicator, manifoldly defective, p. 75.
M
THe Method of a Divine in seeking Truth, p. 8. to 14. Diverse Mistakes about
the Council of Florence, p. 92, 93. of a Censure, p. 16, 17. of the occasion of
my writing the Middle State, p. 28, 29. of a Metaphor, p. 101. of the Liturgyes
manifoldly, p. 109, 110. of my Doctrine concerning a dispossessed Governor, p.
116. and the Uncertainty of Scriptures letter, 110, 117, 118. of best
corporeal pleasures, p. 134. of eternal Happiness to be no Good at all, p.
166, 167. of the Souls nature at reunion, p. 183. Mysteries of Faith not
knowable without Revelation, p. 11.
P.
PAganism uncharitably and weakly objected, p. 187. Pains of Purgatory what, in
the true opinion of the Author, p. 144. Prayers and Alms for the Dead in use
before the Opinion of ante-judiciary Delivery, p. 78, 79. and many ways
beneficial to them in the Authors Doctrine, p. 167. to 173. A Prohibition of a
Book no Censure, p. 16. to p. 20. Punishments of pure Spirits agreed by all to
to be Acts of the Will, p. 88.
Q.
THE Question stated as in the Bull, p. 34.
S.
Scriptures Letter uncertain without the aid of Tradition, p. 117. The Soul,
how substantially changed by separation, yet the same, p. 139, 140. Pure
Spirits know all things together and perpetually, p. 156. to p. 161. The
Sufferings of our Savior not prejudiced by the unyeeldingness of separated
Souls to external torments, p. 146, 147.
T.
TRadition not examinable, p. 72. More or less Time coexisting adds or
dimininishes nothing to a pure Spirit, p. 149. to 153.
Errata.
P. 114 l. 19, 20. these terms; but the Terms expressing those Mysteries, which
were -- p. 147. l. 9. conform. p. 157. l. 12. appetit.

RELIGION AND REASON.
First Essay.
Introduction.
SIR,
HAD your Answer to the unknown Author been written in my fresher days, I
should have endeavored to have given you an ampler satisfaction: Now, being
come forth in my frozen Age, when my long ague has made me fitter to think of
death than of School-quarrels, I hope you will be patient with me, if, in as
short a method as I can, I give you rather hints by which a little endeavor of
your own may find out satisfaction, than dilate my self so far that every weak
eye may see it.

Doctor Hammond, as I am told, about the same time has bent himself against my
Doctrine: whom, though I much esteem, being assured by friends common to us
both that he is a very courteous and civil person, and has spent much time in
reading good Authors; yet have I rather preferred the answering you; both because
I expect better quarter at your hands, since the stricter bond of Religion
should make us apt to interpret one another more fairly; as also, and indeed
far more (for I see that Tie very slippery in many) because you have some
tincture of the School; and, to my thinking, are much sharper and abler to set
off an argument, and write a style solid and proper to the matter: Whereas,
that loose way of preaching and affecttaion of words the Doctor uses, shows
more vanity than substance in his Discourses. Besides he has an Adversary from
satisfying whom he seems to me very short; and I am gladly willing to excuse my
pains when I see the same or more fruit come from another Pen.

Returning then to you, I hold it my first duty to give yon many thanks for
your work; you being the first, who (though somewhat late for me, now scarce
able to keep my self warm by a fire) have given me the occasion to speak for my
self, that the world may see whether those many smothered slanders, which so
long have layen heavy on me and my works, bear a value proportionable to the
noise they have made. Which to examine in short, I divide your Treatise (and so,
my Reply) into two Parts; the first holding twenty two of your Sections, and
belonging chiefly to the Middle State of Souls: the second, containing the rest
of your Sections, touching upon many points of my Doctrine in which you find
fault.

FIRST PART.
Refuting some of the Vindicators Objections, as they ly in his Book; chiefly
those that concern the Middle State.
FIRST DIVISION Containing an Answer to his five first Sections.
The Vindicator's mistake of the manner of treating Controversies, and of the
nature of a Censure. The Method a knowing Divine ought to pursue. Diverse
Errors rectified.
TO begin then with your first Section, I confess you speak very fairly, had
your patience but held out, not to have broke your word in that very Section:
which I intend presently to declare, if first I desire you to beware how you
take principles out of Heretics mouths. The Nobleman out of whom you cite the
Maxim that writing of Controversies ought to carry as much sweetness as
Love Letters, was a very ingenious and worthy Person; but, if you enquire of
his Religion you shall find it in Chillingworths book, in which he is thought
to have had a great hand. And Mr Chillingworths Religion how sound it was you
may ghess out of the answers made by himself to himself which go before his
book. In one whereof he heartily professes, that if tomorrow he sees more
reason for another Religion, and next day for a third, he will change his
Religion as often.

Now, who can doubt but he that has his Religion tackt on him with such slight
pins that he may change it a la mode, has reason neither to take offense nor
give any upon that account, but civilly to proceed with a gentile and unengag'd
indifferency as in a business that concerns him not enough to be angry about:
And, if you have such an esteem of your Religion, you shall do very well to
follow that Maxim: But, if you conceit writing in Religion to be one of the
most efficacious courses to breed an eternal and incomparable mischief to the
readers, if it be so handled that he may think both sides (as men call it)
probable, and that it sinks into neithers heart, then I believe your pen will
prove sharp and stinging, as we see the Fathers is in such occasions; though
some milk and honey toward the Persons be mingled for Charity and
Edifications sake.

Now let me perform my promise. You say you cannot digest their boldness who
usurp the Authority of the supreme tribunal to brand any opinion with the title
of Heresy whilst the Church has not done it to their hands. Yet presently
after you do it your self, branding this opinion of Purgatory as Heretical,
and bringing your Evidence that you are convinced it is condemned.

And, I pray, who off^^s to censure another, but he takes himself to be
convinced that it is against some Rule which he supposes sufficient to make a
Catholic Truth; as, against Scripture, Councils, the generality of the
Fathers, or (as you do) against the Definition of a Pope; and this to him is a
Conviction that it is Condemned before he censures it. Nor have you any more to
build on than your own Persuasion that it is defined; your self professing that
the Question is brought to those niceties that one need have his Understanding
perfectly calm to judge of it. So that, on your perfectly calm judgment
entirely relies this your censure. Thus much to your self: But, as to the
universal proposition of censuring opinions, you seem a great stranger in the
world. For, what famous Divine, what University, what Bishop is not thought fit
to censure a malignant proposition? Is there not regularly in all Dioceses some
Censor Librorum expressly appointed? Is not every Preacher subject to be
forbidden the Chair if he advance a proposition that the Bishops Theologall
thinks not fit to be suffered? Are you ignorant of the pudder at Paris about
censuring Monsieur Arnaulds letters, which censure was not approved at Rome?
And yet you cannot digest their boldness who usurp the Authority of the supreme
Tribunal to brand any opinion with the title of Heresy while the Church has not
done it to their hands. Know, great Divine, that the Pastor or Doctor who lets
a wicked proposition run uncontrolled among the people till means be made to
get it censu^'d and forbidden in Rome (which how hard it is if the maintainer
have great Friends may appear by the long contest betwixt the order of Saint
Dominick and the Jesuits about certain propositions of Molina) wrongs his own
conscience and is unfaithful to his vocation, in suffering the infection to
sink deeply into the hearts of the Faithful ere he prepare an Antidote.
Besides, when would the Pope take notice of what is published in France or
England if no body cry Fire? How many, how violent outcries were there in
France before the Jesuits wicked cases were condemned at Rome. So that this
principle of yours betrays the Church into the hands of any potent Heresy that
shall spring in a far Country. Let me therefore entreat you not to use so
uncivil terms toward all the learned Doctors of the Church.

I hope you will not be offended that I omit to answer some small-shot of yours
in this Section, that I may pass to the next; in which I find my self taxed of
a wrong Method in seeking Truth, out of a story which as I do not particularly
remember, so am I far from denying; for the Method you report, as I understand
you, is truly mine; that is, as a Divine, to find out the Truths in Philosophy,
and then the Mysteries of our Faith will square well enough with them; and so I
doubt not but I have been subject to declare it many times. Nor can I
conjecture who it was that gave me the Answer you mention, but shrewdly ghess
that he either did not understand me, or the matter, or both. And, because by
your proceeding I fear you are in the same Error, I will endeavor to
explicate my sentiments, and leave the judgment of the cause to upright
Understanders. My conceit of matters of Faith is that the Scriptures and Creeds
and sometimes also our Doctors deliver them in words well known, but whose
vulgar sense Divines see impossible to be true. For example, where it is sung
that the Eternal son descended from heaven, the vulgar conceive a local
motion by which he came down into the B. Virgins womb: and, as I remember I saw
it painted thus at Frank ford in a Catholic Church whither I went to Mass: The
Holy Ghost above coming toward the Virgin, and sending rays before it, in
which was a little child carried by them toward that Blessed Mother: An
apprehension which the learned know to be impossible. So, by our expression of
Christ's sitting at the right hand of his father, what does a vulgar hearer
imagine but an old man sitting in an high chair, and his young Son in another,
set at his right hand. I cannot believe you think it possible this meaning
should be literally true. To find out then the true sense, I conceive
Philosophy a fitting instrument; So that by Philosophy we come thus to
understand our Faith, and by understanding it, to be able both to defend it and
propagate science out of it. A certain sort of Divines (if I wrong them not in
calling them so) there is, who, conceiting as soon as they have the words they
know the meaning, reckon not upon this way; but cast about to find out more and
other words that shall lead them to the defense and propagation of the known
truths; and think they must not look what Philosophy says, but teach her what
she ought to say. This I conceive to have been the difference between me and
the eminent Scholar that conferred with me.

When I had read thus far, I expected to see the other Method strongly
maintained, and mine as strongly laid flat on the ground; but, looking farther
I only find your own censure, and that such a one as is hard to judge whether
it be a dispraise or a commendation: But, whatsoever it is, with mistake or
addition. From which last to begin, you suppose I intend out of Philosophy to
frame a Divinity; and, if I understand you right, independently from
Revelation; which I am sure you can find neither in my words nor my writings;
but only that revealed propositions were to be explicated by Philosophical
ones known without Revelation. Do you make no difference between inventing
Divinity-truths and finding out the Meanings of the Words in which they are
delivered? Do not Lawyers dispute the meaning of the Laws after they see the
Words ly before them? Do Scripturists invent Scriptures when they seek out the
sense hidden in those writings? I pray then take notice that you either add to
or mistake what I say; for, how often do I expressly affirm those Mysteries
could not be known without Revelation; though, after they are revealed, they
may by nature be explicated, and new truths propagated out of them. You seem to
be sore afraid that my Method should bring forth a natural and new Divinity.
Had you said a connaturall one, I could not have desired a greater praise at
your hands; for so all supernatural Qualities, at least the good ones, are
termed by Divines. But you say a natural one: what mean you by this term? That
it shall be one never revealed by God, and yet expressed by the very words in
which God revealed his? Truly, if this be your meaning, I am beholding to you
for a great honor and commendation. But I must tell you I suspect you
understand not well your own proposition. For, if it be true that the Holy
Ghost means in his words all true senses which they afford, there is no denying
but such a Divinity will be a revealed one, however it may be proved by
natural Principles; For, you will not deny but the same object sometimes may
be knowable both by Faith and by Philosophy. If the Divinity you mean be false,
it is either against the other which you say is revealed, or against natural
Principles: This latter you cannot press while you grant it is a natural one,
that is, according to natural Principles. The former leaves still this
quarrel undecided which is the true Divinity, since the words bear both the
senses; and, this, by your own plea, has the advantage of conformity to
nature, as indeed any true Divinity must have. Besides, the novelty you fear,
supposing it contradict no truth already known, is a great praise; for to
discover new Truths especially in Divinity, and such as are of moment, is to
advance and give a Progress to that sacred Science, and so the highest pitch a
Divine can aim at.

Thus much being spoken to your fearful thoughts, let me consider the two
sayings, that of your eminent Scholar, and mine own. I desired to be assured
of natural Truths, and said (as your self report) that the mysteries of Faith
would square well enough with them. And I appeal to your self whether I spoke
Truth or no. If I mistake not your Person you have been a Reader of Philosophy,
and so cannot be ignorant that ex veris non sequitur falsum, and that Verum
vero minime contradicit. If then we have once certainly found the Truths of
Philosophy, can there be any danger that what we have so found should
contradict our Mysteries? Much help may proceed out of such Principles, much
direction; no harm, no danger of erring. So that I doubt not but your self, if
you consider it, will find this resolution perfectly secure.

Now let us turn the leaf and examine the course of your eminent Scholar; and
you may easily descry how he commands us to take unkonwn Principles to prove
Truths which may be known by other plain ways. Do not mistake me, I call not
the Principles of Faith unknown as not being demonstrated, but as not being
understood. I grant the Letter to be certain and certainly known, I grant a
quaedam tenus of the sense to be known; but the sense which in rigor is
literally verifiable, that I do not grant to be always and entirely known out
of the pure force of Faith. Your self will easily apply this Doctrine to the
Article of our Saviors sitting at the right hand of his Father. It is
certainly known those words are true; it is certainly known the material sense
which the vulgar takes has a proportion to the true sense: For, the true sense
being that he arrived to perfect Quiet after the troublesome economy he had
passed in this world, which Rest has sitting for its concomitant in an active
man; That he remained the first and chiefest Instrument, and in the French
phrase, le premier Ministre d' Estat in Gods Government of the World; to which
dignity is annexed a kind of perpetual presence and conference with the Prince:
Now, why this is well expressed by being on the right hand of another, may we not
consult some other skill than that of Faith? Wherefore, in such cases as these
I cannot doubt to affirm that true Philosophy is both an useful and necessary
and always obedient servant of Faith. And let your eminent Scholar without
the assistance of any other knowledge than the bare words of the Article
attempt to determine out of them what sitting, and what on the right hand is,
and this according to the way and profession of a Divine, I fear he will come
out with some such notion as others of his form learnedly give to Person,
Nature, Vbi's, Actio's, etc. that is, some strange puzzlling thing, which not
only leaves us altogether ignorant what it is in God, but wholly confounds the
knowledge we have of it in Nature.

Neither do I deliver this purely by Discourse but by Experience; which
Experience jointly with my reading S. Thomas were the Instruments by which God
conducted me to this way. I thought it fit to dilated my self a little in this
point, that you who are in your flourishing age, and hopeful to be a great
Light in Gods Church, if you be put in the right way, may be little and little
mark the difference of them who go under the common name of Divines, and see
how many such as you esteem eminent Scholars are only Historical, not
Scientificall Divines: They can tell you after the manner of an history or
Narrative what the most celebrated Doctors teach; what is in their opinion the
more common sentence of Schoolmen; and, the multitude or reputed worth of such
Doctors is the scale in which they weigh Theological truths; though they read
even in those very Doctors that their Authority is of no more value than the
proofs they bring. Now, if Divinity be a Science, as I am sure you will not
deny, it being voiced so by those very Divines, though slightly executed,
there must of necessity be, or be possible a sort of Divines who in true
speaking know Theological Truths, who therefore will properly and with Justice
claim the title of Divines, whereas these others will be but Discoursers in
Theological Subjects. If an old man's Experience may prevail with you, I
exhort you to study true divinity.

Looking into your third Section, at the very door I met with a scruple which I
must endeavor to remove. You say, The Authority of our Supreme Pastor has
interposed his sharp but justly deserved Censures against diverse of my books.
I confess it is gravely spoken; but I find not any sense within to maintain so
peremptory an outside. I pray which of your eminent Scholars teach that the
prohibition of a book is a censure. The holy Bible if printed I do not say in a
vulgar language, but even in an Heretical Country, especially by an Heritick,
is prohibited; and your way of speaking which makes a prohibition a Censure, I
and a sharp one too, would make us believe that the Bible, that is, Gods word
is sharply censured by the Pope. Can you imagine a greater scandal, considering
the place where you live? In Luthers time there was a Decree that whatever Book
was printed by any book seller who had printed any of Luthers works should be
prohibited. Read the Rules of the Index expurgatorius in the Council of Trent,
and see how far wide you have strayed from the Catholic practice and opinion.

As for the special prohibition against my book, though Doctor Holden has
learnedly declared the quality of it and that be sufficient, yet I have these
two notes to offer you; one, that I am now fortified in my plea (which hitherto
has been accused as a mere shift to cover my disaffection) that a simple
Condemnation of a Book at Rome, without singling out any particular
proposition, leaves the whole Doctrine of the Book untouched. I am confirmed, I
say, now by a fresh Authority out of Stubrockius his new Notes upon Wendrockius
his Commentaries on the Provincial Letters; where, at the bottom of the page
before the first, you may see how unscrupulously those Children of Obedience
take up the same undutifull pretense against Roman Condemnations with others
when their case is the same with others. This you may plainly see if you busy
not your thoughts too much at the seeming contradiction of my words [the page
before the first] for I observe your Art is excellent in descanting on a Bull.
But, because the words prohibited, condemned, make a noise a great deal louder
than their signification, I shall so far comply with my Reader's either
unexperience or indisposition as to cite that disguised Jesuit Stubrockius his
words; that the world may know how Religious men and those whose chief
strictness consists in Obedience, can put by the blow of a Superiour's command
when they are concerned in it, how loudly soever they exclaim against others
for a less matter. Si nihil prorsus in eo (Libro prohibito) sigillatim
config^tur, sed prohibeatur generatim, nemo sapiens neget eo duntaxat nomine
prohibitum fuisse quod contra regulas a Concilio Tridentino praescriptas,
editus sit. If nothing at all in particular be struck at in that Book, but it
be prohibited in general terms; no wise man can deny but that it was only in
this regard prohibited, because it was set forth against the Rules prescribed
by the Council of Trent; as that the Authors name was not printed (by which,
observe, that this your Book, according to the Council of Trent Sess. 4. is
prohibited) or Approbation of Superiors obtained, or such like. And the Book
Stubrockius thus strives to defend is neither better nor worse than the
intolerable Apology for the Casuists, condemned and prohibited by the Pope the
last August.

My other Note is, that amongst all the two Books of mine (for your diverse are
no more) prohibited in Rome, this which you except at is none: So that your
Censure is the first; how well grounded your following discourse will tell us.
The reason that Court would not proceed against it (though the Doctrine it
delivers might justly expect a stronger opposition, than some others that have
had worse luck, from the Interest of its most zealous Adversaries) is because
they see my opinion supported by an Universality of Fathers, of contrasting
with whom they are cautious in Rome, being persons of great prudence. And the
Ex-Jesuit who writ so bitterly against me here in England, though solicited to
oppose that Book, would not, answering he knew diverse Fathers of that mind,
particularly S. Austin, whom (says he) I have read over no less than fourteen
times.

You promise me in the end of this Section to concern your self only with this
one Controversy of the State of Souls dying in grace not as yet fully purged,
and with the positions and grounds on which (my) explication of Purgatory
stands; unless some one Doctrine (of mine) or other, having a near alliance with
the business in hand so offer it self that the Discourse and Subject would be
illustrated by it. You promise me a great favor; for, I naturally love to
speak to one question at once, and points connected with it, that so it may be
more fully illustrated and the Reader informed; which, when many are touched
slightly and only caught at, especially if disparate and not tending to the
same difficulty, the Reader's eye is distractedly drawn diverse ways, and no
occasion offered of clearing any thing fully. But I must not be so happy as to
hope performance from you in any thing. You promised me formerly the sweet style
of Love Letters; but anon very furiously and unkindly call me Epicurean, Pagan,
Heathen, and what not? You promised you would not censure me; and yet proceed
even in the same place and all over to censure me most sharply. You promised p.
5. strength of sense in treating this Subject; but have hitherto afforded me
nothing but the contrary weakness, and I mainly fear the like performance in
the rest of your Book. You promised civility toward my person, and that you
combated only my Doctrine; yet more than once quarrel with my very name, which
I assure you, Sir, is only personal, and not a jot doctrinall. And now you
promise me the treating only one question and points nearly allied with it,
which is a procedure worthy a Scholar; but yet afterward you ramble to the
Apocalypse, the two wings of the woman, the Eternal Generation of the second
person, my expression of my name and quality, and diverse such discourses;
which are not only not nearly but not at all allied to the present question:
Which shows that you are very regardless of your word and credit, and
unconstant to your own thoughts; and that you aim more to cavil and make a
noise against me, by picking out of my works two or three Paragraphs here and
there from their fellows by connection with which they subsisted (a method which
should one attempt in God's Holy Word it self, your own heart tells you
nothing's so absurd but might be fathered upon it) rather than to confute any
piece end ways as a Scholar should do.

Your fourth Section (the substance of it being nothing but the copying another
Book) I am glad to have nothing to except against, only you insinuate a fault
in the Translation, which not having the Latin copy by me I cannot judge of.
Had you endeavored to mend it, you should have obliged both the worthy
Translatour and my self.

In your fifth Section by a malignant slight you seek to bite Sir Kenelm
Digby, saying, the book of the Immortality of the Soul was fathered upon him. I
know you would do me the honor to entitle me to it. But, as that eloquently
proper Style, the diffusion of the Discourse, the multitude of experiences even
in Arts wherein I am totally ignorant, do exclude me from the vanity of
pretending to so excellent a piece, so do they discover to the world the
rashness of your impotent Envy. My part follows next in the subscription of my
Peripateticall Institutions, the natural sense whereof being, Thomas an
English man, of the Whites of Essex, you are pleased to transform according to
your good will. You add I say my Institutions are according to the Mind of
that most eminent man and excellent Philosopher. And, as for the first Epithet
I have the unanimous Testimony of all that know him and are able to judge in
what consists the worth of abilities in the arts both of peace and war. And,
for the second, concur with me all those in Italy, France, Germany and England,
whom their own industry and aequability of mind have made worthy to read his
Book. What your following discourse says of my Institutions I heartily confess
and am bound to thank you for sealing it with your good word; saving still what
you cite out of the Consilium Authoris, where is no such matter as you express,
though your sincerity can allow the putting it in a different letter as a
citation from the place: And, therefore I see even when you make show to cite
the very words, the Reader must look the place if he will not be mistaken.
Though you seem to speak of a Point which all Peripateticks acknowledge to be
done by Aristotle long since, and so needs no greater excellency to perform
than to have read and understood him. It seems by your requiring Faith in your
Reader, that in your schools you do not use to let your scholars see evidence
to anchor them in your doctrine, but you propound some easy and plausible
persuasion to tickle and inveigle their belief; and so need none of thofe
strange terms, fit, sequitur, consequens est, etc. for no one thing follows
another in your doctrine. All are either primo nota or postremo ignota in your
Philosophy.

Your next quarrel is that I say Divinity is inaedificata to Philosophy. Lord!
how you would have been troubled if I should have said that Faith is grafted
upon the stock of our natural understanding, and Charity on our Will; and yet
I believe this will prove the tenet of your eminent Scholars. Now, if this be
so, sure it is less absurd but not less necessary that our Divinity be grafted
into the stock of our natural Speech and words, whose meanings and Definitions
Philosophy must open to us. I pray then be not offended with this word
Inaedificatae; for it signifies not super aedificatae, nor has the force to
signify that the strength of Divinity comes from Philosophy, but that
Philosophy is the wax into which the seal of Divinity is printed, which no
learned ingenuous man will deny. For, if Definitions be the Principles of
Science, and Philosophy defines the words Divinity uses, it must needs have a
material priority to it.

Next, you tell your Reader my Philosophy and Divinity are so perfectly
squared, that if I had not made a Division of the Books it had been impossible
to know where one ended and the other began. Honored Sir, you know I am but a
poor man, and cannot give rewards for good turns done to me; therefore I
beseech you to be content with humble thanks: For I owe them from my heart;
First to God who gave me to perform what you say or rather did it by me; next,
to your self who so kindly acknowledge and divulge it. For I see not how you
could give a Scholar a greater praise, than to signify that the contexture of
(not his Paragraphs, but) even his Books are so closely connected. But to check
my too much feeding on your praises, you give me a knock with every bit; you
say I banish supernaturality, evacuate Christian Faith, admit nothing on other
grounds than Demonstration, all calumnies as false as bold; and so can do me no
harm where your bare word is not blindly believed.

SECOND DIVISION. Containing an Answer, from Section sixth, to the fifteenth.
The Groundwork of the Vindicator's impugnation of the Middle State found to
be a most groundless Calumny. The occasion of writing the Middle State, the
Letter of Vindication, and that in Answer to the Dispensers of the Bull and
Canon. His weakness in arguing, in stating the Question, and opposing his
Adversary.
IN the sixth Section you seem to come to the Question, and cite a large Text
our of my Peripateticall Institutions, adding at the end this conclusion of
your own. This is the Essence, the Substance of his Purgatory, this is his
whole chain or deduction of it, this is the grief he admits in separated Souls,
etc. Is it possible, Sir, you should thus forget all truth and honesty? First,
you cite out of a Book where there is no more mention nor thought of Purgatory
than of the Dungeon of Constantinople; where Method permitted me to treat of no
more than I had before laid grounds for, where I had not made any mention of
Christianity, or Christian Felicity or Unhappiness: Where, in a word, I could
only speak to pure Naturalists; and yet you boldly pronounce this is the
Essence, the Substance of his Purgatory, this is the grief he admits in
separated Souls; whereas the whole bufiness is both in the Sacred Institutions
and Middle State (the Books which purposely treat that Subject) so quite
differently and so at large explicated. Pray, Sir, furnish your self and me
with some excuse why you omit those Books which designedly handle that matter,
and cite out of another which handles it not at all; and then, upon this false
and abusive pretense, lay the whole Groundwork of your future impugnation.

The seventh and eighth Sections consist chiefly of my words, and so I may omit
them till there arise some occasion of farther examination: only I must note
that at the end of your eighth Section you profess your great care fully to
deliver the foundations of my new Fabric of Purgatory; yet make no mention at
all of the Institutiones Sacrae; or that there is either Scripture, or Fathers,
or Theological reasons alleged in my Book of the Middle State; by this sly
trick seeking to draw your credulous Reader into the conceit that there is no
other ground for my opinion than a Metaphysicall Argument, whose force because
they do not penetrate, you may shake it off with crying it is nonsense.

In the ninth Section you tell a forged story (whether out of Ignorance or
Malice I leave to your conscience) that my Lord of Chalcedon admonish't me of
this point and others, and that I was ready with a premeditated Apology. In
which, though short, there ly three mistakes. First, that my Lord admonish't
me: For, though he were my Superior; though one whom a long-well-spent Age,
great study and many writings had made awful to our Church, yet was he far
modester than you; and professed, as he did dislike my opinions, so he dissented
no otherwise than as one Divine does from another, and had never descended to
censure any of them. Perhaps, of this point you may have heard the contrary,
but I have it under his own hand. The second mistake is, that he admonish't me
of this point; for he never descended to any particular; and this you might
understand (as partly the other) out of my Dedicatory of my, Ratio
villicationis written to him, and presented in his lifetime. The third, that I
had fore-prepar'd my Book of the Middle State, and presently sent it him. For,
the reason of my composing it was the many popular noises raised against me by
persons, some ignorant, some malicious, as if I were an Heretic, which forced
me to write the Treatise in mine own defense, and I dedicated it to my Lord,
though I knew no particular Exception of his against this point, but judged he
might have some, because the greatest cry was against it. The Translation, as
far as came to my knowledge, was not made by any design upon earth, though by
the event I perceive it was out of special Providence in Heaven. How things
passed on your side, and what were the true mot^ves of your publishing the
Bull, and that Testimony of the Council I can only collect from the phenomenon
of all concurrent circumstances, of which you may perhaps hereafter hear more.

You say the Publishers of the Bull had no respect to the Letter of
Vindication. I think you aim at one I wrote in Latin to a Person of Honor,
which was presented Him, and by him showed to some Jesuits that frequented his
House, and they can be witnesses of the Truth between us. This, afterward, as
I hear, was translated into English and printed. If this be the Letter you
speak of, I would gladly understand why you imagine the Author conceits himself
inspired with the Genius of Mont-alt: whose spirit, I confess, I take to be
very solid and pious, and generously adhering to persecuted Truth: Nor, do I
find it unlawful that any should wish to be inspired with it, but truly
conceive my self far below the hope of such Excellences.

What you heard well observed that all the Protestant Divines of England would
subscribe to the same Protestation which is in that Letter, I believe purely
upon your report. But tell me first, may a Catholic protest nothing that a
Protestant will subscribe to? or can a Protestant profess nothing but what he
will perform. Again, will any Protestant profess to renounce any Doctrine found
to contradict any Authority constantly acknowledged for Infallible in the
Catholic Church, meaning the same by Catholic Church as my writings declare
me to do, that is all those who adhere to Tradition? Will any Protestant be
content to have lost his cause if any decree of a Pope be expressly repugnant to
him, which I there also profess? How maliciously blind then was the observer
you follow, who could not see such distinctive expressions? How uncharitable
your self who catch at and magnify every rash cavil, out of a tooth to
disgrace and abuse him that never did you injury. Your calumny of my denying
Decrees of Popes and Councils shall be answered in its due place.

You say the Publishers intended not to enter into the lists of Disputation,
which I easily believe; and that they were persuaded, the very reciting the
Bull and Canon would have knocked down the Book (which you say was the occasion
of their setting them forth) beyond all Reply. How weak a conceit was this for
men that saw both Bull and Canon cited and explicated in that very book, and
could not be ignorant that in many private Conferences the same Authorities had
been debated? You thought your Capital Letters would have dazzled the
understanding, of the adverse party, so that none would have dared to look
further into the meaning of those Authorities. But God provided that al should
not be so light of belief, nor his Church led into Error by such a misgrounded
Interpretation of its Decrees. You complain much in your tenth Section that
this pious intention of the Dispensers was wronged. As though you did not know
that Intentions are secret and must expect their reward from him that sees the
heart: Men judge of Actions, and your self confess the effect was that pious
(that is, credulous) persons received satisfaction; that is, were seduced into
Error by that cuning practice; and yet you think it not occasion enough for an
understanding man to discover so prejudicial an Interpretation forced on the
Church; and would needs have it a wrong to you that one unknown and not
intended to be hurt by you should take this pains; as if every honest and
ableman were not interessed in the Churches quarrel of so high a nature as to
set up an Opinion, that may prove when examined erroneous, for an Article of
Faith.

In your eleventh Section you begin to produce your Arguments, whereof the
first is, that all Orthodox writers who have treated this Subject of the State
of separated Souls since the promulgation of the Bull a foresaid suppose it as
a certain Truth. But how many such do you cite? Surely of five hundred which
have written since those days your Readers might civilly expect at least half
a score that positively assert it as an assured doctrine of the Church. But,
such is the irregular way of discoursing your eminent Scholars use, that when
they have audaciously advanced a proposition whereof they know nothing certain,
if it be denied, against all Rules of Discourse and Logic they put the
Defendant to prove the contrary, which peradventure concerns not him a pin
whether it be true or no. As in the present, what concerns it my Faith whether
many or few interpret the Bull and Council as you or I say? To make a new
Article of Faith the definition must be so clear that none can doubt of it: And
ipso facto that it needs Interpretation, it is evidently insufficient to make a
new obligation of Faith. Again, suppose your Antecedent be true, does any
number of Interpreters lock up the understandings of those that follow that
they may not see more than their Fore-goers? If you say yes; show us some seal
of Infallibility in their foreheads by which we may know so much, or else your
Faith will be but probable; but a peradventure I, peradventure no; and Interest
or Passion must supply the rest. And, such I believe is your Faith of this your
newborn Article, though somewhat an older Opinion.

In your twelfth Section you enquire into the state of the Question; and when
you have recited it out of the Bull, you presently cry, Victory, without ever
looking into the words and sense; that one may note in you the wonted
disposition of your great Masters, to read the words, but seldom take pains to
understand them. The Bull then says, that in the days of the Popes
Predecessor there rose a Question among Divines concerning the vision of the
Souls of Just men after their death, in which nothing was to be purged when
they departed out of this world; or, if there were, it was now totally purged;
whether they see the Divine Essence before the re-assumption of their bodies,
and the General Judgment, and also concerning other matters, etc. I pray you
now, in virtue of your Logic, show us here what is the subject of the
Question, what the Predicate. To my apprehension the Subject is divided into
two parts; one is of Just men in whom at their death nothing is to be purged;
the other of them who at their death had somewhat to be purged, but now are
totally purged: The Predicate is, the seeing of God's Essence before the day of
Judgment. If this be so, then resolve me whether the Subject of the Proposition
be affirmed by the Proposition, or be that of which the Predicate is affirmed.
We whose Logic tends to Demonstration, agree that the Subject is not affirmed,
but is that of which the Predicate is affirmed? What your eminent Scholars
that square Philosophy and consequently Logic to their not understood Faith,
will say to this, I expect you to teach us who are a great Professor (I doubt
not) in their way. In the mean while give me leave to think and tell you, that
the Question whether any Souls be purged before the re-assumption of their
bodies, is no part of the Popes Answer, and neither part of the Predicate nor
of the Copula; and this so evidently that no ingenuous person can reply upon
it; which I may very well ghess to be the reason why you would not scan the
Popes words. Nor need I make other answer to Cherubinus, he (as your self say)
agreeing with the Pope. This is the main prop of your whole cause; and yet how
weak it proves when seriously and indifferently examined! though I freely
confess it might easily be mistaken by an unwary Reader fully possess't of the
contrary persuasion.

You see, now, Sir, the way a Scholar that understands Logic would have taken
here, is, since every Question is of whether something be or be not (that is,
of some Proposition, that is, whether some Predicate be identify'd to the
Subject) to show that the Predicate of the proposition you would evince is the
Predicate here; your Subject, the Subject. By this method you might have hoped
to arrive to some strength of sense. But instead of doing this you only cry
aloud the words are most plain and express for you, that they most clearly and
evidently condemn us; and then to prove it, you are very high against your
Adversary's over sight, his prepossession, his boldness, his confidence,
Sometimes he is blamed for an absurdity almost impossible in overlooking it;
Anon, you say, to do him right (as if you would confess you did him wrong
before) he did see it and cite it. Strange challenge of oversight which
consists with a grant of both seeing and citing! So that all you bring in your
own behalf, and this in the main support of your cause, is contradiction to
your self, calumny of your Adversary, many bold sayings, and not one
Schollar-like attempt of proof. Sweet Sir, will this serve think you to prove
your Adversary a Puny, and your self a great Clerk? or rather will not the
Reader judge that the differences of your performance will transpose those
appellations?

In your thirteenth Section you reprehend your Adversary that he pretends there
was but one Question only disputed and defined at that time, and affirm
stoutly that it is not possible for him to persuade a^ Intelligent Reader
thereof; though both the Pope and Cherubinus by your confession call it a
Question, and not Questions. It Is an hard case that the Pope's own word cannot
protect him, but we must be put to prove the Pope spoke what he thought. But,
let us see your Arguments. You say the Pope makes two Questions, and that
Cherubinus does the same (their words being equivalent, I see not why I should
make two disputings of the same case) the first of Souls in which nothing
remained to be purged; the other of Souls in which something is to be purged.
But since by your own confession, and by the words cited by your self they say
these two made but one Question, a man would have expected you should bring
somewhat to prove what you say, and not upon your bare word force us to believe
they contradict themselves in the same period. But, to speak sense as well as
words, who knows not that the word Question may have two meanings; one, to
signify what may be ask't; another what is or may be doubted. An asking may be
framed of any proposition we are ignorant of; a doubting only of those against
which we have some kind of apparent reason. Now, you are pleased to look no
farther than for what may be ask't; but your Adversary goes on to what may be
doubted of; and, therefore, finding no special doubt of one part of the
persons you divide which was not in the other, he was so clear-sighted as to
find that the Pope and Cherubinus expressed themselves properly and dogmatically;
whereas you make them break the common Laws both of Sense and Grammar; and,
when they would speak of many Questions, to use the singular number. You add a
confirmation out of the Title of the Bull, in which in the plural number
Articles are said to be defined; not distinguishing betwixt Articles and
Questions, whereas an Article must be fore-debated to be called a Question. So
that, if there had been but one Article doubted of and debated, there was but
one Question decided, though many Articles defined.

Nor do you well appeal to the 2d. Scholion of Cherubinus, where you only find
that ten Heresies are condemned by this Bull. for it is a far different thing
to condemn a known falsity, and to determine a doubted question. So that your
clear-sight failed you also in this point. As for Eymericus I easily confess of
his worth, all that Pegna writes: But, as all that does not except him from
being a man, so neither from having had his imperfections; and this in
particular that he was too censorious; which is pardonable in him, few Saints
arriving to a perfect exinanition of proper interest, till toward the End of
their days. Wherefore, as all Judges for the most part are subject to draw
causes to their own Courts, so this Inquisitour was willing to make many heads,
upon which Delinquents might fall within the compass of the Inquisition, by
which means he set great quarrels betwixt his own Order and that of Saint
Francis, condemning Raymundus Lullus, whom the Franciscans maintain to be a
Saint, of Heresy, for attempting to demonstrate the Trinity. In which
controversy our modern Divines side much with the Franciscans. Hence I infer
you can ground little upon this Author as to increasing Articles of Faith. Your
citation out of Spondanus is less to the purpose, for his relation reports
nothing more to your intent then what is formally in the Bull it self; and, so,
already discussed: only I may note that this worthy Author, in that he says
the opinion of the Saints not seeing God was not altogether reproved or
condemned in John the two and twentieths days, is mistaken with diverse others
of your eminent Scholars, as may appear by the Universal outcry of the Church
against him, and the Arts and violences he was fain to use to get Doctors to
side with him, as the History of those times does manifest. I may conclude that
notwithstanding your strong confidence that your Adversary never dreamt of
these subtle Mysteries you think you have discovered, he saw the truth more
clearly then you with all your great intelligence; and so may return your
exhortation upon your self, to beware of heat of youth, to beware of the secret
snare of Interest, which many times lurk undiscovered in the hearts of men of
greater age.

In the fourteenth Section you come to the other question of what is the
Subject of this Bull, which your Adversary says to consist in this, whether
perfect Charity brings immediately to Heaven. And you very complementally
beseech him to tell you how his cleer-sighted friends could persuade him to
impose so grossly upon you, as to settle the state of the question in that whose
name is not recorded in the whole decree. I confess I hold him bound to yield
you satisfaction. And because you have imposed by your first Section the
burden upon me to answer for him, in return of your civility my request is, to
know how a man of your worth and parts could persuade your self to descend so
low as to ask a question grounded on so trivial an error, that every
Schoolboy must see it. I imagine if two words have in a Dictionary the same
signification, and a School boy should deny that his Latin had the sense in
English which his Master asserted, because one of the two words was not in it.
I fear his Master would think him negligent enough to deserve the rod. So if
the word Justus signify one that is in charity, and you, who take upon you so
high an Authority of censuring, will flatly and challengingly deny the thing to
be there because the very word is not there, you seem to me most extremely
unreasonable: What if instead of an Angel of gold, I give you half a Piece, is
it not all one? or, which perhaps you will think more like our case, instead of
the term defined suppose the definition? You object therefore more strongly,
that he requires the Popes positive is or is not; And if you do not show that,
and yet will obstinately persist to draw from this Definition that Souls are
delivered before the day of Judgment you hazard to contradict both Bull and
Council. The rest of the Argument though plainly and strongly urged you omit at
the present, what you will do hereafter we shall see. This last point that you
hazard to contradict the Council and Pope you stumble at. But why (I pray) if
you know not their minds about that point do you not hazard to choose the wrong
for the right. I understand no otherwise. But you insist upon his admission
that the Pope was of that mind. First that admission comes after this speech of
his. Secondly it is but a permission, not a certification, for out of it, you
are never the securer that indeed it was so, and so still remain in hazard. As
for his requiring an is or is not, I wonder you should except against it; this
being the very substance of the question in hand. I pray, reflect (as any
ingenious Reader I suppose will) that the Pope may either think that some Souls
are purged before the day of Judgment, and yet neither intend to say it, nor in
fact say it: He may again both think so and intend to say it, and yet not say
it; lastly, he may do all three: Let us then for Argument sake suppose, that,
he did all three, and that this would make an Article of Faith of what was not
so before, for some of your eminent Scholars hold that. Does any of them say
his pure thought has that power, or his Will if it budds not into words? None
that ever I heard of. The most demand publication and affixion ad Valvas Sancti
Petri, and in acie Campi Florae, and such like formalities, far more visible
than an ambiguous elocution or supposition; which you, without being able to
show any express word, will needs fix upon us for a yoke to submit all
understandings unto. Do not reprove so fiercely unless you can give a better
account of your Doctrine and actions. It becomes you not.

THIRD DIVISION. Containing an Answer to his fifteenth and sixteenth Sections.
The true Question established, and the sense of the Bull and Canon defended
against the mistakes of his learned Divine. Some Notes evidencing that nothing
about the Duration of Purgatory was defined in the Council of Florence.
SO much concerning your reply ad hominem. Now, let us say a word to your
question it self. By the precedent discourse it is apparent there was but one
formal question disputed in those times, though the predicate belonged to
diverse subjects as all universal Predicates do. Of which kind (viz.
universal Predicates) it is impossible to see one if the Questions must be
counted as many as the subjects to which they are applyable. Now then in our
present case I averr the Question to be Vtrum justus nihil habens purgandum
immediate potiatur visione Dei. Nor do I see how possibly you can deny either
the Question to be One, or to be this; Since the Pope himself both expressly
calls it one and puts it to be this. Which being agreed on, let us see what
signifies the Subject, [Justus nihil habens purgandum] Just men or Souls in
which there remains nothing to be purged. To Divines a Just man or Soul
signifies one that is indu'd with charity; and to have nothing to be purged,
signifies to have not so much as a venial Sin left to be purged in them, that
is, according to S. Thomas his Doctrine, to have his Charity totally fervent and
perfect. Now John the 22th. denied that such Souls went to heaven before the
day of Judgment: His opposits, the main Body of the Church, affirmed it. If
then this explication be on all parts evident, what can be answered why this,
according to your Adversary's tenet, was not the onely-handled and debated
Question? unles you will return to that trivial excuse, as to cry the word is
not there but only the sense and meaning. And, where I pray, does your
Adversary pretend that his very words are in the Bull, that you challenge him
so vaporingly to show you the Question in terms? I find him indeed say that
'twas the Design, aim, drift, intention of the Definers, but I do not see him
undertake that perfect Charity brings an immediate Heaven were precisely the
terms of the definition. Your self cannot but observe he severally phrases the
Question, as sometimes whether Souls perfect in charity see God immediately,
sometimes in other words; attending to the sense as sober and intelligent
Writers should do, not standing upon terms as dodging Sophisters do. Look but
into the Testimonies which your self cite, and indeed what all Historians and
Divines report, and see whether they do not unanimously agree that this was the
Question. I think I may after so much evidence excuse the answering of your
Adversary's Argument drawn from the Pope's so pious recommends of Holy desires;
for, since the Question is not changed, but by you mistaken and pitifully not
understood, and that your whole solution relies upon that defect, His Argument
remains in its full strength. Only, I will ask your pardon if I presume to
direct you in the example of the Entychians and Monothelites. You argue thus:
when the Church combated the Eutychians, it did not only define the plurality
of wills against the Monothelites, etc. what you would say I cannot tell; If,
that the Church defined both the plurality of Natures and Wills, you discover
too much Ignorance, for it defined only the plurality of Natures: If, that it
defined only the plurality of natures not of wills, you say right, but it
comes quite crose to your intention, which strives to prove that something is
defined by connection, not formally set down in the Definition. Wherefore your
Discourse seems to me imperfect and perplexed.

Now then I may fairly proceed to your fifteenth Section where again I meet
with Eymericus; but, because he either says no more than the Bull or obliges
not so much, I shall agree with you that he is a grave and learned Author,
without contending any farther about what conduces so little to our main
Conclusion. Only, give me leave to note this defect in him where he says
these points were made of Faith by this Bull, If that be his meaning. it was a
great weakness in a writer so near those times and living when the noise was not
yet ceased. For, if the truth of these Articles were not known before this
Bull, what reverence was it in the whole Christian world publikly to term the
Pope an Heretic, and preach against him, even in the Court of Avignon; as an
Englishman of Eymericus his order, by name Thomas Wallis did, and was
imprisoned for it. No; these points were the constant Tradition of the Church,
and this Bull served not to bring in a new Faith, but to quiet the world, and
by Authority to quell the spirits moved by John the 22th.

In your sixteenth Section you pass on to the Council of Florence; but it is
definition being exactly according to the Bull, there is no hope of any new
advantage to your cause from thence. Yet you will try again, though with the
same Argument, and we beg your Readers patience if we repeat the same Answer.
First you cite the Council that some Souls are purged by the punishments of
Purgatory after their body's death Which would have seemd very little to the
purpose, your Adversary professing the same, had not you long before laid a
snake in the grass to use his sting when occasion should serve; which here you
begin. presently adding that this can find no admittance in your new model.
For all the suffering of Souls which you fancy by their irregular and now
unchangeable affections avail nothing as to the purging and cleansing of
Souls, etc. Now I see why you neglected my book of the middle state, and what
I write of it in my Sacred Institutions, that you might freely slander the
Catholic truth I teach about Purgatory, to those who know no more, then what
you cited out of a treatise of philosophy, where there was no intention to
speak either of purgatory or in deed Christianity. But because you will dilate
your self as I suppose more largly herafter, I will deferr the question till
then.

You will have your Adversary observe that when the Council in the fourth
Article declares that Souls which are purged being unclothed of their bodies
are immediately received into heaven, this doctrine by the Parenthesis of (as
is abovesayd) is wholly built upon the former Doctrine of the Purging it self.
And I, Sir, would desire you to note, that because neither in the third nor in
the fourth Article any time of completing the Purgation is expressed or
insinuated, that your note is nothing to your Purpose, nor does any way conduce
to show a complete Purgation of them while uncloathed; And this, though it were
true that a Purgation by punishment in Purgatory were against your adversary;
which is a pure conceit of your own brain.

You proceed to an Antiparallel of the Councels Doctrine to ours, and to manage
it the better you most freely assume what you find not in the Council. I mean
these words being purged unclothed of their bodies, which signify in plain
English that the purgation is perfected while they remain yet uncloathed. The
equivalent of which sense, if it be not in the Council as all my endeavors
cannot find it, I must perforce protest that as I should be content you wronged
me to do the Council right, so to slander the Council that you may wrong me is
a thing unsufferable in any, much more in a religious Person. In the parallel
you give for my side, you put a vast grief by reason those pleasurs are now
impossible to be enjoyed. Show this in all my books ever applied to the Souls
in Purgatory and carry the question: if you cannot, consider what you make me
suffer among them who believe you. You desire your adversary farther to note
that sunt purgata is the preter perfect tense, and show that the purgation is
passed. And are you so unadvised as not to know the Council speaks as well of
the Souls to go out of their bodies the following ages, as in those before? so
that this being passed must stay in some even to the day of Judgment by your
own explication?

After this you seek farther into the roots of the Council even from its
beginning at Ferrara. But as far as I see you are not very expert in the story.
For at Ferrara was delivered to the Fathers of the Council a long oration by
Marcus Ephesius who would never consent to the Councils resolutions about
Purgatory. But his action concerns not us much, so we understand the meaning of
the main body of the Greeks, whose propositions when you have recited, you
infer 'twere absurd to deny that the question of Purgatory was here disputed
and defined, by which you discover a great mind to play soul, but your fingers
are not nimble enough to carry it hansomly; you craftily would persuade the
incautious Reader that we denied Purgatory, but then you spoil all by putting a
wrong term, for truly the question of Purgatory was not disputed, but from the
beginning agreed on by both sides; but a question concerning Purgatory, that
is, whether there were true fire in it was debated, and so, for any thing the
Council says, or I know it may be debated still. Of the other points expressed in
the decree of the Council there was an agreement without debate betwixt the
generality of the Greeks and the Latins.

You go on pronouncing that in these professions both sides agreed against us
directly, and home to our point in question: without expressing in what, or
bringing any proof of it. For your self have before confessed we hold both
expiation and delivery, and the only question betwixt us is whether before the
day of Judgment this expiation end: of which (though the very precise point we
contend about) you still have the ill luck to fall short; you offer sometimes
indeed to rack your Testimonies to confess what you desire, were not the words
too faithful to their Speakers sense, to be corrupted by you: but if they will
not do in Latin, you have a trick to turn them into English, and piece them our
with stuff of your own; making their sense to be this, their present delivery
whilst unclothed? this you say the Council intended to deliver as the Faith of
the Church, in this both the Greek and Latin Fahers clearly agreed, and yet
plainly the conclusion I sustain was neither agreed to, nor debated, nor
questioned, if I be truly accused as the first Inventer of it, nor so much as
mentioned. You conclude, it must be an act not of understanding, but of will to
say presently signifies, at the day of Judgment. Truly it would be so, and in
the mean while it is an act of ill will, to impose on your Adversary that he
says it.

Now a word to the discourse of an eminently learned Divine which you mark with
the letter C. And for his learning I have nothing to say, why it should not be
eminently above yours, but for his wyliness he is far short of you, and if any
thing corrupt his Judgment, it is self-conceit and downright passion, his
unhappy humors, that strangely abound in him. But I cannot omit to note in you,
that you had not the luck to give his Paper a convenient title, but printed it
just as he had written it for his own memory. The entrance of his discourse is
very good; But his first proposition concerning the matter, plainly and
unexcusably mistaken; for he says, the matter in dispute betwixt the Latins
and the Greeks was what Souls were admitted or to be admitted to eternal
Beatitude before the day of Judgment. A question that neither you as far as I
can guess, nor we ever found in this Council. Neither do I remember to have met
with such a gradation of Saints in any Author: Therefore, I leave this great
Doctor to prove that there ever was such a question moved. His next leap though
he calls it this question, yet is quite from the question in hand; being
whether there be fire in Purgatory or no. Which how it appertains to his mainly
proposed question I leave to better wits to consider. But I gather, that this
Paper was only private notes, not written in a form to be printed, and that
you have done very indiscreetly and to his dishonor, to expose them to the
public. He puts next the Latins position, in which you who cannot pardon your
Adversaries sloth in perusing of the Council, omit a sentence most pertinent
of any thing to the cause, to wit, that he who has committed many offenses is
freed after a longer time of purgation, but he who has committed a few is
sooner delivered, which particularity had it been in the decision of the
Council, would have been something to the purpose, and saved you the labor of
corrupting the Council by your additions. But I must note that this eminent man
uses this phrase in this world, and in the next for before the day of Judgment
and after, not (as I think) by affectation, but by negligence, which still more
confirms me, that the whole draught were but private notes, and not framed for
the print.

He goes on to give the variety of opinions concerning their going to Heaven,
in which he says the Greeks imagine that the Souls of just men have indeed
obtained Beatitude, but not perfectly, and that they shall perfectly enjoy it
when they shall be reunited to their bodies: which position, so far (by his
leave) is common also to some principal Latin Fathers. He adds that the Greeks
say that in the mean while they remain in a separated place, where they
interiourly rejoice, entertaining their thoughts with the foreseen and
fore-known perfect Beatitude and adoption which is prepared for them. But in
the conclusion he seems to say that after many disputations the Greeks came to
the ensuing resolutions which are well known. In which he slanders the Greek
Church, for it was but a part of them that maintained this last mentioned
position, upon the like Testimonies as John the two and twentieth did amongst
the Latins, so you see that his master piece for which he esteems himself so
highly, to wit, to understand what the opinion of the Eastern Church was, is a
mere illusion bred out of the reading some Schismatics works, whom he took to
be the mouth of the Greek Church. For the Greeks themselves who at Rome write
against Heretics Profess that the Faith of the Greeks concerning Purgatory is
contained in their Euchologies and Ritualls which are ancient and used both by
Catholics and Schismatics. For as to their writers, if you read one, you know
not who else will agree with him. So various and irregular are their
explications. Now if their Ritualls and Euchologies be not more express then
the Latins for your opinion, you will easily see what will become of you, there
being not one word of delivery before the day of Judgment, but all that is any
way express referred thither: which you are pleased to neglect though it be the
public profession of the Church, and to seek birds-nests in the bushes of
probable Authors.

Next then, your eminently learned man makes his reflections upon the word
presently, just as wisely as you, persuading himself that we think the natural
and formal signification of it is at the day of Judgment, and insisting upon
it, because it is added only to this member. As if the reason were not
evident, to wit, because the time was to be set down uncertainly only in this
member; Presently therefore signifies as soon as purged, whenever that be,
according to the variety of opinions. He goes on to tell us that neither Greeks
nor Latins doubted of the delivery of Souls at the day of Judgment, which is
very true, and therefore also they put no more down. He adds that the sole
difficulty was of the precedent time, as both their declarations do manifest.
But this manifestation was made in his learned brain, for in the text there is
no sight of any such contest betwixt them. But it appears that the Greeks held
their tongues about it, and the Latins were content they should do so. At last
your learned man would persuade us that it is most plain in Benedictus his
Bull, and that there the word [Presently] most manifestly signifies before the
day of Judgment. But because he sent me not the magnifying spectacles of
Passion which he used, I could not perceive such evidence. He concludes with,
what may he judge of me, who call this Definition of a holy Pope and Council, a
new Doctrine. I pray certify him that I neither believe him nor you, that the
Doctrine I call new is either the Popes or the Councils.

Which that it may appear better, I give you a few notes for our side, upon the
Council. The first was that there was no debate betwixt the Greeks and Latins
concerning Purgatory but only about fire, and with some Greeks about the
Vision of God by confessedly just men, so that your learned man's wilful
supposition of a strife concerning the gradation of Saints coming to Beatitude
is a pure fiction, without any ground of History, and his whole discourse built
upon it, nothing but the humming of a Chimaera feeding upon entia rationis. My
second note is that whereas the Latins put in their confession that some of
those who required purgation came sooner to Beatitude, others later; The Greeks
after they had seen the Latins confession, quite left out that point, and this
upon the fourteenth day of June, whereas the Latins put in their propositions
the fourth, so that you see it was not for have or oversight, but because it
was not settled amongst them, as it seemed to be amongst the Latins. My third
note is, that the Greeks express the punishments of Purgatory to consist in
griefs, to wit, for their sins and for the want of Beatitude which are the same
in which I also think the pains of Purgatory consist, howsoever you please not
to take notice of it. My fourth note is that the Latins never took notice of
the Greeks disagreement in point of coming to bliss, some sooner, some later,
but proceeded jointly to the Definition with words abstracting from both sides
of this controversy. All this is so manifest in the letter of the Council, that
there can be no dispute, in truth, of any part; though of this later, you and
your learned assistant will force a disputation thrusting in a sense which the
words bear not, without shame or care of your conscience in so wicked an
attempt as to corrupt a Council.

Now out of these Notes I frame a demonstration, as strong as the nature of
such a case can bear.

Where a difference is so plain betwixt 2 parties that it is not possible to be
hidden from either, and yet neither part takes notice of it, it is plain they
do not hold that difference to be material.

But there was a known and plain and unconcealable difference between the
Greeks and Latins concerning this tenet whether some Souls were purged sooner
then others, the Latins putting it down expressly, and the Greeks after having
seen the Latins confession, leaving it quite out, and yet no quarrel or
disputation arose betwixt them about this point.

Therefore neither part took it for a material point of Religion and
Controversy.

Now then you see wherein consisted the agreement of the two Churches concerning
this point, to wit, in this that neither of them thought it a matter to contend
about. I pray express your opinion in this point whether if the Latins had
believed it an Heres'y to say one Soul was not delivered before another, could
they in conscience have admitted the Greek Church to communion without
declaring their mind in this point, and this after so open an opposition, as to
leave out all mention of it when the Latins had so positively expressed it? If
you think Councils can dissemble in points of this quality, I believe the world
will soon confess that I, as stubborn as you reckon me, give far more reverence
to Counsels then you do. Wherefore I press you farther out of the Council. If
any man should say it was an Heresy to hold there were no material fire in
Purgatory, or that it was not lawful to consecrate in leavened Bread, you
would not spare to tell him that since the Council had declared it indifferent,
he stood not with the Council, but seemed at least to contradict it if he held
it were a matter of Faith. So do I press you, since the Council has passed
this point for an indifferent one, He that will say the opposite is an Heresy
is malapert beyond his strength. Arrogantia ejus plus quam fortitudo ejus.

You give us another paper, which you say was written by a nameless Scholar of
mine. I could reply I have none. For who converse with me, I tell them they
must see themselves, not trust me; which if they do, they are Scholars to
truth, not to me; If they trust me they follow me not, and so are not my
Scholars. But I have too much ground to suspect you aim at some advantage
against me by charactering him a very able proficient in my School, and
repeating it so often; as if you would have men think that both Friends and
Foes were all against me. I must then once more tell you that the Author of
that Letter never was addicted to my Doctrine, nor pretended to be my follower
(however you have got a trick to call all my Followers that will not censure me
as loud as you, nor willingly assent to your uncharitable carriage) nor was he
ever given to be curious in such kind of dissertations, no not even to that
degree as to have read my middle State, which made him more easily liable to
surprise in mistaking the Council at the first sight, taking all for right
which your learned Divine writ concerning it; so that it was candid credulity
of your Friends wrong relation of it, not want of Judgment which betrayed him
into the error of imagining the Bull and Council on your side, nor did he
dream his Letter should ever come into print, it being writ privately to the
other as a Friend, otherwise in likelihood he would have sifted the Testimonies
himself, and not have taken them on others account. So that you first uncivilly
print a private Letter of his, surreptitiously procured, without his knowledge;
then mischaracter him an able proficient in my School, my Follower, etc.
whereas what he writes is only like a moderate and grave Christian, who knows
he is not even by Principles of Charity to interpret as disobedient one who
publicly submits to the Church; and so I look upon it as an act of charity,
not of particular Friendship to me. But since you love to have it thought your
party can gain some advantage against those who are proficients by my Books, I
will show you one, your present Adversary, whom your self character to be but a
puny in my School, and as I hear never appeared in print, nor set himself to
write before, yet has so prudently foiled you in every encounter in this
Question, that he has left nothing for me but to discover your falsehood in
such by-questions as you thrust in to stuff out your Volume.

FOURTH DIVISION. Containing an Answer to his seventeenth Section.
The Authors Doctrine of Councils explicated; This new opinion of Purgatory in
likelihood later than Saint Gregory.
IN your seventeenth Section you first put upon me that I am armed against the
Authority of Popes and Councils, and then you run headlong on with declamatory
invectives upon that supposition. But, as the world is curious, I conceive some
will light on my defense as well as on your calumny; to whom I thus explicate
the true state of the question. It is known to all Christians that Christ and
his Apostles taught the world the Christian faith. It is known to all
Catholics, that this same faith has continued in the Catholic Church now
fifteen ages. It is known to the same that the means of continuing this faith
has been by Pastors, and Fathers teaching their Children what themselves had
learned by the same way. It is likewise known that in diverse ages there arose
up diverse Heretics, who endeavored to bring in Doctrins contrary to the
received Faith: and that Bishops, sometimes in particular (especially the
Bishop of Rome) sometimes in Collections or Councils with-stood and confounded
such Heretics confirming the old belief, and rejecting all new inventions. It
is evident that to do this it fuffices to have veracity enough to attest what
the old Doctrine was, and power enough to suppress all such as stir against it;
Thus far all goes well. Of late Ages among our curious Schoolmen some have
been so subtle that the Old faith would not serve them, but they thought it
necessary to bring in new points of Faith, and because what was not of Faith
could not become of Faith without a new revelation, they looked about for a new
revelation; and, finding the two supreme Courts of Christian discipline, seated
in General Councils and the Pope, they quickly resolved to attribute the power
of increasing Christian Faith to these two Springs of Christianity. Now, the
first difference betwixt the two parties engaged in the present controversy is,
whether the Faith delivered by the Apostles be sufficient to govern the Church
by, or there be necessary fresh Additions of such points as cannot be known
without a new revelation. In which they whom I follow hold the negative, they
whom I suppose you follow, the affirmative. Out of this question springs a
second, whether in the Councils and in the Pope is to be acknowledged a
Prophetical kind of Spirit, by which toward the ordinary government of the
Church, they have a gift to reveal some things not before revealed, nor
deducible out of things already revealed by the natural power of discourse
which God has left to mankind to govern it self by. In which point also I
follow them that deny, you and your eminent learned men stand up for the
Affirmative.

I hope by this any ingenious Reader will perceive that, if the Faith delivered
by Jesus Christ joined with the natural power of discoursing be sufficient to
govern the Church of God, then those who give power to Councils and Popes
sufficient to govern by this way, give them as much as is necessary for the
Church. But if new Articles be necessary to the government of the Church then,
and only then, they fall short. So that no understanding person reading these
lines can doubt but the true question is this, whether the Faith delivered by
Christ be sufficient for the government of the Church; or, that we must expect
new additions to our Faith every age, or when occasion presents it self. Whence
it will easily appear that all the great noise you make, and furious Rhetoric
you use, of, my denying the Authority of Councils; my being armed against them;
and such like angry stuff, are but uncharitable, uncivil, and highly injurious
clamours without any true cause or ground at all. But we shall hear more of
these hereafter.

Now, any prudent Christian that shall, with moderate attention, have read but
so far, will judge the question already decided: For who dare maintain Christ's
Doctrine was imperfect? And indeed all that have any little modesty on your
side, will not say new Articles of Faith are necessary, but that whatsoever the
Church defines was before revealed; though when they come to declare themselves
they demand really new Articles, only calling them Explications of the former,
or Deductions from them: And if they would justify that they were but such
Deductions as natural reason can deduce, there would remain no controversy:
which in very deed the Churches practice shows to be the truth; In the first
Council it being recorded, that there was Conquisitio magna, and all Councils,
and Popes ever since proceeding in the same style.

But here I must remember you what you said in the beginning concerning
Pargatory, that the reason why you write against my opinion was because it was
translated into English. And so I now protest, that you are the cause why I
write of this subject in English. My books generally are to debate what I think
in the points I write of with learned men, whose care it is to divulge truths
to the people, dispensing to every one the quantity he is capable of, not to
raise any new thoughts in ignorant heads. Your crying out against me forces me
to a necessary defense before the people; wherefore if any disputings
concerning this matter displease any person of Judgment, let it light upon your
head who are the provoker, and compeller of me into this new task, which both
age and other thoughts make me slowly and unwillingly undertake. But I must not
be mine own chuser, but follow God.

As to what you say against this Doctrine: first you desire your Reader to
consider that if these grounds, to wit, that the Pope and the Council can err,
(without distinguishing in what either matter or manner of proceeding)
Christian Faith is a mere mockery. I confess the proposition grave in words,
but in sense not worthy a Schoolboy. For, first, I ask you, whether you mean
in necessary points or unnecessary ones? If you say, in both, I doubt your
whole School will desert you. For who is there that has an ounce of brains who
will give authority to the Church to determine all the subtle quirks of the
School? But if you say only necessary ones, then before you went farther
against me you should have proved that the verities come by inheritance from
Jesus Christ are not all that are necessary, which question you never think on,
and so brandish your Logic against the apparitions in the clouds. Secondly, I
ask you whether without counsel or with it? If you say without it, again your
School will desert you. If you say with it, I ask you how much counsel, and to
what period? In all which you will be at a loss. Must it hold till by reason
they see a necessary connection with the delivered Faith? if you say so you
desert your virtue of prophesying, and come over to our School, which you so
abominate as rational and faithless: yet this, experience teaches us, is the
way that Popes and Councils use to take. If you say their consulting must not
hold till they see it by reason, then tell me, what Oedipus or Geometrician can
guess or fix the terminating line of counsel prerequisite? These points a
Scholar would have settled. You distinguish nothing but jumble all your Bells
together into a confused noise, and deafen more then instruct your Hearers. Now
it is to much purpose to talk of the force of the word Anathema, whilst you
have not settled a matter in which the Church has a power to impose it. What
an inconsiderate manner of arguing is this?

You say Catholics require no other assurance of their Faith, then upon this
firm foundation that our holy Mother the Church is their infallible directress.
The proposition is the very Tenet we mainly advance and stick to. Go but
consequently to this, and we shall have no quarrel. You add another ground,
that the Councils (her mouth) are the unerring deliverers of truth. This also
is very true and never denied by us. But there rises a great question whether
Councils be perpetually and in all cases the mouth of the Church: look upon
Cariolanus his abridgment of the Councils, and read his division of General
Councils into approbata and reprobata, and ex part approbata, and ex part
improbata: and see how ignorantly you go to work even in the grounds of your
own eminent learned men, who will oppose you peradventure more then I, and yet
you preach Christian Religion is a mockery if this be taken away. I desire not
to look into particulars, unless you force me to it. For I cannot discover even
your Errors, without discovering too the vanity of that School which you
nickname the Church, and confidently take upon you to be one of her Masters. I
doubt not if you attentively consider your eminent Scholars you will find many
of them speak indeed gloriously of Councils; but, unless I be strangely
deceived, they give them less of inward and real Authority then I; while they
make them, in effect, but Ciphers to the Pope, without whom they signify
nothing, though added perhaps to him they increase his signification; yet
surely not very much; since, in many of those Masters opinion, he alone is
infallible, and I think in every ones opinion, all together are not much more.
Whereas the Doctrine I follow gives them an absolute Inerrancy in testifying
received truths; which is clearly sufficient to conserve and propagate the
Faith of the Church.

I believe you mistake the meaning of that grave and worthy Person, whom,
without any ground at all for your conceit, you call my Scholar, since he
seriously protests, he never gave his mind that way, nor ever read over any
considerable part of my Books, nor particularly, this of the Middle State: his
true meaning I conceive is, we may know when Councils and Consistory's apply
themselves right, by examining (not Tradition it self for that is evident in the
sense of the Faithful, but) their proceedings, by Tradition, whether they be
conformable to it. Which is not only a maintainable but excellent truth. And
by this method the Divines of those days examined the Doctrine of John 22. For,
Tradition is the Law of Christ planted in the hearts of all Christians, not to
be examined; it being to be read, fair written there by their external words
and conversations. Now if a Pope or Council be supposed to delver Doctrine
against this, it is past darkness and examining, since all the Christian world
cannot choose but resent it, and know it to be against their Faith and
Judgment. So that you plainly misunderstand the meaning of Tradition, which is
no hidden thing, but the public and settled belief of the Christian world.

You will say, it is impossible a Pope or Council should proceed so grossly. I
wish there were no examples of it. But the truth is, if instead of a Pope,
considered only personally, you take him as presiding in his Church and Seat,
and joined with it, which is a kind of more then a Provincial Council; but
much more if you take a General Council, without extraordinary violence without
or within, both mainly visible, this cannot happen, and so they have
infallibility in attesting the received Doctrins, most absolutely sufficient to
secure the Church against being misled by them.

By the same Error you look to determine Faith by Inquest, not knowing it
cannot be unknown in a Catholic Country to them that live there. See the story
of Luther. Were men doubtful of their Faith, before he and his fellows in
iniquity set themselves to snarl at it? Therefore Inquest may be made how to
answer their Argumments, but not to understand what the Church held before
opposition rose. How much mistaken is all your discourse about the proceeding
to higher Tribunals after so great diligence of scrutiny? There is no such
thing as scrutiny necessary to find out Faith, nor ever was the Church to seek
her Faith. Since she once received it from Jesus Christ she never lost it, and
so is to look into it, not for it. If any thing be to be look? for, it is not
faith, it may be some Theological Verity, not faith. Your discourse therefore
is wholly out of the way. No wonder then you find your self at a loss, and cry
out like a blind man for a hand to guide you, since instead of Christ's faith,
you look for a new faith. One would have it an Article of our Christian faith,
that his Order is a true Religious. Order, Another, that one hanged for treason
is a true Martyr: others seek some private revelation that brings in profit, to
be canonized for faith, and other such fine questions to be put in the Creeds
of the Church; and if it be not yielded there is a power in the Church to impose
such beliefs upon men, presently the denying Doctrine is an Exterminating
School, and pulls up by the roots all the foundations of Christian Religion.

Nor will there want some to say, that though these things be true, they are
not to be published, but Catholics are to be left in ignorance of such tender
points: But will not the mischief by degrees grow intolerable, if once it
should come to that height that the People by a preoccupated credence, be apt
to be stirred seditiously against their natural and lawful Governor, by any
surreptitious Rescript fetched from beyond Sea, freshly sealed with the new
stamp of faith: and to believe all Christianity is rained if such a Rescript,
nay the Interpretation of the procurers be any way doubted of. O strange
unhappy times!

You press farther that according to me the Church has de facto erred in the
Bull and Council so long treated of. What a strange boldness is this? you bring
an Interpretation against Grammar, against Logic, and against Divinity, and if
this be not accepted of, you cry the Church has erred. Your Interpretation is
against Grammar by your own confession, complaining of your Adversary for
demanding an Is or Is not, which is a plain acknowledgment that your sense is
not formally in the words. It is against Logic, because you put the subject to
be part of the predicate; Against Divinity because you would make the grace of
God and heavenly benefits be bought like Salads in the market, by him that has
most money. Besides other inconveniences whereof I have explicated some in my
Book of the Middle State, and may have occasion to say more hereafter; And yet,
forsooth, if this sweet Interpretation be not gratis admitted of, the Church
has erred, the Church has erred, and all is undone, well a day, well a day.

You go farther and press that my rule of faith fails me in this very point.
And first you appeal to the consciences of all illiterate Persons, whether this
be not their present faith. Yau have found out a Tribunal very fit to gain your
cause in. But I wonder you are so little skilled in spiritual direction, that
you do not know, most illiterate men never reflect upon their inward acts, or
farther then what belongs to the fancy, not one amongst ten thousand: And you
deceive me if you hold faith to be an act of the fancy. Yet I dare not be too
bold, for I have heard of one that wore a plush cloak and could neither read
nor write. Wherefore it is enough for me to deny it, whether it be your opinion
or no.

Besides do you not know that even literate Persons, unless Divines, are not to
mince the doctrine taught them by their Pastors so far as to distinguish what
is delivered for faith what as necessary to the explication of it, or to the
Practice of Christian life: Further you may know that many even of your own
eminent Divines differ not only in what points are of faith what not, but in
what makes them to be of faith what not. Though I think they all agree that an
explication against Grammar and Logic does not raise a position into an
Article of faith, though the explication be of a Popes Bull.

Next, you tell your adversary that Master White him self says Saint Gregory
the great was the first founder of that faith. I know well you account Master
White a kind of a mad man, that dares advance such propositions as he cannot
but foresee what strong opposition they were like to stir up against him. But I
did not think he was so mad, as holding no doctrine to belong to faith which
began since the Apostles days, who are the last revealers of publik faith that
he knows of, and besides professing this doctrine so far from faith that it is
not true, yet should tell you that Saint Gregory founded this faith. As far as
I remember, what I said was, that Saint Gregory reported this novelty first
broke out in his days by the means of certain revelations. And this I said
upon the authority of Venerable Bede, who attributes the book of Dialogues to
Saint Gregory. But now I must tell you that upon fuller consideration, I rather
believe Venerable Bede's information was defective, then to attribute so
unworthy a book to so grave and learned a Pope; nothing like such winter tales
as are told in that book being found in his most worthy and learned works. And
I will make your self, whom I know a great admirer of that learned and pious
Doctor, Judge of the controversy. Do you think there is in the next world
Excommunications and restorings to communion as is expressed in one of those
Revelations? Do you think that one who died obstinate in schism was sent to
Purgatory because he did many Alms as is reported in another Revelation? do you
think it is not the fancy of an Idle brain to imagine Souls are sent to bathes
to scrub and rub men there to be acquitted of their sins? Other things there
are in the same book worth the noting; but these are enough to show it unworthy
of St. Gregory; as indeed it is for so great a Doctor and Prelate to spend his
time in gathering together private stories of obscure and petty Relaters. This
will set this Doctrine an hundred years later, and into an age one of the least
cultivated since the beginning of the Church of God.

Nor is it true that this carries after it a practice testified by Foundations,
Prayers, Masses, Alms, etc. For all these were in the Church before this
Doctrine, as may appear in Antiquity. The Church of Afrik made a Canon to force
the laity to contribute to Prayers for the dead about Saint Austins time, who
yet testifies that the question whether Souls were delivered out of Purgatory
before the day of Judgment had not yet been moved. Now Foundations contradict
this Doctrine, rather then promote it. For he that makes a Foundation intends it
without limit of time; and so must imagine the Soul needs the assistance of that
charity so long; which would much cool the devotion you pretend, and we see
practiced before our eyes, to get Masses enough in a morning to send a Soul to
Heaven to dinner. Show me but one ancient Instance where two or three thousand
Masses have been by Legacy procured to be said the very next morning after the
Testator's departure, and little or nothing after that morning; and I will
ingenuously confess it the best argument you have produced in the whole
managing of your cause.

After the Author of the Dialogue there was no more news of this opinion till
Odilo, a Monk of Cluny's, time: who being a kind of a General of many
Monasteries, dilated this Doctrine in them, upon a goodly ground to build a
matter of Faith on, to wit, the report of a French Pilgrim who said he had met
with an Hermit (I think a French man) who persuaded himself he had Visions of
Souls being delivered out of Purgatory by the Prayers of the Monks of Cluny.
Upon this ground the good Saint recommended the devotion for the dead warmly to
his subjects, and they to the people who frequented their Monasteries: and
hence this Doctrine came to be common where his order was in esteem. And so,
being a pious credulity stayed about one hundred years till the School began.
Which; finding it very common, easily favored it with such reasons and
explications as they thought fit, though not universally, for some are found to
have contradicted it, and so it was exalted to a probable opinion. In which
state the Council of Florence found it, and practiced it, giving communion 'to
the Greeks, (who as is before declared) left it out of their confession, after
the Latins had put it in theirs. And in this quality it persever'd till my book
de medio statu was turned into English. Then it began first to be a matter of
faith, by the power of the great letters you put in the Edition of the Bull of
Benedictus, and the Council of Florence. For, before that, even the consorts of
your Tenet held it no otherwise then for the common opinion of Divines.

LAST DIVISION. Containing an Answer from Section the eighteenth, to Section
the two and twentieth.
The Catholic Rule of Faith defended. The Vindicators weakness in making the
unlearned Judges of Controversy. His frequently mis-representing my Doctrine,
and manifold failings in his new attempts from the Bull and Council.
YOur eighteenth Section you begin with saying, my Doctrine (which is a close
adhering to Tradition) is the way to make fools stray. You follow still the
same truantly humor of using words without looking into the sense. For, if
Tradition signify the delivery of the Doctrine preached and taught by our
forefathers, your proposition signifies that to follow what we are taught by
our forefathers is the way to make fools go astray. Neither do I deny but that
you speak consequently, if first you make the Popes veracity the veracity of
the whole Church, and that all the Church but he can err, and consequently he
may correct the Doctrine which was believed by the Church in the age immediately
going before him; then it is true that to prefer the Belief of the former age
before the Popes word will lead fools astray. But for my part I desire to be
one of those fools, and to go so astray. You run on in a full careere, and tell
us of the Authority of the Church and Councils in common, and that things
settled by them must not be brought in question, not seeing because you will
not, that what the Church believed in the last Age is more the Church's decree,
then what she speaks either by Pope or Council, unless she speaks the same that
she believed the last Age: and so, you continue your discoursing with words,
not taking their meaning along with you.

In your nineteenth Section you come so home as to judge and condemn me by mine
own Doctrine, a great shame to me, I confess, if you make it good. You argue
therefore what have we seen but Masses, Dirges, Alms, etc. so far is almost
true; but why did you not put in, by which in express terms we prayed for the
welfare of the Souls at the day of the General Judgment? but you had reason to
leave that out, for it would have set a shrewd puzzell in your Argument. We
have heard constantly (say you) that Souls are delivered out of Purgatory by
these powerful helps before the day of Judgment? In this part you have mended
your former fault, for there you said too little to serve your purpose, if you
had proved all you said; and here you say more then can be proved to serve your
purpose: do you mean that your way was preached constantly, that is, as a
certain and established Doctrine of faith? or that for a long time they preached
it as a probable truth? or, without engaging at all into the degree of its
assuredness? but perhaps you proceed more nicely, since you only said you
heard it constantly, not that it was preached constantly* For to say a thing
constantly, imports that the speaker teaches it to be certain, and it is not
enough if for a long time he tells you it is likely to be so. Now so far as
concerns the delivery of Souls from Purgatory by the potent means you speak of
was ever constantly taught, but that the delivery should be made before the day
of Judgment, was taught but as a pious opinion, if the Preacher understood the
sense of the Doctors of the Schools themselves, who add no such qualification:
because, their principles being either Authority or Reason, they find in
Authority neither Fathers, nor Councils, nor Popes express in the point, and
Reasons much less favorable, and to say the truth though they are apt enough
to dispute whether there be a God, a Trinity, an Incarnation, etc. Yet I do not
remember to have heard of any one who has treated of his proposition so
directly as to dispute it pro and con. Which being so, what certainty can we
expect a Preacher should fix upon this Doctrine.

But to declare what I think those whom you appeal to will answer: I believe it
is, that they never reflected to make any difference of the things the
Preachers delivered them, and much less upon the degrees of assent they gave to
this or that point, and as far as they can tell they gave the same assent to
any place of Scripture the Preacher explicated, as they did to this point;
unless some particular occasion put them in mind to qualify one and not the
other. But, as they found by experience in other things that if any rub came to
make them doubt of any thing a Preacher said, then first they began to consider
on what grounds they were bound to believe the point proposed, so they have
done in this, and of those who have spent any competent time in examining both
sides, many have discovered your grounds unsafe to build any certainty on, and
some confessed them too weak to sustain even so much as a probability. What the
Gentleman, whose letter you cite (and with some imprudent circumstances) will
say, why he was carried away with your Arguments, I know not; but had he read
my Books as much as I esteem his learning and virtue; he would surely have met
with full answers to your very objections: which they who read yours cannot do;
nor so much as hear of the Arguments I use to maintain my opinion; you on set
purpose concealing them; and proposing, in their stead, as my whole grounds, a
discourse made to a mere Philosopher or Heathen, where the method of a regular
writer obliged me to abstract from Revelation.

But that this answer I set down is for the greatest part of those that follow
this opinion, a true one, is not only manifest to all that reflect upon what
passes within them on the like occasions, but experience has taught me it in
every country where I have conversed since the publishing this Doctrine. In all
which I have found diverse who upon hearing of it acknowledged that before they
had in their hearts a certain dislike of your opinion, but they knew not why;
it having a kind of an uncouth semblance, yet they could not pitch upon any
thing to say solidly against it. One passage I will entreat your patience to
let me tell you: Before I printed it, I communicated this point to one of the
greatest Divines of Christendom, and confessed to be so. He presently replied it
was against the Council of Florence, and went immediately to his Chamber and
fetched down the Council; when we had a little debated the text, and he saw it
did not reach home, he shut up the Book, with these words. Look to it, you will
draw all the Regulars upon your back, meaning all such of them, as found great
profit by persuading the people they should procure a sudden redemption of
their friends out of Purgatory, which I believe, are those you speak of that
hear not of this Doctrine without horror. Therefore, Acute Sir, you will or may
see that your Argument is two edged, and as the Auditors you speak of did not
distinguish the degree of assent to this position from that they give to Faith,
so neither do they make any difference between it and the sleightest assent
they have. Thus may your Adversary by your Argument conclude any practice of
the Church, or common opinion of Preachers, or generally received
Ecclesiastical stories, nay even the new holy days to be points of faith, as
well and as easily as you do this. What difference of assent, think you, do the
People make between these truths, that there was a Saint Philip or Saint Jacob,
and that there was a Saint Bennet, or Saint Augustine? they hear of these far
oftener then of those, and seldom or never, of the several degrees wherein they
are recommended to their assents. Even the more prudent in many such points run
currently on with an undistinguishing assent, till something jog their
thoughts, and awaken them to look into the business, then they begin to make it
a question, to examine and sift it, and at last to settle it in its true box of
Catholic, or Theological or Historical faith, or of some other inferior
assent.

You go on to persuade your Readers, that those who accept of this Doctrine do
it through comfortable apprehensions in lieu of great horrors before they were
in, and because it eases their consciences from the incumbent care of assisting
their dead friends. In the first, you manifestly show you understand not the
Doctrine of your own Divines; for, we agree in the grievousness of the
punishments, or if we disagree in any thing, it is that mine is the severer.
For the difference of our positions is not in what the punishments are, which
we both agree to be acts of the will: Our difference is, whether these acts of
the will be caused by the force of nature in spirits, as I say; or by the force
of material fire, as your Divines maintain. Which was the cause why when I
explicated the nature of Hell in a Divinity lecture, one of my Scholars told
me, I made Hell worse then it was. For in truth the force of a material body is
not to be compared to the strong activity of a subsistent spirit, as any Divine
will easily guess.

In your other point you seem to have framed your conceit out of conversation
with Women and Children, whose desires are violent at the instant, but soon
pass away; and not out of the consideration of men whose counsels are governed
by a far prospect, and aim at perpetuity. So you flatter poor Women with the
hopes of relieving their friends the first morning, or the first Saturday, or
in some speedy time, and get present moneys fit to make merry with for one day;
never reflecting that the ancient and manly charity for the dead was to
establish Foundations, and perpetual Anniversaries; by which the memory of our
friends, and prayers for them was often renewed, and long continued; whereas
taking your Principles, we need neither much fear the terrors of Purgatory,
nor seek new ways to ease our Consciences from the incumbent care of assisting
our departed friends, since one Mass at a priviledg'd Altar will do the work
alone, and a very little sum of money procure that Mass without going to the
cost of Dirige's and such like chargable Offices. And here I must ask my
Readers and my Adversary's leave to correct one suspicion I had unawares
entertained, that Interest might have some influence upon the Defenders of this
short stay in Purgatory; I was deceived, and now I see they are no ways
accusable of that odious crime: anciently great alms were given, and those
often repeated, for the assistance of one Soul; and so the Church and
Churchmen gained much, and grew rich apace; Now, there is opened a far cheaper
way; one piece alone, and that of silver too, dispatches the business. Surely
out fair and numerous and rich Monasteryes were not built and endowed with such
petty Contributions.

After this you proceed to the arraignment of me before my Bishop or a Nuncius
Apostolicus. But there want two things to make your arraignment good: first
that the people be inured to Tradition, and to prefer the received Faith of the
Church before all other Doctrins. From the danger of which your Divines will
secure me, while they teach the People that the Church when it is said to be
inerrable, signifies the Pope alone, that all the People may err, that General
Councils have no strength till they be sealed by the Pope, and so I shall have
this help to appeal from them to the Pope, let my Doctrine be as opposite as it
will to all that has been hitherto the belief of the Christian world. The
second thing that wants to the perfect arraignment is that you have not yet
found out so weak a Bishop, that will believe a Doctrine sprung from uncertain
Visions, fostered by unlearned zeal, and strengthened with an Exposition of a
Council or of a Popes Bull, against the rules of Grammar, Logic, and Divinity,
is the belief of the present Church. In the mean while I give you great thanks
both for your setting forth my plea against Luther, and honoring it with so
high an approbation that it thunders and lightens home. For, besides that the
knowledge of that form of proceeding against Heretics is very necessary, it
will give me a testimony that I am a good Christian, and if I be not a very
beast I have not committed an error to fall under so gross and so well
foreseen a Censure. To the charge it self, from what I have already said you
may gather my clear and full Ansver; that the Doctrine I sustain is not by me
pretended to be of faith but only not against faith: as also, that the doctrine
I oppose, is not and Article of faith, and supported by Fathers and Monuments
of Antiquity and immemorable Custom, but only an Opinion not very ancient,
nor ratified by the consent of Fathers, nor of so long a standing that it is
beginning is not well enough known: perhaps, the later, yet for its time as
much prevailing doctrine of priviledg'd Altars may live to be as old as this is
now, and as common too; will it therefore deserve to be put into our Creed? or
can it ever become an Article of faith which the whole Church professes is but
an Opinion now? And are not these differences betwixt Luthers case and mine,
whom you so charitably endeavor to parallel, sufficient to distinguish our
dooms? Examine them but once more, and I will make you my Judge. Only forget not
these words which your self put down as part of my method to convince an
heretic, That the Authority of things which we stand bound to believe,
descends handed down from CHRIST our B. SAVIOVR and no otherwise, even till
this age.

In your twentieth Section you pretend to examine the Council of Florence once
more against me. Your first mistake is that it was the business of the Council
in Florence to declare the faith of the Church concerning the state of Souls
which depart this life. I mean not to speak to your History, for as much as was
determined of Souls was agreed in Ferrara, but to the word business; for their
business was only to agree two points; one about material fire: the other,
about the Just Souls presently seeing God, which was the business of Benedictus
his Bull, and some of the Greeks were of the same apprehension with John the
22. But you like an Astronomer considering the phoenomena's of the Definition
frame the question out of that, whereas all the rest was no business, but the
completing of the doctrine by dilating it out of tenets agreed without and
before any controversy. Your next error is, that whereas you pretend to
compare my doctrine with the councils, you do it to the doctrine of the parts of
the Council, when it is a clear case, the doctrine of one part is not the
doctrine of the Council, but that in which the whole Council agrees. Your third
Error (if it be not a wilful aequivocation) is, that you say the Latins
believe material Fire in Purgatory; which, if you mean by belief, Catholic
faith, is extremely absurd; Since they join communion with the Greeks, who
profess the contrary; if you mean only they held it as a probable opinion, you
cosen your Auditory, which expects you should speak of Faith, and not of that
from which I may dissent by authority of the Council. Your fourth rather malice
than mistakes is, that you impose upon me, that there is no purging of Souls
before reunion; for all who know that actio is prior termino will allow a
purging before a being purged, as going to London is before being there.
Besides your often repeated fault of mischarging me to hold that the Souls
irregular affections are the torments of purgatory. Your fifth error is, that
you put an opposition betwixt the Latins and me where we perfectly agree in
all, save only that intruded word by this Fire which comes out of a former,
and spoils the whole tenet of the Latins from being a matter of Faith, making
it but a probable-opinion in whole, though the other parts belong to faith. You
add, the Latins must needs have thrust me out of communion, not reflecting that
they gave communion to the Greeks who dissented in all you have alleged truly
against me. As to the Greeks. First you say I hold against them that Souls are
in no place. And though I cannot affirm positively what the meaning of the
Greeks was at the Council in this point; yet knowing their Fathers use, when
they speak of spirits, to call working in a place, being in a place, I am well
assured they would not thrust me out of their Society for denying a true
locality in spirits. The second objection is answered by my answer to the
Latins, and the same is to be said to the third: Of your last objection
concerning the efficacy of the helps because you say you will evidence it, I
must expect the fulfilling your promise, till then it is but a threatening
likely to be of little effect.

You end with a great confidence that you have dispatched this business, and
converted your adversary, unless he will stand upon the Errability of the
Council. For you (imagining your self inerrable in your rash and shallow
interpretation of it) cannot (alas good Christian!) imagine any other possible
way to maintain the conclusion: I on the other side, hope I have said somewhat
that may help your imagination, but dare entertain no great apprehension that I
shall convert you, knowing I have not spoken to the main foundation of your
opinion, which is settled in your will, upon grounds beyond my removal.

Yet in the 21 Section you are forced to retire from your fair hopes, for your
great words satisfy your adversary no more then your Capital letters. His
answer in substance is, that you misconstrue the Pope and Council as it has
been declared by him and me before? And that the purgation before the day of
Judgment may be supposed but not defined. And clearly enough, such is both the
Popes and the Council's meaning as is before more largely insisted on; which
being the only knot of the controversy, you do well to prepare loud clamours
against it, and tell us it is a pitiful evasion. Let us then suppose it were
judged by the Pope to be the more probable opinion amongst Divines that Souls
were purged before the day of Judgment, though he held the other was also
probable, which I think you will not say impossible for a Pope, since diverse
have gone that way in other matters. In this case was it fit the Pope should
define what became of such Souls or no? if you say he could and should define,
what is become of all your clamours against defining upon a supposition which
afterward may be found to be impossible? For he that judges an opinion only
probable, leaves a probability, that it is impossible to be true; since whoever
says one side is but probable as far as concerns science says it may be
false, for any thing he knows. Now, things that have a settled course in nature
are so disposed that impossibility is concomitant to falsity, nor can it ever
be proved to be false unless it be proved to be impossible. So that the Pope in
defining the coming to heaven of such Souls, proceeds not consequently to his
opinion if he does not go upon a supposition that himself confesses may be
impossible, and yet in all prudence he must define it as being but an extension
of this his main question whether Saints go immediately to heaven. If you say he
could not or ought not to define such a conditional case, who will or can
believe you that has any prudence; since, for the position it self, He both
thought it the more probable and saw it concerned the most ample part of his
division of Saints going to heaven. For all christians imagine more go to heaven
through Purgatory, then either by the virtue of baptism or by eminency of
Purity and Sanctity acquired in this world. So that I persuade my self you
would easily allow the Pope not only could, but ought, in case he thought both
sides probable to proceed as he did in his definition. Now, that this was the
Pope's case is absolutely certain and more then probable: since we cannot doubt
but it was the case of the Latins in the Council of Florence, in which the
Greeks by their leaving our the expression of some being delivered sooner, some
later, directly waved that position; and by consequence refused to profess an
Article of faith, if this were one, and yet, without any repugnance or
quarrelling about this circumstance, were admitted to communion and a common
decree made in which the Latins position was abstracted from, as you may
plainly see in the Council, and is before more fully declared.

Now as to your argument, every one can see it is weakly done to talk of actions
proceeding out of knowledge or apprehension, not according to the apprehension
but according as things really are: He that thinks two opinions probable takes
both as possible whether they be or no. For, howsoever they are in themselves,
to him they appear so. Now to argue out of the nature of things, which he
professes not to know, to the actions that must flow from his apprehension, is
a clear inconsequence. Yet all your great clamours have no other ground, and
therefore I think I may leave out your petty quarrels with your Adversary
about his examples, as superfluous, and nothing conducing to the main point in
controversy.

SECOND PART
Refuting the Vindicator's other scattered Objections; chiefly those which
oppose several Doctrins of the Author in other points.
FIRST DIVISION, Containing an Answer from Sect. 22. to Sect. 27.
The Vindicators unskilfulness in the nature of a Metaphor. The Trial of his
Tenet and mine by Fathers and Liturgies. His Drollish Calumnies shown
groundless by the Authors Explication of his tenets about the Church's future
proficiency in science, a dispossessed Governor, and the uncertainty of the
Scripture's Letter by mere transcribing. His manifold abuses of the Author in
his citing him about Councils, and Hell. His miscalling God's doing what is
wisest and best, Pagan Fatality.
DEar Sir, (that I may, following your Directions though not your Example,
begin like a Love-Letter) by chance I had turned over a leaf too much, and so
lighted on the beginning of your 22 Section: in which you designed to give a
clearer view of my Doctrine, and so I hoped to have been quit of the former
controversy, and could willingly upon that condition, have endured the bitter
dissemblings wherewith you end this Chapter. But finding you fall back to the
same quarrel again, I perceive you had condemned me to the Oar for another
Caravan: And therefore I must repeat to you, that you talk so unskilfully of
faith, as if there were none but in Popes Bulls, and Definitions of Councils:
As if the Apostles had gone about preaching that such a Council had defined
such an Article, and such a Pope the other. And so you ask a monstrous
question. How if some Imp of Hell should arise, and admit only a Metaphorical
and not a real Son in Divinis, how could this blasphemy be repressed by
Consubstantialem Patri? A shrewd question I confess, for it so confounds the
terms, that it is very hard to make sense of them. First, I would know what
you mean by that term in Divinis; Whether in the substance of God? or in
The^logy, or speaking of God? For if you speak of the Essence, the Arrians
never held a Metaphorical son in the Essence of God, but in the Essence of
Christ.

Nor do I think any who understand a Modicum of Divinity, can put so foolish a
Position, that to be a Son should be to be God, or the very Essence of God; and
yet should be so solely Metaphorical that it should be no reality. But if you
mean that there was no Son in God, but some creature, was called Son as the
Arrians held, then what signifies this word in Divinis? rub over your old
School-notions again a little, before you put your self in print. Now against
these was made the Nicen creed, and not against the former. But I must
advertise you that by your high skill in Divinity, you should have framed a new
nature of Metaphors, to have come home to your position. For I doubt not, you
can as well square Grammar as Philosophy to Divinity. Then, in our way, who
look into nature to know what a Metaphor is, it appears to be the use of a
word in a second sense, derived from a former. And so, how you jumble together
only a metaphorical and not a real Son, I do not understand. For they have no
more connection then green and d^l^ful, or what disparate terms you please to
compound into strong nonsense? Reality speaks nature; metaphorical, a manner of
speech, yet both these must be joined to condemn some Trinobant to be an Imp of
Hell. And why such fierce unchristian words; Miscreant and Imp of Hell? I
remember indeed the furious zeal of a Pharisee let fly at our blessed Savior,
language far worse then this; but whether my Chider be Pharisee, or Publican,
or both, or neither, I know not, God knows, and God forgive him, and bless me
with grace to take patiently all his injuries, and I hope he will give me
strength to refute his arguments.

But let us look into the thing it self, and seek how a Son is spoken of God.
And, let our first question be, what those people who first brought the words
of Father and Son into use meant to explicate by them. And I know nothing, but
that they meant by Father a man* who by means of a Woman produced a creature
like to himself; by Son, a creature thus produced. This then must be evidently
the first signification of the words, and if another be attributed to them by
design, not pure hazard, they must be acknowledged to be translated from this
first signification to that next; as when he that converts one to faith or good
life is called his Father, the person converted, his Son. Now, because
translations are made upon diverse kinds of connexions of the things signified,
not all but such a one only, as is translated for a proportion or likeness, is
called a Metaphor, as a Governor or Gubernator in Latin, first signifies the
Master or Pilot which governs a Ship, thence its translated by reason of
similitude or proportion to him that in a City or Commonwealth behaves himself
as the Master or Pilot does in a Ship. Now, let us affirm something of God by
this word Father, Will you say, the word was not translated to him from a
former signification, but given him by pure hazard, without any respect to a
fore-used sense? Sure either you or the Readers will not be so senceless. It
remains then to see by what connection it was translated. Certainly not that it
was a cause or effect, or a concomitant, for all these are more improper, but
because there is a similitude or proportion, seeing that in God, another Person
proceeds in likeness to him, from him. Therefore a Father is spoken of God
metaphorically. And if you but consider the language, you use by custom and not
by understanding, you would know it were only metaphorically spoken of God,
that is to say in no other signification of the Word; not by a Metonymie,
Synecdoche, or Catachresis, nor in the first signification: For these are the
terms which are excluded when only is added to Metaphorically: and not the
term really, which is a manner of being not of speaking, and so cannot be
opposed to metaphorically, by one who understands the words he speaks. You will
say you scorn these Grammatical Lectures, and I believe you; but such pride
has brought you to call the principal Fathers of the Church, and her best
Divines, Imps of Hell, for all these say the same I do in this point. You must
have some miscreants to accompany your Imps: Therefore you would have a
miscreant teach that a moderate affection to a Concubine* is a less crime then
an immoderate love to a Wife, and, because this latter is no breach of Gods
Commandments, as your Discourse imports, therefore he must be a miscreant that
should say it. O what want had Solomon of such a Ghostly Father? to tell him
that to love his Wives immoderately was no breach of the Commandments, And that
to love them so, as out of that love to fill Jerusalem with Idols and
Idolatrous Worship, was not far worse then a moderate, or rather an ordinary
(for none is moderate, none but is sinful enough) love of a Concubine. Surely
you have quite forgotten that excellent sentence of our Savior; He that hates
not his Wife, can be none of his Disciple; or, as it is expres't in another
place, he that loves his Wife more then him; For I have heard say, that by
these words, is signified as much as he that loves his Wife immoderately.
Surely he was no miscreant, that preached to men to loavo their Wives, if they
would not let the^ serve God quietly.

After this in your 22 Sect. you arm up your Fathers, and set St. Austin in
front to make a great show with his name, For in his words nothing is to be
found for your purpose. And, indeed, it is an imprudence to cite him for your
opinion, who professes expressly (ad Dulcit. quaest. 1.) the question had not
yet been handled before his time, but might hereafter, but that he knew not
whether side would prove true. Yet you will give him a paper in his hand to
hold forth, though it contains nothing but the profession of your Adversary.
And ^ot to take notice of the doubtfulness of the two latter Books you cite,
there is nothing in them that your Adbersary will deny, but has already
explicated them. But if you fail in Saint Austin, you will help it out by
Origin who says too much for you, being known to speak heretically when he
uses those phrases you cite out of him. For, his opinion was that Purgatory
began after the day of Judgment, and the sentence given by Christ; according to
which some were to be longer, some shorter in torments, but all to be freed at
last. And this he expresses by the words you cite, and you should have brought
some words by which it might appear he spoke of Souls before the day of
Judgment. But you have a salve against this, saying, he wrote this before he
was an Heretic. By which it is clear you speak at random, for he fell not to
be an Heretic, by a set occasion, as some others did, but as long as he lived
was accounted a great Doctor of the Church, and his Heresies not discovered
until after his death, and even then defended to be none of his, but to have
been foysted in by Heretics.

Your next Author is St. Gregory of Nyssa, a man of very great worth and
au^hority, of whom Petavius that famous Jesuit says, that some in his time,
more piously then either truly or wisely, strived to explicate some places of
his which did savor of Origenism. But Germanus Bishop of Constantinople,
ancienter then Photius, defends this great man; yet not without admitting the
Origenists had mingled some sentences of their own here and there in his works.
Now this Germanus his Book is not extant, and therefore such places as use the
Origenists phrases are suspected ones. Specially the Book you cite is excepted
against. Possevinus rejects it absolutely, others object against it, that it is
corrupted by the Origenists in diverse other points, so that it is neither
certain the book you cite is his, nor if it be, that it can carry authority,
where the phrase is Origenical, as this word Ignis Purgatorius is, and avoided
much by Greek Fathers, because it is so notorious in Origin. I have not the
Book, and so I cannot speak expressly to the words. In conclusion, you make the
Judgment of the Ages before those strange Revelations, which Gregorius Dialogus
(as the Greeks call him, and say him to be the Pope whose successor was
Zacharias, who lived about the midst of the eighth Age) has left us, or rather
Odilo who lived about six hundred years ago, out of three Fathers; whereof one
says nothing special for your Doctrine, and is certainly against it. The second
was notoriously an Heretic, and the words you cite pertinent to the
explication of his Heresy. The third's words are certainly corrupted by the
followers of the second, and the Book out of which you cite the place rejected
by learned Catholics, yet this you call the consent of Fathers, and the
apprehension of those ages to which I appeal.

But now comes such an impiety as should make a Christian sink for shame, to
wit, that I say Virgils Purgatory is more rational then yours. But what would
you have me do, I did not know that all the light of Christianity consisted in
certain private Revelations, quarum nox conscia sola est. Now that you have
told me so, I will mend as soon as I shall believe you: mean while, till then,
I may conceive a man of wit may conjecture or feign likelier thing; then we
find in such visions, as go generally accompanied with some circumstance
against the nature of Christian life. Nor do I fear your exposition of the
Councils will stand canonised in Christian Creeds; however you assume the
confidence to nickname such shallow conceits of your own Catholic Faith all
over your Book. You follow the same matter by citing places out of the public
Liturgies; of which all but one are purely indifferent to both parties, even in
the very out side of the words; and that one easily explicable in a sense
consistent with mine. You brave me to find out a new construction of Ante diem
rationis, and I tell you I have found one of which I never heard before, and
it is in your book, and in this very place, page 83. wherein striving to apply
that excellent Hymn to your purpose, you mistake it I think as much as it is
possible. First you make the Priest speak in the person of the dead, whereas
the whole style of the Hymn runs clearly in the person of him that prays, and
in the singular; Quid sum miser tunc dicturus, etc. supplicanti parce Deus.
Contremisco, mei finis. With which person suit these words best? that of the
dead, or of the Priest? Secondly, your Argument must suppose him to pray for
delivery from Purgatory; let us see how you hit it in this: Ne perenni cremer
igne, can these words agree with Purgatory? Thirdly, you bring this passage to
prove he asks Delivery before the day of Judgment. Sure, in this branch you
will have better luck; and yet he that reads the Hymn but once unslubberingly
over (which certainly you have often red over) will easily pick out another
meaning from Quando Judex est venturus, etc. cum resurget creatura, etc. ne me
perdas illa die. Can there be possibly words more clearly contradictive of what
you pretend? which yet is more confirmed and made plain by the fix last lines
where the Hymn begins to change its meeter, and then passes evidently from the
Priest to the person prayed for, Huic ergo, etc. spare him, whereas before it
ran perpetually with me; and from eternal fire to the style used in praying for
Souls in Purgatory. But perhaps you saw the Latin would not so well serve your
passion, therefore you either find or make a Translation of it into English
verse, and cite us three lines of it. Truly I do not take my self bound to
answer such authorities, especially when they are grossly mistranslated with a
soul corruption, of which I suspect you knew well enough; since the verses are
printed in a late Book whose venerable Author you often converse with, and
there they are, my long black score, etc. which you hastily if not maliciously
change into their long, etc. Is this the performance of your promise in this
very Section, to be no Niggard to your Reader? when you thus notably, in the
Scotch phrase, spare the truth. Which indeed appears to mean in this Hymn,
only an expression of fear concerning the rigorous examination at the day of
Judgment, with a desire to be handled then in mercy, else what an improbable
request were it, to beg so solemnly one hour, nay, one minutes anticipation of
delivery, for even thus much would satisfy (were yours the right
interpretation) that moderate petition of Ante diem rationis. But because you
will cry out upon Poetical expressions, though you use them your self and those
lewdly corrupted: I will entreat you to apprehend, this Hymn or Sequence was
put into the Mass, not compos'^ expressly for it, as the Gospels, Epistles, and
other parts of the Mass were: but was made for a Meditation upon the Judgment
day. And so the true meaning of the words are before thou come to count with
me, that is, before my death. The other citations are not worth the writing
over, being common to both sides.

In the 23 Section, you begin to display your Rhetoric which I am very well
contented with for two reasons. The chief* because It is fitter then Divinity
to be made a bawble of, The other because a little patience will be sufficient
to answer as many leaves as you employ in it, that is some four whole Sections,
which I intend almost quite to leave out, they being made for disport and
without proof of any thing save only of this, that you mightily affect the
humor of railing without sense or reason. Yet I would desire you to note, that
it is one thing to say this is to be done, another to say I can do it. True it
is, I think demonstrations may be made in Divinity, but I have not ever said of
any particular point, that I have demonstrated it. (I leave that to the
judgment of the Readers.) Nay not so much as that I ever attempted it. In my
two Euclides I pretended to demonstrate, but so that I preferred not my self
before greater demonstrators who had missed, and so I went with such care,
considering that I also might err in some part. But, where I used not the form
of demonstration, as in my Institutions and other my little Books, I never went
about to demonstrate. For those who know never so little concerning
demonstration, know it is one thing to put a medium which bears with it a
possibility to be framed unto a demonstration; another, to frame the
demonstration. The first is so common, that we cannot talk of our business
without using it, in case what we say be truly consequent. Much less can any
solid Divine frame a long discourse without doing it. The latter, no body does
but he, that makes it his proper task to proceed in form. Whence you may see
how much you calumniate me. Besides, you quite forget the qualifications I ad,
in the places you cite by halves, out of my books; did you not read about the
middle of Ratio Operis these words, Si enim non potuisse rationem, etc. to this
sense, If you say Reason could never have reached these mysteries, I freely
assent, but that after Revelation it cannot be satisfied I unwillingly believe,
till it be proved? Go on, and you shall immediately meet another omitted
Qualification; That even assisted by Revelation we cannot penetrate into the
Deity nor any Mystery, thoroughly, that includes It. Then come the words, wherein
my sentiment is plainly containd; But these hinder not, that such Demonstration
as is given of God may be found out even of these Mysteries, that is, not
thoroughly or perfectly, but some Predicates and truths concerning them; which
every Divine agrees of God, and I only extend that kind of demonstrableness to
other Articles. This I earnestly entreat the Reader to observe, and when ever
he meets with this accusation laid to my Charge, that I would evacuate faith by
Demonstration, evidence, knowledge, etc. to understand me still with these
qualifications: which had you fairly mentioned, they would have very much
allayd the heat of your exceptions. But you cite me sometimes so interruptedly,
and translate me sometimes so craftily, that I fear you rather affect to
contend plausibly, then improve either your self, or me, or the world with any
profitable truth. One passage here you very pardonably english to the worser
sense, for the words indeed are easily mistakable; and they are these, Sed haec
omnia, etc. where I meant not, Things in your sense that is, Mysteries of
faith, expressed by these terms, expressing those Mysteries; but the Terms which
were taught us before Christ. As appears, by my words, Fides in humano nobis
Idiomate tradita est, etc. words not so far off but a shorter sight then yours
might have seen them.

As for what you cite out of my letter to a Person of worth, that Divines do
not profess demonstration. If you mean the form of Demonstration it is so plain
there can be no question of it: If you mean only that they do not evidently
prove; how can those Divines pretend it who think there is no certainty but in
Faith? For the rest I say no such matter, but hold that both Saint Thomas and
others have demonstrated many things, and that my self have followed them in
such demonstrations. Another accusation is, that I pretend to take away Faith
in the Manhood of the Church; which you should have proved. For though I
conceive the great Scholars of that time shall have a large portion of Scierce,
yet I do not know that I ever said the People should have it. The same I
conceive has ever been in the Church in a certain degree; Of which there are
manifest signs in Saint Denis the Areopagite, Saint Basil, Saint Gregory
Nazianzen, and others; as also in the Latin Church, specially in Saint Austin,
Boethius, Saint Auselm, and others. But I conceive demonstration will be both in
its matter, and in Divines much more diffused then it is yet. So that in the
Church will ever march together Science and Faith, though in diverse measures.

Some other little nibblings at my Doctrine, (or rather at little bits of it
snatched from the Context, as your custom is, because taken entire it is too
difficult for your teeth) interlace your jollity in these your Sections of
mirth and raillery. As that of a dispossessed Governor; which you deform in the
worst manner you can, by leaving out the Antecedents and Consequents; which
would have let you see that my discourse proceeds in the case, that only his
own private interest or particular good be opposed and counter-ballanc't to the
public; not if the public good be for his restorement: For then my whole Book
favors him. Wherefore to make my Doctrine invidious against the Person you
mean, you must first subsume that his reentry is against the common good,
otherwise I say nothing against him; but all for him; and if you subsume this;
I believe you will deserve no great thanks for your officious mistake, but
approve your self his greatest enemy.

Next, you are hugely troubled that in Rushworth's Dialogues (which you say are
mine) I make the letter of the Scripture so uncertain. And this objection I may
conceive you borrowed from Doctor Hammond, whose Book in which he has something
against me, and (as I am told) this very passage, was extant long before yours;
and I doubt not but you read very diligently whatever opposes me. Unless
perhaps good wits jump't in their observations, which also may be likely; for
you agree much (taken as Scholars) in your method of seeking for Truth. I must
profess therefore (to answer both in one) that you are two of the prettiest men
that ever I met with, and most hard to please with reason. Neither of you can
endure I should attempt and profess certainty and evidence in things capable of
it, that is, in matters scientifical; nor yet profess uncertainty in matters
not capable of certitude; as in our present point about the delivery of words
by way of transcriptions of Copists or Scriveners relying upon their own human
diligence; which it is impossible to secure against oversight; besides diverse
other miscarriages which the Fathers, as well as I, complain the Letter of the
Scripture was liable to. But to satisfy your tender Conscience, and other
Catholics like yours; I profess that that place speaks of the Letter of
Scripture, as left to multitudes of human contingencies and imbecillities, and
as taken abstractedly from, and unassisted by Tradition or the Churches living
voice and practice, to guide securely the delivery of it downwards: But I ever
profess that this guidance of Tradition did efficaciously preserve the Letter
untainted in all that was coincident with Christian Tradition, that is, in all
points necessary to mankinds salvation; and not only so, but so far the rest
of the Scripture's Letter too, that nothing evidently contrary to the doctrine
of Tradition or Christian Faith could light into it. So that Catholics may with
all security accept it and hold to it. And yet, notwithstanding the aid of
tradition formerly, above 2000 faults were corrected in it by our late Pope's,
since the beginning of the Council of Trent, and more still remain to be a
mended, as the Preface to the same Bible grants, nor is any person living able
to stint us the ultimate completing of the true copy. Thus much to you; How I
can satisfy Doctor Hammond (who holds Tradition only then when he can serve
his turn of it, and otherwhiles impugns it) by what way in his grounds he can
be certain of one little of it, I know not: and therefore must leave him to the
Fruits of his Labor in impugning Tradition, that is to a perfect uncertainty
of any thing that can concern his Faith. In a word, to a Catholic my position
only signifies that we are beholding to the living voice of the Church even
for any Certainty of the true Copy of the Scripture; which, why it deserves
more exception that Saint Austin's noted saying of Evangelio non crederem, etc.
I should be glad to learn. But you think Rushworth has made too long a
Catalogue of uncertainties. To which I answer that if you please to scan the
occasions of that long Catalogue, and then tell us how many we may safely
abate. I shall in his behalf remain very much obliged to you; If not, it is
plain you do not know we can abate any, or that his Catalogue is longer then it
should be in his case.

After this you give a wipe at my denying the Popes personal Infallibility;
and as for the point, you well know it is held but a probable opinion, and that
many learned Authors hold the same opinion with me. As for my censuring it, I
shall hope the reasons given for it in Tabulae Suffragiales will stand to
justify me, till something of greater force than clamor appears to overthrow
them, that is, till it can be shown less than Archi-hereticall to say that an
opinion which confessedly is no more but probable can be a sufficient ground to
build Christian Faith upon.

Your next piece of Gallantry is your old and often repeated clamor of my
denying the Infallibility of Councils, which forces me to lay open to the world
how far your Malice is above your Conscience in writing against me. To do which
I offer the Reader those few notes. First that you only cite here three words,
non est impossible, to prove confusedly that I deny all Authority of Councils,
whereas in my Tab. Suffrag. p. 277. the place where it is found (which had you
quoted the Reader might have rectified himself) it follows immediately, ut
Concilium tentet hoc facere, and tentando in errorem incidat, It is not
impossible a Council should attempt This, and so err. Now what this word This
relates to is to be seen in the Paragraph immediately foregoing, to wit, to the
making new Articles of Faith; so that I put Councils errable only in such a
matter that is in creating us a new Faith, you by maiming purposely my words
make me hold them to have no Authority in any thing. Can this consist with
honesty or fair dealing? Next is to be noted that in the same Discourse there
which gives account of my Doctrine professedly concerning Councils, I maintain
in express terms, that Councils are of Infallible Authority in declaring
Articles of Faith, that the Pope declaring ex cathedra concerning a matter of
Faith is infallible, and that the same is to be said of General and even
Provincial Councils, if they proceed duly in their discussion. And must all
this be conceald, and only three general words which declare neither
particular manner nor matter be barely alleged as a ground of all your
spiteful Rhetoric! How strange a proceeding is this for a Christian! My third
note is that in case Christ be a perfect Lawgiver, and that the Faith he left
be sufficient and no more necessary for the Church, that is, if a Council have
nothing to do in making new Articles of Faith, then I only deny Infallibility
to Councils in things unnecessary for the Church, and unconcerning their duty
as Definers of Faith, and give them an absolute Inerrancy in all points
necessary for the Church, that is, in all that can truly concern their main
purpose, that is, defining Faith. And more than this, I believe you will find
an hundred Catholic Doctors to one, deny them as well as I. My fourth note
shall be that you would make the denying Infallibility of Councils, abstracting
both from all matters and manners of proceeding or acceptance of the Church
(for so you treat it) my singular opinion, whereas thus spoken of, we have for
their Errability amongst the Franciscans Castillo, and the learned Author of
Systema Fidei, who cites him; for the Dominicans Sotus, who tells us that if
God by his secret judgment suffers a Council to err, he will not permit it long
to be conceald from the Church, but will take order that it be corrected by
another following Council before it be received in the Church. For the Jesuits,
Bacon, telling us it was the opinion of Saint Austin, and of all the writers of
that Age, that the resolution of Faith was completed in the reception of the
whole Christian world. For the Fathers Saint Austin himself, whose known words
are that Plenary Councils have been corrected by following ones, where he seems
also to speak even of matters of Faith. Of Cardinals, Cusanus, that it may be
observed by all experience that an universal Council may fail. For your own
Doctors, worthy Dean Cressy, in whom you may find most of these Authors cited,
Exomol. c. 33. where he acknowledges the placing the Infallibility of Councils
ultimately in the acceptance of the Church, an opinion at least allowable, and
according to his eminent learning, and charity puts down the conveniences he
observed in that Doctrine to the reducing the Heterodox party. Nor only these,
but indeed, who is there of any note that will say a Council is Infallilible
unless it proceed Conciliariter? and that it may not proceed conciliarly, or
after the regular way of a Council, I believe you are not unacquainted: if you
be, let Pope Martin the fifth teach it you, who in the last Session of the
Council of Constance, declares himself to hold and observe their Decrees made
conciliariter, and non aliter nec alio modo, and this too expressly in matters
of Faith, which caution of his shows he held a possibility of their proceeding
illegally. Now what they call Conciliariter, I call (in definitions of Faith)
attending to Tradition: which put, I hold and maintain them absolutely
Infallible; whereas I believe, all except me (if you examine the matter well,
and report it heartily) put more numerous, and more difficult conditions to
their Infallibility, and far more liable to contingency than what I require;
which is both extremely hard to fail, and when it does, must needs be most
notorious to the whole world, and so beyond my power to pretend or excuse it,
as you would wisely persuade the Reader, by saying this Doctrine brings all into
my hands.

So that we have eminently learned men of all the chief orders in Gods Church,
Cardinals, and Fathers (to omit many, or rather all others) directly of my
opinion in holding a Non est impossible, speaking in general; or rather I of
theirs, and yet I only must be raild at, as if none in the world held it or
broacht it but I. Turn now, I beseech you, valiant Sir, the mouth of your
pot-gun against all these renowned Authors, and discharge your intemperate
spleen against them as abandoning the Catholic Church, denying the Authority
of Councils, and such like, (which make up a great part of your worthy work)
and see how feeble an attempt you will make, and whether you will not deserve
as great an hiss, as you have made a noise to no purpose but to breath out some
of your swelling passion. At least excuse your self to charitable Christians,
why omitting to mention all others Authority who held the same Doctrine with
mine, leaping over the backs of all distinctions both of matter and manner,
without which your discourse signify's nothing; and, lastly, why leaving out
words of mine within the same comma which should clear me, you rawly took out
three only which were general ones, applied them to what particular sense you
pleased, nay, extended them to that which was invidious, and which I never
held, and by these arts abused the veneration which the vulgar justly have of
Councils, to stir up in them an undeserved ill opinion against me. I pass by in
my Book many such like carriages of yours; this, because you so often, and so
maliciously glance at, I could not leave totally unreflected on.

If it would not spoil your sport, I would crave leave to right the reader in
the conceit you would imprint in him of my Romancicall Hell, as you are pleased
to term it; the ridiculousness of which lies in your expressions, not mine. One
would think by your putting, Dancers, Bowlers, Fencers, etc. in other Letters,
they were my words, but he would be mistaken. One would think that the words
attempting now in Hell in all their several postures, which signified as if
they were playing tricks there, were my words or sense, but would be mistaken
again. One would have thought you might have had the candor not to omit the
word quasi, which would have spoild the exactness of the postures you fancy,
and so have much qualified your jeft; Lastly, one that had not known you might
have imagined you would have transcribed to the full point, and not still take
two or three words single, and then you should have seen the mixture of
desperation, fear and grief, marring the perfect molds your Imagination had
framed, and made me say no more but that the shapes of the damned were
frightfull and distracted.

But (to omit other little advantages by which you strive in the translating 3
lines to render my sense ridiculous) I would gladly know where you find these
words spoken of damned Souls, as you would here persuade us; I would gladly
know where you find the word now which you put as mine [attempting now in Hell]
whereas the whole Chapter is entitled and declares it self in each Paragraph, to
speak of their Bodies only, not Souls; and this not now, but expressly at the
day of Judgment, or rather (if it could be) after it. Were ever three lines
singled out from their fellows so abused, corrupted and falsify'd to make a
little sport! Acute Sir, when you have a mind to make merry hereafter, take
heed your self to sober and judicious persons who require and expect solidness
and sincerity from you, become not the best part of the scene; however to
Gigglers, who examine nothing, but laugh at Mares-nests, found only in your and
their fancies, you pass for a very comicall and witty blade. But, as I value
the judgment of one serious examiner above a thousand of such lightheaded
things, so it seems by your carriage through your whole Book, you intended such
only for your Readers; I hear they are your only applauders, and that wiser
persons, even those that perhaps set you on, seeing your passionate behavior
throughout the whole, will not hazard their own credits to commend your work
before any man of prudence and moderation.

Your next exception is against my sayings that the best happens to the damned
that could happen, and that God himself had been worse had they been otherwise
dealt with. And this you confute very learnedly with loud exclamations, as
Pagan Fatality, Prodigious! and what not, whereas indeed could you rightly open
the opinion, however told rawly it is to a vulgar head subject to
misapprehension, you would have found it to be the greatest honor of God, both
in his own Attributes and in the Government of the world, which mankind esteems
of. In his own Attributes, because it takes God to be essentially wise, even to
the least circumstance; and that he would be worse if he did any thing
otherwise then according to the Rule of Wisdom, and that Wisdom in all things
is the Principle to his will. Whence follows that if it be better to let the
damned be damned than not, he should not have done so wisely as he now does, if
they had not been damned, and therefore had been less wise, that is, worse in
himself. In his Government, because it declares that in that very operation in
which Creatures seem to be worft handled, even there they have the greatest
goods which were possible to them. This Answer of mine perhaps you may have
seen given to another upon occasion of the same difficulty raised. Now to
oppose this Doctrine, you must either say that God in the Government of the
world does not behave himself most wisely, that is, does not what is most wise
to do, or permits not what is most wise to permit, which if you do, I fear any
Christian ear that hears you will abhor your blasphemy; or else you must say
that to behave himself less wisely is not to be worse in himself, which is
nonsense; If you grant both these you fall into my paganism, as you call it.
For if God does what is wisest and best, and actually such or such a creature be
damned, it follows it is wisest and best to permit it; therefore to do otherwise
had been to do less wisely, that is to do worse; and so, if nothing limited the
goodness in that action but what was in himself, to be worse. This you should
have reflected on and spoken to, and not still think that to make a wide month
over a point of Divinity is enough to confute it, without ever weighing,
answering, or so much as mentioning the reasons it is built on.

SECOND DIVISION. Containing an Answer from Section the twenty seventh, to
Section the thirtieth.
The Identification of the Soul's affections with her self. The best corporeal
pleasures most conducive to Beatitude. In what sense the Soul is not the same
in the Body and out of it. Affections of Souls not retractable during their
separation. Mis-informations of that grief the Author puts in Purgatory,
rectified. Our Savior's sufferings not prejudic't by this Doctrine.
IN the twenty seventh Section you begin to speak like a man that aimed at a
meaning and proving, and was not content with pure flashes of words as in your
former Sections: Therefore I must look to my self, especially since you
threaten me both with designs of your own and of abler Pens which will more
largely confute my errors. And I must confess you frighten me, for I do not
love to take pains. But the best remedy I can think of, is to hasten this petty
answer to you, which peradventure may prevent some mistakes in others into
which you are fallen; and so shorten in part their and my labor; your first
onset is to ask how ridiculous a position it is to say the affections got in
the body are not distinguished from the Soul? and your reason of doubting is
because the soul was and can be without them. I give you this answer; It Is as
ridiculous, as to say, that Relation is not distinguished from its subject; That
Intension and remission are not made by adding one degree to another; or that
Charity is increast by a greater radication in the subject; That Union is not
distinguished from its Terms, or Action from the Agent and term, when it
consists not in motion; and twenty such other position; which as I must not
doubt but you have showed ridiculous in your Philosophy Papers; so because I
have not seen them I must judge to be probable opinions in the sentiment of
your eminent learned men, while so many maintain them in your Schools; and yet
all the Arguments you bring, are commonly urged against all these opinions. The
masters whereof peradventure may be of the same Judgment with me, that the Soul
is a creature in its Essence immutable, but mutable to a certain point* And,
so, that other things may be joined to, or severed from her, whilst she
remains perfectly the same, and neither better nor worse if we respect
precisely her Essence. They who have a mind to know what I think in this point,
may find it at large discoursed, in the Preface before the Latin Edition of Sir
Kenelm Digby's Book, de Immortalitate Animae.

Your next question is, how I can say that sinful acts are perfections, since
the Soul is more perfect when she is deprived of them. Sir, my unwariness in
this was, because I had heard that sin consists formally in a privation or want
of something, and that all the positive act is good, and from God as far as
positive, and so must be perfective, and in it self some perfection. Now, to
your Arguments I reply, that in create perfections many times a greater puts
out the lesser, as Science puts out Faith, Comprehension Hope, Innocence
Repentance, etc. so does the perfection of a virtuous act displace the
imperfecter perfect on which is in a bad action.

Your third Scruple is, that I say the life most full of corporal pleasure is
the fittest to attain eternal Beatitude. And I cannot deny but I say so, and
your self bring my reason, because the Body being made for the Soul it cannot
be (regularly speaking) but what is truly best for the Body, is also best for
the Soul. Peradventure you can pray better when you are sick then in health and
ease, and the like is of study: My imperfection is such I cannot. And, if
eating my meat with a good stomach gives me health and strength to study and
pray, I think I do well to put vinegar or some other sauce to my meat, which
may make me eat what is fitting to perform those Actions strongly and
perfectly. Neither do I understand that this is either against Saint Paul, or
the Doctrine of Mortification prescribed according to Saint Paul, who tells us,
he chastis'd his body and kept in slavery in order to attaining Heaven, lest
(says he) I become a reprobate; to which end all that use mortification
discreetly, employ it. I confess this Doctrine is against them who think God is
pleased with a kind of sacrificing their bodies to his honor, without any
commensuration to their own salvation, but merely because they apprehend they
make God beholding to them for the great honor they did him; as heathen
Priests were anciently, and are yet used to do in some Countries.

You say this Doctrine befits only Epicurus his School, and the life of Hogs.
For Epicurus, the Eloquent Gassendus has taken a great deal of pains to
persuade the World you are in an Error. And for the life of Hogs, unless you
be better acquainted with it then a chaste religious man should, I think you no
fit Judge of the Comparison. But, whatever way you go, I Will tell you mine: which
is, to think we feel or (as I may so speak) see no acts of our own immediately
but corporeal ones, therefore those sensible pleasures, heats, violences of
charity, which we read of in many Saints lives are corporeal ones, as appears
by the very narrations, telling us of bones broken, those that were near them
warmed, those that they preached to materially set on fire, and the like. Now,
I say, there being such variety of corporeal pleasures, the understanding man
chooses amongst them, what are fittest to breed in him those thoughts and
desires which are the most efficacious dispositions of the Soul to Heaven: And
these I hold the best and noblest, and which make a man's life the pleasantest.
Of these (speaking in abstract) are generally those that follow or accompany
Charity and Science, but in practice those which be the Instruments to increase
solid Charity proportioned to the pitch of the Soul to be governed, which
possibly is not capable as yet of so great acts as the Saints we spoke of. But
there is none so low but if diligence and industry be not wanting, has higher
and greater pleasures then the Hogs which were your instructers to know what
corporea pleasure is. And I cannot but marvel much on what your thoughts were
wandering, that whereas you cannot but have read in the lives of Saints, and
eminent Contemplators of the excessive and ravishing delight which they felt
(that is, which was even in their body too, and affected it) so as they have
judged it to be inexpressible and above all contents and delights this world
could afford; yet forgetting all these, your thoughts could only pitch on
those which Hogs feel, as the perfectest. Do you think a virtuous man has not a
more solid, lasting and true corporeal pleasure in the calmness of his fancy,
and the undisturbed temper of his passions, than a vicious man, who for a dram
of delight which his mad phrenzy of passion gave him, and scarce left him
understanding enough to know he had it, has whole pounds of bitterest gall of
discontent attending it, both in the perpetual fight of his fancy and appetite
against reason, and the distemperature of other natural parts which vice must
needs disorder. Nay, why should we not think the Saints who lived mortified,
lives felt not as much corporeal pleasure, taking the whole extent of their
lives, as those enormous livers who cloyed their senses with the surfeit of
them. We experience so high a difference in our pleasure taken in meat when we
are heartily hungry, in a warm fire when we are extremely pincht with cold,
that we have good ground to think their deprivement of the degrees of the
thing, is recompenc't by the degrees of the perfect sense they have of what
they admit of; which is by the rarity of it commended and received with as
great a welcome as a necessity both natural and rational, that is, those
powers uncheck't in that action, could give it; All which amounts but to this,
that a virtuous life is in all respects the pleasantest to the whole man. If
this satisfy you not, what think you of Health and Sickness? Is not the former
full of corporeal pleasure, the other of corporeal displeasure or pain? Can
any thing be so agreeable to the Body as that, more disagreeable or unpleasant
than this? Yet I believe neither your self nor any understanding Christian had
a scruple he was in health, but gave God thanks for it as a great benefit.

This being so laid out, what have you to except why the pleasantest life is
not the fittest to attain Heaven? You add, you have a Scruple to translate this
Doctrine, and you justly may to do it so raw and imperfectly, as to make a quite
wrong apprehension in your Auditory of its being from what it is. But as you
have a confidence of your Readers virtue to abhor the Doctrine as you set it
down, so have I, that any has heard of me will give no credit to your
shameless calumny.

You begin your twenty eighth Section with my frivolous concluding that
corporal affections remain in the Soul after Separation. And you seem to bring
two Arguments to show it. First, that all these desires rise from the body,
which being taken away, they remain no longer in the Soul; you may as wisely
persuade a man not to seal his Letter, because the impression coming from the
seal, as soon as he puts that in his pocket, there would remain no more print
in the Wax. No, sweet Sir, Our foul has certain Prints of efficacious
judgments, which though they begin from the flesh, yet sink into her, and
become as it were Limbs of her. For, as beasts work by Legs and Arms, and
Teeth, so our soul by her Judgments.

Your second Argument presses, that as it will not concern the soul to see or
hear, so neither to have corporeal pleasures when she has all fullness of
knowledge, so that you would make the unpurg'd souls follow reason, and desire
nothing but what is fit for them; that is, to be totally purged, and by
consequence go immediately to Heaven, and all to be Saints, and that their
works follow them not. At least, you think a Scholar could endure no
punishment, who had no other irregular desires but of knowledge. Qui est hic?
and laudabimus eum: but, putting the case (how impossible soever in the
judgment of Christians, who hold grace necessary,) we must remember, he that
has much science, has a better knowledge of his last end, how great it is,
and seeing himself deprived of that, has a larger share in the high part of
damnation, which is in the poena damni then any other. But this you knew
nothing of, nor care to consider, diverted by reflecting upon an admirable
nonsense of mine. And, truly I do not wonder, that you who cannot understand
that a thing may be changed in relation, or that water powered out of a square
vessel into a round one, can change its figure, without taking away one company
of little Jacks of the Box, and adding as many more, should conceive how a
thing can be substantially changed, and yet remain the same thing. Neither do I
intend to persuade you, only I presume to open how the one case is consequent
to the other. Which consists in this; that if a substance be divisible in the
formal ingredients which make it a substance, then also is it mutable according
to its substance. Now the Ingredients of substance in this pitiful way of
Philosophizing, which Aristotle and St. Thomas have taught me, are called
Matter and Form, and Existence. Whereof Matter and Form constitute the essence
of the individuum, and if either be changed, the Individuum is changed: But it
is not so of Existence. For some of your great Divines will tell you, that
Christ's Humanity were the same individual Humanity whether it had a proper
human Existence or the Divine. Now, that which we speak of the soul is somewhat
less then this. For, we put the soul to continue the same existence, but to
have it sometimes jointly with the body, sometimes in her sole self; and,
because Existence belongs to her substance, we say she is substantially
changed, and yet remains the same. But to answer your difficulty formally, I
pray remember that the notion of ens or a thing is habens Existentiam, or that
which has being. Now habens Existentiam may be understood two ways; for one
that has actually Being; or, for one that has an aptitude to Being. Now, if
you take it in this latter sense, the soul is still the same, for in the body
it is capable to have its existence without the body, and out of the body it is
capable to have it with the body. But, in the former sense, in the body it has
it commonly with the body; when the Whole, not She, is that which has Being;
whereas out of the Body, She, not the Whole, is that which has being, and so
in this sense, she is another thing out of the body then she was in it. There
is your distinction, sweet Sir, with which I must entreat you to be content,
since you will easily see your arguments or inconvenients, drawn from your
mistake of the opinion, have no force against it, for we speak not of higher
and lower degrees of Ens or Anima ut sic, but only of composition in the
individual degree.

In your 29 Section you fall upon a kind of rational question, whether an
understanding creature can wish what is impossible, and you handle it as if you
had never seen a man do against reason. Let my first question be, whether in
all the explications you have heard of the fall of Angels, you find any but of
some impossible object? some say they desired to be God; some the sight of God
without due means; some a supreme Government of this World; some an
hypostatical Union; none any thing but what depended of God, without whose
pleasure they affected it. Therefore all put an absolute impossibility in the
object, which made in the Angel a damned will. Are you better acquainted with
human affairs? Did you never hear of Niggards that hanged themselves because of
some great loss they had received? Never of an ambitious Courtier, that took a
grief and died upon a disgrace offered him from his Prince? Did you never hear
of a Lover that made himself away, because he could not compass the enjoying of
his Mistress? Our life is so full of such instances, that it is a wonder you
could not reflect on them. Are not all these griefs for what men cannot help?
And does not a grief include a desire of the contrary?

But you reply these are phrenetick men, our disputation goes of soul's perfect
in knowledge, whose understandings represent unto them the lowness, vileness,
baseness, unworthiness, etc. of these objects, and above all the impossibility
which (as you say) at one blow cuts off all the will's pursuit: Thus you; but
give me leave to tell you, all vicious desires are a kind of Phrensy's, there
is no difference but of degrees in them; one hinders reason, the other masters
it: and, besides, Wilfulness is as great or greater phrenzy then Passion. So
that, though Passion be not in souls, Wilfulness is. And as Passion hinders all
those fine considerations which you mention of the baseness and foulness, etc.
so much more does Wilfulness.

You reply again, that according to my Doctrine, the affections remain in the
soul in the same proportion which they have in the body, out of which your
adversary will gather, that as they in the body conquer all good
considerations, so they will in wicked souls out of the body. But you subsume
that in this World they make no vast or considerable griefs, instancing that
the most gluttonous or luxurious man, when he is satiated, desires no more the
same pleasure till his Body be fit again. I wonder to hear one that lives (as
the French call it) an grand mond, in all companies, talk so unexperiencedly of
human affairs. Look upon Lovers, look upon those that seek after moneys, see
whether their whole employments be not to think on their Mistresses, and
gathering of Wealth? Remember how many have held envy and malice a greater
torture then Artificers could invent. How does Tully seem to compassionat
himself for the torment of ambition? How pitiful a man was he when Clodius
prevailed against him? But the great melancholies and disastrous ends I spoke
of, make all this too plain to need many words. You conceit that in this
Doctrine he that goes out of the World in a great thirst, shall be tormented
with the desire of drinking. No Sir, but he that is never well but when his
nose is at the tap, shall have that torment. For he loves drink and makes it
his last end, The other desires it out of need, not out of love, and so the
need being past, desires it no longer. At last you take notice of the
sordidness of Souls in separation, if they be troubled with such desires, I
confess it Sir. I do conceive damned Souls in the next world, and vicious ones
in this to be baser far then beasts. I confess, all you say of the contempt of
drunkenness and carnality (which you seem to take for the only corporal
pleasures) to be perfectly true; save only your opinion of Avicena, who killed
himself by the excess of lust.

Then you go on and teach me what I should have settled for the griefs of
Purgatory. And to show how apt a Scholar I am, and how ready to follow your
admonitions, I present you with two short lines out of Institutiones Sacrae,
where having concluded that those who died in venial affections toward
corporal objects, were not worthy the sight of God, presently add and per
consequens cum illum (Deum) pro ultimo fine habeant, ex desiderio Ejus and
paenitentia negligentiae suae gravissimas paenas sustinere, Tomi 2. lib. 3.
Lect. 10. which is exactly your full sense, and not very different from your
words: wherefore I hope since I have proved an obedient Scholar to my power,
you will inform those your friends who intend to write against me, that we are
agreed in this point, and that it is a wrong to report I say of Purgatory that
the Souls are tormented with the desires of corporal pleasures, much less that
I place the whole misery of Purgatory in the deprivement of those. And likewise
that a farther design was cause that this would not content me, for you see I
put no other but in Hell.

You charge me farther to say that all external torments in Purgatory would be
pure pleasures, because they were suffered out of an extreme desire to come to
Heaven by a courage that yielded nothing to the force of the torments which the
sufferers see to be their only way to felicity. I do not see any great
difficulty in this to a sober Interpreter, that what an external Agent inflicts
is not the grief* but breeds it; nor will it reach so far as to breed grief, if
prevented still with a strong apprehension of an over-ballancing advantage to
be gained by it; which yet does not hinder, but that such outward punishments
are, in their nature, properly torments; and it is the extraordinary
considerations of the benefits they bring, that can sweeten them into
pleasures; and, however, the want of Heaven must needs be cause of an excessive
grief. You go on to object that this Doctrine changes all your pious Meditations
on our SAVIOVRS Passion. Be of good courage man, and let no other pretense
divert you, but proceed constantly and faithfully every day in those holy
Exercises, and I fear not, God will assist you to satisfy all those scruples
and difficulty's, which seldom become unanswerable till we grow cold and
negligent in performing our Meditations. Thus then you argue, Christ sufferd
with invincible courage; therefore all pains were pleasures to Him: I think you
know there was in Christ two parts of his Soul, the Rational and the Animal. I
do not know so much of the Souls of Purgatory. When you say then he sufferd
with an invincible courage, do you mean of both parts, or only of the
rational? If you ask him, he will tell you, Spiritus promptus est, Caro autem
infirma. If you reflect on his prayer in the Garden, you shall see when he
speaks out of the motion of his inferior part, how earnest he is against his
passion, you shall see he did pavere, and taedere; I pray put these points into
your Meditations, and you will find room enough for pains, though the rational
part was still fixed upon a fiat Voluntas tua. And this our Savior sufferd
because he would. For the strength of his Soul was so great, that he could have
had pure pleasures, but would not; that He might give us example, how to fix
our upper Souls when we are not strong enough to confirm the lower part.

THIRD DIVISION. Containing an Answer from Section thirtieth to Section thirty
fifth.
The Duration of pure Spirits freed from the mistakes of Fancy. The
Identification of the Soul and Body maintaind by reason and Authority; and that
this is requisite to the Souls change. The Vindicatours rude conceits of Angels.
Vnalterableness of pure Spirits proved from the Indivisibility of their
actions, His false pretense that the Author injured St. Thomas.
IN the thirtieth Section you examine the Duration of separated Souls. And you
readily advance a Conclusion that as it lies I shall not deny, but only beg
leave to offer a distinction. For there being three parts* Angels, Souls, and
their Operations, of which you pronounce, I distinguish upon your third or last
branch of Operations* which Scholars divide into external and internal ones,
in the external ones I agree with you, that they are measured by succession,
and by succession of time, as being corporal motions: But for their internal
acts of understanding and will, I hold of them as of the substances: Your
Propositions so jumble them together, that I know not what you say separately
of them, and what in complexion: but because I defend the same both singly and
in complexion, it does not much concern me.

But to proceed, you say, it is incomparably false, that to coexist to a
greater or lesser part of time, adds or diminishes nothing to them: I ask,
whether, that a greater or lesser time coexists to an Angel, makes any
intrinsecal change in the Angel? I think you must be a little besides your
Philosophy if you say it does, since common sense teaches the pure passing of
time does nothing even to us, much less to spirits. My next question is,
whether if there be no intrinsecal change, there can be any addition
intrinsecally made? I think this also will appear a plain truth, unless the
fear of the sequel force you to contradict evidence: For the inference will
manifestly follow, that purely to coexist to more or less time, (which is the
same as that more or less time coexists to the Angel, for the variety and
quantity of coexistency holds it self on the part of time) adds nothing to an
Angel.

Now let us see your Arguments. Your first is drawn from God, in whose Closet
you have been, and can perfectly tell what he can do, what not, and so you
press, what if on a sudden God should make a new Angel, would his duration be
as long as that of the former Angels, or separated spirits?

But Sir, I would advertise you, that when the speech is of an Action done, it
is not enough to examine his Omnipotence, for that only reaches to a
possibility of the creature; but you must also consult with his Wisdom as well
as with his Omnipotency: For example, if you first ask whether it was in Gods
power to make, or not make the World, and finding it was, presently you would
suppose; then, let him have made it and not made it, the permission would not
be granted you. So likewise your assumption, that if there were no time at all,
God could at his pleasure create and destroy a soul, would be denied you, or
rather that God could have the pleasure to create and destroy a soul in that
case. And to show your own consent in this point, mark your discourse; God
could not do it in the same moment, therefore in two moments. Do you not see,
as soon as you have denied time, you immediately put two moments, which cannot
be without time. I pray remember St. Austin, St. Thomas, and others, answering
the Heathens question, Why God made not the World sooner, say because sooner
signifies in a former time, and that a former time, could not be, unless God
had created it. Your other suppositions too of Gods creating and anihilating
souls, proceed from an unworthy apprehension of Almighty God, as if he should
make and destroy Spirits, only to show tricks, they having no more difficulty
to be answered, then the plain instance of one Souls separation before
another; and therefore is but the repetition of the same case.

But well, what must be said to St. Peter's Soul and the Soul of St. Teresa,
has not St. Peter's a greater duration then St. Teresa's? To this I answer,
what is immediately loosed out of God Almighty's hand, has no respect to time,
but is created for eternity, as the World and the Angels are. But, what God
does by the mediation of creatures, takes a tang from them, and so has some
savor of time from the very loose. Therefore Souls when they go out of their
bodies, have a kind of individual difference from the causes and time by which
they begin. This is a kind of a difference, when you compare one Soul to
another, nothing if you compare the same Soul to it self. And out of this is
taken that diversity of duration which is found in several Souls.

Your next Argument is from the time, as the Divines call it, of the way of
Angels to bliss, where you ask, who has made evident that it could be done in
one instant? to which I have nothing to say, though there want not Divines who
hold it; but that St. Austin has made it evident, that neither position
prejudices Christian Religion, and therefore it is lawful to hold either side,
and so let Divines dispute it, for no Argument can be drawn from thence, why
succession should be necessary in the intrinsecal operations of Angels.

Your third Argument consists of some expressions cited out of Scripture, to
which I answer, if you bring any Texts of the thoughts of Angels, I shall
yield; but if they be only of outward actions, those are measured by time, as
by twenty days, etc. and so argue no special duration in the inward acts of
Angels. Those cries of the Martyrs under the Altar, are so plainly Allegorical,
that it were lost time to show they signify nothing of importance to our
controversy.

In the 31 Section, you say it is groundlesly assumed, that the Identification
of the body and soul is required for the Action of a bodily Agent upon the
soul, and I cannot deny you have said it. But one that had spoken like a
Philosopher, would have brought the seeming grounds on which it is built, and
showed the vanity of them, and not opposed his bare word against another
reasons. You ask, who ever fancied such an Identity betwixt the Body and Soul?
I answer, no body, no more then they can fancy that parts are not actu in
continuo. But as Aristotle and St. Thomas have raised their speculations above
fancy, and understood this, and taught it their Scholars, so has the Church
done about this Identification of the Body and Soul, if the notion of forma
corporis be rightly comprehended. Then you demand who ever believed, our Souls
in this life are truly and really our Bodies, and our Bodies our Souls? No body
Sir, that I know of, is so grossly senseless; and so I think you are at the end
of your Arguments.

Now let us see your belief, which is, that the Soul and Body, as two distinct
parts, concur to the building up of one man, who is one, not by simplicity, nor
Identification of the parts, but by substantial Union or composition. O how gay
a thing it is to speak words and not understand them? We say the same you do;
and nothing more, if you would make your words good. For if there be a
substantial Union, then there must be an Unum substantialiter, or per se, or
properly one. And if there be a truly one, it is not truly many, that is not
many substances or things. And if there be not truly many substances or things,
the parts of this truly one, are not distinguished really into things which are
actually, but formally into things that may be made of this one thing: which
is, to have its part in potentia. Now if truly and really the thing be but one
thing, all that is spoken of that thing signifies nothing but that thing, so
that the man is body according to the signification of one word. Another word
will signify him as he is Soul, another as he has the virtue of holding, and
so he will be a hand; another as he has the virtue of walking, and that will
speak of him by the name of foot: and all this be but one thing, which we call
man. Now Sir, this is a Catholic verity, defined by ancient Councils, in the
Unity of a Person, that is, an individual substance or thing, against the
Nestorians. The same was done in latter times under the notion of our souls
being truly the Form, or giving the denomination of being a thing. Now the
difference betwixt us is, that you examine the words by fancy, and we by
understanding and discourse.

You add further, it can never be evidenced that so much as a substantial union
is necessary for a Soul to suffer from the Body. For who (say you) shall render
it evident, that in the state of separation, by the omnipotent hand of God she
may not be made passive by fire? Sir, I am so confident of your abilities, that
I believe you are able to show, that God by his omnipotent hand cannot turn a
separated Soul into wood, or straw, or some other combustible matter, by which
she shall become passive by fire. And therefore your Divines use to speak more
warily, when they say, God elevates the Action of the fire, not disposes the
subject or soul. But this also, he that can prove Fire is but a body, and his
action either rarefaction, or local motion, or some such other, may to such as
carry sense along with their words, show, that, seeing an action cannot be
elevated unless it be, that is, Fire cannot burn violently, unless it burn; and
that the Action of fire can have no place in a spirit, which it cannot divide
or burn, neither may it be elevated to torment a separated soul.

Your 32 Section tells us, it is a purely voluntary and false assertion, that
separated Souls know all things perpetually and together. And, as for the
falsity, we may guess by your Arguments. But to say it is voluntary, you have
no reason: since the proofs are set down in Institutiones Peripateticae, which
I suppose you read (as all sober Adversaries do) before you went about to
confute: Your Arguments are first, Our Angel Guardians every day learn our
Actions what they be, as it were by seeing the outward effects of them. You
speak this so confidently, that I may imagine you have talked with some of them,
and they have told you so, and then who dares deny it? Otherwise I must confess
I am hard of belief. But you ground it upon this, that Only God is the
searcher of the Hearts, which although one might interpret to signify the
revealer of Hearts, and find Texts of Scripture to that purpose, yet I go not
that way; but tell you, when God is said to be the knower of Hearts, he is
condistinguish'd only to men, and if you will have the sense reach farther,
you must prove it. For it is against the principles your self uses, to wit,
that Angels know all our material motions of our fantasy, and sensitive
appeal. Now if there be no act of the understanding without a fancy agreeing to
it, Nor an act of will without a proportionate motion in the appetite, you will
leave few actions unknowable to Angels. But our Savior [say you] tells us,
Angels kn^w not the day of Judgment. And truly if he had not included himself
in the same phrase, the place would have born a great show, but since he that
is to be the Judge, cannot be thought ignorant of what he is to do, I believe
the meaning is, that none makes that day known, but only the heavenly Father,
whose proper day it is, in which he shall receive into his own hands the
Kingdom which he had put in his Sons hands to be administered till that day, as
being his right hand, and chief Instrument of Government and supernatural
motion. And this is a known Hebraism, for in the Hebrew the same Verb in one
Voice signifies to know, in another to make known; nor want we such instances
in our own Language, To learn one a Lesson, and to teach one a Lesson, that is,
to make him learn it, being the same signification. Your other place that they
rejoice at the new conversion of a sinner, wants one word to make it fit for
your purpose, to wit, that they rejoice of new, For if they rejoice from the
beginning, as God does from all eternity, it will come but lamely to your
design.

In your 33 Section, you go on with your questions; easy to ask, but long ago
resolved? but as to you, to little purpose, seeing you do not take the pains to
understand the answers. As for the Arguments you bring out of Scripture, they
are already answered in my Institutiones sacrae, but must be repeated, because
you take no notice of them; yet so shortly that they may not be tedious to them
who have read them. You object then that the Dragon drew after him the third
part of the Stars; but why this was not done in a moment, you bring not a
word. You say also, this Doctrine that Angels cannot immediately act one upon
the other, destroys their Conversation for all eternity. Sure you mean their
Grayes-Inn Walks, or Spring Garden, where they use to walk together and treat
one another, or their Academies where they meet at Musicks, or bring their
Poems or discourse of news, or some such like entertainments. Are you not
ashamed to dream of such follies in pure Spirits? learn of Aristotle, that man
is a sociable creature, but beasts or pure spirits not: the one being below it,
the other above it: But did not in the great Battle in Heaven one Angel work
immediately on another? Yes, but not by gossiping and tampering one with another
to dispute or persuade them into the conspiracy, but by example, and by being
the Objects one to another: As when one scandalizes another by sinning in his
sight. But say you, the Indivisibility of their Actions which is the foundation
of this Doctrine is unsound, since it will never be evinced, that an act of a
spirit cannot coexist to a greater or lesser part of time. Sir, If you gave us
security of your spirit of Prophecy, we would believe what you say of things
to come; till then we will grant your Proposition as it lies unwarily couched,
but not as you mean it. For the Acts of one spirit may be longer then those of
another, as we said before of different souls, but that is not your meaning;
but that the same spirit has successive acts, one of more duration, another of
less. And this you should have prophesied of, why the Argument of
Indivisibility did not convince. For speaking of one only Angel, either he is
in some act or in none? If in none, either his nature with the pure force of
his Power, (which the schools call Actus primus) can burst into an act, or it
cannot? If you say it can, then you must put a thing first not to do, after to
do without any change, that is to be not productive, and productive of an Act,
that is, two contradictories, without any variety. Put him now in act, either
his Essence with this Act, abstracting from all other circumstances, is
productive of a 2d act, or it is not? If it be not, then out of this Essence
and this act abstracting from all accidents, he will never have a second. But
if the Essence with this Act is productive of a second act, then as soon as he
has this act, he produces the second, that is both together (or else as we
said before, the same thing without change will be productive and not
productive, and so of as many acts as follow in this sort one of another, that
is, all that be in an Angel by his own power, without external help or
determination. So that the conclusion is, all such acts must be in the same
moment altogether. Your answer is that this is true of one act but not of all.
But you must show that the Argument does not convince as much of every one as
of any one, or otherwise it is but your bare word against a convincing Reason,
though you boldly term it a gross Error.

But you press that I hold all causes are fixed, and set as to all effects
whatsoever, from the very beginning to all future succession. I pray
distinguish the proposition you infer against me, from this other, There is no
effect but had a cause, and its cause had another cause, and so till the
beginning of the World. For if you mean no more then this, I must admit it,
howsoever you will please to miscall it. If you have another meaning, when you
teach it me, I shall tell you whether it be concurrent with my sentiment or no.
As for your crying out that it is Pagan Fatality, that it destroys the liberty
of God, and the Contingency of all created things, if of these three words
(though I doubt not but you have talked them over often enough) you understand
any one, I will yield you the honor of being my learned Master, and shall not
contest with you in Divinity.

But in the mean while I must defend my self from your assaults in your four
and thirtieth Section, wherein you accuse me that I fix upon Christianity and
the Church an Ignorance of separated substances, meaning by these great words,
those that hold the probable opinion which you maintain: as also, a most gross
abuse upon the Angelical St. Thomas. My fault is, that I say the opinion of
Souls being delivered before the day of Judgment proceeded from the not
following a Doctrine of St. Thomas, That in abstracted Spirits there is no
discourse, or any manner of composition of knowledge. Whence I infer, there can
be no falsity in them. This is my position, of which you tell us, that it
imports not to consider whether the knowledge of Angels be by true discourse,
or only by virtuall, to which, say you, suffices a priority of causality. But
if a man should tell you, that the causality you imagine cannot be without true
time, then peradventure it would be necessary to dispute, whether there be a
true discourse in Angels; and this is the very case. For, take away succession,
and all corporeal causes which depend on time are taken away. There remain
then nothing but the spiritual qualities of the Angels to be causes, which
neither are distinguished from one the other, nor from their subject, and so
all notion of Cause and Effect, as they are proper to the Efficient, are quite
taken away, and so there will not remain any discourse at all, but a pure clear
sight framed on them by their Creator, in which I believe you will not say
there is any Error or can be. So that the whole question rests upon this,
whether there be true discourse or no.

Now how do you prove what you say is to the purpose? to wit, that it does not
follow out of this Doctrine of St. Thomas that there is no Error in Angels?
Your proof is because St. Thomas notwitstanding this Doctrine, acknowledges
Errors in Devils. Good Sir, as long as you have been a Divine, did you ever
hear that it was a gross injury to St. Thomas, to say some opinion of his was
not true, or not consequent to another? Truly I desire not to do an injury to
any, much less to my Reverenced Master, to whom, after God, I acknowledge it, if
I know any thing either in Philosophy or Divinity. Yet I have no fear not to
follow all his opinions, much less not to make good all his consequences. And
so, Sir, I hope I am rid of your objections out of St. Thomas. Only because
you often repeat, that to say every thing has a cause to make it before it be,
is an Epicurean, Lucretian, Pagan principle, etc. I must entreat you again to
look to the sense of your words, and not to beat so carelessly the Air. If at
anytime you happen to dispute of Liberty, I will endeavor to show you your
Ignorance, but for vapouring words let others judge how far they become you.

You go on in the same strain to except against the comparison of an Embryoes
designing the Child to be born, and man's life framing the Soul delivered into
the next World. But what you dislike I cannot tell, you say it has no connection
with the immutability of the future state. The answer is, it was not brought to
that purpose, but to open the Readers understanding to aim at, of what
disposition the Soul is at her going out. But if the Antecedent reach home, you
say it is a position destructive of all Christianity. But you say not to what it
should reach, but fain something as if you imagined I would have the body of a
Child never grow in strength or good parts. When I shall know what you aim at I
may know what to answer. So we may leave you to conclude your Chapter with a
high conceit of the Victories you have obtained.

FOURTH DIVISION. Containing an Answer from Section the thirty fifth, to
Section the fortieth.
The Vindicators forgetfulness that Eternal Happiness was any Good at all.
That Prayers for the dead in the Authors Doctrine manifoldly profit the Souls
in Purgatory, and relieve them, even there. Charity asserted to be the
immediate Disposition to Bliss. The Authors Doctrine consonant to the Council
of Trent in the points of Remission and Satisfaction. Diverse Squibs and
Insincerities of the Vindicatour touched at.
THere follow^ ^our five and thirtieth Section in ^^ich you have after so long
a digression, remembered again the question of Purgatory. And intend to show
that prayers for the dead are of no profit, if Souls go not to Heaven before
the day of Judgment: An objection of every Gentlewoman, but I hope seeing you
have come into the lifts as their Champion, you will set it high. And so you
do, for scorning the lower ways of others, who press this difficulty, That the
day of Judgment will come of it self at the time appointed, and Then every one
shall receive according to his deserts, whether any prayers have been said for
them or no; you fly so high as to tell us, that though the prayers made for the
dead impetrate eternal bliss for those in Purgatory, yet they are of no profit.
Is not this a gallant attempt? What may be your Arms fit for so great an
Atchievment? Why (say you) the duration of separated Souls is (according to me)
above time and comprehensive of it, therefore it is but a moment whether bliss
ever come or never, therefore there is no profit in the prayers, though they
bring bliss, and this is the full import of your discourse. Could a man have
expected such an Argument from (...) Logic Master? not to distinguish betwixt
substance and an Accident? yet undoubtedly, according to his ordinary phrase,
All Christianity is ruined unless this consequence be good. You were assuredly
in a great Metaphysicall rapture, when in the same short discourse you took two
such hyper-Metaphysicall propositions, as that it was indifferent to have or
not to have the greatest good God has created for a Person, and that there
could actually be an infinite Quantity or Time; I must confess they are both
very fit for your sort of Learning, to bolt out words without looking into what
they signify.

But because this is only your private error, and the World is to be
contented too, which does not apprehend any great benefit in hastening of
Christ's coming; I must a little show the good that the prayers of the
faithful do for the dead. Let us then consider that our chief Good is Heaven,
and the perfect sight of God, at which we aim in all our actions and
progresses, from the first basis of our inclination to the End of nature, even
to the highest step of Charity from whence we immediately reach it; This
depends on two created causes, The perfection of the World; and The perfection
of the private Person, which is to attain it. For God has made the work of the
World in so exact a method, that it shall happen to be wound up all in a day.
St. Paul has told us, he would not have the foregoers be perfected before the
rest, the Apocalypse expresses the same. Therefore Christ taught us in his own
Prayer, to say to his and our Father, Thy Kingdom come: Therefore he bad us,
when we saw signs of the approaching Judgment, to lift up our Heads with hope,
because our redemption was near. Therefore St. Paul calls the good Christians,
Those who love his coming: Therefore in the Apocalypse, Christ shows himself as
coming, and adds, My Reward is with me. Therefore in the end of the Apocalypse
we read that importunate calling on him, Come, and let him that hears, say
Come: and this was the primitive devotion, to desire to be with Christ. Now, to
conclude, he that by his Prayers effects the coming of the day of Judgment, as
far as he does that, so far he procures to his Friend the eternal Reward, the
main good, the complete satisfaction of the desires of Nature elevated by Grace.

The next consideration reaches to the particular good that accrews to the
party prayed for. For the understanding whereof, you are to remember the
Doctrine of the Saints, that for our selves we are heard as often as we ask in
due manner what is good for us; for our friends not so, but according as is
suitable to the rest of Gods providence. Yet it is agreed, that many times such
Prayers bring some advantage, even to the special party for whom they are made:
but when and how Gods providence does carry such graces, we know not, unless
the effect prove visible. Now we pray for the change of the soul of our friend
from misery to bliss; If he be in capacity to be helped, without doubt our
prayers are heard, but when, and in what degree, only he knows who grants it,
unless he has revealed it. And, as when we pray for a living sinner, the
effect of our prayers (if it be fit they should be heard) is, that
circumstances are so cast, in respect of this prayer, that he lights into
convenient dispositions to bring on his conversion; so our prayers for the
dead, work, that in the Resurrection such grace is increased to the party
prayed for, as is fitting to be retributed to the prayers and affections
devoutly powered out for him.

The third Consideration reaches even to the rendering less and more tolerable
to them those pains they suffer before the day of Judgment in Purgatory; which
is to relieve them there. To understand which, we are to consider, that the
State of Purgatory differs from that of Hell, mainly in this; that this of Hell
is ever accompanied with the horror of Despair; that of Purgatory, with the
comfort of Hope to see God's divine face. Now all Hope of a future good, if it
be rational, is grounded in knowing the strength and efficacy of the causes
which are to effect and bring it; and the stronger causes appear to be laid in
order to such an effect, the livelier and firmer is our Hope, and by
consequence more vigorous and sweet the Comfort which springs from that hope
thus erected: wherefore the suffering souls, by knowing that the releasment of
all in general, and each in particular, is procured by the prayers of the
Church; the more, and the more fervent prayers they see powered out for them,
the stronger hope and comfort they conceive. To apply then this to particulars,
as the aim and hope and present comfort of each Soul, is its future eternal
Happiness as best improovable to it, by the order of Causes laid by Gods Wisdom
and Goodness; so the fore-knowledg that the prayers of Friends will bring to
each with proportionable advantage their due reward (as I expressed it in my
second Consideration) gives each soul anticipatedly present sentiments even in
Purgatory of Hope, Joy and Comforts for those advantages their Friends Prayers
shall procure them in the day of Judgment, which surely none that understand it
can deny to be a very great relief.

The fourth consideration extends this advantage of prayers for a particular
Soul, even to the state of Heaven it self: which to explicate, we may remember
the pious opinion commonly received, that S. Francis, S. Benedict, and other
Saints in Heaven have new accidental Joys there, for any good effect performed
by the Order they founded, that is, for the arrivement of any good toward
which they as Causes had any influence in this World: now, of all Goods
imaginable, none is or can be comparable to the bringing of the Kingdom of
Heaven or universal Bliss (this being the But and End of all our wishes, and of
all, both natural and supernatural motion, nay the only aim of his Providence,
who is Goodness it self) most certainly then they who in this World laid means
of many efficacious prayers for the dead and for themselves in particular, will
(in my Doctrine) see themselves, and rejoice in Heaven, to have been
particularly influential toward that happiest and noblest effect of bringing
that day; Add, that this will be gratefully acknowledged by the whole Court of
Heaven, and they respected accordingly, which will cause almost infinite
multiplications of the best accidental Joys; which they who in this World
neglected to use and procure this devotion, will deservedly want. Reflecting
then this thought back upon a Soul in Purgatory, who has deserved by her
carriage in this World, and taken order to be efficaciously prayed for, that
is, to have a particular share in bringing Christ's coming in Glory, she has
antecedently even in Purgatory by foreknowledg of those accidental Joys she
shall futurely reap thereby, a sense of them at present, by means of the
certain Hope to attain them; and thence in due measure a proportionable
comfort, ease and relief, even in Purgatory. So that you see according to my
Doctrine, both Essential Bliss, and best accidental Joys in Heaven, and (from
the foreknown efficacy of prayers to accomplish these) a present comfort
accrues to the Souls in that State, through our suffrages for them.

You will say these motives will not be efficacious enough to stir up the
hearts of your penitents. I can answer nothing, but that I doubt they are not
well instructed and exhorted. And that it is the Preachers duty to endeavor to
stir up their hearts with solid Christian truths, not by incertainties gilded
over with a show of piety. For indeed, what is not true cannot be pious. When
such Inventions have taken a good effect I bless God, that shows his goodness
as well by weakness as by strength. But to advise any man to teach or preach
that, out of which he and the Church thorough him may be upbraided to cozen the
credulous faithful into false and prejudicial confidences, and make them rely
upon such Doctrins and Practices as have no reality in them, I am not a fit
Counselor; I leave that to you who like it.

In your thirty sixth Section you overreach'd me again, for by your beginning I
persuaded my self I was come to a period of my pains, and that the rest had
been but personal quarrels, which I could easily have swallowed, how bitterly
soever prepared by your rash and angry hand. But looking a little farther I
perceived I must tug again. And first, as for that question whether you had
intention to wrong me in printing your Bull, I believe you had not because you
say so, and that only you pretended to make the Doctrine pass for an Article of
faith, the contrary of which all the world knew to be maintained by me.
Secondly, I must remember you that you do indeed and inexcusably wrong me, when
you say I deny that such Souls are received presently into Heaven: if you mean
by the word such, Souls purged after separation, it is no better then a cunning
calumny, and would represent me as holding directly contrary to the Bull and
Council. Whereas our dispute is whether Souls may be so purged out of their
bodies before the day of Judgment; not, if they be so purged, whether they go
to Heaven before that Day: this I agree to, and is of faith; that I deny, and
is but an Opinion. Thirdly, you do not well justify your Friends for changing
the Title from Concerning the Vision of God and the Beatitude and Damnation of
Souls, to this shorter, but more general one. Concerning the State of departed
Souls: while your answer signifies only that they are several expressions for
the same thing, which to a wary considerer will easily appear an artifice. Is
it all one to contend about white and black, and about colors in general? No
more is it all one to define concerning Beatitude and Damnation, and to define
concerning a State which is neither of them both. Fourthly, you often up and
down your Book brand me with faithless Theology. What do you mean? do not your
Doctors generally agree that something in Religion is demonstrable? are they all
therefore presently to be condemned as faithless? cannot your self demonstrate
there is a God? and will you think your self an Infidel for it. Or dare you tell
the Ladies that for your part you are not so silly as to believe there is a God,
you know it, and that as for belief of such things it belongs to the simple
unlearned, not to Scolars. I hope in your next work you will proceed with more
candor and manliness.

Your thirty seventh Section being spent in petty quarrels, though some lines
in it be both false and malicious, yet I will let all pass and go on to the
thirty eighth Section where you rip up again the question, whether the matter
of the Decree be, that perfect charity carries separated Souls immediately to
Heaven. In which you tell us your Publisher is indifferent, and may yet choose
whether he will say that good Souls at their decease be wholly purged from all
irrational affections or no, in the first Instant. And this may peradventure
be true. But if I am not deceived he will not say they are purged: For I am
sure you would censure it deeply in me, if I should say that after this life
there is any more disposing it self or meriting toward life eternal. But I
must not be over confident; you may have two censures in your breast, for the
same saying in the mouths of different Persons. You ask, if Charity brings a
Soul immediately to Bliss: What then does your Adversary think of Lumen
Gloriae? It is to me a hard question what he will think of it, for I see your
great Divines cannot agree what to think of it. But I guess he may think,
either Charity it self when perfect in a pure Spirit, is the Light of Glory, or
causes it, as well as the Beatificall Vision. You press farther the perfection
of Charity in this life does not give the Beatificall Vision, therefore neither
in abstracted Souls. But, if I should ask you how you knew the Antecedent, you
would be at a stop. I can hear it defended that St. Benedict had the clear
sight of God; And I was at a Sermon in Alcala made to the whole University, in
which the Preacher asserted our Lady had Beatifical Vision in the first Instant
of her Conception, and proved it out of his Text, which was Fundamenta ejus in
montibus Sanctis. Fundamenta ejus her conception, in montibus Sanctis, in the
heighths or tops of Sanctity. Therefore believing Divines must take heed of
denying as well as of saying. Besides I have read in St. Thomas and others,
both more Ancient and more Modern, that there is a certain pitch of Charity to
which when men arrive, God takes them out of this World. But however that
stand, I think there is a large difference betwixt the Charity of pure Spirits
and of men. So that the consequence may be true of one, and not of the other.

Farther on you mention some reasons of mine against corporal punishing of
Spirits: but you knock them all on the head with a Canon of the Council of
Trent. To understand the state of the question, it is not amiss to consider
that a Sin, specially a notorious one, has three effects or parts. One in the
rational Soul, where it is a Judgment or resolution, or affection, that such an
Action is to be done: A second in the Appetite or Body, where it makes certain
motions and their causes which bring a likelihood of falling into the same sin.
The third part is in the external action, where it brings in some disorder,
which is subject to propagate it self farther into other subjects. The
disorderly Judgment and affection is that, which our Schoolmen, when they
speak formally, call the Sin; and account the sin remitted, when that is duly
blotted out, whatever that signifies. But it is supposed to be done by
Contrition and Absolution. And although they admit this to be sufficient to go
to Heaven if one dies, yet in a living man they with reason require that the
other two parts or effects of sin should also be taken away; which is to be
done by Satisfaction. So may the Reader understand what Satisfaction is
required for.

Now let us see what you urge out of the Council. First you object the Council
teaches that it is against the word of God to say that the fault is never
remitted but that all the punishment is also forgiven. And so you see by the
discourse above made that we say also. Secondly, the Council says, that it
becomes the Divine clemency that sins should not be par^on'd without any
Satisfaction: So we say also by the fore-made discourse. Thirdly, the Council
charges Priests to impose Satisfaction so, that it be not only as to the guard
of a new life, but also as in revenge and chastisement of their past sins:
which is clearly necessary for the mending of the outward excesses brought in
by the sin; and so we say directly the same. You press farther that the Council
says, in Baptism the whole pains are remitted; And if you speak in opposition
to sins remitted in Penance, the cause is clear. For the sins committed before
Baptism belong not to the Churches Court. But if you speak in regard of God
Almighty, I fear it will require I should ask your Judgment of a Case. Your
Divines tell us that he who receives Baptism cum fiction^, receives Baptism
truly, yet if he dye immediately, I suspect whether you will send him
immediately into Heaven, though neither the Councils nor the Popes words make
any exception. I doubt then, when it is said, all pains are remitted in
Baptism, the Councils suppose that Baptism is received with that disposition
which out of the property of the Sacrament is due to it. Now, because your
question is none of the intended ones, but only by the by, I need not give a
more positive Answer to it, but leave it to your consideration.

It being by this clear, that your calumny of saying I deny Satisfaction is
fictitious: I may go to your nine and thirtieth Section: where having
translated a long discourse of mine, you learnedly ask in what mood and figure
it is? imagining your Reader to have so little understanding as to think a
Demonstrative discourse ought to be just one Syllogism. How favorable, or
otherwise your translation is I examine not, since your chief aim is only to
make a little sport, which you seldom have the luck to do with the least degree
of good manners. The Gentleman that translated the Book you mention, is a
Person whom all that have the happiness of his acquaintance know to be
completely civil and ingenious, and one who wants but the name (which you
indeed have) to be every way accounted Religious; a name I confess very
honorable, and which carries with it a presumption of virtue; but I have seen
some instances where I fear it went no farther then a bare presumption. I did
not say how faithful, but how favorable; since every Scholar knows the
difficulty of rendering into significant and unbarbarous English, the terms of
art used by the most abstemious Schoolmen in their discourses both of
Philosophy and Theology. All whom your rashness cares not to wound so it be
thorough my sides. Yet this fair offer I make you, translate but your Dictates
into smooth Love-letter English, and I will freely forgive you for my part all
you have unhandsomly written in this whole Section.

LAST DIVISION. Containing an Answer from Section fortieth, to the End.
The Vindicators mistakes of what passes in the Soul at reunion. The efficacy
of his slightly grounded Devotions examined, on the by. His impotent malice in
objecting Paganism. His many bogglings at Divinity-Explications, like to fright
him out of his Faith, satisfied.
IN your fortieth Section you are troubled that after the griefs of Purgatory
the sight of Christ should change the imperfect Affections which are in Souls
while they remain in Purgatory. So little do you understand the course of
Nature, that precedent motion is quite of a different nature from the following
quiet, which is the term of that motion. And, forgetting you had given leave to
your publisher, to say his Souls were purged in Purgatory, now you will have it
the faith of all Christians, that there is no acting for Bliss at the
Resurrection. By which if you mean meriting, it is nothing to the purpose, for
it is but your own fiction to put merit at the Resurrection. But, if you mean
there is no change toward Beatitude, you are not well instructed. Neither is
it a wonder, that this is a pleasure, seeing it is the very taking possession
of Bliss after the pains of Purgatory; or as Philosophers would term it the
Purgatum esse, which yet hinders not but what went before, and was their
purging or purgation in via was painful enough. After this, to make your Comedy
complete, you will have a touch at Hell, which (God be thanked) for my ease,
you will reserve to a new discovery. Yet you very heartily beg to know, why the
damned Souls do not repent themselves at the day of Judgment, and become
Saints? Which is a sign you understand not what you read, though you are able
to put it in English. And that you conceive, this putting in the body again,
makes the Soul not only fit to be perfected or totally framed to the proportion
of her last end, but that she is returned again into the state of th^s World's
mutability, of forgetting, working by abstract notions, gaining new science,
etc. which are the proprieties of her changeable condition in this World. If
you please to study to understand, what you intend to oppose, I shall be
willing to contribute on my part what I can. In the mean while, (having already
answered the other things you touch at in this Section) let me follow you in
what you do understand.

In your 41 Section, you accuse your Adversary of scoffing at hallowed Grains,
sanctified Beads, etc. Which it seems you will not permit to be held external
devices, (whatsoever your meaning is.) Nor Vtensils of a thriving devotion:
which is a term of an indifferent signification, and there must be somewhat in
you to make you wince at it. The next words of deluding privileges I looked
for, but could not find in this place; yet afterward reading them in the
Postscript, I conceive by their nearness to Quamcunque voluerit, that they
glance at the too much confidence of such a promise: so large, that were it
true, (and Doctors say the value of Indulgences is to be taken as they sound) I
should reckon it a great temptation to neglect wholly both all venial sins, and
all satisfaction for mortal, in this life. The only advantage that I know a
priviledg'd Altar pretends, (if we may believe the words of the Privilege it
self) is to deliver a soul out of Purgatory, by saying Mass there. This Mass we
have daily experience may be procured, to say truth, at no unreasonable rate.
What need I then, according to these Principles, be much frighted at Purgatory,
and those dreadful pains they so often preach to me, when all may be healed
with a little wisely-bestow'd alms, if these men be as good as their words? But
they say, it is advisable not to be too confident in one Mass, but to get more:
and is there no suspicion incident to an advice so unnecessary, if the
privilege speak true? and, however, so convenient in all cases? Pray you tell
me in your next Discovery, to how many Masses on our common Altars is one of
your Priviledg'd Ones equivalent? to ten? then the Privilege alone is equal to
nine; then which I think a greater blasphemy can scarce be spoken. Perhaps you
may reply* I hold you too severely to your word, and that by our promising a
full Delivery, we mean only to contribute extraordinarily toward it; but why
do you give me your word, if I must not take it as it signifies? why do you not
play fair, and tell me, that one Mass there, is something better then half two
elsewhere? for at the end of the account, that is all your vast promises come
to, for ought I see. Besides, may not all the other Altars, where the same
great work is performed, justly complain, that you endeavor their
impoverishment? other questions there are as easy to make, and as hard to
answer: but of this enough, the Theam's too plentiful, and I am even weary with
thinking on it.

Next you accuse your Adversary, that he says you think such things promote
souls in Holy desires, though for my part, I think it is a great reason of the
use of them, to make people be devout, when otherwise they would not. And for
souls going to Heaven by them, if they take away the pains of Purgatory, with
what face can you deny it? I remember a Doctor of Divinity, who having obtained
a Scapular from the Carmes, and a privilege from the Jesuits to be admitted a
Jesuit, at the hour of his death, was as confident to go directly to Heaven, as
if he had had a Patent for it under Jesus Christ's own Hand. Why then are you so
touchy, as if there could not be abuses in these things? why cannot you be
patient in this case, as well as the Church is content to admit some abuses to
have crept even into the administration of the Sacraments.

Your last note I believe is quite mistaken, for I do not conceive your
Adversary intended to make any comparisons; both because he does not specify
any particular man to whom he should be supposed to compare me, and because
there is no occasion for it. But peradventure he would not have the good life
of any man, be an Argument to bear down a contrary Doctrine. For my self, I
profess no exemplarity. If my life be such as may not unbeseem my Calling, I
have as much as I desire from men: neither do I see any reason, why any one
should engage for me, supra id quod videt in me. I pray let not
opinion-quarrels break into Personal dissentions. Si invicem mordetis invicem
consumemini.

To the same uncharitable end, I fear, tends your often repetition of
diminishing words to those persons who think well of me or my Doctrine,
insisting especially on their small number: but I pray you tell me, how many
you think have impartially and attentively read these few Books I have made? I
believe, in proportion to them, it is not a small number who profess to have
met, in many points, with great satisfaction; nor do I expect they should in
all; I may sometimes be mistaken my self, and there I desire none to follow me;
others may sometimes be mistaken in me; and there, I am so far from being
followed, that my obscurity (which I confess a defect) will not let me be
found: Nor do I see so much cause to be troubled at the fewness, as to bless
God for the qualities of those who profess to have found good in my writings,
being Persons both ingenuous, and virtuous, and of such frank and unbyassed
Principles, as well by their own inclination as the influence my way may have
had upon them, that I am confident, they desire nothing more then to see my
Doctrine thoroughly examined, and speedily brought to a fair and impartial Trial,
by the sharpest Arguments that a pertinent opposer can make; and indeed they
themselves have been the strongest, though not the fiercest Objectors I have
met with. One reason possibly of this little number may be, that my Books have
not as yet been long enough in the World to be fully perused by many: what time
may produce God only knows, to whom I submit it.

But to return to my self and speak to what you dislike in me, you absolve me
from being an Heretic, to make me a Pagan. Nor will I refuse to be what you
shall please when you have explicated your self. But this not marking nor
understanding your own words, makes all the misintelligence. You make me a
Pagan, but such an one as acknowledges Christ, and every word and tittle either
of the Scripture, or any other Law of his. Such a Pagan, such a Naturalist was
never heard of before. Will you have me give you an Instance? take this Bull
and Canons which you cite, and put them to my self or your Adversary, and see
whether we will either refuse to subscribe, or even swear to them. Then our
Paganisus lies in this, that we do not think you have the right sense. And this
is my Paganism thorough all things belonging to Christian Faith. You say I
agree only in words with the Church; but, saying so, you say, I agree in
words; and by consequence, the whole disagreement is about the sense of the
words. In which controversy because I proceed out of Philosophy and reason, and
you out of what Masters Dictatts I know not, you leave a great prejudice that
my explication is the more reasonable.

Wherein consists then my Paganism? Because I pretend to demonstrate what you
think is not to be known but by Faith. Then if I do not pretend to demonstrate
but only profess that they are demonstrable, and exhort men to seek out the
Demonstrations (which is the true case, and what you add is out of the fullness
of your heart) why do I not hold all the Articles by Faith? and where is my
Paganism? But suppose some great Scholar possibly or impossibly (as the Schools
speak) should have the demonstration of the Articles of Faith, would he
therefore be* a Pagan? sure you never thought what a Pagan signified when you
spoke so choleric a word: That peradventure might make him more then a man, or
more then a Christian, as a Comprehensour is, if it reached to Gods Essence,
less it could not make him. Faith is not desirable for its Obscurity, but for
its Certainty. We govern our lives by knowing the objects, not by the defect in
the knowledge. Let a man see his way by the clear Sun, and sure he will be as
able to walk in it as by the dimmer light of a Star.

But you complain I reduce the mysteries of our faith to our narrow brains.
Sir, you are mistaken. It is the quite contrary; you should rather accuse me of
endeavoring to dilate our brains to the capacity of the mysteries by the help
of Faith. Why God cannot elevate our brains to understand what he has
delivered us to be understood* You have not yet declared to my capacity.

You say when you are told Souls are not purged in the state of separation but
at the reu^ion, though the word remains, your Faith is gone. I easily believe
you speak from your mind, and that truly you apprehend, the explication you
frame to your self is your Faith; and so, that as many Christians as fancy
diverse explications of the same Article have so many faiths, but by this way I
see very few in the whole Church would be of the same faith, 'pray consider a
little that reflection.

Nothing is more clear then your next Example. You say you believe that Faith,
Hope, and Charity are infused by the Holy Ghost into our Souls in Baptism. A
Pope and a general Council too, declared that of two opinions of Divines, this
was the probabler; and, by saying so, said this was not the faith of the
Church, and yet if this be not true, your faith is gone.

Your next Example is to the same purpose, that supernatural qualities are of a
different series then nature. It is indeed St. Thomas his opinion, and a pure
Scholastical one, nor Universally received. Yet if this notion of
supernaturality be lost, your faith is gone: Good Sir, take faster hold on it,
and let not your faith slip away so easily from you. Again you believe the
mystery of the Trinity, but if it depends as to its deducibleness on what is
Essential in God, you doubt it is not your faith, though all Divines will tell
you, all that is in God is Essential. If St. Thomas explicate the Unity and
Plurality in God by the Unity of Action and Passion in motion, your faith is
lost. But chiefly, if any miscreant, or Imp of Hell (as your Love-letter
Complement is) should say the names of Father and Son were derived to God from
what we observe in natural Generation of living Creatures, which being a
material thing can be no otherwise in God then by Metaphor, then your faith is
different from those who explicate it so, that is all the Divines I have either
read or heard of, who universally agree in transferring Aristotle's Definition
of Generation to the blessed Trinity.

You go on and tell us you have hitherto believed that God most freely and of
his own goodness built this Universe, and that he is not necessarily tied to
the order and course of Nature: All this is well, but now you are taught that
God must contradict himself, if he act any thing against nature. And what
signifies this, but what is consequent to that? for if God be the builder of
nature, He has settled this order which we call nature, most freely, but yet he
has done it: and if he has done it, he cannot undo it again, without undoing
what he has done? which in English is called contradicting himself. For one to
contradict himself, is to change his mind or will, which it seems is your faith
that God can do.

Another Article of your faith seems to be, that out of the very series of
nature, Judas might have escaped being damned; whereas all Catholics agree,
that out of the pure series of Nature, St. Peter could not have escaped being
damned. At last your faith descends to flies, and whereas peradventure if you
had thought, should God have had the mind he had not formerly to make another
fly, his resolution (that is his Essence) had not been the same it is now, your
faith might have been the same with mine. But by falling immediately upon the
fly, you have quite lost your faith. And your conclusion comes to be the same
with this, that if God ties himself to any thing, and so remains tied, he is
become a pagan Jupiter. I confess this is not my faith. You march forward,
telling us, if God neither command nor forbid any thing, all morality is lost.
All this would be well, if you told us what you meant by Command; if no more
then Commonwealths do, when they appoint rewards for them who do well, and
punishments for malefactors, upon which morality consists, your faith may be
the same that mine is. For so I profess, God commands not only by setting
rewards and punishments, but by denouncing them. But if you have a special
notion of commands importing a mere will or humor to command without designing
any benefit to the obeyer, then I cannot help your faith, though we agree in
these words, God forbids to steal, commands to honor him, etc.

Then you begin to prognosticate how you will discover out of my works a
morality that Escobar never thought on. And truly I hope you will, if you take
pains to understand them. But, if you only use words, and never look what they
signify, you will do good neither to your self nor others. To give an Essay of
my Morality, you bring this position of mine, that Another man is no otherwise
to me, then a piece of Cloth or Wood, which I cut and shape after my will. Even
though I do him harm, or seek to ruin him, I do him no wrong. And you ask how
this agrees with that Principle of Nature, that we ought to do to others, as we
would have them do to us. I can only say, if it does not agree I was mistaken;
for I brought it to show the ground the second Principle had in nature, and my
deduction is this. Reason teaches me to use Cloth like Cloth, and Wood like
Wood, and consequently a man like a man, that is* to think that fitting for
him, I think to be fitting for my self, seeing a man is of the same nature with
the Considerer.

Lastly you are afraid, if faith yield to evidence, our notions must be
changed; and in that you are not much amiss. For I also conceive the notions of
one who understands what he says, are different from the notions of him who
does not, and upon this subject, I will propose you a place of St. Austin,
which seems to me very home to the purpose. It Is too long to copy out,
therefore I pray read the 26, 27, and 28 Chapters of the 12th Book of his
Confessions, and specially reflect upon the diverse senses or understandings
which diverse Christians have of the same places of Scripture, and I may say of
the same delivery of Faith. The example in the end of the 27th, and the
beginning of the 28th, is in a manner our very case. There are two
understandings of the Creation of the World; one weak, the other strong, both
necessary for diverse sorts of people. If the weak man when he hears the more
intelligent explicate his faith, should cry him down for a Pagan, as taking
away faith, it were no wonder. For so we read of a good Monk that had been an
Anthropomorphite, who when he was taught that God was a Spirit: that is, had no
hands, feet, face, etc. as he before had fancied him, cried out, he had lost
his God, and perhaps, was likely enough to call him a Pagan too, that denied
God such a shape, and explicated to him, according to the nature of a Spirit
and like a Scholar, those places of Scripture which begot and so suited to that
fancy of his; But no Scholar would judge him a great Divine for doing so. If you
read these latter Books of St. Austins Confessions you shall find that by
natural knowledge he directed his understanding of Scripture and Faith, and
consequently was as very a Pagan as my self. And so did all the Fathers by
reason convince Heretics follyes, when they could, and this is the duty of a
Scholar, which Saint Peter preaches to us, and Saint Paul told us he practiced
among the Perfect, giving to weaker stomachs Milk, and not strong Meat.

By this, Sir, you easily perceive my principal aim, to wit, what I have
learned by Faith and Tradition the same to understand and defend by the help of
Sciences; which I think I cannot do, unless I first understand the Sciences
themselves, and not frame the Sciences to Faith before we understand what Faith
it self teaches us. How ridiculous is it that what apprehensions we made of our
Creed when we were Children, the same we should retain when we are men. Or what
Conceptions clowns frame to themselves in Religion, Philosophers and Divines
should be obliged not to transcend, under pain of being esteemed Supplanters of
Christ and his Doctrine, Evacuaters of Faith, Miscreants, and I know not how
many other such ill-favored names as you give me too often up and down your
Book. Think but how contrary it is to man's Nature, and the profession of the
Church, to forbid Learning? to hinder men from searching the true Meaning of
Gods word? from endeavoring to come to Demonstration as near as we can? to cut
off all hopes of Certainty? and confound all Sciences into a Chaos of
probability? Good Sir, since God has created us to Science, and set our Bliss
in the knowledge of himself, since he has given us a strong inclination to it,
do not seek to plunge us into a despair of it, and confine us to the eternal
darkness of knowing nothing. If your self be discouraged, hinder not others to
endeavor. Should six persons find out but six conclusions, there is so far
advanced: those six may each of them produce six more; and so go on with an
unbounded improvement; whose multiplying fruitfulness as we cannot conjecture,
so surely we ought not either to envy or obstruct.

IN your Postscript where you promise to make all such things good as depend on
matter of fact, before any Person of Honor. I understand not well your meaning
by this word matter of fact. But if false citations go under that name, I pray
clear your self of this imputation I charge you with, that you say I put the
pains of Purgatory to be the irregular affections to worldly things. A
proposition you have so often rvepeated and urged, that you cannot deny it to
be deliberately and examinedly done; So false and injurious, that you cannot
refuse to acquit your self if you be indeed Innocent.

And for a Close give me leave against your next Vindication, to offer you this
note; not as a Rule (for who made me your Superior, that I should flatter my
self with thinking you would perhaps obey me?) but as a friendly entreaty, that
since we have experience enough of your power in Rhetoric, you would wholly
apply your self to solid and useful reason; This if you deny, at least let me
prevail with you to put at the beginning and end of those periods where you
intend to be bitter, some visible mark; that I may save the labor of reading
stuff so unsuitable both to you and me; as also, that some other of your
Readers, whose ears delight in such janglings, may directly pick out the parts
that most agree with them, and not be diverted by your other less impertinent
discourses: whereas in your last work all is so jumbled together and closely
woven quite through the whole piece, that for my part I can scarce distinguish
the strong sense from the blustering Satyr. If you intend to write like a Man
and like a Scholar, take some Treatise or Book of mine end ways; then show
either the Principles weak, or the Consequences slack; else every one knows
that in Discourses single Paragraphs subsist by their fellows; and so, to
impugn such taken apart signifies nothing.

FINIS.

