CHRIST Ascended Above the CLOUDS. His Divinity -- Vindicated From the cloudy,
erroneous, heretical, and blasphemous Conceits of John Newman, and his
Brethren. His Light in Man Vindicated From the cloudy, erroneous, heretical,
and blasphemous Conceits of John Newman, and his Brethren. His being The Word
Vindicated From the cloudy, erroneous, heretical, and blasphemous Conceits of
John Newman, and his Brethren. His being In Saints Vindicated From the cloudy,
erroneous, heretical, and blasphemous Conceits of John Newman, and his
Brethren. His being The only way and Rule, Vindicated From the cloudy,
erroneous, heretical, and blasphemous Conceits of John Newman, and his Brethren.
AND The ONLY RULE of FAITH DEMONSTRATED, For the general Information of
Professors (and People) of all sorts.

And the said J. N. his Book styled, The Light within, etc. (with his Manifest
Contradictions) both scripturally, historically, and rationally examined.

By a Servant of Christ, G. WHITEHEAD.

Out of thine own mouth will I judge thee. Luke 19.22. His mischief shall
return upon his own head. Psalm. 7.16. Behold, they belch out, etc. Psalm. 59.7.
The mouth of them that speak lies shall be stopped. Psalm. 63.11. Let them be
confounded, etc. Psalm. 129.5. London, Printed in the Year, 1669.

The PREFACE to the Unprejudiced Reader.
IT is real Love and Zeal for God's living Truth and People, which constrains
me thus to appear in these Controversies, against such inveterate scornful
Spirits and Antichristian Principles, as tend to invalidate and make void the
very Life of Christianity and Power of Godliness, by their slighting and
reviling the Light within, professed by us the reproached People called
Quakers: Which Light, being the very Principle which would direct the mind to
God and Christ, by whom it is given.

Reader, such occasions of public contest are not of our seeking, nor is it
desirable to us, thus to appear against any People professing Religion (called
Sectaries) but it has been some few angry men called Baptists, and some other
Professors partly of their Faith, who have publicly both in Preaching and
Print given us such occasions, by their implacable Enmity vented against us and
the truth professed by us, as also by their dis-ingenuous, false, and injurious
dealing with us and our Principles, by mistaking and perverting of them in many
things, making themselves matter and work to make War with us, as this John
N^wman has in several things, which he has forged against us as our
Principles, which are none of ours. But its prejudice and pride makes such
blind men presumptuous.

Reader, we find no new thing, nor any more profundity brought forth, by these
prejudiced Baptists against us, than the persecuting Hireling Priests did nigh
twenty yea^s ago, in their Railing Pamphlets, and Pulpits; One main Subject of
this John Newmans, in his Book, is to prove the Light in every man, not to be
Christ; which he should not need to have done, until it had been so affirmed by
us; for though we do affirm a spiritual divine Light of God, and of his Son, to
be in every man, yet it is not our Principle to say that Christ is in every
man, or that every man has the Son; but a measure of his Light, Grace, or
heavenly Gift in all, which would lead out of darkness, and give the knowledge
of God's Glory in the face of Christ, and so reveal the Son of God within, whom
he that has, has the Father also. But this J. N. his enmity against the Light
within has led him so far besides any true sense of God, or reverence to his
Gift, as to call it but a feigned Light within, (though he has neither
demonstrated what the Light within is in its self, nor shown any reason against
it) and also to endeavor to exclude both God and Christ out of all his People,
endeavoring to persuade us, that neither God nor Christ can be in any man,
contrary to the manifest Testimonies of both the holy Prophets and Apostles.

Reader, in moderation peruse what follows, and let the Truth and its Light
within (not prejudice and darkness j^dge concerning these matters which are
principal things in Controversy between us called Quakers, and the Baptists,
with other Professors of the same Spirit) and here thou may see the
Controversy is about the Word; 2dly about the only Rule of Life; 3dly, About
Jesus Christ; 4thly, and about the Scriptures, whether they be properly to be
called the Word, the Foundation and only Rule of Life for all men (as J. N.
asserts of them) or Jesus Christ his Spirit within to be the only Way and Rule,
yea or nay. These Controversies are Scripturally and Rationally discussed in
the Sequel. The Principal Passages of this John Newmans Book against our
Principle, are in the same Book contradicted, and plainly confuted by himself,
and his chief Principles and Contradictions are herein laid down, as collected
out of his own Book and briefly noted. Reader, It may seem very wonderful to
thee, that any men should have the confidence to undertake to confute others,
when they can write very few Pages without contradicting and confuting
themselves, and thereby manifesting their own Folly, Distraction, and
Confusion, as this J. N. has done against us, as much as ever I knew any of
our Opposers do: What reason can any have to follow or depend on such who have
neither Soundness, Stability, nor Consistancy in their own Principles, let the
Moderate and Rational Reader judge. This J. N. had been answered, when his Book
was newly Published, but that we had several more noted An^agonists to deal
withal, wherefore I waved his Book, and did not take time so much as to read it
over till very lately, being desired by some Friends, a little to take notice
of it; we have a large Answer to part of it by another Friend, which is laid by
till the rest of his Books be published.

Reader, I have waved much Falsehood and Nonsense, and many Tautological
Impertinencies in J.N.'s Book, as not willing further to obtrude upon thy
Patience therewith; also thou may take notice that diverse of the Subjects
here treated on, (as that about the Light within, and the Scriptures, with
other matters of Controversy) are more fully Discussed and Resolved in our
dear Friend Samuel Fisher's Book, entitled, Rusticus ad Academicos, in Answer
to John Owen, Tho. Danson, John Tombs, and Rich. Baxter, wherein Presbyterians,
Independants, and Baptists are concerned, though none of them could ever Reply
to it, but it lies upon their heads, not Answered by them until this day: Also
several considerable Books besides, have diverse of us writ, in Answer to many
peevish Reviling Pieces of the Baptists, which they never yet Replied to; but
the Truth is and will be over their heads, and over those envious Spirits among
them.

Moreover, The Contradictions of some Principal Baptists, and others (about
their Assertion of the Scriptures being the only Rule) [in Two late Discourses
in London] may be taken notice of in the sequel. -- As also here is Finally a
Bill of Excommunication given forth by diverse of the principal Baptists about
BOW, against one that forsook them and their dead ways; wherein the Reader may
also take notice of their envy and falsehood.

London, the 12th month, 1669.
CHRIST Ascended above the Clouds, etc.
JOHN NEWMAN's Instance to prove the Scriptures the Word, Isa. 28.9, 10, 11,
12, 13. Of the Scriptures.
The Word of the Lord was to this People, Precept upon Precept, etc. Page 6.

Answ. [Scriptures] signify writings, and not the Word; neither does this
Instance prove them to be the Word, for the Prophets of God (who speak as the
holy Spirit moved them) did both inwardly receive and speak forth Precept upon
Precept, here a little, and there a little, from the immediate Spirit and Power
of God, as immediately taught by him, which is before and above the Scriptures
thereof, which no where ^ffirm themselves (being the writings in an abstract
sense) to b^ the Word. Also preaching Jesus Christ the Word, and the Scriptures
a^e two things; the one being in a living Power and Voice, and the other in
written Characters. Moreover, the Lord sends out his Word, and melts the
Snow, the Hoar-frost, and Ice, Psalm. 147.18. Surely this Word is not the
Scriptures.

J.N. There are a People labor to blind this Truth, by affirming, That Christ
is the Word, not the Scriptures, for they say the Scriptures are the Sayings or
Words of God, page 13.

Answ. To affirm Christ to be the Word and not the writings, but that in them
are the words or sayings of God, words of his Covenant, etc. or that they
contain a Declaration of God and Christ, is no blinding of Truth, but what is
^ffi^med in, and by the Scriptures themselves, and the Word of the Lord came to
the Prophets before they spoke forth or writ the words; see Jer. 1.1, 2. The
words of Jeremiah, to whom the Word of the Lord came.

J. N's Instance from Mark 4.14. What Word was this that the Devil takes out
of men's hearts? None will think it Christ, but the Scriptures of the New
Testament, page 17.

Answ. The Seed sown in the heart by the Son of man, has virtue and life in
it, in the very being of it, for rooting, growth, and increase of fruit, which
is more than the writings which no where in Scripture are called the Seed, and
can he say the Son of man did sow some Scriptures in the Highways which the
Devil took? Also many retain Scripture in the profession of it, who
notwithstanding are but as the highway ground unfruitful, in whom the Seed of
Life does not take root, so that the Devil does not steal away the Scriptures
or Bible from them, not properly Christ out of their hearts; but he steals away
their hearts and minds, blinding them from the sense and sight of the virtue,
life, and light of the Seed, or Word of Life within.

J. N. The Word of God grew and multiplied, Acts 19.20. Cannot be understood of
Christ, a multiplication of Christ, p. 17, 18.

Answ. Can he then think that Bibles grew and multiplied? Surely the Word had
Life and heavenly Virtue in it, that was capable of growth, and its multiplying
was both in the increase of gifts, and adding to the number of them who
received it; and though Christ be but one, yet his Life, his living Word, and
Gifts, both grow and increase where he is received.

J.N. Christ cannot be the Word, because Christians may and ought to receive
his Word into their hearts. Christ is not received into the hearts of men, nor
in Person dwell in their hearts, p. 21.

Answ. How grossly Erroniously and Irrationally has he asserted and reasoned
that Christ cannot be the Word, because the Word is received into the hearts;
and how contrary to plain Scripture to say, Christ is not received into the
hearts, see 2 Cor. 13.5. Romans 8.10. Col. 1.27. Christ in you except you be
Reprobates; Christ in you the hope of glory, etc. but that Christ in Person
does not dwell in the hearts, who ever affirmed that he does?

J.N's Instance from Luke 11.28. Blessed are they that hear the Word of God and
keep it. None that will mak^ use of Reason, can believe that Christ did intend
that Christians should keep himself, for every Christian is kept (...) and
Christ, 1 Pet. 1.5. p. 15.

Answ. Though Christians be kept by God and Christ, its through Faith and
Obedience in the Light, whereby they continue in both, and retain God in their
knowledge, holding the Head which is Christ, and holding fast the faithful
Word, keeping the Word of his Patience, such keep the Truth: all which amounts
to the same, or is equivolent with keeping Christ, the Word, the Truth, the
Life, wherein is the Patience of God, and Faith of the Elect exercised against
all Temptations and Trials, which are not overcome by the writings without,
which cannot truly be called the Word of his Patience as J. N. does without
distinction, when they express words of his Wrath, Judgment, and Displeasure
against sin and wickedness; But the word of Faith, Life, and Patience in the
Soul, immediately expresses the Love and Patience of God and Christ unto it,
to a^m it in times of Afflictions and Trials; and this we are to keep.

For many both profess and keep Scriptures or Bibles, who are out of the
Patience of Christ. And now I Query, What Reason is it this Opposer would have
us make use of, and what is the ground of it in man? for he speaks of carnal
Reason which cannot re^ch God, and also a Reason to be made use of, Page 64.
Surely we cannot look on him to be such a Mast^r of Reason, as infallibly to
distinguish, how highly soever he thinks of himself, whilst he denies and
opposes the Light within, as being but a feigned light! John N^wman, where is
thy Reason, and what and w^ence is it? We must not take thy carnal, dark, and
prejudiced Conception for Reason; nor be swayed thereby when thou art ignorant
of the very Grounds and Principles of true Reason, and so much opposest plain
Scripture, which hypocritically thou pretendest for thy only Rule.

J.N. To deny the Scriptures to be the Word of God, is to deny the very
fountain and wellspring of comforts Note.]
to the Soul in Affliction, which is brought out of the Promises in the
Scriptures to the Soul by the Spirit through Faith, p. 44.

Answ. How grossly Erroneous is it to deem the Scriptures the very Fountain and
Wellspring of comforts; and to say, Jer. 2.18. Psalm. 36.9.
that the Spirit brings the Comforts from thence to the Soul; whereas God is
the Fountain, which to say of the Writings, is all one, and as blasphemous as
to say they are God, as some of the Ranters have said; and as once one of them
affirmed to me, at Emnith, near Wisbitch, That the Bible which I had in my hand
was God; but he quickly after came to be distracted.

-- 2dly, The Spirit and Gift of Christ, is as a Well of Living Water in true
Believers, Joh. 4.10.14 and 7.38, 39.
and it is the Spirit of Promise the Comforter, having the Life of all Gods
Promises and Truth of Scriptures in it self from God the Fountain; and this
Spirit is infinite, and so not ^ontained in the Scriptures, though it contains
the truths that are in the Scriptures of Truth* for they came from the Spirit;
and it opens the understanding in the Scriptures as it is waited in.

J.N. -- His sad Consequences (which he thinks do follow the denying the
Scriptures to be the Word and Rule) proved inconsequent, and his great
Ignorance therein detected. -- In Answer to his 43, 44, 45 pages. There are no
sad Consequences as he asserteth in denying the Scriptures to be the Word and
Rule for Salvation.

And First, I does not take away the ground of Faith for Remission.

2dly, Nor Assurance, for Christ and his Light within, is the Ground and
Foundation of Faith and Assurance.

3dly, Nor does it make void the Exercise of Faith in the precious Promises;
for the Spirit of Promise, both as a Rule manifests the Promises, exercises
Faith in, and fulfils them.

4thly, Nor does it deny the Comforts of Faith from the Promises, the Spirit of
Promise being both the Comforter, and shows us things to come.

5thly, Nor does it destroy the support and supplies of Grace to the Soul in
affliction; For these we receive from God in his own Spirit, and not from the
writings outward.

6thly, Nor does it deny the knowledge of Acceptance, for that is given to us
by the Spirit of God, by which we are sealed unto the day of Redemption, and
know that we are o^ God, and the Mystery of Life and Salvation is revealed unto
us by the Spirit.

7thly, Where the Spirit of Truth and its Light within is obeyed and truly
owned to be the Guide and Rule, it leaves not men in the dark, nor out of the
knowledge of God, or enjoyment of Life eternal: But to deny the Spirit, or
Ligh^ (...) Christ, to be the Rule for Life and Salvation, does leave (...)
dark, void of saving Knowledge and Life.

J.N. 8thly, Without this (viz. the Scriptures to be (...) etc.) we know not
that there is any God, or Christ, or Salvation by God in Christ, nor by what
means it may be obtained (all men are left in the dark) and no man knows how
to enjoy Life Eternal, page 45. Neither do we know what God counts unclean,
and what holy; And in short, without the Scriptures we know not any promise
that belongs to this life, or that to come; these dreadful conclusions will
follow, denying the Scrip^ures to be the Word and Rule to Salvation, and it
leaves men to walk by fancy and imagination.

Answ. Poor men! you h^ve shown your selves s^fficiently herein, and what an
empty implicit Faith you are in, and how void both of the knowledge of God,
Christ, and Salvation you are, and how yet in your sins, having denied Christ
and his Light within to b^ your Rule, Way, and Foundation, as he is to his
followers; and so you are walking by your fancies and imaginations, w^o ^et the
Scriptures in the place of Christ, as your only and absolute Rule and Ground of
your Faith and Knowledge. And then, if one should ask you, How you prove the
Scrip^ures to be true, if they must be the absolute and only Rule, and none
other, then you m^st prove them by themselves, or plead their own authority
from an implicit Faith you have of them; which is but still an absurd way of
reasoning, or assaying to convince gainsayers, being but Petitio principii, a
begging the Question. And how would this convince either Papists, Turks, Jews,
Infidels, or Athiests, to tell them our Bible, or Scriptures, are infallibly
true, and the only Rule to know there is a God and a Christ, and Salvation by
him; and to know what God counts unclean, and what holy. And then what a sad
sentence of no less than Condemnation does this pass upon all People and
Nations, who have not the Scriptures, as being all void of knowledge that there
is either God, Christ, Salvation good or evil, whereas there is a living
Evidence throughout the Creation, or Works of God therein, of the eternal
Power, or Maker; see Psalm. 19. Romans 1. Job 12. and many do know, and have known
these things written of (which concerns Salvat^^^ by the Light of God and
Christ, in them that never could (...) or had the Scriptures outwardly; as
those Gentiles which (...) the Law, yet did those things contained in it, and
showed (...) ^ffects of the Law written in their hearts, Romans 2. though the
Scriptures are profitable to the Man of God, who has them, being led by his
Spirit which opens them.

J.N. The Eternal Power and Spirit that was in Christ, cannot properly be
called Christ; this Power or Spirit is God, and not Christ.

Answ. Contrary to plain Scriptures, opposing both the Divinity and Deity of
Jesus Christ, who is both the Power and Wisdom of God, 1 Cor. 1. The second
Adam, the quickening Spirit, chapter 15.45. And the Father, the Word, and Spirit,
are One, 1 John 5.7.

J.N. The will and mind of God is contained in the Scriptures, in order to man's
Salvation, p. 49.

Answ. The Word [ contained] is erroneously place; for the Writings contain
only a Declaration of the Mind and Will of God in order to Salvation. God and
his Mind, Thoughts, Will, and Ways, are Infinite; and the Heaven of Heavens
cannot contain Him.

J.N. The Word was in the beginning, but Christ was in time, not till he had
taken Nature upon him, and became in the likeness of sinful Man, being born of
the Virgin Mary. -- Christ was not the Word before Christ was, page 50, 51.

Answ. This Assertion opposseth the Deity and Divinity of Jesus Christ, Of
Christ.
and contradicts the faithful Testimonies of the Holy men of God in the
Scriptures of Truth. For if the Son of God was not the Word, nor in the
Beginning, nor before the Virgin Mary, then Jesus Christ was not God, but is
represented as a finite Creature. But the Erroneousness of this is apparent,
for the Word was with (and was) God in the beginning, by which he created the
Heavens, and framed the Worlds, Joh. 1.1, 2, 3. Heb. 11.3. And that this Word
was Jesus Christ, is plain; seeing it is expressly said, God created all things
by Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 3.9. Yea, all things visible and invisible were created
by him, Col. 1. But if Jesus Christ, the Son of God, was not in being before he
took flesh in the womb of the Virgin (or was not before Mary) how could all
things be created by him? And Nebuchadnezzar was of a better belief than to
think that the Son of God was not in his time; for he said, Lo, I see four men
loose, walking in the midst of the fire, and they have no hurt; and the form of
the fourth is like the Son of God, Dan. 3.25. And was not this before Mary, or
Christ's outward-birth of her? All ye Baptists answer me, what Scripture had he
for that? And Christ is called the Wisdom and Power of God, 1 Cor. 1.24, 30.
And was not this He (the only begotten of the Father) that said, I was set up
from Everlasting? before the Earth? and when there was no Depths was I
begotten, before the Mountains were settled, and before the Hills was I begotten
(or brought forth) Prove. 8.23, 24, 25. And also see that Prophecy of Christ,
Mich. 5.2. Thou Bethlehem-Ephratah, though thou be little among the thousands
of Judah, yet out of thee shall He come forth unto Me, that is to be Ruler in
Israel, whose goings forth have been from of old, from everlasting: which
plainly proves the Eternity and Divinity of Jesus Christ, against such
Baptists, and Professors, as this our Opposer J. N. who also in his
Antichristian Doctrine of denying Christ to be the Word, or to be in the
beginning, has followed the steps of those old reputed Heretics mentioned in
the Ecclesiastical Chronography, viz. The Allogians, who denied Christ to be
the Word (as this J. N. has done) and of them it is said, See Eusebius. Soc. Ecc.
Ecc. Cro. fol. 572.
They condemned the Gospel after John, (who gave such a plain Testimony for the
Divinity of Jesus Christ, Joh. 1.) Also Theodatas denied the Divinity of
Christ, and he, it is said, was the first Author of that Heresy of Artemon, who
took Christ but for a bare and naked Man, which is like this Assertion, That
Christ was in time, not (the Word) in the beginning, nor till He became in the
likeness of Man, being born of Mary; which has also affinity with that of
Arrias, and his Sect, called Arrians; who said, That the Son of God had a
beginning of Essence, that there was a time that He was not: And does not J. N.
affirm as much, That there was a time when Christ was not, the Word was in the
beginning, not Christ: which is like also to that of Photinus, Bishop of
Sirmium, who (as its said) maintained the Heresy of Sabellius against Christ's
Divinity, and said, The Word was at the beginning with the Father, but not the
Son, Eccl. Chro. fol. 584. Soc. l. 2, c. 24. Ephiphan. Haeres. 71. Also several
others noted in History for Heretics held the like. Also if J. N. or the
Baptists, should use these words, as his Doctrine impor^s, when they Baptize (
viz.) I Baptize you in the Name of tne Uncreated God, in the Name of the Son
Created, etc. would they not then plainly appear like Eunomius, Bishop of
Cyzicum, teaching his Heirs ( viz.) That the Son was Created; as when he
Baptized all that came to him, In the Name of the Uncreated God, in the Name of
the Son Created, etc. Eccl. Chro. fol. 583. Now if John Newman did think to be
more Pop^lar, and gain Repute by this Piece, intended against the Quakers, he
will be frustrated of his end, when his Antichristian and corrupt Doctrines
come to be viewed in this Treatise, and the Baptists, and others, that have
owned him therein, may be ashamed of him, and his works; and it would be more
reputable and commendable for him and them all, to study to be quiet, and
charitable, to follow peace with all men, and not to revile the Light and
Christ within, as but a feigned Light, or Christ; nor to to oppose the Divinity
of Christ, the Son of God, as he has done.

J. N. His Names, Jesus Christ, are not attributed to his Godhead, but to his
Manhood; For his Name, Jesus, signifies a Savior; (...), Anointed; He was not
Jesus, or a Savior, as he was God, p. 51.65.

Answ. Though Jesus signifies a Savior, and Christ Anointed; yet to confine
those Names only to the Manhood, still agrees with the erroneous Doctrines
before, That Christ was not the Word from the beginning; whereas He took upon
him the Manhood in time; in which, though we own Him as the Anointed of God,
yet He was also God's Anointed as He was His only begotten, and delight, (and
so the Son from His Eternal Being or Substance) before the Mountains and Hills
were settled. Also J. N. (though to his own confutation) grants, That He was
the Son of God from the beginning, page 66, 67. (and the^ He was God's Anointed
from the beginning) But his saying, That He was not Jesus, or a Savior as He
was God, is still as gross and false Doctrine as the former, denying God to be
a Savior, which is contrary to plain Scripture. O God of Israel the Savior, a
Just God and a Savior, there is none besides me, see Isa. 45. And also this J.
N. notwithstanding he thinks he has proved his matter by Scripture elsewhere,
(wherein he would show himself some noted Divine) now he would show us what a
profound Logician, or Mr. of Arts he is, as if he would confirm his matter,
stop our mouths, and bind us down thereby with an invented Argument. His
Argument runs thus:

Argument.
If Christ as Christ was not from the beginning, then Christ was not the Word
from the beginning.

But Christ as Christ, was not from the beginning.

Therefore, etc. page 52.

Answer.

The first Proposition, in that it renders Christ and the Word both one,
contradicts himself in his denying Christ to be the Word. For, however it must
follow from this Argument, That Christ was, when the Word was. Christ being the
Word, and so the Word, Christ. So that, if the Word was from, and in the
beginning; then Christ was from the beginning; but the Word was from the
beginning, etc. And then this flatly contradicts his whole Assertion, and
proves it false, which with the pretended Reason thereof being not grounded
upon any general Rule, or Maxim, of either Truth, Scriptures, or Reason (as all
Arguments ought to be) but upon a mere Heretical Opinion that denies the
Divinity of Christ, in denying him to be from the beginning, either as Christ,
or as the Word. Now, does not this deny Christ's very being in the beginning,
and make way for that old Heretical Opinion, That Christ, or the Son of God,
was not in being before the Virgin Mary. But to give my Opposer his Due every
way, I judge he has outrun himself in this matter at unawares, for he has
(though to his own Confutation) confessed, That Christ was the Son of God from
the beginning; and was He not then the Anointed? For, if the Son, then the
Anointed; And his words ( Christ as Christ was not) supposes that He was in
some other capacity; yet his denying Him to be, either as Christ, or the Word,
from the beginning, is contrary to plain Scriptures. For, in the beginning was
the Word, and the Word was with God, etc. Joh. 1. And He was in the World, and
the World was made by Him, and the Word was made Flesh, and dwelt among us,
(speaking of Christ:) So that He was in the beginning the Word, and is still
Jesus Christ, the same yesterday, to day, and for ever.

J. N. This Word cannot be Christ, because it is here called the Seed by which
they were begotten in the New Birth, page 56.

Answ. See how contrary to plain Scriptures he reasons; for Christ is called
the Seed; unto which the Promises are, Gal. 3.16. And He is that Word, which
begets into the New Birth, and not the Letter; and this Seed is Living and
Incorruptible, though the Devil steals away the hearts of many from the sense
of the the Seed or Word of Life, as he has blinded the minds of Infidels, 2
Cor. 4.4.

J.N. Ministers are called Angels, Rev. 2. yet there is no Man that is an
Angel, p. 59.

Answ. Yes: If he be an Ambassador, Messenger, or Minister, he is an Angel.

J.N. Christ cannot dwell in Man, for Christ is perfect Man, as well as perfect
God, p. 61.

Answ. To say Christ cannot dwell in Man, does not only oppose His
Spirituality, Deity, and OMNIPOTENCY; but also is contrary to the Apostles
plain Testimonies of Christ's being in the Saints: And if He be perfect God, he
can dwell i^ His People as He has promised; and su^ely His being perfect Man,
does not put a limitation upon Him, as a let or hinderance, to disable Him from
being in His People, whilst He who was Christ, as come in the Flesh, was also
truly Jesus Christ within, in his Spi^itual appearance; and we do not confine
Him under this, or that particular Name. His Names are diverse in Scriptures,
according to His Manifestations, Offices, and Works: He is called Emmanuel, God
with us. Christ called by several Names.
He is called Jesus Christ; The Way; The Truth; The Light; The Life; The Seed;
The Son; The Everlasting Father; The Word; The Power of God; A Quickening
Spirit, etc.

J.N. Christ Jesus, after He rose, He was still a Body of Flesh;
[Contradiction] the Godhead took Flesh in the Womb of Mary; the Mystery of
Godliness, God manifest in Flesh, etc. page 52, 60, 63.

Answ. Christ Jesus was more than a body of flesh, for he was Spirit as well a^
flesh [He was Lord from Heaven.] Neither is Man made up simply of a body of
Flesh, being a complex or composition of parts, of Body, Soul, and Spirit.
Also, there is a manifest inconsistency between these words (He was still a
body of flesh] And [He took flesh, or was God manifest in flesh.]

J. N's Argument.
If he rose Jesus Christ, then he rose Flesh and Blood, and also Man.

But he arose Jesus Christ.

Therefore Flesh and Blood, etc. -- And he did ascend with the same body, and
is still at the right hand of God with a body of flesh, etc. p. 64, 65.
[Contradiction] As we have born the Image of the Earthly-man, so we are now to
bear the Image of the Heavenly, which is Christ Jesus, p. 89.

Answer.

Though I grant, That Christ arose with the same body that was Crucified and
put to Death, and that he ascended into Glory, Christ's Resurrection owned.
even the same Glory which he had with the Father before the World began; And
that the same that Descended, was the same that Ascended far above all Heavens,
Ephesians. 4. and Ascension.
And as Christ said, What and if ye see the Son of Man ascend up where he was
before? Joh. 6. Yet the Argument is fallaciously, and corruptly sta^ed, in the
manner of it; the Inference of the first Proposition, and so the Consequence
being inconsequent to it (carrying no proof along in it) for it still strictly
limits, or ties up the Name Jesus Christ to a body of flesh and blood, and so
covertly denies His being, before he took on him, that visible body of flesh,
blood, and bones, and so opposes his Divinity as before. Whereas He was the
Spiritual Rock which all Israel drank of long before. 1 Cor. 10.4.
And as to His being at the right hand of God, I grant according to the
Scriptures, but cannot believe His body to be a carnal body in Heaven, or that
He consists of a carnal existence. And further, these words are not the
Scripture language ( viz.) to say, That Christ is a body of flesh, blood, and
bones in Heaven, and a Personal being at the right hand of God, without all
Men, remote, as J. N's terms are. But these words [ Spiritual Body, Glorious
Bo^y, One Body, and One Spirit, and that the Saints discerned and ea^ the
Lord's Body, were Members of His Body, etc. And, except ye eat my Flesh, and
drink my Blood, you have no life in you, says Christ] These are Scripture
terms, and language; So neither is Christ, nor God's right hand, so limited to
a remoatness from them; And as we have born the Image of the Earthly-man, so we
must bear the Image of the Heavenly, which is Christ Jesus [this is true.] But
the definition that J. N. has given of Christ Jesus, the Heavenly Man, is,
That He is a body of flesh and blood, a personal being, not in man. From whence
it follows, That this Heavenly Image men must bear, or be changed into, is a
personal Image of flesh, blood, and bones; as if they had not such a body, or
Image before. Whereas the Heavenly man is spiritual, and so is His Image. And
the Apostle distinguishes between the Natural body and the Spiritual body; as
he does between the bodies that are Celestial, and the bodies Terrestrial, 1
Cor. 15. And further, to take off Objections and Scruples, I confess that
according to the Flesh, Jesus Christ came of the Seed of David, Christ's Body
real.
and the body that He took upon him, or that was prepared for him to do the
will of God in upon Earth, was a real [and not a fantastical] body, and that
according to the flesh He was put to death, or died for our sins according to
the Scriptures, and was buried, and rose again the third day, and was after
seen of the Disciples, and of above five hundred Brethren at once, and that He
was seen of James, then of all the Apostles, 1 Cor. 15. To which the Apostle
Paul adds, verse. 8. And last of all he was seen of me also, as of one born out
of due time. And how did he appear unto Paul? Even by Revelation; God revealed
his Son in him. It was the same Son of God, who appeared va^iously, (both
visibly and invisibly); after His Resurrection he appeared in various forms,
and showed Himself diversely: First to Mary Magdalen; 2dly, to other Women;
3dly, to the Disciples, as they went to Emaus; 4thly, to James; 5thly, to
Peter; 6thly, to the Apostles when the Doors were shut; 7thly, to more than
five hundred Brethren, as aforesaid: after he appeared to Thomas, when he said,
Reach hither thine hands, etc. Mat. 28. Mark 16. Luke 24. John 20. 1 Cor. 15.
Once he said to them, Handle Me, Luke 24.39. another time to Mary Magdalen
(when she thought him to be the Gardener) Touch Me not, Joh. 20.17. And it is
said, Luke 24.30, 31. as he sat at meat with them, He took bread and blessed
and brake it, and gave to them, and their eyes were open, and they knew Him,
and He vanished out of their sight. Now seeing that he appeared so diversely,
being capable by the mighty Power of God, to be changed beyond the reach of
man's natural reason; for any to show themselves so nice, curious, and
intruding in these matters, with unscriptural and unlearned Questions, or
presumptuous Assertions, to show themselves wise above what is written, as many
of these forward Baptists have done; they cannot therein be gratified, for both
their foolish, and unlearned Questions are to be avoided, and they may be
answered as the Angel did to the Devil, when he disputed about the body of
Moses, The Lord rebuke thee, etc. And as the Apostle did those fools who
enquired, what body the dead are raised with, 1 Cor. 15.35, 36, 37. And it is
manifest hypocrisy in Men, to pretend the Scripture to be their Rule, when
they will not keep to the terms and language thereof: But at a public Dispute
between some of Us and some Baptists, at Chersey in Surry, when a Question
about the body of Christ in Heaven, was ignorantly obtruded by W. Burnet, his
Brother Jer. Ives [in Answer to my treating of Christ's various Appearances
after He rose] said, What change or alteration His body might have, We cannot
determine, nor what glory He is in; for to enquire with what body the dead are
raised, is absurd, etc. Yet for all this, how apt are many of them to urge
their unlearned Questions in these matters, notwithstanding the great Confusion
and vain Imaginations that many Professors have fallen into, through their
unlearned Questions, and perverse Disputes, about the Body of Christ. If t^is
were considered, it might be some stop to them from ^uch intruding, as, How He
appeared among the Disciples when the Doors were shut? Some of the Professors
have said, It might be, that He came in at the Chimney top. Others, Professors
Confusion about the Body.
It might be, He glyded in at the Keyhole of the Door. Others, That He might
come in at the Door, and hold their eyes in the mean time, that they could not
see when He opened it: And because flesh and blood cannot inherit the Kingdom
of Heaven, many Professors have said, That Christ's Body in Heaven, is a body
of flesh and bones, without blood in it. And also, some of the Priests have
affirmed Christ to be in Heaven with a carnal body. But these are all
unscriptural Suppositions, and Imaginations of vain minds; who neither know the
Scriptures, nor the Power of Godliness, nor the Mysteries of Christ, or his
Image revealed within; but by their corruptions, and perverting Scripture,
endeavor to shut both God and Christ out of his People, and so to confine and
limit the Holy One (who is not to be limited) as this J. N. does.

J.N. If he (Jesus Christ) be with the Father, then he is not in Man; -- a
feigned Christ, and Light within, page 47, 66, 72. [Contradiction] Let your
Conversation be in Heaven, from whence we look for a Savior.

Answ. Why? Does His being with the Father, or at His right hand in Heaven,
hinder Him from being in his People? This is a gross Error, and contrary to
plain Scripture, 2 Cor. 13. Know you not, how that Jesus Christ is in you,
except ye be Reprobates; and this is neither a feigned Christ, nor a feigned
Light, as blasphemously and scornfully he words it. And what does J.N. think or
imagine concerning God His right hand and being? Of God's right hand.
And Christ at God's right hand, that he thus would exclude, limit, and seem to
confine them out of all men? Does not this oppose the Infiniteness and
Omnipresence of God, and Jesus Chri^^^, and bring them under the limitation of
finite creatures? an^ (...) their Deity; whereas Christ ascended far above all
Heav^^^, that he might fill all things, Ephesians. 4. And He being the exp^^^s Image
of his Fathers substance. Now if God, and his right hand be so carnally thought
on, under such a limitation as before, Wherein does J.N. and his Brethren
differ from those old Heretics. Andaeus, Eusebius. Eccl. Chro. fol. 584, 588.
and the Anthropomorphites (as they are called) who were Monks that Inhabited
the Deserts of Egypt, who thought that God had a body, and was like a Man in
shape; misconstruing that saying, Let US make Man after Our Image, etc. Upon
whose gross Opinion it rose, That God has been painted like an Old Man with a
gray beard, etc. As also, the late blasphemous Dreamers, Reeve and Mugleton,
[who have named themselves the two last Witnesses] have affirmed God to be of
the form, bigness, and stature of a Man, and so having hands and parts of a
Man, and Christ (as such) at his right hand, they denying God to be an infinite
Spirit: But against all such carnal gross conceits We testify, and confess to
God's Infiniteness, and Christ's Ascension, both into Heaven, and far above all
Heavens, that He might fill all things; and that God both dwells, and walks in
his People, and his right hand of Power is where he is, and Christ there
inseparably with [and in] the Father; His being so Anointed, Dignified, and
Exalted, does not exclude Him out of His People, whose Conversation is also
with him in Heaven. And David said, O thou that savest by thy right hand them
which put their trust in thee, and thy right hand has holden me up, Psalm.
17.7. and 18.35. and 20.6. and 60.5. and 63.8. and 73.23. So that neither the
Infinite God, nor his Son, nor his Right hand of strength can be circumscribed,
or limited into a separation, or remoteness from the Children of the Light,
who are saved by the right hand of God, whose Hand and Power is spiritual.

J. N. From Rev. 1.7. Those that pierced him in his body of flesh, shall see
that body visibly come again.

Answ. These are not the words of Scripture, but added; although, to add or
diminish be forbidden under a penalty, Rev. 22.18, 19. yet this man's
presumption leads him to incur that: See also for Answer to him, Rev. 1.7, 8.
and 13.14, 16. In none of which is Jesus Christ either called (or represented
as) a body of flesh, blood, and bones, visibly to come again; but that he is
Alpha and Omega, the first and the last, verse. 11. And Christ in the days of
his flesh (wherein he visibly appeared to the World) said, Yet a little while
and the World sees me no more, Joh. 14.19. Of Christ his second coming.
But his second Coming and Appearance without sin to Salvation, I own and
witness; and that he is therein to be seen spiritually in his Kingdom, Heb.
9.28. Matthew. 16.27. Luke 9.26.
and Father's Glory (which is an invisible Glory, not seen carnally) [mark
that] Howbeit his Appearance shall be universally seen, both to the joy of the
Righteous, and universal conviction and condemnation of the wicked, who have
rejected his Light within, and his saving Appearance thereby made manifest.
Yea, every Eye shall see him (both of good and bad) both those that have waited
for his second Coming without sin to Salvation; and they also which have
pierced or crucified him; which all those in general are chargeable with (as
really as his Persecutors that pierced him outwardly) who profess his Name,
Heb. 6.6.
and yet Crucify to themselves his Life, or spiritual Appearance. He was
spiritually pierced and crucified in spiritual Sodom and Egypt. Revel. 11.8.
-- And this sin, you carnal conceited Professors and Hypocrites are guilty of,
who despise him and his Light within, Joh. 3.19, 20, 21. Job 24.13.
counting them a feigned Christ, and a feigned Light within, as this our
Opposer has blasphemously done; but the same Jesus, as he was seen ascend,
(when a cloud received him out of their sight who stood gazing, Acts 1.9, 10,
11.) it is said, shall so come in like manner, etc. which though every like
manner is not the very same, nor all clouds the same, yet the same Jesus
certainly comes, and in like manner, his coming being in the clouds: Behold,
he comes with clouds; and you shall see him to your sorrow, who talk of his
Name and Coming, and yet depart not from Iniquity; for out of his mouth
proceeds a sharp two-edged Sword, Rev. 1.16. to cut you down with all your
Hypocrisy, carnal conceits, and feigned Profession of Christ, without the
sense of his Power, Life, or Light within.

J.N. Hope to the end, for the grace that shall be brought to light at the
revelation of Christ; and this revelation will be from Heaven, not in man, page
71.

Answ. This Inference and Conclusion is false, and contrary to the Apostles
plain Testimony. For as whatsoever might be known of God, is manifest within;
So the Revelation of Jesus Christ the Son of God, is within, to the true
believers in his Light: And no man knows the Son, but the Father; neither
knows any man the Father save the Son, and he to whom the Son will reveal
him; And God revealed his Son in Paul, Gal. 1.16. his Glory was to be revealed
in the Believers and Sufferers for Christ. And surely, as they hoped, looked,
or waited in the measure of Grace or Light received for the Revelation,
Appearance, or second Coming of Christ to Salvation in their days, their hope
and expectation therein was not void, nor they disappointed thereof; as theirs
is like to be, who are expecting that Christ's second Coming, or Appearance to
Salvation will be a Personal Coming, and his Reign a Personal Reign; which word
[Personal] they add to the Scripture, and to the Book of the Prophecy of John;
to wit, the Revelation; not truly minding the penalty they incur by adding, as
mentioned, Rev. 22. And so where they add the word [Personal] or [in Person] to
his Coming again; [or Personal being, etc.] do they not herein show their
carnal expectations, mean thoughts, and unscriptural conceptions touching
Christ, his Divine Life, Being, and coming to Salvation? And their knowledge
not to be divine, nor after the Spirit? For where does the Scripture say, That
Christ shall come the second time in Person to save? Or, that he shall Reign in
Person, or Personally Reign? etc. [But about this Point, and several other
things, Baptists do not accord, and other Proffesions also are divided.] And so
likewise some imagine, That the new Jerusalem (Prophesied of, that should come
down from Heaven) must be some ou^ward City or Place, consisting of fair
buildings outwardly; and so might they not as well imagine of the Temple
thereof, that it is some fair outward structure? whereas the Lord God, and the
Lamb, is the Temple and Light thereof; and the Nations of them that are saved,
shall walk in the Light of this holy City.

J. N. By denying any personal being of Christ without all men at the right
hand of God, but only a feigned Christ within; then Remission of sins must die,
and Faith also, for want of the object Christ, p. 73, and 74.

Answ. This manner of excluding God's right hand, and Christ to a limitation
out of his People in a personal being (which are no Scripture terms) still
implies him to be a Personal God or Christ: like the Anthropomorphites and
Muggletonian's conceits of Him. And J.N. his scornfully and blasphemously
calling Christ and his Light within, a feigned Christ; not owning Jesus Christ
within as the object of Faith. This is both contrary to the true Faith and its
Righteousness, and savours not of any real knowledge of Christ, in this
scornful man. For the true Faith, and its object or foundation, are
inseparable; see 2 Cor. 13.5. Examine your selves, whether ye be in the Faith:
Prove your selves: Know you not your own selves, how that Jesus Christ is in
you, except ye be Reprobates. So that their knowledge and proof of their being
in the Faith, was their knowledge of Jesus Christ in them, as their foundation,
etc. and this was not a feigned Christ, and in him the Remission of sins is
known, to them that are in the Faith. Paul was sent to turn the Gentiles from
darkness to the Light, and from the power of Satan to God, that they might
receive the remission of sins, and an inheritance among them that are
Sanctified. And this was the Light of Christ within. And the Righteousness
which is of Faith, speaks in this wise, Say not in thine heart, who shall
ascend into Heaven (that is, to bring Christ down from above) or who shall
descend into the Deep (that is, Romans 10. Deuteronomy. 30.14.
to bring up Christ again from the Dead) But what says it? The Word is nigh
thee, etc. (yea, very nigh thee.) Mark, The Righteousness of Faith does not
shut Christ the Word (or object of Faith) out of the hearts of true Believers;
but the Word of Faith is nigh, even in the heart, etc. And we know the Power of
God, and true Remission thereby, is inwardly felt by all the Children of the
Light; and that Living Faith that stands in the Power, and Word of God within
shall not die, nor be void; nor miss of its blessed end, which is Salvation.

J.N. ^he Spirit of God, I my self own, and daily pray for: The same Spirit I
own, though not distinct from the Scriptures: They cannot be separated one from
the other in their Nature and Purity, p. 91, 94, 1.10.

Answ. Are the Scriptures and the Spirit inseparable? and yet thou have the
Spirit daily to pray for, when thou have the Scriptures. What Confusion is
this? Whereas, if they be inseparable, it follows, that all ^^at have the
Scriptures, must necessarily have the Spirit also; which is false, for the
unbelieving Jews, who had Scriptures, and thought to have had Eternal Life in
them (like such as you, who make them the ground of your Faith and Assurance)
yet they would not come to Christ that they might have Life. Also, where thou
affirmest, The Scripture and the Spirit cannot be separated one from another in
their nature and purity: This is all one as to say, The Scriptures are as
incorruptible as the Spirit; which is a gross Error, and contradicted by thy
self, in thy 104, 105, 106 page where thou have granted, That Abel, Enoch,
Abram, Isaac, Jacob, Noah, etc. had a sufficient Rule before the Scriptures
were written, (viz.) The Spirits Rule; God's Speaking and Directions to them
from his own mouth; and that they had a more infallible Word to walk by, than
is now to us; for it is possible, that some Scriptures may be corrupte^, having
been in the hands of corrupted men, etc. Thus far thou J. N. have confuted thy
self, and manifestly broke the neck of thy own Cause: -- First, in that thou
have confessed to a more infallible Rule, or Word, than the Scriptures; so that
the Scriptures are not the only Rule, nor yet the ground of Faith and
Assurance, as often thou have falsely misrepresented them. 2dly. In that the
Scriptures might be corrupted, they are not inseparably one with the Spirit in
Nature and Purity. 3dly. Thou having granted, That the Directions, or Word the
Ancients had from God's own mouth, was impossible that should be corrupted, p.
106. From whence it follows, That the immediate Word and Directions of God, are
the only infallible Rule (in all such as receive them) and not the Scriptures,
which might be corrupted, as is confessed.

But whereas thou say, The New Testament Letter that now is, is to be our
Rule, p. 103. And often say, The Scriptures are the only Rule of Faith for
all men to walk by, unto the end of t^^ World, and none other, etc.

Herein thou have set the Letter or Writing above the Spirit and its immediate
Directions from God, contrary to what thou have acknowledged; as if thou
would now place all Rule upon the Letter, and leave no room for that which
thou have confessed to be more infallible: and thus thou art found shuffling,
saying and unsaying, reeling to and fro, like a man drunk in Confusion; For,
though many times wherein thou have granted to truth, contrary to thy own
corrupt Principle, thou do not keep to it, but turnest round again to thy own
Confusion, which in the tenor of it runs thus, viz.

The Letter is the only Rule for all men to the Worlds and, nay, the Rule of
the Spirit, or immediate Word, which the Ancients had before the Scriptures
were written, was a more infallible Rule than the Scriptures, for they might be
corrupted. But to go round again, They cannot be separated in their Nature and
Purity, etc. Is it not easy to see here, what a labyrinth of Confussion and
self-Contradictions thou art run into, who have presumed to confute others,
though to thy own final Confutation. -- And seeing thou pretendest to pray for,
and own the Spirit of Truth in its help or work (as thou say) in the Word;
Do tho^ mean that the Spirit is in the Scriptures, not distinct from them?
Or, That it cannot be separated from the Letter, according to thy words before?
What then, Do thou think that the Spirit is essential in the Writing? and
so, that all that have the Scriptures, must needs have the Spirit? as it
follows from thy own words; whereas there is a multitude of Examples to the
contrary, even in this Age and Nation, of both many Hypocrites, and empty
Professors, and others, who are not led by the true Spirit, and yet have the
Scriptures? As also thou thy self, who professest the Scripture to be thy only
Rule, yet art found in Confusion and Error, which God is not the Author of, not
yet his Spirit, and what Scripture have thou that says these words, viz. The
New Testament Letter is to be our Rule? Produce plain Scripture for these
words, and it shall end the Controversy; or otherwise be ashamed of professing
the Scriptures thy only Rule, when thou will not be ruled by them, but presume
to assert what thou can not prove therein.

And yet for all thy high Assertions and Titles put upon the Scriptures, thou
have confessed, That another Foundation can no man lay, than that which is
already laid, which is Christ Jesus, 1 Cor. 3.11. But, have not thou often
essayed to have laid another Foundation for Faith and Assurance, even the
Scriptures, or the Letter? yet know not but that they may be corrupted; what
an implicit Faith would thou beget all People into, of that which thou can
give no infallible demonstration of. If thou should thus preach to the Jews,
Turks, or Infidels, and tell them the Scrip^ures, or Letter of the New
Testament, must be their only Rule for Salvation, as thou say it must be for
all men to the Worlds end; and then should tell them that corrupt men (for
ought thou know) have corrupted the Scriptures: What Conviction think
thou would this work upon them? and how would it answer either that Light or
Reason that is in them? and whilst thou seem not to own the immediate
teaching of God, or his Spirit, now for the Rule, but the New Testament Letter,
or Scriptures, only; How came thou by thy Faith concerning them? And if thou
meanest That the Doctrines contained in the New Testament, are the Rule, and
not the Letter abstractively, then how shall a man know these Dostrines, and
which do particularly relate to his state and condition? seeing there are
diversities of states written to? Do not many misapply them, whilst they place
the Rule only in the literal Prescriptions, and do not begin in the Spirit,
which gave forth the wholesome Doctrines in Scripture? which Spirit is still
sufficient to lead into all Truth, and does immediately teach the same
wholesome Doctrines; and now, though every wholesome Direction, or Doctrine
prescribed, may admit of the term [A Rule] as it is rightly received; which
thing I granting, I thereby do no more grant the Scriptures to be the only
Rule, than that they are the only Word, because I grant that words of God are
recorded in them. For, to say the Scripture-Letter or Writing is the only Rule
of Faith for all, is a gross mistake, and excludes the immediate Teachings,
Rule, and Law of the Spirit (which every spiritual mind is led by) and supposes
no true Faith, but what the Letter or Writing is the Ground or Rule of; whereas
it can be but an historical traditional and implicit faith, that is merely
founded upon Tradition and Letter, and not Spirit; or, that that is without the
divine and immediate Illumination of the S^irit without, which is no Divine
Faith, but men's Knowledge, Faith and Religion, are all but traditional,
literal, and lifeless; for in the true Knowledge of the Scriptures there must
be an immediate reflection of Divine Light upon the Understanding from that
Infallible Spirit which they were Ministers of, who could truly distinguish
between the Ministration of the Spirit, and that of the Letter, which thou have
not done, p. 104. who say the Scriptures of the New Testament are the
Spirits New Administration: from whence it follows, that all that can preach
those Scriptures, are Ministers of the Spirit or New Testament; whereas many
both can re^d and preach them literally, who are yet but Ministers of the
Letter, and never knew the immediate and living Administration of the Spirit
from which the true Ministers preached, who immediately were commissioned, and
whose Gospel came not in word only, but in Spirit and in Power, it having the
immediate evidence of the Spirit in it from God, which the Letter or outward
writing has not, for it is directed and given to us traditionally; though I
intend no invalidating of it hereby, but do oppose that spirit and doctrine
which sets it out of its place, that calls the Letter the Only Rule for
Salvation, and so leaves no room for the Immediate Teachings of God's Spirit
or Light, as the Rule in these days: Which is the old defign and work of
Antichrist, which thou ( J. N.) and others of thy Brethren are carrying on, to
keep people in blindness, in a dark faith under your tr^ditional teachings, who
can give no certain demonstration for the ground of your Faith; and yet thou
have granted the Spirit to be more virtuous and greater than the Letter, p.
112. Enough to confute thy opinion of the Scriptures being the only Rule, for
now the Spirit is greater. But then again thou tellest us, The sufficiency of
the Saints Rule and Guid^, stands in the Spirit and Scripture both; For
(say thou) they cannot be separated in their Nature, Purity, etc. p. 110. At
if thou would not freely grant the Spirit's sufficiency without the
Scriptures, or to those that have them not; but seem to limit, or tie up the
Spirit to the Scripture, as being inseparable in their Nature and Purity, as if
the Nature of the Writing were ^he Nature of the Spirit, and equally Pure with
it; whereas the Spirit cannot be corrupted, and its R^le is more infallible
than the Scriptures, according to thy own Confession: and also thou have
confessed, That in all Dispensations God never left his People without a word
of Direction, either written, or immediately from his own mouth, p. 106, and
110. So that here it appears, some had immediate Directions from God who had
not the letter; and so may many now for ought thou know, for God is not
limited, though thou would limit his Spirit and the Saints to the letter;
as if none were Saints and Believers but who had the Scriptures (Oh! Ignorance)
and yet thou have confessed, That the Spirit is of more efficacy and greater
than the Letter, p. 110, and 112. How then is the Letter the only Rule? And I
ask, Is that Word the Scriptures, or Letter, which thou say Christians are
nursed with the sincere Milk of? Does Milk flow from Letter, or Spirit? And is
the nourishment of the newborn Babes (1 Pet. 2.2.) the Letter? Or, are none
true Babes but who have the Letter? What ignorance, narrowness, and pinching
work art thou found in, who have so tied up all to and in the Letter? -- as
Spirit, only Rule, sincere Milk, Wellspring of Comforts, etc. And yet grants,
p. 115. That the Spirit is the Key of Divine Knowledge; which overthrows thy
work about the Scriptures, in thy setting them out of their place; As also to
the Query, p. 117. Whether the Spirit that gave forth the Scriptures, be a
sufficient Rule and Guide? To this thou answerest, viz. Who is so ignorant as
to deny the sufficiency of God's Spirit? If thou do not deny it, Why do
thou go about to tie up all men (to the Worlds end) unto the Scriptures as the
only Rule, when now thou do not deny the Spirits sufficiency as Rule and
Guide, nor dare thou assert the Scriptures sufficient without the Spirit,
though thou grantest, That the Spirit is sufficient apart from the Scriptures
(which thou call ^^e Word) page 118. Then the Scriptures are not the only
Rule, the Spirit being the Key of divine Knowledge; the sufficient Rule above
the Scriptures, and greater than they. As,

Also, in page 116. thou confessest, That there are secrets and private
discoveries that God makes to the Soul by his blessed Spirit, which are not
manifest to any but to the heart that does enjoy it. These secrets are to those
that fear him, etc. Where note, That these secrets and private discoveries, are
not manifest to all that have the Scriptures, but to those that fear God. 2d.
That they are not made manifest, or revealed by the Letter, or Scripture,
outward; but by the blessed Spirit inward, unto the heart and soul that fears
God, or has Communion with him in his own Light, Life, and Spirit, which is
greater and above the Letter.

Again, A further Confutation to thy self, appears page 108. where thou
grantest in the best sense, That the Spirit is the Rule in its own
Administration. To which I say, This still confutes thy work, for that
Administration is immediately and inwardly received from the Spirit, which in
the best sense is the Rule; and this Spirit being the greatest, all wholesome
Doctrines, Teachings and Directions are contained, and summed up in it; and so
the Scriptures of Truth are not hereby made void (though not the only Rule) but
fulfilled in them who walk after the Spirit or Rule of the New Creature; for,
if you walk in the Spirit, then are you not under the Law; and they begun well,
who begun in the Spirit. But whereas thou turnest ^ound again, tying up the
Spirits Rule to this, viz. Doctrine and Teaching delivered in words also
written in Scriptum est (say thou) [As also, that the word Regeneration
signifies twice born; to wit, both after the flesh, and from a state of sin;
whereas (...), to regenerate, is to beget again, not after the flesh.] Here Thy
Divinity and Scholarship may both go together, for where the Rule of the Spirit
thou limittest to the Writing, how consists this with the Spirits sufficiency
to them that have not the Scripture, or to its sufficiency apart or alone? But
it is no strange thing for thee, and such, to be found in such manifest self
Contradictions. -- However thou would have us take notice that thou art both
a Divine and a Scholar. And thy saying, That Christ cannot be a Rule for any
man in his Personal being, p. 94. What makes this for thy purpose? May it not
be here employed, that he has a spiritual being? and that he can be, and is a
Rule in it to his People, as He is their Way to walk in? And, where have thou
these words, Personal being, in thy Rule? Is the Essence or Being of the Son of
God, Personal? Was not his Being Divine, before his Incarnation or Appearance
in Person? But thou appearest as ignorant, both what Essence (or Being) is, and
what Person is, which are different.

Again, Thou appearest as grossly mistaking the state of the Controversy, where
thou say, viz. What if my Spirit lead me to Mahomets Rule? Or if my Spirit
persuade me to believe the Popes mouth to be infallible? etc.

Now it is not thy Spirit that may thus egregiously mislead thee, that we are
pleading for the Rule of, but it is the infallible Spirit of Truth which gave
forth the Scriptures; neither is thy Assertions concerning the Scriptures, any
valid Plea or Argument to convince either Turks or Papists, who are both out of
the Truth, and the Spirit of it; and neither of them owning the Scriptures as
we have them; and never like to be Converted by such shallow Contenders, and
impertinent Preachers as thou art. And as for the Law and the Testimony thou
speak of, page 125. they are yet unknown to thee; for the Law is Light, and
the Testimony of Jesus Christ is the Spirit of Prophecy, Prove. 6.23. Rev.
19.10. which were before the Scriptures.

And, How are Spirits to be tried, as John exhorted, 1 John 4.12. To this thou
say,

The holy Touchstone by which they are to be tried, is that golden Rule by
which the noble Bereans tried the Doctrine of Paul, even the Scriptures, to
know by what Spirit he spoke. And then thou addest, By this we shall know the
Spirit of Truth from the spirit of Error, and not to prove a Spirit by a Spirit
within. -- From whence thou observest, That that Spirit which will not be tried
by the Scriptures, is the Spirit of Antichrist, p. 125.

Answ. What gross Ignorance, Error, and perverting the Scriptures have thou
herein showed thy self guilty of! For first, Where provest thou in all the Rule
(thou pretendest) That the Scriptures are the Touchstone and golden Rule to try
the Spirits by? Produce us plain Scripture for this thy Doctrine, or else
confess thy Error. 2dly. The trial of Spirits is more mysteri^us than merely
the trying of Doctrines, by comparing them with Scriptures; for many false
Spirits bring Scripture, who are not discerned to be such without the Spirit of
God, which searches all things. 3dly. John did not say, That the Scriptures
were the Touchstone, by which they were to try the Spirits, whether they were
of God; But he says plainly, These things have I written unto you, concerning
them that seduce you; but the Anointing, which you have received of Him,
abides in you, and ye need not that any man teach you, but as the same
Anointing teaches you of all things, etc. 1 John 2.20, 26, 27. Now then, the
trial of Spirits being ^uch a weighty thing, which they were concerned in; this
Unction in them was the Touchstone, and that is the Spirit of Antichrist that
opposes this. 4thly. The Scripture does not say, That the Bereans tried Paul's
Spirit by the Scriptures, but that they received the Word with all readiness of
mind, (mark that) and searched the Scriptures daily whether those things were
so, Acts 17. It is not said, They searched them to try Paul's Spirit by them;
for their receiving the Word with all readiness of mind, implies some good
belief they had of the Spirit in Paul by which he preached; And when they had
received the Word, they daily searched the Scriptures (not with prejudice
against the true Ministers, or Light within, as many of you do) [but simply] to
see whether those things were so: Now this kind of searching them we own; the
Word being received within, which gives the understanding of the Scriptures.

And as for thy scoffing at the word Pure Seed, calling it, New-coyned without
Book, etc. page 97. And thy saying, Which Seed we vainly say is Christ begotten
in us, etc. p. 98.

Thou have scofft herein without any ground, and thereby discovered thy own
folly; For, Is not the Incorruptible Seed a pure Seed? and does not the Apostle
call the Seed Christ? Gal. 3.16. And is not Christ in the true Believer where
the Body is dead because of sin? But thou that so nicely carps at words, as
pure Seed, which is Christ within, as being without Book; what Scripture or
Book thereof have thou for thy calling the Scriptures the only Rule for
Salvation for all men* to the Worlds end, and no other; the Touchstone, the
golden Rule, to try or know the Spirit of Truth from the Spirit of Error, the
ground of Faith, etc. Produce plain Scripture for these words, or else confess
thy Error, who so ex^ctly pretendest the Scripture thy Rule, how do thou
square thy work by it? and what Rule can thou produce for us to believe thou
speak truth, when thou give those Characters of the Scriptures, which are
not to be produced in them? And was not the end of Paul's laboring with the
Jews, to turn them from Darkness to the Light within? which thou contemptuously
callst a pretended Spirit, p. 127. Was his persuading them to believe in
Christ, in opposition to his Light within? surely no: but all in order to turn
them to his Spirit, or Light within. But thou have confessed, his persuading
them, was concerning the Kingdom of God, to teach them to believe on the Name
of Jesus, and direct them to the Kingdom of God: see how manifestly thou art
here Contradicted by thy own words; for, was not the Kingdom of God within?
Luke 17.21. And the Name of Jesus, and its Power thou see not, who have
vilified His Light within; and the Scriptures thou citest are against thee, as
that of Romans 9, 10, 11, Chap. for, both the Righteousness, the Word of Faith,
and Grace, were inward and spiritual. Again, To prove that the Scriptures make
manifest the Righteousness of God, thou citest Romans 1.17. which is thy gross
abuse of that Scripture; for it says, that I am not ashamed of the Gospel of
Christ, for it is the Power of God unto Salvation; and therein is his
Righteousness revealed from Faith to Faith, etc. It is not said, the Scriptures
are the Power of God; for the Power of God, or Gospel, was preached to Abraham
before the Scriptures were written.

And to thy saying, Faith has a holy End, which it leads to, even the
Salvation of Souls, not now in man, but at the last day, when our bodies shall
be raised out of the dust, p. 123.

And where provest thou this Doctrine? Is not the Soul in man? And is not its
Salvation deliverance and safety from sin, wrought within by the Power and Arm
of God? How do thou essay to frustrate the End of the true Faith, which is
Salvation, whilst thou say, It leads to the Salvation of Souls, not now in
man; but at the last day, when our bodies shall be raised out of the dust? And
when think thou shall that be? Must all the S^ints have their Hope,
Expectation, and Faith for Salvation of their Souls unanswered till then? what
is become of their Souls all this while, since their decease, if they have not
received the End of their Faith, to wit, Salvation in them? Surely, thou art
yet in the dust, and death and da^kness have power over thy mind or else thou
would never show thy self such an ignorant Papist as here thou have done; for
thou have (though at unawares) run thy self into rank Popery, putting Salvation
of Souls so far off, till thou know not when, according to thy earthly and
carnal conceits, which thou would have us believe for gracious Truths, which
thou say, Quakerism does not own, unless in a Mystery, to deceive, But this
is not thy first slanderous Conclusion against the Quakers, who only oppose the
graceless Errors and Absurdities of thee, and such blind insolent Opposers, who
oppose the Light within, and the power of Godliness, as thou ( J. N.) have
manifestly done.

And now J. N. here follows a few of thy gross Lies and slanderous Accusations
laid down and employed against us, which I return back upon thy own head.
1. THat nothing that is of man, shall at the last be saved, but only the Pure
Seed. This is a gross abuse; for the Redemption, Re^toration, and Salvation of
the whole man, we own.

2. False it is, That our Family Preaches and Printeth down the Scriptures,
and the Commands of Christ, as Carnal etc.

3. False it is, That the Scripture is not to be owned by Saints.

4. False it is, That they bid People turn to a feigned and pretended Light, or
Spirit within.

5. False it is, That our Family does use the Scripture but as a Cloak, to
carry on a design of darkness, when we own the Scripture in its proper place.

6. False it is, That the proper place of Scripture, is but to stand by us as a
Stalking-Horse.

7. A malicious slander it is, To charge us as crafty Fowlers, with shooting
the simple Soul through by deceitful darts.

8. False it is, That we cast behind our backs, all the Order and Discipline of
the Primitive Churches of our Lord and Master. For the Worship in Spirit, and
the Living Way, which Christ set up and Consecrated, we Testify to, and for.

9. We do not make use of either God's Word or Scriptures in hypocrisy; as
most slanderously is employed against us.

10. And that of b^inging a mist and fog upon the Scripture, out of the
bottomless Pit, and bringing it to such a low rate by Evasions and
Contradictions. These things ( J. N.) thou, and such peevish sl^nderers, are
guilty of (and not we); as thy work and self-Contradictions sufficiently have
discovered.

11. A gross and manifest slander it is, That we will not own the Man Christ to
be risen.

12. False it is, That we own not a Rising (or Resurrection of the the Dead,
etc.) at the last ^ay, according to the Scrip^ures. Though not according to the
unscriptural conceits of some busy Intrude^s or Fools, who now (as formerly)
are contending and asking, How are the Dead raised, and with w^^t body do they
come? 1 Cor. 15.35, 36, 37.

13. And as to these dreadful Opinions and Delusions of not owning an Eternal
Life, etc. of drawing all the glory, after this life, into a present enjoyment;
and in this life to make an end of all our happiness, etc. These are none of
our Opinions, nor ever owned as Principles among us, but judged as Atheistical;
and therefore are most injuriously and falsely drawn (or inferred) against us.

But I have heard of some of the Baptists that have held the Mortallity of the
Soul, that it dies with the body, etc. 14. Also a false Inference it is against
us, That the Grave will be the farthest Journey that man shall go toward
Eternal Life.

For as touching the Righteous or Ransomed of the Lord, who believe in his
Light within, they own and witness to an Immortal state, and receive Power in
Him, who is the Resurrection and the Life, over Death, Hell, and the Grave: And
as we do own a Resurrection both of the just and unjust, according to the
Scriptures, and that each shall have rewards according to their works; so
neither Death, nor Hell, nor Grave, nor Earth, nor Sea, shall detain or keep
back the wicked from their just rewards and punishments due for their Iniquity,
Rebellion, and Transgressions, who have rejected the Light within, and hated to
be Reformed: For there is a Lake of perpetual torment for the Devil and wicked
men; for the Beast and false Prophet (that War against the Lamb [the Light] and
his followers) for such as receive his Mark, and such as are not found written
in the Book of Life, Rev. 19.20. and 20.10. to the end. Yea, and further it is
said, That the Fearful, and Unbelieving, and the Abominable, and Murderers, and
Whoremongers, and Sorcerers, and Idolaters, and all Liars, shall h^ve their
part in the Lake, which burns with Fire and Brimstone, which is the second
Death, Rev. 21.8. Wherefore J. N. and thy Brethren, take heed how you go on in
your Envy, Lies, and Slanders against an innocent People; but Repent, repent,
of your wickedness therein, which hitherto diverse of you have often appeared
in, in ^our malicious Spirits: But the Lord will sweep away your Refuge of
Lies, and Slanders; and he knows how to deliver the Godly out of temptations,
and to reserve the Unjust unto the day of Judgment to be punished, 2 Pet. 2.9.

And whereas thou J. N. chargest us with dreadful Delusion, as bringing all to
an invisible state, -- all within man; and that there is no visible God, no
visible Christ, etc. p. 133.

Answ. Dreadful Delusion is without any proof against us, -- its thy own, who
opposest the invisible state, and inward enjoyment of God, who is invisible;
and that which may be known of God is manifest within: And what Rule in
Scripture have thou for these words [ visible God, visible Christ, etc.] Here
thou have not squared thy Work by the Rule thou pretendest; for, is not Christ
the Image of the Invisible God, Col. 1.15. -- And did not Moses by Faith see
him that is Invisible, when he had respect unto the recompense of Reward, Heb.
11. And is not that recompense of reward ( viz. Eternal Life, Peace, and
Felicity) inwardly and spi^itually received, by those that patiently now suffer
for Christ; whose sufferings of the present time, are not to be compared unto
the Glory that shall be revealed in them, Romans 8.18. But thou that art so
carnally imagining, and thus shutting out the weighty things of Salvation out
of man, and like the old Heretic^l Egyptian Monks, (the Anthropomorphites, and
late Muggletonians) art telling of a visible God, and Christ remote, not in
any; and despising the Light within as but feigned: What could we expect better
from ^hee than such darkness, ignorance, and confusion, as has appeared in
this thy malicious, irrational Book against the Light within; and the Children,
or Family of Light, called Quakers, against neither of whom have thou urged any
reason or validity, so as to disaffect any that are unprejudiced against us,
but the more against thy self and them that will own thee. -- Wherefore my
advice and caution to all that are simply-minded, who read this, that they
seriously mind and follow the Light and Unction from the Holy-One within, that
thereby their minds may be kept out of prejudice and enmity, and over and out
of the perverse ways of imaginary conceited, dark and prejudiced spirits, who
pervert the Scriptures, and deride at the Light within, and abuse the Children
of it, as thou have done: But the Truth is set over thy head, and all those of
thy Fraternity, whose spirits the Devil has inveterately set against that,
which you shall one day know will be too strong and mighty for you.

Now unto the King Eternal, Immortal, Invisible, the only wise God, be Honor
and Glory for ever and ever, Amen. 1 Timothy 1.17.

The Baptist and Presbyter, etc. conjunct against us, to their own Disjunction
and Confusion. OR, A Relation of some Heads of Two Discourses (in London); the
first whereof was the 28 th of the 10 th Month (69.) at which Thomas Danson
(formerly Priest of Sandwich in Kent) and William Kiffin Baptist [with the
Assistance of Ald. Hayes] joined against us.
THe Question disputed on both times was,

Whether the Scriptures are the only Rule of Faith, yea or nay? Which was
affirmed by them, but denied by us*

Now let the impartial Readers note how confused and contradictory they were in
the management of their Affirmation:

As first, when we had excepted against their Affirmation, the particle Only
being exclusive of any higher Rule; yea, even of the Spirit of Truth it self,
and importing the Scriptures as the chief, or sole, singular, and alone Rule of
Faith, excluding all other. Now when any of these our Opposers did at any time
include the Spirit, or the divine illumination thereof in the understanding
(when they had asserted the Scriptures to be the only Rule) this Contradistion
they diverse times appeared in. And T. D. when he could not stand by the
Assertion in the terms proposed, instead of the word Scriptures, he would have
it, The Doctrines contained in the Scriptures of the Old and New Testament to
be the only Rule of Faith: which he also could not prove according to his
general Assertion therein; and his disserting the terms of the Question, to
wit, of the Scriptures being the only Rule, he rendered no sufficient Reason for
it: for the Doctrines as contained therein, have still relation to the
Scriptures, which are of diverse kinds; as those of the Law, for the
Circumcision and other Shadows; and those of the New Testament, forbidding
them. But yet, though one while the Scriptures, and another while the Doctrines
contained in them, were asserted to be the only Rule of Faith; in Contradiction
to this, he would assent to the guidance of the Spirit of God, and would
include the Holy Ghost in the comfort of the Scriptures, and confess at length,
That the Scriptures, without divine illumination, are but the foundation of an
historical Faith, and not a saving Faith; and that a man may believe the
historical part, and not be saved; and that the divine illumination of the
Spirit, is the Foundation and Rule of saving Faith.

Observe. Mark, Here is a Foundation, or Rule of the Spirit assented to above
the Scriptures: If the divine illumination of the Spirit, be the Rule of the
Understanding, the Rule for Conviction, and consequently the Rule of Faith;
then the Scriptures are not the only Rule. And T. D. granted, That the
Scriptures are not the Rule of Conviction for those that denied their divine
Authority, it being but a begging the Question, to argue from Scripture for the
Conviction of such, etc. Therefore it follows, that the inlightning of the holy
Spirit, which is able to convict Gain-saye^s, is a Rule above the Scriptures,
which therefore are not the only Rule.

But W. Kiffin (to prove their first Assertion, so much confuted by T. D.
himself) told us, That the Director and Rule to Faith and Salvation, were two
distinct things; as the Way to Bristol, and my Director into the Way; and that
the Scriptures are the only Rule and Way in which we are to walk, and the
Spirit of God is the Guide and Director, etc.

Answ. To th^s he was Answered, That Christ is both the Leader and Director
into the way of God, and the Way also; and that we are to walk in the Spirit:
and therefore his asserting that the Director is not the Way, in this Instance
against the Spirit being the Rule, is all one as to say, Christ cannot be the
Way, because he is the Guide; which is contrary to his own Testimony. And while
W.K. did state the Way and Rule as the same, or equivolent, he m^nifestly ran
to his own confutation; Christ Jesus and his Light being the Author of Faith,
and only Way to Salvation.

As to the Question [ If the Scriptcres come where men question them, or their
Relation of those Miracles or Works of God's Power, etc. which T.D. argued as
ground or matter of Conviction, etc.] How shall such be Convicted by that
Relation which they question, without the Living Evidence of the Spirit?

T. D. replied, Would you question whether there were such a man as King Henry
the Eight? etc.

Answ. This is not an Answer to the only Rule of Faith, and proves no farther
than a traditional Faith; and by this, it appears what is the nature of these
men's Faith, and how weak; for they did not know that there was a King Henry the
Eight by divine illumination; and sure the Spirit and Power that gave forth the
Scriptures, has an influence upon the understandings, and opens the Holy
Scriptures where it is submitted to within. His Instance of King Henry the
Eight, was a very mean and pitiful one in this case, to answer the Ground and
Rule of true and living Faith, which is the Gift of God, and whereof Christ is
the Author. Farther, Mark what corrupt Doctrines and Extravagancies the said
T.D. runs into against the universal extent of the Spirit of God, and
sufficiency of his Light, having granted or supposed many places in the World
where there is neither Bible nor Minister to Preach; he proceeded as follows.

T. D. I say, that God ordinarily does not by his Spirit immediately reveal the
Doctrines contained in the Scriptures (meaning without them) His Spirit does
not go into the farthest parts of India, where the Scriptures are not; the
Spirit of God does not go into the remotest parts of the World: We suppose
there are some plac^s where there is neither Bible nor Minister; I do not
understand any ground that the Spirit in those places does immediately reveal
those things, etc. p. 9.

Answ. 1. See if this be not a limitation put upon the Spirit of God, and a
denial of its alone sufficiency to teach or reveal all Truth without the
Scriptures; And how this man supposes that there are remote places where the
Spirit does not come, which is contrary to plain Scripture: Whither shall a man
go from the Spirit, or flee from the presence of God? see Psalm. 139.7, 8, 9,
10. for his Presence fills Heaven and Earth.

2dly. Supposing that in some places they have neither the Scriptures, nor
their outward Preaching; it were a sad sentence to conclude them all in a state
of Damnation for want thereof; and to conclude, that therefore God does not
afford them of his Spirit or Light, to be an inward Rule of their Faith without
the Scriptures: What cruelty does this charge upon God against his Creatures?
And what a narrow limitation does this put upon his Spirit, to allow him his
path but only where the Scriptures are? Or Presbyterian or Independent
Teachers, or suchlike, go? What a pitiful narrow Spirit and Principle is this
among them? And had not those Gentiles (spoken of Romans 2.) those things
contained in the Law, written in their hearts, when they had not the Law or
Scriptures outwardly? And were they not either accused or excused before God by
his Law written in their hearts?

T.D. They not walking up to the Light they had, was the cause of their
Codemnation, and they were left without excuse.

T.D's [Contradiction] -- But it was not sufficient to lead them to Life or
Salvation, -- it was a Natural Light, etc.

Answ. Then from this it follows, That all was a case whether they walked up to
the Light they had or not, they were like to be Condemned, do what they could
(a sad Doctrine, charging God with no less than Cruelty and Injustice); then
for what Reason was the Light given to them? and what was God's End therein, if
it was insufficient? ^ow should they be left without excuse? And for what end
were they brought into the world, if a capacity of Salvation was not afforded
them? As to his calling it a natural Light, what rule has he in Scripture for
so calling it? For the Law in their hearts was spiritual; and it is said, When
they do by Nature, it is not said, By a Natural Light; and what Nature was it,
by which they obeyed the Law of God in the heart? Surely it was not a Nature
repugnant to the Law.

And when I demanded of these men, to produce us that Scripture that says, The
Scriptures are the only Rule of Faith, and it shall end the Controversy.

Ald. H. Answ. I will, in the last of the Revelations, If any man shall add to
this Rule, etc.

Obs. Here he was mistaken, for it is not said, this Rule, but these things,
etc. the words of the Book, etc. see Revelations 22.18, 19.

T. D's Arg. That which the Scriptures direct to as the Rule of Faith, that is
to be the only Rule: But the Scriptures direct to themselves. Ergo.

Answ. The first part I own; that which the Scriptures direct to is the Rule,
and that is the Light within; the Spirit or Unction from the Holy One, 1 John
2. that gave them forth; therefore I deny that the Scriptures direct to
themselves as the only Rule.

T. D. That the Scripture directs to its self as the only Rule (and no other) I
prove from Joh. 5.39. Search the Scriptures, etc.

Rep. Christ did not say the Scriptures were the only Rule, but rather reproved
these unbelievers (whom these men resemble) in these words viz. In them (to wit
the Scriptures) ye think to have Eternal Life; and ye will not come to Me, that
ye might have Life, verse. 40.

T. D. The more sure word of Prophecy, 2 Pet. 1.19. was the Scriptures, etc.

Rep. Here he has confounded and perverted the Scriptures, as if the word of
Prophecy, and the Writings, and Prophesies were all one; and as if it were to
be read, You have more sure Scriptures of the Prophets; whereas they were not
more sure than the Scriptures of the Apostles; and the word of the Prophecy
(or Holy Ghost that moved in the Prophets to speak or write Scripture) was
before the Prophesies of it (or the Scriptures) were written; the Word came to
the Prophets before they Prophesied, it was in their hearts, and the same Word
now appears in many as a Light shining in a dark place, whereunto ye shall do
well to take heed until the day dawn, and the Day Star arise in your hearts, 2
Pet. 1.19.

Obs. So this Light within was in all Ages (and still is) the most absolute,
perfect, and universal Rule to all the Righteous, who believed in the Light,
and were the Children of the Day, where God has appointed the Great Light of
Himself, to Rule His People in Faith and Practice.

At the Second Discourse which was the 20th of the 11th Month, 1669. Will.
Kiffin and his Brother Jeremiah Ives, with some others appeared against us:
Some of their Contradictions follow.
W.K. THe Scriptures are the only Rule of Faith (from 2 Timothy 3.15, 16.) the
Spirit considered as a Rule, is absolutely excluded, but as a Director, as my
Way and my Guide are distinct, etc. (as before.)

Obs. First, This Scripture cited by him, proves not his Assertion; to wit,
That the Scriptures are the only Rule. Secondly, His so absolute excluding the
Spirits Rule is contrary to this Scripture, which says, All Scripture given by
inspiration of God, etc. (the particle is being added.) Here the Inspiration of
God is owned to give Scripture; as also it is the Man of God that knows the use
thereof, who does not exclude Divine Inspiration, or the Holy Spirit from being
his Guide, Rule, and Way, for he walks in the Spirit: So that if Rule and Way
be one and the same, as here they are rendered, that which is the only Way to
Life and Salvation, must needs be the only Rule; and surely neither Christ, nor
his Light, or holy Spirit within, must be excluded from being this Way in which
we are to walk.

And now mark how Jer. Ives (coming into the Meeting, after his Brother W. K.
had thus absolutely excluded the Spirit) did positively contradict him.

Jer. Ives. Our saying the Scriptures are the only Rule, does not exclude the
Spirit, or the Spirit's Illumination, the Scrip^ures including the Spirit, are
the only Rule, etc. that is our meaning.

Obs. See how manifestly they have contradicted one another; here the one
wholly excluding the Spirit as a Rule, and the other including it: But this
Jer. Ives was not aware of his Brothers having excluded the Spirit before he
came in; upon which we urging them to confess their Error and Contradiction:
Jer. Ives endeavored to salve up the business as well as he could, (saying, We
are reconciled) And in order thereto he proceeded thus, viz.

J. I. Our saying the Scriptures are the only Rule, does not ex^^^^e every
thing else (or the Spirits Illumination) from being a Rule; any more than to
say, God Only has Immortality, does exclude all else from having Immortality,
etc.

Obs. Still he could not hide himself from contradicting his Brother W.K. and
the terms of their own Question; For if the Spirit's Illumination be included
(as in Rule) then to say, the Scriptures are the only Rule of Faith, is not
true; and wholly to exclude the Spirit as a Rule, is erroneous: And to instance
in this case, That God only has Immortality, which is dwelling in the Light, 1 Timothy 6.16. Was this a fit comparison for their Assertion of the Scriptures
being the only Rule? For, has not God Immortality above and before all others?
And has he not it only dwelling in the Light? And have any it out of him, or
out of his Light? But has he it not only as more eminently and above all
others? As he is the only Wise God, the only Potentate, King of Kings, and Lord
of Lords, 1 Timothy 6.15. where [ Only] is both used in a most eminent sense, and
excluding all others from that eminence. And if in this sense (according to
Jer. Ives his Instance) the Scriptures be taken as the most eminent Rule,
before and above all other Rule; what is this but to set the Scriptures above
the Spirit that gave them forth? and above all Divine Illuminations? (although
without it the Scriptures cannot be understood) which is as much as to set them
above God and Christ. And yet Jer. Ives, in Contradiction to their own
Assertion, granted, That they did not intend that none have Faith but they that
have the Scriptures (some may have Faith who have them not, etc.) It follows
therefore, that that [ some] have the Rule of Faith without the Scriptures. See
what a deadly blow he has given to his (and their) own Cause?

Jer. Ives. God does not require any thing to be believed (as a Point of Faith)
or to be practiced as a Duty, for which there is not a Rule laid down in the
Scriptures; and that there is not any sin committed but what is there
mentioned; there is no sin that I commit, but I may correct it by the
Scriptures, etc.

Obs. See how both these passages do egregiously vary from the state of the
Question, and their general Assertion before; Of the Scriptures being the only
Rule of Faith. For a Rule in the Scriptures, and they to be the only Rule, are
much different. And however, if it were granted (which it is not) That God does
not require any thing to be believed, etc. or practiced as duty, for which
there is not a Rule laid down (which imports a particular Rule or measure
specified for every particular point or practice, or else not to be believed
nor practiced) then it follows, That if there be not a particular Rule in
Scripture to prove, That the Scriptures are the only Rule of Faith, nor which
so says of them; We are not bound to believe these men's Assertion therein as
any Point of Faith, for God does not require us to believe it, however they
contend for it, and would impose it upon our Faith.

But further, 1. If by a Rule laid down, it be intended that there is a
particular Rule, Command or Precept specified, exactly to measure every
particular duty or thing to be believed or practiced by all Christians (as
there are many express Commands and Precepts expressing the particular duty,
and forbidding the offense;) this is not so expressed under a general Command
(nor yet proved) as Jer. Ives endeavored; as when I put the Q^estion, viz.
Whether God does not (or may not) by his immediate Power, in these days, raise
up and Commissionate Prophets to declare peculiar Messages to particular
Places, People, or Governments, yea or nay?

To this Jer. Ives granted, That God might (for any thing he knew) do so: But
suppose there may be Prophets now, sent with immediate Commission to a
particular Place, as Rome, etc. (said he) The Scripture has a Rule in it, that
such Prophets ought to obey their Master; and that the Scripture commands to
hear Christ in all things, and not to quench the Spirit nor despise Prophecy,
etc. (Thus far Jer. Ives.) -- But while he cannot prove that all those things
are particularly prescribed in Scripture, which they are to hear and learn of
Christ, and which are to be prophesied: but has granted the contrary (to wit)
That there may be immediate Commissions and peculiar Messages from God to
particular Places, etc. (suppose Rome, or London) which are not particularly
specified in Scripture (however Christ is to be heard in all things, and his
Spirit not to be quenched) -- Therefore it follows, that the Scriptures are
neither the Rule of those Prophets Faith, either for such their Commission or
peculiar Messages, for they have neither from the Scriptures, but immediately
from God: (And therefore if they should go to question their Commission, and
try such their Messages by the Scriptures, and not find them there, this would
argue unbelief, and cause disobedience) whereas their particular Commissions
and Messages, are evidenced to them by the Spirit and Power of God (whether it
be by Vision or Revelation) which is the immediate Object, Rule, and Foundation
of their Faith therein.

2dly, And in our days there has been such Prophets raised up, both to this
Nation, and City of London; witness Humphry Smith's Vision of Fire to London;
Jo. Rance his Prophecy in Meeter (before the Contagion) of the great Woe and
debacement of London; T. Ibbot's Vision of the Fire; which he came to proclaim,
and went through the Streets as a sign thereof (and of the great Distraction
upon it) the day before it broke forth: (But W.K. his surmise, or may be that
these might have a hand in it, was malicious and wicked, as diverse present took
notice.) Yea, many more have truly foretold of the Judgments and Calamities of
this Nation and City; and it would be voluminous to repeat what has been truly
foretold by diverse of the Servants of the Lord, concerning O. C. and those
persecuting Professors that persecuted us in his Name (and what is yet to come
upon the Persecutors who follow their steps) and of the Confusions that his
Priests, and those persecutors of the Innocent, would fall into (as also the
temporizing of many of them) which is manifest both upon many of the
Presbyterians, Independants, and Baptists at this day; whose insatiable enmity
is still continued against us, though they be confounded among themselves; and
their horns broken, that they cannot push as formerly.

3dly, As the Scriptures are not the Rule of Faith, nor is there a particular
Rule therein for every individual motion or action; so are they not the sole
Rule of discovery of sin and evil in men particularly (though they witness
against all sin.) -- Nor are they the immediate, or original Obligation upon
the Conscience to Righteousness or Duty in the sight of God; for it is the
Light of Christ within (that immediately opens an inward eye) that discovers to
men their particular sins and guilt; and that immediately obliges to
Righteousness (and did so oblige man in the beginning before it was so written
in letters) because of God, who both tells unto man his thoughts, and what he
ought to do as his duty; And, whatsoever makes manifest is Light; all things
that are reproved, are made manifest by the Light, yea, by that Lig^t which
Christ gives, Ephesians. 5.13, 14. Howbeit, every one that does evil, hates the
Light; neither comes to the Light lest his deeds should be reproved: but he
that does truth, comes to the Light that his deeds may be made manifest, that
they are wrought in God, Joh. 3.19, 20, 21. So that it is evident, the Light is
that Rule that tryes and manifests all things; and this was before the
Scriptures, and is where they are not. Many overlook (and will not see) their
own evils, though they read those very Scriptures that testify against them:
but if they turn to the Light of Christ within, it will make them manifest, and
bring them under a sense of their own guilt therein, that they may repent and
cease from sin, and so receive remission.

4thly, And now, as for this great Point or Article of our present Opposers
Faith (viz. That the Scriptures are the only Rule of Faith, -- the Spirit being
absolutely excluded as a Rule by W. K.) It is to be noted, that since Jer.
Ives, in a Letter to me says, viz. Though I might own this Question in their
sense, yet I never owned it in their words, etc.

Whereby the Reader may see, That Jer. Ives upon a more deliberate
Consideration, has disserted his Brethrens Cause; he perceiving (as it seems)
that they cannot maintain the Scriptures to be the only Rule. But 1st. where he
says, He might own it in their sense; this is not true; For his sense of
owning it, was That he did not exclude (but included) the Spirit: But his
Brother Kiffin's sense was absolutely to exclude the Spirit as a Rule; so their
senses herein absolutely opposed each other. 2dly, His saying, He never owned
it in their words; is as false (however he now evades or disowns it) for many
Persons of Credit that were present, can testify (as also the Relation of the
Discourse, taken by an expert Short-writer) that he did own the Question
(whether the Scriptures are the only Rule) in these their terms for some time,
however now he would acquit himself of it; and thereby has failed his Brethren,
and broke the neck of their Cause.

These few Questions are for W. Kiffin, and the rest, who own him in his
Principle.
Quest. 1. BY what Rule would you have us believe you, when you say the
Scriptures are the only Rule of Faith and Practice, and absolutely exclude the
Spirit as a Rule?

2. Whether any can truly know and believe the Scriptures, without having their
understandings divinely enlightened by the Spirit that gave them forth, yea or
nay?

3. Is not the true beginning of Believers, in that Spirit? In order to
Righteousness, Life, and Salvation?

4. Do you own the immediate Teaching of the Spirit, or divine Revelation to be
attainable in these days? Or,

5. Can any come truly to know the true God, or Jesus Christ, without immediate
Revelation?

6. What is the key of true knowledge?

7. What was the Rule of Abel, Enoch, Abraham, Moses, etc. their Faith before
the Scriptures were written?

8. Do you think the Spirit is to be received in the Scriptures? Or, that the
Letter and the Spirit are inseparable, yea or nay?

9. What Rule would you make use of, for the Conviction of those that either
oppose the Divine Authority (supposed) or Translation of the Scriptures, seeing
such cannot be Convicted by the Scriptures themselves?

10. (...) Meas^re and ^^le whereunto the tr^e Mini^^ers and belie^ing Ge^^iles
had attained, which they were to walk by, mentioned, 2 Cor. 10, 13, 15. Phil.
3.16. Gal. 6.16. was that Rule the Scriptures of the Old and New Testament, or
Bible, yea or nay?

Here follows a few Doctrines asserted by one -- Wheatly at Lambeth, in a Book
directed in Manuscript to one Mr. Cox (as he calls him): this Wheatley seems to
be a Brother of these Baptists, by his opposing the Light within, and pleading
for their outward Forms, and their Water Baptism, from the Example of Christ's
going down into the Water to be Baptized of John.
Wheatley his Doctrine, viz.
DO not blame the Devil to exclude the example of the Children of God, if he
can by any pretense; do not blame the Devil to persuade men to trust to the
Light within, etc. page 4, 5.

Answ. However this man seems to be a Friend to the Devil, in that he exhorts
not to blame him, he is grossly mistaken in saying, The Devil persuades men to
trust to the Light within; for the Devil, and such his Instruments, persuade
men against the Light as much as they can; for his Kingdom is held up in the
dark, and his way is darkness it self, wherein his Followers walk, who will not
bring their deeds to the Light, lest it should reprove them: but the Light of
Christ in every man, and the sufficiency thereof, and the Scriptures of Truth
which testify to it, we beat witness unto; and against both the Devil and this
Opposer, and against all such as are in the same spirit of dark^^ss and enmity
with him and the Devil, who oppose the True Light.

And he that says, The Devil persuades men to trust to the Light within; he
has highly advanced the Devil, and conferred as much dignity upon him as the
Ranters, when they have told us, That the Devil is Gods good Servant, his
faithful Servant, etc. This is like his blasphemy who sets the Devil in the
place of God's faithful Servants and Ministers, whose work it was to persuade
men to his Light within; but both the Devil, and Ranters, are enemies to the
true Light within.

W's Doct. There may be a Light amongst men and not within, for Jesus Christ
said to the Pharisees, the Kingdom of God was within them; when indeed it was
but among them, (says he); And to prove it, he cites Luke 17.22.

Answ. See how he has proved the Light not within, viz. The Kingdom of God was
within the Pharisees; Christ says, It is within; but this Man says, Not
within: Shall we believe Christ or him? But as if he would plainly let us know
how he is set to oppose Christ, after he has told us, That Jesus Christ said,
The Kingdom of God was within them; In Contradiction to Christ, he says, When
indeed it was but among them; and this to prove the Light not within. It is no
marvel this man sets himself to oppose Christ's Followers and Servants for
asserting his Light within, when thus he opposes Christ himself, for saying,
That the Kingdom of God is within; but this man says it was not within, it was
but among them. Now then here is the case and state of the Controversy; Christ
and his Followers do bear witness to the Kingdom of God, and his Light within:
But the Devil and his Followers, strive and war against the Light and Kingdom
of God within, as much as they can; the Devil he has blinded their eyes from
seeing the Light: he has made fools, vassals, and slaves of them to do his
drudgery, to show their enmity, and vomit out their shame and principles of
darkness against the Light within. Oh! how has the Devil deceived such wilful
Opposers and Unbelievers?

W's Doct. If God, and Christ, and Holy Spirit be within them, then there is
none above them; Is not this spiritual pride? etc.

Answ. No: it was not spiritual pride in the People of God, and Followers of
Christ, to witness God and Christ to dwell in them; neither did this argue at
all that God and Christ were not above them; for, God is above all, and through
all, and in all his own, Ephesians. 4.6. And he that dwells on High, and inhabiteth
Eternity, dwells with such also as are poor in Spirit, and tremble at his Word.
Oh! how ignorant are these Opposers of the Scriptures, and of the Power of God?

W's Doct. I do believe, That essentially from Eternity, the Scripture was as
really God, as a man's mind is himself, before it is revealed; so before that
Spirit that proceeds from Father and Son, gave forth the Scripture, the
Scripture was really God. Can the Quakers show you, That Christ the Word is not
Scripture, etc. page 17. Thus far his Assertion.

Answ. Let this be kept on Record for his Brethren to peruse, and for all other
that read this to judge of, that the Scripture was really God from eternity,
yea, and that essentially; as much as to say, the Essence of the Scripture is
the Essence of God. What say you Baptists and Professors? do you own this
doctrine? If you do not, then give forth your Testimony against him and it, and
correct and stop such N^vices and ignorant men amongst you from meddling with
Controversies, and from scribbling their Confusion and Blasphemies against us:
For, do you own that the Scriptures are God? or, that the Scriptures made all
things? Or, when you carry a Bible in your pocket, do you carry God and his
essence there? Is not this Rantism in the highest, that your Brother has
affirmed? and does it not tend to lead into Atheism? let Truth in all judge.
Many of this Opposers Impertinencies, gross Lies, Slanders and Abuses against
us (called Quakers) in his Pamphlet I here pass by; my recital of these few
passages of his, being, that the rest of his Brethren may take notice thereof,
and be cautioned not to suffer enmity and darkness to lead them to war against
the Light and its Children, as too many have done, lest that shame and
confusion of face (instead of Justification and Peace with the Lord) be their
reward.

Here follows a Copy of the Baptists Bill of Excommunication.
WE the Church of Christ, meeting near Bow, of which you Hester Bird were once
a Member, Do by these presents, signify and declare, That you have turned out
of the right way of the Lord both in Doctrine, Jer. 8.8, 9. 1 John 2.19. 2 Timothy
2.17. 1 Timothy 1.20. Acts 3.22, 23.
and Practice, viz. Departing from the Foundation, Doctrine of Justification by
Grace; From the Resurrection of this Body; The Personal coming of the Lord
Jesus; And the Holy Ordinances of Christ, viz. Baptism, Communion of Saints,
and the Lords Supper: And you having been by Us, or some of Us, Admonished; and
remaining Incorrigible, WE do hereby declare, That you are gone out from Us,
because you were not of Us; having rejected the Word of the Lord and Us his
People, WE also do reject you, according to the Sentence of the Lord, expressed
by the Apostles in these Scriptures mentioned in the Margent.

George Barrett. Benj. Dennis. Edw. Annesley. Rich. Mathyson. Ralph Chapman.

Signed in the Name, and by the Appointment of the Church, the 17 th of the 7
th Month, 1669,
Here follows a Copy of the said Hester Bird (now Hester Andrews) her Answer.
GEorge Barret, Benjamin Dennis, and the rest concerned; I do not own you to be
the Church of Christ as you call your selves: For the true Church never gave
out such a false Bill of Excommunication as you have against Me; therefore your
pretended Authority therein I deny. Whereas you falsely charge me with turning
from the Communion of Saints; I have sensibly known and felt the Communion of
Saints, blessed be the Lord, since I have been from amongst you. As to the
Personal Reign of Christ, I never owned it when I was amongst you; but his
Spiritual Appearance I am a witness of. Your outward Bread and Wine satisfies
not the Soul; I have had more peace when I did not touch your Shadows, than
when I did. As to the Water Baptism, I never found any thing in it, I was the
same when I came out as when I went in; Blessed be the Lord, I have known one
Baptism, the Baptism of Christ, viz. being Baptized with the Holy Ghost and
with Fire; for he will thoroughly purge his Floor. As to departing from the
Foundation, Doctrine of Justification by Grace, as you falsely and slanderously
charge me; I know the Foundation of God stands sure, and another Foundation
can no man lay than that is already laid, which is Christ in us, which is the
Hope of Glory, by whose Grace I am Justified freely: and this I find to be the
Doctrine of Christ, and his Ministers, which I own.

A Word from the Lord unto you, That you would come out from among your dark
Customs of this World, and come to the Appearance of Christ in you,

As to your Excommunication, it is known I came from you some years ago; take
heed your Censure falls not on your own heads: but it shows of what spirit you
are.

Your charge of departing from the Resurrection of this Body, as you state it;
Its neither truth nor sense, nor have you told me your meaning: For, what
Resurrection and Body have I come to, that I have departed from: Howbeit the
Resurrection I believe according to the Testimony of Christ and his Ministers;
see Joh. 11.25. 1 Cor. 15.42. to the end: And Christ's Answer to the Saduces,
Mat. 22.29, 30.

H. A.

A few brief Observations on the Scriptures in the Margent of the Baptists Bill
(or rather Bull) against the said Hester Bird, alias Andrews; which they have
perverted and misapplyed: As,
FIrst, That of Jer. 8.8, 9. was against the Rebellious Jews, who were
backslidden, and knew not the Judgment of the Lord, and had rejected his Word,
who were all given to Covetousness, and to deal falsely, from the People to the
Priest, verse. 7, 10. None of which Evils have these angry Baptists proved
against this Person whom they have Rejected, or Excommunicated; for she did
first reject them, as she was persuaded she had good reason for; and that
therein she did not reject the Word of the Lord, but such as have rejected it,
whom she denies to be either Called by Christ to the Ministry, or to be of his
Church.

Secondly, That, 1 John 2.19. was against those Antichrists who went out from
the true Apostles, and Church: where note, these Baptists have neither proved
their Call to the Ministry, nor themselves to be either true Apostles, or a
true Church; nor yet Convicted this Woman to be such an one mentioned 1 John
2.18, 19. for she is now directed to (and owneth) the Unction within from the
Holy One, which preserves out of Antichrist's Delusions, Lies and Deceits, etc.
which if she continues in, and obey to the end, she shall continue in the Son,
and in the Father, and not deny Jes^^ Christ, or the Father, as the Antichrists
did, verse. 22, 23. But this Anointing within, these Baptists have never turned
People unto, that they might follow and obey it in all things; for they impose
upon People their own Practices, without the immediate guidance of the Spirit:
And therefore this Woman has cause for ever to bless the Lord th^^ she turned
from them, if she continue in this Anointing within; which is true.

Thirdly, As to that, 2 Timothy 2.17. and 1 Timothy 1.20. These concerned such as did
blaspheme, and used profane and vain bablings; of whom was Alexander, and also
Hymeneus and Philetus, who said, That the Resurrection was past already, and
overthrew the Faith of some: But no such thing as vain Bablings, Blasphemy, or
saying, That the Resurrection is past already, have these Baptists proved
against this Person whom they have Excommunicated: And therefore it is,

1st. A great sin in them thus to misaply the Scriptures against such as they
were never intended. And,

2dly, A great presumption in them, to assume an Authority from the Apostles
words, 1 Timothy 1.20. to deliver up to Satan, when they have no Commission,
Power, or Authority given them of God so to do, as the Apostles had, etc.

3dly, What great folly and madness do they show and bewray, in Rejecting,
Excommunicating, or Delivering up to Satan, such as have before rejected and
denied them, and refused to have any Communion with them, as this Hester for
some time has; for such as were rejected and cast out of the true Church, they
were either such as would have continued among them in scandalous Practices, as
Fornication, etc. 1 Cor. 5. Or, 2dly, Such false Brethren, as by Blasphemies,
or Heresies, troubled the Church, and would have sown Sedition and Strife
amongst them; for Testimonies in truth (against such) we own.

Fourthly, As to that of Acts 3.22, 23. It Is on the behalf of Christ, that
great Prophet, whom every one ought to hear in all things; And it is said, Every
Soul that will not hear that Prophet, shall be destroyed from among the People,
etc. Now it is not every Soul that will not hear you Baptists (and come under
your Water and Ordinances, as you impose them) that must therefore be
de^troyed, however you pretend to deliver such to Satan; but every Soul that
will not hear Christ, that great Prophet of God in all things, that Soul must
be cut off: And can you say that you have ever heard the Voice of Christ, who
pretend your selves to be his Church (which we both deny you to be)? As also,
we deny that you have any Call from Christ to the Ministry. Do you judge that
none hear his Voice but such as you plunge in Water? And that all must be
condemned who cannot own you in your imposed Shadows, called Ordinances, upon
pretense of the Scripture being your only Rule? when you never yet did either
prove or demonstrate that ever you heard the immediate Voice of Christ, or had
a Call from him for your plunging People under Water (which is but a Shadow)
Much less can we believe that you hear him in all things else, which you
practice and impose; for Christ is the Life and Substance, and they who hear
him in all things, receive Life, and the One Spiritual Baptism, which yours is
not.

John Newman set against himself: HIS Book and corrupt Principles being
Answered by John Newman himself. His Principles and Contradictions are
Collected and set opposite in his own words, and the Pages of his Book cited
where they are, and briefly Noted, and Annimadvertized upon particularly, as
follows. Whereto is added, Tho. Danson, W. Kiffin, and Jer. Ives their
Contradictions.
[ J. N. his Contradictions.]
THE Scriptures of the two Testaments is properly and principally called the
Word of God, and that distinct from Christ [This is asserted above twenty times
over] Pages 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9.10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 22, 42.

Jesus Christ in Scripture is styled the Word of God, a Name that is given to
him, his Name is called The Word of God, Rev. 19.13. [but then again to shufle
off this, J.N. adds] Christ is not always really that which in Scripture he is
called -- comparatively -- He is called a Door, a Vine, etc. page 3, 46, 47, 49.

Animadversion.
Surely the holy Men who spoke and writ Scriptures from the Spirit of God, knew
how to speak properly and truly, better than J.N. who in effect reflects on
them all, as for speaking improperly; (what bold presump^ion and pride is it in
him?) when they called God, or Christ, or his Name, the Word; and said, In the
beginning was the Word, etc. Therefore Christ was principally the Word; for the
Scriptures were not in the beginning: nor do they any where call themselves the
Word, as improperly J. N. does: For Scriptures signify Writings: And is not
Christ really the Door (in the sense intended) to them that enter in by him?
Howbeit he was really the Word, before his Name was held forth in the many
Parables.

[ J. N's Contrad.]
The Scriptures of the two Testaments, in which is contained the Will of God,
properly and principally the Word, etc.

Or Way of God, in which is contained the will of God, p. 5. -- The Prophet
says, God's Word is a Lanthorn to his feet, and a Light unto his paths, Psalm.
119.100, 105.

Animad.
Christ is the Way, the Word, and Light, and not the Writings, they are not
Christ: And the Word that was a Lanthorn and Light to David, was within him
before he wrote the words, and when much of the Scriptures of the two
Testaments were unwritten; And said he, I have hid thy Word in my heart, that I
may not sin against thee, Psalm. 119.

[ J. N's Contrad.]
The Scriptures of the Two Testaments, principally called the WORD, distinct
from Christ.

God's perfect Way enlightened David, p. 4. and this is called the Word, Psalm.
18.28, 30. Thou will light my Candle, the Lord will enlighten my darkness.

Animad.
God's perfect enlightening Way and Word, and the Light and Candle of the
Righteous, which was Spiritual, Living, and Powerful, was before the Scriptures
were written.

[ J. N's Contrad.]
The Scriptures principally called the Word.

The words that God has spoken by his holy Prophets, blessed Son, and
Apostles, p. 3.

Animad.
Is there no distinction between the Word and words? In the beginning was the
Word; but since, were the words spoken, and Scriptures written. Besides, the
holy Prophets and Apostles who preached the Word from the immediate Power of
God, were living witnesses of what they spoke; and their Ministry was attended
with the same Power, and the plain Evidence of the Spirit went along with it,
which was more than barely the writings received by tradition.

[ J. N's Contrad.]
The Commands of God in the first Testament, or Scriptures of the Prophets --
the Word, p. 7. I shall labor to prove, That the Scriptures of the new
Testament is also called the Word -- distinct from Christ.

The Teaching and Preaching Jesus Christ according to the Scriptures, is called
the Ministry of the Word -- is styled -- is called the Word of God, Act. 4.25,
26, 27. and 5.45.

Animad.
The Word was in the beginning before the Commands, Words or Writings were
given forth; the Commands are called words that God spoke. Is not there a
manifest difference between the Word (that made all things) and the words
spoken, or writ? As also between the Ministry of the Word (which is the
preaching Jesus Christ) and the Writings of the Two Testaments? which this
ignorant man makes no distinction between; for was not the Apostle Paul a
Minister of the Word, though not of the Letter? Did not he distinguish between
them? which this confused Opposer has not done.

[ J. N's Contrad.]
The Scriptures in which is contained the will of God, in order to man's
Salvation, is properly and principally called the Word -- and not Christ. --
There are a People labor to blind this truth, by affirming that Christ is the
Word of God, and not the Scriptures; for they say, The Scriptures are the
Sayings, or the Words of God. -- Christ cannot be understood to be the Word of
God, -- whereas some do affirm Christ to be the Word of God: -- Such an
Assertion would make Christ a Monster, rather than a complete God, and Man,
etc. p. 12, 13, 15, 17, 17, and 49.

I shall freely grant, That Christ is called by this Name, the Word of God; --
Christ being the Word of God, -- Christ may be said to be in men, -- He may be
called the Word of God, because he will be that dreadful Executioner; -- By the
Word of God's Eternal Power, etc. -- He shall by by the Word of God slay all
his enemies; -- in this he may be truly called the Word of God, p. 14, 46, 47.

Animad.
Thou art a blind Opposer, who perverts and darkens Truth with thy monstrous
prejudice, who denies Christ to be the Word of God; and blasphemously say,
Such an Assertion would make Christ a Monster, etc. Yet for all this, thou
shall freely grant Christ to be called the Word, yea, the Word of God's
Eternal Power: do thou herein make him a Monster? And did not the holy Men
of God call him the Word? And did they blind the Truth, or make a Monster of
Christ, supposest thou? Must we reject their Testimonies as improper and
monstrous, and believe thine as only proper, which is so repugnant to the
Scriptures, which are the Writings, that do contain sayings or words of God,
which to affirm is no blinding of truth? And where provest thou these words in
the Scriptures, That the will of God is contained in them? Is not the will of
God Infinite? and the Heaven of Heavens cannot contain God. So take thy
Contradictions back again, viz. That to affirm Christ to be the Word of God, is
to make him a Monster: -- (yet) I shall freely grant Christ is called the Word
of God, the Word of God's Eternal Power.

[ J. N's Contrad.]
The Scriptures properly and principally called the Word.

The Word of God therein contained -- Or the Teachings therein contained -- The
Will and Mind of God contained in the Scriptures, p. 19, 45, 49.

Animad.
See the Contradiction and falsehood of these; for one while to say the
Scriptures are the Word; another while, they contain the Word and Mind of God;
these are different: and thou might as well say that God is contained in the
Scriptures, as to say the Word, and his Mind, and Will is; and so grossly go to
circumscribe and limit him who is Infinite and unlimitable, who is the Eternal
Word.

Mark also how J. N. his Doctrine (of the Scriptures being principally called
the Word) is absolutely confuted by himself in what follows.

J. N's Contrad.] How was Heaven, and Earth, and the World made by the Word
of God? and also by the same Word are kept in store, p. 48. -- The wicked
shall be destroyed by this Word. -- The Rod of his mouth, Isa. 11.11. The
Spirit of his mouth, Rev. 2.12. The sharp Sword with two edges. -- The word of
God's Grace in convincing, and converting of Souls, quick and powerful, sharper
than a two edged Sword. -- In this sense Christ may be called the Word.

Animad.
But surely the Scriptures are not all this, nor ever had this sense given of
them, that is here given of the Word which made Heaven and Earth, and keeps
them in store; and this did not the Scriptures.

[ J. N's Contrad.]
The Scriptures principally called the Word of God, may be corrupted by man.
-- This Word may be, and is cor^upted by man, etc. p. 19, 20.

Being born again not of corruptible Seed, but of incorruptible; by the Word of
God, which lives and abides for ever, p. 57, etc. [Contradiction again.] This
makes nothing to prove this word here to be Christ.

Animad.
The Incorruptible Seed, or Word by which we are born again, is not the
Scriptures which have been corrupted by such Perverters and Corrupters of them
as thou art, who goes to set them in Christ's place; and yet (Hypocrite like)
art not willing to keep to the language and terms (or Doctrines) of them.

[ J. N's Contrad.]
The Scrip^ures are an absolute perfect Rule for all men, etc. -- unto the end
of the world.

Faith is b^gotten by Preaching the Word with the work of his blessed Spirit:
-- Christ the Way to bring us to Life, etc. page 42, 43, 50.

Animad.
The Spirit of Truth leads into all Truth; therefore this Spirit, or Christ
within, is both the Guide, Way, and Rule to all that are Spirtiually minded;
All men have not the Scriptures to the World's end; but Christ is given both
for a Covenant and Light for Salvation to the ends of the Earth.

[ J. N. his Idolatry, in exalting the Scriptures into the place of Christ.
The Scriptures the enlightening way of the Lord, -- The perfect way of God, --
A Light unto his paths, p. 4, 5. The Gospel, -- The Seed in the hearts. The
will of God, in order to Salvation, page 11, 17, 20. Eternal Life therein (viz.
in Scriptures) page 24. The Scripture's an absolute perfect Rule (in order to
man's Salvation) for all men to walk by, and none other, page 24, 25, 26, 27,
28, 29.

The Scriptures may be corrupted by man. False Teachers corrupted the
Scriptures. The Scriptures may, and is corrupted by man, p. 19, 20. The Devil
takes out of men's hearts -- the Scriptures of the New Testament, page 17.

Animad.
To the first part, these are high Names put upon the Scriptures, but not so
proved thereby: -- For the Enlightening, perfect Way, and Word of the Lord God,
the Gospel, the Seed, the Will of God, Eternal Life, etc. were before the
Scriptures were written, and did preceed the writing thereof it them who spoke
or writ them, as they were moved by the Holy Ghost; and Eternal Life is in
Christ, not contained in the Scriptures, as the unbelieving Jews vainly
thought, Joh. 5. (who set up the Scriptures above Christ the Life) And the
Scriptures are not the absolute sole Rule for Salvation (and none other)
especially if they be corrupted by the Devil and Wicked men. But the Rule of
the spiritual mind is spiritual, of that Spirit which leads the true Believers
into all truth. For that which must be owned for the Rule of Faith, Life, and
Salvation, must likewise be infallible, pure, and incorruptible; Christ being
the Author of the holy Faith, and his Light the Rule of the right
Understanding, Conviction, and Persuasion, and consequently of the Belief.

[ J. N's Contrad.]
The Gospel which was preached unto every Creature under Heaven, was the
Scriptures of the New Testament: The Everlasting Gospel. -- The general ground
of Faith and Assurance. Now to deny the Scriptures to be the Word, is to deny
the very Fountain and Wellspring of Comforts to the Soul in Afflictions, page
12, 35, 42, 44.

The Scriptures is corrupted by man. -- Prayer and Supplication to God by his
Spirit, by Faith in Christ God approves. -- Christ says, Ye will not come to
me, that ye may have Life, page 20, 24, 44.

Animad.
Both many Creatures, and the Gospel, were before the Scriptures were written;
and the Light of the Gospel is more general to ground Faith upon than the
Scriptures: and it is the Light of the Power (or Gospel) of God in the hearts.
And the Gospel is preached in every Creature under Heaven. And eternal Life is
in Christ the Incorruptible Seed, the Word, Spirit, Life, and Light. And God
is the very Fountain (whose fullness is in Christ) and the Wellspring of
Comforts to the Soul; not the Scriptures: This Opposer might as well say the
Scriptures are God, as the very fountain and wellspring of Comforts. And those
Unbelievers that thought to have Eternal Life in the Scriptures, were like J.
N. and his Brethren, who will not come to Christ that they might have Life. And
if we must Pray and Supplicate God by the Spirit, then the immediate guidance
of the Spirit of God must be to us a Rule therein; not the Letter.

[ J. N's Contrad.]
The Scriptures are a perfect absolute Rule (in order to man's Salvation) for
all men to walk by, and none other. -- For the sons of men to walk by unto the
ends of the world, page 32, 33, 34, 35.

A Second Covenant of his Will he foretold, Jer. 31. is still in force for all
men to walk by, and none other. -- The Second Covenant was confirmed by the
Blood of that spotless Lamb, etc. -- The Second Covenant of God's Will in order
to man's Salvation, was confirmed by the Death of his only begotten Son, page
27, 28.

Animad.
If the second Covenant or new Testament, may be the perfect Rule for all men
to walk by, and none other (as is confessed) then must the immediate Teachings of
God in his Spirit be followed and obeyed as the perfect Rule; for the New
Covenant-way is spiritual, to wit, the Law and Spirit of God in the inward
parts; and this is above the Writings (or Letter) outward, which many in remote
parts of the world, have not. (Many have not the Bible who have a spiritual
Light or Law of God within as the Gentiles had, Romans 2.) And Paul was not a
Minister of the Letter, but of the Spirit; wherefore thou that say the
Scriptures are the absolute Rule (for Salvation) for all men to the worlds end,
when many of whom have them not; therein thou have shut out the spiritual Rule
of the New Covenant, and art one of them that tread the blood of Christ under
foot; by which the second Covenant was confirmed and ratified. And why have
thou such hard thoughts of God, as to think tha^ all Nations that have not the
Scriptures outwardly, are deprived of Salvation for want of them? But in plain
Contradiction to thy self, The second Covenant is a perfect Rule still in force
for all men to walk by, and no other.

[ J.N's Contrad.]
The Scriptures of the New Testament so confirmed, are a perfect Rule for all
men to walk by, and none other, p. 29. The New Testament Letter is to be our
Rule, page 103.

In the second Covenant of his Will, in order to man's Salvation, there is the
Man, Christ Jesus, at the right hand of God, etc. In his second Covenant he
has promised himself to be ^he God of his People, 2 Cor. 6.16, 17, 18. page
29, 30.

Animad.
The Scriptures, Writings, or Letter (outward) (whether of the Old or New
Testament); And the second Covenant which is spiritual and inward, are two
distinct things: In this second Covenant God is the Teacher of his People
himself, immediately by his immediate Spirit, Power, or Unction within, which
teaches the spiritual minds of all things, which is true and no lie.

And what Scripture have Baptists for saying that the New Testament- Letter is
to be our Rule? Let them produce plain Scripture- proof for their Assertion
herein, or else confess their error. For Pa^l expressly testified, that God had
made them able Ministers of the New Testament; not of the Letter, but of the
Spirit, etc. 2 Cor. 3. He does not say they were Ministers of the Letter of the
New-Test^ment; his words will bear no such meaning: for he plainly
distinguishes between the New Testament and the Letter, as he does between
Spirit and Letter. Many both Priests and Baptists, have (and preach from) that
he calls the Letter of the New Testament, who never knew the Spirit in its
living ministration, although the Scriptures testify thereto.

[ J. N's Contrad.]
The Scriptures are a perfect Rule, in order to Salvation, for all men, unto
the end of the world. -- The very fountain and wellspring of Comforts to the
Soul, page 44.

Act. 3.23. It is said, A Prophet shall the Lord your God raise up unto you of
your Brethren (says Moses) like unto me, him shall you hear in all things;
whatsoever he shall say unto you (observe that) Him shall you hear, etc. In the
second Covenant -- Salvation and Eternal Life to those that obey the same, --
in his Son: Christ a way to bring us to Life, page 23, 31, 39, 40, 50.

Animad.
See how manifestly this Opposer has, in these passages, broke the neck of his
own Cause: For if the Son of God must be heard in all things, and he the way to
Life, and Salvation be in him (as confessed) then the Scriptures are not the
fountain and wellspring of Comforts: God is the Fountain, not the Scriptures,
as most ignorantly and blasphemously is assetted of them.

Also note how J. N. has totally confuted and destroyed his Cause (of the
Scriptures being the only Rule) in what follows.

[ J. N's Contrad.]
Abel, Enoch, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Noah, and the rest of the Holy Men before
Moses day, -- I grant they had a sufficient Rule before the Scriptures were
written, -- They had a more infallible Word to walk by (viz. from God's own
mouth) than is now to us; for it is possible, that some Scriptures might be
corrupted: -- This may be granted in the b^st sense, that the Spirit is the
Rule. -- The Spirit is of more efficacy than the Letter. -- I shall freely
grant that the Spirit is greater than the Letter, etc. page 104, 106, 108, 110,
112.

Animad.
Here Is enough granted to make void all the Baptists work for the Scriptures
being the only Rule, seeing there was a certain Rule to the Holy Men of God
long before the Scriptures were written, which was more infallible than they;
even that of the Spirit, which is above and greater than the Letter, as is
confessed. Reader, take notice of this his ample confession to the Spirit,
against himself and his carnal conceits, in his so highly exalting the Letter
as he has done in much of his Book.

[ J.N. his Doct.] There are a People that have need to have more Christ's than
one; otherwise I know not how they will have a Christ in every man, especially
those who cry up a Light in every man [which this Opposer stiles] a feigned
Christ, or Light within, p. 18, 29, 61, 72, 74.

Answ. See the ignorance and scornful spirit this man shows forth in this
erroneous stuff: For, 1. Jesus Christ that was in every Saint and true
Believer, was not more Christ's than one; He was still one and the same Christ,
how, or in whomsoever manifest. 2dly, His Light in every man, is a true divine
and spiritual Light, and not a feigned Light, as blasphemously he accuses it.
3dly, It Is a falsehood still to accuse us, with affirming, That Christ is in
every man: For we say a true Light or Gift of Jesus Christ is given to every
man, whereby to enlighten the Consciences of mankind.

[ J.N's Contrad.]
The Word in their hearts, Romans 10.7. was not Christ. -- The true Christ does
not dwell in any man as he is Christ; as he is properly and principally Christ,
he cannot dwell in man. -- If he be with the Father, then he is not in man,
page 54, 60, 61, 66.

Christ may be said to dwell in man. I shall freely own the giving forth of his
blessed Spirit into the hearts of his children whereby they are directed in his
most holy will by the enlightening of their spirits,-So far as the Spirit of
God and Christ dwells in men, or any of his Attributes; so far God and Christ
both may be said to dwell in his Saints. -- If we Love one another, God
dwells in us. -- He that dwells in love, dwells in God, and God in him,
p. 77, 78, 79, 80.

Animad.
To the first part, I say his insinuation against us of Christ ^eing in every
man, is still false, and not our Principle; but that a spiritual Light of
Christ is, his Contradiction and Confutation to himself is obvious, in 1st.
asserting that the true Christ does not dwell in any man. 2dly. The true Christ
does dwell in man ( viz. in good men) in that the blessed Spirit does dwell in
his Children, and direct them in his most holy Will; and is not this their Rule
then?

[ J. N's Contrad.]
God dwells in them. -- Now the Apostle does not intend the real Being Gross
ignorance! is God any where without His real Being?
of God (viz. in Saints) in his Glorious and Immortal Substance. -- God and
Christ are out of all men in order to their Glorious and Immortal Being. --
Those that receive Christ's blessed Spirit, such are said to receive his
Father, yet neither of them in their real Being, page 79, 80, 87.

This Indwelling of Christ in his People, is by his Word and blessed Spirit,
and other pure Graces that are of his pure Nature and Being dwelling in his
Saints, -- and his Saints dwelling in the pure Life of the same, so Christ may
be said to dwell in them, and they in him: -- When we dwell in the Life of his
Word, and powerful operation of his Spirit, and the Life of those Gifts and
holy Graces being of the same Nature with Christ. -- God and Christ cannot be
separate in in their givings forth. -- Christ in them the hope of Glory, p. 81,
82, 83, 86, 87.

Animad.
The manifest Contradictions in these passages run thus, viz. God and Christ in
their Immortal Being are not in Saints, yet the Spirit and pure Graces that are
of his pure Nature and Being, dwell in Saints. So then this eternal Spirit of
God and Christ (who are inseparable) is of the glorious Immortal Being of both,
and in the Saints. And when God and Christ are said to dwell in them, dare J.
N. say they are divided from their own Being? What place is God in where his
Being is not? And, who art thou that would limit the infinite being of God
from his place and habitation in his Saints?

[ J. N's Contrad.]
^oh. 1.1. proves the Word to be God, for Christ was not Christ in the
beginning; but Christ was in time, when the Godhead took flesh to it self, and
not before he was born of the Virgin Mary: And it cannot be in reason
concluded, that Christ was the Word before Christ was, etc. p. 50, 51.

[Of Christ] He was not the Son of man from the beginning, for then he was only
the Son of God, and the Son of Man a^ he was of the Seed of Abraham, page 66,
67.

Animad.
What a gross Error is it to affirm, That Christ was not from the beginning;
(or that he was not the Word in the b^ginning?) And what a denial of his
Divinity, like the old Heretics? And how plainly contradicted in confessing
the Son of God was from the beginning, and was then? I ask, If the Son of God
was not Christ? Or, the Anointed of God? Seeing he was the Son of God before he
took flesh, or was born of Mary (and the Anointed then also) (for God created
all things by Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 3.9. and by the Son he made the Worlds, Heb.
1.2.) The Anointing was Spiritual, and spiritually received by the Heavenly
Birth Christ's Spiritual Birth owned.
the Anointed, the holy Seed which is spiritual; as that which is born of the
Spirit is Spirit, etc. Much more might be said, on the behalf of the Divinity
of the Son of God, or Christ, who was the Word in the beginning, and with the
Father in his Glory before the world began.

[ J. N's Contrad.]
Christ was remote from them, (Christ does not dwell in any man) Christ in
person remote at the right hand of God, viz. in his body of flesh, -- Personal
being, -- transhapen manhood, -- a glorified body of flesh at the right hand of
God, etc. page, 55, 60, 63, 66, 67, 71, 73.

The Indwellings of Christ by his Word and Truth, being of the same nature with
him, Joh^ 15.4. to v. 11. Christ is setting forth himself to be the Vine, and
his People the branches, and advises them, -- Abide in Me and I in you, --
from Ephesians. 5.30. for we are members of his body, of his flesh, and of hi^ bones,
page 75.83.

Animad.
If the Indwelling of God and Christ be such in his People, and the Saints, in
such near union and conjunction with Christ, as the branches with the Vine, and
members with the Body; Then it is false and a lying Imagination, to imagine
either Christ, God, and his right hand so remote, as not to dwell in any man,
no not in their own People; [and these word^, Christ in Person, remote in his
body of flesh, etc. and not in any man] are not Scripture, but added: What
strange conceits and limitations would J. N. put upon the unlimited God (like
the old Heretical Monks of Egypt, called Anthropomorphites) contrary to his own
confession.

[ J. N's Contrad.]
Christ sits Advocate with the Father, to plead the virtue of his blood,
that as there are new sins committed, we might, through Faith, have fresh grace
in the pardon thereof, page 73.

The Cond^scention of God and Christ into the hearts of his People, to work up
his Saints into the same nature with himself, etc. -- God and Christ is holy,
so his Word is holy, Heb. 4.12. and through Faith in this Word Christians are
wrought up into the nature of it self, and into God. Gal. 4.19. Little Children
in whom I travel in birth, till Christ be formed in you, and this -- to bring
them forth into a Gospel purity, in heart and life. -- Finally Brethren
farewell, be perfect, be of good comfort, etc. page 78, 84, 87, 88.

Animad.
Wherein the Baptists, or others, do preach up (or plead) the continuance of
sin in all men (even Believers, etc.) term of life: This is flatly contradicted
in J. N's following words, viz. That God and Christ works up his Saints into
the same pure Nature with himself [which is not a sinful Nature] however he
tells us of new sins committed, which (he says) Christ pleads for pardon of;
And that through Faith in the Word, Christians are wrought into the Nature of
it self, and into God [in whom is no sin, nor imperfection] And where Christ is
formed in man [he does not say in a personal being remote] and men thereby
brought forth into Gospel purity in heart and life, etc. Such do not always
commit (or renew) new sins (which renew the old man) but are renewed in Grace,
and in the new-man by the Spirit of Holiness, knowing Christ's Intercession
answered ( viz. that they might be kept from evil, Joh. 17.15. to the end.) The
sins of such being done away, and blotted out by the blood of Christ, which in
his Light within is experienced (in its virtue and power) by such as believe
and walk in it, 1 John 1.7. Now, if J.N's Contradictions, as employed, should be
thus placed, viz. Finally Brethren farewell, be Perfect, be of good Comfort, --
There are new sins committed, etc. How would this answer the end of the Command
[ Be Perfect? Mat. 5.48. 2 Cor. 13.11. 1 Pet. 1.14, 15, 16. Lev. 11.44.
etc.] Or, be any comfort^ble Doctrine to any that truly desire perfect freedom
from sin, and not to live any longer therein?

Here follows the Contradictions of Tho. Danson, W. Kiffin, and Jer. Ives,
upon their Principle, which was, viz.
Contradict.
THat the Scriptures are the only Rule of Faith. T.D. The Scriptures without
divine illumination are but the foundation of an Historical Faith, and not of a
saving Faith. The divine illumination of the Spirit, is the Foundation or Rule
of saving Faith.

Contradict.
T.D. and W. Kiffin. The Director and Rule of Faith and Salvation, are two
distinct things, as the way to Bristol, and my Director into the way.

Yet that Christ is both the Director into the way to God, and the Way it self,
they could not deny.

Irational Inconsistences, and Contradictions.
T.D. That the Light which the Gentiles had, Romans 2. was not sufficient for
Salvation.

That their disobedience to the Light they had, was the cause of their
condemnation. Yet,

That if they lived up to their Light, it would not lead them to Acceptance
with God.

Their Contradictions at the latter Discourse.
Contradictions.
W. Kiffin. The Spirit (of God) considered as a Rule, is absolutely excluded,
etc.

Jer. Ives. The Scriptures, including the Spirit, are the only Rule. Our saying
the Scriptures are the only Rule, does not exclude all other Rule (or the
Spirits illumination) any more than to say God only has Immortallity, does
exclude all else from having Immortality.

Jo. Newman [his Contradiction to W.K.] This may be granted in the best sense,
that the Spirit is the Rule; It is of more efficacy than the Letter.

Contrad.
W. K. and Alderm. Hayes Quest. Whether the Scriptures are the only Rule of
Faith, yea or nay? [affirmed by them.]

Jer. Ives [in his Letter] I never owned this Question in their words.

Animad.
Here it is manifest how these men have shaked their own Foundation, destroyed
their own Cause, and are confounded in their Babylonish building; they having
rejected the chief Cornerstone: but they who believe in the Power of God
(which is known in his Light within) and trust in his Everlasting Name, shall
never be confounded.

THE END.
The faults of the Press the ingenuous Reader may perceive by the sense of the
matter, whether they be points, letters, syllables or words; which are not to
be imputed to the Author, but corrected, whereof these are some.

ERRATA.
In the Preface, page 4. l. 25. the parenthesis is misplaced, read it thus;
Light within (not prejudice and darkness) judge. P. 13. in the Margent, read
Soc. Scho. l. 30. r. Theodotus. P. 14. l. 11. for heirs, r. haeresie. P. 22. l
4. blot out [and] P. 28. l. 12* dele without. P. 35. l. 34. r. (or Inferred) P.
62. l. 25. for it, r. i^.


