AN EPISTLE FOR TRUE Love, Unity AND ORDER IN THE Church of Christ, Against the
Spirit of Discord, Disorder and Confusion, etc. Recommended to Friends in
Truth, chiefly for the sake of the Weak and Unstable Minded, for Information
and Encouragement in our Christian Unity and Society, held in the Spirit of
Christ, both in Faith and Practice.

By two Servants of the Church, according to our Measures, Anne Whitehead, Mary
Elson.

But God has tempered the Body together -- that there should be NO SCHISM in
the Body, but that the Members should have the SAME CARE one for another, 1
Cor. 12. LONDON, Printed by Andrew Soul, and are sold at his Shop in
Devonshire New-buildings, without Bishops-Gate, 1680.

AN EPISTLE FOR TRUE Love, Unity and Order, etc.
Dear Friends;
WHom the Lord has called out of the World's Ways and Manners, and chosen to
himself, and found faithful according to the Proportion of Faith, and Measure
of his Grace received, how to walk, Oh! let us hold fast that which we have
received, that none may take our Crown: Oh! let us keep to our first Love, let
us do our first Works, and be rightly zealous for the Lords Honor; and so with
a good Conscience toward God, and in the sweet Spirit of Peace, seeking good
one toward another, as good Examples and wholesome Paterns in our Practices.
Oh! let us keep our good Order in the Truth, and Unity of the Spirit, even as
we received of Christ 1 John 1.7.
Jesus in the beginning, that we should walk in the Light, as he is in the
Light (so shall we have fellowship one with another) which light is one in us
all, and the one only true and living Way, leading to the Knowledge and living
Obedience of the one, true and living God, that in his own living Spirit of
Truth, we might Worship him, and in all wholesome Service hold forth his Holy
and Reverend Name to be One in us all, who are gathered into it, serving the
Lord with one Heart, one Soul, one Mind and one Consent. -- And in the
beginning of our Day, you that were then born and brought forth in the Truth,
you know the Harmony of our Unity was our Beauty and Comeliness, yea, our
Strength and Compleatness, so far as we had obtained then; and so it is now,
blessed be the Lord, can we with one Heart say, who by his heavenly Power have
been from the beginning kept upon his Everlasting Foundation of true Unity,
held in his Spirit, which is the Bond of our Peace, to this very Day and Time,
in which the Lord has suffered Blindness, in part, to happen to some, through
their own Neglect of Watchfulness, and declining their first Love by the
Enemy's Subtilty prevailing, who came out amongst us, and had a part in the
Belief and Discovery of the Way of Truth; but now, some only have the Sheeps
clothing, and others have lost that too, who through a prejudiced Mind are
alienated from that Unity of Spirit and Bond of Peace, in which we keep our
wholesome Practices, which we have received in the Unity and Order of the
Gospel of Peace, and Truth of Christ Jesus, in the fellowship of the Spirit, in
Bowels of Mercy, being 2 Phil. 1. 4.
like-minded, and of one accord, in whatsoever things are True, Just, Honest,
and of good Report; not that we should think of them only, but be in the
Practice of them, (as we are) and feel the God of Peace with us therein, who
are 1 Cor. 1. 6. and 10.
confirmed in the Testimony of Christ Jesus, the one Guide, Way and Rule we are
to walk after, where all speak one thing, that there be no Dissension amongst
us, but to be knit together in one Mind and in one Judgment; this we have
received of Christ Jesus, one Lord, Ring and only Law-given, that we might walk
so in subjection to his Rule and Government, that all things might be done
Decently and in Order; for our God is the God of Order, in all the Churches of
his Saints, and not the God of Confusion, blessed be his Name; but to our
burden and grief, we find among some, a contrary Spirit that will not subject
to Unity in wholesome Practice, amongst as, and that will needs interpole to
destroy Unity in same places, and obtrude it self to confound our wholesome
Order and Practices received amongst us, as a Church and People. And through
this contrary Spirit, and prejudiced Mind, the Accuser of the Brethren is
broken out, under a sp^^^ous pre^ence, crying out. Liberty of Conscience,
Liberty of Conscience, in opposition to those needful, convenient and wholesome
Practices exercised amongst us, in outward things, to which we are called, as a
People that are distinguished from the World's dark Ways and Corrupt Manners,
in keeping our Consiences void of Offense toward God and Man, in keeping both
in the Power and Form of Godliness.

Now that the Simple may not be enshared, nor the Weak unstable minded
deceived, not the Unwatchful at unawares overtaken, through the crafty
Insinuations of this accusing, opposing, dividing Spirit, that is at work in
this our day, to confound Order, against the peaceable Government of Christ,
amongst his People; therefore in Duty to the Lord, and to clear my Conscience,
for the sake of those beforementioned, are these few Lines writ; Wherefore in
Humility of Soul, as before the Lord, I beseech you, tender Ones, in
seriousness, and fear toward God, weigh the Matter: This Dividing, Accusing,
Prejudicial Worker, would introduce a Belief, That an Apostasy is entering, and
we are gone from the Beginning, or first Principle, and the Power lost; and new
Forms are setting up, and Imposition on Consciences, and the like. And amongst
whom is all this, say they, but amongst us who are in Unity of Spirit, both in
Faith and Practices, with sincere mind toward God, are preserved in
subjection, peaceably in Unity, and wholesome comely Order that speaks forth
our God to be the God of Order; and it is amongst these, and such that they
imagine this Fearful Imposture, and Atbitrary Rule, imposing Prescriprions and
Laws on the tender Consciences of the Weak, is now gotten up to Exercise, and
so the Liberty of the tender Conscience is lost. And you say, They are
entangled with a yoke of Bondage again, who would divide the Heritage of God at
this day. Pray Friends, let us in this consider whether these in this
Blindness, which God has suffered through their prejudiced Mind, justly to
happen in them, by which are they not putting Darkness for Light and Light for
Darkness, while they are striving in the ^^^^ness of their Wills to rule,
placing their own Wills for Conscience, and would have a Liberty therein, which
Christ never set free to any that are in a Perverse, Gainsaying, Opting,
Willful spirit, void of the Reason of Truth, and the Fellowship that is in it
and so are led by a Misguided Conscience; for we never understood that
Conscience to be rightly guided, that was not renewed and regulated by the
light of Christ Jesus, which is one in all Consciences, and leads into the
S^^^ness of 1 Cor. 1. 6.
Mind, not only in faith, but also in sound Judgment and Practice (and in the
Testimony of Christ Jesus has been confirmed in us) the true Re^^^^^er and
Guide of the Conscience void of Offense; but now where Self-will is put for
Conscience, it is sensibly felt to be a gross Mistake. And such are (in
Christian Charity) to be pitied and better informed, and indeed much Travel
has been for that, so that the Misled in a contrary Judgment might be helped
and reduced back into Unity and our peaceable Fellowship, in our wholesome
Practices, in the outward Affairs of Truth; but that which adds to our Sorrow,
that though they still ery, The tender Consciences, yet woeful Experience
demonstrates it far otherwise, where Prejudice has so hardened, that there is
not so much softness left for the Reason of Truth to take Impression, or to
receive that which pertains to Love and good Works, which is one end and
product of our Meetings, distinctly and respectively the Men Friends, who
discharge their places, to whom the Godly Women always give the Pre-eminence,
as Brethren and Women Friends in their places, not seeking Rule over one
another, but that we may be Furtherers of one another Joy, and be each others
Crown of rejoicing in the Lord, meets in the Fear of the Lord, as in the Light
of Christ Jesus in our Consciences, we received, so to walk and do according to
the Order of his Spirit, in which Christ is Present in our so meeting together;
and the faithful can feal to the Testimony of it, to the Glory of his Name
forever.

But wherein does this great and heavy Imposition on tender Consciences
consist? One thing is, say some, Women's Meetings are imposed: Why do you compel
any contrary to their Freedom? No; all are left to the Measure of Truth in
them, which is one and the same in all Consciences; but Informing, Instructing
and Exhorting, that every one be found in the Unity of our Duty, according to
our Measure of the Light of Christ Jesus, received to walk in it, as Members of
his Body to discharge our Office, and Servants in Christ Family to do our
Service, as the good Women of old were Helpers in the Work of the Gospel, in
such things as are proper to us, as visiting and Relieving the Sick, the Poor
more especially and Destitute amongst us, that they be helped, a also the Poor
Widows, and Fatherless Orphans, that the Distressed in all things be
rightlyanswered, the Children at Nurse be rightly educated, and well brought
up, in order to a future well-being in the Creation. Again, we being met
together, the Elder Women to instruct the Younger to all wholesome things,
Loving their own Husbands and Children, to be Discreet, Chaste, Sober, keeping
at Home, that the Word of God we profess be not Blasphemed, etc. with many
other Matters pertient to us, as a Meeting whom the Lord blesses with his
Power and Presence, to sustain and bear us up against all our Opposers.

Again, It is Imposition (says the Workers of Dissension) for Marriages to
offer their Intentions to the Consideration of the Women's Meeting. But pray
consider, in the Reason of Truth, a Marriage has an equal Concern in the
Woman, as in the Man; and it is as reasonable to consider the Women may have as
near a Concern in that matter with the Woman, as the Men on the other Part. And
farther it is said, ' It Is Imposition to go more than once to the Brethrens
Meeting. But say we, that are in our wholesome Practices in these Matters, and
our Consciences bear us witness in the sight of God, our Eye is to the Honor
of his Truth therein, therefore cannot encourage or allow People we are
concerned with, to hasten or run together in Marriage, without due Care and
Weightiness, and that we are satisfied they are clear in all things touching
their Marriage, as they ought to be, and for which end there ought to be a
special care over Young People, to whom the Aged had need to be Examples, both
of Gravity and good Order, that Christ's Yoke be not cast off by either, nor
any false Liberty of the Flesh set up, encouraged or soothed among us;
wherefore when they have proposed their Intentions to one Meeting, for them to
consider, it is but reasonable they have time to make Inquiry and Search into
the the Matter, so as they may be satisfied, that all things are sweet and
savoury, that so far aswe can, we may be approved of by all in such public
Affairs. Yea, But you will have such to come the second time, who are known to
be clear. Yea, it is but reasonable that such should manifest their Patience and
Subjection, as good Examples to others, in these Needful and wholesome
Practices, that are of good Report. And therefore we cannot approve such in
their willful Endeavors, to confound the Unity of our Order in this matter,
under pretense of a burden to their Conscience; for it was no burden to come
once; for that Meeting in it self being Good, Just, Honest, and of good Report,
answering the Light of Christ Jesus, which is one in all Consciences, as well
in the Ignorant, Blind, Mis-guided and Erring, because they will not be
informed, the Light is the same there to reprove and inform, as it is in the
Conscience ruled and guided by the Light: Therefore pray consider how that can
contract a burden, (viz.) the going twice to such a Meeting, as
beforementioned, how it can cause a burden on the Conscience that is rightly
informed, though it may be weak, but rather contradicts the Self-will that
brings Bondage, and blinds the Consciences: And are not such rather by their
opposing Will justly under the Reproof of the Church, and that Endeavors may
be, that the Understanding of such be opened, and brought to a better
Information in their Consciences? For from the beginning we believe God's
Witness in all Consciences is one, and its Reproofs of one Nature and Tendance,
and its Instruction^ tending to one and the same end, and leads all, as they
are guided by it, into one Way which allows of no false Liberty. Yea, but you
are gone from the Beginning; for you had not this Way in the Beginning, say the
Opposers. Pray consider, above tweny six Years ago, in the South Parts we were
a very little handful of People, gathered into the Belief of the Light of
Christ Jesus; so as it is that very Principle of Life in us, that we through
Obedience to it might come to know God, as it is Eternal Life to know him, and
rightly to worship him in his Spirit, and to be led by him into all Truth, and
in Testimony of his own Spirit, in these our Practices, which since the Lord
has called us to, as we are a People called and gathered by the Lord. Pray
Consider, I speak the Truth of my Knowledge, and my Conscience bears me
witness in what I have or shall say in this Matter, according to my small
Portion and Measure, in the Unity of the Grace received (I give God the Glory,
in Humility of Soul before him, for my Preservation to this Day) for pray
consider, through the smallness of Number, in the beginning, we were not so
capable as now for Order in outward Affairs, nor was there then such occasion
as now, but then the Grace of God grew amongst us, and the mighty Arm of his
Power was manifested, by which many were gathered to believe in the Light of
Jesus Christ, it being that, and no other Name given under Heaven, by which men
must be saved. Now in our little measure of Faith, in this One Way, One Name,
One Truth, we were as in a threefold Cord of God's Love, joined together; and
as we increased in Number, then occasion begun of Services, of several kinds,
which we were called in the Truth to consider of, which are not so proper here
to mention, but this one of Marriage. Before we were or could be gathered into
the Order of Men and Women's Meeting: Upon the weight of the matter, a necessity
did appear, that Friends in the Unity of the Spirit and Wisdom of God should
consider of a Way wherein this matter might be transacted among our selves, in
wholesome Savoury Order, as the Truth might in no wise be Scandalized, but the
Testimony of Truth born in it to the World: The most convenient Method then
seen, for Truth's sake, was, that Persons declared their Intentions in our
public Meeting; after Friends were satisfied in their Marrying, they took each
other in the public Meeting: But after our Meetings grew more Numerous, and
also disorderly Spirits began to get up, which were not subject to the Truth,
such would intrude in to our Meetings, to take each other; so then a Necessity
in Truth required a further Method, for a more particular and strict Care in
this case: In all which we are not gone from the Light and Power of God, and
first Principle; but in these and other things we have been in our good Order
and Practices, and sweet Fellowship managed by it; and I hope the tender in
Conscience will consider, that are impartially Minded, that it is no Imposition
to inform and persuade the Ignorant and Willful to subject in this or any other
matter, that is Honest, Just, Savoury and of good Report, and lawful to conform
to, in the Unity of Love to practice, being no other but what is consonant to
the Conscience, swayed and regulated by the Light of Jesus Christ, in which is
the true Liberty of the Conscience, whether weak or strong: For I hope all will
conclude, that if the weak, in their little measure of Light, be kept
Conformable to the Truth, that by the Light they cannot be led in their little
measure to oppose the strong in their greater measure; and may see further,
that it is not reasonable in Truth; for the Light cannot contradict it self, and
it is the same in the strong as in the weak; But it is greatly to be lamented at
this day, that to any that have known the Lord, and at any time fellowship
among his People, the Cross of Christ should become so ineffectual, that such
Blindness is happened, that they should put Selfopposing-will for a tender
Conscience: I do not say, they know it; but whether they do or no, I pray God
open their Understandings, and subdue that perverse wilful Spirit and cross
Selfish-humor, that works in opposition to a General Good and Peaceable
Subjection amongst the People of the Lord and Church of Christ. Surely these,
though they may cry, Liberty of Conscience, and pretend for tender Consciences
too, yet they are not fit Subjects for that Liberty that Christ redeems to, and
sets free in, to serve him with a Conscience purged from Dead Works; nay, they
that set themselves, in their wilful prejudiced Opposition, against our
Peaceable practicing in the Church of God; Whatsoever things are true,
whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are
pure, whatsoever things pertain to Love, whatsoever things are of good report,
Phil. 4. 8. In which the God of Peace is with us now; that which is opposing
our Unity therein, would affright the simple Ones with amazing expressions of
Imposition, etc. on weak Consciences, and going from the Spirit of Life and
Power into the Form; but blessed be the Lord that we have kept our Habitation
in the Power, and held our Unity in that Spirit that gives us Life, thereby to
live to God, and not to our selves, to serve him in that Form of Godliness,
which the Power has brought forth amongst us, to live in the Unity of, and in
his Spirit, the Foundation of our Preservation, in Peace and Consolation to
this very day; and the Faith of such remains firm in God's everlasting Power,
even as we received in the beginning of the breaking forth of the Day of the
Lord, in which his ancient Arm and excellent Everlasting Name was revealed,
which is above every Name, into which a Number was gathered to believe and meet
in, and the Lord was there, and is to this very day in the midst of them, as
Thousands, and ten Thousands can speak to the Testimony of it; Oh, Glory,
Obedience, and everlasting Dominion be ascribed to his honorable and
everlasting Name over all forever; For the Kingdom of our God and his Christ,
on whose Shoulders the Government is laid, shall prevail through all Clouds of
opposition, and Mists of thick Darkness, that have risen out of a misguided
understanding, through a Prejudiced mind, even to ensnare the weak and simple,
and deceive the unstable Soul, drawing from our Christian Unity, which is
purely held in the Spirit.

And so, inasmuch as the Envious Worker is suffered to proceed, that would even
raze out the Foundation of Christ's Kingdom and Government, under which his
Subjects do only own their Christian Freedom and true Liberty of Conscience;
and whatsoever may be insinuated to the contrary, by the Enemy of our Souls
Welfare in the particular, and the Churches Peace in the general, which God
may suffer, it is for the Trial of our Patience, and Manifestation and
Confirmation of our Faith and Love one to another, and that it is in the
Election in Christ Jesus which cannot be deceived, whereby we are strong in the
Lord, and in the Power of his might is our confidence, that all shall work
together for good to the Called, Chosen and Faithful, according to his purpose
in Christ, and effectual working of his Grace; And that the Lord in his Power
and due time, will arise to clear the Innocence of his People, and Confound and
lay Waste all that which works in Opposition to the Prosperity and Unity of his
Truth, and peaceable Government of Christ in his Church, which is formed in the
Power of God.

So all Glory we ascribe to the one pure Power, in which we believed in the
beginning, as the Foundation of Christ's Government and Kingdom that shall
never have end. Anne Whitehead.

A true Information of our blessed Women's Meeting (For we are blessed, and the
Lord has blessed us, praised be that Everlasting Arm of Power, that gathered
us in the beginning to be a Meeting) betwixt 3 or 4 and twenty Years ago.
THus it was, after the Word of eternal Life and Salvation, and Light of Christ
Jesus in the Conscience, had been Preached in this City, for some time, many
there were that received the Report, and was Convinced of it, many Poor as well
as Rich; and often times Sickness and Weakness came upon many Poor Ones, and many
Distressed and troubled in mind, when the Judgments of the Lord were upon them;
and they would oftentimes desire the Servants of the Lord to come unto them,
such that had a Word in season to speak to them: And our dear Friend George
Fox, that man of God, for so he is, the Lord has made him a Blessing in his
Hand to many, praised be the Lord forever, he was many times sent for to many
that were Sick and Weak in this City, and when he came to behold their want of
things needful for them, some scarcely Clothes to cover them, or Food to eat,
or any one to look to them in their Distresses and Wants: The consideration of
it was weighty upon him, and he was moved of the Lord to advise to a Woman's
Meeting; and in order thereunto, he sent for such Women as he knew in this
City; of which there are many living to this day, that can testify to the
same, who keep the Meeting in the Faith of that Power that gathered us
together; Blessed be the Lord forever who makes willing, and gives strength to
answer his Requirings in all things. And when dear G. Fox declared unto us what
the Lord had made known unto him by his Power, That there should be a Woman's
Meeting, that so all the Sick, the Weak, the Widows and the Fatherless, should
be minded and looked after in their Distresses, that so there should be no Want
amongst the Lords People, but that all Distressed ones should be minded and
looked after: I can truly say, we had an answer of God in our Hearts to his
Testimony, and my Soul was refreshed at that time, and my Heart tendered, with
many more of my Sisters, in the sensible feeling of that everlasting Life and
Power of the Lord, and his Universal Love that had moved in his dear Servant,
to call us to this Work; and we joined with him in the Power of God in it: and
so we appointed a Meeting, and after we had met for some time, we considered
which way we should answer the Necessities; and it arose in the Hearts of some
Friends, That we should have a convenience, that so all the Faithful might
offer as unto the Lord, not knowing what one another offers; that so from him
they might expect their Reward; and it was concluded upon accordingly by the
Meeting. And there were found among us some that were unworthy, that we could
not relieve out of that which was provided for the Faithful; and yet they were
such that frequented our public Meetings, and looked unto us for Charity; and
we could not send them empty away; So we considered, and had a Weekly Gathering
for them, that it might be fulfilled, as it is written, Do good unto all; but
especially to the Household of Faith. And after some time of our meeting
together, their came two of the Brethren from the Men's Meeting to us, when we
were met together, expressing their Unity with us, and also did declare the
mind of the Men's Meeting, (viz.) That they would be ready to help and assist us
in any thing we should desire of them for Truth's Service: And so in some time
it was agreed upon, in the Unity of the Truth, that the Men Friends should pay
the Poor Friends Rents, and find them Coals, (such as we Relieve, that were
faithful) and put out such poor Friends Children, as we should offer to them;
And this has been done almost from the beginning of our Meeting to this Day;
besides many other Services that fall in by the way, that cannot be omitted by
us: And thus the Work of the Lord has been carried on and prospered by the Arm
of his everlasting Power, Magnified be his Name forever, who has found us
worthy, and made us willing to answer whatsoever he requires of us, according
to the measure received of him. And this I do declare, that it was the same
everlasting quickening Power that first visited us by the Spirit of Judgment and
of Burning, and wrought in our inward parts mightily, even as the little Leaven
in the three Measures of Meal, to purify and to cleanse, to purge out and put
under all that was contrary to the Lord, and to make us Habitations fit to do
his Will, that gathered us and made us a Meeting, and the same has been with us
to this very day, blessed and magnified be his Name forever.

And I have a Word in my Heart to say unto you all Back-sliders, Obstructers,
Opposers (and such as countenance them secretly) of this our heavenly Order of
Men and Women's Meetings, which the Lord by his Power has set up, and has given
Wisdom according to true Knowledge, to act in the Church of Christ: you that
have despised Dignities, and speak Evil of the Servants of the Lord, such that
faithfully have labored amongst us from the beginning, which the Lord has
found worthy of double Honor, giving some of them odd Names; Alas poor People!
what will become of you, except you Repent? Consider and see, whether some of
you could not once have plucked out your Eyes to have done them good? Oh what
is the matter now! Has not the Serpent deceived you, and made you to eat of the
forbidden Fruit, and let in the Spirit of Enmity that sows Dissension, and
makes Division in the Heritage of God; I do say, the Lord's Controversy is
with you, and your End will be Miserable, except you come to Repentance; which
my Soul has often desired for you: For I do well know, and the Lord has
sealed it upon my Heart, That that Spirit which has opposed the blessed Unity
and Order of Truth, in these our Men and Woman's Meetings, shall never prosper,
nor they who are in it, inwardly to God, without Repentance; although outwardly
they may make never so great a show with high Words and Notions. But says the
opposing Spirit, We are not against your Meetings in London; but we have no
such need in the Countries. Doubtless Christ's Churches in the Countries are
one and the same as in the Cities, of which he is Head of his Churches there as
in London; and surely his Members have the same Office and Service in kind and
quality, although it may be not so much in quantity, which is reasonable for
the Impartial minded to consider.

And now, my Dear Friends and Sisters, in the blessed Truth of our God, you
that have kept this our Meeting for many Years, and some of you from the first
Day the Lord gathered us together, and made us a Meeting, I do believe that you
with me can truly say, That we have felt the drawings of the Father's Love from
time to time to this our Meeting, and his Blessing is amongst us; Insomuch as
we, dared not to suffer any of our own Occasions to hinder us from this our
Service, to which the Lord has called us, but many times have pressed through
the crowd of much Business; and many things that would have hindered, but we
dared not to give way unto it, but in faithfulness answer the Lord's
Requirings: The Lord has been with us of a truth from time to time, his Living
Powerful Presence has been truly witnessed amongst us, to the refreshing of our
immortal Souls; which is a true Confirmation to us, that the Lord owns us in
this our Service. And I can truly say, I had true Breathings to the Lord in the
behalf of our younger Women, as they come to be settled in the World amongst
us, that they may be affected with the Work and Service of our Meeting as truly
as we have been, and are to this day, and that they may be Heirs of the Grace
of God with us. And this I can truly say, I have felt the zeal of the Lord to
arise in my Heart, sometimes in a Meeting, and sometimes upon my Bed against
this wicked Spirit, that has sought to lay waste and bring to naught our
blessed Meeting and heavenly Society and Order, which has been set up amongst
us; and a true sense has been upon me of our dear Friends up and down the
Nation, of their great Trial and Exercise that has been upon them, because of
this wicked dividing Spirit, and especially in my Native Country (viz.)
Wiltshire: And this was the first moving cause in the Power of God in my Heart,
to cast in my Mite as my Testimony to that everlasting Universal blessed Power,
which the Lord has made me a living Witness of, according to my measure: And
this I can say, the more Opposition we have had against our Women's Meeting, the
more we have increased in the Power of the Lord, and he has blessed our
Endeavors and Services; and therefore Friends, be not discouraged, but go on
in the Work and Service of the Lord in his Power* to his Glory, who has
honored his Daughters of Abraham and Sion, in his heavenly Work; and therefore
we cannot but serve the Lord in our Generation, and be Valiant for his Truth
upon Earth, and our desires are, that all our fellow Sisters in the Lords Truth
may do the same every where throughout the whole Earth, where the Lord has
gathered them, so that all may live to the Praise and Glory of God, Amen.

And though we are Absent in the Body, yet Present in Spirit with all the
Faithful, with the Spirit joying and beholding your spiritual Order in the
Spirit, and stedfastness of your Faith in Christ Jesus, the second Adam, the
Lord from Heaven, in whom our Peace and Rest is. Mary Elson.

THE END.

