THE Pernicious Way Of the Rigid PRESBYTER AND ANTICHRISTIAN MINISTERS,
DETECTED.

And several weighty Matters (in Controversy, betwixt Sion and her
Adversaries, or between the true Church and the false) discussed. To inform
both Magistrates, Ministers, and People, against the Spirit of Antichrist and
Persecution. Partly upon occasion of a Book, entitled, The QUAKERS LIBEL
Answered, by Creswel Whately; who calls himself Minister of the GOSPEL. To
which is annexed, Something concerning the true Christ, and his being in his
People; In answer to Matthew Caffin his great Error and Mistake of the Quakers,
in his Book, entitled, Faith in God's Promises, the Saints best Weapon.

LONDON, Printed for Robert Wilson, 1662.

The Pernicious Way of the rigid PRESBYTER, and Antichristian Ministers,
detected.
I. Touching Ministers Maintenance by Tithes, and whether they be now of Divine
right, or no?
SInce that we have seen several of the National Ministers have let fall their
Plea for Tithes, upon a divine account, and only have fled to the National Law,
and pleaded a civil Right to them (they not being able by the Scriptures to
maintain their Plea for them, to be now of Divine Right due to the Ministry) I
find one Creswel Whately (who calls himself a Minister of the Gospel) who (to
show his Ignorance and Confusion more than many others) has taken it upon him
(in his Book) to vindicate Tithes upon a Scripture account (as to be of Divine
Right due to them) And therefore let us a little (in the first place) see what
he says for them.

The said Creswel Whately says, Did not God appoint heretofore, that there
should be Tithes paid of all they had, and in the Gospel he has no where
repealed that Command; and that the Apostle upheld the Right of Tithes, though
he did forbear to take them? in page 2. and 17. of his Book. To which I answer;
This would both make the Apostle a Transgressor (if there were such a Command
in force which he did not obey, as this implies) as also it would make him
false in what he said in his Epistle to the Hebrews, touching the change of the
Priesthood, that took the Tithes, and the change of the Law, and disannulling
of the Commandment which the Sons of Levi had for Tithes; which Priesthood,
Law, and Commandment, the Apostle plainly shows the change and end of, as is
apparent in that of, Heb. 7.

And as for God's ordaining, That as they that Ministered at the Altar, were
partakers with the Altar; even so has ordained, That they that Preach the
Gospel, shall live of the Gospel; to which C. W. adds: Is it not plain, that as
the Levites did partake with the Altar, by taking Tithes; even so must they
that Preach the Gospel, live of the Gospel; namely, by taking Tyths also? To
which I answer; This is an absurd Argument, and that which the true Ministers
would be ashamed of; for the Priests under the Law, partaking with the Altar,
and the Ministers of Christ, their living of the Gospel, are two distinct
things, relating to several states and dispensations.; and living of the
Gospel, is not living of Tithes; though as it was an Ordinance of God under the
Law, the Priests should partake (with the Altar) of Tithes and Offerings; so it
is an Ordinance of God under the Gospel, that Christian Ministers should live
of the Gospel, which is a further state than the other; and as the Gospel is
free, so living of it, and being maintained according to it, is not a living by
Tyth^s and forced Maintenance; neither does it follow, that because God has
ordained the Livelihood, of both the Priests under the Law, and Ministers of
the Gospel, that therefore the Ministers of the Gospel must be maintained as
the Priests under the Law were, as this pretended Minister of the Gospel has
implied: For if it were so, the Ministers of the Gospel must live by Tithes and
Offerings, as the Priests under the Law did, ( Number. 18.9, 10, 24, 26.) which no
true Minister will own.

And now to prove the Ministers taking Tithe-Corn, Hay, Calves, Foals, Wool,
Lambs, Geese, Hens, Pigs, etc. C. W. instanceth, Luke 11.42. Of the Pharisees
(to whom woe belonged) Tything of Mint, Annis, and Cummin, etc. To which I say,
this does not at all make for their taking Tithe now, as this man vainly
imagines; for it was in the time of the Law, before either it, or the
Priesthood and shadows under it, were fulfilled or ended by Christ; seeing it
was before he was Crucified, that he spoke these words, Luke 11.42. and Mat.
23.23. So that in arguing for Tithes from that of Luke 11.42. the Priests come
very poorly and feebly off; as C. W. has done, in his saying, That all Tithes
ought now to be paid, as well as heretofore, if we will follow the Rule of
Jesus Christ under the Gospel, etc. This then would make the Apostle Paul, and
the rest of Christ's Ministers Transgressors against Christ, for they did not
take Tithes, nor forced Maintenance; and this Priest VVhately has confessed,
That Paul did forbear to take Tithes, page 17. and so his words do tend to make
Paul a Trangressor and a Hypocrite, if he owned one thing in words, and another
thing in practice; and certainly, had the Apostle been of this Priests opinion,
that it was a Rule of Christ to take Tithes, he would not have transgressed the
Rule; for there were several of the Churches (to whom he Ministered) that had
been able to have paid him them, had they been due under the Gospel.

And to that of, Heb. 7.12. C. VV. answers thus, p. 16. It is here said,
there must of necessity be a change of the Law; it is not said, there must of
necessity be a change of Tithes, etc. See what a false Gloss he would put upon
the Scripture; he would maintain Tithes as due by that Command, by which they
were upheld in the Law, and yet the Law is changed which gave them. What
confusion is this? If the Law for Tithes be changed, where is the Command of it
in force to uphold them now? But the Apostle says, the Commandment is
disannulled, and the Law is changed; and Christ is not a Priest after the Law
of a carnal Commandment, but after the Power of an endless Life, Heb. 7.16.

But says C. VV. The Law, which must of necessity be changed, is the
Ceremonial, used under the Levitical Priesthood, where there were many Types
and Shadows of Christ, etc. all which, and many other things that were Types of
Christ, are indeed abolished under the Gospel; as Offerings, and many other
things, etc. but there is no resemblance between Tithes and the Lord Christ;
Tithes were no Type of Christ at all, but a maintenance for the Ministers of
Christ under the Law; and so they ought to be a Maintenance for the Ministers
of Christ under the Gospel, etc. I answer; If Offerings, that were under the
Law, were Types and Shadows of Christ, then were Tithes; for it was commanded,
that the tenth of the Tithes should be offered an Heave Offering unto the Lord,
Number. 18.26. and the Tithes were given to the Priests for their Service, at the
Tabernacle, Ver. 21. which Service, Christ the One Offering, has ended: And
out of the Tithes, the Fatherless, Widows, and Strangers, were to be relieved
and satisfied, Deuteronomy. 14. and they were counted Robbers of God (in the time of
the Law) who withheld their Tithes from the Storehouse, Mal. 3. where the
Widows, Fatherless, and Strangers, were to be relieved (and not to lie begging
in the Streets, as they do here in this City, and other places of the Nation)
but now Christ, who is the end of the Law for Righteousness, and of that
Priesthood that took the Tithes; he is the living Bread of Life which is known
in the Fathers House, and the Fruit of the Vine is known in him, and received
in his Kingdom, by which they that come into his Light to believe and walk in
it, shall be fed and satisfied, more than by the Tithe-Corn, Wine, Oil, and
Firstlings of the Flocks, which were but Types and Shadows of this living Bread
which is in the House of the Lord; by which, they that have been as Widows,
without Christ the Husband, and as Fatherless and Strangers, may come to be
fed, relieved, and satisfied, as they come into the House of God. And to tell
of Tithes being a Maintenance for the Ministers of Christ under the Law, and
for the Ministers of Christ under the Gospel. These are unsound expressions;
for the Ministers of Christ under the Gospel, are come to a further state than
the Priests under the Law, who were Ministers of the Law, and not called (in
Scripture) Ministers of Christ; for Christ's Ministers are come to the end of
the Law, and of the Types and Shadows under it.

And as to C. W. his saying, in page: 17. That the Levitical Priesthood, is
changed into the Priesthood which is after the order of Melchizedech, which is
never to be changed; and that Melchizedech took Tithes, who was the Type of
Christ: From whence he argues, That therefore Tithes ought to be paid, as well
now as heretofore, etc. I answer; 1. The Scripture does not say, that the
Levitical Priesthood is changed into the Priesthood of Christ, which is after
the order of Melchizedech, as in effect, this Priest VVhately has affirmed;
for Christ came of another Tribe than that of Levi; for he came out of the
Tribe of Judah, of which Moses spoke nothing concerning Priesthood, Heb. 7.14.
2. He granting that Melchizedech was a Type of Christ, then Christ is the
Substance and end of that Type; and must the Type then be Preached up? And no
where do we read, that Christ's Ministers did take Tithes, or plead for them,
upon any such account (or otherwise.) 3. Melchizedech, his receiving the tenth
of the Spoil, when Abraham did freely give it him; this is no warrant or proof
for the Priests receiving the tenths of men's Estates, Increase, and Labors,
whereby they oppress many poor laboring men. 4. And Mechizedech receiving once
the tenth of the Spoil from Abraham, when he returned from the slaughter of
the Kings, is no warrant or example, for the Priests receiving Tithes every
Year ( viz. Tithe-Corn, Hay, Calves, Foals, Wool, Lambs, Geese, Hens, Eggs,
Pigs, Bees, Apples, Plumbs, etc.) nor for their suing men at Law for Tithes,
nor for their compelling them from poor Husbandmen; for it was a free gift
from Abraham, that he gave to Melchizedech, when Melchizedech met him with
Bread and Wine, Genesis 14. by which he relieved his men; and it was the tenth of
the Spoil, and not any thing forced from him by a Law, nor a robbing the Poor.
So that if you Priests do take Melchizedech for your example, why do you not
follow him? and here it is evident, that you have manifested your selves to be
Preachers up of Types and Shadows for your own ends and Bellies, and so no true
Ministers of Christ the Substance, who is the end of them. And Christ being a
Priest after the Order of Melchizedech, in that he was King of Righteousness,
and of Peace, and Priest of the most High God (and upon that account, like unto
the Son of God) this is no Rule for Christ's Ministers, either receiving Tithes
of Spoils taken in War, or Tithes of men's Estates. So that you, who have upon
this account pleaded for Tithes, have showed your selves to be in a Popish
Practice and Institution, which by the Papists was set up, since the days of
the Apostles, and never commanded nor practiced by the Apostles.

And from that of, 2 Cor. 11.8. C. VV. accuses the Apostle with being
chargeable, and that he did make the Gospel chargeable, page 6. and 17. wherein
he has wronged the Apostle; for though, as by way of reproof to the
Corinthians, he says, He took wages of other Churches, to do them Service,
(which Churches were not of the World, such as the Hirelings of this Age are
chargeable to) yet the Apostle says, What is my reward then? verily, that
when I Preach the Gospel, I may make the Gospel of Christ without charge, that
I abuse not my Power in the Gospel, 1 Cor. 9.18. 2 Cor. 11.9. and so he kept
the Gospel without charge, contrary to this Priests accusation against him.

And as for C. VVhately his accusing us, with refusing to pay Tithes, as doing
it rather for (or out of) covetousness, than from a rectified conscience, etc.
To which I need say little, but the sad sufferings which we have sustained from
the Priests (many of us) by long Imprisonments in nasty holes (some till they
have dyed in Prisons) and the great Havoc and spoil they have made of many
men's Goods (because they could not for Conscience sake pay Tithes) which is not
unknown to the Nation. These sad sufferings may all witness against this
accusation, to be false, and against him as a slanderer, that so accuses us
for refusing to pay Tithes out of covetousness.

II. Touching a settled Ministry.
And whereas C. VV. pleads for a settled Ministry; and that when the Gospel was
planted, Elders in the Churches, and in every City, were chosen, Act. 14.23.
Tit. 1.5. Rev. 1. and 2. Chap. 1 Pet. 5.1. To This I answer: 1. If the
Ministers of England were Planters of the Gospel, as the Apostles and true
Ministers were, they would have the same Power to choose and appoint Elders,
that would be able to take the care and oversight over the Flock of God; and
then they would not settle themselves in Parishes and great Livings as they do;
who are not willing to suffer any to preach there, but themselves, and such as
are brought up at Colleges; for the Elders in the true Church, were such as
were to feed the Flock of God, not by constraint, but willingly, not for filthy
lucre, but of a ready mind; and such gifted and qualified men, did the Apostles
approve of for that end, 1 Pet. 5.2, 3. 1 Timothy 5.17. Tit. 1.5, 6, 7. Act.
14.23.2. If the Ministers of England had been true Ministers or Elders, and had
so planted the Gospel in England as they pretend, they would not remain as
Masters and Lords over the People in this Nation, nor make a Trade of
Preaching, as they have done these many years, but would go into other Nations
and parts of the world, and spread the Gospel freely; but instead thereof, they
are settled, and do feed upon the fat, and live lazily in this Nation, like
droan Bees, that devour the fruits of others labors: And they that go up and
down and Preach the Gospel freely, are envied and persecucuted by these
covetous lazy Teachers, as has been apparent these several years in this
Nation.

And by the way I observe, that C. W. shows but a very slender Reason, for his
counting the Quakers Paper (which is printed in his Book) a Libel, because it
has no particular names subscribed to it; seeing that the Paper, he knew, was
owned by them called Quakers, who sent it to him; as also, it being generally
owned by us, there was the less need of subscribing a particular name to it;
and the truth thereof being so apparent against the Priests, that they that see
how their Covetous Practices do prove it, may be satisfied of the truth of it.
And C. W. has showed himself so Ignorant of the Scriptures, that he has
accused the said Paper with Railing, Revileing Language and Terms, and such
speech as is found in Hell, and hellish mouths; when as the Language and
Terms, he has so accused, is the very Language, and Terms of Scripture: as
you may see, in Isa. 56.11. Jer. 5.31. chap. 6.13. and 4.22. Ezekiel. 34.3. Mica.
3.11. Mat. 23.19.24.33. John 10.12, 13. and 8.44. 2 Timothy 3.13. Titus 1.10. 1
John 2.18. 2 John 7. 2 Pet. 2.13. Jude 11. Rev 22.15. chap. 18.23.

III. The Priests Envy, Hypocrisy, and falsehood in several things, detected.
And who but an envious malicious man, would have sent forth such accusations
and reproaches against us, whereby to incense the Magistrates to persecute us,
as this Creswell Whately has done? Especially in these times, wherein our
suffering is so great already, as is not unknown to the Nation; and still for
our Consciences, and Religion, we are liable to have our sufferings added unto;
and now for him or any of the Priests to seek to add to our affliction, by
accusing us to the Magistrates, is both inhumane and unchristian like, and not
at all as they would be dealt by. And since the Presbyterians themselves are so
liable to suffer, if they constantly adhere to what they have professed, this
man (if he had been in Moderation, and Reasonableness) might have considered
our Case by his own; but many of the Presbyterian Priests can pretty much save
themselves from Sufferings and Persecution, whilst they can daub with every
outward Power and cleave to the Magistrates by flatteries; and in Hypocricsie
and Dissimulation can conform to the Religion that the Rulers are of or will
Impose whatever it be, for their own Ends, to save their Livings or fat
Benefices: So, that had C. W. well considered the way and Practices of his own
generation of hireling Teachers, he would not have accused us with first being
Anabaptists, and then Ranters, and now Quakers, and next of all we know not
what, page 4. when he should rather have said (of many of those Ministers that
are of his own affinity) we must one while be Episcopal men for the Common
Prayer Book, another while we must be Presbyterians, and plead for Ordination
by the Presbytery, and for the Directory, and therein deny the Common Prayer,
and tell the People that the Lyturgy must be laid aside, as that which has
given occasion to many Ministers to be idle and slothful, and too much
negligent in putting forth themselves in the gift of Prayer, and Studying to
Preach the Word; and now after all this we must plead for Ordination from the
Bishops, and turn again to the Lyturgy or Common Prayer, and thereby openly
make our selves Transgressors by building up that again which we have
destroyed, Gal. 2.18. and what Religion and Worship we shall be of, and have
next, we know not; but rather then we will lose our great Places, Livings, and
Tithes, we may (in all likelihood) turn to the Mass (if the Magistrate will)
for we have hitherto been sound changeable both in Practices and Doctrine for
our own ends. And though we have often in our Pulpits Prayed for Oliver
Cromwell, and his Parliaments, and called him the Light of our Eyes, and the
breath of our Nostrils; and kept many Fasts, and days both of Humiliation, and
Thanksgiving for him; and have often given thanks in Public for the Victories
that have been given him over his Enemies, who were for a Kingly Government; as
also we much Rejoiced when his Son Richard Cromwell was Proclaimed Protector,
and kept Prayer-dayes for him, and prophesied that he should be a second
Solomon, and of his Establishment and tranquillity in the Nation; and what a
blessing he should be to it (as many that have heard us in our Pulpits can bear
us witness) and all this was that these men in Authority should gratify us, in
setting great Livings and Tithes upon us; and for that end, many of us have
often humbly Petitioned these Protectors; but now after all this to gloss and
color over all these former proceedings of ours, (now these former Powers
being overturned, and King Charles the Second, being in Authority in the
Nation) we will Preach and Pray for him, and show our selves zealous for him, and
bid People, fear God, Honor the King, and meddle not with those that are given
to change; as also we will Preach against the Independants, Anabaptists, and
Quakers, and call them Fannaticks, (but especially against the Quakers, for
they gaul us most of all) and thereby seek to gratify these Magistrates as we
have done the former (as well as we can) that they may maintain us, (and if any
of us be like to lose our Livings, let us Petition, and get a License under the
broad Seal) and when we have obtained the Magistrates favor, by Preaching and
Praying for them, and flattering them, then will we plead for Tithes and
setlted Maintenance, and seek to cause the Magistrates to persecute all that
will not hear nor maintain us; and when we cannot (by Argument from Scripture)
maintain Tithes to be of Divine right to us, neither from Melchizedochs
receiving the Tyth of the spoil (which Abraham gave him freely when he returned
from the slaughter of the Kings) not yet from the Priests of Levy's example,
who had a command to take Tyth of their Brethren, which were both for their
service at the Tabernacle (which now is ended by Christ) as also for the
relieving the Fatherless, Widows and Strangers, a Tenth of which Tyth was
offered for an Heave Offering unto the Lord; now when we cannot maintain Tithes
to be Jure Divino from these examples, then will we fly to the Law (that had
its rise from the Pope) for Tithes, and we will tell our hearers, that the
Magistrate gives us them, and we will threaten to trouble and Sue them, if they
will not pay us, and thereby seek to terrify and affright People, that they
may be forced to pay us; and so we will drive on our Trade by all the Policy
and force we can: and seek by all means to have the Quakers suppressed, either
by Persecution, Imprisonings, or taking away their Goods for Tithes, in many
places, to the value of five or ten times more then the Tithes come to: and now
if these things will not do to overcome these Quakers, (as we see,
notwithstanding all their sufferings, they grow and increase upon us) then will
we make more complaints against them, and tell the Magistrates they are a
dangerous People, they will overthrow both Ministers and Magistrates, and will
not spare the Supreme Magistrate himself, if they be suffered to go on;
therefore now let them be Banished, for we cannot live in quiet, nor quietly
drive on our Trade for them, but they will need be Checking and Reproving us
for our taking Tithes, and Preaching for gain, and our seeking to compel men
to our way and Worship, and to Impose Religion upon men contrary to their Faith
and Conscience.

All these things with many other deceits, are these Treacherous Clergymen,
and Persecuting Priests guilty of in themselves, as by their Fruits and
Doctrines is apparent; So that the Lord has made them contemptible and base
before all People, Mal. 2.9.

And whereas in page 11. C. W. Accuses us of Insolences and Lybels, which (he
says) so far as they reflect upon the Public, and do tend to the disturbance
and subversion of the Nation, and Commonwealth, so far the Magistrate is bound
not to suffer such Insolences to go unpunished, etc. For when the Child shall
behave himself proudly against the Ancient, and the Base against the
Honorable, Isa. 3.5. Then the Magistrate must remember that he ought to punish
evil doers; and if he do not punish such disorders, but is sparing in this
kind, because of a Temporizing Spirit, and out of base fear; or because of any
selfish Carnal Policy, God will assuredly punish him for his Sin of Negligence.

Answ. 1. As for Lybels or Insolences tending to the subversion of the Nation,
which this Priest would have the Magistrate to punish us for, hereof he has
accused us falsely, and showed a spirit of Envy and Persecution against us; for
which I know no ground he has against us, either to accuse us in this manner,
or to seek to Instigate the Magistrate against us, but only because the Lord
our God has raised us up in Righteousness to bear witness against the deceits,
and unrighteous Practices, Persecution and Oppression, (that such Teachers as
are of his Affinity are guilty of) and their making a Trade, and a Gain of
their Preaching, which we have in the Spirit of Truth, born witness against
both in our words, Writings, and Books, which (scornfully and falsely) this
Priest calls Lybels, though wha we speak and write, be agreeable to the
Scriptures of Truth; and neither this said Priest, nor any of his Brethren (the
Priests) have ever yet cleared themselves of those things which we have laid to
their charge in our Books. 2. What we speak and write in Truth and
Righteousness against the Priests oppression, covetousness, and Preaching for
forced Maintenance, does not at all tend to subvert the Nation, as he would
possess the Magistrate; but to establish the Nation in Peace, and free it from
much bondage, oppression, persecution, and suffering, which the covetous
hireling Priests have brought upon it; which if it were free from those things,
and people left free to the Lord, to lead and order them by his Spirit, in
matters pertaining to Religion and Conscience, and only the Magistrates to
punish evil doers, and to be a praise to them that do well, and not to lend
their ears to the Priests, to be their drudges and executioners, in persecuting
and imprisoning conscientious men, because they cannot maintain them in their
oppression: I say, then the Nation would be more at peace, and all that are
conscientious and moderate in it, more satisfied.

And the Priests might be tried, if they would Preach freely, and live of the
Gospel, as the true Ministers did; for if God has ordained, that they that
Preach the Gospel, shall live of it; he is able to fulfill his own Ordinance,
without their forcing Maintenance by a Law from people, or suing them at Law
for Tithes; in which thing the Priests have manifested themselves to be both
out of the Ordinance of God, and example of all his Ministers. 3. By their so
much seeking to incense the Magistrate to punish and persecute us, for bearing
witness against their covetous practices, and false principles, it appears they
are afraid their Trade should fail them, and go down; as it has already failed
many of them, whilst they are putting one another out of their Livings and
places (where they have upheld their unrighteous Trade for their Bellies) as
those that bite and devour one another. 4. And as to that of, Isa. 3.5. of the
Child's behaving himself proudly against the Ancient; this was in Israel, when
they oppressed one another; which pride and oppression we are not guilty of,
but the proud and covetous Clergy.

But whereas this C.W. accuses us, as behaving our selves proudly against the
honorable; one seeming reason for it (a little before) is, page 10. he says,
That we do continually all along use those disdainful terms of Thee and Thou,
and the like scornful expressions; and says, That this is directly contrary to
the Rule of the Gospel, etc. and it is also contrary to the example of the
Apostle Paul, when he was reproached by Festus, etc. the Apostle does not say,
Thee and Thou, but most noble Festus, etc. Act. 26.24. Answer; This accusation
reflects upon all the Holy men of God, spoken of in Scripture, (who used the
words Thee and Thou to a single person, and You and Ye only as pertaining to a
number, or to more than one) as if they all used disdainful and scornful
expressions, and as if they therein directly transgressed the Rule of the
Gospel; this is but a bad and unequal judgment, and apparently false; for Paul
himself used Thou to Festus; and several times both Thee and Thou (in
signification) to King Agrippa, who was in greater Authority than Festus, Act.
25.10. and Chap. 26.2, 3, 27, 29. and multitudes of examples more might be
instanced for this: As also, this man can use Thee and Thou to God in his
Prayers; and he and his Brethren have learned that plain language in their
Grammar, which distinguishes between the singular and plural number, though
now he has accused us, with using disdainful terms; for using that plainness
of speech which he has formerly learned, in which thing, the very Hea^hen may
judge the pride of these men, who cannot bear the terms of Thee and Thou to a
single person. C. W. little cause have thou to boast (as in page 16.) that thou
can read where we cannon spell, who so ignorantly have judged the plain
Grammatical language so frequently used in Scripture.

And further, in page 11. C. Whately says, If the Quakers may go away with
these affronts, which they offer unto all, making no difference; within a while
they will not spare the Supreme Magistrate, and so at last, all will turn into
confusion and disturbance, which the Lord in mercy prevent: for England has
felt the misery of War already. To this I answer; Herein has this man
discovered himself to be acted both by a false and persecuting spirit, whereby
he has wickedly gone about to stir up the Magistrates to persecute us, though
without any just cause against us, and herein has he and the Priests of this
Nation often manifested themselves to be in the way of deceivers, false
Prophets, persecuting Jews, and to have drunk of the Cup of the great Whore,
who has persecuted and killed the Saints, Rev. 17. and 18. For, 1. We (as
always we have done) do own the Authority and Power of the Magistrate, as
ordained of God, to be a terror to evil doers, and a praise to them that do
well; and for that end, have from time to time, since we were a People, warned,
exhorted, and admonished the Magistrates that have been in power, to Truth,
Equity and Righteousness; and as in respect to the place and Authority of the
Magistrates, have always put a difference between them and the subjects that
are under them in the Nation, though he Glory, Honor, and vain Complements and
Customs of the world we are redeemed out of, and may not be so conformed
thereto, Romans 12.2. 1 Cor. 7.31. 1 John 2.15. and the Faith of our Lord Jesus
Christ we hold without respect of persons, according to Christ and the Apostles
Doctrine, Joh. 5.44. Jam. 2. 2. And as for his saying, That within a while we
will not spare the Supreme Magistrate; To this I need say little, in
vindication of our Innocence, our Life and Conversation having these several
years given so evident a Testimony against this Accusation; and our Innocence
(through many sufferings, trials, and tribulations for Conscience sake, without
doing any evil, violence, or affronting any man's person) is manifest to the
Nation wherein we live, as those that have not sought a worldly Kingdom, or
earthly preferment; so that this C. W. may be ashamed of his Prophecy against
us, in his saying, That within a while we will not spare the Supreme
Magistrate; for as appears, it is above six years since he first wrote this
against us, by the date of this his writing against us, being dated, August.
18. 1655. though the printing of it bears date, 1662. and all this time, since
we were a People, our Life has preached our Innocence, through many
persecutions, and cruel sufferings and imprisonments, which the Priests of the
Nation have chiefly been the instrumental cause of, by their instigating the
Magistrates and Powers of the earth for their own ends against us. And, 3. This
our Accuser, has not any just cause, or real occasion, as from us, so
implicitly to accuse us, either of being the stirrers up to War, or with
affronting the Supreme Magistrate in that kind, as he and many others of his
Brethren have unrighteously accused us, and prophesied against us; for as
hitherto our Innocence and Integrity toward God and men, has evidently
testified against them and their false aspersions cast upon us; so we doubt
not, but also henceforth, through the strength of our God, we shall (as we have
hitherto done) prove them to be false Prophets, that have prophesied against
us, from their own evil hearts and prejudiced spirits, and not from the Spirit
of the Lord; and so they have falsely measured us by their Bushel, and accused
us with that, whereof themselves are guilty, who have been as the Trumpets to
War, and instigaters to bloodshed, when they have been afraid their Trade would
fail, and that their designs would not be managed, by such as have been in
Power; so that then their exclamation has been, Curse ye Meroz that will not
come and fight against the mighty; and so instead of making manifest the true
Riligion and Worship, through freely preaching the Gospel, in holding forth the
love of Truth, or freely admitting of fair and equal disputations with them who
are most concerned in the differences (which is the most equal and reasonable
way to manifest things in that case) instead thereof, they have gone about to
establish their Religion and Worship by the outward sword, force, and
imposition; from whence has sprung that saying amongst the profane, Fight lads
for the Gospel; but we know, that the hand and Power that establishes the true
Religion, is not carnal, nor visible, but spiritual; and therefore in the
patience of the Lamb of God we have been, and are given up patiently to suffer,
and to wait upon the Lord, and to see him carry on his work, by his own Arm and
Power, and not to follow the way of false Teachers, who have sought to
establish themselves by the Arm of flesh, and with force and cruelty have ruled
over the People, as the false Shepherds of Israel did, who fed themselves, and
not the Flock, Ezekiel. 34.2, 3, 4.

And whereas in page 14. and 15. C. W. makes much ado against John Came, for
using the language of Christ, against the Pharisees, in calling them,
Hypocrites, Serpents, etc. and says, That he denies it to be lawful for him to
speak all that Christ spoke; for Christ said, Son be of good cheer, thy sins
are forgiven thee, etc. Can John Came ever prove himself to be as justifiable as
the Lord Christ? And he says, How come you to know, who is a Serpent, and who
is a Viper? Let me tell you, that you your selves are the Children of mortal,
sinful men; etc. Answer, As for wh^^ John Came has said against the Priests, as
comparing them with the Pharisees, the truth thereof is evident, as their
conversation and practices manifest, both in their oppressing the People, and
several other things, Mat. 23. And neither John Came, or any of us, ever did, or
do, take upon our selves, either to reprove or judge others, or to know the
state of others without Christ (as of our selves, distinct from Christ, as C.
W. has implied) but by the Spirit of Christ are we able to discern the Tree by
its fruits; and between the nature of a Serpent, and the nature of a Lamb; and
between a Wolf and a Sheep, and who are in the nature of each; for that Spirit
searches all things, and the spiritual man judges all things, 1 Cor. 2.15.
and they who are in the Spirit are spiritual; and he is a blind man, that is
not able to judge between a Serpent and a Lamb, or a Dog and a Sheep, or that
cannot discern between such as are Serpents, and such as are Lambs; for we know
the Promise of God fulfilled, which says, Ye shall discern between him that
serves God, and him that serves him not, and between the Righteous and the
Wicked, Mal. 3.10. and we neither judge of things before the time, nor yet do
we judge as these that have a beam in their own eye, who are forbidden to
judge; but in the Spirit, which has opened and cleared our eyes, do we speak
the truth, and appeal to the witness of God in every man's Conscience. Again, C.
VV. has condemned himself in the thing he allows, for he forbids others to
judge, and yet he himself has oftentimes judged us, as for being in error,
setting up a false Light, for keeping pride still in our hearts; for refusing
to pay Tithes, from or out of covetousness; for lightly esteeming the Rock of
our Salvation; for not following the Light which is in the Word; for
insolences, disorders, and affronts; for being tossed to and fro with every
wind of Doctrine; for being railers and revilers; for consulting with flesh and
carnal wisdom; for having a mystery of iniquity in the midst of us; for
condemning all the settled Ministers of the Gospel, etc. These aspersions and
accusations against us, which are dispersed through his Book, with many more of
the like nature, we do absolutely deny, as being slanders that are unjustly
cast upon us by him, who has taken upon him in hypocrisy, to forbid others to
judge; as also his saying, in page 7. That all sober-minded and serious
Christians, who are settled in the Truth, do judge, that the inventers and
fomenters of our Way, are the Jesuits and the Papists, Satan's subtle and busy
Factors, purposely to disturb the Truth amongst us in England, etc. Answer,
They who do so judge concerning us and our Way, are neither settled nor
established in the Truth of Christ; for as for our Way, it is the same that the
holy men of God, and true Christians of old owned, and were in; and it is
Christ, who is the Way, the Truth, and the Life, whom we own; which was never
invented nor fomented, by either Popish Jesuits, Papists, or Satan's Factors:
And a clearer Testimony have we given against Popery, than any of you, who are
in the Popish practice, of taking Tithes and Sprinkling Infants, and in many
other things and principles, both as to your education at Colleges, that were
built by the Papists, and in your Preaching in their Mass-houses, which you
falsely call Churches, and several other things wherein you agree with the
Papist, and are out of the Scripture example, and Saints practices; and then to
save your selves, would be accusing us of Popery.

And thou C. W. Have accused us in page 7. For being very plain in our Garments
and Apparel, but alas (say thou) does the Power of Humility consist only in
these External things? why the Papists themselves in this External Humility do
very far excel us, for they Cloth themselves with Sackcloth, go bare footed,
etc. yet say thou, Do I not like of their Religion, neither can I approve of
yours because it is like theirs. Answer, This is but a silly Argument, either
from thence to deem us Papists or to disapprove of our Religion, for, going
plain in apparel is both according to the example of the Saints, and the
Apostles Doctrine, who gave Testimony against both, vanity in Apparel, Pride of
life, and the Lust of the Eye, which was after such things, 1 Timothy 2. 1 John
2.16. and had we not better be in plainness of Apparel, then in Cuffs,
Ribbonds, and such like Fooleries as many of the Clergymen wear? And shall we
be accounted Papists because we are in the Apostles Doctrine, and show an
Example of Moderation and Sobriety to others? and therefore must our Religion
be disapproved of? this is as bad an Argument as if C. W. had judged all to be
Papists that Profess the Name of Christ, and own the Saints Practices, because
the Papists do Profess his Name, and in some things do Immitate the Saints; or
must we disown the Truth in any thing, because evil men do Profess it, and make
a show of it? If C. W. have learned no better Logic then this, he had better
never have gone to the University to have learned his Trade, and that Cost that
was bestowed upon him for Learning, was very ill bestowed; but herein the World
may see his weakness, as they may see his falsehood, page 6. in his saying these
words to Robert Howton, viz. That which we demand from you is none of yours,
but ours, for our Tithes were never purchased by your self, or by your fathers
before you, etc. which how false that is, let all both Farmers and Freeholders
in this Nation witness, who when they Buy a Stock of Cattle, all at their own
charge, for the Managing and tilling their Lands and Tenements, and when they
Buy the Corn they sow their ground withal, and when men have purchased Lands
by their own proper Cost and Charge, and every part and parcel thereof for
their own singular use, as the Evidences are, and are at so much Cost and
Charges with Managing of them, then for the Priests to claim the Tyth of
Cattle, Goods, Corn, Hay, etc. to claim it as their own, and say its none of
theirs who purchased both the Lands Goods, and bought the Corn by which it was
sown, let any indifferent Persons judge of their falsehood, and unrighteousness
in this thing.

IV. Of the Light within both Natural and Spiritual Men.
And as concerning the Light that is within: C. Whately accuses us, With
shamefully undervaluing the Holy Scriptures, and setting up a false Light that
is within us, above the true Light that is in the Scripture; for it is our
constant language, look to the Light that is within you, not knowing that we
are by nature wretched, miserable, poor, blind, and naked; and therefore it is,
that the Lord has given us his holy Word, which we call the Scriptures, to be
a Lanthorn to our feet, and a Light to our paths: What you call Light, we may
well call Darkness, p. 6. As also he says, page 9. You do lightly esteem the
Rock of your Salvation, the Truth of Christ, etc. all this proceeds from hence;
because you follow that Light which is in you, and not that Light which is in
the Word and Spirit, etc. Answer; In these things are we very grossly wronged,
and the Truth much abused, by this our Accuser. For, 1. We neither undervalue
the Holy Scriptures; neither do we lightly esteem the Rock of our Salvation,
either in Preaching the Light within (or any other principle held by us) but
therein, do both own the Rock of Salvation, and the Scripture; for it is the
Light of Christ, the Rock of Salvation (and no false Light) that we Preach and
own, which is the true Light, that enlightens every man that comes into the
World, Joh. 1.9. And he is come a Light into the World, that whosoever
believes in him, might not perish, but have everlasting Life, Joh. 8.12. and
12.46. 2. In his counting the Light within, which we Preach, a false Light, a
deceitful Light, and Darkness, as in page 6. and 7. and 9. he has blasphemed
against the Light of Christ, and has put Light for Darkness, and Darkness for
Light, and turned the Truth into falsehood, or a Lie, and so brought the woe
upon himself, Isa. 5.20. 3. The Light within, which we Preach, is the Light of
the Word, and Spirit of God, and not divided from the Word, as our Accuser has
implied against us: for the Word of God is known in the heart of every one that
believes, Romans 10.8. and this was in David and the true Prophets hearts,
before they gave forth the Words or Scriptures from it; so that, he that makes
no distinction between the Scriptures, which are the Writings, and the Word, or
Light within, from whence they proceeded, is very ignorant. 4. It is the Light
of Christ within, that convinces of (and testifies against) sin and
unrighteousness; and where it is not rejected, but obeyed, it leads man out of
sin, and so out of the natural, wretched and blind state, to God, who is the
Fountain of Grace and Life, and the Father of Lights; none of whose Lights do
we ever read of in Scripture, to be either false, deceitful, or in themselves
darkness.

And 5. Neither was it the Light that was in Paul before his Conversion, that
led him to make havoc of the Church of Christ, or to be exceedingly mad
against the Saints, and persecute them, as falsely C. VV. has implied in his
Queries, page 9. nor was it the Light that was within the Jews, or Persecutors,
that deluded them so, as to think they did God good service in killing the
Saints; (as also this man has implied) but the spirit of error and darkness in
them; for Christ told, even them ( viz. the Pharisees) that were in the
persecuting nature, That the Kingdom of God was within them, Luke 17.20, 21.
the Light of which, is neither false, nor deceitful, nor does it ever lead into
any deceit or evil. And further, how apparent is C. VV. his ignorance,
concerning the Light within, who puts no difference between Light and Darkness,
in his asking if this Light that is in man, did not cause Jesurun to sacrifice
unto Devils? Deuteronomy. 32.17.

Again, C. VV. says, I would also willingly know, whether the Light of the new
Creature, that is in the Saints themselves, be a sufficient Rule to walk by?
for if so, then the Saints may cast away the Scriptures, and walk by their own
Light, etc. Then also, the Saints have such a Light in them, that they cannot
err; and it is to be understood, that you your selves must be the Saints, and
so you being the only Saints upon the earth, we must follow you in all things,
as the Papists do the Pope; and what a compendious way will this be, to bring
in Popery and blind obedience, in the highest degree that evere was? etc.
Answer; Thus has this ignorant man begun in darkness, and ended in scorn and
falsehood. For, 1. The Light of Christ and his Spirit, that is in the new
Creature and Sain^s, is a sufficient Rule to walk by, as the Spirit of Truth
does lead into all Truth; and the Anointing or Light, that was in the Saints,
taught them of all things that was Truth, and no Lie, 1 John 2.27. 2 Cor. 13.5.
and so Christ is in you, except you be Reprobates, and in him is the Saints
sufficiency; and yet it does not follow, that therefore the Scriptures of Truth
must be cast away, no more than John's Epistle was to be cast away by them (to
whom he wrote) that had the Anointing in them, to teach them of all things (and
so to understand the Scriptures) that they needed no man to teach them, but as
it taught them; and this keeps out of error, where it is minded and obeyed. 2.
And to own and witness to this Light, Spirit, or Anointing within, as a
sufficient Rule (as all the Saints have done) is no way to bring in Popery, nor
blind obedience, as unjustly is implied against us upon this account; for that
Accusation reflects upon the former Saints, as well as us. And I am so
charitable, as not to believe, that none have a sufficient Rule to walk by, or
Light to save them, but they who have the letter of the Scripture without; for
the general Love and Goodness of God to mankind, cannot be so limited to a
visible thing, nor bound up in that narrowness; as our Accuser seems to imply.

Again, C. VV. objects (in his Postscript) That they say, that all men have the
Light of Reason and natural Conscience, which is enough to make them without
excuse in the day of Judgment; but as for the Light of Grace, which alone can
make us wise to Salvation; this is not given unto all men; and to prove it,
cites, Deuteronomy. 29.4. Answ. As for Light of Reason and natural Conscience, being
enough to make men without excuse, we do not at all read of in Scripture; for
that which left men without excuse was spiritual, and that which might be known
of God, that was manifest in them, Romans 1.19. and that Light which leaves
without excuse is saving, and sufficient to lead out of sin, or otherwise it
could not leave any without excuse, for insufficiency in the Gift given to Man
(if it were so) would be a ground of excuse. And as for those Israelites spoken
to, in Deuteronomy. 29. their not having an heart to perceive, nor eyes to see, nor
ears to hear, unto that day, was because of their Rebellion and Disobedience;
which occasioned hardness of heart, blindness, and want of understanding; for
there was no fault in God toward them; he gave his good Spirit unto them, and
yet they rebelled against him, and would not hearken to his Voice, Neb. 9. Psa.
81.11. and so all that rebel against the Light, know not the ways of it, for
they abide not in the paths of it, Job 24.13.

V. Of Perfection.
And now, as it has been much of these Priests work, to talk against the
sufficiency of the Light of Christ in men; so also have they much spread abroad
their sinful Doctrins, for the continuance of sin and imperfection in all men,
while upon earth; for which iniquity C. VV. has also appeared, who (in his
Postscript) says, He shall only acquaint the Reader with one particular ( of
the Quakers) which discovers the great Pride of their hearts, viz. that they
say of themselves, that they have a Righteousness within them, whereby they are
made perfect, and without sin: This is R. Fransworth's Assertion; he says, and
then to prove this to be contrary to the Truth, he brings these Scriptures,
Eccl. 7.20. Job 9.20. Jam. 3.2. Romans 3.10, 23.1 Joh. 1.8, 10. Gal. 5.17. Romans
7. But (says he) they say still, they are without sin, because they have the
Spirit of Christ in their hearts, and therefore they are without sin. To which
I answer; As for what he says the Quak^rs say of themselves, and that they say
still, they are without sin; this is a falsehood, and herein has he wronged
them and their words; for they do not go about to set forth themselves in any
justification of themselves, and of their own states, as some mistake them, and
as this man implies against them; but to vindicate the Truth in general, and to
show forth Christ, and his Work and Righteousness, which is to be known within;
For know you not, that Jesus Christ is in you, except you be Reprobates? 2 Cor.
13.5. and the end for which Christ is made manifest, is to destroy sin, and to
make perfect, 1 John 3. Heb. 10.14. and this Work of Christ is known within;
which to bear witness of, is no pride of heart (as our Accuser says) And as
these Scriptures mentioned by him (from whence he seems to plead for sin) so
far as they either relate to the state, in which all are sinners, and none
Righteous; or to the state, wherein some are in the spiritual warfare, warring
against sin; or where sometimes the Apostles condescended as to number
themselves, amongst them that had sin, and so condescended to speak of states
below their own, (as having been in them) I say these Scriptures, do not reach
all states and conditions; for he that is born of God, that has obtained
victory over sin, who walks after the Spirit of God, and he that abides in
Christ sins not, being washed and cleansed by the blood of Christ; which
cleanses them that walk in his Light, from all sin; See 1 John 1.9. and Chap.
3. Rev. 1.5, and it is said, Thy People shall be all Righteousness, Isa. 60.21.
And blessed are the undefiled in the way, they also do no iniquiry, Psalm.
119.1, 2, 3. Ezekiel. 36.25. So that, what we (called Quakers) do hold in this
thing, is a true Testimony against all the Ministers of unrighteousness, who
contend and plead for sin, the term of Life, and number the Righteous that are
in Christ, among the wicked, who are out of the way, and none of them
Righteous; nor that does good, no, not one, Romans 3.10. which Scripture C. VV.
has brought against Perfection; and so like the deceivers of old, that put no
difference between the Holy and profane.

VI. Of studying old Authors, and receiving the Gospel, etc.
And whereas in the Paper, from them called Quakers, it is said, That the
Apostles received not the Gospel at Oxford or Cambridge, nor by studying old
Authors, etc. to this C. VV. replies; Perhaps the Apostles were never in
England: I may pay you in your own Coin thus, viz. the Apostles never received
the Gospel at Colonel Vivers his House in Banbury, nor at any of the Quakers
Meeting-places in Braughton, or Bloxham, or Tadmerton. I answer; This is as
unfit a parallel, as his comparing their Preaching, if they are desired (when
they are upon a journey, about their own occasions) with the Apostles going
forth on purpose, in obedience to Christ, to Preach freely; and Paul's speaking
in the Synagogue, when the Rulers required him, Act. 13. when as he did not
then go about a worldly occasion, but went on purpose to Preach Christ among
the Jews, for which he often suffered persecution among them (which the
Priests, who stand in man's will, are loath to do) but to the former parallel I
say, that the Quakers Meetings, in these said places mentioned, and other
places, (where the Gospel is freely preached among them, and where they feel
the Presence and Power of God among them) are both according to the Example of
the Saints, spoken of in Scripture, who often met in Houses, Joh. 2.19. Act.
10.27. Chap. 12.12. and 20.8. and 28.30, 31. and their Meetings are more
justifiable, than the Priests education to their Ministry, at Oxford or
Cambridge, according to man's will, by natural learning and studying
Philosophy, and old Authors; all which a natural man may do, that never knew
Christ; and for which manner of education to their Ministry, they have no
example from Christ's Ministers, but from the Papists, and such as are in the
Apostasy. And as for the Apostle Paul's mentioning what some of the Greek Poets
said, Act. 17.28. viz. In him we live, and move, and have our Being (which is
brought to prove the Priests studying old Authors, to Preach from them) I say,
this does not prove their Practice, in that thing; for we neither read, that
the Apostle did either study old Authors for his Ministry, or gathered Sermons
out of them to Preach (as the Priests do) but only that he mentions the words
of their own Poets, to come over the Idolaters and Heathen; for the thing
contained in these words, he needed not study old Authors, for having learned
the same thing from Christ in his Gospel, which he received not from man, nor
by studying old Authors, as the Priests do, but by the Revelation of Jesus
Christ, Gal. 1.

VII. Of Women's keeping silence in the Churches.
And as concerning those Women, which were commanded to keep silence in the
Churches, and to learn of their Husbands at home, 1 Cor. 14.34, 35. from hence
C. VV. says, 1. That by your Women, who are commanded to keep silence in the
Churches, is meant the Female Sex. 2. And by Husbands is meant Husbands in the
flesh, etc. his Reasons are, that the Female sex ought to be under obedience,
and that men have no Husbands, and that a woman can never be a man, and a man
can never be a woman, etc. And 2. It is meant Husbands in the flesh, because we
have but one Husband in the Spirit, and because the Text speaks of Husbands at
home, etc. To which I answer; That what the Apostle said of Women's keeping
silent in the Church, does not relate to every state and condition, as to tie
all the Females from ministering the Truth; nor was what he to the Corinthians
commanded (in that case) given as a general Rule to all others, so as to limit
the Spirit of God from speaking, in either Male or Female (and there were some
Women that had no Husbands in the flesh to learn of) but it had relation to the
state that he then saw those Women in, who were commanded to keep silent, and
to be in subjection, and to learn of their Husbands, and not to usurp: So we
say, that they who are yet untaught themselves, and have their learning to
seek, and who would be usurping, whether they be Males or Females, they are to
be in silence, and under obedience, according to the Law; but there is a
farther state in Christ, where he is formed, in either Male or Female (and
where he is come to speak in either) than that which is under the Law, or that
wherein people are unlearned, or the state of Eve that was deceived, or of the
Woman that would usurp over the Man; For neither is the Man without the Woman,
nor the Woman without the Man in the Lord; and the Apostle admits of Women's
praying and Prophesying in the Spirit of Truth. And as there were true
Prophets, so there were true Prophetesses, spoken of in the Scriptures, both of
the Old and New Testament, Exodus 15.20. Judge. 4.4. 2 King. 22.14. Neh. 6.14.
Isa. 8.3. Luke 2.36. Act. 21.9. And it is said, Your Sons and Daughters shall
Prophecy, Joel 2. Act. 2. And did not Women Preach the Resurrection of Christ,
soon after he was risen? Luke 24.10. And that saying, That a man can never be a
Woman, I say in some sense, some Men may be accounted Women, as the false
Prophets in Israel, and the Women that ruled over the People, when Children
were their Oppressors, Isa. 3.12. and Chap. 32. Jer. 51.30. Ezekiel. 13. and such
as were deceived and led captive in the Apostles days, were called, silly
Women, 2 Timothy 3.

And to his saying, page 18. That the whole Country, and he thinks, the whole
Land, is acquainted with Anne Audlands presumptuous speaking in our Assembly;
and surely Anne Audland cannot deny, but that she is a Woman. Answer; As for
presumptuous speaking, that is not proved against Anne Audland, but is denied
as a slander; and when at any time the Spirit of the Lord has moved in Anne
Andland to speak, or in any other Daughter or Handmaid of the Lord, the Spirit
ought not to be quenched, nor Prophecy to be despised, whether it proceed from
true Prophets or Prophetesses: See further of this matter, in G. F. his Book,
concerning Sons and Daughters, and Prophetesses speaking, etc.

And as for C. VV. his Rhyme, in the end of his Book, where he says,

Instead of Papists are the Quakers come,
Disturbing all these parts of Christendom:
Their Plots are Hellish too, their Deeds are evil;
Both boast of Christ; no more, my Muse is civil.
Answer; Herein the world may see what a vain light and false spirit, this man
is acted by, who has herein appeared in the practice of Drunkards (such as
made Songs of David, Psalm. 69.12.) or Fiddlers, in his lying Rhyme against us;
and when he has falsely charged us with Hellish Plots and evil Deeds, then
says, his Muse is civil; wherein he has appeared, more like a Fiddler or a
Stage Player, than a Minister of Christ; and many more of these falsehoods,
slanders, and absurdities there are, which I forbear to mention.

And as to his saying, page 13. That here is the last Answer that ever he
intended to send to the Quakers, etc. I say indeed, more prudence had he
manifested, if he had kept silent, than he has done in many things he has
asserted; and silence hereafter, may be more safe for him and his Brethren,
than to utter words without knowledge. And now I shall leave our Cause, and the
Controversy (that is betwixt C. VV. and us) to the Lord, and all sober People
to judge of.

Here follows something concerning the true Christ, and his being in his
People, in Answer to Matthew Caffin, etc.
HAving lately met with a Book of Matthew Caffin's, the latter part of which is
entitled, The great Error and Mistake of the Quakers, concerning the true
Christ, and how he is said to be in his People, etc. Wherein he does much
wrong, both that People, and their Principles, and abused the Truth it self;
and therefore I saw it expedient, to note a few particular things upon some of
the chief heads of his matter, both for the clearing of the Truth, and for the
discovery of his ignorance and confusion to him, and the rest of the Baptists,
since that he has been such an old and eminent opposer of the Truth, as many
can testify; and as appears, his malice and envy, was so high against the
People called Quakers, that he has vomited out his own shame against them,
whereby to render them odious in the sight of their enemies; and that in such
times as these, wherein they are made as the greatest object of men's hatred,
persecution, and cruelty, which they have in a great measure undergone, and are
liable still to undergo more of the same; from which suffering, the Baptists
themselves are not altogether free, if they be faithful to their own
Principles: So that long ere this, they might have learned more wisdom,
moderation, and discretion, than so to revile us now in the sight of our
enemies, as Matthew Caffin (who is one of their Leaders) has done.

And now whereas in his matter against the Quakers, he beg to relate some men's
experiences, in this wise, viz. Certain men being troubled about their present
conditions, and thereupon following after as more excellent estate, have on a
sudden been greatly carried forth with inward power and zeal, and wonderful
quicknings, after some matters of holiness, so as scarce able to bear with the
least appearance of pride, covetousness, or the like, in others, without
reproof; and at length have been secretly informed, that the powerful working
within them, was Christ come in them, etc. but being somewhat fearful of
delusions, did thereupon give up themselves diligently to pray unto the Lord,
who at length graciously delivered them from the strong delusion, etc. To which
I answer; So it appears, that these motions and operations did arise from a
true power in those People, which so far was the manifestation of Christ to and
in them, that they were not only led to follow after a state of holiness; but
also upon their praying diligently to the Lord, he so far returned an
acceptable answer to them, as that he graciously delivered them from the strong
delusion. But mark Matthew Caffin's very next words, and what a conclusion he
has made, touching these inward motions and operations: I say (says he) the
strong delusion; for is it not so indeed, when an evil spirit shall carry forth
persons zealously to some things that is just, holy, and good, though he no
lover of holiness, but really an Angel of darkness, that seemingly may appear
to be an Angel of light, etc. See how M. C. has herein contradicted his former
words, and what gross ignorance and error he is in now, to conclude that an
evil spirit, and an Angel of darkness, carries forth persons zealously to
things that be just, holy, and good; and of such persons also he speaks this,
as before he confessed the Lord did graciously at length deliver them from
strong delusion; and so he has done no better, than put light for darkness,
and darkness for light; And who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean?

And further, mark how in the next page, he has again confuted himself; for
there he tells you, That the one and the true Spirit of God, being plainly to
be known by his guiding and moving the Saints, not only to be just, holy, and
zealous, in point of Conversation, but also steadfast in the Principles of
Faith, etc. when before he said, it was an evil spirit that carries forth
persons zealously to things that is just, holy, and good; and now he tells you,
it is the true Spirit of God, and so is plainly to be known: it is well that at
length he speaks some Truth, though to his own confusion, as all that are sober
may easily see.

M. C. accuses one of us with saying, That Christ was never seen with any
carnal eye, nor his voice heard with any carnal ear; and to prove it, cites a
Book, entitled, A Declaration to the Baptists, page 13. and another with
saying, That the Flesh of Christ is a Figure; for which he cites Readiness Errand,
etc. page 14. To the former of which I say; Christ, as he is truly to be seen
and known in the Spirit, is a mystery, not seen nor heard with the carnal eye
or ear; with which agrees his saying, viz. He that sees me, sees him that
sent me; who is not carnally to be seen; neither had the unbelievers either
heard the voice of God, or seen his shape, though he spoke by his Son Christ;
and some that outwardly Christ spoke to, understood not what he said, because
they heard not his Word, Joh. 8.19, 43. and 12.45. 2. And as for the words in
Readiness Errand, p. 14. what is said of Christ there (as also in page 8.) has
relation to his coming in the flesh, as therein being an example, (as in Pet.
2.21.) and not in relation to the receiving his flesh in the mystery, as it is
the Believers meat, for that is the substance; but as to his outward
manifestation in the flesh, he was God; an example which was the very intent of
the words Example or Figure; being used in the said Book, for in some sense,
they have relation to one thing, as (...); and whether is it better for us to
say, that Christ as in the flesh, was an example, or for M. Caffin to say, That
in one sense the flesh of Christ profited nothing, as he has, in page 41? set
any rational man judge of this.

And M. C. says, That the eternal Spirit, which dwelt in the man whom the Jews
crucified, which Spirit the Apostles received in them, is not the Christ, the
Savior of the world, but the visible man, etc. I answer; Here he seems to
divide the man Christ from the eternal Spirit, and so has denied the eternal
Spirit to be Christ; but says, the visible man is Christ, when as the Apostle
says, The last Adam was made a quickening Spirit, and the Lord is that Spirit,
1 Cor. 15.2 Cor. 3.

And if the eternal Spirit be not the Christ, but the visible man, then it
follows, that when the Apostle preached that Jesus Christ was in the Saints, he
did not intend that the eternal Spirit was in them, but the visible man; which
is both absurd and false. But in answer to several cavils and objections made
against us, we own the true Christ, both as he was of the seed of David,
according to the flesh, and in the days of his flesh, that he was the true
Christ (but not without the eternal Spirit) and the Son of God with power,
according to the Spirit of holiness, who said, Before Abraham was, I am; and as
to his dying and rising again, according to the Scriptures, and as now
glorified with the Father, in the same glory that he was in, before the world
was: This we confess according to the Scriptures, without any such blind
distinction, as M. C. has unjustly cast upon us.

And M.C. says, That the Quakers to deceive, intend not the Truth; namely,
that the visible man, whom the Jews crucified without, was the Christ. Answer,
This is a slander; for, they confess that Christ was crucified, and died, as
concerning the flesh, but was quickened by the Spirit, 1 Pet. 3.18.

M. C. God thereby bearing false witness to the world, if the eternal Spirit,
which the Apostles afterward received in them, be the Christ; which Spirit
never was slain, never had blood to shed. Answer, This tends not only to render
the Apostles as false witnesses, who knew Christ in them, and dwelling in their
hearts, and the second man to be made a quickening Spirit (though before that he
was known by some, after the flesh, and in the days of his flesh) but also M.
C. has contradicted himself, in page 46. where speaking of Christ (of whom the
Jews said he had a Devil) but the Disciples knew him to be the Spirit of Truth,
he says; and in page 42. M. C. says of Christ, viz. Yet now henceforth, says
the Apostle, know we him so no more; that is, to esteem him upon that account
(viz. upon his being born of the Tribe of Judah, and of the Seed of Abraham) or
for that reason, meritoriously the Savior of the World, but rather upon the
account of his coming down from Heaven, his being the Son of God, etc. How
sadly is M. C. lost and confounded herein; one while to deny the eternal Spirit
to be the Christ, and to say, but it was the visible man that was Christ;
another while to say, as that he is not to be known or esteemed upon his being
born of the Tribe of Judah, but upon the account of his coming down from
Heaven; what then, was he a visible man as he came down from Heaven, or as he
came of the Tribe of Judah and Seed of Abraham? Here all may see this man's
gross ignorance and confusion. And what if the eternal Spirit never was slain,
never had blood to shed (as in M. C. his account?) it does not follow
therefore, that he is not a Spirit who descended from Heaven (as such a one)
and in time took upon him flesh and blood, Heb. 2.14. and was put to death, as
concerning the flesh; who was the true Christ, both in the days of his flesh
(in that low estate of suffering) and in the state of Glory, wherein he was
before the world began. And as to his condescension, low estate, and suffering,
as manifest in his People (who have born in their Bodies the dying of the Lord)
and his blood or life which is poured forth (and freely laid down of himself)
and fed upon (in the Mystery) by the Believers, M. C. is not in a capacity to
receive what might be said thereof.

And now to mend the matter, he says of Christ, his being a quickening Spirit,
That if the Spirit (as Spirit) be the last or second Adam; then it follows,
that the first man Adam, who was of the earth earthly, was first and before the
eternal quickening Spirit, page 42. and 43. Answer, Would any rational man have
laid down such an absurdity as this? for here he cannot deny, but that the
second Adam was made a quickening Spirit, as in 1 Cor. 15. but would not have
him as a Spirit, to be the last or second Adam ( for if the Spirit (as Spirit)
says he) so he would render the Apostles words false; but I say, Christ being
called the second Adam (which is the Lord from Heaven) was in reference to his
manifestation in time, for their sakes that were lost in the first Adam; and
yet he is the first and the last.

M. C. Those that were of the number of Gods Elect, in Ages past, waited for
the Son of God from Heaven, who was raised from the dead, 1 These. 1.4, 10. Now
sure I am, that 'twas the visible Body of Flesh, which was dead, and raised
from the dead, which the Saints waited for: and in page 43. Our Faith and full
persuasion, that Christ is a visible glorified man, leads us to expect his
second coming, as a distinct appearance from, and not in his People, etc.
Answer, 1. If the Saints of God in ages past, and the number of the Elect, did
(after Christ's Ascension) wait for his visible Body of flesh from Heaven, as
here he implies; then it appears, in their days they waited in vain, and
missed of their expectations, (if so) and this would render their Hope and
Faith in the coming of Christ, of none effect. But the Apostle witnessed the
contrary, as in 1 These. 1.9, 10. when the Thessalonians were turned from Idols,
then they waited for the Son of God from Heaven; and Chapter 4.15. We which are
alive and remain unto the coming of the Lord, etc. So the Saints, though in
part they were then eye witnesses of the coming and glory of the Lord, yet they
grew further in the knowledge of the several operations, appearances, and
outgoings of him (whose out-going have been from of old) as they grew from
glory to glory, by the same Spirit, 2 Cor. 3.18. and the Apostles made known
unto men, the power and coming of the Lord Jesus Christ, which power wrought in
them; and they that looked for Christ in the Apostles days, it was promised
unto them, that he should appear the second time, without sin unto Salvation,
Heb. 9.28. which if this coming of Christ, was the coming of a visible Body of
flesh, then the Saints in ages past, did not attain to the coming of Christ in
their days, nor yet to Salvation from sin; which erroneous conclusion that
follows from M. C. his assertion, no wise man will own; for if the Saints in
their days, did not experience the coming of Christ unto their Salvation from
sin, then where and in what state are they now, that are so long since
deceased? does he suppose them to be in some Purgatory? Surely M. C. is very
ignorant, both of the spiritual knowledge, coming, and work of Christ, which
was known in the Saints, and not carnally expected afar off, as he does, who
would shut Christ and his coming out of his People. And where in page 44. as
his proofs, he cites, Rev. 22.20. where it is said, Surely I come quickly, even
so come Lord Jesus; and Act. 7. touching Stephen his looking up into Heaven,
and seeing Jesus standing at the right hand of God: what does M. C. suppose,
that whereas Christ promised to come quickly, and John so prayed for his coming
quickly, that this was a coming in a visible Body of flesh? or that Stephen did
see a visible Body of flesh in Heaven with carnal eyes, as he seems so much to
imply? This is gross Ignorance; for Stephen's being full of the Holy Ghost, was
the ground and cause of his seeing Heaven open, and the Son of man standing at
the right hand of God.

As also, in page 40. he denies, That it was the eternal Spirit that prayed in
the man Christ, Joh. 17. and denies Jesus Christ to be the Anointing, but only
the Anointed. Wherein his ignorance may be apparent to all that can see (who
read this) for Christ and his Father are one; who said, The Son can do nothing
of himself; and as being a quickening Spirit, and the Seed of Promise, he is
both the Anointing and the Anointed, (not divided) though the manifestations of
him, as such, are several, and his operations diverse in the Saints.

And as concerning Christ dwelling in the Saints, M. C. his interpretation of
it is, That he is deep in their affections, much and often in their thoughts and
meditations; and for proof, brings Phil. 1.7. 2 Cor. 7.3. touching the Saints
being in one another hearts. Answer; But Christ does not appear to be very
deep in M. C. his affections or meditations, who would keep him out of his
People, as several of his Principles imply, who now would have Christ only to
be but often in the thoughts and meditations of his People, which does not
fully reach the Being of Christ in the Saints, to operate, act, move, and Rule
in his Members, who are in him, and he in them, giving them life, dominion, and
peace; whose life is manifest in their mortal Bodies, and he dwelling in their
hearts by Faith, which is more than to be often in their thoughts and
meditations, as if he might be often forgotten.

And whereas M. C. makes a great cavilling against that Doctrine of the Light of
Christ, being placed in People, as to be a sufficient Rule, and of such a Light
being in every man; and says, That Humphry Smith, in the face of men and
Devils, affirms, That there is no other Rule, Ways, means, or Name, by which
man shall ever come to walk with God, but by that which is manifest of God in
him: And in opposition to this Doctrine, M. C. goes about to set the
Scriptures, outward Commands and Teachings, as usless, if there be such a Light
in men, page 48. and eight (or more) times in his scorn, he reiterates these
words, viz. Turn to the Light within, says the Quaker, page 49, 50. Answer;
That of the Light of Christ, being a sufficient Rule, and being in some measure
universally extended to all; as Christ enlightens every man, is a Truth which
indeed we do vindicate, both against men and Devils, who does oppose it; for it
appears, it is the Devils, and such as are led by them, that oppose this
Principle; and that is the reason why we are constrained so much to appear
against them in it to their faces: And we in owning the sufficiency of this
Light in men, do neither make void, nor disown the Scriptures, nor true outward
Teaching; knowing that by the Light, or that which may be known of God within,
men come to see and feel the right end and use of outward Teaching, and the
Scriptures; for the Spirit of Truth leads into all Truth; and where the Light
of Christ within is believed and obeyed, it leads out of darkness, and out of
the ways and works of darkness, into the path and way of the Just; which is a
shining Light, that shines more and more, until the perfect day, Prove. 4.18.
But there is a Generation that rejects and rebels against the Light, that knows
not the ways of it, because they do not abide in the paths of it, Job 24.13.
And though we do own outward Teaching, so far as it tends to direct peoples
minds to the Light of Christ within; and the Scriptures in their place: yet we
know, that God is not limited or tied to those outward things, as if none
could be saved (or had a true Rule to walk with God by) but they who have the
letter of the Scriptures, and outward Teaching; for the extent of the Grace of
God, which brings Salvation, is larger than so, it having appeared to all
men, and is sufficient to teach to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to
live righteously, etc. Tit. 2.11. Romans 5.18. and many have this Grace given
them, that have neither the Scriptures, nor the outward ministration of the
Gospel, though it be preached in every Creature, (...), Col. 1.23. yet where
(and as) the Lord is pleased to send outward Teaching, it is of use, as to the
turning of People to the Light of Christ, which shines in the hearts, to give
the Light of the knowledge of the Glory of God, in the face of Christ, 2 Cor.
4.6.

M. C. in page 48. says of the Apostles, What were they to preach to them? not
that one thing of turning to the Light, their Teacher within, but all things
whatsoever, Mat. 28.19, 20. all the Counsel of God, Act. 20.27. Answ. What,
were the Apostles to preach all things whatsoever, all the Counsel of God, and
yet not the Light within? What, was that none of the Counsel of God? Herein
this man has more lost himself than ever; and yet he is made in general words
to confess, that Christ was set to be a Light of the Gentiles; and what, were
they not to turn to his Light within? This is gross ignorance and error; for
Christ, who is come a Light into the world, that whosoever believes in him,
might have everlasting Life; and who is given a Light to enlighten the
Gentiles, Luke 2.32. is the way to the Father, and the Way, the Truth, and the
Life; and his Life is the Light of men, Joh. 1.4, 9. And did not the Apostles
preach to turn men to his Light, that one thing in them? I see for all M. C.
his scoffing and cavilling against the Light within, and our exhorting men to
turn to it, it stands over him and his folly and deceit, though so often over
he has reiterated his canting language against the Light within; more like the
sturdy Beggars, or a Ballad-singer, or a Stage Player, than a conscientious,
zealous Professor. And the truth of this our Doctrine, of the Light within, will
remain and live, when all empty Professions, carnal Ordinances, Traditions, and
Will-worships (which are upheld or practiced, without the guidance of the Light
of Christ within) will wither, fall, and come to naught, as will all formal,
wilful, and dry Professors, who make war against, and oppose the Light within,
and them that are in it.

Many more of M. C. his absurdities and slanders (against the Truth and us) I
here omit, as not worth, either mentioning or taking notice of.

London, Written near the beginning of the first Month, 1662. From a living and
tried Witness of the powerful Truth, GEORGE WHITEHEAD.

THE END.

