A TRUE COPY OF A LETTER From an English Gentleman in the Emperor's Army, to
an English Officer in Holland, concerning the Total Rout of the Turks, by the
United Forces of the Christians, Commanded in person, by the Emperor, the King
of Poland, and Duke of Lorain.
I Cannot express my self in words suitable to the great deliverance it has
pleased God to give the Nation, and Empire of the Germans, from the Cruelties
and Barbarieties it groaned under, by the Savage Violences of Turkish Insidels,
in Conjunction with a worse sort of Menthan themselves, who outwardly pretend a
Belief of the Blessed Jesus when at the same time, their Power, Industry, and
Council tends to no less than the Total Extirpation of Christianity, and the
setting up its common Enemy Mahumetism; under the same Notion of the old Rebels
in England(Viz.) (for the True Protestant Religion.) There being in the
Hungarian Nation two Sects of Protestants, Viz. Lutherans, and Calvinists, the
latter of which, claiming the said Epithet under the Banner of the Horrid
Imposture and great Idol of the East (Mahomet) I could do no less than make
this little short Reflection, because it to me seems a Remark of so near a
Parrallel with some practices in my own Country, the Respect I bear to it,
would not suffer me to be silent in the laid particulars.

The King of Poland, with a Royal Army attending him, arrived at our Camp, the
Emperor having caused all necessary Provisions, to be made for his Royal
Majesty's Reception, before which, several considerable Reinforcements, were
arrived, being part of the Auxiliary Troops of the Empire, of which great
Numbers are on their March from all the Remotest parts of the Empire:
immediately after his Majesty of Poland was arrived a great Council of War was
held in the Emperors Tent; which being ended, prayers were publicly offered
throughout the Camp, for a Success upon the Endeavors of the United Arms, of
the Christians against the Turks and Infidels, which being ended, immediately
the whole Army, by Order, was on its March toward the Enemy; who lay in Seige
before Vienna according to common Computation 150000 strong at least: the Army
marched in three Batalias, the Body Commanded by the Emperor in person; the
right wing by his Majesty of Poland, and the left by his Highness of Lorain, in
which posture we marched with all immaginable Silence toward Vienna: The City
having at we fame time notice that we were approaching, and as soon as we came
to discern the Enemies Leagure, the City gave us a Signal, which in half an
hours time was seconded with a Resolute sally; in which many Thousands of the
Turks were slain, with very small loss on the Christians side. The Turks
seeming to be in great Consternation upon the sight of the unexpected numbers
of the Christian Army, before the said Salley was ended, part of Our Army under
his Highness of Loraine were engaged and soon after the Gross of both Armies,
the dispute being for several hours very sharp and hot; but in the end it so
pleased God, that our Arms prevailed against the Infidels we having killed
above thirty Thousand upon the spot, and taken near half as many Prisoners and
all their Artillery and Baggage which were very great and numerous and Totally
broke the whole Army of the Turks, which our Horse continue to pursue with
great slaughter, and all this was done by the Assistance of the Almighty with
inconsiderable loss on the Christians side, and it is the opinion of most of
our Experienced Commanders here in Camp, that very few of the Turks will Escape
of being taken or killed. The Enemy being fled diverse of our Officers went into
the City and great numbers of the Citizens came to veiw our Camp, their
countenances bespeaking they had been neither in fear of the Enemy nor any want
of necessary Provisions. We are now busied in destroying the Enemies works about
the City; and in my next I may give you a more particular Account of the whole
Affair: in the mean time be pleased to accept of this, as

from your much Obliged and Faithful Friend. and Servant A Whitebrook,
Imperial Camp near Vienna, Aug. the 31th.
LONDON Printed by E Mallet.


