THE NATURE OF CHRISTIANITY IN THE True Light ASSERTED. In opposition to
Antichristianism, Darkness, Confusion, and Sin-pleasing Doctrines. BEING A
Looking-Glass For Sin-pleas^ng Professors of all Sorts.

Written upon particular occasion herein signified; By a Servant of Christ, G.
Whitehead.

If we say that we have fell^wship with him, and walk in darkness, we lie and
do not the Truth, 1 John 1.6. Printed in the Year, 1671.

AN Epistle Explanatory To the Unprejudiced READER^
COntention, especially with perverse spirits, that desire it, and seek
occasion for it, is not a thing desirable to me; howbeit, for the living and
precious Truth's sake, and that living effectual faith which was once delivered
to the Saints, I am one necessitated earnestly to contend, being brought forth
and raised up by the Power of the Living God for that end, against perverse
Gainsayers and peevish Opposers: One of whom I find one ROBERT GORDON, in a
second piece of Antichristianism, stuffed with Confusion, Perversion of
Scriptures, Abusing and Belying the People called Quakers; though he has given
it the Title of Christianity Vindicated, but therein has discovered a great
deal of his own, and of his Tutor's Ignorance of the very Nature of
Christianity, as concerning those weighty matters of Salvation; to wit,
Reconciliation, Justification, and Redemption; which in the true nature and
sense thereof are in this Treatise unfolded, according to the holy Scriptures;
although this man has grossly wronged diverse of us, by accusing us, as if we
did oppose and seek to overthrow the plain Testimonies and Voices of all the
Prophets and Apostles, concerning the True Savior, or the Man Christ Jesus,
whom we have frequently confessed, both as to his Divinity, and as to his
taking upon him the Body, prepared for him to do the Will of God in, according
to the Scriptures of Truth; yea, both his outward and inward Appearance, his
Suffering Nature, and Glorified State, and his Divinity in both we have always
truly believed and confessed; even his Dignity, Spiritual Outgoings from of
old, from everlasting; Mica. 5.2.
as also his outward Birth, and coming in the fullness of time in that Body,
wherein he showed forth Innocence, Preached Righteousness, wrought Miracles,
suffered Contradictions, Crucifying, and Death, by wicked hands; together with
his Glory, Dignity, Resurrection, and glorious Triumph; as a Captain, as a
Conqueror, Leader, and Example through all: These things have a Spiritual and
Divine Impression upon us, and a place in our hearts; through that eternal
Spirit, by which Christ offered up himself a Lamb without Spot, and a Sacrifice
of a sweet smelling Savor to God; which things being so openly and frequently
owned by us, according to the Scriptures of Truth: We cannot but look upon it
as a wilful Perversion and wicked Abuse in this R. G. or any others,
contrariwise to represent us, when (as to him) we have only opposed his
confused dark Testimony, which is without Life, and much of it without Sense or
Reason; although pervertedly he has interwoven some Scriptures, abused by him
in it: Howbeit, he says, He has testified to what he received of the Lord,
and witnessed through and under the Ministry of those I ca^l Presbyterians and
I^dependants. Now seeing he has learned his Testimony or Religion of such, and
yet has pirked up, as if he were ^ome-body, or could do more against us then
his Tutors or Fraternity (although he falls short of many of them, in the
manage^ent of their Cause) I should think it were more Prudence in the
Presbyterians and Indepen^ants, to stop such shallow Cavellers and forward
Novices, as can scarce write three Pages, without manifestly contradicting
themselv^s, as this their Disciple R. G. has done, who will never bring any
Honor to the Cause of Presbyterians and Independants: He should have let us
known, whether they do approve of this his work against us, yea, or nay; which
it he write again, we desire him to signify, whether he is owned, and his work
approved of, by the Presbyterians and Independants, yea, or nay? Some suppose
it probable, that what he has writ against the Innocent and Suffering People
of God in this nature, has some Self-interest and End, as either of some
Preferment, or Applause at least; who though he be dismounted with the Times,
from his former Place and Preferment, yet is not content to live quietly in
that obscurity he is in, but he must Villifie, Reproach and Slander an Innocent
People, who have appeared (and do stand up) for God, and the Testimony of
Jesus, in his Divine Power, where such peevish, pitiful, underly Cavellers as
R. G. dare not show their Faces for Christ (nor yet for their own Directory and
Church-Faith) for all their pretended Zeal for him, though he and they can carp
and quarrel against us, who are under Sufferings: And he having shown himself
both an Antinomian, a shattered Presbyterian, and Independent, he is the more
fit man to insinuate into such, especially the more ignorant sort of them, for
some Applause or Name to himself, like many of his selfish Teachers before, who
being dismounted from their parochial Bishoprics, Pulpits and Tithes, are now
for the rattling of the Platters, which have been v^ry beneficial to many such
feigned Preachers and Temporizers, who can make a flourish in fair Weather; but
either ^lee, Sculk, or Comply, when a Storm or a Pinch comes; or otherwise,
drive a Trade more privately, and have the Platters rattle more secr^tly, with
their Watchers and Spies at ea^h Corner, to give them warning, lest they should
be surpised for driving a Trade unlicens'd, that they may escape out at
Back-doors, ^or By-ways, which has been the manner and practice of such as R.
G's. Tutors, notwithstanding their severely pressing their Hearers to
Faithfuln^ss, and to Stand fast, etc. when they are no Example thereof
themselves; but on slite Occasions ready to flee like Hirelings -- and ready to
give their ^locks the ^^ip.

And now as to the Doctrinal part of his Book, he having affirmed a
Justification and Redemption of men, even while no good is wrought in them by
any Light or Spirit whatsoever; and when no qualificat^on is wrought in man by
any Spirit whatsoever (to mend the matter he adds) in order to the perfecting
the Purchase of Redemption, etc. Which word, purchase, he thus explains, in an
Unscriptural and Nonsensical style, viz. That God man purchased and completed
Reconciliation, Justification, etc. with God, at once, without us (which is as
good sense, as to say, God Purchased them of God) and for Proof thereof, he
very many times over repeats that Scripture, Romans 5.10 If when we were Enemies,
we were reconciled to God, by the death of his Son (not so much minding the
following words) much more being reconciled, we shall be saved by his Life: And
verse 11. We have now received the Atonement, etc. This he has made a Cloak
for his justification of men, even while no good is wrought in them (one while
saying, they are reconciled to God; another while, God to them) Now though
plenteous Redemption, Salvation, and Peace were in being in Christ for us,
while Enemies; and that God commended his Love toward us, in that while we
were Sinners, Christ died for us, verse. 8. which does explain the intent of the
words [ If when we were Enemies we were reconciled to God, by the death of his
Son etc.] yet it is not the nature of Reconciliation for men to be Enemies to
God: I appeal to the Conscience of both R.G. and all other Professors, Whether
Enmity and Reconciliation do not differ? And whether, while Persons are at
enmity, they be then actually reconciled? Though while we were Enemies, we were
reconciled, by the death of his Son; intentionally on God's Terms, but not
actually in our selves, till the Enmity was slain in us; as God, with reference
to his Purpose, speaks to Abraham, I have made thee a Father of many Nations
(before he was actually so made) For Paul, in the following words, says, God,
who quickens the Dead, calls those things which be not as though they were,
Romans 4.17. And also Zacharias, being filled with the Holy Ghost, he Prophesied
saying, Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, for he has visited and redeemed his
People, Luke 1.67, 68. and to the end of the chapter: Now though this [
Redeemed] be spoken of as a thing done, yet it was spoken of in the Prophecy,
of Christ the Horn of Salvation; whose Salvation is Deliverance and
Preservation out of the hands of our Enemies, that we may serve him, without
fear, in Holiness and Righteousness before him all the days of our life: This
was not witnessed when the Enemy ruled, and no good was wrought in us.

Further, If Reconciliation and Redemption had been actually finished without
us, when no good was wrought in us, what needed the Apostle so earnestly
beseech and pray them in Christ's stead to be reconciled to God? 2 Cor. 5.20.
They might have said, that is done and complated already: Or to say, Tbat Jesus
Christ gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all Iniquity, and
purify unto himself a peculiar People, etc? Tit. 2.14. They might have said we
are redeemed at once already without us, while no good is wrought in us; What
needst thou to tell us of redeeming from all Iniquity, or of being purified? We
do not expect any such thing while we live here, and yet we are redeemed,
justified, and perfect in Christ. This is according to R. G's. Doctrine and
Sense; but the Apostle's Sense is contrary, as where he says, You that were
sometimes alienated, and Enemies in your minds by wicked works; yet now has he
reconciled in the Body of his Flesh, through Death, to present you Holy, and
Unblameable, and Vnreprovable in his sight; if ye continue in the Faith
grounded and se^tled, Col. 1.21, 22, 23. Mark here the nature and tendency of a
reconciled state^ and how it differs from that of Enemies in the mind, as you
were sometimes Enemies, yet now reconciled, viz. Ye Saints and faithful
Brethren in Christ, which are at Coloss, chap. 1.2. But the mind of him that is
an Enemy in his mind is not reconciled to God or his Truth. Drunkards,
Swearers, and Ranters, are not in a reconciled State, nor justified State;
neither is God reconciled to them, nor in Union with them.

Again, The words Purchased and Redemption, are used by R. G. in an
Unscriptural Sense, while he does so nonsensically render it as God man, having
purchased all of God without, and so justified man, when no good is wrought in
him by the Spirit of God; and as if Christ's Works without, were the previous
purchasing cause of the Love of God; and also, states man's Justification and
Redemption, as only without, and preceding the work of the Spirit within;
whereas redeeming from all Iniquity and Bondage, under which man was sold, is
not wrought without the opperation of the Spirit of God within; but it is a
Work to be fulfilled within, where Sin and Bondage have ruled? and being
Washed, Sanctified, and Justified by the Spirit, are placed in their proper
order, 1 Cor. 6.11. Sanctified being placed before Justified. And the Apostle
Paul says, You are sealed with the Holy Spirit of Promise, which is the
earnest of our Inheritance (note that) until the Redemption of the purchased
Possession, unto the Praise of his Glory, Ephesians. 1.13.14. So mark here, The Holy
Spirit of Promise was the Earnest of their Inheritance, until the Redemption,
etc. ( And grieve not the Holy Spirit, whereby you are s^aled until the Day of
Redemption, Ephesians. 4.30. But with R. G. the Day of his Redemption was long since
over, many years before he was Born; he was redeemed and justified above
Sixteen Hundred Years ago; but then he must suppose or conceit himself an Elect
person before that, or else the whole World is as much justified as he) See how
plainly these Scriptures refute R. G. as also, God purchased his Church with
his own Blood, Acts 20.28. So his chosen People were a purchased Possession,
God was in Christ reconciling the World unto himself; but the Saints (who are
hi^ Friends) are actually reconciled, he has fulfilled it in them.

And now because those terms in Scripture, relating to Christ and his Works,
are mis-understood, and p^rverted by many Professors and Priests, as this man
has done, I shall state them with the natural and simple sense thereof, as
follows, viz.

Jesus, a Savior, who saves from sin, of whom it was said by the Angel, Thou
shall call his Name Jesus, for he shall save his People from their sins, Mat.
1.21.

Christ, is Anointed; for he was anointed with Power from on High.

Propitiation, a Sacrifice well-pleasing, which is to purge away sin, and (in
Scripture sense) to make nigh to God Propitio ex pro and pio (non imp^o)
Propiti us ex pro and ito.
and which imports Forgiveness, Reconciliation, Favor, Mercy, Kindness, etc.
as Propitious is favouable, merciful, etc.

Sacrifice, an Oblation or Offering, which is to Consecrate or make Holy.

Reconciliation, an Agreement, a Peacemaking between them that have been
Friends, and afterward Foes, a setting at One.

Covenant, an Accord, Agreement, a Contract, a Treaty, a Condition, etc.

Atonement, Peace, Quietness, etc. between them that are reconciled or in
mutual Friendship.

Redemption, a Ransoming, Buying again, Rescuing or Recovering such as were
under Bondage, or sold under Slavery.

Salvation, a Saving, Preserving, or a making Safe from the hand of an Enemy,
Destroyer, or Oppressor, etc.

Imputation, an Ascribing, Attributing to, laying to the Charge of, or an
Accounting, Reckoning, or Thinking.

Justification, a making Righteous, Just, Upright, Virtuous, Good, Perfect,
etc. and also, an Adjudging, Pronouncing, and Sentencing one that is made
Righteous to be so.

Now if Professors come not to feel and experience these things (or works of
Christ) fulfilled within them, they are but mere empty Professors and Talkers
of them, without the true Life and Power of Christianity and true Religion.

Certain Scriptures, touching the Savior, Redeemer, Redemption, and Salvation,
etc.
Thou shall know no God but me; for there is no Savior besides me, Hos. 13.4.
Deuteronomy. 6.4.

I, even I, am the Lord, and besides me there is no Savior. Isa. 43 11. and
44.6, 8. and 45.15. And all Flesh shall know, that I the Lord am thy Savior
and Redeemer, the Mighty One of Jacob, chap. 49.26. and 60.16. Jer. 50.34.

I will mention the Loving Kindness of the Lord, etc. for he said, Surely they
are my Children, People that will not Lie: So he was their Savior, Isa. 63.7,
8. Thy People shall be all Righteous, etc. chap. 60.21.

O the Hope of Israel, the Savior thereof in time of Trouble, Jer. 14 8.

He Saved them from the hand of him that hated them, and redeemed them from the
hand of the Enemy ( by this he made his Power known) Psa. 106.8, 10, 21.

With the Lord there is plentious Redemption, and he shall Redeem Israel from
all his Iniquities, Psa. 130.7, 8. See also Psa. 19.14. and 20.6. and 28.8. and
34.22. and 49.8.

Draw nigh unto my Soul, and Redeem it, Psa. 69.18.

He shall Redeem their Souls from Deceit and Violence, and precious shall their
Souls be in his Sight, Psa. 72.14.

The Redemption of their souls is precious, Psa. 49.8.

And Mary said, My soul does Magnify the Lord, and my spirit has rejoiced in
God my Savior, Luke 1.46, 47. see also, 1 Timothy 1.1. and 2.3. and 4.10. Tit.
1.3. and 2.10. God so loved the World, that he gave his only begotten Son, that
whosever believes in him should not perish, but have everlasting Life, Joh.
3.16.

Our Savior Jesus Christ, gave himself for us, that he might Redeem us from
all Iniquity, and purify unto himself a peculiar People, Tit. 2.14.

But after that the Kindness and Love of God our Savior, toward man appeared,
not by Works of Righteousness which we have done but according to his Mercy he
Saved us, by the washing of Regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost, which
he shed on us abundantly, through Jesus Christ our Savior, Tit. 3.4, 5, 6.

I and my Father are one, Joh. 10.30. Jesus of Nazareth was a man approved of
God by Miracles, and Wonders, and Signs, which God did by him, Acts 2.22.

The Son can do nothing of himself, but what he sees the Father do, Joh, 5.19,
30.

We have seen, and do testify, that the Father sent the Son to be the Savior
of the World, 1 John 4.14.

He is the Propitiation for our sins, and not for ours only, but also for the
sins of the whole World, 1 John 2.2.

Lord, thou will ordain Peace for us; for thou also have wrought all our Works
in us, Isa. 26.12.

The Nature of Christianity, in the true Light, etc. In Answer to Robert
Gordon. The first Part.
The Title of R. G's. Pamphlet.
CHristianity Vindicated; or the Fundamental Truths of the Gospel: Concerning
the Person of Christ, and Redemption, through Faith in him maintained.

Answer, These are covertly, and deceitful Insinuations, implying that we deny
Christianity, or deny Redemption through Faith in Christ, both which are very
false; for it is Antichristian Sin pleasing-doctrines which oppose and slight
the inward Work of Christ in his People, that we oppose: And what we have said
on this account, are neither Cavils nor groundless Exceptions, as we are falsely
accused.

R. G. to the Reader says, Having lately published a Book, entitled, A
Testimony to the true Savior -- Concurring with the Voices ^f all the Prophets
and Apostles, to the Man Christ Jesus, etc.

Answ. Nay, it was a heap of Confusion, which could add nothing to the credit
of the Prophets nor Apostles, if they had been questioned; but their
Testimonies of the Man Christ Jesus, we never doubted of, nor opposed, as
wickedly and falsely he has misrepresented us.

R. G. And unto Reconciliation, Justification, and Redemption, as already in
being in him, purchased, completed, and perfected with God for Sinners, by the
price of his whole, entire, and perfect Obedience -- in his crucified Body
without us, to be made effectual by the operations of his Spirit, etc.

Answ. That perfect Reconciliation and Redemption, etc. were in being both in
God and his Son for us, while Enemies, we assert, but not received by us till
we were made Friends; and so reconci'd in our Minds by the Spirit or Word of
Reconciliation operating within. But ( R. G.) to thy matter, I query first,
How, and of whom Reconciliation, Justification, etc. are purchased for Sinners,
and so perfected whilst not made effectual by the workings of the Spirit
within? Or are men justified, when no good is wrought in them by any Light or
Spirit whatsoever, as thy Doctrine was, and is? And thou should have plainly
spoke-out, and told us what thou meanest by the words, Purchased with God;
whether in the sense of Satisfaction; and Payment to God in our stead, as thy
Tutors, the Presbyterians and Independants hold, yea, or nay? And whether the
Love, which is infinite, was not the cause of his sending his Son into the
World, that the World through him might be saved; and so the coming and
manifestation of Christ in his Life, Works, Doctrines, Sufferings, tasting
Death for every man, etc. Effects of the Love of God to Mankind, yea, or nay?
And tell us plainly where does the Scripture say, That Justification and
Redemption are purchased of God, and perfected without us, by the crucified
Body, when no good is wrought within? And if all these things are so purchased
and perfected without for Sinners, or the whole World, what must be the
Spirit's operation within? And how then can God condemn any for sin, if thy
Doctrine be true? If thou say it is because of their Unbelief, then this has
respect unto the Work of the Spirit and Faith within, without which men cannot
be saved nor justified (wherein thou, R. G. do plainly contradict thy self)
whatever thou, or carnal Professors, imagine of your Justification, etc. being
purchased and perfected without you, you are not yet purchased nor redeemed
from Iniquity, nor from a deceitful spirit; wherein thou have showed thy
pretended love to be Enmity and Falsehood, against us and the Truth, as will
further appear.

R. G. That there are some, pretending to be Teachers among them -- under the
disguise of the names of Light and Power within, thereby bring in damnable
Errors, to pervert the Faith -- among whom these four Men have numbered
themselves, by their voluntary opposition against the plain Truth, left us upon
record by the Prophets and Apostles, and testified by me, etc.

Answ. Its our Testimony of the Light and Power within, that perplexeth thee,
and such dark and lifeless Professors as thou art, who are in the spirit of
Enmity: And why do thou Envy and Belie us, called Quakers, or those for whom
Christ died, as well for thy self? If we had opposed the plain Truths of the
Prophets and Apostles, in Scripture (as thou have most falsely accused us) it
had been thy part and duty to have proved the Scriptures true, if we had denied
them; and not to impose thy impertinent Tautollogies upon us, which thy Book is
filled with; if we were either Jews, Turks, Jesuits, or Papists, which in any
thing denied plain Scripture, thou take but a mean course to convince us, by
thy imposing and begging the Question: But had thou dealt plainly, and only
brought us plain Scripture, without thy Confusion, Corrupt Glosses, and
Sin-pleasing Fancies, we should not have had these Controversies, nor such
mudled stuff, and ramblement to deal withal, as thou have divulged.

And as to thy speaking of two Gospel Mysteries, (viz.) What was wrought in
Christ, and finished and perfected as once by that Sacrifice of his crucified
Body; and the second of what is to be wrought by Christ in us, etc.

Answ. Truly to know Christ crucified, and the Fellowship of his Sufferings,
and Conformity to his Death; as also, his Virtue as a Sacrifice by eating his
Flesh and drinking his Blood, is a Mystery which none but the Children of the
Light know and receive, who only receive Life thereby; and such are they that
see and walk in the New and Living Way, which he consecrated through the Va^l
(that is to say) his Flesh; and so witness the New Covenant, or Testament,
which he the Testator, confirmed through his Death; who in the Body, offered up
himself once for all, to end the many Offerings, and often sacrificing under
the Law (that Once is opposed to the many) He offered up himself by the eternal
Spirit, to break down the Partition Wall between Jew and Gentile, and to
abolish that Enmity that was between them, in putting an end to that figurative
Dispensation, wherein the Jews gloried against the Gentiles, that they might be
reconciled in one Body, and by the Spirit come to have the Mystery of Christ
within, Ephesians. 3.5.
and Fellowship of the Gospel revealed. Now this was not to indulge any in sin,
or enmity thereof in themselves; nor yet for any to plead that they are
redeemed, and perfectly justified at once* without them, while in their sins,
and no good wrought within them; for in that state they are so far from
receiving the Atonement, that they are Enemies to Christ and to his Cross, and
guilty of his Body and Blood, not discerning either: And this is thy state, who
think thy self justified (before thou wast born, above sixteen hundred Years
since) and yet art in thy sins, pretending to the Work of Christ in thee (when
otherwhiles thou reckonest all done without thee) but now say, It is daily
doing in many Bodies, till Mortality be swallowed up of Life: And when do
thou think that will be? Will it be on this side the Grave, yea, or nay? Do
thou not expect a perfest Sanctification, and Deliverance from Sin till after
thou art deceased? If thou do not, how art thou in the Method of the Gospel,
and how art thou perfectly justified? Its they that are washed and sanctified
that are justified. As to the Sufferings of Christ without, though the
Scripture-Relation of them be true, yet thou have but a Traditional and
Historical Faith thereof, with some particular Conceits and wrong
Constructions, whilst thou coverst thy self in thy sins with a Profession
thereof: And so art upon a false Bottom, not sanctified nor justified by the
Spirit of God, which is the immediate Cause of both unto them that believe in
the Name of his Son Christ Jesus, whose sufferings for Sinners was twofold,
both inward and outward; he bore the Burden, and Weight of the sins of the
World.

And whereas thou would have G. K. to prove, That Christ does bear Sins but
as he did bear them in his Crucified Body, p. 5.

To which I say, He was a Lamb slain from the Foundation of the World; the
Righteous Seed has suffered through all Ages, by the seed of Rebellion; there
is a spiritual suffering, as well as there was a bodily suffering; his Soul was
made an Offering for sin; he bore the sin of many, and made intercession for
the Transgressors, Isa. 53. And said the Apostle, The Spirit itself makes
intercession for us with Groanings, which cannot be uttered, Romans 8.26. And do
not these Groanings imply an inward and spiritual suffering? And was not Christ
spiritually crucified in Sodom and Egypt? And that he does suffer, besides
that in his crucified Body at Jerusalem, is evident to them that know the
Fellowship of his Sufferings, though not to thee; as the Apostle Paul
witnessed, when he said, Who now rejoice in my Sufferings for you, and fill up
that which is behind of the Afflictions of Christ in my Flesh, for his Body's
sake, which is the Church, Col. 1.24.

And whereas thou accusest the Author of the Book entitled, The great Mystery
of the Great Whore, with saying, That the Soul is infinite in it self, without
beginning, more then all the World, a part of God, of his Being -- coming from
God, and returning to God again, the Power of God, etc. And addest, Does a Part
of God infinite, need to be saved, etc? And in p. 27. on the same occasion
say, This is the very Root of Rantism etc.

Reply, We have always distinquish'd between the Soul of Man, and that which
saves it; and between the soul as in death under transgression, and as
quickened and united unto God by his Son; as is plain to be seen in that Book
accused by thee, where mention is, Of the Soul being in Death in Transgression,
and man's spirit not sanctified, p. 91. And of the Soul being immortal, and
living in the Covenant of God, where Christ is the Bishop of it; it being in
the hand that saves from Transgression: And that Christ brings up the soul to
God, whereby they come to be one Soul, page 129. In which state the soul is in
Union with God, as he that is joined to the Lord is one Spirit: And they that
are Baptized into Christ have put on Christ, through whom they come to obtain
the answer and end of his Prayer, (viz.) That they all may be one, as thou
Father art in me, and I in thee; that they also may be one in us, etc. And the
Glory which thou gave me, I have given them; that they may be one, as we are
one, John 17.21, 22, 23.

And its said, That Man is the Image and Glory of God, 1 Cor, 11.7. Now how
absurd would it be to question, Does the Image and Glory of God need to be
saved? For man is called so, he partaking of that Image and Glory; and so it is
no otherwise intended of the soul (as to Divine, Immortal, and Infinite) then
as by participation of that Life and Light, which is divine and infinite,
wherewith the soul is clothed and adorned in the renewed state.

But as to its being the Power of God, a Part of God; I find not these words so
asserted by the Author of the said Book, nor any thing (like them) with that
general intent and consequence, as strained by this Accuser; for the Power of
God is that which saves the soul, and it is the soul (as in the Power) that is
unchangable: And God is not to be divided into parts and particulars (he is not
divisable nor separable) It was the Priests words, That the soul is a part of
the Divine Essence, (...) in the said Book, page 227. And one of them
confessed, That there was a kind of Infiniteness in the soul, page 90. And in
p. 68. it is said, God breathed into man the Breath of Life, and he became a
Living Soul; for that which came out from God is the Cause that man became a
Living Soul: And is not this of God, etc?

Now Infinite, Divine, etc. is no otherwise intended to the soul, then as
relating to the Breath of Life (which immediately came from God, by which the
soul lives and subsists in its Being) which (figuratively) some have put for
(or called) the Soul, as being the Soul or Life of it, by which it lives and is
upholden, whether under a sense of Anguish or Peace: And this has no accord
with Rantism, but is a Testimony against it and thee too.

And it had been well for thee, to have cleared thy self of Rantism, ere thou
had charged it on others; for, indeed thy doctrine has a direct tendency to
it; as, That men are perfectly justified and reconciled in the sight of God,
G^d with them, and they with him, while Whoring, Killing, Stealing, Cursing,
Roaring, Ranting; yea, that Ra^ters (if all, while En^mies, wicked, no good
wrought in them, etc.) are perfectly justified, reconciled with God, and G^d
with them: Does not this tend directly to strengthen the Ranters in their
Rantism?

And as touching G. F's. words; the places have been looked, and its found that
thou have disordered them, and left out what was necessary ^o clear their
sense, and his Intent.

R. G. If their Consciences accuse them not, neither have I, who have not so
much as mentioned them.

Answ. Our Consciences do not accuse us, but thou have covertly and
deceitfully, when thou did not mention us by name; and now have openly
reviled us, and wronged our Principles, contrary to that love so much pretended
by thee. So now thou appearest in thy own shape, and for all thy shuffling and
shifting in this matter, I appeal to thy own Conscience, if thou did not
chiefly mean the Quakers in thy other Pamphlet, more than Turks or Jews,
Arians, Papists, Socinians, or Ranters? Will these Pretenses excuse thee? And
as to thy not finding a plain consistency in our Principles, nor a unanimous
reception of them by every Person among us; no doubt but thou had used thy
skill to make an inconsistency in our Principles (but art disappointed) and to
stumble the weak by thy unde^ly Insinuations against us: But I ask, What
persons among us are so far from the reception of our Principles, as to receive
thine, or own thy spirit?

R. G. What an inconsistency is there between thy words, and this work,
published by you four against my Testimony, and that not by the youngest among
you.

Answ. Thou know in thy own Conscience that it was G. K. that chiefly
answered thy Book, A. R. and G. L. were little concerned in it; and it was thy
irreconcilable Contradictions that I chiefly took notice of: What a silly
ambitious Boaster art thou then, to seek to make the World believe, that four
of us were so deeply engaged against thee, and thy self to be such an eminent
Champion against us? Thy Testimony is so much of it false and confused, that
many more then us four, would have testified against it; and what we did, it
was not so much to wage War with thee, as to answer the Truth in our selves,
and clear it in general. However, through thy Ambition thou show thy
Vapouring spirit and Ostentation against four o^ us; the least of which, yea,
the youngest Child of Truth may see thy weakness.

Whereas G. K. said, Though Redemption is wrought within by the Spirit of
Christ. To which thou say, Here I take notice of thy slighting that great
Work of man's Redemption, as already purchased by Christ for Sinners, by that
one Sacrifice of his crucified Body.

Answ. We do not slight that one Sacrifice, nor the Dignity thereof, by
confessing to Redemption, as wrought within by the Spirit of Christ, if thou will own Redemption in the true sense thereof; as Christ gave himself for us,
that he might redeem us from all Iniquity, which is not removed without his
spiritual Operation within. But thou contradictest thy Tutors the
Presbyterians, and Independants, in saying, That man's Redemption is purchased
by his Crucified Body; for they say, He did not satisfy as Man simply, but as
God and Man, or as God Man (which is all one as to say, that God satisfied and
paid God, or that God purchased Redemption of himself) for they say, That his
Suffering being finite could not purchase an infinite Reward; for nothing but
an infinite Price could procure that; there must be an equiv^lency between the
Price, and the thing purchased, etc. Whereas it was the Love and Good Will of
God, to send his Son into the World, to redeem man from Sin and Corruption,
which is a work inwardly effected; and Christ giving himself a Ransom for all,
was for a Testimony of Gods Love to all.

R. G. The Operations of the Spirit of Holiness, being necessary for bringing
the Believer into Union and Friendship with God, etc. p. 8.

Answ. This confuteth much of thy work; for then men are not in a reconciled
state, while out of that Friendship; for where the mind is reconciled to God,
it is brought out of the enmity and evil works, into union with God; and so
there is mutual union between him and the Creature.

R. G. He slew the Enmity in himself; God reconciled us to himself, through the
Death of his Son, while we were yet Enemies; so no qualification wrought in us
by any spirit whatsoever, in order to the perfecting of the Purchase and paying
the Ransom for Sinners, page 8.

Answ. Here is still thy old Story, with thy additional Excuse of purchasing
and payment to lessen the dignity and worth of the Spirit of God, and its
Qualification and Work within ^s; as if God did not value the same Spirit of
his, and its work in his People now, as formerly in Christ and his Followers;
whenas it is the same Spirit by which Jesus Christ offered up himself a Lamb
without Spot to God, and that raised him up from the dead, which also
quickens true Believers: But thou preferest the Suffering of the Body before
the Spirit, and layest all the stress upon it, as the only cause of Redemption,
Justification, etc. and the Works of the Spirit but as the Effect thereof: How
darkly have thou herein consulted (and set the Flesh above that Spirit, which
is the cause of Spiritual Effects) for without the eternal Spirit, his Body
could not be offered nor raised, nor the Saints quickened. And concerning his
Slaying the enmity in Himself, as thou wordst it; and misconstrues Ephesians. 2.15,
for thy sinful design against the worth of the Operations and Qualifications of
the Spirit of Holiness within: Christ had no enmity or sin in himself to slay;
but the enmity which he abolisht in his Flesh, was the Law of Commandments
contained in Ordinances, for to make in himself of twain One new Man, Ephesians.
2.15. (or that both Jews and Gentiles might be reconciled in one Body.) Now the
new Man has the inward Qualifications, and Fruits of the Spirit, which thou
want^st; and therefore art not in a reconciled state, nor actually reconciled
in thy self, who reckonest all done, purchased, and paid in thy stead, at once
without thee, while no qualification nor good is wrought in thee by the Spirit
of God; and yet thou must be qualified with Faith, and both Reconciliation,
Justification, and Redemption must be effected or fulfilled in thee, or else
thou can not be saved, according to thy own Concession. What Confusion are
you still in?

R. G. I say, That the Works wrought for us by Christ in his crucified Body, is
the first Mystery, the Foundation of all our Mercies, the ground of the
possibility of having any Works wrought in us by the Spirit of God, tending to
our being made like unto him; page 8.

Answ. The Ground and Cause of all our Mercies is the infinite Love of God, in
which he sent his Son, whose Works for us and Example to us, were Effects and
Tokens of the Love of God to man, and not the ground and purchasing cause
thereof (nor as by way of Payment and ridgid Satisfaction to vindictive
Justice, as Presbyters call it) as if Christ were more kind to man, and his
Love more infinite, than his Father's, which is blasphemous; like some of the
Popish Friars, that said, The Son was better then the Father.

And what better does thy doctrine imply, then that the Son's Works, wrought
without us, are the previous procuring purchasing Cause of the Law of God to
us, while Sinners, page 22.

On this erroneous stuff depends much of thy Book; thou might as well say,
That God and his Love had a Beginning, or were inferior to the Man Christ, as
that Christ's Works without were the previous (or foregoing) Cause of God's
Love to us: How then is his Love infinite in it self, and free to us, and the
Cause of sending his Son, Joh. 3.16. And dare thou say, That God had not Love
to M^nkind before he sent his Son in the Flesh? Or that the Love of God was not
the previous Cause of his so sending his Son, and of Christ's Testimony and
Works in the days of his Flesh?

R. G. The Works wrought in us, who Believe, being but the Consequence and
Effect of what he did for us, even when Sinners, page 9.

Ans. If but the Consequence, then men must begin first to learn and believe
the History or outward Relation of Christ's Sufferings, and not in the Spirit;
whereas the True and Well-beginning of the Churches of Christ, was in the
Spirit, which is Life; and then I ask, If none can be saved nor sanctified, but
they who have that outward Relation, or History? When as its confessed, that
the Operations of the Spirit of Holiness within do bring the Believer into
Union and Friendship with God: And is no^ th^s absolute Reconciliation or
Agreement with God? So Justification (making Righteous, and accepted with God)
from thos^ things, from which we could not be justified by ^he Law of Moses,
and Redemption from Iniquity, which are Eff^cted within, are the Effects and
immedi^te Consequences of the Operations of God (by his Son or Power) within,
who has ordained Pe^ce for us; For, (note that) he h^th wrought all our works
in us, Isa. 26* 12. A Testimony whereof, and of the Love of God to us, was even
Christ's outward Manifestation, Works, and Suffering in the Flesh, in which he
directed to the Spirit that quickens to God.

R. G. It has been the work of the Devil and his Agents, to darken this
Doctrine, of the justification of Sinners through the Death of Christ, as
already perfected with God, etc. pa. 9.

Answ. By this the Reader may understand thy sense of Justification, That
Sinners are perfectly justified by the Death of Christ (even while Sinners and
Enemies) But thou should have defined what Justification is; for if thy
Doctrine be true, all the World is in a justified State (seeing Christ died for
all) while actually Sinners, Polluted, and Unjust; only it remains for them to
believe it is perfectly done without them, and imputed to them; so they may
conceit themselves at peace with God, in their sins: A pleasant Doctrine to
make Hypocrites, like thy self, who but in the same Page have confessed, That
Christ died for our Sins, and rose again for our Justification; and that the
Apostles entreated men to be reconciled to God: But how agrees this, with
Sinners being perfectly justified without them, by his Death, when no good is
wrought within them? Did he so justify Sinners by his Death, and after rise
again, either to add to their Justification, or do it over again? What a
Laborinth art thou now in! But have not some of thy Brethren confessed, That
Sanctification and Justification are inseparable Companions?

R. G. But thou, as does thy Partner G. W. jumbles these things confusedly
together -- speaking of the works wrought for us by Christ, as lame and
imperfect -- not as having finish the Work given him to do, etc. page 10.

Answ. Thou belyest us; for we affirm, That Christ's Obedience and Works (even
in the d^yes of his Flesh) were all perfect, and that he therein finished so
much as the Father sent him to do, having left a perfect Example to be
followed; being a perfect Captain, Leader, and Conqueror through all his
Sufferings, and by the eternal Spirit offered himself a Lamb without Spot to
God: But wherein we testify, That a mere Belief of his Works and Sufferings
without, are not sufficient to save man, but he must know his spiritual Works
wrought within, and be saved by the washing of Regeneration, etc. this is no
deeming his Works without either lame or imperfect: For thou thy self say, I
do not say that he so finished it for us, as if no more were to be done within
us by his Spirit. Now thou would think much, if we, or any, should accuse
thee, for rendering Christ's Works for us as lame and imperfect: Have thou done
by us, as thou would be done unto? Who also have granted to the Operations of
the Spirit within.

The living Testimony of Christ Jesus, confirmed by him, through his Sacrifice
and Suffering in the flesh (which we truly own) is a Mystery, to be known and
fulfilled within, where the Righteousness of Faith is experienced, which brings
the true Believers (in the Light) into the Fellowship of Christ's Sufferings
(which were both inward and outward) and makes them conformable to his Death
(the Spirit baptizing them into it) a Mystery thou art yet a Stranger to.

R. G. Unwilling to be manifested in the Light, not telling us what that
further influence and service was more then being a bare Example, page 11.

Answ. Jesus Christ, in the days of his Suffering, was not alone in his
Testimony; but as he said, I and my Father, etc. and I can of mine own self do
nothing. He was endu'd with Power from on High, whereby h^s Coming, Offering,
and Testimony had a divine Influence upon the hearts of them that knew and
received him (and still has.) And they who attain to the Blood of Sprinkling,
to have their Consciences thereby sprinkled and purged from dead works, and to
eat of the Flesh and drink of the Blood of the Son of Man, do truly experience
the End of his coming, who has given his ^lesh for the Life of the World (and
Himself a Ransom for all, for a Testimony in due time) which things are
Mysteries, hid from all Hypocrites, and such who are dead in their sins.

R. G. Which of all the Prophets or Apostles ever so wrote of a Ransom, an
Atonement, a Propitiation, a Price of our Redemption, as of a Work to be done
in us, as it was in Christ; or that in these Christ was an Example to us, that
they might be over again effected in us? -- And which of all those Holy Men
ever so wrote of a Believer's being brought through the Ministration of Death,
Condemnation, and Wrath, after the Example of the Man Christ, etc? page 12.

Answ. Thou have perverted our words by adding [ as it was in Christ] and have
also showed thy wonderful Darkness; for though we do not suffer in all Points
after the same manner that Christ did, yet it follows not that he was not a
real Example of Obedience and Humility in his Suffering: But how contradictory
to thy own confession (have thou reasoned) which is, That Reconciliation,
Justification, and Redemption, are to be made e^fectual by the workings of his
Spirit, in all who through Faith receive the Atonement: And did not the
Prophet say to the Lord, Thou have wrought all our Works in us? Isa. 26. And
because the Chastizement of our Peace was upon Christ, does it therefore
follow, That we must never be chastised? This is like thy doctrine, Redemption
was in Christ, therefore not to be done in us; Christ passed through Death,
therefore we must not be crucified, nor perfectly dead to sin in this Life: Is
not this the very tendency or sum of much of thy Doctrine? But is it not Sin,
and its Enmity within, which Christ came to redeem and reconcile man from? Thou
art yet in Death, far from being redeemed, or thus reconciled; who have not
known the Ministration of Death, Condemnation, and Wrath; but questionest the
Believers passing through it [though it be a plain Truth, that they did (and
many do) so pass] they passed from Death to Life, and through the Law, became
dead unto the Law: And did not the Commandment which was ordained to Life, work
Death in the Apostle Paul, who also knew the Terrors of the Lord? But thou have
in thy Imaginations framed up a more easy way to Heaven (or Redemption, etc.)
then through the Ministration of Judgment (through which Sion is redeemed, and
her Converts with Righteousness), or of Death and Condemnation, which in its
time is glorious, which is fulfilled, where the Righteousness of the Law is
fulfilled within, even in them that walk not after the Flesh but after the
Spirit.

R. G. This new-coyn'd M^stery of Faith, in the Light in your Conscience, or
within you, as your Savior, and Obedience thereunto to be done and perfected
in your bodies, etc. page 12.

Answ. Its evident, that the true Light and Perf^ction (by it and in it) were
ever opposed by Darkness and its Children, which cannot comprehend the Light of
Christ within: And this is Darkness to be felt, that scornfully calls Faith in
the Light, a New-coyn'd Mystery: But Jesus Christ (the true Light that
enlightens every man) gave a better Testimony of the Light, when he said,
Believe in the Light, that ye may be Children of the Light, Joh. 12.35, 36. And
so did his Ministers in these words, God, who commanded the Light to shine out
of Darkness, has shined in our hearts, to give the Light of the Knowledge of
the Glory of God in the Face of Jesus Christ, 2 Cor. 4.6. And if we walk in the
Light, as he is in the ^ight, we have Fel^owship one with another, and the
Blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanses us from all sin, 1 John 2.7. And the
Anointing, which ye have received of him abides in you -- and even as it has
taught you, ye shall abide in him, verse 27. See also 2 Pet. 1.19. and Romans
2.7, 10, 13, 14, 15, 16. And has not the Grace of God, which brings Salvation,
appeared unto all men? Titus 2.11. See how manifestly this man has opposed
both Christ and his Apostles plain Testimonies, which are on the behalf of his
Light within, and B^lief in it, and Obedience to it; in order to Perfection,
Cleansing from all Sin, or a perfecting Holiness in the Fear of God: Are these
New-coyn'd Mysteries? Nay, they are Gospel Truths, which stand against the
Devil and his Darkness.

R. G. We, who since we believed received that Atonement, shall after our
bodily death be raised from the Grave, and be made Partakers of that Salvation,
which through Faith and Hope we wait for, while in the Body, page 13.

Answ. Thou put Salvation at a great distance, showing thy self yet in the
Grave of Corruption: Is this thy meaning of Salvation, that thou hopest and
waitest for, while in the body to be raised from the Grave after thy bodily
death? What strange Nonsensical Language is this? He now hopes and waits for
Salvation after the bodily death: see his Sottishness and Confusion; at other
times it was perfectly wrought at once without, or else purchased (he knows not
which) at Jerusalem; but now he hope for it after his bodily death. Ah! the
Hypocrites hope shall perish.
And was this the Salvation that Christ's second Appearance was looked for to
effect, Heb. 9.28. If thou live and die in thy Sins, and be'st not saved
from them, nor raised out of them here, thy Resurrection will be miserable (and
thy State sad hereafter) even that of the Unjust, which is to Condemnation.

R. G. It pleased the Lord to bruise him, he was (he has left out [we did
esteem him] smitten of God -- the Chastizements of our Peace were upon him --
(then he adds) This man should thus answer the Prophet Isaiah, Is that divine
Justice to take Vengeance on, Wound, Smite, bruise the Innocent, and let the
Guilty go free?

Answ. The Prophet said, he was despised, and we esteemed him not; surely he
has born our Griefs, and carried our Sorrows; yet we did esteem him Stricken,
Smitten of God, and Afflicted; but he was wounded for our Transgressions, etc.
Isa. 53.3, 4, 5. There are still those that reject and dis-esteem Christ, and
that esteem him smitten or plagued of God, and even to have under-gone the
Wrath and Vengeance of his Father in their stead, to acquit them from
Punishment (though they live and dye in their Sins, not expecting Salvation
till after their Decease) Whereas 1st, God had never any such Wrath nor
Revenge, against his Innocent Son, to execute upon him; nor will he so clear
the Guilty in their Sins: 2d, It pleasing the Lord to bruise him, was neither
in Wrath, nor to take Vengeance on him; nor yet actually or immediately by
himself to bruise him, but permissively; for though he was delivered by the
determinate Council of God, yet he suffered wicked hands to afflict and put
Christ to death, who did bear and suffer under the Load and Oppression of the
Sins and Iniquities of the World (yea, he has born our Griefs and Sorrows) the
Iniquity of all being so made to meet upon him. But a gross sense have thou
given to the Prophet's words; for neither were these Sufferings of Christ that
the Guilty might go free (for that divine Justice admits not of, as to condemn
the Righteous and justify the Wicked, that is an abomination) neither are God's
Chastizements by way of Revenge, nor a taking Vengeance on his Innocent Son,
who is the Delight of his Soul, the Son of his Love: Chastizement and Revenge
are two differing things; and so are Forgiveness, and the Rigor of the Law.

R. G. Jesus Christ is a Propitiation for the Sins of the whole World: may I
not thence in truth assert him to have been a Propitiation for all Sins past,
present, and to come? page 15.

Answ. That Christ is the Propitiation for the Sins of the whole World, I own
(and that his Blood, that cleanses from all Sin, bears record in the Earth)
but thy words [ for all Sin, past, present, and to come] are added to the
Scripture by thy Teachers the Presbyterians and Independants, and have given
much liberty to sin; contrary to the Apostles words, who says, ( of Christ)
Whom God has set forth to be a Propitiation through Faith in his Blood, to
declare his Righteousness for the Remission of Sins that are past, through the
Forbearance of God, Romans 3. He does not say, for the remission of sins past,
present, and to come; nor that men are perfectly justified and redeemed by the
Sacrifice of Christ, who commit sin all their days (which is implied in these
words [ for all sins past, present, and to come] whereas his b^ing a Sacrifice
for the sins of the whole World, is intended for the sins past (of every man)
committed before Believing or Conversion, or otherwise, through Weakness after
Conviction; not for wilful sins against Knowledge; if we sin wilfully after
that we have received the Knowledge of the Truth, there remains no more a
Sacrifice for sin, but a certain fearful looking for of Judgment and fiery
Indignation, which shall devour the Adversaries, Heb. 10.26, 27.

R. G. But that these Works of the Spirit, wrought in us, are the Atonement,
the Propitiatory Sacrifice, or any part of it, or the Ground and Cause of our
being Redeemed; that I deny, page 17.

Answ. What Is Attoneing, but making Peace and Quietness; and Redeeming, but a
delivering from Sin and Bondage, or rescuing from the Enem^? And must the
Spirit of God have no Hand or part in this? Or he in his working within, be no
cause hereof? (strange doctrine) May thou not herein as well exclude Christ
as his Spirit (who are One?) Whereas the work of Righteousness shall be Peace,
and the effect of Righteousness Quietness and Assurance forever, Isa. 32.17.
And the Fruit of the Spirit is Love, Joy, Peace, etc. Gal. 5.22. It is the
Spirit that both quickens, sanctifies, and justifies, and leads the true
Believer into all Truth: And what is this short of Redemption (I pray you?) if
it be a freeing from Iniquity? But these inward works of the Spirit we dare not
call the Propitiatory Sacrifice, as falsely thou imply'st; but he (Christ) the
Worker, who is made unto us Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification, and
Redemption; and is not this spiritually, o^ by his Spirit? And are not his
Works in his People as acceptable to God as ever (being true in him and in us)
from the dignity of him that works them?

R. G. God has purchased his Church by his own Blood: G. W. his confused
doctrine renders this Purchase as a work daily doing in every Generation, in
many Bodies, Note
as every man comes to be renewed by the Spirit -- a fine dress of new coined
words, page 17.

Answ. Whoever comes to be a Member of the true Church, as he does experience
the Work of God, and his Will fulfilling in him, must feel and witness (even in
the Body) a saving, purchasing, redeeming, and cleansing, etc. (from Iniquity
and Bondage) by the Blood of God: And as its written, After that the Kindness
and Love of God our Savior toward man appeared, not by works of Righteousness,
which we have done, but according to his Mercy he saved us, by the washing of
Regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost, Tit. 3.4, 5. See now how contrary
to plain Scripture and Saints Experience this R. G. has argued; and how the
work of the Spirit, or inward Renewing and Washing, by it (which saves) is
slighted by him, and such as he, who never knew what it is to be purchased unto
God, nor to be of his purchased Church: And they who are not yet come to be
M^mbers of that Church, to know his Blood (or Life) both to sprinkle,
sanctify, and redeem them from sin and iniquity in their Bodies (which have
been defiled) or else they are never like to be a true Church, nor to inherit
God's Kingdom: And herein I do not bring a Sacrifice without Blood, nor without
Spirit, nor like that of Rome, as blasphemously R. G. reproached me; for the
Spirit, and the Water, and the Blood do bear record in the Earth; and except ye
eat the Flesh and drink the Blood of Christ, ye have no Life in you; and Jesus
Christ the Righteous is the Propitiation, etc. Mark [is] in the time present;
he ^e^ains a Sacrifice (his Soul being made an Offering) for all that have not
wilfully sinned against Knowledge, or that have not rejected Christ, and sinned
out their day.

R. G. Christ, as formed within, the Hope of Glory, dwelling in us by Faith,
Note
is manifest within us; this Manifestation of him, as in us, thou calls the
true Christ, our only Savior, which the Apostles never did, page 19.

Answ. Strange Doctrine! Did the Apostles preach a false Christ, or another
then the true? Was not Christ within, the Mystery? And was not the ingrafted
Word that which saved the Soul? And he that has not the Son has not Life: How
amply has both Christ and his Apostles testified of his being in his chosen
Ones? And have thou not in page 22. granted to his appearance in Believers,
through Faith by his Spirit for Salvation? Will this man never leave his
Confu^ion, and self-Contradiction?

R. G. From Acts 2.36. -- God has made that same Jesus (adding) ( not him that
was manifest in that Body of Flesh, but the same Jesus) whom ye have crucified,
both Lord and Christ, pa. 19.

Answ. What a strange Addition and Parenthesis is this! that in effect denies
him to be Christ, that was manifest in that Body of his: I ask if it be not
true Language, to say, that Christ was manifest in the Flesh; seeing that every
spirit that confesses not that Jesus Christ is come in the Flesh [mark that]
is not of God, but is the spirit of Antichrist?

R. G. And to him as Savior, and to this Way of his Appearance in Believers,
thro^gh Faith by his Spirit for Salvation, and Remission of sins through him, I
have in plain words testified, and you have opposed, p. 22.

Answ. Nay, thou have rather opposed it, and not we; for we own, that God our
Savior, according to his Mercies, saved us, by the washing of Regeneration and
renewing of the holy Ghost, Tit. 3.4, 5, 6. But thou think Reconciliation,
Justification, Redemption, and Salvation, are all completed, perfected, and
done at once, by the crucified Body without; but now it must be by his
Appearance in B^lievers, through Faith by his Spirit. See thy manifest
Contradiction, viz. A perfect Justification and Redemption (of Sinners) without
them, when no good is wrought in them: (contra.) But now it must be done by
Christ's Appearance in Believers, through Faith by his Spirit.

As also thou grantest, that his appearing the second time is without sin to
Salvation: But when think thou that must be, is it in this life or
hereafter? Thou say, that after the bodily death, you shall be raised out of
the Grave, and made Partakers of that Salvation, page 13. It Is strange the
Salvation of Sinners, yea, of the whole World, as thy word is, should be
completed at once, above sixteen hundred Years since (from whence thou
should look upon us, whom thou revilest and condemnest, to be in as good a
state as thy self) as yet to be so long after Death looked for, how long, is
not known to thee; or do thou look for Christ, as the Son of Mary, to appear
outwardly, in a bodily Existence, to save thee, according to thy words, page
30? if thou do, thou may look until thy eyes drop out, before thou will see
such an Appearance of him.

THE Second Part, Further asserting The Nature of Christianity, etc.
WHereas G. K. did truly assert, that the works of the Law, excluded by the
Apostle from Justification, is when the Law is done without Life or Spirit; the
first Covenant or Law coming before the Seed be raised; so the Works not done
in Christ the Seed, do not justify; and that the Righteousness by Faith, is
when the Law is performed in us, by the Works of the Spirit, Righteousness in
the Elect Seed, etc.

To this R. Gordon answers, These are strange Unscriptural Expressions, in
effect renewing again the old Popish Trick. And further says, Scriptures do
indiffinitely exclude all Works, wrought in us or by us, as the Ground and
Cause of our Justification with God, etc. Also adds, That which requires
Works to be wrought in us, as the ground of our Righteousness and
Justification, though wrought in and through the Spirit of God, whether by
obedience to a Law without us, or in us before the Seed be raised, or in the
elect Seed, is a Law of Works still; This Doctrine is no other then the old
Law-working spirit, he says, page 23.

Reply, The Ignorance of this scornful man, between the righteousness of the
Law, as immitated by Self, and the Righteousness of Faith, and so between Death
and Life, how obvious is it, and how manifestly contrary to Scripture, has he
here excluded all Work wrought in us, even those of the Spirit and of the elect
Seed, from Justification? Thus laying all the stress upon a supposed Purchase
without; or on the Suffering of Christ's Body without, in opposition to his
Works within; as if the Seed of God, and its Work in his Children, had lost the
Dignity it had in Christ's Person: Oh sad doctrine! and what gross
Antinomianism, and liberty in sin, would this man lead People into? In answer
to whom I say, That God sent his Son in the likeness of sinful Flesh, and for
sin condemned sin in the Flesh; that the Righteousness of the Law might be
fulfilled in us, who walk not after the Flesh, but after the Spirit, Romans 8.3,
4. Now is not Christ fulfilling the Righteousness or Justness of the Law in us
unto Justification; it being both for the removing of sin, which he has
already condemned, and to make us Righteous? And further, the Apostle says,
The Unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of God; and such were some of
you, but ye are washed, b^t ye are justified in the Name of the Lord Jesus, and
by the Spirit of our God [Mark that] Was this any Popish Trick in the Apostle,
to assert the Operation of the Spirit of God within for Justification? 1 Cor.
6.9, 10, 11. And was not this in the Name of the Lord Jesus, who is the Elect,
the promised Seed? It appears this man is a Stranger, both to the elect Seed
which abides in him that is born of God, and to the Righteousness thereof: And
why does he so Scoff at plain words of Truth, concerning the Seed being raised,
and the Righteousness and Works thereof, which are those of the Spirit, those
of Faith, and the Law thereof: But that a contrary seed, to wit, that of the
Serpent, shows its dominion in him, and such as he is; who like the old
Antinomians and Lybertines, exclude the Works of the Spirit, and of the Elect
Seed from Justification, ca^^ing it an old Law-working spirit, as the
Antinomians use to do? And what is his then, but an old Devil-working spirit?
For, can any be justif^ed, or made Righteous, without the work ^f the Spirit,
or Seed of God within? Is not the Seed sown to bring forth the Fruits of
Righteousness? And do not the Heavens drop down, and the Lord rain down
Righteousness, that the Earth may open and bring forth Salvation, and that
Righteousness may spring up together? Isa. 45.8. But you
Sin-pleasing-Preachers, have neither sown in Tears; have not gone forth
Weeping, bearing precious Seed; nor reaped the Fruit thereof; Your fallow
ground is not plowed up; your Earth does not open, either to receive or bring
forth Righteousness in the seed or fruit thereof; your Earth is hard and
barren, Sin and Unrighteousness dwells in it, whereby you have caused the
Heavens to be as Brass, and the Earth as Iron.

Again, To oppose the Righteousness of the Elect Seed and Works of the Spirit
within, as unto Justification, this R. G. scornfully tells us, That in plainer
words they of Rome thus express, that the Apostle excludes from Justification,
works, which we our selves do by our strength, without the help of the Grace of
God; not those Works we do by the aid of the Spirit.

Now, if he has truly represented what they of Rome say in this case, I must
needs say, However they may hold that, and other Truths in Unrighteousness,
that they of Rome have given a better definition of Justification, then R.
Gordon has, and in words at least shown a better esteem of the works of Grace,
and of the Spirit of God, then he has done, which Works are above those of
self; and surely the Apostle James did not exclude the Works of Faith, which
are done by the aid of the Spirit of God from Justification, when he said, But
will thou know, oh vain man, that Faith without Works is dead; and was not our
Father Abraham justified by works, when he had offered Isaac his Son upon the
Alter, Jam. 2.20, 21. Now was this an old Popish Trick, or the old Law-working
spirit (as he calls it) No, sure it was before the Law was written; and it was
the Spirit of Faith, by which Abraham obeyed God; for Abraham believed and it
was imputed to him for Righteousness; and he was called the Friend of God, Gal.
3.6. Jam. 2 23. And they that are of Faith are of Abraham, and Partakers of the
Righteousness of Faith, wherein they are justified and accepted of God: Now if
I be exclaimed against herein, for P^pery, I must say, That wherein Papists
hold any Truth (though in unrighteousness) I must not therefore deny it: If the
Pope, and the Devil also, confess there is a God and a Christ; must I therefore
deny it, or be counted a Papist? Nay, I must speak the Truth in Righteousness,
however I be villified and scorned for it.

Again, Our asserting the Righteousness of the Elect Seed raised in us, and
Obedience of Faith therein for Justification and Acceptance with God: This does
neither deny nor oppose the Sacrifice of the crucified Body of the man Christ
Jesus, nor yet blot out of our hearts either the Name or Remembrance of him,
who is the great Propitiation for sin, as unjustly the Elect Seed, and its
Righteousness within is accused, p. 23. For the Appearance of Christ within,
and his Manifestation in Spirit, does neither deny nor oppose his Manifestation
or Suffering in the Flesh, but rather answers and fulfilleth the Intent and
End thereof; for the outward Manifestation of the Son of God in the likeness of
sinful Flesh, as it did condemn sin in the Flesh, so his inward Manifestation
in Spirit does destroy sin, works Justification and Redemption in them who
obey his Light within; for he is the Author of Eternal Salvation to as many as
obey him; and it is through the Obedience of the Spirit that the soul is
purified unto unfeigned Love, etc. And if ye through the Spirit do mortify the
deeds of the Body, ye shall live: so here is Righteousness, Redemption, and
Salvation received in Christ the Light, through obedience to his Light within;
however this be slightly styled, A Law-working spirit, and falsely judged. A
Principle agreeing with all the false Religions in the World, by this
Antinomian, Presbyterian, Independent, R.G. p. 24. who thus further preaches,
as in the Name of the man Christ Jesus, Receive the Atonement, be ye
Reconciled to God; Believe and be saved, the Man Christ Jesus having already
slain the Enmity in himself, the power of Sin, and Death, and the Law, for us:
And thus he is our Savior, etc.

To which I say, These Exhortations, Receive (...) Atonement (which is the
Peace) be ye Reconciled to God, Believe, etc. imply some Qualification and Good
must be wrought in men before they be in Peace, in a reconciled or justified
Estate: But how agrees this with those doctrines, which wholly exclude the
works, Qualification and Good wrought in us by the Spirit of God, and all
Obedience done by the aid of the Spirit from Justification, Reconciliation,
etc. it being done at once, as he says, by the Sacrifice of the crucified Body
of the Man Christ, whom he says, has slain the Enmity in himself, the power
of Sin, Death, and the Law for us; and thus (says he) he is our Savior, to
wit, when no good is wrought in us, by any Light or Spirit whatsoever: so then
is follows, its only our Priest's Belief, that all this is already done; how
much void of Good and full of Evil soever we be of our selves, this R.G. has
prescribed, an easy way to Heaven, a broad way for Hypocrites to sooth and
flatter themselves up in their sins, but a way that is never like to lead them
to Heaven, though Christ bore the sin of many and suffered for the unjust, even
when in the Flesh, and through suffering did both triumph over the Law of
Ordinances (and Shaddows) which was the Enmity he slew or abolished, Ephesians. 2.15.
For he had no sin nor enmity, nor power of it in himself to slay; seeing by the
eternal Spirit he offered up himself without Spot to God; by all which, though
he by his Innocence condemned sin in the flesh, and in himself became a
Conqueror and Triumpher through Sufferings; yet if R. G. and others, come not
to experience of the enmity and power of sin and death slain in themselves,
they are not actually reconciled, nor saved by Christ, neither yet freed from
the condemnation of the Law nor Judgment of the Son of God, who has all
Judgment given to him, and Power to execute Judgment, because he is the Son of
Man; but where he is received as a Savior, he saves from Sin, Death, and
Enmity in man, and redeemeth from all Iniquity; For, for that end he gave
himself: Its not enough to say, he has slain the enmity in himself, and the
power of sin; for Hypocrites make that a Cloak for the continuance of sin and
enmity in themselves, who know no Good wrought in them by any light or spirit
whatsoever: And such are the Corrupters of the Earth, Destroyers of Souls,
Deceivers of the Simple, and Perverters of the right Ways of God; such think
themselves secure and safe in their sins, while they Unscripturally and
Antichristianly oppose the Work and Light of Christ within, as not being of a
justifying Nature to the Obedient; and so they falsely apply, reckon, and impute
Christ's Righteousness to themselves, while they are actually rebellious
against his Light within: and I see no better tendency that R. G's. work has,
it being strictly examined and compared; however, therein he covers himself
with a pretended applause and extolling of the Dignity and Suffering of
Christ's Person; but they that are saved and redeemed from sin and enmity by
him, can say with the Prophet, I will mention the Loving kindness and Praises
of the Lord -- for he said, Surely they are my People, Children that will not
Lie; so he was their Savior: Mark So, he was their Savior, as having saved
them from Sin. Iniquity, and Falsehood; such are the People that are saved by
the Lord, who are Children that will not Lie, in whom Deceit and Enmity is
slain by the Power and spiritual Appearance of Christ Jesus within, though I
grant in general that he is the Savior of all men, as he affords them
Preservation by his Power, as Men and Creatures, in order to give them a day of
Visitation, wherein the tenders of Life and everlasting Salvation may be held
forth unto them, that believing and receiving the Son of God, they may be saved
from Sin and Death in themselves; for he is the Savior of all men, but
especially of them that believe, whose Faith is not a mere Historical Faith of
things only done without, but a FAITH in the Name and Power of the Son of God,
a Heart-purifying Faith, a justifying Faith, a Faith that works by Love, a
Faith that is victorious over the World; by which Faith, we being justified, we
have Peace with God; and by which Faith we have received Christ in Spirit, and
know him after the Spirit. The Traditional Knowledge, Faith; and outward
Profession of him (as merely after the Flesh) will neither save nor justify.
The Pope and Papists have as much of these as Robert Gordon, who has only his
Tradition and Faith or Credulity for his Religion and Profession.

Although the concurring Testimonies of the holy Prophets, and the four
Evangelists, and true Apostles, and Ministers of Christ, concerning his outward
Birth, Life, Miracles, Suffering in the Flesh, Death, Resurrection, and
Assention, we never denied, nor hereby (in the least oppose, by treating of the
Nature and Effects of Faith in him as the Son of God, the Foundation, the Power
and Wisdom of God; the Light, Life, Salvation, Righteousness, Sanctification,
and Redemption of true Believers: For he that believes in, and has the Son,
has Life; but he that believes not in him, the Wrath of God abides upon him:
How then is he, or such, perfectly justified with God, Reconciled and Redeemed
at once without them, a^^ording to R. G. while the Wrath of God abides upon
them, and while no Good is wrought in them? Is it good Doctrine to say, That
men are perfectly justified while under the Wrath of God? And that they are
perfectly Redeemed, and reconciled, and so at Peace, and imputatively Righteous
while actually under the Wrath of God in themselves? Were it not as good
Doctrine to say, That they are imputatively saved while actually Damned? But
this is something like the Doctrine of R. G. and his Teachers or Ministers, the
Presbyterians and Independants, under whose Ministry he has received what he
has testified, which he deceivedly thinks came from the Lord.

And whereas R. G. having denied that this Light which enlightens every man is
Christ, in which G. K. and I opposed him; and to our saying, So John Preached
him, etc. R.G. again answers in scorn, Thou should rather have added, So G. F.
Preached him, and so others among the Quakers. And further adds, John, or any
of the Pen Me^, never so wrote of Christ; neither can thou show me one place
of Scripture, wherein it is inserted of Christ, that the Light enlighteneth
every man that comes into the World -- is the true Christ.

Rep. What is this, ^u^ to deny the Divinity of Christ, or to deny him to be
that Word or Life which was the Light of men, testified of, John 1. which Word
became Flesh, and tabernacl'd in us? Was not this still ^^^ist that John
testified of, that was the true Christ that enlig^^^^s every man that comes
into the World? Is it not Antichristian Doctrine, to deny this enlightening
true Light to be Christ, and to scoff at us for asserting it? And because I
distinguished between Christ the Enlightener, and his Gift of Light or
Illumination in man, R. G. has judged me severely, as to be in
Self-contradiction, for my saying, That we affirm a Spiritual Divine Light to
be in every man, yet we do not say that Christ is in every man, or that every
man has the Son; though still I own the Son to be the Enlightner of every man:
This he counts a Contradiction, but herein he has but slightly overlookt and
censured my words; for there is no Contradiction in them, any more then in
saying, Christ the true Light, enlighteneth every man; so that there is Christ
and his Illumination, yet every man is not a Child of Light, walks not in the
Light, has not the Son, is not attained to the Revelation of Christ, and yet
has a degree of his Light and Illumination in them; wherein is his power and
capacity of believing and receiving the Son of God; or otherwise, it is
sufficient to leave them without Excuse; yea, the least Measure of Christ's
Light is sufficient in each respect, although this Opposer most ignorantly
s^ights the Work of any Law or Light in man, or Obedience wrought thereby, as
not able to deliver him from the Condemnation and Curse of the Law, so as to
obtain Justification with God the^eby, page 25. Whereas the Law of the Spirit
of Life in Christ makes free from the Law of Sin and Death; and this Law of the
Spirit of Life is within; this Law is Light; this being obeyed thus freeth man
from the power of Sin and Death, where true Obedience to the Light is; sin is
not obeyed, neither sin nor death does reign in the Creature, but Righteousness
raigns within unto Life; sin being forsaken, the cause of Condemnation and the
Curse is removed; and where there is no Condemnation there is Justification,
even to them that walk not after the Flesh but after the Spirit: And is not
this a state accepted of God, seeing its the Doers of his Will that are just
and justified?

But after this, R G. has opposed and scoff^d at that saying, That this Light
that enlightens every man that comes into the World is Christ (having denied
this) he, in plain Contradiction to himself, is forced to acknowledge the Truth
in these words, I also acknowledge that it is said, John 1.9. of Christ Jesus,
that was the true Light, which (...), illuminat, enlighteneth every man, (...),
venientem, coming into the World, for so it is in the Greek; and that every man
is enlightened by Jesus Christ, as he is the Word that made the World etc. page
27, 28.

See here, R. G. against R. G. one while the true Light which enlighteneth
every man is not the true Christ (with him) another while, Jesus Christ was the
true Light, which enlighteneth every man that comes into the World: Do you
think this is a trusty man to give credit to? let the unprejudiced Readers
judge. And further, We do not call the enlightening in every man the Christ,
but the Light of Christ, having already distinguished between the Enlightener
and the Illumination, and between the Giver and the Gift.

And now as concerning the Law and Nature by which the Gentiles did the things
contained in the Law; R. G. says, This Law or Enlightening thus planted in
man'^ nature by generation, is by Generation conveyed into every man as he
comes into the World; and that it is called by Solomon, the spirit of man,
which is the Candle of the Lord, etc. Pro. 20.27.

Answ. This Law and Light, that inwardly taught the Gentiles, was the Immediate
Gift of God; Christ, as the Word, being confessed to enlighten every man, whose
Light is not natural, nor by natural generation conveyed, as most grossly R.G.
words it; neither is it the spirit of man which simply knows but the things of
a man; but it is that Light, which lights, kindles and stirs up the spirit
of a man, whereby it is the Candle of the Lord; neither is it a Light or Thing
formed or made, as the spirit of man is, Za. 12.1. but a divine and spiritual
Light, manifesting the Good Will of God unto the Creature.

Again, It is R. G's. gross Error, That the Law, or enlightening in every man,
is the formed spirit in man (and yet in contradiction adding) enlightened by
him that made it, pa. 29.

So that the Law or Enlightening, is not the formed spirit of man, it being the
Light of him that made it, p. 29. So that the ^aw, or Enlightening, is not the
formed spirit of man, it being the Light of him that made it, that enlighteneth
man's spirit: Thus this R.G. is involved in his own Confusion, as one in a
Labyrinth.

Now concerning the nature by which those Gentiles did the things contained in
the Law, R. G. gives this expl^nation of it, viz. As being born of the Seed,
and after the kind of Man, they are naturally or by nature Men; so being born
of the seed of Man, they do naturally or by Nature, the things contained in the
Law, being written in their Hearts, etc. pa. 29.

Answ. I would ask this man, Whether this Nature he speaks of was pure or
impure, corrupt or incorrupt? These Gentiles had not the Law outwardly, but
they had the Law inwardly written in their hearts, according to which they
should be either accused or excused in the Day when God should judge the
secrets of men by Jesus Christ; this Law or Light in them was not Natural but
Spiritual: excusing the Obedient, and accusing the Disobedient before God, unto
which Law the awakened and convicted Conscience does bear witness and testify
either a man's Condemnation, or Peace: These Gentiles, who obeyed it, showed the
Effects of it; they had more of the Life of Christianity in them, then many of
the Professors of Christianity, who are disobedient to his Law and Light
within, placing Christianity merely in a dead Faith and Profession of Christ,
without the Knowledge of his Work of Righteousness within, or the Obedience of
Faith, or Effects of his Law in the heart; the Christianity of such is but
merely pretended and fa^n'd, and not real: And the Life, State, and Nature of
those Gentiles, who obeyed the Law written in their hearts, as they witnessed
against the Jews outward, so shall these Gentiles rise up in Judgment against
you Hypocritical and Feigned Professors of Christianity, who are Strangers to
the true Life, Power, and Nature thereof.

And what Confusion does this R. G. show in saying, That the Law or Light in
every man, is neither the Light of the Gospel, nor the ingrafted Word within,
that is able to save the soul: And yet confess, That by it the Eternal Power
and Godhead may be known.

How has he broke the Neck of his own Cause! Is there any higher Power, then
the Eternal Power and Godhead? And can any Law or Light, then what is Divine,
and of a Gospel Nature, discover it? For the Gospel is the Power of God unto
Salvation, to all them that believe; and it is the Gospel of God showed forth,
or manifested by the Light of his Son, and Preached in every Creature under
Heaven: And by this Light of Christ within, is the Love, Good Will, and Grace
of God to Mankind declared and signified, both in its being so universally
given, and in its living Testimony in man against sin and corruption, and for
Truth and Righteousness, in order to direct man to Life and Salvation in the
Son of God, who is the Power and Wisdom of God, the Brightness of his Fathers
Glory, and the express Character of his Divine Substance; who proceeded and
came forth from God, whose Power and Glory is Eternal and Divine, seen
Spiritually, not Carnally; his own Royal and Peculiar Offspring do in his
Light behol^ his Glory, as that of the only Begotten of the Father.

As to R. G. his saying, His Apostles and all his Ministers in all Ages -- all
in one joint Voice, pointing to Jesus the Son of Mary, this Son of Man, with an
Hosanna to this Son of David, and to none before him, or to any ever since.

Answ. That the Holy Prophets, Apostles, and Ministers, both pointed and
testified unto Jesus Christ, both as man born of the Virgin (or to his coming
in the Flesh) and unto his Divinity, and Manifestation in Spirit; this is
owned: But that they all cried Hosanna to the Son of David, is a Mistake; for
it was the Multitudes that went before and that followed (when Christ rid to
Jerusalem) that cried Hosanna to the Son of David, Matt. 21.9. Mark, It was the
Multitude that cried, Hosanna to the Son of David: Many can now cry Hosanna,
who never knew his Salvation within, nor believed in his Power; but rather
spiritually crucify him. And the Scribes and Pharisees could talk of Christ's
being the Son of David (and some calling him the Carpenter's Son) when they
neither truly believed nor o^n'd him (that was the true Christ) either as the
Root or Offspring of David. But Christ asked these Pharisees and Scrib^s (who
said Christ is the Son of David) this Questi^n* saying, What think ye of
Christ, whose Son is he? They said unto him, The Son of David: He said unto
them, How then does David in Spirit call him Lord, saying, The Lord said unto
my Lord, Sit thou on my Righhand, till I make thine Enemies thy Footstool? If
David then call him Lord, how is he his Son? And no man was able to answer him
a word, neither durst any man (from that day forth) ask any more Questions,
Matt. 22. and Mark 12.35, 36, 37. Now was not this the true Christ, whom David
in spirit called Lord, before he took upon him Flesh, or came of his seed? And
what is Hosanna? Is it not, Save now I beseech thee? And did not David call to,
and beseech God, to save him, and to show Mercy unto him, long before Christ
(as of Mary) was born? (How ignorant and confused does this our Opposet show
himself?) see Psa. 3.7. and 6.4. and 28.9. I perceive he is ignorant of Christ,
both as the Son of God, and as the Son of Man; for, according to the Spirit he
was the Son of God; and as the Son of man its said of him, that no man has
ascended up to Heaven, but he which came down from Heaven, even the Son of Man,
which is in Heaven, John 3.13. And what if ye shall see the Son of Man ascend
up, where he was before? John 6.62. But it appears further, that R. G's.
Hosanna, and pretended Adoration, and claim of Salvation, is only to him, as
the Son of Mary, as now (imaginary he says) existing outwardly bodily without
us. Why did he not call Mary the Mother of God (as Papists do) which to be sure
is not Scripture Language?
Whereupon I ask him, If he has so considered him to be God the Savior, or the
Son from the Substance of the Father, (as some of his Brethren have confessed
the Son is?) And that he Existeth outwardly bodily without us, at God's
Right Hand: What Scripture Proof has he for these words?) And then, What, and
where, is God's Right Hand? is it visible, or invisible? within us, or without
us only? And is Christ the Savior as an outward bodily Existen^ or Person
without us, distinct from God, and on that consideration, to be worshipped as
God, yea, or nay? And where does the Scripture say, He is outwardly and bodily
glorified at God's Right Hand? Do these terms express the Glory that he had
with the Father before the World began, in which he is now glorified? But did
not Mary express a higher Praise and Worship then R. G's (and the Multitudes)
Hosanna to the Son of David, when she said, My Soul does Magnify the Lord, and
my spirit does Rejoice in God my Savior, Luke 1.46, 47.

And whereas concerning the Law or Light in every man, he instanceth, Does not
even Nature it self teach? either to prove this Law or Light natural, as man's
Nature, insufficient or far below the Teachings of the new Covenant; and yet in
page 31. confesses, That it showed them (to wit the Gentiles) that which may
be known of God, being manifested in them -- They are left without Excuse,
says he; and that of God, which is manifest in them, gave them an Eye to see
his Invinsible Power and Godhead; to know God, and glorify him as God, page 32.

A large Confession to his own Confusion: And was that of God in them, or that
which might be known of God in them Natural, as of man's Nature, or but the
formed spirit of man, or something proceeding from Natural Generation? Oh gross
Ignorance! That ever a man should pretend to vindicate Christianity, and show
so much Contradiction to himself, and so much Ignorance of that Divine Light
and Power, which gives both to see the invisible things of God, and to glorify
him as God; surely this is not natural, nor of corrupt nature, that is
sufficient to bring men into this good Estate; or to leave them without excuse
if they abide not in it, retain not God in their Knowledge, or glorify him not
as God, see Romans 1.19, 20, 21, 28. How contrary to plain Scripture and Reason
has this man reasoned against the Light of God and Christ within; as also,
ignorant of the Seed within, and its being raised; and of the Righteousness in
the Elect Seed. For he calls these, New imagined Notions, whereof there is no
mention made in the Scriptures of Truth, page 32.

I believe they are New to him, and such as he is, in whom the seed of the
Serpent is so highly risen, and raigns as so; openly to oppose this blessed
seed of God where it is raised, though they cannot prevail against it (for,
though it be sown in Weakness, its raised in Power.) And yet in contradiction
to himself, in the same page, confesses, That the ingrafted Word which is able
to save the Soul, which is called the Seed of the Kingdom; which, in the
Children of Faith takes deep root downward, and brings forth fruit upwards.
Neither of which it has done in this, and such like confused Gainsayers, who
can talk much of the outward Birth of Christ, but know nothing of his spiritual
Birth (this is R. G's. state) but as much as in them lies, bury the Seed,
having crucified unto themselves the Son of God, until by their persisting in
their Gainsaying, and wilful Opposition against the Light and Seed of God
within, there remains no more Sacrifice for them; though there remains a
Sacrifie for them that do not persist in wilful Disobedience, nor crucify to
themselves the Son of God, or Seed of ^ife and Righteousness in its Appearance
within, which Appearance being received and believed; and so the Righteous
Seed, which abides in him that is born of God, taking place and rule within,
this brings forth the Fruit of Righteousness unto Life and Justification; and
so removes and works out that which is the Cause of Wrath and Condemnation. Let
him that can, receive it.

AND as to R. Gordon's Part against Gawen Lowry; It appears an impertinent Flam
and a piece of Cavil, much like the rest of his stuff against us.

He seems to be offended, That G. L. should communicate to others his private
Letter; and yet he himself has published some Passages of G. L's. Letter to
him in Print, with his own impertinent Cavils and Pervertions. Now if he thinks
G. L. did not well in communicating his Letter to be published, why did he
publish G. L's. with such cross and peevish Aggravations against him? Has he
not herein done that by another, which he would not have done by himself? Where
is his Pretended-love; or Friendship, or his Equal-dealing? As for what could
be sqeezed out of his Letter to his disadvantage, tending (as his words are
forced to speak) to no less then an owning another Mediator -- then Jesus of
Nazareth, as he says, But that we needed not do by his Letter; it needed
neither forcing nor sqeezing to make it worse then it was; for we laid down his
own very words in it, and did write but little to it, it appeared so gross and
Antichristian: And now because he says, That he is not ashamed of what he has
written, it is meet his doctrine should be here inserted again, that the Reader
may further take notice thereof.

Some Places of Scripture sent to Robert Gordon, by Gawin Lawry.
John 1. (from the first verse forward) In the beginning was the Word.

Chap. 12. verse 46. I am come a Light into the World, etc.

Chap. 15. ver. 5. I am the Vine, ye are the Branches.

Romans 8.10. If Christ be in you, etc.

1 Cor. 1.24. Christ the Power of God, and the Wisdom of God.

2 Cor. 13.3. Seeing you seek Experience of Christ speaking in me.

Tit. 2 14. Who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all Iniquity.

1 John 5.12. He that has the Son, has Life.

Chap. 4. verse. 4. Greater is he that is in you, then he that is in the World.

Robert Gordon's Answer to these Scriptures.
I have considered the Scriptures thou mentionest; and I find that in none of
them it is testified who the true Christ our only Savior is, but what he is
through the operations of his Spirit in Believers, called therefore the
Anointing within, or Christ within; but these Operations of his Spirit within,
are no where in Scripture called the Lord's Christ, our only Savior: And if
thou own no other Mediator, Christ, or Savior, then what is described in these
Scriptures thou mentions, then necessarily thou disowns the Lord Jesus Christ
of Nazareth, a Man approved of God, etc. Thus far R. G. telling us also of the
Writings of that enlightened Man Jacob Behoman, as his words are.

On which the Observation was thus, viz.

Observe, Hear the tenure and tendency of R. G's. Answer how antichristian it
is? He appears here plainly as owning another Mediator, Christ, or Savior,
then that Christ that said, I am come a Light into the World, I am the Vine;
etc. (And we ask, Was not he Jesus of Nazareth?) And of whom it is testified in
Scripture, Christ in you; Christ the Power and Wisdom of God; He that has the
Son, has Life; Who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all
Iniquity, etc. But R. G. does not own this Christ to be the Lord's Christ, or
Jesus Christ of Nazareth; but he must have some other christ, then this Christ,
that is descib'd in those Scriptures before. (But dare he say that Jacob
Behoman owns his doctrine herein? And I add, Surely R. G. grows darker and
darker, to turn from a Behmanist, to an Antinomian, Presbyterian, and
Independent.) For this Christ, who is the Word, the Light, the Christ in
Believers, the Power and Wisdom of God speaking in Saints, R. G. deems but the
Operations of the Spirit, and not Christ the Operator, Savior, or Redeemer;
wherein he is greatly mistaken, and has outrun himself besides any right Aim:
For Christ, as the Word, the true Light, the Power and Wisdom of God, the
Redeemer from all Iniquity; and as in his Saints, the Giver of Life and Victory
over the World, etc. he is the true Operator of God (his Operations within,
cannot be wrought without him the Operator) and the Author of Faith, the Worker
out of Sin, the Savior and Redeemer from Iniquity (and so an Operator as such)
He is given for a Leader, for Light, Life, and Salvation to all who believe in
his Light, which will shine, live, prevail and prosper against all the
Darkness, Dark-spirits, and Enmity which oppose it.

Now let the Reader judge, whether R. G's. words be not Antichristian, and he
an Antichrist and Deceiver, yea, or nay?

This R. G. represents some of G. L's. Letter to him in these words.

I find thy Mind, in this Book, abroad; gathering in the comprehension what
thou fancy'st, and have heard of others, so heaps up Confusion and
Contradiction: What will avail thee or me, that we know abroad, of things done
abroad? Nothing at all. If ever thee or I come to know true Peace, we must come
to know the Life that quickens: It is not Names nor Things done without, but
the Life within that redeems, that purges, that sanctifies, that quickens the
Soul to God. To this R.G. cavillingly answers.

Now consider what is testified by the Prophets and Apostles, concerning the
Man Christ Jesus without them, a Name and thing abroad -- The Saints of old
believed in him for Redemption; they saw, and believed, and left it upon Record
to us, and their Report is true, that we also, who have not seen, might Believe
and be Blessed -- Thou have made the Coming, Death, Sufferings, and Resurrection
of the Man Christ, for the taking away Sin, as quite useless as Redemption,
Justification, Salvation, as a Name and Thing done Abroad, etc.

No, He has not made void these things by his owning the Life that quickens,
the Life within that redeemeth, that purges, and that sanctifies, and
quickens the soul to God; for this answers both Christ's Testimony, and the
End of his Coming: He has only signified how void and empty R. G. is of the
true and living Knowledge of Christ, and his Works within: As also, Accounting
that faith but dead, which is received only by Tradition and Report, without
either sight or sense of Christ, or his Power and Operations within, as the
Foundation, and Author, and Object of Living Faith, which sanctifies and
justifies; which is contrary to R. G's. dead Faith of Names and Things all
without, while nothing of Life is felt within: The Flesh of the Son of Man he
has not eat, and his Blood he has not drunk of; so that Life in him he has
not received: And I believe, that the Name of Christ Jesus, his Power and
Works, have so little place or reception in him, that both Christ, his Name,
the Redemption of the Soul, Justification, and Salvation, are all shut out of
doors, and so but as Names and things abroad with R. G. and so the End, and
Effect of Christ's Coming, and Sufferings, and the Power of his Resurrection,
these also have no place in such as he, who do not experience the Life nor the
Power of Christ within, to redeem, sanctify, or quicken the Soul to God;
neither is his sin taken away from within, while Salvation and Redemption are
shut out, merely as things abroad: but Christ said, It is the Spirit that
quickens, the Flesh profits nothing, John* 6.63. And the Apostle Paul said,
Though we have known Christ after the flesh, yet now henceforth know we him so
no more, 2 Cor. 5.16. And did not the Apostle know him to be their everlasting
Salvation, Justification, and Redemption?

Now that of Jesus, the Son of the Highest, its said, The Lord God shall give
unto him the Throne of David; and he shall Reign over the House of Jacob; and
of his Kingdom there shall be no End, Luke 1. Now to this we both confess, and
assert it.

But whereas* R. G. so very often over, speaks of Jesus Christ the son of Mary,
and that out of the Natural Seed of David, is their Savior, etc.

Now though I grant, that according to the Flesh he was born of the Virgin
Mary, descended of the Lineage of David; yet he was Miraculously conceived by
the Over-shaddowing of the Power of the Highest, and therefore was called the
Son of God; not Natural Seed of David, that is not Sc^ipture: He is neither a
Natural Savior, nor Carnal Christ (as is imported in such like Sayings of
Carnal Professors) But being the Son of the Most High, (who proceeded and came
forth from God) in his Divine Power and Spirit, he was, and is the Savior; and
thereby Raigns over the House of Jacob forever, So the Seed which raigns is not
Natural nor Carnal, but Spiritual; for unto the Son its said, O God, thy Throne
is forever, Heb. 1.8. Now I ask, Was this a Natural Seed?

But in that Christ, in the days of his Flesh, said, I can of my own self do
nothing; the Son can do nothing of himself, but what he sees the Father do,
that he does: Still I imply and grant, that he took upon him a real Body of
Flesh; though methinks R. G. might have ascribed more Honor to Jesus Christ,
as being the Son of the Most High, then by so often calling him the Son of
Mary, which he does so very often, as if we denied his outward Birth of her;
but that no ingenious man will judge of us, how disigeniously soever he has
dealt by us in this and other things; whom I query upon his words, Jesus
Christ, the Son of Mary, of the Natural seed of David, shall Reign over the
House of Jacob forever.

First, Whether or no the Throne of David, which was promised to be given him
to sit upon, be an outward Throne?

Secondly, Whether or no he shall outwardly Reign in Person?

Thirdly, Whether or no his Kingdom, that shall have no End, be an outward
Kingdom; seeing Christ said, My Kingdom is not of this World?

And now R. G. thou showest thy self in a most inveterate Rage against me, as
one highly angry'd at me, in thy parcel of Confusion, and Ignorance, and
Reviling; wherein thou have not at all cleared thy self, nor reconciled thy
manifold Contradictions, which I laid upon thee in my Part of the Book, about
which thou have but made a mere Scraffling Bundle of Confusion against me and
us, instead of heartily answering our Book* Thou begin'st to charge my Part, as
that of a clamorous Woman, having only brought forth a mere Libel, stuffed with
a bundle of (currilous Expressions; which is but thy own Clamor and Malice
against me, and it does not touch me, nor what I writ; for, the Truth asserted
by us, stands over thy head, and thy Confusions and Self-contradictions remains
on record against thee to thy own perplexity; which beca^se I have so plainly
manifested on my Part, thou appear'st (instead of clearing thy self thereof) as
if thou would be revenged of me at once, by seeking to make People believe,
That not only I have contradicted my self; but G. F. also, in these Passages,
viz.

Where I s^id in my Answer to Newman, That though we do affirm a Spiritual
Divine Light of God and his Son to be in every man, yet not that Christ is in
every man, or that every man has the Son: And yet I said thus of thee, Let the
Impartial Reader judge of R. G's. Confusion and Ignorance, not owning the
Light, that enlight^ns every man, to be Christ or the Son of God; contrary to
Scriptures. To which thou add'st, Oh strange! be ^sham'd, etc.

Truly thou may be ashamed of thy Ignorance, to attempt to fasten a
Contradiction upon me, without either right Judgment, Sense, or Consideration;
for I do still assert, That Jesus Christ, the Son of God, is the true Light,
that enlightens every man that comes into the World; and that it is R. G's.
Ignorance and Antichristianism, to deny that it is Jesus Christ that so
enlightens: And yet I say, it is no Contradiction in me to say, That the Light,
Gift, or Illumination of Christ, that is in every man, is not Christ himself,
the Giver, or Enlighterner, his universal Illumination being considered as a
Measure of his Light, Grace, or Gift; for there is the Giver, and the Gift,
which is given in diverse Measures and Degrees, as the Creature is capable of
receiving from the infinite Fullness of Light and Life; so there is a
distinction (as to the Creature) between the Giver and the Gifts, as every good
and perfect Gift comes from God; who by his Enlightnings enlightened the World,
and the Earth trembled and shook, Psa. 77.18. Now here is God the Fountain of
Light, and his Enlightenings, which do enlighten, and yet he is Infinite and
Omnipresent; and so I may say of Christ, as God over all, he is without and
beyond Limitation or Bounds, of Place; the Heaven of Heavens cannot contain
God; his Presence fills Heaven and Earth, although his Light or Life appears
and shows it self by Degrees to the universal capacities of Mankind, Job 36.26.
Psa. 1^9.6, 7, 8, 9, etc.
and not in the fullness thereof, that being beyond the reach of the Creature's
capacity. But to come to R. G's. Objection, as near as I can, to make him
understand my clearness of contradicting my self, or G. F. as also to see his
own Ignorance; I say, Jesus Christ the Living Word, is the true Christ, that
enlighteneth every man that comes into the World; here is the true Light and
its Enlightening distinguished, as plain as Lux and Lumen, he being that vera
Lux quae illuminat, etc. as to speak in a low similitude (not for proof nor
absolute comparison The Sun and its Light being under Limitation; so is not the
Light of the Son of God.
but illustration) there is the Shining, the Beams, or Illumination of the Sun,
in Houses, which are not the Sun it self; though this is but a P^rable limited
to the word Enlighten. Much might be said in these Matters.

But whereas thou add'st, That thou supposest there may be so much Honesty in
G. F. to rebuke me openly, and bring me to a public Confession before him,
thereby at least to vindicate his own Book, Printed 1659. wherein, thou say,
it is often affirmed, That the Light in every man is Christ, and that Christ is
in every man, see page 9, 10, 19, 20.

Now by the way it is observable, That thou have rather justified that
Asse^tion, That Christ is in every man; in pressing to have G. F. rebuke me
openly, which Assertion thou have not only denied at other times, but also
denied that the true Light, which enlighteneth every man, is Christ: But thy
Scorn, and Falsehood, and Wronging us both in this matter, is very manifest from
his said Book, and the very Pages cited by thee: For as G.F. with me, often
asserts, That Christ is the true Light, which lights every man that comes
into the World: Yet he also asserteth in the said Book, and page 9. in answer
to John Bunion, these very words, Thou never knew Christ formed in thee, nor
the reigning of the Seed; and how was the Lamb slain from the Found^tion of the
World, but amongst such as thou art? And Reprobates may talk of Justification,
in whom Christ is NOT, who witness him NOT within; he is not ^our
Justification. M^rk now, where is the Contradiction between G. F. and I? Does
this contradict that Saying, that it is not our Principle to s^y, That Christ
is in every man (intending as formed, rev^al'd, or u^ited to man) or that ever^
man has the Son; and yet a spirit^al divine Light of God and of his Son is in
every man? See now how thou art deceived in thy Conceits and Bragging, as if
thou had fastened such irreconcilable Contradictions on us; who,
notwithstanding thy Insinuation, to make G. F. rebuke me openly, thou would
have such among us, who have known any thing of the Teachings of the Spirit, to
cease from us, as if we were all Deceivers, and yet supposest Honesty in G. F.
as to rebuke me for a Contradiction, as thou falsely imagin'st; but now would
have People cease from us, as if we both taught Untruths, which thou thus
represents, That Christ is not in every man; yet that he is in every man: if
neither of these be true, show us another Truth between them; but thou rather
shows thy own Confusion still.

Again, I neither clamor, nor am angry at any Scripture Proofs, concerning
Christ, as falsely thou accusest me; but thou do not answer my matter, where I
question thee concerning thy words, God Man and his Purchasing all with God; so
I must still leave the Question upon thee: For, whom do thou reckon has he
completed and purchased all? And of whom did God purchase Salvation, according
to thy strange manner of Expre^sion?

Whereas thou go so often over with these words, Jesus Christ the Son of
Mary, whom thou call'st, God-Man: I ask thee, If this be not of kin to the
Papists, calling Mary the Mother of God? and where did the Apostles so often
(or ever) use those Expressions, Jesus Christ [God-man, the Son of the Virgin
Mary?] And who were they that said, Is not this the Carpenter, the Son of Mary?
To whom Jesus said, A Prophet is not without Honor, but in his own Country,
etc. Mark 6.3, 4. Now what think thou? Did they Honor him in those
Expressions? And which have thou more Honored, Him, or Mary? But Peter gave a
higher Testimony of him, when he said, Thou art Christ the Son of the Living
God: To whom Jesus answered, Blessed art thou, Simon Barjona; for Flesh and
Blood has not revealed it unto thee, but my Father which is in Heaven, Mat.
16.16, 17. But do not the Papists honor him as much as thou, in their frequ^nt
calling him the Son of Mary, as thou have done? Who also have grossly wronged my
words, where I said, Nor was the Son of God, nor his Light, under such a
Limitation, either as to Time or Place, a^ a finite Creature; but his
Outgoings were of Old, from Everlasting, etc. from which thou infer'st, If
that Holy Thing, conceived ^f the Holy Ghost, and born of Mary, was not
therefore the Son of God -- Then the Man Jesus Christ of Nazareth, who was the
So^ of the Virgin Mary, was not the Son of God (thou say.) Whereby ^hou
falsely add'st, That I have given the Angel Gabriel the Lie, and am in union
with those Jews, who reckoned him but a mere Man, the Carpenter 's Son, etc.
John 10.33.

To be sure thou art in union with a Lying spirit, and art a gross Perverter;
for though I do not own that the Son of God, and his Light, is under such a
Limitation, the Holy One and his Light being unlimited: I did neither thereby
intend, nor do my words bear any such Construction, as that The Holy Thing
conceived by the Holy Ghost, was not the Son of God: Besides, thou having
confessed, that his Outgoings were from Everlasting, have thereby granted to
what I said, That the Son of God and his Light are not under a Limitation as to
Time and Place, especially if thou will own his Divinity, or that he ever was
the Son of God before he took a Body in the Womb of the Virgin; but if thou
do not own that the Son of God was before then, then thou do not own his
Divinity, nor him no more then a finite Creature: And herein the Heathen may
judge thee as Nebuchadnezar, when he said, Lo I see four men loose, walking in
the midst of the Fire, and they had no hurt; and the form of the forth is like
the Son of God, Dan. 3.24, 25. How came he to speak of the Son of God then? And
by what Scripture, and how much, have thou exceeded those Jews, that called
Christ the Carpenters Son; or those that called him the Carpenter, the Son of
Mary, Mark 6.34. who therein did not truly honor him as a Prophet, much less
as the Son of God, no more then thou have in thy frequent calling him the Son
of Mary, the Son of Mary, the Son of Mary, etc. as the POPE and PAPISTS do? But
when one said unto Christ, Behold thy Mother and thy Brethren stand without,
etc. He answered, who is my Mother, and who are my Brethren? Behold! whosoever
shall do the Will of my Father, which is in Heaven, the same is my Brother, my
Sister, and Mother, Mat. 12.47. to the end. Mark 3.33, 34, 35. Luke 8.21. and
11.29, 30.

And now to what thou say page 41. Of Sinners, Ungodly, Unjust, Enemies,
even while Enemies and no Good wrought in them by any light or spirit
whatsoever; that for these Christ made an end of Sin, abolished Condemnation,
Curse, and Death, etc. And this is thy Explanation, Of God-Man having at once
without us wrought, completed, and purchased all with God (as thou
nonsensically word'st it.)

For which I query, If all this be done for the whole World, when no Good is
wrought in them by the Light or Spirit of God; then why are any condemned? Can
it be just with God, to condemn any, or with-h^ld Salvation from any, if it be
so purchased, paid for, or he satisfied for, and, with men in their sins, when
no Good is wrought in them? But what absurdity is it to say, That Transgression
is finished, and Sin made an end of, and Condemnation, Curse, and Death
abolished; where (yet in thee, and other such empty and dead Professors) both
Transgression and Sin actually remains, and Death raigns, for which you are
liable to Condemnation; the Wrath of God being revealed from Heaven against all
Ungodliness and Unrighteousness of men, who hold Truth in Unrighteousness, and
his Wrath abiding on him that believes not in the Son? But if thou reckon'st
that men's Transgression is finished, and their Sin made an end of, and that
they are reckoned Righteous, when no Good is wrought in them; then it must thus
be taken, That they are imputatively Righteous, while actually Sinful; and
though Sin be in them, God sees it not, Job 10.14.
or takes no notice of it, as to condemn them or reprove them for it; which is
still corrupt Antinomianism, and contrary to reason or Truth: Though he^eby I
do not oppose, but really confess Christ to have given himself for us, an
Offering and Sacrifice to God, for a sweet smelling Savor, Ephesians. 5.2. Yea, and
that God has set him forth to be a Propitiation through Faith in his Blood, to
declare his Righteousness for the Remission of Sins that are past, through the
Forbearance of God: Now though there be an Appeasment of Wrath, and Remission
held forth in this Propitiation for sins that are past; yet this Righteousness
of God, declared thereby, does not admit of sin to be continued; or of sins
past, present, and to come, as thy words are. This Righteousness will not
indulge thee, nor other^ in Unrighteousness all your days; neither is it the
Nature of this Blood of his Sacrifice, nor of Faith in it to cover or excuse
thee in thy sins; for Faith purifies the Heart, and the Blood of Jesus Christ
cleanses from all sin, where it is received in the Living Faith: Neither will
thy Profession of sin being ended without thee, and Righteousness brought in,
in Christ's Person without thee, be any Cloak for thee in thy sin and enmity;
nor yet will thy confused Talk (of God-Man having Purchased all with God for
thee) stand thee in any stead in God's dreadful Day. Although thou professest
Victory and Perfection in Christ, while in Sin and Imperfection in thy self, as
thou represents the Believer's state, p. 43. which shows thy Ignorance both of
Perfection, Victory, and being in Christ; for Perfection and Imperfection are
two contrary things, as being in Christ, and being in Sin are: And as the
Warfare against Sin, and the Victory over it, are different; so he that is in
Christ, is a New Creature, old things are done away, though there is a time of
Warring, and a time of Victory; a time of Groaning within our selves for
Redemption, where the First Fruits of the Spirit are received, and a time of
Triumphing and Rejoicing in Victory; for First Fruits imply that there are
Second Fruits: But thou, in citing that of Romans 8.23. have left out the word
FIRST (for it makes against thee) and set the Fruits of the Spirit, instead of
the First Fruits of it: But why do thou talk of the Warfare, whilst thou
reckon'st Transgression and Sin made an end of; and Justification, and
Salvation, and Redemption purchased and perfected with God without thee, when
no good is wrought in thee? And after what manner do thou pray to God? Do
thou ask Forgiveness for thy sins? Or rather, Does not thy Doctrine tend, not
only to strengthen People in Sin, and to make them so stout in their Rebellion,
as not to need to ask Forgiveness of God for their Sins? For what need that, if
such a Purchase, Pa^ment, or Satisfaction be made without them, for sins past,
present, and to come, as thy Doctrine imports? For that is ^ot of the Nature of
Forgiveness: And what does Christ make intercession for? Is it for something he
has purchased and compleat^d with God already? Which (if so) cannot justly be
detained from the Creature, no, not from any in what state soever, if thy
Doctrine hold: For i^ a m^n's Debts pasts present, and to come, be all
aforehand paid at once, and his Release purch^s'd by his Surety; would it not
be absurd in him still to pray to his Creditor, Oh! I beseech thee forgive me
my Debts? and would it not be as unjust if the Creditor should still detain him
in Prison after such a full compensation or rigid satisfaction of the Law is
made? Such as the Presb^ters and Independants suppose Christ to have made in
our stead, b^ undergoing vin^ictive Justice at the Hand of his Father, as they
vainly imagine.
O^ght there not rather to be enjoyed a Deliverance upon it, Ipso Facto? But
thou, and such as thou art, make Christ's Sufferings a Cloak for Sins past,
present, and to come; pleading your Perfection, Righteousness, and Compleatness
in him; and all as done at once without you, while yet imperfect, actually
Unrighteous, and Incomplete in your selves in your Lives and Conversations, and
no good wrought in you by any light or spirit whatsoever: Do thou think that
God is therewith satisfi^d? or that Christ and his Sufferings will indempnifie
and acquit you, living and dying in your Sins and Pollutions? No, no; God will
not be put off, nor his Ways slighted by such Hypocritical Flams and Mockeries.

And whereas in page 44. thou falsely accus'st me, Of pleading for a being
perfected in my self; and to prove the contrary of me [ as not having attained
the end of Faith (which is the Salvation of the Soul) which thou reckon'st, is
not till men be as Angels, neither Marrying nor giving in Marri^ge] And thou
say of me, Why is he then like unto us M^rtals, Marrying, and giving in
Marriage; Eating, and Drinking, and not above Sickness and Death? Is this a
sufficient Argument against Perfection? Is Marriage an Argument of
Imperfection? Was Adam imperfect in Paradise, when Eve was given an Help-Meet
for him? Or is either Eating, Drinking, Bodily Sickness, or Death, an Argument
of Imperfection? By this thou may accuse many of the Servants of the Lord,
if not all, and Christ himself, with Imperfection; for he did Eat, and Drink,
and suffered Death in the Flesh: But as for my Particular, I do not tell thee
my state, whether Perfect, or Imperfe^t, nor argue from thence against thee;
though I plead for the Principle (of Truth) of Perfection, or Freedom, and
Salvation from sin, being attainable in this life, by virtue of that divine
Power and Faith, which overcomes sin, and is able to subdue all things to it
self. And thy accusing me of giving in Marriage, is a mere Falsehood; for though
I own Marriage as being an Ordinance of God, and Witness bear to the honorable
Marri^ge and Joining in him; yet it is not our Principle to make, or give in
Marriage; but we do own the Lord's Joining, and the Marriage that is according
to his Will. And as for not being above Sickness and Death, which I am accused
of, as a Token of Imp^rfection: This is a very mean Argument against me; and
how I am in such a State or Trial of Sickness, thou do not know how my spirit
is; nor what Enjoyment of God, or Renewing in the inward Man I have, when the
outward man is in Weakness: However, such as thou art, be ready to rejoice and
insult over me, or others of us, when you hear of our Afflictions or Trials;
and its probable thou, and such, would rejoice much more in our Death or
Dissolution, if that might come to pass according to your minds: But I thank
God, he has given me Peace and Patience, and has afforded an increase of
Consolation to me in Sickness; and Death I have not feared, but in my spirit
have been over it, when in outward appearance nigh unto it: I confess I have
had Sickness, and many outward Trials, for the Work of the Lord and his Truth's
sake; as that Servant of Christ in the Gospel, Ep^phraditus, Paul's Brother and
Companion in Labor and Fellow-soldier, was Sick nigh unto death for the Work
of Christ, not regarding his Life, Phil. 2.25. to the end: Now if thou should
upbraid him, or such, with being imperfect because of such Sickness, what a
peevish pitiful Argument would it be? Nay, does it not rather make more against
thee; that the Servants of Christ meet with such Exercises for the Work's sake,
which is not for sin? And that some do the more witness Patience to have her
perfect Work, and Faith its exercise under Trials; and as Job said, When I am
tried, I shall come forth as Gold, Job 23.10. Do not these all make against
thee, and argue that God will have a pure and perfect People, and they shall be
manifest to be such through their manifold Afflictions and Trials.

And now whereas I said, That thou had shown thy self one while like a
Quaker, having gotten many of their words (in thy other Pamphlet) and another
while like a Presbyterian and Independent: Note
To this thou answer'st, That thou have therein testified to, in thy measure,
what thou receiv'dst of the Lord, through and under the Ministry of those I
call Presbyterian and Independent, page 44. What did thou think to gain such
a great Conquest over us, by thy beggarly Scraps and poor Relics, that thou
have gathered and learned under the Ministry of Presbyterians and Independants,
when many of them (thy Tutors) have been confounded and overthrown, and their
Mouths stopped by the Power of Truth in us, when they have gone about to
overthrow it, and villifie us, by their perverse Gainsayings? Thou might
have taken warning from them, to have kept back and saved thy self from this
cumber which by thy Perverseness and busy meddling in thy false spirit, thou
have brought upon thee, had not Conceitedness, Pride and Presumption blinded
thee; and seeing thou have been but a Pedant, under the Tutoring and Ministry
of Presbyterians and Independants: What Conquest think thou now to gain? And
what Name or Title do thou go under? Art thou a Presbyterian, or a
Presbyterian-Independant, or both? May we not rather look upon thee to be an
Antinomian, Presbyterian, and Independent? But indeed, thy spirit appears to be
that of a ridged reviling Presbyter: However, thou should in Policy and
Prudence have sit in silence, to have seen what success and end thy Tutors or
Masters would have had in their warring against us, before thou had thus
busied thy self, or taken upon thee thus severely to judge us; and Me in
particular, that I am not in any measure a Partaker of that Living Faith the
Holy Men lived and died in; Which Judgment I value not, but trample upon it in
the Power of the true Light, and am over all thy Confusion and Nonsensical
Scribbling, or what thou can scribble against me, or the Truth testified by
me, which stands over thy head, and the heads of all such peevish, perverse,
and pitiful Gainsayers as thou art, who have sufficiently manifested whose
offspring thou ar^, and whose work thou ar^ in; and accordingly shall be
rewarded. I pass by much of thy fruitless stuff, and impertinent Tautologies
(whereof a Vollumn might be made) as not worth repetition, or divulging.

G. W.

A Postscript.
IF R^bert Gordo^ will devise and frame any thing, for R^ply to what is here
written; I only desire this Civility and Reason^ble thing of him, That he wou^d
be ple^sed, not to inter-line nor mistake my words, nor ^y down things in my
Name, which I never writ nor i^tended, as he h^th done in diverse Particulars
(to the great ^buse both of Truth, and Me as one concerned in it) mo^e th^n I
have (as yet) mentioned: But I request, that he would state my own words (as I
have his, both in Sentences and Clauses) and not divulge Forgeries in my Name
to Fight with. For we perceive by his two Pamphlets, and his many vain
Repetitions, and I^pertinencies therein; that he is as in a Whirle-Pool, and
has already brought forth the bottom of his matter (as to Doctrine and
Vindication) and can bring forth no profounder Opposition, but a vain
Repetition of the Old, unless that some more Reproachful Rusty stuff remains
behind in him, and his Associate Apostates, to be brought forth, as further to
give occasion for his and their Inveterate Revengeful spirits to be made
manifest.

However, Though it is not my Principle to st^ive for Strife, nor for the last
Word; yet I am not willing to acq^iess under such Abuses, where TRUTH is so
deeply concerned. Though (I thank God) I can both pass by, and bear, many
Personal R^flections and Injuries.

G. W.

An Aditional Postscript, BY George Keith to Robert Gordon.
R. G.
ALthough thy Part to me be answered by another, yet there are some things
which I find fit a little to touch; I had indeed much in my heart, for Truth's
sake, to lay open the Emptiness, Weakness, and Inconsistency of this thy work
against us; but being prevented by another concerned with me therein, much of
what I have to say may remain unto a further occasion.

Thy way of Reasoning against me, as having nothing from the Lord to answer
thee, or proving rebellious, in not delivering it, because I did not
communicate it unto thee, by word of Mouth, or writing, is vain and frivolous;
it was delivered thee in Print by one of my Friends, viz. G. L. and seeing thou
came forth in Print against us (though under a Cover) what ground had thou
to expect another way of answering, then by Print? And although I was in the
same Town with thee, yet I left the Town, and the Nation also, before it was
Printed; so I could not send thee it in Print, and in Writing it was not
convenient; but I left it with Friends, to be given thee in Print, as was
accordingly done: And however thou so positively deny'st that I had any thing
from the Lord to answer thee (in thy presumptious carnal Confidence) yet in the
Day of the Lord, that shall over-take thee, it shall be known unto thee, that I
had it from the Lord, in Love to thy Soul.

Thy alledgance that our Principles are inconsistent (without further
probation) will have no more weight with sober men, then that the Earth is
inconsistent, because it may seem so to a man Drunk with Wine, to whom all
things seem to reel and stagger; so Principles, never so consistent and solid,
may seem as inconsistent to thee, and such as may be Drunk with a spirit of
Giddiness and Levity; whereas the inconsistency is in such men's spirits, and
not in our Principles.

What thou writest of a Fourfold Combination against thy Testimony, as thou
call'st it; and our making such a stir about it, and printing together against
it, as for our very lives; and thy giving us names in a vain and scornful mind,
as if thou seem to glory; is weak and groundless. G. L. p^^lish'd nothing of
his in Print against thee: A. R. only writ a few Lines to thee, as being thy
old Acquaintance, rather indeed regrating thy Condition, then entering into a
Dispute with thee; and but touching at two or three things passing by: And G.
W. did little more but set thy Contradictions before thee, which as yet stand
over thy head unanswered; thou having not so much as assayed any Answer unto
them (but telling us, He or we might no less charge Contradictions upon the
Apostle Paul; thus fathering thy gross Confusion, and Contradiction upon him)
So thy Book was upon the matter almost wholly left upon me, that thou need
not have made such a Noise of a Fourfold Combination; and there was no great
stir made about it by us; however, thou may have apprehended so, by the stir
in thy own spirit; not unlike a man diseased with the Megrum in his head, that
imagins he hears great Noises and Stirs abroad (when all is quiet) because of
the Distemper within himself.

The whole substance and strength of my Answer unto thy first remains in force
against thee, who have waved the most material things in it; only nibling at
some things, when thou seem to thy self, thou would get something to say;
for Proof of which, I refer the Readers to one impartial Examination of both.

In thy fourth Page, Part 1. to A. R. thou abusest my word, taking occasion
from a small Error in the Printing, which is a disingenious way of dealing; and
had not thy prejudice blinded thee, thou might easily have corrected it by
the sense: Thy abuse of me is in these words, that thou citest my words thus,
Yet the Soul, yea and the whole man, is to be saved within; whereas my words
were thus, Yet the Soul, yea and the whole man, is to be saved, with, in, and
through the Seed, whoever believe in Christ, and are joined to him -- The Error
in Printing is, that within was put for with, in; and upon thy own Mistake and
Abusing me, thou raisest a Callumny, as if I held, That the full Salvation was
only from sin within; whereas I said, The whole man was to be saved; and I say
still, not only the Soul, but the whole Man is to be saved, both from sin, and
all the effects and consequences of it, whether inward or outward: And the
Redemption of the Body, and the Resurrection, I do believe according to
Scripture, contrary to what thou falsely insinuatest against me.

And whereas thou queriest, By what Scripture can I prove that Christ died for
a Seed in man that needed Redemption, which Seed is Christ in every man?

Answer, Thou abusest our words herein, which are not that Christ needed
Redemption, but that he redeems his Seed which he takes upon him; but Christ
died for men, that men who were dead might become alive; and no other way can
men live, but by having Christ to live in them, Gal. 2.20. And the Life of
Christ in the Saints is in a raised Seed; he who was crucified in them (who
could not be crucified in them, but as in the Seed) coming to live in them; but
if thou were not ignorant of this Birth, thou would not propound such an
ignorant Question; and the Scripture speaks expressly of Christ, as having
been crucified in some, as Gal. 3.1. crucified in you; and 1 Cor. 2.2.
crucified in you; for so are both places in the Greek (...); And said Christ,
Joh. 6 39. This is the Fathers Will, which has sent me, that of all which he
has given me, I should lose nothing, but should raise it up again at the Last
Day. Now what it is that whereof he should lose nothing, but should raise it up
at the Last Day?

That I slight the Work of Man's Redemption, or what Christ did or suffered in
order thereunto is falsely charged upon me, nor do thou produce the least
ground for it: Did I slight his Redemption, because I said, in Contradiction to
what thou did allege on us, That it was not without respect to Christ, as
outwardly Born and Crucified; I said also more, and could say more; but what
was said, was enough to clear us of thy false Accusation.

Page 10. Thou alledgest, I did not in my first, tell what further tendency the
Sufferings, Testimony, and Example of Christ had unto our Reconciliation, then
that of Paul 's, or any other Martyr's.

Answ. That is false; both G.W. and I expressly affirmed, That he was a
Sacrifice (most acceptable and satisfactory; so said G.W. yea, and W.P. in his
Book, said as ^uch, whom thou falsely have accused) and a Ransom, a
Propitiation, and Offering for the sins of the whole World (but not that men
should be justified while in their sins, but in having forsaken them) yea, in
the very next two pages thou confessest, That we have mentioned him an
Atonement, a Sacrifice, a Propitiation for Mankind in his Sufferings and Death
in the outward; and this is more then Paul, or any, or of all the other Martyrs
were; and had a greater and more weighty service and tendency then the
Sufferings of all others; for of none else can it be said, that is true of him,
who is the universal Offering, Atonement, Propitiation. How ^ art thou not
ashamed thus falsely to charge us, and yet a few Lines after, in contradiction
to thy self, to clear us again?

Page 13. Thou accusest me, as unfaithfully repeating thy words, to make them
speak what thou intend'st not; but thou do not mention one particular,
wherein I have so done, nor can thou; only thou tell m^, That I leave out
that part of the Sentence, in the Apostle's words, that is most weighty against
me, viz. Being Reconciled.

In Answer to which I say, That I did not leave out these words, as making
against me; and that I mentioned them not, was not on any such design; but that
the mentioning, or not mentioning of them, was not material to the thing in
hand; nor do thou gain the least by these words, being reconciled; for he
does not say so of any, while remaining Enemies, as being reconciled.

And for a confirmation of thy false and confused doctrine, as, that Men, while
yet enemies, and so remaining, before and without respect to any inward
Operations of the Spirit of Holiness, are reconciled to God, and God to them:
Thou abusest that Scripture, Romans 5.10. both corrupting it as its in the
English, and wresting it to a wrong sense; 1st, in that thou addest the word
(yet) as importing, A remaining Enemies, which (yet) is not in that verse, Romans
5.10. 2d, that thou draw'st from this place, That God is fully reconciled to
them, while yet remaining Enemies: Whereas the Scripture says not, When we
were Enemies, God was reconciled to us; but thus, as it is in the English, When
we were Enemies, we were reconiled to God: And that the Apostle cannot
understand, that they were reconciled to God, while remaining Enemies, is
manifest; because he inviteth Enemies to be reconciled to him; which imports,
they were not already reconciled to him: Yea, thou grantest, That it is a
Qualification on our part, as to receiving the Atonement, that we be
reconciled to God. But because the English Translation, at first view, seems
to favor thee, I shall therefore refer thee and others, who have any skill in
the Greek to the Greek Text, and you will find the words run thus, If we being
Enemies (Graece (...)) were reconciled to God, etc. this does not import, that
they were both Enemies and reconconcil'd at one and the same time, more then it
imports that, where it is said, Ephesians. 2.1. And you, being dead in your sins,
etc. has he quickened (for so it is in the Greek, (...)) that they were dead
and quickened at one and the same time; both Expressions importing, not a
remaining Enemies, and dead; but a passing from being Enemies, and dead, to be
quickened and reconciled: And that it is said, We were reconciled by his Death,
implies, that his Death had an influence in order thereunto; but not that we
were then, at his Death, fully and perfectly reconciled, as R.G. affirms; for
we are said to be sanctified through the offering of the Body of Jesus, etc.
Yet who will say, we were then sanctified?

Page 15. Thou desir'st me to ask the Boys in the Grammar School, whether was
reconciling, and has reconciled, do not both denote a time past? Saying, that
I am very hard put to it.

Ans. If thou (not I) had not been put hard to it, thou would not have fled
to such a weak Refuge; and seeing thou appeal'st to the Boys of the Grammar
School, let them determine, whether was reconciling (though denoting a time
past) does denote or signify, the imperfect time, or perfect, yea, or nay; and
whether it signifies the action perfectly done, ended, and completed, as thou
insinuatest, that our Reconciliation was then d^ne sixteen hundred years ago?
Will not the Boys of the Gammar School tell thee, that that it is in imperfect
time; and signifies the Action begun, but not ended or perfected? And God was
in Christ, reconciling men to himself ever since the Fall in all Ages, both
before and since Christ suffered in the outward; having given them, or put in
them, the Word of Reconciliation; by which they, who became renewed thereby,
were reconciled and justified in all Ages: But according to R.G's. doctrine, no
men were justified nor reconciled, until Christ suffered Death in the outward;
because then, and not till then, was Reconciliation and Justification wrought,
done, etc.

And here in thy 15th page I take notice of another piece of thy Self-confusion
and Contradiction, as that thou say, Our Reconciliation and Justification
was fully done, perfected, accomplished at Christ's Death without us, and is
not to be done or wrought over again in any man: And yet in Contradiction thou
say, To make our Reconciliation effectual in every man, we are as a
Qualification on our part, etc. required, invited to be reconciled to God. Then
according to thee, it must be made effectual in men; and yet thou deny'st, that
it is to be made or wrought within any men, it being already fully done; And if
it was fully done before, was it not effectual, before? Or if it be not
effectual, till it be made so in us, was it not in-effectual before? And if it
was in-effectual, it was not fully done: What Confusion and Contradiction!
Effectual in-effectual, all done, wrought, yet not made effectual; we
reconciled to God, yet as a Qualification on our part, we are to be reconciled,

Page 16. Thou chargest me with a Self-contradiction, because I said, The full
and perfect Redemption was in Christ, while we were Enemies: But herein thou
show'st thy self weak; for I say still, Our full and perfect Redemption was in
him, while we were Enemies, so was our full and perfect Sanctification, Wisdom,
Righteousness; yet it follows not that we are Redeemed, Sanctified, Wise, and
Righteous, till (as it is in him so) it be received by us; for it is the
receiving it that gives us the denomination of Redeemed, Sanctified, Wise,
Righteous, as the Cloth becomes colored, by receiving the Color, and not
otherwise.

Page 17. That the Works and Fruits of the Spirit, as Humility, Meekness, etc.
are reckoned by us, as the Ransom, the Price, the Mediaton, the Savior, is a
most false and unjust Charge; nor do our Friend's words give thee the least
ground for it: As for W.B. he said, Humility, Meekness, was a Mediator to
assuage and stop Wrath in the Enmity-Seed; but he said not, it was our Mediator
betwixt God and Us: So thou can not be excused, from being a gross and unjust
Perverter of his words: And if any have called Christ the Humility, it is not
more then Paul said, That he, to wit Christ, was made unto us Wisdom,
Righteousness, Sanctification, etc. and when Christ is called Humility,
Righteousness, are not understood those particular Effects and Fruits of the
Spirit, but that original and primative Righteousness, Verity, Humility, Truth,
and Goodness, etc. that is Christ, as he is God, the fountain, goodness, truth,
righteousness, etc.

Page 18. Because Christ is called the One Offering, and that be once offered
up ^is Body etc. Thou would exclude him, as in us, from being one Offering,
but herein thy work is vain; for Christ Jesus is the one Offering still; and
though he offered up his Body outwardly but once upon the Cross, yet he remains
still an Offering for us, within us: For he is a Priest forever, and every
Priest has somewhat to offer; and he is both the Offering and the Priest, who
lives forever to make intercession for us.

That thou alledgest of our Testimonies as dissagreeing, is false, nor have
thou ought to prove it; but to corrupt G. W's. words by a deceitful interlining
of them, as alleging on him, That he calls it a blasphememous opposing the
omnipotency of God, etc. To assert any such necessary respect our Redemption
has to the Death of Christ, which last words are thine, not the words of G. W.

Page 21. Thou cry'st out on it, as strange Doctrine, that I said, The Apostles
preached Christ in the form of a Man; yet they preached him also, and that more
generally a Light to the Gentiles: Then thou ask'st, Was he not a real Man.

Answ. Yea, he was a real man, and is; and it is a most false and unjust
Charge, That we neither confess nor preach him as a man; and that thou ask,
Tell us plainly, what is become of that Man? I say, he remains to judge thee
for thy Lies and false Accusations, against the Innocent; and as for his Body,
that thou queriest, he has his Body, which is Spiritual, and Heavenly, and
Glorious, to which our low body is to be made conform; and the Body of Christ
is but one, yet having many Members: and this Answer is given, not to gratify
thy bad spirit, but for the Truth's sake, and for a service to the
Simple-hearted.

And that thou deny'st, That that was Christ, that took on him the form of a
Man, and was manifest in Flesh: Do thou not herein plainly deny the true
Christ? For did not he, even Jesus Christ, take on him the form of a Servant,
according to plain Scripture? Did he not come in the Flesh? and if he came in
it, was he not in it? and if he was in it, was he not manifest in it? And if
thou deny'st him come in the Flesh, art not thou an Antichrist? Thou say,
Not he manifest in that Body, but thou art the Son of God, p. 19. Oh
blasphemous and contradictory to thy self! Do thou not expressly say, in thy
Testimony, pa. 38. That he is a Christ near us, wrapped up in our very flesh and
blood, the Seed of the Woman, meaning in that Flesh he appeared in outwardly:
And that thou deny'st, that he that was manifest in that Body, was the Son of
God: Do thou not plainly deny his divinity? Was he not the Son of God,
before he took Flesh in the Virgin's Womb?

Page 21. Thou bely'st me, that I said, The Apostles preached one way of
Appearance of Christ to the Jews, and another to the Gentiles: whereas I said,
He was preached a Light more generally both to Jews and Gentiles; and the
Apostles preached him as within men; 2 Cor, 13.5. Know ye not, how that Jesus
Christ is in you?

That thou challenge it that one said, Christ was never seen with any carnal
Eye; thou have no more ground then to challenge Himself, who said, He who has
seen me, has seen the Father; and yet he said to the Jews, who saw the outward
Body of Jesus, You have neither seen him nor known him; and many such places
could be mentioned: And did not thy Darkness and Prejudice still blind thee,
thou might understand better how Christ is seen, and how he is not seen: We
deny not but the names, Messiah, Jesus, Christ, etc. were given to him as Man,
even as in the Flesh; but they do more eminently and more originally belong to
him as he was before he took that Body on him; yea, more immediately and more
originally to the Word, the Light, the Seed, the Life, the Quickening Spirit,
that dwelt in that Body, which he called, this Temple; and it was called the
Body of Jesus.

Page 22. Thou deny'st, That either Faith or Works, wrought by us, or in us, by
the Spirit of Christ; are the previous, procuring, purchusing Cause of the Love
of God to us, while Sinners, etc.

Answ. And who ever said that they were? This is but a pitiful waving and
shifting the state of the Controversy; they are needful as qualifications,
requisite unto Justification and Life or eternal Happiness; and that is the
true state of the Question: And thus I proved in my former, citing Romans 8.13.
and Romans 10.8, 9. to which thou have answered nothing, but art mute as a Fish;
and these I recommend again unto the Readers, and particularly Romans 10.8, 9.
compared with Deuteronomy 30 14. which require not only doing under the new
Covenant, but such as is in order unto Salvation, summed up in these two
general heads, to wit, Believing and Confessing, which is a work, and that not
a bare one, but a living practical Confession, which includes in it our whole
Obedience, and not only Faith, but Repentance, Conversion, and a turning from
the Darkness to the Light, and from the power of Satan to God; or required in
order to Forgiveness, Repent and be converted, that your Sins may be blotted
out, said Peter, Acts 3.19. and Acts 26.18. to turn them from Darkness to
Light, and from the power of Satan to God, that they may receive forgiveness of
sins, and keep my Commandments, and live, said Wisdom (Christ Jesus) Prove. 7.2.
and Rev. 22.4. Blessed are they that do his Commandments, that they may have
right to the Tree of Life, etc. And here the Spirit is not preaching the first
Covenant or Law, but the new. And as for Tit. 3.5. it expressly mentions the
washing of Regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost; which are the Works of
the Spirit of Christ in us, by which we are saved, as said the Apostle; though
in thy Blindness, with the Priests, thou do not observe it; but bring'st it
against us, which makes very manifestly for us, and the Works that the Apostle
opposes to Grace are works of the Law, and not of Grace, which can never be
opposite.

Page 24. That with me, the first and second Covenant are in effect but one, is
a false Charge; though I must tell thee, That the Spirit, Life, or Light of the
New Covenant, is universal, and was from everlasting, and reaches through all
Dispensations of God unto men, both before, under, and since the Law, and
without it none could ever be saved; and though the Manifestations and
Ministrations of it were various, and more and more by degrees came forth, yet
this Spirit, Life, or Light is still the same in it self and in its nature,
extending in some degree to all, both Jews and Gentiles, to make them capable
of Life and Salvation; though many harden their hearts against it, that it has
not an Impression upon them, as upon those who believe and obey it, in whose
hearts the Life of the New Covenant dwells, and the Laws thereof are written or
engraven, as in Fleshly Tables, not stony Tables nor Hearts.

Page 31. As for my Queries, which thou only make a show to answer, but
indeed give them a most pittious and slight go-by; I return them upon thee,
to be directly and plainly answered, in the terms proposed.

Page 34. Thy Insinuations, That I seek a Hole to creep out at; That I am
ignorant of the Scriptures; That I assert n^w Notions, received from other men,
tending to the darkning and denying the joint Testimony of the holy Men of God:
I reject, as false and groundless, together with diverse other false Charges
against me and my Friends; and it is a small matter for us to be judged by one,
who is over Head and Ears in the Mire of such Confusion and Contradiction, as
thy Books hold forth: But that thou say it was none of thy work to prove,
Christ come in the Flesh, or become Man; Thou declar'st thy Impudency in so
saying; for Proof of which, let the Reader see in thy Testimony, so called,
from page 17. to page 35. though to thy own Contradiction.

G. K.
The 3d Month, 1671.
Some of Robert Gordon's corrupt Doctrines.
1. THat Christ without us, upon the Cross, has already subdued all things,
finished Transgression, made an end of Sin, abolished Condemnation and Death,
page 4. of his testimony.

2. That the Light that enlightneth every man that comes into the World, is
not the true Christ, page 10. testim.

3. That Christ came to justify and deliver us from the Law or Light in our
Consciences, page 11. testim.

4. That Obedience to the Light in the Conscience, is but the Work of the first
Covenant, and Righteousness thereof; and that no man is justified thereby, p.
10, 11. testim.

5. That God is fully attoned, perfectly reconciled to man, without any
Consideration, Qualification, or Work to be wrought in any man, by any Light or
Spirit whatsoever; but singly and solely upon the account of the active and
passive Obedience of the Man Jesus Christ of Nazareth, done in his crucified
Body without us, page 12. testim.

6 That Redemption, Justification, and Reconciliation, is finished and
completed by what Christ did and suffered outwardly [ And so, according ^o R.
G. all men are redeemed, justified, reconciled, Christ having died for all; as
he expressly affirms in his second Book] page 12. testim.

7. That our Salvation is wrought by Christ, in what he did and suffered
outwardly; and our wor^ing out of our Salvation, is only as to Evidence and
Manifestation [ And so according to R. G. all men are saved, Christ having died
for all, but it is not made evident to all, that they are sav'd] pa. 12. testim.

8. That Redemption Justification were finished and completed in the crucified
Body in Christ for us, not in our persons, page 3, 4. testim.

9. That the Lord did not direct man to the Light in his Conscience, nor to
Light and Power; but promised him another kind of Savior, p. 18. test. That
the Worker of Redemption could not be the Light inlightening every man, p. 21.
test.

10. That the Light in our Consciences, that shows good and evil, is not given
for Righteousness, nor able to reveal or give L^fe, any more then the Law
written in Tables of Stone.

11. That a Believer is pure, beautiful in Christ, walking in Rest, Victory,
and Perfection; yet in himself in his body he has a Law of sin; he is in the
Earth in Warfare and Imperfections, page 16. testim.

12. That Redemption, etc. and all things, are wrought, purchased, etc. for us,
without the help of any thing to be wrought in us, page 3, 4, 5, 20. testim.

13. That Christ did break through, fulfill, and satisfy stirred up Wrath in
God; which, he says, would hold me captive in Death; intending that thereby
they might be acquitted and justified, Deceit.
and so escape with their Imperfections and Sins past, present, and to come,
page 19, 20. testim. page 15. 2 d Book.

14. That to Question, if it could be an Answer of divine Justice, Blasphemy.
to take Vengeance on the Innocent, and let the Guilty go free, with their sins
past, present, and to come; and then from this to ask, How can God, then in
justice, execute Wrath, on any for sin, [ This R. G. counts an arguing
against God] p. 14. 2 d Book.

15. That the Law, Sin, and Death, were charged upon Christ's crucified Body;
and that he buried them in his Grave, and thus abolished sin out of the sight
of God, page 39. test. And that therein he vanquished and buried in his Grave
all the powers that were against us, p. 26. test.

16. His Argument for Imperfection or against Perfection in this Life) is
Marrying, Sickness, Mortality, etc. as in his 2 d Book and Part to G. W.

17. He insinuates, as if what Christ did and suffered without us, was the
previous, procuring, purchasing Cause of the Love of God to us, while Sinners,
page 22. 2 d Book.

18. That he that was manifest in that Body, born of the Virgin Mary (and
within us) is not (the true Christ Jesus) the Son of the Living God, page 19. 2
d Book.

Also most of these aforesaid corrupt Doctrines are repented over again in his
2d Book.

Some of R. G's. Lies and false Accusations against us.
1. That we deny the Mystery of God in the Flesh of Christ, as a matter of any
necessity to us, as to R^demption, Reconciliat^on and Justifica^ion, page 5.
testim.

2. That we hold our Justification to be without respect to the true Christ,
and our only Savior Jesus Christ of Nazareth, and without respe^t to what
Christ did for us, in his Body without us, page 5. testim.

3. That we make Christ to be no better then the Priest and Levite, only
looking upon us and passing by, leaving us an Example, wherein, if in p^rfect
Obedience, we followed him, we should live; and so departed, leaving us undone,
as he found us, to cure redeem, and reconcile our selves to God by obedi^nce to
the Light placed in our Consciences, convincing us of sin, page 15. testim

4. That our Doctrine asserts another Christ, another Savior, then him, Jesus
Christ of Nazareth, page 17.

5. That according to our Doctrine, Redemption is only of the Seed within, that
lies under condemnation, p. 24. test. and p 4. 2 d book.

6. That we make our selves equal with Christ, page 36. test.

7. That we reckon it a poor low thing to believe in the Lord Jesus Christ of
Nazareth, as our only Savior, page 40. testim.

8. That we suppose our selves to find access to the Glory of the Father,
without this man Christ Jesus, our Mediator, p. 41. test.

9. That we have trod under foot the Son of God, and counted the Blood of the
Covenant an unholy thing, as the Blood of any ordinary Man or Beast, p. 24.
testim.

And in his second Book.
10. That Christianity it self, in its very Foundation, is struck at by us, and
denied, Preface; and that some among us bring in damnable Errors, to pervert
the Faith of some.

11. That the n^w present glorified existence of that Body (or Man Christ) that
suffered at Jerusalem, is denied by some Teachers among ^s, page 2.

12. That the full and complete Salvation, is only a Salvation from sin within
[False; for it is both from sin, and all the effects and consequences of it,
within and without] page 4.

13. That according to G. F. the Soul needs no Salvation, as being infinite,
without beginning, a part of God [which G.F. speaks not all these things of
the soul of man, but of the Breath or Spirit of Life, that made Adam a living
soul, that is the Soul or Life of the soul] page 5.

14. That it agrees with the Doctrine published by G. F. That the Life in Man
and Beast is God, and all in us is God; denying the real individual Existences
of Angels, Saints, Devils, or wicked men in Eternity, page 27. 2 d book. [a
most gross Slander; for all that is in men is not God, neither that which
defiles, nor any part of man, that is or can be defiled; nor deny we either
the real or particular Beeings of Angels, Saints, Devils, or wicked men in
Eternity, as most wickedly he does scandalize us.]

15. That it is not allowed to our Friends, to question and examine the
doctrine delivered to them, by the ancient Friends of the Ministry, page 8.

16. That Christ, in offering up himself, is an imperfect insufficient
Propitiation, page 16.

17. He insinuates, That we hold, that the Works wrought in us by the spirit,
are the Ransom, the Atonement, the propitiatory Sacrifice, and ground of our
h^pe for eternal Life, p. 17. and 12.

18. That the man Christ Jesus of Nazareth, to be the true and only Christ, G.
K. does not confess, page 19.

19. He alleges, That our Friends have put some out of their Synagogues for
openly confessing Christ, calling them Pharisees, and in a vain and evil mind
thus bespeaking G. K. is it because he was hanged upon a Tree that thou art
ashamed to own him as Savior, etc? or rather, art thou afraid to confess him,
because of the Pharisees? page 20.

20. That according to G. K. the first and second Covenant are in effect one
and the same, page 24.

21. That G. K. is against the holy Law of God, p. 25. [False; is he or we
against it, because we say, it is writ in the heart, and does bind unto
obedience, as is written there, and that the obedience only acceptable unto
God, is that which is given in the newness of the Spirit, and not in the
oldness of the Letter.]

22. That th^re is a Light in every man, as he comes into the world, by
natural Generation, that is saving, page 28.

23. That we would preach to the Indians nothing, but what they knew already,
page 43.

G.R. for these thy lies and thy many gross abuses against the Truth and its
Witnesses, the Righteous God will rebuke and judge thee.

Note.
Some other Friends, who are R. G's Countrymen, have a further reserve against
him, whereby he may be further discovered in his false Colors, Turnings,
Twinin^s, Hypocrisies, Shiftings, Self-contradictions, as he shall again
further appear against the Truth, and them concerned in it.

G. K.

Ingenious Reader,
KNowing that the Errors of the Press, ought not to be imputed to the Author;
thou art desired to correct these, as here directed.

Page, Line, Error, Corrected. 4 3 divinity dignity 4 dignity divinity 8 Mar.
pro and ito prope and ito note. 10 5 souls blood 14 18 fest fect 16 11
particulars particles 17 29 would could 19 29 are you art thou 20 9 Law Love 22
1 are is 27 9 dare do 33 to know must know 29 13 as yet and yet 34 22 dele of
35 9 our Priests your priestly 38 7 et let 33 one sentence is printed twice,
dele the latter. 41 22 imaginary imaginarily 32 existent existence. 56 14 Ep
phraditus Epaphraditus 58 4 mistake mis-state 65 1 dele that 71 19 hold me hold
men the word Blaspemy in the Margent, place opposite to these words, viz.
Arguing against God.

THE END.

