The Principal Controversies BETWEEN The Litteral Presbyters of the Kirk of
Scotland, and the Illuminated Members of the Church of Christ, CALLED QUAKERS.

Truly Collected, Stated and Opened, in a particular Reply (herein specified)
for general Information and undeceiving the deceived.

By an earnest Contender for the most Holy Faith, which was once delivered to
the Saints. G. W.

1 Timothy 6.20. Avoiding profane and vain babbling and oppositions of science,
falsely so called.

2 Pet. 2.12. But these as natural bruit Beasts, -- speak evil of the things
they understand not, etc. Verse. 13. Sporting themselves with their own
deceivings. Verse. 14. Having Eyes full of Adultery, and that cannot cease from
sin. --

Printed in the Year, 1672.

A Brief Introduction.
Reader,
HErein is asserted the real sufficiency of Divine Illumination and
Inspiration, together with the Doctrine of the Saints Perfection in Christ, and
his Universal Light and Grace to Mankind; and thereby the real Use and End of
the Holy Scriptures made known, and the precious Truths therein Owned and
Vindicated, from the gross Errors, Perversions, Absurdities, Reproaches,
manifest Confusions and Contradictions of some Rigid Presbyters of Scotland, to
whom this Tract contains a brief Reply (in many short Paragraphs) which was
thus occasioned. Viz.

Some of the Presbyterian Priests or Teachers in Scotland, having some years
ago writ a great bundle against us, the People of God, called Quakers, in a way
of slighting and deriding some things of Truth, which above ten years ago I
wrote, in Answer to a Paper (containing a pretended Answer to 26 Queries of
Geo. Fox's, Junior) with some Queries written by one Edw. Jamison, in whose
Name, (with two more) the said bundle, against us, was conveyed in Manuscript
to diverse hands (as a pretended Answer to mine) which providentially after a
long time was brought to my hands about four years ago, which then I perused,
and collected the principal Heads and Passages in it, both of Doctrine, seeming
Argumentation, and their Objections, which I have here inserted, in their own
very words (as I have their Book in Manuscript to evince) and I wrote a Reply
to each particular, for the clearing the Truth, and to manifest his and their
abuse thereof; and their gross perversion of the holy Scriptures, together with
their self Contradictions, which are very apparent and easy to be seen by any
unbyassed: And not only their weakness and defection appears, but their enmity,
against the Doctrine of Perfection (both as it relates to the truly Sanctified,
and to their Faith and graces, which these Presbyters accuse, not only with
Imperfection, but with Sin) Their darkness against the Light of Christ within;
Their cruel partiallity against the free extent of Saving Grace; their sinful
unbelief against the Sufficiency of the Holy Spirits teaching; their gross
ignorance and scorn against Divine Inspiration, and Immediate Teaching in these
days; their carnal mindedness (for their Traditional Ordinances of men)
against the Spiritual Dispensation of the Gospel, and New Covenant (wherein the
Antitype of all, even the enduring substance, and heavenly things themselves
are enjoyed by the clear sighted Children of the day, beyond and above all
Types, Shadows, and outward Representations or Memento's whatsoever.) These and
the like things are spoken to in my following Reply; A Copy whereof was sent
into Scotland, for those concerned, soon after it was written; whereof (as I am
informed) Edw. Jamison had a Copy; but since I had no further Answer nor Reply
from him.

And now, since some of our Friends in Scotland considering that there would be
a service in making the following Reply more Public, and knowing that the said
Edw. Jamison with diverse more of his Brethren are of contentious and boasting
spirits, and yet seem not ready or willing to take notice of such things as
pinch them, while not made Public (as in this Case) diverse of our Friends in
Scotland have hereupon desired the Printing and Publishing of this my Reply;
And, in Answer to their Requests, I have given them my first Copy thereof to
divulge, desiring that all who Read it, may weigh the things therein contained,
and that they eye and have regard to that Light of the Son of God in their
Consciences, which manifests those things that are reprovable, and is able to
endue the Creature with a Right Judgment, between those things that are of God,
and those things that differ; and so to try all things, and hold fast that
which is Good.

London, the 22th day of the 6th. Mon. 1672. From a Real Friend to all who
desire to know the Way of Life and Peace. George Whitehead.

THE PRINCIPAL CONTROVERSIES BETWEEN The Litteral Professors of the Kirk of
Scotland, and the Illuminated Members of the Church of Christ, called Quakers,
etc.
Here are the Doctrines and Principles of some of the Presbyterian Priests of
Scotland; Collected out of a great Bundle in Manuscript; Subscribed, Edw.
Jamison, with other two Names on the outside, viz. Oswald Harland, Edward Orde;
Together with the Heads of many of his corrupt Reasons and perverse Arguments
against the Truth and Scriptures, which are here detected, and the People of
God, called Quakers, vindicated from his and their Aspersions, Calumnies and
false Accusations therein.

The Priest. YOU Have renounced Learning as Antichristian.


Answer. That Is false. For, not Learning in it self simply considered, do we
renounce, but the absurd and corrupt Idolatrous Use of it, by men of corrupt
minds, who have not Learned of Christ, but in their Antichristian Spirit deny
his Immediate Teachings.


Priest, Absurd arguings against clear and abundant Scripture-Proofes, which
have been held forth by far more able than I am. Therefore, that my Answers
have not Converted you, is not to me either Strange or a Disappointment.


Answer. False again; I argue not against clear Scripture, etc. but against thy
abusing and perverting of it, as will yet further appear; and much unprofitable
labor thou might have spared and forborne; whilst thy end was not to convert
us, what was it for, to insult and boast over us? And yet art far short of some
that have dealt with us, if we were conquered and confuted before, had thou a
mind to show thy valor over us, thou have missed of this end also.


Priest, I have born witness to the Truth against your way.


Answ. Thou have born witness to his work who is the Father of Lies, against
the Truth, as will further appear to the shame of thee and thy confederates.


Priest, There can hardly be brought any absurdity grosser for defense of your
Cause, then it self, etc.


Answ. Then it was gross and absurd in thee to make, raise and forge, so many
absurdityes upon our Cause as thou have done; though they be very groundless,
light, frothy and frivilous, as in this sequel will appear; and become more
obvious to the impartial spectators.


Priest, The Light, the Spirit, Kingdom within, are taken in a dangerous
unsound sense ( by Quakers) in an enthusiastic sense as communicate without
Scripture.


Answ. Its both dangerous and unsound in thee and thy fellows, to oppose the
Light and Spirits imediate teachings, and Kingdom within; which both teaches
sufficiently and opens the Scriptures, and leads into all Truth; and to Scoff
at the true sence-hereof, though under the term Enthusiastic, or Enthusiasm
(however ironically and reproachfully rendered by you) which if that be
dangerous and unfound, then is divinely inspired unsound. Is this good
Doctrine? For, (...), in quo Deus est, (...), Deus divine, inspired;
Enthusiasmus, an Inspiration, it is the inspiration of the Almighty that gives
understanding. Is this dangerous? No; unless to the Priests to discover their
ignorance. And is not the Light, Spirit, Kingdom within, communicated before
the Scriptures are truly understood and opened? What darkness and error have
thou here employed and signified? And does not the Light and Spirit, bring to
the right use and end of the Scriptures which was given by inspiration?


Priest, There is no man free from sin in this life, etc. Christ does not
totally subdue it in this life. For that place, 1 John 3 of Christ's being
manifest to destroy the works of the devil; if ye take it so, may as well prove
that Satan shall not tempt a Child of God.


A^sw. This plainly enough shows thy confusion, and ignorance of Christ's
manifestation and work; and of his Virtue and Blood; which destroys the devils
works, cleanses from all sin, thoroughly purges them that believe and follow
him.

Secondly, Thy Inference is gross and absurd: To charge all with sin whom
Satan Tempts; or to make his Tempting Gods Children, a reason of their not
having ^n totally subdued; for Christ was Tempted, yet sinned not; for the
Prince of darkness found nothing in him. And, he that abids in him, sins not.
And we being made free from sin, and become the Servants of God, we have our
fruit unto holiness. Was not this the good end of Christ's coming? What says
Antichrist, Satan and his Agents and Sophisters to it?


Priest, Neither does these Scriptures (1 John 3.6. Whoever is born of God
sins not. Or that ver. 9. He that abids in him commits not sin, and chap.
5.18. The evil one touches him not) prove any thing, etc.

Do they not prove any thing? Sad Doctrine. Is this divulged in the Kirk of
Scotland? Thus to oppose, not only Christ's work, but the words of plain
Scripture, and say they do not prove any thing; when as they ( Viz. 1 John 3.6,
9. chap. 5.18.) prove that, Whoever is born of God sins not. He that abids
in Christ sins not. The evil one touches him not. Does this prove nothing?
Does not this equally reflect upon Christ's Apostles as well as us? And
implicitly say, they should have been silent, and not so have pleaded Christ's
manifestation, and the state of him that is born of God, against Sin,
Antichrist, and Decievers; whereas they John wrote to were plainly cautioned,
not to be decieved; For he that does righteousness is righteous, even as he is
righteous.


Priest, It Is not the words of Scripture picked out which explain the sense,
etc. This is nothing but a silly and gross cavilling, to insist upon bare words
contrary to their sense.


Answ. Must we then go to the Priests for their sense, contrary to plain
Scripture, where it is neither parable nor allegory, who pick out, and reject
plain Scripture according to their own private imaginations and conceptions;
and yet other whiles in contradiction to themselves, tell us the Scripture is
the Rule; Life is to be had in it, and not communicated without it; but yet
such Scriptures as apparently contradict their gross and Antichristian
Principles, they can throw by and reject as proving nothing, as this corrupt
minded man has.


Priest, By this way a man may prove the grossest blasphemies, as the
Polythrites saying, there are many Gods from, 1 Cor. 8.5. yet in the next
verse, there is but one God, etc.


Answ. First, Not by our use of the Scriptures, both fro man right mind and for
a good end, namely, against sin.

Secondly, And if in the next verse after, He that is born of God sins not,
thou had proved that he does Sin in that he is Tempted; thou had said
som^hing to thy business of accusing all Gods Children with Sin term of life,
but herein the Scriptures own thee not.


Priest, That 1 John 3.6, 9. is to be understood in a limited sense, namely;
that they do not continue in Sin wilfully and with delight, without repentance.


Answ. That Is not John's sense but thine, which is as much as to say, his was
not true; for do they continue in Sin, and yet Sin not? This is a
contradiction, or do they continue in it and still repent of it? Where Is then
the fruits and effects of true repentance? Or is there not a time of
confessing, repenting, and time of forsaking Sin? And casting off every weight
and burden, and of being cleansed from all unrighteousness.


Priest, They do not commit Sin with full consent, without controuling of the
motions: The evil one touches them not to entangle them in such a way of
sinning, etc.


Answ. As much as to say, they do commit Sin, and the evil one does touch them,
but they Sin not with full consent; which is all one as to say, John did not
say true, when he said, Whoever is born of God sins not. The wicked one
touches him not, etc. he commits not Sin; but we have ground to believe him
before Satan's Messengers, who thus have contended and disputed for his work.


Priest, He is an Advocate for our Sins, is meant of the Sins present and to
come.


Answ. Not that Sin should always remain in beli^vers, but that they should
be called and delivered out of it, and become Gods Righteousness in him.


Priest, His saying, (if we Sin) implies as much as (when we Sin.)


Answ. Is this thy Learning thou have boasted of? Thus to pervert Scripture,
and the very plain sense of words, as to make [if we Sin] as positive or
absolute as, [when we Sin] so [if] in other cases may as well be taken for
[when] as if we say, we have not sined, we make him a liar, is as much as when
we say, we have not sinned, etc. what an absurdity would this imply against the
Apostles, according to thy sense of him; who but one impudent would not be
ashamed thus grossly to abuse the Scriptures? Which else where thou seem to
lay such great stress upon.


Priest, We know in part, is an imperfect degree of knowledge, and so sinful.


Answ. As this intends the Apostle, its a false and erroneous conclusion, its
neither true morrally nor spiritually, degrees vary not the property of the
thing, their knowledge they had by degrees was Gods gift to them, and was
spiritual from above, an effect of Life and Truth; which to say is sinful, so
accuses the cause of it which is blasphemous; and if the Apostles knowledge was
sinful because in part, then what were their Epistles, Pr^achings, Testimonies,
etc. which proceeded from (or were effects of) their knowledge they had of God:
Were they sinful? If not, the cause and ground thereof could not be sinful,
therefore away with such sinful stuff and false conclusions upon the Apostles
as thou have uttered. For the Wisdom which is from above, is pure, but yours is
from beneath which is corrupt and sinful.


Priest, Its false absurdity put upon our Doctrine, that we by it strengthen
the hands of wickedness. For,


Answ. Your bad fruits and those that follow you, who have learned from your
corrupt Doctrines to plead and contend for Sin, both from the Pulpits to the
Alehouses, Taverns and Playhouses, do manifest you guilty herein; and we not to
have wronged you in saying, you have strengthened the hands of wickedness by
your sinful Doctrine, and many of you by your corrupt Lives also.


Priest, For we teach that believers should be daily (by the strength of the
Spirit) fighting against the flesh.


Answ. That Is but a cover, what incouragment give you them to fight against it,
when you deny they shall ever overcome and be freed here.


Priest, Paul and Barnabas sinned, either both or one of them, in that sharp
contention.


Answ. Not all their Life time, that contention held not so long as thy (and
your) pleading for sin.


Priest, Who strengthens then the hands of wickedness? Whether you, who teach
a believer may not only Sin, but fall away from Truth, Grace, etc. Or we who
teach that we do sin; but that we cannot thereby fall wholly from Faith, from
Grace, from God, etc.


Answ. Not we but you: We exhort to diligence and watchfulness, to keep the
Faith, to make their Calling and Election sure, that they may never fall, as
the Apostles did; and warn such as are not come to that growth, least they fall
and draw back to perdition, which tends to beget into more fear, watchfulness
and circumspection, and not into a false security, ease and liberty, as your
Doctrine does, which is for Sin term of Life; and yet tell people they shall
not ther^by fall away from Grace, etc.


Priest, Dare any of you say, there is never any vain thoughts, etc. in Prayer,
or anger against those that injure you? If you dare say so, your Light within
is but mere darkness, etc.


Answ. The Controversy is not about our attainment, and for us to affirm what
we have in that case would not decide it; but we do affirm, that state is
attainable, through Faith in the power of God which purifies the heart; and our
Light is not darkness, and the thoughts of the just are right; and you that are
in your vain thoughts and having anger when you Pray; How do you fulfill Gods
Command, and the Apostles Doctrine? To hold up holy hands without wrath and
doubting, Do not you offer up a Cains sacrifice herein? And is not your Light
(or that which you put for Light) darkness?


Priest, There is need even for a David to say, cleanse me from my secret sins.


Answ. Not all his Life time, for then he received not an answer to his ^rayer,
but h^ testifies otherwise; That God heard his Prayer, and granted his
requests; and c^mmended the state of the undefiled in the way, who do no
iniquity, etc. but to argue that because he prayed to be cleansed from his
secret sins, and therefore was not clean so long as he lived (is all one to
say) therefore God heard him not; which is gross and absurd.


Priest, The Commands of God are of use to a believer, that cannot fulfill them
in his Graces; namely to convince him of sin, that he may be driven to lay hold
on Christ for imputed Righteousness, for further supply of his Grace, etc.


Answ. The intent of Gods Commands, were that they might be obeyed and
fulfill^d, through that grace and ability God gives for that end, and not to be
broken and transgressed; for unbeleivers (yea the world) many times are
convinced of Sin by the Spirit; so thou have grossly wronged the beleivers, in
representing their state here but as a convinced state, which many who are
unconverted are come to; whereas they to whom God imputes Righteousness (and
not Sin) their Sin is covered, and in their Spirits is no gui^e, Psalm. 32.1, 2.
see thy error and confusion.


Priest, For Perfect Righteousness [Inherent] there is no promises to this
sense, in all the Scriptures to any beleiver.


Answ. The work of God and his Righteousness (or Image which man was made in)
is Perfect, and this Christ comes to restore into again, and God has promised
and made known him for this end. And I will wash them from all their
filthiness, says the Lord, etc. The word Inherent is not mine, but obtruded
upon me from a false intent.


Priest, There are promises of a growth unto Believers, and of a fullness; but
this is to be meant of such as is consistent with some defects and a body of
Sin.


Answ. A growth and a fullness, and yet denies Pe^fection, and so the Apostles
Doctrine, Ephesians. 4. A g^owth and a fullness consistent with a body of Sin: Is
this the Principle and Faith of the Kirk of Scotland? Surely here is darkn^ss to
be felt, Who can raise an absurdiy and confusion from this, grosser then it
self? Does not this growth and fullness consist by Christ and in him? If so; By
whom consists Sin and its body? Do they consist together? Or is not the body of
Sin put off, where the Circumcision of Christ is experienced?


Priest, Zecharias, his walking in all the Commands and Ordinances of God
blameless: This Perfection was consisting with misbelief, Luke. 1.6, 20.


Answ. (A gross error again) his blamelesness was in his walking in all the
Commands of God, but his mis-belief was after, and was reproved or blamed by
the Angel; for he was smitten for it: But thy Doctrine tells us quite contrary,
as much as mis-belief is blameless, because blamlesness consists with it as
thou implyest; But this is like much more.


Priest, David, Job, Daniel, their failings are noted, which I might cite if I
did not study brevity.


Answ. So are their deliverances noted, and if thou were not partial, and of a
wrong Spirit thou would note them. How have thou studied brevity, to stuff
up near 10 sheets of paper with quarrelling and cavilling against us, in reply
to so little as was writ to thee?


Priest, How shall they believe without a Preacher; Gods ordinary appointed Way
for begeting Faith is by Preaching, and not by immediate teaching alone without
Preaching.


Answ. Gods appointed Way for begeting Faith is the Word of Faith, whcih is
nigh in the heart, which the Apostles Preached; and the inward teaching of the
Spirit, without which there is no true and effectual Preaching, which directs
and brings to the Word: Christ the Word, is the Author of Faith, whom God has
appointed for Salvation; and he teaches both immediately and instrumentally;
both inwardly and through Preaching openly, he is not limited, yet no
Preaching is truly effectual without him who is the chief Teacher. For,


Priest, It might have been answered by one of your oppinion; 2. Paul, your
question is idle and vain, for most men believe without a Preacher; they shall
believe the Light within teaching them.


Answ. If they cannot Preach except they be sent, then who must send them and
give them power for that work but Christ?

Secondly, Neither do we so accuse Paul's question with being idle, nor say that
most men believe without a Preacher; especially if they believe the Light
within teaching them; for that is Christ's Light who is the true Teacher, which
brings to the substance of true Preaching and Teaching, which proceeds from the
Light within.


Priest, The Scriptures Preached, or the things contained in them is the
ordinary way of begeting Faith.


Answ. The things contained in them, seems a little to mend thy matter; which
things contained, were before the Scriptures or Writings were, and extend
farther; for some had and performed the things contained in the Law, which had
not the Law ( Viz. outward) and many in this day can testify, that the Spirit
and Light within, has manifested within, many things contained in Scripture
before they read them outwardly there.


Priest, The whole council of God Paul shows forth, Act. 20.27. yet no other
things then those which Moses and the Prophets did say (the Scriptures) Act.
26.22.


Answ. All Paul's Preaching or his whole council from God, is no^ Recorded
there, but little in comparison of what he P^eached Recorded; he continued his
Speech or Preaching till midnight, ver. 7. and talked even till break of day:
Where is this Sermon Recorded? Many Scriptu^es and Books were writ by the holy
men, which we have not in the Bible; were it not gross and false therefore to
exclude them as no part of the council of God?


Priest, Is not that another Gospel, that all the world over are taught Christ
and his Gospel?


Answ. It is not our Gospel, therefore unjustly charged against us; for not all
the world over are taught, or are learned Christ and his Gospel, though all
have a Light from him sufficient to teach.


Priest, In the use of Scriptures we are to expect he will beget Faith, by his
inward Teachings and Workings on the heart.


Answ. the matter is somewhat mended, in confessing to his inward Teaching and
Working on the heart, but in that it seems to be tied up or limited to the use
of the Scriptures, this d^nyes the sufficiency and extent of the Spirits inward
Teaching, which many have who cannot read nor use Scriptures; and those who
having not the Law, were a Law to themselves, and showed the works of the Law
written in their hearts, etc. though the Scriptures of Truth, in their place we
must needs own, in that Spirit that gave them forth; but whereas other-whiles
Preaching is made the cause but now the Scriptures; this is to make the
Scriptures and Preaching all one, and ^hen people may spare their money they
give to Priests for Preaching, and giving their Interpretations to the
Scriptures, and only read them with expectation of Christ's inward teaching and
working on the heart; which indeed ought to be inwardly and Spiritually
expected and waited for.


Priest, He bid them search the Scriptures, for in them they thought to have
eternal life; and they testified of him, Joh. 5.39. this thought could not be a
delusion.


Ans If this thought of their having Eternal Life in the Scriptures was not a
delusion, then they had Eternal L^fe according to their thought; but Christ
testifies the contrary against them in the following words saying, Ye will not
come unto me, that ye might have life; so to affirm they had it in the
Scriptures, is to affirm they had Christ in the Scriptures, and that their
searching them was their coming to Christ, which is both contrary to their
state and opposite to Christ's own words of them; that they would not come unto
him that they might have Life: And this contradicts thy former, and much of thy
stuff about Scriptures.


Priest, ^f the searching and believing the Testimony of Christ given by the
Scriptures, be not really to find Eternal Life but an error, etc. (such a
thought as we blind Priests have) then Christ would have told them of that
error, and bid them look for Life by following the Light within.


Answ. Believing the Testimony of Christ and searching the Scriptures, are to
things, and the belief of which Testimony, comes not barely by s^a^ching them,
for if it did; then all that searched them had that belief, and so Life, etc.
which is contrary to the truth of what is apparent concerning many, and to
Christ's own words of them, they thought to have Eternal Life in the Scriptures,
and yet had neither heard the voice of God at any time, nor seen his shape,
they not believing him whom he sent; nor would come to Christ that they might
have Life.


Priest, The Fathers, before the Scriptures were written, had the things
contained in them by Revelations, audable Voices, Visions, Dreams, etc. not by
the Light within, your Enthusiastic Fancy.


Answ. Yes, It was by the Light within that they had the knowledge of those,
and had Revelations, Prophecies, etc. For the Word of Prophecy was a Light to
them; and the inspiration of the Almighty gave them understanding, when God
spoke in a dream or vision of the night, etc. and God has promised, to pour
down his Spirit upon all flesh, that sons and daughters may prophecy, young men
may see visions, etc. Joel 2. was this a fancy? Or to be mocked at as thou have
done? ( Your Enthusiastic Fancy thou say^st) what gross error and ignorance
have thou herein showed.


Priest, That Christ will now beget Faith, without the Scriptures Preached or
known, it were as good an inference to say; because, that by faith in Jesus
Christ to come in the flesh, the Fathers under the old Testament were saved,
therefore though one should not believe that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh,
yea, though he should deny he is come he may be sav^d if he believe he is to
come.


Answ. An unequal parallel, and false inference (and abuse against us) to
compare the Scriptures with Christ's coming in the flesh, or to bring them in
competition therewith; and how did the Fathers know he was to come, but by the
Light or Spirit of Prophecy within? And how did the Saints truly and
effectually know he was come, but by the understanding and Eternal Life he had
given them? From whence Scriptures were given, and from whence they spoke and
wrote.


Priest, 1. You deny the main end of Scriptures, which is, that we by believing
what is written of Christ. 2. In them may have Eternal Life, Joh. 20. 3. That
we may find Eternal Life by searching, they testify of him.


Answ. Nay, the main end of Scriptures we cannot deny, whilst we own and
testify to that Spirit which gave them forth; and to him whom they testify of,
to wit Christ, by whom they are to be fulfilled unto the true believer, that
reads them in a right mind and Spirit.

Secondly, But where having Life in them ( Viz. in the Scriptures) is laid down
as following believing? This is an error depending upon the former, and a
contradiction to the Scripture that says, That believing ye might have Life
through his name; he does not say, in the Scriptures, nor by searching them,
but through his name of whom they testify, and those to whom these things were
written, that they might believe that Jesus is the Christ, etc. and have Life
through his name. They were in some measure prepared (by the Spirit or Light of
Christ already manifested) to receive those things which tend^d to the
furtherance of their Faith, and confirmation of their Belief concerning Christ,
that they might have life through his name.


Pr, Whosoever holds this, denies them really and interpretatively.


Answ. Is this thy proof of thy false accusation against us of denying the
Scriptures, that we deny them interpretatively; so then our denying the Priests
Interpretations upon Scripture which are not Scripture, must be deemed a denial
of Scriptures, as if they were either the same or of equal authority with
Scripture; or when they tell us of finding Life in the Scriptures, we must take
it for gran^ed, that they mean in their Interpretations upon them, whereby in
many things they contradict plain Scripture as has been proved any times; so
however, when they bid People search the Scriptures for Life Eternal (in them)
they intend they should take their meanings along with them, and believe as
they say, and so people must run into an implicit Faith, if they take things
on their Authority and Credit; for by their meanings and Interpretations, they
can sit as Judges over Scriptures (and tell people they must give the sense,
and reconcile them) and over the Lig^t and Spirit within, and tell them its but
an Enthusiastic Fancy; but who are not so Ign^ble as to receive a Belief or
Faith from them on such a dark, implicit and slender account as this of
Priests? But wait in the Light of Christ within, for a right understanding of
things that are Spiritual, relating to Faith and Salvation: Such find they have
cause from the certain demonstration and testimony of the Spirit of Truth
within, to believe Christ's Light and Spirit rather then the Priests meanings,
and private Interpretations, wrestings and perverting of Scriptures.


Priest, It is not about the expression of the Word of God that debate should
be kept up, if in a sound sense granted, that they are called the Words of God.


Answ. So, Then the Scriptures are granted to be words of God, why then holdst
thou debate against us, but to show thy cavilling Spirit? For the Word was
that, from whence words and Scriptures proc^eded; and came to the Prophets and
Messengers of God before they spoke the words to Write them.


Priest, Ye deny that Faith comes by hearing of the Scriptures which is the
Word of God; for that we receiving them by Faith are saved; which is plainly
asserted, Joh. 5.39.


Answ. We deny that Faith comes barely by hearing the Scriptures, for if it did
so come, then all that hear or read Scriptures must have Faith, and hear the
Word, but we see the contrary; and Christ told the Jews they could not
understand what he said because they could not hear his words, and yet they
could hear Scriptures, and him speak outwardly to them: But this is a mystery
hid from such as thou art; and there were those whom the Word Preached did not
profit, because it was not mixed with Faith in them.


Priest, Your selves acknowledge that they are the words of God, then this or
that particular saying is the Word of God; seeing there is a singular where
there is a plural.


Answ. But Singular and Plural differs, and though there be a Singular included
where there is a Plural, is it therefore good Logic to say that Singular
includes Plural, or they are both one? Or to sa^, that because there are Words
of God in the Scriptures, and where there are words in the Plural, there must
needs be a word in the Singular; therefore these words are the Word and so are
the Scriptures? Is this thy L^arning and Logic? Surely thou art so far from
knowing the Word which lives for ever, and was before either the Scriptures or
words in it were given out, that thou art yet as one senceless and confounded
in thy expressions, and cavilling against truth.


Priest, The Scriptures in the Bible are called the Word of God, Mark. 7.13.


Answ. This is a very general expression of the Scriptures in the Bible being
the Word of God, when they do not say so of themselves, whereas all the
Scriptures in the Bible are so far from terming themselves the Word of God, in
such an eminent expression, that they cannot all be truly termed his Words,
there being in many places Recorded both words of Wicked men and Devils; though
the Historical part that relates these things be true, as to the narration of
them: And they, Mark. 7.13. that made the word of God of none effect by their
Tradition, and rejected his Commandment, did really act contrary to the Word
within, which Moses preached, and against the Law of God without, so that is no
proof of the Scriptures in the Bible being called the Word.


Priest, That which makes wise to Salvation, or makes the man of God perfect,
etc. is inspired of God, that is the Word of God which makes wise, profits,
2 Timothy 3.15.


Answ. Here again have thou fallen short of proof of thy matter, for where it
is said, All Scripture is given by Inspiration of God, etc. [ Is] is added: So
it is, All Scripture given by inspiration: But if that must be called the Word
of God in thy sense, then it may be read, All the Word of God is given by
Inspiration of God: How will that sound and signify? Or, All the Word of God
given by inspiration of God, etc. See thy ignorance and impertinency* for
though we grant that all Scripture given by Divine Inspiration is profitable to
the man of God; for the making Wise to Salvation, but it is through Faith,
which words [through Faith] I find the^ to have taken little notice of [if any]
or of his being the man of God first, that knows the profit of the Scriptures
which are given by Inspiration, that he may be Perfect, which the Priests deny
in denying Perfection, and that he may be thoroughly furnished: And many things
were written, and directed to the Saints and not to the world, etc. But what
thou concludest from hence does not follow.


Priest, Is there any Prophecy almost, or Book of the Scripture, but it
calls the things contained in them the Word of God. Thus says the Lord, etc.


Answ. For, as was hinted, there are many things written in the Scripture, that
can neither properly be called the Word, nor are they words of God, as what the
Serpent said to Eve, Pharaoh to Moses, false Priests and Prophets, in the true
Prophets days, many things, and accusations which the Jews said to Christ,
Were these the Word of God? May thou not here see thy error and confusion?


Priest, There is nothing so much commends the necessity of the knowledge of
Scriptures and Learning, as the horrid detestable absurdityes which men
unlearned, etc. wresting Scriptures to their own perdition; however they revile
Study of Scriptures and Learning.


Answ. There is nothing more discommendeth things, and the Priests Way of
Learning and Studying the Scriptures, as your perverting and abusing them for
your own ends and turns, and the P^iest making a Trade of them by their
Learning; and must people depend upon the fruits of your Study and Learning to
know the Scriptures? And yet other whiles they must expect to find Eternal Life
in the Scriptures, to be made Wise unto Salvation by them; What contradiction's
here? But if the Scripture given by Divine Inspiration, be profitable to the
man of God, and by the same Inspiration be understood, and make Wise to
Salvation through Faith; and that the Spirit of Truth lead into all Truth, then
we will not be beholding to thee and such as thou art, for your Learning and
Study, who deny the immediate Teaching of the Spirit, and so are but still
unlearnd as to the things of God: And why do thou villify us as unlearned,
and make a flourish as if thou art some Eminent Learned man? This shows thy
Shallowness, Pride and Conceitedness, And were not Peter and John unlearned
men, and so accounted by the Learned among the Jews? Yet were full of the holy
Ghost and learned by it: Would thou and thy Companions limmit the Gift of
God, or a right understanding of Scriptures, to your natural drossy Learning
and imaginary Study? O! The Lord has raised up and brought to light that Life
and Spirit, which has brought many to see through you and your corrupt Learning,
and Babylonish stuff.

And whereas thou do villify and jeer upon these words, Viz. That the word
which the Bereans received with all readiness of mind, and the Scriptures which
they searched are two things, and say, I purposely pass by that which
follows Viz. Whether these things were so?


Answ. Are they not mentioned distinctly as two? The Word they received, etc.
the Scriptures they searched to see whether these things were so. Now there was
more in Preaching then bare words or Scripture, For their gospel came not in
word only; but in Spirit and in Power, which when that had touched their
hearts, and they had received a sense of the Spirit and Life which the Apostles
were Ministers of; this prepared them for a further understanding, of things
and matters relateing to the Testimony of Truth and of the Scriptures, when
they searched them in that weak state wherein they were at first receipt of
Truth, for a further or additional confirmation of their understanding of
things declared upon Scripture account touching Christ; but if according to thy
sense, the Word which they r^ceived with all readiness of mind, and the
Scriptures* which they searched, to see whether these things were so, were but
one thing; then, Is it good Doctrine to say, that when they received the Word
with all readiness of mind, they searched the Word to see if those things in it
were true, or to try the truth of them? How then was it received with all
readiness of mind? Or was it the Scripture which they received with all
readiness of mind, and th^n when they so received them, searched them to see
whether those things where so? (Is this thy excellent Logic?) If so, then thy
Doctrine runs thus; They received the Scriptrues with all readiness of mind,
and they searched the Scriptures to see whether the Scriptures were so, or for
proof that the Scriptures were true, they must search the Scriptures to prove
them true by themselves; Will this be admitted of as excellent Logic in your
Schoo^es, to prove an assertion by the same assertion, and to beg the question
in controversy? If so, then in all points asserted and disputed of, it is so
because it is so, will serve for proof.


Priest, The Word you say is one, How can it be called those things?


Answ. If the Word which I say is one, cannot be called those things, th^n it
proves what I said before, that the Word and Scriptures are two things, and
that their receiving the Word with all readiness of mind was inward, but the
Scriptures are outward, which they searched after they received the Word.


Priest, Are the things written in the Scriptures, and the Scriptures two
things? What excellent Logic is this?


Answ. If they be not two things, and yet the Word (which is but one) and those
things contained in them be two things, How are the Scriptures the Word, seeing
the Word and those things are two? Yet here again thou sh^west very little
Learning as professed by thee; for the Writing and the things written of, are
two things as well as Scriptures, and the things contained in them, for there
is the thing containing, and the things contained, according to the distinction
of (them and) some of your selves.


Priest, Or ye must take the Scriptures in the abstract, for the written
Characters as distinguished from the things that are writ, so nothing can be
either searched or found in a number of Characters.


Answ. I know of none that appear so ridiculous as to search them merely as a
number of Characters, so abstract to prove things or matters, but to search
them for those things or declarations contained in them which appear to the eye
of the understanding, and not to the outward eye in the bare Characters; and
yet (Scriptures) signify (Writings)


Priest, Whereas ye ask whether I think none has Faith, so none shall be saved
but those that hear the Scriptures by the outward ear or can read them? What
God may do, or does in an extraordinary is not the question; for his absolute
Soveranity in his dispensations of Grace is not tied, etc,


Answ. Then God and his dispensations of Grace are not limited or tied as many
other times thou, and others of you seem to tie up all now to Scripture for
Life Eternal, for Faith, etc. other whiles to your Interpretations, Learning
and the fruits of your study; but the way to God and Salvation is Christ, And
no man comes un^o the Father but by him; nor none comes to the Son, but by the
Fathers drawings, which are known in the Spirit and Light, by which we have
access to God.


Priest, The Scriptures search the thoughts as an Instrument, and Christ is the
principal searcher.


Answ. That Is Christ or the Word of God which is a discerner of the thoughts
and intents of the heart, that searches the heart; And its the Lord God of
hosts that tells unto man what his thoughts are, and searches the heart, who
both can and does sp^ak what he pleases, both of things declared in Scriptures
and without them, as he sees meet to the particular states of men and persons;
and so to lay so much upon Scriptures which belongs to God and Christ, and is
properly their Work is unsound: And Wh^re provest thou the Scriptures search
the thoughts? And where say they so of themselves, when they do not speak and
direct to any particular Person and show him his thoughts and actions
perticularly, which the Light does? And the Spirit of Truth reproves and
convinces of the several evils whereof persons are guilty. Its the Lord that
sets their sins in order before them.


Priest, It is false, That any have a sincere supernatural Faith of the
Scriptures that are ignorant of Christ, etc. They testify of him.


Answ. So then they must have some knowledge of Christ, and from thence have a
supernatural Faith of the Scriptures: But how does this agree with much more of
thy work, about searching the Scriptures for Life Eternal in them for begetting
Faith etc.


Priest, The foundation of the Saints and household of God, are the Phrophets
and Apostles, Jesus Christ being the chief cornerstone, Ephesians. 2.20.


Answ. Were not the Prophets and Apostles of that household of God? If they
were, then they were their own foundation according thy to assertion here, but
thou have wronged the Scripture; for it was the foundation of the Prophe^s and
Apostles (mark of the Prophets and Apostles) they were built upon Christ Jesus
the chief corner stone.


Priest, By the Prophets and Apostles that are the foundation is meant their
Doctrine, contained in the Scriptures, not the persons.


Answ. Their Foundation was before their Doctrine or Scriptures: Another
foudation can no man lay, then that which is already laid, which is Christ: But
sure the Prophets and Apostles and Scriptures were not he.


Priest, The Scripture makes known inward sins, of thoughts and lusts, Rom 7.7.
Is able to mak^ the man of God perfect; if they did not search into the
thoughts of the heart, discovering who are blind and carnal, How can they make
Wise unto Salvation? Does not the Scriptures make us Wise unto Salvation?
Therefore Are they not able to save us? Christ as the principle cause of our
Salvation, is said alone to save us.


Answ. Thou meanest Christ as the principle searcher or the Spirit, but the
Scriptures as the instrument; and then thou should have said, Christ makes
known inward sins, the Spirit searches all things, And God Judges the secrets
of men by Christ, according to the Gospel; without the knowledge of Christ,
there is no supernatural faith of the Scriptures; nor can any be made Wise unto
Salvation, but through that Faith: And that Christ and the Spirit makes use of
(speaks and opens) things contained in the Scripture many times, Who denies
that? For then he speaks (and opens) those things immediately; and thus the Law
was made convincing to Paul, not before it came thus; and if on that account
they be the instrumental cause, then its Christ, or the Spirit (by h^s own
speaking or teaching and openings) that is the searcher and savior: And then
it were most proper to lay the stress upon him as the searcher and Savior; and
not thus often tell of the Scriptures being the searcher of the thoughts, and
of having in them Life Eternal; lest also that ignorant persons go Idolatrously
(according to the tendency of much of thy matter) to put them in the place of
Christ, or seek to make them the Savior, seeing that Christ (the principle
cause of our Salvation) (as thou confessest) is said alone to save us, and if
he alone save, its sufficient, people be directed to him for that end; for in
him all sufficiency is, who can now immediately speak matters contained in the
Scriptures, as well as when they were first given by inspiration; And it is the
inspiration of the Allmighty that gives the true understanding, without which
the right use and end of the Scripture is not known.


Priest, The Scriptures of Truth (not I) make four Saviors, Viz. The ingrafted
Word, Faith, Scriptures, Timothy, etc.


Answ. To us there is but one God, one Christ, one absolute Savior, one Faith,
etc.


Priest, There is a Faith of the Scriptures that is historical, this is not
sufficient, but this Faith may be of Christ as well, and yet they not be saved;
but who has saving, unfeigned, Supernatural Faith of Scriptures, cannot want it
of Christ.


Answ. Well Then this saving Supernatural Faith of Scripture and of Christ,
must come from a Supernatural Light, or Christ who is the Light and Author of
Faith.


Priest, How shall they believe without a Preacher sent, Joh. 20. verse last,
They must have the Scriptures who have the knowledge of Christ; for without
this they cannot be kept from hell.


Answ. Who must send them if there be no immediate Teaching or Revelation now?
How provest thou thy Call from Scripture, and that thou art Comissionated by
Christ to Preach? Thou should rather have said, they must have Christ who
truly know the Scriptures, and without him they cannot be kept from hell.


Priest, In th^se Commandments written is our Life, Deuteronomy. 30.15, 16.


Answ. The Word and Commandment was nigh them in their hearts, that they might
obey it, and walk in the Commandments and live, see Verses 11, 12, 13, 14, 15.
how herein thou have diminished and wrested Scripture; and that Word which was
nigh in the heart the Apostles preached: It does not say, in the Commandments
written is your Life.


Priest, But that all Nations have the knowledge of Christ; Its in an
Enthusiastical Bible; etc These places, He enlightens every man that comes
into the world; and, has no resp^ct of Persons, are far wide from this
conclusion, therefore all have the knowledge of Christ; all the Turks, Jews,
Pagans, etc. Oh! What monstrous horrid Doctrine, etc.


Answ. It is not our Assertion nor Conclusion, that all Nations or People have
the knowledge of Christ (herein have thou abused us and our Principle;) for
though he enlightens all, they all do not walk in the Light, nor believe in it:
But all Nations and People that come ever to know Christ and be saved, must
walk in his Light, Who is the Way, the Truth, and the Life.


Priest, Christ as he is God, equal with the Father has planted some Light of
a natural conscience in every man of the world.


Answ. In him was life, and the life was the light of men; And he was that
light, which enlighteth every man that comes into the world; who is not
natural, nor his Light that shines from him in the Conscience: And God is
Light, who enlightens the World, and gave his good Spirit in the days of old
to the Rebellious; and sent his Son a Light into the World, That whosoever
believes on him, might not perish but have eternal life: And here is the power
and sufficiency both for Believing and Salvation.


Priest, All men have a Light of a natural Conscience from him, which tells
that there is a God, and somewhat of the nature of God, that he is Eternal;
which they may read in the creatures, Romans 1.19, 20. and of the morral Law,
which yet is but very dark, etc.


Answ. Where do the Scriptures call it a Light of a natural Conscience? What
great Ignorance is here, seeing Christ is the true Light that enlightens every
man, etc. And that which might be known of God was manifested in them, which
gave the knowledge of the Eternal Power and Godhead from the creatures; and of
the Law of God in the heart, and that Light, or that which might be known of
God which gave this knowledge, was not natural of a natural Conscience, as
blindly is conceived and asserted; for the natural man with his natural
knowledge, perceives not those Spiritual or Invisible things, nor can he know
them; but he that is turned to a Spiritual Light and Principle within, where
that which may be known of God is manifested.


Priest, But of Christ in his nature, and the nature of Faith, they cannot
without the Scriptures, so far as it is Gods appointed Way.


Answ. Christ is Gods appointed Way, etc. This high and general opinion of the
Scriptures, depends upon the former conceit, of finding Eternal Life in them,
by searching of them; but that is answered and contradicted by this our
Antagonist himself, over and over: Supernatural knowledge and Faith of
Scriptures, being not had without the knowledge of Christ; but there are many
search and read Scriptures, that are both out of this knowledge and Faith, so
that it is evident, that the bare reading Scriptures does not attract
supernatural Faith, Knowledge, Light, Spirit, etc. but it is the supernatural
Light and Spirit, that brings to the serious reading and supernatural knowledge
of Scriptures: And its also confessed in contradiction to much more (however)
that the Light in all men teaches them of the morral Law; and, Is not that
Scripture or things contained in it?


Priest, The Light wherewith Christ enlightens all, all Nations had before
Christ came in the flesh, as well as now; and yet, Who will say that they all
knew Christ?


Answ. It is not our saying nor assertion, that they all knew Christ, though
some by his Spirit or Light then, had a foresight of his coming before he so
came, though since he has given a more full demonstration and discovery of his
Light.


Priest, If all men are taught to know Christ by the Light within them, Why
sent he Apostles to all Nations, to make them disciples? Mat. 28.20.


Answ. All men are not taught that knowledge by the Light, because all obey it
not, but many love darkness rather: The Apostles were sent to turn them from
darkness to the Light, that therein they might know their Doctrine fulfilled,
and be Christ's disciples.


Priest, Why did he give gifts to Apostels, Pastors, Teachers, which should
continue till we all come to that unity of the Faith; and fullness of the
Stature of Christ? Was that Light within dim in those times, that it needed the
help of outward Light? How was it a mystery hid from Ages?


Answ. The dimness was in the Persons that were to be turned, and directed to
the Light, not in the Light it self; and the Apostles went by virtue of the
Light and Gifts in them, for the help of people and not the Light, for their
sufficiency and help was in it, and from it, which was not outward nor natural;
and having confessed Gifts, Teachers, etc. to continue till we all come to the
unity of the Faith, and fullness of the stature of Christ. How obviously have
thou herein contradicted thy former Doctrine, for imperfection and sin till
death? etc.


Priest, You have made the visible Church very large, who have taken all the
men of the world that ever has been into it. If the Lord has given Grace and
Knowledge equally to all men, Wherein stands the freedom of his Grace toward
them that are saved?


Answ. These are both forged and false accusations, depending upon the former
against us, for neither did we ever make the visible Church of that largness,
nor is it our Principle, that Grace and Knowledge is given equally to all men;
that is but thy false inference against us, whereupon thou have grounded much of
thy caviling against us; like one that loves to fight with thy own shadow, or a
man of straw of thy own making, to make and forge lies against us, and then go
to confute them. Unprofitable and vain.


Priest, Never did the greatest Enemy of free Grace, so tie up and limmit God
in the dispensations of Grace as you, that with good words and fair speeches
(would) deceive the Souls of the simple.


Answ. Nay, Thou and such like, go about to tie up and limmit God in the
dispensations of Grace, who would tie it up only to a few, and deny its
universal extent to all, and as those Priests of Scotland, that formerly cursed
all them that held Grace is free; and that with good words and fair speeches,
we would deceive the hearts of the simple, is a slander against us, and against
our end and intentions, and contrary to the tendency of our words and speeches.


Priest, Judas got as much from God as* Peter did, but he rejected it, but
Peter made better use of it.

Your free Grace, that all men have received alike, does not exclude boasting;
but say, Well was it with us that made better use of that, which others in hell
got as well as we.

Thanks to our deligence, and good intentions and tractableness, in harkning to
the Light within, which all the damned got as bright shining, as well as we;
but for Christ, we have no cause to thank him more then the damned have. This
is the Language your Doctrine of free Grace teaches men to say in their
thanksgiving.


Answ. Here-upon several of thy false conclusions and inferences against us,
thou have thus uanted and made a false Language of our Doctrine, contrary to
the very nature and tendency of it; Who but men in hardness and impudent
boldness, would go to confute, and raise absurdityes on our Principles when
they do not know them, but are yet to learn as thou art with thy companions?
For it is not our Principle, nor the Language of our Doctrine that all have the
knowledge of Christ [equally] and that Judas got as much from God as Peter, nor
that free Grace all have received alike, nor that the damned got the Light
within as bright shining as we; but that God is no respecter of persons, in
that he gives liberally to all, so much of his Grace to every one as is
sufficient; yet, not that all have received alike, or the same degree of Grace
and Knowledge, etc. for all receive not (or accept not) that measure of Grace
given to them to obey it. But whereas we are sco^^ at for saying, the cause of
som^s condemnation is their rejecting the Light, and their disobedience
stubborness, etc. this is according to the Scripture Language as might be
proved ar large: For the fault is not to be laid upon God, but upon man for his
disobedience, when he is consumed because of iniquity, which is stubborness,
rebellion, etc. For God wills not the death of sinners, but rather their
return that they may live; and, O man thy destruction is of thy self; But thy
help is of me says the Lord: so as God is clear when he judges. Now we can
thank God without boasting, that he has shown such Love, Mercy, and Good will
in Christ unto us; and Christ that he has shown us Power, Life, and
sufficiency in himself, both to believe, obey, and give diligence; and the name
of God we may praise, for all his Mercies and Blessings he attends us withal,
in the way whereunto he has called us, and indeed all Nations are called to
praise the Lord, which if all do not, the fault is not Gods, nor to be charged
upon him, or his free Grace, but theirs that reject it; And have treasured up
unto themselves, wrath against the day of wrath; and on the other hand, they
that count God a hard Master, and they that blaspheme against him in their
Torment and Anguish, are but the slothful servants, and such as have not
recieved the truth in the love of it; but have had pleasure in their
unrighteousness: And thereby have incurred displeasure from the righteous God,
whose severity follows on them that reject his Love and Good Will: So these
have not the Light as bright shining as we; These being condemned from the
presence of the Lord, and from the Glory of his Power.


Priest, How comes it that there is none among all these persons throughout the
Nations (where the Scriptures have never been heard) that have Written in the
defense of the Christian Faith, and against the Paganish worship, etc.?
Travelers should have given some account of it, etc.


Answ. As if the Scriptures were not only the cause of Life, Faith, and
Salvation (according to thy former stuff) but of all Writing in defense of the
true Faith, etc. Then what was the cause and ground of Sciptures? However, it
appears thou art no great Traveller, nor have had much acquaintance with such
Travelers as we know have given account of more Christianity among diverse of
the heathen that have not Scripture, then is among many in England and
Scotland, professing Christianity; besides we find in diverse of the heathens
(so called) their Writings many things both Morral and Divine, both favoring
of Christianity and of some spiritual sense, several of them had of the Nature
and Life of Christianity which in it self is against all Idolatry of Pagans and
others, though not in your borrowed terms and expressions of Religion and
Christianity: And further, why should the Apostle make use of some of the
heathens expressions, and Gentiles experiences for proof, if they had no
tendence to Christianity.


Pr. But the best of those Nations and wisest, were the greatest Enemies to the
Gospel.


Answ. How provest thou that (for we deny it) and the ground of this thy
peremptory censure and judgm^nt, against all them that had not Scripture? Many
of whom we believe were better then thy self; and have thou known the best and
wisest of them, that thou art thus positive against them?


Pr. You have no warrant to say, that deaf persons to whom the Scriptures have
no way been known, shall be saved.


Answ. As much as to say, They that know not the Scriptures, know not
Salvation, or shall not be saved; thou should have said. They that know not
Christ, or come not to him fall short of Salvation, the coming to whom, is
through the Fathers drawings, who draws by his own Spirit; and dare thou
say, that deaf and blind persons shall not be saved, because they cannot hear
and read Scripture.


Pr. Before the Scriptures he taught by audible Voices, Revelations, etc. but
now you make all to be the Light within.


Answ. No Revelation is truly known without the Light within, for what may be
known of God is manifest within.


Pr. We deny that the Power of God is immediate (Viz. in his people)


Ans. You may as well deny its being in his people, and their inward Communion
with it, and therein you deny the very tenuor of the new Covenant, and hereby
limmit that power to m^diate teaching, Scriptures, etc. what in you lies, which
tends to eclipse and detract from that Glory, Sufficiency, and Prerogative that
is in Gods Power; this is very gross and ignorant.


Pr, We grant it is true which the Metaphysitians and Divines say of God, that
he concurreth in all works of creatures, immediatione vertutis and suppositi,
but this ye know not what it means.


Answ. This makes against your selves if rightly considered, and falsely thou
have said of us (or of me) for I do know what that phrase means, both as to
words and matter; but, and if we did not know what is meant, why did thou
use thy Latin phrases and Scholastic terms, to such as thou deemest so
illiterate? Have thou not herein showed thy self a Bravado.


Pr. He told us, he will exercise his power for us, and in us.


Answ. He will exercise his power in us, and yet not immediate; What
contradiction's here?


Pr. Why the Grace of hope should be Christ's more then the Grace of faith, etc.


Answ. Christ is the Grace of all our Graces, and our all, a mystery hid from
thee and those of thy spirit.


Pr. Faith is a habit and an imperfect creature, for all habits are in the
category of quallity, which is an accident and so an imperfect creature.


Answ. What Scripture have you Priests of Scotland for that? Of Faith being a
habit, an imperfect creature, or accident; and, Is accident and habit all one?
Where learned this Philosophy to define Faith? True Faith is not natural,
nor a natural habit however, for thou have granted a supernatural saving Faith,
but it is but a habit, an imperfect creature, whereas Faith is a fruit of the
Spirit which is pure and perfect, and the mystery of it is held in the pure
conscience; but if thou meanest imperfect creature as to the kind or quallity,
its false Doctrine, and its being received by degrees does not prove it; for
its as truly and purely Faith and that of God, and supernatural in the least
degree (yea if but as a grain of mustard seed) as in the greatest measure of it.


Pr. It is as impossible it should be otherwise, as it is that a man abiding a
man should essentially be a beast.


Ans. Is it as impossible Faith should be otherwise then an imperfect creature
as for a man to be essentially a beast? Sad Doctrine! This is worse and worse:
Faith ov^rcomes the world purifies the heart, justifies, the mystery of it is
held in a pure conscience, yet not possible for it to be otherwise then an
imperfect creature: Darkn^ss, Confusion, and Contradiction to Truth.


Pr. The Grace of hope is imperfect, Christ is the hope of glory.


Answ. These are one opposite to another, but Christ is perfect, who is the
Grace and Life of all the Saints Graces.


Pr. Christ's Word was his audible Voice speaking his mind.


Answ. Other whiles his Word is the Scriptures (with thee) as if the Scriptures
and his audible Voice were both one, which if this be true, all that read them
hear Christ's audible Voice; Is this Authentic Doctrine? But Christ's own words
shall stand against it, for, Joh. 8.43. Why do ye not understand my speech,
even because ye cannot hear my word, and we know, that who hear the Son hears
the Father also: But this is a mystery hid from the Carnal minded who
Idolatrously pervert the Scriptures.


Pr. Though Christ and the Spirit be one, yet he is not Christ's Word, for
Christ is not his own word.


Ans. They that hear Christ's Word and receive it, receive of his own Virtue and
Life in, and the words he spoke unto his are Spirit and Life, thou have here
but cavilled, which thou might as well have done against several Scriptures
and against John's saying, In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with
God, and the Word was God, etc,


Pr. I call the Scriptures the Word of God, and the Gospel the Word of
Reconcilliation: The Word of God is distinguished from the Word of
Reconcilliation.


Answ. Other-whiles the Scripture is the Gospel (and the Word of God with thee)
now they are distinct, the Word of God distinguished from the Word of
Reconcilliation; What confusion's here? Is not the Word of Reconcilliation
Gods? God was in Christ reconciling the world to himself.


Pr. The Gospel are a part of the Scriptures, and may be called one with them;
the Gospel is contained in the Scripture.


Answ. The Gospel is the power of God to salvation to every one that believes,
it was preached to Abraham, and was before the Scriptures, and is everlasting;
but thou have spoken blindly here as before; for, Is the power of God contained
in the Scriptures? Then all that have the Scriptures have that power in them
(or from them) which is not true.


Pr. Romans 16.26. The Preaching of Jesus Christ according to the Revelation of
the Mystery which was kept secret since the world began, and by the Scriptures
of the Gospel, according to the Commandment of the Everlasting God, made known
to all Nations, for the obedience of Faith.


Answ. But thou and such do not so preach Christ, nor are so commissionated to
preach, at the Commandment of the Everlasting God, who deny Revelation, and his
imediate Teaching now, and this contradicts much of thy dark stuff; for here
the Revelation of the Mystery is prefered before the Scriptures, and the
Preaching according to them, was from that Revelation of the Mystery which the
Apostles had in them, but, were the Scriptures that Revelation, and kept secret
since the world began? The Revelation of Christ was the Mystery, Christ within,
the hope of glory, a mystery hid from Ages, etc. How was it by the Scriptures
made known to all Nations for the obedience of Faith, if in many Nations there
be neither the knowledge of Christ nor Scripture, according to thy former? And
of that Romans 16.26. which thou say is the Scriptures of the Gospel; thou
have wronged the Scriptures herein; for it is the Scriptures of the Prophets,
etc.


Pr. The Gospel and Mystery of Christ, is made manifest by the Scriptures of
the Prophets preached to all Nations; not by a Light within: If it were not in
the Scriptures, How could it be manifest and made known by the Scriptures?


Answ. If not by the Light within, How by the Scripture without it? Have all
that hear Scripture read or preached, the knowledge of the Mystery of Christ
without the Light within? How then does the Apostles speak of the Revelation as
before? Did nor he preach from the Light within, or Revelation of the Son in
him? Gal. 1.16. How ignorant have thou showed thy self in this matter?

Again, the Mystery was not made manifest by the Scriptures alone, or barely,
for both Revelation and Preaching is mentioned before; and to tell of the
Gospel and Mystery being in the Scriptures, is as much as to say, the power of
God or Christ is in the Scriptures.


Pr. Does not Mark. chap. 1.2. call what he wrote, the Gospel? Where he says,
The beginning of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, etc. Have you a forehead that
cannot blush, that tells us that the Gospel is not Scripture? What a feared
conscience and shameless boldness have ye attained to?


Answ. It is not from any feared conscience, nor shameless boldness for me to
assert the Gospel was before the Scripture; and if Mark intended his Writing
(or what he writ) to be the beginning of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, then it
follows, that the Gospel of Jesus Christ did not begin before Mark wrote that
ReveRevlation, and then how does he mention what was written in the Prophets,
and tell of the Gospel of Jesus Christ? And did not Jesus Christ show forth his
power and preach the Gospel, before that of Mark was writ? But seeing thou have
taken the liberty, both to give thy meanings to Scriptures, and pretends to
compare one Scripture with another, I may have liberty to tell the other
Scriptures in this case, as in, Luke. 1.1. he says, Forasmuch as many have
taken in hand to set forth in order a declaration of those things, which are
most truly believed amongst us, and ver. 3. It seemed good unto me also, etc.
And, Act. 1.1. The former Treatise have I made O Theophilus: So what they writ,
it was a Treatise or Declaration of things spoken, done, and believed, and much
of which relates to the historical part of things and matters; but if the
written Declaration, Treatise of things, or Scripture without, be the Gospel,
then hireling Priests may be silent, and let people read them, without spending
their money of them for their various meanings, traditional Interpretations,
etc. for the Gospel ought not to be added to, nor another preached; how-be-it
there is a difference between true Preaching, proceeding from the immediate
Spirit and Power of God; which Paul was a Minister of, and the Scriptures or
Writings outward, without the Spirit or Life; for Paul was not a Minister of
the Letter, but of the Spirit, and New Testament.

And is not a living Ministry and Voice, especially where it lives by virtue of
the Power of God, from whence it immediately comes of more force and authority
then the Letter, or Writings, which Scriptures signify? Yea I do further
affirm, that the same Words or D^clarations, as immediately proceeding from the
Power or Spirit of God, is of more force and effect then the same words would
be as spoken only from Scripture without. Deny it you Priests if you can, I
can in the Name of the Lord, largely demonstrate it against you.


Pr. The Scripture is Everlasting, Viz. what is contained in them.


Answ. Confusion, Are they both one? This is like much more.


Pr. Is not the Gospel written by the Prophets, the Scriptures written by them.


A^sw. Th^n Marks Writing was not the beginning of it, here is contradiction and
error: again the Apostle calls them the Scriptures of the Prophets, but speaks
of the Gospel, Revelation and Mystery before, see, Romans 16.25, 26. where its
very plain he makes a distinction between them and the Scripture.


Pr. I deny any immediate Teaching by God.


Answ. Then thou deniest God to Teach his people himself, when he dwells in
them, wherein thou have denied the truth of the Gospel and New Covenant.


Pr. Christ's Immediate Teaching will no way follow, for his opening the
understanding to know the Scriptures; for he does by the same supernatural
influence shine on the understanding, and Scriptures, Luke 24.32.


Answ. Does Christ by a Supernatural Influence shine on the understanding, and
yet deniest thou his immediate Teaching, What a Labyrinth of Confusion and
Distraction art thou fallen into! And it appears, without this Supernatural
Influence shining on the understanding, the Scriptures are not truly known nor
opened.


Pr. That Christ was first known himself, or he gave the knowledge of the
Scriptures. The Apostle Paul, Romans 16, 26. denies your consequence.


Answ. Have any a Supernatural knowledge or faith of the Scriptures, who have
not a knowledge of Christ? It seems thou have forgotten thy former words; and
the Apostle does not deny my consequence; for he had a knowledge of Christ
before he Preached him, or writ Epistles concerning him, and his knowledge of
the Son of God, was by his Revlation in him, besides the very Order, Tenor,
and Matter of the Apostles words cited by thee, makes for me against thy self,
see, Romans 16.25, 26. for they run thus, Now to him that is of power to stablish
you, according to my Gospel, and the preaching of Jesus Christ, according to
the Revelation of the mystery, which was kept secret since the world began: But
now is made manifest, and by the Scriptures of the Prophets, according to the
commandment of the everlasting God, made known to all nations for the obedience
of faith, etc. this thou may peruse again to thy own contradiction.


Pr. The Cause indeed must be before the Effect, and yet not always in order
of time, but of nature, etc.

If there be a Pryority, or Posteriority of Christ in the Soul, certainly the
Scriptures has it in the order of nature; though the Lord in the communicating
the knowledge of them, he is in his being first; because, the Cause must be
before the Effect; so the giver of knowledge before the knowledge given.


Answ. This being rightly considered, we find both contradiction and Ignorance
in them; for, Is the Cause before the Effect allway^s in order of nature, not
of time, and yet, have the Scriptures the priority in the order of Nature?
Where learnedest thou this distinction? not from the Scriptures nor from
Christ; Surely Christ has the Priority in order of time, for he is in his
being first, and if the Cause must be before the Effect, always in order of
nature; then he has it in both; for he was the cause both of Scripture, and
communicating the knowledge thereof, as thou confessest; as also, that the Cause
must be before the Effect, so the giver of knowledge before the knowledge given:
And indeed, He was before all things, and by him all things consists, and in
all things he is to have the pre-eminence, and priority: Who is the First and
the Last, the Foundation, the Beginning and the End. But thy saying if there be
a Priority, or Posteriority of Christ in the soul, certainly the Scriptures
has it in the order of nature; in this thou come off but very saintly and
dubiously, and bring the controversy to no result nor clearness, but art
confused; for if there be a Priority of Christ in the ^oul, then it is not of
the Scriptures, it b^ing a Priority of Christ, who also does by a Supernatural
Influence shine on the understanding, etc. But in these matters much might be
said, which time would fail thoroughly to treat of.


Pr. The Juditious will think you a pitiful object, who expose your self to
shame and ludibrie, etc.


Answ. Thy censure an^ scorn herein I vallue not, it will fall upon thy own
head, and theirs that have taken thy part herein.


Pr. Without the Sanctifying knowledge of Christ, one may understand the
Scriptures without error and ^angling.


Answ. This is both erroneous, and contradicts much that thou have said before
and after, which I need not very often repeat.


Pr. Most men, have both preached the Truths in the Scriptures, and maintained
them by Writing, who never had any Sanctifying Knowledge of Christ.


Answ. This is like the former, and that [most men have preach^d Truths in
Scriptures] is too large a word, and contrary to what thou said before of
other Nations; but what do these things tend to, but to set up unsanctified
persons, to be Preachers or Priests: But too many there are of such already,
for of them and their pollutions many are grown sick, and the earth will vomit
them out, and all that seek to maintain them against Christ and his Kingdom,
which he is setting up.


Pr. For Judas, he preached the Truths, etc. The Scribes and Pharisees that sat
in Moses seat preached Truths; whereas Christ bad hear them, Mat. 23.2, 3, 4.


Answ. But does this prove that Judas had no sanctifying knowledge of Christ?
Herein have thou erred; for Judas had part of the Ministry, from which by
transgression he fell, Act. 1.17, 25. So transgression was the ca^^e of his
fall from the Ministry, and that Scipture, Mat. 23.2, 3, 4. proves not that
Christ bad them hear the Scribes and Pharisees, nor that they were true
Ministers of Christ; though wherein they sat in Moses seat, and read or
preached his Precepts (when in force) they were to be obeyed, but Christ
reprehends them in many places for corruptions got in amongst them, contrary to
the Law, and for their vain Traditions and Prec^pts of men; and therein they
were not true Ministers of the Law, much less of Christ.


Pr. Some preached Christ out of envy and strife, and not out of love, etc. yet
preached Christ and the Scriptures without errors, Phi. 1.15, 16, 17. Shall we
say they had the Sanctifying Knowledge of Christ who had not love to him, who
has not good will to him?


Answ. Thou have not proved that they preached Christ and the Scriptures
without Errors who were in Envy and Strife; for they were guilty of Error in
the ground ( Viz. Envy and St^ife) and where that is, there is confusion and
every evil work; in that Christ was preached and his Name published in those
days, the Apostles rejoiced; but not in the Envy and Error, of such as
preached him out of Envy, who were not sanctified for such a work.


Pr. Your reason that without Christ we can do nothing, is to be meant in a
Supernatural way.


Answ. Is not that in a Supernatural way, which is without Error and Jangling,
and good and acceptable to God?


Pr. If they believe them to b^ true, do they not know them.


Answ. No, All that believe them to be true, do not know them; for thou have
granted an historical Faith of Scripture.


Pr. He that has heard, and learned of the Father, comes to him, Joh. 6.44.


Answ. But all that have read and heard Scripture, have not heard nor learnd of
the Father; nor come to Christ.


Pr. None can know the Truths of the Scriptures without the Sanctifying
Knowledge of Christ.


Answ. This is according to what I say, and overth^ows very much of thy matter
according as has been largely proved before.


Pr. He will lead believers into all Truths, this is the meaning; That is, he
will keep them from a total and final defection from Truths necessary to
Salvation; and lead them into Truths, which are thus necessary, etc.


Answ. This acknowledges in part to the truth of what I have said, also, to the
Spirits leading into all Truth; yea, into all Truths necessary to Salvation:
And then the Spirit of Truth is sufficient for us to depend upon, for this
leading and preservation.


Pr, The Disciples, all of them (except Judas) had received the Sanctifying
Spirit.


Answ How have thou excepted Judas from the Sanctifying Spirit, when he had
part of the Ministry, which his transgression was the cause of his falling
from?


Pr. They were all ignorant of the Resurrection, and mistook the nature of
Christ's Kingdom; as if it had been of this world, Luke 24.21. Act. 1.6. The
Galatians who had received the Spirit, yet were they led into Error.


Answ. If they that had received the Spirit might err in these matters, much
more they that had no Sanctifying Knowledge, which contradicts thy former; of
their preaching of Truths without Errors.


Pr. He did not tell them ye err not having the Spirit, but not knowing the
Scriptures.


Answ. The Scriptures they could not truly know without some Sanctifying
Knowledge of Christ, as before confessed, or of the power of God to salvation; so
their ignorance of the Scriptures in a Supernatural sense, was from their
ignorance of the power of God, which unvails the heart to read and understand
them.


Pr. For what ye say we plead for sin, it does more duly fall on the Doctrine
that says, believers may totally fall, as you say Peter by his denial did, and
David likewise by, etc.


Answ. Nay, To say there are believers that may fall from Grace (who are not
yet come to an established and grown state in the Truth and Power of God) is no
pleading for sin, as your Doctrine contending and disputing for sin in all,
term of Life, especially, whiles we exhort all to watch and look dilligently to
Grace received, and withal warn them, etc. that such a falling away may be
prevented; for it was no pleading for sin in the Apostles, to warn the Churches
by the example of some that fell, or of such as made shipwreck of faith and a
good conscience; or of such as drew back to perdition, denied the Lord that
bought them, and such whose latter end was worse then their beginning. But to
charge us with saying, that Peter and David fell totally; this is a slander and
forgery against us, as there are many more in thy bundle.


Pr. If our peace stood in our inherent Righteousness, etc. in our good works,
etc.


Answ. [Inherent Righteousness] are thy own words obtruded upon us, in thy own
sense (as imperfect) and so in that sense not Gods nor Christ's; for in Gods
Righteousness, received in Christ by faith, our peace stands, and of this, the
true believers are pertakers in them, they being in that living Faith, the
Righteousness whereof is not divided from it.


Pr. David's Peace stood not in the freedom from all sin, but in that God did
pardon his sin; and did not impute the same, Romans 4.6, 7, 8.

Secondly, If none ever had, or shall have Peace here on earth, but such as are
in this Life free from all sin; then you alone may boast of it, etc.


Answ. He whose Transgression is forgiven, The man unto whom the Lord imputes
not iniquity, in his spirit there is no guile Psa. 32.1, 2. And David bid, Mark
the perfect man, and behold the upright; for the end of that man is peace. And
blessed are the undefiled in the way; they also do no iniquity, etc. And in
this state stood David's Peace, contrary to what thou have Erroniously spoke of
him here.

Secondly, And what thou have said of our being free from all sin, that we
alone might boast of it; this thou do not believe of us, and therefore have
ironically Scoffed and Jeered, contrary to thy own thoughts and intentions: And
in implying none on earth free from all sin, have again erred, and art herein
sufficiently confuted allr^ady, thou having herein employed, none here ever born
of God, none here to abide in Christ, or come to perfect Holiness; or to be
washed from all sin by the Blood of Christ: So thy Doctrine is contrary to the
Apostles.


Pr. For none either of the Prophets, Apostles, or Saints, that we find in
Scriptures, ever were thus quallified for Peace.


Answ. This seems to be a large and general charge against the Prophets and
Apostles, who generally contrary to this Doctrine testified unto the Peace of
God, which is perfect, which attends the Righteousness (or heavenly Image) of
God, which is also perfect, and known in the new Covenant, whereby he takes
away sin, and establishes his people in Righteousness, and the Prophets could
testify that the Lord was their Righteousness, who wrought all their works in
them, and to the true Apostles, Christ was made wisdom, righteousness
sanctification; so thou and you have shown your selves ignorant of the
Scriptures, and of the Prophets and Apostles states and quallifications; and
what sin or sins they all had, which they (or any of them) were not freed from
before death, is not yet proved by any of you, who are found in the work of the
old accuser of the Brethren.


Pr. Sin is remaining in part in all the faculties of Gods Children, etc.
except ye had made appear, that Paul's Will, and Affections, and Mind, were
perfectly against sin: Some stain and inclination to sin, by the contrary
corruption still remained in some degrees in his Will, Mind, and Affections,
etc.


Answ. This is a sad accusation against all Gods Children again, and what is
this but a pleading for sin, and tending to strengthen the hands of evil doers?
What, all the faculties of Gods Children, having sin and corruption in them?
The Priests were wont to tell of a Regenerate part; What part is it? No faculty
clean, sad news! Thus to accuse Paul's Will, Mind, and Affections, as having
corruption remaining still in them; whereas his Will was to the good, his Mind
and Affections, were on things above (when converted, and victory obtained) and
the vi^e affections and desires mortified, which they that are Christ's have
crucified; and his saying, With my mind I serve the law of God, but with my
members the law of sin; related to the state of his Warfare, and shows an
opposition in his mind against serving sin: But thy Doctrine signifyes thus
much, as if he had said; with my Mind I serve sin, and with my Members I serve
sin, yea; with my Mind, Will, and Affections I serve sin, and the Law of God
both; this were a serving two Masters: And then where is the contrar^e^y and
opposition thou speakst of afterward.


Pr. I said, There was Flesh and Spirit in him, so that neither the operations
of the Flesh or Spirit were complete and perfect, because of the opposition
they have one to the other, the Flesh and Spirit are contrary one to another.


Ans. Thy making the opposition between the Flesh and the Spirit, and their
contrariety one to the other, thy reason to prove that neither the operations
of the Flesh or the Spirit were complete and perfect, it proves the quite
contrary; for the Spirits opposition to the Flesh, and its contrary operation,
proves that the Spirits operation is pure and complete against that which lusts
against it; and so against the fruits and works of the Flesh, which are
(absolu^ly) also opposite to the fruits of the Spirit, yet they through the
Spirit, came to mortify those deeds and works of the Flesh which were corrupt.


Pr. Ye cannot do those things that ye would; because he could not Will them
perfectly.


Ans. Its God that works in the believer, both to will and to do, and his Work
is perfect; and to whose Will, man's Will ought to be subject.


Pr. If all the imperative faculties of the Will and Mind, and (inferior) of
the affections, be fully and strongly joined for any action, the members of the
body cannot but be obedientially, etc.


Ans. Then such as have the mind of Christ, whose Wills and Minds are subject
unto his, as theirs whom he calls his Brethren, and whose affections also are
set upon things above, such have unity with Christ and in their faculties (as
thou call them) and therefore their members must needs be obedientially
subject, as theirs who are sanctified throughout, in Body, Soul and Spirit.


Pr. What part of him did sin dwell in, if neither in his Mind, Conscience
Affections, etc.


Ans. He said, In his flesh dwelt no good thing, but it was not all his life
time of continuance.


Pr. If you can find out any other faculty of the Soul, which can be a seat for
sin to dwell in, then these three; the Schools will be beholding to you for
your new Philosophy.


Ans. We may therefore see what Schools and Discipline you have, that would be
beholding to us, to find out some other faculty of the Soul for sin to dwell
in; but methinks thou should intend better then thy words import, and have
said: You would be bebeholding to us, to show you another, which is no seat for
sin, and that you should not seek for more room for sin, for it has as much
room amongst you as you can afford it, in all the facultys, both superior and
inferior, both in the Wills, Minds and Affections: But so it had not in the
Children of the Light.


Pr. The pure Protestant Religion, which is held out from Scriptures.


Answ. Is that your pure Protestant Religion, that pleads for sin in all the
facultyes of the Soul? An impure Religion and Doctrine of the Ministers of sin,
pure Religion where it is, there is a keeping unspotted of the world.


Pr. There is a Righteousness of Christ's Sufferings and Merit imputed, etc.
which begets Peace, which may consist with sin in a believer, though thereby no
Condemnation to him.


Answ. Christ's Righteousness is known to be pure and perfect, and not to
consist with sin, for they are inconsistant, and the believer that is come to a
fellowship of Christ's sufferings, and a conformity to his death, to know his
Righteous Will by faith imputed; he walks after the spirit, not after the
flesh, and to such there is no condemnation, Romans 1.8.


Pr. Cleanse thou me from my secret sins.


Answ. Then let not secret sin remain in me all my Life time, let not sin and
corruption remain in all the faculties of my Soul so long as I live,


Pr. There is a Righteousness which is the same with Sanctification which is
not perfect and complete, therefore no man by this inherent Righteousness is
Justified.


Answ. What Righteousness (and whose) is it, which is the same with
Sanctification, which is not perfect? Is it Christ's yea or nay? And, Is
Sanctification imperfect in this Life? And, Is this that thou call inherent
Righteousness? In this thou have but acted the part of Satan's m^ssengers, as
hore-tofore, and contradicted the Apostles Doctrine, who preached to present
men perfect in Christ, and exhorted to purge themselves, from all filthiness
both of flesh and spirit (and so) to a perfecting of holiness in the fear of
God: And, Was not Christ made unto them, Righteousness, Sanctification, and
Redemption? And is he divided or imperfect in what he is to the Saints? What
gross and fa^se stuff have thou employed and vented? And it was they that were
washed and sanctified; that were justified in the name of the Lord Jesus, and
by the spirit of our God. See, 1 Cor. 6.11.


Pr. You do not admit of this Doctrine. Your new Light you pretend, is nothing
but old damnable Popery.


Ans. Our new Light (as thou call it) is the Light of Christ, the same the
Apostles preached and bears witness to their Doctrine against thine and the
Priests who oppose it: And its Blasphemous and Damnable in thee, to deem this
our Light, nothing but old damnable Popery; it will appear that thou art nearer
Popery then we, in thy contending for sin term of Life, but only thou tellest
us not of a Purgatory.


Pr, Paul had victory begun but not completed, except from the the Condemning
Power of Sin, but the Reigning Power and Defiling, was not subdued totally, etc.


Ans. Confusion: And contrary to Paul's Doctrine and state, to tell of victory,
and yet the Reigning Power and Defiling not subdued totally; as much as to say,
his Enemy was conquered and yet Reigned still; whereas he said, He had fought
the good fight of faith, and had kept the faith; he was more then a conqueror
through Christ that loved him. And they to whom there was no condemnation were
in Christ, and walked not after the flesh, but after the spirit. And was there
not such as were complete in Christ to whom Paul wrote; and do not believe
that he had attained to as high a growth as any of them to whom he writ or
preached; consider it.


Pr. In the present time, I am sold under sin, That good that I would do, I do
not; if he had spoken to their capacity as weak, he would have told them, he
had been under such a condition, but he was delivered from it: When Paul speaks
of a condition wherein he was, he does not say, I am, etc.


Ans. Paul did speak unto the Romans after the manner of men because of the
infirmity of their flesh, Romans 6. He did also signify the several states which
he had passed through, as how it was with him before the Law came, and how when
it came, and his warfare, as also his deliverance; so that I say again and
still affirm, that Paul could not be in all those states he mentions, or
represents to the Romans at one and the same time (when he so writ, as in the
present time) as thou very blindly have asserted, argued from hence, and
caviled against the truth of what I said, and the most stress of what thou
say for reason, or proof against me, is as much as a Child might say that
has learned his Accidence, Viz. that the present Tense is not the preterperfect
Tense; whereas if it must be taken for granted from thy feeble reason, that
Paul was in all those states at one and the same time, then he was both carnal
sold under sin and yet spiritual, a faithful Apostle that could preach in the
fullness of the Gospel; as if carnal sold under sin, and spiritual, made free
from the Law of sin and death, by the Law of the Spirit of Life were both one,
but, to be carnal sold under sin was miserable bondage, not consistent with his
Saintship and Spirituallity: And when he said, With me to will is present, but
how to perform that which is good, I know not; if that was his present
condition, then (as thou arguest) because spoke as in the present Tense; Then
what did Paul at that time in writing that Epistle? Did he perform that which
is good, yea or nay? If he did, Then knew he what he did? Or, did he do he knew
not what in it? Surely thy Doctrine does strangly misrepresent and wrong Paul,
that Servant of Christ, and the Lords-Freeman, who knew the Mysteries of
Christ, though sometimes, he became as weak to the weak, etc. But if it should
be objected, as some vainly have done, that there was an unregenerate part in
Paul, of which he speaks in those cases; then this would make much of his
Epistles to proced from an unregenerate or carnal part, which were gross and
contrary to their own Doctrine. And to that saying, if he had spoke to them as
weak; he would have told them he had bin under such a state, but he was
delivered from it; to the very same purpose he did speak to them, Romans 7.5. For
when we were in the flesh, the motions of the sins which were by the Law did
work in our members, to bring forth fruit unto death; but now we are delivered
from the law, that being dead wherein we were held, that we should serve in
newness of spirit and not in the oldness of the letter. So that its plain, he
told them both of his captivity and of his deliverance, speaking in the
forepart of the chapter plainly in several things, with relation to what he
was in the flesh in the time past, and also how he was delivered; and so, both
the body of sin and death, and the law of sin, he came to be delivered from by
the law of the spirit of life in Christ; through whom also he was more then a
Conqueror.


Pr. How bold are you, charging the present time for the bypast, for which you
have neither passage in that, nor any other Scriptures, the sense of the words
being all along in the present time, etc.


Answ. This is but like the former, from ignorance both of the Scriptures and
the Apostles states, concluding them in all those sta^es wherein they
personated themselves, either to represent what they had gone through, or the
condition of others to whom they wrote or spoke; but from this man's Argument,
where Paul said, Christ came into the world to save sinners of whom [I am
chiefest] and the Apostle James; with the same tongue bless we God, curse we
men, these things ought not to be; this being spoken in the present time when
they writ; from this man's Argument, Paul was then the chiefest or greatest of
sinners; How was he then counted faithful and put into the Ministry? Or was he
the greatest or chiefest of sinners when faithful? Then who are the least of
sinners if the faithful, such as are saved by Christ be the chief; And was the
Apostle James one that did curse men, when he exhorted against it, or what he
said, had relation to them (or some of them) to whom he writ? And Paul's being
the chiefest of sinners, to his being injurious and a persecutor before
converted, or if the chiefest of sinners after conversion, and counted
faithful; What was he before conversion? Or if it was before; Then did he not
amend and become better when he came to be converted, to receive Grace and
Apostleship?


Pr. As for that by gone state before he was begotten; Was he groaning under a
body of death? Was he giving thanks for victory through Jesus Christ? Yet all
these are knit together.

Secondly, If ye say it was a state after he was begotten of God, ye grant all
that we affirm; that a Believer ever after he is begotten of God, is not free
from Sin.


Answ. This still depends on thy former errors and absurdities against Paul,
for groaning under a body of death for deliverance or victory, and giving
thanks for victory through Jesus Christ, are two differing states, and not knit
together as if they were one and the same condition; How blindly and sottishly
have thou reasoned herein?

Secondly, If we say it was a state after he was begotten, Viz. that he was
groaning for deliverance, we do not grant therefore that a Believer ever after
is not free from Sin, as falsely and absurdly thou infe^rest upon us; as if a
Believer had no growth nor increase in faith and victory after begotten of God,
which if it be thy belief, according as thy words imply, it is not ours; for we
know and believe a growing from strength to strength, and a revelation of Gods
Righteousness from Faith to Faith in the true Beleivers, and that by Faith
victory is obtained by degrees, with such as are begotten and born of God, whom
the wicked one cannot touch; and through Faith in the Power of God, Everlasting
Salvation comes to be attained to by them; such as keep the Faith, and hold
fast the profession of it without wavering.


Pr. They do not so perfectly mortify, as that there are no lusts in them;
otherwise it were to no purpose for Peter to exhort the believing Hebrews to
abstain from their lusts.


Answ. Nay, Herein thou have erred and perverted, and wronged Peter's end and
intention, which is clearly against such as thou art, who plead for continuance
of sin and lusts in them, which if they always be to continue here, and cannot
be abstained from as thou intimatest, then to what purpose was it for Peter to
exhort them to abstain from them, especially if he had been of thy faith that
they could not, or had not power to abstain from lust, etc. But herein thou
have sufficiently discovered whose servant thou art.


Pr. When they are Believers and begotten, they are so freed that the evil one
cannot touch them.


Answ. Much less lead them into Sin, or keeps up the reigning power of it in
them so long as they live: This contradicts all thy corrupt Pleas and Arguments
for Sin.


Pr. They do not fulfill its Lusts, as to continue in Sin wilfully and
deliberately without repentance; yet they are not freed from Sin wholly.


Answ. Yes wholly, when the wicked one has not power to touch them. But thy
saying they do not fulfill its Lusts, as to continue in Sin wilfully without
repentance; now may not this be taken that they do continue in Sin, Lusts, but
not wilfully without repentance; But do they Sin wilfully with repentance? Have
thou cleared Gods Children herein? Whereas, such as walk after the spirit,
shall not fulfill the lust of the flesh; but are in that which mortifyes the
vile affections and desires, and subjects the whole man to the will of God,
Viz. to Righteousness and Holiness.


Pr. In many things we offend all.


Answ. But not in Christ the one thing; for, he that abides in him sins not.


Pr. To be unblamable; Is that Grace? Is universal in all parts of the renewed
man, though not absolute, etc. to be unblameable and unreproveable, may stand
with Sins of infirmity.


Answ. To be unblameable, is to Live as the Grace teaches; namely, To deny
ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live godly and soberly in this present
world: For Sin and Ungodliness is blameable and reproveable wherever it is, it
being contrary to the Grace and its teaching, which is absolute as well as
universal in the renewed man, and is not consistent with Sin, nor imperfect as
you Priests of Scotland have rendered Grace, Faith, etc. as they among you
formerly, that cursed every one that says, Faith is without Sin, and would
have all the people to say Amen to it; wherein your blind zeal out-runs your
understandings, and made you discover your folly and madness, to set people on
cursing; yea, to curse such as held the Truth, contrary to that Doctrine, bless
and curse not.


Pr. In the Book of Common Prayer, there is a promise, To forsake the Devil and
all his Works, the vain Pomp and Glory of the world, and Sinful Lusts of the
flesh, and be led by Gods Spirit to keep his Commandments: Many of those who
promise may do this, and keep it in the sense the Scripture holds, that is;
that they shall disallow, purpose and endeavor against those ills.


Answ. So, Here thou have justified these promises, and many of those who
promise as keeping it, that is (say thou) they shall disallow, purpose and
endeavor against those ills, as if that purpose were a forsaking the Devil and
all his Works, etc. the Sinful Lusts of the flesh, a keeping Gods Commandments,
etc. when as thou have denied that any may attain to such a state, but they
must purpose and endeavor after it; when as the promise is absolute, to
forsake all sin, Viz. all the Works of the Devil, and to walk in the
Commandments of God all their life. What a medly have thou made here, like the
time-serving Priests; that vindicate the Common prayer and Episcopacy, after
they have denied it, and many of them covenanted against it: We thought that
the Priests and Kirk of Scotland, had been more zealous and sincere in their
way against the Episcopal Traditions, then thou have here appeared: Will the
rest of thy Brethren of the Kirk of Scotland own thee in this matter? Or art
thou their mouth; that thou take upon thee, to be such a contender for the
pure Protestant Religion (as thou call it?) But is that any part of your
Religion to tell of Godfathers and Godmothers? And to cause t^em to promise
and vow in the Infants name, and for the I^fa^t (as its surety) to forsake the
Devil and all his Wor^s, etc. all ^he Sinful Lusts and desires of the flesh,
and to keep G^ds holy Will and Commandments, when you do not believe it
possible so to do in this Life.


Pr. As many who are commended for keeping his Commands, their Sins and
Failings are not-with-standing recorded.


Answ. Sins and Failings are not consistent with keeping Gods Commandments, Sin
being a transgression of the Law; which, when transgressed and failed of
keeping, it is not kept then, nor the blameless state stood in.


Pr. You with gross subtilty bear out this sense; That he who at his death is
made holy, is made holy sometimes before his death.


Ans. He is sometime a dying before dead, if at their death, be upon their
death or dying (as thou say) yea, some are many hours, having the symptoms
and pangs of death upon them, before they are dead, and in this sense I
supposed thou intendest, by saying at their death they are freed, etc. that it
was upon their dying, when the throws or pangs of death are upon them; or, when
we commonly say a person is a dying, when he breathes very weakly, faintly, and
sometimes with short breathings, a little before breath is quite gone, and then
there must needs be a little space in this Life, before the person is quite
dead.


Pr. You might as well infer, if one should say, that at his death his Soul aod
Body are separate; that he said, they are separate sometime before his death;
at his death is meant immediately upon his dying.


Ans. A false inference put upon my words, which does not at all follow; for
when the Soul and Body are separate, or the Soul is gone out of the Body, this
is after death, now upon dying is not after death; for when the Body is without
the Spirit it is dead; so, if thou will have it, that when the Soul and Body
are separate, the Beleiver is then free from sin; it is not in this Life, and
then; Where Is the Popes Purgatory? And who is now guilty of damnable Popery? Is
this your pure Protestant Religion?


Pr. I never found but that they (Viz. our Brethren) said, Beleivers Souls
either at their death (which is immediately upon their death) or after death,
are made perfectly holy and received into glory.


Answ. Upon dying, and after death are two things, so it appears still you are
divided somewhat in this point; some of you saying, upon their dying, Beleivers
are made perfectly holy, others say, after death; however by this we may
observe that your Doctrine tends to make people serve the Devil (by living in
sin) so long as they have any time and str^ngth, to do any service for him;
that is, till they can serve him no longer.


Pr. They may mean and understand, that the perfect holiness of both Soul and
Body is not to be till the Resurrestion; which is nothing differing from that
which I say; I do not say that the Body in the grave is capable of holiness
till it be raised.


Answ. If this does nothing differ from what thou say, its very strange,
did not say a little before [upon his dying?] What Is done upon his dying? Is
he made wholly free from Sin yea or nay? If thou meanest only the Soul, that
that is only freed from Sin at death or upon dying, and not the Body till it be
raised (as thou say) Then what becomes of the Sins and impurity of the Body
in the mean time, or the defilments and pollutions thereof? Does it dye with
the Body (seeing the Soul is pure when it ascends to God?) Or if the Body be
not capable of Sin in the grave; Then where is the being of unholiness and
corruption to be done away, so long after death as is imagined? Or to say that
perfect holiness of both Soul and Body, is not till the Resurrection; (how long
after death you know not) Does not this make for the Papists imagination of a
Purgatory? For if the being thoroughly purged from all unholiness be not till
after death, it must be some where; but this your Doctrine is cont^ary to the
Apostles, who said; How can we that are dead unto sin, live any longer therein?
And being made free from sin, etc. He has washed us from our sins in his own
blood, etc.


Pr. From Pro. 24*16 It cannot be so properly said, The godly fall seven times
into trouble and ri^e again.


Answ. Yes, The godly falls into many troubles and afflictions; but God
delivers them, out of them all. And he is with them in six troubles, and in
seven he will not forsake them. And its plain from that of Pro. 24.15, 16. that
the just man's falling sev^n times and rising again, is of another nature then
the wickeds falling into mischief; for in verse. 15, 16. its said, Lay not wait
(O wicked man) against the dwelling of the righteous: spoil not his resting
place: For a just man falls seven times and rises up again: but the wicked
fall into mischief. It is not said (as many of you have wronged the Scripture)
that the Righteous man sins seven times a day; yea, some of the Priests and
Professors, have not only said so, but have also said; that the most Righteous
man that is (or ever was) sins seven times a day, which is a deceit and
corruption put upon Scripture.


Pr. As for my saying a day, it was a mistake of the citation of the place,
though its not contrary to sense; for Christ says to Peter that he should
forgive his Brother seventy times seven times, which implies that a Brother
may offend in the day time.


A. If he who is a Brother may offend in the day time; Does it therefore follow
that all the godly or brethren do fall into sin seven times a day? And will thou (to serve thy perverse and corrupt end) say, in that a Brother may offend
seventy times seven, therefore he Sins seven times every day all his time?
Surely thy implicit consequence, is a mistake and error (and thou have wronged
the Scriptures) as well as thy citation of the place mentioned. But we see thou will stand by the Devils Cause, though thou come never so feebly off; yea,
and fall with it.


Pr. I grant that the Child of God cannot Sin totally and finally and whosoever
does it, is of the Devil.


Answ. Herein again thou have wrested and added to the Scripture, as often
before, Totally and Finally are thy own words, and not the words of John, who
affirmed, That he that is born of God sins not; neither can he: To say he
that commits Sin Totally and Finally is of the Devil; Is this all the
distinction of the Devils Servants and Children, from the Children of God? How
miserably have thou pleaded Gods Childrens cause? Surely they have no Reason to
be beholding to th^e, but may justly exclude thee for wronging of them.


Pr. In the sense ye imply it, that he who Sins at all, or in whom their's
any defect; thus none living then ever knew or saw him: Those who are commended
for knowing him, Sinned.

Secondly, Job cursed his day, David, what sad falls he had is known, Jeremiah,
the Apostles; all of them.


Answ. That [he] that Sins and is of the Devil, and that [he] that Sins
not who is of God are two contrary births ( and that which is born of the
spirit is spirit, as that which is born of the flesh is flesh) which if thou
knew the difference of, and were separated from the evil and joined to the
good, thou would not go about to confound them, nor grossly to pervert the
Scriptures and to accuse Gods Birth, or Child as thou have done.

Secondly, And why do thou not tell us of their deliverances as well as
their falls, and of their conquest which (by d^grees) they obtained in their
Life time? But this would make against thee and thy ill cause for Sin and
Satan, whose work thou art in.


Pr, You say a Believer is free from all Sin, which we suppose you meant of a
Believer from the very instant that he begins to be a Believer; as ye said,
that the Spirit cannot be united unto Sin.


Answ. Nay, It is not our Principle that a Believer, from the very instant that
he begins to be a Believer, is free from all Sin; thy supposition herein and
much of thy matter grounded upon it is false, thou have gone about to overthrow
our Principles, when thou art yet to learn what we hold in this matter: For a
man is a Believer whilst in the faith he is war^ing against Sin, and waiting to
obtain victory over it, and to come into the glorious liberty of the Sons of
God: The victory is not obtained at the very first beginning of Gods work in a
Soul, but by degrees through Faith, which purifies the hearts of them that
believe, and receive power in the Light of Christ and Spirit of Life, to become
the Children of God and of the Light, which has no unity with Sin; nor can
have with persons, but as they forsake Sin and come out of it.


Pr. As you contradict your self, so you do the Truth; For can Sin be in any
man, and the actions flowing, and the man not be Sinful? If Sin be in a man,
does it not defile him?


Answ. If the actions of Sin be flowing from a man he is sinful, but there is a
time when the Beleiver warreth against Sin, and can say as Paul did, Its not I
that Sins; but Sin that dwells in me. And there is a time wherein there be
Sins that do easily beset; and when Sin is presented in the Temptation, when it
is not yielded unto but withstood, and by degrees overcome by Faith, in the
power of Christ: But this is hid from all blind contenders for Sin.


Pr. Neither does that passage which ye abuse (its not I but Sin that dwells
in me) imply any thing of that kind that he does not Sin.


Answ. What is this less then to say, Paul said not true, when he said, Its not
I that sin but sin that dwells in me? But to distinguish between the two
S^eds and two Births, that which did not Sin, and that which did Sin, it
appears thou know not, but art very ignorant, and blindly cavillest in many
things.


Pr. God judges of his Children that are thus divided, according to the better
and sounder part, as is that of the Spirit which is most prevailing with them,
and unto which they do adhere; and not according to the Flesh which they
renounce, and unto which they resist; and which by little and little they
overcome.


A The Spirit most prevailing in Gods Children, they adhere to it, and resist
and renounce the Flesh, and yet the Flesh have the better; What Doctrine is
this, and what contradiction? And how does this oppose the Spirits sufficiency,
and the end of their adhereing to it; which is, that they may be thoroughly
sanctified both in Body, Soul, and Spirit.


Pr. Indeed you make your self a Patron of Sin, in saying, that the Children of
God when they come short of the good they would, and when they do the evil they
would not, they do not Sin: Now whether you, or th^se you rail against, deserve
to be accused as defenders of Sin: You say that a Believer, when he does the
evil he would not, he Sins not: No more vile defense of Sin imaginable, then
to say, that Peter's denial of Christ with a curse, was no Sin; and David's
adultery: Whether he that acknowledges Sin is in the godly, or he that says
the foulest Sins are not Sins; because forsooth they may be warring against
them?


Answ. Herein have thou abused me, and sought to render me odious for that
which is none of my saying, touching the Children of God; neither did I ever
say, that doing evil is not Sin, nor yet grant thy universal Charge against
Gods Children, of coming short of good and doing evil; nor that all that Paul
writes of himself in that kind; Was then his present condition: Herein have
thou but begged the question, and belied me in several things grounded upon thy
misrepresenting our Principles before; and so the Patron and vile defender of
Sin thou art, and not I; who to defend it, have in general accused all God
Children with Sin term of Life. Neither did I ever say, Peter's denial of
Christ, and David's adultery, are no Sins; as here I am belied and slandered, by
one in impudency, and the spirit of lies: And as for Peter and David; Where
ever did they commit those Sins after they had repented of them? Surely this
instance is no proof that Gods Children must have Sin (or dare Sin) all their
life time: How-be-it Paul was no defender of Sin in saying, Its not I that Sin,
but Sin that dwells in me [by all which Sin is still acknowledged to be Sin]
and when they knew the warring against Sin, and the travel in order to obtain
victory, and coming into the state of the perfect Birth (that is brought forth
in the Image of God) they knew the difference between the two Seeds in them,
and a going on in the work of faith, till the old man with his deeds were put
off, and the new man put on.


Pr. Neither that of 1 John. 2. I write unto you that you may not sin, prove
that they were free of Sin so as they did not Sin; for then why does he subjoyn
(but if we sin, we have an advocate with the Father) thus you have wickedly
separated what God has joined, Christ was given for an advocate for the Sins
of those whom John calls little Children, and his own, which therefore were
to be.


An. John's writing unto them not to Sin, surely was contrary to thy pleading
for Sin, for the very tenor of thy doctrine is contrary to his in this case.
And what is it God has joined that (thou say) we have wickedly s^parated?
Is it Believers and Sin, or the advocate and Sin? This were blasphemous to
suppose or assert; how grossly have thou showed thy self in this matter: And
surely thou have drawn but a bad consequence from John's saying, If any man sin
we have an advocate, that therefore John's and the little Childrens Sins were to
be, or that the Devils work in part, remains un-subdued in the Children of
God; for John does not say little Children you have an advocate, and therefore
your Sins are to be, or the Devils work must remain in you unsubdued all your
life time, but I write unto you that you sin not, and if any man sin (which is
not every man is to Sin) we have an advocate with the Father; this is he that
was to call and help them out of Sin, and whose blood did cleanse from all Sin,
for John proposed a way and a remedy for them, to bring them out of all sin,
but thou have proposed a way tending to keep all people in Sin all their days,
who thus have contended for the Devils work, made such a sad consequence both
of John's words, and of Christ's being an advocate, that therefore Sins are to
be. A monstrous inference.


Pr. That the Devils work in part remains un-subdued in the Children of God,
appears by that Paul says to the Romans, The God of peace shall tread down
Satan under your feet shortly, Romans 16.20.


An. That the God of peace should tread down Satan under their feet shortly, is
a proof against thy self, and contradicts thy Doctrine for the Devils work
remaining in the Child of God; for where Satan is trodden down under foot,
dominion is obtained over him and his work.


Pr. We have peace, our peace stands in our justification, yet there are
remains of Sin within us which we are to mourn for.


An. The Saints peace stands in Righteousness, which is not consistent with
Sin, which is the cause of mourning where it is not done away; but thou have
confounded the state of peace, and the state of mourning, like one ignorant
both of true peace, and of the effect of true sorrow and mourning.


Pr. We are all compassed about with infirmities and subject to passions as was
Elias, who had the Spirit of God and peace to, and yet had matter of groaning
even in those passions.


An. The Apostles instance of Elias being subject to like passions, was in the
case of praying for the sick, to show how prevailing the effectual fervent
prayer of a Righteous man is, Jam. 5.15, 16. which proves quite against thee,
whilst thou accountest passions in the general as being Sins, for passions are
sufferings which may be of diverse sorts, as that of sickness and others; as
also it is not true that Elias was subject to that the Priests are, whilst
thou take passions for Sins, neither was he so passionate in that kind as to
pl^ad and contend for Sin as you do: More-over where its said, that Paul and
Barnabas said unto them (that would have done sacrifice to them) We are men of
like passions with you, Act. 14. they could not intend by passions, that they
were men of like Sins and Transgressions with those heathens, as being such
Idolaters, or subject to cry up and worship men as Gods, or to sacrifice unto
them as they did to Paul and Barnabas, whom they termed Mercurius and Jupiter;
so in this thy error is sufficiently detected, who upon such a false ground
(rath^r then be silent) have pl^aded for the work of the Devil.


Pr. Here is another Arminian and Popish error, that Believers fall away from
Grace totally.


An. Thou might as well have charged the Apostles with an Arminian and
Popish error, who held the same that we (...) touching, falling away from
Grace, which many have been (...) (though not all Believers) and therefore both
Peter and Paul and others, did warn them in their Epistles to the same purpose
as we do, and both Paul to the Corinthians, and Peter in his second Epistle,
Chap. 2. as also that Epistle to the Hebrews, do largely prove our Doctrine in
this matter.


Pr. Evil Works come not from Faith in the Believer.


An. If evil Works come not from Faith, then Peter and David stood not in the
Faith when they fell; and this proves what I said of them, which thou have
reviled me for.


Pr. Christ said to Peter, when thou art converted, where you say, that Peter
was never converted before his repentance, but only convinced, which
contradicts that you said he erred from the Faith: Its against Christ's prayer,
saying, I have prayed for thee that thy faith may not fail: if he had not Faith
when Christ spoke these words to him, When thou art converted strengthen thy
Brethren; only do signify when he should be fully recovered.


An. Here thou fightest with thy own shadow, for it does not follow that Peter
had no Faith, when he was convinced before fully converted, and the words, When
thou art converted strengthen thy Brethren, are Christ's own words to Peter,
about which thou have thus wrangled against me, which plain enough imply that
there was something which was not of Faith, that Peter was to be converted from;
and Faith is given in measure in the convinc^ment in order to a through
conversion, as also thou grants that these words, When thou art converted, do
signify when he should be fully recovered from the sad breach his fall made on
his Soul; what a full recovery and yet the Devils work remaining all his time;
what confusion's this? And is the full recovery called conversion as thou
say? Then you that contend for sins remaining all your Life time, remain all
your time in the unconverted state; and that the Desciples had some Faith before
they we^e thus fully converted, is the thing which I have confessed, which
still makes for what I say; that there is a possibility of falling from the
Faith, before this work of conversion is fully wrought, and therefore the more
need of being watchful and exercising that little Faith recieved; so that I do
not maintain Satan's work, or say that he overthrew Peter's Faith ^s falsely I am
accused.


Pr. It is not sad Doctrine (as you say) but comfortable, that a Believer may
fall, as David and Peter, whereas he does not fall wholly away.


An. Is this Doctrine counted Authentic or Orthodox in the Kirk of Scotland,
that it is not sad Doctrine but comfortable, that a Believer may fall, as David
and Peter did? And do you propose this to your Auditors as matter of comfort?
Surely if you do, you are misserable comforters; for to be comforted with
telling them they may fall, as David and Peter did, is to be comforted with
denying Christ, and commiting adultery, as it may be probable, too to many of
your Kirk take comfort in such things; which whilst they do, your Stool of
Repentance will not obsolve them, nor prove them to be in the Faith, how-be-it
a few line^ before, in contradiction to thy self, thou confessest that Peter's
fall did weaken his Graces and cloud his comforts very much, and surely it was
matter of Sorrow, and bitter Lamentation to him, as also was David's fall to
him; for which he suffered the Terrors of the Lord, and great Sorrow and
Tribulation, as at large in his complaints and prayers may be proved.


Pr. What a brave Patron of your Cause are you, when in defense of this, that a
Believer may not Sin; ye say he may fall wholly away from Grace.


An. Here thou have grossly perverted and wronged my words, for that some
Believers may fall, is not my defense to prove that they may be fully restored
and perfected, so as not to sin; but that there is a state in which it is
possible for some to fall away from Grace, which is before they come to that
perfection and safety that answers the end of their Faith and Praying, etc.
This cuts off much of thy cavilling frothy false accusation.


Pr. Ye ask if I can instance in Peter or David any thing (Viz. Sin) before
their death (which they were not freed from before their decease)


Answ. Though I could not instance gross falls of such a foul nature, yet they
have their failings; Esiah an old Prophet, subject to like passions that we
are; Peter walked not with a straight foot, David says, if thou enter into
Judgment, etc.


An. Here thou have gone about to accuse David, and Elias, and Peter with
failings till their death, but in proving thy charge com^s very faintly off,
for that of passions is answered before; and what thou say of Peter's not
walking with a straight foot; Was that till death? Or did he so walk all his
Life time? Surely thou have herein greatly wronged Peter and the rest of them,
and though there be a time and a state wherein, if God enter into Judgment who
can be justified, yet there is a state wherein his people are Redeemed through
Judgment, and purged, by the spirit of judgment and burning.


Pr. You maintain that a Believer from the first Sins not.


An. Thy accusing of me with maintaining that a Believer is freed from all Sin,
from the first time he is a Believer, is a falsehood and an abuse put upon me;
for he is a Believer before he obtain victory, and is taught to believe in the
Light, that he may be a Child of the Light, and so become born of God.


Pr. You do symbolize with the Papists, saying Believers are freed from all
Sin; which yet they do not hold of all Believers, but of some of their
Perfectionaries. Ye say ye do not hold Merit or Purgatory.


An. Nay, Thou have symbolized with the Papists, who have pleaded for sin till
death, and said also that perfect holiness both of Soul and Body, is not to be
till the Resurrection, when that shall be thou know not, which (as before
was answered thee) makes for their imagination of a Purgatory; but if the
Papists hold that some Believers are free from all Sin and perfected in this
Life, therein they outstrip thee and the Priests, who would exclude all
Believers from perfection and freedom in this Life.


Pr. Ye say that all men have a like Light and Grace, some do attain to
salvation, others not, which proceeds not from any difference of Grace given
by God, but that others have better improven the Light given to all, which
improvement must indeed come from free will. Ye hold Merit. You are not so
ingenious as Papists.


An. Concerning Grace being given alike to all, if thou intendest in measure or
quantity, thou have vainly made repetitions without ground against us; but as
for the improvement of the Grace it comes not from free will, as falsely thou
have said, but from the capacity the creature is put into by the Grace it self;
for man's will is not made free of it self, but by the Grace or Power of God,
which works in man to will and to do: But and if somes not attaining of
salvation, is because its either from a difference of the Grace given by God,
or for want of sufficient Grace given by him; according to thy Doctrine, then
this charges the fault upon God as being partial, and the occasion of some men's
destruction, contrary to that saying of the Prophet, He wills not the death
of a sinner, but rather his return, etc.


Pr. That the Light that Christ enlighteneth all men with, is sufficient for
the knowledge of the mysteries of the Kingdom, is contrary to Scriptures.


An. Nay, It is not contra^y to the Scriptures, that the Light of Christ in
men, is sufficient for the knowledge of mysteries of the Kingdom savingly, in
that it is sufficient for believing, leading out of darkness and to receive the
Light of Life.

And they from whom God has hid those mysteries, are such as disobey the
Light, and shut their eyes against it, as Christ said, Their eyes have they
closed, etc. least they should see, and be converted and I should heal them.
All which does evidence the defect and fault not to be in the Light of Christ,
but in them that disobey it.


Pr. The natural man cannot know the things that are of God, he has no
sufficient Light to know that which he cannot know.


An. That therefore he has no sufficient Light, is no true consequence; for
then by this, none have Light sufficient whilst in the natural state, which all
are in before they are made spiritual; thy consequence had only held to prove
the Light insufficient, if thou could have proved that they that are in the
fallen and natural state cannot be changed, nor restored into a spiritual state
[but this were gross to affirm] for as man is natural he cannot know the things
of the Spirit, bu^ the spiritual man does.


Pr. The Jews that had the outward means shut their eyes against it, neither
does it mean of the Light of Christ within, except only the Light of nature.


An. The Jews had not only an outward means, but also an inward Light, the
good Spirit of God given to them though they Rebelled, and the Word nigh them,
in their hea^ts, etc. which was not a Light of nature; Herein thou have greatly
erred; And would Christ have reproved any for shutting their eyes against that
which is natural and insufficient, and made that the cause of their not being
converted and healed? See Mat. 13 15. Thine and the Priests darkness and
ignorance in this matter; How great is it!


Pr. The Kingdom of God being Righteousness, Peace, Joy in the Holy Ghost, no
man that has not the Sanctifying Spirit, has it or had it within him; no
peace nor joy in the wicked.


An. The Kingdom of heaven was in the Pharisees or Jews as Christ said, The
kingdom of heaven is within you, Luke 17.21. when they were unsanctifyed*
though they were not come into it, nor to attain to the righteousness and peace
of it, for that is attained to by such as are translated out of darkness into
the Light, for all that have a true Light and Seed in them are not in it.


Pr. The Light of the Scriptures is a Light shining in a dark place, 2 Pet. 1.


An. The Light that Peter directed them to, was the more sure Word of prophecy,
2 Pet. 1. And was that the Scriptures of the Prophets? Or did that Light come
from them (or from Christ?) If so; then, Why were they not directed to the
Scriptures of the Apostles? Or, Were the Scriptures of the Prophets more sure
then the Apostles writings? Surely the Light which leads to the day star
arising in the heart, thou art exceeding ignorant of, and thy darkness may be
felt.


Pr. How gross Pelagionisme is that, the same Light which was Sanctifying to
others that obeyed, was Condemning to Judas and Cain: Is Gods revealing of
those things and hiding of them, the same Sanctifying Light and Illumination?


An. God who reveals those things to the obedient that he hides from the
disobedient; this plainly contradicts thee and thy former words, for God is
still the same Light, and it is the Spirit of Truth that Sanctifyes and
Justifyes the Righteous or Obedient, that reproves the world of sin, etc. And
this is the condemnation, that light is come into the world and men love
darkness rather then light, etc. Joh. 3. So in this matter thou have showed thy
self ignorant of the Scriptures.


Pr. Where there are many Words of God, being taken together they are called
the Word of God.


An. Thou might as well say, that many words and one word are both one;
Where provest thou thy assertion? For in contradiction to this presently after,
the Scriptures call Christ the Word of God in some places, and sure the
Scriptures and Christ are distinguished; they are not Christ.


Pr. K. 8.46. That there is no man lives and sins not. It does not say,
there is no man lives and has not sinned.


An. He that abides in Christ the second Covenant sins not but is redeemed
out of that state in which there is no man that sins not, and John said, If
we say we have not sinned we make him a liar, etc. 1 John 1.10.


Pr. Their begetting is in order of nature before their faith.


An. Where provest that? Is begetting in the unbelief then, and not in the
Faith whereas the Word which begets is the Word of Faith and profits not
where it is not mixed with Faith within.


Pr. Those of your way have held out to the world, that to have Hebrew Greek
and Latin, is a mark of Antichrist.


An. Thou have often wronged those of our way, as thou have in this, wherein
thou art answered at first.


Pr. Those who tell us of a faith in Christ without the Scriptures, have no
Light in them.

Secondly, There are many things which we think and desire against the Law,
which the Light within would never have discovered if there had not been the
knowledge of the Law contained in the Scriptures.


An. Are all unbelievers then, and have no Light in them but who have the
Scriptures? Thy blindness in this is detected before: And, What contradiction
is it to tell of some having no Light in them, when before thou have confessed
all men to have a natural Light, or the Light of a natural Conscience in them?

Secondly, And was it the Scriptures or the Law as it is in the Letter that
discovered to Paul his sins and desires, or the Law inward? For he had the Law
outward, before he knew or was turned to the Law in his mind, or was cl^arly
convinced in himself.


Pr. Did ever the Prophets or Apostles try the Doctrines of persons deluded by
Satan, with the Spirit without the Scripture, Deuteronomy. 13.


An. The Prophets and Apostles had the Spirit, and knew its sufficiency before
they gave forth Scriptures, and these were not deluded by Satan as falsely thou
have accused us to be.


An. Have not some of your way been so blasphemous as to aver Jesus Christ to
be a type, as to call themselves the Messiah to whom Hosanna should be said.


An. I know none in our way, that either calls themselves the Messiah or that
own such a thing, but co^fess to Jesus Christ as b^ing the substance, and the
end of types shadows and figures; but as for those whom thou hints of, about
their saying Hosanna, they were not in our way but testified against, and some
of themselves came after to see, confess and repent of their error, so to
upbraid us with any ones failings or miscarriage, espetially when it is both
disowned and testified against by us, this is both unequal and unjust; and
would thou be so dealt by if I should go to reckon up how many drunken and
whoreing Priests th^re be, and should charge all of you and your whole Kirk
with their wickedness; Would thou take it well? Which indeed I might better
do, whilst such are owned and upheld as teachers of others among you, th^n
thou mights accuse us with persons and actions, that are cast out from amongst
us.


Pr. What is the Rule whereby the motions of the Spirit are to be tried whether
they be such, or the motions of Satan and our deceitful hearts? Ye answer the
Spirit is the Rule, but this cannot be; for the Spirit has given the
Scriptures.

Secondly, Neither is that place which ye cite to the purpose, (Viz. The
Anointing teaches all things) for though he teach it is by this Rule.


An. Yes, The Spirit of God is sufficient, a Rule sufficient both to try the
motions of Satan, and your deceitful hearts, it searches all things; The Lord
searches the hearts and tries the reins, tells unto man his thoughts. And
if the Anointing within teaches of all things; Must the Scriptures be a Rule
to the Anointing, that thou seem to tie it to the Scriptures? Or, Is not the
teaching of the Anointing Scripture, as well as it was in them that spoke
Scripture from it? Or, Must not people believe the Anointing, till they have
searched the Scriptures to try it by them? If so, then when the Anointing would
tell and show them their particular states, and thoughts, and motions, which
the Scriptures do not tell them, nor perticularly charge upon them, then they
are not at all in such cases to believe, nor follow the Anointing according to
thy Doctrine; and what is this but to set up the Scriptures above the
Anointing, and the Letter above the Spirit, which is a gross error, and
bespeaks great ignorance.


Pr. In the Synod at Jerusalem, Act. 15. the Apostles searched the Scriptures
for what they determined, before they said, it seemed good to the holy ghost
and us.


An. Where provest thou that they searched the Scriptures for what they
determined, before they said, it seemed good to the holy ghost and us? Does not
this plainly confute thee, that what they said was from the holy ghost? And,
Was not its teaching their Rule then? And, What Scripture had they then to
forbid Circumcision as they did? Nay, Had they not Scripture rather for it? If
then they had not Scripture to forbid it, they should not have d^nied or forbid
it, nor have believed the holy ghost in this case; by thy Doctrine, what silly
work have thou made on it; and, How have thou broken the neck of thy own cause?


Pr. The gift of discerning of Spirits was a peculiar gift given but to some,
but this was not for trial of Doctrine: None who had that gift of discerning of
Spirits did try any Truths or Doctrine, or practice, but by the Scripture.


An. This is a strange Doctrine, that they must only try Spirits by the gift
or Spirit of Truth, and not any Truths or Doctrine; Whether is greater, the
trial of Spirits or of Doctrines? Wh^reas the Spirit search^th all things, and
is a Spirit of true Judgment, that gives true understanding; but according to
thy false Doctrine that none who had discerning of Spirits did try any Truths
or Doctrine, or practice, but by the Scriptures: Then by this, when the
Apostles in their Epistles writ diverse things that were not before in the
Scriptures, they were not to be believed by them in the Churches that had the
gift of discerning, and when the Spirit of Truth shall lead to speak or
prophecy concerning a particular Place, People or Nation, that which they have
no Scripture for, this therefore is not to be believed for want of Scripture to
prove it by. Thy ignorant and sottish stuff which also excludes all those Books
and Prophesies of the holy men of God spoken of, which are not record^d in the
Bible. And those of our Friends, which foretold of the late calamities befallen
the City of London, both that of the ^lague, and that of the Fire, which were
both foreseen and foretold, yet they had no Scripture to prove it; but alas,
such as thou are silly and shallow in these matters, being but as those Seers
and Watchmen that are blind, who would insinuate into people, that both
Prophesying, Visions and Revelations are ceas^d, and lay all upon the
Scriptures; and then how know you the Doctrine contained in them to be true
without the Spirit.


Pr. Ye say; Must the Scriptures be the Rule to discern or try false Spirits
when they speak Scripture?


Ans. When the Devil spoke Scripture to Christ, he confuted him by Scripture,
which showed he had perverted them; and so he confounded the Scribes and
Pharisees always.


An. But could not Christ discern the Devils spirit without the Scriptures?
What gross error and ignorance is employed and couched in this thy impertinent
answer! Thou tellest us Christ confuted him by the Scripture, which was when
the Devil brought Scripture words to back his Temptations withal, which is not
an answer; besides the Devils tempting Christ in these words, Command that
these stones be made bread; and, Cast thy self down, etc. were not Scripture,
but he falsely went about to have backed them with Scriptures, contrary to the
end and intent of the Scriptures.


Pr. You answer blasphemously, that they thought to have Eternal Life in the
Scriptures, as if our Lord Jesus Christ was fomenting them in a deceit of their
own hearts, in bidding them search the Scriptures, for to find him in them, and
so Eternal Life.


An. Thy charge against my answer is false, and I vallue it not, that Christ
should bid them search the Scriptures to find him in them; this is a strange
Doctrine and worse then the former, to lay that upon Christ which he never
intended nor spoke; his words were not that they might find Christ in the
Scriptures, nor Eternal Life, but in them ye think to have eternal life,
whereas they would not come to him that they might have Life; and so, Do
thou think that Christ that dyed at Jerusalem, was to be found in the
Scriptures?


Pr. That Christ has paid a ransom for those that wilfully trample under foot
the blood of the Son of God, those places are understood by you, of every
individual person in the world, that he tasted death for them is false,
contrary to the Scriptures, and makes the death of Christ to be vain, and
exalts free will.


An. what we understand of those places of Scripture, is neither false nor
contrary to the Scriptures, as falsely and erroniously thou have accused us; for
that Christ died for all that were dead in sins, tasted death for every man,
gave himself a Ransom for all, is the propitiation not for our sins only, but
for the sins of the whole world, is plain in the Scriptures, which ignorantly
thou quarrels against.


Pr. If Christ did pay a Ransom for the Soul of Judas, he has Redeemed him;
those for whom he has given himself, he Redeemed from all iniquity, but the
damned and reprobates are not Redeemed: Those for whom Christ came, he is a
Savior unto, and saves them from their sins: How are they lost if he came to
save them? But this argues either defect of wisdom, that he did not foresee
such an intention of his death would prove frustrations, or else want of power
to effectuate his intention of saving them.


An. Christ's absolute intention and will is not made void, nor wants he power
to effect it, but such an intention we did not lay upon his death to save all:
And as for the death of Christ and his intention of saving, being made vain and
frustrations, either from defect of wisdom or want of power, these are both
false; for his intention therein, consists with his good will and freeness
toward all, for I did not say that his intention was absolute to save all, but
I do say, it was an intention of good to all, according to the good will of God
toward all, who wills not the death of sinners but rather that they may
return and live. But Christ in his suffering and death was passive, and the
putting forth of his power to save such as are saved, stood not barely therein,
though his good will therein appeared, but we are saved by his life. But are
the damned and reprobates such, because ordained of God so to be, or because
Christ, died not for them (according to thy Doctrine?) And so; Must the cause
of their destruction be laid upon God and Christ, or upon them for rej^cting
free Grace, resisting the council of the Lord, not liking to retain God in
their knowledge, and trampling under foot the blood of the Son of God (as thou
have confessed before) to thy own contradiction, who so much have cavilled
against us, for confessing to the free Grace of God, and Christ's dying for all
(or every man?) But this is like your pitiful narrow, and partial Presbiterian
Spirit and Principle; that would so limmit God in the dispensation of his
Grace, and tie it up in such a nar^ow compass; and, What was the cause of Judas
his fall? And, Who was the Author of his Transgression? Was God or he to be
blamed therein? And, Had not he Grace given him before, seeing that by
Transgression he fell? Will thy telling us so often of Judas clear thee or
confute us? How silly and weak have thou showed thy self in this matter?


Pr. Those [all] for whom he dyed cannot be meant of every individual person,
for they live to him, and not to themselves; but the wicked that perish live
not to Christ. Secondly, Neither would Christ ev^r give himself, his blood a
Ransom for them, for whom he would not pray; but he says, he prays not for
the world, Joh. 17.


An. Thou have herein wronged the Scripture, and erred; for it is not all for
whom Christ died that live to him, for, 2 Cor. 5. chap. and ver. 14, 15. If one
died for all, then were all dead, and that he died for all, that they which
live should not henceforth live unto themselves, but unto him which died for
them, and rose again.

Now they which live unto him, are not those (all) for whom he died.

And Christ praying not for the world at that time, 2. John 17. is no argument
that he did not give himself a Ransom for all; for though at that time he
prayed not for the world, but for the disciples or such as were chosen out of
the world (who were in the world before they were chosen out of it) yet at
other times he did pray for his persecutors, and such as were of the world; as
also exhorted his to pray for their enemies and persecutors, etc.


Pr. Judas never got saving Grace, nor that same Grace that Peter got, and
therefore could not reject it.


An. Judas had part of the Ministry that the other Apostles had; and, Did not
that proceed from saving Grace? Or, What Grace? (How blind art thou!) And
wherefore was Judas condemned then; Was it because God refused to give him
saving Grace, or for his own transgression?


Pr. The Scriptures import that Christ is a propitiation for all the Elect
which are called all the world.


An. John said, He is the propitiation for our sins (and were not they the
Elect) and not for ours only, but for the sins of the whole world. Must we
believe thy meaning contrary to the very words of Scripture, or were the whole
world all the Elect? How have thou wrested plain Scripture herein?


Pr. Who is it, that has put the difference betwixt Peter's believing, from
Judas mis-believing? Whether it be Gods Grace to Peter denied to Judas?


An. Where provest thou it was denied to Judas, or that Judas had no part of
the same Grace? For before thou say wicked men have the common work of the
Spirit (but in contradiction say) which is not supernatural, from Romans 2.14.
Were they then wicked men spoken of there, Which did by nature those things
contained in the law, and showed the work, or effect of the law written in
their hearts? What then are they that Rebel against the law, if they that obey
it be wicked? Whereas the Apostle says, before, That the doers shall be
justified. See how thou have brought forth one error and falsehood upon another.


Pr. Is not the Father distinct from the Son and the Spirit, in the personal
subsistence?


An. Where learned thou these words (the Father distinct from the Son and
Spirit in the personal subsistence) these are not the words of Scripture, or
the words of Scripture clearly conferred together, as thou say after, but in
contradiction after, thou say, although the Scripture does not in so many
words make mention of three Persons, who are one God, and three distinct
Persons, and that these cannot be three, if they be not distinct; for where
there is no distinction, there is perfect oneness, etc. What Is the consequence
of this, but that therefore there is not perfect oneness in the Deity or
Godhead; because, three distinct Persons (or three distinct one from another
in personal subsistence?) Is this good Doctrine? Is not that oneness between
the Father and the Son perfect? And, Did not Christ say, I and my Father are
one, and prayed that his might be perfect in one, as he and his Father were
one? And though thou have said, you disalow all Traditions, or any written rule
which is not Scripture, and yet thou will use words and distinctions, which are
not Scripture according to thy own confession; (What confusion art thou ^n!)

For whereas I answered thee, that we own what the Scriptures of truth assert
of the Godhead, Viz. That there are three that bear record in heaven, the
Father, the Word, and the Spirit, and these three are one, etc. (and thou thy
self in the next Page say, that both the Father, the Son, and the holy
Ghost, are a Spirit) howbeit, my honest answer in Scripture words would not
satisfy thee, but thou have villifyed and abused me in this matter, in several
reproaches and slanders, as with shameless railing and deriding, etc. with
gross evasion, with not being able to answer thee, with not owning what the
Scriptures assert, and with blaspheamous fancyes, blaspheaming Jesus Christ,
etc. All which accusations I utterly deny as thy malicious lies and slanders
against me (and thy bundle is stuffed with many more of like nature) and if
thou did not propound any of those quarrels as not knowing the answer of
them, as thou say, etc. then, Did thou propound them to cavil, and get
some advantages to carp at? For thou have showed thy self in prejudice against
us, and have reckoned me (or us) as wanting Learning, etc how-be-it thou have
showed such Learning as thou have to confute me, with broken School phrases and
words, with some few fragments, and traditional distinctions patched up
together, which we can have no Scripture for, but thy consequences, which much
might be said to show the weakness and shallowness thereof.


Pr. Those who had Christ the living bread, yet were partakers of the outward
bread, as the disciples were; Were not the Corinthians Saints? etc.


An. That the disciples had outward bread; Who denies? But that it was to
continue always of necessity, as an Ordinance after Christ, the Living Bread
and Life was received in them, (which is the substance) that is not yet proved,
that the disciples were to show forth the Lords death till he come in the
observation of the Bread and Cup (or supper) I grant: Now what, and when that
coming was, is the matter in controversy. Christ came after, when he was
arisen, was apparent; he also spiritualy came, and was more fully revealed
within the Saints, and was their Living Bread and Life (as thou grantest) now
when he was with the disciples at supper (before he was Crucified) he intended
by his coming, a third coming, till which they were to do it, which coming not
being in their days, nor is yet (by your Doctrine) this is no where proved in
Scripture as we know.


Pr. Were not the Corinthians Saints, called in Christ? And yet the Apostle, 1
Cor. 11. he gave them the Bread and Cup which Christ gave to his disciples, the
night he was betrayed.

Secondly, And whereas ye say, that Christ's coming again was when he rose
again; how false is this and absurd, etc.


An. That Is very strange Doctrine, that the Apostles gave the Corinthians, the
Bread and Cup which Christ gave to his disciples the night he was betrayed;
Where was it kept in the mean time, that they both should have the same Bread
and Cup, the one so many years after the other? Where have thou learned this,
amongst the Popish Traditions and Relics? But it is probable thou meanest
other-wise then thy words import.

Secondly, And Is it false and absurd to say, that Christ's coming again was
when he rose again? Did he not come again after he rose? And must that be
reckoned for no coming? And a third coming which is not yet; and, Was that an
outward coming till which the disciples and Corinthians were to continue the
Bread and the Cup, whereas that coming is not yet according to thy Doctrine?
The Apostle to the Corinthians told them what Christ did and spoke to the
disciples in the case, but we read not that he imposed it upon them, to
continue it all their time, or till a supposed coming of Christ, which is not
yet come, for he said to them, The cup of blessing which we bless, is it not
the communion of the blood of Christ, the bread which we break is it not the
communion of the body of Christ, And, Was not this the substance? Where then
remained the necessity of the shadow, or outward Representations (or Mementoes
as some calls them?) And, When was the Church to show forth the Life of Christ,
and by what, if all their time they must needs (and people still) show forth or
represent his death, and him as suffered (as thou say) by Bread and Wine?
Does not the substance end the shadows? And, Where have you any example in
Scripture, for the manner of your administering Bread and Wine at certain times
a year, and calling it a Sacrament, The Lords Supper? etc.


Pr. The Apostle tells that the Corinthians were to show forth his death till
he came again, so it behoved to be such a coming again as was yet future, and
unaccomplished in the Corinthians time: the Bread and Cup spoken of to the
Corinthians, behoved to be outward Bread as showing forth his death.

Secondly, Because it was the same that Christ took and divided, and gave to
his disciples.


An. What confusion's here! Were they to use the outwa^d Bread and Cup after
they were dead then? If they were to observe it to a coming unaccomplished in
their tim^. And if it was the same that Christ divided and gave to his
disciples; Was that the outward bread so given to both? Or, Was there not more
in Christ's words then the outward observation? What was his Body and his Blood,
and the Cup of the New Testament in his Blood, and the f^uit of the vine in the
kingdom; Was it not spiriritual, a mystery, which the outward Bread, Cup and
Passover were but as signs or shadows of?


Pr. There is no such passage written, that Christ appointed it to be taken
away by his suffering.


An. As often as they did it, it was to show the Lords death till he came; What
coming, and when was it, or is it to be he intended? Wa'st a first, or a
second, or a third? And was it inward or outward?


Pr, Neither is the Bread and Wine a shadow.

Secondly, For he being present, and it representing him (as suffered, it
cannot be called a shadow as of things to come)


An. Is the Bread and Wine the substance Then? this is popish, thus to deny the
^read and Wine to be a shadow, and worse then the Episcopals that tell us of
their Sacraments being outward and visible signs, of an inward and Spiritual
Grace.

Secondly, If Christ's being present makes Bread and Wine no shadow, or not
figurative, then by the same reason the Passover which the disciples prepared
(to answer that part of the Law) was not a shadow, nor Circumcission,
Offerings, etc. when done either for Christ or in his presence, which to affirm
and make that the reason, were gross and absurd, whereas the mystery,
substance, or end, was not so fully manifest, when Christ was outwardly present
(before his being offered up) as after when they were endued with power from on
high, received the promise of the Comforter, came to eat his flesh and drink
his blood, which saying, the disciples for a time (when he was with them) were
troubled at, and counted hard.


Pr. It concerns all who own the Doctrine contained in the Scriptures, though
they be for baptizing with sprinkling, to propound a query to men that do with
sacrilegious boldness, take away the Ordinances instituted by Christ unto
believers.


An. Is it not then sacrilegious boldness for thee and the Priests to teach (or
impo^e) sprinkling Infants, which is neither a Doctrine contained in
Scriptures, nor a baptizing believers, howbeit, such a great stress has been
laid on the Scriptures before as being the rule and means for Faith, and
Salvation, revealing the Mystery, for receiving Life E^ernal in them, Christ in
them, etc. yet we find not sprinkling I^fants in the Scriptures neither by
command nor practice, though so much pleaded for by one here that tells us, Page
35. they disallow all Traditions or any unwritten rule which is not Scripture;
but sprinkling Infants is not Scripture but only a Tradition of men: And one
main plea for it is, that Infants baptism was approved and practiced in the
Orthodox Church of Christ, etc. which is just like the Papists and Jesuits
plea, to believe as the Church believes (taking it for granted that the Church
is pure (as he says) Orthodox in all her Traditions) whether they be Scripture
yea or nay; whereas before, all Traditions or any unwritten rule which is not
Scripture are disallowed, but instead of Scripture for proof in this matter, we
have mention made of the Teachers and Guides of the Church (as he calls them)
as Tertullian, Cyprian, who lived about 247. after Christ, and Lactanctius that
lived about the year, 317. As also the latter sound Fathers (as he calls them)
as Augustine, Jerome, Bassil, (Viz. their being for Infants baptism) but what
proves all this from Scripture (if it be as he says they did) Must we take it
up upon an implicit faith, because such and such approved of it? And yet at
other times, lay such a stress on the Scriptures as the perfect rule of
obedience of faith, etc. How has E. I. undervallued the Scriptures in this
matter, and spoiled his own cause touching them? And, Do not the Papists plead
for their Traditions and Ceremonys against Protestants and others, in like
manner as he has done in this cause? And, Would he be willing to accept their
Arguments against Protestants, when they are of the same nature, and bear the
same face with his in this point?

Pr. That the Covenant Abraham and his Seed was under, was the same in
substance, with that which believers now and their Seed are under; and
therefore the Children of believers should be under the Initial Seal of the
Covenant as Abraham's were.


An. Where provest thou by Scriptures, that sprinkling Infants is the Initial
Seal of the Covenant? (Or that it is so called) thou herein do but beg the
question, and take it for granted that it is the Initial Seal of the Covenant
of Grace, (which I deny) and then from thence fallatiously draws thy inference
and conclusions, for its being to Believers Seed as Abraham's Children (to wit
the males were Circumcised) and that the Covenant Abraham and his Seed was
under, was the same in substance with that which believers now, and their Seed
are under: But what of this; if it be granted, it was Gods Covenant or Promise;
Must they therefore be under man's tradition? which sprinkling Infants is, (To
plead for it from believers being baptized, is to ground it upon that, you
(Priests) are out of the practice of) so as to that it is not pertinent to
dispute with such about it, who own it not in practice, but only talk of it
for a cover to a popish tradition, and thereby show their hypocrisy the more;
and, Must now sprinckling Infants stand for the substance, or antitype instead
of Circumcision? Or, Was Circumcision the type of Infants Baptizme (so called?)
Whereas sprinckling Infants has neither the true form nor matter of Baptism [
outward] in it, for in the next page it is confessed, that the word in the first
Language signifying Baptism is rendered washing, Mar. 7.4, 8. (...),
afterward it is said, that being washed all over, best signifies our inward
renovation and burial with Christ, and thus contradictions and confusions are
heaped up in many places.

And to my saying, that its not commanded under the New Covenant to Baptize
Infants, thou replyest the Apostle Peter, Act. 2.38, 39. says, That those to
whom that promise that God would be their God, and the God of their Seed,
should be baptized, but to Believers and their Seed, he says that promise
belongs, etc. Now let the Reader but peruse that Scripture mentioned by thee,
and compare thy fallacious arguing from it; for Peter said, Ver. 38. Repent and
be baptized every one of you, etc. Were they Infants such as the Priests
sprinkle, that he bid repent? How grossly have thou perverted Scripture! And
Ver. 39. The promise is to you and your Children, and to all that are a far
off, even as many as the Lord our God shall call. Now, What can be inferred
from hence for sprinkling Infants? Were all they whom God should call Infants
when called? Or, Did Peter intend they should all have their Children sprinkled
before they were called? But in contradiction afterward thou say, though
there be no express command, yet its of divine institution and warrant, if it
be drawn from good consequence from the Scripture, indeed I have seldom met
with any that have appeared so Impertinent and Ridiculous in their
consequences, as thou have done in this matter, though thou countest thy
consequence of Divine Authority, as well as express commands; But they bear no
such Authority with us, who see thy perverting and abusing Scriptures to
maintain, and patch up a popish tradition and humane invention, which thou have
no express command for; and then thou have in this doubly confuted thy self,
for is there some command of Divine Authority now which is not Scripture, when
before thou laid such a great stress upon Scripture and deniedst Revelation
Immediate teaching, etc. from the Light within and have dirided it under the
name of Enthusiasme, when now thou pleads for something being of Divine
Authority which is not Scripture viz your sprinkling Infants, which in Page 37.
thou say brought to the Church, is the ordinary way of putting on Christ,
and ordinary means for Salvation; and say we are Baptized into Jesus Christ
and his death, from, Romans 6. and 3. whereas before, the Scriptures were cried
up as the ordinary way and means, etc. But now, that which no where the
Scriptures repuires, and that of, Romans 6 and 3. So many of us as where baptized
into Jesus Christ, were baptized into his death; how impertinent is this for
thy turn, as if sprinkling did Baptize Infants into the death of Christ, or as
if the Apostles and Believers then were so baptized, when Infants (as thou
pleadest) which is absurd to imagine, and I should think thou can not really
intend such a thing in this proof as sprinkling Infants, which thou would
also make us believe is a standing Ordinance of Christ to continue till the end
of the world from, Mat. 28. and, Mar. 16.16. where they are commanded, To teach
all Nations baptizing them. And, He that believes and is baptized shall be
saved. But did they go to teach Infants of a week old? Or, Were such the
Believers that were Baptized? How blind, sottish, and ridiculous have thou
appeared in this matter, as also in counting it one while the ordinary means
for Salvation, or that which Baptizeth into the death of Christ; another while
as in the thirty eight Page that which signifies our putting on Christ, inward
washing, etc. so here it does but signify inward washing, and therefore is not
the putting on Christ; not that which brings into the Church, neither does it
really signify inward washing, for thou speak, as that being washed all over
best signifies our inward Renovation; and one while, pleads for this thy
pretended great Ordinance, as belonging to the Seed of Believers, and of such
as have received the Spirit; another while the Children of which are profane,
and drunkards that profess the Gospel, whom thou say are in this sense
accounted Believers, and thirty ninth Page reckons it not needful for Ministers
to be persuaded that they are Righteous, so it appears such Ministers as thou
art will be easily satisfied for their own ends, and upon slender grounds
receive men as Believers, if they do but profess the Gospel though they be
drunkards and profane and thus the Parish Priests of the Presbyterian gang
have deceitfully daubed their h^arers, and acted like hypocrites toward those
whom they knew to be drunkards, profane, and so really unbelivers, unholy
unrighteous, etc. yet if they will from their teeth outward, say they believe
and profess the Gospel, though they be known to the contrary, the Priest will
not deny them their Seal of the Covenant to their Children [though they deem
them unholy also] which other whiles they deem as such a sacred thing, as only
belongs to the Seed of Believers, and such as are within the Covenant.

And another sorry shift and come off, in the thirty eight Page is concerning
the Jews that fell into gross sins, who all drank of the Rock, which was
Christ, from hence thou say, that to profess Christ is called a drinking of
Christ, and where provest thou that Doctrine, that to profess Christ is a
drinking of Christ, this is a very easy way thou have prescribed for drinking
of Christ if to profess him be it, and then all that profess him drink of him
by this Doctrine, the falsehood whereof we need not say much to.

But whereas thou say concerning those Israelites, That ate the same
spiritual bread, and drank the same spiritual drink, that drank of the Rock
which was Christ, how-be-it thou confessest they fell into gross sins, as is
cleared from the History of the Books of Exodus Levit. Numb. Deuteronomy, and 1
Cor. 10.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. and that many of them were Idolaters, lusters after
evil, committed fornication, tempters of God, murderers (as thou say) by
all which thou have sufficiently confuted thy self, and given a deadly blow to
thy own Cause, and proved a falling away from Grace, which before was an
Arminian and Popish Doctrine with thee, or Damnable Popery; for, Was not that
spiritual meat, and spiritual drink; and that Rock spoken of, saving Grace?

And thy saying for Infants Baptism, that it is the Seal of the Covenant, and
to be given to those that are within the Covenant; but, Are Drunkards, profane
Persons and their Seed, and whole Parishes within the Covenant? Compare thy
matter together: Yet thou have confessed the Spirit is the inward Seal, but
say Baptism is the outward Seal, and then instead of proof, ask why may
not the Covenant now have outward Seals joined with the inward Seal of the
Spirit; How faintly come thou off here? And, Where provest thou sprinkling
Infants a Seal of the New Covenant, or that the Covenant has two such Seals
as thou implyest, and how know thou that its joined with the inward Seal of
the Spirit upon the Children of drunkards and profane persons, or on such as
turn drunkards, swearers, etc. who come under this thy Seal, which has no
impression of Scripture or Divine Authority in it; but now seeing that to gloss
over thy groundless Tradition and Confusion uttered in mantaining it, thou have
often made use of diverse Scriptures, which the Baptists were wont to bring for
Baptizing or Plunging such as repent or believe; I have not entered here into
controversy with rhee about that point, it being not thy own, but only thou
would make it serve for a cover; yet when thou turnest Baptist, and
intendest to be real in pleading for Plunging believers, thou may let me or
us know, and that point probably may be treated of, as whether or no it be of
necessity to Salvation, and so of continuance to the true Church: But however,
under the sense of the Baptism of the Spirit which baptizeth into one body, we
do know present sattisfaction, and do acquiess in our Spirits above the
Traditions of men and Rudiments of the world.

E. J. Thy Book came but to my hands this summer, it seems it was delayed in
the hands of some, otherwise, I had answered it long ago.


G. W.

The DOCTRINES, CONTRADICTIONS, INCONSISTENCIES, and VARIATIONS of the
Presbiterian Priests of Scotland, as they were collected (in their own words)
out of the said bundle, subscribed by Edward Jameson, etc. together with brief
Observations and Notes upon them; evidently showing the confused body of their
perverse work and babylonish structure, to the discredit and overthrow of their
own corrupt cause, by their many and apparent Incosistencies and self
Confutations which are here made obvious.





Then is Christ manifest to destroy sin and free from it, which they that plead
for, know not his manifestation.



Whosoever is born of God sins not, he that abides in him commits not sin.

Then he that's born of God, and abides in Christ knows him to subdue sin
totally in this life.



The evil one touches him not 1 John 3. chapter 5. (but this does not prove any
thing) the evil one touches them not.

To say these do not prove any thing is false and against plain Scripture, and
they whom the evil one cannot touch, his tempting them has not power to lead
them into his work, for all are not evil doers whom Satan tempts.





The strength of the Spirit of God is greater then the devil or sin either, and
they who truly war by it, overcome; and John's words were not (when we sin) but
(if we sin) which implies not the same.





Which fullness is neither imperfect, nor is any degree of true knowledge sinful.

David, Job, Daniel, their failings are noted, which I must cite.

David said, cleanse me from my secret sins.

And surely then David's prayers were heard, and his requests granted, and
David, Job, Daniel, and others, their deliverances are noted as well as their
failings, and that in their life time.





Gods everlasting Righteousness is promised which is perfect, and the fullness
of Christ, Ephesians. 4.13. wherein is neither want nor imperfection.

search the Scriptures, for in them they thought to have eternal life. This
thought could not be a delusion.



See the confusion of these Priests, one while (with them) the Scriptures are
the ordinary way; another while Preaching; another while, all immediate
teaching by God is denied; but another while, its not by immediate inward
teaching alone; another while, a supernatural influence shining on the
understanding is owned.





Now the Priests interpretations are set for (and over) Scripture, which come
not from the true and spiritual learning and study, but from Babel.





Then neither to be tied to the Scriptures, nor the Priests preaching, nor yet
to their confused meanings or uncertain interpretations.

Enthusiastic fancy.

Christ enlighteneth every man that comes into the world has planted some
Light in every man of the world.

Its no less then blasphemy to count Christ's Light a fancy; for his life is the
light of men, which we bear witness of.





Then if immediate teaching be of use in part, it is not all to be denied.





And surely the Scriptures are not Christ, without whose knowledge, and
Supernatural Faith in him, the Scriptures are not rightly known and believed,
but hystorically.

Viz the Scriptures) they cannot be kept from Hell.



And surely he that alone saves, can alone keep man from Hell.





The Light of Christ in all men is not natural but spiritual, and those in all
Nations that were led by it, were not enemies to the Gospel.

Viz. in his people)



Then his power is immediate in us, and works immediately in us many times, to
our strengthening, comfort and refreshments, when we hear no man speak or
preach to us.





What then, Are men Saved, Englightned, and Sanctified by that which is
imperfect? What gross Ignorance and Contradiction is this!





The Grace of Christ is perfect, and he is the Grace of all our Graces.



Mark wrote is the Gospel, the beginning of the Gospel; the Gospel is a part of
the Scriptures one with them, contained in them.

If the Scriptures and Gospel be one; How are they distinguished? And, if the
Gospel and Mynistry of Christ be one, How is the Scripture it? And if Marks
declaration was the beginning of the Gospel, How are the Prophets writings the
Gospel? Is not manifest confusion, variation, and inconsistencies in these
passages?

Apostle Paul denies your consequence.

etc.

Then it is not false that there must (in some degree) be a Supernatural Knowledge
and Faith of Christ, before the Scriptu^es be truly known or believed.



Luke. 24.22.

Christ's opening and shining by a Supernatural Influence, plainly proves
immediate teaching, as we called Quakers do hold; and against the Priests of
Scotlands denying it, who thus confute themselves.





So that he that is the first, and cause of true knowledge, has the Priority
and Pre-eminence in all things, without whom the Scriptures are not known; and
if it be a Priority of Christ (as is said) then Christ has it.





So then, without that Sanctifying Knowledge, none can understand them without
error.



He that has heard and learned of the Father, comes to him (Viz. to Christ)
he (to wit the Spirit of Truth) shall lead believers into all Truth.

So then the Father is to be heard and learned of, that the Son may be come to,
and the Spirit to be followed to lead into all Truth, and this way was before
the Scriptures.

Viz. in the Will, Mind, and Affections)

Cleanse thou me, from my secret sins; Peter exhorted the believing Hebrews to
abstain from their lusts.

Then let not sin nor sinful lusts, always remain in believers.

Schools will be beholding to you for your new Phylosophie.



If the evil one cannot touch them, much less has he power to lead them into
sin all their time, or to uphold sin in all their faculties; and the Schools
that would have more place for sin, allow Christ no place.



unblamable, is that Grace which is universal in all parts of the renewed man.

is inconsistant with sin, for sin is blameable where ever it is.



Book of Common Prayer, there is a promise to forsake the Devil and all his
Works, the vain Pomp and Glory of the world, and sinful lusts of the flesh,
and be led by Gods Spirit to keep his Commands; many of those who promise may
do this and keep it.

What greater promise can there be of freedom from sin, then to forsake the
Devil and all his works, to be led by Gods Spirit to keep his Commands?



The Spirit of truth will lead believers into all truth. He that has heard and
learned of the Father comes to him. Viz. to Christ.

Our Light is the Light of the Spirit of Truth, which comes from Christ, and
guides both to hear and learn of the Father; and this Light was before the
Scriptures were, and its blasphemy to call it Damnable Popery.

I am sold under sin, that good I would do, I do not. Groaning under a body of
death: It was not a bygone state Paul speaks of, in the present time [ I am]

Paul was giving thanks for victory through Jesus Christ (yet all these are
knit together)

and being sold under sin, are two differing states, as warring, and being more
then a Conqueror are: Paul spoke to the Romans after the manner of men, because
of the infirmity of their flesh, and therein condescended to their capacities,
below his own present state and enjoyment.

Viz. after death.



Perfect holiness ought not to be put off, neither so long after death, nor
till death, for what time do you allow Christ to reign in man, and to serve
him, if all your life time sin must remain, and so long the Devil be served?

Peter, that he should forgive his brother seventy times seven, which implies,
that a brother may offend often in the day time.



It had been well thou had confessed thy mistakes as ingenuously in other
things, the controversy had been the less; but, Do the Brethren sin all their
days? When then do they overcome? What gross confusion art thou in!

put on the armor of God and war against sin, which is not to be ended till we
lay down this Tabernacle.



If believers be cleansed from all sin when they do believe; How have they it
to war against, till they lay down this Tabernacle? Surely they believe before.





What, a cleansing from the guilt of sin, and not from the sin it self; this is
quite contrary to Scriptures.

John calls little Children and his own, which therefore were to be.

Joh. 1.12. I write unto you that you may not sin. Page. 30. Christ Redeemeth
from all iniquity, is a Savior and saves them from their sins. Math. 1.21.
Luke. 19.10.

Christ being thus a Redeemer, a Savior, an Advocate, therefore sins are not
to be; and there was young Men and Fathers as well as little Children.

Paul says to the Romans, The God of peace, etc.

The God of peace shall tread down Satan under your feet shortly, Romans 16 20.

And sure, when Satan is thus trodden down under foot, his work cannot remain
unsubdued; for both his power and possession is taken from him by a greater
then he.

Elias.



A^l passions are not sinful passions; for passions are sufferings for it could
not be that Paul and Barnabas were subjects to the like sins with those
Idollaters, Act. 14.13, 14, 15. when subject to like passion with them.

Arminion and Popish error, that believers may fall from Grace.

Peter and David sinned foully.

Surely their sinning so foully was not in the Faith, but when they were turned
from it, which required their repentance.

Peter and David fell from Faith, is an Arminion, and Popish error.



Then the evil works they did, were out of, and against the Faith; and had they
stood in the Faith, they had been kept from those evil works.

Peter and David had their failings, Viz. (till death) Eliah an old Prophet,
subject to like passion as we are, etc.

Peter, I have prayed for thee that thy Faith fail not: When thou art converted
strengthen thy brethren. Does signify when he should be fully recovered.

And surely Peter was so converted or fully recovered, as to strengthen his
Brethren before his decease; and like passions were like sufferings, which may
relate to sickness, Ja^. ^.13, 14. or other afflictions, for Paul and Barnabas
were not subject to the like Sins or Idollatry with those heathens Act. 14.15.

Peter and David, whereas he does not fall wholly away, but has still the Seed
of Grace remaining in him p. 24.

Peter's fall made on his Soul, did weaken his Grace and cloud his comforts very
much. There are remains of sin within us which we are to mourn for.

If sin did very much cloud his comforts, and be the cause of mournings as it
was both to David and Peter; then for you to plead for sin term of life cannot
be a comfortable Doctrine, unless to such as be hardened in sin, and take
pleasure in it.



put on the whole armor of God, and war against sin. pa. 23.

Do not they improve the Light who war against sin; and this is not of, or from
man's will in the Fall, but from the power that converts, and works in him to
will and to do.



The kingdom of God is Righteousness, Peace, Joy in the holy ghost. Twenty
sixth Page.

Therefore sin which is the cause of sorrow, has no place in the kingdom of
God, which the Saints attain to here.





What strange Doctrine is this, that an imperfect creature is a Savior, an
Enlightener, a Sanctifier; and does the Kirk of Scotland receive this for
Orthodox: The Gift of God is perfect, and every good and perfect Gift comes
from God.

pa. 28.

Twenty sixth Page The Jews wilfully rejected the Light, and shut their eyes
against it; wicked men, who rebel against the Light, have the Light of a
natural Conscience, and the common work of the Spirit.

Then they had the Light, and the work of the Spirit is not natural, but no
Light in them excludes natural Light, as well as spiritual from being in them,
whereas in that, Isa. 8.20. it should be no morning in stead of no Light.





Now Supernatural Knowledge, Light within, Spirit of Revelation and Wisdom
within is confessed; but another while imediate teaching, power etc. is denied
by those who think to find Christ in the Scriptures; but, Is that Christ that
suffered at Jerusalem to be found in the Scriptures? How blind are you Priests
of Scotland.

There is no man lives and sineth not.



How, from all iniquity, and yet sin so much contended for by you.

pa. 31.

trample under foot, the blood of the Son of God.

There is neither defect of wisdom nor want of power in Christ, but wilfulness
and rebellion in man that lets; he died for all his Grace is freely tendered
that they may believe and be saved: But this is not by absolute compulsion and
force, as if therefore he were absolutely intended to save all; but Love and
Good Will is showed toward all, many wilfully reject and trample upon it (as
is confessed)

David and Peter.



It is the deceitful hearts that are comforted with such Doctrine, that is for
falling as David and Peter did, and not the new heart in which Gods fear is put.

pa. 27.

pa. 30.

The Scriptures testify of the Mysteries, but then Christ by that Spirit
within Reveals them.

pa. 25.



Christ the Word was before the Scriptures, or the Words, besides, one word is
not many words, nor many words properly to be taken for one word.

pa. 31.

pa. 33.

Both (^or all) a Spirit, and yet distinct in personal Subsistence; Where
learned you this Doctrine? Not from the Scriptures.

Viz.) about the Deity; three Persons distinct in the personal Subsistence. pa.
32.

That there are three that bear record in heaven, the Father, the word and the
spirit, and those three are one.

Then we own what the Scriptures assert of the Deity o^ the Father, Word and
the Spirit which are one; this is no blasphemy no fancies as maliciously we are
accused.

Viz. touching three distinct* Persons in the Deity, etc.

etc. who are one God; we disalow all Traditions, or any unwritten Rule which
is not Scripture.

Then three dictinct Persons in the Deity, distinct in the personal
Subsistence, are not the words of the Scriptures but a Tradition, and why do
you then allow of that which is not Scripture, but that There are three that
bear record in heaven, and these three are one is Scripture.

Corinthians were to show forth Christ's death till he came again: The Bread
spoken of to them, behoved to be this of outward Bread, etc.

Corinthians time.

Were the Corinthians then to eat and drink outwardly after their time, or so
long after their deceases? What absurdity and grosness is here!

Tertullian, Ciprian, Lactant, Augustine, Jerome, Basil, etc. Its derived from
the Church when pure.

Enthusiasts hold; or Traditions as Papists in this agree.

Then Infants Baptism not being Scripture (but a popish Tradition) is
therefore to be disalowed of.

Abraham's were.

page, 35.

Circumcision of the Males only, was in its time Commanded of God, which is no
proof of sprinkling Infants both Males and Females, which was never cammanded
of God.

pa. 38. The Fathers or Isralites, who fell into gross sins, professed the same
Doctrine of Salvation; to profess Christ is called a drinking of Christ. etc

Abraham and his Seed under the old Covenant, had the same Mediator which is
Jesus Christ, he was the same yester-day to them, that he is to day to
believers.

Their having the same Media^or Jesus Christ the same, etc. And drinking of
Christ was more then to profess him, or the Doctrine of Salvation. And, Did
such fall into gross sins? What fell they from if not from Grace

pa. 36,

pa. 35.

You' have confessed what I said, that there is no express command for sprinkling
Infants, therefore in alowing of it you contradict your selves.



page, 29. Christ bid search the Scriptures, they reveal the [Misteries, page*
27. I deny any immediate teaching by God, page. 14.

Although a great stress and necessity is laid upon the Scriptures, and
immediate teaching so confidently denied, yet no Sprinkling Infants to be
found, or required in Scripture (and whilst any imediate teaching is denied)
How is it of Divine Institution? Surely Edward Jamisons consequence herein is
not Divine, who denies any immediate teaching.

pa. 37. If I had said it Viz. Infants Baptism brought them to the Church,
those places and many others do hold it, as, Gal. 3.27. its the ordinary way of
putting on Christ etc.

page. 26. sprinkling of water is enough to signify inward washing.

If it does not bring into the Church, it is but a sign of inward washing, its
not a putting on Christ; neither can the Scripture prove it when there is no
Scripture for it, and were the Scriptures deemed the ordinary way and means,
but now sprinkling Infants; What ignorant and gross contradictions are these!



pa. 36.

See what Curses these Priests have laid upon them that deny the Infants
Baptism (their Scripturles Tradition) to bring into the Church, and are not
they herein evidently Guilty of Sacrilegious usurpation, and adding to the
words of the Book of God by their false consequence.

Mat. 28. and ordinary means for Salvation, Man. 16.16.

Act. 2.38. repent and be baptized. Mark. 16.16. He that believes and is
baptized shall be saved.

They to whom Repentance and Faith was preached, were not Infants (such as the
Priests sprinkle of a few days old) which is not the Baptism that saves, but
that of the Spirit, or the answer of a good conscience is saving.

Page. 37. That many Ministers baptize the Children of those who are profane
and drunkards, and so not believers.



Page. 85. The Children of believers, should be under the Initial Seal of the
Covenant, to believers and their Seed that promise belongs; those to whom
that promise, That God would be their God and the God of their Seed; should be
baptized, Viz. Infants who are in the Covenant with God. Page. 36.

It seems these Priests can make believers at an easy rate, whilst they can
take the profane drunkards for believers, upon their professing the Gospel;
but surely God is not the God of the profane and drunkards, nor are they in
Gods Covenant (as true believers are) but under Satan's power, and their taking
it for granted that the sprinkling Infants is the Initial Seal of the Covenant
is false, and but a beging the question.

pa. 39.

etc. are not Righteous nor Holy, etc.

Then it is not the profession of the Gospel that makes them believers or in
Covenant with God.

Arminion and Popish Doctrine, that believers may fall from Grace.

Exodus Lev. Number. and Deuteronomy. and, 1 Cor. 10.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. They cat the same
spiritual bread, and drank the same spiritual drink, drank of the Rock which
was Christ, yet many of them were Idolaters, lusters after evil thoughts,
committed Fornication, Tempters of God, Murderers, etc.

See how fully these Priest have proved the falling away from Grace, for which
they have so much accused us with Popery and Arminianisme ( what a Babel are
they in) and, Was not that spiritual Bread and Drink, and Rock, which they did
eat and drink of saving Grace?

Viz of Infants) brought them to the Church is, an ordinary means for
Salvation, page 37. We are baptized into Jesus Christ and his death, Romans 6.3.
and its Instituted for the remission of sins, Act. 2.38.

etc.

Then its not the Sign nor Shadow, but the Substance that brings into the true
Church that saves, that Baptizeth into Jesus Christ and his death, and this is
that one Baptism of the Spirit.



Peter says, Act. 2.38 39. That those to whom the promise is, should be
Baptized, and verse 38 repent and be baptized, Mat 28. Go teach all Nations
Baptizing them, Mark. 16.16. He that, believes and is baptized shall be saved.
And, Romans 6.3. We are baptized into Jesus Christ and his death, page 37.

Those that are capable of such teachings (repenting believing) are not Infants
of a week old; and teach baptizing into the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost, was by the Power and Spirit that went along with their Teaching and
Mynistring.

page 28. They have no Light in them, who speak not according to the Law and
the Testimony, and tell us of a faith in Christ without the Scriptures.

page 31. Wicked men who rebel against the Light, have the Light of a natural
conscience spoken of, Rom, 2.14. and the common work of the Spirit.

The Work of the Spirit of God in the hearts of wicked men, convicting them, is
not natural nor from a natural Light, for it is the Spirit that so works in
them, (which you call common) but your confessing a natural Light in them,
contradicts your saying they have no Light in them; but the Law is Light, and
the Testimony of Jesus the Spirit of Prophecy, which the true Prophets spoke
from, and they that spoke not according to this Light, there is (...) morning
to them, but they are in the dark, where the Light (...) before it shine out of
darkness.

Some Queries of Alexander Skein, sometime Baily of Aberdeen, upon his
forsaking the public Worship there, and joining with the People of God in
scorn called Quakers.










(though it be not so gross in the outward appearance) and therefore as real
superstition to countenance any worship which is of that nature, as it is to
countenance popish worship, though there be a difference in the degree.



ERRATA
Page 10. lin. 8. for Polythrites, read Polytheites page 16. lin. 21. for: to:
read two: page 18. lin. 30. for, to write read, or writ. page 31. lin. 9: for,
Christ's, read Christ page 32. lin. 12. read in it, for spoke, read speaks page
33. lin. last, for Revelation, read relation. page 41. lin. 20: for imperative,
read Superior. page 53. lin. 14. read subjoyne. page 56. lin. 37. for Answer,
read. reply. from pages. 56. and. 66. the pages are misfigured. page 62. lin.
33. read Pr. An. page 64. lin. last, read Pr. An. page 72. lin. 27. not, read
nor l. in..32 for which. read, such as. p. 80. l. 9. del. which p. 81. l. 33.
r. a perfect cleansing p. 82. l. 5. r. work in part. p. 83. l. 1. f. that as.
r. that a. p. 84. l. 5. f. is r. Jesus. l. 33. r. your deceitful. p. 85. l. 31.
del. 31. l. 30. r. p. 35. l. 37. r. and cup. p. 87. l. 5. r. such a great. l.
7. f. any r. all l. 19. r. we are not. 29. r. their infants p. 88. l. 8. f.
85. r. 35. l. 17. f. the r. their. 24. f. the. r. their. 39. del. the.

FINIS

