THE RECTOR EXAMINED, About his Book Scandalously styled, An Antidote against
the Venom of Quakerism. BY John Meriton, who calls himself A. M. Rector of
Boughton in Norfolk. AND His Observations Remarked, and the Christianity of the
People commonly called Quakers, Re-asserted and Vindicated, from his
Perversions and Aspersions.

By GEORGE WHITEHEAD.

-- And they are Shepherds that cannot understand: they all look to their own
way, every one for his Gain from his quarter, Isa. 56. 11. LONDON, Printed and
Sold by T. Soul, in White-Hart-Court in Gracious-street, and at the Bible in
Leaden-Hall-street, 1699.

THE RECTOR EXAMINED, About his Book, Scandalously styled, An Antidote against
the Venom of Quakerism.
WHAT John Meriton calls The Venom of Quakerism, is not what is contained in our
Paper, entitled, The Christianity of the People commonly called Quakers; for
he grants our Profession throughout the greatest part thereof, (as well as some
others) would seem Orthodox, page 5. But what he quotes out of other Books, as
he thinks in Opposition thereto, wherein he shows his own Enmity and
Perversions, and not our Contradiction to what is Orthodox in our said
Profession; and the greatest part, of what he has quoted for that end, being
Answered in the other Examination, entitled, Truth and Innocence vindicated;
and but Repetitions, and no Refutations of his and his Abettors. I need not
much repeat or insist upon them, but take notice of some other Abuses
intermixed in his Observations, and by the way to show his Learning in
Divinity, how he defines Christianity and Christian; first Negatively, then
Affirmatively, viz.

1st. What is understood by the Term Christianity, or what is necessary (in a
strict and proper Sense) to entitle a Man to be a Christian? For making up this
good Composition (says he) it is not enough for a Man, to know and acknowledge
God, as the one only true God, Creator of all things, to depend upon and be
subject to him, to love him, and our Neighbor as our selves; to walk soberly
and honestly, and to practice all those other Duties, which by the Light and
Law of Nature he may be convinced of; for then a Man may believe and be
conformable thereunto, and yet be no Christian, page 3, 4.

Whereupon we may observe, and hence infer, That a Man may be Godly, and so
live to God, and yet no Christian; i. e. a Man may be born of God (as he that
loves is) and yet without Christ; as if a Man could come to God without Christ
(Oh! Lamentable, Unchristian Doctrine) contrary to his own Doctrine! No Man
comes to the Father, but by me; and, If God were your Father, ye would love
me. And if without Christ we can do nothing, How should any Man either know
God, depend upon him, be subject to him, or love him without Christ? And it is
by his Divine Light and Grace, that Men are taught these Duties, to live Godly,
and to walk Soberly and Honestly, and not by a Light or Law of Humane Nature.
So that a Man born of God, who loves and obeys him, and is subject to him, is
truly and lovingly a Partaker of Christ, and of the Nature of Christianity. But
if to know God, to depend upon him, to be subject to him, to love him, our
Neighbor as our selves, to walk soberly and honestly, etc. will not entitle a
Man to Christianity, to be a Christian; then it is not the Jew inward, nor the
Christian inward, nor the New Creature, nor the New Birth, that will avail; but
the outward Profession of Christianity; though many have that, who neither love
God, nor are subject to him, nor love their Neighbors, consequently are no New
Creatures, nor born of God. And if to know, love and obey God, and to live
Soberly and Honestly, etc. be not such a Good Composition, as will make up a
true Christian in Spirit and Life, What will this Composition make up? May we
take, what our Opposer here adds, for Answer? viz. For who doubts, but that
some of the Heathens thus far believed and practiced, who were not only
altogether Ignorant of Christ, but also vehemently opposed him and the
Christian-Name, page 4.

This I cannot receive for sufficient Answer, or for Truth: And it is said, (but
not proved) that any of those Gentiles or Heathens who knew and loved God
(depended upon him, and were subject to him, and loved their Neighbors as
themselves, and walked soberly and honestly) yet that these Gentiles thus
qualified, vehemently opposed Christ and the Christian Name. We want proof for
this Assertion, How could they love God, and be subject to him, and depend upon
him, and hate or oppose his dear Son and Servants?

If God were your Father, ye would love me, says Christ: for I proceeded
forth, and came from God, John 8. 42. for those that hated him were of their
Father the Devil, ver. 44. Where did ever any honest sober Gentiles or Heathen,
who truly loved God, so vehemently oppose Christ, as this Man accuses them? We
find the contrary in Scripture, that many Gentiles believed and received the
Gospel of Christ, who is the Light of the Gentiles; and even in the Case of
Justification, the Apostle brings those Gentiles for a proof, who not having
the Law, were a Law to themselves, when they performed those things contained
in the Law, and showed the Work of the Law that was written in their Hearts,
Romans 2. 13, 14, 15, 16. But the mistake of this our Opposer and his Adherents,
is, they will have the Light which enlightens every Man that comes into the
World, not to be Christ, but Man's Conscience, a Light and Law of Nature, and
so but natural as of Man, and not Divine; deeming it Blasphemy to assert the
Light that does enlighten every Man that comes into the World is not
Conscience; and that it was before any thing was made, or Conscience named, as
in their first and great Charge against us, in their Brief Discovery, page 3.
whereby they have consequently charged John the Evangelist's Testimony of
Christ (who is that true Light, John 1.) with Blasphemy: Thus have they brought
the Blasphemy upon their own ignorant Opposition to this Evangelical Doctrine
of the true Light, which Christ the Word is the Fountain of, which is a Divine,
Supernatural Light, and therefore increated, consequently not Man's natural
Conscience, but a superior Reformer and Guide of Man's whole Soul, with all
the Parts and Faculties thereof: He that made all things, was not made; but he
that was the true Light made all things; by him all things were made, John 1.
He that made Man, was before Man was, before his Soul or Spirit, or any
Faculties or Intellectuals were made or formed within Man: Consequently this
Light was not Conscience, but that which enlightens Man's Understanding and
Conscience, and the Eyes of his Understanding. How Blasphemous then are these
Men, who deem this Doctrine of the Light Blasphemy!

And it is not safe to conclude, That those Jews who were God's chosen People,
and obedient to the Legal Dispensation, had no Faith in the Messiah, or no
Title to Christianity, or were in no Christian State, as implied, page 4.
seeing they had the Word of Faith in them, as well as the Law without them,
Deuteronomy. 30. 12, 14. compared with Romans 10. 8. And all Israel drank of the same
Spiritual Rock which followed them (or went with them) and that Rock was
Christ, 1 Cor. 10. 4. How could they drink thereof, if they had no Faith
therein?

2. Now how this Reason describes a Christian in the Affirmative; He tells us,
To entitle a Man to be a Christian, viz.

He must necessarily believe Christ to be already come; nay, that particular
and numerical Man Christ Jesus, who was born of the Virgin Mary, and was of the
Seed of Abraham according to the Flesh, to be the Christ of God, that was
promised to come in due time; That this very Man was Crucified, died, and rose
again from the Dead, and is ascended, etc. (citing 1 Timothy 3. 16.) This Christ
God-man, as come and Crucified, was that main Foundation of the Gospel and
Christianity; These were new Articles founded upon a new Dispensation, without
the Belief of which (not to name some others, which may be thought by some also
necessary, such as Baptism by Water, and the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper by
Bread and Wine) a Man cannot be called a Christian, page 4, 5.

If this Belief of the Blessed Man Christ Jesus his Birth, Death, Resurrection
and Ascension into Glory, as the Great Mystery of Godliness, God manifest in
the Flesh, etc. 1 Timothy 3. 16. be necessary to entitle a Man to be a Christian,
then we the People called Quakers, sincerely believe all this of Christ the
true and promised Messiah; we really have all this Faith of and concerning him,
consequently we must have a true Title and right Claim to Christianity by the
same Proposition; we really believe both of Christ and in him, even in his Name
and Power, wherein we hold the main Foundation of the Gospel and Christianity,
and the Doctrine thereof. But this Rector has omitted a Living Faith in Christ,
unto Repentance, Sanctification, Regeneration, the New Birth, Newness of Life,
Purity and Holiness, without which no Man shall see God, or be a Christian in
Nature. The more uncharitable and inconsistent then is this Rector; in charging
us with Venom, giving our Doctrine the Character of The Venom of Quakerism; and
the Quakers indefinitely, that of Deceitful Workers, Transforming themselves
into the Apostles of Christ, cannot be looked upon any otherwise at best, than
good moral Heathens, and many of them short of that, page 5.

Hence observe how uncharitable and furious this Rector is, and how he had need
to be corrected for his Rashness herein, though our Profession (taking the
words thereof in their common Acceptance) must be granted (at least) to seem
Orthodox; as he grants both of our Paper observed by him (i. e. The
Christianity, etc. W. P' s Key, John Crook' s Principles, etc.) But still in
his uncharitable and sower Humor, he will presume to be Judge over our
Sincerity, from my seeing cause to construe my Friend's words and Intentions,
as if we were hence to be mistrusted in our Orthodox Confessions; whereupon he
presently passes Judgment against the Quakers, viz. That they have a nauseous
Pill to give you, but that it may not be distastful, they gild it over, as the
Writers of Popery in the late K. J's Reign the other day did; with more such
bitter envious Stuff, and false Judgment, to which we shall never submit, nor
give away our Sincerity or Holy Profession of Christ and Christianity, which he
cannot deny to be Orthodox in it self: Nor extinguish our Sincerity therein,
but only strive to cloud by Reproaches, groundless Jealousies, and
Misconstructions and Perversions, which is not as he would be done by to be
sure: But if a Belief of Christ already come, born of the Virgin Mary, being of
the Seed of Abraham, and that he was Crucified, died, rose again, and ascended,
(as the Scriptures declare) be sufficient to entitle a Man to be a Christian,
How many do believe and confess thus much of Christ, and yet Unsanctified,
Unregenerate, Impenitent, Ungodly and Unchristian, in Spirit and Conversation?
So that they are not in the true living Faith in Christ Jesus, though they have
an Historical and Traditional one, and perhaps may be Baptized or Sprinkled
with Water too. But of that the Rector here writes somewhat faintly and
dubiously, as thought by some also necessary (i. e. to make a Man a Christian)
page 9. But afterward he is more positive in this Point, That it is necessary,
as the Sacred Ordinance of Christ and Saving, p. 27. Necessary to enter Men
into the Kingdom of God, from John 3. 5. p. 28. for Remission and doing away
Sins, cleansing of our Souls; that the Spirit does Sanctify the Waters in
Baptism, to the mystical Washing away of Sin, p. 29, 31, 32. But as for Infants
partaking thereof, he evades proof, It is not his business here to prove, he
says, p. 27. So that he both evades defending their own Practice, and leaves
People at an uncertainty of the Subjects of this ignorantly supposed Saving,
Soul cleansing, and mystical washing Ordinance, (making use of the Anabaptists
Arguments for Baptizing Believers with Water, which is no proof for Rantism (or
Sprinkling) upon Infants.) Thus he attempts to show People the way or means of
Regeneration, and entering into the Kingdom of God, and he lays the stress
thereof upon the outward Baptism by Water, and not upon the inward Baptism of
the Spirit; he has found out an easy way to make Christians, and to get to
Heaven at this rate. His business here being to prove, Whether outward Baptism
by Water, is the Sacred Ordinance of Christ, as necessary to be believed and
Saving; or Inward Baptism, i. e. the Washing or Cleansing of the Heart, or an
Inward Conversion to God, p. 27. So that by this the Saving Baptism must be the
one or the other; he places it upon the outward Waters of Baptism, as necessary
to the cleansing of our Souls, mystical Washing away of Sin, p. 31, 32.
therefore not upon the Inward Baptism of the Spirit, for that was not
sufficient, he says, p. 29. No: What was it good for then? He tells us, The
inward Baptism was but a necessary Qualification for the Reception of the
outward Baptism by Water, p. 29. So that the Water is exalted above the Spirit,
or the Spirit's Baptism. But how many Infants (who are Sprinkled) can they
prove, are thus first qualified by the Inward Baptism of the Spirit? What
confused and bewildred work do we meet withal from some angry Opposers? Upon
the whole, the Man's Definition of a Christian, is summed up in this, viz. That
the Washing of Regeneration by the Word of Life, the Inward and Spiritual
Baptism, is not Saving, or sufficient to make a true Christian, but
Water Baptism; and whether that must be of Infants or Believers, we are left at
uncertainty by this Rector; it is enough with him to cry, It must be with Water,
Water; But who, who, must come under it? Men or Babes? Here we are at a loss.
What an easy way it is to make Christians, and to get to Heaven, if this be
it, viz. Learn and believe your Creed, and that you are inwardly washed,
regenerated and entered into God's Kingdom by your Water Baptism; Whether as
Infants, or grown up, is still the Question?

This Rector boldly tells us, Nay further it appears, That before our Savior
Baptized those in Judea, he represented the Solemnity of Baptism, as a thing
necessary to enter Men into that Kingdom of God, to which he invited them; our
Savior not only telling Nicodemus, John 3. 5. That except a Man be born again,
he could not see the Kingdom of God: But yet more plainly, That except he was
born again of Water, p. 5. and of the Spirit, he could not enter into it, p. 28.

In this Interpretation of John 3. 5. to outward Water, the Rector exactly
agrees with the Popish Notion and Interpretation thereof, That no Man can enter
into the Kingdom of God, nor into the Fellowship of Holy Church, without
Water Baptism; as held by the Rhemists, see their Annotations upon John 3.
5.And therein opposed by the Protestants, as appears in Dr. Fulk's Answer, viz.
It is not necessary in this place By Water, to understand material Water, but
rather the Purifying Grace of Christ. As in Chap. 4. ver. 11, 14. where it is
called Living Water; whereof (he says) Washing with Water in Baptism, is an
outward Sign.

So that the Reformed Protestants did place Salvation, the New Birth, and
entering into the Kingdom of God, upon the Inward Baptism by the Purifying
Grace of Christ, and not upon the Outward Element of Water, they esteemed that
but an outward Sign of the Inward. For the outward Baptism by Water, the Rector
urges our Savior's Example and Practice from John 3. 22, 26. p. 28. as if
practiced or ministered by Christ himself. But that is a Mistake, for in John 4.
2. it is expressly said, Though Jesus himself baptized not, but his Disciples.

I have run the farther into this Point in this place, to show what a
Composition the Rector has run Christianity into. But to return to some of his
invidious Abuses and Perversions; For the Credit of his Charge of Venom and
Blasphemous Opinions relating to Christianity (as well as to the Government)
against us, he says, And to this end and purpose, in the Month of March last
past, there were two Books presented to both Houses of Parliament, the one
Entitled, A Brief Discovery of some of the Blasphemies and Seditious
Principles, etc. The other Entitled, Some few of the Quakers many horrid
Blasphemies, Heresies, etc. And also a Sheet Entitled, Some Reasons humbly
offered, why the Quakers should be examined, p. 6, 7.

Here we may observe this Rector has owned these same Books, as well as
presenting them to the Parliament: Now one of them that is a Libel, styled,
Some Few, has an Owner with the rest. Thou therefore ( John Meriton, Rector, so
called) art accountable for the manifold Abuses, Perversions, Calumnies and
Traducings, which are in those Books, and detected in my Truth and Innocence
vindicated, which I doubt not but will turn to your great Shame and Disgrace
who promoted them; as will also your strenuous Endeavors to Insence the
Government against us, but that they had more Discretion and Prudence than to
be influenced by two or three Invidious Persons against a Peaceable and
Serviceable People.

Now concerning our Christian Profession, on which the Rector makes his
Observations, to evince the Venom of Quakerism, as he unjustly defames us.

He accuses us with dubious and equivocal Terms, agreeable to those of the
Oracles of the Heathen, p. 7. for our confessing, That our Belief is, That in
the Unity of the Godhead, there is Father, Son and Holy Ghost, those Three
Divine Witnesses, that bear Record in Heaven, the Father, the Word, and the
Holy Spirit; and that these Three are One, according to Holy Scripture
Testimony.These the Rector has judged as dubious equivocal Terms, though they
are Scripture Terms, see Matt. 28. 19. 1 John 5. 7. John 14. 26. and Chap. 15.
26. But not being content with this our Confession, he begs this Question, i.
e. But if not Three Persons, what Three are they? page 8. Let him prove these
Terms by plain Scripture, as we have done ours, and then we shall be resolved,
so as not to charge him with dubious Terms. He might have spared his bitter
Insinuations against us, as virulent Poison, grossest Errors, equivocal
Reserves, wherein they (meaning the Quakers) may be thought to exceed their
Brethren the Jesuits, page 8. It had been more Prudence for him to have
forborne or reserved these bitter Aspersions, than to impose them upon the
Reader; which shows a great Enmity and bitterness of Spirit in the Man.

His repeated and partial Citations and Charge against G. F. W. P. and G. W. in
page 8, 9, 10. are answered and detected in the second part of the other
Examination (i. e. Truth and Innocence, etc.) under the first Head and Title
Concerning the Holy Trinity. What is alleged against G. W. out of Ishmael,
etc. page 10. about the Three Persons, (though wrongly cited by the Rector, p.
9, 10.) I have positively disowned that passage twice already (both as it is in
it self, and as it is none of mine) and do now a third time disown the same,
which none therefore but the Implacable will repeat against me.

About a Heaven within, and the Locality of Heaven, p. 10. I do not find either
G. F. or W. P. truly quoted or cited upon Examination. The Matter as it
concerns G. F. is answered in the other Examination aforesaid.

To the Rector's thus construing our Confession, i. e. When they speak of Three
Divine Witnesses bearing Record in Heaven, that is to say (quoth he) the Heaven
within them, p. 10.

Thus he imposes his meaning upon us, as if we confined the Divine Three
bearing Witness in Heaven, only to a Heaven within us, and not as being in that
Heaven without us also; which is a mistaken Construction, for the Heaven
wherein the Divine Three bear Witness, is above, and distinct from the Earth, 1
John 5. 7, 8. and yet the same Holy Spirit (which is God) bears witness in
Earth too, even in Men's Hearts and Consciences. His Spirit bears witness with
our Spirits, etc. And he that believes on the Son of God, has the Witness in
himself, 1 John 5. 10. And he that inhabiteth Eternity, and dwells in the
highest Heavens, dwells also in the lowest Hearts, even with them that are poor
and of contrite Spirits, and tremble at his word, how despised soever they are
in the Eyes of the Proud and Envious whom God will debase. And it was no
lessening of the Blessed Record of the Divine Three in Heaven, for the
Spiritual Believers in Christ Jesus, to be promoted to the Honor and
Privilege of sitting together in Heavenly places in Christ Jesus, Ephesians. 2. 5,
6. and their continuing in the Son and in the Father, if the Word (which they
had heard from the Beginning) remained in them, 1 John 2. 24. As there is a
Plurality of Heavens without us, so there are degrees of heavenly States in
Christ Jesus within us, if our Conversation be in Heaven.

I charge the Rector with a false Quotation and Abuse of me in particular, in
his Observation on our Confession to the Divinity and Humanity (or Manhood) of
Jesus Christ. Where he quotes Truth defending the Quakers, p. 22. and against
me says, Where he affirms Christ's coming in the Flesh to be but a Figure or
Example, (answered in the other Examination, part 1. p. 24, 25. which are not
my words, but in the Priest's 35th Question, wrongly accusing R. Hubberthorn
therewith.

The Rector also wrongs R. H. and me, in what he adds, viz. Which is also the
Saying of R. Hubberthorn, and justified by G. W. in his Judgment Fixed, p. 336.
who tells you plainly, what Man Christ the Quakers own, i. e. their Light
within only, p. 11.

He wrongs me again in both: For 1st, I never understood, that 'twas R. H's
Saying, that Christ's coming in the Flesh, was But a Figure, nor saw it ever so
affirmed under his hand, but by his Adversaries. 2. Neither have I justified
that Saying in Judgment Fixed. 3. Neither do I there tell you plainly, that the
Man Christ the Quakers own, is their Light within only. I do not confine the
Christ to within only, though he be our Light within, as well as he is our
Mediator, the Man Christ without. But the Rector, to fasten his Charge upon me,
adds, viz. His words (i. e. G. W's) are these, Therefore the Man Christ Jesus
was, before he came in the Body of Flesh, p. 11. Here the Rector cites a
Consequence of a Proposition against me, but not the Proposition it self;
wherein he is unfair: Yet the Consequence proves not, that I either affirm or
justify Christ's coming in the Flesh to be but a Figure: It Is fully answered
in the Examination before; and my Proposition, from which the said Consequence
is drawn, is, John bore witness of that Man Christ, saying, He that comes
after me, is preferred before me, for he was before me, John 1. 15. Again ver.
30. After me comes a Man, which is preferred before me, for he was before me.
Therefore the Man Christ Jesus was, before he came in the Body or Flesh; he was
that Spiritual Rock, which all Israel drank of; his Life was the Light of Men
from the Beginning, and all the Generations of the Righteous did Spiritually
partake of the Benefit of Christ, as Mediator; both before and after his coming
in the Flesh, they virtually partook of the Sacrifice of the Lamb, etc.
Judgment Fixed, p. 336.Now could this be to deny either the Divinity or Manhood
of Christ? No sure; but rather a Confession to both. Neither does it prove our
Confession thereunto, only a Paint or Varnish to deceive the Hearts of the
Simple, as this Rector would insinuate, though very frowardly and unjustly:
And, That Christ existeth outwardly, Bodily without us, at God's right hand; my
Enquiry for Scripture Proof for these words, ( Nature of Christianity, page 41.
Anno 1671.) proves no Insincerity in our Belief of Jesus Christ, as he is truly
God and Man, according as Holy Scripture testifies of him; and questioning
those Terms, was not to deny Christ's real Exaltation in Glory, as he is at the
right Hand of the Majesty in the Heavens.

What the Rector quotes against G. F. and W. P. about Christ, that was
Crucified, and his outward Person, etc. p. 12, 13. is answered and explained in
the Examination aforesaid.

What he quotes against W. Smith's Primmer, p. 8. printed 1668, i. e. They that
are False (Ministers) preach Christ without. Here wants the word Only, viz.
they preach Christ without Only (in opposition to his being within) for it was
so corrected in the last Edition of his Works. What carping and picking work do
these Men make against us, to make us Offenders for a word?

We also sincerely confess, We believe and expect Salvation and Justification
by Jesus Christ his Righteousness, Merits and Works, (here they leave out [ and
not by our own,] God is not indebted to us for our Deservings, but we to him
for his Free Grace in Christ Jesus, whereby we are Saved through Faith in him
(not of our selves) and by his Grace enabled truly and acceptably to serve and
follow him, as he requires; He is our All in all, who works all in us that is
well pleasing to God.

To render us Insincere or Contradictory herein, the Rector begins with G. W's
Light and Life, thus quoting him, p. 38. viz. The Quakers see no need of
directing Men to Jesus Christ or his Blood, as it was outwardly shed at
Jerusalem for Justification, etc.

Herein he has falsely quoted me, and misrepresented my words, which if he read
them, 'twas the more wickedly done; If it was upon the Credit of another's
Information, 'twas presumptuously foolish, so injuriously to cite them. My
words in the place quoted are these; viz. The Quakers see no need of directing
Men to the Type for the Antitype, viz. neither to the outward Temple, nor yet
to Jerusalem to Jesus Christ or his Blood;It should be for Jesus Christ there,
knowing that neither the Righteousness of Faith, nor the Word of it, does so
direct, Romans 10. which is not to dissuade People from Jesus Christ where he is
to be found, but from going to seek him in the Type before mentioned. The
Matter is answered before, this Rector had need to be rectified himself.

Again, He quotes G. W. thus, p. 55. ibid. Where does the Scripture say, That
the shedding of Christ's Blood outwardly, was the meritorious cause of (Man's)
Salvation? And p. 64. It is False Doctrine to lay the meritorious cause or
stress of Justification, upon the shedding that Blood let out by the Spear.

He has here quoted me partially in both these passages, especially in the last.

1. My Question to the Baptist in the place was this: Where do the Scriptures
use those Expressions, and so much vary about the Blood of Christ, as one while
to say, that the shedding that Blood outwardly, was the meritorious cause of
Salvation, etc. p. 55.

2. Whereas the Baptist accused us with denying the shedding of the Blood upon
the Cross, that was let out by virtue of the Spear being thrust into his side,
to be the meritorious cause of Man's Justification (as held in the Affirmative
by the Baptist.) My answer was, The shedding of that Blood let out by the
Spear, was an Act of a wicked Man, and the Spear an Instrument of Cruelty,
which to lay the meritorious cause or stress of Justification upon, is false
Doctrine; for there is a great difference between Christ's offering up himself
by the Eternal Spirit, a Lamb without Spot, to God, and the Acts of wicked Men
inflicted upon him; as it is said, by wicked hands they put him to death. The
Merit, Deserving, Dignity or Worth, is placed upon Christ's Obedience, in
offering up himself, and humbling himself to the Death of the Cross for Man's
Redemption, as intimated in the consequence, Wherefore God has highly exalted
him, Phil. 2. 9. Therefore the Merit, or Deserving, was not placed upon the
Soldier's Act, of thrusting the Spear into his side, and letting out his Blood
thereby, after he had given up the Ghost, John 19. 33, 34. But upon the
Obedience of the Son of God, even unto the Death of the Cross, as that most
acceptable Sacrifice for the Sins of the World. Christ's deserving such high
Exaltation into Dominion and Glory through his Obedience in Suffering, was for
the bringing many Sons to Glory, Heb. 2. 10. consequently That in following him
we might be received into Glory; as they who Suffer with him shall be glorified
together, Romans 8. 17. and this no ways interferes with (nor varies from) Our
Sincere Belief of Salvation and Justification by Jesus Christ, his
Righteousness, Merits and Works, and not by our own; Christ as our Mediator and
the one Offering, has obtained Justification, Remission and Pardon of Sins, and
Eternal Redemption for us, which he makes us partakers of, by his Work of
Righteousness and Sanctification in us, so that both Christ's Obedience,
Deservings and Dignity, without us, and his works within us are concerned in
our Salvation and Justification, which his Light and Spirit Leads us to the
living Knowledge and Experience of, as We sincerely obey and follow the same;
for the Apostle describes both the washing Sanctification and Justification of
true Converts, to be in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our
God, 1 Cor. 6. 11. Therefore I hope it will be no reproach to W. P. or any else
to be in conjunction with G. W. in this point as he is accused, p. 14. namely,
That our Justification and Salvation is not Effected wholly without us, as if
there were no need of the Spirit's work within us for our Regeneration and
Sanctification, all which is Christ's work, being done by his Spirit and Power,
which consequently does no ways lessen his Dignity, Glory and Honor, wherewith
he was crowned through the Suffering of Death, that he might bring many Sons
(after him) unto Glory, Heb. 2. 9.

Again, the Rector quotes G. Whitehead, in Counterfeit Convert, printed 1694.
p. 17, 18. That it is the Light and Life within, in which, is the Immediate and
Efficient cause of Man's Salvation; And as for the Sufferings and Death of
Christ in the Flesh, they do but instrumentally contribute thereunto.

The Rector to abuse me, Partially cites me in this place, as if I ascribed
Salvation to a Light and Life within, without Christ, or not to Christ; for
what else could he design in bringing this Quotation to confront, or oppose,
our Confession (before cited) to Salvation by Jesus Christ? And where do I say
in which ( i. e. in the Light and Life within) is the Immediate and Efficient
cause of Man's Salvation, as if I should say something in the Light and Life of
Christ were the Immediate cause of Man's Salvation, and not the Light and Life
of Christ it self; this Rector would fain make me speak Nonsense as well as
Blasphemy. But by our confessing to the Light and Life of Christ within, as the
Immediate and Efficient cause of Man's Salvation from Sin and Condemnation; we
do neither divide Christ nor make two Christ's, nor yet by confessing his
Suffering and Death in the Flesh as a means of God's appointment instrumentally
to contribute thereunto; He being The Mediator of the New Covenant, that by
means of Death for the Redemption of the Transgressions that were under the
first Testament (or Covenant) they which are called might receive the Promise
of Eternal Inheritance, Heb. 9. 15. and as it was by means of Christ that true
Christians believe in God, who raised him up from the Dead, and gave him Glory
and Honor, that their Faith and Hope might be in God, 1 Pet. 1. 20, 21. So if
Christ our Mediator be the Means, the Cause, and Great Instrument, of our Faith
and Salvation, and his Death the Means of our Redemption and Remission of Sins
in his Blood; It can be no dishonor to him to confess his Sufferings and Death
in the Flesh, instrumentally to contribute to our Salvation, and that Christ
himself by his Light and Life in us, is the Immediate and Efficient cause
thereof, thereby fulfilling and confirming in us the blessed and holy Design
and Ends of his Sufferings and Death for us.

I am not ashamed of my Testimony for Christ in this matter, and give it here
more truly than my Adversary has done out of the place quoted, out of
Counterfeit Convert, p. 18. viz.

That Christ, the Promised Seed, through Death was to bruise under, and
destroy, him that had the Power of Death, viz. The Devil, yet he effectually
does it by his divine Power, Light and Life, as the Immediate and Efficient
cause of Man's Salvation; wherein we still confess his Sufferings and Death in
the Flesh instrumentally to contribute thereunto. Christ Jesus, as the Promised
Seed, who came of a Woman, made under the Law, bruised the Serpent's Head both
without us and within us; without us through his Sufferings and Death (by his
divine Testimony, Word and Power) within us by his Divine Life, Light, Word (or
Seed) Spirit and Power, which is all but one Christ himself, not two Christ's
nor to be divided: Else how could we be born again of Incorruptible Seed? Or
how does that Seed remain in him that is born again? And is not that Seed
Christ? And is not the Word of Faith, Christ in Spirit? See 1 Pet. 1. 23. 1
John 3. 9. Romans 10. 6, 7, 8. Now where is the Venom charged in all this Doctrine?

When true and full Recitations are given of our Words, how plain does the
Truth thereof appear? But when our Adversaries give their perverted, minced and
false Citations thereof, to traduce us as Venomous in Doctrine (as this angry
Rector has frowardly and frequently done) How cloudy do they make them and us
look? But Truth will work through and over all this dust and cloudy stuff they
cast upon us.

To what he quotes against Tho. Lawson his Untaught Teacher, printed 1655. p.
4, 5. Against looking for Salvation from a means without, and seeking a way to
Salvation without, p. 15.

I have not the Book quoted, but am apt to think T. L's unfairly, or not fully
cited in this place, let the Rector produce a fair and full Recitation. However
I really believe (upon our Principle) that T. L. meant no other than that, as
Salvation from Sin is an Inward and Spiritual Work of Christ, Men must expect
and wait for it to be wrought within them by the Spirit and Power of Christ,
who is the great means and cause thereof; so that if any seek the way and means
of Salvation only without them, and neglect Christ's Appearance and Light in
them, they miss their way, though He who is the Great means, obtained Eternal
Redemption and Salvation without them, and alone did tread the Wine Press,
which we believe, and therefore the Rector's conclusions are false against us.

1. That They ( i. e. the Quakers) undervalue the Righteousness and Merits of
Jesus Christ, purchasing Salvation for us.

2. That they Extol and Magnify their own Righteousness and Works, like to
their Brethren in the Church of Rome, p. 15.

3. That they exceed all the meritorious Boasts of those their Kindred, in
affirming that their Sufferings are Greater, and more unjust, than the
Sufferings in the days of Christ, etc.

I positively deny and Testify against these Accusations, as Notorious
Calumnies to traduce and abuse the People called Quakers, contrary to our
Principle and Profession of Jesus Christ, and that Glory, Dignity and
Pre-eminence we sincerely ascribe to him, his Righteousness, Merits, Works and
Sufferings. And that it is by his Grace through Faith we are saved, not of our
selves; it is the Gift of God, not of Works, lest any Man should Boast, Ephesians. 2.

Our Confession of Remission of Sin, and Redemption through the Sufferings, Death
and Blood of Christ, and Faith in him, etc.Though this the Rector confesses seems
to be very Orthodox, yet he will needs have it still but Paint and Deceit, p. 16.
Thus uncharitable and incredulous he is of our plain and sincere Profession,
falsely inferring, For Remission or Redemption through the Sufferings or
Righteousness of another, is not by them ( i. e. Quakers) believed.

Which is false, 'twas none of the Question or Controversy between us and our
former Opposers (the Imputarians) for what the Rector observes out of F. B's
Works, p. 33. (already answered in the other Examination) and W. P's Sandy
Foundation, p. 25, 30, 31. and Serious Apology, p. 148. though very brokenly
and partially, as well as impertinently cited by the Rector, p. 16, 17. Yet
it is no ways intended to disbelieve or deny Remission of Sins, or Redemption
through the Sufferings or Righteousness of Christ Jesus; But to refuse a
Justification of impure and unsanctified Persons, by an Imputative
Righteousness, according to W. P's Title of that part of the Controversy,
Sandy Foundation, p. 24. or a justifying the Wicked and condemning the Just,
which they that do, are Abomination to the Lord, Prove. 17. 15. p. 24. Ibid.
which is not to deny the real and true Imputation of Christ's Righteousness to
them that are Sanctified, and by Faith have a true Interest in Christ, as
partakers of his Righteousness and Holiness. His Imputations or Reckonings,
being all True and Righteous; if he reckons or esteems a Man Just, he is really
so.

I do not see that W. P. contradicts this Doctrine of Justification in his
Primitive Christianity, etc. by his former opposing Justification of Impure,
Unsanctified or Impenitent Persons, by an undue Imputation of another
Righteousness which (in that State) they have no share in. Who is that Blessed
Man to whom God imputes Righteousness, etc? Romans 4. 6, 7, 8. but the Man in
whose Spirit is no Guile, Psalm. 32. 6.

The Rector doubtless thinks he has put a learned and binding Question upon us,
viz. Why indeed should they believe Remission of Sins, and Redemption through
Christ's Sufferings, and Justification by his Righteousness, when as they
believe themselves to be perfect as God, and free from Sin? p. 17.

Answer 1st, Where do we say all this of our selves, as that we believe our
selves to be perfect as God? I would have the Rector produce plain Proof that
we say this of our selves.

2dly, That Perfection of Freedom from Sin, which we believe attainable in
Christ; it is not of our selves, nor by our selves, attained. We do not pretend
to make our selves Perfect or Free from Sin, but by the Power and Work of
Christ, and his Righteousness, by a true Faith in him, who is manifest to take
away and destroy Sin, the work of the Devil, and to save us from Sin.

3dly, Now suppose any true Believers in Christ Jesus, his Name and Power,
should call to others, and say, Come and I Will tell you what the Lord has done
for my Soul; he has redeemed my Soul, he has taken away my Sins, and blotted
out my Transgressions, and received me Graciously. And thereupon such a learned
Rector as this should Gainsay his Christian Experience by such a Question as
this, Why indeed should you believe your Soul is redeemed, and your Sins are
taken away and blotted out, through Christ his Righteousness, etc. when you
thus believe your self to be free from Sin? To which he might easily Answer, I
did not make my self so: I magnify the Grace of God in Christ Jesus toward
me, what I am, I am by the Grace of God. The rest against preaching for Sin, to
continue term of Life, p. 18. is opened in the Examination before.

And the Rector is sadly out and wants Rectifying, in his affirming, This
Doctrine of Sinless Perfection being the approved Doctrine of the Quakers, to
be in Opposition to all Professors of the Christian Faith, p. 18.

The Man's Egregiously out and mistaken in this last part, The Doctrine of
Sinless Perfection in Christ, is a true Christian Doctrine, and approved of by
all true Believers who are in the Faith of Christ, and Professers of the same;
such Perfection was both commanded and Promised of God, and Preached by Christ
and his faithful Ministry, and effected by Christ in his true Believers and
Followers, who abide in him; He that abides in him Sins not.

I may here give a full recital of the Question and our Answer, upon which the
Rector has made his said Observations, to prove the same still but Paint and
Deceit, which is proved to be but his own false Judgment.

Quest. Do you believe Remission of Sin, and Redemption through the Sufferings,
Death and Blood of Christ? Answ. Yes, through Faith in Him as he suffered and
dyed for all Men, gave himself a Ransom for all, and his Blood so Shed for the
Remission of Sins, so all they who sincerely believe and obey him, receive the
Benefits, blessed Effects and Fruits of his Suffering and Dying for them; They
by Faith in his Name, receive and partake of that Eternal Redemption which he
has obtained for us, who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from All
Iniquity: He died for our Sins, and rose again for our Justification; And if we
walk in the Light, as he ( i. e. God) is in the Light, we have Fellowship one
with another; And the Blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanses us from all Sin,
1 John 1. 7.

Quest. Do you believe and own the Divine Offices of Jesus Christ in his
Church? Our Answer is, Yes verily we believe and own Christ, not only as he is
the Light of the World, enlightening every Man coming into it, but also that he
is given for a Leader and for a Commander; And that he is both King, Priest and
Prophet, to and over his Church and People. He is the Minister of the Sanctuary
which the Lord Pitched and not Man; and we are to hear him in all things. On
this the Rector observes, viz.

This Profession of theirs, if Sincere, would indeed comprehend a great part of
the Christian Religion; but if the above Quotations be true, they will give you
just cause to suspect them even in this, p. 19.

By this our Profession is granted as comprehensive of a great part of
Christian Religion, and our Sincerity therein is known to God who judges
Righteously, and we may not submit it to this Person's Prejudice or unjust
Judgment, and Quotations wherein his Falseness and Partiality are in a great
measure already detected: And what he now quotes against our said Profession,
out of Tyranny and Hypocrisy detected, p. 19. of S. E's declaring G. F.
Blessed be the Man that came out of the North, etc. And a Letter said to be
writ by Josiah Coal from Barbados, to G. F. in 1658. which this Person says,
is Justified by W. Penn in his Judas and the Jews, p. 44, 45, 46.

We have heard often of this Letter of J. C's, and of W. P's Vindication
thereof, but I find no Reply from this Rector, to Refute W. P. therein; nor yet
any Proof therefrom, of our Insincerity in what we profess as aforesaid, for
our believing the Divine Offices of Jesus Christ, in and over his Church; for
though G. F. was truly esteemed among us, as a Faithful Minister of Christ, and
a Father in him unto many in the Faith, and an Heir of Christ's Kingdom, yet
this was never to Wrest the Scepter out of Christ's Hand, as is falsely
insinuated by this Rector, and his Author Edward Pay a Teacher of the
Anabaptists, whose Authority is quoted against us, p. 19, 20.

See what hard Shifts this Man is put to for Authority against us, for all his
Learning, I may refer him in this Case, to my Answer to Edward Pay, Entitled,
The Contemned Quaker and his Christian Religion defended, p. 81, 82. Wherein I
tell him, that his Charge is very high against two Persons deceased, who I
believe ended their Days in Peace; and that I have cause to question, whether
the said Letter be truly and entirely copied or cited from the Original; and
what Persons, that are no Parties nor Adversaries to us, will attest thine to
be a true and entire Copy, according to Josiah Coale's original Letter, etc.I
doubt not but I can clear that Honest Man Josiah Coal, from giving any
Blasphemous Titles (as charged) and that from his own printed Testimonies; and
G. F. also from receiving such, by his known public Christian Profession and
Confession unto Christ Jesus, both as God and Man, according to the Holy
Scriptures. And concerning the other Pamphlet, Tyranny and Hypocrisy, also
quoted by this Rector against us, it is a Malicious Libel without the Author's
Name; yet so far given credit unto against us, to asperse and traduce us,
though fully answered long ago by W. P. etc Thus hard put to it is this Rector,
to find and rake up Matter against our Christian Profession of Christ, his
Divine Offices, etc.

And therefore 1st, His calling G. F. the King of the Quakers, p. 20, 21. is a
Scornful Falsehood, that is none of our Profession, but that Jesus Christ is our
King, Priest and Prophet, who is the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords.

2. As also his accusing G. F. with depriving Christ of his Kingly Office, and
assuming it to himself, p. 21. is another notorious Falsehood and Calumny, for
he was a Minister or Servant of Jesus Christ, and so he owned himself to be,
consequently unjustly charged with depriving Christ of his Kingly Office, and
assuming it to himself: Neither did I ever say, or intend any such thing of G.
F. though I am here quoted in Innocence against Envy, p. 18. as plainly
intimating, It is not G. F. but the Light or Christ within him, that assumes
this Kingly Power, p. 21. I do not know that I used these words, or plainly
intimated this in behalf of G. F. nor needed I so excuse him from that which he
was never justly chargeable with, as depriving Christ of his Kingly Office, or
assuming the same to himself. Neither was it proper or pertinent for me to say,
That the Light; or Christ within, assumes this Kingly Power, p. 21. It Is
Christ's Right to Rule and Reign, both as King and Lawgiver; and his being in
us by his Light and Spirit, does not lessen his Power, Dignity or Glory, he
has in himself. And it follows not, that because Christ, who is King, is in
us, That every Quaker is a King, because every Quaker has the Light within, as
this Priest argues, p. 21. I wish he would speak more Reverently of the Light
within, and of Christ within, which if he obeys not, will be his Condemnation;
it is they that obey Christ, the Light, and suffer with him, that shall Reign
with him, and not every one in whom Christ or his Light appears, for too many
Rebel against the Light, and will not that Christ should Reign over them.

What he quotes against G. F. Jun. p. 50. speaking in the Name of the Light, is
answered in the other Examination, and no disowning, but a real owning of
Christ's Kingly Office, as he is the Light and Judge of the World.

The Rector insinuating against us, A Denial of the Priestly Office of Christ,
and also his Humanity, p. 22. is as false as the rest of his Calumnies: Where
did ever we deny Christ as the one Mediator betwixt God and Man, even the Man
Christ Jesus? 1 Timothy 2. 5. How often have we confessed him as such?

His saying the Quakers tells you that Christ was never seen with Carnal Eyes,
etc. quoting H. Woolrich's Declaration to the Baptists, p. 13. I have not that
Declaration, but it has been answered, that he meant the True Christ is not
seen Savingly with Carnal Eyes; nor though the Jews saw his Body or Person
outwardly, they did not see him Spiritually and Savingly, as his Disciples did,
who saw his Glory as of the only Begotten of the Father full of Grace and
Truth: Christ says, He that sees me, sees my Father also; in which sense of
seeing, he was never so seen with Carnal Eyes, no more than the Father was.

Again it is objected against us, That we teach that Christ has no Body but his
Church, quoting Jos. Coale's Works, p. 332. This is falsely charged both against
us, and falsely cited against Josiah Coal, for first, We do not so Teach. 2.
Though J. C. confesses the Church to be the Body of Christ in the place
quoted, he also confesses Christ's glorious Body, like unto which his Body the
Church shall be fashioned, saying, That Affliction did still attend these
Members of Christ's Body, and that this Body (i. e.) the Church, though not
free as yet from suffering Afflictions, yet shall be fashioned like to his
glorious Body, J. C' s p. 332.So that he owned Christ to have a glorious Body
above that of his Members: Therefore it appears neither from hence, nor yet
from this Rector's unjust Charge or false Quotation, that the Quakers deny the
Mediator, the Man Christ Jesus, as he falsely says; much less that they do
Scornfully Contemn the Blood of Christ, p. 23. as they are grossly Calumniated
and Slandered.

What he cites against E. B. and W. P. p. 23, 24. is answered in the foregoing
Examination.

And as to Christ's Prophetic Office, we are satisfied that we own it more
than these our Adversaries, in that we believe we ought to hear him in all
things, by his Light, Word and Spirit, in our Hearts; for which they so much
slight and contemn us; opposing his Immediate Revelation, Teaching and Ministry
in these days, and confining his present Ministry to the Scriptures, in
opposition to his Light and Immediate Teaching in Man; for though Christ did
frequently preach from Scriptures, yet his Preaching was with Power and
Efficacy, he had power both to open the Scriptures, and the Understandings of
them that heard him in opening them; and also so to touch their Hearts, that
they said, Did not our Hearts burn within us, while he spoke unto us? Which
Men's mere literal Preaching cannot do, nor work those Effects: We are to hear
Christ in all things, him that speaks from Heaven; but says the Rector, they
( i. e. the Quakers) neither do nor will hear him, no their Christ within,
which they are obliged to, tells them other things than our outward Christ or
Prophet does, p. 24.

What an Ignorant and Scornful Reflection and Abuse is this, as if either we
owned another Christ within than the true Christ and Prophet whom we are to
hear (which is a false Insinuation) or else that Christ as within, and Christ
as without, is not one and the same Christ, which is false also; neither is
Christ divided, though he be both without and within.

And where proves this Rector, that the Scripture is the Touchstone to try
Spirits withal; wherein he takes part with Mat. Caffin (the Anabaptist
Preacher, his affirming the same) against the Quakers, p. 25. Christ said, Have
Salt in your selves, and discerning of Spirits was the Gift of the Spirit,
without which none can truly understand or make use of the Scripture. If Tho.
Lawson said, The Scripture is not the Tryer of Spirits, as it is alleged
against us, p. 25. I find no Scripture produced to prove this Erroneous; Christ
is the Great Judge and Tryer of Spirits, who searches and tryes the Heart and
the Reins; and it is by his Light and Spirit that Spirits must be tried and
judged, not by the Carnal, but by the Spiritual Man. And what the Rector again
cites, out of p. 7. against studying to raise a living thing out of a dead, and
the Spirit out of the Letter, etc. was never intended to oppose the Teaching of
Christ's Prophetic Office, for his Office never allowed any such Study:
Neither do the Quakers deny Christ's Gospel Ordinances which are really such,
and by him perpetuated. Here the Rector imposes upon us, and his Allegations
fall short of proof. And our not continuing under a Literal and Shadowy
Dispensation of Types and Figures, carnal Ordinances, and outward Element, but
under a Spiritual Ministry, is rather an Indication of our owning Christ's
Offices, his Gospel, his Ministry or Dispensation, than any refusing to hear
him, who speaks from Heaven by his Holy Spirit, Light and Grace in Men's
Hearts.

What seems most materially objected hitherto in the Rector's Antidote, being
answered, I may take notice of some Passages hereafter, farther to show what he
falsely deems Venom of Quakerism, according to his Title and Observations
against our Profession.

Quest. Do you believe or own Baptism, as Essential to Christianity, or
necessary to Salvation; and for the ingrafting us into Christ and his Church?
(Our answer is,) We believe and are fully persuaded, That Baptism, which is
Essential to Christianity, and the Saving Baptism, or the Cause, without which
none can be true Christians, or Saved, is the Inward or Spiritual Washing of
Regeneration by the Word of Life. This is the Saving Baptism into Christ and
his Church, which produces the Answer of a good Conscience toward God, of
which the outward was a Figure, 1 Pet. 3. 21. This is that One Baptism of
Christ, by One Spirit into that One Body, whereof Christ is the Head. As to
Dipping or Sprinkling Infants or young Children, we find no Precept or
President in Holy Scripture for the Practice thereof; and therefore we cannot
think, our not-believing it, Essential (or necessary) to Salvation; or making
Christians, a sufficient Argument to prove us no Christians; unless it can be
proved, that none are Saved without it, and that all are Saved, that have it.
Considering also, what is positively affirmed in the 39 Articles; as in the
sixth Article, That whatsoever is not read in the Holy Scriptures, nor may be
proved thereby, is not to be required of any Man, that it should be believed as
an Article of the Faith, or be thought requisite or necessary to Salvation. And
in the 20th Article, That the Church ought not to decree or enforce any thing
against or besides Holy Writ, to be believed for necessity of Salvation. And in
Article 21, That things ordained by General Councils, as necessary to
Salvation, have neither Strength nor Authority, unless that they be taken out
of Holy Scripture. On the first part of this Profession, the Rector makes this
Observation against us, viz. By this their Answer, they ( i. e. the Quakers) do
not Insinuate to, but plainly tell the World, what Baptism it is that is
essentially necessary to Salvation, or making Christians that is the Inward or
Spiritual Washing of Regeneration by the Word of Life, the Washing or Cleansing
of the Heart, or an Inward Conversion to God, p. 26, 27.

And herein we plainly tell the World the plain Truth, according to Holy
Scripture, And what Venom is in this pray? Had not this Rector need to be
severely corrected for opposing this Doctrine, as Venomous, and making the
outward Baptism by Water the Saving Baptism, and not the Inward and Spiritual;
As if all the World of Mankind were in a State of Damnation, who are not so
outwardly Baptized with Water; or could be no Christians, nor Saved, if they be
not so Baptized or Rantized, as he would have them; this is like Dip or Damn:
Oh! uncharitable and unchristian Doctrine. Has Salvation by Grace been preached
so long among us, and must it now be placed on Works; or on such a superficial
Work, as that of outward Baptism, Sprinkling, Dipping or Plunging Persons in
Water? But that the Inward Spiritual Baptism, washing of Regeneration by the
Word of Life, the Spirit of Life, the Power of Christ, is the Saving Baptism,
the truly Regenerating Baptism, the Baptism essentially necessary to Salvation,
and making Christians, and not the outward, nor the Sign, Type or Shadow
thereof, is no venomous Doctrine, but agreeable to Holy Scripture Testimony, is
evident, from Isa. 1. Wash you, make you clean, put away the evil of your
doings from before mine Eyes, says the Lord, etc. this was an Inward and
Spiritual Washing. Jer. 4. 14. O Jerusalem, wash thine Heart from thy
wickedness, that thou may be saved: This was a Heart-washing, an Inward and
Spiritual Washing, whereby they might be Saved. Zech. 13. 1. The Fountain
opened to the House of David, and to the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, for Sin, and
for Uncleanness; was a Spiritual Fountain: The Lord God was the Fountain of
Living Water, which when they had forsaken, they committed a great Evil
therein, as well as in hewing to themselves broken Cisterns which could hold no
Water, Jer. 2. 13. And the clean Water the Lord promised to Sprinkle upon his
People, to make them clean from all their Filthiness, and to cleanse them from
all their Idols, Ezekiel. 36. 25. was a Spiritual Sprinkling with Spiritual Water,
and the Lord's doing. John 3. 5. Except a Man be born again of Water, and of
the Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God. This was Spiritual Living
Water, Inward and Sanctifying Grace, as the True Primitive Christians
experienced, and best of Reformed Protestants believed; and not the outward
Element of Water, as Papists and this Rector believe and hold. As in his page
28 (before more fully observed) yea he holds, This poor Element (as he calls
it) of Water, as necessary to do away Sins, and to work upon our Souls, as the
Waters of Jordan were to the Cleansing of Naaman, 2 Kings 5. 13. so necessary
(quoth he) are the Waters of Baptism to the Cleansing our Souls, p. 31. Such
Virtue he ascribes to this Element, thus idolizing it, even as highly as the
Rhemists against the Protestants, but contrary to Christ's own Testimony also,
If I wash thee not, thou have no part with me, says our Lord Jesus, John 13.
8. who also required first to make clean the inside, that the outside might be
clean also. Therefore 'twas the Inward Spiritual Washing of Regeneration, the
Washing or Cleansing of the Heart, by the Word of Life, the Holy Spirit and
Power of Christ, which was the Soul's Saving Baptism, and not that of the
outward Element, Titus 3. 4, 5. After that the Kindness of God our Savior
toward Man appeared, not by Works of Righteousness which we have done, but
according to his Mercy he Saved us by the Washing of Regeneration, and Renewing
of the Holy Ghost.

And if the Baptism which does now save us, be not the Putting away of the
filth of the Flesh, but the Answer of a good Conscience toward God, by the
Resurrection of Jesus Christ, according to that of 1 Pet. 3. 23. What can be
more clear than that the Saving Baptism is that of the Spirit, (which is the
One Baptism, Ephesians. 4. 5.) whereby the Saints were all Baptized into One Body,
1 Cor. 12. 13. and not that of the outward Element, which can neither cleanse
the Soul, nor wash away the Sin or Guilt thereof. The Inward and Spiritual
Grace Saves the Soul from Sin and Condemnation, and ought to be preferred to
all outward and visible Signs, which can neither Save, nor Sustain or Relieve
the Soul, it is Life and Substance, which is divine can do that. The One
Spiritual Baptism, and that One Bread, that Spiritual Meat and Drink which
comes down from Heaven, is that which both saves and nourishes the Soul unto
Eternal Life, John 6. 1 Cor. 10.

That Disciples and Apostles of Christ did Baptize with Water, is not denied,
Acts 8. 36, 38. and chapter 10. 48. and chapter 19. 3, 4, 5. but that they did
Practice, or enjoin it as an act of necessity, pursuant to Christ's Commission
in Matthew. 28. 19. is to impose upon us, or beg the Question; but that it was
rather permissively practiced in con discention, than by that Commission. For
1st, Water is not expressed in that Text. 2dly, When they Baptized with Water,
they did not use the terms of the Commission in it. We do not read in all the
Acts of the Apostles, that any of them Baptized with Water, in the Name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, or that they used those
expressions or terms, in their Baptizing with Water, but in the name of the
Lord, or in the name of the Lord Jesus. If Water had been intended in that
Commission of Christ, Matthew. 28. 19. the Apostle Paul must be concerned in it,
it must be as much binding to him as any other Minister, but he declares the
contrary, that Christ sent him not to Baptize but to Preach the Gospel, 1 Cor.
1. 17. he does not say Christ sent me not only to Baptize, but positively, for
Christ sent me not to Baptize, but to preach the Gospel, which was part of the
Reason he gave why he thanked God that he had baptized no more than those he
mentions, 1 Cor. 1. 14, 15, 16. as well as, Lest they should have said, he had
baptized in his own name; for it is not to be supposed he would thank God for
not performing part of his Commission, if it had been to Baptize with Water, as
well as to Preach the Gospel; but that positive and general Reason, for Christ
sent me not to Baptize, but to preach the Gospel, leaves no room for him to say
Christ sent me to Minister Water Baptism (in his Commission in Matthew. 28. 19.)
for Water Baptism was properly John's Baptism and Ministry, to make way for
Christ's higher Dispensation and Spiritual Ministry, Matthew. 3. 11. Mark 11. 8.
Luke 3. 16. John 1. 16. Acts 1. 5. and 10. 16. compare with Acts 19. 2, 3, 4.
But I need not enlarge on this subject, to answer the Anabaptists Argument for
Plunging, or dipping Believers in Water, unless this Rector were in the
Practice thereof, and renounced his Rantism, as they do as a Scriptureless
Thing, as they term Sprinkling Infants. But referr him to a Treatise of one
that was of his Coat, i. e. William Dell his (...) Or, The Doctrine of Baptisms.

To the Rector's Referring the Reader to that Excellent Piece of Water Baptism
(as he terms it) writ by that worthy and Ingenious Author (as he applauds him)
of The Snake in the Grass, etc. printed 1697. p. 29.

Thus highly has he commended the Author of that Great Defaming and Reproaching
Libel, i. e. The Snake in the Grass; but it would be too difficult a Task for
him to defend the manifold Gross and Abominable Lies and Calumnies contained
therein, against the manifest detection and discovery made of them, not only in
my Antidote against the Venom of the said Snake, etc. but more fully, in a
farther Scrutiny made in a Book now Extant, Entitled, Anguis Flagellatus: Or,
a Switch for the Snake. By Joseph Wyeth.

When this Rector can demonstrate a Probatum est, of such virtue in that Poor
Element (as he calls it) of Water Baptism, as to cleanse and cure polluted and
distempered Souls from Sin, Spiritual Leprosy and Diseases, as Naaman the
Assyrian was cured of his Leprosy by washing seven times in the River of
Jordan, 2 Kings 5. 13. or as the Blind Man found in washing in the Pool of
Siloam that he received Sight and came seeing, John 9. -- 11. unto both which
the Rector alludes in's comparison for Water Baptism; Then I say if he can
evince a Probatum of such virtue therein, according to his own comparison, It
will be a most pregnant Argument to induce People to believe it is required of
them, to be dipped or baptized in the Element of Water, and to hasten into it,
especially if they can believe it can effect such a Miracle, as an Inward and
Spiritual Cure upon their Souls, as to Cleanse and Cure them from Sin and the
Leprosy thereof, as well as from Spiritual Blindness, which answers the
Allusions before; and the more necessity thereof, if they may not be so cured
without it, as this Rector says of Naaman, If he had neglected it, he had not
otherwise been cured, How much more then (quoth he) when God has appointed the
means of Baptism by his Son, if we neglect it, shall we be saved without it? p.
31.

This is like Dipp or Damn still, and yet all this while he may mean Rantism,
which is not properly Baptism; but I deny either ( i. e. with the Element of
Water) to be the means of Salvation, or that as such, God has so appointed
them, and that Men shall not be Saved without them; ( i. e. without Sprinkling
or Dipping in Water) the Rector still imposes and begs the Question in all
these, without Scripture proof. I would not be understood to own or allow any
despite to Water Baptism, or inventing contemptible Names for it (as the Rector
insinuates) as it was once a Dispensation from Heaven to John Baptist; nor do I
either condemn, despise or contemn any who are tenderly Conscientious in the
Belief and Practice thereof, but desire they may see and come further, so as to
receive that Inward Spiritual Baptism, the Washing of Regeneration, by which
Christ effectually Saves the True Believers in him; I desire none may Idolize
the outward Element of Water which cannot Save, to hinder them of the Inward
which can Save.

And it being generally granted, that the outward Baptism is an outward and
visible Sign of an Inward and Spiritual Grace, and Type or Figure of the Inward
Baptism.

I wish Men would be so considerate, as to examine what Necessity there can be
of the continuance of the Sign or Type, when they do not hear Christ the Great
Prophet directing thereto; nor does it effect the end proposed, i. e. the
Washing away of Sin, seeing the Substance and Mystery thereof is made manifest,
and a Spiritual Dispensation or Ministry from Heaven given immediately,
directing to the Life, Substance, the end of all Shadows, which really end in
Christ the Substance, whose Evangelical Ministry is a Dispensation of the Grace
of God, of Substance and not of Shadow.

Quest. Do you believe or own the Lord's Supper, either as a Sign of the Love
that Christians ought to have among themselves, or as a Seal of the Saints
Communion, and Commemoration of Christ's Death for us, or as Figurative of
Christ's Body and Blood, Spiritually received by Faith? Answ. The Supper of the
Lord we own, and tenderly consider in a Twofold Sense, 1. In the Figure; 2. In
the Substance. 1. That our Lord Jesus Christ, at his Supper with his Disciples,
did eat the Passover (which was for the fulfilling and Consummation of the
Feasts under the Law, see Luke 22.) and at this Supper he did take and minister
Bread and the Cup to his Disciples (for there was no Transubstantiation)
saying, This do in remembrance of me. And (says the Apostle) As often as ye
eat this Bread, and drink this Cup, ye show the Lord's Death, till he come, 1
Cor. 11. After this they did more clearly know his Coming, and Christ after the
Spirit; Jesus Christ in them, 2 Cor. 13, 5. and 5. 16. 2. And Christ said to
his Disciples, I will not drink henceforth of this Fruit of the Vine, until
that day I drink it new with you in my Father's Kingdom, Matt. 26. 29. And
likewise of the Passover, I will not any more eat thereof, until it be
fulfilled in the Kingdom of God, Luke 22. 16. And he further said, I appoint
unto you a Kingdom, as my Father has appointed to me, that ye may eat and
drink at my Table in my Kingdom, etc. Luke 22. 29, 30. In these things we
believe he spoke Mysteriously, and that every Member of his Spiritual Church,
does daily Spiritually partake of his Body and Blood by Faith; as, The Cup of
Blessing, which we bless, is it not the Communion of the Blood of Christ? And
the Bread, which we break, Is it not the Communion of the Body of Christ? For
we being many, are one Bread, and one Body, for we are all Partakers of that
one Bread, 1 Cor. 10. 15, 16, 17. The Son of God says, Behold I stand at the
door and knock, if any Man hear my voice, and open the Door, I will come in to
him, and will Sup with him, and he with me, Rev. 3. 20. And Wisdom calls to
the Simple, Come eat of my Bread, and drink of my Wine, Prove. 9. 4, 5. And,
says Christ, The Bread of God is he, that comes down from Heaven, and gives
Life unto the World. I am that Bread of Life; my Flesh is Meat indeed, and my
Blood is Drink indeed; He that eats my Flesh, and drinks my Blood, dwells
in me, and I in him, John 6. We believe, that all who thus do truly partake of
Christ by Faith, are in true Communion and Love among themselves; which they do
want, who are only in the outward Observation of Signs and Shadows. Upon which
the Rector makes this Observation, viz. The Reader may here discern, how by
their deceivable Words, and manifold Corruptions of the Scriptures, these
horrid Impostors set themselves at work, to evade and make null the Holy
Ordinance of the Lord's Supper, as instituted and administered in Bread and
Wine, etc. p. 34.

Reply. He passes severe Judgment before either Proof or Trial, as one more
expert in Railing and Reviling, than in Demonstration. For our considering the
Supper of the Lord in a Twofold Sense: 1. In the Type or Figure. 2. In the
Substance; Is neither Deceivable, nor Corruption of Scripture, consequently;
it is a horrid Calumny to brand us as Horrid Impostors for such Consideration.
We know none but Papists, that will deny the outward Bread and Wine to be
Typical, though Consecrated; We are sure, no real Protestants do deny them to
be Typical, or Figurative, but have affirmed them so to be. And whether the
Supper of the Lord, or Christ's Last Supper (in the Type) Luke 22. was made up
only of the Bread broken, and the Cup, is a Question to be considered by them
who assert it; or whether the Passover was not principally concerned in the
Supper, seeing, that also after Supper Christ took the Cup, and gave them: I
deny, that the Bread and the Wine only, as now ministered by Priests, is either
properly a Supper, or a Dinner; How then come they to call it The Supper of the
Lord? Or deny it to be a Type or Figure, by deeming us Horrid Impostors, for
asserting, the outward Supper to be Typical? It Is true, it is said, As often as ye
eat this Bread, and drink this Cup, ye do show the Lord's Death, till he come,
1 Cor. 11. 26. I hope our Adversary will not make As often, to import a Command,
and that perpetual too, unless till he (Christ) come, can import a perpetual
Delay of his Coming. And though Christ's Last Supper, wherein he eat the
Passover with his Disciples, was then (pro tempore) commanded by him; yet this
does not prove it his Institution: For it was a Legal Institution, fulfilled by
him, as other Legal Rites and Types were, before he was offered up.

That Christ, as the Bread of Life from Heaven, and his Divine Virtue, Grace
and Spirit, as the Fruit of him, the heavenly Vine (which gives Life,
Nourishment and Comfort unto the Soul) was really the Substance and Mystery
typified by the outward Bread and Cup, I hope, no Spiritual Believer or
Christian will deny. And to suppose, they shall not partake thereof, until
Christ's Coming at the Resurrection, is to suppose, their Souls must starve and
famish in the mean time; which can be no glad Tidings to them.

The Rector falsely charges us with saying, The Resurrection is past already (as
Hymeneus and Philetus, 2 Timothy 2. 18.) p. 34. It Is none of our saying; we deny
that the Resurrection (there spoken of) is past (or made) already; or that we
overthrow the Faith of any believing therein, as it is to come by Christ Jesus,
who is the Resurrection and the Life, and by whom comes the Resurrection of the
Dead, 1. Cor. 15.

And I would ask this Rector, where we say or use these Expressions, That the
Institution of the Lord's Supper was only to continue, till that, Inward
Coming, or forming of Christ in our Hearts, and for that Reason throw off the
outward Supper? p. 34, 35. Where have we so said, or argued? For our not using
the Type, is rather, because we do not believe it of Force or Necessity under
an higher Dispensation, namely, that of the New Covenant, established by the
Death of Christ the Testator, who blotted out and nailed the handwriting of
Ordinances to his Cross; the Dispensation of the Gospel and New Covenant, being
a Dispensation of Substance, and not of Shadows; although they were in some
things condescended unto in a State of Infancy, when not imposed as things
Essential to Christianity or Salvation. It Is true, that they who gladly
received the Word, continued steadfastly in the Apostles Doctrine and
Fellowship, and in breaking of Bread, and in Prayers, Acts 2. 42. And Verse 46.
And they continuing daily with one Accord in the Temple, and breaking Bread
from House to House, did eat their Meat with Gladness and singleness of Heart.
No doubt they were very Innocent in this Practice, Praising God, etc. v. 47.
And this we have often done, and believe, it is the Duty of all true
Christians, to eat their Meat with Singleness of Heart; and whether they eat or
drink, to do all to the Glory of God, 1 Cor. 10. 31. Col. 3. 17. And what
greater Sanction can this Man suppose or place, upon what he calls the Lord's
Supper? Ought we not to praise God for all his Benefits, and use them to his
Glory daily; and not only in a daily Remembrance of Christ and his Love to us,
but also in a true sense thereof, and of his Sanctifying Word. In Acts the
second quoted, it is also said (Verse 44, 45.) And all that believed were
together, and had all things common, and sold their Possessions and Goods, and
parted them to all Men, as every Man had need. Now, if our Opposers will make
all Examples and Practices binding, then why do they not follow this, of having
all things common, and selling their Possessions? etc. I do not think the
Priests now adays will imitate them, or deem themselves bound thereby. And
where do they so much as imitate those Primitive Believers, in breaking Bread
from House to House? And how will they prove this Breaking of Bread only to be
the Lord's Supper? I deny that to be made up only of Bread; and I cannot
suppose this Man will esteem it a sufficient Supper. Nor do I find, that the
Apostles call Believers, only breaking Bread from House to House, ( Acts 2.) or
the Disciples coming together to break Bread ( Acts 20. 7.) the Lord's Supper;
where they neither mention Wine, nor the Passover: Nor would it be of good
report, to say they drank Wine from House to House: And if it should be
asserted, That the Lord's Supper was made up only of breaking Bread, would not
this gratify the Popish Priests, in giving their Sacrament but in one kind?
However, the outward Bread, as broken, and the outward Cup, as ministered by our
Lord Jesus Christ, were not only Figurative of his Body and Blood, as offered
upon the Cross; but also did Typifie the Saints Eating and Drinking the Body
and Blood of Christ Spiritually, who says, My Flesh is Meat indeed, and my
Blood is Drink indeed; And he that eats my Flesh, and drinks my Blood,
dwells in me, and I in him, John 6. And I Will raise him up at the last day,
says Christ. Therefore it is no Corruption of Scripture, nor Imposture, to
consider the Supper of the Lord in the Figure, and in the Substance.

And as to these other Texts, 1 Cor. 10. 15, 16, 17. Rev. 3. 20. Prove. 9. 4, 5.
John 6. Matt. 26. 29. Luke 22. 16, 29, 30. They ( i. e. the Quakers) offer to
the view of the World, I cannot discern or imagine (quoth the Rector) to what
End and Purpose this is done, unless it be to amuse the Reader, abuse the
Scriptures, or confute themselves, Page 36, 37.

Reply. It was to none of those Ends these Texts are offered, but to show our
Consideration of the Lord's Supper, in the Substance and Mystery thereof, as
Typified by the outward, that there is a Spiritual Bread and Wine, Spiritual
Meat and Drink in Christ's Kingdom, for the enlivened Soul to eat and drink of,
and live by, which the Visible and Elementary did Typifie and Figure, Prove. 9.
5. Wisdom says, Come eat of my Bread, and drink of the Wine which I have
mingled: That this was Spiritual Bread and Wine which Christ the Wisdom of God
has in his House for his Family; I hope will not be denied.

Matthew. 26. 29. But I say unto you, I will not drink henceforth of this Fruit
of the Vine, until that day when I drink it new with you in my Father's Kingdom.

Luke 22. 16. For I say unto you, I will not any more eat thereof (i. e. of the
Passover) until it be fulfilled in the Kingdom of God. And verse. 18. I will not
drink of the Fruit of the Vine, until the Kingdom of God shall come. And verse.
29. I appoint unto you a Kingdom as my Father has appointed unto me. Verse. 30.
That ye may Eat and Drink at my Table in my Kingdom.

Now I would ask our Opposers if they think This was meant Literally of Eating
and Drinking outward Bread and Wine in the Kingdom of God, and of Christ, and
at an outward Table therein? If not Literally meant, then it must be
Spiritually, as Christ's Kingdom is a Spiritual Kingdom. God's Kingdom stands
in Power, in Righteousness, Joy and Peace in the Holy Ghost, and not in outward
Forms and Shadows; and in this Kingdom is the Substance and End of all the
Outward Shadows and Types thereof, which being expressed under the same names
the Types are, is the more evidently to show the End and Antitype thereof, in
Christ the Life and Substance.

John 6. 51. I am the Living Bread which came down from Heaven, if any Man eat
of this Bread, he shall live for ever (says Christ.) And verse. 54. Whosoever
eats my Flesh, and drinks my Blood, has Eternal Life, and I will raise him
up at the Last Day. See also verse. 53, 55, 56, 57, 58.

Did Christ mean Literally herein? No sure, This Bread which came down from
Heaven, was not the outward Sign, Type or Figure, but the Spiritual Living
Bread, which gives Life to the Soul, and is Meat indeed unto it, as his Blood
is Drink indeed, to all Spiritual Believers in him, who are come to Eat and
Drink of the same Spiritual Meat and Drink, which Israel did Eat and Drink of,
as testified, 1 Cor. 10. 3, 4. That they Did all Eat the same Spiritual Meat;
and did all Drink the same Spiritual Drink: For they drank of that Spiritual
Rock that followed them (or went them) and that Rock was Christ. And of these
things the Apostle would not have his Brethren at Corinth Ignorant, verse. 1. --
and verse. 15. I speak as to wise Men, Judge ye what I say. Verse. 16. The Cup of
Blessing, which we bless, is it not the Communion of the Blood of Christ? The
Bread which we break, is it not the Communion of the Body of Christ? Verse. 17.
For we being many, are one Bread, and one Body: For we are all partakers of
that one Bread. And verse. 18. Behold Israel after the Flesh: Are not they which
eat of the Sacrifices partakers of the Altar?

From all which it is Evident, the Apostles chief Aim and End was, to bring
those Believers to Life and Substance, beyond and above the Shadows and Types,
that they might not be Inferior to Israel after the Flesh, in their eating and
drinking of the same Spiritual Meat and Drink, even of that Spiritual Rock,
which was Christ, and be true partakers of him, as the one Offering and
Passover, who was sacrificed for us; see also 1 Cor. 5. 7, 8.

Rev. 3. 20. Behold, I stand at the Door and knock, if any Man hear my Voice,
and open the Door, I will come in to him, and will Sup with him, and he with
me. This Christ the Faithful and true Witness declares, for the encouragement
of all to open the Door of their Hearts to him, that they may come into
spiritual Communion with him, and therein partake with him of his spiritual
Supper; unto which this Rector partly ascents, in saying, I make no doubt, but
all good Christians own Christ to be the Bread of Life, and of Spiritual
Communion with him in his holy Ordinances, p. 37.

And I say, there is no doubt, but true Christians have Spiritual Communion with
Christ, in truly hearing, and sincerely obeying him in those things, which may
be truly called his holy Ordinances and Institutions perpetuated by himself,
and attended by his divine Authority for the Sanction thereof; but then Men
should have a Care they do not impose humane Institutions and Traditions for
Christ's, and say, they are His, though without any express Warrant from him
either Mediate or Immediate. We know none among us, that either slights,
vilifies or contemns any holy Institutions or Ordinances of Christ, or any
thing which God or Christ ever commanded, whether now in force or not; neither
do I condemn any one, who believe it is their Duty to observe Baptism, or that
which is termed the Supper, whilst they do it with a sincere Intention, as
Conscientious toward God therein; they seeing no further, nor yet designing to
oppose the Discovery of an higher Dispensation and Ministry. Although I heartily
with (as I hope) that all such may see more clearly, and beyond the Shadows to
the Substance and Mystery of Christ revealed; that the one saving Baptism, and
the one living Bread from Heaven, they may all experience, and truly partake of.

One thing (by the way) I would note, what Construction our Adversary makes of
1 Cor. 11. 26. As often as ye Eat this Bread, and Drink this Cup, ye do show
the Lord's Death till he come. This [till he come] is construed, Till Christ's
Outward, Personal Coming, visible in his Body of Flesh and Bones at the
Resurrection, to make our vile Bodies like his own Glorious Body, p. 34, 36.
According to which Interpretation, if we should read, 1 Cor. 11. 26. As often as
ye eat this Bread, and drink this Cup, ye show the Lord's Death till he come
Personally and Visibly at the Resurrection: It would import as if the
Corinthians were to stay, and live upon Earth in the Observation of the Outward
Bread and Cup, Eating and Drinking thereof until then, i. e. until Christ's
Last Coming at the Resurrection; But how could that be?

But seeing Christ's Eating and Drinking at his Supper with his Disciples, was
Spiritually to be fulfilled in his Father's Kingdom, and at his Table in his
Kingdom (as he promised) according to Luke 22. 16, 18, 29, 30. Matthew. 26. 29.
some may inquire when this should be fulfilled, and when this Kingdom should
come to Saints and true Believers in Christ? Whither in this Life, or in the
last Day, when Christ shall come in the Glory of his Father, with his Angels,
to reward every Man according to his Works? Matthew. 16. 27.

To which I Answer, Christ says in the very next verse, Verily I say unto you,
there be some standing here, which shall not taste of Death, till they see the
Son of Man coming in his Kingdom, Matthew. 16. 28. And the like in Mark 9. 1.
Verily I say unto you, that there be some of them that stand here, which shall
not taste of Death, till they have seen the Kingdom of God come with Power. The
like in Luke 9. 27. All which show the Kingdom Then near to come, even in their
days; consequently, the Saints partaking of the Blessing thereof, was, and is
in their Life time, wherein they partook even of the Spiritual Supper of the
Lord, the Spiritual Meat and Drink at Christ's Table in his Kingdom, wherein
the Substance and Fullness of all Types and Shadows consists, and whereof every
true Spiritual Christian is partaker.

By all which it is Evident, that there is just Cause to consider the Lord's
Supper in the Substance and Mystery of Christ, and that his Kingdom, wherein
the same is Spiritually received, ought not to be put afar off, nor true
Believers excluded out of it, until Christ's Last Coming at the End of the
World, and the Resurrection in the Great and Last Day. Neither ought poor Souls
to be left starving and famishing under Shadows, and a barren Ministry, until
then; for that can be no Glad Tidings, or true Gospel to them, therefore all
had need to be careful, and take heed, that they don't famish their poor Souls,
by neglecting the Substance, and feeding upon Shadows.

And that the Bread and the Cup, which Christ gave at his Supper, were a Figure
or Typical, was confessed by diverse Eminent Martyrs, as John Frith in his
Reasons upon the Sacrament, treating of Christ the Promised Seed, says,

Likewise the same Promise was made unto Moses, the most meek and gentle
Captain of the Israelites, which did not only himself believe upon Christ,
which was so often promised; but also did prefigurate him by diverse Means, both
by the Manna which came down from Heaven, and also by the Water which issued out
of the Rock, for the refreshing the Bodies of his People. Neither is it to be
doubted, but that both Manna, and this Water, had a Prophetical Mystery in
them, declareing the very selfsame thing, which the Bread and the Wine do now
declare unto us in the Sacrament: For, thus says St. Augustine, Wbosoever did
understand Christ in the Manna, did eat the same Spiritual Food, that we do;
but they which by that Manna sought only to fill their Bellies, did eat thereof
and are Dead. On the Margent it is, Manna, the Water of the Rock, a Figure of
Christ's Body: Bread and Wine a Figure likewise of Christ's Body, 1 Cor 10. See
2 Vol. Martyrs, p. 305. printed 1641. And Dr. Cranmer, Archbishop of
Canterbury, confesses, Christ's Speech, i. e. [ This is my Body] to be
Figurative; and quoting Ambrose in 1 Cor. 11. he calls the Bread and the Cup
Signs, a Type, Figure or Sign of the Blood of Christ, and of his Benefit (in
his Disputations in Oxford, Vol. 3. Mar. p. 59.) And (p. 54. Ibid.) he says,
The Flesh lives by Bread, but the Soul is inwardly Fed by Christ. And Dr.
Ridley (Bishop of London) in his Disputation at Oxford, says, And as one of
the Fathers says; a Figure is in vain, where the thing signified is present,
Ibid. p. 74. And p. 75, 76. In Opposition to the Popish Doctrine of
Transubstantiation, he says, The sayings of the Fathers declare it to be a
Figurative Speech; as appears in Origin, Tertullian, Chrysostom (in Opere
Imperfecto) Augustine, Ambrose, Basil, Gregory* Nazienzen, Hilary, and most
plainly in Bertram. The rest of the Rector's Observation, relating to Baptism,
Bread and Wine (page 37, 38.) is answered in the Just Examination of the Two
Books of the Three Norfolk-Priests.

Quest. Do you believe and own the Holy Scriptures, contained in the Books of
the Old and New Testament, to be given by Divine Inspiration, and to contain
all Matters of Doctrine and Testimony, necessary to be believed and practiced,
in order to Salvation, and Peace with God?

Answ. Our Answer is, Yes, we do; and by the assistance of the Grace and good
Spirit of God, which gives the true Understanding of the Mind of God, and
Meaning of Holy Scripture, we always desire to live in the Faith, Knowledge and
Practice of them in all things, appertaining to Life and Godliness; Holy
Scripture being given by Divine Inspiration, is profitable for Doctrine,
Correction and Instruction, that the Man of God may be perfect, thoroughly
furnished unto every good Work, able to make the Man of God Wise unto
Salvation, through Faith which is in Christ Jesus. In the Observation made upon
this our Profession, the Rector is pleased to question the Sincerity thereof,
which he leaves to the World, and the Reader to judge, p. 39, 42. But our
Sincerity is known to the Lord, to whom we commit our Cause. And being
prejudged by this pretended Rector, we shall not leave it to him to be Judge
over our Sincerity, or Conscience toward God. For being all along Prejudicate
in his Observations, he had need to be corrected for his Incharitableness and
Censoriousness.

The first Instance he gives to disprove our Sincerity, is a Quotation of some
Quakers out of the Quakers Refuge, p. 17. against John Whitehead and Robert
Ruckhill, Whether the first Penman of the Scriptures was Moses or Hermes? etc.
With other Questions, which are answered over and over in diverse of our Books,
and particularly in my late Examination, entitled, Truth and Innocence (p.
57.) wherein it is made evident, that those Questions did not arise from any
Doubts or Scruples in the said John Whitehead or R. R. but in some others; and
therefore waved, as not the Subject of R. R's Argument, who recited them in the
said Quakers Refuge. Consequently very unjustly quoted against the Quakers, to
render them Insincere, in the same Confession, to the Truth of the Holy
Scripture, as given by Divine Inspiration.

What the Rector quotes against E. Borough, G. F. W. P. G. W. etc. in p. 40,
41, 42. concerning the Scriptures, and the Word of God, etc. is also answered
in the said Examination, p. 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, and p. 58.

I cannot but take notice how Credulous (as well as Envious) this Rector
appears, in repeating Fra. Bugg's Old Lie, to defame us, bidding the Reader,
See Lawson's Threefold Estate of Antichrist, p. 9. The Scripture is Dust and
Death, Beastly Wares, etc. p. 41.

I would ask this Rector, whether he has seen these very Words in the place
quoted? Or if he has ever read the said Lawson's Threefold State of
Antichrist? If he says, he has, I Am sure, he is guilty of a notorious Lie in
this Quotation, for there is not a word of calling the Scripture Beastly Ware,
etc. But Babylon's Merchants selling Beastly Ware for a large Price, etc. p. 9.
And if he received this Quotation upon Credit from F. Bugg, he is very Unjust
and Immoral therein, in receiving and promoting such a Reproach against his
Neighbors to defame them; which Offense is justly Condemned by the righteous
Law of God.

Another apparent Abuse I find against Samuel Fisher his Appendix, p. 752.
Printed 1679. by a partial and unjust Citation, in curtailing and perverting
his Words, to make them look, as if writ in Contempt of Holy Scripture, where
the Rector says, Samuel Fisher has these Words (speaking of the Text of
Scripture) Which Transcriptions and Translations, were they neve so certain,
and entirely answering to the first Original Copies, yet are not capable to be
(to all Men) any other than a Lesbyan Rule, or Nose of Wax -- T his worthy
Author, in his Works, has the Testimony of Luke Howard, H. Fisher, and W. Penn,
p. 40.

Thus this Adversary has injuriously dealt by Samuel Fisher, rendering him to
speak these words of the Text of Scripture, which are spoken in reference to
the various Transcriptions, Translations, Interpretations, Expositions, Senses
and Meanings, Thoughts and Conceits of Men, who Comment upon them, and not to
the Text of Scripture, purely considered: The Rector having left out both the
foregoing and subsequent Reasons of Sam. Fisher's words, which clear his
intention, both from his Calumny of the Venom of Quakerism, and from his
insinuating Insincerity against our said Profession. I may therefore recite
part of them in S. F's behalf, he not being here to vindicate himself, and the
Truth professed by him; which in his Lifetime he largely vindicated, to the
great Confusion of his Opposers, where he says, Moreover, how entirely soever
the Transcriptions are, the Translations, which is all the Rule the People have
(unless the Priest's prattle must be their Rule) are confessed to be the most
various, and abominably and woefully corrupted; Witness J. O. who is scarce more
busy to evince the entireness of his Hebrew and Greek Text, than in evidencing
the Erroneousness of all Translations, some of which that are most ancient, and
of most account among most Priests (as the Septuagint) are gone off (quoth J.
O.) from the Original in a Thousand Places twice told. -- Thus they run the
bounds, trace to and fro, and dance up and down in their dark Minds, about the
Transcriptions and Translations of their Text, which they take to be their
Rule; which Transcriptions and Translations, were they never so certain and
entire by answering the first Original Copies, yet are not capable to be (to
all Men) any other than a Lesbyan Rule, or Nose of Wax; for as much as even
where Men have them (as half the World has not) they are liable to be wrested,
and actually twisted twenty ways by Interpreters, whose Expositions, Senses and
Meanings, which are as many and various, as the Thoughts, and Conceits, and
Inventions of the Men are, who Comment upon them, must be the Rule to such as
can read them neither in Hebrew, nor in Greek, nor in their own Mother-Tongues
neither. Appendix, p. 751, 752.

Now to clear S. Fisher, from esteeming the Text of Holy Scripture, in it self,
either a Lesbyan (or Leaden) Rule, or a Nose of Wax, but only the Corrupters
and Perverters thereof, making them such, that it may appear, how well he
esteemed of the Holy Scriptures, he in the same Book with the said Appendix,
quoted against him (i. e. Rusticus ad Academicus, Printed in Quarto, 1660. in
his Second Apologetical and Expostulatory Exercitation, Chap. I. p. 6. he calls
the Scripture a Declaration of those things that were believed, and of the Word
of Faith, that was preached, a writing Holy Scriptures, Scriptures of Truth,
Books of Writing, that consists, treat of, and declare in forms of plain, true,
suitable and sound Words, various true things, etc. So that as written in the
Spirit, the Holy Scriptures may be said to be Homogeneous Writings, all of one
kind: But in respect of the several Businesses written of therein, they are
Heterogeneous ( i. e.) a Body or Bulk of as various Writings, as any extant in
the World besides them. And in p. 48, 49. he condemns Men's Mis-renderings,
corrupt Copyings, and Commentings, and making the Scripture to stand, which way
any Critic pleases. And farther says, As it is my continual Exercise in Works
to do it ( i. e. to condemn such their Corruptions and Perversions) so do I
here, in plain Words, exalt the Scripture, which they so debase; and state it
over all their Trash and Trumpery, even on the very top of all their long Train
of Traditions, and over the Archest Title of the Tripple-Crown, the proudest
Pinnacle of Peter's (now Un- Peter-like) painted Temple, the highest Point of
that Pompous, Pious, Pitteous Pillar and Ground of Truth, the choicest Chapter
of that Holy Church, and infallibly Erring infallible Chair. And in p. 49. he
farther declares himself, a just, plain and impartial Pleader for the
Scripture, and a doer of Right to those Holy Writings, which are egregiously
wronged by both Papists and Protestants, etc. And p. Ibid. he argues for many (
i. e. who are falsely supposed to be slighters and disowners of Scripture) who,
to give it its due and no more, (as indeed it is) do own, honor, and exalt the
Holy Scripture, much more, and more truly than any of your exalted selves, etc.
And p. 112. The Scripture testifies of the Word which will endure.

Thus S. Fisher has cleared the Point, of his great Value and Esteem of the
Holy Scripture, considered in its highest, primitive, best and purest Aspect,
as at first given forth; quite contrary to his being supposed a Contemner
thereof.

Quest. Do you believe the Doctrine of the Resurrection from the Dead, and of
Eternal Judgment, and the Immortality of the Soul?

Answ. We sincerely believe and confess the Doctrine of the Resurrection from
the Dead, and of Eternal Judgment, according to Holy Scripture Heb. 6. 2. That
God will raise the Dead, and judge the World in Righteousness, by his Son Jesus
Christ, in the Day appointed, even in the Great Day of Judgment, and that
Harvest, which is the End of the World. That the Soul of Man, though created,
is Immortal, and never dies. Even as these Doctrines are more fully testified
in Holy Scriptures, by Jesus Christ and his holy Apostles. 1. For the Doctrine
of the Resurrection, see Mat. 13. 43. and Chap. 22. 30, 31. Mark 12. 25. Luke
20. 36. John 5. 29. 1 Cor. 15. 19, 35, 36, 37, to the 53d verse. Phil. 3. 29.
Col. 3. 4. 1 John 3. 2. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 16. Rev. 20. 12, 13, 14, 15. 2. Of Eternal
Judgment, see Mat. 13. 39, 40, 41, 42. Chap. 10. 15. and 11. 24. and 25. 30,
31, 41. Mark 8. 38. Luke 9. 26. Acts 17. 31. John 5. 22, 27. Acts 10. 42. 2 Thessalonians. 1. 7, 8, 9. 2 Timothy 4. 1. 1 Pet. 4. 5. 2 Pet. 2. 9. Jude 6. 3. For the
Immortality of the Soul, see Genesis 1. 27. and; 2. 7. 1 Kings 17. 21. Mat. 16.
26. Mark 8. 36, 37. Eccles. 3. 21. and 12. 7. Luke 16. 22, 23. 2 Cor. 5. 1, 2.
In the Observation upon this Profession (On our sincerely believing and
confessing the Doctrine of the Resurrection from the Dead, according to Holy
Scripture.) The Rector thus reflects, That is according to their Sense and
Interpretation of Holy Scripture, which is no ways agreeable to the Sense and
Interpretations of any Orthodox Christians, p. 43. Which is as undue a
Reflection, as it is uncharitably Censorious. And what he quotes against our
Sense, out of W. Penn's Arguments, against such a Carnal Resurrection of Man's
Carnal (or Natural) Body (as some imagine) out of his Reason against Railing,
p. 134. is no proof at all, That our Sense of Holy Scripture (in this case) is
no ways agreeable to the Sense and Interpretation of any Orthodox Christians;
unless he can either prove the same Natural, Carnal and Numerical Body that now
is, to be the Resurrection Body, or the Apostle Paul Heterodox in asserting it
a Spiritual Body; for a Natural Body is sown, a Spiritual Body is raised, and
that was not first which is Spiritual, but that which is Natural, and afterward
that which is Spiritual, 1 Cor. 15. 46. and ver. 37. and our Sense clearly
agrees with this.

His other Instance to disprove our Sense herein (if rightly cited) is out of
Thomas Ellwood's Answer to G. Keith's First Narrative, p. 149. printed 1696. In
1 Cor. 15. 37. he makes the Apostle thus speak (says he) The Body that shall
arise, is not the same Carnal Body that dies. No, the Body that is sown is a
Natural Body, but the Body that is raised is a Spiritual Body; it is sown a
Natural Body, it is raised a Spiritual Body, ver. 44. And that none might think
this Spiritual Body was the same with the Natural Body, he adds (quoth the
Priest) there is a Natural Body, and there is a Spiritual Body. He does not say
(quoth he) the Natural Body is made a Spiritual Body, or the Natural Body and
the Spiritual Body is but one and the same Body, but he sets them in opposition
as two distinct Bodies; and (again) that none might think this Spiritual Body
was the same, he adds, There is a Natural Body, and there is a Spiritual Body,
p. 27. Thus far the Rector.

This Addition, as he counts it, and repeats twice over against Tho. Ellwood,
to make him an Offender, is the express words of the Apostle Paul, 1 Cor. 15.
44. There is a Natural Body, and there is a Spiritual Body. Thus the Apostle
uses the same distinction between the Natural Body and the Spiritual Body,
Where does he say, They are both one and the same Body? And farther to evince
the distinction, Paul adds, And so it is written, The first Man Adam was made a
living Soul, the last Adam was made a quickening Spirit. Howbeit that was not
first which is Spiritual, but that which is Natural, and afterward that which
is Spiritual, ver. 45, 46. Now I ask these Men, 1st, If the first Adam, and the
last Adam, were one and the same Adam? 2. If the Spiritual Body, and the
Natural Body, be one and the same Numerical Body? And 3. If the Celestial
Bodies, and the Bodies Terrestrial, be one and the same Bodies? see ver. 40.
and ver. 37. And thou sowest not that Body that shall be: Whom shall we believe
in this case, the Apostle or this Priest? for they differ herein; the one says,
Thou sowest not that Body that shall be; and the other, It Is the same Body that
shall be: The one says, Flesh and Blood cannot Inherit the Kingdom of God, 1
Cor. 15. 50. The other I presume (upon his Principle) says, The same Carnal
Body (i. e. of Flesh and Blood) can and shall Inherit the Kingdom of God. But
then how agrees his Notion herein with his Beloved Friend (their Assistant)
Geo. Keith, his affirming, The Husk or drossy part, that is no more the true
Body, than dross in a lump of Rich Ore of Gold is Gold; as in his Gross Error
and Hypocrisy detected, p. 13. And what he means by the Husk or drossy part,
may be gathered from his affirming (concerning the Body of Christ that was
Crucified) that It is so wonderfully changed, as to the Mode and Manner of its
being, that it is no more a Body of Flesh, Blood and Bones, but a pure,
Ethereal, or heavenly Body, like unto which the Bodies of the Saints are to be
at the Resurrection. See G. Keith's Way Cast up, p. 131, 132. 1676. So that the
Flesh, Blood and Bones, the Saints now have, must be the Husk or drossy part,
which they shall not have in the Resurrection, but pure Ethereal or heavenly
Bodies, like Christ's glorious Body: And if so, 1st, How shall they remain one
and the same in Substance or Essence they now are? 2. How shall they be the
same in Substance, without Flesh, Blood and Bones? 3. What shall be their
Substance or Essence, when they shall be no more Bodies of Flesh, Blood and
Bones? 4. How will this Priest and G. K. reconcile themselves in this Point, of
the Sameness of Bodies? If one affirm the Resurrection Bodies shall be the same
Flesh, Blood and Bones, (or at least the same Flesh and Bones) they now are,
and the other, they shall be the same in Substance, but no more Bodies of
Flesh, Blood and Bones? Let them reconcile and demonstrate the same, we are
satisfied with the Appointment and good Pleasure of God in this weighty Matter,
and to wait upon him in the hope of the Resurrection of the Just unto Eternal
Life and Glory, sincerely believing that God will give a Body as it pleases
him, and to every Seed his own proper Body, 1 Cor 15. 38. And do not think it
necessary to Faith and Salvation, to be too curious or inquisitive, as to the
very Mode or Manner of the Resurrection Bodies, and How God will manifest his
Pleasure therein, Let Us live well here, and it shall be well with us hereafter;
say to the Righteous, it shall be well with them; but Woe to the Wicked, it
shall be ill with them, Isa. 30. 10, 11.

I refer the Ingenuous Reader to several further Answers in this Great Point of
the Resurrection, (i. e. My Antidote against the Venom of the Snake in the
Grass, p. 102 to 111. And to the Christian Quaker, printed 1674. Part II. p.
316 to 167. and p. 168 to 173. where also Dr. H. Moor is largely cited on the
same subject, in his Modest Enquiry into the Mystery of Iniquity, and Search
into the Nature of a Glorified Body. And as to what is objected against R.
Hubberthorn (who was both a very Innocent, Gifted and Knowing Man, if rightly
quoted) his owning the Glorified Saints in Heaven to be in a State of
Perfection, and as having received the Redemption of the Body ( i. e. from the
Bondage of Corruption and Sin, even before they came thither.) This no ways
contradicts our sincere Belief and Confession Of the Doctrine of the
Resurrection from the Dead, according to Holy Scripture, Heb. 6.

As to what is objected against G. W's Questions; Is it ( i. e. the Glory of
God) visible to the Carnal Eye? And of Christ's coming therein, etc. p. 46. I
would ask this Rector, Do thou expect to see this Glorious coming of Christ
from Heaven, with thy carnal Eyes thou now have? 2. If thou neglectest his
Inward and Spiritual Appearance and Work, may thou not neglect thy own
Salvation thereby? 3. Seeing our Lord Jesus Christ, The King of Kings, and Lord
of Lords, only has Immortality, dwelling in the Light which no Man can
approach unto, whom no Man has seen, nor can see, etc. 1 Timothy 6. 15, 16. How
can thou expect to see him with thy Carnal or Fleshly Eye? Have thou better,
clearer, and more lasting Eyes of Flesh than all other Men? When I have thus
questioned any, it was in Opposition to their neglect of Christ's Inward and
Spiritual Appearance and Work, effectually to save them from Sin and
Condemnation. This Point is more fully answered in our Books, and particularly
in my Examination, Entitled, Truth and Innocence vindicated, p. 61, 62. And my
thus questioning the Carnal Expectations, etc. of some Persons, I affirm, as
'twas never intended to oppose or contradict our sincere Belief or Profession,
That God will Judge the World in Righteousness (by his Son Jesus Christ in the
Day appointed, even in the Great Day of Judgment, and that Harvest which is the
End of the World.) So neither does what is quoted against the same Profession,
contradict it, unless it can be proved, that Men may see the Power and great
Glory of God, with their Carnal Eyes they now have; or that with the very same
they shall see Christ at his last coming to Judgment in the Glory of the
Father, and all his Angels with him, Matt. 16. 27.

What the Rector objects against that Man of God William Dewsbery, to prove us
Insincere in our said Profession (that God will Judge the World in
Righteousness by Jesus Christ, etc.) and him (the said W. D.) guilty of gross
Perversion. Herein our Accuser has shown himself as Ignorant as Envious, and as
void of Christianity. He quotes the said W. Dewsbery's Discovery of Man's
Return, printed 1654. upon a Passage where Rev. 20. 12, 13. and 2 Cor. 5. 10.
are only quoted, with other Scriptures in the Margent of the said Discovery,
which the Rector recites at large, and then makes his Observation against W. D.
viz. Observe here his Gross Perversion, he applying all this to the Light
within, and the Judgment within; so that the outward Judgment at the Last Day,
which is here so plainly described, is not by him professed as a thing to be
expected, p. 46.

Ans. I cannot but observe the Ignorance and Enmity of this Person, what he
objects against the said W. D. is no proof at all that he did not profess or
own Eternal Judgment, or the final Judgment and Rewards at the Great and Last
Day. His words cited are these, viz.

Every one arise out of your Earthly Wisdom, and mind the Light in thy
Conscience, and wait on the Power of the Lord in it, and it will bring thee to
Judgment before the Throne of the Lamb (viz. within thee added) where the
Righteous Law will be opened in thy Heart, that will cry through thy Earthly
Heart for Righteousness and Judgment, and the Book will be opened in thee,
where thou shall see all written, that thou have done in the Body, and shall
give an Account for every idle Word, (i. e. to the Light within added also) and
receive thy Reward for what thou have done; and thy Reward is Wrath and
Condemnation, which will pass upon thee from the presence of the Lamb ( within
thee, again added) for thy Disobedience and breaking of the Righteous Law.
Where is the Insincerity or gross Perversion in all these words recited by the
Rector? Or any Opposition to our Profession before mentioned? Surely, to mind
the Light of Christ in the Conscience, to know his Power in it to bring Man to
Judgment, according to the Righteous Law in the Heart, and thereby to see the
Record that is made in Man, of all the Evils done and committed by him: This
cannot be to oppose or contradict our Profession, that God will Judge the World
in Righteousness by his Son Jesus Christ in the day appointed, but in order to
bring Man to Repentance, that he may escape the Judgment and Wrath to come,
upon the Impenitent World of the Ungodly. And therefore our Adversaries
bringing this Citation out of W. Dewsbery's said Discovery of Man's Return,
either to evince the Venom of Quakerism (falsely charged) or our Insincerity or
Opposition to the Doctrine of Eternal Judgment, etc. This shows our Adversaries
Insincerity and great Ignorance of the Work of Repentance: The Rector has need
to be corrected in this as in many other weighty Points, his Enmity appearing
chiefly against the Light within, which both manifests and Judges those things
that are reproved in God's sight; For can any be truly humbled unto Repentance,
before they are convicted, and know what Sins and Evils they are guilty of, and
chargeable for, in the sight of God, and of the Lamb Christ Jesus, who is Judge
both of the Living and of the Dead? Surely no: He who is the Heart-searcher and
Tryer of the Reins, and the very Inward Affections; who shows unto Man what
his Thoughts are, will bring every Work to Judgment, with every secret thing,
whether it be Good or Evil; and if his Judgments do not take effect upon Men in
this Life, to humble them unto Repentance, his Eternal Judgment will be heavy
upon them in that which is to come. It Is by the Spirit of Judgment and Burning
that the Lord Purges his People; and it is through Judgment that Sion is
redeemed, and her Converts, with Righteousness. And how plain is it, that W.
Dewsbery's Testimony in this case, even as it is recited, respects the present
Law, Light, Judgment and Righteousness of Christ in Man; and also cautions Men
of (and points at) the future Judgment, Wrath and Condemnation, as that which
will pass (in the future) upon the Rebellious, for Disobedience, and breaking
the Righteous Law: And both the Judgment that comes upon Man here, and that
which will come hereafter upon Man, for Disobedience and Rebellion against the
Light and Law of Christ in Man, it all proceeds from the presence of the Lamb
Christ Jesus, to whom all Judgment is committed, and Power given to execute it.

Awake, awake to Judgment, therefore, all you that are a-sleep in Sin, that
Mercy and Judgment may meet, and Righteousness and Peace embrace each other;
that being Judged as Men in the Flesh, you may live according to God in the
Spirit, 1 Pet. 4. 6. And all who sincerely desire after God, and to remember
him in his ways, must wait for him in the way of his Judgments, as his Servants
of old did, Isa. 26. 8.

And though this Adversary has added in the Citation [within thee] after, the
Throne of the Lamb; and after, the presence of the Lamb, he adds [within thee]:
And after, shall give an Account for every idle Word, he adds [i. e. to the
Light within.] And, the Book will be opened in thee, he puts, [IN THEE] in
Capital Characters, as if it were a Crime or Error to own the Lamb of God to
have a Throne or Dominion in Man, or the Light within to be Judge of every idle
Word. Which still bespeaks a secret Enmity against the Light, and as if the
Light were neither to Judge nor to Record Men's Actions in the Book of Men's own
Consciences; whereas the contrary is evident, if they will search and examine
their own Consciences, and be willing to bring their Deeds to the Light in them
that they may be manifest, proved and Judged. For every one that does Truth,
comes to the Light, and brings his Deeds to the Light, that They may be
manifest, that they are wrought in God, John 3. And it is certain, that there is
a Record made of Men's Iniquities, even in their Hearts and Consciences by the
true Light; as the Sin of Judah was graven upon the Table of their Heart, Jer.
17. 1. And without true Repentance it will not be blotted out of that Record,
but will remain unto the Great Day of Judgment, and final Recompense of
Rewards, when the Books shall all be opened, and the Dead Judged out of those
things written in the Books, every Man according to their Works, Rev. 20. So
that the Judgment given, and the Record made in Men's Consciences, by the true
Light even in this Life, will not wear out, nor be made void, but remain unto
the Last Judgment of the Great Day to come, to the great Joy of the Righteous,
and Shame, Contempt and Misery of the Wicked, and finally Impenitent, who live
and die in their Sins. As it is testified in Job 21. 30. That the Wicked is
reserved to the Day of Destruction; they shall be brought forth to the Day of
Wrath. And Christ spoke of such as would not receive his Ministers, nor hear
their Words, Verily, I say unto you, it shall be more tolerable for Sodom and
Gomorrah in the Day of Judgment, than for that City, Matt. 10. 15. compare with
Chap. 11. 22, 24. and Mark 6. 11. and Luke 10. 12, 14. All which signify a Day
of Judgment to come, And as it is appointed unto Men once to die, but after
this the Judgment, Heb. 9. 27. As also the Apostle Peter speaks of the Day of
Judgment and Perdition of Ungodly Men, 2 Pet. 3. 7. And also 2 Pet. 2. 9. The
Lord knows how to deliver the Godly out of Temptations, and to reserve the
Unjust to the Day of Judgment to be punished. And Jude v. 6. And the Angels,
which kept not their first Estate (or Principality) but left their own
Habitation, he has reserved in Everlasting Chains under Darkness, unto the
Judgment of the Great Day: In which Great Day it will fully appear, that the
Judgment given, and the Record made in Men's Consciences by the Light, is true,
and will stand for ever against the Wicked, the willful Unbelievers and finally
Impenitent. And that there is no Opposition nor Contradiction between the
present Judgment of Christ in Men's Hearts and Consciences, and that which is to
come.

That the Soul of Man, though created, is Immortal, and never dies: This we
still believe and confess, and what the Rector quotes (as he supposes) against
it, out of G. F. his Great Mystery, and W. Penn's Brief Answer, p. 47. (if
rightly considered and compared) will not make void our Belief and Profession,
which I have answered and explained over and over; and so has W. P. by his
Distinction between the Breath or Spirit of Life, which God breathed into Man,
and Man himself, who thereby became a Living Soul: Consequently the Soul of Man
is created, as well as Man; being included in the Being of Man, as the more
Noble and Spiritual part, inspired by the Divine Breath or Spirit of Life,
whereby Man became a Living Soul. And this Distinction is clearly implied in G.
F's Great Mystery, though unfairly quoted; What Is more Explanatory, being left
out by this Adversary, and more fully answered in my aforesaid Examination,
Entitled, Truth and Innocence vindicated, etc. against the three Norfolk
Priests, and Bugg, p. 7, 8, 9, 60.

That we are Sincere in our Profession of Christianity, in what is contained in
our said little Pamphlet (as he calls it) entitled, The Christianity of the
People called Quakers Asserted, we are not Conscious to our selves of the
contrary, nor Convicted of any Insincerity therein, by this Rector's, or any
others Invidious Essays or Attempts, nor from any Instances which either he or
his Brethren, or F. Bugg, have produced against us. Nor are we Conscious to our
selves of holding Tenets or Doctrines, which are either directly opposite, or
contradictory to these he calls New Creeds, if impartially cited, and truly
explained, which they have not done in their Invidious Endeavors against us,
consequently we find no cause to Retract, Censure or Condemn, the Tenets or
Doctrines which we hold; and therefore his Charge of Horrid Blasphemies we
reject, as an odious Calumny, proceeding from a Proud, Envious, Persecuting
Spirit, which the Lord will Rebuke! Neither has he shown from those Instances
against us, any such Horrid Blasphemies, as he tells of; but rather his own
Perversions, Ignorance and Envy: The Lord deliver poor Souls from such Blind
Guides, that they may not fall into the Ditch with them! For some of their
Leaders, the Priests, especially those of them, that are of an Envious,
Persecuting Spirit, are the most Blind and Ignorant of the Mystery of Christ,
and of those things which pertain to his Kingdom.

FINIS.

