THE CHRISTIANITY OF THE PEOPLE Commonly Called QUAKERS, Vindicated from
Antichristian Opposition.

I. In a serious Examination of Doctor Ford's Preservative against Quakerism;
in a large fallacious Scheme Tendered by S.F. D.D. as he styles himself.

II. In a brief Answer to Henry Osland's Manuscript against the said People.

III. In a brief Consideration of an Epistle directed to Friends and Brethren
at their next General Meeting in London. -- Signed N.N. but no Name to it.

Sincerely Tendered in behalf of the aforesaid People and their Ancient
Friends, by some of them.

Psalm. 35.20. They devise Deceitful Matters against them that are Quiet in the
Land.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Northcott, in George Yard, in Lombard street, 1690.

THE CHRISTIANITY OF THE PEOPLE Commonly called QUAKERS, Vindicated from
Antichristian Opposition.
In a serious Examination of Doctor Ford's Preservative against Quakerism; in a
large Fallacious Scheme.
THE Industrious (though fruitless) Attempts of this Profound Doctor (as he
would be esteemed) to unchristian or rather Antichristian the People called
Quakers, especially those of their ancient Friends, is in this wise Methodized;
in three Columns on one large Sheet, small Print: The first contains a Recital
of a Paper, Entitled, The Christianity of the People commonly called Quakers,
asserted against the unjust charge of their being no Christians; writ by some
of the said People, by which the said Doctor S.F. says, They seem to be of a
New Edition compared with the Vnchristianity, or rather Antichristianity of
their ancient Friends, as he unjustly charges them in his Title set over his
two other Columns, and yet in contradiction, falsely styles our said Paper, a
Partial and Fallacious Scheme of their Doctrins. Thus his Design appears
malicious and uncharitable to endeavor not only to unchristian, but to
antichristianize an Innocent People that truly fear God, and to render them
contradictory to their Christianity, sincerely asserted by them.

And, whereas contrary to the Title over his first Column, which is, The
Christianity of the People called Quakers; over his second and third, he has
put the Title of the Vnchristianity, or rather Antichristianity of the Quakers
ancient Friends.

Hereby its apparent, ^^rst, That all those Doctrins are by him rendered
Unchristian and Antichristian, which he has placed under the same Title, and
charged the Quakers ancient Friends withal in his two last Columns. Secondly,
we may therefore rationally take him as holding the contrary, and need give the
less Remarks on the Particular^, where his Unchristian Doctrins and Errors
appear most obvious. Thirdly, most part of his charges are but what some of our
old Adversaries and Persecutors have enviously and blindly Objected, (which
long since are answered, and the Truth fully cleared in our Friends Books)
whereby he seems to have been one of them, and since turned about from his
Presbytery to the now Church of England, for his own Interest; yet retains his
old Enmity. And why is he now in's old Age so disturbed and angry against the
Quakers? What Is the matter now? Is he afraid to lose some of his Benefactors,
(seeing he directs his Scheme to those of his own Neighborhood, and all others
who are newly made or endangered to be made Quakers?) But he takes not the
Course to oblige them that mean honestly by his abusing an innocent People in
Print. Fourthly, Many Things are very unfairly and partially Cited by him,
leaving out the most material which are for Explanation of the Matters charged,
which we do not find; but our Friends Books themselves (which he quotes)
sufficiently and plentifully clear. Others he has taken upon Trust against us
out of our Adversaries Books, without any impartial Enquiry what we could say
for our selves, or representing our Answers thereto. But selfish Temporizers
are commonly the most envious, and apt to pervert Truth.

Now let us examine his severe charge of Vnchristianity and Antichristianity
against the Quakers ancient Friends, in the several Instances given by him the
said S.F. D.D. as he styles himself, that we may see what contrary Divinity he
is Doctor of.

Charge 1. Is against our deceased Friend Ed. Buroughs, viz. That God is a
Spirit, not distinct nor far from living Creatures; for in him they live, move,
and have their Beings.

Observation. The Doctor's deeming this Antichristian, is to tell us, he
believes the contrary, i. e. That God is not a Spirit, That he is far from
living Creatures, Distinct (or divided) from them, etc. This being in his first
Charge, may be thought to be his Chief; but his Divinity herein is expressly
contrary to the Doctrine of our Lord Jesus Christ, who Testified, that God is a
Spirit, Joh. 4.24. and please to take the words [not distinct] to intend not
divided, or separate as E.B. intended, and has explained, That God is not far
from his living Creatures; and we see no Reason to render this Doctrine of God's
Omnipresence, either Antichristian or Unchristian, but him to be both, who so
renders it: For, does not God fill Heaven and Earth with his Presence, and
uphold all Things by the Word of his Power? Jer. 23.24. Heb. 1.3. In whose hand
is the Soul of every living Thing, and Breath of all Mankind, Job 12.10. And in
him we live, move, and have our being, Acts 17.28. If this Doctor had either
known God, or his Power and Omnipresence truly, or seriously consulted holy
Scripture, he durst not have rendered such Doctrine either Antichristian or
Unchristian.

Charge ibid. Against E.B. That the nature and glory of the Elect differs not
from the nature and glory of the Creator: The Elect are one with him, enjoying
his glory, etc.

Obs. These being also put under the Title Vnchristianity, or rather
Antichristianity, we may take this Doctor as holding the contrary, i. e. That
the nature and glory of the Elect, differs from the nature and glory of the
Creator; That the Elect are not one with him in his nature, that they enjoy not
his Glory; contrary to Christ's own Testimony, John 17.21, 22, 23. That they
all may be one, as thou Father art in me, and I in thee; that they also may be
one in us, etc. And the Glory which thou gave me, I have given them, that
they may be one, as we are one; I in them, and thou in me, that they may be
made perfect in one. And see, 2 Pet. 1.4. That by these you might be Partakers
of the Divine Nature. Though we be Creatures still, yet by the work of God's
Grace, and making good to us his precious Promises, we are in some measure
Partakers of his Divine Nature, being Partakers of Christ, Heb. 3.14. and so
far united unto, and in Union with him, and is not this divine Nature, the
nature of the Creator?

Charge 2. Against our ancient Friends, G.F. and R. Hubberthorn. Of the Soul
coming from God, and returning to God again, as of his Being, etc. And E.B's
saying (when dying) Now my Soul and Spirit is Centered into its own being with
God.

Obs. Here the Doctor has unfairly quoted G.F. upon trust, leaving out what is
most material, both Distinction and Explanation about the Soul or Spirit of
man, both with Relation to its Creator, and to the Creature man; being spoken
of in both respects by our Friends. 1. Where G.F. insists on the Words, God
breathed into Man the Breath of Life, and he became a living Soul. It was to
this Breath of Life, (as immediately coming from God) that our Friends Words
related, as his Question plainly shows, i. e. Was not that of God, and of his
Being, which came out from God? meaning that divine Breath, or Spirit of Life,
by which Man became a Living Soul, and from whence came not only Man's natural
Breath and Life, but also his spiritual; and this does distinguish between the
divine Being, and the Creature Man, and not confound their Beings. And for the
Soul or Spirit of sanctified Man to center with God, this is not to render it
the Being of God, or God himself. We know none (professing the true God and
Christ) so grossly absurd as to say, That Man made himself, or was his own
Maker, Savior, or Redeemer. 2. Our Friend speaks plainly in the same Book
quoted against him; Gr. Mist. Fol. 90, 91, 100. That the Soul should be subject
to the Power of God; that Christ is the Bishop of the Soul, who brings it up
into God, the Soul being in Death, in Transgression, Man's Spirit not
sanctified, etc. This could not intend the Being of God, for that never sinned,
though there be something thereof in the Soul, even in that reasonable Soul or
Spirit of Man, which God (by his divine Word, Breath, or Spirit) formed in Man,
Zech. 12.1. and so made Man a living Soul.

On Jonathan Clapham's Authority and Report, R. Hubberthorn is charged by this
credulous Dr. That he expressly said, The Soul was the Being of God. Quoting
R.H. his Truth and Innocence, and Clapham's Discovery Epist. to the Reader for
proof. How envious and unjust is it thus to condemn Persons upon report of
their Enemies, who regard not Truth, but revenge and perverseness, as in this?
We find not in all R.H. his Answer to Clapham, any such Expressions, as that
the Soul of Man was the Being of God, but rather the contrary, yet that it is
immortal, That the first Man Adam was made a Living Soul; that the immortal
Life in the Soul came from the same Being, (and so says Clapham, that the Soul
came indeed from God and is Immortal,) and that God breathed into Man the
Breath of Life, and he became a Living Soul; that the Soul is to be watched
over; that Peoples Souls are to be redeemed by the Blood of the Lamb, raised up
by the Power of God, out of Death. R.H. his Collect. p. 30.38. How can the
Charge before stand with these Passages. i. e. That the Soul of Man should be
the Being of God, and yet to be watched over by his Ministers; redeemed by
Christ, and raised up by his Power? That divine Sense which he has given us,
would never admit us so to confound the Being of the Creature, with the Being
of the Creator, as to render them both one and the same Being. For though the
Soul of Man be a Spiritual Being, it is not God nor Christ, but is saved by him.

This Adversary by his Instance in his second Charge, which he takes upon
Trust, from our old Adversary Jonathan Clapham his saying, that R.H. in his
Book against Sherlock, p. 30. brings Phil. 2.5, 6. To justify the Quakers
Equality to God.

We look upon this Charge to proceed from mere Malice, and as a foul Abuse of
R.H. his words; for the same Mind that was in Christ, to be in us, Phil. 2.5,
6. was in respect to his Humility and Obedience. There Is no mention of the
Quakers Equality to God in R.H. his Answer: But of Christ being Equal with God,
on Phil. 2.5. See his Collect. p. 34

Charge 3. Against W.P. and R.H. about the Term Trinity, That God is the Holy
One, etc. That few are so blind as either to affirm or believe that there are
three Subsistences, and but one Divine Being, etc.

Obs. Pray where is the Unchristianity, or Antichristianity here? If he
believes the contrary, Viz. That God is not the Holy One, that there are three
Subsistences (or Bottoms) in the one Divine Being. This appears not to us
either consistent with the Holy Scriptures, or good Sense, See Deuteronomy 6.4. Mark
12.29, 32. 1 John 5.7. Joh. 10.30. Besides, he has dealt very unfairly in this
Charge, taking no notice either of the Doctrine opposed by our Friend^, which
was that of Three distin^t and separate Persons in the Godhead, (which we do
not find their own Articles of Religion will warrant,) nor yet of their
Arguments to the contrary. See our Friend's Book, Divinity of Christ; yet the
Dr. grants they, i. e. the Quakers, seem to own the Thing, but not the term
Trinity (he might have added) of separate Persons in the Deity, because the
Father* Son, and Holy Ghost are One, and Inseparable; and then his Sentence or
Charge against us, is, because we are not satisfied with those unscriptural
Terms of Trinity, of Three separate Persons or Subsistences in the Godhead,
and reverently profess the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit in the words which the
same Spirit has taught us, in the Holy Scriptures. Thus uncharitable and
envious some of the Priests have appeared against us to condemn us as no
Christians, because we could not in point of our Christian Conscience, come
under their imposing unscriptural Terms upon us, whilst they cannot deny, but
grant that we own the Thing (or Doctrine) intended.

Charge 4, 5, 6, and 7. Against some of our Friends for manifesting their
Dislike of the Terms, Human Personal Christ, and that he took to himself an
Human Soul, and some Adversaries terming Christ himself an Human Body, and some
Friends asserting the Oneness of Christ's Body, 1 Cor. 12.20. and his Heavenly
manhood, and Christ as but one in all his Saints.

Obs. Here again the Dr. has condemned our Friends as Unchristian about
Unscriptural Words and Terms imposed upon us, whilst we deny not the Thing it
self; namely, the real Manhood of Jesus Christ, as he is complete Man; the
Heavenly Man, yet his Soul Divine, and Body Heavenly, Spiritual and Glorious.
And cannot the Dr. (with all his Learning) find out an Oneness between Christ
in Heaven and his Members on Earth? and between his Members or Church on Earth,
and his glorious Body in Heaven, so as to admit his Body in the fullness of it
in Heaven and Earth to be but One? are not his Members in spiritual Union with
him? 1 Cor. 12.12. And why the Man should either Antichristian or Unchristian
any of our Friends, because they think the Term Human too low to give to the
Soul of the Messiah, whilst he cannot prove it so termed in Holy Scripture, we
are yet to seek? He still imposes without Proof or Demonstration, as if his own
bare ipse dixit must bear us all down. But note by the way, that our Friends
questioning the Term human, as applied to Christ, or to the Soul of Christ; is
still in honor and respect to Christ, they taking the Term as originally
relating to the Earth of which Man was made* and not opposing it simply as it
relates to Mankind; nor questioning Christ's being perfect Man in Soul, Spirit
and Body, as well as God over all, in respect to his Divine Power and Oneness
with the Father; but being the Heavenly Man the Lord from Heaven, the Question
is, if Human be not too low a Term for his Soul.

Charge 8, and 9. Against our Friends, E.B.W.P. and F.H. 1 st. For asking,
Where do thou Read in all the Scriptures, that God does require satisfaction
for the Sins of the Elect? or laid any thing to their Charge? 2 ly. For
cautioning against saying, That God should condemn his innocent Son, that he
having satisfied for our Sins, we might be justified by the Imputation of his
Righteousness. 3 ly. And against F.H. for saying, You are only talking of
Christ at a Distance, and his Righteousness as far from you as betwixt Earth
and Heaven, and here is your Justification. -- God^s Righteousness in you
justifies.

Obs. Now seeing this our Adversary has put all these Passages under the Title
of Unchristianity and Antichristianity, charged on the Quakers Ancient Friends;
May we not justly place the contrary upon him, that his Christianity is, 1.
That God requires satisfaction for the Sins of the Elect, and charge them, 2.
That he did condemn his Innocent Son to satisfy Divine Justice for our Sins,
and to justify us by the Imputation of his Righteousness, whilst Christ is at
a Distance, and his Righteousness as far from us, as betwixt Earth and Heaven,
and not in us.

Now first observe, His thus excluding Christ Jesus and his Righteousness and
Justification out of his People, and so leaving People in their Sins all their
days, is expressly contrary to Holy Scripture Testimony, contrary to the
Righteousness of Faith, and Testimony thereof; say not in thine heart who shall
ascend into Heaven (that is, to bring Christ from above, etc. Romans 10.6, 7, 8.)
as well as to the Nature, Intent and Tendence of Justification, Redemption,
Pardon and Acceptance with God in Christ Jesus. See Romans 8.33. Who shall lay
any thing to the Charge of God's Elect? It Is God that justifies, and 1 Cor.
6.11. Such were some of you, but ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye
are justified in the Name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God, and
Heb. 13.20, 21. Where the Apostle both prayed for their perfection, and that
God would work in them that which was well pleasing in his sight, through Jesus
Christ our Lord. See also these Scriptures, Isa. 26.12. and chapter 60.21. Psalm.
32.1, 2. Romans 4.6. and chapter 8.1. Titus 2.14. and chapter 3.3, 4, 5, 6. 2 Cor. 13.5.
Romans 2.13. Heb. 3.14. 2 ly. To place Man's Justification in a sinful unjust
State, upon such a kind of satisfaction supposed to Divine Justice, that is,
Vindictive (as they call it) as by God's condemning his Innocent Son to undergo
his Wrath and Punishment, due to the Sin of the World in the Sinner's stead, as
many of our Opposers hold, and this seems to be of the same Notion; This is to
justify the Wicked, and condemn the Just, which to do is an abomination to the
Lord, Prove. 17.15. And thus to render the most dear and innocent Son of God,
the Subject of his Father's Wrath, and of the Execution of his vindictive
Justice, to indemnifie Offenders continuing in their Sins. How can this consist
either with Divine Justice it self, or with that most glorious Union, Divine
and Superlative Love that is and ever was between them? And though we confess
Christ's satisfaction in the Sense, that God was always well pleased, and
satisfied in his dear Son, in all he wrought and suffered for Mankind for Man's
Redemption; yet we find not in Scripture, that ever he required such severe and
rigid Satisfaction and Payment of our Debts from his Son in our stead, or for
the Sins of Men, and thereby to acquit, pardon and justify the Guilty; This
Notion or Term Satisfaction, and the Understanding of it is confessed (by Dr.
Owen) to depend upon some Notion of Law, in his Declaration and Vindication,
and directly opposed and argued against by Dr. Stillingfleet, now Bishop of
Worcester, in his Discourse of the Sufferings of Christ. Page 269, 270, 271,
272, 273, 275. For he says, It is easy to observe, That Socinus his Arguments
are levelled against an Opinion, which few who have considered those things do
maintain, and none need to think themselves obliged to do it, which is, that
Christ paid a proper and rigid Satisfaction for the Sins of Men, considered
under the Notion of Debts, and that he paid the very same which we ought to
have done.

Charge. S.F. In his 9 th. Charge again, takes upon Trust Clapham's Quotation
of a Book Entitled, Readiness Errand to Damascus. P. 8.9. In these words, viz.
Christ in the flesh, with all that he did and suffered therein, was but a
Figure, and nothing but an Example.

Obs. We deny these words as a plain Abuse, Miscitation and Perversion. For in
the said Book of Readiness Errand, Christ is confessed as both the Substance of all
Figures, Types and Shadows, and Example of his People. The words are, Christ in
the Flesh without them is their Example, or Figure, which is both one, (as they
intended who so writ) for his being their Example, 1 Pet. 2.21. and 4.1. and
1.15. and John 13.15. are quoted. See also Luke 2.31. He was called a Sign: Now
hence to say, he was But a Sign; this were a gross Perversion. Christ was our
Example, Now hence to say, he was nothing else, is an Abuse and alters the
Sense, as our Adversary has here done upon Trust, condemning our Friends as
Unchristian, etc. upon a false Report, which is besides all Justice, Morality,
and judicial Proceedings. But, whether the Word Figure may be in any tolerable
sense attributed to Christ, is the Question. We find in some sense, it is with
other Words of like Nature, and some meaner Characters are given to him, as not
only Example, Figure, Form of a Servant, Similitude, Habit, Image, etc. but he
was said to be made Sin and a Curse for us, though he knew no Sin, nor ever
sinned, 2 Cor. 5.21. Gal. 3.13. 1 Pet. 2.22. His Humiliation, Lowliness, and
suffering for us, did not hinder him of his most excellent Glory and Dignity.
But to the Point in Hand; in Heb. 1.3. The Son of God is said to be (...), In
some rendered, Figura Substantiae, the Figure of his Substance. And Phil. 2.6,
7. He took on him the Form of a Servant, where (...) is Form or Figure; and he
was made LIKE unto Men, and was found in (...) Shape or Figure of a Man. See
the difference in Crit. Sacr. and the Translation of the Church of England. In
Phil. 2.7. Of Christ its expressly said, and found in Figure as a Man, as Dr.
Fulk against the Papists has it.

He was also said to be made of a Woman, made under the Law, to redeem them
under it, Gal. 4.4. He was Circumcised, presented to the Lord with an Oblation,
Luke 2.21, 24. He eat of the Passover, etc. and thus came under the Law to
fulfill it in these Things which were figurative and shadowy, yet was the
Substance and End of them.

Charges 10, and 11. Against an Actual keeping of the Law of God, so as to
avoid all Sin, though he grants, such a Perfection as imports Sincerity,
Integrity, and Constancy in our utmost endeavors perfectly to keep God's Law
entirely, to avoid all Sin, etc. which Perfection he confesses to be requisite
to Salvation. Yet contrariwise, charge one of our Friends for saying, He had
proved by manifest Scriptures, that some were perfect in this Life, even
without Sin; and that our Sanctification is Christ himself, 1 Cor. 1.30. And
another Friend he charges for saying, In your Unbelief, you judge that none can
live without sinning.

Obs. Now take the Doctor as believing the contrary, thus, viz. Though it is our
Duty sincerely to use our utmost endeavors perfectly to keep God's Law, and
entirely to avoid all Sin; yet none were ever so perfect in this Life without
Sin; and that our Sanctification is not Christ, and that it is our belief to
judge, that none can live without sinning. Thus faithless is this great Doctor;
how contrary to the Faith of Christ and true Christians is his belief herein?
And such endeavors for such a Perfection as never attain it, but still fall
short, are not in the true Faith, nor so sincere as they should be; for Christ
said, Whatsoever ye ask in my Name, believe that ye shall receive it, and the
same shall be given you, Mark 11.24. Luke 11.9, 10, 11, 13. John 14.13, 14. and
16 23. Mat. 7.7. And by Faith in Christ comes the Heart to be purified, Acts
15.9. And Christ is of God, made unto us Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification,
and Redemption, 1 Cor. 1.30. And blessed are the undefiled in the way, etc.
Psalm. 119.1, 2, 3.

And seeing the Son of God is manifest for this very purpose, to destroy the
Works of the Devil, 1 John 3. Why then should Sin which is the Devil's Work, be
thus Preached up or contended for, by any who profess Faith in Christ Jesus?
Their's must needs be a faithless Preaching, who when they have told People,
it is their Duty to use their utmost endeavors entirely to avoid all Sin, yet
contrariwise tell them, That none can live without sining: With what Faith or
Sincerity, can this Man, or any of his Brethren, engage Childrens Godfathers
and Godmothers (as they call them) by Promise and Vow, that they shall forsake
the Devil and all his Works, and yet endeavor to persuade them, it is
impossible for them so to do, i. e. to live without Sin, or to avoid all
sinning, wherein they obey the Devil, and do his Work?

And note, that this Doctor S.F. has in this Point also contradicted the said
Doctor Stillingfleet, his now Bishop. See his Sermon Preached before the King,
March* 13. 1666/7. Wherein he does not only plead, and argue it as our Duty to
obey God's Laws and Commands, but the Possibility thereof, through the
Assistance of his Grace and good Spirit, against them who charge God with
laying impossible Laws upon Mankind, etc. and puts the Question, What then is
wanting, but only setting our selves with a serious obedience to them, to make
his Commands, not only, not impossible, but easy to us?

Now, that this Priest S.F. who styles himself D.D. has apparently contradicted
his said Bishop; the Contradiction being between the Impossibility and
Possibility, of living without sining, or avoiding all Sin,

Charge 12. Against some of our ancient Friends, for asserting that (he calls)
main fundamental of all our Religion, namely, The Light, and Christ within us,
and that this Light is in its own being, no other than God himself, the Christ
of God, and Savior of the World, the living Principle of God, of the Divine
Nature, etc.

Obs. And we do not believe this to be either Unchristian or Antichristian, as
he has rendered it by his Title over it, which is no Proof, but his own bare
Affirmation and Charge, wherein he imposes still; we preach no other Light but
what is Divine, of the divine Nature and Being, and manifest by degrees in us.
God is Light, and in him is no Darkness at all, and has shined in our Hearts,
2 Cor. 4.6. 1 John 1.5. And Christ says, I am the Light of the World, he that
follows me, shall not abide in Darkness, John 8.12. and Chap. 12.46. And he
says, Believe in the Light, that ye may be the Children of the Light, John
12.36. And his Apostles Preached, not only Christ as without, but also Christ
as within, in Spirit; and so did Christ himself, John 14.20. and 15.4. and
17.23. 2 Cor. 13.5. And therefore our Adversary is far out, and shows himself
Unchristian in opposing such ancient Christian Doctrine, as this of the divine
Light, and Christ within, etc. Rendering it both Unchristianity and
Antichristianity. The Lord deliver poor Souls from such ignorant, dark, and
unchristian Preachers and Doctors, who neither know the holy Scriptures, nor
Jesus Christ, nor his divine Light, or power of God within them.

Charge 13. Is about the Holy Scriptures; that one said, They are not the Word
of God; not the Rule and Guide of Faith and Life to the Saints, but the Spirit
of God that gave them forth; the Covenant of Life and Peace; That a Man may
lawfully deny the Scriptures to be the Foundation of Faith, and Rule of Life,
etc. That another Friend said, Faith is the Ground of the Scriptures, and of
the Scriptures the Ground of Faith, etc. (With more of like Nature in his
Charge, elsewhere Answered, and Explained in our Friends Books quoted by him.

Obs. Where any of our Friends have said or writ such things, it was so far
from undervaluing or slighting the Holy Scriptures, that the matters here
charged as unchristian, are agreeable to the very Doctrine of Christ, and his
Holy Apostles; as,

First, That the Word of God is Christ. In the Beginning was the Word, John 1.
His Name is called, The Word of God, Rev. 19.13.

Secondly, That the Spirit of God and Christ, is the Saints Guide and Rule of
Faith; to lead and guide them into all Truth, as Christ Jesus promised, John
16, ^3.

Thirdly, That Christ is the Foundation of the Saints Faith, and not the
Scriptures. No other Foundation can any Man lay, than that which is laid, which
is Christ.

Fourthly, That Faith is the Ground of the Scriptures, and not the Scriptures
the Ground of Faith, is very plain. I believed, and therefore I have spoken,
Psalm. 116.10. 2 Cor. 4.13. And there were many true Believers before the
Scriptures were writ, who wanted not a true Foundation or Rule. It Is wonderful
strange, this old great Doctor should represent such Doctrins as these, either
Antichristian, or Unchristian. The Lord teach him better, and humble him unto
Repentance, for his unchristian and uncharitable Opposition.

Charge 14. Against E.B. for saying, All who go before the moving of the
Spirit, their Prayers, Preaching and Ordinances, I deny, etc. We own the
immediate Spirit of God, which was before the Scripture was written, to be the
Rule of our Conversation. And against G. Keith, viz. We are to wait for an
immediate Call, Motion, etc. to preach, pray, or give thanks, and forbear till
it be given.

Charge 15. Against being infallibly guided by the infallible Spirit that gave
forth the Scriptures, and speaking from the Mouth of the Lord.

Charge 16. Against that which was spoken from the Spirit of God, in any, being
of as great Authority as the Scriptures, (or greater,) and our Friends
pretending to speak or write, by one and the same Spirit, according to measure,
by which Christ, and the Apostles, and Prophets spoke.

Obs. We do not perceive any Antichristianity or Unchristianity, either justly
chargeable upon these Passages, but rather on this Doctor, for so judging them
all: From which it naturally follows,

1. That he is for praying and preaching, before, or without the moving of the
Spirit of God, and so runs when the Lord never sent him, contrary to the true
Prophets, Christ and his Apostles Doctrine, and Christians Practice, Jer. 23.21,
22. 1 Pet. 4.11.

2. He does not own the immediate Spirit of God and Christ to be the rule or
guide of his Conversation, contrary to Christ and his Apostles Doctrine.

3. Nor waiting for any immediate Call or Motion from God, to preach, pray, or
give thanks; so that he promotes only a Will Worship, which God never accepts.

4. Though we always confess the holy Scriptures of the old and new Testament
to be given by divine Inspiration, and prefer them before, and above all other
Writings or Books, and in no wise question the Truth of them; yet we must needs
allow the holy Spirit (from whence they came) the preference, and its immediate
Teaching and Speaking in the Soul, as of greater Efficacy, Power, and Authority
to that Soul, than the bare writing or Scripture without, or only reading
thereof, though it contain the same Words immediately taught. And so Christ and
his Apostles living and powerful preaching, in and from the powerful motion of
the holy Spirit, as being of greater Efficacy, Power and Authority, than the
outward Writing or Scripture it self, simply or abstractly considered, as
distinct from that Spirit, though the Words preached, and the Words written may
be the same: For the Gospel as livingly preached, came not in Words only, but
also in Power, and in the Holy Ghost, 1 Thessalonians. 1.5. For the real Authority,
Efficacy and Service, the Holy Scripture has upon a Soul, is from the holy
Spirit, or Word of Life, giving the true Belief and right Understanding
thereof. But we may suppose, that our Adversary's Charge in this Point, is from
his not owning the immediate teaching of God, or preaching by the immediate
motion and guidance of his blessed Spirit in these days, but only by Tradition;
his Acquirement, by reading and study of other Men's Works and Lines, made ready
to his Hand; and therefore, that he wants divine Power, Authority and Efficacy
in's Ministry: And then he might be more ingenuous to lay aside his Trade of
Preaching, and leave the People to read the Holy Scriptures, without his
meanings, or private Interpretations upon them.

Charge 17. In this he accuses our Paper, asserting our Christianity with a
Tedious and Obscure Harangue, under pretense of enjoying the spiritual Part of
Baptism, and the Lord's Supper; but neither Refutes nor Answers what we have
writ in that Case, both of our Christian Experience, and agreeableness to holy
Scripture; so the less notice need be taken of his Charge against our Friends,
for Asserting the Baptism of the Holy Ghost.

Charge ibid. And that the Bread and Wine being no other than a Figure of a
spiritual Thing, which is the Substance, which being witnessed, the Figure or
Shadow is not obliging, being ended, i. e. In the New Covenant.

Charge 18. Against some of our Friends, telling them, That they set up their
Carnal Ordinances, in Christ's stead, calling them their Means, and not
witnessing the immediate Appearance of Jesus Christ in their Souls, drawing
them in his Life and Testifying against the beggarly Rud^ments of the World,
and their Carnal Observances.

Obs. What more than a Figure does this Doctor suppose the Bread and Wine which
they minister to be in the Sacrament so called? Does he think them to be the
Substance, which is Christ? If not, then 'twas very unadvisedly and
uncharitably done to charge our Friends, as Antichristian or Unchristian either
in this Point for calling the outward Elements of Bread and Wine, etc. A Figure
only, as Protestant Martyrs esteemed them. Vid. Dr. Cranmer Disp. at Oxford,
etc. 3. v. Mar. In opposition to the Papists affirming them to be the Substance
Christ. Let him therefore tell us what he esteems them, if not a Figure. For
the Spiritual Substance is Christ, he is that One Bread. John 6. 1 Cor. 10. and
his Spiritual Baptism is The one Baptism, Ephesians. 4. and in him the Shadows and
Figures are ended.

Charge 19. About the Resurrection, That W.P. said, To assert the same Body
that falls shall rise, is incons^stent with Scripture, Reason, etc. And against
another Friend for saying, The Seed of God is hid in thee, etc.

Obs. He having not wherewithal justly to charge us with denying the
Resurrection it self, for that we never did, but always believed it, of both
the Just and Unjust, and that they shall come to Judgment every Man for
himself.

Now our Friends are charged because they believe a Spiritual Resurrection in
opposition to their Adversary's asserting a Carnal or Sameness of Bodies to
rise; wherein this Adversary's Charge reflects upon the Apostle's Testimony in
this Case, as well as on our Friends as Unchristian; For the Apostle answers
such Fools Questions, by way of Allusion plainly, -- And that which thou
sowest, thou sowest not that Body that shall be, etc. God gives it a Body as
it pleases him, and to every Seed his own Body. There is a natural Body, and
there is a spiritual Body* 1 Cor. 15. chapter and 35, 36, 37, 44, Verses, etc.
Which is no other than what our Friends believe and hold.

Charge 20. Of Christ's second coming to Judgment against this Question, i. e.
Where proves he that Christ's second coming without Sin to Salvation, is a
Personal Coming?

Obs. And where proves he that it is Unchristian to ask such a Question to any
that holds it? Or that Christ's second coming without Sin unto Salvation
mentioned, Heb. 9.28. is called in Scripture, A Personal Coming? This he should
have proved before he had assumed the Charge of Unchristian or Antichristian,
against any of our Friends for such a plain question. See what the Scripture
says, Heb. 9.28. Christ was once offered to take away the sins of many, and
unto them that look for him shall he appear the second time without sin unto
salvation. They who then looked or waited for Christ's Appearance the second
Time to their Salvation, surely were not disappointed of their Hope and
Expectation in him; For he did spiritually appear to their Salvation to save,
and set them free from Sin. See Tit. 2.

Charge last. Of the Judgment it self, and Heaven and Hell. 1. Against Wm.
Dewsbury. For saying, Mind the Light in thy Conscience, and it will bring thee
to Judgment and the Righteous law, and the Book will be opened in thee, wherein
thou shall see all thou have done; and give account for every idle word, and
the Law will cut thee down, and cast thee into Hell, where is weeping and
wailing for want of the Presence of God. 2. And then the Dr. adds. Mr.
Jonathan Claphan taxes the Quakers, that they granted no local Heaven or Hell,
none but what is now within Men. 3. And that R. Hubberthorn, in a Book in
answer to Mr. Clapham, called Truth and Innocence, spends many li^es in proof,
that there is something of Heaven and Hell felt here, which Mr. Clapham denied
not.

Obs. 1. For Men to mind the Light of Christ in their Consciences, this is no
Unchristianity, but their Duty, even to believe in the light, and walk in it,
John 12.35, 36. -- This Divine Light of Christ, and Law of God in the Heart (if
minded,) will discover and reprove all evil Deeds, and bring the evil doer to
Judgment, and to feel Condemnation and Sentence of Death, Tribulation and
Anguish upon the Soul, the Terrors of the Lord, and Sorrows and Pains of Hell
in some degree, because of Sin and Iniquity, that through Judgment men may be
prepared for Mercy. No true Christians will count these (being their manifest
experiences) either Antichristian or Unchristian.

2. The Charge he has from our Old Adversary Jonathan Clapham against the
Quakers, is not true, i. e. That they grant no Heaven nor Hell, but what is Now
within Men. For we really believe that the Righteous shall know and enjoy more
of Heaven hereafter, than now they do here in this Life, though they have the
earnest thereof here. And that the Wicked shall know more of Hell hereafter,
than now; Yet some degree or earnest thereof many feel before they go hence, as
Tribulation, Anguish and Terror comes upon them, and they receive in themselves
the Recompense of their Error.

3. To his Charge of granting No local Heaven or Hell, we know no ground for
it. If by Local he means Place, we grant to what the Scripture says, i. e.
Hear thou in Heaven thy dwelling Place, 1 Kings 8.30. And Dives being in Hell
in Torments calls it this Place of Torment, Luke 16.28.

4. That there is something of Heaven and Hell felt here, is certainly true; Our
Conversation is in Heaven, Phil. ^3.20. This was experienced by true
Christians, who were made to sit together in Heavenly Places in Christ Jesus,
Ephesians. 2.1. And did not David feel something of Hell, when he said, The Terrors
of Death compassed me, and the Pains of Hell took hold on me, Psalm. 116.3? See
also, Psalm. 18.5. and 49.15. and 86.13. But 1 st. what does the Dr. mean by
Local Heaven and Hell? 2 d. Whether there are not more Heavens and Hells than
One? Else what means the Heaven of Heavens? and the Lowest Hell, 1 Kings 8.27.
Deuteronomy. 32.22? 3 d. Whether Hell be always spoken of or intended in Scripture as
a limited Place? as where it is said, H^ll has enlarged her self, and opened
her Mouth without measure, Isa. 5.14. And Hell beneath is moved for thee to
meet thee at thy coming* Isa. 14.9. And Death and Hell were cast into the Lake
of Fire, Rev. 20.14. God has no doubt prepared Degrees of Punishments, and the
Limitations thereof suitable to the Degrees of Wickedness, which the Finally
impenitent and wicked are justly condemned for.

II. Henry Osland's abusive and insulting Manuscript examined and briefly
answered.
HEnry Osland, says, Few in these parts knew them, (the Quakers) sooner than I
did some years ago, and then so far as I could judge, their Religion was
composed of some Pagan, some Popish, and some Christian Points of Doctrine.

Ans. This is a blind Charge without distinguishing, which he calls Pagan, and
which Popish points, and we deny his Judgment against us.

H.O. They then held -- The Christ that dyed at Jerusalem, was a Christ
without, but the Christ within was all in all.

Ans. This is a false Charge, as if they held two Christ's, whereas they own
but one and the same Christ, who died and rose again, and ascended, etc. and is
revealed within, was and is Spiritually in the Saints their Hope of Glory, 1
Cor. 15.8. 2 Cor. 13.5. Col. 1.27.

H.O. They denied the Resurrection of the Body.

Ans. This is a false Charge also, the Resurrection was never denied by us.

H.O. You cannot persuade some of us that you own Christ for your Lord and
Lawgiver, and the Scriptures.

Ans. That Is because of your prejudice, envy and unbelief; we own Christ for
our Lord and Lawgiver nevertheless.

H.O. I hear not that you baptize any with Water, Young or Old.

Ans. We have no Scripture for sprinkling Infants, nor commission to baptize
Believers any more than Paul had, 1 Cor. 1.17.

H.O. On Acts 10.47. Can any Man forbid Water, etc. Had there been any Quakers
there, they would have forbid the Water.

Ans. That Is more than he knows what they would have done at that Time and
Occasion.

H.O Perhaps you will say that this is of the same Nature, as the other Signs,
and Shadows, and Figures, which were of a decreasing Nature.

Ans. Water Baptism is confessed to be an outward and visible Sign, and it was
but a Shadow or Figure of a decreasing Nature, for so John's was.

H.O. Has not our Lord promised his Presence, and to be with us to the End of
the World, that use and are sound in his Ordinances? Go, says he, Teach and
Baptize, and I will be with you.

Ans. 1. The Lord is with his Ministers that preach freely, not with the
Covetous, nor with Hirelings, who make a Game and Trade of their Preaching. 2.
Christ mentions not Water in his Commission -- but Teach, Baptizing them into
the Name, (...) of the Father, Son and Holy Ghost.

H.O. Pray tell me who can Baptize with the Spirit, Is it not John 's Work, or
any Man's, or Christ's Work alone? Read Matt. 3.11, 12.

Ans. It is Christ's Work to baptize with the Spirit, to convert, to save, etc.
Yet his Ministers attended with his Power and Presence are instrumental
therein, even in Spiritual Baptism, as well as the Conversion of Sinners.

H.O. Other Christians sit under these Ordinances with great delight, and they
are sweet to their Taste.

Answ. The converted Souls great Delight, and the Fruit that is sweet unto the
Taste thereof, is in sitting under the Shadow of her Beloved, and partaking of
his Living, and pleasant Fruit, Cant. 2.3.

H.O. You do not own Christ for your Lord and Lawgiver, and the Scriptures for
his Law, seems plain to us, in that you Communicate not in the Body and Blood
of Christ at the Table, as other Christians do.

Answ. We both sincerely own Christ for our Lord and Lawgiver, and the holy
Scriptures, and do communicate with all spiritual Christians at the Table of
the Lord, where we livingly partake of Christ that one living Bread from
Heaven, and the Cup of Blessing, which only can, and does comfort, strengthen
and nourish our Souls to eternal Life, as we daily in his Light do wait upon
him.

H.O. On Acts 4.8. and 13.9. These had then Christ within them, and yet they
sat down at the Supper, Acts 2.4. Others filled with the Spirit of Christ, yet
came together to break Bread, 1 Cor. 10.16. and 11.26. Paul gives them
Directions, etc.

Answ. Its not questioned, that they who received the Word and believed,
mentioned in Acts 2. did continue in Fellowship, and breaking of Bread, and
daily in the Temple; and breaking Bread at home, did eat their Meat together,
with gladness and singleness of Heart, (which we truly own) but also, they had
all things common, they sold their Possessions and Goods, and parted them to
all Men, as every one had need. And that the Disciples came together to break
Bread, Acts 20.7. But the Question is, 1. Whether, because these Things were
done by Believers then, they must be practiced by the Church of Christ as long
as the World lasts; if so, why are they not all? Are all their Temporary
Practices, Commands? If so, why do not the present Priests and Professors sell
their Possessions, and divide them, and have all things common? 2 And whether
Christ's Practice as to the Bread and Cup, and Passover in his Supper, Luke 22.
was therefore an Institution enjoined by him to be observed, and practiced in
his Church while the World lasts? Christ took, brake, and gave them Bread, and
Fish likewise, after he was risen, Luke 24.30. John 21.13. But we find not that
he imposes these as a Sacrament, or perpetual Institution, to be allways
observed in his Church. 3. And Paul having recited Christ's Practice, says to
the Corinthians, As often as ye eat this Bread, and drink this Cup, ye show the
Lord's Death till he come, 1 Cor. 11.26. Was this an universal and perpetual
Command to the Church? Or, was it not fulfilled in Christ's COMING, which those
very Corinthians waited for, 1 Cor. 1.7. and 4.5. and which coming of Christ,
they had then great need of, to remove and end the Strifes, Divisions,
Carnality, Drunkenness, Sleepiness, and Disorders among them, 1 Cor. 3.3. and
11.21, 30? We farther seriously ask,

1. If the outward Bread and Cup were not figurative visible Signs, or Shadow
of something more excellent?

2. If outward Types, Figutes and Shadows, be not of a decreasing and vanishing
Nature?

3. What perpetual Command and Necessity is there of the Shadow to continue,
the Substance being come and manifest in Christ's Church?

4. Is not Christ the Sum and Substance, and end of all outward Shadows, Types
and Figures; and the Bread of Life from Heaven, the spiritual Meat and Drink of
every sanctified Soul?

5. Is not the inward Living, and spiritual Enjoyment of Christ, and our being
truly partakers of Christ, far more excellent than the outward Observation of
the Shadow, to put us only in remembrance of him?

6. If the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ in Spirit and Power, and his Members
and Saints spiritual Communion with him, their eating and drinking at his
Table, in his Kingdom, Luke 22.16, 30. and partaking with him of his spiritual
Supper, or supping with him, Rev. 3 20. do not fully answer and fulfill the end
of the Figures and Shadows, as being a far more excellent Dispensation?

Show us any Thing figurative or shadowish mentioned in Scripture, that we
cannot show the substance thereof under the same Term or Title.

7. Can any Bread, Cup, or Wine give Life unto, or nourish the Soul unto
Eternal Life? then that which is spiritual, the Bread of Life, and Wine of the
Kingdom of Christ, even the same Bread and Wine, in Wisdom's House, Prove. 9.5.

Pray, seriously consider these Questions, for they are serious, and to us of
concern.

H.O. Say they (i. e. the Quakers) That Christ enlightens every Man that comes
into the World: I told them, that was with the Light of Nature.

Answ. Where proves he that Light of Christ in every Man, John 1.9. is but the
Light of Nature? By what Scripture proves he this? when it is expressly said, In
him was Life, and the Life was the Light of Men, John 1.4. which rather proves
it a divine and spiritual Light, for that Life that was in Christ the Eternal
Word, was the Light of Men. Can this be the Light of Nature? How great is the
Darkness of such Preachers who so teach?

H.O. That you do not own Christ for your Lord and Teacher, you do not own the
Ministry of such men who are lawfully called, set apart by such as have lawful
Authority in the Church. It is plain in Scripture, Christ gave some Apostles,
some Prophets, and some Evangelists, etc. for the perfecting of the Saints, etc.

Answ. The first part charged against us, is not true; we do own Christ's
Ministry and Ministers sent by him, who are gifted and qualified for the Work
of his Ministry; but such Ministers as were never called, gifted, nor qualified
by Christ, but made and authorized only by Men, and who deny any immediate Call
or Revelation from Christ in these Days, and who in their Preaching, oppose
Perfection and living without sinning in this Life; such we do and shall deny,
and testify against.

H.O. Are all Apostles, are all Prophets? What, may every Man or Woman speak in
the Church? Oh no.

Answ. Though all are not such, yet if the Spirit of the Lord be upon them to
speak or prophecy, as he has promised, Jo^l 2. that is not to be limited nor
quenched; Ye may all prophecy one by one, 1 Cor. 14.31. And there were Women
among them, Chap. 11.5. Therefore the Prohibition to their Women, 1 Cor. 14.34^
was not General, nor comprehending all States and Seize of Christian
Women, nor yet to make void that Prophecy, Joel 2.28, 29. nor to hinder godly
Women (gifted and qualified) from their Duty of being Teachers of good things,
Titus 2.3.

H.O. Take heed to thy self, and thy Doctrine, continue in them, 1 Timothy 4.15,
16. That is, be constant in Preaching, no^ in your Study one day, and at Plow
the next.

Answ. There were better and more effectual Preachers, who were Plow-men,
Shepherds, Herds-men, Fishermen, etc. 1 Kings 19.19. Amos 1.1. and 7.14. Mat.
4.18, 19. John 21.7. 1 Cor. 4.12. than you, who by the help of your acquired
Arts, and Learning, contrive and study Sermons, and fill your Heads out of
other Men's Books, and Authors, instead of waiting upon God for Light and
Understanding in divine Matters. The true God is not limited, he teaches the
Plowman Discretion, and is more felt and known by an honest Plowman at his
Plow, than by a corrupt Priest in his Study or Closet, setting his Imaginations
at work, filling his Head with Notions, out of other Men's Works, and Lines made
ready to his Hand.

H.O. Where is your Presbytery? Who lays on Hand? Who sets apart among you? Who
is set apart to the Work? I know them not.

Answ. We have true and faithful Ministers among us, called and set apart by
Christ Jesus, and owned and approved of by faithful Elders in Truth, and the
Church of Christ, though they do not come under the Hands of your Presbytery.

H.O. Some say, John Payton of Dudley speaks sometimes, yea, and the Women
often talk in your Churches; an hour together, is this your Christianity?

Ans. Good Christian Women to whom God has made good his promise, Joel 2.28,
29. may be required of him sometime to speak among his People in Humility and
Godly Fear, and be no worse nor less Christians for that: There were
Prophetesses and Godly Women in the days of the Holy Prophets, and among the
Primitive Christians, who were also Teachers of good things.

H.O. When you turn Quakers you forsake all Fellowship and Communion with all
other People whatsoever. Is this a part of your Christianity? etc. Is this
Obedience to the Apostles Doctrine, forsake not the assembling of your selves
together?

Ans. Israel shall dwell alone, and not be numbered among the Nations; the
Lord's peculiar People are a chosen People, called and chosen out of Kindreds,
Tongues and People, and must be separate from the unclean. God has called and
gathered us by his Arm of Power out of all empty Professions, and to turn away
from all such as have a Form of Godliness, but deny the Power; from all the
proud and covetous hireling oppressing Priests and Teachers made by the Will of
Man. And we are required to assemble our selves, inwardly to wait upon and
Worship God in Spirit and Truth, distinct and separate from them who are, --
But formal outside traditional Worshippers.

H.O. You will have no Communion with any other above ground or below: you have
in Stowerbridge a constant able ancient profitable Preacher, able to divide the
Word aright in the public Assembly, -- you have also others in the licensed
House, that preach Truth there frequently.

Ans. If this his able ancient Preacher at Stowerbridge be Dr. Ford, who he
pleads for, and the same S.F. D.D. who has printed the perverse, fallacious and
abusive Scheme to prove our ancient Friends unchristian and antichristian; And
if the Preachers in the licensed House (he talks of) be such as H. Osland
himself, we have but very poor Encouragement to go to hear or learn of either,
because of the Envy and Abuse of the one, and the Ignorance of the other.

H.O. But you have built you a Fabric to binder from attending at either.

Ans. Our Meeting House or New Fabric, as he calls it, is one Cause of Dr.
Ford's, and H.O. his present Envy, and perverse Scribbling against us; they envy
our Liberty and Prosperity, and have now begun the Quarrel with us, to
misrepresent and defame us, which shows a partial persecuting Spirit in them;
which is far from either a true Christian Spirit, or State of Saints.

H.O. What are there no Christians, no Saints in either? Are ye the only called
and chosen? How went the Spirit and the Grace of God by the other Assemblies,
to sit down with you?

Ans. This Question is much like that of Zedekiah the false Prophet to Micaiah
the true, when he had smote him on the Oheek, Which way went the Spirit of the
Lord from me to speak unto thee? 1 Kings 22.24. But this was no proof against
the true Prophet, nor for the false; and as poor an Argument for H.O. against
the Quakers.

H.O. Must you be Christians, because you deny the Communion of Saints?

Ans. A false Charge, the Communion of Saints (which is Spiritual,) we never
denied, but are come in measure into it through the Power and Goodness of our
God in Christ unto us.

H.O. Does the Preaching of Dr. Ford, and our hearing of him, unfit us for
Fellowship with you? Or our hearing a young lively Nonconformist?

Ans. Which does he prefer here as, better Preacher? the Learned Dr. or Lively
Nonconformist, by this distinction? His thus pleading for hearing Dr. Ford,
the Parish Priest at the public Assembly or Parish Church (so called,) or a
young lively Nonconformist (as he calls him) at the licenced Meeting House
does bespeak such an indifference between Conformity and Nonconformity, as
thereby he has at once given away, and betrayed the Cause of all conscientious
Non-conformists and Dissenters into the Hands of their Persecutors and
Adversaries, so as to give them occasion the more to insult and persecute, if
they have opportunity. But we hope all that are conscientious and mean
honestly, will see and refuse such Indifferency, such Insincerity, such Medly,
such Neutrality and Hpocrisie, as this Lukewarm Temporizer and Hypocrite has
here pleaded for. His zealous Brethren of the Presbytery of Scotland, etc.
would not endure such his Indifferency and detestable Neutrality, as being a
Violation of their solemn League and Covenant, which it seems he has dispensed
with.

H.O. Does the Preaching of John Payton, and such as he, make you only Saints,
or is it the Preaching of the Women?

Ans. These are but silly Scoffs and Flouts from a proud and scornful Spirit,
and prove nothing against us; we are a Religious People who conscientiously
dissent both from the Parish Priests, and such Linsy-woolsey Temporizers as
himself; and doubt not but the Lord has inspired, and raised up and made better
and more powerful Preachers, probably some poor industrious Men (and Women)
than himself or his said Dr. ever were.

H.O. Nay you will have no fellowship with us in the Bowels of the Earth, you
will not sleep with us in the Dust; for you have many Grave-Yards up and down.

Ans. What sad Complaint is this? what Cause has he for it? what great hurt do
we do them in not burying our Dead with them? surely none at all; they have the
more room then. And it is no new thing to purchase Burying Places, some of the
Holy Ancients have been presidential in that Case. See Genesis 23.4, 11. and
49.30. and 50.13.

H.O. Now your Belief of God and Christ, and other good things you express in
your Paper, prove you only Christians in part, but not that you are complete in
him.

Ans. It Is well he has granted us Christians, so far as to our Belief of God
and Christ, and other good things. And then is not this our Belief in God and
Christ, the principal Part of Christianity, from whence the other Parts of
Christianity gradually and naturally follow, as the good Effects and Fruits of
Faith in God and Christ, where there is a Continuance in that Living, Divine
and Christian Faith, which works by Love into a Compleatness or Perfection in
Christ, which we believe in him is attainable? but so do not they who preach
against perfection, and believe not a Possibility for any on Earth to keep from
sinning, and therefore such are greatly defective as to Faith and Christianity.
Pray, which are the best Christians? they who believe in Christ unto Salvation
from Sin, that they may be complete in Christ, or they who believe not unto any
such Salvation or Compleatness?

H.O. You deny the Ancient Christian Rule [a Falsehood still] and the great
Commands of the Gospel, [i. e. Water baptizm and breaking of Bread.]

Ans. Nay, the great Commands of the Gospel, which are required both in the Law
and Gospel are, Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, etc. and
thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self. These are the two great and lasting
Commandments, Matt. 22.37, 38, 39. Luke 10.27. Where proves he that the other
are so, or that they were perpetual Commands of the Gospel? Let Us have plain
Scripture proof.

H.O. Your Paper has shamed you in the Eye of the World, which discovers you to
be half Christians at the beast, and the lest in the Nation.

Ans. No such matter, his Charge is unjust still, we find no Cause to be
ashamed of our Paper, nor has it shamed us. It has had kind Reception and
Approbation by wiser and greater Persons, and of more honesty than H.O.
himself; and wherein is our half Christianity only? Is it in our Faith in God
by Jesus Christ, attended with a sober Godly and Christian Conversation? what
then is the other half of Christianity omitted by us? does it consist in
observation of the outward Elements? does Christianity consist in Shadows, or
in Life and Substance? Surely the Kingdom of God and of his Christ, and the
Life of Christianity in the New Covenant, consists not in Meats nor Drinks, nor
diverse Washings (or Baptizings) or carnal Ordinances, as the Old Covenant did,
Heb. 9.10. but far excels the State of the first Covenant.

His Charge that we are the least ( i. e. Christians) in the Nation; Is to tell
us that the Drunkards, Swearers, Liars, Whoremongers, Extortioners, etc. in the
Nation, (being entitled Christians by their Baptism,) are better Christians
than the sober People called Quakers: But this we can never believe.

H.O. These are not to begin a Quarrel with you, [and yet it is really a Quarrel
begun with us;] but to acquaint you with some of your Defects, etc. And also to
entreat you of Stowerbridge, to go to Dr. Ford, an able Minister, he will
direct you to obey the whole Will of God.

Ans. When will this Parasite cease his temporizing Flattery, and false
Insinuations? How can he be such an able Minister, teach us the whole Will of
God, when he opposes immediate revelation, Preaching and Praying by the
immediate Spirit of Christ and Motion thereof? How then proves he, or H.O.
either, his Call to preach? We do not believe him to be a Minister sent by
Christ, or in the Steps of Christ's Ministers, who preached freely as they had
freely received. Does S. Ford, and H.O. preach freely, without either Tithes or
forced Maintenance, Lucre or Gain of Money, or Rewards for Preaching? Dare they
say they are free from Coveteousness, Pride and Envy? And why did not Simon
Ford clear himself in answer to D. Wills his Queries sent to him at
Northampton, in the year 1662, about his changing or wheeling about with the
Times, his public Confession, his one while preaching openly against the
Common Prayer, another while reading it? Whether the same Spirit or the same
God could lead him in both? or whether filthy Lucre did not too much sway him?
If the said S. Ford has not yet answered those Queries, we could heartily wish
him seriously to consider how he can in good Conscience answer them to God and
Man, for they are remarkable Queries, and pinching in Point of Conscience, and
worthy of serious Notice. But being somewhat large, we will at present forbear to
insert them all here; yet know not what we may do hereafter, if the said S.
Ford (who has begun the Quarrel against us,) will not yet please to study to be
quiet, and carry it peaceably toward his quiet honest Neighbors called
Quakers; if he will yet enviously scrible and print more perverse Stuff against
us, to abuse and render us odious to the Nation; we have more to say to him,
and it is not his Empty Title, D.D. shall excuse him or his Advocate H.O.
either; but we hope in the Name of the Lord our God to clear our Consciences as
in his sight, and vindicate his blessed Truth against all Falsehood, and
Hypocrisy.

And moreover, we can make it appear, That Dr. Ford in his Charge of
Vnchristianity and Antichristianity against the Quakers; (so called) has
contradicted his Exposition of the Church Catechism in diverse Points. And that
therein he teaches his Hearers the very same things which he has condemned, as
the Antichristianity of the Quakers Ancient Friends; which manifest
self-contradiction is at present reserved for a further Opportunity.

III. A Brief consideration of an Epistle directed to Friends and Brethren, at
their next general Meeting in London.
WHEREAS this pretended Brother, (or rather envious Libeller) near the
Beginning pretends, That, because he would not do any thing that looks like
making or keeping up differences at this Time, when all English Men should be
united against the common Adversary; he resolves not, to print two large
Epistles, (he has writ) directed as this Paper of his is, Viz. To the Friends
and Brethren at their next general Meeting in LONDON, yet near his Conclusion
threatens, That if we do not protest against the Errors they implead, etc. He
intends ere long to publish them.

To all which we say, 1. That if he publish them, he will publicly discover his
Contradiction to himself, and his own fair Pretense, not to do any thing that
looks like making or keeping up differences. 2. That he is one guilty of that
great Abomination, of sowing discord among Brethren, (what he can.) 3. His
great Envy, Malice and Falsehood, and also forgery in Fact, against some of our
Friends, may plainly be evinced, which at present we wave. 4. That seeing he
feigns himself our Friend and Brother, in directing to us as Friends and
Brethren; He is a false Brother then, who Judas like would betray and expose
our ancient Friends and Brethren, to public Reproach and Persecution, which is
the Tendence of his perverse Work against us. 5. Though he highly applauds G.
Keith, and Robert Barcley, especially, G.K. in opposition to several of their
and our ancient Friends, and Brethren, i. e. R.H. Ja. Parnell, E.B. W.D. I.N.
G.F. G.W. W.P. T. Speed, etc. The first Five being deceased. And we have cause
to assure our selves, that both G. Keith, and R.B. would abominate this false
Brother's Attempt to make Divisions between them, and their ancient Brethren,
diverse whereof are gone, and have laid down their Head in Peace.

And as to his giving these Commendations of G.K. as agreeing with them, i. e.
Protestants in this important Truth of the Divine Word, assuming the true
Nature of Man in Soul and Body into an immediate Union, etc. That Jesus Christ
is true and perfect God, and true and perfect Man, etc. very largely and fully,
etc. [All which Truths we firmly believe and own.] But (says the false
Brother,) Others in as great Repute among us, as G.K. clearly contradict him,
[which we do not believe,] Whereupon we solemnly declare, that we find nothing
asserted by G.K. and R.B. where rightly cited, but we really own in the matter,
and intent thereof; as about the Holy Scriptures, the Word, the blessed THREE
in Heaven, Christ's Divinity, and Manhood, Body Sufferings, etc. And also we do
not find, but what our Ancient Friends have written in these Points, are
reconcilable to the other, upon a fair and rational, or charitable
Interpretation of their true Intentions, and Meanings, and taking due and
serious Notice of the Tenor and Import of what they writ upon each Subject,
without mangling or curtailing, as this and other Adversaries are apt to do,
where any things seem to oppose or vary as to some Terms or Expressions; no
doubt, they may be easily reconciled by the Authors, i. e. some of our Ancient
Friends, and G.K. and R.B. though many cannot so learnedly express their Minds
and Meaning as they.

Howbeit this false Brother, N.N. who seeks Division and Discord among
Brethren, feignedly pretends to defend G. Keith, and the Protestant Churches
against G.F. E.B. and others; and says that G.K. owns as fully as they can
desire, the Doctrine intended by the Word TRINITY, which (he says) they contend
not for, but the Doctrine intended; the Truth of the thing it self we deny not,
says G.K. That these THREE are one in Nature and Substance; yet Three otherwise
than by mere Name, Operation or Manifestation, etc. Being distinct in their
relative Modes and Properties, G.K. and R.B. are for us, (says he) and hopes
some of us are of their Mind; and so far we may very well be called Protestant
Quakers, -- and says, God forbid, that we or the major part of us should
approve such as say they are Prophets, but are not, but have said and done such
things as are not to be named among Christians or Men.

By these partial Insinuations this false Brother would still render us a
divided People; and some who are esteemed as Ministers of Christ among us, very
suspicious and odious. Though we know no reason to disown or protest against
either W.D. E.B. R.H. I.P.G.W. W.P. or the rest named by him, (because he has
reviled and abused them as no Protestants,) nor to disown our Friends G.K. or
R.B. whom he pretends to defend, for we have a true, tender and Christian
esteem of both, even of them all, and of their Christian Testimonies, and
innocent Conversations and Sufferings for Christ.

The Author of the Libel, or false Brother, condemns many things he neither
answers nor refutes. He supposes Contradiction in Matters reconcilable. He
reproaches the Dead whom he did not answer nor confute when Living. One
principal Contradiction supposed is this Title of a Paper, i. e. Certain
Papers, which is the Word of the Lord; and yet may not the Scripture be so
called? We say such a Title to any Paper or Writing is improper; [ from the
word] should be, instead of [ which is the word] we shall not stand by the said
Title as it is worded without such Amendment. Yet charitably think it was worded
contrary to the intent and meaning of the Author; for Paper and Ink cannot be
the Word of the Lord, nor can the Eternal Word be contained therein. Yet that
Word has and may immediately move upon the Spirits of some to speak and write,
and that is our case.

The words cited against G.W. and others, Thus, Viz. and here thy Antiquity,
thy Reasons, (and [about] the 3 Persons thou dreamest of, which thou would
divide out of one like a Conjurer,) are all denied, and thou with them, (i. e.
his dark Reasons and Imaginations,) shut up in perpetual Darkness, etc.

G.W. positively disowns the Words To this
, and affirms they are none of his, and that he writ not that part of the
Answer to Townsend I subscribe, Geo. Whitehead.
, (which was about the Year 1654.) yet looks on the words as wrong writ or
wrong printed, and that he raced them out, or corrected them long since, where
he has met with that Answer. For instead of [ and the 3 Persons,] it should
have rather been [ about the 3 Persons.] And G.W. shall neither stand by, nor
own those words as charged; after he see them in Print, he was sorry his Name
was to that Paper without distinction between what he writ, and what he did not
write in it, wherein those words are which give the Occasion. Let this
Advertisement clear G.W. and others, and suffice w^ry charitable and ingenuous
Reader, as we hope it will.

And now seeing this false Brother has so much commended Geo. Keith, and Robert
Barcley as to their Soundness in Doctrine, etc. We say there is matter
sufficient in their Books in Vindication of the Doctrins, Principles and
Christian Religion of the People called Quakers; which if this false Brother
should oppose, he will run into further self-contradiction against them, he has
so highly applauded.

Besides his Misquotations, uncharitable and unjust Reflections and Falsehoods
(here omitted) and his wicked Attempts to sow Discord, cause Divisions and
Contentions among Brethen; he most unfairly picks and nibbles here and there at
our Friends Books and Words, taking them in Pieces, Bits and Scraps here and
there, leaving out the stress and explanatory Part of the Matter in diverse
things, we could evince: And thus it is possible for a disingenuous Person to do
by the best of Writings.

And lastly, Whereas this false Brother would hear whether we would protest
against the Errors his Letters implead, etc. Yet neither tells us his Name, nor
Residence, nor how to direct to him, nor who this N.N. is that is subscribed to
his Letters, nor what religious Society he belongs to; we have more to say or
write to him for his better Information, if we knew his Name and where he lives
to direct to him, and we should not be unwilling to subscribe our Names to such
Defense as we have Cause to make in Truths, and our own behalf; for we are only
defensive in these Controversies, which this and other obscure and sculking
Adversaries have begun against us the peaceable People called Quakers, now in a
Time of Liberty and Freedom from open Persecution; which is an Indication that
these secret peevish Smiters do secretly envy our present Liberty, and
therefore are in the same persecuting Spirit with our open Enemies and
Persecutors. This N.N. should come forth like a Man, and discover himself, that
some of us whom he has accused might have some friendly Discourse with him,
which probably might tend to his Convincement and better Satisfaction, if not
obstinately set to oppose. For hitherto he lurks, he smites privily in the
Dark, he sits in the lurking Places to murder the Innocent, Psalm. 10. and
11.2.
he skulks privily to shoot at the Upright in heart, like the wicked; If he
would be plain and let us know how and whither to direct to him by his right
Name, it would give us Opportunity to let him hear more particularly from us;
till then excuse our Brevity.

FINIS.
Books Printed for, and Sold by Thomas Northcott, in Georgh-Yard, in
Lombard Street.
RObert Barclay's Apology for the true Christian Divinity, as the same is held
forth, and Preached by the People called in scorn Quakers; being a full
Explanation and Vindication of their Principals and Doctrins, etc.

G. Keith's Way to the City of God,

-- His Way cast up, and the Stumbling Blocks removed,

-- His fundamental Truths of Christianity,

-- His true Christ owned, as he is true God and perfect Man,

-- His Rector corrected,

-- His Truths Defense.

G. Fox the Younger's Collections.

E. Bathurst's Truth's Vindication.

G. F's. Heavenly Salutation,

-- His true Christian distinguished from the false.

A Narrative concerning Grace Watson's Death.

Abigal Fisher's Salutation of true Love.

Buds and Blossoms of Piety, with some Fruit of the Spirit of Love, and
Directions to the Divine Wisdom.

Mankind Displayed, or the History of the Little World; being curious
Collections out of the best Authors, of the most wonderful and remarkable
Things, that have been performed by Men and Women, in the several Ages of the
World, etc.

Scephen Strisp's Epistle concerning Present and Succeeeding Times.

Grammatista, or the young Grammarian; being a very useful selling Book,
containing Bills, Bonds, and Receipts, etc.


