THE Counterfeit Convert, A SCANDAL TO CHRISTIANITY, AND His unjustly opposing
Quakerism to Christianity justly reprehended. AND THE True Christ, and Holy
Scripures Confessed by the QUAKERS. In opposition to Two Scandalous Books
falsely styled I. Quakerism Withering, and Christianity Reviving. II.
Animadversions on G. Whitehead's Book, Innocence Triumphant.


Obad. 3. The Pride of thine Heart has deceived thee. Romans 1. 31. Without
natural Affection, Implacable, Unmerciful. LONDON: Printed and Sold by T.
Soul, at the Crooked-Billet in Holloway-Lane; Shoreditch, 1694.

AN EPISTLE TO THE Impartial READER.
I Do hereby sincerely and in good Conscience declare, that it is not for
Controversy's sake, nor in love thereto, that I am so much engaged therein; a
Peaceable and Amicable Conversation toward all Men, and their Quiet Behavior,
(though of different Persuasions) being far more desirable and acceptable to
me: Nor am I the beginner of these Controversies or Contentions, being wholly
defensive in my Concern therein; but for the living Truth and an Innocent
Peoples sake, to remove those gross Aspersions which are cast upon both,
chiefly by Contentious Apostate Adversaries, which are of the most disingenuous
and malicious, who are more skilful in Perverting and Aspersing, than
Disputing; their Pamphlets being stuffed with Reviling and Railery, not with
Argument. And if I did not really believe a necessity laid upon me (in point of
Conscience toward God, and love to his People,) to discover and oppose their
foul Abuses, bitter Aspersions and gross Calumnies, they might rail on against
my self and others, till wearied and out of Breath, and the Fire of their own
Envy consume them. But the Controversy is not Personal only, but the Holy
Truth is concerned, our Christian Faith and Religion is concerned, our Holy
Profession is concerned: And these furious Adversaries will needs concern, (and
would fain incense) the Civil Government with their invective Pamphlets against
us, to render u^ as highly obnoxious to the same as they can* And therefore we
have been the more under a necessity to detect, oppose and obviate their
malicious Designs, that our Innocence may not unjustly lie under such Clouds of
Infamy and Scandals as they unjustly cast upon us. As Fra. Bugg endeavored to
incense the House of Commons, against the People called Quakers, with a
Malicious Pamphlet (to interrupt our Endeavors for Relief of the said People
in the Case of Oaths,) therein most falsely charging the said People with
Denying Jesus of Nazareth, Contempt of Governors, Christ's Ministers and
Magistrates, Scripture, etc. Having before in his late Book styled New Romans
Arraigned, termed Twelve of us Perjured Persons for our Negative Testimony
against his so charging the Quakers with Denying Jesus of Nazareth, etc. and
thereupon acting his Mock-Trial, forging our Answers and Erecting the form of a
Pillory, and thereby scandalizing diverse Citi^ens (of good Repute and Credit,)
as Per^ured Persons, thereby affecting not only their Christian, but Civil
Reputations, ^randing the said People and their Mini^^ers, with these
Characters, viz. New ^ome, Rome's Sister, the Papists their ^rethren, and with
following the Steps of the Jesuits; and withal, terming one of their Ministers,
one of her chief Cardinals; (i. e. New Rome's,) and consequently this is no
better than to render the said People Papists in a high degree. Now let the
Impartial and Judicious judge: First, Whether his unjust Attempts herein, and
his thus misrepresenting us, do not greatly ten^ to lessen and injure the
Protestant Interest, and consequently to gratify the Papists. Secondly. Ana is
not this a plain Contradiction to the Government, which has been pleased
legally to recognize us as Dissenting Protestants. Thirdly, And what Ingenuity,
Honesty or Prudence has F. Bugg or his Abettors shown, in thus representing a
Body of Protestant Subjects, as New Rome, Papists? etc. What a New Rom^ under
the English Protestant Government Strange Reflection? Fourthly, And whether F.
B's. thus contradicting the Government's recognizing us (by Law) as Dissenting
Protestants (by his thus defaming us as New Rome, Rome's Sister, Papists
Brethren, etc.) be not Seditious in the Natu^^ and Tendency thereof, as tending
to stir (...) Discord and Strise amongst Protestant Subjects, and consequently
to weaken the Interest of King and People? Let the Prudent and Impartial judge.
Fifthly, F. B's. rendering our Declaration to the King and Parliament, ( for the
Divine Authority of the Holy Scripture, as inserted in the Act of Exemption)
Deceitful on our part, and to serve a turn, in his New Rome Arraigned, p. 40,
42. This is to go about to invalidate and destroy a principal Condition of our
present Liberty: And is not this to Confront and Oppose the Governments
acceptance of our said Declaration. All which, with many more
misrepresentations and Calumnies against us in F. Bugg's Pamphlets, greatly
bespeak his Deadly Malice, Revengeful and Unchristian Spirit, which we hope no
Rational, Impartial or moderate Man, will Countenance or Encourage. To be sure
such malicious Treatment, must needs be odious to all true Christians, and
Merciful Men. And seeing I could not with all my late and earnest Endeavors,
obtain a Meeting for a free and fair Debate with Fra. Bugg, (when lately in
London) about the Controversy he has begun and published between us. I
acquainted his Two Ministers ( viz. William Smithies of Cripplegate Parish,
London, and Isaac Archer of Milden-hall in Suffolk, where he lives,) with these
(and other) his Abuses and Misrepresentations aforesaid against us, to try if
they would put a stop to his farther proceeding therein; showing them by
Letters wherein his Abuse and Calumnies against us, would affect them, (he
having the Reputation of a Convert, and his writing against us, approbation
among some of the Clergy, by his own Confession.) But his last Pamphlet being
in the Press before my Letters to them, I suppose they had not opportunity to
prevent or stop that. However it will concern them for the future, to stop his
Malicious Attempts, otherwise I am persuaded his work will not be to their
Credit or Reputation: But the more to the contrary, if they do not stop, and
lay him aside, and provide better Tools to work withal, if minded fairly to
Controvert Matters with us, or otherwise to let us live quietly, and on all
hands to endeavor for Charity one toward another as much as we can.

And seeing F. B. has presumed to dedicate his last Pamphlet, styled Quakerism
Withering, to the Bishop of Gloucester, falsely charging the Teachers of the
Quakers therein with Damnable Heresies, even Denying the Lord that bought them.
And yet as one both uncertain and doubtful in his evil Attempts against us,
proposes this Offer and Submission to the said Bishop in these Words, viz. I
therefore do most humbly offer what I have wrote to your Lordship's perusal,
and shall most willingly submit to your Censure, the Matters therein contained.
And if for want of Judgment in the Matters controverted, I have wronged the
Quakers, I shall most willingly retract and make them public reparation.

Hereupon, I and another Friend, i. e. Samuel Waldenfield, lately took occasion
to repair to the said Bishop of Gloucester, (having the reputation of a moderate
Person,) and showed him Fr. Bugg's said Pamphlet and Epistle dedicated to him,
and this very Passage of his Submission, as not knowing but he had delivered it
first in Manuscript to the Bishop, for his Perusal and Correction: Which when I
enquired of him about, the Bishop answered, he had never seen it before, nor
knew the Man. Whereupon I showed him how preposterous it was for F. B. to
expose his said Pamphlet in Print to general Judgment, before he had the
Bishops Judgment about it, and how inconsistent with his said offer of his Book
to his Perusal, and submitting to his Censure the Matters therein. How
insincere F. B. was herein is obvious.

It seems he was resolved to traduce and asperse the Quakers in Print first,
that the Bishop might not have the opportunity to prevent him therein: Though
for a Pretext and Color, he Complements the Bishop with his Conditional
Submission to his Censure and Judgment, whether he had wronged the Quakers or
not. Did not this tend to make the World believe he had the Bishops Privity or
Approbation therein, or otherwise, that he would not have div^lged what he had
writ, because offered to the Bishops Perusal and Censure? who knew nothing of
it until 'twas gone out into the World. What a Mockery and plain Abuse was
this, (tending to make the Bishop suspected of giving Countenance thereto.) To
whom we showed also Bugg's other Book against us, styled New Rome Arraign. with
his Mock Trial and Condemnation of Perjury and Pillory against us, and the
Occasion thereof; which Calumnies the Bishop disowned, and could not allow of
such Treatment. And I thought meet to give this hint thereof, to do the Bishop
so much Justice, that he might not lie under the suspicion of giving
Countenance to this our Implacable Adversary, in these his Calumnies and bitter
Invectives against us. As I did in the Postscript of my late Answer, Innocence
Triumphant. For Henry Goldwell, Justice of Peace, and late Member of
Parliament, to whom F. B. dedicated his other Scandalous Book, (styled New Rome
Arraigned) without his Privity or Knowledge (as he confessed) and for which he
also told some of us, he severely advertised F. Bugg, when he saw it in Print
(with his Mock-Trial, Perjury and Pillory against us) being sensible it was a
Reflection on his Reputation, to be rendered or suspected as the Patroniser or
Countenancer of such Scandalous Pamphlets. And it is to be much more hoped, that
the said Bishop will advertise F. B. for endeavoring to shelter himself under
his Countenance or Reputation.

[In point of Civility, I thought meet to show the said Bishop of Gloucester,
this foregoing Passage, (relating to him about F. b's. Dedication) in
Manuscript, before 'twas printed, because I had such occasion to make use of
his Name in Print, that he might not be offended; which he was not, but took it
well from us: Samuel Waldenfield being then also present with me.]

However, whatever we suffer, there is a just and all-seeing God, that will
judge righteously, do rightly, and finally determine the Controversy between
the Two Seeds, the Righteous and the Wicked. To Him the Righteous Judge of all,
we commit our Innocent Cause.

Friendly Reader, my Concern in this Controversy, is designed only to
vindicate Truth according to my understanding thereof, and to do particular
Persons wronged, so much right (as to their Principle) as by referring to their
own Explications; for where either their Words are perverted, or seem dubious
in the manner of Expressions, their own more full and clear Demonstrations
ought to be taken notice of, in point of Justice to them. And where the whole
Body or People called Quakers, are wrongfully charged about their Principles
from particular Persons, it is an absurd way of arguing, whether it be from any
one's defective or dubious manner of Expressions, (or our Adversaries own
perversions and misrepresentations.) And in that case, to manifest Truth, and
to do the said People right as to their Principles, etc. I find it the plainest
way to have recourse to their Concurrent Testimonies and Harmonies of their
Writers and Books, to evince the truth of their Principles to others. And this
Method which I do sincerely observe all Religious and Christian Societies will
allow of, and not condemn a whole Body of Sober Religious People, or Christian
Society, for any particular shortness in manner of Expressions; for that were
very partial and unjust. And I doubt not but the Lord our God will stop the
Mouth of Iniquity that is open against us, and clear our Innocence more and
more, that his Truth may prevail over Deceit and Envy, and the Upright in Heart
shall see it, and rejoice in the Lord, and in the prosperity of his blessed
Truth, over his and their Enemies.

From a Servant of Christ George Whitehead.
London, the 3d. of the 2d. Month, 1694, Reader, Note, That the omission of the
Names of our present Opposers in the Title is, 1. Because of the Contempt
brought upon them by their great Envy and outrage. 2. Lest their Names in the
Title, should cause some to refuse inspecting this Treatise.



In opposition to the great Abuses, Misrepresentations of F. Bugg, and his
Advocate Tho. Crisp against us, the following Testimony (which was lately
delivered to the Parliament) is added.
WE whose Names are underwritten (being in Christian Society with the People
commonly called QUAKERS,) Do in good Conscience Declare and Certify all
Persons concerned.

1. That we sincerely believe and Confess, That Jesus of Nazareth, who was born
of the Virgin Mary, is the true Messiah, the very Christ, the Son of the Living
God, to whom all his Prophets gave Witness. And we do highly value his Death,
Sufferings, Works, Offices, and Merits for the Redemption and Salvation of
Mankind, together with his Laws, Doctrine and Ministry.

2. That this very Christ of God, was and is the Lamb of God that takes away
the Sins of the World, who was slain, was dead, and is alive, and lives for
evermore, in his divine eternal Glory, Dominion and Power with the ^ather.

3. That the HOLY Scriptures of the Old and New Testament are of divine
Authority, as being given by Inspiration from God.

4. And that Magistracy or Civil Government is God's Ordinance, the good ends
thereof being for the Punishment of Evildoers, and Praise of them that do well.

And we know of no other Doctrine or Principle preached, maintained, or ever
received among (or by) us since we were a People, contrary to these before
mentioned.

Signed in Behalf of the said People, Thomas Lower, William Crouch, William
Ingram, William Meade, William Macket, Philip Ford, Francis Camfield, John
Edge, Thomas Hutson, Charles Marshall, Josiah Ellis, Gilbert Latey, Theodor
Eccleston, Joseph Wassey, Thomas Cox, John Bowater, Benjamin Antrobus, William
Philips, Edward Brook, William Townsend, John Hall, George Oldner, Thomas
Barker, Abraham Johnson, Tho. Twinbarrow, Michael Russel, John Harwood, John
Danson, John Stringfellow; William Paul, Fra. Etteridge, Benj. Bealing.


THE Counterfeit Convert, A SCANDAL TO CHRISTIANITY.
TO introduce the ensuing Reflections on F. Bugg's said Pamphlet, I think it
expedient to give a brief Account of our late sincere and earnest Endeavors
for a Meeting with him in London, fairly to debate the principal Matters in
Controversy between him and the People called Quakers; in order whereunto, in
our printed Sheet, Entitled The Quakers Vindication against Fra. Bugg's
Calumnies: The following Offer and Proposal was made, viz.

And further seeing Fra. Bugg has shown his Hatred and Revenge against George
Whitehead, especially for discovering his Self-Condemnation and Malice, etc. I
(the Person concerned) freely offer, and am willing (with with the Lord's
Asistance) to make it plainly appear, before any Six, Ten or Twelve Competent
Witnesses, who are moderate Men of Sense and common Reason, that Fr. Bugg has
grossly and wickedly abused and perverted Truth, and wronged the People called
Quakers, both in Charge Citation and Observation in his said Pamphlet (which he
delivered to the Parliament.) And that in his Book New Rome Arigned, he has
forged notorious Lies in other Men's Names to ridicule, defame and scandalize
diverse Citizens of London, and men of good Repute, condemning them also to the
Pillory as Perjured Persons, in his pretended Trial in a way of Judicature,
unwarantably acted by himself, assuming the Place of both Judge, Accuser, Jury,
Condemner and Executioner, with a form of a Pillory, and Effig^es in^^, to
represent the persons so grossly scandalized by him: I say, for these Ends, I do
profer, (God willing) to meet Fr. Bugg before Witnesses, at any convenient Time
and Place, within the City of London, that the Persons so defamed by him, may
be present. To which Proposal I subscribe

-- Gearge Whit^head.

Hereunto Fr. Bugg gives an answer, with a new Charge, with Six Articles
against the Quakers, and Six against George Whitehead, dated Jan. 29th, 1693;
and he has printed what he says is the substance of his said Answer, p. 5, but
he has left out of his printed, what really is the substance thereof, in the
very beginning of it, namely, his acceptance of my printed Challenge, being in
Writing thus, viz.

George Whitehead.
In answer to your faint Challenge, in your pretended Vindication to meet me in
any place in London, the following Words he leaves out, viz. [ I do accept
thereof, and am come to London, being Sixty Miles to meet you.]

Observe here, how plainly and positively this his acceptance seems to be of my
said Challenge, but how insincere evasive and shifting he was therein, his
following indirect Terms shows insisting upon the Choice of Eight moderate
Ministers, giving me my Choice whether to chose the whole number out of the
Episcopalians, Presbyterians, Independants or Baptists, or whether each of us
one out of each. And what was his intent in proposing such a Choice? It was
that the difference might be referred to such Ministers for them to Judge and
Determine; as he confessed at Jacob Franklings, the First of the twelfth Month,
1693, in the Evening before several Witnesses. I showed how unreasonable it was
for me to give away Matters of Faith and Conscience, to such Persons of
different Persuasion; and how besides the terms of my Challenge for the Persons
present to be Witnesses only of what passed, i. e. as to matter of Fact, and
not to refer matters of Faith and Conscience to their Determination; asking
Bugg if he would refer all the Matters in Difference to Anabaptist Ministers?
(whereof Sprinkling Infants was one, as he well knew,) He answered, he would;
as indeed his own Proposal would have obliged him, if I had chosen the whole
number of Anabaptist Ministers. By this those of the Church of England Clergy,
who have encouraged Fr Bugg in his Scribbling against the Quakers, may see what
a Convert he is, and how little of Religion or Stability he is come to, in his
offering to refer Matters thereof to the Judgment of Presbyterian, Independent,
or Anabaptists Ministers, whereby he had been liable to turn Presbyterian,
Independent or Anabaptist.

However, since Fr. Bugg so plainly had writ that he accepted of my Challenge,
and came to London Sixty Miles to meet me, I closely pursued him by Letters,
thereupon sending one Letter after another for some time, day by day, for a
Meeting with him fairly to dispute Matters; and seeing him Dillatory, and
protracting Time by his various Terms he had to make one after another, I
appointed several Meetings on purpose, and gave him timely notice thereof, as
many are Witnesses to Six several Letters of mine sent him. And this thou Fr.
Bugg know in thy own Conscience to be true; and therefore may thou not be
ashamed of thy sorry shifting and evading both my Challenge and thy own
Acceptance thereof; and yet in thy own Contradiction art driven to confess in
these Words; viz. Thus far then we agreed as to matter of Debate; I in my Sheet
offered to produce every Book and Page quoted, before Ten or Twelve Impartial
Men, and by G. W. offered to make it appear before any Six, Ten, or Twelve
Moderate Men, that I had wronged them. So that nothing remained now, but my
coming to London to join Issue with G. W, As in Page 3, of thy last Pamphlet
styled Quakerism Withering

But that Agreement thou made shift to evade by other Terms; one while by
urging for Ministers of diverse Persuasions as before, to be Judges of the
Matters in Controversy: Another while, for a pre-Engagement to a Conditional
Retraction under Hand; another while to leave the Matters in Controversy to
the Decision of Disinterested Persons, (as thy Letters show.) And not only so,
but thou woulst have pre-ingaged our Friends, (whom thou have scandalized with
thy Mock Trial and Pillory, as Perjured Persons, to Retraction and
Condemnation, if proved False Witnesses. Another while thou woulst accept
against G. W's Twelve Witnesses being present at the Debate, unless when the
Certificate came under Examination, or called in when any Matter depending
thereupon, was under Consideration; as by thy Letters to me, which was contrary
to my printed Challenge accepted by thee. Thou know what Exceptions I made
against the inequality of these thy dilatory evasive Terms, and against thy
Arrogance, in bringing thy self into Competition with a Body of People,
refusing therein to make any such unequal Bargain with thee, to gratify thy
Ambition. Whereupon I queried, First, Do any of the Clergy engage either
themselves or the whole Clergy, to stand or fall by Bugg in his Controversy
against a whole People and their Ministers. Secondly, Will any one or Two of
the Clergy, (who are Men of Repute) personate and vindicate Bugg against the
Quakers, as in my Letter to him dated the Twelfth of the Twelfth Month, 1693.
Now F, Bugg thou art still partial and unjust, in leaving out my Answers to thy
Offers and Terms in thy said Printed Pamphlets thou have left out.

First, Thy accepting my Printed Challenge, and coming Sixty Miles to London to
meet me.

Secondly, My Proffer to leave thee to thy Liberty, to bring whom thou pleased
of Members of Parliament, or Ministers for Witnesses.

Thirdly, My Answers to thy Offers, with my Exceptions against the partiality
of thy terms, why did not print them?

Fourthly: My Offers and Appointments of Three sundry Meetings, and thy
absenting from Two of them; and thy flying of about Terms at another of them, (
i. e.) at Josiah Ellis's,) after thou had granted interchangably to discourse
Articles.

Fifthly, Thy granting a Meeting before disinterested Persons, without
retraction, and my Acceptance by Letters, containing what follows, viz. Our
demand of Satisfaction, and positive challenge made to thee thereupon, for a
fair and moderate Dispute within the City of London, before either Three, or
Four, or Six, or Eight or Ten Competent Witnesses, being Dis-interested
Persons: And withal, giving thee liberty to bring Two, Three or Four Persons to
be thy Advocates or Assistants in the Discourse, who are Men of Civility and
Sense, that we might have opportunity to vindicate our Christian and Civil
Reputations from thy great Abuse and Scandal, affecting both, by thy defaming
us as Perjured Persons in thy pretended Trial and Pillory, etc. in thy N. Romans
Arraign. And to clear the People called Quakers from thy Calumnies in thy
printed Sheet delivered to the Parliament, as particularly that of Denying
Jesus of Nazareth, etc. As more largely appears in our Letter to thee, dated
the Nineteenth of the Twelfth Month, 1693. Pursuant to which, we then gave thee
Notice, That we intended (God willing) to meet in the upper Room, at the Bull
and Mouth Meeting House, within Aldersga^e, London, on the 22d of the same
Month, about the 9th Hour in the Morning where thou had notice to meet us.
And where accordingly diverse of us, whom thou had scandalized as aforesaid,
did then and there meet together, with several moderate disinterested Persons
for Witnesses; and also then and there we waited for thee Two Hours, (or above)
but thou came not, as the Persons here named are Witnesses.

Gilbert Latey, Theodor. Eccl^^ston, Richard Needham, James Park, William
Robinson, Samuel Waldenfield. John Butcher, John Vaughton, Benjamin Antrobus,
and others.
So that thy Evasion and timorous sculking to secure thy self from fair
disquisition of Matters, was notorious, and thou wast as well told of it home,
by my next Letter to thee, dated the 23d of the 12th Month, 1693. And how
apparent therein did thou act* contrary to thy own pretense of accepting my
Challenge, and coming Sixty Miles to London, and wa^ing near Three Weeks for a
Meeting with me. All thy slim Shifts, Boasting, Railing and Scandalizing us,
will not cover thy Shame, Guilt and Cowardice which thou have unjustly charged
us withal, until it is directly fallen upon thy self; though thou falsely turnest
the Story of the Pursuit against me, viz. But still I pursued him, (say thou,
p. 7.) as if I had fled, when thou know the contrary how frequently I
followed thee with Letters pursuant to my printed Challenge in the Quakers
Vindication, seeing thou had accepted thereof (in pretense.) And therefore
thy implying G. W. to have shuffled and evaded a fair Debate, p. 9. is
notoriously false, as many can testify, but true upon thy self: And as false
is thy following Reflection; viz. That G. W. promised in Print; (and what?) to
leave the Matter to any moderate Men. What I offered in Print is obvious; 'twas
for Moderate Men to be Witnesses, as in the said Q. Vind. but not to leave the
Matters in Controversy to them as Judges to detetmine. Wherefore I was not
free to pre-ingage to leave or refer Matters of Faith and Conscience to the
judgment and determination of Persons of other Persuasions; thereby to betray
my Christian Liberty, and come under an Implicit Faith, which my Adversaries
Terms would have imposed upon me; though as I told him, I left others Judgments
free, as I would have mine, without being preingaged or imposed upon. This was
the general Reason of my not obliging my self to his Terms of others Decision.

On our deeming thee F. B. a Self-condemned Apostate, p. ^0. Thou questions, Is
not (...) throwing Dirt in the Face of the Government, r^^dring their Religion
so false and erroneous, as (...) whoever forsake you, and conform to the
Established Religion, must therefore be Self-Condemned Apostates? As if the
Government and Establishe^ Religion, must patronize and excuse all (...)
Uncharitableness, Malicious Attempts, Errors Lies, Calumnies and Enormities,
under preten^^ of thy conforming thereunto. But here th^^ art out egregiously,
thy Self-Condemnatio^ and Temporising, is made obvious from t^^ own Confession,
to the tru^^ of our Doctrine, Ministry, Society, Christian Love, and our
Meeting as Blessed of God, even with the comfortable Enjoyment of his Presence,
as in thy Quak. De^^c^ since thy Conformity. Therefore thou argu^ falaciously
as well as maliciously, to render (...) deeming thee a Self-Condemned Apostate,
(...) th^o^ing Dirt in the face of the Government, etc. This will not cover nor
excuse thee before the Great Judge of all; thy Excuse herein being both
irreligious and uncertain. And thenc^ it is apparent thou did not in 1686,
accoun^ the Quakers Criminal in point of Doctrine, seeing thou wast Confirmed,
their Doctrine and Ministry was a dispensation of the Love of God sent (...) a
Visitation to Mankind as in thy said Qr. Detect. which many of the Conformists
were never so Persuaded nor Confirmed, neither ever turned to be such
Malicious, Inveterate Enemies and Persecutors as thou art. Therefore
Self-Condemned Apostasy, cannot be so justly charged upon them as upon thee.
Thy turning thy Testimony for the Quakers Doctrine and Ministry, as by thee
given in 1686, unto what thou thought of them in 58 and 60, is a most base and
false Prevarication, as well as contrary to the plain Grammatical import of thy
own Testimony given in 1686, (Two Years after thy leaving us, and conforming to
the Church of England,) which thou confirmest in these positive Expressions, as
thy then present Sense, viz.

And in this Manner we went on for many Years, and loved one another with Love
unfeigned. And doubtless God blessed our Meetings with the comfortable
Enjoyment of his Presence.

Thus thou in 1686: How can thou in Conscience alter and turn this to what
thou thought of us in 58 and 60? Oh Hardened Man, and injuririous to thy own
Conscience; awake, awake to judgment!

Thy consequence also is very inconsequent and false, That by our Doctrine,
Pious Sincere Christians are rendered Apostates for acknowledging themselves
mistaken (upon Conviction) in that they once thought the Popish Doctrine true,
etc. Quak. Wither, p. 12. For the First, Thou art no such Pious sincere
Christian as left us, and conformed upon any such Conviction. Secondly, Thou
wast not convicted that our Doctrine and Ministry were false or erroneous, when
thou left us, nor when after thy Conformity thou confessed it was a
Dispensation of the love of God, and God blessed our Meetings, etc.

Thy First Charge against the Quakers is, That they deny Jesus of Nazareth, who
was born of the blessed Virgin Mary to be Christ, and the efficient Cause of
Man's Salvation.

Here are Two Charges made one, both which we positively and sincerely deny, as
contrary to our professed and known Principles. The Scripture Texts 1 John 1. 14.
Luke 1. 26. and 2. 10. 1. Mark ^. 7. Matt. 17. 5. and 26. 67. and 27 38. 50.
and 28. 6. Acts 1. 9, 10, 11. and 5. 3^, 31. Acts 2. 36. Hebr. 5. 9. and 12. 2.
Romans 8. 34. Acts 7. 35. 56. and 10. 38. 1 Cor. 15. 15.
proving Jesus to be the Christ, etc. p. 14, 15, 16. we ever have and do
sincerely believe and own. But that the Quakers ^^ach the contrary, (as B^^gg
^aith) we utterly deny, as a gross Calumny imposed upon us. His instance
fo^roof of from Isaac Pennington's Question to ^ssors, wherein he distinguishes
between Christ and the Body in which he came, and between the outward Vessel
and the Inward Life, and not calling the Bodily Garment Christ, etc. i. e*
chiefly and in the first place Christ, as I. P. explains himself, is no Proof
that the Quakers deny Jesus to be Christ, for he did not consist only of an
outward Body or Vessel, he had both inward Life, Soul and Spirit, even as
perfect Man, much more as God. And therefore Fr. Bugg's inference, that the
Quakers would divide the Humanity from the Godhead is false; they are
distinguished but not divided in the entire Being of Christ* as also that they
can never call him Christ but a Vail, is falsely infinuated; though his Flesh
was called the Vail, Heb. 10. 20. This Objection has been plainly answered as
well as the Question: Does not the Name Christ belong to the whole Body, etc.
In our Charitable Essay, p. 4. which Fr. Bugg gives the go by to, without
Replication, running the rounds to his old Objection, Idem per Idem, imposing
and begging the Question; he will neither see, nor take Answers, how plainly
soever given, thus impertinent and trifling he is.

But to clear Isaac Pennington in this Point, he did not deny Jesus of Nazareth
to be Christ, but sincerely confesses to the same Jesus Christ in his Works,
2nd Part, p. 18. in these Words, viz. The Enemy has raised up Jealousies and
Prejudices against us, as if we denied the Scriptures and Ordinances of God,
and that Christ that died at Jerusalem; against which Isaac P. Answers, viz.
First, That we do really in our Hearts own that Christ who came in the fullness
of time in that prepared Body to do the Father's Will, (His coming into the
World, Doctrine, Miracles, Sufferings, Death, Resurrection, etc. in plainness
and simplicity of Heart, according as it is expressed in the Letters of the
Scripture. Secondly, That we own no other Christ than that, nor hold sorth no
other thing for Christ but him, who then appeared and was made manifest in the
Flesh. And p. 19. ibid. The Lord has shown me in Spirit, that they themselves
are guilty of that very charge, (and that he will so implead them at his
Judgment Seat) which they cast upon us, even of denying that Christ which died
at Jerusalem to be Christ. Thus far Isaac Pennington. What more plain and
innocent Testimony could Man have given? Where Is now either his or the Quakers
denial of Jesus of Nazareth to be Christ, as F. Bugg has over and over unjustly
charged us.

Another Instance out of the Christian Quaker, is that the holy Body, ( i. e.
of Christ,) was not instrumentally, without a share of the general Victory, and
holy Privileges obtained; yet that the efficient and chiefest Cause was the
Light and Life, p. 18.

This is so far from either denying Jesus to be Christ, or the efficient Cause
of Salvation, that it is a plain Confession that Jesus Christ was both the
instrumental, and the efficient cause of Man's Salvation; Instrumental in his
Holy Body, and Efficient by his Light and Life: Seeing we preach no other Light
or Life to effect Salvation, but that of Jesus Christ. And we know of no true
Understanding Christians, but will confess that it was not the Humanity or
Manhood of Christ only that effects or works Man's Salvatian, without the
Divinity, seeing as Man, he says, I can of my Self do nothing; as I hear I
judge, John 5. 30.

Wherefore Fr. Bugg's Inference that they, ( i. e.) the Quakars,) have robbed
the blessed Jesus of one of his eminent Attributes, (viz. of being the
efficient Cause of Man's Salvation,) is notoriously false and impertinent like
the rest, (Jesus Christ is a complete Savior.) As also is F. B's other, That
they insinuate by consequence that Him that was born of the Virgin, He is no
otherwise a Savior, than other good Men are, p. 21.

Which he has flatly contradicted by his Instance immediately following, viz.
If some Men in Scriptures are entitled Saviors, because of their Contribution
of their Trials, Travels and Labors toward the Salvation of Mankind; of much
more right is that honor ascribed to Him who had the Spirit without Measure,
etc. p. 21.

Whereby its apparent, that much more Honor of a Savior is ascribed to
Christ, than to any other Men. Thus notorious is Bugg in his Contradiction to
himself, most unjustly to prove his Lying Charge of their Denying Jesus to be
the Christ, and the efficient Cause of Man's Salvation. Oh Horrible Insolency,
and Self-Condemned Apostasy!

Now Fr. Bugg, I query of thee,

1. Did thou, when a Quaker, deny Jesus to be the Christ.

2. Did thou when a Quaker, deny Jesus to be the efficient cause of Man's
Salvation?

3. Did thou when a Quaker, ever hear the Quakers deny Jesus to be the Christ
in their Ministry.

4. Did thou when a Quaker ever hear the Quakers Deny Christ to be the
efficient Cause of Man's Salvation?

5. Nay, did thou deny Jesus to be the Christ, or the efficient Cause of
Man's Salvation, when in the Name of the People called Quakers, thou
confessedst, That in the beginning the inshining Light of Christ Jesus by his
Heavenly Spiritual Appearance in the Hearts and Souls of his People, was our
Principle, the very Foundation, Principle and Corner Stone of our Building? See
his De Christ. Lib. 2d Part, p. 24.

6. Did thou deny Jesus Christ to be the efficient Cause of Man's Salvation,
in thy confessing to this inshining Light of Christ Jesus, as the more sure
word of Prophecy; and that there was sufficiency in it, (being obeyed) to lead
to Salvation? Or in thy confessing to the virtue and excellency of this holy
Unction, and to this word nigh in the Heart; and to Christ Jesus the Second
Adam, as he is a quickening Spirit, even to Christ within; and thus People must
wait to know him, except they were Reproba^es? ibid. p. 25, 26, 27.

7. Did thou by these Confessions, deny Jesus of Nazareth, who was born of
the Virgin Mary, to be the efficient Cause of Man's Salvation?

8. What notorious and gross Contradiction to thy self is it then for thee, to
make ascribing the Salvation chiefly to the holy Light of Life in Christ, and
unto his Body instrumentally, to be a denial of his being the efficient cause
of Man's Salvation, Qu. Wither. p. 22. Seeing that Light of Life was the Light
and Life of the same Jesus Christ.

And I think it is a real owning Jesus Christ, who was born of the Virgin Mary,
to be the efficient Cause of Man's Salvation, to confess that to his own holy
Divine Light of Life, Salvation is chiefly ascribed; but Instrumentally to his
Body. And has not the Apostle Paul the like Distinction, where he confesses
we were reconciled to God by the Death of his Son; much more being reconciled,
we shall be saved by his Life? Romans 5. 10.

Here Is Reconciliation by his Death, and much more Salvation by his Life.

Wherefore F. Bugg's Consequence against us, as bringing in Damnable Heresies,
Denying the Lord Jesus Christ to be a complete Savior, p. 23. is a most foul
and absurd Slander.

His instance in p. 23, that the Serpent is a Spirit, and therefore that
promised Seed which bruiseth his Head, must be Spiritual: And that Seed is
Christ. To which I add consequently, not only the outward Body or Flesh which
he took upon him.

I cannot understand how this can be a Denial, that Jesus Christ himself is the
efficient Cause of Man's Salvation, unless F. Bugg does think that Christ was
made up only of that outward Body of Flesh, without any Divine Principle of
Light and Life in him; which I suppose he will not attempt to own or prove. For
though Christ took upon him the Seed of Abraham according to the Flesh, and was
the Seed of the Woman that bruises the Serpents Head, even the promised Seed,
who through Death was to bruise under, and destroy him that had the power of
Death, viz. The Devil, yet he effectually does it by his Divine Power, Light
and Life, as the immediate and efficient Cause of Man's Salvation: Wherein we
still confess his Sufferings and Death in the Flesh Instrumentally to
Contribute thereunto. Christ Jesus as the promised Seed, who came of a Woman
made under the Law, bruised the Serpent's Head, both without us and within us;
without us, through his Sufferings and Death, (by his Divine Testimony, Word
and Power; within us, by his Divine Life, Light, Word, (or Seed,) Spirit and
Power, which is all but one Christ himself, not Two Christ's, nor to be divided.
Else how could we be born again of incorruptible Seed? Or how does that Seed
remain in him that is born again? And is not that Seed Christ? And is not the
Word of Faith, Christ in Spirit? It Is well that F. B. grants the head of the
Serpent in Men shall be bruised. Consequently this must be for their Salvation.
And Christ therefore as inwardly revealed by ^is Spirit and Power the efficient
Cause there of.

Diverse other absurd Consequences he draws upon us in this case not worth
tracing. His other Instances to prove his false Charge of the Quakers denying
Jesus to be Christ, and efficient Cause of Man's Salvation, are most grossly
applied and perverted, as (he says) by G. Fox's assuming Divine Attributes to
himself, p. 26, 27. Which we must needs look upon to be a reiterated aspersion.
For where G. F. uses these Words, I am the Light, him by whom the World was
made, and does enlighten every Man that comes into the World, etc. This he
speaks in the Name of Christ, and not of himself; nor in his own Name, as his
following Words plainly shows, viz. If you love the Light wherewith you are
enlightened, you will love Christ, who says Learn of me. Now F. B. Do thou
in Conscience believe that G. F. assumes this to himself, or that he himself
made the World? Or that he himself enlightens every Man? It Is very sad to see
thee so hardened and wilfully perverse in thus perverting truth. Thou know
better, and sins against knowledge in thy Calumnies against us.

F. Bug's Second Charge against the Quakers, Their Books are Blasphemous, and
their practice Idolatrous, etc.

This we utterly deny as a Calumnious Clam^u^ against our Books and practice in
general: And therefore the more impossible for Fr. Bugg rationally to produce
the Color of proof thereof. Wherefore I question him about his pretended
Allegations.

1. What Blasphemy or Idolatry was it for any of our Friends to write, viz.
Thou, O North of England, out of thee did the Branch spring, and Star arise,
which gives Light to all the Regions round about; in thee the Sun of
Righteousness appeared? etc.

2. How proves F. Bugg that Fox's Disciples or Proselites, (as he scornfully
calls them,) ecchoed back these Adorations to him; as calling him the Branch,
the Star, the Sun of Righteousness? Alluding to Mic. 5. 2. Numb. 24. 17. Mal.
4. 2. Zech. 3. 8. p. 31. I challenge Bugg to prove where the Quakers gave these
Titles to the Person of George Fox, or that he assumed them to himself?

Observe. I have viewed over that Epistle of Edward Burrough's, to the Camp of
the Lord in England, p. 64, 65, 66, 67, where mention is made of the North of
England, and where the Branch did spring, and the Star arise, and the Sun of
Righteousness appeared, etc. And G. F. is not so much as mentioned, or named in
all that Epistle; and therefore Bugg has most shamefully belied and scandalized
the Quakers in this point also; not only in charging them, that the Quakers
Prophets give Witness to G. Fox, instead of Christ; that they call him the
Branch, the Star, the Sun of Righteousness, and put the North of England for
the Town of Bethlehem* ( N. Romans unm. Epist. to Ber. p. 2.) But also, because
of our Testimony against this Horrid Lie and Abuse; among others, Bugg staged
Twelve of us, (being Citizens, Tradesmen and others of good Repute,) in his
Mock Trial, wherein he condemns us for Perjured Persons to the Pillory, with a
form thereof, (in his N. Romans Arraign.) to redicule and most grossly defame us,
both as to our Christian and Civil Reputations affected thereby. Oh, horrible
Insolency and Wickedness in thee F. Bugg! Thus wilfully to persist in thy
Imposing gross Lies and Calumnies upon the World against us!

3. What Divine Attributes did G. F. assume to himself, in saying he wrote from
the Mouth of the Lord, or that he was clothed with Righteousness? p. 30.

5. How proves Bugg, that to be a true and entire Copy of John Audland's Letter
to G. F. which he cites, p. 30? I deny his Citation; and there is reason to
question the truth of it, being also so often varied in Print; and particularly
from the Copy sent me by John Pennyman; besides the Date of 1665 given it, in
the printed Libel, entitled, Some of the Quakers Principles, etc. gives more
Cause to question the Truth of his Copy: For that Date was Two Years after John
Audland Died, being in 1663, ('it is great Nonsense to suppose he writ it after
he Died,) as appears by their Register of Burials in Westmorland. And thou F.
B. have owned the said Libel and the composing of it, in thy N. Romans Arr. p.
10. And did thou find the Date of 1665, on the said Letters; or did thou
give it, or who did? Answer truly. We may not be imposed upon by thy various
uncertain Accounts or Equivocations in this Matter.

5. Which of you have the Original Letter of J. A's? And which of you are able
to make it appear, by comparing of Hands to be his, (as printed by thee) as
thou say? p. 32. Which of you are so expert in his Hand, that you can make
it so appear ex certa scientia? I greatly question it. I am sure that John
Audland believed in, (and confessed) the true Christ of God, according to
Scripture, as is fully proved in his Works, cited in my Just Enquiry, ( p. 26,
27, 28, 29.) and that he esteemed G. F. no otherwise than eminently
Instrumental in Christ, for his own and others help and comfort.

6. What Blasphemy and Idolatry can thou prove against W. P. and others, in
their Book Judas and Jews, and in excusing Josiah Coa's Letter? Thy proofless
Clamours will not do, to bear us down, nor thy hideous outcry and clamor,
that never greater Blasphemies were spoke by Man, than by Fox. For shame leave
these thy Malicious Calumnies.

7. What Blasphemy and Idolatry provest thou against John Blackling's
Testimony, that G. F. was blessed with honor above above many Brethren? Were
there not Elders worthy of double Honor? And is not that Honor Eternal, which
God gives, and is from above, and wherewith he Honors them, that Honor him?

8. And that his Life Reigns, ( i. e. the Life that G. F. partook of,) Is not
Christ the Life of all his true Believers and Followers?

9. His tender Words in the Lords Love were my S^^^'s Nourishment.

If these were J. B's Words, what Blasphemy or Idolatry was in them; as
believing G. F. Instrumental in the Lord's Love for his Souls Comfort? Did not
Paul say, I have fed thee with Milk, and not with strong Meat? 1 Cor. 3. 2. And
did not Christ's Ministers comfort the otints who were in Trouble, by the
Comfort where with they themselves were comforted of God? 2 Cor. 1. 4.

Were these Blasphemous or Idolatrous, supposest thou, F. Bugg? Oh, how filthy,
Loud and Clamourous art thou in thy Charges, and how poor, faint, dull and
short in thy proof!

Fr. Bugg's Third Charge against the Quakers.

That they deny the Scriptures, by speaking contemptously of them, etc. Their
Contemptuous Expressions of the Holy Scripture, their contempt of the Holy
Scriptures, p. 32, 33.

We utterly deny these his Charges, as both Calumnious, and directly contrary
to our Principles. His Allegations are fully answered in these our Three
Treatises, viz. A Charitable Essay; A Just Enquiry, and Innocence Triumph^nt.
But he is so tenacious to his own Opinion, and so Implacable, that he will
receive no Answer; but repeat and impose his old worn, Reproachful Stuff, over
and over again.

I am sure our Friends Books alleged by him, if impartially viewed, will clear
them in this Case, from either Denying or Contemning the Holy Scriptures. And
even that of News coming out of the North, so often objected, does in diverse
parts of it clear the point, both by the numerous Quotations of the Scripture
in the Margents, as also where its therein said, the Lord has spoken by his
former Prophets; and what? The Scripture. And p. 8, Christ Jesus the Substance
of the Prophets, Ibid. The Testimonies of the Prophets of God, and Apostles of
Christ ( against false Prophets and the Works of the World,) owned, And p. 12,
13. The Scriptures and Saints Conditions, and the Words spoken by the Prophets,
Christ and his Apostles, owned. And in Eternal Substantial Truths, p. 17. The
Life and power of God gave forth the Scriptures, (he says.)

Now could this be any Contempt of Holy Scripture? No, but the Contrary. And
where do the Quakers say, that to preach out of them, ( i. e. the Holy
Scriptures) is Conjuration?

There may be true Preaching out of the Holy Scripture by the Spirit of Truth;
and there is false Preaching, by perverting the Holy Scriptures.

Bugg's own instance which is against them that study to raise a Living thing
out of the Dead; to raise the Spirit out of the Letter, are Conjurers and
Diviners, their teaching not being from the mouth of the Lord, p. 34. This is
no proof of his general Charge* that to preach out of the Holy Scriptures, is
Conjuration. Quer. Where proves he these Words?

His Observation is also false, That the Quakers call the Holy Scriptures
Death, Dust, and Serpents Meat. This is a foul perversion* seeing they esteem
the Holy Doctrine, to be the Holy Scripture; which he also has granted and
agreed to. And our distinguishing between the outward Writing or Books and the
Holy Doctrine therein contained, and between the Letter and the Spirit, 2 Cor.
3. 6, 7. This was no Juggle, nor any Contempt of Holy Scripture, as falsely
suggested, p. 33, 36.

The Holy Scriptures mentioned amongst those Writings which I. P. did bring to
the Exchange. And to this F. B. says, Surely they could not burn the Holy
Spirit; and that it seems they can call the Bible the Holy Scriptures, for a
Wicked Design, p. 36. This is impertinent, as well as Malicious; for the Holy
Scriptures therein mentioned, was with the respect to the Doctrine therein
contained; for I must tell F. B. that it would show Contempt to Holy Scripture,
even to the Holy Doctrine contained in the Bible, if a Person should
voluntarily offer to burn the Bible it self, as the King of Judah did
Jeremiah's Roll, Jer. 36. (though he could not ^urn the Word of the Lord.) But
to say the Bible or Books made up of Paper and Characters will decay and turn
to Dust, but the Holy Doctrine, Word and Spirit from whence it came, will
endure: This is no Contempt of Holy Scripture* nor yet to the Bible.

His Saying G. W. holdly imposes upon the World, that though they call the
Scripture Dust, etc. yet they do not call the Holy Scripture so. The first part
he falsely imposes upon me, as he does on the Quakers. Not only that they call
the Holy Scriptures Dust, Death, Serpents Meat, Beastly Ware, etc. which is a
horrible Calumny,) but also that they do not believe the Doctrine and Precepts
recorded in Scripture, to be either Blessed or Holy, p. 38, 39

Thus he imposes his horrid and gross Lies (against us) upon the World; as
also that the Quakers never did beg Pardon of God for Christ's sake; and that
they do prefer their own Books, Papers and Epistles before the Scriptures, p.
40. These like the rest, are gross Lies, and contrary to our Testimonies extant
in Print, as in diverse of our Books we positively declare, That we prefer the
Holy Scripture above all other Books extant in the World; and also declare that
we are truly thankful to God for preserving to us the outward Writings,
Scriptures, or Books commonly called the Bible, as in Christ's Lambs defend.
Epist. to the Reader, p. 7. The Christianity of the Quak. Vindic. In Answer to
Dr. Ford, p. 13. And Charitable Ess^^, p. 5. And we do also frequently read the
Scripture in our Families many of us, more than any other Books or Epistles
whatsoever.

To prove the Quakers Denial and Contempt of the *Holy Scripture; pursuant to
this abominable Lie, Bugg says, viz. And not knowing a better way to manifest
them, I erected a mock Pillory, and tried them, and found them guilty on their
own Premises, p. 33.

The more Insolent, Impudent and Shameless thou F. Bugv, and the greater thy
Shame and Wickedness: What, convict us of Error by wilful Lies and Forgery, and
by notorious Scandal and Defamation? As was thy mock Trial, and mock Pillory,
(as well as thy mock Cage;) from whence we may justly return thy Calumnies
against G. Whitehead, upon thy self, and can prove them against thy self: viz.

That F. Bugg is First, A public Defamer. Secondly, A wicked Forger. Thirdly,
A wilful Liar. Fourthly, A gross Perverter. Fifthly, A false Glosser. Sixthly,
A Deceiver, i. e. of some Silly, Ignorant, Cr^dulous and Enviour Persons, not
of any Impartial, Wise or Judicious. Oh horrible! What a Christion, a Convert,
a Churchman, an earnest Contender for the Christian Faith, (as thou styles thy
self,) and yet guilty of such horrid Forger^, Scandal and Slander as thy said
mock Trial is made up off. Good Lord deliver us all from such a People, and
such a Ministry as own such a sinful Wretch, and Self-Condemned, Malicious
Apostate as thou art, for a true Convert.

Thy Charge of Denial and Contempt of Holy Scriptures, on the People called
Quakers, is expressly contrary to what thou thy self have positively declared in
Print; and that even in the Name and Person of the said People; pleading for
our Testimony to Christ within and the Kingdom of Heaven within, De Christ Lib.
chapter 1. par. 2. This (say thou), we told, this we proved to the People out of
the Holy Scriptures; and that although the Scriptures were good, and a true
Declaration of those things which were most surely believed by the Apostles,
and by us ought to be believed, yet not the only Rule, but still the Spirit of
God, which was the first Principle, the Foundation Principle, etc. [Thus far F.
Bugg.] Pray note, here is F. Bugg, when a pretended Quaker, speaking truth
herein, and clearing himself and the Quakers from being guilty of the least
contempt of Holy Scripture; but on the contrary, owning the same both as Holy
and True, and to be most surely believed; whereby both himself and the Quakers
did then, ( i. e. in 1682,) own the Divine Authority of Holy Scripture by his
own Confession. But F. Bugg, since a pretended Churchman, tells the World
gross Lies against the People called Quakers; namely, That they deny and
contemn the Holy Scripture: F. Bugg the Quaker spoke truth, but F. Bugg the
pretended Churchman and Convert, tells Notorious, Shameful Lies and Calumnies.
It Is an ill Bird that fouls its own Nests; and One such Runagado, is worse than
three Turks.

His Reasons to prove that we do not believe the Doctrine and Precepts recorded
in Scripture, to be either blessed or holy, are as false and impertinent as his
Charge, and but a telling Lies, to prove Lies; which therefore I thus oppose.

1. It Is false that we cast Reproachful Language, and Contemptuous Expressions
upon the Doctrine and Precepts recorded in Scripture.

2. Not reading them in our Meetings for Worship, is no Proof that either we
have not the Spiritual and Living Worship of God among us; nor any Evidence
that we do not belihve the Doctrine and Precepts recorded in Scripture, to be
blessed or holy: Our humbly Worshipping God in Spirit and Truth, is what is
required of us by Jesus Christ, and the Holy Scripture, which therefore is
Testimony of our Belief that the Doctrine thereof is Holy.

3. It Is false again, that we say (without Distinction,) to Preach out of them
is Conjuration. I am confident these Words were never spoken by the Quakers
thus general and positive, without any other Distinction or Exception about the
Preachers and manner of Preaching.

4. These are notoriously false, that we lay aside a^ useless the use of the
Lord's Prayer, Ten Commandments, etc. Seeing by the Spirit of Christ, we Pray
after that manner as he has taught, and practice the Substance of the
Commandments, in that Love which is the fulfilling thereof.

5. We are not conscious to our selves of denying the Ordinances of Jesus
Christ, either in not believing Sprinkling Infants to be of Divine Institution,
or in not practicing John's Baptism, which is that of Water, not mentioned in
Go teach all Nations, Baptizing them, Mat. 28. And This do in remembrance of
me, (i. e. as often as ye do it.) But of how long continuance, and till what
coming of Christ is the Question? Though we believe this and all other Precepts
both of God and Christ were holy under their several Dispensations, yet it
follows not that we must reeds still practice every thidg that was holy, or
else be condemned as not believing the Doctrine and Precepts of Scripture to be
holy. F. Bugg will make no good Logic of such Arguments and Consequences; for
that were to bring us back to the diverse Washings, Baptisms, Tithes, Offerings,
Pussovers and Circumcisions, etc. under ehe Law; which were all holy in their
first Institution and Dedication.

6. It Is also notoriously false, that we do prefer our own Books, Papers and
Epistles before the Scriptures, (i. e. the holy Scriptures,) because some of
them are occasionally read in some of our Meetings; for both in our Ministry,
Books and Epistles, People are often referred to the Holy Scriptures for proof,
and excited to read them, and that they may understand, believe and live
according to the same, by the Assistance of God's Holy Spirit. And therefore we
esteem and prefer the Holy Scriptures before our own Writings, contrary to
Bugg's false Aspersion upon the Quakers; i. e. That they make void the holy
Scripture by their Traditional Pamphlets. His gross Lies of this kind are
numerous; the Lord rebuke his Lying Spirit, and great Envy.

F. Bugg's Fourth Charge against the Quakers. They deny the Ordinances of Jesus
Christ, as Baptism and the Lord's Supper.

We deny this Charge, as laid down without distinction; and that for our Reason
F. B. cites, viz. As for Baptism and the Lords Supper, Scripturally considered
in their several Dispensations, in the Figure and Substance, we confess and
own. To this F. B. presently answers, This is false as their Books declare, p.
45. What Is false? He considers not he knows not what? He answers very
inadvertently, are not Baptism and the Lord's Supper, Scripturally considered,
both as in the Figure and in the Substance, in the Type, and in the Antitype? I
never heard any true Convert Christian, or real Protestant say, this is false
before. Was not John's Baptism with Water, a Figure of Christ's Baptism with
the Spirit? And of the Washing of Regeneration? Which was greater? And was not
the outward Supper, Bread and Cup, in Commemoration of Christ's Death, a Figure
also of his Inward Spiritual Supper, Eating and Drinking with him in his
Kingdom? Who said he, except ye eat my Flesh, and Drink my Blood, ye have no
Life in you. Where then is the falsehood in our confessing Baptism and the
Lord's Supper, in the Figure and Substance? F. B. quotes E. Burrough's Works,
p. 51. The Bread and Wine is visible and carnal, a figure of a Spiritual thing.
And what then? are they Spiritual, or the Substance which is Christ? That Is
Popery, which the Martyrs opposed, who esteemed the outward Elements, the Bread
and the Cup, figurative, or a Figure of the Body and Blood of Christ
spiritually receivedly Faith. What great Error then can F. B. prove against us
therein?

He farther cites E. B. in this point, as follows p. 45, viz. For Christ never
since he was sacrificed, brake the Bread, and drank the Cup with his Disciples,
p. 581, (instead of 518.) We do deny, and do say it is no Ordinance of God,
neither was it ever commanded of him, or practiced by the Saints, but is an
Institution of the Whore of Rome, etc. This F. B. renders E. B. to say of the
Bread and the Cup, (being cited in the next antecedent Words, as here.) Oh sad!
what a gross Perverter art thou F. B? This has been often thy fallacious manner
of Citation to abuse us; as it is plain, that which E. B. here says we deny, as
never commanded of God, nor practiced by the Saints, but ^ Romish Institution
was Sprinkling (or Baptizing) Infants; calling it the Baptism into Faith, etc.
as in E. B' s. p. 518, (before quoted,) and not breaking of Bread, and drinking
of the Cup' as given by Christ unto his Disciples: E. B* knew this was some
time practiced by Believers' but not the other; and it had been more ingenious
for F. B. to have convicted him of Error about Sprinkling, than to
mis-represent him. Though I grant E. B. in p. 518, objects against their manner
of breaking Bread, and drinking Wine among the Unconverted and Unregenerate, as
not commanded of God, nor practiced by his Saints. But does not call the
breaking of Bread, and drinking Wine, a Popish Institution of Rome, as he does
Sprinkling Infants, and their calling it the Baptism into the Faith. This point
is answered in the Quakers Vindication, p. 2. col. 1. But F. B. is more expert
in mis-representing, traducing and railing, than in rational Argument, or fair
Disputation.

As to our Exception against Sprinkling, and seeming thereby to allow of
Dipping, p. 46. we except against the one as unscriptural, and allow of the
other as once Scriptural in its proper Dispensation.

F. Bugg's Fifth and Sixth Charge against the Quakers.

That they undervalue the Death and Sufferings of Christ; and exalt their own
Sufferings above the Sufferings of Christ, above the Sufferings of the
Apostles, above the Sufferings of the Martyrs, or any Christians since the Days
of Christ, etc.

We deny these Charges, as expressly contrary to our Principle, and public
known Testimonies, both highly valuing and exalting the Death and Sufferings of
Christ above all other: His charging the Quakers to exalt their Sufferings
above the Sufferings of Christ, imports as if they so lifted up, extolled,
dignified or rendered their Sufferings more excellent than Christ's. This is a
most gross Calumny cast upon the People called Quakers, and as expressly
contrary to their Intention and Principle. Though F. B. takes advantage at some
Words of E. B's, which he partially cites, adding the Words [ called Quakers,]
and as unfairly construes against the Quakers in general; as where he says, Q.
Mary's Days brought not forth a Suffering more cruel, F. B. leaves out [ in
many respects,] which many respects, he explains to be about trivial Matters,
as for not putting off the Hat, ( thee or thou to a Person) and denying the
circumstance of Swearing, and Hundreds suffering on Suspicion, when nothing
could be charged against them; and that this was contrary to Magna Charta. Thus
E. B. reflects upon the Arbitrary Proceedings of those in power, in 1657.
Though I cannot warrant all his comparative Expressions, but grant that the
Passage objected against E. B. in this place, was not so well worded as
intended according to his own Explication: For by greater and more cruel
Suffering, I cannot think E. B. so senseless, as to intend in all Respects; as
that the People of God in our Age, have unde^gone greater and more cruel
Sufferings than all the Primitive Sufferers, Apostles and Martyrs in the Ten
Persecutions; no sure, but in some respects wherein they did not suffer then,
upon such small Pretenses as many did in Cromwell's time, without any such
pretext of Law, as the Jews pretended against Christ. However, though the
Sufferings of the People of God among us, was far short of the Sufferings in
the Apostles Days, and in the Ten Persecutions, etc. yet F. B. gives but a mean
and partial Account thereof; namely, of a few Imprisonments, and some small
Distresses, etc.

In the Twenty Five Years he was amongst the Quakers, he might have remembered
also, the cruel Whippings, and tedious Imprisonments, close Confinements many
of God's People have met withal here in Old England, together with cruel
Beatings, Stockings, Stonings, etc. As also the sad Accounts from New England,
of the cruel and barbarous Whippings, Cutting Ears, Hanging and putting to
Death, diverse of our Iunocent Friends there: I may not say, this was so cruel
as the Sufferings in the Days of the Apostles, and Ten Persecutions, etc. But
these being inflicted by Professors of Christianity in Old and New England; it
seemed more sinful and unjust in them, than in the Heathens, who pretended to
no such Religion and Profession.

One remarkable Passage of Fr. Bugg's, pursuant to the Fifth and Sixth Charge
against the Quakers, I must needs take some notice of. In his Sheet to the
Parliament, he puts a Query, viz.

Whether was greatest, the Sufferings of the Quakers, or the Sufferings of
Christ? To which ( Bugg says) G. W. gave no direct Answer, but glossed it
over, as his usual way is; for if he had answered, that the Sufferings of the
Quakers had been greatest, as their Doctors teach, (a gross Lie by the way,)
the People would have been ready to Stone him for Blasphemy. Again, if he had
said, the Sufferings of Christ had been the greatest, he had then given the Lie
to E. B. So that he was in a great strait like the Pharisees of old their
Predecessors. (Thus far Bugg,) p. 47, 48.

Now F. Bugg, I pray thee see, and I wish thy Ministers William Smi^hies, and
Isaac Archer, may see what a notorious wilful Liar thou art, in this very
point, in saying, G. W. gave no direct Answer to thy Question, but was in a
great strait. To evince thy wilful Lie herein, do but review thy own Query, and
G. W's. direct Answer therein, in the Quak. Vindic. p. 2. viz. To Bugg's Query
5. Whether was the Sufferings of Christ, or the Sufferings of the Quakers
greatest?

1. In the First place we answer, the Sufferings of Christ, in the nature of
them, both inward and outward, in Agony of Soul, and Pains of Body, by that
most cruel Death of the Cross, following that of Scourging and Crowning with
Thorns.

2. It was most unjustly and wickedly inflicted by his Persecutors the Jews and
Heathen; yet worse'in the Jews, because they might have known better, and
because they prosecuted him upon false Witness. And as Christ's Sufferings were
most Cruel and Unjust, both as to the Nature thereof, and the Dignity of him
that suffered, so he was a most acceptable Sacrifice, and sweet smelling Savor
to God, and his Suffering and Sacrifice of Universal Advantage and Benefit to
Mankind, in that he died for all Men, and and gave himself a Ransom for all,
that all might be capable of Redemption and Salvation through him.

Now pray observe, that G. W. gave a direct Answer to Bugg's Query, viz.
Whether was the sufferings of Christ, or the sufferings of the Quakers
greatest? G. W. etc. answers directly, viz. 1. The Sufferings of Christ in the
nature of them, etc. 2. Christ's Sufferings most exalted and esteemed, because
of the Dignity of him that suffered. And this was obvious to Bugg's Eyes in
Print, in our said Vindication; and therefore then F. B. must needs be a
notorious wilful Liar herein, in affirming G. W. gave no direct Answer to thy
Query, but was in a great strait. And as to E. B's. intention and Principle, he
exalted Christ's Sufferings in their worth, dignity and merit, above all other
Men's, as appears by his own and many other Friends Testimonies; highly valuing
and exalting the Death and Sufferings of Christ. E. B's. Confession of Faith,
in his Works, p. 252. Confesses Christ Jesus as the High Priest of God, the
one Offering for Sin, who takes away Sin, and makes Intercession. And p. 441,
He also confesses a being washed and cleansed from all Unrighteousness, by the
Blood of Jesus, by which their Sins are remitted, who walk and abide in his
Light, etc. (He says.) See also a Book Entitled, The Son of Perdition
Revealed, Printed 1661, wherein Ed. Buroughs and G. Whitehead truly thus
confess, p. 2, 4. viz. As Thousands can witness, who have heard us both preach
up, and contend for the free Grace of God to all Men; and thereby ( i. e. by
the Grace of God,) Christ tasted Death for every Man, and died for all Men, and
gave himself a Ransom for all, Heb. 2. 9. 1 Timothy 2. 6. 2 Cor. 5. 14. 1 John 2.
2. And its also testified, that in many more Books of ours, the free Grace of
God, ( i. e. in Christ) to all, and Christ's Dying for all Men, is declared.
And p. 4. ibid. Reconciliation of the World hrough Christ's Death, and his
being a Propitiation through Faith in his Blood, clearly confessed. [Thus far
E. B. and G. W.] Thus highly have they exalted Christ's Sufferings for the Good
of Mankind; but thus have they not exalted their own, or any other Men's, or
Peoples wha^ever. Therefore the Quakers exalt Christ's Sufferings above their
own and all others; consequently Bugg has greatly wronged the People called
Quakers in this point, in his Fifth and and Sixth false Charge before cited.

Some of Bugg's Railery and Lies added under the same Head against the Quakers,
viz. Gross L^ars, Grand Impostors, Impudent Cheats. Yea, Ellwood, Richardson,
and the most Learned among them. As they have showed all the Contempt they can
to Jesus of Nazareth, ( calling him a Vail, a Garment, etc. To the Scriptures,
to the Ordinances and Ministers of Jesus of Nazareth; with great Incharity, p.
56. Here F. B. thou have lied to purpose, both against the Living and the Dead:
I dare say Tho. Ellwood, and the Learned among us (who are yet alive) can
testify against thee and the Devil too; who is the Author of these thy Horrid
Lies.

And that their Preachers never lost Fifty Pounds, p. 57, is another notorious
Lie; for I in particular, with many others, have lost many times more by
Informers and Imprisonments.

Whereas F. B. is offended at my calling him so often Bugg, p. 59, 60, calling
me thereupon Insolent and Imperious George. What Is he then in calling me only
Whitehead, and another Fox, and another Ellwood, and another Richardson? Was
this Pride, Insolency or Imperiousness in him? If he says 'twas for Brevities
sake, so sa^ I, for I have often mentioned his Name at ^engtr; but sometimes F.
B. for Brevities sake. He has also told me he would not go a step to meet such
a proud imperious Fellow, as in his Letter to me Dated Feb. 16th, 1693. Pray
what Humility has F. B. shown herein? And this is not all, but he thinks
thereupon to debase me, by upbraiding me with my former Estate, saying, G. W.
came amongst the Quakers, Anno 1652, a poor Boy about Fifteen or Sixteen Years
old, traveling on foot, and has so gathered up his Crumbs, though chiefly at
other Men's Tables, that he scorns to call him that fed him and his Friends at
his Table by his proper Name, p. 60.

Though he somewhat mistakes as to Time and Age, yet that Poverty I am not at
all ashamed of; it was for Christ's sake that I was made low and poor: I was no
whit behind F. B. in Education, though I was made willing to walk on foot, and
deeply to suffer by Imprisonment, (as I did) and many other ways even in my
young Years, wherein the Lord was with me, as he still is (I bless his Name.)
And as for being fed at F. B's. Table, I think 'twas not very often, whether
Three or Four Times I remember not; and I suppose it was not without some
Invitations by him to his House: Did not thou F. B. invite me to thy House
sometimes? Surely it was not then intended to upbraid me in Print, with seeding
at thy Table. Thou wast then more a Man, and of more Civility, it is pity thy
Conversion to the Priests and Levites should so much deprive thee both of
Compassion, Natural Affection and Civility: However since it is thy pleasure
thus to upbraid me, I offer thee reasonable Satisfaction; let me have a true
Bill how often I have fed at thy Table, and what each Meal of mine comes to,
according to the usual Rates of Ordinaries, and I will pay it, or cause Payment
to thee, (God willing.)

To thy Six Charges against G. Whitehead.

1. A Public Defamer.

I deny thy Charge, (the Terms thereof considered in the common and evil
Sense,) But why a Public Defamer? what because he writ that F. Bugg was turned
Informer, a Self-Condemned Apostate? etc. The latter is largely proved against
thee in my several Answers; as in Innocence against Envy. The contentious
Apostate, etc. A Charitable Essay; and Innocence Triumphant.

And the first was also proved against thee in Judgment fixed, p. 225, 226,
227, 228. By thy informing the Magistrate against us, in thy Book of Christian
Liberty pretended, accusing us with Impositions, a new stamped Government,
comparing our Yearly Meeting in 1675, to the Popes Council of Jesuits and
crafty Friars: And our Testimony then given concerning Men's and Women's
Meetings, as if it had come from the Pope's Council, etc. upbraiding our
Women's Meetings as an Idol of our own erecting, com^aring it to the Papists
great Idol, viz. The Rood ^ Grace, as in thy De Chris. lib. 2d Part, p. 32, ^8,
46, 47, Printed in 1682.

But to be accounted an Informer, as before, said, F. B. takes very hardly,
being in the time 1682, saying, he was one of the greatest Sufferer^ by
Informers in the whole Country. But F. B. was not thou about that time
quarrelling with S* Cater, about the Fifteen Pound Fine? And pulling thy Neck
out of the Collar, and winding thy self out of Sufferings? And was it such a
great Crime to render thee an Informer, seeing what thou then writ against our
Yearly Meeting, tended to render us as obnoxious as the Papists, like the Popes
Council? etc. When it is well known, that in those Days; many of our Friends
deeply suffered by Laws made against Popish Recusants, in Two Thirds of their
Estates, and 20 l. per Month: Did not tho^ then deserve the Character of a
Malicious Informer, in grossly aspersing us as aforesaid? ^ Wicked Man, is a
Wicked Man, a Liar i^ a Liar, a Forger is a Forger, a Persecutor is a
Persecutor, and deserves his Characters.

2. A Wicked Forger.

I deny thy Charge again; Wherein a wicked Forger? What for saying F. Bugg
affirms in hi^ Book de Chris. lib. part 2d, p. 83. That Conformity is a
Monster, etc. And yet in about Two Years after, he himself turned about and
conformed? In answer to which, thou say, I am not the Author of one Word of
that Page, bu^ the whole Passage is a Query of John Ainsloe's beginning p 81,
and ending p. 87.

But hold F. B. Jo. Ainsloe's Query begins not in p. 81, but in p. 82, and
recited in p. 83, for p. 81, concludes with these Words, viz. I shall add one
Query which J. A. put forth, to which I never heard that he had any Answer; and
were not these thy Words Francis? And the Words a few Lines before in the same
Page, viz. Error ^oves obs^urity, for its Habitation is Darkness, and Ignorance
is the Mother of its Devotion, and Conformity the Monstrous Womb that produced
it, etc. And are not these thy Words Francis? and what difference pray between
calling Conformity the Monstrous Womb, and Conformity a Monster? Is not a
Monstrous Womb as bad as a Monster? What makes a Monster, but something
Monstrous; and is not that which is Monstrous, a Monster?

Besides, thou have appeared so much affected with Jo. Ainsloe's Query and
Answer, that thou ^ast taken some care to recite and print the ^ame at large,
without showing any dislike to ^t, but rather as a matter highly approved by
^hee: So that thou did espouse the same; and that he writ therein, thou
made thine by ^doption. Thou appearing then of the sa^e ^ud gment, why art
now so shy of thy own A^opted Birth or Monster? Why did not re^ct it at
first, but hugged it so long?

3. A Wilful Liar.

That I am sure is false; for though I may ac^dentally mistake in some
Circumstances, yet ^ot a Wilful (nor witting) Liar: Thy pretended proof of this
Charge, is the Conten. Apost. p. 3. viz. F. Bugg and his Company being go^ into
the Meeting before G. W. and into the Gallery. I grant there was an accidental
Defect or Error happened in that Passage, I not being present to correct the
Press, which was afterward corrected, as may be seen in my Sheet, The Cont.
Apost. Recharg'd, p. 8. in these Words, viz. And Reader observe in the said
Contentious Apostate, and his Blow refelled, p. 3. l. 11. to read [And he into
the Gallery,] the word he being omitted, varies from the sense intended, though
in some it was corrected after Printed, but in others omitted.

Now pray how will this prove G. W. a wilful Liar? F. Bugg can take small
occasion to asperse. Therefore the defective Account, with the said omission of
the Word [ he] was neither wilfully nor maliciously sent abroad to render thee
a Turbulent Disturber, as thou falsely say, p. 66. although thou wast very
turbulent, and disturbed the whole Meeting, and that wilfully and wickedly,
having like a Persecuting Informer, procured a Warrant and a Constable to cause
the Persons met, forthwith to appear before some Justice of Peace, to answer an
Information against the Meeting, because held under pretense of a Religious
Worship, in different form from the Religion established in a place not
licensed, etc. which disturbance being contrary to the intent of the
Government. And afterward thou falaciously excused this thy Turbulancy and
Persecution, pretending thy getting a Justice's Warrant, was to the intent to
get me to own my Book, Judgment fixed, N. Romans unm. p. 53, when the Warrant was
expressly grounded upon an Information of a Meeting, under pretense of
Religious Worship, etc. And to cause the Persons met, to appear as aforesaid,
to answer the Information. Now was not this like an Informer?

4. A Gross Perverter.

This I deny as a gross Lie, and his Instance, (though unfairly cited,) Is no
proof thereof: It Is evident that the Instances Bugg brought in his Sheet, to
prove the Quakers Contempt of Government, reviling Christ's Magistrates and
Ministers, were out of E. Burr. Works, between the Year 1654, and 1659, which
was in Cromwell's Days, against his Persecuting Magistrates and Ministers, whom
E. B. testified against, because of their Persecution, and their Arbitrary
Usurped Dominion over the Consciences of Men, p. 501. This is no Perversion,
but true in fact. It was E. B's. reprehentions against them and their
Corruptions, that Bugg did make the Quakers Contempt of Government, as more
fully is made put in the Quakers Vindication, p. 3. And therefore I did not
aggravate the Matter against him, by saying, to do us an ill turn, Bugg has at
^nawares run his own Head against a Wall. What E. B. G. F. and G. R. writ to O.
C. and that Government, it was not in favor to their Usurpation over Men's
Consciences, Persecution, etc. and the Substance thereof is answered long
since, in a Treatise Entitled, Christ's Lambs defended from Satan's Rage.

F. Bugg's Charge of Usurpation against the Quakers, p. 69, shows a great
height of Malice and Bitterness, as well as gross Falsehood and Perversion, and
particularly his first Instance, viz. And that in diverse respects: First, In
that you Summons the Kings Subjects to meet Annually in London, by way of
General Council or Con^^ication, without any legal Warrant, Writ, or other
Legal Authority; and when sat in Council in Devonshire- House, you make Laws,
Edicts and Canons for the King's Subjects throughout England (...) observe,
contrary and in direct opposition to those very Laws, Rules, etc. which the
King and Parliament make at Westminster.

Pray observe, this seems a heavy Charge, as if F. B. had a Mind to hang us
all, as well as to Pillory and Cage us. But here are several notorious
Falsehoods contained in these his Words, in diverse respects. As First, that we
Summons the King's Subjects; this is general, and without Exception too. Query,
Who issues out Summon's for the King's Subjects? Secondly, And what Subjects
are they? I know no such Summons, but in Free and Christian Agreement Our
Yearly Meeting, (which has been of many Years standing, is innocently held for
Religious Good and Christian Ends, in the Law of God and for Peace, good Order,
Amity and Unit^ in the Churches of Christ; that we may as God's People and
Christian Society, be helpful and serviceable one to another in our Day.
Thirdly, And this our Annual Meeting is of no such intent or design to be as a
general Council or Convocation, to make Laws, Edicts or Canons for the Kings
Subejcts throughout England to observe, in direct opposition to those of the
King and Parliament, (as F. Bugg most maliciously suggests.) For First, We know
no Laws, Edicts or Canons we have to make, either for the Kings Subjects, or
for our selves, but to be helpful in the truth, and to stir up one another to
faithfulness, to that Law and Testimony that God has given and made known to
us, who is our Lawgiver.

But what is this Usurpation so highly charged against us? and what Laws and
Edicts do we make? To this he bids us see our Yearly Epistle, May 1675, where
(he says), viz. In opposition to the Law the King and Parliament made, that
^ou should not meet above Four, etc. You in opposition made a Law, that your
People should neither ^^rsake, decline, nor remove their Meeting. This was one
remarkable Instance of your justling with Authority, etc. [Thus far F. Bugg.]
To make (...) look as odious and obnoxious to the Government, as his deadly
Malice promp^s him. But he is mistaken for all is haste, for what he ^^ls a Law
made by us in opposition to King and Parliament, we know no such Law made by
us, ^^t an Ancient, Apostolical and Christian Testimony and Exhortation, which
our said Year-Meeting gave to our Friends; and which had been our Care and
Practice from the beginning, viz.

That an open Testimony for the Lord should be borne, and a public Standard
for Truth and Righteousness, upheld in the power and Spirit of God, by our open
and known Meetings, etc. The said Meeting giving Advice and Judgment, that all
Friends gathered in the Name of Jesus, keep up those public Testimonies, and
not to decline, forsake or remove their public Assemblies. Whereby it is plain,
that this Advice was given for no other end, than for their keeping their
Public Assembles for the Worship of God, in the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ,
and very agreeable to the Holy Apostles Exhortation, not for saking the
Assembling of your selves together, as the manner of some is.

And how proves F. Bugg, that this Advice was a Law made by our said Meeting,
in opposition to the Law made by the King and Parliament? Has he not herein
reflected upon the Government, and aspersed the King and Parliament? For where
did they make a Law against public Assemblies, gathered in the Name of Jesus
Christ to worship God? How does he prove the Laws made against Conventicles, or
Seditious Meetings, under pretense of Religious Exercise, etc. were made
against such Assemblies as met in the Name and Power of Christ Jesus, really to
worship God in Spirit and Truth? for such were our Assemblies advised to be
kept.

Another Instance Bugg has against us, That our Books be spread up and down the
Nation, etc. And what Usurpation or Justling with Authority is this? Why not
our Books be spread as well as his? And must he have all the liberty to spread
his dirty Defaming Books, and we not have liberty to divulge Answers to them,
to remove his ^^lumnies? That Is very unfair and unjust. But he objects being
unlicensed; that is not true of all our Books. (But who licensed his New Rome
Arraigned, with his Mock-Trial, Perjury and Pillory? Neither is it true, that
they tend to defame both Clergy and Gentry, unless to publish the Persecution
and Cruelty of some of the Clergy, be to defame both the Clergy and Gentry in
general, That none should pay Tithes or Steeple-House Rates; are not the Words
of our last Yearly Epistle which he also objects against. But that our
Christian Testimony borne, and greatly suffered for, be faithfully maintained
against t^^^: ^his was not Advice to all the Kings Subjects, but to those that
have a Testimony from the Lord against the Oppression of Tithes, as being
thereof convinced in their own Consciences, that they might be faithful to that
Testimony for Christ Jesus, who put an end to the Law and Priesthood that
upheld the Tithes.

Which thou F. B. had once a Testimony against; but wast unfaithful, and turned
thy back thereof. But farther, our Christian Testimony against Tithes, was
neither Law, Edict, or Cannon of our own making; but what we received, and were
persuaded of in Conscience, by the Light and Testimony of Jesus Christ from the
beginning.

That none should carry Guns in their Ships: This is perversely and
mischievously worded by F. Bugg, and (in its being made a general Prohibition,)
varies from the Words of our Yearly Meeting Epistle; and his Inference
thereupon, is as Malicious and Mischievous, where he says, This shows that you
are not content with your own ease, but as far as your Usurpation prevails, you
weaken the Government, p. 70.

Whereas the Caution in our said Epistle was Tender and Christian, relating
only to some Ship-Masters, reputed Quakers, who contrary to their former
Principle and Practice, (and to the injury of their own Souls and Consciences,
by their declension, and placing their Security in that which is altogether
Insecure,) carry Guns, and (...) to ^e endangering their own and others Lives,
having let in Disobedience and Unbelief, 'Twas to such only the Caution was
tenderly recommended, that they might be preserved through Faith and Confidence
in the Arm and power of God, which is the greatest Security: Now I see not how
this could be to weaken the Government, to have them thus preserved. It Is more
like to be a weakening; for any such (by acting contrary to their Principle and
Conscience, and letting in Unbelief,) to provoke God to deliver them up to
their Enemy to be destroyed.

Let it be observed how tender and careful our said Yearly Meeting was in this
very Matter, with respect both to our Christian Testimony, and the outward
Government also, in the next following Passage which F. Bugg, has unfairly and
disingeniously left out; and therefore it is here inserted, viz.

Dear Friends, you very well know our Christian Principle and Profession in
this Matter, both with respect to God and Caesar, that because we are Subjects
of Christ's Kingdom, which is not of this World, we cannot fight, Joh. 18. 36,
Yet being Subjects of Caesar's Kingdom, we pay our Taxes, Tribute, etc.
according to the Example of Christ and his Holy Apostles relating to Christ's
Kingdom and Caesar's, wherein we are careful not to offend, Mat. 17. 27. and 22.
20. Romans 13* 6, 7. Being also very glad, and much satisfied in the many
Testimonies given at this Meeting, of our Friends Innocence, quiet and
peaceable Behavior, under the outward Government, as becomes our Christian
Principle and Profession. Now the Reader may observe, that our Yearly Meetings
Epistles, are not Laws and Edicts Imposed, but Epistles tenderly recommended to
the Consciences and Christian care of our Friends only.

5. A False Glosser.

This also I deny, being not conscious to my self of false glossing in this, or
any other instance he brings against me, viz. The Quak. Vind. etc. p. 2. F.
Bugg accuses somebody for objecting against paying of Tithes under the New
Covenant, because abrogated by Christ, etc. On which he makes his Observation,
That by this they, (i. e. the Quakers,) have condemned the Martyrs and all
Christians, etc. As in his Sheet, p. 4. Whereupon he adds, viz. Observe this
false Glosser; I did not say they condemn either Martyr or others, who did
refuse Payment of Tithes; I neither said so, nor will my Words carry any such
intendment. Rep. Neither did I charge thee with so saying; but that the Quakers
have Condemned the Martyrs and all Christians, etc. (which makes no
distinction.) And by what have they condemned them, but by denying to pay
Tithes under the New Covenant, because abrogated by Christ. And how could this
be a Condemning the Martyrs and all Christians in thy Sense, unless thou
concludest they were all for the payment of Tithes? The Case is plain, I did no
accuse thee with saying the Quakers condemned the Martyrs or others who refused
the Payment of Tithes, but because in opposition (...) Tho. Ellwoods saying, [
They who pay Tithes uphold a Legal Ceremony, abrogated by Christ; and thereby
deny Christ to be con^ in the Flesh.] Thou observed, by this the have condemned
the Martyrs and all Christian yea, Kings, Parliament and People, who pay or
take Tithes. Now does not this plainly imply, that the Martyrs and all
Christians were for the payment of Tithes, if the Quakers Testimony against
Tithes be a condemning the Martyrs and all Christians? I confess I cannot find
how I am a false Glosser herein; and against thee F. B. in this I fairly
objected, That thy Observation was too general upon the Martyrs, for that both
John Wickliff, William Swinderby, Walter Brute, William Thorpe, the Bohemians,
with others mentioned in the Book of Martyrs and others, did bear Testimony
against the Corruptions of the Popish Clergy, and against Tithes, and compelled
Maintenance. (And were not these Martyrs Christians?) This was made a Principle
Article against them by the Papists, as more largely appears in the first
Volumn of Martyrs, in the Reigns of Richard the Second, Henry the Fourth, and
Henry the Fifth.

6. A Deceiver of the People.

This I also sincerely deny, as a false and malicious Aspersion cast upon me
and my public Ministry; it cannot reasonably be supposed to relate to any
Personal or Circumstantial Mistakes, (if I have been under any,) but to my
public Ministry about Matters of Faith and Salvation; concerning which, I know
him in whom I have believed, whose Divine Power and Goodness, has preserved me
from my Youth upward in sincerity toward him, whom I have sought from my
Childhood; and therefore am not Conscious to my self of being a Deceiver of the
People; for my Eye is to the power and Spirit of Jesus Christ, who has made
known unto me the word of Reconciliation, and made me a Living Witness of him,
to the Consciences of many Thousands, (I bless God.)

And F. B's Instance, Judgment Fixed Introd. if the Lord did not lay a
necessity upon me, I should choose to be mute, but the Lord has laid a necessity
upon me, etc. And (what Proof is this of his Charge? Where Is the Assumption?) I
say so still, he has laid a necessity upon me to preach the Gospel, and to
testify against Deceit, Envy and Wickedness; and I perceive not how this
instance alleged agaisnt me, can be any color of Proof for his Charge. Can my
saying, The Lord has laid a necessity upon me, either to Preach or Write, prove
that I am a Deceiver of the People? Does not F. B. himself pretend the
Assistance of God's Holy Spirit, in his New. Romans Arraign. p. 46. But I am sure
a contrary Spirit has assisted him, blown and pu^t him up in his reproaching,
stigmatizing, calumniating and rendering odious and obnoxious a Peaceable
People, and their Christian Testimony; for which the Righteous Judge of all
will deal with him; and as for his Personal Detractions, Defamations, and
bitter Calumnies cast upon me; as Wicked Forger, Wilful Liar, Gross Perverter,
Public Defamer, etc. I return them (as before) upon himself, and rejoice in
the Lord my God over them: And that I am counted worthy to suffer for his sake:
For I esteem the Reproaches of Christ, greater Riches than the Glory of Egypt.

A FEW Gentle Reflections UPON T. C's Animadversions, (said to be Tho.
Crisp's,) on George Whitehead's Book, Entitled [ Innocence Triumphant.]
TO evince the said T. C's Inadvertency and Impertinency, as well as Malice and
outrage, in his unjustly Charging G. W. and his Abettors (or Friends) as proved
guilty of Contempt of the Person of our Blessed Savior, the Holy Scriptures
and Governors, Perverseness and Falsehood, justly chargeable on himself in his
undertaking to be an Advocate for Fr. Bugg in his Bad Cause, and gross
Calumnies.

I finding a great part of T. C's Allegations against us to be taken upon trust
from F. Bugg's Authority, and before answered in the foregoing Treatise, and
diverse other Answers; I shall need say the less to many of his impertinent and
senseless Quarrels; but take notice chiefly of such as concern me, and those
Friends whom he calls my Abettors, pursuant to his false Charge of being guilty
of Contempt of the Person of our blessed Savior (i. e. Jesus Christ,) and the
Holy Scriptures, etc. which Charge (in good Conscience toward God, and his
dear Son Jesus Christ our Mediator,) I sincerely deny and testify against in
the first place, as contrary to my Christian Principle and Profession from my
Youth upward. Howbeit to prove G. W's Partiality and Contempt of our Lord
Jesus, T. C. says, viz. I shall here insert some of G. K' s. Doctrines, which
G. W' s. Creatures opposed, and about which chiefly the Difference was, which
G. W. represents but as [pretended Fundamentals;] for says he, about some
fundamental Doctrines, as is pretended by one Party. This is falsely represented
and perverted against G. W. in the first Part, who did not represent those of
G. K's Doctrine mentioned, but as pretended Fundamentals; although T. C. has
this falsehood pretended Fundamentals diverse times over in his Introduction.
Whereas my Words are [ as is pretended by one Party,] relative to diverse
Accounts lately published in Print, of some ^ate Divisions and Disputes about
several Fundamental Doctrines of the Christian Faith, (as is pretended by one
Party,) which therefore, (at least some whereof,) I grant to be such, and do
not call them pretended Fundamentals: But that the late Division is pretended
to be about them, according as my Words are clear, in our small Treatise
referred to, viz. The Christian Doctrine and Society of the People called
Quakers, p. 1. one of which Fundamental Doctrines which he says G. W.
represents but as pretended Fundamentals, is, That Christ is in Heaven in his
glorified Nature of Man, Body and Soul, God and Man both; Introduction, p. 2.

And where have I contemned or opposed this Doctrine? How Inadvertent and
unjust art thou T. C. in this? Do not I plainly declare in the same Treatise,
p. 3, That as Man Christ died for our Sins, rose again, and was received into
Glory. And p. 5. That Christ's Body that was Crucified, by the power of God was
raised from the Dead; and that the same Christ that was Crucified, ascended
into Heaven and Glory, and that his Flesh saw no Corruption; it did not Corrupt
But yet doubtless his Body was Changed into a more Glorious and Heavenly
Condition than it was in when subject to diverse Sufferings on Earth. etc.
Where Is now the Contempt of his Person? May thou not be ashamed of thy false
abusive Charge?

From my Saying the same Christ that was therein ( i. e. in the Body, or
Flesh,) Crucified, thou falsely inferrest, So then he that was nailed to the
Cross and pierced, was not Christ, p. 24. Here thou quarrellest with the
Apostles Doctrine and Language, 1 P^t. 3. 18. Being put to Death in the Flesh:
And chapter 4. 1. Christ has suffered for us in the Flesh. 1 John 4. 2. Jesus
Christ is come in the Flesh: And 2 John 7. And many Deceivers are entered into
the World, who confess not that Jesus Christ is come in the Flesh. Mark here,
Christ suffered in the Flesh, and Jesus Christ come in the Flesh. Was this to
deny him that suffered on the Cross to be Christ? or to Con^emn his Person? No
sure. How sillily have thou deduced many Inferences of this kind against us, as
if thou were minded to be Litigious?

Again, Thy inferring, That he who was nailed ^o the Cross, was not Christ, but
a Body, a Vail, a Garment, of an Earthly, Perishing Nature, p. 24. Here again
thou pervertest and abusest us: Where did we ever say, that he who so suffered,
was not Christ, but a Body, a Vail? etc. Seeing (...) was Christ that suffered
in the Flesh, and his ^^esh was called the Vail, Heb. 10. What Contempt to
Christ, or Denial of him was such Say^^g? And where did ever any of us say,
that ^^s Body that was nailed to the Cross, was of a ^^rishing Nature, seeing
his Flesh saw no Cor^^ption?

But thy great Offense is about I^. Pennington's ^ords, viz. We can never call
the Bodily Gar^t Christ, p. 26, etc. And what then? is this (...) Undervaluing
or Contempt to Jesus Christ? ^25. Is it not as true literally, as a Man's
Gar^ent cannot be the Man himself that wears it? ^^d may it not be as true
figuratively, as Christ's Flesh was the Vail? And that without any Contempt to
him, his Body or Flesh called the Vail: Unless thou can prove the Holy
Apostle a Contemner thereof; who used the same Expression. He ( i. e. Christ)
has Consecrated for us a new and living way, through the Vail, ( i. e. his
Flesh,) Heb. 10. 20. That Christ Jesus, as to his entire Existence or Being,
does not consist only of the Body or Flesh that was Crucified. Thou grants as
much, not only in thy Confessing his Person as joined to the Godhead, Power,
Life and Soul, was called Jesus and the Savior, p. 24. But also his being the
Anointed, as well as the Anointing, p. 5. For Christ was before Abraham, and
David in Spirit called him Lord, and he was that Spiritual Rock that all Israel
drank of. As for excusing Errors and Contempt of our Lord Jesus, (falsely
charged on J. P.) and being liable to be charged therewith, p. 26. I am not
conscious to my self of so doing, by discovering his Intention, and by his own
Explications of the Words objected against him, viz. As either that the Vail
which was Christ's Flesh, or that the Bodily Garment we can never call the
entire Christ, as intimated by his own Words, chiefly and in the first place
Christ; as in one of his Questions.

It Is strange that thou should show so much Envy against that Innocent Man, as
to charge him with Contempt of our Lord Jesus, who did more sincerely believe
and confess him, both in Principle, Doctrine, Charity and Innocent
Conversation, (than thou have done) whose sincere Confession is also evinced
against thy Brother F. Bugg. By the Term Vail, we neither undervalue Jesus, nor
set his Light above himself, as is implied against us, p. 25. For though every
degree of Divine Light in us, is of and from Christ Jesus, yet it is greater and
more as in him, in whom the fullness is, as is more fully cleared in our said
Treatise of our Christian Doctrine.

Concerning the Flesh of Christ being a Vail, Heb. 10. thou grants was in
respect to Man, and so the Figure may be proper, as intended by the Apostle: If
so then that Vail was not the entire Christ, though the Name was given both to
his Soul and Body in Scripture, jointly and severally; if by the Term Flesh, be
commonly understood the Person of our Lord Jesus, where then do thou prove
that the Quakers contemn the Flesh of Christ, considered either Spiritually or
Literally? And though the Person of Christ I find but once mentioned in
Scripture, 2 Cor. 2. 10. from (...) in facie Christi vel Conspectu Christi, in
the Face or Sight of Christ. Yet understanding thy meaning, I am not minded to
quarrel with thee about Words and Terms.

To thy excusing F. Bugg's false Charge of Denying Jesus of Nazareth, against
us, p. 25, I do not perceive thou can make any good work of it upon his
Instances, where he makes our confessing Christ in us, and witnessing him
nearer us than at Jerusalem, (as J. Nayl^r did, etc.) to be a denying of Jesus
of Nazareth, or confessing that Divine Principle ( i. e. the Word, the Life or
Spirit of Christ,) to be the Foundation Principle of Living Faith and Knowledge
of Christ in his Spiritual Appearance in us. I cannot see how this can be a
Denying of Jesus of Nazareth, any more than the Apostles preaching the Word of
Faith nigh in the Heart, etc. However thou art chargeable with Bugg's Charge in
this Case, which results in this Proposition, from his own pretended Proofs,
viz. That to affirm Christ in us, or that which may be known of God in us, or
Christ nearer us than Jerusalem, is to deny Jesus of Nazareth. Will thou stand
to this Proposition yea or nay, according to Bugg's said Charge and Allegation,
in his Sheet? If thou will, then it will appear who is in the Spirit of
Antichrist, G. W. or T. C. For whether is it not as much Antichristian to
deny Christ come in the Spirit, as to deny Christ come in the Flesh?

And for F. Bugg's Paper to the Parliament, thou grantest so far as it may
affect any truly conscientious Quakers, its not well, and thou believe he
would not damage such, p. 14. But how know thou that? When contrariwise like
a Busie-Body in other Men's Matters, and malicious Incendiary, he did interpose
with his inveterate Lying Pamplet to the Parliament, against the People called
Quakers, even at that very interim when our Friends were petitioning the House
of Commons for ease to the said People in general in case of Oaths. Did not
this tend to obstruct favor being shown them? With what Face or Conscience
then can thou say thou believe he would not damage Conscientious Quakers,
when his Invective Pamphlet made no such distinction? For shame Man do not
excuse such an act of apparent Malice and Intrusion, who also have farther
shown how thou do second Bugg in Malice and Partiality, where thou say
Liberty of Conscience is but just and reasonable, for such as are truly
conscientious, if they could be truly distinguished from G. W. and some such as
he is; the opportunity G. W. may have thereby, may be of ill consequence, p.
14. Here thou show thy self offended at G. W. and his Friends; having that
Liberty, it is well thy Horns are short, that thou have not power to ruin us,
but only to bark, and hiss and grin at us Thy Mercy would be that of the
Wicked, which is Cruelty; and thou shows what thou would be at, namely, to
incense the Government against us, about our Marriages, and Non-payment of
Tithes; the latter thou art greatly concerned about, for Liberty of Conscience
(forsooth) for the free Payment of them, p. 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20. And who
hinders such whose Consciences are for the Payment of them, if there be any
such? But we ^now very few beside thy self, who allege Conscience, but rather
Compulsion for the Payment thereof. And therefore thy Charge of Reflections on
the Laws and Government of the Nation, and of Pride and Insolence, and deserves
the Cognizance of the Ministers of State, p. 15. and Contempt of the
Government, with much more of such inveterate Consequences against us about
this case of Tithes; all this is a great indication of Malice, Rage and Revenge
more than Reason on thy part; the Civil Government need not thee to be an
Informer and Instigator therein against us, either because of our Non-payment
of Tithes, or our Christian Testimony against them: For it is a Case well known
to the Government ever since we were a People, and many of them have so much
Charity, (much more than thou have) as to believe it is not in Contempt to the
Government of the Nation, that we refuse the payment of Tithes, but purely
because it is a matter of Conscience to us, as our deep Sufferings,
Imprisonments and Sequestrations on that account de demonstrate whether our
Consciences be rightly informed or no in that Case. However it is an easier
matter for T. C. to rail against us, and to villi^^ those among us that have
given Testimony and Reasons in print, against the Impositions o^ Tithes in this
Gospel Day, than for him to answer or refute such Reasons. Why does he no
answer T. Ellwood? Besides his supposing that a there were Tithes before the
Law, so he know not but that there may be, after that Law (...) abolished, p.
19. And who then abolished tha^ Law that gave the Priesthood a right to tak^
them? if that Law was of Divine Authority it must be abolished by Divine
Authority, an^ one had that Divine Authority to abolish them ^ut Christ.
Therefore it was by his Divine ^uthority they were abolished. Now then it
^emains for T. C. either to prove that Christ re^ewed the Law for Tithes, or
bring an Authority above his, to enforce Tithes again. But presume he will not
attempt either of these. consequently he does not refute what he cites against
Tho. Ellwood, by his [I know not but ^ere may be,] viz. That they who pay
Tithes, uphold a Legal Ceremony, abrogated by Christ, and thereby deny Christ
to be come in the Flesh, which is a mark of Antichrist. And whereas T. C.
takes up F. Bugg's Objection, viz. That by this they have con^^mned the
Martyrs, and all Christendom, Kings, ^^rliament and People, who pay or take
Tithes; a^^inst which, I objected his Observation is too ^^neral upon the
Martyrs, because some did ^ar Testimony against Tithes. Hereupon C. charge me
with being very fallacious, ^d with wilful wickedness; and why so? ^his is very
harsh;) for says he, F. B. does ^t say all without Exception. But I say his
^ords are general, that by this the Quakers (...) condemned the Martyrs, as
well as all ^^ristendom: And by what? but by their Te^^^mony against the
Payment of Tithes, be^^^se it is in opposition to Christ's Abrogation. ^r the
Words who pay or take Tithes, cannot be ^ative to any of the Deceased Martyrs,
for ^y can neither pay nor take Tithes; and therefore if Bugg had intended an
Exception of the Martyrs who denied Tithes, he should have said, they have
condemned such, or so many of the Martyrs who have paid or taken Tithes; for
who do pay or take Tithes, is in presenti, and not in preterito: The matter
seriously considered I must needs look upon T. C. to be very uncharitable, in
deeming me fallacious and wilfully wicked in this point. And I am still
confirmed in my Consequence upon F. Bugg's Observation against our seeking
Favor of the Government, viz. So that if we cannot for Conscience sake pay
Tithes, he will not allow us any favor of the Government, if his uncharitable
Attempts may take effect: And I do not find how T. C. can invalid this
Consequence, by his excusing Bugg, in saying, viz. And not as G. W. would
wickedly insinuate, that if any cannot for Conscience sake pay Tithes, they
should have no favor. No, no, such uncharitable Sentences are to^ near of kin
to G. W's. own Spirit, to come from F. B. far be it from him, I dare say it
never entre^ into his Heart, such an uncharitable Though^ p. 17.

To the first part, I answer the very Instanc^ which F. Bugg and T. C. chiefly
strike at in thi^ point, viz. [That Tithes are abrogated b^ Christ, and the
Payment thereof a Denial o^ his coming in the Flesh and Antichristian,] (...) a
plain Indication, that it is for Conscience sake they (that are truly
Conscientious and Faithfu^ among us) cannot pay them. And their believing they
are abrogated by Christ, and therefore ^e Payment thereof, a denying him to be
come in ^e Flesh, is the greater Argument of their be^^g conscientious to
Christ, in refusing to pay ^^em. And therefore F. B's opposing our ha^^ng
Favor, tended to affect the most Tender and Conscientious among us. And it is
not T. C's. ^o, No, that will excuse him, nor his daring to ^y such an
Uncharitable Thought never entered ^B's Heart, that will clear either of them
from ^ncharitableness toward us in this point. What profound, heart-seeing
Judge have thou T. C. ^ade thy self herein? it seems very high Pre^^mption in
thee, (but without Probation,) thus acquit thy Brother Bugg's Malicious Heart,
^en from Uncharitable Thoughts, as if he ^ere arrived to a very high pitch of
Perfection love thy self, who confessest thy self to be an ^^perfect, Fallible
Sinner in thy Imrod. And no ^^ubt as Fallible in this thy profound Judgment ^^d
Vindication on thy Brother Bugg's Heart. and as Fallible and Sinful thou
appearest in ^ondemning G. W. as wicked, and his Spirit as ^t the Spirit of
Christ; and that upon a strange, ^^esumptuous, and severe Exercration upon thy
^^lf, in thy following Words, viz. p. 5, 6.

I have here taken notice of but some of G. W' s. ^ess, that by the Fruit he
brings forth, you ^ay be capable of judging into what Root he is graft^^^; and
I am so well satisfied that his Spirit is not ^e Spirit of Christ, nor he ( as
he falsely pretends) a ^^stant Servant of Christ, that I do now in coolness and
not in heat of Passion, give him and his wicke^^ Abettors that advantage to
improve their Intere^^ and Power therewith, (i. e. the Spirit of Christ,
against me, that I may end my Days in Infamy, (...) an Example to others, if
his Spirit be that (...) Christ's. [Thus far thou T. C].

Now observe here what a fearful Execratio^ or Curse thou have conditionally
denounced against thy self, (resembling that Oath, God do^ to me and much more,
if, etc. 1 Samuel 20. 1^ 2 Samuel 3. 35. 1 King. 2. 23.) and appears no le^^ than
an Oath of Cursing in a high degree, an^ all to prove G. W. wicked, not led by
the Spirit (...) Christ, nor a Servant of Christ. For if he (...) so, or his
Spirit be of Christ, then with t^^ Spirit of Christ we may improve our Intere^^
and power against thee; and so, as that thou may end thy Days in Infamy, as an
Example, etc. Th^^ this be no proof at all against G. W's. Spirit but rather
the contrary, that thou art not (...) a Christian Spirit, nor led by the Spirit
(...) Christ, (who forbids all Swearing, and co^mends Blessing and not Cursing)
by thy volu^tary bringing thy self under such an Oath (...) Execration; yet the
Spirit of Christ in us, not willing thou should perish or dye und^^ thy own
Curse, though thou have reason to fe^^ it is coming upon thee for thy great
Envy, a^^ horrible Presumption herein, if thou do n^^ Repent.

SOME BRIEF REMARKS ON T. C's. BOOK.
MY testifying against F. B's. Seditious Treatment, as thereby endeavoring ^o
incense the Government, and stir up the Mobb against us, as being New Rome,
Perjured Persons, etc. proves not me Seditious, as is falsely re^orted, p. 9.
unless T. C. will own himself Se^itious, by the same Argument, because he
ac^uses G. W. to be guilty thereof. Yet Buggs. ^eigned Pillory, T. C.
confesses was not well don'e ^ut then to extenuate and excuse F. B's Crime, ^e
places it on high Provocations, etc. telling ^s Oppression may cause a Wise Man
to err, p. 9. (...) seems he would not have him rendered Mad, ^^o' his
Mock-Trial and Pillory, was no small piece of Madness. But is this all the
Judgment and Condemnation T. C. has to give against Bugg's cruel Mocking and
gross Forgery, in his Mock Trial, and Condemnation of Honest Men to Perjury and
Pillory; which appeared no other than the Tragedy of a furious Incendiary and
Persecutor, and a work of Envy, Outrage and Scandal to incense the Government
and Mobb against us? which to testify against, could not be seditious on our
parts, as T. C. mistakes in his Inference.

On that Saying his Flesh is a Figure, p. 26. The form of a Servant, and
Fashion of a Man, are of the same Import, (...), Phil. 2, 6, 7. and not in
Contempt given to Christ. Where is the Term Flesh, understood the Person of ^ur
Lord Jesus? Where did J. P. say that the Fles^ or Body of Christ, is of an
Earthly, Perishing Nature, p. 27. though ours be?

I am not convicted of acquitting the Guilty, (...) accusing the Innocent, by
inverting F. B's. A^gument against J. Pennington upon himself, viz* Now if he
(to wit Christ) took ours, and ours ^e a perishing nature, ergo his was
perishing, or it w^^ not ours, (Quoth F. B.) This being spoken o^ Christ's
Flesh and Blood, it is apparent F. ^ run into the same Error he falsely accuses J
^ with; for he cannot deny that Christ took upon him the Flesh and Blood of our
Nature, H^^ 2. 14. And that ours is perishing. When^^ F. B's. Consequence is,
Ergo, his was perishing, (...) it was not o^rs, thereby he plainly has in^e^re^
Christ's Flesh and Flood to be of a perishing Nature. And thou T. C. can not
wind him out of this Snare, nor make F. Bugg innocent or sound in his Logic;
against which I excepted, viz. I deny his Ergo, though our Flesh be perishing
as in us, it was not perishing when assumed by him: See Innocence Triumph. p.
23, 24.

How far the Name of Christ belongs to every Member, but chiefly to him the
Head, is fully demonstrated in my Charitable Essay, p. 4. which thou do not
Answer but quarrelest impertinently.

Where do thou prove that the Person of our Lord Jesus consists of Flesh, if
none do oppose his Flesh or Body, to his Soul or Life? (as thou say,) p. 26.

Thou would know where the Flesh of Christ as distinguished from his Life and
Soul, is called Christ in Scripture, p. 28.

Answ. 'T was Christ that died, but how? as to his Flesh, not as to his Soul or
Spirit.

That the Person Jesus of Nazareth, we do not exclude or deny to be Christ, p.
29. If by Person, thou meanest both Soul and Body, he being a Complete Savior.

Qu. 1. Can the Bodily Garment taken literally, be called Christ?

2. And is a Person made up of Body or Flesh only?

3. What is a Person truly and properly? Though [ Him] is sometimes given to
the Body, yet more properly to the Son of God, for whom it was prepared, or to
the entire Christ.

I know no Contemptuous Speeches, or Expressions of our Lord Jesus, or
Scriptures excused, p. 12. 29. consequently much less owned by me. And though I
have evinced J. P's. meaning, on his Words reflected on about the Body or Flesh
of Christ; it follows not that I thereby make his Expressions mine, seeing I
note them as his. I may see cause otherwise to word the Matter, and yet our
Intentions be the same. We have not the same Expressions and Utterance in all
Cases, and yet may aim at, and mean the same thing, but never to Contemn our
Blessed Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, (or the Holy Scriptures which testify
of him,) in any respect, far be it from us so to do. Therefore T. C. has grossly
wronged and misrepresented us in these Matters, with many more Perversions,
Lies and Scandals in his Pamphlet than are here recited, for which I wish his
Repentance before he dies.

What Terms were intended to G. Fox, where his Name is not mentioned? p. 29.

Do thou ground this on Bugg's Charge, that our Prophets called him the
Branch, the Star, the Sun of Righteousness, and put the North of England, for
the Town of Bethlehem; as in his New Romans ^n^sk. Epist. to Ber. and p. 81? If
thou do, thou have espoused a shameful Lie, before detected, that our
Testimony against T^thes should be maintained, p. 30. is not a Law of our own
making, but of Christ's; and we are Conscientious in observing of it.

And to thy Question about ( our boldness for ^ur Testimony in that Case,) what
may be expected from them, (that is the Quakers), when they have ^ower? p, 18.

Answ. It may be expected that they will take ^way the Burden of Tithes and
forced Maintenance, and leave all People free to maintain their own Ministers.
And what hurt should we ^o therein pray?

Qu. Who termed G. F. the great Apostle of Jesus Christ? p. 30. He was a great
Apostle ^f Jesus Christ, Ergo, not Jesus Christ, as some ^ave aspersed us with
Blasphemy. But he might (...) eminently instrumental in Jesus Christ, as a
^reat Apostle of his, endued with Life, Strength ^^d Power from above, for the
Converting (...), and strengthening many in the Faith: And ^ believe J. C. and
J. A. meant no other of ^. F. but as eminently Instrumental in Christ Jesus,
whose Servant, Minister and Apostle he ^as.

Thou fallaciously beggest the Question, in ^^lieving those High Titles of the
Branch and ^^e Star, were intended to G. F. p. 30, as thy ^rother Bugg most
falsely accused and defamed (...), (for Denying*) with Perjury and Pillory: ^^s
a bad Cause thou abette^^, for which the (...) Jadge of all, will judge thee.

If true Prayer and Praise to God by the Spirit of Christ in his Saints be as
Living Sacrifices, how much more his Spirit and Life, which is the Cause of
such Sacrifice?

Where provest thou that those Names an^ Terms thou say were H^llish and
H^ll-f^^ch^^ were given by any of us to true Ministers, (...) to Christ's
Ministers, as thy Brother Bugg h^^ accused us?

That F. B. gives us all the ill Names he c^^ p. 32. I meant all the worst of
Names, as N^^ Rome, Impostors, Cowards, Sophisters, a pack (...) False
Witnesses, and Perjured Persons, and th^^ Simon Magus never exceeded these
Impost^^ Were not these as ill Names as he could gi^^ us? What worse than
Impostors and Sorcer^^ as Simon Magus was? can thou give us worse?

P. 35, 36. The Expressions charged as (...) Contempt of Christ's Person, set
in opposition (...) Scripture Testimonies, seem to be taken b^ on trust from
Fr. Bugg, and out of his N^^ Rome, etc. and mostly answered; and I doubt not
but our Friends Books out of which the were taken, would clear themselves, if
impartially examined.

T. C's. Charge against the Quakers amo^^^ to this, that they undervalue and
con^em^ (...) Body of Christ, the Flesh of Christ, the Pers^n Christ, and the
^^a^ Christ Jesus himself, p. 37. and^ Which is all a gross and great Slander
a^a^^ us, for which Jesus Christ will judge thee T. ^*

As also a Notorious Falsehood that G. W. in his little Book, p. 5. does
implicitly deny Christ's Bodily Ascension, p. 37. I have confessed the
contrary, viz. That the same Christ that was Crucified, visibly ascended, etc,

Thou finally appealest to the Impartial Reader, whether there be not great
cause for Suspicion, that we contemn and slight our ever Blessed Lord Jesus,
the Scriptures and Governors? And what Cause or Ground of Suspicion have thou
for these Ca^umies? with Bugg's Exceptions, and thy impertinent Quarrels, which
we accept not for any Probations. Now thy great Charge is turned to Suspicion:
For shame give over such Envious, Trifling, Doting, Shatter-headed, Confused
Work? And do not thus mispend thy little remaining precious time with such
abusive peevish Quarrels and Calumnies against the Innocent and Peaceful, who
ows thee no ill^il. What Injury have either G. Fox, Isaac Pennington, George
Whitehead, or Tho. Ell^oad done thee, that thou art so peevish and bitter
against them?

THE END

