THE CHRISTIANITY Of the PEOPLE commonly called QUAKERS ASSERTED Against the
Unjust Charge of their being no CHRISTIANS, upon several Questions relating to
those Matters wherein their Christian Belief is Questioned.
Question, What Is your Belief concerning the Blessed Trinity, as our Term is?

Answer, Our Belief is, that in the Unity of the Godhead there is Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost, being those Three Divine Witnesses that bear Record in Heaven,
the Father, the Word, and the Holy Spirit; and that these Three are One,
according to Holy Scripture Testimony.

Quest. Do you Believe the Divinity and Humanity of Jesus Christ the Eternal
Son of God, or that Jesus Christ is truly God and Man?

Answ. Yes, we verily believe that Jesus Christ is truly God and Man, according
as Holy Scripture Testifies of Him, God over all blessed for ever, the true God
and Eternal Life, the One Mediator between God and Men, even the Man Christ
Jesus.

Quest. Do you believe and expect Salvation, and Justification, by the
Righteousness and Merits of Jesus Christ, or by our own Righteousness or Works?

Answ. By Jesus Christ his Righteousness, Merits and Works, and not by our own,
God is not indebted to us for our deservings, but we to Him for his free Grace
in Christ Jesus, whereby we are saved through Faith in Him (not of our selves)
and by his Grace enabled truly and acceptable to serve and follow Him as He
requires; He is our All in All, who works all in us that is well pleasing to
God.

Quest. Do you believe Remission of Sin, and Redemption through the Sufferings,
Death, and Blood of Christ?

Answ. Yes through Faith in Him as he suffered and Died for all Men, gave
himself a Ransom (...) shed for the remission of Sins: so all they who
sincerely believe (...) of his suffering and dying for (...) receive and
partake of that Eternal Redemption which he has obtained for us, who gave
Himself for Us that he might Redeem us from all iniquity; he died for our sins,
and rose again for our Justification; and if we walk in the Light, as he is in
the Light, we have fellowship one with another; and the Blood of Jesus Christ
His Son cleanses us from all sin, 1 John 1. 7.

Quest. Do you believe and own the Divine Offices of Jesus Christ in his Church?

Answ. Yes, verily we sincerely believe and own Christ, not only as He is the
Light of the World, enlightening every Man coming into it; but also that he is
given for a Leader, and for a Commander. And that he is both King, Priest, and
Prophet (...) and over His Church and People. He is the Minister of the
Sanctuary which the Lord pitched, and not Man, and we are to hear Him in all
things.

Quest. Do you Believe or own Baptism as Essential to Christianity, or
necessary to Salvation, and for the Ingrafting us into Christ and His Church?

Answ. We believe and are fully persuaded, That Baptism which is Essential to
Christianity, and the saving Baptism, or the Cause without which none can be
true Christians, or saved, is the inward or spiritual washing of Regeneration
by the Word of Life. This is the saving Baptism into Christ and His Church,
which produces the Answer of a Good Conscience toward God, of which the
outward was a Figure, 1 Pet 3. 21. This is that One Baptism of Christ by one
Spirit into that one Body, whereof Christ is Head.

As to Dipping or Sprinkling Infants, or Young Children we find no Precept or
Precedent in holy Scripture for the practice thereof, and therefore we cannot
think our not believing it Essential (or necessary) to salvation, or making
Christians; a sufficient Argument to Prove us no Christians (unless it can be
proved that none are saved without it, and that all are saved that have it.)
Considring also what is Po^itively affirmed in the 39 Articles; as in the 6th
Article, That whatsoever is not Read in the Holy Scriptures, nor may be proved
thereby, is not to be required of any Man, That it should be believed as an
Article of the Faith, or be thought requisite or necessary to Salvation. And in
the 20th Article, That the Church ought not to Decree or Enforce any thing
against or besides Holy Writ, to be believed for necessity of Salvation; And in
Article 21. That things ordained by General Councils as necessary to salvation,
have neither strength nor Authority, unless that they be taken out of holy
scripture.

Quest. Do you believe or own the Lords supper, either as a sign of the Love
that Christians ought to have among themselves, or as a seal of the Saints
Communion and Commemoration of Christ's Death for us, or as Figurative of
Christ's Body and Blood spiritually received by Faith.

Answ. The Supper of the Lord we own, and tenderly consider in a twofold sense,
1. In the Figure. 2. In the Substance. 1. That our Lord Jesus Christ at his
supper with His Disciples, did eat the passover (which was for the fulfilling
and consummation of the Feasts under the Law;) see Luke 22. And at this supper
He did take and Minister Bread and the Cup to his Disciples (for there was no
Transubstantiation) saying, This do in Remembrance of me; and said the Apostle,
As often as ye shall eat this Bread, and drink this Cup, ye show the Lords
Death till he come, 1 Cor. 11. After this they did more clearly know His
coming: and Christ after the Spirit; Jesus Christ in them, 2 Cor 13. 5. and 5.
16. 2. And Christ said to his Disciples, I will not Drink henceforth of this
Fruit of the Vine until that day I drink it (...) with you in my Fathers
Kingdom, Mat. 26. 29. And likewise of the Bread, I will not any more eat
thereof, until it be fulfilled in the Kingdom of God, Luke 2^ 16. And he
further said, I appoint unto you a Kingdom as my Father has app^^nted to me
that ye may Eat and Drink at my Table in my Kingdom, etc. Luke 22. 29, 30. ^
these things we believe he spoke mysteriously, and that every Member of his
spiritual Church, does daily spiritually partake of his Body and Blood by
Faith, is the Cup of Blessing which we Bless, is it not the Communion of the
Blood of Christ? And the Bread which we break, is it not the Communion of the
Body of Christ? for we being many are One Bread, and One Body, for we are all
partakers of that ONE Bread, 1 Cor 10. 15, 16, 17. The Son of God says, Behold
I stand at the Door and knock, if any Man here my Voice, and open the door, I
will come into him and will SUP with him, and he with me, Rev. 3. 20. And
Wisdom calls to the simple, Come Eat of my Bread, and Drink of my Wine, Prove.
9. 4, 5. And says Christ, The Bread of God is he that comes down from Heaven,
and gives Life unto the World. I am that Bread of Life; my Flesh, is Meat
indeed, and my Blood is Drink indeed, He that Eats my Flesh, and Drinks my
Blood, dwells in me, and I in him, John 6. We believe that all who thus do
truly partake of Christ by Faith, are in true Communion and Love among
themselves, which they do want who are only in the outward Observations of Sign
and Shadows.

Quest. Do you own the Seals of the New Covenant?

Answ. Yes, as the New Covenant is spiritual, so are the Seals thereof (as they
may be termed) proper to it, and therefore we believe they stand not in any
ex^^^nal Shadow, Sign or Figure, but in spirit and substance, the seals of the
New (...) (which is inward and spiritual) must needs be the Evidence, Testimony
and Interest in that Covenant. See what the Holy Scripture see 2 Cor. 1. 22.
Who has also sealed us, and has given us the earnest of the spirit in our
Hearts. Ephesians. 1. 13. After that ye believed ye were sealed with the holy
spirit of Promise. And Ephesians. 4. 30. And grieve not the holy spirit of God
whereby ye are sealed unto the day of Redemption.

Our Christian sense and belief in these Matters may be briefly summed up in
what follows, viz.

1. We believe, That the spiritual appearance, and living enjoyment of Christ
in spirit, is above all outward signs, shadows, or figures, or a Remembrance
only of him thereby. And that Christ more clearly discovers himself by his
spirit in the New Covenant, than by any outward Representations in the Old, or
thereunto appertaining. 2. That the One Baptism of the spirit is a seal or
confirmation of the New Covenant to true Believers, and of them in it; and so
is their spiritual Eating and Drinking with Him in his Kingdom a certain
assurance, seal or evidence of their spiritual communion with him, and in him.
3. As all outward shadows and figures were of a decreasing nature, so there is
the substance thereof, which they pointed at, and wherein they ended, though
the names given to the shadows were carried along to the substance also, that
it might the more plainly appear in Scripture how the shadows were fulfilled in
the substance Christ; as in the Old Covenant there was outward Circumcision of
the flesh; in the New, there is the Inward Circumcision of the Spirit. In the
Old, there was diverse Washings or Baptisms, Heb. 9. 10. In the New, the One
Baptism of Christ; in the Old, the Feast of the outward Passover kept with
unleavened Bread, and other Feasts observed, etc. in the New Covenant, Jesus
Christ is our Passover, and the Feast is to be kept with unleavened Bread of
sincerity and truth; and here the One Bread of Life is known and received. 4.
We do not read nor find in Scripture, that One outward Type or shadow, was a
Type of another Type outward, but always of the thing Typified or shadowed
forth, which was the substance and end of that shadow or type, as may be shown
at large, if any undertake to show us any shadow or thing that is figurative in
its own nature (mentioned in Scripture) which they suppose we cannot show the
substance of, under the same Name or Title.
Quest. Do you believe and own the Holy Scriptures, contained in the Books of
the Old and New Testament, to be given by Divine Inspiration, and to contain
all Matters of Doctrine and Testimony, etc. necessary to be believed and
Practiced in order to salvation, and Peace with God?

Answ. Yes, we do, and by the assistance of the Grace and good Spirit of God,
which gives the true understanding of the mind of God, and meaning of Holy
Scripture, we always desire to live in the Faith, Knowledge and Practice of
them in all things appertaining to Life and Godliness, Holy Scripture being
given by Divine Inspiration, is profitable for Doctrine, Correction, and
Instruction, that the Man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto every
good Work, able to make the Man of God wise unto salvation, through Faith in
Christ Jesus.

Writ in behalf of the People of God called QUAKERS, By some of them.
LONDON, Printed for Thomas Norhcott, in George-Yard, in Lumbardstreet, 1689.


