The CASE of such PROFESSORS. As have known the WAY of TRUTH, and are turned
aside from its holy Testimony to save Themselves; OPENED and LAMENTED.
With some wholesome Warnings and Admonitions, tending to restore and turn them
again to the Lord, that they may be saved by Him, both from the Evil of Sin and
Punishment.
DEAR HEARTS,
What Lamentation shall I take up for you? and wherewith shall I sufficiently
Bemoan you, who were visited in the springing forth of Gods Day, and have
clearly seen the Way of Truth, and felt somewhat of the Power of God, which
once made your Hearts Tender, and caused the Strong Man to bow himself, so that
you began to be pliable unto God's Will, and did love his Precepts, but now are
turned from the Light, and wandered out of that Way which you know to be true,
and have lost the Feeling of the Power of God, and have your Hearts hardened
with the Deceitfulness of Sin, and overcharged with the Cares of this Life, and
your Wills at liberty like a Bullock unaccustomed to the Yoke, running on
contrary to that of God in you? I say again, What Lamentation shall I take up
for you? surely if my Head were Waters, and mine Eye a Fountain of Tears, I
could not sufficiently bemoan you; for I do plainly see that Destruction and
Misery is in your way, because the Lord's good Spirit is daily grieved with
you, and his Soul takes no pleasure in you that draw back from the Path of Life
and Truth, and those to whom you fly, under whose Shadow you seek to shelter
your selves, cannot at all deliver themselves not you from the Wrath to come,
upon all that are Disobedient to the Gospel of Christ; neither do they at all
care for you, though they Flatter with their Lips, yet have they an Eye to see
that you who are Treacherous to your own Principles, will easily become
Treacherous to them; so that your Condition is exceeding Sad, for in your
present State, you are an Abomination to God, to his Saints and Angels, and a
Scorn to Fools, and a Hissing and Derision to the subtle Adversary that has
caught you in his Snare: Therefore consider your State, and let me a little
expostulate with you in the name of the God of Heaven.

What can be done for a People that he has not done, and been ready to do for
you? has not Line been upon Line, and Precept upon Precept, here a little and
there a little, that ye might understand and lay it to heart? Have not God's
Servants and Prophets been frequently sent amongst you, to whom God has given
witness by his own Light in your Consciences? Moreover, has he not smitten you
with the Word of his own mouth, and caused you to feel and dread his Power?
Has he not also come in the Spirit of Meekness, and with yearning Bowels of
Love besought you to return when ye began to stray from him? Has he not also
been ready to forgive your Trespasses, and to heal your Backslidings, and can
you justly charge him and his Servants with Blame if you perish? Did not he
once appear unto you altogether lovely, and with him there is no alteration nor
shadow of changing? O then consider what has blinded your eye, and why do you
turn aside from following him? do you not therein despise your Birthright as
Esau, and betray the Just as Judas did? O woe is me for you that have let go
Eternal Life, and laid hold on this present World, for you have made a
miserable exchange; and the Earth that you think to save is reserved unto Fire,
and that which pertains thereunto, and can delight therein, shall be burnt
up, and where will you then hide your selves, when the Terrors of Death
Everlasting compass you about, who (as Cain) have Murdered the Just, and must
be Banished from the Presence of God for ever? And what good will all those
earthly Treasures wherein you have delighted, do you in that day? shall not all
the Worlds Friendship then have an end, and one Tempter to Wickedness shall
curse another, because they have been the occasion of their Misery, out of
which Gold cannot redeem, nor all the Worlds Riches, Glory, and Power, ransom
one Soul? Therefore be ye awakened, all you who have not yet Sinned unto Death,
but through Distrust, slavish Fear, or the Lusts of your own Flesh, are veiled,
and do either stand still, or are turned away backward, for you may be renewed,
unto Repentance, who have any sense of your out-running, or grievous Sin in
backsliding, if you be at all smitten, and do grieve for the same, there is
hope concerning you; Therefore hear the Rod and him that has appointed it, and
if there remain any bowels of Tenderness, or any spark of Love to God, if it be
but so much as makes you in secret to sigh for want of him, then arise and come
away, linger not in Darkness (where Satan has Dominion) any longer, least you
wholly murder the Just and join to Idols, for why should you wander in the
blackness of the Night, till in the End yoursteps take hold on Hell, out of
which there is no Redemption? Therefore I say again, be ye Awakened, and do not
trifle away the precious Time, least the Door of Mercy be quite shut against
you; and take heed of giving any more way to an evil heart of unbelief, which
says, the Lord delays his coming, and thinks him slack in fulfilling his
Promises, for that (together with the worldly Wisdom wherewith the Serpent
mixes) is the ground of all Apostasy from the Life, and the principle Chain
wherewith Man is held from returning to God, because unbelief hinders from
beholding his glorious Power, and from enjoying the most precious Treasures of
his Kingdom; and then the worldly Wisdom not being capable of discerning the
Invisible things of God which he has ordained to our Glory, draws down the
mind to save self, and lay hold of this present World, which ye can in no wise
please, and have his Love and Friendship, but ye do displease God and lose his
Love and Friendship: Therefore seeing you cannot serve God and Mammon, Come
forth and be ye separate from all their Idolatries, Profaneness, and
Will Worship, and if they pursue you with Reproaches and Persecutions, look not
at them, for such light Afflictions are but for a moment, and do work for us, a
far more weighty Crown of Glory, which God will certainly give unto all them
that be Faithful to the End; But it is a fearful thing to fall into the Hands
of the living and long provoked God, if wilfully you disobey his Light in your
own Consciences, and rebelliously forsake him, because be has Power to cast
into Hell, where the Wicked and all they that forget God, shall be tormented
perpetually.

What can I say more unto you, but with yearning Bowels of Love, exhort you to
search and try your Ways, -and turn again to the Lord, who would not your
Destruction, but delights rather to pardon than punish you, because he loves
you as his Creatures, and as you return to the Lord, when you see Briars and
Thorns, grievous Wolves and hungry Eagles in your way to devour, be not dismayed
at all, but with purpose of heart cleave unto the Lord, who is a consuming
Fire, and he will make your way through them, and you shall see all vanish as a
Shadow that stands in opposition to you in God's Work and Way; For the end of
all things is at hand; and the Kingdoms of this World shall become the Kingdoms
of our God and of his Christ; and they which have Suffered with him, shall
Reign with him, says the Spirit of the Prophet; but they that have denied him
before men, shall be denied by Him at, his appearing in the Glory of his
Father, and the holy Angels with him, to give a Reward to every Man as their
Works be: Therefore consider, that if you for Earthly things deny the Truth of
God, how it will grieve you in that day to stand a far off and see the Lord's
Innocent People (who have not loved their Lives unto Death, but freely given up
all, that they might overcome through the Blood of the Lamb, and the Word of
their Testimony) receive a Kingdom and Crown which fades not away, whilst you
are bereaved of all that wherein you delighted, and are compassed about with
Terror, and covered with Shame and Contempt, which is the just reward of all
who deny the Lord that bought them, who have put him to open Shame by
distrusting his Power, and turning from him in the sight of his Enemies.

These things bearing a weight upon my Spirit, and because I do both desire to
be clear of the Blood of all Men, and do entirely love their Souls; I have in
this manner communicated them, because I am a Sufferer in outward Bonds,
amongst the Lord's Valiant and Faithful People, called Quakers, who (though we
have been Despised and Reproached by the Wise Professors of this Generation,
yet) are not of them that draw back to Perdition, but press on to the End of
our Race, wherein I say, Follow us as we follow Christ.

Lincoln Castle, the 16th. day of the 7th. Month, 1662. John Whitehead.

London, Printed for Robert Wilson, at the Black-spread-Eagle and Windmil, in
Martins Le Grand, 1662.


