This is an EPISTLE FOR THE Remnant of Friends, AND Chosen of God, WHOM He has
yet preserved to bear their Testimony in and about the City OF LONDON; TO WHOM,
This is a Testimony of the dear Love, and tender care which flows forth, and
is extended toward them, and all tender hearts who are concerned in the like
Sufferings, Temptaons, and Trials.

From their faithful Friend and Servant in the Lord, G. WHITHEAD.

Printed in the Year 1665.

This is an Epistle for the Remnant of Friends, and Chosen of God, whom he has
yet preserved to bear their Testimony in and about the City of London, etc.
O My dearly Beloved Friends, Brethren and Sisters, among whom my Soul has
traveled and suffered for the Afflicted's sake, and whose burdens and trials
are still with me in Spirit, as also the Love, Tenderness, care, and freeness
of Spirit that has appeared among you toward the afflicted and harmless
sufferers; who have been led and driven as sheep to the slaughter for the
witness of Jesus, and of a good Conscience. Oh, dear hearts feel my life and
tender bowels toward you all in the spirit and unity of true love and faith of
the Elect seed, wherein life and dominion is felt, by all that wait patiently
upon the Lord in true subjection to his eternal Power and Council in all the
Exercises, trials and hardships that the Righteous Seed is beset withal, that
being thoroughly tried it may come forth as Gold thoroughly refined; and the
Righteous who are of this Seed may through all these things) go on in their
way, and the Innocent and clean in heart may grow stronger and stronger in the
Lord, that Truth and Righteousness may for ever shine forth both among you and
all his Elect to the praise of his Name, who both beholds, feels, and bears the
sufferings of his People, in his long suffering and patience, wherein the
spirits of his Chosen ones are exercised, and by which they shall overcome, and
be more then Conquerours, where neither calamities, distresses, life nor death
shall ever be able to separate from that love, virtue, life and glory revealed
and made manifest in the faithful.

And my dear hearts, the glory and weight of Gods Righteous Testimony of life
and Salvation, being in his light truly and evidently manifested in and among
you; you have great cause for ever to prize his love and glorify his Name, and
stick close to him therein, what ever perils, trials, oppositions, sufferings,
or temptations you meet withal, and to be of a constant spirit, and upright
mind in the unchangable truth to the Lord God of life, in whom your
preservation and safety stands, knowing that no weight of affliction or
suffering is comparable to the weight of Eternal life and Salvation, which you
are called unto, through the Glorious appearance of God's power and Gospel of
peace and Salvation; for the sense and enjoyment thereof does certainly
out-ballance and far exceed all the sufferings and trials of the present time
though they are very many and deep.

And so none of you to be discouraged or shaken in mind at things of this
nature, nor because of the seeming advantage or occasion that the wicked or
rebellious and envious spirits, (or such as are prejudiced) do take against us
because of that common Calamity and late Mortality which has befallen many of
the Righteous as well as the Unrighteous (as to the outward man) in this time
of such a great and universal calamity and sore distress as has been upon that
City; for God's Testimony and glory shines and will shine, and break through
all these clouds of afflictions, sufferings, and reproaches which the
Habitation of the Righteous has been and is encompassed with; yea the
faithfulness, innocence and uprightness of many innocent Lambs in and about
that City is never to be forgotten, which so greatly did appear and shine forth
in their faithfully standing to their Testimony, and keeping to the Truth in
tenderness of Conscience and sincerity toward God, who has called us to meet
together in his fear, and in his everlasting name and power, and out of a real
respect to his Glory and righteous cause which is concerned in the obedience of
his people both in that and all other duties or acts of obedience required by
him whose obedience and spiritual worship many have not denied nor declined,
neither under the trials which have proceeded from men or under those which
came from God, but whether they have been liable to fall into the hands of God
or men for the proof of their faith, they have not departed from him, who
makes up his Jewels through trials and tribulations in all which his Fatherly
care is felt, and his tender mercy and compassion is seen toward his own as to
his own peculiar Offspring and tender babes, sons and faithful servants whom
he loves, and therefore chastises and tries not in anger and fury, but in
love, fatherly care and pity, so that whose eyes are open in the true light,
and in a right mind and spirit have thoroughly weighed the state of the
suffering seed amongst us which is in the faith of Abraham brought forth in the
Immortal power of an endless life, considering the faithfulness and godly
sincerity of a Remnaut whose life has testified for God herein, both in doing
good and suffering for well doing, such who have thus weighed this suffering
state do plainly see that neither Satan nor his Instruments have any real
advantage against any of the Remnant of this Seed, through any of these trials
or sufferings either from the hands of God or men since that many have kept
their Integrity to the last, and have embraced their trials and afflictions in
Gods tender love; and have had such unity therewith that they have been far
from either blaspheming or cursing God as the wicked many times have done, and
will do when Plagues, woes, torments, and pains seize upon them, but neither
Satan nor his Instruments have their evil designs or ends answered, or
fulfilled herein against the Righteous as the Devil would have had against Job
under his affliction when he sought to make him curse God to his face, so that
the Truth of our God and innocence of his people (who know the Redemption of
the Soul which is precious) does and shall come over both Men and Devils, in as
much as the Truth is over the Devil himself, (who has the power of death and
darkness) even to the confounding and stoping their mouths that they all who
are acted by the power and spirit of enmity and darkness may be convicted,
confounded, and left without excuse before the Lord God, who will be known to
be clear when he judges.

Yea blessed for ever be the name of our God who has given us strength and
courage to stand in an evil day over Hell and Death, and the Devil with all his
fiery darts and fierce assaults against the Righteous, and that the Lord has
yet spared, and will spare a Remnant to bear his mark and name upon Earth, and
to hold forth a living Testimony for his glory and praise amongst the sons of
Men, for which many have not loved their lives unto death, but have offered up
their lives as diverse manifestly did in that City the last Summer when such a
sore Visi^ation and Calamity was upon that place, wherein diverse offered up
life and all for the truth, and their afflicted Brethren and Sisters, for whose
sakes my soul has often been greatly bowed down and afflicted, and my bowels
have earned for them, and my Inwards were so moved with compassion and
brokenness of spirit that neither life it self nor any outward privilege did
seem too dear to me to resign or offer up for their sakes.

And though when the Sickness was so hot in that City and Prisons, some of the
Persecutors at that time appeared cruel, wicked and abominable against the
Innocent to destroy them in these Pestilential places of Confinement, where
both there, and also on Shipboard (wherein so many were confined for
Banishment) many innocent Lambs laid down their lives for the witness of a good
Conscience: And though the wicked may for a time in their wickedness and
mischievous minds be lifted up against us to insult over us because of these
our deep trials, and the death of so many innocent persons either in the
Prisons, on Shipboard, or out of Prisons; yet their being so elevated and
hardened against us (who are the People of the Lord) does but the more make
for, and further their own destruction, ruin and misery as often I have said
and been sensible, and their Plague torment, and calamity (which slumbers not)
is greater and more sad then many's that have died under that common Calamity
of the Pestilence, by which many have been removed both of good and bad, which
thing those that are yet alive and remain in their sins without taking warning
thereby, it will prove the greatest Plague and Judgment against such who are
the least considerate and sensible of the hand of the Lord in it, or of their
states and conditions; for as to this particular calamity or sickness, it is (in
it self) not the worst of Judgments which God has in store for a sinful,
provoking, rebellious people or Nation, and Gods controversy is not yet ended
in this Nation, nor the viols of his displeasure emptied upon his enemies and
persecutors of his Seed. And oh! to consider what a sore and heavy Judgment is
it, and what misery does it presage to many in this Nation that so many
innocent or Righteous persons in it should be taken away as those whom the
world are not worthy of, but such are taken away from the evil to come, both
from future calamities, and set in safety for ever from them that have puffed
at them, and made a prey upon them in their life time.

And as for us that yet remain, who fear the Lord, and stick close to him
always, eyeing and seting him before us in the greatest of our perils and
sufferings, we know his goodness endures for ever, though the mighty and
exalted of the Earth boast and insult (for a time) over us, and the more the
suffering is, the greater is the consolation and glory to them that continue
faithful to the end.

And what ever conclusions are brought forth against us either by wicked men,
or any who in prejudice turn against us and take occasion from this Mortality
(which has come upon so many Friends in the time of this great Calamity) as if
it were in Gods wrath, indignation or fury against the body of Friends, or any
of us who are come to the Communion of the body of Christ (which we are Members
of) or if any that profess the name of the Lord be so clouded, biased and
prejudiced in their minds as to conclude this a fulfilling of some such
Prophecies of wrath and indignation against Friends; such spirits and evil
tidings are plainly seen, and they to be presumptuous and no Prophets sent of
the Lord, and therefore cannot make us afraid, who confide in the name of our
God, and in that living faith wherein our unity and victory stands, our
innocent life stands over them in true Judgment against all that which among
some has crept in at unawares to create devisions and enmity against the
faithful servants or people of God where it is received in any unstable or
brickle spirits; And therefore my soul says, the Lord rebuke thee oh Satan!
who enviest the heritage of God, why do thou subtlely present thy self
amongst the sons of God to trouble the innocent? endeavoring with thy fiery
darts and temptations of this nature to turn them against their Maker? and why
do thou subtlely make use of Instruments in this thy wicked work to effect
thy treacherous designs? The Lord will rebuke thee by his mighty power; for we
are sure that where Gods faithful Witness in the Conscience is owned which
ought to be judge in the case, and must deside the Controversy: We know that
does bear witness with us and for us, and to the justification of all the
Faithful amongst us who are really of Us, and belong to the seed of Election;
and therefore, will not go out from us, who abide in the truth of God which
changes not, being of the seed of Jacob, and offspring of Israel after the
Spirit (which is beyond revolting Israel after the flesh) for herein are we
heirs of promise, and then who shall condemn, conclude, or prophecy wrath
where God justifies, and not bring condemnation upon themselves? for that Gods
love was felt by many under that trial and Visitation which many died in, about
that City, and many were sensible of Gods love and favor till the very last.

And the life, peace, satisfaction and comfort that many innocent Friends felt,
and that some express and signified on their Deathbeds; I am a living Witness
of, for them: Having at some times [as the Lord has drawn me in his Love] been
present with many of them when they were very low in the outward Man, and with
diverse when upon their Deathbeds, both in that destructive place of Newgate,
and some other places: Yea, when sorrow and sadness has seized upon my spirit,
and my heart and soul has been pierced and wounded when I have seen the sad
sufferings of so many harmless Lambs when they were on their sick beds in
these noisome holes and Prisons: Yet at the same time having had a deep sense
and knowledge of the Lords love and care to them in that condition, and having
truly felt his life and power stirring amongst them: This, on the other hand
has refresht and revived my spirit, knowing that Christ their Salvation and
Redemption was manifest to and in them, though in that suffering state, as they
have followed and obeyed him through sufferings and tribulations, and so with
such to live was Christ in that state and to die was gain; it being through
death that the Lord had appointed the final deliverance of many from the
cruelties and rod of their Oppressors, and so from the miseries and evils to
come.

And also the faithfulness; uprightness, and innocence of diverse of those that
were taken away, and their constancy of Spirit to the Lord, and his living
truth, and their unfeigned love to the Brethren, (by the which, 'twas evident
they had passed from death to life) and what a living and faithful Testimony
they bear for the Lord in their life time, being well known and manifest
amongst us, their Memorial is truly precious to us, and never to be forgotten;
and we are satisfied that they were found worthy for the Lord, and the World
was not worthy of them.

And besides, some whom God has restored and raised up again, who yet remain
alive with us, who were under the same trial and sickness, can testify to Gods
tender love to them; and how freely they were therein by faith given up to the
Lord under it in his love and favor (which they partake of) either to die or
live as he should be pleased to dispose of them, knowing that some that were
very dear to the Lord, even some of his choice Jewels and peculiar treasure
were removed by it.

So that I must say what I have seen and felt, that as to the state of faithful
Friends in this case, some by faith according to the will of God were given up
and desirous rather to die then live, and therein freely embraced the outward
affliction or calamity which was but for a moment in comparison; knowing that
to die would be a great advantage and gain to them, and that thereby they
should be freed from future sufferings, burdens; calamities and evils; and
their Spirits should acquiess and rest in everlasting peace, joy and triumph.
And others by faith were simply and singly given up in the will of God to die,
if he should so dispose of them, not in themselves expecting life or recovery,
and yet in so being given up have come to be restored again to continue longer,
bearing their Testimony amongst us, having known and felt that in the patience
to resign to the w^ll of God in self-denial, abasement and humility in their
affliction and trial; was most consistant with their peace. And again, some
others of us by faith according to the will of God, have been kept over the
distemper and hitherto preserved alive; not for any respect that we may assume
to our selves in the matter, nor for any reason (as I know) that can be shown
for us more then for some innocent persons that were taken away, but that the
Lord had a respect to his own glory and further service for himself which he
had for us to do and be employed in, and that he will preserve a Remnant as he
has determined to bear his Name and hold forth his Testimony amongst men in
their innocent lives and holy Conversations; so as the glory and praise we give
to the Lord, desiring all of us may faithfully serve him in Godly fear and true
humility the days we have to sojourn here, that we all may ever be to his
praise, in whose hand we are whether we live or die, for he makes all things to
work together for good to them that love him, who are not offended in him in
any of their tribulations, or temptations, when the hour of temptation is upon
all flesh to try them that dwell upon the face of the earth; he that has
committed unto us the word of his patience who is Israel's Keeper is our
preserver, support and refuge thorough all these things, and he has made us
co-workers together in one and the same spirit of faith and life, wherein he is
obeyed and submitted to by his faithful people and servants in their several
states, trials and exercises, and among whom the various effects and fruits of
the same faith are seen and brought forth according to his will, who gives life
and preservation.

And now moreover if such as take advantage against us on this occasion
aforesaid, (whether they be open or secret smiters or enemies) did either
rightly or seriously come to weigh their conditions, and let Gods witness judge
in the case, they have no cause to boast, glory or insult over us or against
us, for that they are not their own Keepers, nor is their life continued by
their own power, and how soon their time may be expired, and their judgment
overtake them they know not, nor how soon their days may be cut asunder; to be
sure their condemnation slumbers not, who in the pride of their hearts and
presumption of their spirits turn against the suffering seed of God under what
profession and pretense soever, though under pretense of the name of the Lord
or profession of the truth it self, and knowing also that many that were of
their own spirit and principle have also been taken away under the same
calamity, (for it has extended to all sorts both holy and profane) they have
cause to dread and fear before the Lord, and not to be high minded nor
presumptuous, for the mouth of the boaster and exalted must be stopped, and all
flesh and carnal reason is to be silent in this matter, for Gods power is over
it all, and over that which has threatened or brought evil tidings against his
Israel; for we know the same spirit that turns against us, and watches for
occasions, and prophecies our destruction, would have it come to pass, so to be
reckoned a true Prophet, and that is the murderer that kills the poor, the
same that is in our open enemies, and the same that was in Cain against his
Brother, and he that is in this spirit or principle of enmity or prejudice,
has no eternal life abiding in him. O let this thing be published in the ears
of Gods people, and let Friends feel my innocent intention and end herein;
having writ the more of this nature for prevention of the enemy's subtlety and
temptations of this kind, that the tender and weak may not be ensnared thereby;
I knowing and having really seen how Satan besets such with temptations upon
these deep trials, to undermine their hope and to beget unbelief and despair in
the minds to turn them from truth, and how he makes use of his Instruments in
the same way to effect his evil end against us, but the Lord will rebuke him
and bruise him under the feet of his own anointed seed and faithful people.

And now a common calamity or distemper as this which has brought such a great
Mortality (as it has been appointed and permitted of the Lord) has extended
and opperated according to the spreading and contagious nature and property of
it, to the bodies of both old and young, good and bad, nocent and innocent, yea
to many that know not their right hand from the left; but the iniquities and
abominations of the wicked was the cause of Gods anger and displeasure herein,
and the Original cause of this Calamity, the Creation being oppressed under their
wickedness, and the Earth defiled under the Inhabitants, which causes the
Heavens to frown upon the World, and the curse to go forth, and Blessings to be
withheld from them, and the taking away of good and merciful men, and many
innocent persons though it be in love to themselves, yet it is in judgment
against the other who have brought innocent blood upon their own heads by their
cruelties and persecution, and whose hearts are hardened and become cruel and
implacable against Truth and Righteousness, and all them that walk therein,
whose souls have been daily vexed and oppressed through the ungodly, and
unchristian coversation of the wicked.

And God who spared not his own Son, but delivered him to suffer and to be
numbered among Transgressors both in life and death, and his soul to be an
Offering for the Offenses of many; he also has given many of his dear Children
not only to believe, but also to suffer with his own Son who has borne our
griefs and sorrows, and with him he has suffered them to be reckoned and
numbered among Transgressors both in their life and death, that his Followers
might bear his reproaches and partake, of his sufferings, who made his Grave
with the wicked and with the rich in his deaths, and was esteemed as smitten or
plagued of God, though as to their own conditions it is and will be well with
the Righteous for ever, having obtained witness thereof, and for their
justification from the Lord God, by whose Righteous Witness it is known and
manifest in secret in Men's Consciences, where he visits in wrath, or
distributes sorrows in his anger, and where he visits, tries, or chastises in
love, favor, and tender mercy; and this Witness discovers where the guilt of
sin and disobedience is, where deceit, treachery, and revolting from truth is,
which occasions terrors and fear of Death, and which incurs the anger and wrath
of God upon the guilty therein, and also brings sufferings upon the tender and
innocent, who knowing the guilt taken away and removed, every affliction and
trial that such meet withal is sanctified to them through the tender love and
favor of God wherewith their cup is mixed, which their implacable enemies and
persecuters shall drink the dregs of without mixture; now the difference herein
of the two states and conditions of men is felt and discerned in the Invisible,
by that which judges not by the sight of the eye or hearing of the ear, nor
barely from the outward appearance of common afflictions (which sometimes come
alike upon all) but in Righteousness and Truth that judges, and as it has
been said (of old) concerning the Righteous whose souls are in the hand of God,
that in the sight of the unwise they seemed to die, and their departure is
taken for misery, and their going from us to be utter destruction, but they are
in peace; for though they be punished in the sight of Men, yet is their hope
full of Immortality, and having been a little chastized, they shall be greatly
rewarded, for God proved them Wisd. 3.
and found them worthy for himself, as Gold in the Furnace has he tried them,
and received them as a Burnt-offering, etc. Yea such are they who shall judge
the Nations and have dominion over the people, whose Lord (that takes care for
his Elect) shall reign for ever.

Now my dear Friends and tender hearts commit your way to the Lord, and cast
your burden upon him, and he will bear you up, and sustain you by his own
right hand of power; and live in the Immortal Seed and spiritual Communion
where life and peace is daily received, and your mutual Refreshment and
Consolation stands, and wherein the Spirits of just Men are seen and felt, and
the life of Gods faithful Servants and Martyrs, and such as have finished their
Testimony with joy and peace, is enjoyed even in this Spiritual Communion,
which reaches beyond all Visibles, and is above all mortal and faiding Objects
or things. So in the dear and tender Love of God, which dwells and lives in my
heart toward you, and all the faithful every where, I commit you to him, in
whom our help and deliverance is, and in the Kingdom of Christ's Patience, am

Your Dear and Faithful Friend and Brother, G. W.

Let This be read distinctly in the Life and Authority of God (from whence it
came) among Friends, in, and about the City of London, and elsewhere, as any
Friend are moved in the same Life.

THE END.

