A BRIEF TREATISE, ON The Truths behalf in discovery of Falsehoods which are
dispersed abroad in two papers of Richard Baxters who is greatly esteemed of as
an able Minister at Kedarminster in Worcester shire, but his ignorance and
deceit is here made appear in his two papers, the one entitled, One sheet for
the Ministry, the other A second sheet for the Ministry.

And he has pretended the one against Malignants, among whom he has numbered
them called Quakers, and uttered forth his envy in several lies and revilings
against that people called Quakers, whose known integrity shall stand a witness
against all such deceivers and revilers as he is proved to be perpetually.

1. Here are several of this said R. Baxters lies made manifest and void.

2. Here is something concerning Ministers maintenance, and tithes, which this
Priest Baxter goes about to prove that tithes are both of Civil and Divine
Institution.

3. Concerning the Priests call to their Ministry, and how it differs from the
true call, with several other things of concernment that here both Magistrates
and people may come to see the blindness of the deceivers in this Nation.

This is given forth only for the truth sake and for their sakes who love it,
by their friend, George Whitehead.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Simmons at the Bull and Mouth near Aldersgate, 1658.

IT was the enmity and hatred of the old serpent in the false priests and false
prophets of old, when the power of truth did appear, to hate, persecute and
falsely to accuse the Righteous seed of God, whom he had wrought deliverance
for out of captivity and bondage, by his mighty power, and whom he had stirred
up thereby to witness for himself, against deceit and deceivers both among
Jews or Gentiles, so that the enmity of the righteous seeds adversaries was so
great, and their rage so stirred against the true witnesses, that such as
witnessed forth the truth, and such as loved the truth was not only persecuted
and hated by deceivers, but also numbered among the seed of evil doers, and
reviled by the wicked, that so one strengthened the hands of another in
wickedness, who said report and we will report, and because of Lying, and
swearing and drunkeness, the land mourns and the false Prophets strengthened
the hands of evil doers, and by their lies and lightness made people light and
vain, and they put no difference between the precious and vile, and even, so it
is evidently seen by the Priests of England, who make it their daily practice
to rail, falsely accuse, slander and back-bite the innocent people of God
called Quakers, insomuch that the hands of the rude persecutors are daily
strengthened by them, and in stead of seeking the preservation of the Lambs of
Christ's they cast dirt on them, and these shepherds that feeds themselves and
not the flock by their lies and dirty stuff which they disperse abroad, sets
the dogs on the Lambs of Christ to worry them, so they are far unfit to be
sheapherds or Ministers of Christ, but devourers, one of whom this priest
Baxter is plainly proved, who has numbered them called Quakers among the
malignants, drunkards, whoremongers, covetous, and all ungodly persons, and
compared them with the Papists, and says, that these wicked wretches despise
and revile the Ministers (in his one sheet for the Ministry, ( page. 5.)
therefore, now I proceed to lay open his words and lies given forth out of envy
against the Innocent, that this Priest may be manifest to be a deceitful
Tradsman, and not worthy to be suffered to sell any more of his deceitful ware,
he has confessed as much as that which they (to wit the Priests) are brought
up to is a trade, as in page 6.

Ans. But to his lie and false accusation, I answer, that malignants are such
as are in envy, and hatred, who are given over to a reprobate mind, and such
as are filled with malignity, commit sin with greediness, Romans 1. 28, 29. and
for Papists and such, we are truly witnesses against them and against both root
and branch of them, and if the Priests of England could as well show an evident
example for their cleerness from popery, as we can for ours who are called
Quakers, there should not be that vast difference betwixt us that there is; for
then we should not have the Priests to cry against, for upholding many of their
own traditions, and superfluities, and ceremonies, which in their worship they
uphold, which in matter and form the Papists uphold, though in the esteeming of
their traditions or in the conceit of them there may be some difference, but in
the substance they do agree as in their sprinkling infants and using bread and
wine, and calling it a sacrament, and in their owning the idols temples or
Papists masse-houses, and the Priests in covetousness, and receiving Tithes
(that great oppression) but something to that I shall speak hereafter: And for
drunkards in this Nation, the greatest part whereof are of the Priests, hearers
or owners of them who speaks well of the Priests, and will be the readiest to
fight for the Priests, and to hail the children of the Lord out of their
Assemblies, if any of them be moved to speak to them in their Idols Temple, so
we are far from having fellowship with them. And for his accusing us for
envying the Ministry; the true Ministry we own and love, and God knows our
hearts we envy not them at all, neither hate we any man's person, though
falsely here he has numbered us among the wicked, so if he can let him clear
himself from popery, for there are many things pertaining to Popery that we
could justly charge these Trads-men, the covetouss Priests of England, with.

This said Priest, Baxter, says in page the fixth. These enemies reproach as
faithful a Ministry, as the world enjoys, the most of the protestant Churches
have a Learned ministry, that is so taken up with controversies, that they are
much less in the powerful preaching and practice of Godliness.

Answ. Indeed that Ministry which the World enjoys, are but little in
powerful preaching, for the Ministry which the world enjoyed was false Prophets
and Antichrists, and they are of the world, and the world hears them, (1
John. 4, 5.) and though the truth may be preached to the world by such as are
in the truth, yet the world is not in the enjoyment of it, for the world loves
its own (Antichrists and false Prophets) who are less in Godliness indeed, for
they are nothing like God, for they that were deceivers were ungodly men, Jude
4. 2 Peter 2. 14. so that if this priest and the rest did but consider what a
ministry the world enjoys among them, they have little cause to boast of
themselves, or their Ministry.

Priest, It is for your sakes and souls that they study, and pray, and fast,
and watch, and exhort and labor to the consuming of their strength; ( and this
he speaks to them he calls malignants) on his own and the priests behalf in
page 6. and in page the 8th. he says of the same people he speaks against, nay
such are noted for the highest sort of the wicked upon the earth, worse then
drunkards, whoremongers and such filthy beasts, the persecutors of Gods
Ministers, have been ever taken as walking Devils.

Answ. This is such a Ministry as the world enjoys indeed, and altogether
out of the faith (so unfaithful) where the teachers prays and fasts, for such
as this priest confesses to be the highest sort of the wicked, and as walking
devils, surely they spend their strength in vain, that prays for such as they
count as Devils, and the worst or highest sort of the wicked; and how can his
or their praying be said to be in the faith, for such as he does thus judge,
and yet he confesses that there is a little help and hope left for their
miserable souls; see his blindness and confusion, have malignants help and
hope? for if they have hope, then have walking devils hope according to this
man's account, and then have the reprobates hope, but it is manifest that there
are some that are given over to a reprobate mind, and some are without hope,
and some have neglected their visitation, and such are malignants, for whom we
do not spend our strength, neither do we pray for walking devils, but* for them
whom God has chosen and will choose out of the world, neither did the Apostles
pray for filthy beasts, but for men.

Priest. I profess were it not for the belief of the greatness and necessity
and excellency of the truths that I am to preach, and for the will of God, and
the good of souls, I would be a plowman, or the meanest trade if not a
sweep-chimny rather then a Minister.

Answ. As for the sake of the belief or greatness of truth: he himself is
proved both to labor out of the true belief and to be out of the truth, whose
labor has so little effect as it has, seeing he labors for such as he
compares to walking devils, and complains of the drunkards, whoremongers,
covetous and ungodly persons in their parishes, and yet he is a Minister among
such; truly he might see that he Labors but for very vanity if he were not
blind, so that a plowman or a sweep-chimny are more lawful then this man's trade
who makes a trade upon the scriptures; and its better to be plowman or sweep
chimnies then an unprofitable Teacher.

Priest, And he that is the accuser of the brethren which accuses them before
God day and night, and is not this the works of the Quakers?

Answ. No, for the saints were not in the false accusers work when they cried
against such teachers as were in the covetous practices, and called them cursed
Children, neither are we accusers of the brethren when we witness against such
Ministers now as are in the covetous practices, but do suffer by the false
accuser, many of whose false accusations are extant in Priest Baxters lying
papers against us called Quakers.

Priest in page ten, And what else do Quakers and all these sects that are the
enemies of the Minictry, do they not go up and down the land, and say to the
wisest holiest teachers, as if they took them by the sleeve, come down and let
me preach, that can do it better, come down thou deceiver and ignorant man, and
let me come up that am wiser and better.

Answ. I question not but that there are many in this natition that can witness
against this Priest for a false accuser in these words, for we do not use these
words, he lays to our charge, as to say we are wiser and better, and let me
come up, here he accuses us as if we had as mind to come up into their
pulpits, but such high places or chiefest seats, we desire not at all, but
rather leave them for the hireling priests that they may appear like Pharisees
who had the chiefest places in the assemblies, whom Christ cried woe against,
and it is against the Priests, the deceivers that are in the Pharisees steps
that we cry and not against the true Ministers; but we know that the seed is
come that tramples upon the high places of the earth, and upon these places
wherein Idolatry is upheld.

In the 11 page, Priest Baxter takes the labor of most tradesmen in the Town,
to be a pleasure to the body in comparison of his (and says) they work in
ease, and I in continual pain.

Ans. Here let such as labor daily with their hands, consider whether this man
has spoken the truth or no, and whether compacting a sermon together in a week
in his study or elsewhere, and much of it made ready to his or their hands, and
declaring it over one day, it may be sometimes in two days in the week, and it
may be speak by an hourglass as many of the Priests in England do, whether
this be not easier to the body, then daily hand labors from mornings till
evenings? and he that says he is in continual pain, it appears then, that his
trade is a bondage to him; but if he were a Minister of the Gospel, he would
not be in continual pain in Ministering that, neither would he murmr or
complain as he does, and as the filthy dreamers did, Jude 16. for the commands
of Christ was joyous to his, and the way thereof they ran with great delight
and had joy and peace and consolation in the Lord which they received through
obedience to his commands, and were not in continual pain, as this priest
confesses he is, and indeed such as he is are like to be in pain they being in
their steps who ran, and the Lord never sent them, and the Lord is against
them, how can they but be in pain, for the wicked men have no peace with God,
and surely this labor and travail and trade of theirs is deep in the curse if
they be in continual pain.

Priest. As wisely do the Quakers argue, that because we use spectacles or
hour-glasses and pulpets, we have not the spirit; it is not want of your
abilities that makes ministers use notes, I use notes as much as any man, when
I take pains, and as little as any man when I am Lazy.

Answ. Here he goes about to plead for the Priests using hour glasses, pulpets
and notes for teaching by, but he cannot prove that the Ministers of Christ
used these things as the blind guides in England do; and as for pulpets, such
was in Ezra's time, in the time when the Law was read; and the Pharisees had
the chiefest places in the Assemblies, who professed Moses but denied Christ,
and he witnessed against them, Mat. 23. and it is manifest that these that
limit a time to teach in by an hour-glasse, are not led by the spirit of truth;
for the saints did not preach by hour-glasses, for they spoke when, and so long
as they were moved by the spirit, neither did they use notes for Sermons as the
priests do, but spoke in the power and demonstration of the spirit: And here he
confesses himself to be sometimes Lazy, and before said be had scarce time to
eat and drink. R. Baxter, see thy confusion, What, art thou in continual pain
and yet lazy? and yet have thou scarce time to eat and drink, thou may have
time for both if thou preach by an hour-glasse; for shame give over thy trade
if it be so tedious to thee, and yet thou art Lazy:

Now concerning Tithes and Ministers maintenance, and some other things of
concernment.
And where this said Priest would clear himself of covetousness and oppression,
he begins to plead for their taking tithes, and his taking hire in these words,
The same Law of the Land that makes nine parts theirs, does make the tenth
ours; if we have no title to the tenth, they have none to the rest; we ask none
of our people for a farthing, they give it not to us, it was never theirs when
they buy or take Leases of their Land, it is only the nine parts, they pay for.

Answ. Here he has neither cleared himself from covetousness, oppression, nor
from lying, and here he challenges as great an interest in the Tithes as a man
has in his heritage, or possession which he has by inheritance, and they that
profess themselves Ministers of Christ, pleads now for Tithes by a Law of the
Nation, when their Gospel will not manage them in taking Tithes; truly the
Mass Priests or Papists might have brought as strong a proof for their
receiving Tithes as this man brings, and the manner of both their receiving of
them is contrary to the Law of God, and what a man has a just right to by
inheritance is according to the Law of God, but so is not the Tithes due to
priests, now seeing that the second priesthood is come which abolished tithes
among the rest of the figures. And for people paying but for 9 parts of their
estates, or farmed lands: Let people see this Priests deceit in this, and bring
their evidences or deeds of lands or leases against him, for do they not
mention that every part and parsel of a tenement or a living that's sold, is for
the singular use of him or them that buys it, or for his or their heirs,
executors or assigns, or every part and parcel of such a Tenement for the use
of him that buyeth it, or for the farmers use; These and such like expressions
are recorded in many legal evidences of the nation for farms or livings
without any exception for paying the priest tithes, besides there is the
husbandmans labor, or his charges to laborers spended upon his living or
Tenement and goods; so that being considered in the tithes what the priest
takes for tithes, does amount in many places to far more then the tenth of
their estates, and if men's ground wanted labor it would lie waste, that the
priests would soon want tithes, which were established by the Pope, and upheld
by Tyrants who could argue as strongly for them as this priest does, and
therefore by this man's argument were the mass-priests to be upheld by them
because they could plead for an interest in tithes and other things, by a Law.
For shame you teachers in England, if you be not popishly affected, come out of
their steps, places and oppressions, and if you ask not people for a farthing,
then why are so many of the people of God subpoened up to the Upper Bench, and
many have been imprisoned through your ungospel-like means, and your envy and
covetousness whereby the innocent suffers, and the creation groans, but the
Lord will meet with you, and pay you your wages for all your deceits one day.
And whereas this lying priest also would here accuse us to make people Thieves,
and to have them rob God, and to prove his deceit he brings these scriptures,
Mal. 3. 8. Romans 2. 22. Genesis 14. 20. Heb. 7. 6, 9.

Answer. Its no marvel that this hireling has here prefered an outward or
national Law before the scriptures, for the scriptures in this place will not
at all manage his design for tithes, for as for that in Genesis 14, 20. and Heb.
7. 6. 9. touching Melchizedecks receiving the tenths of the spoil of Abraham
when Abraham was returned from the slaughter of the Kings, which was before the
Law was given, it makes nothing for the priests now receiving the tenths of
men's estates, labors and increases, and Christ being a Priest for ever after
the order of Melchisedec, was not in order to Melchisedec's receiving the
tenths of Abraham, but in order to his Immortality, and his being without
desent, without beginning of days or end of time. And Christ did not give any
command for his to take tithes, and for that in Mal. 3. 8. in Malachies time
the Covenant was with Levi, and that was before Christ came in the flesh, when
they were to bring the Tithes unto the storehouse, that the Lord might have
meat in his house for fatherless widows and strangers, which was according to
his covenant and law to Levi, so that then in the prophets time, when they did
not bring the Tithes to the storehouse they robbed God, and the priests had
corrupted the covenant of Levi, and violated the Law of God, Mal. 2 2. 8. and
3. 8. so now seeing this priest counts the tithes or hire that they take to be
of the Lords portion in page 14 and that if they have never so much that they
devote it wholly to the Lord as he says, then I say where is their
storehouse, And if the reader would be further satisfied touching the ground
and rise of Tithes, he may seriusly view a book called the great case of Tithes
truly stated by A. P.
or when do any of them bring the tithes to a storehouse for the relief of
fatherless widows and strangers, seeing they bring that in, Mal. 3. 8. for
their taking tithes; it may as well be said that they rob God: Now if the first
covenant and Levitical Law, and priesthood were to be preached up now as they
were counted robbers of God in Mallachies time that brought not the tithes to
the storehouse. But we conclude that that priesthood that took tithes is
changed, and of necessity, the Law is changed and the commandment disanulled
that gave tithes. Heb. 7. and where this priest here would plead for tithes to
be of divine institution, by that in Mat 23. 23. here he would grosely blind
the minds of people indeed, and here he has plainly brought a popish argument
in effect, and cited the Scriptures that the papists plead for tithes by, as I
have seen in an annotation of their, adjoined to that in Heb. 7. but let me
tell both the papists and the priests of England, that when Christ spoke that
in, Mat. 23. 23. that this was before he suffered on the cross, whereto he
nailed the hand writing of Ordinances, and blotted it out, Colos. 2. and he
abolished in the flesh, the Law of commandments contained in ordinances; so
that this priest and the rest that pleads for tithes to continue in that
particular, do deny Christ come in the flesh, and are enemies to his cross,
minding earthly things, and for earthly ends pleads for Tithes, as to maintain
themselves in ease, and them and their wives and children in pride and
Idleness, which causes the creation to groan, and causes many poor men to
work hard and earn their livings dearly; so that which they receive from the
people is not devoted to the Lord as the Lords portion, but coveted unto
themselves, for the maintaining of these covetous, lazy shepherds in England;
and to maintain his deceit, he also says that the primative Christians gave
not only the tenth, but all that they had, and laid it at the Apostles feet.

I answer, but here the Apostles did not receive tithes for themselves, nor
plead for tithes as a Divine institution, as the Priests do; for this was that
distribution might be made unto every man according as he had need, Act. 4. 35.
And this said Priest also goes about further to cover this his evil
coveteousnes and oppression by that in the 1 Cor. 9. 5. 7. 13, 14. To which I
answer, that he, and the rest of his companions, in iniquity are manifest to be
in antichrists deceit, and in cursed practices, and the root of all evil
sprung up in them, to wit covetousnes after money, and the fruit of it, as
oppression which abounds among them, and covetousness is idolatry, so the
priests that are covetous are Idolaters, so then these Idolaters Antichrists,
blind guids and Deceivers have no interest in that livelihood that pertained
to the Gospel for their teaching, seeing that they are no Ministers of the
Gospel; so for living of the Gospel they cannot, and for going a warfare for
the gospel they do not forgoing a warfare is not a lying loytering at ease in
settled places as the Priests in England do, like lazy drones who never came to
endure hardship, as the soldiers of Christ have done and do, who go not a
warfare at their own charges, but their Master Christ bears them out and
rewards them, and puts them forth, and goes before them, and they live of the
Gospel, as his true Ministers have done who had power from him to eat and
drink, where they were received according to his command, Mat. 10. 1 Cor. 9.
but not to take tithes, nor to oppress people as the Priests do; so now R.
Baxter thy false cloak for covetousness is quite rent, and all thy arguing for
preaching for hire, and taking tithes, will not at all maintain thee therein,
neither does any scripture prove these thy practices, nor are they at all
concordable with the Saints practices.

Priest. Prove us unsanctified, and we will refign our office.

Answ. Thou art proved a covetous man, an idolater, a false accuser, a
deceiver; and covetous unthankful men, (such as thou art) ware unholy, 2 Timothy
3. 2, 3, 4: then you are unsanctified, for such as are unholy may Justly be
said to be unsanctified, therefore if thou and you do not resign your office,
you will be further taken notice of, who hold up a deceitful trade that God will
overthrow who make a trade upon the Scripture, and are teachers for hire which
Micha and the Prophets of God cried against, and R. Baxter thou have confessed
as much as that which you are brought up to at the Universities as thou call
them is a trade, in these words ( to wit, would not the time and labor and
cost that they are at in the Schools and Universities, have fitted them for a
more gainful trade?

Answ. It appears then that they that have money enough thereby may bind
themselves as Apprentiless at Oxford or Cambridg (or at Durham, which of late
is set up to bring up such tradesmen) as through carnal industry and bestowing
cost may come to such a trade as R. Baxter, and the rest of the priests are of,
truly they may even be ashamed of calling themselves Ministers of Christ,
seeing that they are set up and made Ministers by the will of man, through
carnal cost, and their own labor, but here they are out of the true wisdom,
for it cannot be purchased with gold, Job. 28. 15. And thus for the Priests
education to their Ministry, they cannot prove it to be as the call that
Timothy and the elders in the Churches of Christ had, though this priest has
gone about deceitfully in his second sheet to prove it; but y^u may see further
concerning that shortly and in plainness.

Priest. In his fifth and thirteenth pages he confesses that there is scandals
in the Ministry (as drunkenness and swearing, etc.) and says, that Ministers
are still spurring on the Magistrates, to cast out the insufficient, negligent,
and scandalous.

Answ. If the Priest be still spurring on the Magistrates, then they make
slaves on them, and makes them as beasts, or horses that wants understanding,
truly if the Magistrates grow not weary of their teachers they are very blind,
and very much feared in their consciences, for who could still endure spurring
on, but I believe that if the Priests spur the Magistrates on as he calls it,
its more for their own preferments that the priests have petitioned often to
the Magistrates for Tithes, Augmentations and preferments in the earth to
satisfy their ungodly covetousness, rather then spurred them on to cast out
drunkards and swearers; but if the Magistrates stood in the counsel of God,
they would have understanding how to act for God, and do their duty in
obedience to God of a ready mind, and would not need the priests continually to
spur them on as slaves; But be not ye like the horse or mule that wants
understanding, but learn judgment and do justice ye Rulers. And what, have the
Priests been Rulers so long, (as this priest pleads for them to be) and
teachers in England so many years, and have they not cast out from among them
the drunkards and swearers yet? Its even time for them to resign their office
indeed: And this Priest says, that Magistracy is as truly from God as the
Ministry.

Then I say what need any Ministers be still spurring on the Magistrates as
this Priest says, that they do (also he says, that there is a clearer word in
the gospel for the Ministry then for the Migistracy in page 2.) Then I say, How
is Magistracy as truly from God as the Ministry? If there be a clearer word for
the one then the other, and also to say that there is two words in the Gospel,
the one not so clear as the other, is another error; for every Word of God is
clear; and for Magistracy, and the power that Magistrates are entrusted withal
it is ordained of God, but the Magistrates or Rulers that do uphold such blind
guides as this, who is in such errors and confusion, they grossly abuse their
power, and shall give an account for it one day. And this said Priest says to
them he calls Malignants, etc. If you will come and help us to cast out any
that are vicious and unworthy, we will give you thanks.

Answer. Here he speaks of such helping them as before he counted as walking
devils, and as the highest in wickedness upon earth; surely he can but help
his hearers badly and miserably for their souls seeing his strength is so much
decayed, that he would thank them he calls malignants if he could have their
help, it may be justly said that they that seek to him for help do but go down
into Egypt for help.

Priest. If the Magistrates stop the mouths of such raylors and abusers of God
and men, he does no more persecute then he persecuteth a thief when he haugeth
him ( and this he speaks against them called Quakers in page 12.)

Answer. Here his envy and maliciousness is made appear whereby he would stir
up the Magistrates to persecute us for our profession, which we know Christ
Jesus is the Author of, and this is because that we are made to witness
against him, and against such deceitful tradesmen as he is, but if he were in
the truth, and saw us in errors, then he would not seek to incense the
Magistrates to persecute us, but rather seek to convince us by sound doctrine,
and a good example, but such as he are manifest to be out of both, and he would
bring Paul and Peter and the Churches of Christ for a cloak to his malice,
which here he has uttered to the Magistrate against us, but they will not
cover him nor his deceit; for though they rejected, judged and delivered some
up to Satan, yet they did not persecute them nor complain to the Magistrates to
have the^ east into prison, nor to have their goods taken from them for their
profession, as many of the priests in England have done, by whom many of the
servants of the Lord in England have suffered and do suffer, both the spoiling
of their goods, and imprisonments, and some the loss of their lives in
prisons, whose sufferings will rise up as a heavy judgment when their prayers
shall be fulfilled against their persecutors.

And this said Priest it appears allows of hanging them that steal, seeing that
he would have us persecuted, and counts it as lawful as hanging a thief.

Answer. Here this is a murtherous spirit, that would take away the life for
the creatures, and so doing is contrary to the Law of God, Let the Priest and
the Magistrate read Exodus 22. 1, 2, 3. If a man shall steal an Ox or a Sheep
and kill it or sell it, he shall restore five oxen for an Ox, and 4. Sheep for
a sheep. If a thief be found breaking up, and be smitten that he die, there
shall no blood be shed for him; if the sun be risen upon him, there shall he
blood shed for him, for he should make restitution. If he have nothing, then he
shall be sold for his theft, Mark by this then if the thief was slain after the
sun was risen, there was blood to be shed for him, and in verse the fourth, if
the theft certainly be found alive in his hands, whether it be Ox, Ass, or
Sheep, he shall restore double, and in Ephesians. 4. 28. Let him that stole steal no
more, but rather let him labor, working with his hands the thing which is
good, that he may have to give to him that needs; but he does not say that he
is to be hanged for this theft, and how shall he labor or work with his hands
if he be hanged? Therefore Magistrates had need to take heed of hanging
thieves, and priests of allowing it.

Now concerning the Priests call to their Ministry as follows, and how it
differs from the true call.
Now whereas R. Baxter in his second sheet, goes about to prove the priests
call to their Ministry to be of God, and brings scriptures to prove his and
their call to be lawful; for their sakes that desires to be informed in this
thing I shall mention something concerning it, that the simple may be informed,
and the minds of the ignorant unvailed, that they may see the difference
between a true call which is revealed and a false call, where revelation is
denied by the false Mininisters, and that the scriptures, and the form of sound
words do not make void revelations.

Whereas R: Baxter in his first proposition in pages 3, 4: goes about to prove
2 distinct sorts of Ministers, first such as received revelation, or a
particular law or message immediately from God, these were prophets and
Apostles; and he goes about to distinguish a second sort of Ministers from
them, and the second sort he calls over seers, Bishops presbyters or elders,
pastors, and Teachers, and Decons, and that the latter sort (as he calls them)
was not to declarewhat they had immediately from God but what is declared in
Scripture, and what they have heard of others, and says that the holy Ghost is
to help us in keeping that which is committed to us, and not to reveal more.

Answ. This is a false distinction and a perverting the scriptures to
distinguish Elders, Pastors and Teachers, or Bishops from them that had
Revelation and immediate teaching, and from being Apostles, for John was an
Elder and declared what he had revealed, that which he had heard, that which he
had seen, and which he had looked upon, which was from the beginning, the same
he showed to others, 1 John 1. 1. And he says the Elder unto the Elect Lady,
and the Elder unto the wel-beloved 2 John 1. 3. John 1. and John was an
Apostle, Mat. 10. And the Apostle Peter was an Elder who had the word of God
revealed, so an Elder not distinct from an Apostle here as this man would have
them: And Paul was a father in the truth, and an Elder was as a father to be
entreated, 1. Tim. 5. 1. so he that is a father is an Elder, and the same that
was an Elder was an Apostle, and declared what he had received immediately from
God, and the Elders, Pastors and Teachers had gifts given them from God when
Christ was ascended he gave gifts unto men, he gave some Apostles, some
Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors and Teachers, for the
perfecting of the Saints; for the work of the Ministry, for the edifying of
the body of Christ, Ephesians. 4. 11, 12. the Apostle does not say, that the
Evangelists, Pastors and Teachers had not received that immediately from God
which they taught, as this man does, for they had gifts given them when Christ
ascended, which gifts were perfect, and was given for the perfecting, which
gifts was revealed in the Church of Christ, for these gifts were for the
benefit of the Church, neither had they received these gifts from man, but from
God, and these that had gifts given them for the work of the Ministry, whether
Prophets, Apostles, Evangelists, Pastors, or Teachers, they had power to ordain
Elders in the Churches, as well as the Apostles had power to lay on hands on
several that believed, which when they laid their hands, immediately the holy
Ghost came upon them, so that Paul, and Barnabas, and Timothy, and Titus had
power to ordain Elders, Acts 14. 23. Titus 1. but this was in the Church whom
Christ presented blameless, and fitted for himself. Ephs. 5. 26 27. and Christ
had fitted them that were Elders, Bishops, or Deacons, for himself before they
were allowed of for their Office by the Apostles who were first to be tried,
and then they were to Minister; now that which presented them blameless was the
gift of God, and they had the gift revealed in them, and a Bishop, and a Decon
must be blameless, not given to wine, no striker, not greedy of filthy Lucre,
but patient, not a brawler, not covetous, and apt to teach, and so must Elders,
for they were Bishops, Titus. 1. 5, 6. 7.

Priest. Now seeing this said priest professes the Ministry in England to be
of this sort, for he says in page the tenth for qualifications, they have
first competent knowledge, secondly and utterance, thirdly and godliness.

Answ. That Is all false, For first how can they have competent knowledge seeing
that they deny revelation, and immediate teaching, when as Christ says no man
knows the father but the Son, and he to whom the Son will reveal him, Mat. 11.
here they that denies revelation knows neither the father nor the Son. Let
Christ's own words stand a witness against this lying Priest, and the rest of
them: Secondly true utterance they are far from, seeing that they deny
immediate teaching by the spirit; for true utterance was a gift of the Spirit,
the Saints spoke as the spirit gave them utterance, and the spirit and word of
God was revealed in Timothy and Titus, who were owned for Ministers by the
Apostles, and Timothy had the gift of God in him, and unfeigned faith in him,
and that gift was given by Prophecy with the laying on of the hands of the
company of Elders, as it is in some translations recorded, now his call was not
like the call of these Priests of England, for the Prophefies that went on
Timothy, they came not by the will of man, neither was the laying on of Elders
hands according to man's will. So that though the Priests would put themselves
in number with Timothy and the Elders, yet we find them shut out from their
call and Ministry, for we never understood that they that set up these priests
were called as Peter or Paul, or the Elders, who had power to lay on the hands,
that the holy Ghost fell on the party on whom they laid on their hands, and
thus much will some of the Priests confess, which may be to the shame of him
that here professes himself to be called as Timothy was. And further this man
aforesaid has confessed that the Ministers for whom he pleads, are brought up
at the Universities, as he calls them, where they have bestowed labor and cost
to bring them up to the Ministry, which might have fitted them for a more
gainful trade; so that here their education is not to the true Ministry, but to
a trade; but Timothy and Titus, and the elders in the true Churches, on whom
the Apostle laid hands, did not make a trade on their Ministry, nor on the
Scripture, though they knew the Scriptures and did preach the word of God
according to the Scriptures by the gift of God in them, and who was to do the
work of Evangelists, whom Christ had endued with gifts from above, neither was
the holy Ghost to be bought with money though it fell on several who believed,
when the Apostles laid their hands on them, for he and his money was to perish
who would have bought the holy Ghost with money, Acts 8. 19. 20. So all the cost
that the priests bestows at Oxford or Cambridge, it does but purchase them a
trade, and that a deceitful one too, it cannot purchase the holy Ghost, nor the
gifts of the spirit, which Bishops, Elders, and Deacons, in the true Churches
were endued and fitted with, but not made Ministers at Schools, nor by the will
of man, as the priests are now. Thirdly, Neither are they in godliness nor
qualified as a true Bishop, or a Deacon, or Elder, seeing that the Priests in
England, are covetous, greedy of filthy lucre, and many of them given to wine,
and envious men, and brawlers, and novices as many in this nation can witness,
but the true Elders were not such, and the man of God was to flee from the
desire of money, and they that went in the error of Balaam for reward, and in
the way of Cain to envy, and through covetousness made merchandise of people,
were ungodly men, ordained of old for condemnation, Jude 11. 2 Pet. 2.
Therefore the Priests being ignorant of Revelation, immediate teaching from
God, and being out of the true knowledge, utterance and godliness, so strangers
to the heavenly gift, they are not fit to teach, but are deceivers, shut out
from among the number of the true Elders of Christ, for the ungodly shall not
be numbered with the seed of the righteous; but we look at the life and gifts
of God which qualifies and brings into the state and condition that the true
Elders, Bishops and Deacons were in, more then their names, seeing that they
could not have these names, nor be ordained for their office by the Apostles,
till they were first fitted and tried in the truth, and by the gift of God
which was in the Apostles and elders of the true Church, who denied not
revelation and immediate teaching, for they had that revealed in them which
they taught, and by that knew the holy scriptures which are able to make a man
wise unto salvation through faith that is in Christ, but without faith which is
revealed, and the gift of God, the Scriptures cannot be known as they ought to
be, for it is the man of God that the Scriptures are profitable for the
furnishing of, and for our learning they are written who walk not after the
flesh but after the Spirit.

Priest. But we are not built on the foundation of every Pastor, Teacher,
Elder, Bishop, or Deacon, though both in their places, Apostles, Prophets,
Evangelists, Pastors, and Teachers are given for the perfecting of the Saints,
etc.

Answ. Here he would make two foundations, the foundatition of the Prophets and
Apostles, not to be the foundation of the Pastors, Teachers, and Elders, (which
were all given of God) here he has quite shut himself forth of the number of
the true Church, and has shut himself out from being one of that sort of
Ministers which before he pretended himself to be of, so that this does the
more confirm to what I have written, for how can he be either true Pastor,
Teacher, or Elder, when he is not built upon their foundation, according to his
own confession, so he cannot be any Minister of Christ who is not built upon
the true foundation which is but one; so you may take notice of R. Baxters
confusion, for another foundation can no man lay then that which is laid, which
is Christ, and they that were members of the true Church, were built upon the
foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, Christ Jesus being the chief corner
stone, who was and is the saints foundation, and that building which is not
builded upon Christ, shall as surely fall as R. Baxter is proved to be no
Minister of Christ, and that is sure enough.

Priest. In page the 14 he brins an objection which is, But you are not
ordained by Bishops; his answer is almost all in England are till of late, if
that will serve, our parish Presbyters are Bishops, etc.

Answ. Here he goes about to justify the Bishops that was in England,
ordaining of priests, so that in this he is setting up that which before he
pretended they had taken down as in his other sheet in page the sixth, he
says, have not the Ministers themselves been the pincipal instruments of
taking down Bishops, Deans, and chapters, Archdeacons, Prebends, and all means
of preferments, and what have they got by it? so he that is here setting up
that which before he has pretended, that the Ministers have taken down, here
he makes himself a transgressor; and people may take notice further against
this priest for a liar that all means of preferment which the Bishops was
preferred in, the Priests of England have not taken down, seeing that almost
all of them, till of late are ordained by the Bishops; so they are not Christ's
Ministers, but Bishops Ministers, and if all the Bishops means of preferment
were taken down by the Priests, then what means the Priests taking Tithes and
upholding such great oppression, as causes the creation to groan, and their
suing people at Law, and their causing of them to be imprisoned that refuse to
pay the Priests Tithes (for conscience sake) surely here is Bishops Ministers,
upholding Bishops Tyranny, and that by Bishops Laws that are corrupt (and
unrepealed) as may be made appear: This Priest has quite cast himself into the
mire, and has made his call void, for he says in his 16 page ( the truth of
our doctrine depends not on our calling) Then it is manifest that their calling
is a false calling, for if it were of God it were according to true doctrine,
and true doctrine that is preached in obedience to a true calling; depends on,
or has unity with that calling.

Priest. He that has no just call shall answer for what he does as an
intruder, but the people shall have for all that the fruit of his Ministration,
and preaching, and Baptism, and other acts shall not be null to them.

Answ. That's false, for they that ran and the Lord sent them not (they had not
a just call from God) they could not profit the people at all, therefore their
teaching was null to the people as yours is, who are not built upon the
foundation of the true Prophets, and Elders, accordingly as it is made appear
in the foregoing words, as also is your unjust call; and here thou go about
to vindicate an intruders preaching, when as the Apostle witnessed against
such, Colos. 2. for intruders are mainly puffed up in their fleshly minds, and
even so is he that would have them to be preachers.

Priest. In page the ninth, The necessities of the Church continue, we still
need a Teaching Ministry, and for that he brings, Heb. 5. 11.

Ans. In Heb. 5. there is no such word as that the necessities of the Church
continue, here he is proved to be a perverter of the Scripture, as it may be
seen in that place, for those unto whom the Apostle spoke was dull of hearing,
so he reproved them, for when as for the time they might have been teachers,
they themselves had need to have been taught, but he did not say they still
needed teaching by Ministers, as this priest would have the Church to continue
in necessity, and so then if the necessity of the Church continue, the Church
is not supplied; Oh what blindness is here, that ever people should be blinded
and led by such blind guids as this, they may be in want and necessity, still
ever learning, never able to come to the knowledge of the truth indeed, that
are lead by them, and never come to receive the promise, while they are led by
such, but the promise of God was fulfilled in the Churches who were taught of
God as he had promised, they shall not need to teach every man his neighbor,
saying know the Lord, but they shall all know me from the least to the greatest
says the Lord, Heb. 8 and John wrote to them that needed not that any man
should teach them, for they had the annoiting from the father which taught them
of all things, but this said Priest has been much pleading for himself, and
such as he is to be the principal members, parts and supporters of the Church,
but it may be truly said that such Churches as have such as he is for their
principal members and supporters, that they are both blind and lame; and dumb
from speaking any thing from revelation or immediate teaching from God, but
them of the true Church witnessed both, for they might all prophecy one by
one, 1 Corinthians. 14. 31. And this priest also says in the foresaid page that
there is no salvation promised but to the Church, and brings Ephesians. 5. 23, 25,
26, 27, and Mark 16. 16. to prove his deceit when there is no such word in
these scriptures as he brings them for, but if he had said that there are none
in whom the promise of salvation is fulfilled, but them of the true Church, he
would not need have been questioned for so saying, but Christ who is the
covenant and the salvation of God, he is promised to be his salvation to the
ends of the earth, and he is given for a light unto the Gentiles, and the
scripture foreseeing (or foretelling) that God would justify the heathen
through faith, Gal. 3. 8. and they shall be called the people of God that were
not his people, so that the promise of God reached unto a people, before it was
fulfilled, and before that they were united into the Church, but this blind
guide has made manifest his ignorance concerning the promise of salvation as
he has done concerning many other things he has given forth in his lying
papers, who says that many thousands are damned for want of the light, but in
this he is also in error, for thousands are condemned by the light, because
they hate it, and this is the condemnation, that light is come into the world,
and men loved darkness rather then the light because their deeds are evil, John
3. And this said priest in his second page would accuse them he calls Quakers
for being the Papists Agents but this we deny and return it back again upon
him, for both the Papists, their ways, worships, superstition and deceits and
adherents we clearly witness against in life, conversation and doctrine, as in
many things is evident to the World in many of our books and manner of our
life; and for them he calls Seekers among whom he numbers us, All that are
seeking, worshipping or waiting in their own wills and imaginations we deny,
but they that seek in sincerity so as to find the right way we own them
according to the true light wherein the drawings of God is manifest unto them
that believe in the Light which does inlighten every man that comes into the
world. And R. Baxter says this is the saving Gospel that the Seekers, Quakers
and their brethren preach, that the scripture is not the Gospel, etc. I answer,

If the Quakers preach a saving Gospel, then out of thy own mouth art thou
judged, to revile and speak evil of the Ministers of the Gospel, and then why
have thou written so much against the Quakers as thou calls them, if they
preach the saving Gospel which is everlasting, which was before the scripture
was. But did thou mean as thou have spoken? if thou did, then why do not you
Priests preach that which here thou say we preach. But what thou R. Baxter
has uttered in these two sheets is not the first time thou have set thy self
against the innocent and against the Truth with thy lies and confusions, as the
Reader may be further satisfied concerning thee if he read the Answer to thy
book called The Quakers Catechism, and that book tituled ( Many strong reasons
confounded) in answer to another lying sheet of thine against the Quakers; And
here thou art proved a Deceiver, a Raylor, and false accuser of the innocent, a
teacher and disperser of lies and false doctrines, and thy call to be a false
call, and thou and the rest that own thee to be out of the true foundation:
Therefore stop thy mouth, and give over thy trade for shame, and be confounded,
for the light is risen and the morning is broken forth which discovers all you
blind guides, and destroyers of souls, and your filthiness shame and
confusion is made appear, and your noysom smell of wickedness, oppression,
pride and deceit is come up before the Lord who will consume you by the breath
of his mouth and will scatter you and break you, and stamp you to pieces. Dread
and tremble you Babylons Tradesmen, for the time is a coming that your ware
shall not be esteemed of, and you shall wail for the misery that is coming upon
you, and let all that love their souls save themselves from this wicked
generation of deceivers, and return to the Lord God, and walk in his light
which shines in their hearts, to receive the teachings of his ways, that the
true promises and Ministry they may partake of, and deny the false ministry and
ministers which we are made through the truth to witness against and renounce
with their dishonesty, and we preach not to keep people always learning, but
that they may be turned from the darkness to the light, and come to see the
true Ministry fulfilled in them by the spirit of Truth. This only lay upon me
to give forth for the Truths sake, to clear it, and them that are in it from
lies, otherwise I should have been willing to have suffered under them, for it
is no pleasure nor advancing to me to search in the Priests confusion.

THE END*

