A Christian Reprehension OF Confusion, Ranterism, Cruelty, and Opposition to
Spiritual Order and Christian Liberty, In Brief Reflections.

First, On a conceited Pamphlet, untruly Styled, Spiritual Order and Christian
Liberty proved Consistent in the Churches of Christ, and Impositions upon the
Consciences of Believers, etc. found Antichristian and Destructive to both;
Signed R. G. Secondly, On a Brief History of the Rise, Growth, Reign, Supports,
and sudden fatal foil of Popery; and Description of Six Popish Pillars; By a
hidden Author.
By Lovers of Truth and Peace, G. W. and S. C.

Psalm 10. verse. 8, 9. He sits in the Lurking-Places of the Villages, in the
Secret Places does he Murder the Innocent; his Eyes are privily see against the
Poor: He lies in wait secretly as a Lion in his Den, etc.

Printed and Sold by A. Soul, at the Crooked-Billet in Holloway-Lane, in
Shoreditch, 1690.

A Christian Reprehension of Confusion, Ranterism, Cruelty, and Opposition to
Spiritual Order and Christian Liberty, etc.
WHerein the Author of this Treatise has seemed to plead for Spiritual Order
and Christian Liberty, as consistent in the Churches of Christ, and against
Impositions on the Consciences of Believers in Religious Practices, without
inward Convincement or Clearness to act therein; and for the Principle of
Immediate Inward Revelation of Light and Spirit, etc. and against the Roman
Church-Popes, etc. usurping Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction and Power unto an
implicit and blind Obedience, Tyrannously usurping and exercising Government
over the Consciences of Believers or Diseiples, etc. And yet that both
Spiritual Order and Christian Liberty were established by the Apostles in the
first Churches, page 5. and for Church Government, which is Spiritual, page 9.
And that it rests in the Power of any one particular Church to make Orders, for
the better governing of the Church, so as in the Exercise of Church Government
the Rules of Expediency, Peace and Charity be observed, page 10. And that
Spiritual Government and Christian Liberty are not only Consistent, and
accordingly practiced in the first Churches, but also necessary for preserving
Spiritual Unity and Peace of the Churches from Confusion and Tyranny, all
things being decently and in order, in Charity, and to Edification, page 6.

With many more passages, which in themselves being general Truths, we should
have let pass the said Treatise or Pamphlet without taking this notice of it,
if the Author had not perverted and contradicted the same Truths by some
particular corrupt passages and perverse Reflections, and putting forth a sting
of Envy and Bitterness in the Tail or Postscript of his Pamphlet against the
Quakers especially, and tauntingly, and enviously telling of being alarmed with
the loud Clamor of Church Government, Laws, Orders of general and particular
Meetings of the Friends of the Ministry and others, the necessity of one or
more in the Church having Power infallibly to determine all matters
Controverted therein, to whom all must submit, though unconvinced or unclear in
themselves, or else be branded with the odious Names of Schismatic, etc. p. 2.
By all which it appears the man's wholly ignorant of the Intent, Use and
Service of those general and particular Meetings of our Friends, which he
scornfully and enviously smites at. He falsely Clamours herein, for they have no
Church Government, Laws or Orders now to set up, being long since established
by the Lord's Power and Council; nor do they meet to determine all
Controversies in them, having no Controversy either in Doctrine or Discipline
to determine, the Lord having fully satisfied them in those things by his Light
and Spirit; nor yet to impose any matters upon any of their Society unconvinced
or unclear therein; But for the help and comfort of one another in the love of
God, and Unity of his blessed Spirit, in all things proper to such Meetings,
which are not for Controversy, nor to set up men over the Churches of Christ,
but for the help and comfort of one another in the Lord, who is our Lawgiver,
from whom true Wisdom and Counsel comes, whose Presence and Power attends those
our Meetings, and is livingly felt in them; and therefore we value not what
Envy and Scorn can say against them in this or any other perverse Gainsayers,
Apostates or others.

We being willing to search what are those Impositions on Believers
Consciences? What those Church-Orders, Laws, out ward Appointments,
Instructions, New Papacy, etc. which he conplains of and derides, as imposed
without inward convincement among the people called Quakers, at whom he Smites?
Whether evil or unlawful in themselves, or altogether unnecessary? We would
know what particular order or outward appointments etc. they are, all his
Clammour is against? upon the search we find them mentioned, and (as he
conceits) strongly argued against, page 7. 8. thus, viz.

The contradiction between, this kind of Imposition and Immediate Revelation of
the Light and Spirit of God in every Individual as his unering Rule, etc. is in
this, that this inward Revelation is asserted, as being of it self sufficient,
if obeyed, to lead into all Truth, without any necessity of hearkening unto any
outward Writings or Instructions whatsoever; but as this Light leads thereunto,
which if it be so, that a Society be united upon that Principle, the uselesness
of general or particular outward Laws, and Instructions, and of the
fore-appointed standing Meetings Weekly, Monthly and Quarterly, and the
frequenting the Set-Time and Places of those Meetings, further than it becomes
necessary to every individual Person of that Society through the Immediate
Revelation in his own particular then received, is so very Manifest, that
indeed it is a deserting the Case of Immediate Revelation, and an
Acknowledgement of the Insufficiency of that Light within, etc.

This is such an Argument and Opposition as we have scarce ever seen before,
that because the Light within, and Immediate Revelation is sufficient to lead
into all Truth, therefore all outward Writings and Instructions whatsoever, for
appointed standing Meetings, Weekly, Monthly, etc. and frequenting them at
settimes and places, are all useless to them of the same Communion; we deny the
Consequence.

First, because the Light of Christ within has directed, ordered and settled
such a Method and Order for these our Religions Meetings, at Set-Times and
Places, to be known, open and free, both to them that are in Christian Society
with us, and others who are seeking after the Truth; and not to leave them in
uncertainties, as to Time and Place, when the Method is already settled as to
both, in God's Wisdom by his Light and Spirit, according to the primitive
Christians Practice, who professed and knew the same Light and Spirit of Inward
and Immediate Revelation as we profess.

Secondly, When the Lord has taught us our duty, and order of our Christian
Meetings and Society, for us to persevere in, we have our Law and Order therein
Established by our great Lawgiver, which to decline and reject, in pretense of
leaving every one to an Immediate Revelation, when and where to meet, or to run
up and down the Countries to gather every particular Meeting; this were to
tempt the Lord, and to slight his Law and Order already given and established
among us, under pretense of expecting a New Revelation for every Meeting, both
as to time and place; and what intolerable cumber and trouble would this create?

Thirdly, How, or where can this Gain-sayer prove, that ever the Primitive
Christians, who knew Immediate Revelation and Light within, did keep their
public Meetings, either for Worship, Order or Discipline, without any
sore-appointment, of fet-time or places? If they did not, then the said
argument and consequence reflects on them as well as on us.

Fourthly, To suppose the sufficiency of in ward Revelation to make all
Writings or Instructions whatsoever useless, is to render all Gospel-Preaching
and Instructions by Immediate Revelation useless and unnecessary, whether it be
to the Church or others: And therefore this Writer, R.G. his arguing thus
falaciously, to dissolve our Christian Meetings from their settlement as to
Times and Places, and to make the Gospel Ministry therein void; this is merely
idle, loose and licentious, only suiting the Irreligious, the Careless, the
loose Ranters and slavish Temporizers, who dare not stand nor appear for Truth
in persecuting times; and what then is become of his Spiritual Order he pleads
for? We cannot but observe the Man's Confusion and Contradiction, whilst
sometimes he pleads for Believers to be in the same mind and Judgment, to
observe the Scriptures, and the Spiritual Order and Christian Liberty
Established by the Appostles; and confesses that indeed Uniformity in a
Christian Society is much to be desired, page 3. 5. Yet in contradiction to all
this, he pleads for such a Latitude as that in several distinct Fellowships,
and differing in outward Practices, they ought to continue as one in the Lord,
Page 1. And for Church-Vnity, no Schism in the Body, Christians to be of one
mind in the Lord, Unity in Spirit, not in an Uniformity of outward Practices,
Page 4. And yet that indeed Uniformity in a Christian society is much to be
desired: Thus confused and contradictory saying and unsaying this Agent
appears; and while he contends so much for Charity, Love and Unity of Spirit,
etc. in distinct outward Practices, several distinct Fellowships, etc. He
miserably dissembles and plays the Hippocrite, whilst he is enviously smiting
against the Christian Society of the People called Quakers, because they differ
from him, and cannot allow themselves such a Liberty as his loose arguing (like
the Ranters) tends to, going on like them, telling of what ever outward
dispensation of Light God has once gloriously appeared in; the Life of God in
every outward Administration, is one and the same Administration, being but the
outward Garment that he chooses and refuses at his pleasure, gathering his
People out of various Administrations into himself, who is Love, however
distinguished from one another, who therefore cannot be tied to any one Form,
Page. 14. But pray where does he prove that either the dispensation of Light,
wherein God Gloriously appears, or the outward Administration wherein his
Life is, in the Gospel dispensation, is refused, or the Form of Godliness
rejected by the Lord, or his People in the Gospel Dispensation? This Person's
Work against us still tends to Ranterism, under pretense of Love and Union, not
distinguishing between the administration of the Law, and the Dispensation of
the Gospel; and though he does so greatly pretend to Love and Union of the whole
Israel of God, walking under various outward Practices, because of differing
Apprehensions, yet he is so far from either Love or Christian Charity, that he
shows neither toward the People called Quakers, whom in his Postscript he
bitterly Reproaches, telling of the Builders of Babylon, this Beast described,
Rev. 13. among the Quakers, comparing them to Sect Mrs Form-Builders, Proud and
Self-Righteous Pharisees of this People, etc. Thus the Serpent's sting and
venom appears in the Tail of his Work; thus he has vented his confusion and
envy, like a Babel Builder, against the Innocent whom the Lord stands by; one
while he is for Order, Government, Form and Uniformity in a Christian Society;
another while he is against it and them, who are steadfast in that Christian
Order and Form the Lord has gathered them into, and his Presence and Power
supports them therein, who are neither for making Rents, Schisms, nor Sect,
Masters, but testify against them, in the Name of their Lord and Master Christ
Jesus. And though this false Accuser has opposed the Imposition of Laws and
Orders upon Christians Consciences, without in ward Convincement, yet he
appears very defective and Partial, in that he has not given Testimony against
making Opposition and Parties against such Order and Church Government, as is
agreed upon by a Christian Society in the Truth; for it is such opposition,
causing Divisions and Seperations, which We, as a Christian Society can in no
ways own, nor Countenance, but Testify against in whomsoever that professing
the same Divine Light and Truth and Immediate Revelation as we do. And the Lord
Rebuke all our envious Opposers.

After this secret Smiter has thus dissorderly argued against Order, he gives
us this false and scornful Wipe, viz. This little Now Erected Popery, Page 8.
but no Demonstration, nor Manifest Proof thereof against us, other than what
himself has granted and assented to; nor has he proved the People (whom he
chiefly Smites at) justly chargable with Popery, or Raising old Arguments out
of the Rubbish of Popery to defend it. But thus Smits blindfold in the dark;
for we raise no Arguments, but what are warrantable by the Holy Scriptures of
the Old and New Testament.

I Having lately seen a Pamphlet, called, A History of the Rise, Growth, Reign,
Supports and sudden fatal foil of Popery, with a Description of its Six
Pillars: I looked for the Historiographer's Name, but find that concealed in
Darkness, he being conscious to himself it would not abide the Light and that
if his Name had been exposed, then his Folly and Rashness would have reflected
upon his Person: So he has left us to the old Rule, to know the Tree by the
Fruits.

The first thing he seems to reflect upon is Railing Accusations, which in
Words he highly explodes, and says, Its the duty of Christians to perform all
Offices of Good to their Country, with utmost Charity, etc. So that we might
expect a mighty sober and charitable account of things from this Man by his
beginning; but alas, the Man had not writ much before the Venom of his Spirit
appears against all sorts of People differing from his own Sentiments, and lays
about him like a Fury, calling one sort of People pernicious to Church and
State; Another sort Paganish, damnable Heretics, void of Conscience. And in
page 11. speaks his mind out at once, viz. That its the Magistrates duty to
punish all sorts of Dissenters, from the old Councils and Canons with the same
Punishment with which they punish Murderers and Adulterers, and not at all to
tolerate them.

By this time we see what is the ground of his Anger, that makes him busle
thus, the Anabaptists, Presbyterians, Independents and Quakers are not hanged a
days for being such; as Murderers are; but what sort of Man this is, may easily
be guest at, and upon Inquiry, we shall find him a Stone in the Building of the
sixth Pillar of Popery, viz. a Popish Churchman, retaining in him some of the
worst Dregs of Popery, viz. Cruel Persecutions unto Death; for all such as he
is pleased to brand with Heresy or Schism, which all Protestants look upon as
the avowed Principle of Papists; and so it seems it is his: And it was he, or
such Churchmen as he is, that were the Cause of such Cruelties and Barbarities
upon account of Religion here in England from the Years 1680. to 1686. In which
they set the Informers a work to Ruin many Hundred good Families in this
Kingdom, and filled the Goals with fourteen or fifteen Hundred Innocent
Prisoners, who suffered under their Cruelties as Trophies of the great Power
and Rule that the Popish Churchmen had in those days; I say, Popish
Churchmen, for the real or moderate Churchmen do generally excuse themselves
of that work, as much as they can, and do deny Persecution for Conscience Sake
to be any Principle of their Church, and do lay the Fault upon such bloody
Hunters and Drivers as this History-man, who while they seemed to be Members of
the Church of England, by their Cruelty and Feircness against Dissenters,
brought this Ignominy upon their Church, and put an oppertunity into the Hand
of a Popish King; when he came to ease the heavy Burdens which they had so
Cruelly laid on, and to put a stop to the Ruinous Practices of the wicked
Informers (which they had made the Pillars and Supporters of their Church) as a
Great Father of their Church being told, what a shame the Informers were to his
Church, said, That a Ship could not be built without some crooked Wood;
implying the Ravenous Informers as necessary to the uphold, or building the
Church, as crooked Wood to building a Ship) and thereby to Ingratiate himself
in the Hearts of the greatest part of the Kingdom, by the ease he gave them,
either from their Sufferings, as Dissenters, or from the Slavery and Drudgery
they lay under, as Officers in their respective Places, being all at the Call
and Command of those wicked Varlets, to Ruin their honest Neighbor, how, when,
and where they pleased to Require them.

Now after they had, I say, provided such a Means for the Popish King to
Ingratiate himself, and if possible, to sweeten the Minds of his Subjects into
a better Opinion of him and his Government, then they had conceived; he took
hold of the oppertunity given, and in a good measure emptied the Goals, stopped
the Informers Trade; caused some to be punished for their notorious Perjury;
others fled for it; and then he put out a Declaration, to stop such Cruel
Proceedings, till Remedy might be found for all People to have a legal right to
Worship God, as they were persuaded was most acceptable to him; as of right
they ought.

But when these poor Dissenters were thus delivered by a Popish King, from
their Protestant Fetters, then those (pretended) Pretestant Persecuters grew
exceeding angry, both with him, and with the Dissenters that he had set at
Liberty; and fain would they be at the Old Trade again if they could: But
because their Horns are shortened for goring that way, now they are trying other
ways to bring mischief upon us; and because he thinks the best way in these
Times to bring Suffering upon us, is to set us forth as Supporters of Popery,
and thinks thereby to raise up a Protestant Zeal against us; for it may be he
thinks others as much void of Sense, and as much subject to Blood and Enmity as
himself; for they must be very silly that will be kindled by his falacious way
of Argument into bitterness against us: For Example; He affirms the poor Quaker
to be one of the Pillars of Popery; but when we go to seek for demonstration;
why, they addressed King James: Ay, but what did they say? They returned their
Grateful Acknowledgements for the Ease and Freedom they Enjoyed, from their
Cruel Persecutions the Popish part of the Church of England had laid upon them;
and humbly desired he would go on to ease them from the Grievances and
Oppressions that still lay upon their tender Consciences.

Now let all Rational Men judge, whether this has any the least savor of
supporting Popery; might not as much have been said to the Grand Senior, if lie
had been Regnent here, without any just cause to impute Turkism to them? And
does not this bold daring Man at the same time, spit his Venom against all the
Gentlemen, pertaining to the several Inns of Court, and against most of the
Grand-Jury-Men, and Corporations, among whom I know there be better Protestants
than he is: but who is so bold as blind Bayard? And how much cause has this
man to Rage against us after this furious rate, to tell the World we are a
Pillar of Popery, Paganish, Men without any Conscience, damnable Heretics,
etc. page 22, 23. But in the Conclusion of that Paragraph (through
forgetfulness, or some other ill Accident) the man pulls down all this fiery
Pile about his own Ears, and tells us, That these Quakers would not Vote for
the New Members in London, for fear they might be Instrumental to bring in King
James again.

Can any Man that is in his Senses, think this History-maker was in his, when
he blundred out this Nonsense; which if put together reads thus, The Quakers
are one of the Pillars of Popery, for they would not Vote for the New Members,
for fear they should bring in King James again; and it is even as good Logic
to say, the Quakers are a Pillar of Popery, for they thankfully acknowledged a
Popish King's kindness, for delivering them from Cruel Prostants, Popish
Persecution.

But after all this, methinks I find more cause to suspect this Historiographer
to be himself really Guilty of what he would fasten upon others, namely
supporting and upholding Popery; for he is one that would in a hidden, sly way
Advance Popery; for he gives it such Magnitude in his History (which he
transmits to futer Ages) as I believe the most Arrogant Jesuit in France would
not have dared to do; For (mark) he has presented very near all the People of
England, save a piece of the Church of England, to be in the Interest of
upholding and supporting Popery; for if Anabaptists, Presbyterians, Quakers,
Independants, and part of the Church of England, be all concerned, (as he said)
how does he think a piece of the Church should grapple with the other piece;
and all the other Interests besides? So that it seems to me as if his business
or task were (whoever set him to work) to show the People of this and other
Nations, the Popish Interest in a Multiplying-Glass; That if they will not
love, yet they may at least fear it; and to make the Protestant Interest very
diminitive: This is not like one that wrote in King James' days, that there
were not Papists enough in England to make all the Coal-Fires in London at
once. But if this History-man be to be credited, the Popish Interest must be
looked upon very formidable still, for Five of his Six Pillars are still what
they were; and four of them are more firmly settled than they were then; by the
Act of King and Parliament for ease of tender Consciences, by which it appears
the Government and Wisdom of the Kingdom did not see with this man's Eyes; they
did not think it the best way to hang people for dissenting (in some points of
faith or worship) every Circuit and Assizes, as Murderers commonly are served.
And truly it is hard for a man of his evil temper to retain so much venom in
himself, but he must vent it against some body; and I perceive the Government
should have a snare of it if he durst; but cursed Cows have short Horns: He
reflects what he durst upon the Magistrate, page 11. for not doing their duty,
namely in not hanging up all that dissent from any of the Canons of the first
six, or at least four general Councils, as they do murderers. But if this man
would come into the Light, we might see him; I am persuaded it would be easy
to prove him a dissenter from several of the Canons of these very Councils; but
I would not have him hanged for it, but live and learn to be wiser, and
honester, and to repent him of his Rashness, and learn to love his Neighbors,
and not thus Cain-like, to grudge the Rain and Sunshine to men of better
Principles than himself, and perhaps (when we know him) they will outdo him in
Practice and Conversation also. However, I mean to leave him at present, with
the Exhortation of an Unerring Teacher, Whatsoever you would that Men should do
unto you, do ye unto them; and then he will write no more Books, to procure his
Neighbors to be hanged for Conscience Sake, till he is willing to be Hanged
himself upon the same score.

THE END.

