The Contemned QUAKER, AND HIS Christian Religion, DEFENDED, Against Envy and
Forgery, In Answer to two Abusive Invective PAMPHLETS, The One styled,
Antichrist in Spirit Unmasked; The Other, Railings and Slanders Detected,
Promoted by some Persons, commonly called Anabaptists, at Deptford in Kent, who
have unwarily begun the Contest.

Jer. 48.30. His lies shall not so effect it

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Northcott, in George-yard in Lombard Street. 1692.

THE CONTEMNED QUAKER, AND HIS Christian Religion defended.
WHereas in a small Treatise, entitled, Antichrist in Flesh unmasked, and the
Quakers Christianity vindicated, from the Malicious and Injurious Attempts of
Edward Pay, William Alcott and Henry Loader,

in their late Defaming, Confused Book, falsely styled, Antichrist in Spirit
Unmasked. I did near the Conclusion of the said Treatise seriously enquire only
of William Alcott and Henry Loader, in these four Questions following, viz.

I. Was Edward Pay Deputed and approved by your Congregation, or any Select
Assembly of Elders or Mininisters of the Baptized People or Churches, to Write
and Publish his said Book against the People called Quakers, or did he do it on
his own Authority and Head, with your Approbation only?

II. What Ministers or Elders of your Churches, besides your selves, did peruse
and approve of Edward Paye's said Book, before printed, and of the Printing
thereof, to Defame us as a People?

III. Is the said Edward Pay, indeed esteemed among you and your Society a
good Christian, a Person of a Godly and Sober Conversation, of Sound Judgment,
Piety and Parts, meet to manage Matters of Controversy about Religion?

IV. Do you intend to stand by him the said Edward Pay in all Matters that he
has written, in Charge, both against certain Persons and against the People
called Quakers, in his Book?

Having also given my Reasons for these Questions in the said Treatise,
Antichrist in Flesh, p. 26. Now let it be observed, that to these Questions I
find no answer from the said William Allcot or Henry Loader, to whom they were
put; but a pretended and evasive Answer from Edward Pay himself, having only
his own Name subscribed a few Lines after, but no William Allcot nor Henry
Loader subscribed thereto, but Edward Pay left to shift for himself, and they
slunk back, for all they highly commended his Work and defamed us in their
Commendatory Epistle to his other Pamphlet ( i. e. Antichrist in Spirit)
against us. And yet as if he had a Plurality of Advocates to answer for him, he
gives us his slim Answer in the Plural thus, viz. We will give an answer to G.
W's impertinent Questions, though I think they are not worth taking notice of:
His Questions are four, but his Reasons for asking them vanish in answering the
first. -- And in the pretended Answer it is said, E. P. did Write and Publish
his Book by the Approbation of the majority of this Congregation; and so he did
not do it on his own Head; neither did we see it needful to desire the
Approbation of others herein, though several have approved of it since, p. 37,
38. But what We are these give this Answer besides Edward Pay? we find no
Body's Name else to it but his own: If by [ WE will give an Answer; neither did
we see it needful to desire the Approbation of others] be meant William Allcot
and Henry Loader; why did they not put their Names to it? Why do they now
shrink back and decline their Brother in his Work, seeing the Enquiry was so
fairly made of them? Can they or Edward Pay either reasonably suppose, that we
(as a People defamed and injured by E. P.) will accept of his own Answer or
Justification of his perverse Work, and himself too, and believe that he says
true, in saying, That he did Write and Publish his said Book by the Approbation
of the majority of their Congregation at Deptford? For my Part I do not believe
him herein; in Point of Charity I do not suppose the majority of the
Congregation or Hearers of the Baptists at Deptford are so grossly corrupted
and deluded into Envy and Prejudice as really to believe and approve of such a
Bundle of Malicious and Numerous Slanders, Forgeries, Notorious Lies,
Perversions and Abuses as are contained and apparent in the said Pamphlet,
styled, Antichrist in Spirit, by Edward Pay (and many of them repeated in his
second) and highly approved by William Allcott and Henry Loader: But if either
the majority or minority of their Congregation have given their Approbation for
the Writing and Publication thereof (as is pretended) I and others of us should
be very sorry for their sakes, that they should be so miserably deluded, as not
only to believe, but approve of the Publication of such gross Slanders and
Defamations against their Innocent Neighbors, as are contained in the said
Pamphlet: And that they should be so implicit and blindly credulous of such
gross and notorious Falsehoods and Reproaches, invented by envious Persons and
Persecutors. And you E. P. W. A. and H. L. who have so far deluded any of your
Hearers, have much to answer for, and a sad account to give, before the
Righteous Judge of all.

But now, seeing the Writing and Publication of E. P's said Envious Pamphlet (
i. e. Antichrist in Spirit) is at last so far dedicated to the majority of the
Baptist's Congregation at Deptford, as having their Approbation, it may not be
unseasonable to show them and others some of Edward Paye's and William Allcot's
notorious Falsehoods, Slanders and Perversions contained therein; and in his
last Pamphlet also, styled, Railings and Slanders, etc. which I shall here
recite in their own Words, as in Charge against them and all that approve or
publish them, to their Shame and Disgrace.

Charg 1.
The Holy Scriptures this Generation of Men (i. e. the Quakers) contemn and
vilify (Commendatory Epistle, by William Allcott and Henry Loader to
Antichrist in Spirit;) and that the Quakers are great Enemies to and Contemners
of Holy Scriptures, p. 20.

Answer.
This is their General (and a most odious) Charge, which in our very Souls and
Consciences, in the Sight of God, we the said People do utterly deny with
Detestation; and I find that all their pretended Proofs do fail of any real
Proof of the Matter charged, the chief whereof being hereafter examined more
particularly.

That the Quakers prefer their Lying Pamphlets above the Scriptures, p. 9.
Their pretended Proof is, That G. W. affirms, That which is spoken from the
Spirit of Truth in any, is of as great Authority as the Scripture, and greater,
p. 11. quoting Apology, p. 49.

Answ.
In which Apology no Pamphlets at all are preferred above the Scriptures, but
the immediate Living Ministry of the Holy Spirit within above the Letter, the
Divine Inspiration which was before the Scriptures were written, for they
proceeded from it. I am very unfairly and unjustly dealt with in this Charge;
my Intentions and Words perverted, after the Word [ Scriptures] in mine, [ or
Chapters] are here left out; and after the Word Greater all these following are
left out, viz. [as received and proceeding immediately from that Spirit, and
spoken in the Sense thereof; as Christ's Words were of greater Authority (or
Power) when he spoke, than the Pharisees reading the Letter; and them in whom
that Spirit speaks not, and their Speaking we deny;] whereby I did prefer the
Spirit in it is Living and Powerful Ministry above the Letter, but not a Word of
preferring any Pamphlets to the Holy Scriptures: God knows, it never entered
into my Heart to prefer any Pamphlets or Books, extant in the World, (much less
Lying Ones) before the Holy Scriptures of the Old and New Testament, but do
prefer and esteem them before all other Books or Writings extant, whatsoever.

When Humphry Smith 's True and Everlasting Rule came in date, the Scriptures
became no better than an Old Almanac. [this from a Story of Tho. Hicks against
one Tho. Holbrow (though we know no such Person) Dialogue, p. 27. to which
Edward Pay, etc. adds these Words, viz.] These are the Men that in their
Pamphlets profess so high an Esteem for the Holy Scriptures, Antichrist in
Spirit, p. 13.

Observe.
Pray observe here, These Men, here accused ( with esteeming the Scriptures no
better than an Old Almanac) are therein most wickedly belied and scandalized,
being those of us who published the Paper in Print, entitled, The Christianity
of the People commonly called Quakers asserted, wherein we sincerely declare
(the quite contrary to what is here implicitly charged by E. P. etc. against
us,) namely, That we do believe and own the Holy Scriptures, contained in the
Books of the Old and New Testament to be given by Divine Inspiration, etc.

Tho. Hicks in his Dialogue I. p. 24, 25. and Edward Pay, etc. (on his Credit)
Falsely and Wickedly Personate the Quaker thus, viz. When we make use of
Scripture, it is only to Quiet and Stop their Clamours that plead for it as
their Rule; but for us had the Scriptures never been we could have known what
Where proves he these to be the Quakers words? from which he himself varies, p.
11. viz. That all things necessary may be taught without them, and what less
have Baptists heretofore confessed, by approving Samuel How Is Sermon for The
Sufficiency of the Spirit's Teaching? printed 1655.
is therein contained. I hope (quoth Edward Pay) the Reader by this may
perceive the Reason why the Quakers talk so much of Scripture in their Paper.
Observe, we own not the Scripture, we seemingly allow it, but our End in this
is only to stop their Clamours that plead for it as their Rule. You see here
(quoth E. P.) the condescending Spirits of these Men, etc. Antichrist, p. 15.

We do in the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ utterly deny this Passage and
Declaration, as laid down in the Quakers Name and Person, as no Declaration or
Speech made or thus declarable by the Quakers, on their Principle, but a Horrid
Abusive Forgery of Thomas Hicks, long since detected, and which you Baptists
now may be horribly ashamed to bring forth, or suffer to be renewed in Print.

The Names they (i. e. the Quakers) give the Holy Scriptures, viz. No better
than an Old Almanac, A Gross Lie.
a Dead Carnal Letter, p. 18.

Answ.
But on second Consideration, E. P. deems it a difficulty to prove that the
Quakers do now in the present Tense say, The Holy Scriptures are but a Dead or
Carnal Letter, as his other Pamphlet- Raylings, p. 23, 24. and yet charge
them in the present Tense, with giving such Names to the Holy Scriptures; but
now it is a Difficulty to prove his own Charge.

E. P. falsely charge the Quakers to give the Holy Scriptures, viz. That they
are the Precepts and Traditions of Men, p. 18. That Obedience to the Scriptures
is the Harlot's Child, p. ibid.

These are both utterly denied by us the said People, Answ.
and the pretended Proof of the first is hereafter examined and proved false.
The latter I really believe could never be so said, nor ever was held by the
Quakers, so to term sincere Obedience to the Holy Scripture, but rather to
reflect upon an Hypocritical Profession, and Imitation of some Shadows and
outwardward Things, and neglecting the Substance of the New Covenant
Dispensation.

That the Heaven, they (i. e. the Quakers) intend (wherein the three Divine
Witnesses bear Record) is No where else but within their Mortal Corrupt Bodies;
they intend no other Heaven than what is within them, Antichrist in Spirit, p.
20, 21.

This is expressly contrary to our known professed Principle of the
omnipresence of God and his Spirit, Answ.
both in Heaven above and in Earth beneath, and whom the Heaven of Heavens
cannot contain.

And I take the Charge to be but E.P's own Consequence, which he himself has
drrawn from some Words he has partially and mincingly taken up against James
Parnell, Thomas Lawson, Edward Buroughs, etc.

First, For a Pretext, quoting James Parnell's Book (as he calls it) Satan's
Design Discovered.

But I know no Bok of James Parnell's so entitled upon the Reviewing the
Titles of his Books, nor any of the rest quoted, that oppose or disown God's
Omnipresence; much less that the People called Quakers are guilty of any such
Charge.

I would desire E. P. if he will still be so injurious as to reassume this
Charge against the People called Quakers, that he would yet be so ingenious as
fairly and fully to cite the whole Passages of the Authors quoted by him,
relating to the Matter intended, and for Proof of his Charge, without his own
Consequences and Perversions. That if it shall appear that any of them have
opposed or denied the Omnipresence of God or his Eternal Spirit, we may show
our dislike thereof.

But, I believe, there is enough in our Friends Books to clear them, if honestly
viewed and cited, and we have great cause to Question, and detect his unfair
Citations, as I have this following Instance against my self; for Proof of his
said Charge 8. Quoting Dipper plunged; Christ without us is not Scripture
Language, but the Anthropomorphites and Muggletonians, Antichrist in Spirit, p.
22.

Observe.
But E. P. in his other Pamphlet, Railings, p. 29. varies in his Repetition of
his Charge thus, viz. G. W. Dipper plunged -- Jesus Christ a Person without us
is not Scripture Language, etc. Observe here, in the one it is Christ without
us (where after (Christ) E. P. leaves out [ God-Man, a Person] i. e. without
us, which, I said, is not Scripture Language, etc. In the other it is Jesus
Christ, a Person without us, is not Scriture-Language; where after [ Christ] he
leaves out God-man again, and yet both charged by the same Credulous Person E.
P. though both be falsely cited and unjustly charged upon me as mine.

For to Tho. Hick's strange Phrase, viz. Jesus Christ God-man, a Person without
thee, Dial. p. 9. My Answer was, This is not Scripture Language, but the
Anthropomorphites and Muggletonians who profess a personal God, denying him to
be an Infinite Spirit; Dipper plunged, p, 13.

Wherein my Objection was not against the Words Jesus Christ without us, for he
is both without us and within us, but my Question was of the Words [ God-man, a
Person without us] including God as well as the Man Christ Jesus, as being but
a Person without us, which may be ascribed to any Man or Woman that is but a
finite mortal Creature; which as it was not Scripture Language, I did esteem it
too low and mean an Epethite to ascribe to an Infinite and omnipresent God; but
does this deny either God or Christ to be in Heaven above, or confine God only
in the Hearts of his People? No sure, and I was very Conscientious and Tender
of the Glory and Dignity of God and Christ therein, as thinking T. Hicks and
his Brethren would never preach People into the Knowledge of the true God or
Jesus Christ, by telling them, That God and his dear Son Christ Jesus, is a
Person without them; howbeit I am not so pertinacious in my Objection, but if
they will bring me Plain Scripture, that calls the Infinite God a Person without
them, let it be in any true Translation of Holy Scripture, and I Will acquiesce,
for I am not willing to be under any Mistake, Heb. 1.3. (...) Figura
substantiae ejus, Figure of his Substance; it is not Image of his Person, nor
the same with (...), in conspectu Christi, as some have it, others in persona
Christi, 2 Cor. 2.9. which proves not the Phrase [ God-Man a Person without
thee] to be a Scripture Phrase.

G. F. said, He that has not this Christ (that was Risen and Crucified)
within, is a Reprobate; Great Mystery, f. 206.

Here E. P. leaves out the Words [ Risen and] and proceeds, viz. I think here
is a barefaced Piece of Blasphemy and downright denying the Lord Christ. What
was that the False Christ that dyed at Jerusalem, without the Gates of
Jerusalem? Ay This is a gross Forgery.
, says George Fox, if there be any other Christ than he that was Crucified
within he is the False Christ; p. 28. quoting G.F. his Mystery, p. 206. And
then E. P. Falsely and Absurdly Discants upon the Words Crucified within;
whereby he says is meant, within that Man, the Son of Mary, not the Man that
was Crucified was Christ, p. 28.

None, but one blinded with Envy, Observe.
would ever have thus Charged G. F. or the Quakers with such horrible falsehoods
and Forgery; G. F. gives no such Answer, as Ay to the Question. Before, he owns
no other Christ than him that was Crucified and Dyed at Jerusalem, and the same
Christ to be within, as the Apostles did. G. Fox's own Words clear him herein,
even in the very Book and Page cited by E. P. viz. Great Mystery, p. 206. where
G. F. says, If Christ that was Crucified be not within, and Christ that is
Risen be not within, I say that you all are Reprobates: And this is not
opposite to Jesus Christ without, that Dyed at Jerusalem, but the SAME. And the
Apostles Preached Christ (that was Crucified) within, and not another, him that
was Raised from the Dead, was Risen; that Lord Jesus Christ within; it was HE
that was manifest IN the Saints, that was and is, and not another, etc.

Now let all Impartial Readers Judge how clear G. F. and we are from the
Blasphemies before-charged, as both that of denying the Lord Christ, or
esteeming him the false Christ that Dyed at Jerusalem. Oh! Edward Pay, William
Allcott and Henry Loader, and those of your Congregation, who approved of your
said Pamphlet, containing such Horrid Abominable Lies, Perversions, Slanders
and Forgeries, as these against G. F. and us: Be ye all horribly ashamed
thereof and repent, before it be too late. Your following Charge, deduced from
the foregoing, is of the same kind, and as wickedly False and Pernicious, viz.

Christ that was Born of the Virgin, was Crucified upon the Cross without the
Gates of Jerusalem, that was in all Points tempted like as we are, yet without
Sin. This they (i. e. the Quakers) will not allow to be the True Christ or
God's Christ (which is a most horrid Lie, elsewhere detected). Is not this a
plain denying of the Lord that bought them, Antichrist in Spirit, p. 28, 29.

See also Mr. Penn's Sandy Foundation, To say God should Condemn and Punish his
Innocent Son, that he having satisfied for our Sins, we may be justified by the
Imputation of his perfect Righteousness, p. 40.

Here E. P. after [ Justified] thou have left out [ whilst unsanctified] and so
have wickedly perverted and altered the Sense of his Words, Observe.
and belyed us and him shamefully in what follows.

Why should the Quakers be such Grand Christ) dyed for your Sins, and rose
again for your Justification; when, ibid. p. 16. Mr. Penn says, That the
Consequences of SUCH a Doctrine are both Irreligious and Irrational; and why
should they believe Justification by Christ's Righteousness, p. 40, 41.

This Charge appears as notoriously false in Fact as any of the Rest. Answ.
I have strictly perused the Places quoted in W. P's Sandy Foundation, p. 16,
etc. And I find no such Thing, as the Doctrine of Christ's Dying for our Sins
and Rising again for our Justification, charged with Consequences either
Irreligious or Irrational: But the Doctrine, That God inflicted the Penalty of
Infinite Wrath and Vengeance on his dear Son Jesus Christ and that for Sins
past, present and to come, he has wholly born, and paid it, to satisfy the
offended infinite Justice, etc. ibid. p. 16. 'Twas the Consequences of this
Doctrine, and also that of the Justification of the Wicked or Impure Persons,
before Sanctification, That W. P. deemed Irreligious and Irrational, ibid. p.
16, 22, 24, to 31. And dare E. P. or his Associates own and stand by these
Doctrines (as Religious and Rational) which W. P. opposed? Though Christ Dyed
for all Men, suffered for the Sins of the whole World, it was not under the
Penalty of his Father's Infinite Wrath and Vengeance, but as a Sacrifice of a
sweet smelling Savor to God: He Rose again for our Justification, but not to
Justify us in Sin, or without True Faith and Real Sanctification by his Spirit
in us.

Why should the Quakers be Angry, as they have been, for calling G. F. the King
of the Quakers, since he is as really so on their Account, as Christ is the
King of Christians, p. 45.

We do in our Consciences Testify against this Charge, Answ.
as a great and false Scandal upon us, the People called Quakers, Jesus Christ
being our King and Lawgiver; G. F. was never so accounted by us, but a Servant
of Christ, and true Subject in Christ's Kingdom, and Instrumental for the Good
of many in his Day and Time.

But read p. 6, 7. Saul 's Errand to And George Fox takes the Name to himself,
saying, He is the Eternal Judge of Quick and Dead, p. 46.

This False Charge is again recited by E. P. in his other Pamphlet Raylings,
Answ.
p. 35. and a Defense thereof, therein attempted by him, but to no purpose, for
as was told him, it is notoriously False in Fact: And instead of proving the
Charge, That G. F. takes the Name to himself, he alleges, That G. F. is so
charged in the Lancaster Petition, G. F. is so charged with taking to himself
the Name of the Eternal Judge of Quick and Dead. Though here E. P. misses
again. He is there charged, That he professes himself to be the Eternal Judge
of the World. And who did so charge him? But his Persecuting Adversaries in
Lancashire, whose Charge he denies in the very Title of his Answer thereunto
(as well as in the Matter) viz. The Answer of George Fox to the Matters falsely
charged upon him by the Petition and Scedule aforesaid.

Now, Edward Pay, may thou not be ashamed to make that thy positive Charge,
to Defame a Person, which thou have but upon Trust from his Adversaries,
without taking notice of his Defense? Was this Justice, or any Judicial Course
of Passing Judgment before both Parties are heard, think thou? It seems thou
art as Censorious as Credulous to defame others. And how know thou the
Lancaster Petitioners were Men of Credit and Repute, that thou should have
more Reason to believe the Affirmative of so many, than G. F 's Negative? And
why wast thou so positive in thy Charge, as if thou had spoken ex certa
scientia, when now thou art put to it to plead the Credit of thy Authors, and
for the Reason of thy Belief of their Defamation? Now, who can think (say
thou) that such a Number of Men should agree together in Charging G. Fox with a
Falsehood? Although it is well known that it is no New nor strange Thing for
False Witnesses to arise and join together against the Innocent, as they did
against the Prophets, against Christ and his Servants; See Psalm. 27.12. Matt.
26.60. Act. 6.13. And we have sufficient Instance thereof at Hand. How apparent
is it that Edward Pay, and his Brother William Alcott, etc. (and those that
have approved of the Writing and Publication of E. P's Malicious Book, styled,
Antichrist in Spirit) have agreed together, as False Witnesses against us, in
their manifold, notorious and gross Falsehoods, to Defame the People called
Quakers?

That the Quakers do not own the Kingly Office of Christ, that Dyed at
Jerusalem, no more, no nor so much neither, as the Kingly Office of G. Fox,
page 47, 48.

We utterly deny this Charge, as contrary to our very Intentions and professed
Principle. Answ.
The Matter is farther examined hereafter.

That they deny the Place where Christ our Highpriest is entered, which is the
Heavens, The Quakers deny Christ to be entered into the Glorious Heavens above,
p. 49.

This is a notorious Falsehood, detected elsewhere. Answ.


They deny the Blood of the Sacrifice Christ, our High Priest, offered upon the
Cross, and scornful Contempt they have cast upon it, p. 50.

Answ.
The Lord, who knows the contrary, rebuke this Envious Lying Spirit. How can
they deny the Blood, when they have owned it to be a principal Part of that
Sacrifice offered for an Atonement?

The Quakers cannot believe the Priestly or Mediatory Office of Christ, because
they have no need of a Mediator. If they are Perfect, etc. what need have they
of the Mediatory Office of Christ? p. 51.

Answ.
This Charge is falsely deduced, for our sincerely believing a Perfection
(without Sin) attainable by the Power of Christ in this Life; this cannot
oppose Christ's Mediatory Office. 1. Because it is by him that we attain unto
that Perfection. 2. It Is by him that we must be kept in it. 3. It is through
him that we enjoy Life, Union and Peace with God, and receive all our Spiritual
Blessings In Christ Jesus.

See Parnel 's Shield of Truth, p. 12. where he calls Water Baptism a Formal
imitation and Invention of Men, and so a mere Delusion, p. 59.

No; Answ.
He does not call Water Baptism so, but sprinkling Infants; for in the Place
cited he says, I received Water upon my Face, as my Parents, told me, which
they called Baptism: So that J. P. does not call it Baptism; no more did the
Baptists heretofore.

Smith's Primmer, p. 39. Thy Baptism, p. 59. Again, the Charge is made far
worse in E. P's recital of it, viz. Thy Bread and Wine in the Lord's Supper are
the Pope's Invention. See how barefacedly they can lie against the Truth, p. 71.

I find William Smith wronged in both these Charges, and that very grossly,
Answ.
in being charged for writing, That Bread and Wine in the Lord's Supper are the
Pope's Invention. This is a notorious Forgery, for what William Smith renders
the Pope's Invention, was, Sprinkling Water in a Child's Face, making the Sign
of the Cross in it is Forehead, Godfathers and Godmothers to undertake for it:
Bread and Wine, so used and received ( i.e. by a Sort of Priests and People) as
the Body and Blood of Christ, which they tell them is Broken and shed for them,
and did not these rise from the Pope's Invention, trow ye?

Christ's Merits and Work, for the Salvation of Man, our Envious Adversaries
endeavor to fasten some strange Inconsistencies upon us, or Absurdities (as I
may call them,) as perversely Stated and Construed by them, quite contrary to
our said Profession, and to insinuate that our Belief of Redemption and
Salvation by Christ, is neither Redemption of Body nor Soul, but only of a lost
God and Christ, p. 41, 42. which are very Foul and Notorious Perversions and
Falsehoods. One Instance E.P. gives, is against G.F. about the Soul, that it is
part of God without Beginning or End, and then it needs no Redemption, for God
did not send his Son to Redeem himself, p. 41. This gross Perversion was Thomas
Hicks's, and now taken upon Credit by these too credulous Anabaptists, E. P. W.
A. etc. But did G. F. say, That the Soul of the Creature Man was part of God,
or of his being without Beginning or End? No sure, but that Divine Breath or
Spirit which God Breathed into Man, whereby Man became a Living Soul: Wherein
is a plain Distinction between that Divine Breath or Spirit of God and the
Creature Man, or his created Soul; as may be seen more at large in G. F's Great
Mystery, quoted, where he speaks of the Soul of Man being in Death in
Transgression, so Man's Spirit there not Sanctified, (and declares Christ the
Bishop of the Soul; Great Mystery, p. 91.) which therefore needs Redemption by
Christ, which cannot be said of God or Christ himself, that he Needs or Wants
Redemption; what Gross and Silly Nonsense would that be to affirm?

These Adversaries may be ashamed of such gross Perversion and Abuse, as their
thus rendering the Quakers, to confound the Being of the Creator and the
Creature, as if they were one and the same Being.

Another Instance is against G. Keith, Speaking of Christ, That he came lost
God, a lost Christ, and then E. P. etc. cries out of G. K's being Inspired by
the Prince of Darkness, to talk of a lost God and a lost Christ, to be Sought
and Saved, p. 42.

Answ.
Oh horrid and abominable Falsifying and Perversion! See G. K's own Answer and
Detection to Tho. Hicks, in this very Matter, entitled, George Keith 's
Vindication from the Forgeries and Abuses of Thomas Hicks, showing, that when
he speaks of a lost God, and a lost Christ; he says, whom they (i. e. People)
had lost, and from whom they were separated by their Sins: And this Hicks and
his Brother E. P. take no Notice of, in their Citation or False Inferences,
much less of G. K's Vindication, p. 8, 9. viz. The Plain and Open Sense of my
Words is this, That as Jesus Christ came to Seek and Save the lost Souls of
Men, and to Raise up and Recover the Image of God in Men again, so all the true
Ministers of Christ Preached People to God and Christ, near them, whom though
Men had lost, yet were near unto them, to save them, and to bring them into the
enjoyment of him, and Fellowship with him.

James Naylor's Love to the Lost, falsely quoting p. 30, 47, 48. citing him
thus, viz. That there is a Seed, to which the Promise of Redemption is; which
Seed is that which ONLY wants Redemption, and that Christ is the Elect Seed:
And then draws this Consequence from a false Position, That Christ came to
Redeem Christ.

We do not find the Citation true, Answ.
no more than we own the Position; we find not that his Words are, That this
Seed Christ ONLY wants Redemption; but WHEREIN only Redemption is seen and
received, namely, That in the promised Seed Redemption is only to be seen and
received by Man, or the Creature that wants it.

Now I find a Distinction in J. N's. Writing of the Seed, as between the Seed
Christ, who is the Redeemer, and the Seed of Abraham ( i. e. Believers) whom
Christ Redeems; the Children of the Kingdom, the Children of the Promise are
counted for the Seed. And this Distinction appears in J. N's own Words
following: That it is the Seed of Israel whom Christ redeems (as J. N. says,
and tells man) no further art thou Redeemed by Christ Jesus. And that Salvation
IN the Seed is placed; and the Heritage of Faith is the Seed that is Redeemed,
which all who know Redemption by the precious Blood of Christ are redeemed from
the vain Conversation; for this End he gave himself for us, to redeem us from
ALL Iniquity; (thus far J.N. Love to the Lost) p. 59, 60, 61, 62. concerning
Redemption, but no such Words, as that the Seed, which is Christ ONLY wants
Redemption.

Is it not a great Shame and Reproach to Religion, that any Preachers should be
so Credulous and Envious as to receive such downright Lies and gross
Perversions, to Reproach their quiet Neighbors, and thus confidently to Expose
them to the World, as these Anabaptist Preachers have done; and thereupon to
roar out and cry, Blasphemous Absurdities, Gross Contradictions to Truth? p.
43. When such Absurdities and Gross Contradictions are their own Malicious
Forgeries against us, Fomented and Exposed by Thomas Hicks (and on Trust from
him) by Edward Pay, Henry Loader, and William Allcott.

Whereas Christ has all Power in Heaven and Earth given him, and he is our
Savior and Redeemer, and as he had Power to lay down his Life and take it up
again, so his own Seed of Life, Word or Plant in the Soul (though for a Time
under Suffering and the Load of Man's Iniquity) he has Power to Raise it up,
and therein to bring forth an Immortal Birth and Holy Generation, which is his
Seed, whom he shall see as the Fruit of his Soul's Travel. Such his
Condescension and Humiliation under Suffering, both inwardly and outwardly
argues no Deficiency nor Impotency in Christ himself, who is the very entire
Christ of God, in whom all Fullness dwells, and who received the Spirit not by
Measure; but 'twas his own free Love, and Act of pure Condescension and
Humility, to descend into the Heart of Man, to Redeem and Raise up Man, his
Soul and Spirit out of his Fallen and Captivated Estate, and from under the
Bondage of Corruption, who in that State ONLY wants Redemption, and not Christ;
for how much soever he Suffers, or is Spiritually pierced or grieved by Men's
Iniquities, he can take unto him his great Power when he pleases, and ease
himself of his Enemies, and his own Arm can bring Salvation to him.

We never Entertained or Believed any such Doctrine as these Adversaries
enviously and falsely insinuate, as that the Seed Christ ONLY wants Redemption;
for so to render him Impotent, were to oppose his All-sufficient Power and
Dignity, but that it is the Soul of Fallen Man and Woman, that wants Redemption,
and not Christ, who is the Redeemer and Savior of it; this does plainly appear
to be our Belief, from our Apprehension of the Nature and Being of the Soul of
Man as a Creature, and not the Creator, viz. That the Soul of the Creature Man
is not God nor Christ, But the Spiritual Being and Principal Part of Man,
Created in the Image of God, and Divinely Inspired and Enlightened by its
Creator and Redeemer, who formed the Spirit (or Soul) of Man within him; for
the Soul or Spirit of Man, as distinguished from the Body, is often in Scriture
rendered one and the same thing, more livingly perceived and felt in that Divine
Light and Life of Christ, whereby our Souls live to God, than by any
Philosophical or School Definitions.

Edward Paye's Second Pamphlet, styled, Raylings and Slanders Detected,
Examined.
WHereas in my late Brief Treatise, entitled, Antichrist in Flesh unmasked, I
did complain against the Envy and Persecuting Spirit of Edward Pay and his
Abettors, William Allcott and Henry Loader, as appearing Envious against our
present Liberty; 1. By seeking to make void one Condition thereof, which was
our Profession of Faith, In the three Divine Witnesses in Heaven, etc.
(according to 1 John 5.7) and acknowledging the Holy Scriptures of the Old and
New Testament to be given by Divine Inspiration; being sincerely owned by us
before the Parliament (when proposed to us, and accordingly accepted, and more
fully inserted in the Statute for Exempting their Majesty's Protestant
Subjects, dissenting, etc. from the Penalties of certain Laws) and therein
confessed to be a Profession of their Christian Belief.

2. That in Contradiction thereunto these Persons aforesaid have grossly Belied
and Misrepresented us, the People called Quakers, accusing us with vilifying
and contemning the Holy Scriptures; and with saying, We own not the Scriptures,
but seemingly allow them; and that the Quakers are great Enemies to, and
contemners of Holy Scriptures, Epist. and p. 14. and 20. of their first Pamph.
Antichrist in Spirit; both contrary to our Sincere and Christian Profession,
and to the Civil Governments Belief and Acceptance thereof, thereby
contradicting, and consequently affronting the Government in its Belief and
Charity toward us, and to set Subjects at Variance, and to raise Persecution
against us again, instead of being humbly thankful for their and our present
Liberties. The very Nature and Tendency of these their Bitter Lying Invectives
being to bring Persecution upon us, as a People not to be given any Credit
unto, in our Solemn Profession before Authority.

3. When we have solemnly and sincerely declared to the Government, That we
believe the Holy Scriptures of the Old and New Testament are given by Divine
Inspiration, two or three Anabaptists (so called) divulge the contrary to the
World in Print, etc.

Unto which E. P. replies, viz. to all which I answer: 1. We did not know till
our Book was published, that you had professed this as your Faith before the
Parliament.

The more Shame for you, to be so precipitant in your Unjust and Censorious
Attempts to the Contrary; your Ignorance herein will not excuse your Rashness,
much less your Falsehood, in charging us as a People ( i. e. the Quakers in
general) with being great Enemies to, Vilifyers and Contemners of the Holy
Scriptures, and now their chief Guides (as E. P. terms them) and our former
Writings, directly to oppose and evidently to contradict this Confession of
Faith, p. 3, 4. which is, our believing the Holy Scriptures of the Old and New
Testament to be given by Divine Inspiration.

Now I challenge E. Pay and his Abettors, W. Allcot and H. L.

1. To produce plain Proof, That the People called Quakers do Vilify the Holy
Scriptures: This is Matter of Fact charged, What Vilifying Terms or Characters
has that People put upon the Holy Scriptures? We do in good Conscience still
deny the Charge.

2. What Expressions of Contempt has that People put upon the Holy Scriptures,
it being contrary to our Consciences and Intentions, either to Contemn or
Vilify them? The Matter of Fact charged ought directly to be proved against
us, as a People, or else retracted, and for ever condemned.

3. What former Writings of ours, or our Ministers, do directly Oppose and
Contradict this our Profession, That we believe the Holy Scriptures of the Old
and New Testament were given by Divine Inspiration? Where do we the said People
or our Ministers declare, That the Holy Scriptures were not given by Divine
Inspiration, or only given by Human Tradition? We demand plain Proof of the
Indictment or Matters herein charged against us, and by us denied.

E. P. proceeds, viz. 2. We must the more admire your Presumptuous Confidence
herein, that you should so affront the Government, except you had at the same
Time renounced your former Writings, that so evidently contradict it, p. 3, 4.

Both which are still to prove, being sincerely denied by us. Our Confidence in
what we professed to the Government, was from an honest and good Confidence in
the Truth of what we professed, and not to affront, but to answer and satisfy
the Government, in what was required of us as Christians, and under a Christian
Profession, and therein to be allowed our just Liberties, both as Men and
Christians (as the Parliament then desired we might approve our selves); which
Christian Reputation you seek to deprive us of, and, like Persecuting
Incendiaries, falsely charge us with affronting the Government in our
Profession, which (God knows) was both Sincere and Christian, both with respect
to the Eternal Deity, and the Holy Scriptures.

E. P. Which way could the Quakers expect to escape being defamed or
discredited? Why, it is like they did suppose, That the Honorable Assembly of
Parliament had Matters of greater Moment, in Hand, than to compare their former
Writings with their new Faith: So that if we had not concerned our selves to
peep into their Writings, and compare them with their newly-professed Faith,
and published this to the World, namely, That the Quakers former Writings and
their late Profession of Faith, are as really alike as an Apple to an Oyster,
and agree as directly as Light and Darkness, it had not been known, p. 7. Thus
far E. P.

It Is very rare to find such a Piece of Presumptuous, Proud and Fallacious
Insinuation as this, implying not only, that we dissembled a Profession of our
Belief, in Words, before the Parliament, as directly contrary to our former
Writing as Light is to Darkness; but that the Parliament was drawn into a
Mistake (or deceived) concerning us, by such Dissimulation: Wherefore to
undeceive them and the World concerning us, these Adversaries (to make
themselves wiser than the whole Parliament, and every Member thereof) have
peeped into our former Writings, to find out Matter to Defame and Discredit us
in our Christian Profession, before the Parliament. Herein they have acted like
Peepers in the Dark; but they have peeped to little purpose, for a Dark Lying
Spirit has attended their Peeping (as is clearly in this and our other short
Treatise made manifest): And that E. P. has but peeped indeed, into some of our
former Writings, and not seriously or honestly read them with due Observation,
is apparent in his manifold Perversions, Mincings and Curtalizings.

Concerning Primitive Errors and Corrupt Principles in Point of Faith, unduly
charged upon the Quakers, p. 8, 9.

To the first I answer, We never denied the Scriptures to contain the Words and
True Sayings of God, whereas Christ is the Word, his Name is called the Word of
God, Rev. 19.9, 13. Exodus 20.1. But that they are the Rule, that is, the only
Rule of Faith, Life and Practice, as he terms them, p. 8, 17, 33. In that we
cannot so call them, he must excuse us herein, until he produce us Plain
Scripture, that SO calls them, though the Holy Scriptures be a Rule of Doctrine
subordinate to that Spirit from whence they first came. But seeing it is an
Article of his Faith, That the Scriptures are the only Rule of Faith, etc. He
had need to produce plain Scripture, that SO says; otherwise his Failure
therein will be an Indication, That the Scriptures are not the only Rule of his
Faith, because there wants Scripture Proof of this great Article of his Faith;
and then where is his Faith?

2. Truly I never knew the Quakers affirm the Scriptures to be of NO Use in
order to the true Knowledge of God, but that the Holy Scriptures are very
useful, with the help of the Spirit of God.

3. I never knew the Quakers hold it a Sin, much less of Idolatry, to take the
Practices of the Saints, Recorded, Commanded and Continuing Commands in Force
in the Scriptures, for our Examples and Rules, because the Spirit of Truth,
which is our chief Guide and Rule, does not lead to Reject, but to Own and
Follow its own Precepts and Commands, which are in Force in Scripture.

4. I have not known it asserted by our Friends, That whatever is commanded in
Scripture is no Duty to us, except we receive the Command by immediate
Inspiration, as the Prophets and Apostles did; for something commanded in
Scripture is, and may be, truly in it self a Duty for all, but cannot be truly
understood nor performed without the Assistance and Guidance of the Holy
Spirit; and that Spirit will not be wanting to assist in both, as truly heeded.

5. I never knew our Friends, the Quakers (so called) deny the Resurrection of
the Just and Unjust, though probably your gross Sense thereof; but we have only
pleaded for the Spiritual, Celestial and Glorious Bodies in the Resurrection,
as far excelling the Natural, Earthly and Corruptible Bodies, and sincerely
believing the Holy Scriptures in that Case, Luke 20.35, 36. Joh. 5.28. 1 Cor.
15. Hosea 13.14. Phil. 3.20.

6. I never knew our Friends (the People called Quakers) deny the Body of
Christ, that suffered, to be raised from the Grave or Sepulcher, but diverse
declare their Belief to the contrary; namely, That his Flesh saw no Corruption
(or did not Corrupt) but rose again the Third Day; and that Christ in the same
Body Ascended into Heaven; yea also, that he ascended far above All Heavens,
that he might fill all things.

7. As to that Point of your Water Baptism, and your Bread and Wine, you must
excuse us, we are not yet satisfied that they are Gospel Ordinances, and to
continue always in Force, under the Gospel and New Covenant-Dispensation, being
a Dispensation of Substance, and not of Shadows; nor do we believe that you
Baptists have any immediate Call from Heaven to Baptize People in Water, nor
that your observing Breaking of Bread or Drinking of Wine can properly be
called the Lord's Supper, either in the Figure or in the Substance; yet we do
not Despise or Contemn either Water Baptism or Breaking of Bread (as we are
falsely accused) as once practiced, nor as observed by such now as are
Conscientious therein, from a Belief that it is their Duty to observe the same,
we charitably think, they mean well therein, but wish they might more mind and
partake of the Substance, both as to the Spiritual Baptism and the Bread of
Life from Heaven, for their poor Souls Relief, and Safety in Christ the
Substance.

8. We never held that pernicious Tenet, of Believing, That no Blessedness is
to be enjoyed by the Saints after Death, as is most unjustly insinuated against
us, from Suggestions grossly false, p. 9. and elsewhere detected.

9. We never denied Justification by Christ's Works, Righteousness and Merits,
much less call it a Doctrine of Devils, as we are most horridly belied, p. 9.
as is clearly evinced.

10. We are not ashamed to say, and affirm, That Christ is the Light of the
World, and that he is that True Light that enlightens every Man coming into the
World, and that God is our Light and our Salvation; and is not this Divine
Light within, think ye? Does not both God and Christ, in some degree, appear
within, to be known within, suppose ye? else how should that which may be known
of God be manifest within, seeing there is no knowledge of God but by Christ?

11. And as to Billingsgate Complements charged, and for Moderate and Mild
Treatment of our Antagonists. The truth on it is, the former I like not, but the
latter: I am truly for Moderation and Mildness, even in treating Antagonists,
if they are any whit Treatable, Rational or Fair Opponents. But if I find an
opposing Adversary guilty of Envy, Lying, Forgeries, gross Perversions,
Wresting and Turning my Words to a contrary Sense than they naturally import or
ever was intended by me, then I hope I may tell and show him his evil and
injurious Work, and justly reprehend him for the same, and yet I not be justly
deemed guilty of Billingsgate Complements, or Rhetoric either; for I can make
no better of a gross Lie or Forgery than it is, nor give it a better Character
than it deserves, or that lying Spirit from whence it comes, which I have
plentifully met with in Edw. Paye's Works of Envy against us, for which I think
he justly deserves to be paid off by just Reprehension. And of his mild
Treatment you may hear anon.

To excuse his envious and scornful Story from our Persecuting Adversaries, the
Westmorland Petitioners about Sorcery, cited in his other Pamphlet against the
Meetings of the People called Quakers, p. 7, 8. Antichrist in Spirit. Now E. P.
says, viz. For my part, I have seen them Quake and Foam at the Mouth, besides
several that have been Eye and Ear-Witnesses of it, Railings, p. 10.

But neither tells us the Persons, nor in what Meeting or what Place he saw
them in both those Postures, nor who else, besides himself, were the Eye and
Ear-Witnesses thereof: And what reason have we to believe his Testimony any
more in this than in many other notorious Falsehoods?

And Corrupt Notions and Deceivable Gestures, p. 11. he has not proved against
us. But instead of Proof, is now fain to beg Questions, and come to his
Supposition, viz. Suppose you formerly used to Quake, Tremble, Roar, Swell and
Foam at the Bull and Mouth in London, the Westmorland Petitioners may say true,
etc. p. 11.

See how faintly he comes off, for those Westmorland Petitioners and their
Story, to render us odious. As for Quaking and Trembling, I ask him, If these
be the Deceivable Gestures which he accuses us of? And as to Roaring,
Swelling, and Foaming, which he would fain Insinuate against us, I neither know
nor remember these Gestures among our Friends at the Bull and Mouth Meeting, or
elsewhere in London, ever since I knew the Meeting in that place, which has
been above 34 Years. E. P. grants, Christ present in Spirit, but the reason of
Fasting; his being personally taken from them into the glorious Heavens above,
beyond the Stars, and they obliged to Prayer and Fasting, etc. till his second
personal Coming, p. 15.

Whereas Christ assigned another cause of Prayer and Fasting, even when
personally present with his Disciples for the casting out the unclean Spirit,
Mark 9.29. and the Apostles approving themselves Ministers in Watchings, in
Fastings, by Pureness, etc. 2 Cor. 6.5. was not because of Christ's personal or
outward absence. And as for your being obliged to Prayer and Fasting, 'till
Christ's second personal coming, I do not believe you will fast so long: G. W.
denies not Quaking and Trembling, (quoth E. P.) p. 16. And what then? Was that
all the Instance the Westmorland Petitioners were brought for? Does that prove,
either Sorcery, or a Diabolical Spirit, Swellings or Foamings in our Meetings,
(as they insinuated) or deceivable Gestures, as he has accused us? Where proves
he Quaking and Trembling, (without exception) deceivable Gestures? Or so called
in Scripture?

Page 18. E. P. I have, it is true, examined the Quakers Appeal, by way of
Charge, against Tho. Hicks, wherein they charge him with Lies and Slanders and
Forgeries. -- And I have perused Mr. Hicks 's Answer to their Appeal, where Mr.
Hicks clears himself both of Lies and Forgery. I find his Answer to their
Appeal subscribed by no less than 22 Persons of Credit, who testify they have
Compared Tho. Hicks his Citations with the Quakers Books, out of which they
were taken, and find them truly cited.

Thus far Edw. Pay, in Vindication of his Brother Tho. Hicks, to regain his
long since lost Reputation. Which I did not think any of the Baptists would
have undertaken to defend at this time aday, especially since he was so
publicly and often detected of many Gross and Notorious Forgeries; Besides
those few Passages wherein he pretended to clear himself, as his 22 Witnesses
also attempted, who were of his own Party, and willing to cover him what they
could; but all would not do, they did but thereby disgrace and defile
themselves, as we made it plainly appear in a small Treatise, Entitled, The
second Treatise wherein the Forgers, Compurgators are Impeached, in a strict
Examination of diverse Citations and doctrinal Matters, in their Book,
Entitled, The Quakers Appeal Answered. In which Impeachment they are proved
both Unfair and False Witnesses, as well as Unjust Judges, even in Matter of
Fact, as to Citations. But of this Treatise E. Pay takes no notice; but is
willing to credit and vindicate his Brother Hicks, 1. Upon his own Testimony,
wherein he is Witness only for himself in his own Cause. 2. Upon the Credit of
his 22 Compurgators, who were of his own Party, and willing to say as he would
have them, for a cover to himself; whereby they got no good, but shame and
disgrace, as is clearly evinced in the said Second Treatise.

And many of the said Hicks his deceitful Forgeries are discovered both in our
Friends Narratives of the Two Meetings with the Baptists, in 1674. And also in
our Answers to Hicks, one Entitled, The Counterfeit Christian, and the other,
Reason against Railing. With more Books, wherein his Deceits, Forgeries and
Abuses are detected. And therefore the more shame for E. P. thus to credit and
justify Hicks, as he has done, whom we well knew to be a very Envious Person,
and so seems this Pay very much to resemble him therein, by espousing so many
of his Lies as he has done, and now has the more pulled an old House about his
Ears, by owning Hicks and his Romantic, Fictitious Dialogues, so much as he
has done; so that now E. P. is the more bound to stand or fall by Hicks his
Dialogues, seeing he has so cordially espoused his Interest. And by E. P.'s
Method of Writing against the People called Quakers, we may charge all the
Baptists and their Society with Hicks his Dialogues and E. Paye's disingenuous
lying Pamphlets: But some among them, wiser than himself, should consider,
whether his Method may be safe or reputable for them.

His crediting and quoting Hicks against us, who was a bitter and virulent
Adversary, is somewhat like his quoting J. Faldo's confuted Book, styled,
Quakerism no Christianity, to support his scurrilous Story from the Westmorland
Petitioners, viz. That Mr. J. Faldo says, How generally were their Meetings
(viz. the Quakers) either silent or taken up with sudden and violent Eruptions
of dismal Howllings and horrid Ravings, Persons suddenly taken as with the
Falling sickness, Shaking and Foaming at the Mouth, and some lying flat on the
Ground, as if stark dead? p. 15.

Here Is a long Question, containing strange Stories, but never the truer for
his Mr. J. Faldo's mis-insinuating them by way of Question, neither are
Questions Proofs. But we who have known our Meetings and the Manner of them all
along, do know it to be a great untruth. That they were generally taken up with
those sudden and violent Eruptions (or Breakings out) mentioned, though many
times silent, we grant, which is a far different posture from horrid Ravings,
dismal Howlings, Foamings, etc. But how does your John Faldo make out his
Story? E. P. tells us, viz. And, says Mr. Faldo, some Such things as these I
have seen and heard. Which is short of proving these things, according to his
general accusation against our Meetings; some such things as these, are not the
same things: Then, How poorly does E. P. come off against us herein? Yet fain
thus to fly to our Adversaries Books for such Subterfuges, lame Proofs against
our Meetings.

But would the Baptists be so served? would they take it well to have Books
made out of their Adversaries against them? Whereof I could instance not only
that styled, The Anabaptist washed and washed, and shrunk in the washing, long
since writ by Rich. Carpenter, Independent, (probably as much a friend to the
People called Anabaptists, as John Faldo was to the Quakers, or them either)
and many others of their Adversaries Books against them (as E. P. has done
against us) which I presume these Baptists now would not take well, nor accept
as proof against them; so that in suffering E. P. in such his credulous and
unfair Dealing, thus to gallop on against us, surely they would not be so dealt
by.

E. P.'s Story, accusing the Quakers out of Hicks's Dialog. 1. Page 24, 25.
with saying, as for us, had the Scriptures never been, we could have known what
is therein contained. This (E. P. says) he has also heard from their own
Mouths, Antichrist in Spirit, p. 14, 15.

But in the Name and Behalf of the People called Quakers, I deny both Hick's
and Paye's Accusation; and that he has heard this from their Mouths. This I
look on as a Lie of his own making, my self and many thousands never spoke
those words, nor so believed, viz. that we could have known what (i. e. or
whatever all) that is therein contained, etc. we disown the Expressions, as
they relate to our selves. And E. P. has varied and fallen from his own
Testimony as it is general against the Quakers. Now to tell us, He has heard it
from a Quaker himself, in p. 18. of his Railings and Slanders: So in one Book
it is thus, I have also heard from their own Mouths. In his other Book, it is, I
have also heard this from a Quaker my self. Thus the Man faulters and varies in
his own Evidence to defend a Falsehood. And his unlearned Questions (or rather
Challenge) he pretends to be grounded on the said (false) Story against the
Quakers, they are as impertinent and insincere on his part, namely, to resolve
him what those things were that Jesus did, that are not written, Joh. 20.25. or
what were the the Contents of that Writing on the Ground, Joh. 8.6, 8. or else
let their proud boasting of Immediate Inspirations be condemned to perpetual
silence.

Which is a sad Sentence, both unnaturally and unjustly deduced from a
Proposition made altogether in a disbelief and contempt of the Matter proposed,
viz. To resolve all those other unwritten things that Jesus did, etc. by
immediate Inspiration. But now the Challenge is altered, and abated too, Now
let him resolve me in some of those things that Jesus did, that was not
written, and what was wrote on the ground, and let him or any other Quaker do
it either by a Mediate or Immediate Inspiration, or Revelation, p. 21.

And what follows? If by neither of these ways we can resolve him, then not to
pretend to Immediate Inspiration. And yet he himself pretends to Mediate or
more Common Gifts of the Spirit, and then confusedly tells of the use of these
more immediate or common Gifts, p. 19, 20. And yet by these his pretended more
immediate or common Gifts of the Spirit, or rather mediate Gifts, in his sense,
I presume he cannot resolve himself his Two Questions before, nor can he upon
his own Principle either resolve them or be resolved them, either by any
mediate or immediate Gifts. For the immediate, he has disclaimed, he needs it
not, (he says) but pretends the Scriptures to be the Only Rule of Faith. By
what Rule then should he be resolved what those or any of those other things
were that are not written? John 20.25. Therefore he has insincerely and
temptingly imposed unlearned Questions and Propositions, which he does not
believe can be resolved to his conviction or satisfaction, and thereupon has
past unjust Judgment against our having immediate Inspiration; and yet in
contradiction to himself, tells us of common and more immediate Gifts and
Graces of the Spirit, and of the use of these more immediate or common Gifts to
help our Infirmities, p. 19, 20. Although I presume he would be loath to have his
own Judgment and Condemnation against us returned upon himself, on the same
condition. For it is certain, he that has not the Spirit of Christ, is none of
his. And what are these more immediate Gifts and Graces of the Spirit he
pretends to the use of, seeing he and his Brethren pretend not to immediate (or
extraordinary) Inspirations, p. 19, 20.

There Is another Contradiction in the Case, to prove their Call to Baptize
People in Water. (He says) they have a sufficient Call for it from the
Commission of Christ our Great Prophet, who is to be heard in all things,
Matthew. 28. Mark 16. and the frequent Examples of his Apostles, etc. So that we
need not immediate Inspirations for our Call or Authority herein, p. 21.

Ans. Which is to tell us, you may take upon you to be Preachers and Baptizers
in Water, without being inspired by Christ, because he gave a Commission to his
Disciples to teach all Nations, baptizing them (...), into the Name of the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. But, 1. This is no proof, that you are called by
Christ to either. 2. Here Is no Water mentioned in the Commission. 3. And to
baptize into that Name, is a work of the Spirit attending a living and
spiritual Ministry, given and authorized by Christ himself, which this proves
not yours to be, no more, than that the false Prophets were true and truly
commissionated, because they said, thus says the Lord; when yet God never
spoke to them no more than Christ has spoke to you to Preach and Baptize with
Water; when as you do both without his immediate Inspiration, Commission, or
Spirit; and consequently you do not hear him in all things. 4. Neither does it
follow, that you hear Christ, because you Preach and Baptize People in Water,
by imitation of others, whom he sent to Preach and Convert People by his
Spirit, whereby they did Minister. 5. You might as well argue, that because
Peter, James, John, and Paul, etc. were Apostles and Ministers of Christ,
therefore we Edward Pay, and William Allcott, etc. are Ministers of Christ. 6.
If Reading Christ's Commission to his Disciples, Mat. 28. Mar. 16. be
sufficient authority for persons to turn Preachers, and then to tell People
they hear Christ, because they read his said Commission, and presume to take it
upon them without immediate Inspiration from him, why may not the Priests of
England, etc. be his Ministers as well as you? and why do you dissent from
them? Thus we see how you have proved your Call and Authority for what you
pretend, even as well as any sensual Impostors, blind Guides and Deceivers may.

On Romans 10.6.7, 8. E. P. says, neither did the holy Apostle understand the
Word here to be Christ, p. 22.

Ans. How does he answer the Questions then which the Righteousness of Faith
gives answer to? Say not in thy Heart who shall ascend into Heaven, that is, to
bring Christ from above? Or who descend into the Deep, that is, to bring Christ
again from the dead? But what says it? The Word is near thee, etc. Is this all
one as to say, the Scripture is near thee, even in thy Mouth and Heart? Or was
the Enquiry after the Scripture? Who shall ascend or descend to fetch me the
Scriptures? No sure: Was not the antecedent Question of Christ? And surely,
none can savingly believe with the Heart, and in true Faith confess with the
Mouth, that God has raised Christ from the dead, so as to be saved, but by
that Living Word of Faith in the Heart, which works a true and living Faith
therein; and therefore that Word of Faith, which begets and works this Faith,
is Christ in Spirit, who is the Author of this Faith, otherwise the Questions
who shall fetch Christ, etc. are not answered. For where, with the Heart, Man
believes unto Righteousness, and with the Mouth makes Confession unto
Salvation, Romans 10.10. he must needs first feel that Living Word of Faith in
his Heart to work that Faith in him which produces that Righteousness in Man
which attends Salvation.

It Is true, that I did complain of E. P.'s injurious way of Writing, in
accusing us with giving better or higher Titles to our own Books than to the
Holy Scripture, instancing that of H. Smith's Book, where E. P. gave these
words only for the Title, [ A True and Everlasting Rule] being but the first
words of the Title, and leaving out the next following in the same Sentence,
viz. [From God discovered.] This I did deem very disingenuous. Now to extenuate
and excuse the Offense, he asks me, Does those Words [ from God discovered]
added to The True and Everlasting Rule, diminish the Height of the Title? p.
23.

Answ. Yes, as the first Part was only (by E. P.) attributed to the Book,
contrary to the Design of the Title and Matter contained in the Book, to which
the Title had plain reference, as taken together entirely, that True and
Everlasting Rule, from God discovered, being the Holy Spirit, the Eternal Light
and Manifestation of Christ within, or what may be known of God being manifest
in Man, plainly testified unto (in the said Book) as that True and Everlasting
Rule, that was from God discovered; so the Perversion and Abuse is plain.

I think E. P. might have spared his Labor of giving the Reader a Breviate of
what he Ironically calls, The Sweet Convincing Language the Quakers use to
treat their Antagonists withal, unless his own Language had been sweeter, and
more convincing than it is, and less Partial and Abusive in his Accusations, as
to Matter of Fact; wherein he is still general against the Quakers, as if they
all treated their Antagonists of all Sorts with such sharp Language, as some
have treated a few; and how far they merited severe Treatment from our Friend,
concerned he does not know.

The Instances of the Quakers Treatment, E. P. gives, are upon T. Lawson, E.
Buroughs, W. Penn and G. Whitehead, but chiefly on E. B. who, in Scorn, he
terms Famous, p. 25. for using the Words Reprobate, Child of Darkness, Diviner,
Antichrist, Beast, Blind, Pharisee, Hypocrite, Sottish, etc. These with other
Words of like import he has picked up among Matters of Controversy; which
though the Language be sharp, it is not unscriptural; both Prophets of God and
Ministers of Christ, (yea Christ himself) did sometime use the like against
Wicked Men, who really were such in Spirit and Practice, especially against
Envious Persecutors, Deceivers, Hypocrites, etc.

In his accusing E. B. hereupon, with sentencing a Man to Woe and Condemnation
for ever (for asking some sober Questions) p. 26.

Herein he apparently wrongs E. B. for 'twas not only for the Questions that he
censured him (though they were not sincere nor consistent clear Questions), but
as knowing that Adversary to be in Strife and Envy, as he declares, f. 31, 32.
denounces severe Judgment; 1. Absolutely upon the Envious Persecuting Spirit of
the Beast in him. 2. Conditionally, upon the Envious Person, leaving him room
for Repentance: Exhorting him, To Own and Obey the Light in his Conscience,
that he might know that Obedience (of Christ) which reconciles to God; and that
by the same Light he might see his Evil Deeds, and be led up to Christ, from
whence the Light comes (thus E. Buroughs, f. 30, 31, 33.) Whence it evidently
appears, He did not absolutely condemn the Man for ever, but the Beast in him,
the evil envious Spirit and Works of it in him; and this can be no just
Occasion for E. Pay or W. Allcott, to accuse the People called Quakers with
having Affinity with the Muggletonians in their execrable Imprecations, Curses,
etc. as they falsely declare in their Antichrist in Spirit, p. 9. For the
Muggletonians have absolutely Cursed and Damned Persons for opposing them only;
allowing them no condition of Repentance, or of owning or obeying the Light of
Christ in them to lead them up to him, as E. B. did; neither does any Just
Ground appear from his Words (as justly distinguished before) to deduce any
such Rude Censorious and Reviling Question, as E. Pay and W. Allcott, etc.
have done, in their Antichrist in Spirit, p. 34, 35. Their Reviling (yet
mistaken) Question follows.

viz. Could the Devil himself have been more Vile, and prodigiously Arrogant,
to take upon him to Determine a Man's endless Condition? When it was not the
Endless Condition of the Man, but of the Evil Spirit in him, the Beast in him,
that E. B. absolutely excludes from God for ever; but conditionally declares
Judgment upon the envius Man, warning him, To own and obey the Light of Christ
in his Conscience; that so he might find Repentance, otherwise Destruction
would be his Portion. This Distinction I observe, and clearly find in E. B's
said Answer to Bennit: The Matter justly considered is, much like as if a Son
of Thunder (stirred up in Zeal, for Truth) should severely Judge and Condemn
the Evil Lying Envious Spirit of the Beast and false Prophet in E. P. and his
Abettors, and unto that Lying Spirit in them, declare, viz. Thou Envious Lying
Persecuting Beast, thou Foul Wicked Spirit, thou Malicious Devil and Father of
Lies and Liars. thou Author of all Mischief and Discord, thou Troubler of the
Creation, thou Reproacher of God's Heritage, thou that have opened thy Mouth in
Blasphemy against God, his Tabernacle, and them that dwell in Heaven; thou art
utterly cast down and condemned for ever, and to the Pit thou must return, etc.
And you, in whom this Lying Envious Spirit has so violently appeared against
the People of God, to Defame and Reproach them and their Christian Profession:
You and your Lies and Perversions are condemned with the Light of Truth, and
you will come to Shame and Contempt for the same, and utterly perish, if you do
not repent (this is more than a Supposition, it is a real Warning to you) the
Lake, which is the Second Death, is, and will be the Portion of all Liars; and
therefore I exhort you, in love to your poor Souls, Return, Own and Obey the
Light of Christ in your Consciences, that will show you your Evil Deeds, your
Hypocrisies, your Falsehood and Envy, and lead you to repent of the same, that
you may find Mercy and Pardon in Christ, if your Day be not over; the Spirit of
Truth, the Saints Comforter is the World's Reprover, and Judge also of the
Prince thereof. Christ's Ministers, who were led by this Spirit, did not
wrestle against Flesh and Blood, but against Principalities and Powers, and
Rulers of the Darkness of the World, against Spiritual Wickedness in High
Places, Ephesians. 6. These testified against Evil Spirits and Wickedness it self,
both in Root and Branches.

The great Degeneracy has been such in the World, that a Generation of Men
have turned Beasts; the Persecuting Envious Spirit of the Beast has made them
Beasts, Bulls, Dogs, Foxes, Swine, Wolves, Devourers, Destroyers of others; the
Old Serpent has made them Serpents, Vipers, Children of the Devil, etc. These
being Characters in Scripture put upon Wicked Men: And it is no hard Matter to
show E. P. and his Brethren as severe Judgment and sharp Language given in
Scripture to Envious Wicked Persons as E. Buroughs gave to his Envious
Antagonist beforementioned, and which I am persuaded is as justly applicable
to our present Malicious Adversaries, as to those to whom first directed by the
Spirit of true Judgment, in the Servants of God and Christ, as Ps. 52. (observe
E. P. etc.)

1. Thy Tongue devises Mischief, like a sharp Razor working deceitfully, thou
love Evil more than Good, and Lying rather than to speak Righteousness,
Selah. Thou love all devouring Words, O thou Deceitful Tongue; God shall
likewise destroy thee for ever: He shall take thee away, and pluck thee out of
thy Dwelling place, and root thee out of the Land of the Living, Selah. v. 2,
3, 4, 5.

2. And Isa. 56.10. His Watchmen are blind, they are all ignorant, they are all
dumb Dogs, etc. v. 11. Yea they are greedy Dogs which can never have enough;
they are Shepherds that cannot understand, they all look to their own way,
every one for his gain from his Quarter [as the Covetous Persecuting Priests
used to do; and it is well if some of you be clear thereof.] And,

3. Ye Serpents, ye Generation of Vipers, how can ye escape the Damnation of
Hell? Matt. 23.33. O Generation of Vipers, who has warned you to flee from the
Wrath to come? Matt. 3.7.

4. Read also the Epistle of Jude, v. 10. But these speak evil of those things
which they know not, but what they know naturally as Bruit Beasts, in those
things they corrupt themselves. 11. Woe unto them for they have gone in the way
of Cain, etc. 12. These are Spots in your Feasts of Charity, etc. 13. Raging
Waves of the Sea foaming out their own Shame, wandering Stars, to whom he is
reserved, the Blackness of Darkness for ever.

Many other Instances might be given of the Prophets, Christ, his Servants and
Ministers, giving severe Judgment against the Wicked. And what think you now,
do not these Instances contain as much Sharpness of Language and Judgment (if
not rather more) as either the said E. B. or any of our Friends have given
their Envious Adversaries; and yet 'twere not warrantable to compare them to
the Muggletonians, much less to the Devil's Vileness or prodigious Arrogance.
The Lord open these Men's Eyes, and soften their hard Hearts, and make them
more charitable, if it may yet stand with his good Pleasure.

And I perceiving the very same Bitter Envious Spirit of Persecution in these
present Adversaries Pamphlet, styled, Antichrist in Spirit, I could do no less
than tell them of their Hypocrisy, Envy and Bitterness, their Turbulent
Persecuting Lying Spirit, their Gross Lies and Falsehoods, etc. for which I am
not condemned of the Lord, nor conscious to my self of Wrong done them, for
these Evils are apparent in them, but really believe the Just God will Rebuke
and Judge them, and plead our Innocence.

And seeing Ed. Pay upbraids us with the Sweet Convincing Language of the
Quakers, I will not so unequally retaliate, and say, I shall give the Reader a
Breviate of the Sweet Convincing Language the Anabaptists use to treat their
Antagonists withal: But (to speak in his Terms) of the Sweet Convincing
Language which Edw. Pay and his Brethren, Will. Allcott and H. Loader, have
treated the People, commonly called Quakers, withal, in their said Pamphlet,
Antichrist in Spirit, viz.

Quakerism a great Delusion, their Deceit, their pretended Faith proved a
Counterfeit (Title) their Profession a Labyrinth of Confusion, a Compound of
Heresies, corrupt Notions, Equivocal Reserves, Proud Boastings, the Pride and
Ignorance of these Impostors, these deluded Impostors, the Quakers, great
Enemies to and Contemners of Holy Scriptures. The Quakers dream, This
Generation of Impostors the Quakers, who say, Behold he (Christ) is within
thee, to deceive the Hearts of the Simple; Horrid Blasphemy. They labor to
keep a Christian-Mask over their Antichristian Face; a Bundle of Blasphemy.
Could the Devil himself have been more Vile. Why should these Impostors talk of
the Blood of Christ? their Pofession but a Painted and Deceitful Flourish. The
Quakers Grand Deluders; Blasphemous Absurdities. By no means their Word must be
taken; blasphemous Confidence. The Title on each Page is, [ Quakerism a great
Delusion]; (above 70. times over) and, Turn to the Light within, says the
Quaker, (7. times over in three Pages, repeated in Derision, and set in
Opposition to Christ's Doctrine, etc.) The Spirit of Delusion and gross
Ignorance in the Quakers. These Clouds of Popish Darkness. These Men care not
for the Scriptures, except it be to abuse them. A Spirit of Delusion. Their
impertinent Evasions and manifold Corruptions of the Scriptures. The Quakers
are greatly deluded. What Horrid Contradictions and gross. Absurdities attend
this Spirit of Delusion. The Quakers vainly feed themselves with Wind, in
Imagining that they have the Holy Spirit who rebel against Christ, contemn his
Blood, despise his Ordinances, etc.

With much more such like Treatment in their said Pamphlet, in pages 8, 16, 18,
20, 24, 25, 28, 29, 34, 35, 37, 39, 40, 43, 46, 54, 55, 56, 58, 62, 64, 69, 70,
71, 75, 76. which as it is unmerited, so it is utterly denied by us.

Take a View farther of some of Edw. Pay's Sweet Language, he treats us withal,
to convince us, in his Second Pamphlet, styled, Railings and Slanders detected,
viz.

The Folly and Heresies of the Quakers. Quakerism a great Delusion, (in the
Title.) Slanderous confused Raileries. Ill-shapen Cub. Your Defects in Truth
and Reason. Gross and abominable Errors. All their Authors Books full of
Railings and Blasphemy, that they have formerly called it a Doctrine of Devils;
viz. Justification by Christ's Works, Righteousness and Merits (which is an
abominable Falsehood). I have seen them Quake, and Foam at the Mouth. Your
Corrupt Notions and Deceivable Gestures. Suppose you formerly used to Quake,
Tremble, Roar, Swell, Foam, etc. G. W. an old Stickler for Quakerism. Mr. J.
Faldoe says, How generally were their Meetings either Silent or taken up with
sudden and violent Eruptions of dismal Howlings and horrid Ravings, Shaking and
Foaming at the Mouth, etc. G. W. is so daringly Confident; his Impertinent and
Absurd Evasions. This small Bundle of Railery, written by G. W. Like raging
Bears. Their Ragings. The confused Profession of Faith that G. W. makes, p. 1,
2, 6, 7, 9, 10, 11, 12, 15, 22, 24, 27, 28, 34.

I am not willing to trouble the Reader in this Place with more of E. P's sweet
Treatment, or rather his sour scurrilous Contemning, and undeserved
Detractions; he had better have let what he calls the Quakers Sweet Convincing
Language alone, than to have reflected so scornfully upon us, unless his own
had been sweeter than it is, and more Convincing and obliging; though I confess
this his latter Pamphlet is not quite so bad as the other.

An Examination of those Exceptions and Passages which Edward Pay has set
opposite, as the Quakers Contradictions of their Profession of Faith, in his
said Pamphlet, styled, Railings and Slanders detected.
Excep. SMith's Primmer, p. 9. They that are false Ministers preach Christ
without, and bid People believe in him as he is in Heaven above: p. 29. and not
within also, nor in Peoples Hearts; they preach Christ without and in Heaven
only, excluding him Men's Hearts, as William Smith's Book shows that to be his
Intention.

Excep. Your Carnal Christ. Who so wrote? and on what occasion? We know not:
But suppose if any Quaker did, he struck at some Carnal Imaginations about
Christ; for the true Christ of God could not be intended, for he is a
Spiritual, Divine and Heavenly Christ.

Exc. Your imagined God beyond the Stars. Who has so writ? I know not, nor on
what occasion; but if any among us did, the Intent was this, viz. That the True
God is not such a God as you or some Men imagine; he is not an imagined God,
limited or circumscribed only beyond the Stars, but is also on this Side the
Stars, a Real, True, Infinite, and Omnipresent God, both in the highest Heavens
and lowest Hearts.

It Is true, I did question some Socinians and Baptists, their defining Christ,
under the Terms of a Personal Being, a Human Body, and consisting of a Human
Body, asking them what they meant by Human Body in Heaven? And if Human Body be
not an Earthly Body? Appendix to Reason against Railing, printed in 1673. p.
21, 22.

This is impertinently alleged against me by E. P. p. 30. whilst he unfairly
passes by and leaves out what I Grant. Ibid. Reas. aganist R. p. 23. If by
Personal Being he means a Body distinct from ours, I believe he has a
Spiritual Glorious Body, distinct from all these Earthly Sublunary Bodies. If
by Personal Being he means the Manhood of Christ, our confessing the Man Christ
as Mediator is sufficiently evinced. To the Question then put, Is the Heavens
that must retain him only the Hearts of Men? My Answer was, It is whom the
Heaven must receive, Act. 3.21. And this is above, and larger than the Hearts
of Men. Reas. against Rail. p. 24.

Excep. G. F's Great Mystery, p. 71. Christ's Nature is not Human which is
Earthly; and yet they profess to believe the Humanity of Christ. It Is evident
by Human, in this Place, he understands Earthly; and therefore esteems it not
properly applicable to the Heavenly Man Christ, or his Divine Nature. We may
believe the Manhood or Humanity of this Heavenly Man, and yet not his Nature to
be Earthly, as the first Adam's was. G.F. in the very same Place alleged,
confesses, That we do not deny Christ, according to the Flesh, to be of
Abraham, Gr. Mist. p. 71.

Except. Against G. F. again; Bunion is deceived, who says, God is distinct
from the Saints. By the Words, [ Distinct from] here (if not mis-printed) he
means Divided or Separate from, as many in common Acceptance understand them;
for though God and his Saints be different or distinct Beings, yet not separate
or divided one from another.

Excep. See Mr. Hayworth's Animadversions, p. 11. One W. Bates a Quaker, said
more than once, That what Christ took of the Virgin had now no Being, p. 30,
31. I know not how to credit this Story, which E. P. is so credulous of, but
rather think 'twas a Mistake or Misunderstanding in the Hearers; for such Words
are disowned by us, and therefore not justly to be imputed to us.

Excep. p. 31. Mr. Penn's Justification is not by the Imputation of another's
Righteousness, but from the actual Performance and Keeping God's Righteous
Laws. Sandy Found. p. 25. This is not fairly cited; for the Scripture, Ezekiel.
18.20, 26, 27, 28. from whence W. P. argues is left out, and so are the Words,
or Condemnation, after Justification, and the Word Laws added, instead of
Statutes or Commandments: Besides, his Argument is mistaken, for it is not to
oppose Salvation or Justification by Jesus Christ his Righteousness, Merits and
Works, for there cannot be any true actual Performance or keeping of God's
Commandments, by any Person whatsoever, without Christ, or without his
Righteousness and Work being partaken of. And did not the Lord say, He that
has walked in my statutes, and has kept my judgments, to deal truly, he is
just, he shall surely live, Ezekiel. 18.9. And if the wicked will return from all
his sins, that he has committed, and keep all my statutes, and do that which
is lawful and right, he shall surely live, and shall not dye, v. 21. For as the
real Righteousness of another belongs not to that Person that is wholly
Unrighteous, but the Righteousness of the Righteous shall be upon him only
that is truly the Righteous Person, so Christ's Righteousness cannot truly be
reckoned theirs, that have none of It wrought in them, but are wholly
Unsanctified and Polluted, for then it is his and not theirs. But who are made
Just or Righteous by Christ Jesus? Both he and his Righteousness is theirs so
far as they are made Partakers thereof. Without Christ we can do nothing; it is
he that has purchased us to God; it is he that works all our Works in us; it is
he that enables us truly to obey and follow him; and it is our Duty to obey him,
and to keep his Commandments: So that both the Merit of our Redemption and our
Sufficiency for true Obedience is Christ's, and of and in him, and not of our
selves.

Excep. p. 31. E. B's Works, p. 33. God does not accept any, where there is any
Failing, or who do not fulfill the Law, and answer every Demand of Justice.

Here E. B.'s next foregoing words are left out, viz. [those that love God,
keep his Commandments, and they are not grievous]. Whence it follows, that they
that do not keep his Commandments, do not love him: The Question is, Whether
God accepts them that do not love him? It Is true, the words, [ or who do not
fulfill the Law, and answer every demand of Justice] seem partly to relate to a
state under the Law, according to James 2.10, 11. Gal. 3.10. Heb. 2.2. Romans
2.13. and partly to that sincere Obedience required under the Gospel, and it is
certain God accepts none in any disobedience; neither the Law nor the Gospel
allows of sinning against God or Christ. [See Luke 12.47. Joh. 14.21. 1 Cor.
7.19. 2 Cor. 10.6. Joh. 10.14. 2 Thessalonians. 1.8. 1 John 3.6, 8. 2 John 9.] But
every Disobedience is to be repented of.

Except. Page 32. Truth's Defense, p. 101. They say, That it is dangerous for
Ignorant People to read them, (i. e. the Scriptures). That is, such Ignorant
People as pervert them to their own destruction; that must needs be dangerous,
yet profitable to the Man of God, and those who are guided by his Spirit to the
true understanding of them (the Book quoted more fully clears it self). Christ
by his Divine Light and Spirit is the Only Rule and Guide of God's People, both
in the knowledge of his Divine Will, and of the Holy Scriptures. Christ is the
Only Way and Means of Men's coming to walk with God, and the Only Rule of Faith
and Practice. Christ, who is the Author of living Faith, must needs be the Only
or Chief Guide, Way and Rule unto his true Spiritual Followers. And this
answers most of p. 32, 33.

Except. p. 33. See what my Antagonist says, Dipper plunged, p. 13. and then
judge, If the Scriptures be No Rule, yea, if it be Idolatry to call the Bible A
Means, as G. W. expressly says.]

Obs. I am very unfairly cited and wronged in both these, and it is notoriously
false, to say G. W. expressly says either that the Scriptures are No Rule, or
that it is Idolatry to call the Bible A Means; for in the very place quoted, my
words expressly are these, viz.

1. By what Rule must we believe that the Scriptures are the Only Rule of Faith
and Practice, while they no where do call themselves so?

2. To Tho. Hicks's, saying that the Bible is The Means of our knowing God,
Dial. p. 41. My Answer was, He Idolatrously sets up the Bible in the place of
Christ, for no Man knows the Father, but the Son, and he to whom the Son
reveals him, Matthew. 11.27. Now pray observe further.

1. My not granting the Scriptures to be the Only Rule, implicitly grants them
to be a Rule, or some Rule, my Question being on the Word [ Only] in this case.

2. By my not assenting that the Bible (or Books) are the Means of our knowing
God, I do not therefore conclude, that the Divine Doctrine therein contained may
be no means of our knowing God; for in Christ's hand, and by his opening it to
us, and our understandings therein, it may be and is A Means of Divine
knowledge to us, Christ being the Way and the Means original of Divine and
Saving-Knowledge.

Obj. against G. W. again, viz. Who also affirms, that Faith grounded on the
Scriptures is but an empty implicit Faith, and bespeaks such persons void of
the knowledge of God and Christ and Salvation, and that such Men walk by their
own Fancies and Imaginations. Quoting [ Christ ascended, p. 11.]

Observe. This Baptist has again apparently miscited and wronged my Answer;
'twas none of my affirmation, or words, That Faith grounded on the Scripture,
is but an empty implicit Faith, etc. I affirm they are not my words, but E.
P.'s fallacious abuse put upon me: The Case was this, viz.

John Newman, in his Book, styled, The Light within, etc. having affirmed, p.
45. That without the Scriptures to be the Rule, we know not that there is any
God or Christ or Salvation, etc. all Men are left in the dark, and no man
knows how to enjoy Life Eternal, neither do we know what God counts
unclean, and what holy; without the Scriptures we know not any Promise, etc. --
It leaves men to walk by Fancy and Imaginations. Thus far he: My Answer was,
Poor Men! You have shown your selves sufficiently herein, and what an empty
implicit Faith you are in, and how void both of the Knowledge of God, Christ
and Salvation you are, and how yet in your sins, having denied Christ and his
Light within to be your Rule, Way, and Foundation, as he is to his Followers:
And so you are walking by your Fancies and Imaginations, who set the Scriptures
in the place of Christ, as your only and absolute Rule and Ground of your Faith
and Knowledge, etc.

So that I did not own nor grant, that their Faith was really grounded on the
Scriptures herein, but on their own unscriptural Fancies and Imaginations, (
vid. Christ ascend. p. 12.) contrary to Scripture-Testimony of Christ. And I
further oppose their Ignorance of God and Christ thus, viz.

And then what a sad Sentence of no less than condemnation does this pass upon
all People and Nations, who have not the Scriptures, as being all void of
knowledge, that there is either God, Christ, Salvation, Good or Evil (without
the Scriptures); whereas there is a Living Evidence, throughout the Creation or
Works of God therein of the Eternal Power or Maker thereof. See Ps. 19. Romans 1.
Job 12. and many do know and have known these things written of (which concern
Salvation) by the Light of God and Christ in them that never could read, nor
had the Scriptures outwardly, as those Gentiles which had not the Law, yet did
those things contained in it, and showed the Effects of the Law written in
their Hearts, Romans 2. Though the Scriptures are profitable to the Man of God who
has them, being led by his Spirit, which opens them. Christ ascend, p. 11, 12.

And now, E. P. to prove thy Brethren, W. Allcot, and H. Loader's, false
Charge, That the Quakers contemn and vilify the Holy Scriptures, in their
Epistles, and thy own horrid Slanders also; that they are great Enemies to, and
Contemners of Holy Scriptures, p. 20. of thy Antichrist in Spirit.

Thou summest up thy Argument with diverse If's, (but assumest no Assumption
pursuant to thy general Charge) as in thy 33 and 34 Pages of thy Railings and
Slanders detected, thus, viz. Now if the Scriptures be a dead carnal Letter,
Ink, and Paper, says Parnel: If they are, the Precepts and Traditions of Men,
says Naylor, in his Love to the Lost. If they are no better than an old
Almanac, as Holbrow said, Hick 's Dial. p. 29. If to say an Ass has as much
Authority essentially in himself to teach and rebuke, as the Scriptures, etc.
be not to Contemn and Vilify them, I am yet to seek what is.

Ans. The Assumption or Minor Proposition intended ( i. e. but the Quakers say
all these of the Holy Scriptures) is here wanting, and the Argument is lame and
fallacious, as well as falsely stated also in the first Proposition, being not
in the terms of the Charge.

For 1 st, The Charge is general against the Quakers, That they are great
Enemies to and Contemners of the Holy Scriptures, yet the word [ Holy] not
mentioned in the particular Instances fallaciously alleged for proof, though
it be in the general Charge.

2. If some of the Instances were true, yet to charge them upon the People
called Quakers in general, is an absurd and unjust way of arguing, a
particulare ad universale, and no better than to argue thus, If Edw. Pay, (the
Baptist) has raked up and charged diverse of Hicks's Lies and Forgeries upon the
Quakers, and added many more of his own to them, then the Baptists are all
Forgers: But Edw. Pay has so done, (is apparent) Ergo, They may justly deny
the Major, though the Assumption (or Charge) alone stands good, being
plentifully proved against E. Pay in particular.

3. Neither are the particular Instances true in fact; the Holy Scriptures are
not a dead Letter in the Quakers esteem, though none of us ascribe Holiness to
Ink and Paper or the dead Characters, but to the living Divine Precepts and
Doctrine therein contained; nor did we ever think the Holy Scriptures to be but
the Precepts and Traditions of Men; or (much less) no better than an Old
Almanac, as the People called Quakers are most unjustly accused by these
Adversaries, Antichrist in Spirit, p. 18. And it is far from J. N. or any of us
either, to say or think, that an Ass has as much Authority essentially in
himself to teach and rebuke, as the Holy Scriptures. For shame, E. P. retract
and leave off such foul, gross and horrid Lies and Reproaches against the
People called Quakers.

To prove, that we name (or call) the Holy Scriptures, the Precepts and
Traditions of Men, (charged against the Quakers in general) Antichrist in
Spirit, p. 18. Thou, E. P. have repeated this again in thy Railings, p. 33. and
quotest James Nayler's Love to the Lost for it, but not in what Page; and
therefore I have been at the pains to view over that Book, to see if I could
find any such words, but find nothing like them, but the contrary; namely, 1
st, That the words of the Scripture were given forth from the Light, which he
calls the Eternal Light, Love to the Lost, p. 4, and 20, 21. And that the
Ministers of Christ, who have the Word, who are begotten by the Word, through
such came the Scriptures, which came not by the Will of Man, but by the Spirit,
and so are of no private Interpretation, Love to the Lost, p. 73. which Spirit
is the Eternal Spirit, the Spirit of Light and Truth, p. 13, 18. Thus J. N. All
which is far enough from calling or esteeming the Holy Scriptures but the
Precepts and Traditions of Men, as most unjustly is charged upon the Quakers,
by E. P. and consequently by his approvers, William Allcott, and Henry Loader,
who had need to retract this and the rest of their Charges, which are
notoriously false in fact.

And E. P. thou have no cause to boast or insult over us, touching the Writings
and Sayings of our ancient Authors, which thou have so foully wronged and
perverted; and when thou have made Lies upon them, then falsely to say, they
directly contradict the Quakers new Faith, when by deceitful Perversions, false
Citations, base and falacious Forgeries, thou have attempted such
Contradiction, as thy self and abettors may for ever be ashamed of, and have
great cause to renounce and explode the same, rather than we our ancient
Friends Writings. And to evince thy contempt and scorn, thou shall take no
notice at all of the confused Profession of Faith that G. W. makes, p. 34. No,
thou art too big, too great, too high in thy own proud Conceit, to take notice
of what such a mean contemptible person as G.W. or any of us testifies of our
Belief, how sincere soever. But I must tell thee, if thou go on in this, thy
wicked Course of Defaming and Scandalizing us, I hope we shall take further
notice of thee and thy base malicious Work, to thy own and abettors perpetual
shame, to keep your Infamy in remembrance; and when we have fully cleared our
Consciences, I doubt not but the Righteous Judge of all (whose People thou have
evilly entreated and reproached) will meet with thee, and rebuke thy Envious
Spirit.

To extenuate thy notorious Lie and Forgery against Geo. Fox, of taking the
Name of the Eternal Judge of quick and dead to himself, quoting p. 6, 7. of
Readiness Errand. Now thou art fain to beg the Question, viz. Why may not G. F.
take the Name to himself, as well as approve of those blasphemous Titles given
him by Jos. Coal, in his Letters from Barbados? p. 35. cited in Antichrist in
Spirit, p. 43, 44.

Ans. The Charge here (of approving and giving blasphemous Titles) is very high
against two persons deceased, who (we believe) ended their days in peace; and
my present Answer is, 1 st, I have cause to question, whether the said Letter
be truly and entirely copied or cited from the Original, by thee E. P. 2 dly, I
do not believe it is an entire Copy. 3 dly, Whence had thou thy Copy and
Credit thereof? And what Persons (that are no Parties nor Adversaries to us)
will attest thine to be true and an entire Copy, according to Jo. Cole's
original Letter? 4 thly, If thou can not produce the Original, then what
validity is thy Charge of, if the Credit of all the Copies thou can produce,
be called in question, for want of impartial Witnesses, or the Original to
compare them with? For I do really question the truth of thine; and when thou
give an unquestionable Copy thereof, probably I may give a further Answer;
for I doubt not but I can clear that honest Man, Jos. Cole, from giving any
blasphemous Titles, and that from his own printed Testimonies, and G. F. also
from receiving; by his known public Christian Profession unto Christ Jesus,
both as God and Man, according to the Holy Scriptures. And where and when did
G. F. say in a Meeting, I have power to bind and to loose whom I please? p. 36.
What Meeting, and who are Witnesses of this Story? I do not believe it.

To prove E. P.'s false Charge, That they (i. e. the Quakers) say, that Christ
has no Body but his Church, Antichrist in Spirit, p. 29. (This being shown not
to be the Quakers Saying, but something like it, objected against One Person,
by some persecuting Priests, as in Readiness Errand, p. 2.) Now E. P. again is
fain to beg the Question and shuffle, viz. And why may not G. F. deny Christ to
have a personal Body, besides or distinct from his Church, as well as G.
Whitehead? Dip. pl. p. 13.

Ans. I am the Person here falsely accused again, they are none of my words, or
negation, nor so much as mentioned in the place quoted in Dipper plunged, p.
13. but the terms [ God-man, a person without thee] questioned as not
Scripture Language, answered before; which was not on the Question, Whether
Christ has a Body distinct from his Church? Also answered presently.

Whereas E. P. objects against what I said in answer to Tho. Jenner's saying,
Christ sits at the right hand of God in Heaven with a Natural Body. And
accusing us with saying, Christ has but one Body. E. P. should have been so
ingenuous as to have recited my whole Answer in that case, in our Apology, p.
33. quoted by him, p. 37. and that will clear me from his impertinent Objection
against the words, viz. They should produce Scripture, that say Christ has two
Bodies. (Here E. P. leaves out) [ a Natural and a Spiritual] which is very
unfairly done. And in the Question, Where does the Scripture say, that Christ's
glorified Body in Heaven is of Human Nature? After [ Is] he leaves out [ a
Natural Body] and [ as his terms are] whereby I grant, that Christ has a
Spiritual Glorious Body of his own. Also E. P. takes no notice of my
Explication in these words, viz. If T. Jenner supposes, that we intend the
Natural Bodies of Men to be the Body of Christ, without distinguishing between
them, he is mistaken, for the Natural Body and Spiritual Body are two. -- And
if Christ's Body in Heaven be Natural, whose Body is it that is Spiritual,
Glorious, etc? is it Christ's, yea, or nay? And I further add in my Answer,
Apol. p. 34. If so be Christ's Body in Heaven be Natural, then where the
Apostle said he shall change the Body of our lowness, that it may be fashioned
like unto his glorious Body, Phil. 3. This were all one, in Jenner's sense, as
to say he shall change and fashion our Body (which is Natural) like unto his
Natural Body, etc.

By all which I grant Christ's own glorious Body in Heaven distinct from those
natural Bodies of Men on Earth; though I must own a Spiritual Union or Oneness
between that and his Church, so as his Body in its Fullness is but One Body. And
in my Appendix to reason against Railing, p. 23. I plainly confess I believe he
has a Spiritual glorious Body, distinct from all these earthly sublunary
Bodies. -- and that the Heaven, that must receive him, is above and larger than
the Hearts of Men, Append. p. 24.

To E. P.'s repeating, that J. Parnell calls Water Baptism, a formal Imitation
and Invention of Men; and now adds, that He (J. P.) says so, p. 37. whereas
it was plainly shown him, that he did speak this of Sprinkling Infants, which
E. P. calls Baptism; and yet says, the Name Anabaptists belongs not to them,
p. 13. And why so? If Sprinkling Infants be Baptism, are you not Anabaptists,
when you Re-baptize them, or Baptize them again? and yet I did not call you
Anabaptists on that score, nor in derision, as is wrongfully suggested, p. 12.
but only for distinction-sake, my words at first being [ the People commonly
called Anabaptists,] p. 1* It Is far from me to design any derision, or to put
any ridicule upon the People so called from E. Paye's particular abuses; for I
hope as some of them are more honest than himself, so many of them will be
ashamed of his malicious Pamphlets, though he pretends the Approbation of several
since, p. 38. which we have little cause to credit, without their own
testimony; for some eminent among that People, have declared their dislike of
his work already. And it will be far more for their credit and reputation, to
stop him from his scribbling to defame others, than to suffer him to persist
therein.

And as to his Challenging any to charge and prove against him any thing
unbecoming a Man and a Christian, respecting either Life or Principles, Human
Frailties excepted, p. 38. I ask him, if to bear false witness against his
Neighbors, to belie, slander and defame them, to take up reproaches against
them, to pervert and corrupt their words, to gather up, credit and publish
their Adversaries malicious Defamations against them, (all which E. P. is
proved notoriously guilty of) be either becoming a Man or a Christian? or be to
do as he would be done unto? (What an easy matter is it for a wicked person to
write malicious Pamphlets at that rate?) Or must these Enormities be reputed
only as Human Frailties? Will his Religion and Conscience allow him to slander,
to lie, to defame others, and yet for all that to be a moral Man and good
Christian, and Minister to others? I am sure the just God will not so esteem
him nor any one else in such a state.

Upon a serious View and Observation of the Method which he E. Pay, etc. has
taken up against the People commonly called Quakers, I find it thus, 1. To
quote and cite diverse of their Adversaries Invectives against them. 2. To
mis-cite and abuse some of their own Authors Books and Writings against them,
sometimes leaving out the most emphatical Expressions in the middle, and
sometimes in the end of a Sentence, and many times the most explanatory part of
their Answers, thereby greatly altering, perverting and corrupting matters,
contrary both to the Authors own Words and Expressions. 3. To invent and forge
notorious falsehoods, contrary to our express Christian Profession and
Persuasion. 4. From such indirect and unjust Premises, to draw his own perverse
and evil Consequences against the People called Quakers in general, to render
them and their whole Society and Profession as odious and obnoxious as he can.
5. Diverse of his Authors, to whom he has given credit, and whose odious
defamations he has raked up against us, were persecuting Priests, and others of
party with them, who were as much enemies to the Baptists as to us, and long
since answered and refuted. 6. He is so credulous, as he seems to take all for
granted that such Adversaries have maliciously writ against us; but in many
cases takes no notice of our Answers to them; and where he does, he is very
subject to pervert, mince, curtailize and abuse them as before.

Now I am persuaded the Ministers and People of the baptized Societies, would
not be thus served after such injurious Methods. And to me, and diverse others,
it is a wonder that those Ministers and Elders of that Society who appear more
discreet and judicious (than this injurious Adversary, E. P.) do not give a
severe check to him, and put a stop to his perverse and contentious Scribbling,
(tending to Strife, and to aggravate Divisions, and cause Animosities among
Neighbors, and to make Breaches wider among People) and rather seek Peace,
Mutual Love and Charity among all; for I must tell them, these crooked Methods
which E. P. takes will be no small disrepute and disparagement to them that are
of the same Society with him, or that own him as a Brother or Minister among
them.

And since in conclusion of his last, he has given us a Threat, (as if he would
frighten us) That if he be foolishly provoked, we may it is like have a
quarterly Packet, to keep our Fame in remembrance.

And truly if he will be so foolish, as to be foolishly provoked, or to make a
foolish Provocation the ground of his Packets or Pamphlets against us, we shall
have little cause to be affrighted or deterred by his Threat from making our
Just Defense; and now, since he has so loudly alarmed us, he has given us
occasion to watch him narrowly and warily, really believing he will make no great
earnings of such his undertaking, nor advantage of his achievements, but bring
Infamy upon himself, and an unnecessary Charge upon others, and be no small
Disparagement to his own Society.

I have traversed the Controversies long since, and I bless God, that he has
made me a Witness for his Truth and for Christianity in Life and Power (even
from my Youth upward) against Deceit, Envy and Hypocrisy, that I have seen in
these our Adversaries and Opposers; what personal Detractions or Reflections I
meet withal, I value not, my Innocence and Christian Conversation, being well
known to many and my inward Peace with the Lord in my own Conscience; but
wherein I find the Truth abused, and God's Heritage reproached, I am
constrained in God's holy Fear and Zeal to stand up for Truth, and in its
Vindication, against its Adversaries and Gainsayers and their Contradictions,
and hope ever shall, so long as the Lord gives Life and Ability.

And I humbly thank the Lord my God, who has hitherto helped and supported me,
and many more, in his Work and Service, and in Christian Love and Good Will
toward all Men.

G. Whitehead.

The Conclusion.
I Have hitherto been mostly on the Defensive Part, to remove these Adversaries
Calumnies and Misrepresentations of our Principles, much I have to except
against diverse of their Unsound Doctrines, particularly about the great stress
they lay on their Water Baptism, and what they call The Lord's Supper; it is
easy to make it appear that they exactly run parallel with the Rhemists, in the
manner of their defending there Water Baptism, and the great Weight they place
upon it, contrary to Scripture, and the Doctrine of the Ancient Protestants.

Please to take a View of some of these Baptists Doctrines, and some brief
Observations and Questions upon them, as follows.

1. That by Baptism (i. e. Water Baptism) we must put on Christ, and so become
Members of his Mystical Body, Heirs of the Promise of the Holy Spirit, etc.
Antichrist in Spirit, p. 69.

Observe. This is Popish Doctrine, and contrary-to the Apostle's; See 1 Cor. 12
13.

2. That the highest Seize or greatest Measures of the Holy Spirit, do
but fit Men for Gospel Ordinances, p. 64. Whereof their Water Baptism is
rendered a Sacred or Holy one, p. 57, 63.

Qu. Where does the Scriptures say, That the highest Seize of the Holy
Spirit do but fit Men for Water Baptism? as if that were higher than those
Seize, or the Spirit Inferior to the Element of Water.

3. But in contradiction to themselves herein, they tell us, That Water Baptism
is the initiating and ingrafting Ordinance, whereby the Penitent Believer puts
on Christ, p. 68.

Obs. For which they quote and misapply Gal. 3.27. which shows, That it is by
Faith in Christ Jesus that they were Children of God, being baptized into
Christ, v. 26, 27. and Romans 11.19, 20, 23.

4. That there is but one Baptism in a full and proper Sense, and that is that
of Water, in which the Penitent Believer is Buried, for which they unduly quote
Coll. 2.12. Romans 6.4. and on Ephesians. 4.5. say, To be Baptized with Water is the
one Baptism. Pa. 66, 67.

Obs. This appears directly Popish Doctrine, and accordingly held by the
Rhemists, contrary to the Protestants, and wholly excludes Christ's Baptism by
the Holy Spirit.

5. 1 Pet. 3.21. Applied to Water Baptism, as the Baptism that does now save
us, the End whereof is the Answer of a good Conscience toward God. p. 67.

Obs. If Water Baptism be the one-saving Baptism, then out of the
Baptist's-Church there is no Salvation: This is not only Popish but contrary to
that very Scripture, 1 Pet. 3.2. that Saving Baptism being not the putting away
the Filth of the Flesh, etc.

6. That our saying, Water Baptism was a Figure of the Spiritual, is an
apparent Falsehood, p. 68.

Ob. No, it is an apparent Truth, John's Baptism was a Figure of Christ's Saving
Spiritual Baptism and Washing of Regeneration; See Matthew. 3.11. Mar. 1.8. Luke
3.16. Joh. 1.26, 27. Tit. 3.5, 6.

7. That Christ is not come, because that Kingdom is not come that Christ
speaks of Contrary to Christ's own Testimony, Matt. 16.28. Mark 9.1. Luke 9.27.
; I will not henceforth drink of the fruit of the Vine, 'till I drink it new
with you in my Father's kingdom, Matt. 26.29. Luke 22.18. p. 73. compared with
p. 74. In that Kingdom they neither marry nor are given in marriage; neither
can they dye any more, Luke 20.35, 36.

Qu. How then shall they drink new Wine with Christ in that World to come, and
in that State wherein they shall be equal with the Angels of God in Heaven,
suppose ye? And as neither can they dye any more, so neither shall they Hunger
nor Thirst any more, Rev. 7.16. Isaiah 49.10. What occasion for New Wine then?

8. That his Disciples upon Earth are to Break and Eat Bread, and Drink of the
Fruit of the Vine till he come, to wit, in a Personal, Glorious and Visible
manner, Phil. 3.2^. -- Who shall change our vile Bodies, and make them like his
own glorious Body, at Christ's second personal coming visible in his Body of
Flesh and Bones, p. 73, 74.

Qu. And shall those glorious Bodies then have occasion to drink New Wine with
Christ, in his Father's Kingdom, do you think? or are you not rather too Carnal
in your Expectations, in this Matter, whilst you mean literally? and then do
you not delay and put off the Spiritual Eating and Drinking with Christ ( Rev.
3.20. Luke 22.30.) in his Spiritual Kingdom?

9. No Christians can allow them (i.e. the Quakers) that Christ is come the
second Time, p. 74.

Obs. Yes, true Christians can allow it, though these Baptists cannot, wherein
they contradict the true Believers Expectation and Experience of Salvation by
Christ's coming, Heb. 9.28. Tit. 2.13.14.

10. That the Quakers say they are perfect, viz. without Sin [this is not true
by the way, but that to be so is both required of us in this Life, and
attainable in Christ Jesus] but Christians expect complete Perfection, that is,
a living without Sin, (as it is explained by E. P. Rail. and Slan. p. 38.) when
they come to glory on the other side of the Grave, etc. p. 51.

Qu. When do these Men expect to be made clean, in the Grave or at their
expected Resurrection unto Glory? If not until they are in their Graves, they
dye in their Sins, and then whither Christ is gone they cannot come, John 8.21.
If not until such their expected Resurrection, what shall become of their Sins,
inherent Pollutions and Defilement between their Death and Resurrection?

A few more of their Unsound and Antichristian Doctrines about Inspiration,
Christ within, his Kingdom, and Light within.

1. That if the Quakers by their immediate Inspirations do not resolve what
those many other things were that Jesus did, that are not written, Joh. 21.25.
and what were the Contents of that Writing on the Ground, Joh. 8.6, 8. then
their boasting of immediate Inspiration is to be condemned to perpetual Silence
and shame to cover their Faces. Antichrist in Spirit, p. 15, 16.

Contradiction. Things that are Secret and not written, not at all belonging to
us but to the Lord; as in E. P. Rail. and Slan. p. 20.

Obs. There they have imposed such a Proof of immediate Inspiration upon us, as
does not at all belong to them, if things not written do not all belong to them.

2. On Matthew. 24.26. they say, It Is more than probable that Christ pointed at
this Generation of Impostors, the Quakers, who say, Behold he, Christ, is
within thee, etc. p. 25.

Obs. Antichristian Doctrine, contrary to Christ and his Apostle's Doctrine,
Joh. 17.23. 2 Cor. 13.5. Coll. 1.27. Romans 10.6, 7, 8.

3. That those that are in the Possession of that Kingdom (viz. the Kingdom of
Christ) neither Marry nor are given in Marriage, etc. but the Quakers do Marry,
ergo, not in possession of that Kingdom, p. 51, 52.

Obs. Marriage in the Lord hinders not his People from the Enjoyment of
Christ's Kingdom, therefore the first Proposition and Conclusion of this
Argument is contrary to plain Scripture, Coll. 1.13. Rev. 1.9. Matt. 16.28.
Mar. 9.1. Luke 9.27.

4. That the Disciples did not expect this Christ to come into them: Namely,
This Christ, the Prophet, whom ye shall hear in all things, Deuteronomy. 18.15. Acts
3.22. He, of whom God the Father, from Heaven, testified, Matt. 17 5. This is
my beloved Son, hear ye him. This Christ that was Crucified and Rose from the
Dead, Luke 24.39. This is he that told Mary, Joh. 20.19. I go to my Father and
your Father, to my God and your God. [Hereupon these Baptists affirm as before]
the Disciples did not exp^ct this Christ to come into them, p. 52, 53.

Qu. What Christ then? Is there two Christ's! (See 1 Cor. 8.6.) Is not this
Antichristian Doctrine, contrary to Christ's own express Testimony, Joh.
14.20.17.23. And to these Baptists own Confession, on 2 Cor. 13.5. c. 5.17. 1
Cor. 6.19. Coll. 1.27. To. 8.9. Ephesians. 2.22. p. 22, 23.

5. Turn to the Light within, says the Quaker.

This these Baptists have in contempt repeated seven times over in less than
three Pages (and all under the Title of Quakerism a great Delusion) to prove
that the Quakers disown the Doctrine taught by Christ and his Apostles, and
that they oppose the Teachings of Christ's Prophetical office; p. 54, 55, 56.

Obs. Here they have opposed and contemned the Doctrine of God's Prophets,
Christ and his Apostles, who were all for (and preached) the Light within; see
Ps. 56.13. Isa. 2.5. Jo. 12.36. 1 Jo. 1.7. and 2.10 Acts 26.18. and how can the
Light of Christ within either oppose his Doctrine Ministry or Offices? And it is
no other Light we exhort People to turn to. The Lord open these Men's Eyes,
that they may come out of Darkness; which they cannot do, unless they turn to
the Light within.

FINIS.

