Mr. Thomas Wadsworth's LAST WARNING TO SECURE SINNERS: Being his Two Last
SERMONS Concerning the Certainty and Dreadfulness OF THE Future Misery of all
Impenitent ungodly Sinners. To which is Prefixed an Epistle of Mr. RICHARD
BAXTER's

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Parkhurst, at the Bible and three Crowns in
Cheapside, and at the Bible on London-bridg 1677.

TO THE READER.
IT is not so much for the sake of the departed Author of these Sermons, as for
thy self, that this Preface does recommend them to thy acceptance and perusal:
Though in order hereunto it is meet that thou have some account both of the
Author, and of the reasons of their publication. The Author was a person with
whom I had long much communication by Letters, before I ever saw his face. By
many of which, and by the full testimony of his flock, I can assuredly give
thee this true account of him: When he was placed for the exercise of the
Sacred Ministry at Newington-Butts, near Southwark, he addicted himself
entirely to the winning and edifying of Souls; believing the great things of
the unseen world, and life to come; the obtaining of that happiness by faith
and holiness, was the end and work of his Ministry and Life. He took heed to
himself and to Doctrine, and continued therein, that he might save himself, and
those that heard him, 2 Timothy 4.16. Unnecessary Questions and Controversies he
avoided: In those that he was constrained to meddle with, he much looked at the
end, and adhered to the Doctrine which is according to Godliness; carefully
shunning contentions and extremes, and that manner of disputing or conversing
which destroys Christian love. In the common Controversies about
Predestination, Grace, and Free Will, he held to the middle way of Augustine,
Prosper, etc. contenting himself to prove and teach, That all evil is of our
selves, and all good is of God; that God is no author of Sin, but yet is the
Governor of all the World, whose absolute Will cannot be frustrate; and that
Christ has procured that universal conditional gift of pardon and life which
is found in the Gospel, and commanded his Ministers to preach and offer it to
all; and so of the rest.

But the Errors which subvert Faith, Hope, or Obedience, he would not make
light of; and therefore lately wrote that very considerable Treatise of the
Immortality of the Soul; especially for the use of such as reject not
Scripture Proof, leaving out most of the Philosophical Reasons which Infidels
expect; but adding some few of them which are of weight, though not a large
performance of that part of the work.

He was happily too young to be engaged in the military or uncivil quarrels of
this Age. He knew that Christ's Ministers have work enough of their own, in
preaching, promoting and practicing the Christian Faith, and hope of Glory, and
keeping themselves and others in obedience, love and peace.

When the Changes had occasioned great contentions about Church-Worship,
Admiministrations, Communion and Discipline, the City of London where he lived
attempting to set up the Presbyterian Government, but finding it very
difficult, because of the number of Episcopal and Independent Dissenters, and
because the Parliament would give Presbytery no more than a Toleration and
Recommendation, he resolved to join with no party in the Division, but to look
simply to Gods Word, and to do that which there he found past Controversy, an
unquestionable duty. At that time the Ministers of Worcestershire had entered
into an Association:

1. In their Worship, Administration and Discipline, unanimously to practice so
much as the then parties, Episcopal, Presbyterian and Independents are agreed
in; believing that the faithful practice of so much, would better reconcile
them, than strangeness and disputes.

2. To set up a regular course of Personal Conference by Catechizing and
loving-instructions, and exhortations, to prepare them for death and eternity,
with all the Families in our Parishes, in order, who would voluntarily submit
to it.

In the practice of these two, we had great experience of Gods blessing. And
Mr. Wadsworth desiring (as many Counties did) to do the like, sent to me for
the draught of our Agreement: And because he would avoid temerity and needless
singularity, he addressed himself to the Classes of the London Ministers, and
asked their Advice; who told him to this purpose, That they were under many
hindrances from doing it themselves, but they would not dissuade nor
discourage him from attempting it: Which hereupon he presently did. To his
constant Public Preaching he added this work of Personal and Family
Instruction; not only to visit the Sick, but to Teach and Exhort his Flock, in
health, to prepare for death, and work out their Salvation. To Catechize them,
and help them to understand the words, and to get down the sweetness and power
of the matter upon their hearts: Behaving himself with convincing Light, with
melting Love, and quickening seriousness, to those that he conversed with; that
none might be left as dark, disaffected, or dead, as they were found.

He also gave Catechisms and Testaments, and some other Books most suited to
their state, to the poor people of his Parish, engaging them to read them, and
taking an account of their performance and proficiency.

If you ask where he had Money to do all this, he lived frugally himself? He
took nothing to be so much his own, as to be laid out on himself any further
than it maintained him in his Masters work. The rest he took himself to be but
a steward of, to distribute it prudently to others. What was not necessary to
his personal maintenance and work, he gave to others, in the way and on the
terms which might best further their Salvation. And what he was unable to do
himself, he begged from such as were more able.

And as to the aforesaid manner of exercising his Administrations, and
Church Discipline, he and the Church chose many Deacons, and certain of the
ancientest and most prudent members, who should not be Officers, as unordained
Elders, but only the Churches Delegates, to take such cognizance of the action,
and give such assistance as the Laity may do; himself with these Deacons and
Delegates of the people, met once a Month to hear what causes required their
open admonitions, when private reproofs had been rejected; when offenders were
to be humbly and compassionately admonished, and by moving-arguments persuaded
to repent: And if they yet were obstinate, more earnestly persuaded by them
all, and by clearest reasons convinced of the evil of their sin, and the great
necessity of true repentance. And if yet they remained obstinate (with us, they
were summoned to hear the convincing reasons of an Assembly of Pastors that
shortly after met, and their humble Exhortations and Prayers for their
Repentance; but Mr. Wadsworth had not so much of that assistance) the order was
next to publish the crime and impenitence to the Assembly, and there publicly
beseech the Sinner to repent, and the Congregation to join in prayer for his
Repentance (and this usually three days together). And if still he were
impenitent, to declare him unfit for Communion with the Church, and require the
people to avoid him, and binding him over to the judgment of God, who will not
pardon the impenitent.

I will recite part of a short Writing which his Hearers gave me now since his
death, in their own words:

At his first coming to Newington-Butts, which was about 1653, He preached
constantly twice every Lord's Day; And had monthly meetings with us, where he
prayed and preached: In the Summer, for half a year, he preached a Lecture: And
in the winter, every day of the week, except Saturdays, neither cold nor wet
did keep him from his work; which was Praying and Expounding, which he
constantly performed at seven a Clock in the morning: And on Saturdays he spent
the afternoon in Catechizing: And finding much ignorance in the Parish, he was
the more laborious for their instruction; and once every week in the Winter, he
would be-speak a house in the Street at the end of an Alley, and thither he
would send for the poor people out of the Alleys, and spend much time in
instructing them, and praying with them: the next week he would do the same in
another place; and where he himself had been the former week, he would appoint
one that could write well, to follow him, and repeat a Sermon, and pray with
the people in the same place, to keep on their hearts what had been wrought;
and such of the willing persons as could not repeat sufficiently, he appointed
to read some fit Book to the hearers, usually the book called, A Call to the
Unconverted. And that against Making Light of Christ, which in a great measure
answered his ends. And finding by going thus through all his Parish, that not
only Children, but Servants, and Ancient persons, were very ignorant; and the
more because they could not read: he sent to the University for a young man (
who is now a Minister in Sussex) and gave him his maintenance, to go three days
a week, to teach people to read; by which means aged persons, some of sixty
years of age, and some more, did learn to read, to their great comfort: And to
farther their understanding of the Principles of Religion, he Printed a short
Catechism of Twelve Questions and Answers, and gave them freely to all the
Parishioners that would come for them; and for them that were poor, and old, he
bought a great number of Testaments, and gave them to the elder poor people and
servants that could not buy them: and when he asked many poor people why they
came not to the Public Worship of God, and they would answer, because they had
not clothes; he would stir up some friends which he had in London, to relieve
them, and so got cloth, and clothed them.

His health calling him to abide most in the Country at Theobalds, he got a
grave Minister Mr. Parsons to be his Assistant in Southwark; and so divided his
labors to Two Congregations, being one day with one, and the next with the
other. And having a competency of his own, he never took any Stipend or
Maintenance from either of them; but lived as believing that it is more
honorable to give than to receive: That very small proportion which was
Contributed, he left his Assistant, who needed it, to receive.

This faithful Servant of Christ did for many years perform these hard but
pleasing labors, under that sore disease, the Stone in the Reins (which some
think was Paul's prick in the flesh, though others rather take it for Reproach
or Persecution). And though by the ordinary use of North-hall-Waters he seemed
long to keep it under; yet leaving the Country, and coming to abide again at
London, after twice preaching with very great fervency, he fell into that
extremity of pain, which in a short time brought him to his Death; which how
peaceably and comfortably he underwent to the last, Mr. Brag has told you in
his Funeral-Sermon. His dissected body showed that a Stone in the Bladder as
well as his calculous and corrupted Kidneys, was his Death.

The affection of his Flock to their departed Pastor, made them desirous that
his last Sermons might be published; not because they excelled all the rest
(for in these you may see his ordinary fervency and familiarity in preaching);
but the last words of our friends affect us most; and as we remember them best,
so we are desirous to commemorate them to others.

It will be thought by some an injury to the deceased Author, that such popular
and plain Exhortations should be published, when no doubt had he lived to
publish them himself, they would have appeared in a less homely dress. But I
take it for no disgrace but a great and necessary duty, to speak the important
matters of Salvation (not in a slovenly, but) in as plain, and familiar, and
fervent a manner, as (its well known) the common ignorance and dullness of most
Hearers do require. Who can speak too plainly or too earnestly to such? And
Writings must be suited to such Readers Capacity, as well as Sermons to such
hearers. Two instances encourage me to this recommendation, viz. The works of
Mr. William Fenner, and of Mr. Thomas Hooker, which were popularly delivered
and taken from their mouths in so broken and rude a manner as greatly injured
the Authors, (and are not to pass as the notice of their judgments in points of
Controversy) yet did more good by their plainness and familiar earnestness,
than most Books that I have known: But those that the same men published
themselves in a closer style, have far less profited the world of ordinary
Readers. That is good, which does good.

To show the reasonableness that all Ministers should deal thus faithfully and
plainly with such as are under their Ministry, I will lay open somewhat of the
case before you, and then judge reasonably of it as you are men. The Eternal God
delighting in the wonderful diversity of his Creatures, has made man of a
middle nature, between Bruits and Angels, giving him Vital-power, Reason and
Free will. He has placed him in this World as for a race or warfare, resolving
that as he behaveth himself, it shall go with him in another World for ever:
For though his body be dust, and must to dust return, his soul is from above,
and lives in blessedness or misery for ever. By Sin we have all forfeited our
right to Heaven: But Eternal Love has given us a Redeemer, who is God and Man,
who as our Surety became a Sacrifice for our sins, and by his Merits has
purchased a Conditional Grant of free forgiveness, and of renewing Grace, and
endless Glory. And being ascended into Heaven, possesses it in our nature, and
intercedeth for us, being now as Redeemer, Lord of all. And as the Sun above us
sends down its beams on Earth, so does our Glorified Lord his Spirit, to
quicken, enlighten and sanctify Souls, who were dead and dark, and disaffected
to God, to Holiness and Heavenly perfection. And he has appointed the
Ministerial Office, that men might be his messengers to men, to acquaint them
with his Grace, and with the Glory which he prepares for them, that they may
truly believe it, soberly think of it, duly value it, heartily choose it, and
diligently seek it, and live and die in the joyful expectation of it. And as
our Souls converse not with our neighbors immediately, but in and by our
bodies in which they work; so the Spirit of Christ does not ordinarily work on
men's Souls without any means, but by his Word and Works which his Ministers
must declare. Man is not now put upon satisfying Gods Justice, or purchasing
his Salvation by a price. Christ has done these, and made a free gift of Grace
and Glory to all that will but penitently and believingly accept it. Under Gods
Grace, men's everlasting Salvation now lies on their own wills; no men or
devils can damn or undo any one soul, but by his own consent to the cause of
his damnation. No men or devils can keep our souls from the Heavenly Glory, but
by tempting him to refuse it, undervalue and neglect it, and prefer the
pleasures of sin before it, and by keeping him from loving, desiring and
seeking it: For every one shall certainly have it, who had rather be a holy
Christian on earth, and live in perfect love and joy with God in Heaven for
ever, than for his filthly pleasure to enjoy the prosperity of this world. To
acquaint men with this* is our Ministerial Office; we are charged to set before
them the great Salvation which Christ has procured, and importunately to
beseech them to mind it, believe it, and accept it, that it may be theirs for
ever: we believe God, and therefore we speak to men as he has commanded us: We
entreat them in his Name, to turn from sinful enmity and folly, and to be
reconciled to God, and be wise for their Salvation: We tell them but what Gods
word sent from heaven, tells us and them, That holiness is the love of God
and goodness, and the hatred of sin; that the pure in heart are blessed, for
they shall see God. But without holiness none can see him: We tell them from
God, That heaven is won or lost on earth; and that none shall have it but such
as hence learn to love a holy and heavenly life; and that the dislike of
holiness is the forfeiture of happiness, and the beginning, or forerunner of
Hell: We assure them, That God will never say, Depart from me ye workers of
iniquity, if they do not first by iniquity depart from God; and that God will
not damn them, except they damn themselves, by the obstinate final refusing and
resisting of his mercy. We entreat men therefore but to live as men should do
that love themselves, and that are not indifferent whether they live in Heaven
or Hell for ever. We entreat them not to be worse to themselves, than the Devil
and all their enemies are, who cannot make them commit one sin against their
wills: And yet after all this warning, entreaty, and importunity, there are
thousands, and ten thousands that will not be persuaded, nor regard the warning
given them from God; some will not believe but that a man dies like a Dog (and
what wonder if such live like Dogs): And some will not believe but that they
may be saved without regenerating-grace and holiness, though Christ's own mouth
has protested the contrary, and told us verily that it cannot be, John 3.3, 5,
18, 19. Mat. 18.3. Heb. 12.14. Romans 8.6, 7, 8, 9, 13, etc. Multitudes will not
be brought to understand what we say; but when we talk of Redemption,
Sanctification, and Salvation, they hear us as if we spoke Greek or Hebrew to
them, and under teaching, grow old in sottish grossest ignorance; multitudes
are taken up with the love of prosperity, and the love of this deceiving world:
multitudes are carried away with aspiring ambition and foolish pride; and more,
with the love of fleshly pleasures, and satisfying their appetites and lusts.
Many poor people (who every where are the most) are so oppressed with want, and
wearied with their daily labor, and taken up with cares to pay their Rents and
Debts, and maintain their Families, that they think it excusable in them if
they little mind the pleasing of God, and saving of their souls; supposing that
they have no leisure for it, and God requires it not at their hands. And the
same most servants think, who have time little enough for their Masters work.
Multitudes have such dead and hardened hearts, that when we tell them that they
must shortly be in Heaven or Hell, as they are here prepared, we speak almost
as to blocks, or men asleep: they feel not what we say, as if they did not hear
us.

We are bid, cry aloud, and tell them of their sin and danger, Isa. 58.1, 2.
and yet we cannot get them to regard and feel; God says, Awake thou that
sleep, and Christ shall give thee light; and yet we cannot get them to
awake, nor hear us like men that have the use of reason, and love themselves.
Alas, how many thousands are there whom we could never persuade to consider
with deep and serious thoughts, what will become of their Souls when they are
dead, nor to seek to be resolved of it from the infallible Word of God! that
never set a part one hour in their lives to consider seriously, Whether they
have any title to Salvation, which they can make good by the Word of God by
which they must be judged!

Sirs, This, this is the case of multitudes of our neighbors; and what would
you have a Minister to do in such a case? should we flatter and smooth them up
in an unholy life, what thanks would they give us for this ere long, when they
find themselves in hell?

Would you have us stand by in silence, and look on, while Satan thus leads
thousands to perdition? Would you have us let them quietly go to hell, for fear
of displeasing them or others, or seeming to be unmannerly or uncivil with
them? Would you have us whisper to men that must be awakened or undone for
ever, whom thunder and lightening will not awake?

Alas, we see men dying daily, and we are dying our selves, and daily look when
we speak our last, and when they hear their last, even all that ever they shall
hear more for their Salvation: We see how Time does pass away! much is lost
already, the rest is short, and utterly uncertain^ and the ignorance, unbelief,
hard-heartedness, fleshliness, worldliness, pride, malignity and unholiness of
sinners, are deep-rooted, strong and damnable evils. We see men when they are
convinced, that they must repent or perish, Luke 13.3, 5, putting it off from
day to day; when they are certainly to be gone ere long, and never certain of
one more hour: And alas, a long life is little enough for a willing awakened
serious Christian to work out his Salvation, and make his Calling and Election
sure.

Sirs, tell us as Christians, or at least as men, what faith, and reason, and
humane love command us to do in such a case? shall we forbear, or speak to them
in formality as on a stage, as if we were Players, and not Preachers, and would
persuade them not to believe what we say; should we let them alone, be damned,
and take it for our excuse, that they or others were unwilling of our labors?
Shall we pretend charity and hope that they have already enough to save them,
while we see not so much as knowledge, or any love to Holiness, nor forsaking of
mortal sin, nor any serious care of their Salvation? Is it the office of
Charity to further men's delusion and damnation? If we believed not another life
our selves, and that there is a God who will reward them (and only them) that
diligently seek him, ( Heb. 11.6.) we would quickly renounce this ungrateful
Ministry and Work; we would wish that all the Preachers in the world were
silenced, and that the people would better use their Tithes, than to maintain
such troublers of the world. But God has shined into our minds with the
heavenly convincing light. He has given us the first fruits and pledge of
Glory: We believe a Heaven and a Hell, and the absolute necessity of a holy and
heavenly mind and life; and we know why we do believe it. Here we have upon our
sober consideration laid up all our hopes and comforts; and what should we
persuade our neighbors to choose, but that which God has taught us to choose
our selves? And woe to him that ever he was born, that makes not this choice,
and takes not the Heavenly Glory for his portion!

And now, Reader, I have told thee why such Ministers so live and labor, as
our Brother did, and why I commend to thee his Example, and these Sermons: The
Lord persuade you to use what is given thee.

Richard Baxter.
December. 18. 1676.
To those who were Hearers of these Two Sermons, especially such of them who
yet continue in their Security.
I Would hope (if not the bare reading, yet) the due considering the Title
prefixed to this little Book, would cause at least this reflection: It is high
time now to awake out of sleep: they are secure sinners indeed, who (after a
Boanerges has sounded his Trumpet as loud as Thunder, till his breath was
stopped, especially considering his last breath was shrillest of all) will not be
awakened: God forbid the Judgment threatened, Isa. 29.10, should be the sad fate
of any that heard him: I will pour out, says God, the spirit of a deep sleep
upon them. Every word of which threatening is terrible; Sleep, deep sleep, the
spirit of a deep sleep, and then the pouring out the spirit of a deep sleep: It
affected me to think that this holy man of God (when he went up and took his
Farwell in the Pulpit) should, as it were, go to the top of lofty Nebo, and
(though from thence as to his own particular, he had as clear a view as any
ever within my forty years observation had of the Holy Land, not that of
Caanan, which flowed with Milk and Honey; but that which Stephen saw, Acts 7,
yet) should be directed by his Text, and assisted with such a mighty presence,
with so great authority to warn sinners, as if he saw a flood coming upon them,
that would drown them else suddenly in perdition: and when he had done, that he
should come down, as Moses did, and die as soon (it may be) as he did; and
(without a may-be) go to Heaven as Moses did. My friends whom I love, pity and
pray for; it is true, we have now no new Revelations, no infallible predictions;
but Verba novissima, the last words of so well qualified a Watchman, a man so
solid, self-denying, so holy and heavenly, that it was even natural to him to
be so: I say the words of such a dying Minister methinks should be always
sounding in your ears; My friends, get you into the Ark, for the flood is a
coming; repent quickly; else, if you be not drowned, you may be burnt, you will
be damned. Read seriously these Sermons, and give slumber to thine eyes before
thou have smote upon thy breast, and cried God be merciful to thee a sinner, if
thou can.

The great wonder-working God, who of old smote the Rock, to fetch water in
abundance, reward thee, who ever thou art, that wilt seriously read over and
over this warm discourse, with smiting thy rocky heart, till thou can read no
longer for weeping bitterly.

I have called it a warm Discourse, which is no impertinent or insignificant
adjunct: when people are in bed, and the house the while a fire about their
ears, I think he speaks best who speaks loudest to awaken them. This servant
of God now knows and feels whether speaking as he spoke, to reach hearts, not
tickle ears, or humor fancies, was not better than the rarest composure of any
Tertullus in the World.

Sinners, sinners, it is more than two Months since this holy Saint, (who has
turned preaching to men into praising God with Angels, and with the heavenly
Inhabitants) preached these Sermons. Are you yet in your sins? could you have
thought you should live so long, and not be cut down like dead trees for the
fire of Tophet? and do you presume still? what, curse and swear, be drunk and
debauched still! What, is the spirit of the old world in you! will ye take no
warning! you do not take your selves to be bruits, not to have immortal souls;
and yet you will not act like men; Reason, as well as the Word of God, does
tell you, you are the worst and dearest purchasers in all the world; to give a
soul for sin, is the maddest bargain that ever was made; the eternal happiness
of the soul, for the dirty pleasure of sin for a season. O let not the Devil
jear and reproach you in hell for this folly.

Is there not a merciful God that would forgive and forget all that is past, if
you would even now to day fully, without any hesitation, return to him? would
not his bosom be open to receive you? should not you find a father that would
fall upon your neck, and kiss you, as well as the prodigal did? To you God
cries, upon you God waits that he may be gracious to you. O ye simple ones, how
long will ye love simplicity! Turn ye at my rebuke, and I will pour out my
spirit upon you; though your sins were as scarlet, I Will make them as white as
snow. Turn ye, turn ye, why will you die? Will you not be made clean? when
shall it once be? What would you have God say more to encourage penitent
sinners? to persuade men to cease loving their lusts, which will else damn
their souls?

But if you will be deceived by the Devil, and will gratify your lusts for a
moment, though you die eternally for it: I must tell you, such a resolution is
like theirs, who have made a covenant with hell, and with death, and cry a
short life and a sweet; who forget they have souls, while they thus speak, and
resolve; and will not believe there is a God, till they wish for rocks and,
mountains to fall upon them, to hide them from him; nor believe there is a
hell, till they feel it.

O what a deep sense had the Apostle Paul of the misery and immergent ruins of
his Countrymen, Romans 10.1, His hearts desire unto God for them was, that they
might be saved; he could wish himself accursed that they might escape. I know
no man more like-minded to him than this Servant of God, who is with the Lord,
who delighted in nothing, no work in the world, like plucking brands out of the
fire, saving men from hell, and sending men and women before him to heaven, if
he could.

I hope the impression upon my heart from the consideration of that
incomparable transport of his Soul in the Preaching the last Sermon (as if he
had known his time was so short, and that Sermon his last) shall still remain
fresh upon me. After Sermon, I told him of it; and he told me, His heart was
carried out with zeal and pity, that he could not keep to method, but he could
not help it.

All that knew him, can bear him witness, that he was able to write or speak
for matter and form gratefully to any; but he studied plainness; and therefore
purposely declined great Auditories, to my knowledge; a clear proof of his meek
and self-denying spirit: Gainsay it who can. He sought not honor from men
whilst alive; and now he is dead, let his own Works praise him in the gates.

If any should enquire why, or who called me to interpose these few rude lines?
I only say, It is pia fraus, to steal an opportunity to testify more publicly
the great veneration I have for the name of this holy man, who indeed was one
of the Sons of David's Worthies. As also to signify my longing after the Souls
happiness of all that were his ordinary Hearers: Whom again I beseech to read,
and afterward to ponder, who and what moved him to speak his heart in these
last words unto them, if peradventure God may give them repentance unto life by
the Ministry of him who not only saved himself, but shall then save also them
that heard him.

A.P.

1 Peter III. the later part of the 18, the 19, and part of the 20 Verse. Being
put to death in the flesh, but quickened by the Spirit.

By which also he went and preached unto the spirits in prison,

Which sometimes were disobedient, when once the long-suffering of God waited
in the days of Noah, while the Ark was a preparing.


IN the opening of this portion of Scripture, we will,

First, Consider its Scope; and then we will consider the words themselves; and
give you a short Explication thereof; and then we shall draw that Practical
Observation from them, which the Lord bless unto your Edification.

As for the Scope of them (in the former part of the 18 Verse), I have showed
you how the Apostle was acquainting us with the great benefit that sinners do
receive from the death of Christ; that I have (already) opened to you. Christ
has once sufferd for sins, the just for the unjust, that he might bring us to
God.

Now (in the following Verses) the Apostle passes on from the death of Christ,
unto the life of Christ; and shows that we have not only benefit by a Christ
dying, but by a Christ living: For, Christ is our Savior both ways. We are
saved by his death, meritoriously; we are saved by his life, as he lives for to
see the purchased-blessings of his death made good to us. Now the Apostle in
these words (I have already read) considers the life of Christ two ways:

First, With respect to the world before he came in the flesh; with respect to
the old World, above Two thousand years before he came in the flesh; Jesus
Christ the Eternal Son of God was alive then: yea, before the World was, he was
alive, and was God blessed for ever; by him the World was made. To the old
World, even that world that was destroyed by the Flood, to that world he was a
Savior by designation; and he took care of them: The care of mankind, from the
fall has been deposited in the hands of Christ, he has taken care of sinners
from the fall of man into sin. Then,

Secondly, The Apostle does speak of the advantages that the Church has by a
living-Christ, upon his Resurrection from the dead (as he speaks in the 21 v.)
The figure whereunto, even Baptism, does also now save us, (then there comes in
a Parenthesis). How does Baptism save us? Why, by the Resurrection of Jesus
Christ. When he was on earth he preached the Gospel, promised pardon and
salvation to the penitent believing sinner, and died for him when he had done
preaching; and arose from the dead, and is gone to Heaven to make good every
word.

We are now upon the consideration of the benefits that the old World had from
Christ, above two thousand years before Christ was born in the flesh. Why, what
was the benefit that the old World had? Why, Christ by his Spirit did send
Noah, a Preacher of righteousness to preach repentance to the old Word: the
Spirit of Christ was in Noah, by which Spirit Noah Prophesied of the
destruction of the world. By which Spirit he was directed to build the Ark, to
prepare for himself and those that should repent, for that time that the Floold
should come upon the world. Christ by his Spirit preached then, to that world
of sinners that were drowned then; and not only drowned, but their spirits
damned: which was for disobeying Christ, for disobeying the Spirit of Christ in
Noah.

Having now given you the Scope of the place, we shall proceed (according to
that light I have) to give you the understanding of the words and phrases of
this Scripture: for it seems to be a Scripture that is not without its
difficulties. We will begin at the First:

First, What it is to be put to death in the flesh? (that we must enquire into).

Secondly, What is it to be quickened by the Spirit? What does the Apostle
understand hereby?

Thirdly, What is this preaching? What are,

Fourthly, These Spirits that are in prison? And what is the prison? And so we
shall take in what follows in its order.

Being put to death in the flesh:

Who put to death? Christ. By whom? By the unbelieving wicked Jews, they were
his accusers. Put to death in the flesh, by whom? By Pontius Pilate as his
Judge. Put to death in the flesh, by whom? Why, by those Executioners that were
employed by Pontius Pilate to see him Crucified; The Jews, Pontius Pilate, and
the Soldiers put him to death.

Put to death in the flesh, What Is that? That is after he was made flesh, he
was put to death; as he was man, he hung upon the Cross: The loss of blood, and
the anguish and pain, the nails in his feet, and in his hands killed him; he
died there, his soul separated from his body; he cried with a loud voice and
gave up the Ghost: so he was put to death in the Flesh; that is, as to his
human Nature. That is plain: The following words have more difficulty in them.

But quickened by the Spirit.

What Is the meaning of quickened? And what is here meant by Spirit? (that we must
enquire into, because it will tend to open the difficulty that lies in the
following words): Quickened, (as the Greek has it) Vivificatus autem spiritu,
made alive, which is of the same import with quickened: he died as to his human
Nature, but he did not continue in a state of death, but was made alive again.
Christ that died for sinners, was made alive. What was made alive? That which
was dead. What was dead? The man Christ; so that that which died for our sins,
was made alive again; that is, raised from the dead, that is the meaning of it.
There Is nothing can be made alive, but that which was dead. The Apostle uses
this word (...), for to signify the Resurrection of the body; and therefore in
reason it may signify so in this place, 1 Cor. 15.22, For as in Adam all died,
so in Christ shall all be made alive: It Is the same word (...), made alive:
that is, they shall be raised from the Grave. So here Christ died as to the
flesh, but he was made alive: that is, he was raised from the dead: Raised, How
was he raised? (it follows) In or by the Spirit. What Spirit is here? Why it is
that Spirit that did efficiently raise him; he was quickened in, or by the
Spirit.

Now by this Spirit, say the Papists, is meant the human Soul of Christ. For
this reason it cannot be meant of the Soul of Christ, because that the Soul of
Christ being a creature, could never quicken, could never raise the dead body
of Christ: For Christ was perfect God and perfect Man; as he was Man, he had a
Soul and body; his Soul and body were creatures; and though the Spirit or Soul
of Christ was an excellent, pure, holy Soul, without sin; yet it was not God,
and had not an Almighty power. None but God could raise the dead: therefore the
soul of Christ could never raise the body of Christ. What was it then? It must
then be the Holy Ghost, it must be the Spirit of God, which is God, which is
Almighty, that can raise the dead, and did raise the dead Christ.

For what reason do I think that by Spirit is here meant the Holy Ghost? Why, I
will tell you: Because all the Miracles that Christ, or his Apostles did,
whether they healed the sick, whether they raised the dead, or cast out Devils,
were all attributed to the Spirit of God, to the Holy Spirit of Christ. And
therefore no wonder if the very Resurrection of Christ be given unto the Spirit
of God. And (if I mistake not) that is the meaning, or the import of the
Apostle, in Romans 1.3, 4, Concerning his Son Jesus Christ our Lord, which was
made of the seed of David according to the flesh: And declared to be the Son of
God, with power, according to the Spirit of holiness: Holiness in the abstract,
that is by the Greeks commonly used for the concrete, and you may read it thus,
According to the Holy Ghost, he was declared to be the Son of God, with power,
with the power of the Holy Ghost, by the Resurrection from the dead; he was
raised by the Spirit of God, by which all works of Miracles were wrought, or
done by Christ and his Apostles; he was raised from the dead by this Spirit.

And now, That which follows will be somewhat clear: For if by being made
alive, is to be understood the Resurrection of Christ's human Nature, and by the
Spirit that raised that human Nature, is to be meant the Holy Ghost; then
proceeds, by which, or in which, he went and preached. He went. Who went?
Christ went. By which Spirit? by which Holy Ghost he went and preached to the
spirits in prison. Why, did Christ the Son of God preach to the old world
before he came in the flesh? Yes, How? By his Spirit. What immediately? No, but
by Noah, for he was a preacher of righteousness: Why all the Prophets they had
their Prophetical gifts, and they had them all from the Spirit of Christ, 2
Pet. 2.5. -- And spared not the old world, but saved Noah the eighth person, a
preacher of righteousness, bringing in the flood upon the world of the ungodly.
You must know, all the preachers under the Gospel have their gifts from the
Spirit; the Spirit is employed in sending them out: the Spirit assisteth them;
the Spirit said, Separate me Barnabas and Saul: It was the Spirit which sent
all the Prophets out; the Spirit of Christ sent out Noah, made him his
Preacher. So then, by this Spirit of Christ Noah preached, or Christ preached
in Noah. To whom? To the Spirits in prison; that is, to the souls of those
wicked men that are now in prison; that were in prison at the time when Peter
did write. When God drowned the world, that was not all; their bodies lay
floating upon the great Sea, but their souls went down into Hell. Well; but say
you, Did Christ by his Spirit preach to them after they went to Hell? No. They
were preached to when they were sometime disobedient, in the times of Noah; as
in the verse following; the Spirits in prison, that were sometime disobedient.
Disobedient to whom? To the Spirit. When? In the time of Noah; for they
disobeyed Noah, regarded not his preaching, nor the building of the Ark; looked
upon him as a madman, they took not the warning, and were swallowed up in the
flood, and are now in prison for their disobedience; they were disobedient to
the Spirit of Christ in Noah.

The Papists, by the Spirits in prison, they would persuade you, is to be meant
a Limbus Patrum, (as they call it) a middle state between Heaven and Hell,
wherein the Patriarchs were held until the time that Jesus Christ died; and
that when Christ was dead, and his body in the grave (for that three days and
nights) that Christ in his soul did descend into this Limbus, and there did
preach himself unto the soul of Abraham, of Isaac, and Jacob, and the rest of
those good Spirits that were alive in former days, and took them out of that
state, and carried them to Heaven. Thus say the Papists; this is their
Interpretation.

First, But this is not to be believed; because the Apostle speaks of such
Spirits that were disobedient, not of the Spirits of the Fathers: for the very
Papists themselves speak of no Spirits in their Limbus, but only good Spirits;
But the Apostle (in this place speaks of none but disobedient Spirits.

Secondly, It Is a vain Interpretation; because if that their Limbus (or middle
state) is only a receptacle of good Spirits: Why, they needed not to have
preaching after their death to them; because they believed while they were upon
the earth: and if they believed whilst upon the earth, they were justified; and
if they were justified, their sins were taken away: and what then should keep
them out of Heaven? It Is a very impertinent thing to think, that Christ should
go into their Limbus, to preach faith to them that have believed already.

Thirdly, Their Interpretation depends much upon the interpreting the Spirit
by which he was quickened; interpreting that to be meant of his soul. But if
that cannot be meant of his soul, but of the Holy Ghost, then their notion
falls to the ground: for they read it thus, Christ was dead in the body, but
kept alive in his soul; by which he went and preached unto these Fathers in
their Limbo.

Lastly, The Scripture is plain, that Christ did not go down into any such
middle-state; for he said to the Thief, This day shall thou be with me in
Paradise. This cannot be any middle-state, where Paul said, He saw and heard
things that were unutterable. Well then, this is that the Apostle means, that
those Spirits that are now in prison, were sometime alive in the body as we,
and they heard the preaching of the Spirit of Christ in Noah; but for their
disobedience they were taken off by the flood, and their souls were laid up in
Hell, as in a prison.

Now the Doctrine shall be this;

That the Spirits or souls of wicked men, (when they die) they shall as
prisoners of Gods justice be dragged out of their bodies; and by the righteous
sentence of God, shall be laid up in the prison of Hell, for their disobedience
unto the Spirit of Christ, that preaches in his Ministers.

All this is contained in the words.

In the opening of it, there are these things I shall speak to;

First, What are these Prisoners? Spirits.

Secondly, How are these Prisoners carried away to their Prison? By death (as
those of the old world were by a death caused by the flood).

Thirdly, What Is this prison? Hell.

Fourthly, What Is the cause of their commitment? Disobedience, disobedience to
the voice of the Spirit of Christ in his Ministers.

Lastly, Here is the justness of the Sentence implied; for inasmuch as they are
Gods prisoners, so they are prisoners that are justly imprisoned. I pray God by
what you and I hear of it (this day), it may never be any of our lots; that you
and I may never prove any of these dreadful Prisoners!

First, What are these Prisoners? Spirits, Souls: those immortal Souls that
live and abide in you, while you are in this world. Your bodies they are like
houses that are made up of clay, of earth: but a house is not without its
Tenant. God has made no body, but he has made it for a Tenant. Every human
body has his Tenant: What Is that? The Soul, the Spirit. It is that immortal
Spirit that is in you, by which you live, move, act, reason; by which you see,
hear, walk: all the motions that are seen, or done by any part of you, come
from the Spirit, from the Soul. And as it is with an old house, or any house,
if it be pulled down, the Tenant goes out of doors; if it be fired down, the
Tenant steps out of doors, and perhaps on the other side of the street, looking
upon his house burning down: The house is burnt, but the Tenant's alive: So it
is with you, when these bodies of clay of yours fall, are they drowned (with
these of the old world); should they be burnt, should they fall by a Fever, or
any other way; your souls (like Tenants) they come out: That living spirit in
you comes out, you give up the Ghost, give up the Spirit. The body returns
(says Solomon) to the earth, your Spirit returns to God, to be judged. This is
the Prisoner. But, O what a sad Prisoner is the soul of a wicked man, when
stripped of his body! He is a naked Prisoner, and a friendless Prisoner; which
are two sad circumstances of a prisoner. When God sends the Sergeant death,
and seizes upon the spirit of a wicked man, knocks at the door of his body;
the body is fast bolted, locked, no getting in. What does death do? breaks down
the Body, pulls it about his ears: sometime death drowns him, sometime death
hangs him, sometime stabs him, sometimes he goes to Sea, and is cast away,
sometimes a Cart goes over him; and so the poor soul of the wicked man is
arrested; death lays hold of him, and drags him away to the Tribunal of God,
and there is he in a naked condition: naked of the world, naked of his body: A
poor thing! When a wicked man's spirit is in the world, he has a house, a body;
and out of his body he has the casements of his eyes to look through, and has
some kind of enjoyment in his meats and drinks. But when death comes, he pulls
down the house about his ears, and the soul's dragged away, and there is no more
the light of the Sun, no more eating and drinking, no more the delights of the
flesh. He is like the malefactor that has committed some great crime, and the
Prince sends the Officers, and they surround the house, and break it open, and
drag him away in his shirt, and will not give him time to put on his clothes. This
is a sad sight. Just so will thy wicked soul, O thou wicked man, be dragged
away without shirt, or hose, or shoe, out of the house of thy body. And when
the poor prisoner, the spirit of a wicked man, is sent by death to the Tribunal
of God, he is in a friendless condition. If a man is Arrested for debt, there
may be some composition; some good neighbors may come and say, Pray have pity,
he is a poor man, he cannot pay you, he will pay you when he can, I will lay
down somewhat for him: you have such a thing as that is here, that saves the
poor man from prison. But alas! thou poor wicked soul that would take no
warning, but have been disobedient to the Gospel, when death comes with a
Commission from God, from Christ the great Judge of quick and dead, he seizes
upon thee, draggeth thee away; and perhaps, when thou art dragging away, thou
look about, what, can I have no friend to intercede for me? O, for a little
more time to repent in! A little more time to pay my debts in! What, will none
lay down a ransom for me? No, No. Thou wicked man, while thou art in the body,
Jesus Christ comes often in his Ministers, saying to thee, Thou wicked sinner,
thou art ten thousand Talents in debt; Come sinner, believe in me, repent of
thy sins against me, and I will pay all thy debts; I will discharge them all:
but thou poor rebel would not hearken to it, but thou would go on, and
run farther and farther. Now says Christ, I will have no more to do with him;
Justice, seize upon him. Sergeant of death, arrest him, drag him along with
thee: bring him to my Tribunal, and there to prison thou must go: and now poor
soul, thou have no body to pay thy debts for thee; now thou must go, and pay
them all thy self: but thou will never be able to pay the uttermost farthing;
nay, thou art not able to pay one farthing.

Well, but whether must I go? To prison. What Is that prison? Hell (man), that is
the prison: so it is called a prison, Rev. 20.1, 2, And I saw an Angel come
down from heaven, having the key of the bottomless pit, and a great chain in
his hand. And he laid hold on the Dragon that old Serpent, which is the Devil
and Satan, and bound him: Where? why where he was loosed afterward, for a
time, Verse. 7, And when the thousand years are expired, Satan shall be loosed
out of his prison. This deep pit is here called a prison; this deep pit where
the Devil is chained, is a prison, and thither must every arrested sinner be
dragged into this pit, and laid in this prison, in chains, under darkness. Why,
say you, Why is Hell called a prison (for these poor spirits to be laid in)?

Why, because of the resemblance that it has to a prison. In these three
respects Hell is called a Prison.

First, It Is a place of punishment, as Prisons are.

Secondly, It Is a place of Restraint.

Thirdly, It Is a place of Abode.

1. A prison is a place of Punishment: Alas, your prisons are full of the
instruments of punishment: Go into a prison, and there you shall see your dark
dungeon, without any light (or next to none), there you may see your
Press-yard, where the malefactors are sometimes pressed to death, and you may
see the press, and the weights that are laid upon them: go into Prisons, and
there you shall see Racks to torture men, to stretch them, to pull their limbs
and members out of joint; there you shall see Chains, Chains for the feet, for
the hands, to bind them, to load them, to pain them. Prisons are places of
punishment, torment, misery. Hell is called a Prison, because it is a place of
pain and torment. Why, what is there in Hell that answers to these Racks,
Presses, Irons, Chains? Why there is darkness, there is your Dungeon, utter
darkness, extreme darkness: For Misery, there is weeping, wailing and gnashing
of teeth. For Torment, there is fire, everlasting fire that will never go out.
There Is a rack for the Spirit, there is the worm that never dies. For a Jailer,
there is the Devil, that is in for his own fault, and to be tormented himself,
and to torment others. O! it is a sad Prison! to be under a cruel Jailer, in
Chains, and fire, with a worm gnawing at the very heart, under the wrath of
God! This is a sad state, sinners! a sad state! The Lord help you to believe
it. But you are apt to hear this as a Fable; but believe it, you will find this
true. The old world was as secure as you are. Repent, faith God, or I will
drown you all, and (that which is more) I will damn you too: I will send your
bodies to rot in the ground, and your souls to the Prison of Hell. Noah tells
them so: Says God to Noah, Prepare thy Ark against the time: He did so. Why
what did the rest do? They believed it not, they regarded it not: they thought
Noah must say something, and they looked upon him as a Madman, and so you do
Us. Sinners! take heed that death does not come and drag you away before you
have repented, and obeyed the voice of Christ in his Ministers. The old world
because they did not repent, they were damned for not harkening to Noah; and
you shall be damned if you will not hearken to Us. The Lord awaken your sleepy
souls, that you may not sleep the sleep of death; that you may not go down with
your bodies to the Grave, and your souls to Hell.

But again, Hell is called a Prison, because it is a place of restraint; you
cannot go out when you please. Go to Newgate, they will talk with you through
the grates, but they cannot go out of doors, neither can friends come to them,
but must ask the Jailer leave: and if he has commission to deny any, away you
must go, though a Wife, though a Father or Brother: So, poor soul, when God
has stripped thee of thy body, and laid thee in this Prison, thou shall be
restrained, and others restrained from coming to thee; there is no friend to
come to thee then. Noah preached to the old world in the body, and so we do to
you; but when you have by your disobedience provoked God to cut you off, and
lay your souls in this Prison, there is no coming to you, no preacher then, no
Christ, and no Spirit to offer Salvation then: you are poor Prisoners
restrained and kept from all manner of comfort. O says the rich man in Hell,
Father Abraham, O that some would come and give me but the refreshment of a
drop of cold water to cool my tongue in this torment! No, says he, there is a
gulf between us and you; it is a Gaol, and the Prisoner is bounded up by the
Justice of God; and there is a charge, none shall come from us to you, nor from
you to us. It Is a Prison, you are restrained, poor sinners! Will you believe?
No, you don't believe. Because you don't believe, you will be damned: This
damned the old world, and this will damn you, if you don't believe.

Thirdly, Hell is a Prison, as it is a place of Abode. When you are in Prison,
if it be for debt, How can you get out? Why these Three ways you may get out of
these Prisons.

1. By breaking of them: but you cannot break the gates of Hell, no you cannot;
you may clamber these walls, and come down by ropes: but there is a great gulf,
that you may as well think of clambering the Stars, as to get out of this
Prison. And again,

2. There is an other way, if you cannot pay your debts, another may: But there
is no paying for you out of Hell. Christ has once done it, if you will repent
he will pay all for you; but if once clapped into that Prison, Christ's blood will
profit you nothing. Or,

Lastly, By Pardon. If no body will pay the debt, the Creditor may forgive him:
but believe it, sinner, you will never have such a pardon from God; for here is
your time of pardon, if thou will repent, Christ he will pardon thee, To day if
ye will hear his voice, harden not your hearts: but if you die, no more pardon,
no more offers of Grace; then thou art shut up for ever. It Is a Prison. Never
man that was in Hell, got out of Hell more. So much for the Third.

Fourthly, What Is the Crime (having discoursed of the Prison)? Wh^^'s the
Crime? Disobedience. That were sometimes disobedient in the days of Noah. To
whom? To the Spirit of Christ. In whom? Noah Where (...) the old world. Why,
did the Spirit appear in visible shape? No, but in Noah, a Preacher of
righteousness. They hearkened not to Noah, and for that they perished: That is
the great crime for which men have from the beginning of the world gone down
into Hell, for their disobedience to the Spirit of Christ in his Prophets, and
in his Ministers. Why, what were the sins that they were guilty of, that Noah
called them to repent of? Why you shall see in the 6 Chap. of Genesis and the 5
ver. (they were a wicked sort of people, and made God repent that ever he made
them, Genesis 6.5), And God saw that the wickedness of man was great in the earth,
and that every imagination of the thought of his heart was only evil
continually. Here were wicked spirits, wicked souls: they are the principals in
sin, and they are the principals in punishment. The wickedness of their hearts.
Men are condemned for the wickedness of their thoughts, as well as for the
wickedness of their lives, The 11, 12, 13, Verses, The earth also was corrupt
before God, and the earth was filled with violence. And God looked upon the
earth, and behold it was corrupt: for all flesh had corrupted his way upon the
earth. And God said unto Noah, the end of all flesh is come before me; for the
earth is filled with violence through them: and behold, I will destroy them
with the earth. Here are wicked hearts, and wicked lives; wicked thoughts, and
wicked deeds: When God does imprison souls in Hell, it is for their wicked
thoughts, as well as for their wicked lives; and some of you perhaps never take
account of the wickedness of your thoughts; and yet God does take a a special
account of your wicked thoughts. And in this state of sin they were a secure
people, they feared nothing; they went on in trading, and merry in their
business, as the world is just now. As in Mat. 24.38, As in the days that were
before the flood, they were eating and drinking, marrying and giving in
marriage, until the day that Noah entered into the Ark, and knew not until the
flood came, and took them all away; so shall also the coming of the son of man
be. They were sinners, wicked rebellious sinners, and secure sinners, and Noah
was sent to awaken them out of this security, and called them to repentance,
and threatened the wrath of God upon them if they did not repent. But (says
Christ) they regarded it not; no, not to the very day that the flood came. And
so it will be (says he) against the coming of the son of man. And is it not so
now? Look about your streets, in the morning there you hear the clattering of
your Shop doors, and setting out of your wares, and buying and selling; and
when Breakfast, or Dinner, or Supper comes, you set down, and eat and drink;
you lie down and rise again; and sometimes you go to the Change, and busy you
are, like so many Ants; and here we Ministers of the Gospel come, like Noah, we
say, Repent, repent, for God has appointed a day wherein he will judge the
world for sin, by the man Christ Jesus. Yea, that he has a prison to throw
your souls in at death, where he has darkness to affright you, and chains to
bind you, and fire to burn you; and you mind us no more than these people did
in the days of Noah; no, not you: till sickness comes, or the day of your
death; and then you begin to bethink your selves, and cry, O that I had an Ark
now! O that I had an interest in Christ! O that I had Grace and a title to
Heaven! Now nothing but Christ, nothing but Grace, nothing but praying and
sending for Ministers to come and talk with you. Here is a Customer come in, O
don't talk to me now! O I must mind Heaven! But before that time, you are as
careless as the old World was, until the flood came and swept them all away. O
you poor fools! what do you do? you are busy for time, and regardless for
eternity: Death is at your doors, and you know not how soon you may hear the
blows and clattering about your body, and your house fall, and your souls
hurried away; and yet do you mind nothing but eating and drinking, buying and
selling, and the like. What will you do? The Lord awaken you! Here you sit and
hear me, and you are stupefied many of you, you gaze upon me, you do not know
what to think of what I say; and thou art questioning whether what I say be
true; and thou art thinking to escape, but assure thy self sinner, that as sure
as God is in Heaven, thou will not escape, if thou do not believe now in this
thy day, when God is calling upon thee, now hear his voice; but if thou go
on secure, as the old World, say you had warning, and that I gave you warning
this day: God knows but before seven days hence thou may be in this prison. O
come to Christ that your debts may be discharged. But you go away, go to
dinner, and come again, make it a hearing-business, and do no more, and think
your selves secure: This will not serve thy turn, poor sinner, no, no; no, this
will not do. Go into thy Closet and down upon thy knees, tell God what a sinner
thou art; tell him how much thou have provoked him, and promise him to obey him
for the time to come; and never give him rest till he has given thee an
interest in Christ, and an assurance of an Ark; and then go comfortably, man,
about thy business, when thou have got an assurance of another world. Noah
might go and eat, and drink comfortably, he had an Ark to go into when the
flood came; so thou poor soul if thou would but repent and believe in Jesus
Christ, thou may comfortably eat and drink, and buy and sell as thou have
occasion, for thou have an Ark. But for thee to live in a wicked ungodly way,
and take no thought for eternity: what will thou do sinner, when death comes
and awakens thee? O that the Lord would awaken you this day! How few of you
have been a hammering upon this Ark? a making this Ark? I tell thee, (I will be
a Prophet to thee, sinner!) thou will wish a thousand times that thou had
taken this counsel. Be wise now in time; thou will repent that thou have not
prayed more, that thou have not repented more. O do it now then, for the Lords
sake; for when thou art once thrown into prison, thou art gone for ever. It is
for the disobeying of the Gospel; and therefore the rich man in the Gospel
cried, Father Abraham, I have brethren upon earth, O that some would go and
tell them: no, no, says Abraham, they have Moses and the Prophets, if they will
not believe them, neither will they believe, though one go from the dead. So
then the rich man is in hell; how so? Why I did not believe my sin would bring
me there? Why, did not Moses and the Prophets tell thee so? Yes, But I did not
believe; O that some would come from the dead! so sinners, you go on in sin,
why do you so? Because you do not believe what will come of it. Why, did not
Ministers tell you so? and they are sent of Christ to tell you so? has not
Moses and the Prophets told you so? Yes, yes; But you will not believe us, nor
Christ, nor his Apostles, nor Moses, nor the Prophets. Men will have their
sins, and they will not fear being damned; though all the whole cloud of
witnesses warn them, they regard them not. But though you will not regard them
now, they will all come in as witnesses against you at that day. Had not you a
Bible? Yes, but I could not read. But did not you hear it read, and had it
preached to you? What can you say? But say you, here is a prisoner, and sent to
prison too, for disobeying the Gospel; but is it justice for God to send men to
prison for not harkening to a company of prating Preachers? Prating! God will
vindicate us from prating; I tell you, we come with our Commission from God to
you, and Christ speaks by me, and by every Minister that comes to you; and if
you reject us, you reject him; if you reflect upon us for prating, you may as
well say, it is a prating Christ. We beseech you in Christ's stead to be
reconciled to God. We come not with our own words, but the words of the Lord we
bring and preach.

Well, but is it just for God to damn me thus eternally in a prison, because I
will not repent of my sin? Yes. Why?

First, because God does it.

Secondly, because thou deserve it.

God! why what is he? A righteous God, a just God, just in his nature,
righteous in all his ways; and when he does pour out his plagues upon sinners,
the Heavens glorify his Justice, and cry Hosanna's to him. See how God is
applauded in his severe acts of Justice upon men: Rev. 15.1, 3, And I saw
another sign in heaven, great and mavelous, seven Angels, having the seven
last plagues, for in them is filled up the wrath of God. Ver. 3. And they sung
the song of Moses the servant of God, and the song of the Lamb, saying, Great
and mavelous are thy works, Lord God Almighty; just and true are thy ways,
thou King of Saints. Go Angels, pour out the plagues full of my wrath upon
yonder rebellious sinners. And when the Angels come upon this work, Righteous,
O Lord God Almighty art thou, thou loving King of Saints: Thou loving King of
Saints that have mercy for thousands, and ten thousands of them that love thee:
But for them that hate thee, Just and righteous art thou, O God, in all thy
ways of pouring out plagues full of thy wrath upon men. O sinner, the Angels
will shout up the Justice of God for pouring down the wrath of God upon you. So
sinner, do but think of it; suppose thou Drunkard were to die to night, and to
be dragged to the Tribunal of Christ, and to receive this sentence, Go, get
thee down to thy fellow prisoners that have disobeyed the voice of my Son. O
poor Drunkard! for thee to hear thousands of Angels (presently) shout, and say,
Righteous and just art thou, O Lord God, for sending that Drunkard to hell. O
we knew with what a hard heart he persever'd in his sins, notwithstanding all
the calls and warnings given him by the Spirit of thee our God in thy
Ministers. Rev. 16.5, Thou art righteous, O Lord, which art, and wast, and
shall be, because thou have judged thus. Angels admire God for judging thus;
that is, for judging the spirits of wicked men to hell; and afterward for
raising their bodies, and uniting spirit and body together, and throwing down
both into hell. Now,

Secondly, Thou have deserved it, sinner; thy crime deserves it: What is the
crime? The crime is disobedience, rebellion, stubborness, obstinacy in sin; men
are damned for that. The wicked world had evil thoughts, were full of evil
thoughts and imaginations continually, they were full of violence, full of
oppression. Were they damned for that? Yes; but not only for that. What then?
why it was because they were told (by the Spirit of Christ in Noah) the
wickedness of these thoughts, how they angered God, and God repented that he
made them; but notwithstanding this, they would go on; this is that which damns
the sinner; it is not barely, because a sinner, but it is because when he is
called upon (by the Ministers of Christ) to repent, he will not repent. You
poor sinners, you have lived lives without God, without Christ, prayerless
lives, drunken lives, unclean lives, Sabbath-breaking lives; shall these damn
me? no sinner, if thou will now (while Christ speaks by his Ministers) hearken
to his voice, and not harden thy heart against the Call of the Gospel; these
shall not damn thee, if thou would but repent and confess them to God, and
give thy self up to Christ, to be ruled and governed by him: God for Christ's
sake will then blot them all out, and they shall never rise up in judgment
against thee. What is it damns me then? why this, That thou art a Drunkard, and
wilt be so; a Swearer, and wilt be so; an unclean person, and wilt be so; a
prayerless man, (thirty or forty years) and wilt not call upon God: Thou art an
obstinate sinner, a rebellious sinner; though Christ calls by one Minister, and
another, yet thou regardest it not: it is for this that God will throw thee to
hell; and how just a thing is it for thee to be damned for stubbornness? If a
child has committed a fault, and will be reclaimed, the father will forgive
him; but if he will go on still in his stubbornness, the natural affections of
the father will be turned to hardness. You see the Prodigal when he came home
crying, I have sinned against heaven and before thee: father let me be as one
of thy hired servants: The father meets him, falls about his neck, and kisses
him, takes him home, and says, My son was lost, and is found: he was dead, and
is alive again; and there was joy and rejoicing. But if this son now after he
had spent all, and continued with his harlots, and never had thought of
returning, he might have died and rotted there in that field with the swine. So
sinner, if thou will still keep to thy swinish lusts, and there lie and die,
and rot, and go to hell, God does not matter thee, Christ will not regard thee.
But if it comes into thy heart, Lord I am in a starving condition, here I am, a
rebel, an unclean person, a drunkard; I am a weary, I see I am undone; I come
to thee, father. Go now, and he will accept of thee, and receive thee. But if
thou art stubborn and rebellious, and wilt go on, thou may expect no other,
but that God will inflict upon thee, hell to thy soul at death, and at the
Resurrection, hell to soul and body.

But there are Aggravations of this thy stubbornness, for thou art stubborn,

First, Against the tenders of mercy that are made to thee.

Secondly, Against the long-suffering of God to thee. And,

Thirdly, Thou art stubborn, notwithstanding thou have had so much warning.

And these things will justify God, and lay a foundation for condemning thee
in thine own Conscience: As,

First, Mercy, mercy! I will pardon their iniquities; let a wicked man forsake
his sins. What then? I will have mercy upon him, and will abundantly pardon
him. Here are tenders of mercy offering strength to help thee to conquer thy
lusts (according to that of the Prophet), O ye simple ones, how long will ye
love simplicity? Are you blind? I will teach you. Are you weak? I will
strengthen you. How will thou do it? I will pour out my Spirit upon thee. Have
thou a mind to have Grace? He will give it thee. Have thou a mind to have the
Spirit of Grace and Supplication? He will bestow it upon thee. But for thee to
go on in sin, and reject pardon when offered: What can thou say for thy self?

Again, These tenders of mercy are made with long-suffering. There are a great
many sinners (I am afraid some here are not yet Converted), who all for a long
time have heard Sermons: God has been calling upon you. As God said of the old
world: Here is a wicked people, What shall I do with them? What? Why Justice
might have said, destroy them. No, says God, they are a rash
giddy-headed-people, I will give them warning. How long? Why almost one hundred
and twenty years. So sinner, God saw thee Drunk, heard thee Swear: Justice
might have said, cut him off: No, says God, I will try him with another month
of Sermons, another year of Sermons; I will try what my Children, that are his
Friends, will say to him. O sinner! The long-suffering of God waits upon
thee. Grace cries, repent, and I will pardon thee: Repent, and I will give thee
my Spirit: though thou art a wicked Rebel, I will not snatch thee away; I will
let thee live five years longer, ten years longer: O, if thou go to Hell,
what will Conscience say? O thou art a stubborn sinner. Thou must say,
Righteous art thou, O God, in all thy ways, and just in all thy judgments. I
might have been in Heaven, but I would not; and now I am in Hell, and that
justly; because I preferred my lusts before God.

Lastly, Never say, it is an unjust Sentence; because God gives you warning:
There is the merit of the cause. If nothing will do, Why then take notice God
gives you warning. He does not let you go on, and say, let them alone, I will
be even with them at length: He might have done so: No, but in pity to poor
sinners, he gives them warning. Sinner, repent, says God, and be reconciled to
me; come and lay hold upon Christ, for else I will damn thee. Take notice of
it, there is a Tophet prepared, and everlasting burnings prepared, a worm that
never dies: and I tell thee beforehand what it will cost thee, and yet
sinners will go on still. Never complain that God has done thee wrong, he has
offered to give thee his Spirit to sanctify thee, and save thee. But if thou will not, after all, thank thy self if thou go to Hell. O sinners, What will
you do? Will you imitate the old world, or imitate Noah? Why, if you imitate
the old world, you see then what a desperate course you are running; you are
running your bodies to the Grave, and your souls to Hell: For when the flood
came there was not one spared: The flood takes whole Families; they look ghastly
one at another: Father, what shall I do (says the child)? And when the world
was full of cries and scrieks, and they all drowned, one would have thought
this was enough, yet God had no pity upon them; for as soon as they were dead,
their disobedient souls were laid in Prison.

Well now, say you, What shall we do? Why, obey the Gospel, This is your Duty.
Obey Christ Jesus speaking by his Spirit in Us, poor men, that are the
Ministers of Jesus Christ; for we are but as instruments to convey the mind of
the great God to you; for certainly, what I have Preached to you, is no other
than the word of Jesus Christ, and he will make it good. O get into some
corner, and cry mightily to the Lord, and pray Christ to pay all your debts for
you; and that the blood of Christ might take away all your iniquities, and that
you might have an Ark to save you from the fire that will burn the world; as
Noah had an Ark to save him and his house from the flood that did drown the
world; and then you are safe, and never safe till then. The Lord awaken you,
that you may take warning, and not go away and mind no more what you have
heard, than they did, and so be lost as they were.

1 Peter III. the later part of the 20 Ver. -- While the Ark was a preparing:
wherein few, that is, eight souls were saved by water.


IN the former words you have an account given you of the Destruction of the
old world by the flood. They were all drowned, Men, Women, and Children. God
neither spared the grey-headed-sinner; no, nor the sucking-infant; children of
wicked and Rebellious Parents, he drowned them all. The reason of this wrath of
God that was poured out upon them, was their Disobedience; their disobedience
to the Spirit of Christ, by which Noah Preached to them. What did he Preach? He
Preached to them Repentance, called them to repent and reform their lives; and
if they would not, God would drown them all. Why what were their sins? Why, the
very thoughts and imaginations of their hearts were evil, and that continually.
They were men of wicked hearts, they were devising nothing but mischief, they
thought of nothing but the satisfaction of their lusts. I wish it be not the
case of some here. I am sure it is the case of every unconverted sinner, the
imaginations of his heart are evil, and that continually; for he does defile
even his good thoughts with unbelief.

And their sin was likewise the sin of their lives. Their hands were full of
violence, they were oppressors, they were cruel, they were bloody; and besides
this, they were secure and wanton, and they minded nothing but eating and
drinking, and marrying, and giving to marriage, their whole hearts were taken
up in these things. No man enquired after God, no man regarded the voice of God
in his servant Noah. God waited upon them, (after he had sent Noah, and
forewarned them) above a hundred years; (and that while, was Noah a building
his Ark), but they despised the long-suffering of God, which should have led
them to repentance: and at length the threatened Judgment came upon them, and
they were drowned, all, but eight persons. This is not all, God did not only
destroy their bodies, but likewise (we read here in the Apostle Peter) their
Spirits were laid in prison, in the infernal Prison of Hell for their
disobedience to the voice of Christ. Having already spoken to this; The
Doctrine that I raised from this was, That those wicked men (while they are in
their bodies) that will not obey the voice of Christ in his Ministers, but live
and die impenitently, their souls by the righteous judgment of God shall be
condemned unto the prison of Hell: For what is said of this old world, will be
verified of every impenitent sinner here, that dies in his impenitent state;
Lord, who is it that does believe thy report? Few sinners (the Lord knows) do
regard it. God knows his word is little believed. We do as little believe these
things now, as the old world did: and as the flood came upon them before they
were aware, so the spirits of some here (God knows, as Jeremy said, I do not
desire to see that evil day) may be in these Prisons before they believe them.
Death (sinners) is coming, which will drag you to the Tribunal of Christ; and
assuredly Christ will do you justice: I say, he will do you justice. He that
will be faithful to his promises that he makes to believers that obey the
Gospel, he will be faithful to do justice to those that are disobedient. He
will give you all your Mittimus's, he will lay you fast enough; and when he
has laid the Chains on, take them off if you can. I know (through your
unbelief) what I say, seems to you but as a Fable: So did the drowning of the
world appear to be; but they found it true, and so will you, if ye repent not.
It amazeth me, my Brethren (when my faith at any time is but raised to the
close of these truths of God; it amazeth me) to look upon your faces, to see
how indifferently you look, how carelessly you look; you look up-and-down this
place as if these things did not concern you: but the reason of it is, you do
not believe, your unbelief ruins you, and will ruin you for ever. What man that
really was in his wits, and did believe a Hell, would venture upon those sins
that will certainly bring him thither? But you slatter your selves in your
unbelief, that there is no punishment to the wicked, nor reward to the godly;
and so you go on in sin: These things are true (my Brethren), your Consciences
must bear me witness they are true. No man or woman that are in their wits, and
did really believe an eternal Torment that is laid up for the disobedient to
the Gospel, but they would obey be-times, they would not go on hardening their
hearts against God: but you do not believe. We shall presently make some
enquiry into the reasons of it.

We come now to the other part, wherein you have an account of a few that are
saved. A few! Lord, What a few! Eight persons out of a world of men and women.
I do not know but the world at that time was as full of men and women as it is
now; for the world was at that time about Fifteen hundred years old, and they
lived many years: so that it is likely that there was a very numerous company
of people; and that there were great Cities, and great Kingdoms upon the earth.
What a strange thing is it, that of a world of people there should be found but
eight persons that would believe a God! And yet it is certainly so, there was
but eight persons saved; all the rest were drowned for their disobedience to
the voice of the Spirit of Christ in Noah. Why were no more saved? Because
there did no more believe. They did not believe that God was in good-earnest,
they did not believe that God would send the flood, as Noah threatened: they
looked upon Noah as a madman to build an Ark they knew not for what. Just so
does the world now, they look upon poor, humble, believing Christians, as a
company of melancholy distracted persons, that look sadly, and pray much, and
weep much, and hear much, and are afraid of sinning; and all this while they
are but busy about their Ark: and they cry, what a stir is here that these
people make? I will tell you what the meaning of it is: why this world is to be
burned, and these poor souls are providing against the burning of the world:
The wicked must be turned into Hell, and all the Nations that forget God; and
these poor, praying, humble Christians do believe, fear, and tremble; and that
is the reason that they live not as you live, but take that care that they do,
to prepare against that great day of the Lord. And were not you desperately
blind and foolish, you would do so too? There were eight persons (says Peter)
saved. Which were they? All of one Family, Noah and his Wife; there was the
three Sons of Noah, and their three Wives, Genesis 7.7, eight persons in one
family, they were saved, they were saved from the deluge, they were saved from
being drowned. God knows whether all these were saved from hell (too) of these
eight. For of these, Shem, Ham, and Japhet, there was (one of these Sons) Ham,
that did laugh at his fathers nakedness, and God afterward cursed him; so that
whether he was eternally saved, is not a thing certain unto us. But this is
sure, all these eight persons did believe the deluge would come, or else they
would not have entered into the Ark, for if any of them had looked upon it as a
mere old doting fancy of their father, they would have been ashamed to have
gone into the Ark; but at the set-time before it began to rain, they all went,
therefore they all did believe the word of the Lord, that the deluge would
come. It Is true they received an encouragement by the miraculous bringing of
all creatures into the Ark to save them alive. Wherein few, eight persons were
saved by water. Saved by water! there may be a double sense:

By water as an instrument; for that very water that was the instrument of
destruction to the enemies of God, became a means of salvation to these eight
persons; for it bore up that Ark wherein the lives of these eight persons were.
It may be rendered,

Thus again, But they were saved by, or through water, saved through the danger
of water, carried in the Ark through, or upon the water.

The Observation that I raise from it, is this,

That though many have the means of Salvation offered them, yet there are but
few that make use of these means, and do obtain Salvation by them.

The old World had the means, as those eight persons had the same means; they
were told of it, they were a hundred years told of it, God waited long enough;
there were many had the means; if they had repented, the flood had not come; or
if more had repented, they had been saved. But these eight did believe, and
they were saved by water, the rest had as good means as they, but they did not
repent upon it, they did not believe upon it.

This should be an awakening Consideration to us, that though God does afford
the means of Salvation to multitudes, yet there are a very few that do make use
of those means, and are saved by them: I say it is an awakening Consideration.
Here is England, a great and populous Country, here is London a great City, a
City that has some hundred thousands of souls in it, they have all the means
as the old World had; the Gospel is preached up and down the City, and up and
down the Suburbs; the voice is every where, throughout all your streets.
Repent, for the Kingdom of God is at hand; repent, for there is a day of
judgment, and Christ is made the Judge of quick and dead, that will give to
every man according to his works. You have all the means, but alas, how few of
England, how few of London, or of Southwark are like to be saved by these
means! for how few do believe what we preach? How few do repent upon their
seeming profession of repentance, and believing? How few reform their lives?
how few are converted in Southwark, in London, in England, so as to be healed
by the grace of God! How few! Many are called (as Christ says) but few chosen.
Why here is perhaps three or four hundred people here, you have been called
every one of you to repent, but when God that searches the heart, comes for
to examine the truth of our repentance, and of our faith, how few, how few in
likelihood will there be found penitent? how few! alas, it was always so: Many
called, a whole world called to repent, but eight believed. But perhaps you
will say, that was an notorious wicked world, that old world; but surely the
world is grown better since. Truly, there is reason it should, because they
have that judgment to awaken them; but we will show you that the hearts of men
have been desperately wicked, all along to this day; yea, under the richest
means that ever God has afforded the world, from the beginning to this very
day. And we will take the seed of Abraham, and give you several instances
thereof: God promised Abraham, that he would give him a seed that should be as
the stars of heaven, and would take that seed into a Covenant with himself, and
that he would be their God, and they should be his people. What a wonderful
blessing was this, for the great God to marry himself to a people? And he gave
them the Covenant of Circumcision for a memorial of this Covenant, of this
betrothing; he gave them the Oracles, and the Promises, and was with them, in
the midst of them; he was the King of them, he made War and Peace for them,
fought for them, and defended them. They had all the means of Salvation, the
best means that the world had in those days. But you will see how few of them
made use of those means of grace that God afforded them.

We will begin with this great people of Jacob coming out of Egypt. (The Lord
help you to consider what I am speaking; for many, because they are Christians,
and are baptized, they believe they shall be saved; but you are deceived. Just
like the old World, they eat, and they drank, they married, and gave in
marriage, and never dreamt that God was angry with them, and would drown them;
and so do these people of England, never think that God does intend to burn
them.) Now you shall see what advantage they made of the means, and you may
read as in a glass the condition of England, and the most parts of the world at
this day, Numb. 1.45, 46, So were all those that were numbered of the children
of Israel* by the house of their fathers, from twenty years old and upward, all
that were able to go forth to war in Israel: Even all they that were numbered
were six hundred thousand, and three thousand five hundred and fifty. These
were the people that God brought out of Egypt into the Wilderness, and
afterward led to Canaan, the seed of Jacob, six hundred thousand, all men,
from twenty years old and upward: How vast must be the number of Women and
Children, and young men also, that were below twenty years old! above six
hundred thousand fighting men! An Army of twenty thousand is a great Army; but
a hundred thousand, that is much more: But here was an Army of six hundred
thousand fighting men, besides Women and Children. What had God done for this
people? I will tell you what God had done for them: why, they were in Egypt
under a cruel hard-hearted Pharaoh, they were groaning under their burden, and
God remembers his Promise made to Abraham, That he would visit his seed, and
bring them into Canaan. God comes by Moses, and commanded them to go; They are
my people says God, let them go and serve me. I will not let them go, says
Pharaoh; why who is your God, that I should obey him? God at length sends one
plague upon him, and then another; and then another, and then a fourth, a
fifth, a sixth, a seventh, an eighth, a ninth, a tenth; ten Plagues God sent
upon him before Pharaoh would let them go. When they were gone, they came to a
Red Sea, (I am telling you, my Brethren, the works of God for his people in the
days of old, remember them, my Brethren, they are written for your example,
they came to a Red Sea) now thinks Pharaoh I have got them in a trap, I will
follow them, I will pursue, I will overtake, I will destroy them; but God makes
the Red Sea divide, and brings them all through; but Pharaoh and his Host
assayed to follow, and God makes the Sea to close and drowned them all. Well,
God carries them from thence to Mount Sinai, and there was thundrings and
lightnings, and gave them his Law, and his Covenants, and did as it were
solemnly marry that people to himself, promisiing them if they did but do what
he bid them, he would be their God, and fight their battles, and give them
counsel in all their straits, and be a defense round about them. Away he leads
them then, and gives them a Symbol of himself; for if they marched by night,
there was a pillar of Fire; if by day, there was a Cloud went with them. A
wonderful condescension, that God should do so with them! They come into a
Wilderness, they want bread, they begin to murmur; Well, says God, they shall
see what it is to be my people; he gives them bread from Heaven, rains down
Manna: They want water; Well, says God, they shall not want water; he
commands Moses to strike a Rock, and there came streams out of it, and those
streams followed them where ever they went up and down the Wilderness; they
wanted Water no more. What now became of this People? Here is a good God, he
lets them want nothing; he works wonders for them, and delivers them with a
mighty hand, and gives them Angels food to eat, and water out of a Rock to
drink; and here he numbreth them in the Wilderness, Six hundred thousand
fighting men. What did these people do? Do! Surely they loved God, and were
obedient to his Law, and would never murmur against him more. But did they do
so? No, you shall see how that before Forty years came about, God cut off all
these Six hundred thousand men, and left their carcases to rot in the
Wilderness, and swore in his wrath, they should never enter into his rest.
Notwithstanding he had done all this for them, they so provoked him to wrath,
and so abused all the means of mercy, that God cut them all off: See also,
Numb. 14.28, 29, 30, Say unto them (says God), As truly as I live, says the
Lord, as ye have spoken in mine ears, so will I do to you. What had they said
in his ears? They had murmured against God, and said, God has brought us and
our children into the wilderness to destroy us. Well, says he, I have heard
your murmuring, and for your murmuring against me, your carcases shall fall in
the Wilderness; and all that were numbered of you, according to your whole
number, from twenty years old and upward, which you have murmured against me.
Doubtless ye shall not come into the Land concerning which I swear to possess
you of, save Caleb the son of Jephuneh, and Joshuah the son of Nun. There were
six hundred thousand men, and amongst them there was but two men that did
believe that Promise that God made to Abraham, that he would give them Canaan
for an Inheritance. O read to day as in a glass here, the infidelity of
England, and the World; for as face answers to face in a glass, so does the
face of the generality of the men of the world, answer to the faces of the
unbelieving Israelites, and old unbelieving World. But says he, For your
little ones, which ye say shall be a prey; No, (says God) your little ones
shall go into the Land, and shall possess it; for they knew nothing of your
murmuring. But as for you, there is not a man of you shall enter into the Land.
Well, go a little farther, (for the instances are many,) I will pass by all the
dealings of God with this very people under the Judges, where you may read that
they were as many times captivated (for their rebellion against God) as they
had a Judge raised up among them; but we will pass by the time of this people
under those Judges (because the time will be short for me to relate all the
dealings of Christ with this Church) and we will come to those Twelve Tribes,
after they came into Canaan, and were divided into two great Kingdoms, Ten
Tribes under Jeroboam, and Two Tribes under the Posterity of David, two mighty
Kingdoms; all of them that had, or might have had the Oracles, Promises, and
Covenants, all of them had the Bible, and might have used it. But what did they
do with it? They cried themselves up, (just like England) The Church, the
Church; The Temple of the Lord; and boasted of their privileges, that there
was no people in the world like them; and that if God should cut them off, he
knew not where to find another people. See now what became of them; We will
consider the Ten Tribes first. In the first of Kings, the 19, and the 11 and 14
Verses. And it was so, that when Elijah heard it, he wrapped his face in a
mantle, and went out, and stood in the entering in of the Cave; and behold,
there came a voice unto him, and said, What do thou here, Elijah? And he
said, (Elijah said) I have been very jealous for the Lord God of hosts; because
the children of Israel have forsaken thy Covenant, thrown down thine Altars,
and slain thy Prophets with the sword, and I, even I only am left, and they
seek my life to take it away. Here were Ten Tribes, a great Kingdom, a people
of the Lord, that had the word of the Lord, and the great Prophet of the Lord
Elijah among them, who called them to Repentance, and told them God was angry
with them for forsaking Him, and his Covenant. Why, but how many of this
Kingdom did so? Why truly, for what Elijah could see, he could not see one man,
that did keep Covenant with God. I only am left alone. Why what did the rest
do? Why they have all forsaken thee. This is strange! What! the seed of
Abraham, all gone! What they, whose fathers God delivered out of Egypt; and
brought them through the Red Sea, and fed them with Manna, and gave them water
out of a Rock! What, forget it all! Ai, forget it all. They have left the Lord,
and forsaken his Covenant. What have they done with the Prophets of the Lord?
Knocked them of the head, slain them, killed them, thrown down his Altars, and
no worshipping of God; and yet these were the men that were the seed of
Abraham, that had all the means of grace offered them; God had given them many
a call, they had the word to do it, and his Prophets to do it, and yet we see
they all left him. It is true (as God said afterward in reproving Elijahs
judgment in the case, I have a few more, my Kingdom are not all gone) says
God, I have reserved seven thousand, that keep Covenant with me. Ai, but (my
Brethren) what are seven thousand to a whole Kingdom? What if God may have
seven thousand in England to keep Covenant with God? What if twenty thousand?
What are they to compare to those many hundred thousands that are in England?
Here you see many are called, but few chosen; many are taken visibly into a
Covenant, but there are few that are spiritually in Covenant with God. Well,
what became of these Ten Tribes? these that had the Oracles, Covenant, and
Promises among them? What became of them? Why you shall see what became of
them, (no good, you may be sure, God pays them off their old scores at length)
God is a long time in reckoning, but be sure he will do them justice in the
end. He will do it, 2 King. 17.18, there you shall see the destruction of them
(In the 15 verse. And they rejected his statutes, and his covenants that he made
with their fathers -- and they followed vanity.) Therefore (Verse. 18.) the Lord
was very angry with Israel, and removed them out of his sight: there was none
left but the Tribe of Judah only. 22. For the children of Israel walked in the
sins of Jeroboam which he did, they departed not from them. 23, Until the Lord
removed Israel out of his sight as he said by all his servants the Prophets.
(The word of God spoken by his servants and Ministers, (though but men) he will
make it good; here you have Minister after Minister come to you; and believe
it, when we speak his word in his name, he will take care of our honor, and of
our word; he made good the preachings of his servants the Prophets.) So was
Israel carried away out of their own land to Assyria unto this day. There came
the King of Assyria upon them, and took them away, and spoiled them, and
carried them away captive, and they never returned more into the land of Canaan
to this day. O wicked people! They had the means of grace, but would not make
use of them. You are told of Heaven and Hell, and bid to repent, but no body
repents; here you give us the hearing, and when you have done, you go away; and
when gone, you pass on in a carnal manner, and there is no reformation of your
lives.

But (pray) what became of the other Tribes that were under the tutilage and
government of the Posterity of David? Why the truth is, they were sometimes
better than the other. But see also what became of them for their revolts, 2 Chronicles. 36.15, 16. But what did they do? (these were the two tribes) They mocked
the messengers of God, and despised his words, and misused his Prophets, until
the wrath of the Lord arose upon them, till there was no remedy. 17, Therefore
he brought upon them the King of Chaldees, who slew their young men with the
sword, in the house of their sanctuary, and had no compassion upon young man or
maiden, old man, or him that stooped for age; he gave them all into his hand.
And this was all for their general revolt that they made from God. Follow it
(now) to the time of Christ; when Christ Jesus came into the world, and
preached the Gospel himself, one would have thought now, that though they had
abused all his Prophets of old, yet now his Son himself is come, sure they
would hearken to him. When Christ himself turns Preacher, and works such
Miracles among them to confirm his Doctrine, and to evidence himself to be sent
from God, and all this to bring them to Heaven: When Christ came to preach the
Gospel, did they believe him? No, he lifted them up to Heaven by means; he
would as it were have dragged them by force, he lifted up voice and cried, Ho,
every one that thirsts, come unto me, and drink of the water of life freely.
He cried and wept over them, O that she had known the things of her peace!
(Mighty earnest!) I would have gathered her, but she would not. And did they
believe? No. Why, what do they do? They conspire together, and lay hold of him
as a malefactor, and crucified him; they put him to death: and as being very
well satisfied, when that innocent blood was shed, O say they, Let his blood
come upon us and our children: we are not afraid of his blood. Of all that
people of the Jews, there was but a few that did believe in him: And that the
Apostle takes notice of, Romans 11.5, I say then, Ver. 1, Has God cast off his
people? God forbid. For I am an Israelite: God has not cast away all Israel,
not every individual: For I am of the Tribe of Benjamin: And through Gods
mercy, I am not cast away (says he), for I do believe in Christ, and there are
some few with me that do believe also. But what became of the whole Nation?
They are cut off, the curse of God is upon them, and they are a hissing and
disgrace to this very day. I tell you, Sirs, of these poor contemptible Jews;
God offered them a Christ before he offered him to you: Christ came of the
Loins of a Jew, he was born (after the flesh) of a Jew, he was first sent to
the Jews; and offered grace first to the Jews; and you came in but in the
second place. But for their Infidelity, God has cut them off, only a remnant,
a little scattering flock, they hearkened, they believed, they embraced Christ,
and they were saved, and the rest were cut off. Here are a great many
instances, That many are called, but few chosen. Here is a great deal of
Preaching to England, but few of England like to be saved: Don't think it a
hard censure. What a whole world drowned, and but eight saved? What a whole
Kingdom of ten Tribes, and but seven thousand saved? What, that great Kingdom
of Judah cut off, and but a few of them saved? There were (it is true) a good
seed in that Kingdom of Judah, but take the generality of them, they did
provoke God as much as her Sister Samaria did. Well, But what shall we say of
our selves? Look in the glass of the Christian Church, and then tell me, how
many among us are like to be saved? 2 Cor. 6.10, Know ye not, (Ver. 9,) that
the unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of God? (and if they do not, they
shall never be saved; for none are saved, but they inherit the Kingdom of God)
Who are they? Why God knows, some of you may read your own Names here in your
Character. Be not deceived, neither fornicators, or unclean persons: you know
what it means: If there be any wanton persons here, the Lord give you
Repentance. Such as you are for the flood, and for the fire, and for Hell. God
has set you apart. The Lord give you Repentance. No Idolater, no
Image-worshipper, no Host-worshipper; such as those Popish Idolater,
worshipping Saints and Angels, and praying to a piece of bread, as unto God
himself. These are Idolaters. God will not give his honor to any other. And
Papists will know in the end, that they have wronged God, to give his honor to
a piece of bread. God will not be wronged of his Glory. Be not deceived, many
Idolaters have been apt to flatter themselves, that it shall go well with them;
but they have deceived themselves, and so will these in the end. No Adulterers,
the Lord help you to look into your hearts and lives: There is an Adulterous
heart, and an Adulterous life: none such shall enter into the Kingdom of God.
These are all for the flood, these are set apart for burning: assuredly, you
shall be burned, if you repent not. Believe it, it will be so, if you reform
not; you may laugh and mock at me, and Paul, and the Bible, as the old world
did at Noah. Nor effeminate, not abusers of themselves with mankind. No
Thieves: that is, that repent not in their time. No Drunkards; mark, that you
Ale-house-haunters, and Tavern-haunters! None of these, not a man of them shall
be saved, except, in time they repent and reform their lives. Say you so? None
of them? No, none of them shall inherit the Kingdom of God. Ah, but (by your
leave) we will not believe you tho. I know there are but few will believe it. I
knew it before I came to you before I read this Text, Lord who has believed
our report! I have been a Preacher (up and down) two and twenty years, and have
had experience of the hardness of men's hearts. I can Preach to them, and take
them in a room, and sit an hour over a hard heart, and make it no more stir,
than a rock: No, he does not believe, turns away, and laughs at (perhaps) all
the counsel given him. But whether you believe, or believe not, This day know,
God has given you warning; you are men as certainly set aside, and designed to
be eternally burned, as the old wicked world was designed to be drowned. And if
you say why do I give you this notice? Why, The Lord in mercy gives it you,
that in time you may repent. But if you repent not; as the flood drowned the
old world, so Hell will burn and torment you.

But truly I have not come to the half of that which I intended.

The Question will be, What is the reason that men will not believe? What, but
eight persons believe, in a whole world? But one Elijah in a whole Ten Tribes?
What, but one Elijah? No truly, for ought that he knew. What, but a remnant in
the time of Christ? No, but a remnant. So but a few, a very few in England.
What is the reason of all this? why the general reason of it all, is this:
Neither would the old world believe, that God was in good earnest; neither
would Israel believe, neither will England believe; they don't believe what is
said. No. What if God speaks by a Noah, will you believe? No. What if God
speaks by a Moses, will you believe? No. What if God appears upon a Mount,
and speaks signally, will you believe now? Yes, for a little while, but not
long, as they did not. Will you believe by a Christ? No. (Crucify him.) Will
you believe the Apostles? No. Will you believe us that speak? No, No, you will
believe none? What is the reason of it, why wont you believe? Why, I think
this is one reason:

In very truth, says the poor carnal wicked world, we do not believe that God
is in good earnest; none of them did, till they found the judgment upon them.
But why, you poor sinners, why do not you believe that God is in good earnest
now? Why I will tell you, you flatter your selves thus; surely God is a very
good God, and he has done us good all our days; he has been my God twenty,
thirty, forty years; he has fed me when hungry; and when naked he has clothed
me; and when sick, he has healed me and mine; and when in danger he has
delivered; and do you think that God will damn me, and burn me (as you talk of)
at last? Ai, but sinner! has not God said he will? Ai, but say you, God is not
in good earnest; he threatens us, but as we threaten our Children. We threaten
our Children sometimes what we will do! and then lay down the rod again. Ai,
but sinner! God is not like a man, that he should change. But say you, he is
good. It Is true, or else he would never have stayed so long; but for you to say
he is good, and will not therefore be true to his Word, that is absurd. Why
should he not (notwithstanding all his goodness) damn such a rebel as thou art,
as well as damn an Angel? Thou art his Creature? so were the Angels. Does God
give thee abundance of the glory of the earth? so God gave him abundance of the
glory of Heaven, and yet notwithstanding all this, for sin he threw the Angels
down into Hell, and now they are Devils.

Why, if God spared not an Angel, do thou think he will spare a man or woman?
Nay, when thou have provoked him to wrath more than the Devil, do thou think
he will spare thee, and not an Angel? God never offered a Savior to the Devil,
but he offered a Savior to thee, that if thou will repent and turn, he will
save thee: and will thou abuse all, and go on in thy wickedness? Why certainly,
as thou sinnest more in this respect than the Devil, thou will as sure go to
hell as he did; it is not your relation to God as Creatures, that will save you.
What, (I pray) was the old World? Did not God drown them all? were not they men
and women as you? and had not they Children as well as you? and had not God
bowels to them, as well as to you? But was God loath to drown them? Why, first,
it repents me, says God, that I made them, I will drown them all; Tush, say
they, God is so good he will not. But I will, says God. You say God has done
you good, and healed you of many diseases, and has looked to you, and blessed
you, and has wrought wonders for you, and that therefore he will never damn
you. O poor sinner! how simply do thou cheat thy self? Single me out any
blind Drunkard, or unclean person, or self-justiciary, I would single thee out,
and reason with thee this day; God has wrought wonders for me, he will not
damn me (say thou). Alas! that is true, says a poor drunken Water-man, I was
at Sea, and was in danger to be drowned, and God saved me; and do you think
that he will damn me! And says another, such a time I was ready to fall off
from a house, and God prevented me. Why I tell thee now, that though God does
give many signal mercies and tokens of his long suffering to sinners, he does
not intend therefore to save them. When God brought Israel out of Egypt, did
God ever work such Miracles for you, as he did for them? Did God ever bring ten
Plagues upon your enemies to deliver you from them? Did God ever in a danger
that you have been in, make a Sea for you to pass through, and your life saved?
And when you were hungry, and had no bread, did God ever rain bread down from
heaven to you? When you were thirsty, did God ever bring water out of a Rock to
quench your thirst? These, and such things as these did God do for Israel. Here
now was some ground for them to plead, and yet though God did this; did he love
Israel so, that he would not destroy them? No. He laid their Carcases as dung
in the wilderness, and swore in his wrath that they should never enter into his
rest. I Will tell thee sinner, if thou live for forty years together upon bread
out of the Clouds, yet if thou live and die in thy sins, thou will most
certainly be damned. God can be good, (man!) for all thou art damned; for God
is good to the Angels that stand, though the rest that fell are in Hell; so he
will be good in his mercy to Saints and Angels, when the wicked are thrust down
into Hell. God can be good, (man!) and God can do thee good, and when he has
done, he can hang thee up in flames. Alas, you see that commonly among your
malefactors, Princes do allow their prisoners to have meat and drink, while
they are in prison, they should not be starved; and when condemned to be
hanged, there will be care taken, that they should be fed and clothed; but when
the day comes, away they are bound, and to the cart and gallows they go. Thou
prisoner! (for so thou art in the decree of God) before thou come to that
prison of hell, he will feed thee, and clothe thee, and yet all this while
intends to destroy thee, if thou repent not.

Ai, but say you, there is another reason of our unbelief: why truly, God has
threatened such great things that they are incredible. Why, what are they? God
threatens prisons for Spirits; Alas, we cannot understand how this spirit should
live after our bodies are dead, that when our bodies are rotting in the grave,
our souls should be roaring in flames. And then again God tells us of the
Resurrection of our bodies; How is it possible it should be so? And then again,
God threatens to throw our bodies and souls into Hell, to be burned for ever;
an incredible thing! who can believe this, when we can hardly live fifty or
threescore years, How can we be alive for ever and ever? And that Christ should
judge the world; it is now sixteen hundred years ago; wonderful things! Here has
been a great deal of talking, but no performance. A company of fables! we cannot
believe them; and who would go and venture to make themselves sad and miserable
in the world, with fear and repentance; with fear of these things that are
never like to come to pass. I know it, sinners, that these are the workings of
thy heart, as well as if I was within thee. Why, do you think there are any
such here, that are of such a mind? why truly, it is likely, for there were
such in the Apostles days, and of this sort of people the Apostle speaks in 2
Pet. 3.2, That in the latter days there should come scoffers, walking after
their own lusts: one after the lust of uncleanness, another after the lust of
drunkenness: What are these walkers? Scoffers. What do they scoff at? why
they scoffed at the burning of the world, and the day of Judgment. Why do
these men scoff at it? why, I will tell you; they scoff because the Scripture
does threaten the eternal burning of these sort of men that walk after their
own lusts, and they cry, Tush, we believe no such thing. Well, and thus they
argue, saying, Where is the promise of his coming? Christ said, He would come,
and he would come quickly. Here is a talk of his coming, but here is no Christ
come; when will this Trumpet sound? No, no, for since the fathers fell asleep,
all things continue as they were from the beginning of the Creation: The Sun
rises as it did, and the Moon observes its course, we have Summer and VVinter,
and we see all things just as they have been for these five thousand years, and
we see no change. No? (says the Apostle) don't you? But, says he, if you are
ignorant of this one thing; you are wilfully ignorant: What is that? why says
he, That by the Word of God, the heavens were of old, and the earth standing
out of the water and in the water, whereby the world that then was, being
overflowed with water, perished. But the heavens and the earth which are now,
by the same word are kept in store, reserved unto fire against the day of
judgment, and perdition of ungodly men. I Will tell thee, thou scoffer, and
walker after thy lusts, Do thou not know that God once drowned the world? if
thou art ignorant, it is a wilful ignorance. And I pray you scoffers, is it not
as easy a thing to conceive how God should burn the world, as drown the world?
he has done one already; the Lord open your ears and hearts to understand it.
You scoff now, as the old world scoffed at Noah; but they found that Noah's
words were true; and you will find that our words are true too. The Lord strike
you with the authority of the Word, that you may receive it as the Oracle of
God. This is the Word of God, and do you oppose it, and rebel against it, and
slight it if you dare. But I know you have that impudence to do it. But then I
summon you to answer it at the day of judgment; do you remember it then.

There are several other workings of carnal hearts, by which they encourage
themselves in their wicked lives.

What are they? Come let me name them.

O say you, we don't deny, but God will condemn men, and we don't deny but God
can make good all his threatenings: But say you, we are in such a body, and our
bodies are in such want; you know we must not starve, and suffer our poor wives
and children to famish for want of bread; and truly we are poor, and must work
for our livings; and we are so taken up, that we have no leisure to hear what
God says, or what Christ says; we have scarce leisure to read or hear the word
of God: This is another thing.

I know you would fain be gone, but I will tell you why I stay you so long; I
would fain (before you go out of them doors) have you to believe. If Gods
Ministers do so compassionate you, you should compassionate your selves: Ah,
But say you, I cannot attend it, I must be gone, my dinner waits for me; no, nor
to morrow neither. I have no time at all to think of these things. No? Have you
no time to think of them? Do you think that they don't deserve your thoughts?
Why, What are your poor bodies (for which you labor so much), in a compare to
your souls? I tell thee (man) if it were put to thy choice, that thou should
either starve, or make use of the means of Grace; thou should rather go and
read, and kneel, and pray till thou art faint, and can scarce rise up: If one
must perish, soul or body; let the body starve. Thou poor creature! Thy soul is
more worth than thy body; it is a thousand times better that thy body should
starve, than that thy poor soul should be damned. But, Starve! Thou poor
unbeliever! Thy wretched heart of unbelief deceives thee. I tell thee (man)!
(but that thou have no faith to entertain what I say, I tell thee) if thou will
but set thy self, first to mind this great work of saving thy soul, and
preparing thy Ark; if thou will set thy self to look upon thy ways, and confess
thy sins, to turn to the Lord, to cry mightily, and to pour out thy soul in
secret to God, that he would pardon thee, and sanctify thee, and reform thee,
and give thee grace: I tell thee, I dare promise thee in the name of the Lord,
that thou shall live more comfortably as to this world, than ever thou did in
all thy life. Why, will you promise that we shall grow richer by it? This I
will promise thee in the name of the Lord, (and I am sure it is true) that
either thou shall thrive more in the world, or else thou shall be better
contented with what thou have: and besides, it shall be blessed to thee, that
thou will say, it is far better to thee than abundance. Seek ye first the
Kingdom of God and his righteousness, and all other things shall be added to
you. Do but set thy self to pray mightily to God, that whatever he does, he
would save thy soul; and then for thy care, thou might cast thy care upon
him; your care distracts you, it is Gods setting in with you, that makes your
care succesful. O poor sinners, if you were but acquainted with God and Christ,
you would have a God to cast your care upon. You Masters of Families; begin
your day with God, bring your Families to God, make it your great business to
serve God; and then trust God for his blessing upon your endeavors. There is
another Reason.

What is the reason that you do not believe? That you believe not God that
speaks by his Son, and by his Prophets? Why truly I dare not believe. For (to
speak plainly) I am so in love with my sins, that I cannot think to part wirh
them; and I do profess, if I must be damned for them, I must run the hazard.
Such desperate slaves are Satan's slaves, though they see Hell before them, and
in they must, if they repent not; says Christ, Light is come into the world,
and men love darkness rather than light, Why? because their deeds are evil.
They love their evil deeds, and love darkness, and hate the light of the
Gospel; they hate my word, because my word threatens their deeds of darkness
with Hell; they cannot endure to see what is at the end of sinning. I have kept
you a long while; and so God kept them above a hundred years. I have spent one
hour (perhaps half an hour more), but if it were possible that I could Preach
an hundred years to an unbelieving heart, it would never work upon him, without
Gods Grace: O therefore resist not Crace: When I have done all, it is God that
singles out one at one time, and another at another time, and then another, and
sometimes many at once, and opens their eyes and hearts, and makes such a
Sermon bear upon them, and commands their hearts to strike in with the word:
And if the Lord does but bless the word, to take hold of some poor youth,
whether man or maid; it is worth all my labor that I have spent in Preaching:
If the Lord would but bring some poor soul to believe, that the word of God is
true, and that it is as certain that they will be damned, if they repent not,
as is was certain that the old world was drowned: This might be the beginning
of a new life. O it is an hour well spent, and thou will bless God for it, if he
will come in with light upon thee, and make thee believe the Gospel, that
Christ is willing to save every penitent sinner that is brought thus to believe
in him. O that God would be pleased to convince you that he is in good earnest
to damn the wicked and impenitent sinner; but to bless and crown with eternal
life, every obedient soul.

I am forced to cut off many things that I have to say; But the Lord in heaven
bless this word unto you.

FINIS.
Books Printed for, and are to be sold by Tho. Parkhurst, at the Bible and
Three Crowns in Cheapside.
SERMONS on the whole Epistle of St. Paul to the Colossians, by Mr. J. Daille,
Translated into English by F.S. with Dr. Tho. Goodwin's, and Dr. J. Owens
Epistles Recommendatory. An Exposition of Christ's Temptation on Mat. 4. and
Peter's Sermon to Cornelius; and circumspect walking, by Dr. Tho. Tailor. A
practical Exposition on the 3 d Chap. of the 1 st Epistle of St. Paul to the
Corinthians, with the Godly man's Choice, on Psalm. 4.6, 7, 8. by Anthony
Burgess. Dr. Donns 4to Sermons, being his 3 Vol. Pareus Exposition on the
Revelations. Choice and practical Expositions on 4 select Psalms, viz. The
Fourth Psalm in eight Sermons. The Forty second Psalm in ten Sermons. The Fifty
first Psalm in twenty Sermons. The Sixty third Psalm in seven Sermons.

Books 4 to.
The Door of Salvation opened by the Key of Regeneration, by George Swinnock,
M.A. An Exposition on the Five first Chapters of Ezekiel, with useful
Observations thereupon, by William Greenhil. The Gospel Covenant opened, by
Peter Bulkley. Gods Holy-mind touching matters moral, which he uttered in Ten
Commandments: Also, an Exposition on the Lords-Prayer, by Edward Eston, B.D.
The Fiery Jesuit, or an Historical-Collection of the rise, increase, doctrines
and deeds of the Jesuits. Horologiographia optica: Dyaling, universal and
particular, speculative and practical; together with a description of the Court
of Arts, by a new Method, by Sylvanus Morgan. A seasonable Apology for
Religion, by Matthew Pool. The practical Divinity of the Papists discovered to
be destructive to true Religion, and Men's souls, by J. Clarkson. The Creatures
goodness as they came out of Gods hand, and the good-mans mercy to the
bruit-creatures, in two Sermons, by Tho. Hodges, B.D. Certain considerations
tending to promote Peace and Unity amongst Protestants. The Saints triumph over
the last enemy, in a Sermon at the Funeral of Mr. James Janeway, by Nath.
Vincent. The Morning-Lecture against Popery, or the principal errors of the
Church of Rome detected and confuted in a Morning-Lecture, preached by several
Ministers of the Gospel in or near London. Four useful discourses, by Jeremiah
Buroughs. A new Copy-Book of all sorts of useful hands The Saints privilege by
dying, by Mr. Scot. The Virtuous Daughter, a Funeral-Sermon, by Mr. Brian. The
Miracle of Miracles, or Christ in our Nature, by Dr. Rich. Sibbs. The unity and
essence of the Cartholick Church-visible, by Mr. Hudson. The intercourse of
Divine Love between Christ and the Church, or the particular Believing soul: in
several Lectures on the whole second Chap. of Cant. by John Collins, D.D.
Large 8 vo.
The sure mercies of David; or a second part of Heart-treasure. Heaven or hell
here in a Good or Bad Conscience, by Nath. Vincent. Closet-prayere a Christians
duty; by O. Heyword. A practial discourse of Prayer; wherein is handled the
nature and duty of Prayer, by Tho. Cobbet. Of quenching the Spirit; the evil of
it by Theophilus Polwheile. The sure way to Salvation; or a Treatise of the
Saints mystical Union with Christ; by Richard Stedman. M.A. Sober Singularity,
by the same Author. Heaven taken by Storm. The mischief of sin: both by Tho.
Watson. The Child's Delight; together with an English-Grammar. Reading and
Spelling made easy; both by Tho. Lie. Asop's Fables, with morals thereupon in
English-Verse. The Young-mans Instructor, and the Old-mans Remembrancer.
Captives bourd in Chains, made free by Christ their Surety; both by Tho.
Doolittle. Eighteen Sermons preached upon several Texts of Scripture by William
Whitaker. The Saints care for Church Communion; declared in sundry Sermons,
preached at St. James Dukes-place, by Zach. Crofton. The life and death of
Edmund Stanton D.D. To which is added a Treatise of Christian conference; and a
D^alogue between a Minister and a Stranger. Sin the Plague of plagues, or
sinful sin the worst of Evils; by Ralph Venning. M.A. Cases of Conscience
practically resolved; by J. Norman. The immortality of the Soul explained and
proved by Scripture and Reason; to which is added Faiths-triumph over the fears
of death, by Tho. Wadsworth. A Treatise of the incomparableness of God, in his
Being, Attributes, Works, and Word; by George Swinnock, M.A. The generation of
Seekers; or the right manner of the Saints addresses to the throne of Grace,
with an Exposition on the Lords-Prayer. An Essay to facilitate the Education of
Youth, by bringing down the rudiments of Grammar to the sense of seeing, which
ought to be improved by Syncresis; by M. Lewis of Totenham. An Artificial
Vestibulum; wherein the sense of Janua Linguarum is contained, compiled into
plain and short sentences in English, for the great ease of Masters, and
Expeditious progress of Scholars, by M. Lewis. Baptism no bar to Communion; by
Jo. Bunnian. The Dutch-dispensatory; showing the virtues, qualities and
properties of Simples; the virtue and use of Compounds; whereto is added the
Complete Herbalist.
Small Octavo.
A defense against the fear of Death; by Zach. Crofton. Gods Sovereignty
displayed; by William Gearing. The godly man's Ark, or a City of Refuge in the
day of his distress, in five Sermons; with Mrs. Moors Evidences for Heaven; by
Edmund Calamy. The Almost-Christian discovered, or the false Professor tried
and cast; by M. Mead. A Plea for the godly, or the Righteous man's Excellency.
The holy Eucharist, or the Sacrament of the Lords Supper. A Treatise of
Self-denial. All three by Tho. Watson. The life and death of Tho. Wilson of
Maidstone in Kent. The life and death of Doctor Sam. Winter. Worthy-walking
pressed upon all that have heard the Call of the Gospel. The Spirit of Prayer;
by Nath. Vincent. The inseparable Union between Christ and a Believer; by Tho.
Peck. A discourse of Excuses; setting forth the variety and vanity of them: the
sin and misery brought in by them; by John Sheffield. Invisible realities,
demonstrated in the holy life and triumphant death of Mr. J. Janeway. The
Saints encouragement to diligence in Christ's service; by Mr. James Janeway.
Convivium caeleste; a plain and familiar discourse concerning the Lords Supper;
by R. Kidder. The Saints perseverance asserted in its Positive-ground against
Mr. Ives. A Wedding-ring fit for the Finger; by Will. Secker. An Explanation of
the shorter Catechism of the Assembly of Divines; by Tho. Lie. The Child's
Delight with Pictures; by Tho Lie. The life and death of Tho. Hall. The flat
opposition of Popery to Scripture; by J.N. Chaplain to a Person of Honor. The
Weavers Pocketbook, or Weaving spiritualized; by J.C.D.D. Two disputations of
Original sin; by Richard Baxter. The ready way to prevent sin; by William
Bagshaw. The Little-peace-maker, discovering foolish Pride, the Makebate.
Philadelphia; or a Treatise of Brotherly-love; by Mr. Gearing. Reformation or
Ruin, being certain Sermons on Levit. 26.23, 24. by Tho. Hotchkis. FINIS.


