THE Way of Life AND PERFECTION Livingly Demonstrated IN Some serious
Animadversions, or Remarks and Answers upon the Book ENTITLED The middle Way
of Perfection, with Indifferency between the Orthodox and the Quaker.

Herein considered, and the naked Truth as it is in Christ Jesus, opened in
real Love to the Souls of men

By George Whitehead.

Let your Moderation appear unto all Men, Doing nothing by Partiality.

Printed in the Year 1676.

Friendly Reader,
THE Publication of this ensuing Treatise, is from a Necessity that came upon
me for the holy Truth sake, to remove Occasions of stumblings out of the Way of
the simple, and honest minded Inquirers after the Way of the Lord, which is
perfect, so that although, by Reason of other weighty Concernments (the Press
being also clogged with other Books) this has lain by in Manuscript above a
Year after it was finished, being written at sundry Oportunities, when I could
find some spare time, yet I could not be clear in Conscience, that my Labor in
it should so remain obscure, or the Service frustrated, which I hope it may be
of to such serious and unprejudiced Readers, as desire after the Knowledge of
the Truth, as i^ is in Chrst Jesus, which is the Aim and End of my Labors and
Travails; I could have been content only to have sent a Copy of this Treatise
unto the Author of the Book styled The Middle Way of Perfection, if that would
have cleared Truth from his Mistake, and removed the Burden off me; but that
could not be sufficient, in regard his Book was so public; and if he come
seriously to consider, and see wherein he has been mistaken, and
misrepresented us, called Quakers (especially in the latter Part of his Book)
it is to be hoped, that out of a Respect to that Christianity, Justice and
Moderation, professed by him, he will as publicly do us Right, in retracting
his Mistakes, and Misconstruction put upon us, as to some Things of weight and
moment, which in this Treatise are seriously (and from a Sense of the
Foundation of God) spoken to, and opened in Love both to this Man's Soul, and
the Souls of all who desire true Information in these weighty Matters of
Salvation, herein treated on.

London the 12th. of the 12th. Month 1675. G. W.

THE CONTENTS
Sect. I. OF Justification from the Charge of the Law, and the Charge of the
Gospel; how far it extends; and our Evangelical Obedience of absolute
Necessity, page 10. Sect. II. Of Perfection being our Duty; and how attainable,
confessed by this Moderator or midle-man, page 12. Sect. III. Some Objections
alleged by him against the attaining to Perfection, answered, page 17. Sect.
IV. His Objection against sinless Perfection, for sinful Imperfection in this
Life, proceeds from his wanting the true Sight of that Seed and Nature wherein
is Victory and Perfection, page 19. Sect. V. His Alleganiots for Sin from these
Scriptures (viz. There is no Man that sins not; not a just Man upon Earth
that does good and sins not; No more I that sins; but Sin that dwells
in me; in many Things we offend all; if we say, that we have no Sin, etc.)
considered and answered, page 21. Sect. VI. Of Regeneration, the two contrary
Principles, and concerning the Phrases [Whatsoever is born of God] and
[Whosoever is born of God, etc.] page 23. Sect. VII. The Law of Grace,
Condition of Life and greater Commandments being performed, sincere Obedience
in lesser things may not be omitted, page 25. Sect. VIII. The calm Protestants
in granting a Real and True Righteousness, and that which is perfect and
entire, according to the Covenant (or Law) of Grace, do assent to the Quakers
Doctrine of Perfection, page 28. Sect. IX. The Performance of the Condition, or
Covenant of Grace, and David's Perfection, or being found a Man after God's own
Heart, not concerned in a sinful State, nor consistant with the Breach of Duty,
and of Sin unto Death, page 30. Sect. X. That Heaven wherein Unrighteousness
dwells, is not the New Heaven; of the new Law and Spirit's Assistance to the
Performance of Imputation; being crucified with Christ, Children of God, etc.
page 33. Sect. XI. Of Repentance, what real, and what not; of Christ, as
Propitiation; some Scriptures perverted for Sin, by our Moderator; of God's
entering into Judgment. etc. page 36. Sect. XII. Of Justification, Grace, Law
of our Creation, Redemption, as in Christ, and as in us, as universal, and as
peculiar, the Quakers opinion about Perfection misconstrued, page 39. Sect.
XIII. That those called Divines who deny Christ's Universal Grace and
Redemption, are stumbling in the dark, and not orthodox; of God's Terms, and
Man's Terms; of Faith, Repentance, sinning and not sinning, etc. page 42. Sect.
XIV. That the Quakers have the Divines on the blind Side; that the orthodox are
quite out about Justification, etc. confessed, page 44. Sect. XV. The Spirit's
Help to that Perfection, which is the keeping the Commandments, or Perfection
obtained in and by the Spirit and spiritual Birth, and not by the Flesh in the
Letter, page 47. Sect. XVI. The Charge of bolstering up Men in their Sins
justified, against the pretended Divines, who oppose Perfection, and they not
at all cleared by this Advocate, page 49. Sect. XVII. His pretended Discovery
of several Inconveniences of our Doctrine, as the hurling Men into Despair,
casting off God's Care, etc. no real or true Discovery, but the Consequences of
his own and his Divines Doctrine for Imperfection, so much confuted by himself;
the State of the most mortified on E^rth, not consistant with Sin; his
reiterated Mistake against us, page 53. Sect. XVIII. His most dreadful
Consequence and Conclusion of our Doctrine (viz. of Evils secret, and deadly to
the Soul, Contempt of most serious holy Professors, monstrous overweening
Conceit of a Man's self, despising and setting at naught of others) turned into
a groundless Fear, and proved inconsequent; and his pretended Danger and Fear,
that it cannot consist with the Grace of God, etc. proved altogether causeless,
and groundless, page 56.
THE WAY of LIFE AND PERFECTION Experimntally Demonstrated, etc.
WE must confess that the Author's Proposition near his Beginning, is very
moderate, (viz.) As the best Physicians have been noted, sometimes to take very
great Regard to the ordinary Receipts of old Women, and the meanest Persons; so
will it become the M^dest Divine to endeavor rather, Page 3, 4.
to discover and sift out that Truth, which lies in his Adversaryes Meaning,
then to expose and shame their Opinions.

As also, that in the first Part of his Book there are diverse Truths contained,
in which he has expressed more Modesty and Candor, then in the latter Part, and
because there appears not that universal Consistency in his Work, which the
professed Indifferency or Impartiality should have produced, I therefore propose
this Method in my Observations and Remarks upon them viz.

1 st. To take Notice of those Truths in his first Part, together with some
Variations therefrom, as I find them.

2 dly. To consider, whether his Reflections upon us are consistant therewith,
as touching our Principles.

Sect. I. As touching Justification he says, viz.
To avoid needless Difference with Brethren, I must distinguish Justification;
Justification we agree to be a forensical Act, opposed to the laying any Thing
to a Man's Charge, whereby he may be condemned, who shall lay any Thing to the
Charge of God's Elect? it is God that justifies; now there is a Double Charge,
the Charge of the Law, that we are Sinners, and so condemnable for violating of
it, and the Charge of the Gospel, that we have not performed the remedying
Condition which God requires of us, for the escaping of that Condemnation.

And also he farther explains. There is a farther Justification in regard to a
particular Charge of the one, or an universal Justification against all
Accusations, or the Charge of both, as we must answer to the Charge of the
Gospel by denying that Charge, and pleading our Performance, we answer the
Charge of the Law, by confessing it and pleading Christ's Satisfaction.

Our Faith and Repentance is our Righteousness, in Regard to the Gospel, Page 5.
but Pardon of Sin together with this Righteousness may go both into universal
Justification.

And that, God justifying us by this Righteousness, that is by Faith or
Evangelical Obedience, without the Works of the Law, and that pardoning us as
the Effect of that Act, may both make up the Compositum of Universal
Just^fication; you see how tender I am of persisting in any Mistake, wherein I
have or may prejudice others; I do not find that the Scripture does denominate
or pronounce any one Righteous, or a Just Man, from one End to another, upon
any-other Account then his doing Righteousness, yet will I not quarrel with any
that say, we are made Righteous also by Forgiveness; and that the Delivery of
us from Sin, from the Law and Condemnation by it, is Justification, though
really I am apt to think that this Work is rather to be attributed with the
Apostle to our Redemption: Compare Ephesians. 1 and 7. 2 Cor. 5. 19. Rom 3. 24.

Animad. Observe what is hereby granted.

1 st. That Justification is opposed to the laying any thing to a Man's Charge,
whereby he might be condemned, a^, who shall lay any Thing to the Charge of
God's Elect? The Questions therefore is, whether God's Elect be chargeable with
any Thing that is condemnable? For against a Righteous Man there is no Law;
this answers the End of Christ's coming in the Likeness of sinful Flesh, that
he might not only condemn Sin in the Flesh, but that the Righteousness of the
Law might be fulfilled in us, who walk not after the Flesh, but after the
Spirit; and this then truly acquits and clears such, who thus walk, both from
the Charge of the Law and of the Gospel, there being no Condemnation to them
that are in Christ Jesus, etc.

2 dly. That we cannot deny the Charge of the Gospel, until we have performed
that Remedying Condition, which God requires of us for the escaping the
Condemnation, or rather until that true Faith and Repentance be wrought in us
by the Grace of God, as the Condition upon, and through which God does both
pardon and justify.

3 dly. That God justifies us by this Righteousness that is by Faith, or
Evangelical Obedience, without the Works of the Law; it must be considered, to
be without those Works of the Law which the Apostle intended, as namely those
that were fleshly and shaddowy (that were not essential to an Evangelical
Righteousness) and not that substantial and continuing Obedience of that Love,
which is the fulfilling of the Law.

4 thly. That Evangelical Obedience and doing Righteousness, by which God
justifies, or pronounces any one Righteous, and in which his Elect is not
chargeable or condemnable, either by Law or Gospel, must needs therefore be a
sincere Obedience, without the Mixture of Sin or any Thing condemnable, Christ
being the Cause and Worker of that Faith, Sanctification and Righteousness in
the true Believer, from whence his Obedience and doing of Righteousness
proceeds, all which seriously considered, does both shut out the Opinion of the
Imputation of Christ's Righteousness to Men, while actual in their Sins, and
the pronouncing them Righteous in God's Sight, who are by his Spirit denounced
or condemned in themselves, as unrighteous and disobedient Persons; for where
real Faith and Repentance from dead Works is wrought in the Heart, there is a
real Cessation from those Works, and evil Actions, although the very Nature and
Seed thereof is not immediately wrought out of the Heart, but by Degrees.

But then I see no Cause why it should be said, that Pardon or Remission is not
any Essential Part, or no Part of Justification, but the Effect, as in Page 4.
Seeing that Pardon of Sin, together with our Faith and Repentance (as the
Condition) goes both into Universal Justification, as before, though a Pardon
of Sins past upon true Faith and Repentance be not alone the absolute
Justification, but also a Perseverance in faithful Obedience to the Gospel is
necessary to an absolute justified Estate, both being by the Grace of God, in
and through Christ, wherein he looks upon the Creature that is truly humbled,
with an Eye of Compassion in remitting of Sins past, and with his Fatherly Love
and Goodness in preserving and keeping such in the Sense of his Goodness, which
does obliege to Faithfulness and Continuance in the Truth unto the End, so that
in an absolute justified Estate, there is both an Experience of true Humility,
living Faith, Sanctification and sincere Obedience, and the continuance of the
same [according to these Scriptures 2 Cor. 5. 17, 18. Ephesians. 1. 7. to the End.
Romans 3. 24, 25, 26, 27, and 31. ver. compared with ver. 21. see and observe
also Titus chap. 3. 4, 5, 6, 7.] the real Experience whereof is beyond Men's
Thinkings and Conceivings, and it is only the true Believers, and sanctified
Ones, who can truly say from an inward Experience of the Work of God in their
Hearts, that Christ is made unto us Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification and
Redemption, and he that spared not his only Son, but delivered him up for us
all, how much more shall he not with him give us all Things?

Sect. II.
And seeing it is also granted or at least implied, that the State of
Justification extends to a State of Perfection, it is necessary we by the Way
further take notice of some Truths laid down by this Author about Perfection,
as namely. It is to be acknowledged.

1st. That there are and may be very many Scriptures, easily pressed by the
Quakers and Papists for the Service of their Doctrine; so that there is no
doubt but thus much is proved, that it is our Duty to be as perfect, page 6.
as they would have; every Sin is forbidden, and every Good Thing (that is to
say, by the Law of Innocence) is commanded* [ thus far true]

2dly. He cites Augustine de Spiritu et Littera, that he says, Alia est
Question, utrumaesse possit Homo in hac Vita sine Peccato, page 7.
alia, utrum sit? It is one Question whether it be possible for a Man to attain
to such a Perfection as to live without Sin? and another, whether there be any
that do? Unto which this Author adds, That it is possible to attain this by
Grace, or the special Assistance of God's Spirit, he thinks it best to grant;
he thinks it not fit nor safe to say, any or all of God's Commands are
Impossible -- the Work is to be attributed to him, unto whom nothing is
impossible.

Animad. Thus far we agree then:

1 st. That it is our Duty t^ be so perfect, as to live without Sin.

2 dly. That it is also possible by the Grace and Assistance of God's Spirit,
so to live and to keep all God's Commandments, though not possible to any Man,
by his own free will and Strength, but only through the Assistance of divine
Grace, it being God that works in us to will and to do, as also this Author
freely grants.

That under the Covenant of Grace, God expecting our Works to be right, that
they proceed only from the sincere Heart, page 6.


Animad. And that Heart must be such a one, as will not willingly disobey God;
and then what shall be wanting in Performance when God affords the Assistance
of his Grace and good Spirit, which is alsufficient? And further he soberly
cautions, viz.

And if any in the Dispute, do carry the Matter so high against them (viz. the
Quakers) as to deny what they contend for to be possible, they may if they
please, chose more Wariness from Saint Augustine; for the Quakers ascribe not
to themselves, but to the Spirit, the Life* the Power, or to Christ within, all
that they do: [ then he adds, viz.]

On the contrary side, if these Friends will not be content with what is
allowed them, that our Duty reaches so far, as not to sin at all, that this our
whole Duty is possible through that Spirit by which I hope, some of them are
led, page 8.

Animad. I am glad that this Author has so freely manifested a serious and
ingenious Mind in him, as to confess unto these Truths,

1 st. That it is our Duty to be so perfect, as to live without sin.

2 dly. That it is possible, through the Assistance of God's Spirit so to live.

3 dly. That they who dispute against us, should chose more Wariness, then to
deny the Perfection we contend for, to be possible.

4 thly. That the Quakers ascribe not the Possibility to themselves, but to the
Spirit and Power, or Christ in them, in whom their Sufficiency is.

And I do heartily wish that he were so far consistant herewith as by the same
Spirit and Power, to acknowledge and believe on the behalf of Christ and his
sincere Followers, that they are both willing, faithful and obedient in
performance of their Duty, as well as accomplished with the Knowledge and Power
for that End.

Note. Otherwise I cannot see, but this Man will leave a secret and hidden
Charge against God's Elect and Justified Ones, which is not, that they either
want the Knowledge of their Duty, or God's ^ssistance for Performance; but that
they either want Willingness, or are unfaithful to God therein, and how are
they then said to be called, and chosen and faithful? or how are his People a
willing People in the Day of his Power? And he confess^th a sincere Heart has
God's Elect; therefore let us further observe those Passages, wherein he
differs with us in this weighty Matter.

Upon Augustine' s Question whether there be any that do attain to such a
Perfection, as to live without Sin, he concludes with the Denial, and that if
these Friends say, that every one who does not attain to the same Pitch, as to
live without Sin, cannot be in a State of Grace and Salvation, he shall think
it Time to send them to the same Father and Book for their Reproof and
Satisfaction; but he has confessed, the Duty of Man is, not to Sin, and that it
is possible through that Spirit, by which he hopes some of us are led, citing
these Scriptures, viz. Walk before me and be thou per fect. Thou shall love
the* Lord with all thy Heart, with all thy Soul, with all thy Strength. Thy
Will be done in Earth as it is done in Heaven. Be Followers of Christ, and as
his was, so must our Conversation be in the World. But then this Author
concludes. There is no Man has a sensible Knowledge of himself, page 8.
but he perceives daily, how far his Duty is above his Performances.

Animad. 1st Though we do confess that such an Estate of Grace and Salvation,
as to live without Sin, is not suddenly, or at the First Days Work attained
unto, yet by Degrees every one that follows Christ through the Work of
Regeneration, and so comes into an Estate of absolute Salvation, such come at
length, yea in this World, to be delivered from all Sin, and to know that
Christ's Saving Work effects a Salvation from Sin; he thoroughly purges his
Floor, as this Man also denies not, but the END of Christ's Manifestation in
the Flesh, was to redeem us from all Sin, to destroy the Works of the Devil, to
restore us out of sin and unrighteousness, page 8, 9.
and present us to God as a Peculiar People Purified by Faith, Zealous of Good
Works, Holy and without Blame, Entire, and wanting nothing, Perfect and
Complete in ALL the Will of God. These being seriously considered, the Truth
thereof believed, and a Living Faith, Hope and Expectation begotten in us for
the fulfilling of these and such like Testimonies of Holy Scriptures, we think
there is no Cause to send us to Augustine for Reproof; for we must prefer
Christ and the Apostles Testimonies in the Scriptures of Truth, before any
other Man's private Opinions.

2 dly. Though it be the Estate of many Men who have a Knowledge of themselves
to perceive how far their Duty is above their Performances, yea of such as may
have a Sincere Mind and Defire in them to see all Lets and Hindrances of
Performance removed, yet neither is this Imperfection always the Condition of
such; nor is this Deficiency the Estate of every Man, for, there are Young Men
and Fathers in the Truth, as well as little Children, and whosoever is so far
enlightened, as to perceive a Shortness in Performance or Duty, yet having a
sincere Desire to follow the Lord, and be made conformable to his Image; there
is a Promise to such, and as they wait upon the Lord, he will renew-their
Strength, and grant unto them the Desire of their Souls: Blessed are they that
Hunger and Thirst after Righteousness. And farther when God makes known his
Will, and tells to thee O Man what thou ought to do, namely to do justly,
love Mercy* and walk humbly with the Lord thy God; if in Submission thou yield
to him, thine Help will be in him, as also he imposes no Impossibilities upon
his Church, but freely affords Grace and Power to encourage and assist in Real
and Perfect Obedience; and he having sent his Son a sufficient Workman to
redeem Man from all Iniquity, and he works in us to will and to do; what shall
hinder the sincere Soul from its Duty, if no Grace be wanting, nor Divine
Assistance witheld on God's Part, nor a sincere Mind awanting on the Creature's
Part? Where can there be a Place for Disobedience to remain? Shall any charge
God's Elect, or condemn his Chosen and Faithful Ones with Unwillingness to
serve their so Gracious Lord and Master? Let not such a Charge or Condemnation
be left upon them, who are God's Workmanship, created in Christ unto good
Works, unto whom the Promise, both of Power, Sufficiency and of Willingness is
made, and so experimentally received in the Day of his Power; and withal let it
be considered that, as through the first Work of Grace in the Heart, there is a
sincere Mind, Desire and Willingness in the Creature to follow the Lord, he
deals gently with such, and draws them on by Degrees, even with
Loving^kindness; he lays no more up on them then suits their Abilities given;
suffers them not to be tempted above what they are able; and his Grace being
sufficient for them, he exercises Patience, charge not Temptations as Sin
upon them when they consent not; he also deals with them as a Shepherd,
leading gently those that are with young; in the Day when ^e makes up his
Jewels, he spares them, as a Man spares his only Son; he attends and assists
the travailing Soul in his Journey; he gives the Babe Suck; he affords them
Time and Space for growing in Strength, until they become Men; he has Regard
to his own workmanship from the least or smallest Beginnings thereof. O that
the Work and Dealings of God in his New Creation were seriously minded, and
really experienced; this is beyond all Men's acquired Notions, Gatherings,
Distinctions and Professions, that are without this Living Inward Experience of
this Saving Work, and this would end Controversy and Strivings.

Sect. III.
Object. But the Failings of such are recorded, that were said to be Perfect.
page 8.

An^mad. So also are their Deliverances, as David's, Job' s and others. Again,
if the End of Christ's Manifestation was to redeem us from all Iniquity, to
destroy the Works of the Devil, to restore us out of Sin, present us unto God
holy and without Blame, entire wanting nothing, perfect and complete in all the
Will of God; and has purchased for his Church and People such a State,
Concess. page 8, 9.
as to be without Sin; why should any go about to frustrate his End therein, or
invalidate his Purchase? And why should any contend or arg^e for the contrary
End? And what more can we desire of Perfection, then is here granted? But it is
added, that this State which is completing always, must not be expected to be
completed until the other Life page 9.

Animad. We must look upon this to be a Diversion from Scripture; Ye are
Complete in Christ, as well as not answering the End for which Christ gave
himself, that is, to wash and purify his Church, and to present her a Glorious
Church, without Spot or Wrinckle or any such Thing, although in this Life she
arrives not to that Fullness of Glory that shall be hereafter, yet to such a
Spotless Estate as to render her both Beautiful and Glorious (else how could he
say to his Spouse, Thou art Fair, thou art my Undefiled, there is no Spot in
thee) in which Christ presents his Church unto his Father, as being the Effect
of her being washed by Water through the Word, which surely must be in this
Life.

Object. But while she is both a Gracious Church ( that is) while she is in
this Life she shall not be without her Wrinckles nor her Troubles. page 9.

Animad. Such Kind of Reconciling and Suppositions, together with this
deferring or putting off perfect Freedom only unto the State of the Life to
come, I say, such Work as this has giv^n many loose Professors and others too
much a Liberty, both to confound the State of Grace with that Universal State
of Sin, and so that of the Gospel with that weak Estate under the Law, as also
to oppose Christ's Work in this Life, and to put off Freedom from Sin unto that
which is to come; and in this Faith many take a Liberty all their Lives to the
Hazard of their own Salvation, which if the sad Consequence of such Doctrine
were seriously considered, and prudently foreseen, we should all preach up
Righteousness, and cry down Sin, and excite Men to lay hold of Christ, and
believe in him for perfect Redemption, and not argue for the Continuance of Sin
all our Days, knowing how apt Men are to lay Hold of that which most suits
their corrupt Minds, which are in the Evil Works; we should not dispute for
Sin, or a Deficiency in Duty, whatever Infirmity we perceive in our selves, but
in all sincerity wait upon God, and exercise all Diligence through his Grace,
Light and Presence for Evil to be suppressed, and the Seed of Enmity to be
extirpated, both out of our selves and others; that Righteousness might be
exalted, and run down as a mighty stream to wash away the Dirt and Corruption,
which greatly abounds among many, who think to salve themselves, and to quiet
their justly disturbed Consciences, with a Feigned Application of Christ's
Righteousness and Merits, however they neither allow him, nor his holy Nature
to have a Place in their Hearts, whose unsound Doctrine, as well as their
unchristian Lives, has levened many into Hypocrisy as well as kept them in
ignorance from the very Life and Nature of Christianity, which consists in the
inward Enjoyment of the Real Righteousness and Nature of the Son of God, as
inwardly revealed, spiritually begotten, born and brought forth in the Soul
through the Spirit of Holiness.

What the Author says concerning Perfectio Viae or Patriae Viatorum or
Comprehensorum, a Perfection belonging to the State whiles we are in the Way as
Travelers, or a Perfection belonging to the State, when we shall get home or to
our Country, page 6.

Adnimad. It is granted that there is a twofold Perfection belonging to the
Saints, as namely to the State, as Travailers in this Life, and to the State of
that to come, and that which is to come does ex^eed the Estate that now is, as
to the Fullness of Glory, yet granting a Perfection in the Way or Journey, in
Order to that furrher Degree at the Journeys End; this then is a Perfection in
the Way, not out of it, and what is the Way that conduces to a further Glory?
but the Way of Righteousness, Thou will guide me by thy Counsel, and afterward
receive me to Glory. With me to live is Christ, and to dye is Gain. The
exceeding Weight of Glory which is prepared for the Righteous hereafter none
can attain to, but they that faithfully follow Christ, while in the Earthly
Tabernacle; the Perfection of Grace here, which conduces to the Perfection of
Glory hereafter, admits not of the Continuance of Sin in Saints in this Life.

Sect. IV.
Object. If this Perfection, which consists in a Freedom from all Sin does
remain for the Rest above; I see not who there now is, that can free himself
from sinful Imperfection in this World, page 10.

Herein he speaks doubtfully, and his not seeing the man, that can fr^e himself
from all sinful Imperfection, is no Argument to prove that there is no such
man, as Christ does so free; he further says, That Perfection which belongs to
the Estat of this Life is to be considered in the Kind and in the Degree of it*
there is a Perfection in Kind and of the Degree.

Animad. Well, this Perfection in Kind is our Business to plead for at present,
as namely the true Child of God, or he that is born of God, who has his Seed
remaining in him, his Generation and King is of a pure Nature, the Heavenly
Birth is of a right Seed, and that which is born of God overcomes the World;
this Birth outgrows, overcomes and works out by Degrees all that is of a
contrary Nature or Kind in man; and that there are Fathers, Young Men and
Children in Growth, as this Man moderately states our Doctrine: And concerning
his two Questions, which he would fain be satisfied in, viz.

1 st. Whether that Degree of Holiness, which is attained by any Man, is not
the Duty of every Man? page 10.

Answ. It is the Duty of every man to experience a Perfecting Holiness in the
Fear of God; and without Holiness no Man can see God; every Member of Christ,
and every Branch that abides in him, is of the Heavenly Father's purging, and
therefore must be thoroughly purged; his Work is perfect, and it is said to him,
Thy People shall be all Righteous.

2 dly. Whether he that fails in the least of what is his Duty, does not sin?

Answ. Yea, But if any Man sin we have an Advocate with the Father, and if we
walk in the Light, as he is in the Light, we have Fellowship one with another,
and the Blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanses us from all Unrighteousness;
the Righteous Seed in us overcomes and works out the contrary.

Conces. We do not deny to them that Perfection in its Kind, which every Man
does and must attain unto, that is saved; the great D^fficulty will be only in
a Right Understanding, of what kind of Perfection it is which is to be agreed
upon by both, page 10.

Animad. Seeing that it is immediately after granted, That when the Scrip^ures
speak of any Good Man or Woman, that fears God and works Righteousness, it is
all one in Holy Language, as the being perfect is, page 10,
and that to be a perfect man is to be a Just Man, a Righteous Man that fears
God and eschews Evil. So then the Kind of Perfection must be that of Goodness,
Righteousness and Justice, etc. Be ye Perfect as your Heavenly Father is
Perfect; be ye Merciful, as your Heavenly Father is Merciful, Luke 6. 36. or*
as this Man well says, our Duty is not to sin at all to be in our kind, as God
in his is Perfect. And indeed they who have escaped the Corruptions of the
World, and by the precious Promise of God, are made Partakers of the Divine
Nature, they are conformable to his Image, Partakers of his Goodness, Kindness,
Mercifulness, Long-suffering, etc. now this is the Kind and Nature, which every
true Child partakes of, and grows up in, both to strength and stature in Order
to a future Glory, though I grant all have not the same Gifts, Parts and
Abillities in a Way of Demonstration, yet in every true Babe and Child of God,
there is that hidden Seed, Nature and Life, where in both Purity and Perfection
do consist* and the Perfecting of Holiness is known, and from thence does
spring up the Fruits of Righteousness, and though I grant, that there were and
may be Failings for a Time on the Creature's Part, in whom the Work of Grace is
begun, and a No^le Plant in the Seed or Root, before it be grown up, yet those
Failings do not always remain, but even in this Life, or this Side of Time are
outgrown and done away by that Noble Seed and Birth of the Heavenly Father,
unto which the Perfection is originally ascribed, and only to Man or the Soul,
as Partaking thereof.

If we confess our Sins, he is Faithful and Just to forgive us our Sins, page
12.
and to cleanse us from all Unrighteousness; a manifest Encouragement not to
continue in Sin, nor to despair because of it, nor yet to believe its
Continuance in us, but to believe that he, whose Faithfulness and Justness will
allow of Forgiveness, will cleanse us from all Unrighteousness; for, we are
sure ^his Righteousness admits of no Unrighteousness at all in us.

The Author adds, viz.

Of what Value then that Notion about this Righteousness of God, page 12, 13.
which after many Years Thoughts I have offered in the two former Papers, I
leave to Time, etc.

Animad. Well, I desire the Lord may yet further open this Author's
Understanding with an experimental Knowledge of the Righteousness of God in
Christ Jesus, in the Revelation thereof from Faith to Faith, and this will be
more to Confirmation and Satisfaction then all Man's Thoughts, studied Notions
and Comprehensions thereof; and seeing there has been such serious
Inclinations in his Heart, it is to be hoped that the Lord will answer his
Expectations, if he waits upon him, and has an Eye to him in that Measure of
his Divine Light given.

Sect. V.
Object. There is no Man that sins not; there is not a Just Man upon Earth,
that does good and sins not; there is none that does good, no not One, page
13.

Animad. 1st. These Places if rightly considered; cannot reach or comprehend
the highest State or Growth of Saints under the Gospel, or of such as are born
of God, whom the Wicked One touches not, and who do not commit Sin; for such
do Good and do not sin in doing Good; but some learned Men do not understand
the Words cited, in the same Sense or Mood; as rendered in the Translation, viz.
that there is no Man that sins not, or no Man Just that does Good and
sins not, but in the Potential, viz. may not sin, or no Man but that he may
sin, and no man Just in the Earth that does Good and may not sin; and that this
concerned a Legal State, or the State of a Just Man under the Law, and not of a
Gospel Estate or Attainment, thus Dr. Gell in his Essay toward the Amendment
of the last English Translation of the Bible, Fol. 768, 769. Besides, there is
a Difference between a Just Man, as in the Law, and a Good Man, as in the
Gospel; it is not said, that there is not a Good Man on Earth that sins not.

2 d^y. There is none that does Good, no not one; cannot be taken ^universally;
for that were to contradict the Saying before, of the Just Man doing Good, and
to bring this as a proof of the Saints State, cannot be Just nor Right; for it
did not concern them, but the Unconverted Jews and Gentiles, and such, as
neither understood nor sought after God, see Romans 3. 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15
16. 17, 18. together with the Place in the Psalms to which this refers.

Object. In many Things we offend all; if we say, we have no Sin we deceive our
selves, page 13.

Animad. Nor do these comprehend the highest Growths or Seize of Saints
and Good Men in this Life; it was usual, both with Apostles and Prophets to
personate, or take in themselves with the least and weakest of those they spoke
and wrote to, using the Particle WE, as instance in the same Apostle cited,
Jam. 3. 9. Therewith curse WE Men, and 1 John 1. 6. to the End, and it is also
said verse 10. If WE say, WE have not sinned, WE make him a Liar, and his
Word is not in us, yet see he declares the Rem^dy, as well as the Disease,
verse 7. If WE walk in the Light, as he is in the Light, We have Fellowship
one with another and the Blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleans^th us from all
Sin and: further he shows his Holy Design in what he writes in these Words,
viz. My little Children these Things write I unto yuo, that you sin not, 1 John
2. 1.

Object. No Man is regenerate but in Part, not as if one Faculty was sanctified
and not another, but there remains the Principle of Corruption, together with
the Principle of Grace, which is infused, that is both Flesh and Spirit in the
same Person, and whatsoever ^rodeeds from the one cannot be Sin, as whatsoever
proceeds from the ^ther cannot be otherwise page 13.

Animad. Herein we differ, for we must confess that by Degrees, the Work of
Regeneration, and Sanctification comes thoroughly to be effected, or perfected
in every one that continues in true Faith, even to a through purging out of
Corruption, and to a perfect Mortification of that from whence Sin proceeds; be
ye sanctified throughout in Body, Soul and Spirit, and farther, They that are
Christ's have crucified the Flesh with its vile Affections; and it is not the
Flesh merely of it self, but as it is subjected to an Evil Principle or Seed of
Sin, that brings forth corrupt Actions, but Christ's Work is thoroughly to purge.

Sect. VI.
But further seeing this Author's Opinion is, that no man is Regenerate but in
Part, and that there remains the Principle of Corruption, together with the
Principle of Grace; how does he dispense with these Scriptures cited by him,
viz. He that cammitteth sin is of the Devil; Whosoever is born of God does not
commit sin; for his Seed remains in him, and he cannot sin because he is b^rn
of God; He that is born of God keeps himself that the Wicked one touches him
not, 1 John 3. and chap. 5.

To salve this, he tells us that St. Augustine does lay some two or three of
these Texts together, and offers us this Solution; That which is born of God (
says he) sins not, which is as much as to say, there is that which is born of
God in the true Christian, and that which is not born of him, page 13.

Animad. I grant that there is that, which is born of God (as relating to a
Thing or Principle) spoken of in John's Epistles, as WHATSOEVER is born of God
overcomes the World; and this is the Victory that overcomes the World, even our
Faith, 1 John 5. 4. well this is to our Purpose still, that WHATSOEVER is born
of God overcomes the World, and surely then, this does not leave the world's
Principle of Corruption unsubdued in true Christians, but there is also
WHOSOEVER is born of God does not commit sin; for is Seed remains in him, and
WHO is he that overcomes the World [who] relates to the Man or Person that
believes in the Son of God, as well as the other does to the Principle or Seed
in him, so that as the holy Seed or that which is born of God comes into
Dominion in Man, this takes in the Creature or Soul to partake of its Nature
again, as the Author has added, That according to the Prevalency there is of
any of these two Principles in the Soul, so is the Person to have his
Denomination, page 13. Very true then, as the Good Principle becomes prevalent
in the Soul, man becomes a good man, or an holy and just man.

As for his Allegation from the Apostle in Romans 7. That the Ap^stle did the
Evil he would not, saying, it is no more I that does it, but Sin that dwells
in me; This, it is true, was a State that Paul knew in the Time of his Warfare
and Travail; and even in this State God had Regard to the Sincerity of his
Mind, wherewi^h he served the Law of God, even while he was warring against the
contrary Law; but as I answered before, this Apostle as well as others, did so
far condescend to the Weakness of others, as not only to signify such
Exercises as he had past through, but also to personate the Conditions of
others to whom he wrote and spoke; for, he could not be in all those different
and various States that he represents in that Epistle to the Romans, at one and
the same Time when he then wrote, viz. as to be both Carnal and Spiritual, sold
under Sin, and yet freed by the Law of the Spirit of Life in Christ Romans 8. 1,
2. with many more Instances, which ^ight be cited out of the same Epistle*
compare Romans 6, and 7, and 8. Chapter, read them seriously, also how plain is
it that Paul condescended to speak as one below his own present Attainment; for
I speak after the manner of men, because of the Infirmity of your Flesh, Romans
6. 19. To the Weak I became as weak, etc. see 1 Cor. 9. 22.

Object. What is alleged by this Writer for the Principle of Corruption
remaining in the Child of God, and for all Men being sinners, and for every Man
upon Earth sinning against the Law of Works, in leaving undone what it
requires, or doing what it forbids in Thought Word or De^d, even continually,
page 14.

Animad. I think he has sufficienly answered himself with a Confutation,
distinguishing by these Texts Confession inserted in the next Section,

Sect. VII.
He confesses That other Texts say, that the Regenerated do not sin, and the
Blood of Christ cleanses us from all Sin, and there is no Man sins against the
Law of Grace, so as to leave undone what tha^ requires as the condition of
Life, who is saved; as also, that all Power is committed to the Son; page 14.
the Law of Nature is put into Christ's Hands to be commanded by him which
together with Remedying Grace are Parts of his Law; But then he bids us
distinguish between sinning against one or other Precept of Christ's Law, and
sinning against it as a Conditional Covenant by none performance. To this I
must add, it is true that the Condition of Life cannot be left undone by any who
are saved, that is, Faith and Repentance cannot be omitted by any such, or no
Man can be saved, or inherit Eternal Life in a State of Unbelief; but then if
this great Condition of Life be performed, or this Remedying Grace received and
enjoyed, sincere Obedience to Christ's Law in lesser Matters must needs follow;
for, as the Performance of the greater Things must needs argue a Capacity to
perform the letter, so we ought to show a sincere Respect and Faithfulness to
our Lord and Master in the least Things, as well as in the greatest; for, he
that is unjust in the least, Luke 16. 10. see also Mat. 5 10.
is unjust also in much; and if they be Christ's Friends that do whatsoever he
commands, then it is evident that in a State of Grace, Favor and Union with
him, Christ does not permit of sinning against one or other Precept of his Law
upon any Account; and though there be that which is called the Law of Works,
which the Believer is never under nor obliged to perform in the Shadow, in the
Flesh or outward Part, yet the Law of the New Covenant, the Law of the Spirit
of Life in Christ, the Law of Faith, the Law of Love must be performed, and
faithfully obeyed by all that come into that Covenant, or to be under Christ's
Government in his Kingdom, and as for his Covenant as Conditional, or wh^t is
required thereby as the Condition of Life, this admits not of the Continuance
of Sin or Corrupt^on; see what the Author grants in this Case. If thou will
enter into Life ^aith Christ, keep the Commandments; neither Circumcision nor
Uncircumcision avails any thing says the Apostle, but Faith working by Love,
in one Place, but a New Creature, in another, but keeping the Commandments of
God, in a third; do we make void the Law through Faith? No, we establish it,
that the Righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us, who walk not after
the Flesh, but after the Spirit; the doers of the Law shall be justified; it
appears by a Multitude of such Scriptures as these [saith he] that the Law or
Commandments of God are to be kept or fulfill^d; that the Fulfilling them is
required as necessary to the Person justified, A plain Concession to truth.
and consequently, as the Condition (which is all one) of Pardon and Life. Thus
far he grants, page 14. which is a large Concession.

Object. But again, To help us out here ( he says) we must distinguish after
our more sober and best Divines; the Law of God may be considered ridgedly, or
not ridgedly, that is with Condescension to Human Frailty, according to the
Measure in every one of the Gift of Christ, page 14.
or according to our Model, Strength or Grace in this Life, and that Degree of
Perf^rmance which God requires of us precisely in the New Covenant, to the
obtaining of Salvation; it is in the latter, the mild the gracious, not in the
former, page 15.
the ridged Sense, that such Texts are to be interpreted that the Law or
Commandments are fulfilled, and that the Observation is made necessary to the
justified and saved.

Animad. 1st. That there is a gracious Condescension in God toward Mankind, as
not to leave Man under the Severity of the Law, without affording Remedying
Grace, is confessed by us, as also according to the Measure of the Gift of Christ
in every^one, and according to our Strength and Degree of Grace, which he
affords us; he does condescend both in extending Pardon, remitting Sin past,
delivering us from under the Severity of the Law, and justifying us from all
those Things, from which we could not be justified by the Law of Moses, as we
receive and submit unto his Grace, and New Covenant of Life and Salvation, but
still this mild and gracious Condescension of God, his Law and Commandments
appertaining to this Covenant, admits not of the Continuation of Sin, nor does
the least Measure of the Gift of Christ, or Principle of Grace admit of
Corruption or Sin to remain with it, but by Degrees works out the very Seed and
Principle of Corruption, and sanctifies the whole Man, leavens the whole Lump,
in so much that this increases, and Truth springs up daily, and the Fruit of
the Spirit grows and ripeneth in man, as he comes thus to be prepared and
fitt^d, and hereby comes the Way of Life and Salvation to be made easy and
delightsome to him: Take my Yoke upon you; for my Yoke is easy and my Burden
light says Christ, and this is the Love of God, that we keep his Commandments,
and they are not grievous but joyous to us; thus the Grace and Love of God
makes Way through all Difficulties, and makes all that he requires in the New
Covenant to be, not only possible, but easy and delightsome to that Soul who
comes to Christ, who said, come to me all ye that labor, that are weary and
heavy la^en and I will ease you [namely, I will ease you from the Burden of
your Sins and of your Failings in your Duty, and of the Severity or
Condemnation of the Law, which you have been laboring and travailing under, I
will perfectly ease you and free you, that you may the more cheerfully bear my
Yoke, and undergo my Burden, and I will enable you to run the Way of my
Commandments with Delight; I will lay no more upon you then what you are able
to bear, and cheerfully to undergo; be of good Comfort, for I have overcome,
etc.] And I further grant God's merciful Acceptance of us for Christ's sake,
and of what we do, through the Obedience and Oblation of Christ Jesus, as he
gives us an Evidence by his Spirit of our being in him, accepted in the
Beloved; and this Acceptance extending to the least of his Children and
People, and to the lowest stature among them, whose Hearts are sincere toward
him; so this is Encouragement unto them to persevere in Obedience according t^
their Measures, and Abillities in this Gift of Grace, that they may continue
therein, and grow from Strength to Strength and from Faith to Faith, until
they come to Maturity, or to a full Age in Christ.

Now the least Child, or lowest of the Servants of God, in obeying or being
faithful to what he gives t^em to improve according to their Abillities, such
do not commit Sin therein.

Object. There is no Man keeps the Commands of Christ, so as never to fail in
any thing of his Duty, but every Child of God keeps them so as they are made
the Condition of Life in the New Covenant, page 15.

Animad. To the first it may be granted, that no Man has al^wayes kept the
Commands of Christ; For, if we say we have not sinned, we make him a Liar. To
the second Part, if every Child of God keep his Commands, as they are made the
Condition of Life in the New Covenant, then I hope it will be granted however,
that the greatest and most substantial Commandments are kept, and how he should
then neglect the lesser, or remain unfaithful in the least Things I cannot
understand; for, ye are my Friends if ye do whatsoever I command you, faith
Christ; and he that is faithful in that which is least, is faithful also in
much: Now, this great Commandment of Love being the Fulfilling of the Law, must
needs be therefore comprehensive of (or take in) the lesser Commandments; and
farther let it be seriously minded and considered, that he that is come into
the New Covenant, or to be in Covenant with God, is come into that Agreement
and Union with him, which this Covenant contains, which admits not of the
continuance of Sin, or Breach of the Law of this Covenant; and he that abides
in Christ sins not; he that dwells in Love dwells in God; be not deceived, he
that does Righteousness is Righteous, even as he is Righteous, 1 John 3. And
this may answer what is said about the Child of God, that as he is Righteous
and Perfect, he sins not, etc. and that when St. John speaks of sinning not, we
may observe, how he counterpoises committing Sin with being Righteous or doing
Righteousness: [to which this Author addeth] The true Christian sins not, so as
he opposes his being Righteous; he commits not Sin, as is contradictory to his
doing Righteousness, page 15. But still he seems here to leave Room for the
Child of God's sinning, or committing Sin in some Sense or other while in this
World, about which we differ, and cannot be reconciled, unless we both join in
that Seed and Principle, which lives in the child of God; if we both did meet
in that which is born of God, which overcomes the World, we should both agree
about the State of him or whosoever (to wit, the Man of God, or true child)
that is born of God whom the Wicked One cannot touch.

Sect. VIII.
Again since he says, The calm Protestants will grant to the Papists such a
fulfilling of the Law, as does constitute a Real true Righteousness, and that
which is perfect or entire according to the Covenant of Grace, and so accepted
of God unto Life, etc. page 15, 16.

Animad. It Is well that some Protestants grant thus much; for this is
repugnant, both to the continuance and mixture of Sin and Corruption in the
Children of God, or with their Obedience; for, true and real Righteousness,
which is perfect and entire according unto the Covenant of Grace, is what we do
plead for, both, as to the Root and Fruits of it, but I cannot see how this can
consist with what he says; The most violent Papists will grant to the
Protestant, that this Righteousness nevertheless is not wtthout all Sin, but
does both fail in the Degree which the Law exacts; and is intermingled with
many, at least venial Transgressi^n^, page 16. Although this does somewhat
agree with what this Author drives at against us, yet such a mixture we cannot
own, nor such an interminglement of Sin with that Righteousness which is
perfect, and entire according to the Covenant of Grace; and I see no Reason
when the Soul's great Enemy is overcome, and the greater Sins washed off, and
the greater Pollutions done away, why those venial Sins or lesser Sins should
remain, and there is no Reason that venial or pardonable Sins should remain or
be continued after pardoned; Man's Mind and Heart being changed and turned from
them, having repented thereof at the Time of his receiving pardon, or when he
receives Redemption through the Blood of Christ, even Remission of Sins past.

As for standing on our own Righteousness, when it is taken for
Self-Righteousness in the Sense of the Prophet Isaiah chap. 64. 6. We do
utterly deny and exclude it, but as the Lord is o^r Righteousness by his inward
Work of Grace, and Sanctification in our Hearts, we must forever own and stand
by this with Respect to our Justification, Acceptance and Peace with him, as
being the Ground and Original thereof to us and in us; and they who exclude
this inward or inherent Righteousness of God from Justification, we can in no
wise own their Doctrine.

Again between this Man's Assenting, page 16, 17. that that Righteousness which
is accepted of God unto Life, is a real true Righteousness, perfect and entire
according to the Covenant of Grace, and yet, that this Righteousness is
imperfect wherein we are justifiable by the Covenant of Mercy, as Performers of
the Condition; here appears such an Inconsistancy, as I know not how to
reconcile; for, that which is perfect and entire according to the Covenant of
Grace, is never deficient, lame or imperfect, nor yet intermingled with any Sin
to make i^ so, as Christ being made unto us Wisdom, Righteousness,
Sanctification and Redemption, we are only accepted in him, justified in his
Righteousness, accepted in the Beloved; whereby we do not exclude that
Obedience on our Parts which Christ injoyns, but are enabled and naturallized
thereunto.

Confess. He confef^eth, that God gave his whole Law for a Covenant, and if one
Part only were transgressed, the Condition of that Covenant is broken, as well
as if all were transgressed; and that we must understand the like in reference
to the Law of Faith, or Covenant of Grace and its Observation, page 17.

Animad. Must we so? Then as perfect or full Obedience is required by the
latter, and unto it, as by the former, and much more Power and Encouragements
attend this (being established upon better Promises) then were known under the
other; and in this Covenant of Grace God's Promises are Yea and Amen, which
concern perfect Holiness, as well as the rest of the Saints Privileges; and
both this Law and Righteousness of Faith, require a sincere or perfect
Obedience to the Word of Faith in the Heart (and that in order to the
completing an absolute Justification and Salvation) as the Law or Letter
without does to the Precepts therein contained; but then the Man varies in what
he adds in the next Section.

Sect. IX.
Object. viz. Let a Man's Sins be what they will, so long as the Condition be
performed he, may according to this Law be judged no Transgressor, page 17.

Animad. Whereas if this Law of Faith or Covenant of Grace must be as fully
observed, as the whole Law that God gave to Man for a Covenant (as before) no
Part whereof was to be broken, how do these consist? And if the Law be not made
void through Faith, but established; and if it be not the Unrighteous that
shall inherit the Kingdom of God, but such as are washed and sanctified from
all Uncleanness, that are also justified in the Name of the Lord Jesus, and by
the Spirit of our God, see 1 Cor. 6. Then I do not see that the Performance of
the Condition of the Covenant of Grace can consist with [ Let a Man's Sins be
what they will] which Words have a Tendence to an Evil Liberty; for, a
justified State is plainly opposed (as contrary) to that of the Unrighteous in
this, 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10, 11.

Object. It Is further added; Though we fail in our Duty we fulfill the
Condition, page 18.

Animad. How can that be? if the Covenant of Grace, or Law of Faith be the
Condition which we are to observe and obey, as our Duty so far as it concerns
us, both as enjoined and assisted by Christ Jesus our Life and Righteousness?
Is it not our Duty to fulfill the Condition? and do we yet fail in our Duty
whilst we fulfill it? No sure.

As to David's Heart being perfect, and that he kept God's Commandments or
Precepts. 1st. This of his Heart being perfect, page ibid.
respects what was sincere and uprght in David as a Spirit without Guile, a
sincere Desire, Intention and Resolution of Heart toward God, though for a
Time he had Failings, and was bes^t with Temptations, yet the Lord had Regard
to his Uprightness, etc. 2 dly. David's keeping God's Commandments or Precepts,
was when he was really clear, and actually obedient, walking in the Ways of
God, and not as consistant with his sinning in the Matter of Uriah, etc. for
which he underwent great Judgment and deep Affliction, often imploring Mercy
and Pardon, praying for Cleansing, Washing etc. 3dly. As he was a Man after
God's own Heart, he was according to and in God's Choice and Promise, he stood
in the Election: The Lord has sought him a Man after his own Heart, 1 Samuel 13.
14. I have found David the Son of Jesse, a Man after mine own Heart, which
shall fulfill all my Will; this being fulfilled he was in a precious State, not
guilty nor condemnable, for, after God's own Heart, was both ^is Sincerity,
Perfection and Purity: Surely being a Man after God's own Heart and fulfilling
all his Will, could not concern David's worst but his best State.

Object. But to answer that Complaint, That his Sins were more then the Hairs
upon his Head, page 18.
this Writer says, There are Sins consistant with Sincerity, and inconsistant
with it.

Animad. Though I would as favorably construe his Words as I can, yet this
Phrase [ Sins consistant with Sincerity] I can neither own to be sound,
scriptural or of a good Tendence; but tending to gratify both the sin-pleasing
Professors unrighteous Imputarians, and loose Antinomians of our Times; for,
though I do grant, that a sincere-minded Man may possibly be overtaken with a
Fault through some great Temptation or Trial, and yet not loose his Sincerity
(though it be clouded) but retain his Integrity, as Job did his, until he be
fully recovered, restored and delivered, (wherein he differs from him that
wilfully or designedly sins, or is obstinate or wittingly dissembles and plays
the Hypocrite) yet no Sin or Neglect of Duty is consistant with the Sincerity
it self, which God has begotten in the Creature; but there is a daily or
constant Travail and Warring in the sincere Mind and Soul, until the Sin be
overcome, and really done away, as it was with Paul when with his Mind he
served the Law of God, had travailed in Spirit for Deliverance from that Law of
Sin, which did embondage or captivate his Members, in which low Estate of
warring, God has an Eye to the upright and sincere Mind that waits upon him,
and subjects to his inward Law of the Spirit of Life in Christ Jesus; and by
his Spirit of Adoption does help his Creature's Infirmities, until all that
offends be subdued, and the Soul becomes more then a Conqueror. And so as for
his Distinction between the Breach of our Duty and the Condition, page 18.
while he discourses for Failing of the first, and yet a Fu^filling the
latter; I cannot reconcile him herein, nor own such Distinctions, either as
necessary or consistant with the real Experience of a Justified State, wherein
the Law of the Spirit of Life [ or Law of Faith] in Christ is answered and
followed, and the Effect thereof experienced in them that are in Christ Jesus,
who walk not after the Flesh, but after the Spirit; and in them the
Righteousness, Morality, Good Order and Duty (both respecting the Law and
Gospel, Nature and Grace) is fulfilled by Christ Jesus, and performed through
his spiritual Assistance.

It Is true, there is a Sin unto Death (as he says) and a Sin not unto Death;
page 18, 19.
and no better then sinning unto Death, can I look upon Men's Continuance in
any known Sin or Unrighteousness, all their Life Time against the holy and just
Law of God in the Conscience; the Sin of Impenitence as well as of Unbelief
being persisted in, incurs Death, as it is granted that David (in the M^t^er
wherein he sinned) in that present State could not have been saved if he had
dyed; And what he cites is also true, viz. De. Peccato ad Mortem, quoniam non
expr^ssum est, possu^t diversa sentiri; ego autem dico id esse Peccatum, Fid^m
quae per Dilectionem operatur, d^serere usque ad Mortem. Concerning Sin unto
Death, because it is not express^d, d^vers Things may be thought of it; but I
say, that sin is this, to desert (or never come up to that Faith which works
by Love) unto Death, August. de Con. et Gra. chap. 12.
but surely if the Condition of true Faith and Repentance be performed, and the
Nature there of be experienced, the other Acts of Duty and Obedience will
follow; for, is there any Sin or Neglect of Duty that is not to be repented of
and ceased from? or can a true Believer see any Sin or Failing without
believing, or exercising Faith in his Warring against it till he overcome, and
he has out grown it? No sure, he attains to the Accomplishment of his Warfare
through valiantly fighting the Good Fight of Faith, he reaches unto the End of
his Race by unwearied travailing on without Fainting.

Sect. X.
To his saying, Behold here a Kind of Heaven opened unto you, who are the
Children of God, and fear his Name, where all your Sins and Iniquities are
removed, and where every one of you are righteous and perfect, and sin not;
for, this is the Benefit and Fruit of Christ's Death and Redemption, that he
has delivered you from that Law which you break.

Animad. 1st. That Heaven where all Sins and Iniquities are removed, and where
the Children of God are perfect and sin not, is not of this Man's or any of
their opening who oppose perfection of Duty, and argue for Sin's continuance in
God's Children whilst in this Life; for that Heaven wherein dwells
Righteousness, and they are all Righteous and sin not, admits not of Sin to
have any Place in it, the Will of God being perfectly done therein. 2 dly.
That Is the old Heaven and old Earth wherein dwells Unrighteousness, and these
must ^e shaken and removed for the New to take Place. 3 dly. Christ is the End
of the Law for Righteousness, and not to indulge Transgression or any Breach of
that Law which is Holy, Just and Good, fulfilled and not destroyed in the New
Creature and Covenant.

4 thly. It Is true as he says, That Christ has brought us under a New Law,
the Law of Grace which requires nothing of us, but what sub Ratione Conditions;
we do keep; for he gives his holy Spirit to enable us to the Performance,
Concess. page 19.
so that not only our Sins are done away and not imputed, but forgiven, as the
Iniquities of Judah shall be sought for and not found; but this Covenant has
nothing to lay to our Charge [to which I would add] as we are Children of God
redeemed by Christ, who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all
Iniquity [mark that] And further, Blessed is he whose Transgression is
forgiven, and whose Sin is covered; blessed is the Man unto whom the Lord
imputes not Iniquity, and in whose Spirit there is No Guile, Psa. 32. 1, 2.
Observe, In whose Spirit is NO Guile: And further, the holy Spirit in this New
Covenant, enables them that walk in it, to the perfect Performance of their
Duty therein required, and the Reconciliation that was wrought in the Body of
his Flesh through Death; for such as were sometimes alienated [as the Apostle
saith] I was to present them Holy, unreproveable in his Sight, if they continue
in the Faith grounded and settled, and be not moved away from the Hope of the
Gospel; Col. 1. 21, 22.
this unreproveable State in his Sight, and Duty of Continuance in the Faith,
is the Perfection and Justification that we aim at.

As for his granting a Perfection which Divines call Evangelical to the Quaker,
that is an Integrity of Heart and Life which the Gospel requires of every man
that shall be saved. page 20. We accept of this Grant, as rightly understood
and experienced in the Evangelical and New Covenant State, and are satisfied,
that where this Integrity of Heart and Life, which the Gospel requires is thus
experienced, there will not be a Falling short of Duty, especially since
neither the Knowledge thereof, nor yet divine Assistance will be wanting to
such as possess this Integrity of Heart and Life: As for this Man's
Supposition, If these Friends (meaning the Qu^kers) will have more, then they
must come to that, our Divines call legal Righteousness, etc. page 20. I do not
understand that a legal Righteousness, or Righteousness of the Law can be more
or higher then an Evangelical Perfection, or Righteousness which the Gospel
requires, nor Moses's House more beautiful then Christ's; though we do not
propose the Righteousness of the Law, or the keeping the Law in the outward
Part of it, nor impose it as in the Letter and Shadow, as either the Condition
of Salvation or necessary thereto; but True Faith in Christ, which works by
Love; and as the Apo^stle said, I though the Law am dead to the Law, that I
might liv^ unto God; I am crucifi^d with Christ, etc. Gal. 2. 19, 20. As for
this Man's, or any others sleighting the Perfection we plead for, tearming it a
legal Righteousness, we value not such insinuations, seeing, that to live
without Sin according to the Royal Law of Love, is both what the Law and Gospel
requires, and he has confessed it our Duty* and possib^e for us to attain to
it through the Assistance of God's spirit.

It is granted that the Disciples did call God Father, and so they must be in
some Degree called and adopted to be his Sons while they did ask Forgiveness
for their Tresp^ss^s or D^bts, as they for^gave others, yet I do not grant this
to be their highest State, or Seize in this Life; for they did not only
obtain Forgiven^ss, but also the Blood of Christ cleansed them from all Sin;
and if they were heard in saying, Thy Will be done in Earth, as it is in
Heaven, as doubtless they were; then what Sin or Trespass could always be
continued by them, or persisted in which was not perfectly done away in this
Life? I further confess, that true Believers may be called the Children of God,
and under two Considerations or Degrees, 1 st. As called and adopted to be his
Sons (being begotten into the Faith) w^ile yet they are weak and have
Infirmities, which the Spirit of Adoption does help; they are Children, as to
their Weakness little Children, Children in Understanding, yet in a Degree
(...) Faith, Sincerity and Innocence, having their Sins forgiven; I have writ
unto you little Children, because your Sins are forgiven you. 2dly. Children,
and Sons of God in a higher Degree and State, perfectly born, not only of
Water, but also of the Spirit, even of the incorruptible Seed, that lives and
abides forever, Partakers of and naturallized into the Divine Nature and
Image; and such are they that cannot sin, in whom the Seed remains, and whom
the Wicked one cannot touch, etc. And if he cannot touch them, muchless lead or
drive them into sin or Neglect of Duty; further, the Forgiveness that any true
Believer had daily need of for a time, was obtained and experienced, even by
little Children.

Touching that Article of that Prayer, Forgive us our Trespasses, etc. The Man
seems undeservedly to reflect, by saying, yet they think they may scratch it
out of their Bibles, because they leave it unsaid, page 21.

I suppose he means the Quakers herein, having a little before insinuated
something against them, touching Perfection, which I cannot own, as fair
Dealing; for we think no such Thing, but do really own that Prayer, both as to
the Matter and seasonableness of it; and as to the Fulfilling of it, with
Respect to the several Condition; concerned therein.

Sect. XI.
To his saying, page 21. That the constant stream of God's Word runs thus, that
we are sinners, that we must all repent, that we must always be renewing our
Repentance, in making our Prayers, Confessions, Supplications, doing our Alms,
etc.

Animad. He appears herein much declined from the first Part of his Book, and
the Perfection and universal Justification therein consented to, as our Duty,
and Possibillity of Attainment through Divine Grace or Assistance: Now he seems
to be fallen into the Ditch of the Imputarians of the Times, who are daily
pretending Repentance, Humiliation, Confessions and Supplications, which are
never attended with a real forsaking of Sin, but they are sinning still in
their best Duties. none of them so just or good, as to do good without sinning
in doing good, while they have Forgveness to crave for the Iniquities of their
best Duties, at which Rate they may be every Day praying, feigning a Penitency
and Humility, and even therein still adding more Sin, and making themselves
more Work: Both this pretended Repentance, Voluntary and feigned Humility is to
be repented of; if the true Nature of Repentance, Praying, Asking and Receiving
were experienced through the Spirit, it would cut off all this struggling for
Sin, which must have no Place in Christ's Kingdom.

Upon that Scripture, If any Man sin we have an Advocate with the Father, who
is the Propitiation for our Sins, and also for the Sins of the whole World;
upon this he is pleased to pataphrase thus, viz. There is our Sins, St. John's
Sins that need Advocate, as well as the World, page 21.

Animad. I must need confess this allows St. John very little Preeminence, the
Comparison is somewhat mean; for [ our Sins] may relate to Sins that were past
and forgiven, as well as the accidental sinnings of any weak ones among them;
for he should have considered that [ if any Man sin] is not that every Man must
sin, or that no Man can do otherwise, but rather implies, that they might also
be kept out of Sin, seeing he says, These Things write I unto you, that you
sin no^; it seems he was not of this Man's Mind, that they were Sinners all
their Days, or could be no otherwise: Besides, both John and others
condescended to the lowest of those to whom they wrote, taking themselves in as
sharers in the same Conditions, and suffering with them, that they might help
them; To the weak I became as weak etc.

As for his Alleging and citing Eliphaz for Sin, What is Man, that he should
be clean, and he that is born of a Woman, that he should be Righteous? Because
he puts no Trust in his Saints, and the Heavens are not clean in his Sight.

^o this I say, that I am no more of his Mind then Job was; and I do not reckon
such an Instance of one of Job's miserable Comforters, to be any valid Proof
against Perfection; for, does God put no Trust in his Saints? Does he not give
this Testimony of them? surely they are my People, Chi^dren that will not lie,
and so was he their Savior: And further observe, that the Lord said to Eliphaz
the Temanite, My Wrath is kindled against thee and against thy two Friends; for
ye have not spoken of me the Thing that is right, as my servant Job has, Job.
42. 7.

^^is Author further adds, We are all an unclean Thing says the Church, and
all our Right^ousnesses are as filthy Rags, page 21.

Animad. I wonder he has distinguished no better here; for this as applied to
the Church without Distinction, contradicts all his Concessions to the Truth
before, both of universal Justification, Perfection, the Condition of Life and
Salvation, and Evangelical Holiness; methinks he should consider that these are
not intended in those Righteousness^s that are as filthy Rags, and that the
Prophet Isaiah himself did personate and intend the Jews herein, as
disobedient, rebellious and corrupt in their doings, and not the Evangelical
Church, whose Righteousness the Lord is, and concerning whom it was promi^ed,
Thy People shall be all Righteous.

Object. There is one Text most full, he says, which is that of David, Enter
not into Judgment with thy Servant, O Lord; for in thy Sight shall no Man
living be justi^ied; upon which he is pleased to argue, If there is ^r ever was
any mere Mortal on Earth, that lived altogether without Sin, then must this
Text be false.

Animad. This [ altogether without Sin] has a large Extent, and it is not that
which we lay the Controvesie upon; we do not state this for Justification in
God's Sight, that any mere Mortal on Earth lived altogether without Sin; for
all generally have sinned; and if we say we have not sinned, we make him a
Liar, and his Word is not i^us, 1 John 1. 10. And further I will grant, that if
therefore God should enter into strict Judgment with any, deservedly to punish
them for all that ever they have done, then there would be no Place either for
Pardon, Justification, Salvation or Redemption by Christ; and further, by the
Deeds of Law, and all the Righteousness that is merely performed by the Flesh
shall no Flesh living be justified; if God upon t^is A^count should enter into
Judgment, then in his Sight should no Man living be justified; ^ut seeing he
has provided and afforded a Gracious Remedy, to wit the S^ed of the Woman,
(...) bruiseth the Serpent's Head; that destroy the Devil, and treads Satan
under Feet; hereby (...) livers Man from Condemnation and Death, although the
first has a Sense of the Sentence of Death, and the Ministry of Condemnation
in him, as knowing that Commandment which kills and makes alive, works Death,
and brings for h^ Life: And so I will further confess, that no Man living in
this State (unto which he must dye in passing through the Law) can be justified
in God's Sight. His saying, that it is common for Men to allege a few ^catered
Scr^ptures against any Opinion, which yet is true. This both is a sleighty, as
well as an irreverend expression (as touching the Scriptures) and the
Reflection implied in it against us, as groundless.

Sect. XII.
Object. If we are justified through C^rist's Redemption through Faith, when
none of us have performed the Condition required ^fus to our Justification by
the Law of our Creation, th^n must our Justification be of Grace, etc.

Animad. 1st. Though Justification be of Grace, yet this does neither indulge
nor allow us in the Breach of the Condition required by the Law of our Creation
nor are Men justified in the Breach and Violation thereof. if by the Law of our
Creation, the Law of Innocence or Image of God wherein Man was created, be
intended for a justified State by the Grace of God in Christ where completed,
is where Men are saved through the Washing of Regeneration, Tit. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7.

Object. If this Grace is obtained or purchased for us through Christ's
Redemption, then is God righteous though he accept of us (seeing it is for
Christ's Sake) without that Condition.

Animad. Without what Condition that which was required of us by the first Law,
or Law of our first Creation? I deny that; for without Innocence, without the
Image of God (which consists in Righteousness and true Holiness) none are
accepted of God, though it is true, we are forgiven for Christ's sake, through
Faith and Repentance of (...) ^st before, but our Acceptance is in the Beloved,
not out of him (...) in him we have our Redemption and Justification, both from
Sin and Condemnation of the Law; and in him we have restored to us what Adam
lost by Transgression, and not only that, but enjoy more Security and
Stabillity.

And what does God by his Spirit work in those that are chosen? but perfect
Holiness, yea, he will ordain Peace for us; for he has wrought all our Works
in us, Isa. 26. 12. page 23.

Also it is an Untruth, That the Perfection of the Quakers does quite overthrow
all this which the Apostle teaches, page 23. for the real Quaker is of the
Apostle's Mind, that Christ came both to condemn Sin in the Flesh, to redeem us
from ALL Iniquity, to fulfill the Righteousness of the Law in us, who walk not
after the Flesh, but after the Spirit, that so we might be delivered from ALL
Condemnation.

And also it is unjustly inferred from our Opinion, That we have no need of
such Grace or Christ's Redemption (that is of any from Christ as without)
whereby we should be justified and saved; and as untrue, that the Righteousness
of God or of Faith in Opposition to Works, is below that of ours; for in the
Gospel which is the Power of God, is his Righteousness revealed from Faith to
Faith, his Parenthesis [from Christ as without] is needle^s and impertinent
seeing neither Christ nor his saving Grace are divided, whether without or
within or both, and the same Grace, Virtue, Spirit, Life and Redemption that
was in Christ, as without, is received from the same Christ, as within.

Object. But if Christ's Redemption lay altogether where they place it, in
bringing M^^ off from Sin and Unrighteousness unto Holiness and Perfection,
even such as to live without Sin in this World, then Redemption cannot be
Universal, page 23.

Animad. Here we must distinguish to show how groundless this Objection is;
for, 1 st. His Redemption is Universal for all Mankind, as it is in him,
respecting his being an universal Sacrifice, and Propitiation by his Death and
Blood for all mankind; while we were Enemies Christ died; God was in Christ
reconciling the World to himself; the Price is universal. But

2 dly. It is they who only believe in him, that receive this Redemption, and
they, who are not only reconciled through his Death, but also saved by his
Life, who by him have received the Atonement or Peace made by him, so that
though the Redemption and Price, as in Christ or on his Part be universal, yet
the End thereof is not received by all, but only by those who believe and live
unto him; and so the Glory of our Redemption and Salvation we ascribe unto him,
who gave himself for us that he might redeem us from all Iniquity, which
answers the End, and manifests the compleatness of that Redemption, for
which Christ gave himself.

Object. I Do not think that the Quaker alone is in the Dark about this matter,
yet these Men I count here are most of all out, they look upon the Works of
Christ's Redemption, to be the Work of Christ within, so they speak and so they
think altogether, and then wilfully confound Sanctification and Redemption.

Animad. This is a Mistake, we do not confound them, yet must confess they are
received together, as inseparable, where Christ is made unto any, Wisdom,
Righteousness, Sanctification and Redemption; for the receiving Redemption
through his Blood, even the Forgiveness of Sins cannot be without
Sanctification which is both gradually carried on and effected by the Work of
Christ within, although I do confess, Redemption was manifestly or publicly
set forth and declared by Christ, as without in his Sufferings, Death and
Blood, as the Introduction and Preparation of the Way into the New Covenant, he
consecrated and set open the New and Living Way through the Vail, that is to
say, his Flesh.

Object. page 24.
The Quaker does place Christ's Redemption in bringing us up to these Terms,
the Performance whereof is indeed our Gospel, Perfection; but he is here so
miserably out, that he both mistakes the Terms or this Perfection, as if it
were no less then the fulfilling of every Jot of the Law it self, and also
contradicts himself in the best Tenet he has.

Animad. Though we confess Christ R^demption to be twofold, both as in him and
in us, respect^ng his Fulfilling the Law, his suffering for us, as also his
fulfilling the Righteousness of the Law in us, yet our Accuser is herein either
over^een in wording his Matter, or mistaken in the Matter it self; for,

1 st. We place not Christ's Redemption in bringing us to fulfill every jot of
the Law it self; for much of it is abolished, as the litteral and shadowy Part,
though the Substance thereof remains, not to be made void through Faith, but
established, yet this we have not obtained, either by our own Strength or
Imitation of the Letter, but through the Righteousness of Faith in Christ,
bringing us up to the Word of Faith in our Hearts, to obey it and do it, so
that our Redemption by him, is not to serve in the oldness of the Letter, which
made nothing perfect, but in the Newness of the Spirit, which perfectly
sanctifies.

2 dly. And in this we do not think our selves out, but in, even the Truth; and
within; even in the Spirit of Life in Christ Jesus; not out in the Letter, but
within in the Spirit; not out in the Righteousness of the Law (which Paul calls
his own) but within in the Righteousness of Faith, walking in the Spirit.

3 dly. And herein we are not conscious of Self contradiction in any of our
Tenets, much less in the best, this Objection is taken off by our confessing
Universal Grace and Redemption in Christ toward all, and for all Mankind, and
yet this Grace and Redemption not taking effect in all, but only in them who
believe and repent, which Men are not irresistably, forced to, but generally
called and (...) to, Faith being also offered unto all by Christ, and the World
being reproved of their Sin of Unbelief by the Spirit of Truth.

Sect. XIII.
It is true what he says, viz. Our Divines we call orthodox do generally
stumble upon this same Stone, in their D^nyal of Christ's Redemption to be
Universal; that he has procured that all may be saved if they believe and
repent, which are our new Terms, unless he has procured also that they believe
and repent, but it is the Elect only do believe and repent, and therefore they
hold Redemption only of the Elect.

Animad. It Is very true there are too many that stumble about this and deny
Christ's Universal Redemption and the Sufficiency thereof, and so oppose the
general Extent of saving Grace, partially limiting and restraining the
universal Sense and intent of those Testimonies of Scripture, which assert that
Christ gave himself a Ransom for all, and that by the Grace of God he tasted
Death for every Man, etc. these they confine only to the Elect; herein they are
not Orthodox, but are stumbling in the dark.

Object. Let the Quaker then know, it is not Christ's bringing Man up to the
Terms of God, but his bringing down God to the Terms of Man, that is such as
are suitable to his fallen State, wherein the great Work he has done for us is
to be fixed. page 25.

Animad. Truly the Quaker does not know how to own this Doctrine in the Terms
of it, on either Hand as it is stated; for Christ came to bring Man up to God,
1 Pet. 3. 18.
and those Terms that he has tendered in Christ for Life and Salvation, are
his Terms; and God was in Christ reconciling the World to himself, though it
was God's free Love thus far to condescend in the Son of his Love for Man's
Restoration, yet Man must also be brought up to meet God in his own Covenant of
Life in Christ, who is the Mediator, not to bring God down to the Terms of
Fallen Man, but as a Mediator which is not of one, but betwixt two, both to
bring God's Love and evidence his Kindness to man, and also to restore Man out
of his Fallen Estate into Covenant and Reconciliation with God, so as God and
his Creature meet in his Son Christ Jesus, who is the Son of his Love.

Seeing it is confessed, page 25. Our Faith and Repentance are a Fruit of his
Spirit, They must be real and true, such as admit not of the Mixture of Sin nor
of the Continuance thereof.

Object. As for his saying, It is true, that no Men but sin, and it is true
what they s^y, the regenerate sin not, the Scriptures say both.

Animad. Why are we then so much opposed and striven with? either for holding
this Perfection, or that some Men sin not, which we see not consistant with [
no Man but sins] The Scriptures say both; what? that there is none but he may
sin, and yet he that is born of God cannot sin; these then must both be
considered with reference unto two Dispensations, Estates or Degrees, otherwise
it would render the Scripture inconsistant, but the Scripture cannot be broken.

Object. The Child of God sins not, so as that Sin has Dominion over him when
he sins, page 25.

Animad. This still gives too much Liberty, and reflects upon the Child of God
contrary to the Apostle John's Testimony of him, 1 John 3. and 5. 18. Psalm.
119. 1, 2, 3.

Object. The prevailing Interest of his Soul is for God above the Flesh and the
World, and so long he is right in God's Sight; right Righteous, or perfect
according to the Law of Grace, although there be a Thousand Things wherein he
might do more Good, or less Evils then he does, and so is Imperfect,
Unrighteous and a manifold Sinner, etc. page 25.

Animad. This is still worse and worse, and a gross Reflection upon the Child
of God in this latter Part, which is inconsistant with the former, and to me
appears no other then Confusion, which is a Fruit of Sin and Transgression;
for, that the Child of God should be thus Righteous and Perfect according to
the Law of Grace, which is Perfect, Pure and Holy, and yet be chargeable with a
Thousand Things wherein he might do more Good, or less Evil then he does; this
appears very Unnatural, as well as Inconsistant.

That We plead Justification, according to some Law; that we are Innocent,
according to that Law, page 25 Is true, and that is the Law of the Spirit of
Life in Christ, the Law of Faith, the Law of ^r^ce, the Law of the New
Covenant, which admits not of the Continuance of these (or any) Evils, he seems
to accuse the Child of God with.

Object. This being seen, they come on too fast that they sin not, before they
have learned to distinguish between Law and Law, Righteousness and
Righteousness, Justification and Justification, Sin and Sin, page 25, 26.

Animad. Though we do not judge it necessary for the Child of God to learn all
this Man's Distinctions, yet we cannot own his Charge, that we come on too
fast, as not to sin; for we know, though it be an Estate attainable, yet it is
not by making haste, nor by Man's own Willing or Running, but by a Dependence
on the Grace of God; and it is sufficient for us, that we have experimentally
learned to distinguish what is necessary, both in our spiritual Travail, and
conducing to a happy End, which is a REAL RIGHTEOUSNESS and JUSTIFICATION
according to the Law of Faith and Spirit of Life in Christ Jesus, partaken of
and enjoyed within.

Sect. XIV.
I must say with them where they have our Divines on the blind Side, Con^ess*
page 26.
they are justified according to the Law of Faith, or as they are judged at the
Throne of Grace, but no Flesh living can be justified according to the Law of
Works.

Animad. But then he keeps not to this, but varies with his [ but they do sin.]
they are Unrighteous; expl^ins this Law of Works to be at the Ba^r of the Ten
Commandments, whereas, though I grant, that by the Law of Works no Flesh living
can be justified, with all its own Endeavors of Conformity thereto, because of
it self it still fails, yet I can never grant, that the Law of Faith will
suffer us to continue in Sin, or be Unrighteous; nor yet that the Apostle
intends by the Law of Works, the Substance of the Ten Commandments, to wit,
Real LOVE to God, and one to another; I cannot believe, that he excluded this
from a Justified Estate, but rather the Shadowy Part, and Jewish Imitation of
the Letter, without Faith in Christ, an absolute Justified State being
according to the Law of Faith; herein we must differ; but again, he assents to
the Truth, viz.

Those that will follow Christ shall argue as strictly; if we be justified by
Grace, Concess. page 26.
then we must be righteous and perfect, according to the Law of it; the
Orthodox are quite out, that will have any justified without a Righteousness
that is perfect, according to the Law that justifies him.

Animad. Oh! That he were but well accquainted with this Law of Faith, and
would keep to it, then we should not have this struggling and turning about to
uphold Sin, or the Breach of the Ten Commandments in Justified Persons, wherein
he goes about again, viz.

Object. The Quaker is quite out, that will have his Righteousness perfect
according to the Ten Commandments, which does not justify him, page 26.

Animad. No the sincere Quaker is within, who owns the Life of God and Christ
in his Heart; and knows that God requires perfect LOVE with ALL the Heart and
Soul, etc. and this in the New Covenant* not to make void the Law of the Ten
Commandments, as to the Substance and End thereof; for LOVE is the Fulfilling
of the Law; the Commandment is Love out of a pure Heart; and do we make void
the Law through Faith? No, we establish it, yet it is neither merely by the ten
Commandments, nor by any of our own outward or litteral Observatinon t^ereof
that we are justified, but by him that enables and strengthens us to the Real
and Spiritual Obedience of Faith* Now the Righteousness of God without the Law
is manifested, being testified by the Law and the Prophets, see Romans 3. 21. to
the End.

Concess. The lover of Truth and Mediocrity will have every man have the
Righteousness of a perfect Heart for his Justification, and yet no Man be
justified but by the Grace of God, through Redemption which we have in Christ
Jesus, page 26.

Animad. I wish this Man and all others, that oppose or dispute against us,
were such Lovers of Truth, and Possessors of this Righteousness of a PERFECT
Heart, so much pretended to and talked of, and so little experienced amongst
Men; and that this Redemption which the Saints had in Christ Jesus, were
experienced and livingly possessed; this would end the Controversy about
Notions and Opinions.

It is true, that Pardon of Sin and Justification may in some Sense be
distinguished, though not divided; there is Pardon of Sin and Transgressions
that were under the first Testament, or of Sins past: When the Act of Faith is
known in the Blood of Christ, which is in Order to Justification being some
Degree of it; there is a further Degree of Justificat^on, more absolute, not
only from all those Things from which we could not be justified by the Law of
Moses* but also in a constant Perseverance in the Grace and Goodness of God in
Christ, and faithful Obedience to him, through the Spirit which is revealed in
us.

Again we know no Opinion of ours that leads th^se Friends called Quakers from
the Spirit and Life, page 27.
back to the Letter and Flesh, and Ministration of Death, but to bring men
forward through the Law to be dead unto it, and through the Sentence of Death,
to the Ministration of Life, which exceeds in Glory, that under this they might
live unto God

Though I own the Apostle's distinguishing between the Letter and the Spirit,
the Law of the Spirit of Life, and the Law of sin and Death; the old Covenant,
and the new; the Law of Faith, and the Law of Works, yet his deeming the ^aw
written in stone, the Law of sin and Death, page 27. In this I am not
satisfied; for the Apostle spe^ks of two contrary Laws; the Law in his Mind
which was holy, and the other Law in his Members which rebelled against the
Law, Romans 7
and led him captive: Now I dare not exclude the Substance of what was
contained in the Law written in Stone, as not being contained in that Law in
Paul's Mind; though that Law in his Mind had a greater Effect and Force upon
him then the Law without ever had before; and when he said, The Law of the
Spirit of Life in Christ has made me free from the Law of sin and Death; We
may not understand him to be made free from answering the Righteousness of Love
to God required in the Law written in the Tables of Stone; so, though it was in
a more effectual and lively Manner, written in the fleshly Tables of the Heart,
wherein it was renewed and became a New Commandment, though in it Self an old
Commandment, yet this Commandment, as renewed and made lively in the Soul
remains still, Love out of a Pure Heart, and is ^ve^ that Commandment which is
exceeding broad.

Sect. XV.
The Law of Grace does require a sincere walking before God in all his
Commandments; Concession to Truth.
and the Spirit of God does certainly help us so far, as we sin not against
that Sincerity, page 28.

Animad Why then should we fall short of our Duty, or of Perfect Obedience? Can
we desire better Help then that of the Spirit?

Object. But the Spirit is not given to bring us up to the Terms of the Law,
and that we should not sin at all, page 28.

Animad. Not? That Is strange; is not the Spirit given to lead us into all
Truth? thoroughly to sanctify, justify, etc? what can be required more then to
be in ALL Truth for a perfect sinless State.

Object. The Galatians were seduced to the Opinion, that they must keep Moses
Law, or else they could not be saved, and this is their seeking to be made
perfect by the Flesh; the Flesh and Nature are synoynmous Terms; the Works of
the Law, as given by Moses, are called Flesh, page 28.

Animad. 1st. The Galatians then were seduced from the Spirit wherein they had
begun, to seek to be made perfect by the Flesh, which cannot be justly
chargeable upon us, who seek Perfection by the Spirit; desiring to continue and
walk therein for that End.

2 dly. The Apostle does not oppose Perfection, but reprove their Foolishness
for seeking it the wrong way, viz. in the Flesh and not in the Spirit

3 dly. Not all the Works of the Law given by Moses are called Flesh or Nature,
but such Works, as the Galatians were turned again into (from the Spirit) such
as were but shadowy ceremonial and elementary, and such as stood in Fleshly
Observations, as the observing of Days, Meats, Drinks, dive^s Washings, weak
and beggarly Elements of the World, Circumcision, etc. which the Apostle so
much argues against.

4 thly. ^f any turn from the Spirit, and then seek to be made perfect by their
Fleshly lmitation of the Law, or Voluntary observation of the most weighty
Precepts thereof, without the Spirit's Guidance and Assistance; this is no
better then a seeking to be made perfect by the Flesh; and short of that which
the Apostle travailed for on the behalf of the Galatians, which was, that
Christ might be formed in them, which is not a Fleshly Birth in the Shadow, but
a Spiritual Birth in the Life and Substance that lives to God for ever.

Object. If the Quaker then is come to seek Life by such a following his Light,
as must answer the Covenant of Nature it self, that is by a Perfection as is
without sin against the Law, he is plainly under the Notion of the Spirit
brought at last to the Flesh for what he seeks, page 28.

Animad. This is a gross Mistake, and it no Ways follows from our following
the Light of Christ (for Perfection without sin) that we must be brought at
last to the Flesh for what we seek; this can be no ways deducible from our
following this Light within: for it is neither Flesh nor Fleshly, but Divine
and Spiritual; and the contrary Inference plainly follows; for if we walk in
the Light, as God is in the Light, then have we Fellowship one with another, 1
John 1. 7.
and the Blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanses us from all Sin; observe, from
all S^n; what Sin then can remain behind?

Sect. XVI.
Object and Concess It seems that these Friends do apprehend that our Doctrine
which p^^seth Perf^ction, does serve for the boistering up Men in their sins,
and lull them into security, that though they live and dye in their Wicked^^ss
they must be saved; and this being taught, spiciall among us Protestants, who
believe that we are justified by Christ's Righteousness without Works, does
appear very destructive to many Souls, which makes them out of an Intention,
which we may suppose zealous for God^ness, and the Promotion of a Good Life, to
f^ll on our Divines with so much tragical Exclamation, as they do on this
Point, page 28, 29.

Animad. And we have Reason sufficient to exclaim against them on this Point,
for indulging and bo^stering up men in their Sins to their Grave; yea, we may
say to their Grave of Perdition; and what this Man says, for such their
divines, and against Us for an abuse herein, page 29. will neither clear them,
nor prove us guilty of wronging them; and I wish that he would no further
contribute to their Sin in this Point, though yet he himself is not satisfied
with those he calls Divines, as appears in diverse Passages of his Book, and
particularly touching their unsound sense of imputed Righteousness, which he
sets aside in the same 29th. page which we are now upon: and I would seriously
ask him, if that their unsound Sense of Imputation, does not give us occasion
to witness against them, as too much soothing, or bolstering up men in their
Sins; And if their Sense herein be not repugnant to Christianity? But to excuse
these he calls Divines, he pleads, viz.

It is but the same Doctrine of God's page 29.
abounding free Grace, Mercy and Forgiveness through Christ to poor sinners,
that our Divines do bring against the Doctrine of Perfection (setting the
unsound sense of Imputed Righteousness aside) which Paul preached and pleaded
against those, who would bring in the Work^ of the Law for their Justification.

Animad. This will neither cure the Disease of those Divines, nor free them
from our Charge, nor yet reconcile their Doctrine herein to the Apostle Paul's;
for Paul did not preach the abounding of free Grace, etc. against the Doctrine
of Perfection, nor against the Saints living without Sin, but the plain
contrary, as appe^rs, Romans 6. 4, 5, 6, 7, 11, 15, 22. and 5. 17, 20, 21.
Romans 6. Even so we should also walk in Newness of Life, ver. 4. Knowing this,
that our old man is crucified with him, etc. ver. 6. And shall we sin because
we are not under the Law, but under Grace? God forbid, ver. 15. See the Chapter
throughout, it is very full to our Purpose, See also Romans 5. 17, 20, 21. What Is
more evident then that the Doctrine of the Apostle, and the Nature of the Grace
of God, are against the continuance of Sin in any of those that come to dye
with Christ, and to live under Grace, and to partake of the abounding of Grace
toward [and in] them.

There are tow Things particularly our Divines teach, His other Excuse for
their divines page 29.
The one is, that notwithstanding Grace be imperfect in this life, there is no
Man may sin for all that, in any the least Thing whatsoever, that is, though
our Holiness be imperfect, yet is it our Duty to be perfect, and we are still
to be pressed to go on to Perfection: The other is, That a State of Grace will
not stand with any Sin in Dominion, that is, that whosoever does willingly and
wilfully live in any known sin, without Repentance unto Death, he cannot be
saved.

An. No doubt but this Person has here made the best he can of a bad Cause, as
we have Reason to deem it, but is far enough from clearing those Divines from
the Charge that is laid against their Doctrine, as Sin pleasing, or soothing and
bolstering up Men in their Sins, etc. For though it is true they seem to preach
down every Sin, and to preach up perfect Obedience, as our Duty, and to press
Men to go on to Perfection, yea, and that a State of Grace will not stand with
any Sin in Dominion: What Encouragement can they hereby minister, for such Duty
and Pressing on to Perfection? when they persuade People that what they preach
and press them unto, it not attainable; as to tell them, it is their Duty to be
perfect, and not to sin at all, but it is impossible to attain that State: Grace
is imperfect in this Life, etc. Though it is trnc, herein this Author seems to
d^sown them, by ^nfessing a Possibility to live without sin through the
assistance of God's holy Spirit, page 7, 8. yet this Man bord^rs too near their
Doctrine for sin, in not believing nor confessing to any of the Saints keeping
Christ's Commandments, or their perfect Obedience, but in arguing for the
contrary, which reflects Sin and Imperfection on all the Saints of God and true
Christians.
this is not Yea and Amen; if they were real and preached the word of Faith,
they durst never put such faithless Thoughts into the Minds of People, like as
to put them upon a War without an Enemy, but first disarm them with such an
Unbelie^, or Despair of a Conquest, whereas if they faithfully preached perfect
Obedience, etc. and believed what they preached, they would sincerely endeavor
their Eucouragement by exciting them to believe in and depend upon the Grace
and Power of God in Christ, which is stronger then the Devil, that they might
experience, That greater is he that is in us, then he that is in the World; and
not tell them, that Grace and Holiness are imperfect in this Life, and no Men
but that he sins so long as he lives; no not the best of God's Children, yet a
state of Grace will not stand with any sin in Domini^^. Why then must Sin have
any Place of Continuance? shall God's Children (by the Grace) either have
Dominion or Power over Sin, and yet suffer Sin always to have any Being or
Prevalency in them? can this either consist with a State of Grace, or their
Sincerity? No sure [The Matter is sufficiently answered before] shall we have
Dominion over such an Enemy, so far as that he is conquered, slain and ca^^ut,
and yet after^a^ds suffer him to rise again, and lead us captive in any Thing
all our Days? God's Children and People, who have been thoroughly experienced
in the Lamb's War, have otherwise obtained the Conquest and Dominion (at that
dear Rate) then so easily to part with it, or give their Power or Service to
such a conquered Enemy, as the Devil, who is the Author of all Sin. It is true
as the Man says, page 29. That there are many practical Books of those called
Divines, wherein Universal Obedience is both press^d and given, as the chiefe^^
Note of an Upright Man, and of that Faith which is saving.

This is true, and no doubt but in former Times this Universal Obedience was
preached and urged, with more Faith and Sincerity then is now in many that
pretend to preach it, but do it in that overly and faithless Manner, that it
has no lively Impression upon the Hearers Consciences, as to evidence them
truly to believe endeavor or expect such an Universal Obedience to all God's
Requirings, in the Covenant of Grace; but rather, many do spoil and mar their
preaching Obedience, by their preaching up Imperfection, and Sin Term of Life;
and such preaching has more abounded (yea been too much upheld in this Nation)
of late years in despite against the Quakers, and in Contempt against the
Doctrine of Perfection: The Presbyter Priests and some others have filled the
Nation with their Doctrine of the Impossibility of Perfection, or a sinless
State, to render it not attainable, wherein, though they have done it the more
eagerly to shame and odifie the Quakers in the Peoples ^yes, their Doctrine
tends to debase many to Hell, having hardened Men in Sin, and strengthened the
Hands of Evil doers, and made many Hypocrites, for which they have a sad
Account to give in the great Day of God Almighty.

Object. Will it not indeed suffice, that a Man is uprights before God, in his
Desires and Endeavors after Perfection, that is, page 29, 30.
the having Respect to all his Commandments, unless he also be perfect and his
Works overtake his Will? what then shall become of the Generation of the most
just?

An. 1st. The Des^^^ and Endeavors [only] of the Upright Man do not suffice
(...), but his receiving the Answer, or Thing desired and endeave^^ after.

2 dly. Does the ^^ght Man sincerely desire, and endeavor after such a
Perfe^^n, as that of Universal Obedience to all Christ's, Commands, and yet
still his Works fall short of his Desire, or not overtake his Will? how should
that be? does not God hear the Prayers, and grant the Requests of the Upright?
Yea sure, they shall not want for any good thing, who walk in their Uprightness
and Integrity before him: I cannot yet apprehend, that the great Inconvenience
which has been charged as the Consequence of their Doctrine, (who preach up
the Continuance of Sin, and a Falling short in Duty) is yet wiped off, by all
this man's Pleading to excuse and salve the Matter.

Sect. XVII.
And now whereas he pretends to discover several Inconveniences that follow
our Doctrine, and bids let us see, whether they do not require more heed, page
30.

Let us then see and heed, what Inconveniences he supposes do follow our
Doctrine.

Object. First then, where they say, our Doctrine does lead Men into Security,
Remisness of Life, Neglect of their Duty, a sinful Course; how must their
Doctrine hurl Men into Despair, and lead them by that to the casting off the
whole Care of God, and their own Souls together? page 30.

An. No such Inconvenience does follow our Doctrine, as either the hurling Men
into Despair, or leading them to the casting off the Care of God and their
Souls; for there is no Cause to Despair of what is possible or attainable
[through divine Assistance] as is confessed, to live without Sin, or to keep the
Commandments of God, and so to enter into Heaven, is possible or attainable,
through the Assistance of Grace; Men may despair upon Impossibilities, or the
Aprehensions thereof, but they have no Cause on the contrary: We both testify
unto true Faith and Hope in God through Christ, and his Name and Power, to
enable the Soul to resist and overcome Temptations; as also we preach up God's
Love, and Care over his Children, for their Safety and Preservation out of Sin
and Evil; and that even he who is the God of Peace, according to his Care over
his People, does (in his own due Time) tread Satan under their Feet, by his
great Power, which they believe in and partake of.

Object. If it will not serve a Man for his Acceptance with God, that he is
sincere in his Desires and Endeavors of walking before him, unless he attain
to Perfection, or to a Life that ^s wholely without sin in this World; then
must the Heart of the most holy, and mortified Man upon Earth be quite broken,
and discouraged for ever: There is Mercy with thee that thou may be feared,
says David, page 30.

An. Sincere Desires and Endeavors of walking with the Lord God, are
acceptable to him, they being begotten by his own Spirit, but it is a Mistake,
that they fall short of attaining to Perfection, or to a Life without Sin [in
this World] who follow such Desires and Endeavors.

As also it is a gross Mistake, That the most holy and mortified Man upon
Earth, did either fall short of such Perfection in this Wordl^, or that he must
have his Heart quite broke, or discouraged forever on this account, page 30.
Besides Thousands do experience the contrary, that our Doctrine of sinless
Perfection, has no such Tendence nor Effect, as this of Despair unjustly
surmised to be the Consequence thereof: Besides, I suppose it is as hard a
Matter for this Man to prove, what Sin or Sins the most holy and mortified of
God's Servants and People lived in all their Life time, as to evince when,
where, or how they came to be perfectly cleansed, or thoroughly purged after
their decease: For our Parts, we do not believe the Pope's Doctrine of a
Purgatory after Death.

If God were not Good and Merciful to consider Man's Frailty, A supposed
Objection yet not inconsistant with our Principle.
to pardon his shortness and Imperfections, and bear with him, we should not
fear him. that is, worship or serve him; for it were to no purpose to go about
it, seeing we could never please him.

An. Herein he says true, but then God's Goodness and Mercy in thus
condescending, and pardoning any such shortness or Imperfections (which when
confessed and repented of, or where the sincere Desires and Endeavors are
alive) tends to engage the Creature the more to fear, serve and worship him;
and to bring Man nearer and nearer to God, with whom there is Mercy, that he
may be feared; and the Fear of the Lord does keep the Heart clean.

Object. Alas! that these Folks did but know what they do, when they bring in
such Doctrine, who themselves must tremble Contrary to 1 John 4. 17, 18.
to be judged by it. O ye foolish Galatians! who has bewitched you, that you
should depart from that Comfort and Peace, which some of you, I believe
sometime had in believing and trusting in Christ altogether for your Pardon,
and Reconciliation with God; that you should be brought now to the Works of the
Law, page 30.

An. The Man runs altogether upon his own reiterated Mistake in the State of
our Doctrine and Case; we know what we do, and that we are none of those
foolish Galatians in what we hold; we draw none from the Spirit, to be made
perfect in the Flesh, but do both direct Men to their Beginning in the Spirit,
and to persevere therein, to walk in the Spirit, obey the Spirit unto
Mortification and Sanctification, etc. For if ye walk in the Spirit, then are
ye not under the Law; And we through the Spirit have waited for the Hope of
Righteousness by Faith; and through the Spirit do still believe, trusting in
Christ for all the Good, the Sufficiency, the Strength, the Joy, the Soul's
Comfort and Peace, that we daily receive; for without (or separate from) him,
we can do nothing, yet all things through Christ that strengthens us

Object. page 30. Is there any indeed of you think that you are able, and do
continue in all things that are written in the Book of the Law, or in all
things that are written in the Tables of your Hearts, to do them? And are you
ignorant, that upon that account and that alone, that none do, or are able to
do so, the Apostle tells you, as many as are of the Works of the Law, are under
the Curse.

An. A mistake still, the Apostle no where tells us, that none (which as well
concludes Christians as others) do or are able to continue in all things, that
are written in the Tables of their Hearts to do them (as for all things written
in the Book of the Law outward, they are not required of us) Surely the
Apostle's Testimony was, that they could do all Things through Christ that
strengthens them; and it was neither Circumcision nor Uncircumcision that
availed any Thing, but the keeping of the Commandments; to conclude, that none
are able to continue in the Law of Christ written in their Hearts, is contrary
to his Doctrine; for abiding in his Love, and his saying, If ye love me keep my
sayings or Commandments; and in this is the Love of God manifest, that we keep
his Commandments; and his Commandments are not grievous, but joyous unto us.

Object. page 31. Alas Sirs! what mean you when we are under the Ministration
of the New Testament, which brings the Spirit and Liberty (where the Spirit is
there is Liberty) and Righteousness (for by the Law of Faith the Christian has
a Righteousness to plea^, and to be justified by) and so Life; you should be
ready to return into a Jewish or Natural Bondage, to seck for it, from that
only, which can bring Death, and is the Ministration of Sin and Condemnation.

An. His Sigh [ Alas Sirs!] for us, and Consequence upon us, are both
groundless and the Consequence of his own Mistake still, as that we are ready
to return into a Jewish or Natural Bondage o seek Life from that only which can
bring Death, etc. this has no Truth in it; we neither seek Life from the
Letter which kills, nor from any Ministration without the Spirit; nor are we
Ministers of the Letter (nor do we sow to the Flesh) but Ministers of the
Gospel of the Spirit, and of the New Testament, knowing that it is the Spirit
that gives Life: And if ye through the Spirit do mortify the Deeds of the
Flesh [or the Fruits thereof, which are corrupt] then shall ye live.

Sect. XVIII.
Object. page 31. His other Consequence of our Doctrine is, of Evils more
secret and spiritual, much more deadly to the Soul then their ordinary Sins, as
Persons wrought over to us, immediately to look on all others at a distance,
This is a plain Untruth.
even to a Contempt of the most grave, serious holy Professors, but as Men
altogether in the Dark, without Light or Life, to be separated from, etc. as
also Insolence and in finite Presumption, falling into the Condemnation of the
Devil; Pride, spiritual Pride, the most damnable Pride, proud of God's Grace,
Monstrous overweening Conceit of a Man's Self, despising, continually censuring
and setting at naught of others, etc.

An. These are sad Inferences; we have enough of them; he should have spared
such censuring, whilst he is opposing others for contemning and censuring, but
these are no ways deducible either from our Doctrine or Testimony, which is
for a sincere Obedience and real Conformity to Christ Jesus (and following of)
his Steps, who left no such Example, as either spiritual Pride. Insolence,
Presumption or Self-conceit, but of Meekness and Humility, ^et gave true and
severe Judgment against Hypocrites.

As for the Prudent, the sober and pious among us whom he mentions they see no
such Consequence of our Doctrine, as this man suggests, nor any Cause to mourn
for any natural Effects of our Testimony; but rather for their Miscarriages and
Abuses, who are disobedient to the Truth thereof; and for such Professors, as
undervalue, pervert and misrepresent that holy Testimony, which God has
committed unto us they are at a real Distance from us, and far from being the
most grave, ^erions or holy Professors.

It Is true as he says, That the Way of Christians is to be humble, to debase
themselves, to make self of no Reputation; Concess. to Truth, page 32.
after the Example of their Lord and Master; and ( as he says) to live
altogether on Dependence upon God, each Man in Lowliness of Mind, etc.

An. This is the Christianity and Perfection we aim at, and bear witness unto,
and which many are pressing toward; and what better, what more pure and
perfect ^tate is desirable, then to live altogether on Dependence upon God? But
how well this Man's opposing our Doctrine of Perfection and living without Sin,
agrees with his Concession, of living altogether on Dependence upon God; let
the serious Reader judge.

Object. Last of all, there is that exceeding Danger in the entertainment of
that Opinion, that I am afraid at my Heart, it cannot consist with the Grace of
God and Justification of a Sinner by Christ; it is a high Text, that if you be
circumcised Christ shall profit you nothing: I am really afraid at my very
Heart, Sirs, lest your Case be the very same in Effect, with these, (viz.) that
of the Galatians and Jews, which was a looking to the Law only for
Righteousness; not to the chief End of it, which was through Conviction of Sin,
to drive them to God for his Pardon.

An. 1st. Friend, this Fear of thine appears a very dark and groundless Fear;
for first, have thou not confessed, that such a Perfection, as to live without
sin, is our Duty.

2dly. That it is not impossible, but that it is possible to attain this state
of keeping God's Commandments, and being without sin by Grace, or the special
Assistance of God's spirit, page 6, 7.

3dly. That the Quakers ascribe not to themselves, but to the spirit, the Life,
the Power, or to Christ within, all that they do, page 8.

Well said, come on, enough to clear the Quakers from giving the occasion of
such a Fear concerning them; do not let such a Fear lie upon thy Heart; for
their Case is far enough from that of the Galatians and Jews, who sought to be
made perfect in the Flesh, set up their own Righteousness, being gone from the
Spirit and Law of Life within, into the Letter, and Ministration of Death
without; whereas the Quakers Obedience through the Spirit, the Life or Power of
Christ within, is no Self-righteousness nor Fleshly Perfection, fetched or
sought from the Letter without, but very well, both consistant with, and
springing from the Grace of God, the Pardon and Justification of a Sinner by
Christ, who is the Author of Eternal Salvation, to all them that obey him; and
is only the Righteousness and Justification of such, who believe in him, obey
him, and walk sincerely before him.

Object. But you have taken up an Opinion, that the whole Law must be kept [
That Is a Mistake] that you must live without sin, page 32.
and unless you come up to this Pitch, you cannot be saved.

An. First. It is not our Opinion, that the whole Law must be kept, but (...)
much of it as God requires, that is what concerns the New Covenant, wherein,
God does both pardon and take away Sin.

2 dly. to ^^ve without iSn, is required in the New Covenant, and is the Effect
of Christ's saving Work, who was called JESUS for this Cause, and to fulfill
this Promise, namely, He shall save his People from their sins; and this no
ways hinders our acknowledging him to be our Advocate; nor yet opposes that
Saying, If any Man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, even Jesus Christ
the Righteous, through whom, both Pardon and Deliverance out of sin is
obtained; for [ If any Man sin] is no positive Conclusion, that every Man
sins, or that none of God's People live without Sin, but rather implies,
that [though it be possible that some may si^, ^et they may be helped, and
preserved out of it] there are or may become that do not sin; for [ If any man
sin] is not, that [ every Man does sin.]

As for These Friends (meaning Quakers) [being at the Bar of the Gospel] they
see no Cause, either to look upon themselves, page 33.
as declining the Grace of the Gospel, or to have forfeited their Interest in
that Freedom, which belongs to honest Christian Folks, through thy Redemption
that is in Christ Jesus, whatever this Man has insinuated against them, or
charged upon them to the contrary; nor will they appeal from these Terms under
which they are brought by Christ [or from the Terms of the Gospel] to the Terms
of the Law; neither will they be judged by this Man's Consequences, what
Foolishness soever he therein charge upon them.

The Danger he surmiseth, the sincere Quaker sears not, nor are we (who are
called Quakers) doubtful what shall become of us before the great Tribunal of
God, while we have the Testimony of a good Conscience; holding our Integrity,
and abiding in Christ Jesus, the Son of the Father's Love, in whom we have
Access with Boldness unto the Throne of Grace; knowing also, that he that
abides in Christ, sins not; and if our Heart condemn us not, then have we
Confidence toward God; near is he that justifies, who shall condemn? who
shall lay any thing to the Charge of God's Elect? It is God that justifies,
unto whom it is said thy People shall be all Righteous.

Finished London the 3d. of the 12th. Month 1674. G. W.

THE END

