THE Accuser of our Brethren Cast Down in Righteous Judgment AGAINST THAT
SPIRIT OF Hellish Jealousy Vented in a great Confused Book, falsely Entitled,
The Christian-Quaker Distinguished from the Apostate and Innovator; In Five
Parts.

The Fallacy and Force whereof being herein clearly Detected and justly
Repelled.

Jer. 2. 19. Thine own Wickedness shall Correct thee, and thy Backslidings
shall Reprove thee; know therefore, and see, that it is an Evil thing and
Bitter, that thou have forsaken the Lord thy God, and that my Fear is not in
thee, says the Lord God of Hosts.

John 13. 27. That thou do, do Quickly.

London, Printed for John Bringhurst at the Sign of the Book in
Grace Church Street, near Cornhil, 1681.

A Short ADVERTISEMENT To faithful Friends called QUAKERS, to whom this may
come.
Christian-Friends;
IN this Treatise, we the peaceable Christian People called Quakers are
Conscientiously vindicated and cleared, in our CRISTIAN SOCIETY, CHURCH ORDER
and DISCIPLINE, from the unjust Charge of APOSTASY and INNOVATION, and from the
great Envy, horrid Abuses and Fallacies of WILLIAM ROGERS, in his Book falsely
Entitled, THE CHRISTIAN-QUAKER DISTINGUISHED FROM THE APOSTATE AND INNOVATOR;
but his own Apostasy and Innovation is herein clearly Detected.

And this is recommended to your Care and Prudence, to be reserved in your
Hands, and dispersed only where you in your respective Places and Counties
shall (in the Wisdom of God) see a necessity to remove and prevent the great
Scandal, Infamy and Reproach of the said Book.

A Brief INTRODUCTION TO ALL Faithful Friends CALLED, QUAKERS.
Tender and Beloved Friends in Truth;
A Holy concern of Soul and Conscience, on behalf of our Lord Jesus Christ, his
Kingdom, Church and People, THAT only was the real Motive to this ensuing
Treatise. The matter whereof is not to trace the late Difference and present
Controversy Historically, nor to traverse the Way of the crooked Serpent in
all his* windings, there is no need of that, the Eyes of many are open to see
his perverse Ways; but clearly to Detect and set Judgment upon his Work of
Enmity in WILLIAM ROGERS's said Book, in the most Material Parts, that are
Wicked and Scandalous to Truth, and Christ's Innocent Followers and Subjects,
and to Evince the most Subtle and Fallacious Pretenses thereof, and his most
manifest Inconsistences and Self-Confutations, as well as his Froward
Oppositions and Contradictions to us, as we are a Church and People, gathered
by the Lord, and settled in good Order and Society by his holy Spirit.

The Ground and Cause of the present Division and Opposition, furiously
managed by W. R. and his Abettors against us, has been and is originally
placed upon a wrong Spirit in them, a Murmuring, Complaining, Dividing Spirit,
a Rending Tearing Spirit, a Dark Jealous Spirit, a Loose, Gainsaying, Opposite
Spirit, a Proud Exalted Spirit, a Contemning Scornful Spirit, a Self-conceited
Spirit, a Turbulent, Froward, Wilful Spirit; against this Spirit have the
Complaints been, by several Tenderhearted Friends among us. If we be asked,
how we prove that to be the Spirit, against which we are now engaged in this
Treatise? We may justly Answer, W. R's Malicious Book is apparent Proof, being
a Birth of that same Spirit, it bears the exact Image and Shape of all the
Parts and Properties of it; it is Proof against him, and all that own it, being
brought to the Test of Truth in all Consciences; for it shows all that which is
charged upon that Jealous, Rending, Dividing, Proud, Exalted, Scornful Spirit,
etc. from whence the Book proceeded. Its Style and Matter (on his Jealousies,
and if Report be true, etc.) bespeak all these, to his and its great Shame and
Disgrace. He places the Apostasy and Innovation against us, not only in outward
Order, Discipline and Form of Church Government, but even in the very Doctrine
and Life of Christianity, as if they were greatly extinguished from among us,
and therefore has divulged his Book (and that from a great pretended concern of
Conscience on many) that it might not be Pref. p. 2, 3.
reputed, that the Doctrine and Life of Christianity are wholly extinct among
the People called Quakers, but that both yet remain in some of them ( i. e. in
W. R. and his Party) But his termed, Honorable Friend John Wilkinson gives a
quite contrary Par 4. p. 77.
Account concerning the Breach of Concord and Jarr: The Cause, says he, God
has showed me, that it is not in Principles of Truth, nor in Christ's
Doctrine, nor in any Practice, which Truth in the members of the heavenly Body
leads into, but about Prescriptions, through the blind Zeal of the Weak, etc.
And W. R. also grants, it is but about the SHELL, and not the KERNEL, soon after
he has placed the Apostasy in Doctrine and Life, as if both Christian Doctrine
and Life were extinct among the greatest part of us, as a People. But how can
that be true, if no Breach of Concord, nor Jarr in Principles of Truth, nor in
Christ's Doctrine, nor in any Practice which Truth leads into, and that this
be shown of God too? yea, W. R. also confesses, that those small Differences,
which at first seemed but like unto little Sparks, Pref. p. 2. it is true
indeed, that great Endeavors, in much Christian tenderness, have been used for
a Composure, and matters were brought near it at Drawell; but Satan has
prevailed to make this fiery Agent an Incendiary to make the Breach wider,
(having been secretly animated) his abusive Book is Proof; whereby he has
abused diverse of the Servants of Christ by Name, and many not named in's Book,
rendering them Apostates, Innovators, etc. He has Abused and Scandalized our
Meetings, and our Order and Discipline, as being but a Form and Government, set
up by man, and Man's Tradition; G. Fox's Form of Church Government, G. F's
Orders, etc. These Expressions we own not, they are not proper; for though we
grant, that He has been Instrumental in the hand of Christ for stirring up
others to Unity and good Order, yet we are satisfied that the great Builder,
Former and Orderer of the spiritual House, is Christ Jesus, and that HE is the
Author and Foundation of that Christian Religion, Care, Oversight and good
Government among us, as a Church and People; the Substance, Intent and End of
all which, is, that pure Religion, which is not only to visit the Fatherless
and the Widows, but to keep Unspotted of the World, which we have
Scripture-Testimony and Instances, and Christ's and his Apostles Doctrine for.

W. R. has not spared to seek out occasions against Persons, to gather up and
divulge Weaknesses, to pervert Truth, and make false Constructions of men's
words, his Heart being filled with Pride and Envy, his Head is laden and
confused with cloudy Conceits and perverse Imaginations against the Innocent.
After all his great Clamor and heavy Charge of Apostate and Innovator, etc.
about Orders, Prescriptions, Impositions, Innovations, Form of
Church Government, etc. setting aside his Prejudice and Enmity, his wrong and
evil Jealousies, Perversions, false Inferences, false Reports, and the like:
The Matters of Fact, wherein he can place a real Difference, as to Church Order
and Discipline, may be summed up in this narrow Compass, under these Heads, viz.

I. W. R. and some others (his Party) seem to be ONLY for a select Company of
Elders and Deacons to order in Church Affairs about the Poor, Marriages, etc.

Our Meetings in that case are more free and open for others also of the
Younger sort to be present, whose Conversations are Honest and Sober.

II. W. R. in his Contest with R. B. seems not to own that the Church of Christ
has Power or Right of Judgment to decide Controversies (in matter of Evil Fact
Pref. p. 8.
or Trespass of one Brother against another) in things of outward Property,
etc. but only the Parties differing to have an equal Choice of Persons, to
determine the Difference; yet he varyes, and is not altogether consistent with
himself, but is somewhat off and on in these cases, as is more fully evinced
in this Treatise.

Whereas we distinguish between a wilful Injury and an Offense (whether real
or supposed) only through mistake.

In the first, the real (not supposed) Offender has not an equal right of
Choice with the Offended; but the Offended Brother has Power to proceed with
the Offending, according to the Doctrine and Order prescribed by Christ, Mat.
18. 15, 16, 17. so far, as (if there be necessity) to make his Complaint to the
Church, and if he refuse to hear the Church, then he is to be accounted as an
Heathen Man; accordingly we assert, the Power and Right of Judgment in the true
Light, to be in the Church of Christ, in cases of real Trespass of one Brother
against another, which is not to set the general Judgment of Truth in the
Church, in opposition to any measure of true Light and Judgment in any
particular Member, but to the real Offense, which the Light in all condemns.

In the second, Where the Offense is not wilful, but through Mistake, both the
Parties differing are more easily persuaded, either to compose the matter
between themselves, or to submit to a hearing and determination of two or three
just, judicious and discreet Persons in the Truth, whom neither Party has any
just Exception against.

III. They are against proposing Marriages before the distinct Meetings of
faithful Women amongst us.

We judge it very convenient and sociable to lay them before those Meetings,
where they are settled.

IV. They are against recording Condemnations to Posterity.

We judge it needful in many Cases, for the clearing us from Reproach, and
vindicating of Truth; and that both the Condemnations and Repentance be
recorded, and Testimonies kept against such as continue Impenitent, whose
Conversations are reproachful and scandalous to Truth, and to our Society, as a
People gathered by the Lord's Power.

Now, if these things seem inconsiderable to divide and separate upon, and that
they might easily be accommodated or reconciled upon amicable conference. We
say so too; therefore the greater is the Enmity of that Spirit, that will
separate on any of them, and cast the odiums of Imposition, Apostasy,
Innovations, etc. upon us, for our Christian Care and Advice about them; urging
with Severity we need not among our tenderhearted Friends, and it is to no
purpose to those that are in prejudice and hardness, only we would have them
(who profess the same Light and Spirit with us) to studdy to be quiet, that
whilst they pretend Liberty of Conscience, they might not maintain Opposition
to others for those things, which they are Conscientious (in the Light of
Truth) in the Practice and Counsel of; for that were to plead Liberty of
Conscience to themselves, and allow it to none but themselves. Whereas our
pleading (for Liberty of tender Conscience) to the outward Powers, was never
intended for a Liberty to make Discord, Schisms or Strife among our selves, but
singly as a People intending nothing but Love and Unity, among our selves, in
Gods Way and Worship, a Liberty of Conscience (in Christ Jesus, as to us) from
those outward Laws, Penalties and Persecutions, which we have suffered under,
NOT a Liberty from the Yoke of Christ, nor from the Judgment of Truth (nor from
Unity or good Order in him) no more than a Liberty of gross Enormities from the
hand of Justice; not a Liberty for Disorder and Confusion, not a Liberty to set
Conscience against Conscience, under the Profession of the same Light and
Spirit of Christ (as the great and certain Rule of Conscience) for that were to
let up Ranterism, and cause our Adversaries to Blaspheme against the true Light.

As for W. R's Book against Church Government, it is outragiously Wicked,
Clamorous and Abusive; it admits of no Mediation nor moderate Qualification, or
Accommodation; no better Character than Apostates and Innovators will serve his
turn against the very Body of Friends, who are not of his Party; his Book is
revengeful and scornful, it gratifies the Ranters and Atheists, and tends to
make our Enemies rejoice, and us a scorn to Fools (if they take him for a
Quaker, which now he is not) it tends in many things to expose us, not only to
the Censure of our professed Adversaries, but to the Fury of our Persecutors, and
to bring open Persecution upon us, by Implicity, rendering us Obnoxious to the
outward Government: The Lord rebuke that Malicious, Proud Spirit, from whence
his Book came (and he will rebuke it, and send it to its place) and stop the
Mouth of Iniquity, for his Name and Seed's sake. His Title Christian-Quaker, is
a false Title, as his Unchristian Work evinceth. His Text also which he begins
with, is Mis-applyed, viz. the words of Christ, which are, As I hear, I judge;
this is his Text. 1st, As its applied only to outward Hearing and Evidence,
it is Misapplyed; Christ intended his hearing of the Father, and that true and
just Judgment given him of the Father, who bore witness of him, John 5. 30. and
chapter 8. 16, 18. And the Father has committed all Judgment to the Son, Joh. 5.
22. for Christ had (and gives also) a spiritual Judgment, that is not after the
sight of the Eyes, nor after the hearing of the Ears, Isa. 11. 3. yet in Cases
Criminal, Infamous and Injurious, we grant outward and certain Evidence, Proof
and Knowledge very needful, safe and judicial; though a true and spiritual
Discerning, Sense and Judgment of Spirits in the Church of Christ, cannot in
Truth be denied, it being a spiritual gift.

But 2dly, As the said Text [ As I hear I judge] is applied by W. R. to
himself, or his Judgment in's Book, it is Hypocritically and Unjustly applied;
for he has not given Judgment as he has learned or heard of God or Christ, but
in many things as he has heard by Reports, and from his own Jealousies,
according to his common phrase, If Reports be true; this Jealousy has entered
me; I am Jealous; full of Jealousy, etc. which we are sure proceeded not from
God nor Christ, but from the Spirit of Antichrist, the Cruel, Outrageous,
Deadly, Hellish Spirit or Image of Jealousy Prove. 27. 4. and 6. 34. Ezekiel. 8.
3. Numb. 5. 14. Cant. 8 6.
or Envy, as will be more obvious in the Sequel, although in the following
Treatise many gross Abuses and false Aspersions are omitted (to prevent
prolixity) as much as we well could, in such unpleasant Controversies.

Now we entreat the Patience, even of all those that have any way encouraged or
promoted W. R's said Book, or have been any ways affected with it, that they
would be pleased seriously in coolness and moderation to read over and peruse
this following Treatise, and Impartially in the Light of Truth weigh the
Matters, and we doubt not but God will further open their Eyes, and enlighten
their Understandings, to the Acknowledgement of the Truth, and to escape the
Enemies Snare, which we pray God in Mercy effect, in order to their Stability
and Peace in the Truth, as it is in Christ Jesus our Lord.

If W. R. should Object or Question us about wording this Treatise in the
Plural, in using these terms W E and US, etc. as in whose Name it is written?
It Is answered; They are used according to the several occasions given in his
Book, which the matter treated on shows; sometimes in the Name of the People
called Quakers, when vindicated from his Scandals; sometimes in the name and
behalf of our public Meetings; sometimes in behalf of Christ's faithful
Ministers and Servants among us; sometimes in behalf of our Second Days
Meeting in London, according as there is occasion, to vindicate these from his
abuses and scandals. And though 'twas thought meet this ensuing Treatise should
only be signed by our ancient and known Friend Ellis Hooks, as witness for our
said Meeting concerned, not doubting but his Credit in the case, will go as far
as W. R's Subscription (and farther, no doubt) on behalf of himself, and other
Friends in Truth concerned; yet he may be assured, 'twas not through any doubt,
fear or diffidence, or want of freeness of Spirit, that the Name or Names of
such Friend and Friends as are most immediately concerned in this Treatise, are
omitted; there is time enough yet to concern the Names of such in Print, as some
already are, if W. R's Enmity and Revenge continues farther to throw Dirt and
Reproach at any rate upon us (or any of us by Name) in Print, as he has done,
this Treatise contains but little in Comparison of what several have in reserve
against W. R. his Unkind and Unchristian Dealing, and Perverse Gainsaying; he
is here treated far more mildly than his work deserves. May the Lord yet humble
him, and grant him Repentance unto Remission.

The Contents of the ensuing Treatise, under the Title ( Disaffection.)
DIaffection 1. Of William Rogers his Title [The Christian - Quaker
Distinguished] Page 1. Disaffect. 2. Of his Subscription on behalf of himself
and other Friends, page 2. Disaffect. 3. Of the great concern of Conscience,
pretended for the Publication of his Book, p. 2, 3, 4. Disaffect. 4. Of his
high Applause and Comparison for John Story and John Wilkinson, p. 5.
Disaffect. 5. His Pernicious Construction of the words, [Let us exclude the
Wisdom and Jealousy, and have an Eye to the Brethren] rendering Friends under a
Popish Ministry, p. 6, 7, 8, 9. Disaffect. 6. Of his unjust Reflection upon our
Quarterly and General-Meetings, p. 9, 10, 11. Disaffect. 7. Of his omitting the
Names of some Persons reflected on in his Treatise; his Self-contradiction and
Injustice therein, p. 12, 13, 14, 15, 16. Disaffect. 8. On W. R's Conclusion,
That for some time past, G. F. has stood in a state of Separation, etc. p. 14.
[Note, That the Number of this Disaffection missed the Press.] Disaffect. 9. Of
W. R's Conscience in preparing his Manuscript: His Delusion therein; his Book
an Untimely and Monstrous Birth, p. 16, 17, 18, 19. Disaffect. 10. Of his
pretended Righteousness in proceeding to Print and Publish his Book: His
Reasons given, proved Fallacious and Deceitful, from page 19, to p. 32. His
Injustice also in his Instances, p. 32, 33, 34, 35, 36. Disaffect. 11. Of
Believing as the Church believes; W. R's Envy and Fallacious Abuse in the
Citation, to render us like Papists, p. 37, 38, 39. Disaffect. 12. W. R's
Fallacy and Forgery in devising an Objection, like an open Adversary, to render
the People called Quakers, ( who are for outward Methods and Forms, etc.)
Apostates from Christ's Light and Law within, to set up Man, etc. p. 39, 40,
41, 42, 43. Disaffect. 13. Of outward Government, Rules, etc. we know no other
practiced among us than such as answer the pure Law of Love and Truth within,
p. 44, 45. Disaffect. 14. Of Mens-Meetings, his Reflection and Inconsistence,
p. 45, 46. Disaffect. 15. His Accusations Scandalous to many Friends
Assembling, p. 46. Disaffafect. 16. Of VV. R's Enmity, and Perverse Jealousy
against* G. F. about the design of Monthly and Quarterly Meetings, p. 46, 47,
48. Disaffect. 17. Of his Jealousy, Unjustly charging Designs and Contrivances
upon our Meetings, p. 48, 49. Disaffect. 18. Of his Doubts, unjustly Reflecting
gross Ignorance upon some among us, p. 50. Disaffact. 19. Design of Imposition
denied by us, p. 50, 51. Disaffect. 20. Of the word Church Government; His dark
Smiting; the Matter cleared on Friends part, p. 51, 52. Disaffect. 21. Of his
pretended Reasonable Conclusion, and Right Reason, on the words of Christ and
of the Apostle, Mat. 18. 15. and 1 Cor. 6. concerning Offenses and Differences;
His Confusion and Self-contradiction therein, p. 53, 54, 55, 56. Disaffect. 22.
His Charge of claiming a Power over the Properties, as well as Consciences of
Believers (upon the Second Days Meeting at London) is Scandalous, Unjust and
Pernicious, p. 56, 57, 58. Disaffect. 23. His Charge against some, who may be
accounted Chieftains among the Quakers, still grossly Scandalous against our
said Meeting in London, tending also to Persecution, etc. p. 59, 60, 61.
Disaffect. 24. Of composing and deciding Differences about outward things among
our selves, as a People or Church, etc. and W. R's Testimony against it, p. 62,
63, 64, 65, 66, 67, 68. Disaffect. 25. Two gross Untruths Insinuated about
deciding Differences, without the assent of the Parties, p. 68, 69. Disaffect.
26. Of his Implicit Charge, and the Terms of Obedience, a Forgery cast upon our
Assemblies, p. 70, 71, 72. Disaffect. 27. His Invalidating the Authority and
Positive Sentence of the true Church, p. 73. Disaffect. 28. Of his limitting
the Sentence of Christ, Mat. 18. 15, 16. as not Obligatory on all other Members
of the Church of Christ, etc. p. 74, 75, 76, 77, 78, 79. Disaffect. 29. Of
Preaching up Obedience; the Conscience unsatisfied: W. R. unsound in the point,
p. 80, 81. Disaffect. 30. Of Preaching a Blind Obedience, denied by us, p. 81,
82. Disaffect. 31. Of W. R's Envy against G. F. and his Abuse in several
Particulars, about Methods, Forms and Church Government; all Contradicted by
VV. R. himself, in an Epistle signed by him and others, in the Year 1673. p.
82, 83, 84, 85, 86, 87. Disaffect. 32. W. R's Principal Objection against
outward Orders, Answered, p. 88, 89. Disaffect. 33. His Objection against
expecting that any should be invested with Power from on high, to establish
things relating to Conscience, Confuted by his own Confession, p. 90, 91.
Disaffect. 34. Of the words [No Unity but in Conformity] brought upon Report,
p. 91, 92. Disaffect. 35. Of Womens-Meetings, how abused by some, and assented
to by others. Of Marriages, how proposed, according to an Epistle from a
Meeting in Suffolk, in the Year 1674. and some Advice given to Friends at
Hartford, concerning the Women's Meeting, p. 92, 93, 94, 95. Disaffect. 36. W.
R's Abuse and notorious Untruth, about a Submission to the Women's Meetings, and
Jealousy of their Ruling, p. 95, 96, 97. Disaffect. 37. His Shameful and
Jealous Story against the Women's Meeting, and their becoming Rulers over both
Men and Women; with a Citation of two Seasonable Papers for the Women's Meeting,
the one from G. F. and the other from J. Wilkinson, and above twenty Friends
more of the Meeting at Kendall, p. 97, 98, 99, 100, 101, 102. Disaffect. 38. Of
entering into Possession of the Power of God. VV. R's Story against some
Incredible, p. 103. Disaffect. 39. His Scandal on the People called Quakers and
their public Meetings, about unsavory Testimonies and Division, p. 103, 104.
Disaffect. 40. Of Tithes. VV. R's Objection, and his loose and fallacious
Answer, contrary to our ancient Christian Testimony, and to the Testimony given
by J. Wilkinson and J. Story, and tending also to false Liberty and Ranterism,
p. 104, 105, 106, 107, 108, 109. Disaffect. 41. Of the Tree of Knowledge; W.
R's opposing that Doctrine, [ or saying that 'Twas not good for Food.] His
joining with the Serpent that tempted the Woman to eat of it. His great
Ignorance and Error in going about to prove the Tree of Knowledge good for Food
by that saying of Christ, John 17. 3. p. 109, 110, 111, 112, 113, 114. The
matter relating to Church Government, principally aimed at on our parts,
included in five general Propositions, p. 114, 115, 116. Disaffect. 42. Of the
two sorts of Governments, as distinguished in W. R's Title page of the third
part (viz. the Outward Government, under which we live, and the Inward
Government of Christ) and his opposition to Visible Persons, outward Form of
Church Government under Christ's Government, examined, and the Case fully
resolved, p. 116, 117, 118, 119, 120, 121, 122, 123, 124, 125, 126, 127, 128,
129, 130. Disaffect. 43. Of his accusing of the People of the Lord, called
Quakers, with many things in Church Discipline, wherein the Scriptures are
silent, not granted him; yet that he has answered himself, in assenting to a
higher Rule than the Scriptures, p. 131, 132, 133, 134, 135, 136. Disaffect.
44. Of Circumcision; W. R's Error in accounting it A CHRISTIAN LIBERTY, because
of the Christian-Forbearance in that and other legal Bondages, p. 137, 138,
139. The Case further explained, with respect to the weak in the Faith, who are
distinguished from the Wilful and Contentious, and from those of a Libertine
Spirit, p. 140, 141, 142, 143, 144, 145. Disaffect. 45. The use and great abuse
W. R. makes on G. Fox's Words in a Letter from Amsterdam, about making no
Bargain with that Spirit which is out of the Truth. W. R's gross and horrid
Perversions and Comparisons thereupon, as between G. F. and the BEAST;
Condemnation on that Spirit; and the Mark of the Beast, mentioned Rev. 13. 17.
p. 145, 146, 147, 148, 149, 150. Of Henry Sweetings, M. B's and Edward Perkin's
Certificates against G. F. examined, and appear varying in the Relations, p.
150, to p. 154. Disaffect. 46. Of Fleeing in times of Persecution: W. R's
Charge against G. F. and Certificates or pretended Testimonies from some
Persons in Bristol, examined also, p. 155, 156, 157, 158, 159, 160, 161.
Disaffect. 47. W. R's Charge and Judgment against G. F. about advising Friends
to purchase Tithes; Nathaniel Crips and Robert Arch their Certificates in the
case, Examined, and shown to be very Suspicious and Improbable* p. 162, 163,
164, 165, 166, 167, 168, 169, 170, 171, 172. About the Censure of breaking
Covenant, hainously resented by W. R. yet he has not cleared himself therein,
p. 173, 174, 175. Disaffect. 48. J. W's Answer of liking well no Impression of
Form, unsound, p. 175, 176. Disaffect. 49. VV. R's Unjust Insinuation of
Dependency on some other Name than Christ Jesus, p. 177, 178. Disaffect. 50. J.
VV's foul Aspersion in his Letter, p. 178, 179, 180. Disaffect. 51. His bitter
Insinuations in another, and W. R's Reviling, Partiallity and Injustice, p.
180, 181, 182, 183, 184. Disaffect. 52. W. R. of squaring with the
Fifth-Monarchy Principle. His false Comparison, p. 184, 185, 186. A few
Collections of VV. R's Concession to Truth, in pretense of our Duty to follow
the Appearance of the Spirit in the meanest Member, p. 186, 187, 188.
Disaffect. 53. Of Submission that centers not in the Creature, but in Christ,
p. 188, 189. Disaffect. 54. His Jealous Insinuations against G. F. and others,
Pernicious, p. 189, 190, 191. Disaffect. 55. His application of J. N's Words
against G. F. p. 191, 192. Disaffect. 56. Of the Church built on the Rock, p.
192, 193, 194, 195* VV. R's Concessions confuting his Book, p. 195, 196. Of the
John's Paper at Drawell, and that counted -- the Foundation of the separate
Meeting, p. 196, 197. A few Questions to John Story and John Wilkinson, p.
197, 198, 199. VV. R's Character and Comparison of J. W. and G. F. p. 200, 201,
202, 203, 204. VV. R. against VV. R. in some of his Contradictions to himself,
and to his Friends John Wilkinson and John Story, p. 204, 205, 206, 207, 208,
209, 210, 211, 212, 213, 214, 215, 216, 217, 218, 219, 220, 221, 222, 223, 224,
225, 226, 227, 228, 229. A Catalogue of some of William Rogers his Falsehoods,
Slanders, Abuses, Perversions, Railing, Scoffing, Flattering and Reviling
against G. F. and others, p. 230, 231, 232, 233, 234, 235, 236, 237, 238, 239,
240, 241, 242, 243, 244, 245, 246, 247, 248, 249, 250, 251, 252, 253, 254, 255,
256, 257. A Passage in William Rogers's Postscript, about a Meeting with G. F.
and William Mead's Exception against it, being concerned in the matter, p. 254,
255. A summary Collection of more of W. R's Acknowledgements in a full
Confutation of himself, p. 258, 259, A Postscript, partly by way of Question,
and partly some Friends Sense on VV. R's way of Writing, p. 263, 264, 265.
Something of Concern added by another Hand, p. 266, 267, 268, 269, 270.
The Accuser of our Brethren cast down in Righteous Judgment, etc.
William Rogers his Title of all the five Parts of his Treatise, viz.

Disaffection I.
The CHRISTIAN-QUAKER Distinguished from the APOSTATE and INNOVATOR.

Observe.
That by Christian-Quaker, we understand, he means Himself and his Party: by
Apostate and Innovator, he means all those of the People called Quakers, whom
he writes against (and several of their Meetings, which he Reflects upon)
whether by Name, or not Named in his Book (and that his Book is in Pursuance of
the Title, as appears at large in it) this we judge to be both False and
Scandalous, and also, as absolute a Sentence of Excommunication, and much like
a Bull from Rome, against many faithful Servants of Christ: And herein has W.
R. unjustly assumed a Power of Excommunication, never given him by Christ Jesus
our Lord, nor allowed by his Church.

In the Title pages of his three first Parts, he writes thus, viz.

Disaffect. II.
By WILLIAM ROGERS, on behalf of himself, and other Friends in Truth concerned.

To those he writes against, he gives these Titles, viz.

Preface. Adherents to George Fox, Apostates or Innovators: George Fox his
Party: Those of Party with G. F. etc.

Observe.
First, We cannot believe that W. R. in this his Book truly represents Friends
in Truth: But, secondly, That many Friends in Truth are Scandalized and Abused
thereby.

Disaffect. III.
William Rogers's Preface says, Now, so it is, that so great a concern of
Conscience lies on many to encourage the Publication thereof, as that we can no
longer forbear, lest it should be reputed, that the Doctrine and Life of
Christianity were wholly extinct amongst the aforesaid People.

Observe.
This Passage we also judge tends to the great Reproach and Scandal of the
People called Quakers, as implying, that they by a great Apostasy have given
occasion to be so reputed, and that therefore W. R. and his Party only are so
deeply concerned to Vindicate the Doctrine and Life of Christianity (in
themselves only) by the Publication of his Book. But who those many are, that
had such concern of Conscience lying on them for its Publication, is yet to be
enquired; And what Ancient Doctrine, or Doctrines of Christianity are those
People called Quakers (whom he writes against) Apostatized from? And what New
and Unchristian Doctrines or Practices are they fallen into? We find no Proof
nor Discovery thereof in all his Book, but the said People greatly abused
thereby.

The Passage before-cited about such concern of Conscience, as that they could
no longer forbear the Publication of his Book, to prevent the Thoughts of the
Doctrine and Life of Christianity being wholly Extinct amongst the People
called Quakers, together with many Passages in the Second Part of his Treatise,
do show, that it was designed to be published not only among the People called
Quakers, but among the World's People, and such as are our Adversaries and
Opposers, as appears by these Objections, amongst others, in his second Part,
Chap. 2. page 6. viz.

Obj. Do you not think that those Jews who Crucified Christ, acted not from the
Light within, since some of them verily thought they did God good Service
therein? (which having given an Answer to) he frames another Objection, thus,
viz.

However some Objecting may say, What is this to a Light Within? It Is very
plain that John the Evangelist meant nothing of the Light within, in your
sense, but of the Personal Appearance of Christ without, etc.

Observe.
That these Objections are taken from our Adversaries and Opposers of the Light
of Christ within (and not from any called Quakers) which W. R. accordingly
undertakes to Answer, in Vindication of the Light within; and therefore it
appears, he designed his Treatise to go among Truth's Adversaries, as well as
Friends; whence it follows, that wherein it either charges or reflects on the
People called Quakers, or the greatest part of them, as being Apostates,
Innovators, etc. or gone from the Doctrine and Life of Christianity, the
Scandal and Reproach thereof against the said People, and the holy Truth
professed by them, is the more Notoriously aggravated. And though W. R. has
shown himself as a strong Oak and tall Cedar in this Work of Division, we doubt
not but some that have leaned upon him, and been mistaken in his Design, will
be ashamed of their Oak.

Disaffect. IV.
W. R. Preface, page 3. Many in that City (i. e. Bristol) retain their ancient
Respect for John Story and John Wilkinson, two Ancient and Honorable Laborers
in the Gospel of Christ, whose Conversations and Doctrine I have not known or
understood to be exceeded in Godliness by any MORTAL MAN WHATSOEVER.

Observe.
By this it appears, that W. R. seems to be a great Admirer of, and Advocate
for these Persons, whom he thus highly applauds and contends for; but whether
his being so greatly afficious for them will redound to their Reputation, or
the Credit of their Cause, we refer to God's Witness in all Impartial Friends,
and even to the same in their Consciences for whom he thus highly Advocates:
and we disown his Admiration and Comparison of them, as not safe, nor a
preaching up Christ, but setting up Man and Creatures, the same he has accused
others for: He has neither Known, nor so much as UNDERSTOOD their Conversations
and Doctrine to be Exceeded in Godliness by any Mortal Man WHATSOEVER. He has
not understood that either Righteous Abel, Enoch, Daniel, Job, Elijah, Elisha,
Jeremiah, or any of the holy Prophets of God, or Apostles of our Lord Jesus
Christ, did exceed these Persons (whom he so highly contends for) in Godliness
of Conversation and Doctrine; We cannot own his Judgment or Comparison herein;
and we ask, if J. S. and J. W. do really approve thereof or not?

Disaffect. V.
W. R. Preface, p. 6. These kinds of Declarations frequently published amongst
the aforesaid People, viz. LET US EXCLUDE THE REASONING, THE WISDOM AND THE
JEALOUSY, AND LET US HAVE AN EYE TO THE BRETHREN; further Insinuating, as if
God had ordained Ministers among them that are to see and hear for the Body,
and common Members of the Church (as the Printed Terms are Que. Where are those
Printed Terms?
) I cannot but be full of Jealousy, that these things have a tendency to
insinuate Submission without Conviction, and nurture up Ignorance, instead of
Wisdom, and to introduce Bondage, instead of Freedom in Christ, as much as ever
was under the cover of a Black-coat in the Dark Night of Apostasy, where this
Maxim, viz. Ignorance is the Mother of Devotion, is known to be true, with
respect to a zealous Observation of what the Clergy have imposed and taught.

Observe.
First, That [ These kinds of Declarations are frequently published among the
People called Quakers] we utterly deny; he has therein (as we judge) uttered
Falsehood, and abused the said People. And yet to his own Contradiction he has
granted the matter herein opposed by him in page 18. first Part, in his
Marginal Note, the words are these, viz. We would not be understood, that it is
not fit to have an Eye to faithful Brethren in any thing; whereby he grants,
that an Eye is to be had to faithful Brethren in some things at least; the more
unjust he to make such ill use, as he has done, of the words before-cited by
him.

Secondly, If any of the said People have at any time so published, as, Let us
exclude the Reasoning, the Wisdom and the Jealousy, and have an Eye to the
Brethren, we cannot but in point of Justice, as well as Charity, conclude, that
the words will bear a better sense than W. R. has (as we judge) most unjustly
deduced from thence, and that from his own false and perverse Jealousy, which
he appears to be full of; and that the intent of the words was to exclude
Fleshly Wisdom and Reasoning, and Evil Jealousy, and to have an Eye to such
faithful Brethren in their Doctrine and Example, as show forth Righteousness
and Christianity in both, as he has in part granted; and not that those eying
them therein should be kept in Blindness, or brought under a Submission without
Conviction, or kept under a Blind Obedience to be nurtured up in Ignorance or
Bondage, like those in the Dark Night of Apostasy, where Ignorance is the
Mother of Devotion; for how should they eye faithful Brethren, if they be Blind
or have no Eyes to see the Christian Example? nor have we any such Doctrine
among us, as to shut out the Reason, the Wisdom and Jealousy without
Distinction (that is, Wisdom and Reason of all kinds) as he falsely says, page
18, and 27. first part; as if we were taught to shut out True Reason, Divine
Wisdom and Godly Jealousy, as his words [ Without Distinction] and all kinds]
imply; Oh Horrid Abuse! These things considered, we judge W. R. has most
Unjustly inferred his false Jealousies against us, tending to render us, the
said People, highly guilty of gross Popery, wherein he has taken up the
Persecutors Weapon against us, tending to make us so Obnoxious, as that our
Persecutors may take the more occasion to destroy us, but that the Lord stands
by us; and herein we judge W. R. has written and acted Wickedly, and shown
himself a Public Adversary against the Interest of Truth and God's People, as
well as against the Protestant Interest in general; and consequenly, his Work
herein greatly tends to gratify our Enemies the Papists: And of this his
wicked Work of charging us with Rank Popery, he ought to Repent, and to Retract
and Condemn it; and we do believe, there are but few (if any) of his own
Friends, who dare publicly own or stand by him in it; for it is most shameful
and abusive, and shows the Spirit of Apostasy and Persecution to be deeply
entered him; the time was when he knew better things, than thus to write of the
People of God called Quakers, but his Condition is now to be Lamented; the Lord
forgive him.

Disaffect. VI.
W. R. In his first part, p. 8. thus frames the Objection, viz. But suppose
some Persons in their respective Countries should undertake to meet together
quarterly, and at such Meetings choose two Persons to go to the said
General-Meeting, as was endeavored the last Year. W. R. Answers, viz. We deny
that it can be agreeable to the Truth, for such to assert, that from thence
they are invested with Power to Ordain and Appoint certain things unto which
others as Members of Christ's Body ought therefore to yield Obedience, whilst
not persuaded by Christ's Light in their Consciences of their duty therein.

Observe.
These passages compared, we look upon them as unjustly reflecting on those
Meetings of our Friends mentioned, and a gross mistake, at least, in his so
stating the matter against the Persons desired or chosen to attend the
General-Meeting, and upon this mistake depends much of his Book, from whence he
has deduced most scandalous Consequences, to render the Members of our said
Meeting, as from their choice, assuming a Power to ordain and appoint certain
things to impose upon their fellow Members, to yield Obedience unto, whilst not
persuaded by Christ's Light in their Consciences of their duty therein; this we
testify against as a falsehood, and as a scandalous Aspersion cast upon the
members of our said Meeting, as tending still to render the People called
Quakers assertors or imposers of Blind Obedience, to make us look as like
Papists as he can; but if he cannot prove that either our said Meeting, or the
Friends of the Country, who come to it, do so assert, as he says, That they
are Invested with Power to ordain and appoint certain things unto which others
as Members of Christ's Body ought therefore to yield Obedience, and that whilst
not persuaded by Christ's Light in their Consciences, etc. (as we are satisfied
he cannot) then it is a manifest Forgery in him to place this as their
assertion, and in this his framing of Objections and general Answers to the
scandal of the said People, without either Naming or Enumerating those certain
things so appointed and imposed, as he pretends, he appears a very unfair
disingenious as well as impertinent Writer, that fights with his own Shadow,
and quarrels with his own Unjust Forgery; and we are still to query, What those
certain things are that are appointed in our said Meeting, which the Light of
Christ in his Members has not Unity with? And secondly, when did ever our
Meeting, or our Country Friends attending it, assert, that They are Invested
with Power to ordain certain things, unto which other Members of Christ's Body
ought to yield Obedience, WHILST NOT PERSUADED by CHRIST's LIGHT IN THEIR
CONSCIENCES OF THEIR DUTY THEREIN? For since our Adversary has framed this
passage in pursuance of his Charge in his Title, viz. Apostate and Innovator,
he might as truly have told the World, that the Quakers in their Meetings do
ordain and impose such Innovations or New things, that in themselves are so
unjust, dishonest or corrupt as that the Light within cannot own so as to
persuade his Members thereunto, (but he has known the contrary in his own
Conscience) for whatsoever things are just, honest, commendable, and of good
report, consistent with Truth, Christian Charity, Love and Good Works, the
Light of Christ within does own and persuade to such things, and for such
things, Christian Ends and Services we testify our Meetings are, and to stir
up thereunto in Practice, whatever Satan (the Accuser of the Brethren) or his
Agents say to the contrary.

Disaffect. VII.
In W. R. his Preface to the Reader, he puts the Question thus.

Query, Why have thou omitted to mention the Names of some Persons and Authors
of some Books and Papers reflected on in this Treatise?

In answer to this, he gives this principal consideration and reason, viz.

Though hardness of Heart has so over-taken some, as that they may still
continue to oppose their Brethren in the Truth, without the least just ground
or pretense either from the Light of Christ within, the Scriptures of Truth or
right Reason; yet I am not without hope that some others (concerned against
their Brethren in the present Differences) may in some time come to a sense of
their failings, and Repent, and then either the Memory of their Offense may be
blotted out, or their Repentance therewith (if timety known) Recorded, and that
according as Opportunity may permit and Truth require. [Thus far W. R.]

Hence observe: 1st, That the Reason why he has reflectingly mentioned the
Names of some Persons in his Book, is, their hardness of Heart, and continuing
to oppose, as he judges.

2dly, The Reason why the Names of others reflected upon are omitted in his
Book, is, That he has hope of their coming to a sense of their failings ana
Repent.

And 3dly, That when they Repent, either the memory of their Offense may be
blotted out, or their Repentance therewith Recorded. See now what Authority and
Judgment he has, ( Diotrephes-like) assumed to himself (without the Church, or
consent thereof) to Excommunicate, to Condemn, and Record such Persons as
oppose him, and with what distinction some by Name, as hopeless of their
Repentance, others not by Name as having hope for them: hence it follows, that
all whom he has censured and condemned by Name, are in his account hardened
past Recovery, as George Fox, Charles Marshal, Jasper Batt, Robert Barclay,
John Blaykling, Robert Barrow, and others ( Men more Righteous than himself) he
has reflected on and severely judged by Name, and that on Record, rendering them
Infamous (what in him lies) to Posterity, in his printed Volumn; and when is
such a Record and Memory like to be blotted out, as he pretends? But if to get
off this hanck, he should allege, That his meaning was not so severe as to
render them whom he has named Irrecoverably Hardened, or Without Hope, (though
it most evidently follows, from his Reason before cited, why he has omitted the
Names of others, Persons reflected on) for that he has intimated some hopes
concerning G. F. in his fifth part, p 92. in these Words, (viz.) On this score
I am now concerned in my Conscience thus to declare, and conclude, that for
sometime past G. F. has stood in a state of Separation from many of the Lord's
People; May the God of Heaven give him a true sight and sense thereof unto
Repentance, that so before his Body be turned to Dust, from whence it came, he
may be restored into fellowship with them again, says my Soul, William Rogers.

It Is true, that he has herein intimated that there is yet some hope for G. F.
as that his Offense is not so great, nor he so irrecoverably hardened, but that
he may possibly Repent, and be restored into Fellowship with the Lord's People;
that is, in his sense, with W. R. and his party: but then how fairly does this
contradict his Reason for omitting the Names of others, as not being without
hope of their coming to a Sense and Repentance? for by the same Reason, he
should have omitted to name G. F. and others upon Record, so Infamously as he
has done, if he be not without hope of their Repentance and Restoration,
otherwise he has dealt very partially and unjustly in recording G. F. and
others by Name, whilst there is the same Reason for to have omitted their
Names, that he gives for omitting others; thus this severe Judge, and
Excommunicator, runs himself into a Labyrinth of Confusion; and this is not
all, but there lies another palpable Contradiction in the case, he appears for
recording Persons Offenses, and their Repentance also, as his great Book in
Print contains matter of Record and Condemnation against many Friends, some by
Name, and others not, all as being the Apostate and Innovator, from whom he
distinguishes the Christian-Quaker in his Title page, and yet as Persons not
Irrecoverably fallen, but that they may be restored to a true sight and sense
unto Repentance; but how Notoriously in this matter has he contradicted the
Testimony of his frequently termed two Ancient and Honorable Friends and
Brethren, J. W. and J. S. cited in his fourth part, page 39. where they thus
declare, viz. From that Inward Sense and Heavenly Understanding we have, we see
no necessity to leave them (i. e. Condemnations) upon Record to Posterity, or
retain them when the Sin is blotted out and remitted by the Lord, neither to be
extended farther then the Offense is known, nor yet to continue longer than the
Memory of the Offense abides. Thus far W. R's said Brethren.

But W. R. has recorded Condemnations in his great Book in Print, that are
like to be of farther Extent and longer Continuance then either the Offenses
supposed, or Memory of them otherwise would have been, and that in a very
infamous and disgraceful manner against particular Persons by Name, whom yet
upon serious thoughts, he dares not finally condemn as Persons Irrecoverable:
See how apparently contradictory his Work is to it self, and to his Brethrens
Testimony, he is contradicting them whom he advocates for; so that his Judgment
against particular Persons will be of less Credit with all Judicious Readers,
because of its inconsistency.

Disaffect. IX.
W. R. has pleaded his being concerned to oppose an Erroneous and Persecuting
Spirit, which he says, He has beheld entering among the Flock of God, and his
being preserved by the Arm of the Lord's Power, in his acting to keep a
Conscience void of offense, and his concern of Conscience to prepare his
Manuscript, his frequent breathing unto the Lord that he might not bring forth
an untimely Birth, but might answer the Witness of God in all Consciences: On
all which he tells the Reader thus, viz. That to my inward Peace and Joy in the
Lord, I can say, that I have the Evidence of his Spirit (notwithstanding what
any Man may say to the contrary) that he has owned my proceeding therein
hitherto.

These are very fair and specious Pretenses, but his Work appears otherwise, an
untimely Birth, and monstrous, both scandalous to Truth, and the People of God
among us, called Quakers, as is evidently proved in this Treatise, and as it
will farther appear, his Delusion under these fair pretenses is the stronger,
and the Witness of God has searched and found it out, in his reproachful
abusive Work; By all which we find that he has not singly nor Innocently waited
upon the Lord, nor in a right Spirit breathed unto him for Counsel; but rather
with a False Heart, a Double Mind and a Self-Will, inclined and bent toward
this his perverse Work of Discord, which was conceived in Sin, and brought
forth in Iniquity, and is found to be a confused, deformed, monstrous Birth; we
mean his great Book, styled, The Christian-Quaker, etc. Though he farther
pretends, that As he was seriously waiting on the Lord, he became satisfied in
his Conscience, to forbear Reflecting in his Treatise on the Names of many
reputed Quakers. Albeit he has so Characterized many, not named by him, that
it is easily understood whom he smites at, for all his great pretenses in the
matter, and his Forbearance, which he pretends was upon the Intercession of
several of his Brethren, for which Submission to them, he cites the Apostles
counsel to the Ephesians, To submit themselves to one another in the fear of
God: Whereby it seems then he owns an outward submission to his Brethren,
though he has much opposed outward Orders, Directions, Laws, Decrees, outward
form of Government in the Church of Christ; hereupon is a great part of his
Contest throughout his Book; yet he owns a Submission to his Brethren, in a
matter, which was such a concern of Conscience to him; but if any Direction,
Advice or Counsel be given by an Assembly, Meeting or Church among us, such as
he himself formerly has owned to be the Church of Christ, and joined with in
Counsel, then he can easily evade it on this pretense, It is not his Duty to
obey, without inward Conviction; It is no Bond upon him, when he sees it not;
They are not to submit to outward Orders, Instructions or Prescriptions of any
Assembly, whether they see it to be their Duty or not; it is not binding to
them, unless they see it; with these, and such like Exceptions is much of his
Book made up, to shun that Authority and Right of Judgment, which Christ has
given his Church and People, that answer his Witness, though these his
Exceptions and Allegations, as applied, contain a very Unjust Insinuation and
Reflection upon our Meetings (which are for the Service of Truth and one
another in Love) as if we imposed Rules and Methods for our Fellow Members, to
observe in an Implicit Faith, or Blind Obedience, which has ever been far from
us, and contrary to our Principle and Testimony since we knew any thing of
Truth's Inward Conviction and Work; nor do our said Meetings give any
Instructions or Advice (relating to good Order in the Church, etc.) to such as
are Blind, Faithless or Senseless, and not belonging to us as a People, but to
such whose Eyes are opened in some measure, to incite them to Faithfulness and
Diligence in those things which the true Light will show to be their Duty, as
they are watchful in it, to receive and practice good Advice and Counsel from
the Light, both in themselves and in their Elder Brethren in Christ Jesus.

Disaffect. X.
W. Rogers, to prove the Righteousness of his proceeding to Print and Publish
his Book, gives this Account, dated, Bristol, the 10th of November, 1680.
Postscript page 25, 26, 27. viz. The Question needful to be answered is this,
Whether it is matter of Evil Fact in me to Publish in Print an Historical
Relation of the Truth, and that for the clearing of my Conscience, etc? The
Answer in short is, Nay, to every Impartial and Unprejudiced Reader; I doubt
not, but that the Preface to the Reader, the Introduction to the First and
Fourth Parts of this Treatise may give sufficient Satisfaction; but lest the
Ignorance and Blindness of any should be so great, as n^^ from thence to
perceive the Righteousness of my present proceeding to Print, or that the
Partiality of any that do so, should so abound as to strengthen Evil
Insinuations against me on that account, Page 26.
I have this to say, That such a^ have been of Party against us (concerned in
the Publication hereof) have been the first (and Frequent) Promulgators, by
Declaration, by Manuscript and by Printing, that there has been Divisions
amongst the aforesaid People.

[Passing by (at present) his Impertinent Instances relating to Declaration and
Manuscript, for perspicuity and brevity's sake, we will insist on his chief
Instance that relates to Printing, which he gives to prove the Righteousness of
his proceeding to Print, or to Promulgate or Publish by Printing (according to
his own Terms) his pretended Historical Relation; his Instance follows] viz.

But that which on this occasion is Page 27.
chiefly my concern, is to Evidence that there has been a Publication of the
aforesaid Divisions in Print, before the Publication hereof, and that by (and
on the behalf of) some of G. Fox's Party. On the 8th Instant came to my hands
two Sheets of Printed Paper, Entitled, An Epistle, etc. Anne Whitehead and
Mary Elson the Subscribers -- I should now Page 28.
proceed to cite a few Sentences out of it, which amounts to a Publication of
Divisions. [Thus far W. R.] To evince the Righteousness of his proceeding to
Print and Publish his great Book of Divisions, Be pleased to observe then, That
what he alleges for Instance in this Case, to prove his Proceeding Righteous,
bears this Sense, that the Instances he cites for this end, are not only
Occasions and Causes justly provoking him to proceed to Print, but also, that
they were all such Occasions given him before he proceeded to Print, or to
Promulgate Divisions by Printing, which we judge are both very Unjustly
pretended, and nothing parallel to his Work in his Book, nor demeriting any
such public Volumnious and Remaining Infamy and Reproach, as his Book contains
against certain faithful Men in particular, and the People called Quakers in
general. And now we will presently detect his Fallacy, and manifest Injustice
in this his Principal Instance relating to his Printing.

Query, Whether W. R. did not know in his own Conscience that he had proceeded
to Print his Book some time before the 8th day of November, 1680? which he
confesses to be the time that the said two Sheets of Printed Paper came to his
Hands. We Answer, Yes, he knew in his Conscience that he had Printed most of
his Book before that Day or Time; for he confesses, Post. p. 24. in these
words, Bristol, the 8th of November, 1680. (which was the same day that the two
Printed Sheets came to his Hands) notwithstanding that all this Treatise,
excepting the Postscript, Index and Errata is already Printed. So that all his
Treatise (excepting as is excepted) was Printed before the two Printed Sheets
came to his Hand, and therefore that could be no Reason of his proceeding to
Print his Book, or to Promulg^te or Publish it by Printing, it being Printed
before that Epistle.

For Note also, That by W. R' s own Letter to John Bringhurst, dated the 21st
of the 8th Month, 1680. it appears, much of his Book, viz. of all the Five
Parts was then already Printed, about Eighteen Days before the said Printed
Epistle of two Sheets came to his Hands (being about Eighteen Days from the
21st of the 8th Month, to the 8th of the 9th Month, 1680.) In the said Letter
to John Bringhurst (the Printer) W. R. advises him thus, viz. This Morning I
received another small Parcel -- I want two Sheets of the Third Part, from page
113. to page 128. and one Sheet of the Fifth Part, from page 69, to 83. And
when I have those Sheets, then the Sheets I shall have from thee will be as
follows.

First three Sheets of the Preface.

Of the First Part to page 72.

Of the Second Part to page 80.

Of the Third Part to page 136.

All the Fourth Part, viz. to page 108.

Of the Fifth Part to page 84.

Not more to add, then to desire thy Expedition. -- Thus W. R. in the said
Letter, dated the 21st of the 8th Month, 1680. as before.

By all which its apparent, First, That on the 21st of the 8th Month, 1680.
much of W. R' s Book was Printed, and received by him at Bristol; two several
Parts of it almost finished, as appears by the pages. Secondly, That W. R. was
then Earnest for the Expedition of it, that it might be Printed, which was
about Eighteen Days before the said Epistle came to his Hands. And to be sure,
his Book was put to the Press a considerable time before that; the Printer
says, 'twas begun withal in the Press in the Month called August, 1680. which
was about or near two Months before the said Epistle (alleged by him) was in
being; for it was not delivered unto the Printer until the 25th of the 8th
Month, 1680. which was Four Days after the date of W. R's said Letter to J.
B. the Printer, which intimates so much of his Book then already Printed, and
requires Expedition for the rest.

Qu. But then why was W. R. so ready to catch up the said Epistle that came to
his Hands but the 8th of November, 1680. for to make such a Principal Instance
of it to prove the Righteousness and Reasonableness of his proceeding to Print
his Book of Divisions? seeing he knew in his Conscience he had proceeded so far
in the Printing his Book so long before, and not only so, but confesses the
same 8th of November, 1680. That all his Treatise, excepting Postscript, Index
and Errata, was then already Printed? We can make no better of it, than that he
was befooled in his Craft, so as to manifest his own Fallacy and
Unrighteousness in his Silly Pretenses and Deceitful Subterfuges, and the plain
Truth of it is, the said Epistle by Anne Whitehead and Mary Elson was so far
from being the Cause of of W. R's Printing and Publishing his Contentious Book,
that his Printing thereof was an Occasion of their Writing and Printing their
Epistle, as they were concerned in Conscience, when they heard that W. R's Book
was in the Press, and had been for some time Printing before they writ heirs,
and they understanding what kind of Book his was (when some Sheets of it were
handed up and down) tending to Strife and Division; whereas their end in
writing theirs was to warn Friends against the Spirit of Discord, and not
against Persons by Name; so that W. R. has not Imitated that Copy, whatever
Occasion he makes of it.

If he alleges, that the Publication of his Book was not till after he met
with the said Epistle. We Answer, That Is an Unjust and Silly Evasion again,
only varying from his Terms Proceeding to Print (for which he brings the
Instance of their Epistle) unto the Term Publication, which leaves him without
his chief Plea of Righteousness in Printing. This Equivocal and Fallacious way
of Writing and Pleading will not excuse or cover him, as an Innocent or
Righteous Person in his proceeding to Print, or in his Allegations for himself
therein, against others; for he has granted Printing to be a Promulgation or
Publication, as in his words [ Frequent Promulgators by Printing] (which is a
Falsehood) and he has confessed, his Treatise was Printed when the said Epistle
came to his Hands, being the 8th of November, 1680. so that in Printing his
Book of Divisions, he did Promulgate or Publish it, only it was so Bulkey that
he could not get it all Completed, Bound up, and sold abroad, before the said
Epistle was Printed; however, that was Accidential, the Bigness, Trouble and
Charge of his Book made it not so Expeditious as an Epistle of two Sheets,
which no whit proves his Intention or Proceeding to be Righteous, in first
putting his to the Press, and having gotten it Printed before the two Sheets
came to his Hands; besides, was not W. R. so earnest for Expedition, in the
Printing his Book, that (in its several Parts) it was put into several Hands of
the World's Printters, Persons not called Quakers? and not only so, but being
Printed, it appears to be designed to go abroad in the World.

And further, if to evade the Charge of Fallacy and Injustice, Deceit and False
cover laid on W. R. in this matter, he flies to his Gramatical sense of his
Words, and pleads his Intention, etc. as thinking himself safe in both -- 1st,
We say his present proceeding to Print cannot in reason be confined to his
Postscript, wherein the Words are -- Nor Answer the SOME of the People called
Quakers he tells of, that have judged him Wicked as for intending to Print
against Friends, Post. page 25. (whom he undertakes to Answer in that case) nor
vindicate him, as to his Historical Relation mentioned in the same page, which
includes his Book, which cannot be confined to, nor included in his Postscript.

2dly, The Reasons he gives in his Postscript to prove himself Righteous in his
proceeding to Print, cannot relate only to that his Postscript, but to his
whole Book, because they areadded for a Supplyment to his Preface to the
Reader, his Introduction to the First and Fourth Parts of his Treatise, which
Preface and Introduction concern his whole Book, or Historical Relalation (as
he calls it) and which Preface and Introduction he thinks may give sufficient
satisfaction to every Impartial and Unprejudiced Reader; but lest the Ignorance
or Blindness of any should be so great, as not from thence to perceive the
Righteousness of his present proceeding to Print, etc. he gives his Additional
Reasons and Instances in his Postscript, the chief whereof is that relating to
the two Printed Sheets which came to his Hands the 8th of November, 1680. as
aforesaid, wherein the Supplymental Reason given, was more clearly to evince
the Justness of his proceeding to Print, than he had done before in his said
Preface or Introduction, as that it was even to prevent such great Ignorance
and Partiality, as would hinder any from perceiving his Righteousness in
proceeding to Print.

3dly, If W. R. says, That he thinks himself safe, both in his Intention and
Gramatical Sense As he pleaded at a Meeting at Devonshire-house, London, the
27th of the 3d Month 1681.
of his Words, viz. That such as have been of Party against us, concerned in
the Publication hereof, have been the FIRST and FREQUENT PROMULGATORS by
DECLARATION, by MANUSCRIPT, and by PRINTING, that there have been Divisions
among the aforesaid People, as thence concluding, the words being Conjunctive,
only to import that FREQUENT cannot relate to each one abstractly, but to all
jointly, viz. to Publishing by Declaration, by Manuscript, and by Printing, and
that he intended by PRINTING, only the said Epistle of two Sheets being
Published before his Book came out of the Press. We say, that then he writes
Fallaciously and Prevaricatingly; for [ Frequent] does as well relate to
Printing as to Declaration and Manuscript, wherein we cannot think that he
intended only that there was but Once a Publication by Declaration, and but
Once by Manuscript, and so but Once by Printing, as if only those three
Publications, in these three ways, did amount to make up the Frequent
Publication intended; for he quotes several Declarations and several
Manuscripts, and but that One Epistle in Print, for his Printing; as also his
Intentions in Printing cannot be proved Righteous, by his Instance of that
Epistle being public before his Book; for his Intention of Printing, as also
his often Threatening to Print, was a long time before that Epistle ever was in
being; and when he gave his said Supplymental Reasons in his Postscript, on the
10th of November, 1680. he had Printed his Treatise, except the Postscript,
Index and Errata, as he confesses the 8th of November, 1680. being the same
day that Epistle came to his Hands, and therefore his Intention of Printing and
Publishing Divisions could have no Relation to that Epistle, as any Cause or
Reason of his Intention; And how could that Epistle be any Reason of his
Printing, when it was not in being till after he had Printed a great part of
his Book in the Five Parts of it?

4thly, If he yet allege, That in the Title Page of the said Epistle, it is
said to be Printed by Andrew Soul, and to be sold at his Shop in
Devonshire-Buildings, and that therefore he was the more concerned for the
Publication of his Book, when it was Printed. To this we say, That Addition,
showing by whom it was Printed and Sold, was the Printer's own Addition, and
not the Authors, and yet suitable enough for him to add, being cautioned in the
same Title Page how far it was intended by the Authors to be published, being
plainly Recommended to Friends in Truth, chiefly for the sake of the Weak and
Unstableminded, for Information and Encouragement in our Christian Unity and
Society, held in the Spirit of Christ, both in Faith and Practice, as their
words are; so that the Advice, where to have that Epistle, was for Friends, to
whom it was recommended, that they might know where to have it; whereas W. R.
has given no such Caution in his Title page, but leaves his whole Book, and
Friends Reflected on therein, to the Censure and Judgment of the World,
Unbelievers and Truth's Adversaries, to the great Scandal and Reproach of Truth
and Friends in it.

Qu. But has not W. R. placed the Publication of his Book upon a higher Motion
and Necessity, than the occasion pretended of the aforesaid Epistle?

Answ. Yes, a far higher; and what is it? It Is upon such a great concern of
Conscience pretended, that the Publication of it could no longer be forborne.
The Accounts he gives in the case are these, viz. So great a concern of
Conscience lies on many to encourage the Publication thereof, as that we can no
longer forbear, lest it should be reputed, that the Doctrine and Life of
Christianity were wholly extinct among the aforesaid People [as in his Preface.]

And page 77. 1st part, The Righteous God bears us Record, that the very reason
why this Treatise is now prepared, is, because our very Consciences, on behalf
of God's People, are concerned. [Thus far William Rogers, William Ford, the
Subscribers.

Note, That these high Pretenses of Conscience, both for the Preparation and
Publication of their Book, as that they could no longer forbear, must needs be
before 'twas Printed; here was two great concerns in the case, the one to
Prepare it, the other to Print or Publish it by Printing, both which Concerns
were before the aforesaid Epistle of A. Whitehead and M. Elson was in being (at
least, before ever W. R. knew or saw that Epistle) and therefore that Epistle
could not be the cause of such concern of Conscience to Prepare, Print or
Publish W. R's great and Chargeable Book; besides, it may be observed, that all
the Allegations (used by some of his Party) for the Publication of his Book, as
about G. F's not giving him a Meeting, or not giving it under his hand to meet
him, appear but mere Pretenses and slight Covers, having placed a Necessity to
encourage the Publication thereof upon a higher and more absolute concern of
Conscience, as namely, to prevent such a Misrepute, as that of the Doctrine and
Life of Christianity being wholly extinct amongst the People called Quakers.
And there is not the least Color or Pretense of Reason, that this Danger should
be placed either upon the said Epistle, or upon G. F's not meeting W. R. in his
time: This his pretense of such concern of Conscience is far higher than these.

But if it shall yet be pretended by any, that G. F's not giving W. R. a
Meeting, was cause of his publishing his Book. Then how Unjust, and grossly
Unreasonable was it, to expose the Names of diverse other Faithful Friends in
Print, and that to Infamy, without any such particular Offer to them, and
Refusal on their parts?

Moreover, W. R. is so far from proving himself Just or Righteous in his
proceeding to Print, by those Instances he gives of a Publication of Divisions
by Declaration, by Manuscript, and by Printing, that his great Injustice and
Iniquity therein appears, there being no just Comparison between these (so far
as he yet gives Instances) and his great Book in Print, either as to the
Nature, Quality or Quantity; For, 1st, What he mentions of Declaration in their
Meetings, if it were all true, it was not published in Print to the World until
he himself did it; neither do we understand, that such Unprinted Declaration
can Equalize his Book, in the Pernicious Nature and Tendence of it, in many
particulars, which are Scandalous to us as a People, and against diverse honest
Men by Name, and not only so, but it is against Church Government and Order
among us.

2dly, The Forty Four Articles he mentions, were not in Print, nor the Paper of
Sixty Six, nor the Narrative at Drawell, nor were these ever intended to be
exposed in Print, or to the World, as his Book is, but to be reserved within
the Church, till matters might be cleared, and Reconciliation and Union
effected, which diverse faithful Friends among us have earnestly desired and
traveled for, whose Work and Reward is with the Lord, though this Perverse
Spirit turns all into Bitterness, Gall and Wormwood.

3dly, And as to that Epistle written by a Public Preacher, as he says, Post.
page 26. that was not in Print, nor any Persons by Name reflected on in it,
though mention be made in it of Rents, Schisms, Contention, Strife,
Distraction, Discord, etc. A faithful Testimony was therein given against the
Spirit of Discord, Division and Separation, refering it to the Witness of Truth
in all Consciences, and the Spirit of Judgment in themselves, to make the
Application to Persons, and not by Name to Infamize any. G. Whitehead owns the
said Epistle, and says, he has stood by it, and hopes ever to stand by the
Testimony and tender Counsel therein, in the same Spirit that moved him to
write it; as also, that since W. R. has made such an occasion and pretense of
it, to justify his own proceeding to Print, he had done him more Right, if he
had printed it together among others, in his Book, which Epistle, and the
public reading of it, was approved by diverse of W. R's own Friends: And what
if it were read in such a public Meeting for the Worship of God within the
City of Bristol, the 21st of the 11th Month, 1678. (as he says) where some
were present not accounted to be of the People called Quakers? though there was
but very few such there then, as Credible Account was given from Bristol; but
at that Meeting the People present were mostly Friends, as in an Account,
dated, Bristol, the 25th of the 11th Month, 1678. And what though some others
were present, and heard it read? What knows he but it had a good Effect on some
of them? seeing Division, Contention and Discord have (both before and since
that) happened in that Meeting, according as he has related in Print, there was
the more need of such a Testimony going forth against such a Spirit of
Contention and Discord, that has so openly appeared in that place.

4thly, Neither is there any just or equal Comparison between the said Printed
Epistle, and W. R. his great Invective Book, which tends to the Perpetual
Reproach, Scandal and Infamy of diverse Faithful Persons by Name, and of the
People called Quakers, the Truth and Christian Religion professed by them;
whereas the said Epistle by Mary Elson and Anne Whitehead was not to Infamize
any Friends or Professors of Truth by Name, but according to the Title, An
Epistle for True LOVE, UNITY and ORDER in the Church of Christ, against the
Spirit of Discord, Disorder and Confusion, etc. All which considered, W. R.
has manifested his Injustice in these his several Instances, as well as his
apparent Fallacy and Impertinency in that one principal Instance of the said
Printed Epistle, so that the Foundation of W. R's proceeding to Print is
evidently proved Deceit and Falsehood.

But come on, we have dwelt somewhat long upon this point, let us now briefly
sum up and present the Case in W. R. his own sense (and see how far that will
go) thus, viz. The said Epistle of two Printed Sheets, given out by Anne
Whitehead and Mary Elson, amounting to a Publication of Divisions (though
Reflecting on no Persons by Name) coming to my Hands the 8th of November, 1680.
it was a great Provocation to me, and the chief concern upon me to Publish my
Book of Eighty Sheets, or above, reflecting on many of the Chieftains among the
People called Quakers, by Name in Particular, and upon the greatest part of
that People in General, who own them, as also upon their Meetings that are for
an Outward Form of Church Government, Visible Orders, etc. as being Apostates
and Innovators, etc.

To all which it may be said, Oh! great Champion Scribe of the Schism and
Faction, and Popular Person! wast thou so provoked by two poor Women, with
their but two Printed Sheets against the Spirit of Discord, that thou must
needs revenge thy self with a Furious Confused Book of above EIGHTY Sheets in
Print? Is this thy Justice, Manhood and Valor so Excessively to vent thy Fury,
for the sake of two such (in thy esteem doubtless) Inconsiderable persons,
their two Sheets? At this rate we may expect, that we shall so hugely provoke
thee, by this Treatise, against thy work of Darkness and Confusion, that thou will severely pay us off with a Book of Five or Six Hundred Sheets at least
(but then thy Friends must very highly advance their Purses toward the Charge,
if they will be so Mad or Silly.) Be sure (if thou writest against us) make it a
huge big Book, or else thou will not proceed according to thy former GREAT
CONCERN OF CONSCIENCE and JUSTICE against the TWO Women's TWO Sheets, and many
more because thereof. However, if thou pretends to make Answer or Reply
hereunto, let it be as big as it will, let it but refer to holy Scripture, and
be Argumentative, and it may probably be the more taken notice of; but if it be
a kind of History, made up of Stories, Reports (and thy own Jealousies) to
expose Weaknesses, and to render Persons by Name Odious; 'twill then be No
Answer, but a Dirty Revengeful Clamor, like much of thy Unchristian Book
already extant, to thy (and thy Abettors) great Shame and Disgrace.

Disaffect. XI.
First Part, page 9. W. R. frames an Objection, in which are these words, viz.
And that we ought to believe as the Church believes, compared with his 4th
Sect. page 23. The Title whereof, with some other words objected by him
follows, viz.

Sect. 4. An Answer to the Third Position, deduceable from an Objection raised
toward the Conclusion of the first Section, viz. That it is Folly and Hypocrisy
to profess our selves Members of the true Church, and yet not believe THUS as
the true Church believes.

VV. R. To this we say, We are altogether dissatisfied (especially when we
consider what a Body of Darkness has entered under the Belief of this Position
[We must believe as the Church believes]* And page 24. May it not further be
said, we know how Papists and Protestants describe their Church, etc.

Observe.
That herein our Adversary still persists in his course of Envy and
Persecution, by thus seeking to render us as like Papists as he can, as if we
were imposing an Implicit Faith, concerning our Assemblies, without Conviction,
on the bare Terms of [ Believing as the Church believes] which Imposition we
Abhor, being always for that Faith that is Explicit, Clear and Evident,
grounded upon the plain Evidence of the Spirit; besides, to render us Odious
and Obnoxious in this matter, W. R. has Fallaciously wronged the Citation in
his said 4th Section, and whereon he grounds his whole Section, leaving out the
very foregoing words, which are the most Material and Explanatory words, as in
the Title of his said Section, compared with the Book he took them out of,
Entitled; THE APOSTATE INCENDIARY REBUKED, etc. page 16. the words are these,
viz. I affirm, That the true Church is in the true Faith that is in God, and we
must either believe Thus as the true Church believes, or else it were but both
a Folly and Hypocrisy to profess our selves Members thereof. See how plain the
words are, principally relating to the Faith that is in God, which explains the
matter; but W. R. though in his first Sect. page 9. cites the words, viz. The
True Church is in the True Faith, that is in God; in his 4th Sect. he wholly
leaves them out, and places his Exceptions and Answer upon the latter part,
somewhat varied into a Position, which he deduces from an Objection of his own
framing, and then cries out, We are altogether dissatisfied, when we consider
what a Body of Darkness has entered under the Belief of this Position, WE MUST
BELIEVE AS THE CHURCH BELIEVES. Thus crookedly and perversely has he Scribbled,
to put the Odium of POPERY upon us; but if we should ask him, Is it not in it
self true Doctrine, That the true Church is in the true Faith, that is, in God,
and we must either believe thus [i. e. in God] as the true Church believes, or
else it were but Folly and Hypocrisy to profess our selves Members thereof?
Dare he say, that to believe in God, as the true Church believes, is Unsound
Doctrine? But be it noted, how he has contradicted himself in confessing to
that which he has made a Section against, as before; see his Third Part, page
74. his words are these, viz. I confess the true Church is in the true Faith,
and every Member thereof is in some Measure (at least) of the same Faith, that
all the Elect of God are of, so that it may in Truth be said, every Member of
the Church does in some Measure believe as the rest of the Members do. Behold,
here he has granted the matter, which he has made so much ado against, in his
4th Section of his 1st Part, aforesaid. Thus one while he Opposes; another
while he Grants the Thing Opposed; one while he Condemns; another while
Retracts; but that we do not impute to his Ingenuity, but to his Enmity,
Inadvertency, and Discomposedness and Prolixity in his writing.

Disaffect. XII.
W. R. first part, page 9. He frames the Objection, viz. It Is true, Friends in
the beginning were turned to the Light in their own Consciences as their Guide;
but when it pleased the Lord to gather so great a number into the Knowledge and
Belief of the Truth, as were in few Years gathered, then the Heavenly Motion
came upon G. F. as the Lord's Anointed and Chosen, having the care of the
Churches, as being the great Apostle of Christ Jesus, and as one whom the Lord
had ordained to be in that place amongst the Children of Light in this our day,
as Moses was amongst the Children of Israel in his day, to set forth Methods
and Forms of Church Government, and to establish Monthly and
Quarterly-Meetings of Men, and of Women distinct from Men, etc.

Observe.
Here he has heaped up diverse matters to make up this Objection, as one
scraping up and devising what he can to render us odious; never was any such
entire Objection made by any real Quaker; he has framed it much like an open
Adversary (and then deduceth his own Positions and Inferences) to render
Friends, who are for outward Order and Methods in the Church, not only weak and
silly in their Arguing, but Apostates from the Light in their Consciences, to
which they were turned in the beginning.

The design of this whole Objection forged by him, is to render us a People
departed from the Light and Law of Christ within, to set up Man and Men's
Precepts instead thereof, which is wicked and scornful, tending also to render
the very Profession of the heavenly Motion Contemptible; which heavenly Motion
(in opposition to his Contempt and Scorn) we affirm, came not only on G. F. but
also on many other faithful Brethren, for due Methods and Order, as to
Church Government, no ways repugnant to the Light of Christ within. And for G.
F. though an Apostle and Servant of Christ, yet to be in this our Gospel day,
in that very place amongst the Children of Light, as Moses was amongst the
Children of Israel in his day; This Comparison we own not, nor does G. F. own
it; for it is to render the Gospel day of Christ no brighter than Moses's Day
under the Law, and the Children of Light in this Gospel Day, as in no further
Dispensation than the Children of Israel under the Law; but such Doctrine we
utterly disown, neither does G. F. own the Comparison, but as a faithful
Servant of Christ, his Labor was and is to turn People to Christ, his Light
and Spirit in them; neither he nor we do own any Sect Masters, nor making of
Sects among us, but seek to bring all to the Universal Spirit and Unity, and
Bond of Peace in Christ Jesus, and we all as Servants of Christ, and Sufferers
for his Name and Testimony; and do own the Dispensation of Christ, as far
excelling that of Moses, as being more bright, inward and spiritual; for thus
far only the Comparison in Scripture is between Moses and Christ, Heb. 3. 1, 2,
3. Consider the Apostle and High Priest of our Profession, Christ Jesus, who
was faithful to him that appointed him, as also Moses was faithful in all his
House; for this man was counted of more Glory than Moses, inasmuch as he who
builds the House, has more honor than the House; and Moses was faithful in
all his House as a Servant, but Christ as a Son over his own House; see verse.
4, 5, 6. But farther observe our Adversaries Jealousy in this Case, namely, in
his 4th Part, page 83, 84.

W. R. in his Letter to G. F. dated, Bristol, the 27th of the 1st Month, 1677.
Among other things, this Jealousy enters me, viz. That thou look upon thy
self that man, at least, in whom the Son of God has appeared to give forth his
Law The Son of God may give forth his own Spiritual Law and Testimony in his
Ministers and Servants, not only in One, but Many of them, as he pleases; and
his Law and Ministry is not to be kept hidden.
(and to be recorded as his Law) under the Dispensation of the Gospel, even as
Moses was the giver forth of the Law in that day, if this be so, etc. And in
his Margenal Note on the same passage, he has these words, viz. The Reader may
take notice, that G. F. in his Letter on the 14th of the 11th Month, 1676.
hints at something written by me to him, thus; And thou (meaning my self)
say, that there is a Spirit risen at this day, that gives many occasion to
be Jealous, that thou (meaning G. F.) art looked upon by some AS THAT Prophet
which Moses testified of, that God would raise up, etc. And thou say, Christ
is that Prophet that is to be heard, etc. and he is the only Lawgiver, and no
outward man.

Observe.
We testify against W. R's Jealousy, and the Jealousy of those he represents
against G. F. as tending to Persecution, and that the Jealousy of his being
looked upon by some, as that Prophet which Moses testified of, that God would
raise up (viz. Christ Jesus) is not only in it self a Jealousy tending to
Cruelty and Persecution, but a Jealousy that proceeds from Enmity and
Darkness; and not only so, but this Jealousy is contradicted by W. R. his own
Jealousy, that has entered him, viz. of G. F's looking upon himself that Man IN
whom the Son of God has appeared; and not only so, but confesses, that G. F.
thus answers, viz. Then is not this Prophet (meaning Christ) to be in man to
give forth his Law, etc? And what I am I am by the Grace and Love of God, etc.
4th part, page 83, 84. [ Marg. Note.]

Mark how W. R. has gone about to accuse and bespatter G. F. and others, with
his own and others Jealousies, though inconsistent, as well as he shows himself
Impertinent and Envious in his writing against the Servants of Christ, who
confess Christ to be in Man, and not themselves to be Christ.

Disaffect. XIII.
W. R. 1st part, page 4. And that whosoever should endeavor by Outward Ways
and Means to establish an Outward Government and Outward Rules, Orders, Laws or
Prescriptions OVER the Heritage of God, under the Notion of CHRIST's
Government, would be found Invaders of Christ's Prerogative; this compared with
what he writes, page 13. viz. That Spirit that would remove us from that
Teacher that cannot be removed into a Corner, to follow the Dictates of
Fallible Men.

Observe.
First, We judge both these are unjust Reflections, as well as unjustly
applied; for we know no Outward Rules, Orders, Laws or Prescriptions practiced
among us, that are the mere Dictates of Fallible men, but such as Christ is
originally the Author of, and which answer his pure Law of Love of Truth within.

Secondly, Our Adversary to prove us and our Meetings Apostate from the inward
Teacher, is very uncertain, and frequently various in his Opposition, as one
while, it is against Outward Rules, Orders, etc. another while, against them, as
being the Dictates of Fallible men; another while, as being imposed or urged
with too much Severity; another while, as Imposed on our Fellow Members without
Conviction, Sight or Sense of their Duty therein; another while, as being
Innovations, and such as Christ's Light within parswades not to: And so he is at
a loss in his Uncertainty, not assigning what those Rules, Orders, Laws or
Prescriptions are, that are liable to all these Exceptions, which while he does
not, his Work, and great Clutter and Noise therein, appears very Impertinent
and Contentious, Silly and Rediculous.

And what are his chief Allegations against the Men's Meetings of our Friends?
See what follows.

Disaffect. XIV
W. R. 1st part, page 16. That Men's Meetings have most usually CONSISTED of Men
Uncertain in Numbers, as well as to Qualifications, may assume Power over
Conscience, under the Notion of the Church of Christ. Page 7. Persons Uncertain
in Qualifications, do take upon them to call themselves a General Meeting.

Query, But do these Meetings most usually consist of such Persons Uncertain in
Qualification? No, we deny that, and take his own words to show his
Inconsistence therein, viz,

W. R. page 12. Though we dare not conclude, that none in those Meetings were
Members of the Church.

Observe.
Then they are not all Uncertain in Qualifications.

Disaffect. XV.
W. R. page 7. [concerning Friends said Meeting] To be very plain, we cannot
but appeal to the Consciences of all such honorable Friends, who are both
Intelligent and Impartial, whether some who have usually there assembled, or
may pretend Right to be Members thereof, have not been false Accusers, and
Man-Pleasers, and MANY OF THEM a sort of Persons, who being Lovers of
Pre-eminence, and Time-Servers, take that as an Opportunity to appear unto
others, that which they are not in themselves?

Observe.
These Accusations we do judge are not only Scandalous against many Friends,
but tending to the great Reproach and Scandal of our said Meeting, and the
Truth professed among us.

Disaffect. XVI.
W. R. 1st part, page 11. Sect. 3. It Is well remembered, that that one Man G. F.
went some Years past into many parts of this Nation, advising Friends to hold
such Meetings, viz. Monthly and Quarterly, and in many places his Counsel was
readily embraced; but for our parts, we understood not at that day that it was
designed by him, or any else, that those Meetings should not only be accounted
the Church, but also such as professed the Truth, ought to believe as this
Church believes; had he so expressed himself, Testimonies would have risen as a
Flood against such Darkness; for this would have plainly appeared to us to have
opened a Door whereby that Babylonish Rubbish, which we had been long
testifying against, might have been exalted in one day.

Observe.
This passage we judge does greatly bespeak the Man's Enmity and perverse
Jealousy, both against G. F. and those Meetings, to render him one that has
acted upon some Hidden, Selfish and Unchristian Design, to set up an absolute
Dominion in and by those Meetings, over the Faith and Consciences of their
Brethren; which we utterly testify against, and look upon it to be very grossly
Scandalous and Reproachful; for the very Intent and Design of those Meetings
has been from the beginning manifest to be for the Service of the Lord, his
Truth and People, in the Unity of true Faith and Love, as Fellow-helpers one of
another.

Query, And why may not these Meetings be accounted the Church, or any of them
a Church of Christ, when gathered in his Name and Fear? Has not W. R. counted
them such formerly? Are none of them now worthy of the Name Church, in his
Esteem? Would he Unchurch them all at once? if so, why does he come at any of
them then? But see his 3d part, page 78. what he confesses, viz. That the Word
CHURCH is most used in Scriptures with respect to Particular Congregations or
Assemblies; and page 79. Where two or three are gathered together in Christ's
Name, there is the Church of Christ. And dare he say, there is not so many as
two or three that gather together in Christ's Name among us? No; he has
confessed, He dare not conclude, that none in those Meetings were Members of the
Church, 1st part, page 12. Thus he shows his Uncertainty in his Gain-sayings.

Disaffect. XVII.
W. R. page 14. 1st part, An Eminent Person, professing Truth, being at
Bristol, did take occasion to signify at a Men's Meeting held in that City, to
this Effect, That in London, and other parts of this Nation, where such
Meetings were usually held, the Sense of the Generality has been taken for the
Sense of such Meetings; comparing this with this Doctrine frequently of late
published amongst us, That the Apostasy shall never enter the generality more;
does give us just occasion to be Jealous, that our Opposers, for the carrying
on of THEIR DESIGNS against us, have contrived this Method of carrying all
things by the Generality, or Major Number of Voices.

Observe.
He draws Inferences from his own perverse Jealousy still, which we affirm are
Unjustly deduced from what here he falsely pretends does give just occasion
thereof; for such Designs and Contrivance to carry all things by the Major
Number of Voices, we plainly disown; but by the Sense and Influence of the
Power of God, and Demonstration of Truth, and where that makes the generality
of one accord, it is no Design or Contrivance against Persons.

Query, We ask him, if he believes a general Apostasy shall come over the
Church of Christ, or enter the generality thereof in these latter days* seeing
he seems so much concerned against such a Doctrine, as that, the Apostasy shall
never enter the generality more; how then does* he consist with his own
Confession, 3d part, page 77. viz. My Faith is, that a Remnant will be
preserved so watchful, as that being built on the Rock, Christ, the Gates of
Hell shall never prevail against them.

Disaffect. XVIII.
W. R. page 21. 1st part, Marginal Note, This Sentence, as Heirs of the Gospel
of Life and Salvation; take your Possessions, of late Years frequently
expressed -- by way of Encouragement, to continue Men's and Women's Meetings --
By which means it is much doubted, that some Ignorant People have concluded,
that frequenting those Meetings is an Evidence that they are Heirs of Life and
Salvation.

Observe.
He is now upon his doubts, Reflecting, by way of Inference, upon he knows not
whom among us; and what is this, but to render some Men or Women, or both,
among Friends, both Silly and Ridiculous, as taking up such an Ignorant
Conclusion, as that their frequenting those Meetings were Evidence, that they
are Heirs of Life and Salvation (which consists in the Power of Christ) What
Silly and Tedious Work has he made from his Doubts, false Jealousies and
Prejudice!

Disaffect. XIX.
W. R. 1st part, page 42. That the meaning of this Exhortation, frequently
uttered, Have an Eye to the Brethren, is chiefly meant with respect to that (i.
e. General) Meeting; this we take to be both Limitation and a Design of
Imposition.

Observe.
This we take to be a Dark and Causless Reflection: Whom does he accuse with
this frequent Exhortation, and Design of Imposition? We deny any such Design.

Disaffect. XX.
W. R. 1st part, p. 46. And now, as to the meaning of the word
Church Government (in the sense of our Opposers) we take it to be thus, viz.
That some, who account themselves Members of the Body of Christ, claim a Power
to Rule over other some, if not all the rest, and give forth Sentences,
Directions or Orders, which they ought to own, receive or obey, though they may
pretend they see it not their Duty.

Observe.
This still we deem a Dark and Implicit way of smiting, and may be construed to
extend farther than can be proved, and that to the Reproach of such Directions,
Orders, etc. as are really necessary and convenient; we own no such a Claim of
a Power to Rule OVER Christ's Members, or over their Consciences; what
Gospel-Power we have, it is given us, not claimed by us, as he imagins; besides,
W. R. confesses, page 8. That it is taken for granted, that the Authority of
all those Meetings ought to be the Power of God; then we say, this Power gives
forth no Sentences, Directions or Orders in the Church of Christ; but such as
the Light will give his Members a Sight and Sense of, as to their true Use and
Service, as they wait in it.

By Church Government, we understand the Government of Christ in his Church,
who has his Ministers, Servants and Instruments therein, as he always had in
his Church, when gathered into visible Order and Society.

W. R. 1st part, page 46, 47. We think it necessary to quote those Scriptures,
from whence (so far as ever we understood) the most pertinent Arguments might
be produced to prove Church Government, Mat. 18. 15, 16, 17. we find Christ
thus saying, Moreover, if thy Brother shall Trespass against thee, go tell him
his Fault; if he will not hear thee, take with thee one or two; and if he shall
neglect to hear them, tell it to the Church; but if he neglect to hear the
Church, let him be unto thee as an Heathen Man: Verily, I say unto you,
whatsoever ye shall Bind in Earth, shall be Bound in Heaven. Compare this
Scripture, touching the Trespass of one Brother against another, with what Paul
writes, 1 Cor. 6. 1, 2, 4. Dare any of you, having a matter against another, go
to Law before the Unjust? Do ye not know that the Saints shall judge the World?
If then ye have Judgment of things pertaining to this Life, set them to judge
who are leaft esteemed in the Church. We REASONABLY conclude, that the words of
Christ and of the Apostle ONLY This Passage he has Contradicted in his Third
Part, page 36. where he grants, That every Case of one Brother's ^respassing
against another, may according to Right Reason, be comprehended. So here is his
Right Reason against his Reasonable Conclusion.
hinted at either PERSONAL Offenses, or Differences touching worldly Matters,
and that therein the Duty of the Church was only to Exhort to submit to their
Counsel, which if they did not, they might justly be esteemed as Heathen men;
but this is nothing to the Purpose of those, who have approved a Plea for such
a Church Government as claims a Power Disaffect 21.
of deciding matters relating to Conscience, and outward things also, on the
occasion of Differences raised touching Worldly Estate; and that others ought
to obey such Decisions, which in its natural Consequence, has (as we take it)
no less tendency, than to claim Power over our Properties, as well as
Consciences.

Observe.
In these Passages we judge our adversary has writ very Confusedly and
Contradictorily; for, 1st, he grants from the words of Christ and the Apostle,
that the Church ought to be heard, and to judge in Personal Offenses, and
Differences in Worldly Matters; yea, that therein the Duty of the Church was to
Exhort to submit to their Counsel. Query, What Counsel, if not tending to
decide the Difference?

But, 2dly, he undoes that again, in opposing the Churches Power of deciding
matters relating to Conscience, and outward things also, on occasion of
Differences raised touching Worldly Estate, as tending to claim a Power over
Properties, as well as Consciences; which is not only Contradictory, but
unjustly deduced; for in that the Church is to be heard, even in Personal
Offenses or Differences, and to Exhort to a Submission touching Worldly
Matters, as he grants; and in those matters, the least esteemed in the Church
have power to judge. This is not to claim a power over the Properties of
others, as he very unjustly charge; but by a right Judgment to compose the
Differences; and set them to Rights, each man in his own, that they may not
wrong one another in their Properties, nor go to Law with each other.

But whereas W. R. would bind up the words of Christ and the Apostle, as ONLY
hinting at Personal Differences touching Worldly Matters, we find him again
Inconsistent with himself, in his 3d part, page 36. on the words of Christ,
Mat. 18. 15, 16, 17. in these words, viz.

W. R. Perhaps some may object thus, This relates not to outward Affairs, but
to Offenses that are of a Spiritual Nature -- In Answer, it may be, said as to
that the Scripture is wholly silent, and therefore EVERY CASE wherein one
Brother may Trespass against another, may according to RIGHT REASON be
comprehended in it [Thus far W. R.]

Hence observe, his Inconsistence is plain, 1st, on pretense of a Reasonable
Conclusion, he Limits the words of Christ and the Apostle, and so the Church's
Power therein, to judge and counsel in that case, only to Differences touching
Worldly Matters.

2dly, He grants, that Every Case (wherein one Brother may trespass against
another) may be comprehended in it (that is, in what Christ says, Mat. 18.
17.) and that according to Right Reason, which Every Case may therefore include
Cases relating to Conscience, or Offenses of a Spiritual Nature, as well as
those about Worldly Concerns, Outward Properties, etc. Those that are Spiritual
have Power from Christ to judge also concerning a Mistaken and Offending
Conscience, and a Wrong Spirit, without Usurpation. And it is no difficult
matter for the least Child of Light to give a right and absolute Judgment in
the case of our Adversaries conscience, even as to his high pretenses of
Conscience to bring forth his great Book, which is filled with Envy, Confusion
and false Jealousies, That his Conscience therein is not a Good* Conscience,
it is not a Conscience void of Offense toward God and Man, but very Offensive
to both. And that his Contradiction is obvious, in his ONE WHILE limiting the
words of Christ and the Apostle ( Mat. 18. 15. 1 Cor. 6.) ONLY to Personal
Offenses about Outward Matters, and that upon pretense of a Reasonable
Conclusion; ANOTHER WHILE, granting that in the words of Christ, Mat. 18. 17.
EVERY CASE may be comprehended, wherein one Brother may Trespass against
another, and that according to RIGHT REASON, whereby he has set his RIGHT
REASON in Contradiction to his REASONABLE CONCLUSION; You may see what a Master
of Reason this Person is.

In pursuance of his Charge against us, of claiming power over the Properties
and Consciences of Believers, he proceeds thus, viz.

Disaffect. XXII.
W. R. 1st part, page 47. We are sensible that many Friends will be even
startled at this, and ready to query, Are there any such amongst the People
called Quakers? We Answer, Yes verily; and that those who may be accounted
Chieftains too, viz. those who approved in the Second Days Meeting at London
the beforecited Book of R. B. relating to Government in the Church.

Observe.
His charge of claiming Power over the Properties as well as Consciences of
Believers, upon those counted Chieftains among the People called Quakers, and
the Second Days Meeting at London, we do judge to be very Scandalous as well
as Unjust, and tending to render us the People called Quakers Obnoxious to the
Civil Government, as assuming an Arbitrary and Absolute Dominion over the
Properties and Consciences of others, which is an Abhorence to us.

And what he alleges out of R. B.'s Book in the case, does not appear to us
any proof of his charge against us, being rightly and ingeniously considered,
as to what R. B. affirms, of the Church of Christ having power in some cases
that are matters of Conscience to give positive Sentence or Decision, which may
be obligatory upon Believers: We would ask this Opposer, if in no cases of
Conscience the Church of Christ has power to give such positive Sentence as is
Just and Righteous? (for the true Church neither pretends nor claims any other)
if she has, then whether such Sentence be not obligatory to other Believers
concerned? And then whether there can be any Just pretense for a Believer to
refuse to submit, as not seeing that his duty which is Just and Equal? which no
doubt but the Light of Christ within will discover and oblige him to, if he
obey it; and therefore W. R. his Inference, that this Meaning and Government
over the Consciences of Believers, he takes to be contrary to the Principle of
Truth, and Liberty we have in Christ Jesus, appears to us both Perverse and
Impertinent; for all just Sentences given, and Decision made, either by the
Church of Christ, or faithful Members thereof, is done in his Service, and
according to his Mind, and in Subjection to his Power, and therein the Dominion
over the Conscience is his Dominion, which is neither claimed nor assumed out
of his hands by his Church, or any faithful Members thereof; we claim no Power,
nor assume any Dominion of our selves, the power and dominion over Conscience
is Christ's, and we are but his Ministers or Servants; but it appears, our
Adversary allows the Church of Christ no Power in cases of Conscience, to give
positive Sentence or Decision, which may be Obligatory upon Believers; if he
says he does, then why does he oppose affirming the Church has such Power?
But to proceed upon his Scandalous Charge against the second days Meeting in
London, see what he further says, page 51, 52. 1st part, viz.

Disaffect. XXIII.
W. R. Some there are amongst the People called Quakers, who may be accounted
Chieftains too, that approve of a Plea for Government among themselves, which
in its natural Consequence has no less Tendency than to claim a power over our
Properties as well as Consciences; for proof whereof, we say, the second Days
Meeting of Ministering Friends in London took upon them the Approbation of the
aforesaid Book relating to Government, whereby they are entitled to the matter
therein contained: compared with what he says, page 52. viz. saying in our
Hearts, blessed be the Lord, that neither the second Days Meeting, nor those
who are at Unity with them, as Approvers of the said Book, have any
Jurisdiction over our Properties, etc.

Observe.
In these passages we do still positively judge, that our Adversary has grossly
Scandalized our said Meeting in London, as claiming a Power and assuming a
Jurisdiction over their Properties, etc. and so has rendered the said Meeting
Arbitrary, and usurping a Dominion in things Spiritual and things Temporal,
which appears to us Horrid and Odious, tending to expose the People called
Quakers to Suffering and Ruin by the Temporal Power and Government.

And his principal Instance for proof of his Charge against our said Meeting in
London, we cannot judge amounts to any real proof thereof; he takes it out of
R. B's Book, Entitled, The Anarchy of the Ranters, etc. page 37. in these
words, viz.

In what Cases, and how far this Government Extends; and first as to Outward
and Temporals, page 39. in the second place this order reaches the taking up
and composing of Differences as to outward things; We do boldly Aver, that as a
People gathered together by the Lord unto the same Faith, and distinguished
from all others by our joint Testimony and Sufferings, that we have Power and
Authority to decide and remove these things.

We request the Friendly Reader to note this Instance, that there is not one
Word in it, that either in it self, or Natural Consequence, amounts to a proof
of his Charge against us, or our said Meeting, that is, of claiming a Power or
assuming a Jurisdiction over the Properties of Friends or others; but only a
Power given us in Truth to compose, decide, and remove Difference in outward
things among our selves, as a People gathered by the Lord into the same Faith,
and to make no other composure or decision thereof, than what consists with
Truth, as appears more fully in the Words following the same passage, in R. B's
Book, quoted by our Adversary, as where R. B. says, page 40. If the Truth we
profess have not Efficacy as to reconcile us among our selves in the matters of
this World, if we be forced to go out to others for Equity and Justice, because
we cannot find it among our selves, how can we expect to invite them to come
among us?

This with many other passages in R. B's said Book, together with his own
Explication thereupon, dated, Aberdene Prison, the 6th of the 1st Month, 1679.
cited at large by W. R. in his third part, from page 99, to page 122. We do at
least really suppose, does fully clear both him and our said Meeting from any
such Imputation, as either Assuming or Exercising an absolute Jurisdiction,
Power or Dominion over men's properties in outward things; for R. B. affirms,
That they have greatly mistaken him, who did suppose that he did Ascribe to
Friends an absolute Jurisdiction over men's Properties in outward things; nor
was our said Meeting in London, or any of us, in the least, designed or
principled to any such thing; whose Ox or whose Ass have we taken, etc?
Therefore has our Adversary most grossly misrepresented and abused us therein,
to the great scandal and reproach of us, and the Holy Truth professed by us.

As to the taking up and composing of Differences among our selves as to
outward things, and R. B's avering, That as a people gathered together by the
Lord unto the same Faith, we have Power and Authority to decide and remove
these things. Against this W. R. immediately testifies in these Words, viz.

Disaffect. XXIV.
W. R. first part, page 51. This we testify is repugnant to the Light of
Christ Jesus within us, and Testimony of the Scriptures of Truth without us;
for as Christ's Kingdom is not of this World, so it is not likely that his
Members should by his Authority claim a Jurisdiction in the matters relating to
this World; and if Christ himself, when he was desired by a certain man to bid
his Brother divide the Inheritance with him, refused to be a Judge in that
matter relating to Property, when desired by one party, saying, Who made me a
Judge over you: How much more unreasonable is it for his Members to assume a
Jurisdiction when desired by neither party, etc?

Observe.
We look upon this Testimony in the first place Unsound, and the Allegation
Impertinent; for, 1st, That as a People of the Lord, or Church of Christ, we
have Power to compose Differences as to outward things; This is neither
repugnant to the Light of Christ within, nor to the Testimony of the Scriptures
without us; see 1 Cor. 6. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Man. 18. 15, 16, 17.

2dly, [ claim a Jurisdiction] What Jurisdiction do Christ's Members claim by
his Authority, other then what he himself has given them, viz. to Counsel,
Advise and Admonish, for the ending of Differences, and to give true Judgment.

3dly, What does Jurisdiction mean properly, but a pronouncing right Equity or
Justice, though in the common Law it is Power and Authority to minister and
execute Laws, which in a Gospel Way and Order is not excluded the Church of
Christ, seeing the Law shall go forth of Sion?

4thly, Christ's refusing to be a Judge in that matter, relating to property,
when desired by one party, Luke 12. 13, 14. argues not, that none of his
Members, Church or Saints have power to judge in matters relating to outward
Property; for that were to contradict the Apostle's Testimony, 1 Cor. 6. 3.
Know ye not that we shall judge Angels; how much more things that pertain to
this Life?

5thly, That of Luke 12. 13, 14. alleged, proves not that either Christ had
not Power and Right to judge among his Disciples in matters relating to this
World, nor yet that the Saints, or his Members, were altogether to refuse
judging in matters relating to Property among themselves, or them of the same
Faith.

6thly, In the Scripture alleged, Luke 12. 13. its said, One of the company
said unto him, Master, speak to my Brother that he divide the Inheritance with
me. It is not said, 'twas one of his Disciples: Nor would it have been Judicial
for him to have given Judgment in the matter, upon the motion and determination
of one pa^ty assigning what he would have done in's own case aforehand, and
whose fault Christ seems to reprehend in the following Words, Luke 12. 15. Take
heed and beware of Covetousness; for a man's Life consists not in the
abundance of the things which he possesses. Nor was it so properly Christ's
Ministry and Work, to be concerned in determining those outward matters of
Property, having given a higher Ministry and sufficient Law, Light and Judgment
in men's Consciences to determine what is Right, and to do Right in those cases,
especially in his Church and Followers. The Lord is exalted when Sion is filled
with Judgment and Righteousness.

And now, whereas R. B. pleads for the Church of Christ having Power in some
cases of Conscience, to give a positive Sentence or Decision, which may be
obligatory upon Believers. This W. R. opposes, as being a Government over the
Consciences of Believers, contrary to the Principle of Truth, and Liberty they
have in Christ Jesus, page 48. because his Plea is for a Liberty, for a
Believer to refuse to submit on account of not seeing it his Duty. This is
still to divide the Church of Christ, and Believers, as if the Church did see,
and Believers were blind, which is Absurd and Ignorant. He now neither allows
the Church power in cases of Conscience, nor outward things, to give positive
Sentence or Judgment, to decide difference, page 48, and 51. but both these he
has sufficiently contradicted, 1st, in concluding the words of Christ and the
Apostle, Mat. 18. and 1 Cor. 6. did concern Personal Offenses, or Differences
touching Worldly Matters: 2dly, In granting, that Every Case wherein one
Brother may Trespass against another, may be comprehended in it.

But now, to his Opposition against the Churches Judgment, set case, the Church
of Christ in some, or any matters of Conscience or Property (where a Difference
is) does give a positive Sentence or Judgment, which in it self is Just and
Reasonable. Our Opposer is for a Liberty for Believers to refuse to submit, on
account of not seeing it their Duty; that is to say, That Believers, who are
Members of Christ's Church, may refuse Submission to their Brethren in things
that are in themselves Just and Reasonable (according to the Law of Truth in
the Conscience) on the pretense, of not seeing it their Duty, which is a most
Blind and Irrational way of pleading and arguing; and we can make nothing of
it, but what tends to Confusion, Rebellion and Ranterism, and to a Contempt of
the Church of Christ, and an undervaluing of the Light of Truth and
Righteousness, which is in all true Believers ready to engage in a concord, in
whatsoever things are Honest, Just and Reasonable. And that which aggravates
the Offense of our Adversary is his Fathering this Contradiction and
Opposition, which he would make in the Church of Christ, (and this Liberty for
Believers refusing to submit to this Church) upon the Liberty that is in Christ
Jesus; which is as Absurd as to tell us, the Church of Christ may in some
things have a Liberty in Christ to give a Righteous Judgment, both in matters
of Conscience and Property; but Believers, who are Members of the same Church,
must have a Liberty in Christ to refuse to submit to the same Judgment; and not
only so, but a liberty in Christ to plead, That they see it not to be their
Duty, as the Reason of such their refusal. What a large extent would he make
this Liberty in Christ Jesus! and how Contradictory to it self! God preserve
his People from this Libertine Spirit.

But he has contrariwise stated the matter, which may be taken for both an
Answer and Confutation to himself, 1st part, page 43. where he confesses
plainly thus, viz. Some may run into Looseness, and say, The Light in
Conscience condemns me not, and therefore it is the care of Faithful Brethren
to appear as Watchmen over the Flock, WE SAY SO TOO, and those who approve
themselves Watchmen, will endeavor to convince such, who in very deed run into
Looseness, etc. that though they may pretend, the Light condemns them not, yet
that their Deeds are Evil, and that the Light does condemn the same, though
they may be hardened and see it not.

Note, Now he has granted some to be Watchmen over the Flock, and their care as
such, and that the Blindness and false Liberty is placed upon such as run into
Looseness, and become hardened, and not upon any Innocent Members of the true
Church, or tenderhearted Believers, whose Liberty is in Christ Jesus; and this
Blindness and Hardness cannot excuse them in Sin or Evil, whether in Omission
or Commission, because the Light does condemn the same, and both their Blindness
and Hardness being effects of their disobedience to the Light of Christ in
them, Ignorance can be no excuse for Sin, when it self is Sin; as also W. R.
confesses, page 52. That the Church of Christ has Power to Admonish the
Parties differing to their Duty, and if they refuse to take their wholesome
Counsel, may then declare such Unworthy of their Society; whereby he has
granted the Churches Power, both of Admonition and giving Judgment against
those that refuse the Churches wholesome counsel and admonition; so that it is
plain, that Power of Judgment and Rejection he has granted the Church, in which
he has granted the Authority and Government pleaded for by us (for Power of
Coertion or Force we claim not) and this leaves no room for W. R. or any else,
to plead a Liberty in Christ for the Members of his Church, either for not
seeing it their Duty to practice such Counsel, or for refusing to submit on
that score.

Disaffect. XXV.
W. R. 1st part, page 52. For any Members under the Notion of the Church to
say, We have Power to decide and remove these things, without the assent of the
Parties differing, is an Usurpation; and that the Assent of Parties was not
intended by the Approvers of the said Book of Government, is evident to us, for
that there is not in any part of the said Book one Tittle to that purpose.

Here are two gross Untruths in this Passage, insinuated against us.

First, [ Without the Assent of the Parties Differing] When did any of us so
pretend a Power to remove the Difference? We cannot force Unjust and Injurious
Persons to make Restitutions for Wrongs done, but leave them to the outward
Power to subject them, to common Law and Justice, though we have Power by
Persuasive Means with those among us, who design nothing but Justice and Right
to all men, that they may do accordingly.

Secondly, That the Assent of Parties was not intended by the Approvers of the
said Book; is a very gross Abuse and Untruth; for it is most acceptable to us,
as we are a People, for Peace and Concord, to have all Parties differing among
us, assent to a just decision, and fair end of the Differences, by faithful and
competent Persons among our selves, to prevent their going to Law one with
another.

Thirdly, And if the very words [ Assent of Parties differing, to the Decision
of honest men in the Church, skilled in the Matters] be not expressed, yet we
take the thing to be all along employed in the said Book, viz. the assent of the
Parties differing to be concluded by some or other Judicious Persons in the
Church, and not to go to Law before Unbelievers; there is much in the said Book
will prove that their Submission in that case is urged.

His telling us, page 50. That the Author to the Hebrews speaks nothing of the
Churches Authority as Judges, is still to lessen the Churches Authority,
contrary to the Doctrine of Christ and his Apostle, viz. If he will not hear
the Church, let him be unto thee as an Heathen Man, Mat. 18. And The Spiritual
man judges all things; the Saints shall judge the World; Know ye not, that we
shall judge Angels? how much more things that pertain to this Life? 1 Cor. 6.
And wherein judge Angels, but in higher things than those of this Life?
therefore the Church is not to be denied a Judgment in those lower things
pertaining to this Life.

Disaffect. XXVI
W. R. page 48, 49. Mixed and Uncertain Assemblies, as to Number and
Qualification, may call themselves the Church, and under that Notion, give
forth Orders, Rules and Sentences, telling the rest of those whm they account
their Fellow Members, It Is your Duty to Obey, though you pretend you see it NOT.

Observe.
This we take to be not only a slight, but an Unjust and Implicit Charge upon
our Assemblies; therefore we demand Proof of any Assembly or Assemblies among
us, that under the Notion of the Church, have given forth Orders and Rules in
these Terms, as telling the rest of their Fellow Members, IT IS YOUR DUTY TO
OBEY THOUGH YOU PRETEND YOU SEE IT NOT. We dare say, this is a Forgery of his
own contrivance: When did any of our Assemblies so tell their Fellow Members?

It Is to be noted, that in such places where he in his Book allows not the
Church of Christ power to judge, or to give positive sentence in cases of
Difference, nor yet so much as to choose or set a part any for the persons
differing to decide their Differences, but only those at variance to make their
own choice, as in page 53. Herein he has endeavored wholly to make void all
Church Government and Authority, allowing more Power to the persons differing,
yea, to the person offending, than to the Church; the person offending to make
his own choice as well as the person offended; whenas the Offender, if one
unwilling to make Restitution for the Injury done, he will be apt to choose some
partial persons of his own party, to serve his own turn, if he can; which no
ways can tend to bring the difference to a fair and just end. Now to allow
such Offender an equal power of choice, is not according to Christ's Doctrine,
Mat. 18. where the Brother offended was to make his Complaint, and tell the
offender his fault, who refusing to hear, then two Witnesses, and for want of
hearing them, lastly, to tell the Church; and if he would not hear the Church,
then to count him as an Heathen man, etc. So the innocent offended Brother was
to make his choice; and had an esteem of the Churches Authority, and right of
Judgment in the case of Offenses, which such Injurious offending Brother had
not, and therefore to be rejected, as an Heathen man, chiefly for refusing to
hear the Church; and herein consists the Nature of the Controversy between Us
and W. R. We take part with the Innocent Brother, that is injured and offended,
who is willing to bring his Case before the Church of Christ, and to hear the
Church as in point of Judgment, and as knowing his presence in the midst: But
W. R. plainly appears to take part with that injurous offending Brother that
will not hear the Church.

And as for the Power, W. R. grants it, any Members of the Church for deciding
and removing Differences only when given by the assent of Parties: He
confesses that any Heathen man might claim the like Power, p. 53. What Power
then has he here allowed the Members of Christ's Church in these cases more
than to any Heathen man? But mark, if this Gainsaying Spirit be not drawing
back among the Heathen, that has so little esteem of the Church of Christ; but
he often contradicts himself, confessing to diverse Truths against his own
Oppositions; so that the Light sometimes interposeth, though Darkness has mo^^
prevailed in his Work.

Disaffect. XXVII.
W. R. third part, page 64. Christ's Doctrine well described by his Sermon in
the Mount, Mat. 5. and Chap. 6. wherein there is not the least Tittle to
countenance this Sentence, that the positive sentence or decission of the
Church in matters of Conscience may be obligatory on Believers.

Observe.
His main Work is still to Invalid the Authority and Sentence of the true
Church, whereby here he would set Believers in opposition to the Church, as not
obliged by the Churches Sentence without exception, let it be as really from
Christ, and as true, just and reasonable as may be; but if the Sentence or
Decision of the Church in matters of Conscience be no ways obliging on
Believers, then why has he told us of the Counsel and Admonition of the Church,
which they that will not submit unto, are to be rejected by the Church? His
Inconsistences and Self-contradictions are numerous; and what was that counsel
which he that did but say to his Brother Racha should be in danger of? as
Christ said, Mat. 5. 22. Was not this counsel in the Church of Christ under the
Gospel, as well as in the Church of the Jews under the Law? But still our
Adversary proceeds in his Inconsistency.

Disaffect. XXVIII.
W. R. page 64. third part, Nay, in that very Case, Mat. 18. 15, 16. where it is
said, If thy Brother trespass against thee, go tell him his Faults; if he hear
thee not, take with thee one or two; if he hear not them, tell it to the
Church; if he refuse to hear the Church, let him be unto thee as an Heathen
man. The Scripture does not say, that Sentence ought to be obligatory on all
other Members of the Church of Christ (who might be no way concerned either in
the Admonition or Sentence) to look upon him as an Heathen man; but it says,
Let him be unto Thee as an Heathen Man.

Observe.
This we do except against, as unsound Doctrine; the sentence in this place
against that Brother that refuses to hear the Church, was Christ's; and the
offense for which he is sentenced as an Heathen man, is both against a Brother
in particular, and against the Church, in his refusing to hear the Church; and
therefore seeing its Christ's Admonition and Sentence, to let him be to thee as
an Heathen man; how could the rest of the Members of the Church of Christ look
on him otherwise than as an Heathen man, having refused to hear the Church?
Strange Doctrine! that one Member of the Church of Christ should have occasion,
and that according to Christ's Doctrine, to look upon a Brother so offending
against him and the Church, as an Heathen man, and yet other Members of the
Church of Christ not to look upon him as an Heathen man; what then may they
look upon him as a good Christian contrary to Christ's own Sentence? And what
though there be other Members of the Church of Christ, that are not immediately
concerned in the Admonition or Sentence against the Offender, being not present
in the Church when he refused to hear them? Does it therefore follow, that they
must be so far divided in their Sense and Judgment, either from the Sentence of
Christ, the Sense of the Church (to whom complaint was made against the Brother
Trespassing) or from the Sense of the Brother offended, as to look on him not
as Christ, or the Offended Brother, or the Church (whom he refused to hear)
have judged of him, that is, as an Heathen Man? What Confusion would this make
in the Church, and Contradiction to Christ's own Sentence? Much might be said
to show the Absurdity of this; but W. R. in his own contradiction has granted,
3d part, page 36. viz. Since the case is stated between two Brethren, and that
on an orderly Proceeding and Admonition of the Church, the Sentence for not
hearing the Church, is, Let him be unto thee as an Heathen Man.

Here he has granted both Authority, Order and Government in the Church of
Christ, in respect to such Judicial proceeding as is confirmed by the Sentence
of Christ himself. This is the man whose Work is, much of it, to oppose
Church Government, and to render the Sentence or Decision of the Church of
Christ not obligatory on Believers: We have rarely known any of Truth's
Adversaries more confounded in their Attempts against the Truth and People of
God, than he is; howbeit, we will grant him, that nothing that is Outward,
whether it be Sentence, Judgment, Order or Decree in the Church of Christ, that
can be a Bond on such to forsake Sin, and embrace the Truth, as are run into
Looseness, Evil Deeds, and are become hardened, as he says, page 43. 3d part,
Until their Consciences be awakened to hear Gods Witness in themselves. This is
true, but then its no Proof against Church Government, or that the just
Sentence, Admonition or Judgment of the Church of Christ is no ways binding on
Believers, who are Members of the same Church, but only that they are not
obliging to such as are hardened through Sin, that they see not their Duty,
whose part our Adversary has taken, and their cause he has pleaded against
Church Government, and against the Authority, Sentence, Judgment, Outward
Directions, etc. of the Church.

Again, W. R. grants, 1st part, page 48. That though we find the Author to the
Hebrews, chap. 13. v. 7. saying on this wise, Remember them which have the Rule
over you; yet he does not say, Such who had the Rule were the Church; but
describes them to be such who had spoken unto them the Word of God; so that if
any Authority be given to any to Rule as Members of Christ's Body, it appears
from the Scriptures of Truth to be unto such who had spoken the Word of God
unto them, over whom they had the Rule: Thus far W. R. Whereby he has fairly
given away his Cause; for here he has granted Authority of Rule or Government
given to such Members of Christ as had spoken the Word of God unto them, over
whom they had the Rule; whence it follows, that all such Members of Christ's
Body, whether Elders or Overseers, etc. as have the Word of God to speak, or a
Testimony from him committed to them to bear to others, may have a share and
right in Rule and Government in the Church of Christ, with respect to them,
unto whom they speak the Word of God; and this may extend to as many faithful
Members as grow up in Truth, and unto a Testimony, so as to have the Word of
God to speak. But then we ask, If such be not of the Church, seeing he seems
not to own them that had the Rule to be the Church? What! were only the
Hearers, and not the Preachers the Church? however, W. R. has granted Rule to
the Preachers (which is not to be tied up to the First Preachers, but also to
extend to Others whom God shall raise up, and fit for his Service) though he
has opposed and gainsay'd many faithful Ones in his Book, yet he grants such
Preachers to be Members of Christ's Body; however, it appears, that the
Inferior Members, or Weaker part of the Church, owed a Submission to those
Superior in the Church, obey them that have the Rule over you, etc. yet all in
the Lord in the Light and clear sight of their Duty, in Humbleness of Mind,
submitting themselves one to another, as the Primitive Christians did: Also,
the Members of the true Church were not come to the same Growth, to the same
Dignity, to the same Degree of Judgment, to the same Measure of the Gift of
Christ, nor to the same Stature in him; some were more Eminently dignified for
the Service of the Church, than others were, and accordingly were required to
be helpful to others, and a suitable Submission one to another, according to
the heavenly Order of the Gospel, Church and Body of Christ, and diversities of
Gifts, Operations and Degrees of Growth through the same holy Spirit, do not
oppose nor contradict, nor clash one against another; and even they that were
appointed Elders and Overseers in his Church, were to hold fast the faithful
Word, as they had been taught, that they might be able by sound Doctrine, both
to exhort and convince the Gainsayers.

Moreover, the Church of Christ, and every faithful Member thereof, has Power
to give Testimony, absolute Judgment and Sentence against all Loose, Disorderly
and Scandalous Ways and Conversations, when duly manifest among any
Professors of Truth, which dishonor our holy Profession, and let up a Spirit
of Ranterism and false Liberty, and these ought to be testified against, judged
and condemned; and it is not justly in the Power of any Offender, in those
cases, to make their own choice of any Person whatsoever, to evade or make void
any such Judgment or Sentence; nor ought the Offender to be at his own choice
in such criminal Cases of Looseness, and Disorderly walking, but the Universal
Judgment of Truth to be set over the Transgressors Head, in a Gospel Way and
Order, on a Judicial hearing and discovery of the Offense; for the Church of
Ephesus was commended, in not bearing them that were Evil, and hating the Deeds
of the Nicolaitans, Rev. 2. 2, 6. But the Church in Pergamos was blamed for
having them that held the Doctrine of Balaam, and the Doctrine of the
Nicolaitans, which tended to Ranterism, Fornication or Community of Women,
(which was to be judged out with the Light of Truth forever) see Eusebius. Hist.
l. 3. c. 26.

W. R. is Impertinent also in his Gainsaying, where in page 53. 1st part, he
has these words, viz.

Disaffect. XXIX.
It appears evidently to us, that preaching up Obedience to that wherein the
Conscience through Faith is not satisfied, is a handling the Word of God
deceitfully.

This, as it is generally stated (and as it is designed) is not only unfound,
but a kind of an Implicit smiting at those whom he writes against, and tends to
make void that first preaching of the Gospel to People Unconvinced and
Unsatisfied in their Consciences concerning the most Essential Truths relating
to Salvation, as that of the Light, the Cross of Christ, the Narrow Way, being
Crucified to the World and the Vain Fashions thereof, etc. which are preached
to many, before they are satisfied or convinced in their Consciences to come
into Obedience in these things, yet these things must be preached, that they may
be convinced and converted too; and we have a Ministry from Christ for that
end, and as we have received Mercy, we faint not, but preach the Gospel in much
Boldness and Assurance in Christ of the good Effects thereof, and are one with
the Apostle's Testimony, as having renounced the Hidden things of Dishonesty,
not walking in Craftyness, not handling the Word of God deceitfully, but by
Manifestation of the Truth, commending our selves to every man's Conscience in
the sight of God, 2 Cor. 4. 2. Our preaching is to convince the Conscience, and
not to leave it dark, or unsatisfied in that wherein the Duty of Obedience
stands. A Blind Conscience is Convincible by Spiritual and Effectual Preaching,
which has the Evidence of the Spirit of Christ in it, making its way into the
Conscience, if not wholly hardened and seared through Rebellion and
Stubbornness; even Gainsayers are to be Exhorted and Convinced by sound
Doctrine, Titus 1. 9.

Disaffect. XXX.
W. R. 1st part, page 53, 54. proceeds thus, viz. We have been informed, That
We are Dark and Blind, even by such who tell us, They do see; publicly
Preaching on this wise, If you do not see your selves, you must then follow us
that do see; yet we cannot on that foot embrace such Doctrine, lest, like Blind
Men, we fall all together into the Ditch.

Observe.
This is such a Reflection upon some public Preachers and Preaching, as tends
to Scandalize our Friends and Meetings; as if still our Design were to preach
up a Blind Obedience, and an Implicit Faith, and to Impose on others to follow
us therein; and this he often and much harps upon, but tells us not who they
are that thus preach; for we do not approve of such preaching, for any to
follow us in their Blindness; and though it is probable, some may have publicly
commended the Example of the Faithful to be followed by others, yet not
Exclusive of all sight and sense in the Hearers and Followers of their
Examples; for our Travel and Desires have always been and are, that the Eyes of
Peoples Understandings may be opened and enlightened, first to see their way,
and how to follow the Footsteps of Christ's Flock, in his Divine Light and
Faith.

Disaffect. XXXI.
W. R. Sect. 8. page 61. first part, G. F. has taken upon him to give forth
Directions and Instructions to others: and page 61, 62. Many professing Truth
do look upon G. F. as one whom the Lord in these Latter Days has raised up
and set in the like place amongst the Children of Light, as Moses was, etc. --
and that whosoever shall oppose him, shall never prosper, which we are
persuaded has so overawed MANY, that they become Sacrificers of their own
Sense and Understanding to the will of man: and p. 62. We firmly believe, he
will become Despised and Vile before the People, etc. and page 86. A slighting
of G. F's Rules, Methods and Orders, with respect to Church Government, is (in
their Sense) a slighting the Cause of God: and p. 91. If a Conscientious
slighting of G. F's pretended Motions, with respect to Forms of
Church Government, imposed contrary to Faith and a Charitable Belief, that he
intended not to urge his Papers relating thereto on any of Gods faithful People
with Severity, etc.

Observe.
We are very sensible of our Adversary's great Envy against G. F. and his great
Abuse and Scandalous work in his Book, to render him Odious and Vile; but he
has known better things, and given another manner of Testimony on G. F's
behalf, than now he has done, slighting his Directions and Instructions without
Distinction, as having taken it upon him to give them forth from his pretended
Motions, not owning him now as a Servant of Christ, or moved by him at all
therein; but only renders him one assuming to himself a Power to direct others.

Time was when W. R. gave a better account of G. F. witness an Epistle, dated,
London, the 26th of the 3d Month, 1673. and subscribed by Thomas Briggs,
William Rogers, Arthur Eastmead, John Rance, Charles Marshall, Morgin Watkins,
Jasper Batt, William Gibson, Samuel Cater, Stephen Crisp, John Moon, William
Penn, Robert Barclay, George Whitehead, Thomas Green, and above Twenty more of
the People called Quakers, at a Meeting at Anne Traver's House at Horslie-down,
the day and year abovesaid, wherein William Rogers and the rest do thus
testify concerning G. F. viz.

DEar Friends, let the Authority of God's Power, heavenly and Peaceable Wisdom
be Eyed in all your Assemblies, that the Government of Truth and Righteousness
may be Exalted over all, that true Judgment and Mercy may have their place. --
And though a General Care be not laid upon every Member, touching the good
Order and Government in the Churches Affairs, nor have many traveled therein,
yet the Lord has laid it more upon some, in whom he has opened Counsel for
that end (and particularly in our dear Brother, and God's faithful Labourer G.
F.) for the help of many; and God has in his Wisdom afforded those Helps and
Governments in the Churches, which are not to be despised, being in Subjection
to Christ, the one Head and Lawgiver, answering his Witness in ALL, and so all
necessary Counsel, Admonitions or Testimonies that have been given forth and
received in the Universal Spirit of Life and Unity have their Service for God,
in subjection to his Light, and subservency to (and in order to answer) the
great Rule and Law of the Spirit of Life, as proceeding from it; and they that
are spiritual, will acknowledge those things spoken or written from this
Spirit, and for this end, to be the Requirings of the Lord. [Thus far the said
Epistle.]

Wherein W. R. and the rest have plainly confessed, First, To that Care the
Lord has laid on some, with respect to good Order and Government in his
Churches.

And, Secondly, To the Counsel which the Lord has opened for that end,
particularly in G. F.

And, Thirdly, That G. F. is therein owned to be a Dear Brother, and God's
faithful Labourer.

Fourthly, That God has in his Wisdom afforded those Helps and Governments in
the Churches, which are not to be despised, etc. which things do Answer,
Confute and Condemn much of W. R's Book against Church Government, Outward
Methods, Orders and Rules, etc. with respect to Church Government, which he
calls G. F's Methods and Orders, page 86. 1st part; but though in his Letter to
G. F. cited in his 4th part, page 93. he tells of some New Prescriptions, which
they cannot embrace for Conscience Sake, and which G. F. is accounted either
the Author or Countenancer of. Howbeit, W. R. produces not any New
Prescription, Methods, Rules, Orders, and Forms of Church Government, set up
and imposed by G. F. at his pretended Motion, and that contrary to Faith, since
the date of the said Epistle of the 3d Month, 1673. and signed by W. R. etc.
(he having justified G. F. in his Service until that time) Now he should have
produced some such new Orders and Forms of Church Government, introduced among
us since that time, to prove his Charge of Apostasy and Innovation against G.
F. and those he calls His Party, or otherwise have forborne such Unjust
Judgment. And comparing W. R's Book against G. F. and Forms of
Church Government, with the said Epistle, on behalf of both, it will plainly
appear, that W. R. is guilty of Apostasy, and that his Book is a Scandalous
Innovation against the Truth, and People of God called Quakers.

And further, W. R. his opposing Outward Rules, Orders, Precepts, etc. with
respect to Church Government, appears Contradictory to what his Honorable
Friend J. S. has granted, as is cited, p. 87. 1st part, viz. That John Story
took occasion to give his Sense touching such things which G. F. had given
forth, on this wise, viz. That he did not believe that G. Fox intended any such
thing, that they (meaning his Papers directed to the Churches) should with
Severity be urged upon any of God's Faithful People, but as Instructions or
Directions, commending them to the Churches, leaving the Effect thereof to God,
and his leading Grace in his People, to make use thereof, as he should manifest
a need of such Direction, Counsel or Advice. [Thus far J. S.] whose Sense
herein appears contrary to W. R's, both in respect to G. F. and to those
Outward Instructions or Directions: J. S. granting also, That God and his
Leading Grace in his People might lead them to make Use thereof, as he should
manifest a need of such Counsel or Advice; which Answers and Confutes W. R. in
his opposing Outward Directions, Methods and Forms relating to
Church Government: Thus his Pleading and Advocating on his honorable Friends
behalf, is run to a Contradiction to them and their Sense, as well as to
himself, in many things, and that on the same Objections he makes to prove G.
F. and others Apostates; and its very much if he do not fly out against J. S.
and J. W. as Apostates also, if so be they should but plainly oppose the
Unsoundness and Inconsistency of his Work; which to Evince farther on the
point, observe what follows, viz.

Disaffect. XXXII.
W. R. page 73. first part, We now appeal unto every Understanding, Ingenious
and Impartial Reader, whether since the Labor of the Apostles of Christ was to
draw the outward Jew off from the Observation of these Ordinances, which were
established by the appointment of God himself, having exalted instead thereof
the Word nigh in the Heart, and Law written therein -- under the New Covenant,
which was not to be like unto the Old, can consist with the tenor of the New
Covenant, for any to attempt the establishment or giving forth of outward
Orders, Prescriptions, Sentences or Decrees to be on that Foot a Bond upon the
Consciences of those who have believed in the Everlasting Light, especially if
they are of the Gentiles stock.

Observe.
His principal Objection against outward Order, Prescriptions, Sentences,
Decree, etc. in the Church of Christ lies in the difference between the Old
Covenant and the New.

Answer; God had his Ministers, Officers and Messengers both under the Old and
New Covenant, and also Outward Instructions and Doctrines of Faith and Practice
under both, though the New far excel the Old in Spirituality and Brightness,
yet there was a Condescension to low Estates under both, to believing Jews and
Gentiles, even in outward Ministries, Helps and Services, but all center in the
Inward Life and Substance, Christ's Ministers both Immediately and
Instrumentally, both in Doctrine of Faith and Practice, both with respect to
divine Faith and a Christian Conversation, good Order and Society under his
Government in his Church, and therefore all the Effects and Precepts of the New
Covenant are not confined within to an Invisibility, because that Covenant is
inward, and the Law of it first written in the Heart, we cannot reduce and
confine our Assemblies, Societies and Christian - Counsel and Admonitions
(which many have need of) all to an Invisibility, because the New Covenant is
Invisible; for Visible and Religious Actions, Good Instructions and
Conversations outward, proceed from the Law of the New Covenant in the Heart
(being of the Nature thereof) and that for the Universal benefit and help of
others; and such as own not this, cannot endure sound Doctrine, especially the
Practical Doctrine.

Disaffect. XXXIII.
W. R. page 75. 1st part, We have no ground either from the Word of the Lord,
the Appearance of Christ, or from the Scriptures of Truth, since the appearance
of Christ in the Flesh, to expect that any should be invested with Power from
on High to establish such things relating to the Conscience, (i. e. outward
Orders, Sentences, Decrees, etc.) much less to expect that the Children of
Light under the New Covenant should be led by the Eternal Spirit and Word in
the Heart unto such a Conformity.

Observe.
This still relates to his General Objection against outward Rules and
Directions, Form of Church Government, Discipline, etc. but is still contrary
to the said Epistle signed by him, Arthur Eastmead, and others, at Anne
Traver's, 1673. as also Contradictory to what he himself has granted, p. 23. 3d
part, in these words, viz. NOT THAT I WOULD BE HEREBY UNDERSTOOD, THAT ITS NOT
NECESSARY TO BE IN THE EXERCISE OF OUTWARD ORDER, WITH RESPECT TO THAT GOSPEL
DISCIPLINE WHICH BECOMES THE CHURCH OF CHRIST; Thus W. R. has granted both
Outward Order and Gospel Discipline, as becoming the Church of Christ, and as
necessary to be Exercised; whereby he has still fairly given away his Cause
against Church Government, and the outward Methods and Forms thereof: As also,
observe further how manifestly he has overturned his Work by what follows, and
therein behold W. R's Self-Confutation in his own words, 3d part, p. 82, 83.
viz. I doubt not but there are many, who are ready to conclude, That an
Universal Unity ought to be established in the Churches, by the Assistance of
outward Instruments, that as we are Members of one Body, so we may not only be
One in Faith, One in Doctrine, but also One in Practice, with Relation to
Discipline, Order and Outward Forms of Government; My Soul should rejoice to
see that day, wherein we might be all so led by the Appearance of Christ's
Spirit in us, under his Government, which ought to be exalted over all, as that
THIS ONENESS might thereby be witnessed amongst all the Families of God's
People at this day. Thus far W. R. We need not Explicate upon this Passage, its
so plain and Evident a Confutation of the greatest part of his Gainsaying, and
most general Objections against us, in relation to Church Government, and Order
among us the People called Quakers.

Disaffect. XXXIV
W. R. 1st part, page 72. Moreover, it is observeable, if Report be true, this
Doctrine has of late been Exalted, No Unity but IN Conformity.

Observe.
Here in pursuance of Report, as elsewhere of his Jealousies, Doubts and
Fears, he brings an Ambiguous Doctrine, as Reported, which as its laid down and
Charged, without Distinction, we own not, and do question the Truth of the
Report, let him place it where he can.

Disaffect. XXXV. Of Women's Meetings.
W. R. 1st part, page 63. There is amongst many Friends a Difference touching
the Meetings of Women separate from the Men.

Observe.
Not amongst many Friends does a Difference appear; but amongst a few Heady
Rash Spirits, who despise those Meetings, and the Service of them, calling them
an Image, an Idol, etc. but W. R. appears more warey in this point, in not so
directly and absolutely opposing the Meetings themselves, as some have done,
but only giving a History of the different Senses and Jealousies of some about
them, as also his Friends J. W. and J. S. write more Cautiously in this point
of Women's Meetings, in these words, viz. That it is not agreeable with the Line
of Truth to oppose others in the Exercise and appointed Service of the said
Meetings, who being Conscious therein, etc. And if it shall please the Lord to
manifest a Service in those Meetings in the Countries, as well as Cities, the
same Integrity toward God, which has dwelt with us these many Years past, we
believe will become a Bond on us to join Hand and Heart with others our
Brethren and Sisters therein, etc. Thus far J. W. and J. S. 4th part, page 38.

Herein they appeared more moderate than some that take their parts, who
Oppose, Contemn and Vilify those Meetings.

Page 64. In process of Time some Friends thought it necessary that Marriages
might be proposed to the VVomens-Meetings, but yet several Friends in diverse
Counties would not assent that they should be concerned in Marriages; at length
several of those who appeared for those distinct Meetings to be concerned,
said, The Faithful see a Necessity and Cause to propose Marriages to the
faithful Men and Women's Meetings; This being uttered with those of Party with
G. F. etc.

Observe.
Many faithful Friends, who are not for Party for Man, but Followers of Christ,
do see a real Convenience and Service in proposing Marriages both to the
Faithful Men and Faithful VVomens Meetings distinctly; and because our
Adversary gives us no valid Reason nor Proof to the contrary, we shall only at
present cite the Reason given in an Epistle from the Quarterly Meeting in
Suffolk, dated, Mendlesham, the 29th day of the 7th Month, 1674. and directed,
To be read at the several Monthly Meetings, and VVomens Meetings, and at every
particular Meeting of Friends in Suffolk (in which Epistle our dear Friend
Robert Duncon, and many other good Friends were concerned) their Advice and
Reason given in the said Epistle follows in these words, viz.

ANd as at our Men Friends Meetings we have advised together in the Wisdom of
God to order all things, so we shall also be ready and willing to confer with
our Women Friends, who feel it laid upon them by the Lord to meet together, and
to take care especially in the Household of the Faithful; and we have real Unity
with their so Meeting together, and taking care in the Church of Christ; and
also in those Parts where God has put it into our Women Friends to meet
together, we desire that those Friends that have Intentions to Marry together,
do acquaint our Women Friends with their Intentions of Marriage, -- that our
Women Friends may ask Questions, that they may also be satisfied, as is but
Reasonable, that Women Friends should be satisfied in this matter, as well as
the Men, seeing we cannot make a Marriage without a Woman, and that Women are
Members of the true Church, and that Women are Competent Witnesses in the Case,
etc.

Also, we may add another Passage, being the 9th Article of Advice, given by
George Whitehead, Robert Duncon, Charles Harris and John Crook, dated,
Hartford, the 18th of the 1st Month, 1678/9. For the Monthly and Quarterly
Meeting at Hartford, for a quiet and peaceable Management of Truth's Affairs,
therein the Advice is this, viz. That all Women Friends, who are or may be
fully persuaded in their own Minds that they have a Service in the Church in
Meeting distinct from the Men, be left free therein, without Interruption,
Molestation or Reflection upon them, yet so as not to Limit or Restrain them
(or any of them) from coming among the Men Friends, if they shall find Freedom
and Service in the Lord.

Disaffect. XXXVI.
W. R. page 64, 65. 1st Part, Many Friends Jealous, that a Submission was not
only intended to Meetings of Men, but Women's Meetings also, and therefore
FRIENDS, who in Simplicity submitted to the latter Meetings (as supposing Women
in some Cases fitter to pry into the Necessities of the Poor than Men) did at
length begin to be Jealous, that the words of the Prophet Isaiah, chap. 3. 12.
were again fulfilled in our Age, As for my People, Children are their
Oppressors, and Women Rule over them.

Observe.
Friends, who in Simplicity assented to the Women's Meetings, without Exception,
are charged with this Jealousy of Women Ruling over them, which is a Notorious
Untruth and Scandal against many honest-hearted Friends, who never entertained
any such Jealousy against the Women's Meetings; but in the Love of God do
encourage them and their Wives in frequenting them, with respect to their
Religious and Christian Service, in Submission to the Royal Law of Love; and
therefore the Jealousy pretended of such Submission and Rule, as is
Insinuated, is Groundless, and a false Imagination; for the Submission
intended, in both our faithful Men and Women's Meetings is to the Power and
Spirit of Christ Jesus in them, and not to a Rule or Dominion of mere
Creatures, either Men or Women; neither has he proved the said Jealousy (
against our Women Friends and their Meetings) reasonable by telling of some
rendering such Dark Spirits, as opposed proposing Marriages to the faithful
Women's Meetings; for the Opposition of some, both to That and the Meetings
themselves, has sufficiently discovered the Darkness of their Spirits, as W. R.
has shown his dark Jealousies, and taken part with Opposers herein, contrary
to what J. W. and J. S. have confessed, That ' it is not agreeable with the Line
of Truth to oppose others in the Exercise and appointed Service of those
Meetings, as settled and agreed upon; and then if the Opposition be not
agreeable with the Line of Truth, it must needs proceed from the Darkness of
their Spirits.

Disaffect. XXXVII.
W. R. page 65. This Jealousy increasing, many of those who were contented,
that Women should hold their Meeting apart from the Men, to take care of the
Poor in some Cases, became less affected to such Meetings, lest instead of
being Servants to the Poor for the Truth's-sake, and taking that weight and
burden of that Care from the Men, they should become Rulers over both Men and
Women -- The Reasonableness of the said Jealousy, etc.

Observe.
A shameful Jealous Story still, and Scandalous to many who owned the Erecting
those Meetings; and it is not only shameful, but unmanly, to render so many
such, so Disaffected and Jealous of the Women in their Meetings becoming Rulers
over both Men and Women; he might as well tell us, that many Faithful Men are
Jealous of their Innocent Wives, and afraid they should Rule over them; no less
Ridiculous and Absurd is W. R's Jealous Story against the Women's Meetings. But
seeing W. R. has vented so much Jealousy against our Women Friends, and their
Meetings, it may not be amiss to insert upon what Terms they were encouraged
and assented to; to which purpose, see a Paper by G. F. and another annexed,
wherein some of W. R's Friends are concerned. Dear Friends;
TO whom is my Love, in that which changes not: It would do well, and be of
Service for you to have a Women's Meeting, as they have in other parts, that the
Women may come into the practice of the pure Religion, which is to visit the
Fatherless and Widows, and to see that all be kept from the Spots of the
World; and so the Lord Jesus redeeming you by his Spirit, out of the old Adam
in the Fall, into the Image of God's Righteousness and Holiness, that Man was
in before he fell, in which you are all Helps-meet to the Men, in
Righteousness, and Truth, and Holiness, and Justice, and the Wisdom of God; And
ye may assist and inform the Men of Necessities, in what you cannot do your
selves: For Man and Woman being both in the Power and Seed of Christ, they are
both Helps-meet. And so it would do well for the Women to have a Distinct
Meeting by themselves, as it is in other places, and to see that nothing be
lacking, then all is well amongst you, that you all may be Perfect and Complete
in Christ Jesus your Head, holding him, from whence you have Understanding and
Wisdom, to order all things to his Praise and Glory: And when you do see that
all is well, and nothing is lacking, to honor* God, that all may be kept out
of that which dishonors him, and all may be kept in their Testimony of
Jesus, and to see that nothing is lacking outwardly in God's House, in his
Family, who have the Mind of Christ, To do good unto all, especially to the
Household of Faith. And when you see that all is well, then whose Mouth the Lord
opens, in the Women's Meetings, to praise and confess him, to his Glory, they
are to be Obedient, as it is in other Women's Meetings; So once a Month to have
a Women's Meeting in the County, Town, or other places convenient; then the
other Neighboring Women may come and go Home, they Meeting together about the
Tenth Hour of the Day; and so they may keep a little Stock among themselves, to
help the Poor, and them that be in Necessity; and what they cannot do
themselves, they may inform the Men, of all the poor Widows, and poor Men's
Children that are fit to go to be Apprentices and to Services to Friends, that
they may be trained up in the fear of God, and in the New Covenant, that they
may be the Children of the New Covenant, where all may come to know the Lord,
who is blessed for evermore; Amen.

So no more, but my Love in the blessed Seed, Christ Jesus, in whom you have
all Wisdom of God, to order all things to his Glory, by which they were made.

G. F.

At the Quarterly Meeting at Kendall, the 6th day of the 8th Month, 1671. this
Paper before being read, and joined with, with an unanimous Consent, to be put
in Practice, as hereafter does appear by the Names hereafter Subscribed.
IT is further agreed upon, that this Paper be read in every particular
Meeting, that the Women Friends, who are faithful, may be stirred up to a
serious Consideration in the Light of the Lord, to Examine themselves, and feel
his Requirings, and so to answer the Lord with Diligence and Willingness of
Mind, that so every one that profess the living Truth of God, may be
serviceable Instruments in his hand, to extol his Name, and to perfect his
Praise, in our day and time. And in the Women's Assembling together, to see and
consider, that all Women, Young and Old, who profess the Truth, do walk therein
in good Order, in Modesty and Moderation, in Chastity, out of the Customs and
Fashions of the World, and that nothing be lacking. And so herein the Females
will become very sensible of the Necessities of the Body; and so you will
Rejoice with them that do Rejoice, and Suffer with them that Suffer, and Mourn
with them that Mourn, who are not gotten out of the Bondage and Captivity of
the Adversary, and so be ready to lend unto such a helping hand, and encourage
every good Desire, and reprove the Wilful and Obstinate. And so every one
acting in the just Principle of God in our selves, Justice will be executed,
and Righteousness established; and herein Male and Female is serviceable in our
Place and Calling in this our Day and Generation. And so, all Women Friends,
who feel secret Desires in themselves to be Instruments of Good unto others,
let them meet together (as aforesaid) and in this Desire, certainly the Lord
will assist you in his Wisdom and Counsel, to act and speak that which is
convenient. And all the faithful Women, who are thus inclined and affected
herewith, may signify their Minds and Intents to the Men's Meetings, and so be
encouraged by us, whose Names are hereafter subscribed.

John Wilkinson, Henry Story, James Clarkson, Richard Pinder, Thomas Langhorn,
John Pearson, Bryan Lancaster, William Robinson, Thomas Atkinson, Miles
Bateman, Rich. Stephanson, Thomas Camm, Thomas Robertson, Peter Moser, Thomas
Airy, Henry Garnet, William Whitehead, Robert Thompson, Anthony Bownes. John
Airy, Robert Barrow, Richard Robinson, Edward Atkinson, Joseph Baines.




Disaffect. XXXVIII.
W. R. p. 66. Some who (as they may take it) seem Affecters of Government, and
Lovers of Pre-eminence, concluding, they are entered into the Possession of the
Power of God, because they take upon them to be Members of a Woman's Meeting.

Observe.
A Silly and Incredulous Story, still to render the Women Ridiculous; we do not
believe this Conclusion justly chargeable upon any who are really Members of
the Women's Meetings, or are esteemed meet to be conversant among them; but this
is his Dark way of smiting against some, frequently using the word [ Some] when
he proves not any one guilty; we have only his own Jealousy instead of Proof.

Disaffect. XXXIX.
W. R. Sect. 9. page 69. Unsavory Testimonies and Unchristian-like Discourses
in our Public Meetings so frequently, that it is thereby known both to
Professors and Profane, that the People called Quakers are divided.

Observe.
Here he has Scandalized the People called Quakers and their Meetings.

Query, What public Meetings are frequently thus served?

He has a very Fallacious way of writing, in laying his Charges and Accusations
so General, as in this Passage, that they tend to render the People called
Quakers and their Meetings suspicious of what he Charges; whereas there are
many, yea, the generality of our public Meetings are kept clear of any such
Unsavory Testimonies and Unchristianlike Discourses. Besides, it is not the
People called Quakers, that are divided, but some Backsliding, Loose,
Contentious Spirits are permitted to trouble them.

Disaffect. XL.
Concerning Tithes, 2d part, page 43. William Rogers puts an Objection thus,
viz. But what if it please the Supreme Powers to bestow on the National
Ministry Tithes, how prove you from the Scriptures, that those who freely pay
it do ill, or that it is not Lawful for them to receive it from such, and Sue
for it by the Law from others, who are not free to pay it?

W. R. Answ. We are so far from condemning all those who freely pay them, and
not as by Constraint, that we look upon it to be the Duty of all professing
Christianity, to Contribute toward the Outward Maintenance of such whom they
usually hear, and account to be the true Ministers of Christ (though not
obliged thereto by Law) in case they have need; and if the Charity of any
should be such, as to bestow upon them one Fifth Part, instead of a Tenth, far
be it from us to condemn it; but the Testimony of Truth is against all those
who under pretense of being Gospel Ministers have received Carnal Things, from
any who give them not freely, but by virtue of Humane Institution.

Observe.
We are wholly dissatisfied with this his Answer; it appears to us both Loose
and Fallacious: In the first part, he grants a freedom of paying Tithes, as
being far from condemning all who freely pay them without Constraint; in the
second place, he prevaricates, and alters from the Terms of the Objection, that
is, from freely paying Tithes, unto Contributing toward the outward
Maintenance, as being the Duty of all professing Christianity, with respect to
those they usually hear, and account the true Ministers; so that his Answer
looks with two Faces; as if it would please the Tythe-Payers, and yet save
himself from the Censure of Truth, by varying from Paying Tithes, which was
Jewish and Typical, to a Contribution toward an outward Maintenance or Relief
of Christ's Ministers, in case they have need, which is a Moral and Christian
Act, not limited to a particular Proportion or Number; whereas the Number Tenth
or Tithe was Jewish and Typical, not Moral nor Christian. But what Indifferent
or Judicious Readers can reasonably take W. R' s words [ Contribute toward the
outward Maintenance] to mean any other Maintenance than Tithes, the Objection
being wholly about Tithes, and he presenting a [ We] that are so far from
condemning those that so freely pay Tithes, that he grants them one Fifth part
instead of a Tenth, if the Charity of any be such as to bestow it on them they
account Ministers of Christ. Thus we judge he has declined our ancient
Testimony against Tithes, and shown his own Apostasy and Innovation, and given
away the true Christian Right and Freedom (under the Gospel) from that Yoke of
Tithes, which his Friends J. S. and J. W. have accounted Antichristian. But W.
R. though he has opposed Tithes as claimed, either upon a Divine Right or
Humane Institution under the Gospel, as in the same cap. 8. 2d part; yet in his
Answer he grants a Liberty for the freely paying them as an outward Maintenance
of their Ministers; which being compared with his Friends Testimony against
them, amounts to thus much, viz. Tithes in these days are an Antichristian
Yoke, yet nevertheless we are far from condemning any that will freely put
their Necks under it, and bear it without Compulsion or Sueing at Law; whereas
there is no need of Compelling them by Law, who can freely submit to bear that
Yoke; but we deny that Freedom assented to by W. R. it is not a true Christian
Freedom, nor a Freedom in Christ; before he had given the said Fallacious
Answer, he should have considered whether it would not thwart or lessen the
Testimony of J. W. and J. S. cited by him in his 4th part, page 39. in these
words, viz. As to Tithes, we can in Truth say, 'twas never so much as in our
Hearts to strengthen any in the Payment thereof, nor yet to weaken the Faith of
any, having a Testimony in our Hearts, that Tithes, as at this day paid, are
Antichristian.

But to W. R's Indulgence to the Blindness of those that freely pay Tithes to
them they account Christ's Ministers, in being so far from condemning them for
that Practice (or rather seeming to render it their Duty) This is to make void
Christ's Ministry and Testimony, to make it suit with men's Ignorance and
Blindness, and not to answer his Light in them; this is to leave them in
Blindness under their Priests, and not to bring them to Christ; this will never
be the way to convert People to Christ, the true Shepherd; but is to leave them
under their false Shepherds and Hirelings; had we taken this Course in
Preaching, what success should we have had in our Ministry? (How little has W.
R. ever known of the Work of Christ's Ministry? It Is a Question whether ever he
Converted one Soul to God in all his Days?) This kind of Liberty and Indulgence
to Ignorance and Blindness, yea, to Erroneous Practices on the one hand, and to
neglect what is good on the other, on pretense of not seeing it their Duty, as
also to make Opposition, Dissension and Separation, under pretense of Different
Gifts and Measures of Grace; this appears to us as the very Nature and Medul of
W. R's Contest, and a kind of Ranterism, which Solid Truth and Gospel Light can
never admit of; it appears to us no better than to preach thus to People, viz.
Far be it from us, to condemn you for doing Unchristian Practices, if you see
not your way out of them, you may continue in them; And (so by the Rule of
Contraries) far be it from us, to condemn you for omitting Christian Practices
(or to lay any good Commands or Things upon you) if you see them not your Duty;
or if the Light does not discover them to you, you may remain in Darkness, and
that uncondemned all your Days. Away with such Doctrine, or any thing of this
Tendence; Its to introduce Carelessness, and a False and Fleshly Liberty; on the
one hand, to leave People in Blindness and Ignorance, in Judaism and Popery; on
the other hand, to let loose a shunning the Cross, and to let up an
Apostatizing, Dividing, Rebellious Spirit, that will pretend want of Sight and
Conviction, or to a Differing Measure of Grace, against True Light, Grace and
Knowledge; all which is highly to pervert the Gospel, and oppose good Order,
and to make void the Divine Authority of the true Christian Ministry of the New
Testament, which was preached even to them that had the Vail over their Hearts
(that they saw not the end of things abolished) to bring them from under the
Law, and Ministration of Condemnation.

Disaffect. XLI.
Second part, page 27. He forms (or rather imagins) the Objection thus, viz. W.
R. You seem to exalt Knowledge as an excellent thing: How comes it then to
pass, that diverse amongst you called Quakers have Preached reflectingly on such
as are endued with Knowledge above many of their Brethren -- telling us, that
the Tree of Knowledge was not good for Food?

To which W. R. answers thus, ' It Is very true; However, that does not prove all
such Expressions according to Truth. page 28. As to the Tree of Knowledge of
good and evil, though the Scriptures do not positively declare whether it was
good for Food, or no, as in it self, yet it clearly imports that Adam's Sin in
eating thereof was the Sin of Rebellion. A Father may command his Child not to
eat an Apple, -- His rebellious eating, no Argument to prove the Apple in it
self not good for Food -- It may reasonably be concluded that there is no
ground to assert, that the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil was not good for
Food, as in it self: page 29. We know not on what Foot of Truth any one can
assert that the Tree of Knowledge is not good for Food.

Observe.
By all this opposition to the Doctrine, that the Tree of Knowledge of good and
evil is not good for Food; W. R. seems to account it good for Food, because
that Tree in it self, or in its own Nature is good; and so it might; and yet it
follows not that it was good for Food, for the Soul to feed upon in a state of
Innocence. And we may presume that W. R. may remember that it is no Innovation
in Doctrine, to say, that the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil was not good
for Food. Have not some ancient and faithful Friends said this, who have ended
their days in Peace? And therefore for W. R. now to object it against us, or
any of us, to bring us under his terms Apostate and Innovator, shows his evil
design of Envy: Howbeit, he appears still inconsistent with himself in varying
from his charge in these Words, page 29. viz. But yet, I would not be
understood to reflect on all that have used that Expression, to wit, the Tree
of Knowledge is not good for Food; because I question not, but many have so
expressed themselves; not thereby to represent that Wisdom which is accounted
Sensual and Devilish, but rather to show forth, that if we should feed upon, or
admire any excellent Qualification or Endowment whatsoever, and not have the
Eye of our mind chiefly unto the Giver, we might then come to a loss.

From all which observe, that our Adversary has here found out a Salve, or
better Construction for the said Doctrine, than his opposing and contradicting
of it before, as not being according to Truth. At this rate he may make large
Books against us; but to what purpose, thus to Say and Unsay? as if he should
tell us, it is unsound Doctrine, to say, The Tree of Knowledge is not good for
Food; But to turn about again, It may be used in a good and sound Sense; and
therefore I would not be understood to reflect upon all that have used that
expression, viz. The Tree of Knowledge is not good for Food. What kind of
Preacher would he make, if he should tell People, The Tree of Knowledge is good
for Food? The Tree of Knowledge is not good for Food.

And what if some, as he says, have reflected on the Wisdom that is Sensual,
when they have declared, the Tree of Knowledge not good for Food? What
unsoundness can he prove therein, as to the Allusion? The Question is, whether
Man by transgressing God's command, in eating of that Tree, did not fall into
that Wisdom that was Earthly and Sensual, or Devilish? Whether that Sensual
Wisdom was not produced in Man by that Transgression? And therefore W. R's
telling us, That which is a discoverer of Good and Evil, being in it Page 2^.
self Good, as the Tree of Knowledge is, cannot be a proper Allusion, etc. We
are sure his Allusion and Comparison here is not proper, nor according to
Scripture: He here confounds the Discoverer, which is Christ, the Tree of Life,
with the Tree of Knowledge; As if man in Innocence were forbidden to eat of the
Tree of Life. For our Opposer in his very next instance, p. 28. has these
Words, John the Evangelist testifies, This is Life Eternal that they might know
thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent. A very good
Scripture; but no Proof that the Tree of Knowledge was good for Food; or that
God did forbid the knowledge of himself and of his Son to man in Innocence,
when he gave him this command, But of the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil,
thou shall not eat of it; for in the day thou eatest thereof thou shall surely
dye, Genesis 2. 17. This Tree was excepted from every Tree yielding Seed and good
for Food, which was allowed unto Man, Genesis 1. 29. and 2. 9. Did God forbid man
(in Innocence) the knowledge of his Maker? or command him not to eat of that
which was good for his Souls Food? No sure* Who then presented the Tree of
Knowledge as good for Food to be eaten, to make one Wise, etc? 'Twas the
Serpent: Therefore the Scripture is not silent in it. The Serpent said unto the
Woman, Ye shall not surely dye: For God does know, that in the day ye eat
thereof, your Eyes shall be opened, and ye shall be as Gods, knowing Good and
Evil: And when the Woman saw that the Tree was good for Food, and a Tree to be
desired to make one Wise, she took of the Fruit thereof, and did eat, etc. Genesis
3. 4, 5, 6. Did the Serpent say true, in saying. Ye shall not surely dye? No,
sure: For God had said the contrary; In the Day thou eatest thereof, dying thou
shall dye. Therefore when the Woman saw that the Tree was good for Food, she
saw not aright; she had let in the Serpents persuasion to eat thereof, contrary
to God's command. There was an Eye open, giving way to the Temptation, which
God did not open, a mistaken sight: It was the same by which she saw it was a
Tree to be desired to make one Wise. Whence came that Desire, but from the
Serpent's allurement? That begot a false sight, a misapprehension, not
consistent with the Law of Innocence or Uncorruptness of mind, that stood in
the Simplicity of the Truth.

All which considered, our Opposer is so far from proving any of us Apostates
and Innovators, in saying, That the Tree of Knowledge is not good for Food,
that he has discovered his own Apostasy and Innovation, in introducing the
Serpent's Doctrine, contrary to God's command, and the Doctrine anciently
preached among us. And therein we cannot believe that God or Christ is his 2
Cor 11. 3.
Teacher, but the Serpent, who beguiled Eve through his Subtilty: So he has
corrupted the minds of some, from the Simplicity that is in Christ Jesus, to
feed upon that which brings Death over them, and to fall into that Knowledge
which puffs up the Fleshly Mind. And that Eye that the Serpent opens, is not a
Single, but an Evil Eye, which Christ came to blind, and to bring that
Knowledge to naught, that puffs up, before men can clearly see with that
Innocent Single Eye that Christ opens, or partake of that true Divine
Knowledge, which is Life Eternal.

The Matter we Principally aim at and stand for, both in the foregoing and
following Controversy on our parts, is included in these general Propositions,
viz.

I. That since the Term [ Church-Government] is of late so much cast upon us,
we do thereby intend Christ's Government in his Church, exercised by him both
Immediately and Instrumentally.

II. That Christ Jesus, our Lord and Master, Governs, Rules and Orders in his
Church and People, Immediately and Principally by himself, and Instrumentally
(in some measure) by his Ministers and Servants, as well as he Teaches and
Instructs both Immediately and Instrumentally.

III. That Christ's Governing and Ruling Instrumentally by his Ministers and
Servants, relates to the Godly Care, good Instructions, Admonition, and true
Judgment given to (and Ministered by) such his Faithful Servants, Ministers and
Elders in Truth, whom the holy Ghost has made Overseers, 1 Cor. 12
and appointed for Helps and Governments in the Church, for the sake especially
of the Younger and Weaker Members, Children, and such as are under Age, as to
Truth and Experience in the Work of the Lord.

It Is about this last Proposition that the Controversy does most depend; for
Christ's Immediate Rule and Government in the Conscience is in words owned by
our Opposers.

IV. No other kind of Government in the Church of Christ, in Substance, Nature
and End, do we at this day plead for, than what was exercised in the Primitive
Christian Churches before the Apostasy, in a Spiritual, Persuasive, Convincing
Way and Manner, suitable to Christ's Spiritual Kingdom, which prospers by his
Truth and Meekness, Righteousness and true Judgment; wherein we acknowledge him
to be our King, Lord and Lawgiver; all Carnal Force and Rigor being excluded
his Kingdom.

V. In the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ we utterly deny and detest Exercising
Lordship over God's Heritage, or seeking Dominion over the Faith and Conscience
of his People, and assuming to our selves any Power, Dominion (or Arbitrary
Jurisdiction) over their Properties, or the Properties of any other People in
outward Things; but in the Name of the Lord, are, and stand for Justice and
Right between Man and Man, against all Injurious and Unjust Actions and
Dealings, we being for Doing to all men as we would they should do unto us. God
is our Record for our Christian Principle and Conscientious Tenderness in these
matters. However, our Adversary has asperst us to the contrary, from his
Perverse and Cruel Jealousies.

Disaffect. XLII.
In the Title page of the third part of the Christian-Quaker, (so called) there
is this Passage, viz. W. R. Manifesting that there is but two sorts of
Government owned by the Children of Light, or Christian-Quaker- One is the
outward Government, under which we live; the other is the inward Government of
Christ, (who alone is Lord over the Conscience) which is not represented by
Persons Visible by Carnal Eyes, invested with Power from him to execute outward
Laws, Prescriptions, Orders, Edicts or Decrees in an outward Form of Government
Compare this with the Paper which W. R. signed at Anne Travers's House, 1673.
and that in 1672. relating to a Godly Care, Order and Government in the Church,
wherein Advice is given to Friends, who have a Care and Oversight committed to
them, in their respective places, by the Lord for good Order and Comfort of the
Church, as the words are therein; which Epistle was signed by James Parks,
Jasper Batt, John Story, Thomas Curtis, John Crook, Stephen Crisp, Thomas
Green, and thirteen more Friends, and was a very Seasonable Epistle, dated, the
31th of the 3d Month, 1672.
Visible, as aforesaid.

Observe.
First, That W. R. and his Party are by him accounted the Christian-Quakers and
Children of Light; and that all those that are not in Unity with him and them,
nor of his Party, are counted Apostates and Innovators: And why so? but because
they are for some Outward Laws, Orders, etc. in an outward Form of Order and
Government in the Church of Christ, that is Visible.

Secondly, That this Outward Order and Visible Form is such, as by his Sense
and State of the Case, is both rendered Obnoxious to the outward Government
under which we live, and against the inward Government of Christ, insomuch that
all the People called Quakers, who are for outward and visible Form and Order
among them, are put under the Character of the Apostate and Innovator; and this
still tends to expose them to Persecution; whereas our Innocent Conversations
and Peaceable Deportment toward the outward Government (under which we live)
has been and is well known to be such, as neither our Opposer is able to
disprove, nor need we here Vindicate our selves therein, although unjustly
rendered, as neither consistent with the Outward and National Government, (which
has been the Charge of our Persecutors) nor yet with Christ's Inward and
Spiritual Government: This appears not only Malicious but Absurd; as if because
Christ's Immediate Government and Kingdom is Inward and Spiritual in the
Conscience, therefore he must have No Visible Ministers in his Kingdom; No
Visible Order and Form of Government under his Dominion; No Visible Persons
exercised in any Rule, outward Order, Laws or Decrees under his Government, as
if all Christ's Ministers, Apostles, Elders, Overseers, Helps, Governments,
(which were appointed by him in his Church, with all the Instructions, Decrees
and Commands of the Apostles setting in order things that were lacking, doing
all things decently and in order) were a^^ Invisible, and nothing Outward,
Visible or Formal, because Christ's Inward and Spiritual Government (whence
these proceed) is Invisible; we can make no better arguing than this kind, in
our Adversaries Distinction of his Christian-Quaker from the Apostate and
Innovator; nor deduce a more Natural Inference from his opposition against
Visible Persons being concerned in an Outward Form of Government and Order in
the Church of Christ.

But, Thirdly, How does he consist with himself, in relation to the Paper which
he says is accounted the Foundation of the Separation in the North? 2d part,
page 78. which Paper was subscribed by his said honorable Friends J. W. and J.
S. and above Eighty more Persons, in which Paper are these words and terms,
viz. We who are chosen by the Churches, and in their behalf to Act -- Some of
other Counties, and some amongst our selves, not chosen by the Churches, have
usurped Authority over us. -- The Meetings by whom we were Employed -- Our Men,
who have their Authority given them by the Churches Choice and Consent, are
hindered by others not so appointed, to whom we gave no Power by our Consent,
but do deny, that they have had Authority from us to dispose of our Collections
or Records, or ORDERS, or Matters of our Concerns -- Our Chosen Men -- They who
are not chosen by the Churches -- You who are concerned and rightly Chosen by
the Churches -- etc. With many other Passages in the said Paper, all which
intimate Authority, Power and Government (together with Records, Orders, etc.)
what Power, as a Church, they assurned to choose Persons to act in their
Concerns, and give Power to Persons therein; so that here was W. R's great
Intimate Friends for a sort of a Church Government, Authority, Orders,
Instructions, Prescriptions, etc. Does he not deserve to be severely reproved
by them, for so manifestly contradicting them (whose Cause he pretends to
plead) by his Publishing such a great Book against Church Government, Visible
Forms, Orders, etc.

And now, we would ask W. R. if those Churches choosing, and giving Power to
others, and the Persons chosen to be Employed in their Affairs, were all
Invisible? and their Affairs and Business Invisible? and their respective
Meetings, with the Methods they intended therein Invisible? and their Records
and Orders Invisible? Surely the said Paper of theirs, with the limited
Prescriptions therein was not Invisible any more than the Persons that formed
them.

Fourthly, but seeing W. R. is so much for Invisibility in Church Order,
Government, etc. it had been well his great Book of Division, and those his
confused Oppositions and Gainsayings had never been so Visible, but kept all
Invisible, that he might not have troubled poor simple-hearted Friends, and the
World with such his groundless Jealousies, and ill managed Controversies; We
are persuaded, if this his Fruitless Work had been all kept in Obscurity and
Invisibility, it had been far more Reputable for him than it now is, or ever
like to be in its Visibility. Howbeit, it is observable, that he varies in his
Objection against Visible Persons, being invested with Power to execute Laws,
Prescriptions, Orders, etc. under Christ's Government, in an Outward, Visible
Form; whereas this Objection is absolute in other places; he seems to restrict
and qualify it with this frequent Addition, viz. Whether they see it their
Duty or no; that is, that they are not bound to obey outward Prescriptions,
Orders, etc. unless they see it their Duty. As for Instance, see his 3d part,
p. 9. pretended, On behalf of Christ's Government, and his Spirit's Guidance
into all Truth, he gives this Testimony, (viz.) That there is no ground either
from the Scriptures of Truth without us, or Light of Christ within us to
believe, that any Christian Professor can in Truth affirm, That there are
outward Prescriptions and Orders given forth by the Spirit of God through any
one or more Mortal Men in this our day, which others ought to obey and follow,
whether they see it their Duty or no.

Observe again here, That his Objection is not absolute as before, against
Visible Persons, being invested with Power from Christ, to execute or put in
Practice outward Prescribed Instructions and Orders, etc. nor against such
outward Prescriptions and Orders, being given forth by the Spirit of God
through one or more Men or Persons in this our day; (for there are many
wholesome and binding Rules, Precepts and Commands outwardly recorded in the
Scriptures of Truth, that proceeded from the holy Spirit in the Servants of God
and Christ, which are now renewed by the same Spirit in his Servants) but his
Objection is against their being given forth with intent to be obeyed by
others, whether they see it their Duty or not; wherein the Objection does not
only vary from that in his Title Page, but is very Frivolous and Loose, and
will serve only for a pretense to Loose Spirits, who (to evade just Precepts
and Instructions, proceeding from the Spirit of Truth in the Servants and
Ministers of Christ) will be apt to pretend, They see it not their Duty; which
yet is no proof that any thing Just and Lawful in it self is not their Duty:
On the other hand, seeing whatever Precept, Direction or Command is given forth
from the Spirit of Truth, which concerns our Duty, either toward God or Man,
and the keeping a Conscience void of Offense toward both, is not given forth
to be left Indifferent, as to be Accepted or Rejected, but to be put in
Practice; it cannot reasonably be supposed, That the Spirit of Truth in that
Case, leaves the Conscience without Evidence, or the Creature, to whom it
directs in such Blindness, as not to see that a Duty which in it self is Just
and Righteous, having a necessary Tendence to that Godly, Righteous, and Sober
Life, which the Grace of God Universally appears to teach and lead men into;
and therefore, for any professing Truth, and the Guidance of the Spirit, and
Light thereof, to pretend, That Spirit may through Instruments direct such
Orders and Rules unto them, as they see not to be their Duty; This will not
excuse them in the Day of the Lord; for if they sin against Sight and Knowledge
given of God, that is their Rebellion and Stubbornness; if they are become
Blind and Ignorant of what is their Duty toward God or Man, through their own
careless Neglect of his Grace given them, they are justly condemnable therein,
their want of Sight proceeding from their idle Sloth, and want of Diligence,
if he grants that every one has a measure of the true Light and Spirit: On the
other hand, whatever is really any ones Duty, in relation to a good Conscience,
it cannot be livingly and acceptably performed, as in God's sight, without
keeping in a true Sight and Sense of that divine Light and holy Spirit, which
is near to show man his Duty, both in shunning Evil and doing good, as also to
lead him into all Truth, as he gives up to it, and attends upon its Guidance.
But further, the Members of Christ, the true and spiritual Believers, have so
much inward sense and feeling of those outward Instructions and Precepts, that
proceed from the Spirit of Truth in their Brethren, that they have Unity
therewith, and have some discerning of the Nature, good Tendence and End
thereof; and even such as are but weak in the Faith, being tender and
honesthearted, as the Lord lays no more upon them than what they can bear; so
they are so far from opposing any thing of God's Counsel through his Servants,
which they have not a present sight of, that they apply their Hearts to the
Lord with diligent Attention, that he may reveal that unto them. For in
assurance of God's revealing what should be needful to the true Believers (in
the Primitive Christians days) as they walked by one and the same Rule, and
minded the same thing; the Apostle to the Philipians says, If in any thing ye
be otherwise minded, God shall reveal even this unto you, Phil. 3. 15. and to
the Thessalonians, We have Confidence in the Lord touching you, that ye both
do, and will do the things which we command you, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 4. The true
Ministers and Servants of Christ writ and spoke in a Holy Confidence in Christ
Jesus, and preached in Much Assurance, that their Testimony would meet with
Reception in the Hearts of them who received the Love of Truth: They did not
leave the Concerns of Truth and of the Churches of Christ, relating to Unity or
good Order, upon Loose and Indifferent Terms, as when the Spirit of the Lord
required them to Teach, Exhort or Command any thing needful to be practiced in
Churches of Christ, with respect to good Order, Society, Unity, and Holiness of
Conversation, they faithfully signified it, and did not leave the matter loose
and indifferent, in this wise, (viz.) These things we are required of the Lord
to signify to you, as very needful in such and such Cases, but they are not
Binding upon you, you need not Practice them unless you see them to be your
Duty; or if the Lord does not let you see them to be your Duty, you may let
them alone; you are not Bound to Practice any thing we Preach, Direct or
Counsel you to do, if you do not see it to be your Duty. This would be a very
feeble kind of Preaching, and bespeak such Inconsistency and Distrust in their
Testimony, as if the Lord would not open their Eyes to see that which his
Spirit Directs to, and Leads his Servants to Testify; and not only so, but
such kind of Loose Indifferent Preaching would be a means to leave them Blind
and Dim-sighted, who are so, instead of opening their Eyes by the plain
Evidence of the Spirit and Power of God; whereas the true Ministers and
Servants of Christ by the Manifestation of Truth did commend themselves to
every man's Conscience in the sight of God, as having Faith, Confidence and
Assurance, That they should have an Evidence and Answer in the Conscience,
being unto God a sweet savor of Christ, in them that were saved, and in them
that perished; to the one, the savor of Death unto Death; and to the other,
the savor of Life unto Life, 2 Cor. 2. 15, 16. They preached both in Assurance
and Divine Authority, These things Command and Teach, Preach the Word, be
Instant in Season, out of Season, Reprove, Rebuke, Exhort, with all
Long-suffering and Doctrine: I Charge thee, etc. Charge them that are Rich,
etc. In such Terms Paul writ to Timothy: And concerning a Bishop, or Overseer,
and Elder in the Church, he gives the Description to Titus, how he must be
Qualified, Titus 1. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. Holding fast the faithful Word, as he has
been taught, that he may be able by sound Doctrine, both to Exhort and Convince
the Gainsayers: And blessed be the Lord, we know nothing we practice among us,
as a People gathered by him, in our Assemblies and Congregations, either in
respect to Unity, Church Government, Order or Discipline, but such things as we
have the Evidence of the Spirit of God for the Practice of, and have a Tendence
toward the great Ends of true Religion and Christian Society, as having a
Godly Care among us over one another, the Strong to help the Weak, and that all
may be preserved out of the World's Evil Ways and Polutions, in that pure
Religion that is to Visit the Fatherless and Widows, and keep Unspotted of the
World, so as we may provoke one another to Love and Good Works, and to serve
one another in Love, as the Primitive Christians did, knowing that all our
Care, and the very Intent of our Proceedings in the Church of Christ are for
these Ends, and all center in that Love which is the fulfilling of the Law; and
having these things in our Eye, we can the more easily concur and accord as to
Circumstances and outward Methods, and in the Wisdom of God so condescend one
to another, and accommodate matters, as not to divide about them; and
therefore, we do profess seriously, we see no real Cause or valid Reason our
Opposer shows for the great* Noise and Rumble he makes about outward Laws,
Prescriptions, Orders, Edicts or Decrees, outward Form of Government, Apostasy,
Innovations, Impositions, Lording over Faith, over Conscience, etc. whilst he
shows us no Unjust, no Unlawful nor Uncomely Order or Proceedings among us as a
People, nor yet gives us any Instances or Catalogue of those Impositions,
Innovations, New Doctrines or Practices, brought in and received among us,
which are either Inconsistent with our first Testimony to the Light and Grace
of God within, and the Teachings thereof, or thereby condemned as Evil, or
wholly Unnecessary in themselves: He should have given us a Catalogue of those
Innovations he complains of, and what Order and Methods he would prescribe to
the contrary, whether any or none, and not go to fill the Peoples Ears with a
general Clamor of Apostasy, Innovations and Impositions, scandalously to
render us as bad as the Church of ROME. He often charges us with Uncertain
Qualified Persons, Third part, page 12.
that usually Assemble in our Meetings, which concern the Affairs of the Church
among us: Which is a very Impertinent Objection; for granting some Persons
Uncertainly, or not Rightly Qualified, may come into such Meetings, such sway
not the Meetings in Truth's Affairs; but there is an Eye to the Universal Power
of God, to sway and rule in our Proceedings, and Concerns of Truth; and what
Reason and Evidence is in Truth given in matters before us, these have place in
our Meetings: and it is very needful that some that are not grown into the
Exercise of Help and Government in the Church, who are Honest-minded, should be
present at such Meetings, that they may have the Advantage thereof, in order to
their furtherance in the Truth and Service, as the Lord shall make them
capable; for the least sound Member has its Service in the Body: But W. R.
appears not of the Apostles Mind, who said, Those Members of the Body which
seem to be more feeble, are necessary; and those Members of the Body which we
think to be less honorable, upon these we bestow more abundant Honor, etc.
(see 1 Cor. 12. 22, 23, 24. and Chap. 9. 22.) we do not disgrace them in Print
(as W. R. has done) and therefore those our Meetings are not confined to a
Select Number; for our Opposer grants, That the Children of God may be
Instrumental in his Hand to Establish one another in the Faith of God's Elect,
3d part, page 12. as also page 19. he has these words, viz. I am abundantly
satisfied, that set and appointed Meetings on certain prefixed days, being
with the joint Concurrence of those Members, assembling, and from time to time
to be assembled, to take care of the Poor, and discharge other Charitable
Duties, to inspect Marriages, that none come together Disorderly, and to take
Care that Truth may not be Scandalized through the backsliding of such who have
been in fellowship with the Children of Light, are not Inconsistent with that
FORM that the Power of God may lead into; for I am a Witness, for many Years
past, even to this day, that such Meetings have been serviceable to answer
those Righteous ends.

Observe.
He has here granted the point for Church Government, to his own Confutation,
and that which is the end of such our Assemblies: What Is then his complaint of
Rules, outward Orders, Forms of Government, etc? And who among the Children of
Light do not see these to be needful, as well as serviceable? And what Forms,
Prescriptions, Rules or Laws are executed or put in Practice among us, which
tend not to answer those Righteous Ends (to wit) the taking care of the Poor,
discharge of other Charitable Duties, inspecting Marriages, to prevent disorder
therein, and to take care that Truth be not Scandalized through the
backslidings of such who have been in Fellowship among us; These are the very
Righteous Ends and Services intended and aimed at in those our Meetings, which
being granted in the General, we would ask this Person, or any one adhereing to
him,

1st, What are those Innovations he complains of among us, in respect to an
outward Order, Discipline and Form of Government?

2dly, What Impositions, Orders, Prescriptions, Laws or Rules can he justly
charge the People called QUAKERS (who are not of his Party) withal, which the
Spirit of Truth has not Unity with, and which therefore the Members of
Christ's Body and Children of Light are not obliged to obey or practice, as not
seeing it their Duty?

Disaffect. XLIII.
And seeing he affirms, That the People of the Lord called Quakers are in the
Practice of many things, with respect to Church Discipline, wherein the
Scriptures, treating of those things given forth by Christ and his Apostles,
are silent. Third part, page 20. compared with what he affirms, page 24. That
part of that outward Order in Discipline, wherein diverse of the People of the
Lord, called Quakers, have been acted is such, as that there is not the least
Footsteps thereof to be found in the Scriptures, as Exhorted to, or as
Practiced by the Apostles. And what! suppose this were true? (which yet we do
not grant him) so long as they are the People of the Lord, and they waiting on
him, he is their Shepherd and Guide by his holy Spirit and Principle of Truth
within, which leads not contrary to any Wholesome and Evangelical Precept, or
Christian Conversation and Practice recorded in the holy Scriptures. And W. R.
so far Answers himself in this matter, as that he grants, The Principle of
Truth in these latter days has and may lead into the Practice of OUTWARD
ORDER in Discipline, with relation to the Church of Christ. Whereby he assents
to a higher Rule than the Scriptures, namely, the Principle of Truth: and then
the Question is,

1st, What those many things are, with respect to Church Discipline, wherein
the Scriptures are silent? We find him only in reference to this point, telling
us thus, 3d part, page 24. viz. I could give many Instances hereof, but one
shall suffice, viz. the form of proceedings in Marriages, wherein the
Scriptures are wholly silent, as to the Primitive Christians: By which you may
see what a narrow compass his great noise of Innovations, outward Order in
Discipline is brought to, he should have made his Book wholly on this subject
about the form of proceedings in Marriages among us, and not have made such a
great impertinent blunder upon general Scandalous Charges to no purpose; and
then it would have appeared, whether he could have disapproved our proceedings
therein or not, or prove them inconsistent with those Righteous Ends, that he
himself has granted.

2dly, In his Preface he only mentions outward Forms relating to Marriages,
Relief of the Poor, etc. About which he says, a great part of the Contention
seems to be; and yet he is the hotest Maintainer of the Contention.

3dly, And though in some Circumstances every thing be not specified in the
Scriptures, yet whether there is any part of Church Discipline practiced among
us, that does not tend to answer the Apostolic Doctrine, in respect to Good
Order, a Holy Conversation, a Heavenly Society, and things that are Honest,
Just, Reasonable, and of good Report. What Form or Discipline do we practice
that is unsuitable to these Righteous Ends? We affirm, that his crying out
Impositions, Innovations, Form of Church Government, Orders, Prescriptions,
etc. in general, is no answer, nor any proof of his Charge of Apostate and
Innovator against us; let him either specify the particulars thereof that he
condemns us for as Apostates, and that we practice as Church Discipline, or
else forever be ashamed of such Impertinency and Scandalous charging the
Meetings of the People of God called Quakers, which are concerned in and about
those Outward Affairs and Christian Services (for which they were intended) as
Charitable Duties, inspecting Marriages, taking care that Truth be not
Scandalized, etc. which he has confessed, (and the Service of such our
Meetings being to answer those Righteous and Good Ends.) As also to the same
purpose (in reference to Friends care about Printing) in these Words, viz.

Third part, page 31. I would not be understood that it is unnecessary for the
Members of the Church of Christ to take care, that nothing Scandalous to the
Truth come forth in public under the Name of any who make Profession thereof;
and were it so, that I had ought upon me on Truths behalf to bring to public
view, I should be glad of the opportunity to lay it before such Brethren with
whom the Word of Wisdom, Knowledge and Discerning of Spirits dwelt.

Hence it appears that this Man would seem to be for Order and Society with
such Brethren as he has a good esteem of, and to be so conformable and
submissive, as to have their Counsel and Approbation of what he brings to
public view, granting it necessary for the Members of the Church of Christ to
take care, that nothing Scandalous to Truth come forth in public which is one
main end of our Meeting in London, so much struck at and vilified by him -- But
who those Brethren are, with whom he accounts the Word of Wisdom and Knowledge
dwells, and before whom he would lay what he would bring to public view, for
their Care and Approbation, he tells us not; but we may easily guess by his
high Characters of Ancient and Honorable Friends, Laborers in the Gospel,
etc. And whether they did see and approve of this confused scandalous Book of
his or not, is best known to themselves; either they did, or they did not; if
they did, then by his own Inference they are entitled to the matters contained
in it; if neither of them did see and approve of it, then that omission
contradicts his own pretense, it not being probable that he can justly plead he
wanted opportunity to lay it before any of his honorable Brethren in two or
three Years time.

Third part, page 82. There is great need for every one to watch against a
Censorious judging Spirit, lest whilst they are judging their Brethren, they
themselves become cast-awayes. p. 83. It behooves every one diligently to watch,
that we judge not one another by reason of these differing Exercises, etc.

Observe how well this man can Counsel others, but how contrary thereto he acts
himself, in giving forth such a censorious judging Book, as he has done,
tending to render many Innocent Persons and People Apostates and Innovators,
wherein he is far more loud in his Charge and Exclamation than in his Proof or
Instances of that Apostasy or those Innovations. But if he could prove such
Innovations or New matters in Discipline or differing Exercises therein, as he
would Insinuate, which yet is not granted him, then by his own rule he ought
not to have brought forth his Censorious Book, but rather have watched, and
studied to be quiet.

Page 80. I would not be understood to judge Apostles or Elders, when they
shall find freedom from the Lord (being met together) for giving forth any
thing by way of Recommendation to the Consciences of their Brethren.

Answ. We know nothing given forth (as Duty to God or Man) to be practiced
among us by Apostles or Elders, but what is in Truth intended (at least) to be
recommended to the Consciences, and has an Answer and Reception in the
Consciences of Friends in Truth; what we write or preach on behalf of Truth and
true Religion, is recommended by Divine Authority and Evidence, in the Apostles
sense, by the Manifestation of Truth, commending our selves to every man's
Conscience in the sight of God; and this may be either by good Exhortation,
Counsel, Admonition, Reproof, Judgment, Testimony, Warning, Charge, Command,
etc. all which the holy Apostles used. But it appears our Opposer has another
sense of Recommendation, as leaving matters more indifferent and loose, by way
of doubtful Proposition, as on these, or the like Terms, viz. You are not Bound
to submit, whether you see it your Duty or not.

And whereas this Person is frequently judging our Friends for Imposition,
Innovation, etc. We would be understood, that those things commended among us,
as necessary for good Order and Holiness of Conversation, are not recommended
doubtfully, or upon mere Supposition, nor as Matters of Indifferency to be
Practiced or Rejected, but in Faith and full Assurance, as answering God's
Witness and Truth in the Consciences, and that such will meet with a tender
Reception (and not Opposition) in all tender and upright Hearts.

Disaffect. XLIV.
Third part, page 83. Amongst the Primitive Believers, there were such as
practiced Circumcision; some made Conscience of keeping a Day, and some that
abstained from eating Flesh, and others that did not; and yet a
Christian-Liberty and Forbearance was so Exercised, as that they were not to be
judging one another about these things; and that we find not, that these
Differing Exercises in a CHRISTIAN Liberty did subject any of those Believers
exercised therein, to the Censure of being out of the Unity of the Body. And
5th part, page 75. on Gal. 5. 2. and 4. 9, 10, 11. to the same purpose he
says, Yet this did not at that time condemn that CHRISTIAN-LIBERTY and
Forbearance, which the Apostle before approved, in and with respect unto such
as made Conscience of Circumcision, and the Observing of Days, before they had
so received the Spirit as to be led out of it, that is, many of the Believing
Jews, whom (he says) the Apostles did not condemn the same in, until by Faith
they saw beyond it, 3d part, page 81.

Observe.
Here it is evident what kind of Liberty this Person would Introduce an
Indulgence of, under the Notion and Title of Christian-Liberty; but his Mistake
in this matter appears very great; for he takes that to be Christian-Liberty,
which was no other in it self than a Legal Bondage or Servitude, as
Circumcision was with the Legal Observation of days, which were not only
Shadows and mere Types abolished by Christ, and nailed to his Cross (as
inconsistent with that Evangelical Dispensation the Apostles and Primitive
Christians were in) but also counted a Yoke and Bondage, Acts 15. 10. Gal. 5.
cap. and not a Christian-Liberty, their Testimony was absolute for Christ's
abolishing and ending these Types and Shadows under the Law; but Christ did not
abolish Christian-Liberty, nor did the Apostles forbear their absolute
Testimony to Christ, as the End of the Law, because many of the Jews did not
see the end of things abolished, nor yet did they tell them, that they were in
a Christian-Liberty in the Practice of Circumcision, or those things abolisht,
but that the Vail was over their Hearts, that they did not see to the End of
things abolished: We grant there was a Christian-forbearance toward the
weakness of believing Jews in Circumcision, etc. but not a Christian-Liberty
declared in the Practice thereof. Our Opposer has greatly erred in this point,
and extended his Liberty too far in this, and many other matters, and not only
so, but has manifestly Contradicted himself, having in his first part, page
73. confessed, That the Labor of the Apostles of Christ in the Primitive days
was to draw the outward Jew off from the Observation of these Ordinances, which
were established by the Appointment of God himself, having exalted instead
thereof the Word nigh in the Heart, and the Law written therein.

See now how inconsistent this Man's Work is; surely the Apostles did not Labor
to draw them off from a Christian-Liberty, nor the Exercises thereof; and did
not the Apostles witness to the Inward Circumcision of the Heart, by the
Spirit, as well as the Jew inward and Law inward? This man who is th^s
Discomposed in his Work, should not have meddled so much with points of
Divinity, which he appears so little skilful in; he Dreams so much of Liberty,
that he is greatly bewildered in the Mannagement of it; and what is the
Tendence of his Work, but to Invalidate the Christian Authority, Care and
Oversight that God has set up in his Church and People among us?

The Case further Explained.
But to take W. R's Notion of Christian-Liberty in the best and most Charitable
Sense of his Intention, viz. not to judge one another about the outward
Circumstances of Discipline, nor urge them with Severity, on Romans 14. 1, 2, 3,
4. Him that is weak in the Faith receive, but not to doubtful Disputations;
One man believes, that he may eat all things; another, who is weak, eats
Herbs: let not him that eats, despise him that eats not; and let not him
that eats not, judge him that eats; for God has received him: And Verse. 5.
One Man esteems one day above another, another esteems every day alike; Let
every man be fully persuaded in his own Mind.

We do testify in the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ, that where this is really
the case of any one weak in the Faith, who is under some private Scruple or
Dissatisfaction of Conscience, yet peaceably minded, and having his Faith to
himself, there ought to be Christian Tenderness and Forbearance toward such,
and no urging with Severity; for too much of that (we mean of Severity, or Zeal
without true Knowledge or Wisdom from God) may possibly discourage the weak,
drive and scatter from Truth into Prejudice, and make some Desperate, Hard, and
Careless; but tender Persuasion and Instruction toward such is needful; and
far be it from us to be Severe in such Cases; the Lord Jesus Christ has
taught, and daily teaches his Servants how to bear the Burden of the Weak
Ones, and their Weakness and Infirmities, to help them, and not drive them out
for a Private Difference in Opinion or Judgment in one that is peaceable (though
but Weak) may be better born than Public Opposition and Contention in the
Church. But where Persons may differ only in Judgment, in some outward Thing or
Circumstance from the Society they belong to, and yet will be Contentious,
Strive with, Oppose and Disturb their Brethren, or the Meetings they belong to,
and seek to make Parties, raise Annimosities, sow Discord and Strife, cause
Divisions and Seperations, Whisper, Murmur, Backbite and Complain against their
Brethren, who are Unanimous and Conscientious toward God, in what they believe
is Convenient and good Order, the Opposers Imagining themselves to be stronger
and wiser than all the rest, not being content to be quiet, nor to demean
themselves peaceable under their differing Opinions; this is not Tender,
Brotherly nor Sociable, but to be avoided, and they marked; Mark them that
cause Divisions and Offenses, and avoid them: If any Man lust to be
Contentious, we have no such Custom in the Church of Christ. There can be no
Unity in orderly proceedings in the Church without Love and Concord; there can
be no true Society held without Agreement, Due Order and Method. Be of One
Mind, be of One Judgment, be of One Accord, do all things without Murmuring and
Disputings, let nothing be done through Strife or Vain Glory; whosoever would
appear to be Elders and Overseers in the Church, and be at Variance, and do not
accord with faithful Brethren in public wholesome Counsel and Advice to the
Younger sort, nor to agree in due Methods and orderly Proceedings, these are
Wrong, this their way tends to distract those that are weak in the Faith, who
should be helped by good and Unanimous Counsel and Advice. Those that mind not
Peace nor Unity and Concord with their Brethren, in due and orderly
Proceedings, are not fit to advise others; they had better keep at Home than
disturb Meetings, and confound the Weak; it is a shame for such to undertake the
Place or Office of Elders, Overseers and Counselors of others, who are neither
Sound nor Unanimous in Judgment and Advice themselves, (with them who are for
Peace and good Order, and to prevent Reproach and Scandal) but are ready to let
Loose Youth, and let up a Spirit of false and fleshly Liberty, under pretense
of Conscience. For Instance, set Case two Young Persons about to propose their
Intentions of Marriage to a Meeting, shall pretend a Scruple of Conscience
(whether from themselves, or as they are prepossest by others) for not
proposing it a Second Time, and some pretending to sit as Overseers in the
Meeting, take part with them, abet and plead for such Liberty therein against
coming a Second Time, and against the Sense of a great part of the Meeting, who
are Tenderly and Conscientiously concerned for that good and needful Order of
proposing the Marriage Twice; they that oppose this, and plead a Liberty to
come but Once, are therein Unsociable, and what they stand for is not in
Reality Tender Conscience, but Flesh and Fleshly Will; it looks not like the
pure Spirit, but Flesh; nor like Tender Conscience, but Self-Will and Humor.
What! a Tender Conscience against so much Patience, Temperance and due Order,
as to forbear Consumnating the Marriage until laid before the Meeting a Second
Time? and that both for Example to others, and Satisfaction of the Meeting,
touching the Parties Clearness; there can be no Honest Pretense of Conscience
for such Irregularity, Hasty and Abrupt Procedure* Let all things be done
Decently and in due Order; our God is the God of Order, and they that fear him
love good Order.

Now it is evident, our present Controversy lies not with Persons, that being
weak in the Faith scruple Meats, and Esteem one day above another, nor with
such as do Conscientiously scruple to proceed with us in some Outward Matters
of Order or Discipline, and desire only to wait in quietness until satisfied by
inward Light and Conviction; but with some few Persons that think themselves
Strong, and Wiser than all their Brethren besides, and thereupon are Restless
and Turbulent in their Opposition and Gainsaying Spirit. So that the Case in
Controversy or Difference may be in General thus stated, viz.

They cry out, Imposition, too much Severity, Urging with Severity, etc.

We complain of OPPOSITION against things (in themselves Innocent and Needful
for due Order) and against drawing back into a Libertine Spirit, Contempt and
Gainsaying in W. R. and a few that are his Abettors.

They cry against outward Forms, Methods and Order, Visible Form of
Church Government and Discipline, pretending a fear of getting too much into
the Form, going from the Power, Inward Teacher, etc.

We may rather plead, a fear of the other Extreme, i. e. that by opposing
Forms, due Order and Methods, they will be so in Form confused and void of good
Order, due Methods and Discipline, that they are in danger to let up a
Libertine Spirit, Looseness, Ranterism, Wilfulness and Contempt in Youth
against the godly Care, Oversight, good Government and Order in the Church of
Christ, that through their neglect of true Judgment, due Care and Order, they will
let in Ranterism and Confusion, and the Spirit and Anarchy of the Ranters over
them. This is our serious Sense and State of the Case, which we recommend to
God's faithful Witness inward, and to the Consciences of all sincere
tenderhearted Friends, who are zealous for God's Glory, and the Honor of his
holy Name and Truth.

Disaffect. XLV.
Preface, page 11, 12, 13. W. R. on G. F' s words, in a Letter from Amsterdam,
the 14th of the 7th Month, 1677. he thus cites G. F's words, viz. And you that
have given your Testimony against that Spirit, stand in your Testimony till
they answer by Condemnation: And do not strive and make Bargains with That
which is out of the Truth. Against which W. R. proceeds thus, viz. Clearly
shows a design of Imposition, and that so far as in him lies, to obstruct
Friends from Bargaining with such whom he condemns. By which, if his meaning
be, that he would not have Friends to discourse with such, nor yet to agree
about any orderly Conference, in order to a Reconciliation* or hearing of
Differences; then his own Practice afterward condemns his own Direction, in
submiting to a limited Meeting with me within the City of Bristol, in the 12th
Month, 1677. Gainsayers were to be convinced by sound Doctrine -- And whether
it is not Rational to conclude, that G. F. who endeavors that others should
avoid such Conferences, does not give just cause of Jealousy, that he is of
that Number, whom the Apostle reputed Ungodly, Vain Talkers and Deceivers? But
if otherwise his meaning be, that such whom he condemns, have no right to
Bargain, Buy or Sell, until they answer by Condemnation, then I may justly term
that to be a Mark of the Beast, spoken of Rev. 13. 17. where it is thus said, No
Man might buy nor sell, save he that had the Mark or Name of the Beast. Let the
Reader take either of these two Meanings (for a third I cannot think of.) And
it is the Mark of a Deceiver, of such as dwell on the Earth, which are the Terms
wherein John (Rev. 13. 14.) described the Beast. He that has an Ear to hear,
let him hear.

Observe.
He gives a Positive Judgment against G. F. as a Deceiver, upon his own
Uncertain Suppositions of his meaning. And that because he cannot think of a
Third, he supposes doubtfully G. F's Meaning two ways, that is, if his meaning
[ By not making Bargains] be, that he would not have Friends discourse with
such, or not buy or sell with them (concluding it must be the one or the other
of these, by bidding the Reader take either of these two Meanings) and it is the
Mark of a Deceiver, the Mark of the Beast, etc. He has falsely supposed two
Meanings, or two [ If's] and thereupon given his Positive Judgment to render G.
F. a Deceiver, comparing Him with the Beast, and as causing others to receive
his Mark, etc. And what for? but for Exhorting Friends to keep to their
Testimony against that Spirit, (to wit, the Spirit of Division and Separation)
and not to strive and make Bargains with that which is out of the Truth. The
true Intent whereof was not to make Peace with that Spirit in its own Terms,
nor to come under it contrary to Truth's Testimony; but W. R. turns the words
from Spirit to Persons; whereas G. F's meaning could not be to forbid Friends
having any Discourse or orderly Conference for the Convincement of the Persons
mistaken thereby, nor yet to forbid Friends buying and selling or Trading with
any of them; therefore W. R's supposed Meanings are both False, Dark and Silly,
and his positive Judgment Wicked and Malicious, void of all Sincerity, as well
as of Reason or good Argument; and if it be accounted plain Forgery materially
to alter the Sense of another Man's words, as W. R. confesses, 5th part, p. 84.
then is he himself guilty of plain Forgery in this case; for he has so
materially altered the Sense and Meaning of G. F's words: And W. R's Comparison
betwixt G. F. and the Beast, and between answering by Condemnation, and the
Mark of the Beast, are Absurd, Malicious and Wicked, as if he had told us, That
G. F. in advising for Condemnation upon that Spirit of Division, did advise
Persons to receive the Mark of the Beast; and on the other hand, that the Beast
in causing both small and great to receive his Mark, did cause them to own
Condemnation upon that Spirit of Division: We never had such a Description
given of the Mark of the Beast before. And why did W. R. draw his supposed
doubtful Meanings on his [IF's] and give his positive Judgment against G. F. as
a Deceiver, causing men to receive the Mark of the Beast, etc. without first
enquiring of, and hearing G. F. give his own Sense and Meaning? Is not he
herein condemned out of his own Mouth? even in that which he has much pleaded
and insisted upon, to wit, in his enveighing against Judging any man without
hearing him; Judging the Merit of the Cause, without hearing the same; Judging
and Censuring a Person Unheard, in the Defense of himself, as being a Grand
Mark of Apostasy: Has he not greatly condemned this in his Preface, and other
parts of his Book? and that upon the Law and Manner of the Romans, citing John
7. 51. Acts 25. 16. and yet now is sound presently after Accusing and
Condemning a Person without any Judicial hearing Face to Face, upon his own
Malicious Suggestion, contrary to the plain Intent and Sense of his words;
whereas if he had first heard the Person accused Face to Face, no doubt but he
could have given him a better Meaning upon his own words, than either to forbid
Friends convincing Gainsayers, or buying and selling with them. But his great
pretense for this false Interpretation is what he says in his Marginal Note, of
One of his Correspondents that has been Partner with him in a Merchandising
Trade, breaking off dealing with him in Partnership, giving for his Reason
these words, viz. I CANNOT BUT REASONABLY EXPECT, THE HAND OF THE LORD MAY BE
AGAINST THEE, AND THAT PERADVENTURE IN THE THINGS OF THE WORLD. The Person's
Name W. R. omits, which if he had told, would not have added any weight to his
Cause, nor Credit to him in Religious Concerns. However, it appears, this his
Correspondent had a Concern and Fear upon him, according as he expresses, which
no ways proves, that G. F's words were intended to discourage him or others
from buying and selling with him. 'Twas his own Concern and Care, who so broke
off with W. R. which is none of G. F's or any of our Business. Let W. R.
consider what Occasion he has given to provoke the Lord against him, by his
Envy and Bitterness against his People.

And whereas W. R. 5th part, page 87. cites what John Story said to the matter
of Charge contained in Henry Sweeting's Certificate, viz. That these are not
the first Lies G. F. has reported both against my self and the Meeting they
call Separate; he has not given us ground of late Years to expect any Right of
Justice from him.

Whereby (if these be J. S. his words) he takes it for granted, 1st, That the
said H. S. his Certificate contains nothing but Truth in the Citation of G. F's
words. And 2dly, He gives positive Judgment, that G. F. has reported Lies
therein, as not being the first Lies. Howbeit, the Charge, as laid down and
contained in the said Certificate, G. F. denies, as a Perversion and
Confounding his words, yea, as Horrid Lies, except that of Drunkards and
Swearers, as W. R. has cited G. F's Answer and Negation before H. S. his
Certificate, 5th part, page 83. We think, that J. S. should not have taken the
words so Hardly and Censoriously up against G. F. until he had been sure G. F.
would have owned them directly, as laid down by H. S. and that upon a fair
hearing Face to Face. Now the Question is, whether W. R. and J. S. have heard
G. F. and his Accusers, Face and Face, concerning this Matter whereof he is
accused by H. S. before he was Condemned and recorded as a Liar therein? If not
(as we presume they have not) then whether they have therein done Judicially
and Justly, according to their own Pretentions of Justice and Right, and their
severally declaring against condemning any man before heard; judging and
censuring him when unheard in defense of himself, concerning the Crime laid
against him? And if it be a grand Mark of Apostasy and Persecution so to do, as
W. R. signifies, we would know how they can escape their own Judgment herein,
thus to condemn a Person, and that in Print, before he be heard or duly tried
in the Case? And seeing also W. R. 2d part, page 76, 77. thus says, viz. That
which to us seems to aggravate the Offense of the Sixty Six Subscribers is
this, J. S. does POSITIVELY affirm, That a great part of the Subscribers never
spoke or sent to him about the matter; we have great cause to doubt, that not a
few, but many of the Subscribers (IF NOT ALL) Can this be justly Insinuated,
when many of them had heard both Parties at Drawell, in Matter of Fact? And why
does W. R. take no better notice of the Advice given by the said Subscribers,
for Reconciliation? And can he think that none of them could show Reason for
such Advice and that from their own Knowledge, who were Persons of more Credit
than himself?
have given Judgment without hearing of either Party.

Now we may still Question, 1st, Whether J. S. and W. R. did ever speak or send
to G. F. (the Party accused) in this matter, before they condemned him to such
Infamy (as W. R. has recorded him in Print) for a Liar.

2dly, Whether J. Story gave way to, allowed or advised, or does really own the
Printing of what he says to H. Sweeting's Certificate against G. F. J. S. his
plain Answer hereunto may justly be expected.

3dly, The Question is also, whether H. Sweeting, and the rest that Certified
against G. F. on this point, were not a Party against him, when their
Certificates were written?

4thly, Whether their Certificates do not so much vary in their relations, as
may justly render them of less Credit, and to be looked on as from Parties set
against G. F.?

H. Sweeting certifies G. F. did say, That to the Separate Meeeting there was
Whores and Rogues, Drunkards and Swearers, and that there came a couple to be
Married, and one stood up and said, Master Story, I take such a one to be my
Wife, etc.

M. B. testifies to G. F. thus, viz. That thou said, Master Story, I take
such a one to be my Wife, and I take such a one to be my Husband, and eat Bread
and drink Wine, go together like Whores and Rogues.

See now how various and differing the Certificates are, as between saying,
That to the said Meeting there was Whores and Rogues, Drunkards, etc. and go
together like Whores and Rogues, etc.

Seeing these Certificates are so differing in the manner of stating the
matter; the Question is, whether these Persons might not mistake in both upon
failure of Memory or Prejudice, and might possibly mis-place the Words, if
spoken? However they might have been better employed than to make such sorry
Certificates, and so might W. R. than to publish a Judgment upon them without
any Judicial hearing of the Parties Face to Face.

And as for E. P. he appears angry against G. F. as one willing to be his
Accuser, casting on him this perverse Insinuation, with an [IF] viz. So IF he
did speak a Rabble of Lies of People behind their Backs, be it upon his own
Head.

W. R. has published this doubtful and infamous Insinuation among his
Testimonies against G. F. and its pretended in vindication of Truth too, page
84, 85. part 5. And not only this, but there is another [IF] against G. F. in E.
P's pretended Testimony, viz. as IF he had surrounded the Countries to get up
all the Miscarriages and Failings done and committed in time past; Was ever
such senseless Testimonies Printed before? Herein E. P. has neither appeared
Impartial, nor done Friendly, nor as he would be done by; howbeit, to do him
Right on the other hand, we understand that he gave not his consent to the
Printing these angry Words of his; how willing therefore was W. R. to rake up
gather and receive any pitiful sorry Stuff up and down the Nation, to help to
make up his partial, confused and revengeful Book withal?

Disaffect. XLVI.
About Fleeing in Times of Persecution.
W. R. 1st part, p. 30. Neither can we be at unity with the appearance of that
spirit in any one that villifies others for Fleers in time of Persecution --
when such an one has appeared a Fleer himself. This compared with W. R.'s
Charge in his Letter to G. F. dated the 3d day of the 10th Month, 1677. page
93, 94. 4th part. There are endeavors to send Papers to and fro, to be spatter
J. S. for going out of a Meeting when the Persecutors came; yet I know that
thou thy self have been found in the like Action, and (If Reports be true) the
FREQUENTEST of any Man that ever I heard, called by the Name of a Quaker.

Observe.
A very high and foul Charge to render G. F. a Flyer in times of Persecution,
yea, the frequentest Flyer or Goer out of Meetings, when Persecutors came, of
any man that ever he heard called by the Name of a Quaker. Oh sad! Will any
that has known G. F's many and frequent Sufferings, and long Imprisonments for
the Truth's sake, believe this Accusation, so grossly cast upon him, and that on
no better Proof, than IF REPORTS BE TRUE; when doubtless W. R. could not but
know such Reports to be false. This is that Judicious and Conscientious Person
William Rogers, that is so severely set against Censuring and Judging Persons
upon Reports, without hearing the Accusers and the accused Face to Face, who
thus extrajudicially and grossly has represented a Person in Print as the most
frequent Flyer in times of Persecution, of any called a Quaker, that ever he
heard of, and that upon Reports, with an If, i. e. IF REPORTS BE TRUE, but his
pretenses of Justice will not hide his manifest Injustice.

It is to be noted that W. R. in his 2d part, page 88. has Printed these
Reports against Jasper Batt, viz. That he went abroad Preaching, thereby
occasioning sometimes twenty Pound Fines, sometimes forty Pound Fines to be
imposed on the Hearers -- whilst his Estate was well secured out of the
Persecutors reach. And yet W. R. would be thought a very Just man in this case,
by this False and Hypocritical pretense, page 89. viz. We are not willing to
accuse on Report: When it is his frequent Practice against G. F. and others,
which if he be Just toward Jasper Batt, in not accusing him upon Report, then
he is very Unjust to G. F. in accusing and judging him upon Reports: And he
has not shown himself Ingenious toward J. B. in Printing those Reports
against him, to cast and leave an Odium upon him, which we are not bound to
Credit all, either as undeniable Verities, or as justly stated by him upon bare
Report.

And this is not all, as to G. F. we must proceed further to find some more
likely proofs for his Charge against G. F. of Flying in time of Persecution,
and that is to some pretended Certificates and Testimonies in his fifth part,
page 62, 63. in the first whereof mention is made, Of a Meeting held in
Broad-Mead in the City of Bristol, when Persecution attended Friends, and that
G. F. stood up and spoke in the Meeting, and after departed out of the Meeting
at a back pair of Stairs, a very considerable time before the Meeting broke up,
and was not taken Prisoner that day; and the ground of his departure at that
time, we have cause to believe, was to avoid being taken Prisoner.

Now M. G. M. N. and A. D. who are the Subscribers, we are sorry your Names
should be exposed in Print to such an impertinent and silly Testimony as this,
to gratify an Envious Spirit against G. F. and we testify, the Charge
contained in it is no matter of Testimony, but an Accusation on your own
belief, that his departure then was to avoid being taken Prisoner, nor do we
remember any back pair of Stairs belonging to that Meeting, but such as were a
common passage to it; such Insinuation therefore was not kind nor friendly. To
your Testimony, so called, William James says, He also can bear Witness. And
also Nathaniel Day says thus, viz. I believe his so departing was to save
himself from being taken by the Persecutors. [How now N. D? how come thou in
Print, as a Witness for W. R? Look at home and mind thy own condition.]

But to the Matter, we have this to say, That as your Belief imports no matter
of Testimony, so if the belief of all those who have appeared a Party with W.
R. were taken and Recorded for Certificates and Testimonies against G. F. we
might have more strange Testimonies; suppose they believe as W. R. does, and
are full of Jealousy, as he is, they might Write and Print such Testimonies as
this, viz.

We believe and are jealous that G. F. is an Apostate, an Innovator, an Imposer
of Blind Obedience, a Deceiver, a Liar, one that has the Mark of the Beast,
the greatest Fleer in times of Persecution, that ever we heard of, among any
called Quakers, etc. according as W. R. has represented him; pray what kind of
valid Testimonies would these be? and of what Credit with impartial Readers?
from such as are a party with W. R. against G. F. Oh Friends! consider what
Impertinencies and silly Occasions PREJUDICE is apt to produce; and we must
tell W. R. that this kind of his proceeding to Print such pretended
Testimonies, or rather Accusations, grounded on the Belief (or Jealousy) of a
Party, is a new kind of process, neither Christian nor Legal; has he heard the
Accusers and the accused Face to Face in this matter, according to his own
rule? We presume he has not; then what a new uncouth and irregular course has
he taken to Infamize a Person in Print, upon pretended Testimonies and
Certificates, without any real Proof or lawful Evidence on any Judicial
procedure? At what an easy rate can he Defame and Expose Friends by Name to
public censure in Print? Besides, (Friends, M. G. M. N. A. D. W. J. and N. D.)
your pretended Testimonies bear no Date, as to the Day and Time, when that
Meeting in Bristol was held, when G. F. departed (as you believe) to avoid
Imprisonment, nor as to the day and time of the making and signing your said
Testimonies, nor do you show how long it was between the time of the said
Meeting, and the making and signing your said Testimonies, and we may question
whether they were formed and drawn up by your selves, or by W. R. or whether
you were not drawn by him to sign them? And whether it was by your advice or
consent that he Printed them? However, Pray, for the time to come, be you more
careful, and no more drawn to sign such Insignificant and Impertinent
Testimonies or Certificates against any Friend or Brother, to gratify an
Envious Revengeful Spirit, as is W. R's.

And now Samuel Hollister, how come thou to expose thy Ancient deceased
Uncle's Name in such a Certificate as this? viz. I do also remember that my
Uncle Dennis Hollister did acquaint me, That G. F. did advise him to absent
himself from Meetings in time of Persecution.

Have thou herein shown that Reverent respect to thy Aged, Grave Uncle, as thou
oughtst to have done, thus to expose his Name so long after his decease? which
doubtless had he been alive, he would either have prevented, or severely
reprehended thee for; and we may justly question whether thou have given a Just
and Impartial account of thy deceased Uncle's Words in this matter, when he is
not here to answer for himself; to be sure thou have not given a Circumstantial
Account to render it credible to us; and do thou not know, that Circumstances
may greatly vary matters? Nor do we believe that G. F. gave him any such
general Advice as to absent himself from Meetings in time of Persecution; for
he absolutely denis it, and says, He did encourage him to the contrary, when he
was able or capable. Do thou not know and remember, that thy Uncle was an
Aged, Weakly and Sickly man, that much kept his Chamber in Winter time, and
therefore sometimes unfit to endure such Hardship and Sufferings as Friends
were often exposed to, at Meetings? Was he then meet to expose himself to stand
in the Streets, when Friends were either haled out, or kept out of their
Meetings in the Streets? Thou say thou Remembrest thy Uncle did acquaint
thee, but thou certifies neither Day nor Year when. And suppose G. F. spoke any
thing in tenderness to thy Uncle, with respect to his Age and Infirmity of
Body, it could not amount to any such general advice as to absent from Meetings
in time of Persecution, he having encouraged him to the contrary. However,
could it be Just in thee to expose both thy Uncle and G. F. as thou have done,
to gratify W. R. his Spirit of Enmity against Friends, in such a Certificate?
Whether of thy framing, and whether Printed by thy advice or consent, or not,
thou can best Answer; we do not believe it will be grateful to Dennis
Hollister's honest Children and Family, to see their Ancient, Grave and
Honored Father's Name thus exposed in Print, so long after his Decease, to
gratify an Envious, Quarelsom, Proud, Disdainful Spirit.

Disaffect. XLVII.
W. R. 1st part, page 31. Neither can we be at Unity with the Appearance of
that Spirit (be it in whomsoever it will) that can Recriminate Men as
Tythe-Payers, who have been faithful in their Testimony, relating to Tithes,
and yet advises Friends to purchase Tithes, which is G. F's Case, with
relation to his Advice unto Nathaniel Crips and Robert Arch, according as is
treated on and proved by Certificates under their Hands.

Observe.
This indeed is a Heavy Charge and Judgment against G. F. and the matter if
duly and judicially proved, with the Accusers and the Accused Face to Face,
before Competent Persons, would be as justly condemnable, as for one to judge
fleeing in Times of Persecution, and yet be the frequentest Fleer himself: But
we question whether W. R. has given this Charge against G. F. on any such due
and regular proceeding and hearing of both Parties Face to Face, and that
before a proper Judicature; but this we presume he has not, although he has
given positive Sentence, that it is G. F's Case, to wit, To blame men as
Tythe-Payers, and yet advise a Friend to purchass Tithes: But this G. F.
denies. Let Us Examine the Certificates mentioned, 5th part, page 54, 55. which
W. R. cites for Testimony against G. F. viz.

This is to Certify, etc. That G. F. being several Years past at my House -- I
told him, That in the Parish where I dwell there is both Priest and
Impropriator, and that both of them claimed Tithes of the Inhabitaints; and
amongst our Discourse that we had there-about, G. F. then advised me, To
Purchase the Tithes of them: This he spoke in Love to me, and I took it no
otherwise; but if he will prosecute others for such things whereof he is more
guilty himself, he will much loose his Honor, and hardly ever recover it. Thus
far Nathaniel Crips, dated, the 23d of the 11th Month, 1677.

Robert Arch his Testimony, viz.
G. F. being at my House, (as I remember, it was the time that he came into our
Country to set up the Monthly and Quarterly Meetings) and there being several
Writings read of G. F's in which there was written (as I remember) That such
Friends as did pay Tithes, should be Exhorted or Admonished, etc. -- In my
Garden I told him, There was two or three Priests, and two Impropriators did
claim Tithe of me, or of my Land, etc. -- Said G. F. to me, Can not thou buy
it? Buy it (said he) I answered him, That I did look upon it to be no odds or
difference between paying of it and buying of it. Dated, the 18th of the 11th
Month, 1677.

Observe.
We grant, that the Buying Tithes, or Compounding with the Priests for them, is
not consistent (but contrary to) our Testimony; but G. F. positively denies,
that he so advised or intended; there has been some Mistake in the Case, it is
probable; and here is no date of the day and year when he so advised, in either
of these Certificates or Testimonies, as W. R. calls them: The one says, it
was several Years past; the other says, as he remembers, it was that time that
he came into their Country. It seems, 'twas several (or many) Years after they
had some private Discourse apart with G. F. that they made their Certificates
or Testimonies from it, and that upon the Credit of their Memories, which might
easily fail them in so many years time; and which incertainty W. R. has
grounded his Charge and Judgment against G. F. upon, as having advised a Friend
to Purchase Tithes, thus to make this a matter of Credit against G. F. he lays
it down, under the Title of Testimony, with his own Judgment presumed on it, to
wit, that he so advised them to buy their Tithes, which is contrary to G. F's
known Testimony and Principle, who has been for several Years, and is at this
present in trouble for Non-Payment of Tithe, being under prosecution at Law,
because he cannot comply with the Plantiff, which is far from buying off his
Tithe. And that which renders these men's Certificates of less Credit, is, that
G. F. would have them that paid Tithe admonished: Strange! what admonished
against Tithe, and at the same time advise to the buying off Tithe? that is very
Improbable. And why should he advise them to purchase or buy the Tithes of the
Priests? For what time, or how long could they sell them, or give them Title to
them? Has the Priest the Tithe any longer than for his Life? and how uncertain
is that? But has not N. C. appeared an Accuser of G. F. as being more Guilty
himself, etc? And does W. R. in point of Judicial Proceedings, allow of an
Accuser or Informer to be a Competent Witness? we suppose not; some of his
Party have distinguished between a Witness and an Accuser; but he has taken N.
C's Information for Testimony against G. F. yea, for granted; he has given his
Censure and Judgment upon it, that G. F. did so advise to the Purchasing or
Buying of Tithes, both of the Priest and Impropriators. But before he gave this
Judgment and exposed those Certificates in Print, did he Examine and hear all
the Parties concerned Face to Face? Did he Examine and hear all Circumstances
on all hands relating to the Accuser and Accused, face to face? We may presume
he did not. And who induced N. C. and R. A. to make and give out their
Certificates upon a Private Discourse so many years after? Have they not done
Unkindly and Prejudicially therein, and W. R. more basely to Print them, and
give a Judgment thereupon, without hearing the Parties face to face? Where was
his Justice? his Conscientiousness and his Legality pretended, according to his
own Plea upon John 7. 51. Does our Law judge any man before it hear him, and
know what he does? And Acts 25. 16. For him which is Accused, to have his
Accusers face to face, and have License to Answer for himself concerning the
Crime laid against him; and not to judge and censure a Person in matter of
Fact, when unheard in Defense of himself? has not W. R. much pleaded for this
Method? but how has he kept to it? Did he hear G. F. and N. C. and R. A. face
to face, and G. F. answer for himself, and make his own Defense before them?
and that before such time as he had exposed and promulgated their Certificates,
and his Censure and Judgment against G. F. upon them? If not, (as we are apt to
think he did not) then what gross Hypocrisy, Irregularity, as well as Unfair
and Unchristian Dealing, is he guilty of? And how False and Inconsistent with
himself is he in these matters discovered to be? And how will he escape the
Grand Mark of Apostasy (in his own Terms and Sense) in judging and censuring a
Person unheard in Defense of himself before his Accusers face to face? Let the
Impartial and Prudent judge.

And now, N. C. thou have known something what belongs to the Administration of
Justice, do thou not know, that the Omission of Material Circumstances, in
point of Evidence, may greatly alter the Case? And what probable Circumstances
have thou given in thy pretended Testimony? How tender is Common Law and
Justice in such Cases? Chief Justice Cook says, Quod in Criminalibus
Probatione debent Esse Luce clariores, Cook's Institut. 3d part, fol. 210. i.
e. That in Criminals, Proofs (or Testimonies) ought to be more clear than the
Light. And Michael Dalton plainly shows how many ways Justice may be
perverted; amongst which he mentions, When they proceed hastily, without due
Examination and Consideration of the Fact, and of all MATERIAL CIRCUMSTANCES,
without hearing both Parties; for as one says, (Qui aliquid Statuerit, Part
inaudita altera, aequum Licet Statuerit haud equus. est) He that shall Judge or
Determine of a Matter, the one Party being Unheard, although he shall Judge
Aright, yet is he not a just Judge. We do confess, and will grant, That where
Matters Criminal of outward Fact or Overt Act are charged, it is most safe and
judicial to have the Parties face to face, and a fair and equal Hearing and
Proof, before Judgment be given. But this is not the Case of W. R. who in many
things is Informer, Accuser and Judge, and herein has assumed to give Judgment
without any such equal Hearing or Evidence.

What Concerns Matters of Charge, Trespass or Crime upon Persons, in common Law
and Justice, ought to have fair and judicial Hearing of all Parties, and
sufficient Evidence Outward, of the Fact, before Judgment be past; but true
Judgment of Spirits, Angels, or Inward States, considered abstractly, without
outward Evidence of Matter of Fact (whether they be Good or Evil) this cannot
be without a Spiritual Discerning, Inward Sense, or Divine Revelation given by
Christ Jesus, whereby both Right and Wrong Spirits and States have been
Discovered, even Satan, when Transformed as an Angel of Light, and his
Ministers, when transformed like the Ministers of Christ. And W. R. 1st part,
page 2. himself grants, The Evidence of our heavenly Union to spring from that
which neither the Carnal Eye, nor the Carnal Ear could be Witnesses of: And
page 24. We who had believed in the Light of our Lord Jesus Christ, had the
Evidence in our selves, that we were of the true Brotherhood, and Members of
Christ's Body. So that he has granted an Inward and Spiritual Evidence in
Spiritual Cases, which is higher than the outward.

But to the occasion of N. C' s Certificate, aforesaid, What kind of Discourse
could be between him and G. F. that he could ground HIS CHARGE upon? (as W. R.
calls it) Or what Discourse could they have that might any ways seem (in N.
C's Apprehention) to look like an Advice, to Buy his Tithe of Priest and
Impropriator? for we are not willing to leave him under the suspicion of a
designed Forgery in this Case, but rather in Charity, to impute it partly to
the Infirmity of his Age, and Defect of Memory, that he has thus represented G.
F. as having advised him to buy his Tithe, and that this said Certificate was
prejudicially drawn from him so many years after that private Discourse he had
with G. F. which he grounds it upon, as it is very possible and easy for an
Aged Man's Memory to fail him, in such a Case, that is, in making a Prejudicial
Certificate or Charge, upon a private Discourse, many Years after the
Discourse, as his against G. F. was; What then could be the Matter or Subject
of that Discourse, which he might very likely be Mistaken in? Was there any
thing said about Buying off Tithe on any account? To this we may cite G. F's
own Answer to W. R's Queries, in a large Manuscript, dated, the 20th of the 9th
Month, 1678. in these words, viz.

I could hardly have believed that N. Crips would have done such a thing, as I
told him, when I came to his House, that he did confess he had sent such a
Certificate to Bristol to W. R. as I take it. I asked him, When it was that I
should bid him buy off his Tithes, and what Year? he told me, He could not tell
-- he said it was in the Field, but could not tell what Year; then the thing
came into my mind, what I said to him, his Son, and others, about twenty Years
since, how that -- H. Lower came from Cornwall to London, and endeavored to
Convince several of the Parliament Men how they might ease the Nation of the
grand Oppression of Tithe -- and to buy off all the Impropriators Tithes, (the
manner of the expedient for the Money to buy them off, we here omit) and this I
might say would do very well, unto him and several others; but for him to turn
this and say I advised him to buy off his Tithes, he does me a great deal of
wrong; and he told me then, it was his Principle to pay his Tithes to the
Impropriators -- I was sorry for him, that he neither writ nor spoke to me
about it this twenty Years, I took it unkindly from him; and if he does give
forth an Hundred Certificates, and W. R. spread them abroad contrary to what I
have here asserted, I shall not give Credit to them; none will that fear the
Lord, that knows my Innocence, and the Falsehood of thy Charges, etc. Thus far
G. F.

By all which it appears that this G. F's discourse concerned something H. L.
had to propound to the then Parliament, to make some Provision for the buying
off the Impropriators Tithes, and not to advise him or any particular Person
charged with those Tithes to buy them off, such a mistake does greatly alter
the Case: And we may add, that whatever the private discourse was between G. F.
and N. C. when in Friendship and Kindness, was it not very unfair and
unfriendly in N. C. to frame a Certificate thereupon so many Years after
against G. F. and not only so, but to put it into the Hands of W. R. an
Adversary to G. F. and others, and then for W. R. to expose it in Print, as a
Charge against G. F. to make him a Transgressor, an Adviser to that in Private,
which was contrary to his Testimony in Public, which G. F. has so plainly
denied, and testified against.

But N. C. we would ask thee a Question or two farther:

1st, Whether two Public Friends in the Ministry, after a Meeting at
Nailsworth, in the 6th Month, 1679. did not ask thee, Whether thou gave thy
Advice or Consent, that William Rogers should insert thy Certificate concerning
George Fox, about buying of the Tithes, in his Paper or Letter which he sent to
the Yearly Meeting before; and whether thou gave William Rogers any order so
to Publish it to the Nation, as he endeavored in his Paper?

2dly, Whether thou did not then give this Answer, viz. NO SURE; I gave no
such Advice; I knew nothing of his so doing; he had no order from me, to spread
it any further, than to produce it at Bristol, if there was occasion, when G.
F. went down thither, I hearing that he then intended to proceed or give
Testimony against J. S. and J. W. concerning Tithes, and I was desired to give
that Certificate, only to produce then at Bristol, if there was such occasion,
not expecting it should have gone any further? Can thou deny this to be thy
Answer?

3dly, We desire to know, who it was that desired thee to give that Certificate?

4thly, Whether thou gave any order to W. R. to put thy Certificate in Print
against G. F? and whether or no thou do now approve of his so doing?

And we do not find, that W. R. does clear himself from the Censure of breaking
Covenant, in his sending forth a Relation of some Passages discoursed on
between himself and other Friends at Bristol, in the 12th Month, 1677. with
his own and William Ford's Name to it (Entitled, A brief Relation of some
Passages happening among the People called Quakers at the City of Bristol,
since the late coming of George Fox, George Whitehead and William Penn, in the
11th Month, 1677.) contrary to the Propositions and Agreement made between
William Penn and himself, etc. by his alleging, that in that Agreement, There
is not a word intimating, that no other Relation should go forth; and that
there was not one word of Covenant or Agreement, that any Person should be
obliged not to send abroad a Narative, whether it might relate to all, any or
either of the Meetings, part 5. page 15, and 88.

Whereas he knows the Method was mutually agreed upon, for a Narative or Record
of all that each Party thought fit to have written, and which should be finally
agreed by both Persons, to be a true Record, Minute or Memorial of the
Conference; and that any Friend present had the Liberty to speak his or her
Mind; and that every such thing said by Friends on either side, if desired,
might also be recorded, as more fully intimated in the first and third
Propositions agreed upon, 5th part, page 10, 11. and that all things so agreed
on to be Recorded, should be subscribed by both Parties, and by, at least, six
Credible Persons of each side, as in the second Proposition.

Now though this could not be done at the end of each Meeting, as was proposed,
(for want of Time and Opportunity to read over and Correct what was done, for
such mutual Subscription) yet neither the Agreement, nor the Intent of it gave
any Liberty for one Party alone, without the other, to send out a Narative or
Relation of Passages relating to any of those Meetings, as W. R. did send out a
Relation containing diverse Reflections and his Disaffections, which were the
very subjects partly debated on, without the Answers of those Friends charged
by him, wherein we cannot perceive, that he either acted justly, or as a man
keeping to the Agreement in that matter, but the contrary; and therefore his
saying, That there was not a word intimating, that no other Relation should go
forth: This appears a mean shift; he might as well say, that in the Agreement
or Covenant made, for the manner of proceeding to, and subscribing a Narative
or Record by both Parties, there is not one word, that either Party should do
contrary, or send out any Narative prejudicial to the other Party, contrary to
that Agreement or Covenant; no, what need of any such word? 'Twere absurd, the
Method and Rules were agreed upon for a Narative or Record, by mutual Consent
and Subscription, and W. R. has done contrary, in sending out a Prejudicial,
Partial and Reflecting Account of his own; therefore has W. R. therein acted
Irregularly and Unjustly; and there is in being and readiness a fuller Account
and Demonstration of his Perfidious and Injurious Proceeding, contrary to
Agreement in this Case; and therefore we do not understand, that he has gotten
himself from under the aforesaid Censure, but that the more he strives in it,
and other Matters (that we esteem him justly charged and chargeable with) the
more he will but manifest his own Impertinency, as he has in this and many
other Cases.

Disaffect. XLVIII.
In G. F's Questions to J. W. 4th part, page 8. Question 3. Whether did thou
read or consent to be read in a Quarterly Meeting at Kendall a Paper that
directed, that the Way of Truth should be as the Way of a Ship in the Sea, or
such like? [He Answers thus, viz.

Answ. Nay; but if they mean no Impression of Form left behind, I like it well.
(And J. S. gives this Answer, viz. I consented to a Paper that had some such
Words, but knew not 'twas A. Pearson' s, page 13.)

Observe.
We are wholly dissatisfied with this Answer; yet in point of Charity we may
suppose, that they intended not to exclude the Power of Godliness from having
its remaining Impressions upon the Hearts; but how this can be without leaving
any Impression of the Form of Godliness, appears not consistent with our
ancient Testimony, viz. The Power brings forth its own Form, there is the form
of Godliness, the form of sound Words, the Example of Christ and his faithful
Followers and Ministers, the Footsteps of the holy Flock of Christ which we
are to walk in, as J. W. but a few Words after his Answer in the same page
grants. But what a sad thing would it be if Friends in our Age should give
way to such an Opinion, as to leave no Impression of the form of Godliness upon
their Children that succeed them, who are to be trained up in the way that they
should walk in the fear of God? It had been more safe and clear for J. W. to
have testified against the precedent Words, viz. That the Way of Truth should
be as the Way of a Ship in the Sea, than to allow them such a meaning and
likening as no Impression of Form to be left behind; for in Prove. 30. 19. where
the Way of an Eagle in the Air, the Way of a Serpent upon a Rock, the Way of
a Ship in the midst of the Sea, etc. are mentioned, it follows, that such is
the Way of an Adultrous Woman, verse. 20. Her way is compared to that of a Ship
in the Sea, etc. but so is not the Way of Truth: We hope in the Lord, that
both the Power and Form of Godliness, Christian Order and Examples in our Age
will have lasting and remaining IMPRESSIONS on many Souls for Ages to come.

Disaffect. XLIX.
Fourth part, page 31, 32. VV. R. Pride must have a fall; and that my
Persuasion is, the Lord has suffered this great Evil to come upon him, and to
be thus manifested unto those who have professed his Name, that they may have
no dependency on any other Name, that may be given under Heaven, but the Name
of Jesus, the Eternal Son of the Living God.

Observe.
We are not only greatly dissatisfied with the severe judgment contained in
these words against G. F. to his defamation, but also with the more general
Censure, unjustly insinuated thereby against such as profess the Name of the
Lord among us, as having been, at least, in danger of a Dependency on some
Other Name under Heaven, than the Name of Christ Jesus, the Eternal Son of the
Living God: This is to expose Friends to the Jealousy and Suspicion of their
Enemies and Persecutors, as for being incident to Idolize and set up Mortal
Man, or the Name of some Mortal, above the Name of the Eternal Son of God, for
Salvation; which we abhor, as Idolatrous, and contrary to the Testimony and
Sense we have of the Son of God revealed in his People for Life and Salvation.

Disaffect. L.
Fourth part, page 43. in J. W's Letter to G. F. are these words, viz. If J.
N's Opposition consisted in NOT REPROVING HIS COMPANY, when they Bowed to him,
and Cried, HOSANA; let it be a Warning to thee, and Reprove THY COMPANY when
they give thee the Titles and Honor due to the Highest.

Observe.
[REPROVE THY COMPANY, etc.] An Odious and Foul Aspersion, as well as General,
upon all that have a tender Respect for G. F. for who else can he term his
Company? and we utterly detest and abhor both the Accusation and Practice of
giving to any Creature the Titles and Honor due to the Highest: And what is
the Tendency of such Reproach, but even to render many Innocent Friends
Blasphemous? and consequently (and especially, as now in Print) to raise great
Enmity, Persecution and Contempt in Truth's Adversaries against G. F. and
others, if the Lord did not prevent, and stand by the Innocent? Is it possible
such bitter Invective words should proceed from J. W. against his Elder
Brother, and other Friends? It Is real matter of Grief unto us, to see such
black Lines from him, who has known better things: And set Case any in Weakness
have spoken too highly, unadvisedly or unwarrantably, out of an esteem of any
Person, could it be either tender or like a Christian Spirit, to expose them to
the World, to the Reproach and Fury of their Adversaries? Has not this been the
way of our Professed Enemies to render some Friends Admirers and Adorers of
Persons or Creatures, setting up Man, etc? What better, in these Cases, do
these professed Friends than John Pennyman, Robert Rich, Jeoffery Bullock,
Controversy Ended, Tyranny and Hypocrisy, Quakers Quibbles, Spirit of the
Hat, etc? [Perverse Pamphlets] Oh John! where is the Ancient Love, Tenderness
and Regard to the Honor of Truth? Thou have known many of us understand better
than to Idolize Men or Creatures. How came thy Letter in Print, wherein thou
have shown so much Harshness and Severity against G. F. and those thou slightly
termest HIS COMPANY? Do thou not know, that this kind of smiting at G. F. and
those that own him (or have a tender esteem of him) tends to bring the People
called Quakers into Infamy and Reproach, and to add to their Affliction, by
smiting at them through him, or smiting them upon his Back? And can thou
reasonably think, thou servest Truth's Interest by such kind of smiting at thy
Brethren and Fellow Servants, as thou have formerly esteemed them? And did W.
R. Print these thy Letters by thy Advice or Order? or did he do it Voluntarily
on his own Head? And do thou own his Printing them, or not? If thou art but
so far unconcerned in his Work, as not to approve or allow of his thus
Printing, we desire thy plain and ingenious Answer; and whether W. R. has
rightly cited thy words, which we have recited, and complain of?

Disaffect. LI.
Part 4. page 77, 78, 79. In another Letter of J. W's to G. F. are these
Passages, viz. It may be feared, many do Eye more the Orders from thee, than
they Eye the Lord in them, accusing and judging all out of Truth, that Practice
not with all speed from them, using all FORCE they can devise, according to the
Power they have, to Compel all to them, Censuring all Friends out of the
Unity, that come not to Practice with them, which is the greatest Penalty and
Persecution they can Inflict for WANT OF OUTWARD POWER.

[Compared with the following Passage, page 78, 79. viz.]
For the Enemy of Truth has taken occasion from thy Orders, to beget a false
Birth in many -- And Angry Proceedings about them, of late declare, which was
not before in our Age, neither did Heads nor Horns of the Dragon appear to cast
down the holy People, by lying against them, saying, that they oppose the holy
Orders; and by approving of such Proceedings is Satan let loose in our Time, to
deceive; and all that see his Transformings, he casts Floods out of his Mouth
against them, to carry them away, and cast such to the Earth, wanting nothing
to effect his Design but the OUTWARD POWER to carry them on to KILL; for his
Wrath is against them that keep the Testimony of Jesus Christ, and such he
accuses of fleshly Liberty, and loose Walking.

Observe.
We look upon these unkind and bitter Passages and Insinuations to be very
Pernicious, and as proceeding from a wrong Conception, and Birth of Cruel
Jealousies, under the pretense of fear concerning many, and not from the Spirit
of Christ; and the Construction made of some's Censuring some out of the Unity,
for their Opposition (to such Orders, or orderly proceedings, as they account
good and wholesome) as the greatest Penalty and Persecution they can Inflict;
and that they would Inflict greater, if they had but outward Power, this
appears very Uncharitable, even the same that our open professed Adversaries
have often Insinuated against us, and greatly tends to stir up Persecution
against us, as do also the following words, viz. WANTING NOTHING TO EFFECT HIS
DESIGN BUT THE OUTWARD POWER TO CARRY. THEM ON TO KILL. Here, John, thou have
severely prejudged many, which we are assured, thou have no Proof for, but thy
own Jealousy. Remember how thy Friend and Advocate W. R. has severely
censured such kind of Prejudicate Proceedings, as the censuring and judging
Persons without a Hearing, or Proof of Matter of Fact; but have thou heard any
Friends ever grant, they want only the outward Power to carry them on more
severely to Persecute and Kill you? Oh John! we are persuaded thou must meet
with an Hour of Tribulation for this Prejudicial and Uncharitable Dealing! Were
ever worse things exposed in Print against us before? And would thou be thus
dealt by? We pray God to give thee a sight of the Danger of these things, and
tender thy Heart unto Repentance, and a Return to thy first Love; for thou have
known better things than these thy Printed Letters bespeak; which if thou
gave way to the Printing them, thou wast not aware how they would (and
assuredly do) make against thy Interest, and your Cause, which W. R. Pleads and
Advocates for. And we would seriously ask, Whether such bitter Invectives and
Infamies, cast upon G. F. and others, in thy Letters, do not rather show forth
the Heads and Horns of the Dragon, than the Zeal of any Friends does in
testifying for good Order and Government in the Church of Christ, and against
fleshly Liberty and loose Walking? which if any such have exceeded in their
zeal, or their zeal at any time has not been so prudently and warily managed
(in thy or your account) as should have been; yet to judge them as so far
possessed with the Wrath of the Dragon, as that by them he accuses such as
keep the Testimony of Jesus, with fleshly Living and loose Walking; this we
think is very Hard and Uncharitable: and we pray thee consider these things.

And let it be observed also, that in W. R's Letter to G. F. part 4. page 97.
is this passage, viz. Therefore is the zeal of the Lord of Hosts kindled
against that ungodly insinuating Spirit, that makes it its business to
bespatter J. S. and J. W. whereby the Simple-hearted may be in danger to be
turned out of the Way.

Upon which we must needs note, how Zealous he is for these two Persons, and
what a great stress he lays upon them and their Reputations; as if to write or
speak what reflects upon them, might endanger the turning the Simple-hearted
out of the Way; and why so? We may suppose it is because he thinks that many
Simple-hearted have a good Opinion of them; though we would tell him, not so
many since VV. R. became such a furious Advocate for them as before; a great
many are offended at his Book, and at him for suffering it to come forth, and
him to go on in their defense, without showing public and absolute dislike
thereof. The truth on it is, whatever J. S. and J. W. may think of W. R. he has
been Instrumental extremely to lessen their Esteem; though we do not approve of
any making it their business to bespatter them, neither do we know of any
Friends that so do; However W. R. has made it a great part of his business to
Bespatter and Revile many of the Servants of Christ, whom many simple-hearted
Ones has a good belief and esteem of: He has taken but little care to prevent
their being turned out of the way by his bespattering such, and that by Name in
Print, wherein his great Partiality and Injustice is the more evident.

Disaffect. LII.
W. R. third part, page 28. I now appeal to God's Witness in all Consciences,
whether the outward establishment of outward Government, under the Notion of
Christ's Government, does not seem to square more with the Principles of such
who look for his second coming in some outward Bodily Appearance, than with the
Principles of those who conclude his second coming to be by his Spiritual
Appearance in the Heart.

Observe.
Under pretense of this solemn Appeal, here is a perverse Insinuation and false
Comparison to represent us, as squaring with (as we take it, he means) the
Principle of Christ's Personal Reign ( i. e. by himself alone) in outward Power
and Dominion: This compared with J. W's words before-cited (about wanting the
outward Power, etc.) tends to make us Offensive still, and to expose us to
Suffering. Why will he admit of no outward Government in the Church, called
Christ's Government? Is not this to account all outward Government
Antichrist's? And does not this square with such whom he compares us to? Surely
William Rogers has known otherwise and better things of US, that is, of the
People called QUAKERS, who own Christ's Second Coming to be by his Spirit in
the Heart, Principally and Immediately to set up His Government there, and to
bring forth true Judgment, Righteousness and good Order (in his Church and
People) which extends and appears even Outwardly: Christ Rules both Inwardly
and Outwardly; Inwardly by his Spirit, and Outwardly by his faithful Ministers;
not by the Will of Man, nor by the Arm of Flesh, nor by Carnal Force, but in a
Gospel way, and of the Increase of his Government and Peace, there shall be no
End: His Government is a peaceable Government, and Endless, in the Increase and
Peace. The manner and Extent of his Government, and the Concern of his
Ministers and Servants therein, is more fully opened before.

Here follows a few Collections on a Re-view of some of W. R's Concessions or
Acknowledgments to Truth, and his Severe Uncharitable smiting against G. F. and
others, with brief Notes on them, omitted in the precedent Discourse; also a
few Questions added, of Concern to J. S. and J. W.
[A Concession to Truth in pretense.]
Part 1. page 56. We account it our Duty to follow the Appearance of the Spirit
of God, in the meanest Member, when our Consciences are Convicted that it is the
Appearance of the Spirit.

Observe.
The great difference then is in this, that all Instructions and Precepts these
men oppose are such as they do not believe the Spirit of God to be the Mover
of, nor have they an esteem of such Members or Ministers, whose Counsel they
reject; for all who feel Unity in the Spirit, are of one Heart and Mind, in the
great Essential Commands relating to Godliness and Honesty, and are not willing
to be at variance about any ^^^er, Outward or Circumstantial Matters; but to be
so tenderly condescending one to another in those things, as they may keep
their Peace and sweet Society, so as their Actions may concur to one good and
principal End; here the weak are supported, and the feeble strengthened, as the
Fathers and Aged know how to bear with Children in their Infancy; it is the
Contentious and Obstinate, the Selfwilled and Conceited that make Opposition
and Disturbance, and cause Divisions and Strife; their Minds are not peaceable,
nor they Sociable, but break the Bonds of Society (like Unruly Cattle, that
will not be quiet, but be Wincing, Pushing and Biting at their Fellows, until
separated --) being such as run into Looseness, against all Order and
Government, till the very Spirit and Anarchy of the Ranters becomes their
Liberty, from all which God preserve his People.

Disaffect. LIII.
W. R. page 92. The Submission spoken of, clearly centereth in a Submission to
G. F. and the NAME of Monthly and Quarterly Meetings; compared with his
Postscript, part 1. viz. The blind Zealot, Principled to Eye the Brethren,
instead of the Light in himself; and his consideration, how fruitless all Man's
outward Endeavors, under the Notion of Church Government, has been to
preserve in a Real, True, Heavenly Society: It appears to us a mere Badge of
Apostasy for any to have a depency on any such Means of Preservation, Part 1.
page 43.

Observe.
Is It, These are manifest Untruths relating to Submission; for we are for that
Submission which centureth in Christ, our Lord and Lawgiver, and not in any
man besides, though an Instrument in Christ's Hand, much less in the mere NAME
of those said Meetings, nor do we exalt the Power of any Assemblies, as
Assemblies of Men, one above another, further than the Power of God appears
more Eminent in degree in one, than another, which W. R. has plainly granted,
Part 3. page 78. So the Submission we owe, is to the Power of God.

2dly, We dare Challenge him to prove any zealous or other Person, so
Principling any, or any Person so Principled among the People called Quakers,
as to EYE THE BRETHREN, INSTEAD OF THE LIGHT IN THEMSELVES: Where can he find
such Zealots among us? What Gross and Scandalous Insinuations have we from him!

3dly, Of all Man's outward Endeavors, etc. he should have distinguished
between Man's Endeavors without Christ, and Man's Endeavors in and by Christ,
who said, Without me ye can do nothing; for Christ makes use of Instruments,
good Men and Persons, to stir up others to Love and heavenly Union; and good
Men's Endeavors in him, and by his Assistance, have been, and are blessed, and
not fruitless toward a real heavenly Union, Society and Order in Christ Jesus,
to whom we owe the Submission in the Performance of such outward Directions and
Order, as we see and feel him to be the Author of.

Disaffect. LIVE.
W. R. page 93. The Argument used by the Serpent to tempt Eve, was this [YE
SHALL BE AS GODS] EVEN SO we are persuaded, that there has not been wanting
unto him a Tempting Eve, which has been too aspiring after such a State --
It Is to be DOUBTED, that this Aspiring Mind has had so much place with him, as
that he has taken too much upon him. Page 94. We dare not say, that his
preaching the Light in the Beginning of his Travel, as well as by others, his
fellow Servants, was not the Ministration given them of God -- It Is certainly
known, that MANY did on a sudden admire the Creature -- as if not only the
Planting and Watering were by him, but the Increase also -- Page 95. And it is
too much to BE FEARED, that the Imprudent Acceptance of what was unduely
offered (viz. of more Respect than was meet) has begotten a Spirit of Pride
and Exaltation in G. F. which the Lord is determined to bring into the Dust.

Observe.
1st, [ It Is to be doubted, etc.] These Jealous Insinuations, Doubts, and
pretended Fears, tend not only to render G. F. (and those that have a tender
Respect to him) Obnoxious and Odious, but to expose them to the Fury of the
Adversary, and so to Persecution; however, such his Doubts and Jealousies are
no Proofs.

2dly, [ That many did on a sudden admire the Creature, etc. It Is much to be
feared, that the Imprudent Acceptance, etc.] We look on these to be Gross and
Jealous Aspersions cast upon many, and to vilify G. F. also, still tending to
betray him, and many others, to the Jealous Censure and Fury of Persecuting
Adversaries: But the Lord has created a Defense upon the Glory of his Heritage.

Disaffect LV.
W. R. page 95. WE CANNOT be otherwise persuaded, but that he is fallen from
the Truth, and that the words reported to be spoken by J. N. when he said (in
relation to his own fallen State) I am but the Figure of another, are now
fulfilled in him: Oh! that the Lord would Change his Heart, and bring him to a
true sight and sorrow for his Sin, as he did J. N. after his fall! and then, we
hope, as he has been an Offense unto the Church of God, etc.

Observe.
We may presume, that he has abused J. N. in misapplying his Intention:
However, these Jealousies still tend to expose G. F. to Persecution, and to the
like Suffering and Reproach which J. N. under-went, by rendering him Guilty of
the like fall, or rather worse; and W. R. is so Tenatious in his ill Opinion,
that he CANNOT be otherwise persuaded, as he says; so he assumes to himself to
be an absolute Judge, an Unalterable, Infallible Judge, that will not be
persuaded nor convinced, contrary to the Judgment he has taken up, and
presented for himself and others, in the Plural Number, WE CANNOT be otherwise
persuaded, etc. but who these WE are, besides himself, he signifies not, save
only some pages before, i. e. page 87. we find William Ford's Name subscribed
with William Rogers, who has known better things in his time, than thus to be
concerned with W. R. in his work of Strife and Enmity, in his old Age; the Lord
bring him to a sense from whence he is fallen.

Disaffect. LVI. Part 2. Sect. 3. About Infallibility and Perfection.
VV. R. page 13. Albeit we must acknowledge that the Church of Christ, which is
built on the Rock Christ, cannot (whilst abiding on the Rock) be prevailed
against; yet no Argument from hence may rationally be brought to prove any one
Member of this Church, whilst on this side the Grave, not liable through
Temptation to Err and DEPART FROM the Rock, whilst there is an Enemy ready to
enter all, if they watch not. Compared with part 3. page 34. The Apostle might
well say, Be not unwise, but understanding what the Will of the Lord is (He
does not say what the Will of the Church is, but what the Will of the Lord is)
submitting your selves one to another in the fear of God.

Observe.
1st. [ Whilst abiding on the Rock etc. yet no Argument, etc.] This implies a
danger in the whole Church, and in every Member of Christ, of not abiding on
the Rock, of not Watching, and of Erring, yea, and of DEPARTING also from the
Rock; but this is but the condition of a weak Faith, and of little Growth,
short of being built, fixed and established in the Faith upon the Rock, which
Christ's Promise in this case extends to, i. e. Upon this Rock will I build my
Church, and the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against it; and they that trust
in the Name of the Lord, shall be as Mount Sion that shall never be removed.

Obs. 2dly, [ The Apostle does not say, what the will of the Church is, but
what the Will of the Lord is.] This Parenthesis is to oppose the will of the
Church to the Will of the Lord, and so render Christ and his Church divided,
but then he contradicts this Parenthesis in the very next Words, Submitting
your selves one to another in the fear of God. Very well; and was not this the
Will of the Church, so to submit in the fear of God? And could this be any
other than in his Will? Does the Church in the fear of God Will any other
submission than Christ wills in his Church? No sure; Christ does not will one
thing, and his Church in him another contrary: But to qualify or mend the
matter, W. R. (as one inwardly interrupted in his Attempts, but six Lines after
in the same page) says, I say [ not the Church, but what the Will of the Lord
is] yet hereby I would not be understood to render Christ and his Church
divided; but rather to show that his Will, who cannot Err, is a surer
Foundation to build upon, than the Wills of those, who, if they depart from
Christ their Rock, may Err.

Which we will readily grant him; but it is nothing to purpose; 'twill not serve
his turn for his opposing the Will of the Church (as undivided from Christ) to
his Will, but only to signify, that his meaning is, that the Will of the Lord,
who cannot Err, is a surer Foundation to build upon, than the Wills of those
who depart from Christ their Rock. But here he has varied from the Will of the
Church, as undivided from Christ, to the wills of those, who (if they depart
from Christ) may Err. How Impertinent to his purpose is this! If they depart
from Christ their Rock, they Unchurch themselves, and cease to be his Church.
But then, how if they do not depart from Christ? what then? (which is the Case
we aim at, and he should have kept to, then they are his Church, and in his
Will; and what they will and command (as in Unity with him) is Christ's will
and command, and if so, then W. R's Parenthesis before (on the Text, Ephesians. 5.
17, 21.) is wholly Impertinent and Improper (and his Inference remote and
foreign thereto) yea, contradictory to his desiring not to be understood, to
render Christ and his Church divided. Thus he says and unsayes; he is off and
on; he marrs, and he mends; he mends, and he marrs; he darkens Counsel with his
many VVindings, Twistings, and Tossings.

Concessions to Truth, which confute much of W. R's Book.
W. R. page 35. We do testify, the Principle of Truth leads none to be Rude,
either in Word or Action, nor yet to cross the Customs and Fashions of other
Societies, which in themselves are Comely, Decent, and of good Report. Page 36.
It Is good for every one in all things to mind the Inward, Divine and Spiritual
Teacher -- and then doubtless such will be led to take up the Cross in denial
of Self, and not be active in any thing that may justly be termed Rude or
Ignorant, but in those things that are Comely, Decent, and of good Report.

Observe.
This Concession overthrows much of his work against outward Methods, Rules,
etc. and condemns his Rudeness in much of his Book. And if the Principle of
Truth leads none to cross the Customs and Fashions of other Societies, which in
themselves are COMELY, DECENT, and of Good Report, then not to cross nor oppose
any Order, Form or Custom of our Society, which in it self is Comely, Decent,
and of good Report; and dare he affirm, that there are no such Customs among us
(in our Societies and Meetings) as in themselves are Comely, Decent, and of
good Report? or has he more Charity for the Customs and Fashions of other
Societies than for ours, which he has for so many Years owned and been in?

W. R. page 77. That* J. VV. and J. S. gave forth a Paper at Drawell -- That he
still owns, with that Interpretation he and J. VV. give; which if it will not
bear, then let them be judged, etc.

Qu. Is not W. R. Partial in his History, in not citing and publishing that
Paper, as he has others? and yet still advocating for and highly applauding the
Men, as Ancient and Honorable Friends, not exceeded in Godliness by any Mortal
Man, etc. We ask if that Paper implies not something that was blamable on
their parts, but that they were wholly Innocent?

Touching that Paper accounted the Foundation of the separate Meeting in the
North (as W. R. says) he appears Partial also, in not citing it fully, but
leaving out what chiefly concerns Order and Discipline, yea, something of a
form of Church Government then owned by them, where they mention their Chosen
men, to whom they gave Power, their RECORDS, their ORDERS, Matters of their
Concern, etc.

And now, John Story and John Wilkinson, seeing William Rogers has so much
advocated and pleaded in your defense, and so bitterly exclaimed against many
others, who (as we believe) are faithful Servants of Christ; And seeing he has
made the Paper subscribed by Sixty six Friends one great occasion of his
Printing, and made a huge Outcry against it, and them that signed it, as no
better than Apostates, and have run in the very Way of Cain, etc. Part 2. page
91, 92. and Part 1. page 45. And that the Form they take, is worse then the
Forms of diverse Apostate Christians, which appear very uncharitable Judgments,
and a severe Excommunication. We would seriously ask you these few Questions,
viz.

1st, If you own W. R. his Printing, and what he has Printed on that subject?

2dly, If you own his Reviling so many Friends and Brethren in Print, as he has
done, several by Name, and others not by Name?

3dly, Had he no Counsel, Advice or Encouragement from you, or either of you to
Print his Book?

4thly, Seeing he makes the said Paper of Sixty six so much the subject of his
Complaint and Contest, as also takes occasion at that from Drawell, and an
Epistle written by a public Preacher, (as he says) Postscript, page 26. Had
he not done more fairly to have Printed all those Papers, without diminishing
(together with his Reformed Narrative in commendation of the Meeting at
Drawell) than to Print but pieces and small parcells of them, that so the
occasions pretended of his Complaints might more clearly have appeared?

5thly, Do you really believe or own W. R. to be a Person so Conscientious in
his Writing and Printing, and so to have the Evidence of the Spirit of God for
his proceeding therein, as he himself pretends?

6thly, Do you really believe W. R. a Person meetly accomplished and qualified
to maintain the Contest on your behalf, in Writing, and in Print, both as to
History and Doctrine, as he has endeavored?

7thly, If you do not put a stop to his Proceeding, Reviling and Abusive Work
against Friends and Ancient Brethren, nor show any public Dislike against his
Book already Printed, so much on your behalf, as Persons chiefly concerned and
vindicated therein, whether this will not give just occasion to suspect, or
rather conclude, That he is secretly abetted and countenanced therein by you?

8thly, IS HE DEPUTED BY YOU? HAVE YOU IN TRUSTED YOUR CAUSE WITH HIM, to
Manage, as he does? or does he make himself Officious, as one seeking
Popularity therein?

9thly, His Book being thus signed, viz. By WILLIAM ROGERS, on behalf of
himself, and other Friends in Truth concerned; Do not you count your selves
some of those other Friends concerned, on whose behalf he has so subscribed?
or has he therein presumed for you, without your order, he having greatly
concerned you in his Book?

10thly, If you do not show some public Dislike to his Printed Book (being so
much in your Defense) nor give us any Plain or Satisfactory Answer to these
Questions, then whether your Silence and Connivance in the Case, does not give
occasion for his Book, in some Sense, to be reputed or esteemed your Book,
though not immediately yours, but as made and promulgated by an Advocate and
Agent for you?

Pray let us have your plain and ingenious Answer to these Questions, either in
Writing or in Print, if in your Hearts and Consciences you find freedom
thereunto, to free and acquit your selves therein; for we are willing at
present, rather to induce you to a tender Consideration of the dangerous
Tendency of W. R's proceedure, than to lay the Charge thereof immediately upon
you, desiring rather you might find out a way to quit your selves of his
fruitless Contention. These things are recommended to your Consideration with
the Light of Truth.

It may not be amiss to note what Comparison W. R. makes between G. F. and J.
W. on the Character he gives of each; the Character W. R. gives J. W. as not
deferving to be termed of an High and Lofty Spirit; is concerning the value of
his Estate, his Exercises in Bodily Labor, sometimes at Plough, etc. his
having no more Land than at first; his Travels often alone, but at all times
without any Attendant as his proper Servant; his being content with the meanest
of Meats and Drinks, etc. Part 4. page 63, 64. To all which we say, though we
grant all these commendable in their places, and do not understand that he was
charged in these things with a High or Lofty Spirit; yet we must tell W. R. he
pleads but Impertinently, as well as Pharisaically, in these Instances for J.
W. unless it be a certain Proof that every man is of a Lowly Humble Spirit,
that has but an Estate of 15 l. or 20 l. per annum, and sometimes goes to
Plough, and other Bodily Exercise, etc. (according as he pleads for J. W.) and
can, according to his Education, be contented with indifferent mean Diet. On
the other hand W. R. shows his Spite and Contempt against G. F. to prove him a
man of a High and Lofty Spirit, Reflecting on his Honest Trade of a Poor
Shoemaker, and of mean Qu. Did W. R. know his Parentage? how many degrees were
they meaner than his own? However, he would have us all know, what an
Industrous Merchant he is, and how able to assist others; thus he has divulged
his own Fame in Print, part 5. page 22.
Parentage (as his slight Language is) Reflecting also on his Poor Relations,
implying, that of late Years, their Outward Man wanted some Refreshment and
Comfort with necessary Food, Raiment, etc. as in Part 5. page 49. By all which
he endeavors to make G. F. as contemptible as he can; but we never heard such
an Account before of those Relations; this appears mere Malice: And what cause
have any to believe him in it? We may wonder whenever any of those Relations
did complain to W. R. of their Indigency or Poverty! He also Reflects upon G.
F. his Marriage, and his Traveling with a Man, and his Enjoyment of things
Lawful in the Creation, and necessary for the Ease of the Body, and Pleasure of
the Pallet [Thus our Persecutors have falsely upbraided us when we lay in Cold
Prisons] teling of his Gross and Abusive Insinuations; what better than to
render him an Epicurian or Gluttonous Person? Is this W. R's concern of
Conscience, to write thus sordidly? They that fear God, had need to have a
care, how they eat and drink at his Table, or at any of theirs that own his
Book, lest he upbraid them with it in Print.
often freely making use of those things when to be had -- so far (says he) as
we can understand, etc. We cannot but take notice how Scurrilously and Basely
this man treats G. F. and what Beggarly, Sordid Stuff he is willing to make use
of, to cast an Odium and Contempt upon him.

He adds this Character of J. W. viz. He takes not upon him to give forth an
Outward Directory for the Children of Light to walk by. Is not this a manifest
Untruth? Was there no Outward Directory in that Paper which J. W. and J. S.
with above Eighty Persons more, signed? wherein they made their Propositions,
Terms and Directions, pretended, for a Reuniting, which these are some of, viz.
That they who are not chosen by the Churches, do cease meddling about the
Churches concerns; and that all cease meddling for time to come, (in your Work)
who are not concerned, and only keep unto their own, whether it be of God given
unto them, or of outward things concerning Mankind to offer them, and SO DEPART.

Now observe, does not thus much of the said Paper, and these Conditions of it,
evince, that it contains a kind of Directory and limited Prescriptions? and if
not for the Children of Light to walk by, then what Children was it made for,
and that observed it, until the Separation became more apparent? But touching
G. F. how Silily and Impertinently does W. R. argue, to prove him of a High and
Lofty Spirit? though G. F. says, He esteems W. R's Reproaches great Riches:
and we do not believe, that he is or will be (or has any cause to be) ashamed
either of his Trade or Parentage; but rather Magnifies the Power and Wisdom of
God, according to his ancient Testimony, in raising up poor honest Tradesmen
to be Ministers of the Gospel, Fishers of men, etc. Again, we do not
understand, that G. F' s desiring J. S. and J. W. to come to him at his House
(in order to end Differences) does prove him a man of a high and lofty Spirit;
for G. F. was then in Bodily Weakness, unfit to come to them, and his end was
for Peace (as we understand) which no ways tends to prove the Charge against
him. We must needs say, we are very unwilling to detract from, lessen, or (in
the least) to contemn W. R. his Parts, Education or Parentage, of what Degree
or Reputation soever; for his Parts, we doubt not, but he has both Natural and
Aquired, but they seem to us to be greatly, clouded and perverted by that
Lofty, Proud Contemning and Tempestuous Spirit that has entered him, and puffed
him up, so much in Disdain against others: You that are his Friends and
Relations, pray Counsel him to lay aside his Spiritual Pride and Contempt; for
it is hateful to all Lowly-minded and Serious Souls, who are truly
Conscientious toward God.

William Rogers against William Rogers, and William Rogers against John
Wilkinson and John Story, in the most Material Passages of his Book; being but
some of his Contradictions, with Questions, Notes and Remarks upon them.
PReface, p. 2, 3. So Great a CONCERN OF CONSCIENCE lies on many to encourage
the Publication hereof, as that we can no longer forbear, lest it should be
reputed, THAT THE DOCTRINE AND LIFE OF CHRISTIANITY WERE WHOLLY EXTINCT AMONG
THE AFORESAID PEOPLE.

PArt 4. page 77. John Wilkinson to G. F. viz. Of late days the concord we
once had, seems much to be broken, and many Instruments whom God wrought by, of
late time have greatly jarr'd; and the cause, God has manifested to me, that
it is NOT in Principles of Truth, nor in Christ's Doctrine, nor in any Practice
which Truth, in the Members of the heavenly Body leads into, but about
Prescriptions from thee, through the bl^nd zeal of the WEAK, to promote thy
Orders.

Qu. What danger can there be of any such Repute? or what cause for any to
think so of the People called Quakers, as that the Doctrine and Life of
Christianity were wholly extinct? if the Cause of the Difference or Jarr does
not lie in there Pinciples of Truth, nor in Christ's Doctrine, nor in any
Practice which Truth leads into? as J. W. contrary to W. R. has plainly
confessed, God has shown him. As also W. R. in Contradiction to himself
confesses, That a great part of the Contention of one Party with another,
seems to be but about the SHELL, and NOT the KERNEL; his meaning is, about
outward Forms and Methods relating to Marriages, Relief of the Poor, etc.
Preface, page 23. Where Is then the Apostasy charged, as to Doctrine, Life of
Christianity, Principles of Truth, etc? for these are not the Shell; Has not W.
R. been greatly Instrumental to make the Breach wider, and to increase the
differences? which he confesses, to have been small Differences, that at first
seemed to be but as LITTLE SPARKS, Pref. page 2. But in his Marginal Note
says, The Divisions among the People called Quakers have been at least Eight
Years increasing to the height they now are at: Whereas it is well known, the
Division was much allayed, until he and some private Abettors did blow up those
little Sparks, the Flame whereof is now the more apparent by his PROMULGATION
in PRINT.

Preface, page 22. It seemed unlikely to bring forth a Credible History
touching Religious differences, without nameing the Authors of Books, Papers,
and Names of Persons reflected on, evidencing the Reallity of such PRINCIPLES,
DOCTRINES and PRACTICES which occasioned Disunion and Separation amongst some
of the aforesaid People.

Part 4. p. 100. It Is too evident that the great Difference amongst Friends is
about outward things and Ceremonies, wherein some appear like People contending
about the Shell, and lose the Kernal, which occasions me to tell thee, that
when I have heard thee Preach against Austin the Monk's bringing into England a
Snapsack of Ceremonies, I then little thought, etc.

John Wilkinson in his Letter to G. F. Part 4. page 77. viz. Of late days the
concord seems much to be broken -- and the cause God has manifested to me,
that it is Not in Principles of Truth, Nor in Christ's Doctrine, Nor in any
Practice, which Truth in the Members of the Heavenly Body leads into, etc.

Query, Is it not still more plain how contradictory W. R. is to himself, and
to J. W. in this matter? One while he places the occasion of the Disunion and
Separation upon Principles, Doctrines and Practices; another while, upon
outward Things and Ceremonies, the Shell, etc. And John Wilkinson, That the
Cause God has manifested to him, that it is not in Principles of Truth, nor in
Christ's Doctrine, nor in any Practice which Truth leads into. Now if W. R.
says, that those Principles, Doctrine and Practices which occasioned Disunion
and Separation were not of Christ, nor true, then he must suppose them contrary
to the Principles of Truth, and Christ's Doctrine, which still contradicts J.
Wilkinsons affirming, That the cause of the breach of Concord and Jar among the
Instruments whom God has wrought by, is ^ot in Principles of Truth nor
Christ's Doctrine. If there be not so much as Jaring in Principles of Truth,
nor in Christ's Doctrine, how does W. R. place the Disunion upon Principles,
Doctrines and Practices? And then in Contradiction to that says, the great
Difference is about outward Ceremonies, the Shell, etc. Behold how this Person
like a Wave is tossed! Oh that he would return to the sure Foundation!

Part 1. page 24, 25. Other Churches had outward Marks and Tokens whereby a man
might manifest himself to be a Member of their Church, when received, etc. --
So we (who had the Evidence in our selves --) were at a loss Infallibly to
manifest unto others, by any outward Marks and Tokens, that we were in reality
Members of the true Church, because this Light did reveal unto us, That those
who were but in the Gentile Nature, and had come no further than the outward
Court, might have all the outward Marks and Signs of a Member of their Churches.

Page 19. That such a one is a dark separate Spirit -- which cannot be
evidenced either by Doctrine or Conversation, as if the Tree were not now to be
known by its Fruits, as in days past. -- Had they not entertained unrighteous
Jealousy, we are persuaded they would not have testified against such as have
approved themselves unto us, no other than faithful Ministers of Christ, sound
in Doctrine, and as blameless In Conversation, as any Friends [Compared with
part 5. p. 91.] That Rule which God Almighty, as by a finger from Heaven, has
laid down, viz. BY THEIR FRUITS YE SHALL KNOW THEM.

Qu. Whether then sound Doctrine and blameless Conversations, be not such
Fruits, Marks and Tokens, whereby Persons may be known to be good Trees,
Members and Followers of Christ Jesus? But W. R's Contradiction appears both
ways, as in what follows also, partly relating to the Contradictions before.

Preface, p. 10. Insisting on Judging by Outward Fruits, viz. If living well,
and holding forth nothing but sound Doctrine, shall not be brought to the
Measuring Line of Christ, what Defense can there be aganst a Slanderous tongue?

Part 3. page 83. I therefore do reasonably conclude, that the Infallible Mark
whereby any Member of the Body is known to be in true Unity with the Body, does
NOT consist in Profession and Belief of certain Principles and Doctrines, and
Practices DEPENDING THEREON (which comprehends both well living and holding
forth nothing but sound Doctrine) BUT in the Circumcision of the Heart, and an
answer of a good Conscience toward God; and p. 84. The most Infallible Mark
and Token then of a Member in the true Unity of the Body of Christ, is an
inward Invisible Mark that cannot be stamped on any, but by the Impression of
Gods Power on the Heart.

Qu. Are not his Contradictions various and manifold? One while, no outward
Marks and Tokens do Infallibly manifest the Members of the true Church; Another
while, Living well, and holding forth nothing but sound Doctrine, shall be
brought to the measuring Line of Christ, i. e. ye shall know them by their
Fruits; another while, the infallible Mark to know a Member of the Body in true
Unity, is an invisible Mark, Stamped on the Heart, by the Impression of God's
Power; it is the inward Circumcision of the Heart, and answer of a good
Conscience; it does not consist in Profession and Belief of certain Principles
and Doctrines; no, nor in any outward Marks and Practices THEREON DEPENDING,
especially if by no outward Marks or Tokens Christ's Members be to be known:
One while, the Infallible Mark is Outward; another while, it is Inward: Again,
it is Outward, in sound Doctrine and Practices; Again, it is NOT Outward, but
Inward: One while, it is Visible; Another while, it is Invisible. Whereas there
are really good Fruits, both Inward and Outward, Visible and Invisible
proceeding from the true and holy Root of Life, all manifest in the Light; for
be sure, bad Fruits come from a bad Root and Spirit. But to take the matter in
W. R. his last sense, viz. The most Infallible Mark and Token of a Member in
the true Unity, is an Invisible Mark: And this grants an inward and Invisible
Evidence from the Spirit of Christ, and so a certain Sense and Judgment of
Members in the true Unity, and Members out of it, beyond all outward Evidence,
Marks or Tokens; and this Inward Sense and Judgment extends even to Men's
Spirits, certainly to discover whether they are right or wrong, in true Unity,
or not in it. And yet in giving any public Judgment upon Persons, as being in
a Wrong Dividing Spirit, there ought to be outward apparent Evidence; Mark them
which cause Divisions and Offenses, contrary to the Gospel, and avoid them:
Those Divisions and Offenses are somewhere evident, though they be not
Drunkards, nor openly Gross or Scandalous in Conversation, yet if they cause
Division, Schisms and Rent: in the Church; this may be easily evidenced, and is
to be condemned; and we know of none judged among us on this account, without
some real Evidence of matter of Fact of this kind; if any are, we allow it not.

Part 1. page 7. Some Persons Uncertain in Number and Qualifications do take
upon them to call themselves a General Meeting.

Page 16. Men's Meetings have MOST usually CONSISTED of Men Uncertain, as to
Qualifications, etc. may assume a Power over Consciences, under the Notion of
the Church of Christ.

Page 12. We dare not conclude, that none in those Meetings were Members of the
Church.

Part 3. page 39. Where two or three are gathered together in Christ's Name,
there is the Church of Christ.

Note, If some of those Meetings be Members of the Church, or gathered in
Christ's Name, and so his Church; then such are certainly Qualified; they
CONSIST not of men uncertain.

Part 1. p. 11. That one Man G. F. advising friends to hold such Meetings
Monthly and Quarterly -- But for our parts, we understood not, at that Day,
that it was DESIGNED by him, or any else, that those Meetings should not only
be accounted the CHURCH, but also such as professed the Truth ought to believe
* as his Church believes; had he so expressed himself, Testimonies would have
arisen as a Flood against such Darkness.

Part 4. page 37. J. W. and J. S. do testify thus, viz. On the whole matter,
in the Fear and Presence of the Almighty God, we declare, That as we do APPROVE
of Monthly and Quarterly Meetings, for the necessary service of the truth, so
we further say, that as these, or any other Meetings of Friends in Truth, shall
be continued to answer these Services, we believe, that as it now is, it also
will become our: Duty to be at UNITY with our Brethren, in the Services thereof.

Part 3. page 74. * I confess, the true Church is in the true Faith; and every
Member thereof is in some measure, at least, of the same faith that all the
Elect of God are of: So that it may in truth be said, every Member of the
Church does in some measure believe as the rest of the Members do.

Note, Qu. 1st, Wherein have those Meetings declined the Service of Truth?
2dly, Then why not to be accounted the Church, if two or three gathered in
Christ's Name be the Church? 3dly, How comes W. R. to UNCHURCH them, and yet
they approved by his Friends? 4thly, How can every Member be in the same Faith,
if they believe not as the same Church does?

Part 1. p. 12. It Is now our concern to declare, that whosoever has or shall
testify, that all those Meetings, as usually held (viz. Monthly and
Quarterly) were the Church of Christ, has and will appear to be such, as know
not whereof they affirm.

Part 3. page 78. The word [Church] is mostly used in Scriptures with respect
to particular Congregations or Assemblies. Page 79. Where two or three are
gathered together in Christ's Name, there is the Church of Christ, Mat. 18. 19,
20.

Qu. Whether W. R. can prove, that any of those Monthly or Quarterly Meetings
among Friends, are not gathered together in the Name of Christ?

Part 1. p. 14. This Doctrine frequently of late published among us, [ That the
Apostasy shall never enter the generality more] does give us just occasion to
be Jealous, etc.

Part 3. page 78. I would NOT be understood to say, that the Church of Christ
is not Invested with Power from on high, or that the Apostasy shall enter the
Generality again.

Qu. Then why does he so often Quarrel with the Doctrine frequently published,
as he says, viz. That the Apostasy shall never enter the Generality more?

Part 1. page 47. On Mat. 18. 15, 16, 17. and 1 Cor. 6. 1, 2, 4. WE REASONABLY
CONCLUDE, that the words of Christ and the Apostle ONLY hinted at either
Personal Offenses or Differences touching WORLDLY Matters, and that THEREIN the
Duty of the Church was only to exhort to submit to their Connsel, which if they
did not, they might justly be esteemed as Heathen men.

Part 3. page 36. On Mat. 18. 15, 16, 17. Some may object thus, This relates
not to outward Affairs, but to Offenses that are of a SPIRITUAL Nature. In
answer, it may be said, As to that, the Scripture is wholly silent, and
therefore EVERY CASE wherein one Brother may Trespass against another, may in
RIHGHT REASON be comprehended in it.

Qu. Whether EVERY CASE be to be limited only to WORLDLY MATTERS, and not
extend to any Cases or Offenses of a Spiritual Nature?

Part 3. page 64. NOT the least Tittle to countenance this Sentence, that the
positive Sentence or Decision of the Church, in matters of Conscience, may be
obligatory on Believers; NAY, in that very Case, Mat. 18. 15, 16. If he refuse
to hear the Church, let him be unto THEE as an Heathen man. The Scripture does
not say, that Sentence ought to be obligatory on all other Members of the
Church of Christ, to look upon him as an Heathen Man; but it says, Let him be
unto THEE as an Heathen Man.

Part 1. page 47. The duty of the Church was to exhort to submit to their
Counsel, which if they did not, they might JUSTLY be esteemed as Heathen Men.
And Part 3. page 36. If he neglect to hear the Church, let him be unto thee as
an Heathen Man, when a Brother is through the DECLARATION of the Church become
so to the other Brother, etc. EVERY CASE wherein one Brother may Trespass
against another, may, according to Right Reason, be comprehended in it.

Qu. Why then not a Heathen Man to the rest of the Church, if they may justly
be esteemed as Heathen Men, that would not submit to the Churches Counsel?
seeing it is confessed by W. R. to his own Confutation, Part 1. page 52. That
they who refuse to take the Churches wholesome Counsel (or Admonition) the Church
may then declare such unworthy of their Society: And is not this then
obligatory on other Believers and Members?

Part 3. page 82. on Gal. 5. 2. and 4. 9, 10, 11. This did not at that time
condemn that CHRISTIAN LIBERTY and Forbearance, which the Apostle before
approved, IN and with respect unto such as made Conscience of CIRCUMCISION: And
page 83. There were such as practiced Circumcision -- yet a CHRISTIAN LIBERTY
was so exercised, as that -- we find not these differing Exercises IN A
CHRISTIAN LIBERTY did subject any of those Believers, exercised therein, to the
Censure of being out of the Unity of the Body. Part 5. p. 74, 75. NEITHER DID
THEY (i. e. the Apostles) ENDEAVOR to oblige those who practiced Circumcision
(after they believed) to forbear the same, before by the Spirit they were led
from it -- Page 75. on Gal. 5. 2. and 4. 9, 10, 11. This did not at that time
condemn that CHRISTIAN LIBERTY in such as made Conscience of Circumcision.

Part 1. page 73. The labor of the Apostles of Christ in the primitive Days,
was to DRAW the outward Jew FROM OFF the Observations of these Ordinances,
which were really established by the appointment of God himself, having exalted
instead thereof the WORD nigh in the Heart, and Law written therein, as a
fulfilling of that which (according to the Word of the Lord by the Mouth of his
Prophet) was to come to pass under the NEW COVENANT, which was not like unto
the OLD. And Part 3. page 82. and Part 5. page 75. on Gal. 5. 2. I Paul say
unto you, If ye be CIRCUMCISED, Christ shall profit you nothing. a

Qu. How can it be good Doctrine to account Circumcision a CHRISTIAN LIBERTY,
and an Exercise not Condemnable in Believers, when the labor of the Apostles
was, To DRAW the outward Jew from off the Observation of these Ordinances?

Part 1. page 73. We appeal unto every understanding ingenious Reader, whether
it can consist with the tenure of the new Covenant, for any to attempt the
establishment or giving forth of outward Orders, Prescriptions, Sentences or
Decrees to be a bond upon the Consciences of them who have believed in the
everlasting Light. [Part 3. Title page.] The inward Government of Christ not
represented by Persons visible, by carnal Eyes, invested with Power from him to
Execute outward Laws, Prescriptions, Orders, Edicts or Decrees in an outward
Form of Government visible.

Part 3. page 23, 24. NOT that I would be understood that it is not necessary
to be in the Exercise of OUTWARD ORDER, with respect to that Gospel-Discipline,
which becomes the Church of Christ. -- The Principle of Truth in these latter
days has, and may FURTHER LEAD into the Practice of OUTWARD ORDER in
DISCIPLINE, with relation to the Church of Christ.

Qu. Is not this a very fair Confession? What would this man be at? does he
know? Has he not here very plainly granted the thing we plead for, viz. Outward
Order and Gospel-Discipline in the Church? What Is now become of W. R's contest
against outward Order, Discipline, and Form of Church Government, visible, etc?

Part 3. page 34. The Apostle might well say, Be ye not unwise, but understand
what the Will of the Lord is, (He does NOT say, what the will of the Church is,
but what the Will of the Lord is) submitting your selves one to another in the
fear of God.

Part 3. page 34. Though I say, as aforesaid, [not the Church, but what the
Will of the Lord is.] Yet hereby I would not be understood to render Christ and
his Church DIVIDED.

Qu. If Christ and his Church be not divided? How does he oppose the will of
the Church to the Will of the Lord? His telling us of the Wills of those who
depart from Christ, this is not the will of the Church, in Unity with him;
therefore his dividing the Church and Christ in Will, stands not with that
Unity,

Part 1. page 75. Outward Conformity to outward Rules and Orders relating to
the Conscience -- established amongst the People called Quakers -- We have no
ground either from the Word of God, by the Mouths of his Prophets, or from the
Appearance of Christ by his Light in us, or from the Scriptures of Truth --
since the Appearance of Christ in the Flesh, to expect that any should be
invested with Power from on High, to establish such things relating to the
Conscience, muchless to expect that the Children of Light (under the New
Covenant) should be led by the eternal Spirit, and Word nigh in the Heart unto
such a Conformity.

Part 3. page 82, 83. It Is a blessed thing for Brethren to dwell together in
Love and Unity -- this ought to consist in the Truth -- I doubt not but there
are many, who are ready to conclude, that an universal UNITY ought to be
established in the Church, by the assistance of OUTWARD INSTRUMENTS, that as we
are Members of one Body, so we may not only be ONE in Faith, ONE in Doctrine,
but also ONE in Practice, with relation to Discipline, Order, and OUTWARD FORMS
of Government. My Soul should rejoice to see that day wherein we might all be
SO led by the appearance of Christ's Spirit in us, under his Government, which
ought to be exalted over all, as that THIS ONENESS might thereby be witnessed
amongst all the Families of God's People at this day.

Qu. 1. Is it not evident, that one while, he declares, that he and they have
no ground to expect That Oneness, which another while, he should rejoice to see
the day, we might all be led by Christ, to witness it, viz. Oneness in Faith,
Oneness in Doctrine, Oneness in Practice, Discipline, Order and outward Forms
of Government?

Qu. 2. How should that universal Unity be established by the assistance of
outward Instruments, or that Oneness in Faith, Doctrine, Practice, Discipline,
Order and Forms of Government be witnessed by the leading of Christ's Spirit,
if we have no true Ground at all, to expect that any should be invested with
Power from on high, to be Instrumental therein, nor yet, that the Children of
the Light should be led into any such Conformity by the eternal Spirit? Strange
Confusion!

Part 2. page 27. Obj. How comes it to pass, that diverse among you called
Quakers, etc. -- teling us, that the Tree of Knowledge was NOT good for Food?
W. R's Answ. It Is very true; however, that does not prove, that all such
Expressions are according to Truth, etc. Page 28. As to the Tree of knowledge
of Good and Evil, though the Scriptures do not positively declare, whether it
was good for Food or no -- a Father may command his Child not to eat an Apple
-- his rebellious Eating would be no Argument, that the Apple in it self is not
good for Food. P. 29. We know not on what foot of Truth any one can assert,
that the Tree of Knowledge is not good for Food, as in it self.

Part 2. page 29. I would NOT be understood to reflect on ALL that have used
that Expression, viz. THE TREE OF KNOWLEDGE IS NOT GOOD FOR FOOD, because I
question not, but many have so expressed themselves -- to show forth, that if
we should feed upon or admire any excellent Qualification or Endowment
whatsoever, and not have the Eye of our Mind chiefly unto the Giver, we might
then come to a loss, even as Adam did.

Qu. 1. If he counts the Doctrine Erroneous, or not of the Truth to say, that
the Tree of Knowledge is not good for Food, does not this reflect on all that
have used that Expression?

Qu. 2. And is it not Erroneous and Ignorance in W. R. not only to esteem the
Tree of Knowledge, an Excellent Qualification or Endowment, but to compare it
to THAT which is a DISCOVERER of Good and Evil, and to the Knowledge of the
only true God, and Jesus Christ, which is Life eternal? quoting John 17. 3.
page 28. And in Commendation of the Tree of Knowledge, (to prove it good for
Food) to add, that It Is EVIDENT that Knowledge is the Way to Life?

Qu. 3. Did God forbid the Knowledge of himself? the Knowledge which is Life
Eternal? that Knowledge which is the Way to Life, to Man, in that state of
Innocence in the beginning? Let this be considered.

Qu. 4. Can it be good Doctrine to say, that the Serpent persuaded Eve to that
Knowledge which is the Way to Life? or to the Knowledge of the true God, and
Jesus Christ, which is Life Eternal? Could THAT be the Knowledge that God
forbad Man to eat of? Were not this very Absurd, to render the Serpent more
kind to Man than his Maker was?

W. R. Part 2. page 43. We are so far from condemning all those who pay THEM
(that is, Tithes) and not as by constraint, that we look upon it to be the DUTY
of ALL professing Christianity, to contribute, etc. -- And if the Charity of
any should be such, as to bestow upon them (i. e. their Ministers) one FIFTH
part instead of a TENTH, far be it from us to coudemn it.

Part 4. p. 39. J. W. and J. S. in their Testimony, viz. As to TITHES we can in
Truth say, 'Twas never so much as in our Hearts to speak any words whatsoever,
with the least intent to strengthen any in the Payment thereof, nor yet to
weaken the Faith of any; having a Testimony in our Hearts, that TITHES, as at
this day paid, are ANTICHRISTIAN. And Part 4. page 9. in J. W's Answer, viz. I
brought in a Testimony AGAINST TITHES -- NO such word spoken by me, as to put
an Indifferency concerning Testimonies for God, against the GRAND OPPRESSION of
TITHES -- the word of Life to stir them up with Testimonies against the GRAND
OPPRESSION of TITHES.

Observe, Qu. Whether the Liberty W. R. has here granted for the free Payment
of Tithes, be not an Innovation, tending to beget into a Looseness and Apostasy
from our Ancient Christian Testimony against Tithes? And whether it be not
Contradictory to J. W. and J. S. their Testimony, cited by himself against
TITHES?

Part 1. page 48. W. R. excepts against R. B's affirming, That the Church of
Christ has power in some cases that are matters of Conscience, to give
positive Sentence or Decision which may be obligatory upon Believers, and that
their giving a positive Sentence in such cases, will not import tyranny,
neither will the pretenses of any Contradicting them, or refusing to submit on
the account THEY SEE IT NOT, excuse them of being GUILTY of disobeying God. W.
R. objects, viz. Clearly shows to us his meaning to be, that in SOME CASES the
Consciences of Believers ought to be bound by the positive Sentence of others
-- THIS Meaning and Government we take to be contrary to the Principle of Truth
and Liberty we have in Christ Jesus.

Part 1. page 43. Whereas its jealoused, some are run into Looseness, and say,
The Light in my Conscience condemns me not, and therefore it is the Care of
FAITHFUL BRETHREN to appear AS WATCH - MEN OVER THE FLOCK: WE SAY SO TOO. And
those who approve themselves WATCHMEN, will endeavor to Convince such, who in
very deed run into Looseness, etc. that though they may pretend the LIGHT
CONDEMNS THEM NOT, yet that their Deeds are evil, and that the Light does
condemn the same, though they may BE HARDENED AND SEE IT NOT, and so endeavor
to awaken the Conscience, that God's Witness may be heard.

Part 1. page 47. The duty of the Church was to exhort, TO SUBMIT TO THEIR
COUNSEL, which if they did not, they might JUSTLY be esteemed AS HEATHEN MEN.
And page 52. If they refuse to take their WHOLESOME COUNSEL, THE CHURCH may then
declare such UNWORTHY of their Societies.

Part 3. page 36. EVERY CASE (i. e. outward or Spiritual) may in RIGHT REASON
be Comprehended in it (viz.) in the Case mentioned by Christ in Mat. 18. 15,
16, 17.

Query, For what End then is the Church of Christ to admonish or counsel, and
the faithful Brethren to watch and take care over the Flock, if their Sentence
or Judgment be not binding to them in any case of Conscience? Whether it relate
to Spiritual or Temporal matters? And why should God make use of Instruments to
build Believers up in the most holy Faith, (as he confesses, part 2. page 65.)
if the Exhortations, Reproofs and Instructions (which he also grants) be not
binding on those other Believers? For is not the most holy Faith a Spiritual
matter, and relating to Conscience?

As also Part 3. page 33. he confesses, That those who are invested with Power
from on high, may be Instruments in God's hand, according to the Dispensation
thereof given them of God, to stir up the pure mind in others, sometimes by way
of ADMONITION, EXHORTATION and SOUND DOCTRINE, and sometimes by CHARGE or
COMMAND, according as the Spirit of the Lord MOVES and OPPERATES.

A plain Confession to Truth: Now he speaks like some Ambassador of Christ,
but keeps not to this; he is inconsistent; we would ask him, if such
Admonition, Charge and Command by such Instruments in God's hand, be not
binding on others to whom they are directed, and if they be not obliging to
their Consciences, and if the Light in their Consciences does not the more
enforce them, and make them binding? Where is then the Imposition? And has
the Church of Christ no Power to give forth any Commands or Precepts that are
binding to Conscience? All just Ones are binding; But has not W. R. in his
fifth part, page 91, 92. denounced a Sentence of Excommunication against G. F.
as one that has cut himhimself off from being a Member of the Body of Christ,
by departing from the Rock Christ, and as one that for sometime past has stood
in a state of Separation? Is not this a Sentence of Excommunication, seeing he
(on this occasion) says, It is not in the Power of any Mortal man, or
Assembly, to Excommunicate from amongst the true Members of Christ's Body, a
Servant of the Living God. Can W. R. expect this his Sentence of
Excommunication to be binding on true Believers Consciences, when he has so
much opposed the Power of the Church of Christ to give forth Sentences and
Judgments to be binding to the Consciences of Believers? Has not he here
assumed a Power and Jurisdiction above the Church of Christ? And is not this
Pope-like, or Antichrist-like? Doubtless he would have all Friends in Truth
believe and receive his positive Sentence, or else he would not have taken so
much pains as he has done, in Reviling, setting at Naught, Judging and
Condemning many others, far more Righteous and Innocent then himself; for
which, and the Reproach he has brought upon Truth, we are persuaded the
Judgments of God hang over his Head, and the Hand of the Lord is against that
cruel, jealous Spirit in him, and God's Truth and Power has Excluded and
Excommunicated all his uncharitable Judgments, usurped and unjust
Excommunications, his gross Abuses against the Innocent, and Perversions of
Truth, and foul Aspersions, together with his Fallacies and Self-contradictions
are numerous and manifold; We wish the Lord in Mercy may yet incline his Heart
to seek Repentance before he dye, that he may not end his days in Horror and
Anguish.

A Catalogue of some of WILLIAM ROGERS his manifest FALSEHOODS, Notorious
SLANDERS, Scandalous ABUSES, PERVERSIONS, RAILING, SCOFFING, FLATTERING and
REVILING, in the 4th and 5th Parts of his Book and Preface, against George Fox
and others, in W. R's own words and terms [with Interlineary Notes upon them.]
I.
THat of THOSE who in derision have been called QUAKERS, Part 4. p. 3, 4.
by whom the Principle of Truth has been held forth and owned, it may be now
said, -- the Enemy has so prevailed, as that the Seeds of Discention and
Discord sown amongst them, have taken so deep Root, as that THEIR PUBLIC
Meetings for Worship in several parts of this Nation have been the Stages of
Contention.

[These we take to be Infamous and Scandalous, too general to be true against
the said People and their Meetings.]

II.
Page 4. That they are Persecuting Opposers, who oppose J. W. and J. S. [VVould
W. R. be counted a Persecutor for his opposing others more vehemently?]

III.
Page 5. That Imagination has so possessed the Hearts of MANY that travel
under the notion of Ministering Friends, as that instead of manifesting a divine
Understanding, or speaking the Word of Truth, they have brought forth the
Fruits of an unsound Mind, showing forth no better Resemblances, than the
confused Chaos before the Creation, etc. [A gross Scandalon many Ministering
Friends.]

IV.
Page ibid. That either the multitude of Iniquity, or great Hatred, through the
Influence of G. F. possessing the Hearts of such, is the occasion thereof,
(viz. of their showing no better Resemblance) [A great Scandal still.]

V
P. ibid. Of the present Separation in some parts, etc. that G. F. has been
one of those very Persons, occasioning the Differences to arise unto the
height they now are. And page 6. One chief Instrument that a destroying and
devouring Spirit has entered into some among the Flock, and that many a simple
Honest-hearted Friend to Truth and Righteousness, have received and believed
Lies, and slanderous false Reports against many Brethren, etc. Page 6. And that
the Blood of many such, if they Perish, before true Repentance, will be laid at
G. F's Door. [Gross and Abusive Charges against G. F. and many Honest-hearted
Friends.]

VI.
Page 15, 16. That in G. F's second Query to J. VV. seems to be employed (if from
a Query any thing may properly be employed) then it must be asserted, that there
is either one or more, that have Power to impose in the Will of Man, that which
the Scripture gives no Authority or Warrant for; [compared with his foregoing
words, page 15. viz.] That the People called Quakers ought to practice things
imposed by Man, or in the Will of Man, etc. [A most slanderous Perversion.]

VII.
Page 30. That G. F. has described himself one unto whom Infallible Judgment
has been committed in ALL things. [This is suspected at least, for an Untruth,
till proved.]

VIII.
Page 32, 33. That some amongst the People called Quakers, known to stand by G.
F. ( in Vindication of many Errors) have published, with seeming Zeal and
thundering Lungs, such like kind of Doctrine and Exhortation as this, Away with
this Jealous Spirit; Oh Friends! Exclude the Reason, the Wisdom and the
Jealousy, and have an Eye to the Brethren; if you do not see your selves, then
follow us that do see; [compared with page 35. viz.] If you do not see your
selves, you must follow us that do see: A not able Expedient whereby the
Leader, and those who may be led, may, like blind men, fall into the Ditch
together, and instead of following the bright Beams of ^^e SUN, may be found
Followers of the dark Body of the -- MOON. [These are, at least, suspected
Untruths, and highly Scandalous, as laid down; and his Allusion to the dark
Body of the Moon is Improper, whether he intends really to that Body called the
lesser Light, or some Person under that Name; if the latter, it is but an idle
Scoff.]

IX
Page 35. That there are many at this day that have no better measure to
discover, whether one professing the Truth be right, and in the Light and Power
of God, but by understanding how they stand affected to G. F. and his outward
Prescriptions; as if ALL the Labors, Trials, Sufferings and Travels of Friends
were to center in the Exhaltation of G. F. [A sordid Reproach on many, and a
foul Perversion.]

X
Page 76. That what G. F. has written by way of Reflection to J. W. is the
Fruit either of Ignorance, Pride, Scorn and Disdain, in the BEST SENSE; and
that he has been of so proud a Spirit, as to expect a sort of Reverence and
Submission to him, which the Truth could not own. [These appear insolent and
defaming Charges, bespeaking rather this Accusers Pride and Arroganc^]

XI.
Page 85. In W. R's Letter to G. F. dated Bristol the 27th of the 1st Month
1677. are these words, viz. and that thou have no less esteem than the repute
of an elder Brother, by all Friends, which as far as I know, thou have not; how
can it be less than thy duty to Interpose, etc? [Compared with page 89.] My
plain Lines are the Fruit of a plain - hearted - Friend -- with my Love to
thee, etc. I remain a Friend to thee, etc. William Rogers. [This last passage
appears false and feigned, his Love and Frinedship to G. F. is now apparent
Enmity to bite and devour him, what in him lies, yet these his smooth pretenses
appear contradictory to his manifest abuse of G. F. in many other passages, in
treating him neither as an Elder (according to 1 Timothy 5. 1.) nor like a Friend,
compared also with what follows.]

XII.
VV. R. in his Letter to G. F. dated Bristol, the 3d of the 10th Month, 1677.
page 92. That Darkness has overshadowed the Hearts of many, so that they seem
like men void of ALL Wisdom and ALL Reason, whereby they seem to me (i. e. to
VV. R.) as Proselites of such amongst the Sixty six Subscribers at E. H. his
Chamber, who coming with another Gospel than that which stands in the Wisdom of
God, have Preached against ALL Wisdom and ALL Reasoning. [These are very
scornful Abuses, without proof or instance of the Persons, who the MANY or the
SUCH charged are.]

XIII.
Page 93. Those who stand in and for the same Faith and Practice they were in
from the beginning, are now judged Apostatized, because they cannot embrace,
for Conscience sake, some NEW PRESCRIPTION, which thou art accounted either the
Author or Countenancer of. [VVhat new Prescription? that is but one in the
Singular, elsewhere it is Prescriptions in the Plural: And who are so judged,
that so stand? He should have made his Book on that one Prescription, if it
were unsound, and not have made such a great hollow and empty noise about
Prescriptions, Prescriptions.]

XIV.
Page 93, 94. I know that thou thy self have been found in the like Action,
(that is, of going out of a Meeting when Persecutors came) and if Reports be
true, the frequentest of any Man that ever I heard called by the Name of a
Quaker; and it is to me a broad sign, that this would not have been omitted as a
grand Article against J. S. amongst others at Drawell, had not thou been
guilty in the like case. [Here he has not only scandalized G. F. but the
Meeting at Drawell, or at least many concerned thereat, but that is but only his
own evil Jealousy.]

XV.
Page 96. Gross Ignorance and thick Darkness for any to look upon thee as THAT
PROPHET whom the Lord by his Servant Moses Prophesied he would raise up like
unto him, etc. I cannot believe thou art ignorant that such there are who so
look on thee. [This is at least suspected for a great Scandal, and is very
Pernicious.]

XVI.
Page 98. Truly Friend, it is much taken notice of, that ALL Reasoning and ALL
Wisdom is preached against of late. [This we look on as a Falsehood frequently
reiterated, and here aggravated still, without any Instance or Proof of such
Preachers or Preaching amongst us.]

XVII.
Part 5. page 20. That the Faith of many are IN him (i. e. in G. F.) as one
that cannot Err; so that if he affirm any thing never so false, we take it to
be unto MANY as an infallible proof, etc. [This we judge is a horrid abuse
against many, as also against G. F.]

W. R. in his Paper and Queries against, and to G. F. dated Bristoll the 20th
of the 7th Month, 1678. has these passages, page 26, 27. viz.

XVIII.
That when the Persecuters came up one pair of Stairs in our Meeting-Room in
Broadmead, whilst he was speaking, he -- of such a Spirit (distrustful and
dispairing) as on a sudden, to step down and hasten out of the Meeting at a
back pair of Stairs which he once did, and of which my Eyes, with many more,
were Witnesses. The like in p. 70. [Against which G. F. testifies, as a false
Accusation; and though he pretends many more Eyes as Witnesses besides his
Eyes, yet we find not any more so attesting it, besides himself, for neither
the Women ( M. G. M. N. A. D.) nor William James, nor Nathaniel Day, nor Samuel
Hollister, do testify any such thing in their Certificates, page 62, 63.
produced by him, as that their Eyes were Witnesses, that when the Persecuters
came up one pair of Stairs, whilst G. F. was speaking, he once on a sudden
stepped down and hastened out of the Meeting at a back pair of Stairs; There is
no such thing attested by them in their Certificates, but that he departed
before the Meeting broke up; nor has W. R. told the Reader when this ONCE was,
as what Day and Year he so suddenly stepped down and hastened out as the
Persecutors came up Stairs, which G. F. denies, and accounts W. R's Eyes false
Eyes, or rather his Evil Eye and Mind, is no sufficient proof against him,
without other Eyes, more clear and impartial than his own.]

XIX.
W. R. page 27. I query of G. F. whether he does not remember that when the
Soldiers, or some other Persecutors, came to a Meeting in or near London, at a
certain time, when he was there, he did not go out of the Meeting, and betook
himself to an upper-Room or Cock-loft? For so I have been informed. [To this G.
F. says NAY, They are false and wicked Charges and Accusations insinuated
against him; as also he says, that of flying at Ringwood is a HORRID Lie, and
that Friends there have certified the contrary.]

XX.
Page ibid. And If Report be true, this is but VERY LITTLE of what might at
large be manifested to prove Him one of the GREATEST Fleers and Shifters in
time of Persecution that ever I knew, professing the Truth, and esteemed by
others a faithful Friend. [A foul Aspersion; but instead of Proof, we have only
his Accusation, grounded on his doubtful and frequent Expressions [ IF REPORT
BE TRUE] but Report is not generally true, therefore the more silly and
malicious he to make that the ground of so many Infamous Accusations, where he
neither produces his Reporters nor Informers, but only [ IF REPORT BE TRUE,
AND HE FIRMLY BELIEVES IT, page 33.]

XXI.
Page 33. Against G. F. still, viz. Let the time past be sufficient; Repent for
thy many miscarriages, which God has raised me as an Instrument in his Hand to
discover. [No, thou ^rt rather suffered to be a Revengful Instrument in Satan's
hand for a little space.]

XXII.
Page 35. Que. Whether thou G. F. did not advise Nathaniel Crips to buy his
Tithes both of Priest and Impropriator? If thou deny it, I will undertake to
prove it, or bring it under the Hand of Nathaniel Crips, that thou so did.
[Note, THIS G. F. has positively denied, and W. R's bringing it under the Hand
of N. C. cannot reasonably be received for Proof, according to this his own
dis-junctive proposition, viz. his Promise of undertaking to prove it, OR bring
it under the hand of N. C. if he has done only the latter (as we take it) then
not the former.]

XXIII.
Page 39. Such -- that say God has given them Infallible Judgment in ALL
things, and yet appear notoriously Fallible. [This chiefly against G. F. (as we
take it) but it is suspected for an untruth, that ever he did so say of himself,
as having Infallible Judgment given him in ALL things without limitation, yet
so much Judgment as is given of God to any of his Servants is true and
infallible.]

XXIV.
Page 40. That it is evident he (meaning G. F.) does not heed what he writes;
and in the most Charitable Construction that I (i. e. W. R.) can put thereon;
the Reason he so does springs from an Imagination possessing his Heart, that he
concludes WHATEVER first arises in his mind, on the sight or hearing of any
thing, is fit to be brought forth and stood by. [These appear gross and
presumptuous Lies.]

XXV.
Page 41. And truly, it is to be doubted, the like Imagination has possessed
many, amongst whom I take John Blaikling to be one.

Page ibid. John Blaikling and twenty five more Accusers and Informers against
J. S. and J. VV. [Doubtless he has greatly wronged John Blaikling from his own
corrupt Jealousy, Scorn and Contempt against him and others, who deserve a
better Character than Informers.]

XVI.
Page 42. That he (intending G. F.) has made Lies his Refuge, thereby abusing
honest men, that cannot submit to his Will; it is proper enough for me (i. e. W.
R.) or any that may have a concern of Conscience, as I have, to discover the
Fruits of such a deceiving, betraying Spirit, though behind the Back of him in
whom it appears. [See what a large Liberty he takes to revile and abuse, and
vent his Malice (and that under pretense of Conscience) without all bounds, as
one having cast off both all Gospel Order and Friendship.]

XXVII.
Page 44. About securing part of his outward Estate, he says, Neither did I so
do from any Dispensation given me from G. F. or any Body else. [Compared with
page 45. viz.] I reasonably suppose, that his further meaning is, that he has
Power to dispense with Friends, doing something contrary to what they
(according to their own measure received) have freedom in themselves to do --
his Pride and Ignorance, etc. [His reasonable Supposition is grossly
unreasonable, and a horrid Presumption of that which was never known or before
heard among us, to be G. F' s meaning: Did ever more Pride, Scorn and Falsehood
appear in any open Adversary, than in this Opposer?]

XXVIII
Page 46. That asting according to ones Principle in some cases, at least,
without an allowance so to do from G. F. is worthy of Condemnation, which I
take to be the Fruit of his Pride and Ignorance. [A gross abuse still, falsely
insinuating that G. F. sets his own allowance above the inward Principle,
thereby to render him Odious and Infamous as bad as the POPE.]

XXIX.
Page 48. W. R. of G. F. viz. I am persuaded, that he would have added more to
his Repute and Name, to -- have given Glory to God, that he made Choice of so
poor and mean a Person, through whom to preach the Everlasting Light, Christ
Jesus -- And if G. F. had EVER SINCE he went abroad to preach, labored (whilst
able, and at leisure) with his Hands, or otherwise been Industrous in an
outward Calling, that the Gospel of Christ might not be CHARGEABLE, etc. [Doth
not this Insinuate, that he has made the Gospel very Chargeable, for a long
time since he went abroad to preach? And is not this still to cast Dirt upon
him.] This compared with what he says in his Preface Lie 30.
of such kind of Preachers, or rather Praters, whose Necessities have seemed to
be a Bait unto them, to follow for the Leaves, and instead of gathering to God,
gather to themselves. Adding also, Such like Doctrines -- I am a witness from
the hearing of my Ear, have in public Meetings for Worship been published, as,
[ Have an Eye to the Brethren; if you do not see your selves, follow us that do
see] seems to me more like the Language of those Shepherds, who sought for
their Gain from their Quarters, than the Language of such whom the Lord has
anointed, Pref. page 36. [Very Gross and Unfair Dealing, Scandalous and
Defaming! Why does he not detect such Preachers, if there be any such, but thus
Defame and Scandalize our Meetings with them? It Is to be hoped, that all true
Preachers will be aware of W. R's Hospitality.]

Notwithstanding W. R's Reflecting on G. F. for not laboring with his hands
ever since he went abroad to Preach (whilst able, and at leisure) to keep the
Gospel without Charge; he has but a few Lines before, given this Testimony for
G. F. viz. I can truly say, and so I believe many more can, That in his Person
I accounted the Testimony of the Apostle Paul fulfilled, who said, God has
chosen the Foolish things of the World, to confound the Wise; and God has
chosen the Weak things of the World, to confound the Mighty, and base things of
the World; and things which are despised, has God chosen, etc. And partly on
this score, can I in the fear of the Lord say, and that justly too, that he was
to me -- TRULY HONORABLE. [Qu. When was he so in God's Choice, and truly
Honorable to W. R? Was it not for many Years since he went abroad to preach
the Everlasting Light? Why then does he upbraid him for not laboring with his
hands, ever since, whilst able, etc? Behold his apparent Contradiction!
However, it is one good turn, that W. R. was not (nor is) G. F's Master, to set
him to work at his pleasure.

XXXI.
Page 49. W. R. to G. F. viz. POOR GEORGE! I am sorry for thee, and pity thee,
etc. [A gross Lie (or false flattery) to be sure; his Pity and Sorrow is to
devour him, to throw all the Dirt he can upon him, by Railing, Infamy and
Reproach in Print, to destroy his Christian Reputation, as much as he can,
though in that work he strives against the Stream.]

XXXII.
Page 52. That G. F. seems to publish LIES, as it were by HEAPS. [A Lie, so
unlikely, as not likely to have Credit.]

XXXIII.
Page 61. That he that runs may read, that G. F. in some cases does NOT matter
what he says, (which by his own Rule) is the very Mark of that Spirit that
made SOME LIKE DEVILS. [A gross Slander.]

XXXIV.
Page 69. Concerning the Testimony or Certificate of some ( viz. twenty eight)
Friends Note, that W. R. has only published this Subscription thereto, viz.
John Ware, and twenty seven Persons more, as if poor John Ware was the chief of
them all: This is but a Silly Fallacious Cover, to lessen the Credit of their
Testimony.
of Bristol, in Answer to W. R' s Charging G. F. for fleeing in time of
Persecution; W. R. in his Observations thereupon says, They seem concerned to
vindicate G. F's Innocence in this Case, yet they have done it but at a very
poor rate, much like the PERJURED INFORMERS, that on the late Act have appeared
against Friends. [A most foul and gross Defamation, Scandal and Abuse.]

XXXV.
Page 77. W. R. against G. F. and John Blaikling, viz. That it is to me plain
enough, that he can get A John Blaikling, a T. B. or an S. H. to write or sign
ANY THING, when written, RIGHT OR WRONG, that may in his sense tend to his
Vindication and my Condemnation. [A fordid and soul Abuse of J. B. a Person
known to be Conscientious toward God, and for ought we know, of better Esteem
and Repute in his Country than W. R. in his.]

XXXVI.
Page 78. That the Method of General Applause, used by John Blaikling -- is
more like a PARASITE to an Earthly Prince, than a Serious, Well-meaning
Conscientious Christian to a Servant of Christ, that seeks not the Praise of
Man. [This appears a very foul and scornful Aspersion: We take the English of
Parasite in this place, not in the ancient and best sense, as, an Assistant or
Officer to a chief Mastrate; but in the now common and worst sense, i. e. A
Flatterer for his Belly, that says and does in all things to please the Humor
of another, to have his Repast (or small Dinner) Scot-free; and therefore the
Comparison, as placed upon J. B. appears Shameful, Gross and Scandalous; nor is
there any need for him to take any such Unconscionable course of Flattery, for
such (or any Outward) Gratuities.]

XXXVII.
Page 79. That John Blaikling has or does write at a Wicked and Ungodly rate;
[compar'd with page 81. viz.] John Blaikling cannot lay all his Profane and
Wicked Charges against me at my Door: And page 82. John Blaikling has been so
puffed up with Spiritual Pride; and that the Lord has suffered his Wisdom to
be turned into Folly, and his Zeal into Envy. [ W. R. in these and other
Passages appears in a very great Storm and Outrage against John Blaikling, and
extremely Abusive: But as to the particular Matters, being about a Certificate,
it is not to be doubted but J. B. can give a better, a more Conscientious and
tender Account than W. R. has done against him; and no question but he is able
to bear W. R's Reproaches patiently.]

As for his pretended Testimonies from Hartford against G. F. page 85, 86, 87.
which are before examined, it may be further added, that there are since come
to hand, more full and consistent Accounts, under the Hands of diverse Credible
Persons, on G. F's behalf, too large here to insert; whence it may easily be
gathered and perceived, wherein the Mistakes (in all probability) have been, in
confounding and mixing G. F's Discourses. However, his denying Matter of Fact
(as stated against him by them) as being an absolute Perversion of his words,
might in Charity be so far accepted by his Accusers, as not to persist in
casting that upon him, which he is so far from being tenatious in, that he
wholly denies the matter as certified, both in Fact and Intention. Doubtless
they would not be so served.

And truly, it is matter of some Sorrow to some that know our Ancient Friend T.
M. of Baldock, who have Love and good Will to him, to see his Name in Print
(whether with his Knowledge and Consent or not, he knows best) to such a silly
and frivilous Certificate, as that G. F. said, There came acouple to a Meeting
to be Married -- and the Man said, Mr. Story, Mr. Story, putting off his Hat,
etc. [which varyes from those Certificates from Hartford, which mention Mr.
Story but once in each; one would think T. M's Age and Gravity should require
and suit more grave and weighty Matter to be exposed in Print.]

XXXVIII.
And whereas W. R. in his Preface bitterly Enveighs, telling of the Envy of a
Proud man, that seeks Lordship over the Consciences of others, putting the
Bears Skin upon the back of a Friend of Truth, spreading abroad Certificates of
Defamation, right or wrong, amongst Enemies as well as Friends, according to
the Example (says he) of G. F. when writing to H. S. R. T. and another Person
of Hartford, he thus said, Here is a Certificate enclosed, etc. which you may
show both to Enemies and Friends. This seems greatly Aggravated and
Mis-construed against G. F. in which he accounts himself greated abused, (his
Intention being perverted) affirming, That his Meaning was NOT that they should
show them to the WORLD, but to those and such ENEMIES that were PRETENDED
FRIENDS, under the Profession of Truth, and yet spread Untruths behind his back
up and down the Country (such as are since affected with W. R. his Book.)

XXXIX.
Another more apparent untruth in his Preface, p. 10. is, That the Opposers of
the Christian-Quaker, (meaning such as oppose W. R. and those of his Party,
whom he pleads for) sometimes affirm, that a good Cause may be ill Managed,
and a bad Cause well Managed, thereby Insinuating into ignorant People, that
though J. S. and his Friends have Managed their Cause well, whilst their
Opposers have Managed their Cause but ill. [This is a very unlikely Story,
that their Opposers should so insinuate against themselves; and we do not
believe, that W. R. their chief Agent, in their Cause, has Managed it well,
but greatly to his own and their Disadvantage.]

XL
Another notorious and twofold Untruth (before opened in this Treatise) is,
that by these words [ Do not strive, nor make Bargains with that ( i. e. that
Spirit) which is out of the Truth] W. R. insinuates, that G. F' s Meaning must
be, That he would not have Friends Discourse, nor have orderly Conference, in
order to Reconciliation, nor to Bargain, Buy or Sell with such whom he
condemns, until they Answer by Condemnation [Which are gross Falsehoods and foul
Perversions.]

The like Perversion has he made on another Friend's words (in page 4, 5. of
his Preface) viz. Let not this Spirit be reasoned with; enter not into
Proposals and Articles with it but; feed it with Judgment, that is God's
Decree; so may the Souls that are deceived come by the right Door into the
heavenly Unity, etc. yet Lie 41.
(says W. R.) he himself did a few Months after accompany G. F. to the City
of Bristol, and there enter into Reasonings, Proposals and Articles with such
as owned J. S. etc. -- contrary to his own Counsel. [Here W. R. has dealt very
Disingeniously, confounding the Persons with the Spirit, making no difference
between entering into Terms with the Spirit, and some Proposals with the
Persons, for a fair Discourse concerning the Difference; as if we could not
Reason with the Persons, without entering into Covenant and Terms with the
Spirit of Division; whereas he knows the contrary; and that when W. P. entered
into Articles with him at Bristol, it was but for Method and Order, in
Discoursing Matters in Difference, and for a Narrative thereof, according to
Agreement from both Parties, and not to acquit that Spirit of Division in W. R.
or any of his Party from just Judgment, nor yet to enter into an Agreement and
Peace with it upon its own Terms, muchless to set W. R. (as he is in that
Spirit) upon equal Ground and Terms with the Church of Christ, or Body of
Friends concerned in Judgment against it, who yet desire, that the Souls that
are deceived may come in by the right Door, and be restored into the heavenly
Unity, and on that account may Reason with the Persons, and propose due Methods
to them, for their good; but not enter into Covenant with that Spirit of
Discord, which will submit to no Terms of Agreement and Reconciliation, but in
its own Will and Way, which Truth cannot admit of. Surely it is no Contradiction
to stand in true Judgment against an Evil Spirit, and yet gently endeavor to
persuade the Creature out of it.

And concerning the preparing his Manuscript, and bringing forth his Birth,
viz. his Book in Print, he has this passage in his Preface, viz.

XLII.
And to my inward Peace and Joy in the Lord, I can say, that I have the
evidence of his Spirit (notwithstanding what any man may say to the contrary)
that he has owned my Proceedings therein hitherto; and not only so, but that
there has been an answer thereto in many Brethren.

Note, That we do not charge him in this Passage with down right designed Lies
against Knowledge, but with strong Delusion and Error, which is the effect of
his believing a Lie (which the Devil is the Father of) which will be his own
Trouble in the End; nor can we believe that he says true, in saying, There has
been an answer in MANY BRETHREN, seeing there has not yet appeared any
Brethren, so much as his own, that would publicly own or stand by his Book, as
having the Evidence of God's Spirit for it, when closely called in Question
about it.

Abundance of his Abuses, Perversions, Raylery, Slanders, Falsehoods, Scorn,
Reviling and foul Aspersions, are here omitted and passed by, which are
dispersed throughout his Book; for which he is left to the Righteous Judge of
all, to deal with him, as (no doubt) he will, in his own due time.

XLIII.
As concerning the Quotation about Micahs Mother, Judges 17. which he has made
a great ado about, over and over in his Book, calling it, THAT ABOMINABLE
QUOTATION, Part 4. page 96. which seems but an Irreverent Character of a
Quotation out of holy Scripture. And concerning the Woman (or Widow) of
Tekoah, and what she said to King David, 2 Samuel 14. W. R. also shows himself
very fierce against this poor Widow, accusing her over and over with a LYING
STORY, Part 5. p. 5. Whereas it was but a Parable or Form of Speech, as Joab
had directed her to save Absolom's Life. At this rate W. R. might charge the
Prophet's Parable to King Ahab, 1 Kings 20. 39. and abudance of Parables more
in the holy Scriptures, with being Lying Stories, because it seems G. F.
expressed some Charitable Thoughts concerning these and other Women, as having
Virtue, or some Religion in them toward God in their day and time See 2 King.
17. 34. and 41. verse.
although some were clouded with Superstition. For the further opening of which
Controversy, we refer the Reader to a short Tract written by our Ancient and
Learned Friend Richard Richardson, Entitled, A few Ingredients against the
Venom of William Rogers his Book, styled, The Christian-Quaker Distinguished,
etc.

A Passage in William Rogers's Postscript, about a Meeting with G. F. and
William Mead's Exception against it, being concerned in the Matter. Postscript,
page 24. dated, at Bristol, the 8th of November, 1680.
XLIV
W. R. As a further Evidence of my readyness to meet George Fox, and his
declining thereof, I thought meet to insert this Additional Postscript: A
Friend from London advised me -- That William Mead desired Nicholas Lucas, that
it might be intimated unto me, That now George Fox would give me a Meeting --
Which occasioned me immediately to take care that my Mind might be communicated
to Nicholas Lucas, who thereupon -- acquainted William Mead, That their desire,
that I would give G. F. a Meeting, was accepted by me, provided, that G. F.
would give it under his Hand to meet me. To which, William Mead said, He would
speak to G. F. about it: And afterward the said William Mead told Nicholas
Lucas, He had spoke with George Fox, and his Answer was, He would not give it
under his hand, nor write to me. By which all Impartial Readers may further
judge whether George Fox has any Inclination at all to give me a Meeting, for
clearing of Matters laid to his Charge.

William Mead's Exception.
Against which account W. Mead objects, That it is not the whole Truth, but
Partial, Fallacious and Abusive both to him and George Fox, in leaving out the
most Material part of G. F. his Answer, which was, That he would meet William
Rogers in his own way, before Persons chosen on each side, provided, that he
came within a certain time, while he staid in the City; as also in leaving out
the Reason William Mead gave, why G. F. refused to give it under his hand,
which was, That he was sensible, they would make an ill use of it, against him
in Print; as also, in leaving out Account of William Mead's Engaging on G. F's
behalf, for his giving W. R. a Meeting; but W. R. would not accept of his
Security in that Case.

The Matter was more particularly thus, viz. William Mead understanding that
Nicholas Lucas and John Barnard were concerned on William Rogers's behalf, for
the bringing forth of his Book in Print, he asked them the reason, Why they
would bring forth such a Book (as he heard it was?) They told him, That George
Fox would not give W. R. a Meeting. William Mead replied, That he did believe,
that G. F. would not decline giving him a Meeting. Nicholas Lucas asked him, If
he would Engage he should give him a Meeting? William Mead told him, 'Twas not
Proper so to engage, till he had spoken with G. F. first. VVhereupon William
forthwith went and spoke with G. F. about it, who very freely and readily
answered, That if William Rogers desired it, he would meet him, in his own way,
before Persons chosen on each side, provided, he came within a certain time,
while he staid in or about the City. With which Answer, the very next day on
the Exchange, William Mead acquainted Nicholas Lucas, then adding, That he now
would Engage on G. F's behalf, that he should certainly give VV. R. a Meeting.
VVhereupon Nicholas Lucas seemed to be satisfied, and said, He would stay the
coming forth of the Book; and said, He would write to William Rogers about it.
Some time after, Nicholas Lucas meeting William Mead upon the Exchange, told
him, He had writ to William Rogers, and received his Answer, which was, THAT
HE WOULD HAVE IT UNDER GEORGE FOX HIS HAND. William Mead forthwith again spoke
with G. F. about it, who said, He mattered not the giving it under his Hand;
but that he was sensible, they would make an ill use of it in Print; for which
very cause only, he forbore giving it under his hand; but did not refuse giving
W. R. a Meeting. However, then William Mead did proffer very earnestly to
Engage on behalf of G. F. for his certain giving W. R. a Meeting. Nicholas
Lucas his Answer was, That William Rogers would not take his Security in this
matter.

A summary Collection of more Passages and Acknowledgments in William Rogers
his Book, which may stand for Answer to him, and in Condemnation against
himself, and to the manifest Confutation of all that he has written or can
write in general against a Form of Church Government, outward Order,
Discipline* etc. in his own words granting to Truth.
OUr Expectations were, that Part 1. page 15, 16.
every Member should there appear in subjection to Christ the Head and higher
Power, unto which as Members of his Body we owe Obedience: In this sense we
readily embraced the Counsel, to meet together to Serve, but not to bear Rule
over one another Consciences; and the matters intended by us, to be transacted
in those Meetings, and by others also (as far as we understood) were chiefly to
take care of the Poor, the Fatherless and the Widow; and that if any professed
the Truth, and Dishoncured the same by Profane and Evil Conversation, we might
by such ways and means, as the Lord on every occasion might direct*

Part 1. page 38. We are not against appointed Meetings for the outward
Services of Truth; for that has been and is our Practice, knowing that there
may be a Service therein, as occasion offers, provided, all in such Meetings
may be kept in Humility, as Servants each to other, and the Truth; not
Exercising Lordship over the Conscience, which is God's Prerogative.

Part 2. page 64, 65. The Author to the Hebrews tell us, That Jesus is the
Author and Finisher of our Faith: No doubt, this was not a work done in a
Moment or Twinkling of an Eye; for though he is the Author and Object of
every true Christian Faith, yet we learn from the holy Scriptures, that such as
believed, that Jesus was the Lord, stood in need of many Exhortations, Reproofs
and Instructions, to build them up in the most holy Faith; and all this may be
attributed to Christ, the Author thereof.

Part 3. page 34. The Apostles Labors were to establish the Churches in the
Faith, and in the Power, having them so established to be in the Practice of
that Form which the Power either had or should lead them into; and therefore
the Apostle might well say, Be ye not unwise, but understanding what the Will
of the Lord is; submitting your selves one to another in the fear of God.

Part 3. page 41. If Differences arise between Brother and Brother, I do
conclude, that going to Law before Unbelievers, is an Indication that one or
both are departed from the Truth; and that it is the Duty of such who are at
variance, to request such Brethren as are skilled in the matters touching which
they differ, to hear and determine the Case, and then of a willing and ready
Mind (and not as by constraint) to submit unto such Determination; and that it
ought to be as an incumbant Duty on the Members of Christ's Church, to be
watching over one another, so as that by wholesome Counsel, Admonition, and sound
Doctrine, all Variance, Strife, Emulation, Rents and Divisions, both in
relation to Temporal, as well as Spiritual Matters, may, as much as in them
lies, be kept out from amongst the Members of Christ's Body.

Part 3. page 23. Not that I would be understood, that its not necessary to be
in the Exercise of outward Order, with respect to that Gospel Discipline which
becomes the Church of Christ -- Page 24. The Principle of Truth in these latter
days has and may further lead into the Practice of outward Order in
Discipline, with relation to the Church of Christ. [This is a very fair
Confession in words, to the Overthrow of much of his Book.]

Part 4. page 38. John Wilkinson and John Story their Testimony, viz. That
inward Sense and heavenly Understanding we have received from God, has and yet
does confirm us in this Judgment, That it is not agreeable with the Line of
Truth, to oppose others in the Exercise and appointed Service of the said
Meetings, as heretofore, and yet settled and agreed upon, who being
Conscientious therein. And if any of our words and actions have had any
tendency to oppose, we say, the Truth in us would have condemned it, even as it
now does.

Part 4. page 24. As particular Members are become Married unto Christ, and
having all fellowship each with other in the Spirit; those who are such, ought
to demean themselves each toward other full of Love, Charity, Bowels of
Compassion, Long-suffering, Forbearance, Meekness, Humility, Patience,
Gentleness, and all other Virtues that are the Fruits of the Spirit of God. [A
fair Acknowledgment, good Words; but these Virtues and Fruits are awanting in
W. R. How do these Acknowledgments agree with his Uncharitable, Unchristian
Dealing in his Book?]

Part 4. page 100. Such who contend, that their Order for Gospel Discipline
ought to spring from Truth within themselves; for that was the undoubted Sense
of those honorable Brethren, who knew a travel of Spirit, for the gathering of
those who in the beginning of this latter day, were gathered as a sort of first
Fruits unto God. [Here he has granted Order for Gospel-Discipline, springing
from Truth within, which answers his general Oppositions to outward Order, Form
and Discipline.]

WHereas William Rogers has concerned (by way of Reflection) the second days
Meeting of Friends in London, (which is the Morning Meeting at E. H. his
Chamber) in his Book entitled, The Christian-Quaker distinguished from the
Apostate and Innovator. This Treatise, entitled, The Accuser of our Brethren
cast down, etc. is signed by the agreement and on the behalf of the said
Meeting, by

Ellis Hooks.
London, the 1st day of the 6th Month, 1681.
A Postscript, Partly by way of Question, and partly some Friends Sense on W.
R's way of Writing.
SEeing William Rogers has taken so much occasion at the Printed Epistle of two
Sheets, by Anne Whitehead and Mary Elson, as the Principal Instance for his
proceeding to Print and Publish his Book, the Question is, Whether some of
Party with William Rogers did not publish several Parts of his Book to diverse
Persons, whilst it was designed to be published by single Parts, and before the
said Epistle by Anne Whitehead and Mary Elson was writ or designed for the
Press? And whether William Rogers did not assent or give way to their so doing?
He informing the Reader, That though the five Parts of his Treatise be bound up
together, yet 'twas once designed, that they should be also published by single
Parts. The Question still is, If some of those Parts were not published in
single Parts, as before?

Let William Rogers or any of his Party deny it if they can; And was not this a
Publication in Print, every one of his five Parts being designed for a single
Book, as well as to be Bound together in one Volumn?

It Is true, as he says, That some things (he should have said many things) are
often inserted, and the wording of other things not so Proper and Concise as
might be, Pref. Cond. For indeed many things are often inserted, and
Improperly, as well as Impertinently, reiterated after a tedious manner, and in
a perplexed perverse way. The Style and Method is not Compendious nor Succinct,
nor yet plain or easy to be understood by Persons unacquainted with his Knotty
and Fallacious way of Writing, and long deviating Parenthesis; much of it looks
asquint and with two Faces; its writ as by a Person upon various Reserves and
Provisions, to save his Head from an expected Blow. It appears to be no Simple
or Innocent way of Writing, or clear Oratory; it is neither pleasant in the
Manner, nor in the Matter, to a Clear, Ingenuous or Tender Conscience: It makes
a show and flourish of Conscience, Reason and Religion, but appears void of
all, and much of it but like a HOCUS POCUS, or LEGERDEMAIN, upon a strict and
clear Inspection with the Light of Truth, into the matter and manner of it.

Something of Concern added by another Hand.
WHereas there is a false Jealousy begot in some of our Adversaries and
Opposers, That we would impose things upon them (that have not Sense, do not
See, and have not Faith in them) to act without Faith, in a blind Obedience;
which is utterly false, and against our Principle, to Impose any thing upon
Senceless, Blind and Faithless People.

And now, all you that have opposed us without Sense, Sight and Faith, your
Senceless, Blind and Faithless Opposition has not pleased God; for without
Faith none can please God; and where there is Faith, there is Sense and Sight;
and God never accepted the BLIND for a SACRIFICE, neither do his Faithful
Spiritual People.

And therefore we say and declare to all our Opposers, Let them return to the
Light, Spirit, Truth and Grace, which at first convinced them, and judge down
the contrary, and in that we can receive them. And let them call in all their
Papers, and the Book which they have given forth in Print, since they went out
from their Unity with Friends in the Spirit of God, and come again to it, and
with it condemn and judge all that they have given forth (tending to Division)
since they went out from the Spiritual Union and Fellowship; and let J. S. and
J. W. take out their Names from the Paper of Separation, as also the rest of
them that are left behind in the Separation; in which Paper they say, That some
of other Counties, and some amongst themselves, not chosen by the Churches,
have come and intermeddled with them, and with their Business, and usurped
Authority over them, whom they never gave Power to. So that if they (who yet
remain in the Separation) will burn this Paper Not because it contains a Form
relating to Church Government, but because it has in it such limited kind of
Terms and Prescriptions as could not be received in the Universal Spirit of
Christ, or Unity thereof, because it tended to a Separation, as strictly stood
upon by the Proposers and Subscribers.
and condemn and testify against that Spirit that gave it forth, and not
pretend themselves to give People Power (in the Churches Affairs) calling
others, Usurpers of Authority, whom they have not given Power to, and so to set
up man's Power, to do Business in the Church of God; and if they will condemn
this Power of their own, and leave every Man and Woman to the Light, Grace and
Truth, Spirit and Gospel, which they have from Christ Jesus, in which all
receive Christ Jesus, their Lord from Heaven, who gives Power to become his
Sons and Daughters, and to meet in his Power; in this Light, Grace and Truth,
Spirit and Power, which is received from Christ, in which is our Order and
Fellowship; we say, as we feel them come into this, we can receive them, and
not otherwise.

We are Men of Peace, and are in the Peaceable Gospel, and in the Kingdom of
Peace, and would have all Mankind come into Peace, the Covenant of Peace,
Grace, Light and Life; and also we would have these return again, that have
been Opposers, to come to the Spirit and Gospel of Jesus, that they are gone
from, that in it we might have Peace with them; without it, is not the Eternal
Peace.

And as we are concerned to bring to Truth, such as were never convinced, so we
Travel for their Return to Truth, that are gone from it, that they may come
again to that which did at first convince them of it.

THE END.
ERRATA.
Friends and Friendly Readers;
YOu are desired to amend these (being the most Material) Faults, that have
escaped the Press, according to this Errata. As for litteral Faults, and
Mis-pointings, they may be perceived by the Matter in reading.

Page 5. line 19. for Afficious read Officious. page 24. line 29. for heirs
read theirs. p. 39. l. 25. r. Retracts his Sentence. p. 42. l. 8. r. counted
worthy. p. 44. l. 29. f. various r. varyes. p. 71. l. 26. f. two r. to. p. 78.
l. 18. f. Also r. All. p. 79. l. 17. r. Offenders. p. 89. l. 6. f. Christ's r.
Christ. p. 93. l. 2. f. Conscious r. Conscientious, l. 26. r. Parties. p. 114.
l. 24. r. the matter [ about Church Government.] p. 145. l. 8. f. in Form r.
Inform. p. 147. l. 17. f. or r. on. p. 167. l. 19. f. Probatione r.
Probationes. p. 174. l. 14. f. Disaffections r. Dissatisfactions. p. 176. l.
26. f. likening r. liking. p. 184. l. 12. f. at him r. at them. p. 189. l. 4.
r. Persons. p. 230. l. 10. dele Interlineary, l. 17. r. Dissension. Some other
litteral Errors excuse.

Books Printed for John Bringhurst.
An Epistle of Caution to Friends, to beware of that Spirit that is entered into
W. R. etc. Price Three half Pence. The Accuser of our Brethren cast down in
Righteous Judgment, against that Spirit of Hellish Jealousy, vented in a Book
written by William Rogers, Entitled, The Christian-Quaker, etc. Price 1 s. A
few Ingredients against the Venom of William Rogers's Book, styled, The
Christian-Quaker, etc. Price 1 d. The Life of Christ Magnified, etc. being the
Testimonies of several Friends concerning that faithful Servant of the Lord
Giles Barnardistan, Price 3 d. Something concerning Agbarus, Prince of the
Edesseans, Price 1 d. An Epistle of Paul to the Laodiceans, Price 1 d.

