THE Timorous Reviler SLIGHTED: Being a Brief Reprehension of a Scornful
Pamphlet, styled, The second Part of the Quakers Quibbles, subscribed by the
Name of Thomas Thompson; but (by some) suspected to be the Author of the Two
Pamphlets, the one entitled, The Spirit of the Quakers Tried; the other,
Controversy Ended; with diverse others against the People called QUAKERS.
Shun Profane and Vain Bablings, 2 Timothy 2. 16.
THe Author's Account of himself, viz. I not pretending to Infallibility, my
Opinion being still, so long as we are men in this Condition, humanum est
errare, Q. Quib. 1st part, page 38.

God keep me humble and little in my own Eyes still, to confess my Fallibility,
whilst it pleases him we should be in this State and Condition, 2 part. p. 6.

My Opinion is, Humanum est errare; and that would have born me out, I honestly
and ingenuously telling the World, that I pretended to no such Infallibility,
as the Quakers do, p. 25.

If unwillingly there should happen any Mistake, to be committed by me, as
possibly there may be, considering the Weakness that all men are subject unto
(unless Quakers) I should not be ashamed honestly to acknowledge it in Print,
and beg their Excuse for it, page 81.

Observe. That his Scurrilous and Abusive Pamphlets against the Quakers, are
Effects, not only of his Fallibility, but of his Envy also to us, is evident;
but whether he will be as good as his word (or perform his Pretension) before,
as to acknowledge any of his Mistakes in Print, the Sequel will try him; which
to do, would not be so Disgraceful to him, as to lie under the Guilt of
manifest Perversions, Lies and Slanders, which he is chargeable with in much
more then this Tract takes notice of.

To begin with him:

Touching the Two Passages he seems to take great Advantage upon in his Epistle
and much of his Pamphlet; I begin with, and state the first as follows.

1st, Whereas to convince him of W. Penn's or our Christianity, he proposed the
Gift of Tongues immediately inspired, and such Mighty Signs as were in the
Church in the Apostles days for Evidence. Upon this I queried thus, viz.

And what if God will not bestow such Gifts and Signs now, must we therefore be
no Christians?

Qua. Plainness, p. 14. He concludes, That this Interrogation absolutely
destroys my own Cause, and answers my self in all I writ, Argumentum ad
hominem: and why so? He puts the Case to Immediate Revelation from God, to
Divine Inspiration, to being sent and commissionated by God, and called by the
Spirit to Prophecy and Preach the Gospel, as the Apostles were, and to the
Light Within, which the Quakers so much talk of, and to the Doctrine of
Infallibility, and to the Gift of Discerning of Spirits.

From all which he infers, What if God will not bestow such Gifts now, must we
therefore be no Christians? Epist. p. 2.

The ingenuous and impartial Reader may easily suppose how he has managed the
rest of his Controversy by this Beginning: How plain and evident is his
Perversion and Fallacy in this his Retorsion, and how Unchristian: as for
instance, from my implying by way of Interrogation, that we might be
Christians, though we had not the Gift of Tongues, Mighty Signs, or Outward
Miracles (that were peculiar to some Christians and Ministers in the Apostles
days) he infers the same putting the Case that the Dispute be about Immediate
Revelation, and so to Divine Inspiration, the Light Within, etc. supposing,
that if God will not bestow these upon us now (any more then the other) are we
therefore no Christians? (says he) as if we may as well be Christians without
Immediate Revelation, Divine Inspiration, etc. as without the Gift of Tongues;
and he would make my Question be speak the same of the one as well as the
other, to give away my Cause: Oh Injustice! Apparent Partiality and False
Construction put upon my words, never spoaken nor intended by me [as my
Principle] for the Gift of Tongues and Working of Miracles were only peculiar
to some in the primitive Church, 1 Cor. 12. Whereas a Manifestation of the
Spirit was given to every man to profit withal; and he that has not the Spirit
of Christ is none of his: So that though men may be true Christians and
Ministers without the Gift of Tongues, yet not without Divine Inspiration,
Divine Light, and Immediate Revelation from God, in some Degree, more or less.
Also, as to the Spirit and Gift of Prophecy, and of Discerning of Spirits, and
Working Miracles in a Spiritual Way, I cannot give away our Cause as to these,
nor did I ever intend to exclude those Gifts out of the Church among us; for we
have sufficient Evidence both of true Prophets and Discerning of Spirits, as a
Gift given to diverse [And does not the Apostle prefer Prophecy above Tongues,
which were for a Sign, not to them that believed, but to them that believed
not? see 1 Cor. 14. 5. and 22, 23, 24. verse. So have not thou plainly employed
thy self to be an Unbeliever and a Dark Man, who wants such a Sign to be shown
thee, to evidence that we are Divinely Inspired? And yet, if we could speak
with the Tongues of Men and Angels, that were not a sufficient Evidence (of it
self) to convince Unbelievers, that we are ^o inspired] And I must say, that
though every Member in the true Church has not all those peculiar Gifts that
some have, yet none can be either True (...) or Living Member of the True
Church (or of Christ) without Divine Inspiration (for a Rule) or a partaking of
the Spirit, Life and Power of Christ within ( viz. in an Immediate Way) which
is sufficient to evidence and show forth it self in what Operation, Gift or
Demonstration, as the Spirit pleases or wills; and not as man wills, in
his own Will and Time.

2. Whereas to clear our selves from that Charge of Preferring our Books before
the Scriptures (because of the Titles given to some) after I had discovered the
Unjustness of the Charge, and Falseness of the Comparison, I said, Such Titles
therefore have been not strictly, but figuratively placed upon some Books And
withal, showed as high Titles given to Baptists Books as ours, Qu. Plainness,
p. 71, 72, 73.
Hence he infers, That Thomas Hicks may as well tell me -- for all his words,
wherein W. P. and I charged him with Forging and Forgeries, Slanders and Lies,
that such Titles, such Words or Sayings are not strictly but figuratively
placed, and put down in his Dialogues.

Upon which this Opposer vapors and triumphs, as if he had gotten some great
Prize, filling part of his Book with his Taunts and Jeers hereupon, as if he
were some singular Rhetoric^an; but his Perversion and silly piece of Quarrel
appears very plain: For, Are there not some Figurative Phrases lawfully used?
Yes. He denies not all Figures, he says; Why does he quarrel then? And how
grossly and fallaciously does he compare some Titles of our Books with those
Passages in Tho. Hicks's Dialogues, which we not only charged upon him (but
also proved in our Books) to be Forgeries, Slanders and Lies, though affirmed
by him for very Truth? And from our Charge this Author and all his Abettors can
never clear him, by all his Shifts and Retorsions. For, supposing (as for ought
this man knows otherwise) T. H. be really guilty, as charged of Forgery,
Slanders and Perversions, Is it as lawful to excuse this by a Figure (which
must needs be the Devil's drawn Figure) as when we treat of the Light Within
being risen out of Darkness, such a Title is placed upon the Book, as, Light
risen out of Darkness: which properly belongs to the Matter or Subject treated
on, and is explained in the Treatise accordingly? Is this all one with forging
Lies and Ridiculous Stuff in other men's Names? Oh senseless Man! Is this thy
Rhetoric? Do thou make no Difference between a Metonymical Phrase, used in a
serious Sense, and a palpable Slander or designed Forgery to render men Odious,
as T. Hicks has done, beneath the common use of Phrases Ironical? Surely this
will not blow away our Charges, nor make T. H. much beholding to me, or his Way
easy Which renders his Friend T. H. his Cause very lame, and sorely wounds it*
then
(as this man reckons I have done) nor have we Cause to think, that I have so
furnished my Adversary with such Weapons as may mortally wound our Cause, as he
says; nor is there any need for the Quaker to wind or twine, kick, winch,
slatter and flutter, as he scornfully words it; however, he thinks he has found
a Net, and is able to hold the Leviathan, he says. Oh silly Scorner! blush and
be ashamed: Is this thy Net, that if we use Words or Phrases in a figurative
Sense in some Case, then a Liar and Forger may as well excuse himself by a
Figure? Will thou grace thy Cause by such Rhetoric, think thou? Being so
accustomed to equivocate and quibble thy self, thou art ever and anon accusing
us therewith.

Thou say, The Quakers have excluded themselves from using of Figures: Why
so? Because all Figures were ended by Christ, the Substance. Here thou art a
very silly Quibbler: Did we ever say, That Christ ended Figurative Speeches,
when he so much used them? And also, his Ministers often spoak figuratively,
not only Metaphors and Allegories, but Metonymyes also: Or have we not rather
confessed Christ, the Substance, as ending the Figures and Shaddows under the
Law? See now how thy silly Quibble is evident, and what a Scornful Fellow, as
thou termest thy self, thou have shown thy self to be.

Thy Pamphlet is made up much with Scoffs, Quibbles, gross Perversions and
Abuses, the greatest part of which I am necessitated at present to pass by, as
looking upon thee to be an unworthy, cowardly and base-spirited Man, who
shuffles about to hide thy self, but makes no Conscience of exposing others by
Name to Infamy and Reproach; as for instance [after thou have charged me with
Circumlocutions and Evasive Words] thou both evadest and shufflest about the
Question made concerning the Name Thomas Thompson (subscribed to both thy
Pamphlets against us) as, Whether this be the real Author's Name? thou putst us
off thus, He has a Nose in his Face, as well as any Quaker has; what if the
Author, instead of Thomas Thompson had subscribed M. A. could not W. P. have
joined N. and then have read it thus, A Man? and says, It is happy for him
that I am so ignorant, and that my Light leaves me into so much Darkness of the
Author -- Suppose the Author be a Private Person; what if he dwells 50 or 60
Miles from London? etc. page 10, 11.

And what Evasions and Shufflings is here? Have thou not bewrayed thy own
Equivocation, and that the Author's Name is not Thomas Thompson? A shuffling
Apology of the like Nature we have in the Pamphlet, entitled, The Spirit of
the Quakers Tried, p. 44, 45. wherein the Author (it is supposed this same)
gives his Reasons why he is afraid to discover his Name.

But what does my Person signify to the Merit of the Cause ( say thou) that
is that which they ought to mind, if they were ingenuously honest, and not my
Person? etc. p. 12.

It is very likely thy Name and Person would neither add to the Merit of (nor
grace) thy Cause: Thou art very Cautious and Timorous thy Name or Person should
be discovered, and here have gotten a Pretense that stands in Judgment against
thee, while thou make no Conscience of scurrilously abusing other men's Names
in Print, with a Multitude of scornful Reflections upon G. Whitehead, W. Penn,
and others, and not only so, but upon the Quakers in general, with which thy
Pamphlet is much stuffed, short of all Seriousness and Sobriety: Where is thy
Conscience and Religion? Is it all devoured with Lightness, and turned into
Scorn? Do thou think to terrify us with using such a Liberty of Speech as
thou tellest of, page 7?

And have not thou made use of such mean and unmanly Artifices as thou tellest
of, page 12, as namely, to be Angry and Waspish, and therein to reflect upon
Persons? What is then become of thy Cause?

And when did we ever tell thee, That we would have thee guided by our
Sufferings merely? p. 8. Herein thou pervertest: But have thou not formerly
perceived something of Religion and Christianity, as the Ground of our giving
up to suffer? However, we are satisfied, that we suffer as Christians, and that
the Presence of God has been with us in many Sufferings and Tribulations, and
that his Presence and Power is with us to this day, whatever Mockers and
Apostates say to the contrary.

I deny all Prejudiced Angry Anabaptists Spirits, p. 15.

Do thou so? Deny Prejudice and Anger in thy self then: Why have thou
appeared so much then (like an Envious Socinian) for the Angry Anabaptists, as
one greatly possessed with the Leaven of their Spirits?

As for Craftily taking thee for a Baptist, or jumbling thee with them. I did
not, nor do take thee for a Baptist; though I did look upon thee as having
jumbled thy self as a Consederate with them, or an Assister of them against us;
I have Ground to think who thou art, and possibly in time thou may be more
manifest, for thy creeping underly Work of Strife, and dark Attempts against
the Lord's People. And whereas to clear the Baptists Innocence touching thy
other Pamphlet, thou addest these words, viz. I do hereby declare once more,
and affirm, as in the Presence of God, that no Baptist nor Anabaptist, so
called, did see that my Epistle to W. P. till after I had writ it, p. 15.

Very like so; how should they? But to take thy Intention; If they did not see
any part of it, nor advise thee in the writing of it, this clears them not from
seeing or approving it for Publication, nor thee from being a Partial Abettor
of them in their Socinianiz'd Cause, which it seems is very lame therefore, and
like to be more lame and defective, if they leave it in thy hands to manage:
It is well, if while they are contending for the Humanity of Christ, they do
not at length oppose or further deny his Divinity.

As for clearing thy self of Contradictions, thou art so far from it, that I
think I can easily make it appear to any indifferent Person, met thou have
added diverse more Contradictions, Confusions and Gross Perversions; as also can
as easily remove thy Charge of Contradictions or Inconsistencies, which thou
have framed against Me, W. P. G. F. G. K. J. C. etc. but at present I count it
not worth my Labor or Time particularly to enervate them, except thou would
appear and show thy self, like a Man, not afraid to discover thy self or Name:
but it appears in thy hiding and obscuring thy self under another Name, as
diverse think, thou have the more Liberty to traduce and abuse thy Neighbors,
or such as have wished thee well, and are not willing to render thee Evil for
Evil. But if thou will enter into any serious Debate about Principles, come
forth and show thy self, and do not use such Equivocal Subterfuges: I proffered
thee fair enough in my Letter to thee, when I desired but so much Civility from
thee, as to have an Hour's Discourse with thee in the Presence of Two or Three
of thy Friends and mine, that I might have shown thee, wherein I apprehend the
Truth, my Self and my Friends wronged, in diverse Passages of thy Book;
proffering, either to come to thy House, or to meet thee, if I might know
where: But instead of either, thou shuffledst me off with a long Letter,
subscribed T. T. neither letting me know where thou dwell, nor where I might
meet with thee; pretending some Circumstances of thy Occasions would not
conveniently admit; with some other trivial Allegations. A strange Put-off!
What, not spare an Hour's Time to discourse or examine thy own Injuries and yet
can take many Hours to write Pamphlets thereof against us? Oh Timorous Man!
What sorry Shuffling art thou fain to make use of?

And as concerning our Confession of the Christ of God, both as to his Divinity
and Manhood, we have not been nor are ashamed thereof; and instead of proving
us guilty either of Equivocations or Confusions, therein it may be easily made
appear, how far thou have brought forth both, together with many impertinent
and groundless Cavils against us thereupon: And as for the Divinity or Deity of
the Son of God, and his Sonship, and being Christ before he took Flesh, thou
art so far from confessing this with us, that thou make a mere Scoff at our
serious Account thereof, p. 30, 31. Telling me of a pretty Medley of
Hypocrisy, Quibbling and Confusion, and deviating from Scripture Language in
speaking of the Divine Nature, or Word clothed with the Most Holy Manhood
being the Christ. But is this a Truth in it self, yea or Nay? What! is the
Socinian or Biddlean Proselyte offended at our confessing the Divinity of
Christ so much as we do, when he dares not appear ingenuously and publicly to
state his own Principle? But whatever he thinks of our deviating from
Scripture Language, or of opposing our selves therein When we Oppose our
Adversary's Raising Conten^ion, by their imposing Unscriptural and Unsound
Words.
we would not impose or force a Belief of our Principles in such Language as is
Unscriptural and doubtful, or make mere Words Matter of Contention, where they
are sound, or according to Scripture; neither would we be imposed upon by Words
both Doubtful and Unscriptural; and if we be necessitated, in our own
Vindication, to use any words that are not expressly laid down in Scripture, it
is in Condescension, and not for Contention [Note, that this Man boggles at and
evades my Eight plain Questions in page 22, 23. of Q. Plainness, about the Son
of God; and instead of giving any ingenuous Answer, he merely Triffles,
Quarrels, Contemns, Retorts, Questions, etc. through much of his second Section.

Passing by at present many Injuries and Falsehoods, and scornful Cavils against
my self. I must take notice of one Abuse against Samuel Fisher, page 54. and
reiterated p. 59, 89. where thou thus chargest him, That he positively asserts
the Scriptures to be a Nose of Wax; yea, and says, it is capable of being no
other; and for this quotes Samuel Fisher's Additional Appendix, p. 21.

Thou art here very positive in thy Charge, which indeed is a Charge of a high
Nature; But have thou dealt honestly or truly in this? Was it S. F's positive
Assertion concerning the Scriptures themselves? Or did he speak it with
Reflection upon them who make or render the Scriptures no better then a Nose of
Wax by their own various Interpretations? Though he be Dead, yet he speaks
for himself so much as may detect thy Injustice and Abuse against him; where
treating of the then Priests Confusion, or going round, etc. about the
Transcriptions and Translations of their Text, which they take to be their Rule
(he thereupon adds) Which were they never so certain and entire, by answering
to the first Original Copies, yet are not capable to be (to all men) any other
then a Lesbian-Rule, or Nose of Wax; forasmuch as even where men have them (as
half the World has not) they are liable to be Wrested and Actually Twisted
Twenty Ways by Interpreters, whose Expositions, Senses and Meanings (which are
as Many and Various as the Thoughts, and Conceits, and Inventions of the Men
are, who comment upon them) must be the Rule, etc. see his Additional Appendix
to his Rusticus ad Academicos, page 21. Now judge (serious Reader) whether it
be Samuel Fisher's own positive Assertion, That the Scriptures are a Nose of
Wax (in themselves) or whether that they are not rather made so (or no better)
by such as Wrest and Twist them? What a manifest Perverter is this Man! Surely
the Lord will rebuke him, and all perverse Opposers and Perverters.

Whereas thou say, That the Baptists have this to say for themselves, They
do not pretend to Immediate Divine Revelations and such Inspirations, nor to a
Gift of Infallibility, nor yet to any such Immediate Commission from Heaven, as
the Quakers do, viz. to go forth as Prophets and Apostles, p 56.

I say, the Baptists are then greatly declined from what many of them pretended
at first, as may be seen in diverse of their ancient Books; wherein they professed
Inspiration, and confessed to the Sufficiency of the Spirit's Teaching, and being
moved and led thereby, both in Praying and Preaching; see Sam. How Is
Sufficiency of the Spirit's Teaching, commended by W. Kiffin; D. King's Way to
Sion; T. Colster's Works, with many others: Have thou managed the Baptists
Cause well, in saying, They do not pretend to Immediate Revelations,
Inspirations, etc. contrary to their former Testimonies? And whether we or they
will show more or greater Evidence, Time, Trials and Sufferings will further
manifest, as it has already: God has made our Testimony both evident and
effectual in many Consciences, through our Travails and Suffering as
Christians; wherein he has appeared with us and for us, and stood by his
Prophets and Faithful Witnesses among us. As for thy Comparison between the
Quakers and Muggleton in both thy Pamphlets; there is enough in it to manifest
how Unjust, Irrational and Dishonest thou art therein; it will neither hold as
a just Comparison either in general, or in the particulars It is not thy
Mocking [and telling G. W. That when thou talkest of Reason he presently thinks
of Plums] that will clear thee. How easy is it for a Scoffer to fill Books
witk such Frothy Stuff?
For all the rest of thy Revilings, Hard Speeches, Cavilling and Quarrelling
against us, we commit our Cause to God, and appeal to him to plead it, and to
evidence for us in the Hearts of our Adversaries, as we doubt not but he will
yet further, for his own Name and Truth's sake; in the mean time, he has given
us to Rejoice over the Revilings of our Adversaries, to pray for them that
persecute us. And though we are as Fools for Christ, we have learned to show
forth so much of Christianity, as when Persecuted, patiently to Suffer it; when
Revised, to Bless; when Defamed, to Entreat; Rejoicing when men Revile,
Persecute and speak all manner of Evil of us falsely for his Name's sake: whose
Sufferings we esteem Greater Riches then all the Glory of Egypt.

London, the 27th of the 12th Month, 1674. I subscribe my self thy Abused
Friend and Lover of Truth and Men. G. W.

THE END.

