THE CASE OF THE QUAKERS Concerning OATHS Defended as Evangelical: IN ANSWER To
a Book, entitled, The Case of the Quakers relating to OATHS stated by J. S.

Because of Swearing the Land Mourns, Jer. 23. 10. Printed in the Year, 1674.

THE PREFACE.
READER,
IF thou have perused the said Pamphlet against the People called Quakers,
entitled [The Case of the Quakers] we desire thee to read over this following
Answer; But if thou art not pleased so to do, thou art requested (according to
the Rule of Equity) not to entertain prejudice, nor to censure the said People
upon the mere report and reproaches of their Adversarys, it being unjust to
pass a Judgment upon a People without hearing them, upon the bare Reports of
their Enemies.

However, this Disadvantage we are put upon in the Eyes of the World, that our
Enemies will be our Judges, and that at the Instigation of the Father of Lies.

Be pleased to take notice, that while our Adversary scoffs at our Plea, as
that our Conscience will not allow us to Swear, he says, we actually do Swear,
in as solemn and August a Form as it is possible for the Tongue of Man to
express, in our saying, God, who is the Searcher of Hearts knows, that it is
with a Holy Respect, etc. And thus he does not only render us to contradict our
own Doctrine, but also in like manner represents the Apostle Paul, as
frequently confirming his Sayings with an Oath in these and such Expressions,
God is my Witness; I say the Truth in Christ; I Lie not; The God and Father of
our Lord Jesus Christ knows, that I Lie not, etc. which were in his Epistles to
the Saints, and not formal Swearing on the four Evangelists before the
Magistrates. Howbeit he is mistaken in his Reckoning these and such like words
a most solemn and august Form of Actual Swearing: And what can he argue from
hence, but that Paul most highly swore in his Epistles upon a sacred Account,
therefore we ought to Swear before Rulers in Courts? which follows not, though
he reckons we do Swear in saying, God knows: But does not persuade the
Magistrates to accept of it for an Oath, but rather vilifies us. However,
herein we are not of his Mind, that either the Apostles or primitive Christians
did swear, or held it lawful; for we make a Difference between earnest
Affirmations, and Swearing; and they did really speak the Truth in Christ, unto
which God was Witness; and this was in a state so n^arly related to God, as
that of being in Christ, wherein they could neither speak nor do any thing
against the Truth: But the state of the Jews under the Law was much inferior
to this, wherein their Swearing by the Lord (as the Chief Judge and Revenger of
Falsehood and Injury) was in a more remote state, when they formally bound
themselves by an Oath, or conditional Curse, which was a Bond upon their Souls,
when they feared it (as few do now who are in the Swearing Nature) But there is
no need for the true Christians in Christ to use Imprecations, or to pronounce
any conditional Curse against themselves to bind their Souls; and we have not
so learned Christ, as thus to Swear or Curse; but to say the Truth in Christ,
unto which God is witness, which is not to Swear the Truth in Christ, nor to
bind our Souls with an Implicit Curse in his Name (knowing also, that the
Penalty from God of all Liars is the Lake of Misery, as well as of false
Swearers) For, where did the Apostle Paul say, I Swear the Truth in Christ?
Howbeit, if otherwise our Conscience, as to our simple Affirmation or Denial in
Yea or Nay be questioned, we have proposed to those in Power thus, That we
desire and request, that you will be pleased to Enact and Provide, that in
stead and place thereof, as the Cases may require, our Yea and Nay may be
accepted and taken; and if we break our Yea and our Nay, which is Christ's
solemn Form of sound words, and which is his Gospel Command, which we stand to
and for, then let us suffer the same Penalty as they that can Swear, and break
their Oaths: This we have left to the serious Consideration of those in Power;
and not to the Prejudice of malicious men, such as our Opposer, who, like a
Busy Body, has vainly spent his Labor against us.

This is written on behalf, and in the Person of the People of God called
Quakers, and their Evangelical Testimony, by some who are Lovers of the said
People, and the Souls of all Men.

THE CASE of the QUAKERS Concerning OATHS Defended as Evangelical, etc.
Section I.
Of the Nature and Extent of Oaths, not a Property of True Christians.
LEt the serious Reader judge, whether our Opposer J. S. has taken a Christian
Way and Method to convince us of Error or not, by Vilifying and Railing,
calling us Monsters of men, impudent, obstinate and reprobate-minded men, as in
his second and sixth pages; and on serious Examination of his Matter, we shall
find it as ineffectual for the same End, as in his first Argument, to prove the
Lawfulness of Swearing. He Instanceth Paul's saying, God is my Witness, Romans 1.
9. I say the Truth in Christ; I Lie not; my Conscience also bearing me witness
in the Holy Ghost, Romans 9. 1. Together with 2 Cor. 1. 23. chap. 11. 37. Gal. 1.
20. Phil. 1. 8. 1 Thessalonians. 2. 10. Ye are Witnesses, and God also. And these Forms
of Speech he says, are sacred Oaths; and that the Definition of an Oath in the
common Notion of Mankind, is nothing else but the calling God to Witness to the
truth of what we say, p. 2. It appears that he varies, and is confounded about
the definition of an Oath; for one while he says, It is the Invocation of
God's Name, a most solemn Invocation of the Divine Majesty; Another while it is
the Denouncing of a Curse; p. 4. Another while a man's calling God for a
Witness against his Soul, daring him to his Face, challenging the Divine
Vengeance to do its worst in case he swear falsely, p. 13. Now, Reader, be
pleased to observe, first, his Variation and Contradiction, between his saying,
An Oath is nothing else but a calling God to witness, and the pronouncing of a
Curse, daring God to his Face, challenging Divine Vengeance to do its worst. As
for the first, We cannot be convinced that it makes up a formal Oath among
Christians, to whose Testimony God is Witness as he was to Paul's. As for the
latter, It is more then an Oath, and savours of high Presumption, unbecoming a
Christian-Spirit, either to dare God to his Face, or challenge Divine
Vengeance. Besides, if those very words of Paul, God is my Witness, make up a
formal Oath by him, then we ask, If his saying, My Conscience bearing me
witness, and Ye are Witnesses, does not (by the same Reason) make up a Formal
Oath, by his Conscience, and by those Saints to whom he wrote? And were not
this most grossly to charge Paul with Transgression both of Law and Gospel?
Whereas in a Formal Oath, as made amongst Men, there is, First, Swearing by the
Great God intended; Secondly, An Imprecation or Curse contained; Thirdly, Some
Ceremony or Sign used See Genesis 24. 9. and 47. 29, 31. But our Opposer has
brought us no Scripture for Kissing and Laying the Hand on a Book.
besides the bare words of invocating or calling upon God (or so help me God)
For that the same Invocation may as well be used without an Oath, even in our
praying for God's Help and Assistance.

The words, So help me God, or I call God to witness, may be used without any
Intent of Swearing, as well as in an Oath; in desiring his Help, and simply as
owning him for Witness to the Truth spoken in Christ, which, as such, is not an
Oath; but when thus intended Iuramentum aliquod mente juratur.
viz. So let me have or want the Help of God according as I speak the Truth; or
so let God be Witness, or judge for or against me: In this latter Sense is an
Oath implying a Curse; as, Let God be Witness or Judge against me if I speak
not the Truth; but the bare words, so God help me, or God is my Witness, or God
knows I speak the Truth in Christ, I Lie not, cannot be a Swearing (nor a
Formal Oath) without an Intention thereof, or of an Imprecation or Execration
employed, Number. 5. 24.
as of old some time an Oath of Cursing was used among the Jews; 1 Samuel 14. 28.
and there are several Sorts of Oaths, and several Ways or Ceremonies
expressing Formal Swearing, as among the Heathen, Laying the Hands upon the
Altar, and Swearing by the Gods; Jurare aras. Hor. Genesis 24. 2. and 47. 29.
Abraham's Servant putting his Hand under his Thigh; the Angel Lifting up the
Hand toward Heaven; among the professed Christians, a Laying the Hand upon a
Bible, and Kissing it, or Swearing upon the four Evangelists (according to the
Pope's Imposition.) However, we taking the last, as the Magistrates general
Sense of an Oath; the Definition thereof is not so much the Matter in
Controversy, as the Lawfulness or Unlawfulness of Swearing among Christians.

His Instance, that Jacob Swore by the Fear of his Father Isaac, proves not
that Laban's simply saying God is Witness, makes up a formal Oath; seeing he
also said, This Heap (viz. of Stones) is Witness between me and thee, see Genesis
31. Will any presume to say, That he Swore by the Heap of Stones, which was a
Witness or a Memorial? His accusing St. Paul, notwithstanding Christ's
prohibition, that he did frequently confirm his Sayings with an Oath; is both a
gross Abuse of Paul, and contradicts this man's confessing that he delivered
the Truth with great Demonstration of the Spirit and of Power, and that by
Manifestation of the Truth he commended himself to every man's Conscience in
the Sight of God, 1 Cor. 2. 4, 13. 2 Cor. 4. 2. Surely the Demonstration of the
Spirit, and Manifestation of the Truth, was not Swearing to every man's
Conscience; for there was no need of Swearing where the Truth was so manifest
among the Saints. But to say, that Paul did frequently confirm his Sayings with
an Oath, renders him both of very little Power, Manifestation or Credit, as a
Minister of Christ among his Saints and Churches (none of them excepted) and
them also to have as little Knowledge and Confidence of Paul and his Testimony.

Further, He varies between saying, God is Witness, and men's calling him for a
Record against their Soul; where he brings Augustine for a Proof that Paul
Swore in these words: If so, Augustine is not constant to himself, nor with
other Fathers, particularly Basil. on Psalm. 14. page 155. of his Works, impr.
at Paris 1618. where he says, There are some Speeches which have the form of
an Oath, which are not Oaths, but are Remedies for the Hearer; as the Apostle
to the Corinthians, willing to show his Love, said, Yea, or by your Rejoicing,
etc. for he was not disobedient to the Doctrine of the Gospel, who was
entrusted with the Gospel: but he gave a small word in the Form of an Oath;
that their Rejoicing was most desirous to him he showed by such a manner of
Speech. Thus far Basil, though we know the Particle [by] is not always a Note
of Swearing.

In his second Argument he grants, that Justice may be administered according to
the Rule of the Gospel by the Testimony of Two or Three Witnesses, Mat. 18. 16.
but not of one without an Oath (as taking in God to witness with him) where
there is but one Witness, as in the Case instanced, Exed. 22. 10, 11. However,
that Testimony of Two or Three Witnesses may decide a Controversy without an
Oath; and where there is but one faithful Witness, God is Witness with him and
for him therein, and has a Witness for him in men's Consciences. And the
Lawmakers (to whom we have applied, and not to such busy Opposers as this
Agent against us) have Power to make Provision for such a one as cannot for
Conscience sake Swear, that his Testimony may be taken instead of an Oath,
especially he being willing to undergo the same Penalty that is due to perjured
Persons, if he be found false in his Testimony, as we have proposed; however,
this Opposer takes little notice thereof. And many in Authority have confessed
our Proposition therein to be fair and sufficient, and not at all tending to
obstruct the Administration of Justice, nor to patronize Injustice, as is most
falsely insinuated against us, page 3.

In his third Argument he asserts, That the Spirit of Christ in the Old
Testament Prophets did commend Swearing by God, as that which was to be the
practice of his Elect Servants in the Christian-Church, after his Rejection of
the Jews and choosing the Gentiles.

Answ. We deny this Assumption, that they did so commend Swearing, as a
Practice to continue in the Christian-Church among Jews and Gentiles; For
Christ and his Apostles Prohibition of Swearing at all, either by Heaven or
Earth, or any other Oath, was of an Universal Extent to both Jews and Gentiles
that come to be of the Christian-Church, both forbidding such Swearing, as the
Jews of old time used under the Law, viz. by the Lord; and the Apostate Jews
and Gentiles Swearing by Idols, or the Creatures, or any Oath whatsoever.

He attempts to prove his Assumption from Isa. 56. 15. And ye shall leave your
Name for a Curse to my Chosen; that is (says he) the people that I shall choose
from among the Gentiles shall use your Name in Execration, when they have a
mind to denounce a Curse, etc. And this he brings to prove Swearing a Practice
to continue amongst God's Elect Servants in the Christian-Church: And so he
would persuade them, not only to Swear contrary to Christ's Command, but to use
Execrations, and to denounce a Curse when they have a mind, as he supposes;
which is contrary to Christ and his Apostles Doctrine, who taught the Elect to
Bless those that Curse them, and to Bless, and Curse not; for, to Bless God and
Curse man ought not to be.

In his fourth Argument he says, The Spirit of Christ, which was in the
Prophets, foretold; That in the Time of the Gospel the Lord's people should
Swear by his Name, as an Evidence of their Conversion to him.

Answ. This we also deny, together with his high Applause of Swearing, as an
Evidence of man's Conversion in the Time of the Gospel, and as Divine Service
and Homage, and as denoting an eminent Act of saving Confession to God, and as
a part of Divine Worship, and as a Sign, Witness and Argument of Egypt 's
Conversion, and the Language of Canaan, a pure Language, which God promised to
restore to all Nations at the Coming of Christ; yea, the Condition of God's
accepting men for his people, the Condition of accepting us as sincere
Disciples, the Way of God's People; as may be seen in his 5th, 6th, 9th, 10th,
11th and 14th pages. All these high Commendations he attributes to Swearing by
the Lord; As if all those that so Swear must needs be such great Converts,
divine Worshippers, attained to the pure Language of Cananan, highly accepted
of God, sincere Disciples in God's Way, etc. Mark here, Swearing by the Lord is
this man's Gospel, and the Condition of all his Felicity; but such Ignorance
and silly Stuff what rational man cannot see? His Proof is, Isa 45. 23. and
Chap. 19. 18. In the first it is said, I have Sworn by my self, the Word is
gone out of my Mouth in Righteousness, and shall not return, that to me every
Knee shall bow, every Tongue shall swear. In the second it is said, In that day
shall five Cities in the Land of Egypt speak the Language of Canaan, and swear
to the Lord of Hosts. There shall be an Altar to the Lord in the midst of the
Land of Egypt, etc. Here he applies Swearing to Gospel Times, so takes Swearing
as literally under the Gospel, to continue, as under the Law, but not the
Altar; but confesses, that the Altar here specified is no other then that
which St. Paul mentions Heb. 13. 10. We have an Altar, etc. that is, says he,
Christ's Stable-Throne of Grace, p. 8. So that the Altar he interprets
figuratively under the Gospel, but swearing literally; see his Confusion:
Whereas if the Altar be Christ's Stable-Throne of Grace, then by the same
Reason he should have said, that by Swearing is intended a Gospel-Confession,
according to the Apostle's own words, Romans 14. 11. where mentioning the
Prophets words before, instead of Every Tongue shall swear, he says, Every
Tongue shall confess to God. And likewise Phil. 2. 11. And that every Tongue
should confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the Glory of God the Father. It is
not, every Tongue shall swear, (...), that Jesus Christ is Lord; but (...),
shall confess, the same word that is in Romans 10. 10. And with the Mouth (...),
it is confessed, or Confession is made to Salvation; And likewise in John 4. 2.
Every Spirit that confesses that Jesus Christ is come in the Flesh is of God,
there is the same word. He does not make swearing that Jesus is the Christ,
that Proof; nor commend swearing to God in the Gospel, as an infallible Mark of
man's Conversion, and the Condition of God's accepting them as sincere
Disciples, as our Opposer does: For many both can and do Swear by God, that
never came to such Acceptance, nor to such a Confession of Christ, as is to
God's Glory, which proceeds from a heart that believes to Salvation; For that
no man can thus confess to God, or say that Jesus is the Lord, but by the Holy
Ghost, 1 Cor. 12. 3. But many can and do Swear without the Holy Ghost,
therefore true Confession is Evangelical, and not Swearing. It is true,
Confession from a believing Heart is an Evidence of Men's Conversion, and not
making Oath or Swearing, which this Man seems to confess appertains to common
humane Infirmity, p. 1. And what was that Infirmity upon which Swearing was
occasioned under the Law, but man's Diffidence, Jealousy or Distrust, which if
they had fulfilled the Principal and Royal Law of Love both to God and one
another, there would have been no such occasion of Distrust? Therefore Swearing
was neither Moral, Perpetual nor Evangelical, as some suppose; nor is it
essential to the Divine Worship of God (as this man vainly thinks) which is in
Spirit and Truth; for that Worship was both before Swearing, and is performed
without Swearing. That God himself swore by himself, who could not swear by a
greater, we deny not; But if this must be made an Argument, that therefore in
this man may imitate God, who is his Maker, we deny the Consequence; for this
were to set up a Creature in the Creator's place: Nay, as good an Argument did
the Serpent bring when he said, Ye shall be as God's, etc.

To J. S. his saying, That to Swear by the Lord of Hosts is to speak the
Language of Canaan, that pure Lauguage which God promised, etc. that pure and
undefiled Religion, which was at first revealed to man in Paradise, p. 10.

Answ. First, That God promised to return to his People a pure Language, we
own; and that they should serve him with one Consent; therefore they should not
need to Swear one to another, or be Swearers under the Gospel. Secondly, Nor
does he prove by Scripture, that to swear by the Lord of Hosts was that pure
and undefiled Religion, which was at first revealed to Man in Paradise; For
this is to tell the World, that God taught Adam and Eve to Swear to each other
in the State of Innocence, when there was no Occasion of Swearing.

In his fifth Argument to prove Swearing in Gospel Times, the Condition of
God's accepting Men for his People, such a Condition, as upon the fulfilling
thereof he will number them among his Disciples, and account them his People
that do, viz. learn to Swear by his Name, p. 11. For Proof of this erroneous
Assertion he cites Jer. 12. 16. And it shall come to pass, that if they will
diligently learn the Way of my People, to Swear by my Name* the Lord lives, as
they taught my People to Swear by Baal, etc.

Answ. This was in the Prophets Time; and to be fulfilled under the Law; There
is not the same Reason for Christians under the Gospel, to swear by the Lord to
divert them from Swearing by false Gods, as there was in those former days:
For those that had learned to swear by Ball, viz. As Baal lives, by the Life
of Baal, etc. p. 12. which was opposed by swearing, As the Lord lives, under
the Law, and now confessing his Name, and making Confession to his Glory under
the Gospel. His telling us of a diligent Learning to Swear by God's Name, and a
learning this way of God's People, etc. p. 12, 14, 15. is, as if he should tell
us, that to swear by the Name of the Lord is such a difficult and hard Lesson,
that men must be very diligent to learn it, and therein come into God's Way and
Condition of Acceptance; when Drunkards, Liars, Dissemblers, etc. can easily
and do frequently tread that Path, and walk in that Way of Swearing both in and
out of Courts.

J. S. says, Men may confess God in Prayer and Thanksgiving, and Attendance
upon the Word and Sacraments, and yet not glorify him sufficiently in order to
God's accepting of them as true Worshippers, in order to his reputing them
living Stones fit to be laid in the Walls of his House, the Church, except to
those who are mentioned; and all other ways of expressing their Homage they
add this of Swearing by his Name; except they learn diligently withal to
acknowledge his Omnisciency, Omnipotency, etc. by Swearing by his Fearful Name:
Where this most solemn Invocation is denied him he esteems all other Acts of
Invocation not serious enough to obliege him that tenders them to a sincere
Confession, page 13.

Answ. Oh, what lamentable Doctrine and sad Work is this! What is this but to
tell the World, that they cannot acceptably confess God, nor sufficiently
glorify him, either in Prayer, Thanksgiving, Attendance on the Word, etc.
unless withal they add thereto a Swearing by his Fearful Name? which is to
teach or tell People, When they go to Prayer, to Church, or elsewhere, they
must go there to Swear; and also in their Attendance upon the Word, while the
Minister is preaching the people must swear; and from thence, the more they
Swear, the more they perform Divine Worship; which therefore must needs be most
effectually done where there is most frequent Swearing, and (as his words are)
DARING GOD TO HIS FACE. And then a farther Abuse against God is, That without
Swearing by his Name (which he reckons a daring him to his Face) he esteems all
other Acts of Invocation and Prayer not serious enough to express a sincere
Confession: Oh sad! As if God did not regard a sincere Soul and upright Heart
in his Devotion without Swearing; or regarded not the Sighing and Breathing of
the Needy, when he is worshipped in the Spirit and in the Truth.

Again, J. S. in Justification of Swearing by the Name of God, says; God
esteems this as the Highest and most August Act of Divine Worship that the
Creature can possibly exhibit to him, and as that which eminently contains all
others, and comprehends the whole Condition of the Gospel, all the ways of
God's People confessing to him; and that Swearing by God implies the whole
Worship of God, p. 13.

Answ. This is such a Commendation of Swearing as we never read of before; and
such a Way of expressing the whole Worship of God, and the whole Condition of
the Gospel, as neither God nor Christ ever taught him; Nor yet did ever God
say, when he allowed Swearing, that he allowed it as the highest and most
august Act of Divine Worship.

But it is to be considered yet, whether this highest Act of Divine Worship,
that eminently contains all others, to be administered by the Laity to all sorts
of People without Distinction, be not the highest Degree of Profanation; or
otherwise, Whether the Admistration thereof do make Clarks of Courts, Ministers
of the Gospel and of the Clergy as well as Parish Clarks, yea, or nay?

Having taken notice of his high Commendation of swearing by the Lord, and the
Advantage he has promised thereupon, as no less then God's accepting them that
so swear as sincere Disciples, and of his ingrafting them into his Evangelical
Church; Now let us take notice of his Threats against such as refuse to swear,
or to learn this Way of Confessing God by swearing. It renders man obnoxious to
the Dint of his Fearful Doom; I will utterly pluck up and destroy that Nation;
And that God does reject them; And that he will not let them escape unpunished
who will not learn to swear by his Name in Judgment, Righteousness and Truth
they shall perish, etc. p. 14. But they that abide in the Doctrine of Christ
and his Apostles who said, Swear not at all, they will not fear such Threats;
nor do they value this man's vain Flourish, Boasting and Reviling, nor his
threatening Familists, Anabaptists, Catharists, Quakers with Destruction, if
they will not learn diligently to swear, contrary to what Christ learns us; and
because of Oaths the Land mourns; and God's Hand and Controversy is against
such Opposers of Christ's Doctrine and Urgers of Men to swear: Does not Christ
say, I am the Way, the Truth and the Life? And must not we walk in him the New
and Living Way, and obey his Commands?

Sect. II.
The End of Swearing and Oaths proved from the Texts commonly urged by us.
HE undertakes the Explanation of the Texts we commonly urge against Swearing,
which are.

Mat. 5. 34. But I say to you, Swear not at all; neither by Heaven, for it is
God's Throne; neither by the Earth, for it is his Footstool; neither by
Jerusalem, etc. But let your Communication be Yea, Yea, Nay, Nay; for
whatsoever is more then these comes of Evil. And

Jam. 5. 12. But above all things, my Brethren, Swear not, neither by Heaven,
neither by the Earth, neither by any other Oath; But let your Yea be Yea, and
your Nay, Nay, lest ye fall into Condemnation.

For our urging these, he most grossly and falsely reflects upon us, as dealing
with those Texts as the Devil did with that which he quoted (he should have
said cited) to Christ, Mat. 4. 6. out of Psalm. 91. 11. leaving out in all thy
Ways; so these Men, quoth he, wrest these Portions of Scripture, by making a
Stop at Swear not at all, leaving out the words following, neither by Heaven,
etc.

Herein he abuses us; for first, we leave not out those words, as both ours
and his own Citation proves, see our Case, p. 24. and his own Book, p. 15*
Secondly, We make no other Stop but what the Greek Copies and Translations have
after swear not at all; where [neither] a Disjunctive follows, which he joins
in the same Colon or Member of Sentence; whereas in the Greek after (...),
there is a middle Distinction, or severing of the Members of the Sentence, as
likewise in the Latin after omnino, and in the English after at all: more
fully explained by James, Swear not; neither by Heaven, Earth, etc. nor ANY
other Oath; which this Opposer by his Meaning endeavors to restrain only to
swearing by those or any Creatures, and also to irreverential and common
Swearing, p. 23. and lavish Oaths, p. 24. voluntary rash Oaths, p. 31. and to
swearing rashly, profanely, irreverentially, in our ordinary Communication, p.
32. and in your common Talk, p. 36. as if only these were forbidden in the
Texts before. But still he pleads for Swearing by the Lord reverently, besides
the extent of the Prohibition before, neither by any other Oath; As if this man
should tell us, that Swearing by the Lord is no Oath: Who also presumes to tell
us, Here is nothing forbidden but what was forbidden in the Law, when Swearing
by the Lord was not only lawful but expressly commanded, Deuteronomy. 6. 13. and 10.
20. All which is answered by Christ himself, where he recites what was said in
old time in this Case of Swearing; as namely, It has been said by them of old
time, Thou shall not Forswear thy self, but shall perform to the Lord thy
Oaths: But I say unto you, Swear not at all; neither by Heaven, etc. But let
your Communication be Yea, Yea, Nay, Nay, etc. Which makes it very plain, that
here was more forbidden by Christ then what was by the Law, his words in this
holding parallel with his very next words; Ye have heard that it has been
says, An Eye for an Eye, and a Tooth for a Tooth; but I say unto you, That ye
resist not Evil; but whosoever shall smite thee on thy right Cheek, turn to him
the other also, verse. 38, 39. Did not Christ himself hereby forbid his
Disciples that kind of severe Retaliation which was allowed under the Law* as
he allowed diverse and other things in Condescension to the People's Weakness,
Deuteronomy. 24. 1. Matthew. 5. 31, 32. Luke 16. 18.

And in this Case of God's allowing the Jews to swear under the Law, where he
said, Thou shall fear the Lord thy God, Chrysostom. Tom. 1.
and serve him, and shall Swear by his Name, Hom. 17. on Mat. 5.
Deuteronomy. 6. 13. This appears plainly to be a Condescension to their Weakness,
Oecumen. on Jam. 5. page 136.
and an Obligation to prevent them from going after other Gods, as is evident
by the very next words; Ye shall not go after other Gods, of the Gods of the
people that are round about you, verse. 14. This State was much below the
Evangelical State of the true Christians, who in the Love they bear to the Lord
are engaged to speak the Truth in Yea and Nay without an Oath, as Christ and
his Apostles have taught. So the Difference lies here, the Jews when bound by
an Oath, they feared the Oath, or the Curse contained or employed in it (they
Swearing by the Great God, as chiefly to be feared them, with regard to his
Power to judge and avenge, etc.) and this was for a time some tie upon them, to
prevent them from going after other Gods. The True Christians are bound in
their Consciences by the Royal and Evangelical Law of Love (which was before
Swearing was, and takes away the Occasion of Oaths) to serve God, and speak the
Truth every man to his Neighbor without Swearing. So that the Disparity
between the State under the Law and that under the Gospel lies here; Under the
Law, Thou shall fear the Lord, and Swear by his Name: Under the Gospel, Thou
shall so Love the Lord as to speak the Truth, and confirm it in Yea and Nay,
without being bound by an Oath. Now judge, serious Reader, which of these do
express more Love, Respect and Honor to God; whether he that is bound by an
Oath not to go after other Gods, and to speak the Truth as fearing an Oath and
the Curse (which was the better use of Oaths, which now few that use them
regard) or he that is bound in Conscience to speak and do Truth without an
Oath, whose word Yea and Nay is more binding to him, and of more Value and
Credit then men's Swearing, Imprecations and Curses? And likewise between man
and man and Neighbors, which do express most Love one to another and
Confidence in each other, they that will not believe one another without Oaths
and Curses, or they that will (like Christians) speak the Truth, and believe
one another's plain and simple Yea, Yea, and Nay, Nay, as Christ and his
Apostle has commanded? Such are the true Christians and People of God, as are
come to the fulfilling of the Evangelical Prophecy; Surely they are my People,
Children that will not Lie, and so was he their Savior, Isa. 63. 8. And the
Remnant of Israel shall not speak Lies, neither shall a Deceitful Tongue be
found in their Mouth.

But to return to Christ and his Apostles express Prohibition: But I say unto
you, Swear not at all; neither by Heaven, etc. nor by ANY OTHER Oath. Hereby
Christians are so plainly forbidden Swearing in any Case, as Christ forbids an
Eye for an Eye, and a Tooth for a Tooth, or hating thine Enemy, see Mat. 5. 39,
44. Or else, what Coherence is there in his Words, and what Difference is there
between the Dispensation of the Law and that of the Gospel, if (as this man
says) Christ here forbids nothing but what was forbid in the Law? By which he
renders Christ as thus speaking, It has been said by them of old time, Thou
shall not Forswear thy self, but shall perform to the Lord thine Oaths; And I
say the same, Instead of, But I say unto you, Swear not at all. And likewsie ye
have heard that it has been said, An Eye for an Eye, and a Tooth for a Tooth;
And I say the same to you, instead of, But I say unto you, Resist not Evil,
etc. And so this would make Christ still leave his Followers in the Fighting
Revengful Nature; as this man's limiting his words for Swearing as the Jews
did, renders Christ as leaving his Followers but still in the same common
Humane Infirmity (as his words are) and weak Distrusting and unsteady
Condition, as the Jews under the Works of the Law were in, who were allowed to
Swear by the Lord, as a Prevention from running after other Gods, and to remove
Jealousy or Hard Thoughts out of the Minds one of another, as about the Case
mentioned Exodus 22. 10, 11.

Upon the words, Neither by any other Oath, J. S. adds, Swear not at all, by
Heaven, Earth, or any other of those Forms of Swearing by the Creature, that
Christ forbad the use of, p. 17. whereas the words of the Apostle, who well
knew the Mind of Christ, extend farther, as not only a forbidding a Swearing by
Heaven or Earth, but also by ANY OTHER OATH. But mark, how presently after this
Oath-Vindicator has opposed Swearing by Heaven, Earth or the Creature, he
contradicts himself in the same page where he says, He that swears by Heaven,
swears by him whose Throne it is; He that swears by Earth, swears by him whose
Footstool it is; because though God's Name be not expressly mentioned in such
Forms of Oaths, yet it is employed; and therefore we are not to use such Forms
in our common Speech any more then the Name of God himself, but in Reverence,
and in extreme Necessity, p. 17. So that by this he allows of such a Form as
Swearing by Heaven or Earth, that thereby they may Swear by God that dwells
therein; when before they are not at all to Swear by Heaven, Earth or any other
of th^se Forms: See what an eminent Antagonist this is that undertakes to
confute the Quakers, and yet contradicts himself in one and the same page; As
much as to say, We may not Swear by any of those Forms, as by Heaven or Earth,
yet we must swear by such Forms of Oaths, as by Heaven or Earth, that we may
Swear by him that made them and dwells therein, being his Throne and Footstool;
whereas it is confessed on all hands, that to Swear by Heaven or Earth, or any
other Creature, is absolutely forbidden; but Swearing by the Lord on a Book or
otherwise, is the Matter in Controversy. But this man further in his own
Contradiction says; As to the Forms of Swearing, whether God's Name be
expressly mentioned in them, or only employed by mentioning some of his Creatures
with respect to him; as when we call Heaven and Earth to bear witness to what
we say, I do not find any Difference between them, either in Point of
Lawfulness or Obligation, by the People of God or God himself in any Age, p. 19.

He finds little to purpose then, but what is to his own Contradiction and
Confusion, that one while confesses it unlawful to swear by Heaven, Earth, or
any other Creature; and another while finds no difference between Swearing by
Heaven or Earth without mentioning the Name of God, and Swearing by God
himself: And yet in his second page, his Definition of an Oath is nothing else
but a calling God to Witness; but here he has found something else; for an
Oath in his 19th page is, calling Heaven and Earth to Witness. Oh, what a
Labyrinth of Confusion is this man in! It is true, that Christ reproved the
Scribes and Pharisees Folly and Blindness in saying, Whosoever Swears by the
Temple, it is nothing; but whosoever shall Swear by the Gold of the Temple, he
is a Debtor: See his Reproof upon them Mat. 23. 16, etc. He also adds ver.
22. He that swears by Heaven, swears by the Throne of God, and him that
sits thereon.

Now this man in allowing such Forms of Oaths, as a Swearing by Heaven, etc.
because therein, it is both a Swearing by the Throne of God and him that
sits thereon, he represents Christ as contradicting himself, who said, Swear
not at all; Hilary comment. on Mat. Canon 4. on Mat. 5. 34.
neither by Heaven, nor by Earth, etc. So that he forbids both Swearing in
general, and using such Forms of Oaths as this man allows of, as a Swearing by
the Throne of God, and by him that sits thereon. And we do not find that
Christ allows the Scribes and Pharisees to use any such Form of Oaths, as
Swearing by Heaven, and therein by God, any more then he allowed them to swear
either by the Temple, or by the Gold of the Temple; either by the Altar, or by
the Gift that is upon it; But rather reproves them with, Ye Fools and Blind; Woe
to you Scribes and Pharisees, Hypocrites, etc. He is so far from telling them,
that to swear by Heaven, and so by God, was the most August Act of Divine
Worship, as this man has affirmed; and yet says, We are not to use such Forms
but in extreme Necessity; which in his sense is to tell us, We are not to
perform the Worship of God, or the most August Act thereof, but in extreme
Necessity: For he says, That Swearing implies the whole Worship of God, p. 13.
And that he is not Glorified sufficiently in order to God's Accepting us either
in Prayer, Thanksgiving or Attending upon his Word, unless we add Swearing by
his Name: But who besides himself of the Church of England will believe such
Doctrine? By the same Reason that God interprets it, as an Affront offered to
him when Perjury is committed in the Name of an Idol, this man's idolizing
Swearing, as implying the whole Worship of God, and as being the most August
Act of Divine Worship, God may justly interpret as an Affront offered to him,
and a Depraving his Worship, who was and is truly loved and worshipped in the
Spirit and in the Truth, before men's Oaths and Swearing were, and when they are
ended.

J. S. alleges 1 Cor. 15. 31. saying, I Protest by your Rejoicing, or more
properly, I Swear; for, says he, (...) in that Tongue is a Note of Swearing,
and therefore makes the Apostle say, I Swear by your Rejoicing.

To which we say, First, Let it be considered, whether their Rejoicing was God
their Maker; if not, as we know none holds, then whether this man has not
rendered Paul highly a Transgressor according to his own Opinion, in making him
Swear by something that is not God, as also by the Rejoicing of others; for
their Rejoicing simply could but be an Effect of Grace, or of the Spirit.
Secondly, Though the Adverb (...) was sometimes used as a Note of Swearing
among the Greeks, yet not always; for it is simply an Affirmation, as coming of
(...), yea or truly, and is used when we are about to affirm somewhat; see the
Lexicons. See the various Readings in Walton and the Cr^ticks.
And some read the Apostles words thus, Verily I dye daily for your Rejoicing,
or our Rejoicing, which I have in Christ Jesus. And likewise J. S. represents
the primitive Christians, who sufferd under the Pagan Persecutions the most
exquisite Torments rather then to Swear by the Heathen Gods or the Genij of the
Emperors; yet by the Health All of them did not so Swear.
of the Emperors, Tertullian assures us they did; and as saying, We Christians
Swear by the Health of the Emperor, which is more worth then all the Genij; and
by the Majesty of the Emperor: And also adds, That the Form of the Military
Oath, which the Christian Soldiers took in Constantine's time is thus laid
down, By the Majesty of the Emperor, etc. And says, That in such Forms of
Swearing, though we name some Creatures, yet we Swear not ultimately by that
Creature, page 20.

First, However Tertullian represents these Martyrs as Swearing by the Health
of the Emperor, and those afterward by the Majesty of the Emperor; The Truth
of the first is a Matter in Question, especially since Swearing by a Creature
has been accounted unlawful both among Jews and Christians; neither can such
an Example (if true) be Warrant to any to take such a Form of Oath, as by the
Health of a Man or Creature. Secondly, Neither is Swearing by the Health of the
Emperor any more warrantable; And did not both these Oaths savor of
Heathenism? which if any esteemed Christians, came under and took, it was more
a Condescension for Fear then any Example to be followed.

And his saying, That though we name some Creature, yet we swear not ultimately
by that Creature; yet however, it implies a Swearing in part by that Creature:
And how well this agrees with his accounting a Lawful Oath but a calling God to
witness, or a Swearing only by his Name, let the ingenuous Reader judge; or
with Tertullian his Sense of the said Swearing by the Health of the Emperor,
viz. Per salutem Imperatoris, salvum esse volumus quod Deus voluit; et hoc
nobis pro magno juramento est: We acknowledge that Emperors are set over the
Nations by the Will of God, and what is by the Will of God we will or wish that
God may save; and this to us is for or instead of a great Oath. And the same WE
also will or desire, that is, the Welfare of Caesar or the King, as
acknowledging God's Power or Hand in setting him up; For that Promotion comes
not from the East, nor from the West, etc. but from the Lord, who puts down
one and sets up another as he pleases.

His accusing the Quakers for wresting those Passages aforesaid, we pass by
among the rest of his Slanders. But his confessing, That no People upon the
Earth were more scrupulously tender of taking solemn promissory Oaths then the
Jews were at that time when our Savior gave them this Prohibition, page 24.
from Joeseph Antiq. l. 18. cap. 5.

This makes for us; for were not promissory Oaths as well as assertory allowed
under the Law? And if they were tender of taking promissory Oaths, they were
more fitted for Christ's universal Prohibition of Oaths, as they were in some
measure prepared for Christ by John's Baptism.

He tells us, That the Jews could swallow such Camel-Oaths as by Heaven, etc.
page 24. And is not he himself guilty of the same? Could not he swallow such
Camel-Oaths where he allows the use of such Forms, as Swearing by Heaven; etc.
because Gods Name is employed? And he that swears by Heaven, swears by him
whose Throne it is, which he accounts lawful, page 17, 19. But in page 24. To
Swear by Heaven or Jerusalem are Camel-Oaths: What Credit can this man's Work
against us be of? He reckons that Christ's words may be applied to their
Stipulations by Oath in their private Contracts and mutual Trading; whenas
Christ's Prohibition, as explained by the Apostle James, is general; But his
applying it to an Oath in private Contracts, seems to grant, That Christ did
forbid something of this kind that was used under the Law as well as in a
public manner: And there seems no Reason why Christ's words should be only
thus applied, unless men were more clear of Corruption and Fraud in private
Contracts then in public Testimonies; or why Christ's general words [For
whatsoever is more then these comes of Evil, or of the Evil One] should extend
only to the private and not to the public, appears not to us: However, they
whom the Evil One leads to Lie for any Self-Interest, what Credit is to be
given to their Swearing? And is it not evident, how little the Custom thereof
sweyes with their Consciences by the Injury and Injustice many suffer, and the
long Continuance of Contests, Lawsuits and Quarrels? And a man would think,
that there should be less need of Swearing in the Magistrates Presence then in
private Covenants and Contracts; because it is the Magistrates Wisdom to search
and find out the Matter, and in his Power to punish the False Witness, and be a
Terror to him; but in Private only the Fear and Terror of God in men's
Consciences can restrain them from Evil: See Genesis 24. 9. and 31. 53. and 21.
23. and 26. 28. and 47. 31.
However, what is more evident, then that private Oaths and Covenants thereby
between man and man were in use both before and under the Law; Number. 30. 2, 3. 1 Samuel 20. 3, 17. 1 King. 8. 31. and 14. 26.
So that this man's deeming Christ's Prohibition to extend to an Oath in
private Contracts between man and man, and yet reckoning, that he forbids
nothing but what was forbidden in the Law, we cannot but wonder at such
wonderful and frequent Contradiction.

J. S. says. Applying Christ's Prohibition to solemn Oaths, either Promissory
or Assertory, or to any but common-Discourse-Oaths, makes Christ a Transgressor
of the Law. I Tremble at the Thought of this Consequence, which as naturally
flows from the Quakers Hypothesis as Light from the Sun, page 25.

Answ. He has cause rather to Tremble because of his own Igrance and perverse
Talk, thus to tie up Christ's Prohibition so fully explained, in Opposition to
former Oaths and Swearing under the Law (even those to the Lord, which surely
were solemn and serious, Neh. 10. 29.) as also to the Heathenish Swearing by
Creatures, where he forbids his to swear at all; adding, neither by Heaven, nor
by the Earth, further explained by his Apostle James, Nor by any other Oath;
And yet Christ was so far from being a Transgressor of the Law it. self, or
from causing an Obstruction to all Legal Proceeding, or proclaiming an
Indemnity to Thieves, Murderers, Blasphemers, and all sorts of injurious
Persons, or turning of Hell loose in the Kingdom of God (as this man
blasphemously words it) That Christ came not to destroy the Law, but to fulfill
it, in answering the End of it, as in this Particular; where Swearing under the
Law was a kind of Bond upon their Soul to speak or do that which was Right and
Just in the Sight of God and Men, the greater Weight still was upon this then
upon those words and Ceremonies of Swearing, which though Christ ended
Swearing, and the Law thereof, with many other Circumstances, Ceremonies and
Shadows; yet he did not come either to stop Justice or to indulge Malefactors,
he being the End of the Law for Righteousness; and yet unto his own forbids
some things the Law allowed, as that, An Eye for an Eye, and a Tooth for a
Tooth; though he was for overcoming of Evil with that which was Good.

J. S. page 26. alleges St. Paul, as if he called Witnesses to swear
concerning him, in saying, All which the High Priest and all the State of the
Elders can bear me Witness: And in his Apology before Felix he challenges his
Accusers to prove the Matter of Fact they accused him with, Acts 24. Neither
can they prove the things whereof they now accuse me: And that in his Answer
before Agrippa, he appeals to the Testimony of those that knew him from his
Youth, Acts 26. 5. To which he adds, That if he had thought solemn swearing to
be unlawful by this Prohibition of Christ, he would rather have undergone a
Thousand Deaths then tempt so many to make Shipwreck of their Immortal Souls,
by calling them to that unlawful Act, page 27.

Answ. This is a far fetched Consequence, and as far from proving the thing
intended: For, first, it is an unlikely thing Paul should call the High Priest
and all the State of the Elders to Swear that he had been a Persecutor; for
then he must call many to be Swearers: And it was sufficiently known abroad
among the Jews what manner of Person he had been. Secondly, Neither can they
prove the things whereof they now accuse me, was far enough from calling them
to swear against him. Thirdly, His admitting a bearing him witness, or the Jews
testifying concerning him, who knew his former manner of Life, Acts 26. 4, 5.
Did he therein call them to swear, in saying, If they would testify? The most
Paul allowed of was a bearing Witness: If they would have sworn, it had been
the Rulers and their own Act, who did not think it an Evil, and therefore not
so great to them, as to those that believe it is so.

J. S. undertakes further to expound James 's words, But above all things, my
Brethren, Swear not: He says (...) is nowhere else rendered in Scripture
above, but before, and it should be so here, page 29. And then he thus
paraphases, Let not an Oath lie uppermost upon your Heart, and come first of
all, before all things out of your Mouth, page 30.

This is a kind of an easy Meaning, but a plain Perversion of the Apostle's
Testimony, which does not allow of any such Liberty at all for swearing as this
does, as if he only forbad Swearing in the beginning of our Discourses; whe^as
the Prohibition is plain and positive, Above all things Swear not, neither by
Heaven, neither by the Earth, neither by any other Oath; but this man will
still have some other Oath: So whether must we believe him or the Apostle
James, judge Reader. And though we do not look on Swearing as worse then
Adultery or Manslaughter, as is queried upon the words, Above all things Swear
not; yet doubtless the Apostle saw the Consequence of it might be bad, and sad
enough, or else he would not so strictly have Forbidden it to the Twelve Tribes.

J. S. makes these the Consequences of our sticking to the express Command of
Christ and his Apostle, viz. That Paul's calling God to witness came from an
Evil spirit. That our Savior, as often as he said Amen, Amen, had those words
put into his Mouth by the Evil One, page 31.

To the first we say, No; it was Christ, the Son of God, that spoak in Paul,
whose Witness God is; and the Son's simply owning the Father for his Witness we
do not look upon as making up a Formal Oath.

To the second; Neither can we own that our Savior swore as often as he said
Amen, or Verily, Verily, which was but a Note of Affirmation, and not of
Swearing, and more then Yea, Yea, Nay, Nay.

Again, He infers, That the Elect Angel which Christ sent from Heaven to
communicate the Knowledge of future things to St. John was inspired by the
Devil when he swore by him that lives forever.

Answ. No, that he was not; for he spoak as God's Representative or
Ambassador, having a peculiar Commission, Power and Dispensation therein,
which men may not imitate, which extended through the Law and the Prophets, in
which the Swearing was; and wherein the Angels were sent as God's Messengers
and Representatives, Ministering Spirits and Servants to the whole Seed of
Abraham, and Heirs of Salvation, to whom God's Promise was confirmed by an
Oath: And this was a Vision represented in Figures.

His telling us, That Christ prohibits the use of [whatsoever is more] to be
intrinsecally Evil, page 31.

Answ. Though Oaths when lawful, could not be accounted intrinsecally Evil; yet
there was an Evil that was an Occasion of Oaths, before permitted among the
Jews, as that of Diffidence, Jealousy, Instability, Liableness to run after
other Gods, and to do Injustice, Distrust one of another, etc. and as this man
confesses, common humane Infirmity, Ambiguity, page 1. and page 17. How plain
is it, it was Weakness, Distrust and Fear in Abimel^ch, which was the cause of
his requiring Abraham to Swear, that he would not deal falsely with him; and a
Covenant with Isaac, that he would do them no Hurt? Genesis 21. 23. and chap. 26.
28. Therefore Christ's words are plain, Let your Communication be Yea, Yea,
Nay, Nay; for whatsoever is more then these (that is, in Affirming and Denying)
comes of Evil, or of the Evil One. And many Things, Ceremonies, Circumstances
and Shadows under the Law, that in themselves were not intrinsecally evil, did
wax old, and grew out of use, and vanished, as the old Covenant it self did,
being accounted Weak, Insufficient and of a Decaying Nature, when a higher and
more eminent Dispensation was brought in, as that of the New Covenant, which
therefore to oppose (with any of those inferior things before lawful) comes
now of the Evil One.

And J. S. his Consequence and Doctrine appears both Gross, Impious and
Antichristian, where he says; That if the Christian-Churches do not perform
Homage to the God of Truth by Swearing as well as Blessing in his Name, if
their Tongues do not as well Swear as their Knees bow to him, then the
Christian-People are not the People of the Messiah; and the Messiah is not yet
come, but st^ll to be expected; Then the Blessed Jesus is not the Christ of
whom the Prophet speaks; but as the Jews at his Arraignment and their
Posterity Blasphemously style him, a Deceiver and a Counterfeit, page 34.

Answ. Oh Monstrous and Blasphemous Stuff! First, Thus insolently to attempt
the engaging of the Christian Church to Swearing as well as Blessing; yea, to
Cursing, and daring God to his Face, challenging the Divine Vengeance to do its
worst (as before he has defined an Oath) as well as Blessing in his Name,
bowing the Knee, or performing Worship to him* What people of a
Christian-Spirit can believe this Doctrine? Second^y, His rendering Swearing
such an eminent Proof of Demonstration of the Messiah's Coming, against the
Jews Opinion of him, and as reasonable as to tell us, that the effectual Means
to convince the Jews that Jesus is the Christ, is to swear that he is so,
instead of the Apostle's plain Confession of him, that Jesus is the Christ, who
preferred Confession instead of Swearing.

Again, His scornful Talk of the Reign of the Quakers Christ, and saying, That
the Quakers Gloss defrauds God of his due Homag, robs the King of Saints of one
of the Prime Jewels of his Crown, presents the Ever-blessed Jesus in the Form
of an Impostor* and False Christ, leads directly to the Gulf of Gross
Infidelity and Denial of Christ, page 35.

This is as Wicked and Blasphemous as his Consequence before, and shows this
man to be a most gross Idolater in thus unscripturally applauding of Swearing,
as the Prime Jewel of the King of Saints his Crown; whereas the King of Saints
and his Servant have plainly forbidden Swearing, which is not to make the
Gospel contradict the Holy Prophets, as to their spiritual Intent and End
(which was to confess to God and to Christ) as is falsely inferred. And as
falsely he represents the Prophets, as saying, Christ should teach his Disciples
to Swear, The Lord lives: but where the Prophets so say we are all to seek;
but not where they testify against Swearing, see Jer. 23. 10. Hosea 4. 15.
chap. 2. 3. Zach. 5. ^. Zeph. 1. 5. Eccles. 9. 2. But if Swearing were that
Divine Homage, or included the whole Worship of God that is to be among
Christians, why is Christ so silent in it and the Apostles, as not expressly to
command it, but on the contrary, expressly forbid it? Or if Swearing were the
most August Act of Divine Worship, surely the Apostle James instead of saying,
Above all things my Brethren swear not, should have said, Above all things my
Brethren swear ye. There was a time when the Jews ^eared an Oath; but through
the Custom of Swearing they run into False Swearing: And though they said, The
Lord lives, yet surely they swore falsely; And because of Oaths the Land
mourned, and this Land mourns. And therefore even in the Prophets time Oaths
and Swearing were testified against; as, Though thou Israel play the Harlot,
yet let not Judah sin; Come not ye unto Gi^gal, neither go ye up to B^thaven,
not swear The Lord lives, Hos. 4. 15. If it be said, that this forbidding to
Swear was because of their Wickedness and Profanation; we say, by the same
Reason we may now testify against Swearing, and for Conscience sake cannot
uphold the Custom thereof, nor submit to the Imposition thereof, though this
man is not ashamed for all this Abuse and Profanation, to urge and applaud it
as the highest Act of Divine Worship, and the Condition of God's receiving
people; which, if it could be granted, as it is not, it only signifies thus
much, That only the Righteous, and such as are converted to God, must swear,
and that upon a very sacred Account, to God himself.

Now judge, serious Reader, what the Tenor of this man's Work amounts to; it is
that Righteous Men must obliege themselves to God and adore him by Swearing:
What is this to swearing to men in litigious Courts? And what is this to the
Imposition of Oaths we desired the Parliament to remove?

Under the Law Oaths were used in two respects, namely, First, To prevent and
end Strife among men (and these both in private and pub^ick) 2dly, ^o God
himself, or between man and man, And man and God; or Swearing to man, and
Vowing to God: See Genesis 24. 9. and 31. 53. and 21. 23. and 26. 28. and 47. 31.
Number. 30. 23. 1 Samuel 20. 3. and chap. 14. 26. 1 King. 8. 31. Neh. 10. 29. chap.
5. 12. Now this man's Work renders Swearing by God in general to be the highest
Act of Divine Worship, which only they that are converted to God can perform in
his Sense; and such none of the Wicked or Unconverted are capable to perform.
Judge whether this Distinction be made in the usual Practice of Swearing; or,
Has this man taken so much Pains with the Magistrates as to instruct and warn
them, not to impose Oaths upon the Unconverted, nor especially upon those
Excommunicated by the Bishops? For it needs must be granted on all hands, That
they that are Wicked and Unchristian, profane the Name of the Lord if they
swear by him; and they must needs partake of their Sin who force them to it:
And as for the Converted and Righteous, they are of Credit; and there is no
need to force them to Swear, being under a greater Bond and Covenant with God
then that of Oaths imposed by man, Christ being to them their Covenant and
Bond, the End of Oaths under the Law, and the Substance of God's Oath to the
Heirs of Promise. So we leave this man's Doctrine for all serious Readers to
judge of concerning Oaths and Swearing.

As what an OATH is, and concerning SWEARING, these are his Affirmations.
1. It is an Invocation of God's Name.

2. Nothing else but a calling God to Witness to the Truth of what we say.

3. A calling God for a Record against their Soul.

4. An Execration or Denouncing a Curse.

5. An Evidence of Conversion to the Lord.

6. Divine Service and Homage.

7. An eminent Act of Saving Confession.

8. One part of Divine Worship.

9. A Sign, Witness and Argument of Egypt's Conversion to the Lord of Hosts.

10. The Language of Canaan, that pure Language, which God promised to restore
to all Nations at the Coming of Christ.

11. That Pure and Undefiled Religion, which was at first revealed to man in
Parad se.

12. Such a Condition, as upon the fulfilling thereof God will number men among
his Disciples.

13. That Confession of God, without which they do not sufficiently glorify
him, either by Prayer, Thanksgiving, Attendance on the Word and Sacraments.

14. A Daring God to his Face, challenging the Divine Vengeance to do its worst
in case he swear falsely.

15. That God esteems this Swearing as the Highest and most August Act of
Divine Worship that the Creature can possibly exhibit to him.

16. That which comprehends the whole Condition of the Gospel, all the Ways of
God's People confessing to him.

17. That Swearing by God implies the whole Worship of God.

18. That Men ought to learn diligently to Swear by the Name of God, to learn
this as the Way of God's People.

19. To Swear Religiously by his Name (yet but in extreme Necessity.)

20. That in the Forms of Oaths we are to Swear by Heaven, Earth, etc. and call
them to Witness lawfully, because he that swears by Heaven swears by him whose
Throne it is.

21. We must subscribe to this, that in such Forms of Swearing we name some
Creature.

22. That to Swear by Heaven, by Jerusalem, etc. are Camel-Oaths.

23. That strong Asseveration by Oath, as a solemn Invocation of God's Name, is
the Celebration of the most august Act of Divine Worship and Adoration that can
possibly be tendered to Divine Majesty.

24. That Christian-Churches ought to perform Worship to God by Swearing as
well as Blessing; their Tongues must swear as well as their Knees bow.

25. That Swearing is one of the Church's strongest Bull-Works, one of those
Demonstrations of the Spirit whereby the Champions of the Christian-Faith have
irrefragably proved that Jesus is the Prophets Christ; viz. Because since the
calling of us Gentiles, we have worshipped the True God in Swearing by his Name.

26. That this Swearing is one of the Prime Jewels of the King of Saints his
Crown.

27. That the Prophets say, That he (Christ) should teach his Disciples to
learn to Swear, The Lord lives.

28. That it is, and always was the will of God, that Oaths should be reserved
and sequesterd to the Service of God.

Thus having summed up this man's Fruitless Work for Swearing, to make it
conspicuous, we proceed to his Accusations and Aspersions in his Third Section.

Sect. III.
The Anthorities and Testimonies Rescued.
THat some of the most eminent primitive Christians, Martyrs and Fathers were
of the same Mind with us in their Conscientiously refusing to swear, not only
by the Heathen Gods, but also more generally in Obedience to and Pursuance of
the Doctrine of Christ and his Apostle James, before urged against swearing at
all; and that we have alleged Examples pertinent for Tender Conscience, not
only against swearing in particular Cases, but swearing in general; and have
neither bewrayed the Want of Ingenuity or Honesty therein, as most falsely and
maliciously our Antagonist has asperst us: But that he himself has bewrayed
his own Want of both Ingenuity and Honesty will appear, though those Examples
that we have alleged in this Case are but a very few to those we could allege.

1. About Polycarpus, that eminent Martyr, who was said to be the Disciple of
St. John the Evangelist, and who suffered under Verus the Emperor, Ann. 170.
Eus. l. 4. c. 14, 15. E^e. Chro. 567. To our saying that he was demanded to
swear by the Emperor's Good Fortune, or Caesar 's Prosperity, he absolutely
denied, and said, He was a Christian; J. S. answers, They interpret [GOOD
FORTUNE] by Prosperity, or as if this Martyr could not swear by the Emperor's
Good Fortune, but by his Prosperity; But for that he has left us to seek for a
Proof. He adds, Eusebius in the place quoted has (...), which the Translation
renders, Jurare per Caesaris genium, Swear by the Genius, the good Demon or
good Fortune of Caesar, which Form of Oath Polycarpus and the whole Army of
Martyrs refused to take; because that which the Gentiles stil^d Genij the
Christians know to be Devils. A Daughty Argument; Polycarpus would not swear by
an Heathenish Goddess, or their Gods who were Devils, therefore Christians must
not Swear by the True God.

Reply, This he calls a Daughty Argument is none of ours, but his own
Consequence unjustly deduced against us; for ours is, That Polycarpus refused
to swear as the Heathen required, because he was a Christian, for Conrcience
sake; but J. S. thinks this not enough to prove that he refused to swear by the
True God: And as he has not proved this, so we do not think that he has
proved or can prove that Polycarpus either could swear, or proffered to swear by
the true God; for that was not required of him: Therefore it was enough for him
to refuse all the swearing that they required, and not to tell them he could
not swear by the True God; for that was not the Matter he was called upon It is
true, that Polycarpus and those Christian-Martyrs, refused to Swear by the Good
Fortune of Caesar, which is as we cited before. 2. But why makes this man such
a Difference between the Good Fortune of Caesar, or Caesar's Prosperity?

He tells us, p. 20. That Tertullian assures us, That the primitive
Christians, who suffered under the Pagan Persecutions, who would not swear by
the Genij of the Emperors, have sworn by the Health of the Emperors, Tertull.
Apolog. c. 32. Whatever Tertullian says of those Christians, it does not
invalidate our particular Instance of Polycarpus, who was a more eminent
Martyr, and clear in his Testimony then many others; For what is more plain in
Ecclesiastical History, then that some Christian-Martyrs exceeded many of the
more weak Christians, both in their Courage, Valor, Patience, Nobility and
Clearness in bearing their Testimony? And we did not say, that all the former
Christians, Martyrs and Fathers since the Apostles days refused to swear, as
we do, but many did; and therefore said, we have of many more given some
Instances and Testimonies of such Primitive Christian-Martyrs and Fathers, etc.
the Case, p. 9. And also its confessed, that the Christians prayed for the
Emperor's Health, and wished Caesar's Prosperity, which to them was instead of
a great Oath, Tertull. ibid.

And though J. S. would insinuate, That Polycarpus did not refuse to Swear upon
the Account of Christ's Inhibition, but the Impiety of the Form of the Oath;
saying, That the true Criterion was this, That the Gentiles would have had the
Martyrs swear by the Idols, but the Martyrs would not swear but by the God of
Truth, page 38. See the Man's Contradiction to himself, and to what he says
Tertullian assures us, viz. That without the least scruple of Conscience they
have sworn by the Health of the Emperor. Oh strange! and yet would not swear
but by the God of Truth: Was there no Difference between the Health of a Wicked
Persecuting Emperor, and the God of Truth? If Polycarpus had then proffered,
according to J. S. his Account of those Martyrs, viz. By the Eternal God I wish
or pray for the Health of the Emperor; or else, if this would not have pleased
his Persecutors, when they urged him to swear by the Fortune of Caesar, he had
then answered, Well, I will swear by the Prosperity or Health of the Emperor,
probably he might have come off at a more easy rate then he did; as many
Temporizers have evaded Suffering in our days.

But to proceed with Polycarpus; The Proconsul urged him diverse times to swear
by the Fortune of Caesar: To whom Polycarpus answered, If thou requirest this
Vainglory, that I protest the Fortune of Caesar, as thou say, seigning thou
know me not who I am, hear freely, I am a Christian; and if thou desire to
know the Doctrine of Christianity, appoint the day and thou shall hear it. The
Proconsul commanded the Beadle thrice in the midst of the Theater: Polycarpus
confesses himself a Christian: The Multitude both of Jews and Gentiles
inhabiting Smyrna cried with one Voice, That Polycarpus must be Burnt quick;
upon which the Multitude forthwith carried Logs, and Wood, and Sticks out of
their Shops and Bootks, but especially the Jews served promptly (after their
wonted manner) for that purpose, etc. See the Account at large, Eusebius. l. 4.
chap. 15.

So it appears that both the out-ragious Gentiles, who were for swearing by
their Heathen Gods, and those hypocritical Jews, who were commanded to swear
only by the True God, both joined together to murder this Eminent and Valiant
Christian-Martyr, who would have taught the Proconsul the Christian Doctrine,
which contains an express Prohibition of Swearing; and whose Refusing to Swear
by the Good Fortune of Caesar appears to be (as he was a Christian, from
Christ's Prohibition) with respect to him, as well as upon the Account of the
Impiety of the Form of the Oath it self, though those furious Heathens and
envious Jews were not fit to hear all his Reason on that Account. Consider that
Irenaeus reports (Lib. 3. against Here Is.) That Polycarpus was not only
instructed by the Apostles, and conversant with many who saw Christ; but also
of the Apostles ordained Bishop of Smyrna -- who lived long, Eusebius. l. 4. c. 14.
and was very old, and at length finished this Life with most Glorious and most
renowned Martyrdom, when he had continually taught that which he learned of the
Apostles: And that he converted many of the Heretics unto the Church of God,
preaching the one and only Truth received of the Apostles. To which we add, It
is not then probable that he should teach the Jews Doctrine, for swearing by
the Lord either to God or men; much less that he taught men to swear by the
Health of Caesar: But rather that he taught them as Christ and his Servant
James did, Not to swear at all, by Heaven. Earth, or any other Oath; seeing he
continually taught that which he had learnt of the Apostles. 2. It is not
probable he should so plainly contradict the Apostle James his Doctrine, My
Brethren, Swear not, neither by Heaven, nor by Earth, nor by any other Oath; as
to say, My Brethren, Ye may either Swear by God that you wish Caesar's
Prosperity; or otherwise, You may Swear by the Health of Caesar the Emperor,
though not by his Good Fortune. For if he had thus taught, as this man implies
of the primitive Christians, he had taught quite contrary to the said Apostle.

And its also said by Irenaeus, Eus. l. 4. c. 14.
There is extant an Epistle of Polycarpus unto the Philippians, very profitable
for such as are careful of their Salvation, where they may know the true
Character of Faith and Rule of Doctrine. And it is said, Polycarpus makes
mention hereof, (viz. of Ignatius, Eusebius. l. 3. c. 32.
the Martyr his Epistle to the Church at Smyrna) in the Epistle under his Name
unto the Philippians, writing thus, I bereech you all that you be Obedient, and
exercise Patience, which you have thoroughly seen, not only in blessed Ignatius,
Rufus and Zosimus, but in diverse of your selves, in diverse of the Apostles, and
in Paul, with the rest of the Apostles, etc. Now it is not likely that
Polycarpus, exhorting them so to Obedience as to follow the Apostle's Doctrine
and Example, should yet hold it lawful to Swear either by the Health of the
Emperor, or by God, both contrary to the Law and the Gospel, and to the express
Doctrine and earnest Admonition of the Apostle James, Jam 5. 12. It is also
said, (Eusebius. lib. 5. chap. 23.) That Polycarpus being at Rome in the time of
Ani^etus, they both varyed among themselves, yet were they soon reconciled,
neither was A^ic^tus able to persuade Polycarpus that he should not retain that
which he had always observed with John the Disciple of the Lord, and the rest
of the Apostles, with whom he had been conversant. It is not probable then,
that he should be persuaded not to retain Christ and his Apostles Doctrine,
Swear not at all, neither by Heaven, etc. nor by any other Oath, to teach the
Christians that they might Swear by the Health of the Emperor, etc.

J. S's accusing the Quakers with comparing the Oath which the Proconsul
tendered to Polycarpus, to that Form of Oath which is in use in this Kingdom,
and therewith aspersing the King and both Houses of Parliament with the Crime
of Heathenish Idolatry. These are both very Malicious and False, for no such
Comparison was intended by us: There was no mention of that Form of Oath which
is in use in this Kingdom, but of that which was required of Polycarpus by the
Fortune of Caesar (which was then their National Oath) which he could not swear
for Conscience sake, because he was a Christian; no more then we now can for
Conscience sake, because we are Christians, and Christ and his Apostle have
commanded us expressly not to Swear at all. So that the Comparison lies between
his being obliged in Conscience as a Christian, not to take that Oath; and our
being obliged in Conscience to Christ, and in Obedience to his Doctrine, not
to Swear at all, or take these Oaths, because of Christ's Prohibition, there
being yet a Difference in the Objects sworn by.

2ly, That Ponticus and Blandina, who were Martyrs, and cruelly tormented to
Death by the Heathens in France, in the Reign of Antoninus Verus, Ann. 179.
refused to Swear, being often urged, is plain, Eusebius. l. 5. cap. 1. And that
they contemning the Heathen Idols refused to Swear by them, is not denied: But
that they were bound in Conscience to this Refusal, only because of the Impiety
of the Form of the Oath, and not also upon the Account of Christ's Prohibition,
is denied by us, and not proved by J. S. For it is probable enough it was on the
Account of both, they suffering both as Christians who respected Christ and his
Apostles Doctrine, and so near the Apostles days. Besides, it was most
necessary for the Martyrs in those days openly to contemn and testify against
the Heathen Idols, in refusing to Swear by them, being not called to Swear by
the True God; without declaring, that Basilides, who of a Persecutor was made a
Martyr, who was a Soldier, and of Authority in the Roman Host, being required
to give an Oath in a Matter concerning his Fellow Soldiers, denied to do it,
plainly affirming, He was a Christian, and therefore suffered Death about Ann.
Christi 205. For this see Eusebius. lib. 6. chap. 4. and Acts and Mon. 1 Vol. p.
71. The Matter here, so far as it is cited J. S. cannot deny, and yet says, I
must make bold to set down the Book which they have omitted, Fox Vol. 1. fol.
71. which is not true; the Book is set down before his Eyes, but not all J.
Fox's words cited where he adds, Their Oath then was wont to be by the Idols
and the Emperor; this is Jo. Fox's Addition: Whereas Eusebius has it more
positive, thus, Basilides being required of his Fellow Soldiers to Swear for
some Occasion or other, affirmed plainly, It was not Lawful for him to Swear;
for he said, He was a Christian; and he would in very deed Protest or witness
the same, see Eusebius. l. 6. c. 4. The Truth of it is, We cannot see how to
reconcile J. S's Work, or to make it consistent with it self, or in History,
That these primitive Christians and Martyrs could without Scruple of Conscience
Swear by the Health or Prosperity of the Emperor, and yet refuse to Swear by
his Good Fortune, or that they could take such a Military Oath, even in
Constantine's time, as by the Majesty of the Emperor, and yet refuse to Swear
but by the God of Truth, as he confesses.

His Charge of wickedly Falsifying Authorities we return back upon him, as a
Slander; and we doubt not to make it further obvious, that he is the man guilty.

4ly, Our Example out of the Plow-man's Complaint against the Pope's Breaking
Christ's Commandment, Is there any Probability or Appearance of Likelihood,
that if the Denial of Swearing had not been a received Doctrine from the
Primitive Christians, but the Martyrs for the first Three Hundred Years had
sworn all along? That the Famous Fathers in the succeeding Ages of the Greek
Church (which was the less degenerated) as, Chry^ostu^m, Basil, Hilary, etc.
should bring it in as a revived Doctrine against that which had been practiced
several Ages; without mention of the Maintainers or Abettors of the contr^ry?

And Origin. Justin Martyr, etc. even in those Times of Persecution, testified
against Swearing, which Testimony was continued among the Waldensis, who, as
their Adversaries say, continued from the primitive times.

And Vsserius de successione, cap 10.. 2. ex Botono Parmensi, ci eth, Humilia^i
in nullo errabant, nisi quia condemnabant jurantes. Of these he say; their
Original were in Millan; They were rejected of Pope Innocent 3. and Pope Lucius.

Chap. 8.. 22. Anno 1052. Agennenses, Manichae^s, Radul. Ardens ita insectatur.
Tales sunt hodie haeret^^i Manichai, quia s^^a haeresi patriam Agennensem
ma^ula^erunt, qui mentiuntur se vitem Apostolorum tenere: Dicentes, se non
mentiri, nec omnino jurare.


in making a Law to compel men to Swear; This J. S. confesses comes home to
the Point, if the Allegation be faithful; but if this Plowman be Chaucer Jack
upland, as by his style he seems to be, I never read, says he, that he was
canonized a Martyr, or dubbed a Father of the Church, though he be Dad of
English Poets: Nor do I think his Romance will pass among Rational Men for Good
Authority.

Repl. Here this Opposer savours more of one affected to Popery, then with the
Plow-man's Complaint against the Pope. As for his guessing who penned that
Complaint, it is of little value, while he sleights and scoffs at the thing it
self, more like one Popishly affected then a real Protestant; However, whether
the Plow-man's Complaint was penned by any Martyr or Father of the Church or
no, it was owned by the Sufferers, as their Sense in those days, and recorded
among the Martyrs Testimonies for Christ, and against the Pope: And however he
sleights or jeers Chaucer, has he not been owned as a witty Wickliffian, and a
Witness in his Method against the usurping Clergy in his time?

5ly. He slightly shuffles off the Instances of John Wickliff, William
Swinderby, and the poor Christians in those days, their Testimonies against
Swearing, and against the Pope and Prelates compelling Men to Swear, etc. as if
they were only applicable to Oaths in Contracts, or by any Creature, or idly,
etc. But he has nothing against our Citations, whereas what we have cited of
William Swinderby extends farther then this man's Limitation; As the 14th
Article against him was, that he should say, That no man ought to Swear for any
thing, but simply without an Oath to Affirm or Deny; and if he Swears he sins,
Act. Mon. 1 vol. fol. 614. Its true, he answered to this. That men should not
Swear by any Creature by the Law of God; K. Rich. 2. Anno 1391.
but he further declares his Mind and Sense in his Appeal from the Bishop's
Sentence to King Richard 2. and his Council, in these words, Whereas Christ's
Law forbids Swearing, the Pope's Law justifies Swearing, and compels men
thereto, Act. and Mon. 1 vol. fol 618. [note that in the former he speaks with
reference to God's Law, in the latter to Christ's Law] which no doubt was the
Opinion of many more, as appears by the Plow-man's Complaint, which otherwise
had not so been preserved and propagated as it was. And it appears from that
Doctrine received among the poor Christians in this Nation, that neither the
Pope, nor the Prelate, neither any other Ordinary can compel any man to Swear
by any Creature of God, or by the Bible-Book, Act. Mon. 1 vol. fol 687. which
Opinion among others their Persecutors sought to make them renounce and abjure.
By this it appears they opposed the Popes compelling men to swear upon the
Bible Book, wherein they also swear by the Lord.

By his saying, Those Martyrs that held that all Oaths that be made for any
Contract or Bargain were Unlawful.

However, it was matter of Conscience to them that so held, etc. It appears
then, that they held something unlawful that was used of old time, both before
and under the Law, contrary to J. S. p. 15. For both before and under the Law
there were private Oaths and Swearing in some Contracts and Covenants between
man and man, as well as public before Judges; And if the Martyrs Testimony
against the Pope's Compulsion reached only private Oaths, we ask, Where did ever
the Pope's Law compel Men to Swear in their private Bargains between man and
man? and why are men put upon Swearing in their Account for their Tyths, more
then in their private Contracts about them?

J. S. would seem cordially to concur with William Thorpe's Testimony, as being
only against Swearing by the Book, by any Creature, etc. Whereas when William
Thorpe was demanded to kneel down, and touch the holy Gospel-Book, and kiss it,
saying, So help me God, and this holy Doom; he argues largely against it,
concluding thus, Therefore to Swear upon a Book is to Swear by Creatures, and
this Swearing is ever unlawful; adding further, This Sentence witnesses
Chrysostom plainly, blaming them greatly that bring forth a Book to Swear upon;
charging Clarks, that in no wise they constrain any Body to Swear, whether they
think a man to Swear True or False, Act. Mon. 1 vol. fol. 701. See how plain it
is that William Thorpe's words were against Swearing upon a Book, by God, (or
as help me God) and against forceing any Body to Swear True or False; so that
the said William Thorpe did not only condemn the Papists common Swearing by our
Lady and other Saints, but also their Swearing upon a Book in this Form, So
help me God and this holy Doom, see Act. Mon. fol. 701, 702. Now what
Chrysostom, whom he alleges, witnesses in this Case against Swearing, is
very plain and positive from the Greek Copy unquestioned, Tom. 1. Hom. 17. p.
217. (passing that in his other, Tom. Homil. 12. if questioned) where he says,
What therefore if some require an Oath, and impose a Necessity of Swearing; let
the Fear of God be more powerful then all Necessity: For if thou will always
object such Occasions, thou will keep nothing of those things that are
commanded -- What is more then Yea and Nay? To Swear, not to Forswear, seeing
none need to be taught that that is of Evil, and not so much superfluous as
contrary; for that is superfluous which is added needlessly, which certainly is
an Oath; if Evil, how then was it commanded in the Law? -- That is now
Adultery, which was then allowed -- Weakness required then -- for unless those
things had gone before, the other had not so easily been received -- Their
Virtue is now shown -- Swearing was permitted heretofore by the Law, lest men
should worship Idols, or swear by Idols; it brought them to solid Meat. What
Evil then is it to swear? much without doubt -- but now after so many Arguments
of Power, but not then -- We must study to do above the old Commandment --
Unless your Righteousness exceed, etc. Some come so far short of it, that they
refuse not only to Swear, but even do Forswear -- If to Swear be Evil, Perjury
is great Evil. With much more to the same purpose, his Assertions and Reasons
being general, extending to all swearing; and goes on to exhort and deter men
from sleighting the Command of Christ. Read the place at large.

Concerning Elizabeth Young, who was brought to Examination in the Marian days
before the Catholic Inquisitors of Heretical Pravity, as they styled
themselves; her refusing to Swear J. S. confines to these Reasons, First,
Because she would not betray her Christian-Friends. 2dly, Because of the
Needlesness to Swear whether she was a Man or a Woman, she affirming her self
to be a Woman, that being determinable without an Oath by Search: Whereas her
Reason is more general then either of these two hinted; For when Dr. Martin
said to her, Thou shall be Racked Inch-meal, thou Traitorly Whore and Heretic;
but thou shall Swear before a Judge before thou go. To this Eliz. Young
answered, Sr. I understand not what an Oath is, and therefore I will take no
such Oath upon me. Dr. Martin said, She refuses to Swear upon the four
Evangelists before a Judge; for I my self and Mr. Hussy have had her before us
four times, but we cannot bring her to Swear. Then said the Bishop, Why will thou not Swear before a Judge, etc? Eliz. My Lord, I will not Swear that this
Hand is mine. No, said the Bishop, and why? Eliz. Christ says, that whatsoever
is more th^n Yea, Yea, and Nay, Nay, it comes of Evil see the Relation more at
large where it is quoted. Observe that the Reason of her refusing to swear was
more general then J. S. relates: It was not only because she would not betray
her Friends, or because of the Unnecessariness of the Oath; But because, first,
She scrupled an Oath it self, saying, I understand not what an Oath is. 2dly,
Because of Christ's saying, Whatsoever is more then Yea, Yea, and Nay, Nay, it
comes of Evil. And 3dly, It is plain she refused to Swear upon the four
Evangelists and before a Judge to a thing that was True. Therefore J. S. has
greatly abused this sincere Woman and Martyr, in Restraining her Testimony
against Swearing from its general Tendence.

To our Example of the Waldenses professing it to be no way Lawful for a
Christian to Swear, whose Defense Bishop Usher undertakes in his Book De
Successione Eccl. c. 5. They were about Ann. 1200.
and of the Christian-Protestants in the Valley of Pi^dmount, Morl. Hist. page
217, 218.
who were cruelly Tortured to Death by the Papists about Anno 1655. One Article
alleged against them was, That they believed it not lawful to Swear any thing,
be it True or False. To these J. S. answers thus, viz. I join these because
these of Pi^dmount are the Relics of the old Waldenses, against whom this was
wont to be charged by the Papists, that they were wholly against all Swearing;
in which point the Archbishop of Armaugh undertakes to vindicate them; but
how? not by maintaining the Opinion, but by proving it to be a Calumny cast
upon them by their Adversaries. How true this Account is, whether or no the
Bishop of Armaugh did prove it a Calumny cast upon the Waldenses, that they
professed it to be no way Lawful for a Christian to Swear; will appear by and by.

In Answer to J. S's Allegation, where he adds, That Friar Ni^. Eymericus
reckons this to be the third Heresy of the Waldenses, That to Swear, whether
it be before a Judge, or extrajudicially in any Case, is Unlawful, and a mortal
Sin: And their fourth Heresy, That to Swear Falsely about confessing Truth, or
revealing their Accomplices, is not Unlawful or a Sin, but Lawful and Sacred.
This, says he, Bishop Usher in the place forequoted, p. 162. on purpose to
evince the slanderous Pens of Roman Scribes from the Incoherence of their
Calumnies, and from the extreme Unlikelihood that they who h^ld it Lawful in
some Cases to Forswear, should hold it Unlawful in any Case to Swear. Observe
here, Reader, he vindicates the Waldenses, as not being of the Opinion, that it
was no way Lawful for a Christian to Swear, from the Papists Accusation, that
they held it lawful to Forswear. So that this man still (most dishonestly)
leaves that honorable People the Waldenses, under that Blemish of Forswearing;
whereas if he had dealt h^nestly by them and Bishop Usher, he should otherwise
have cleared them from holding it lawful to forswear, for that they hold it
unlawful in any Case to Swear; as may be plainly seen by Bishop Vshers own
Account, De Success. c. 6. page 161, 162. where he says, The old German
Author, who wrote of the Doctrine and Behaviors of the Waldenses, says, That
the Occasion of this Error (viz. Refusing to Swear) was, the frequent Use of
Swearing for light Causes, and because Men fall into Perjuries; and adds a
quaint similitude, saying, That the Heretics who never swear, are like the
Devil, whom we never read to have Sworn. But (says Usher) They who have
learned of Christ, let your Speech be Yea, Yea, Nay, Nay; for whatsoever is
more is of that Evil One, Mat. 5. 37. will judge the Papists (with whom the
frequent Custom of Swearing for light Causes is grown in use) much liker this
Evil Devil then the Waldenses, who (as is evident from the Relation of the
Popish Inquisitor) used only to say, Yea, Yea, Nay, Nay; avoiding a Lie and an
Oath. And in the following page he says, But that these (viz. the Waldenses)
are as far from Lies and Perjuries, as those false Friars are from Truth and
Modesty, I bring those two Inquisitors cited in the said Article for Witnesses;
The one whereof writes thus of the Leonists or Waldenses, They are aware of
Detraction, and of Scurrilousness, and of a Lie, and of an Oath: The other
thus, In Words they are Cautious; Lies, Oaths, and all things that are
Naturally Dishonest they avoid. To which may be added also a third, namely,
that German which published a Writing of the Doctrine and Behaviors of the
Waldenses; They teach to avoid a Lie, Detraction and an Oath. And so Usher
argues thus, Because their Adversaries confess they avoid Oaths, therefore to
charge them with Forswearing is an Absurdity without Truth or Modesty.

So that denying to swear is thus far commended, as that it clears them from
the possibility of Forswearing and Customary-Swearing; wherein (he says) the
Papist, their Adversaries, are more like the Devil: And so is ours in Lying;
for he perverts it thus in Usher's Name. From their Forswearing he argues their
Swearing; whereas Usher defends them from Forswearing by their not Swearing at
all.

Now whereas J. S. has so plainly perverted Bishop Usher, and abused the poor
Waldenses, and greatly vilified and upbraided us, saying, Where are your Eyes?
Where is your Conscience, who belie so many, etc? We may ask this, J. S. Where
are thy Eyes? Where is thy Conscience, who have not only most grossly belyed and
abused us, but shamefully misrepresented the Waldenses, and perverted Bishop
Usher? And where must be our Wit (or any Bodies else) if we believe J. S. upon
his bare word, perverting such an eminent Author, so plain and obvious, which
we desire the ingenuous Reader seriously to look into and compare with both our
Account and his. We appeal to the truth in all.

Whereas for Example 12. J. S. only sets down Erasmus, Plato, Maeander,
Antonius, Hesiod, Theognis; and then answers, or rather quib^es, This ranking
Erasmus with Heathen smells rank of the Jesuits spirit: Whereas he himself has
thus ranked Erasmus with the Heathen, rather then we; For we have given a
particular Account of Erasmus's Testimony, only added the other afterward, not
at all either to undervalue Erasmus, or to point him hanging between Heaven and
Hell, as he says, it is the Jesuits Device: But to let that pass. However J.
S. seems to have no mean Esteem for Erasmus; but whether he be real therein or
not, will further appear, where he confidently says of him, His Judgment was
far enough from the Opinion of the Quakers; for where he speaks thus of the
Unlawfulness of Swearing, the Vselesness of Oaths, he speaks of Swearing in our
ordinary Communication, as is manifest from that Clause [in your Bargains] ye
need no Oath, ye need no Execration.

Observe here, Reader, he restrains Erasmus here to oppose Swearing only in
ordinary Communication, and the like, and as before, far enough from our
Opinion; and then adds another Untruth, That the Quaker-Apologist either
ignorantly or maliciously omits that Clause [in your Bargains] both which are
false; for it was neither ignorantly nor maliciously, but because we had enough
beside in general Assertions and Reasons, we cited against all manner of Oaths,
besides this Particular he mentions.

See further Erasmus in his Paraphrase on Mat. 5. 34. Having cited the ^ext he
says, Among the Jews only Perjury is punishable -- but the Law of the Gospel,
that ye should be more sure from Perjury, does utterly condemn all manner of
Oaths; that is not lawful to Swear, neither by God, nor by those things which
seem to the common sort to be of less Religion. Here both the Assertions and
the Reasons are general, with several other Clauses, some more particular, and
others general, before he comes to the particular Instance [ in your Bargains]
ye need no Oath, ye need no Execration or Cursing; which Particular cannot make
void his general Position and Reason, both before and after; to which we refer
the Reader to view at large.

And likewise on his Paraphrase on Jam. 5. 12. he is as general and positive in
asserting and arguing the Case against Swearing, Erasm. para. on Jam. 5. 12.
thus, But especially, my Brethren, Swear not, lest by little and little you
accustom your selves to Forswear. Among the Jews and Heathens for Fidelity's
sake there is an Oath put between; But among Christians, which ought neither to
distrust any man, neither be in will to deceive; it is a vain thing: Whosoever
is accustomed to swear, is cousin german to the Peril of Forswearing; Be ye
afraid not only to swear by God in humane Affairs and in light Matters, but
also abstain from all kind of Swearing, that you Swear neither by Heaven,
neither by Earth, nor any other thing that the common people esteem holy and
religious. Whosoever dare be bold to Lie without Swearing, he dare do the same
also when he Swears, if he list. He that is a good man will believe a man
without Swearing; and that naught is will not trust a man if he Swear: But
among you that are furnished with Gospel-like Plaineness, there is neither
place of Distrusting, nor to imagine Deceit; but let your plain Communication
be regarded for no less true and steadfast then any manner of Oath of the Jews
or Pagans, how holy soever it be, etc.

To our Instance of Augustine on Psalm. 88. and de mendacio, J. S. answers; The
very words here alleged evince, that St. Augustine speaks of common Swearing;
and that he must be beside his Text, if from the Old Testament he infer the
Unlawfulness of all kinds of Swearing.

Reply. Augustine's words are plain and general, that we cited; however he kept
to the New Testament Text and to himself in other places we shall not at
present examine (if he did not, it should have been retracted by him) but
recite Augustine's words more fairly then J. S. has done.

It is well that God has forbidden man to Swear, lest by Custom of Swearing
(inasmuch as we are apt to mistake) we commit Perjury: August. on Psalm. 88.
There is none but God can safely swear, because there is no other but may be
deceived.

I say unto you, Swear not at all, lest by Swearing ye come to a Facility of
Swearing, from a Facility to a Custom, August. De mendacio.
and from a Custom ye fall into Perjury.

Observe here, Reader, that both his Positions and Reasons are general, and his
Inference deduced from Christ and his Apostles own words against Swearing, as
Erasmus's are.

And we now must further cite Augustine in the Case; see Augustine Sermon. 3. Ad
competentes: Let them not only abstain from Perjury, but also from an Oath;
Because he does not Lie who says, A man Swearing much shall not depart from
Iniquity, and the Plague shall not depart from his House, Eccles. 23.

Augustine. de sermon. dom. in monte, on the place in Mat. 5. thus; The
Righteousness of the Pharisees is, not to Forswear; This he confirms who
forbids to Swear, which belongs to the Righteousness of the Kingdom of
Heaven: For, as he who does not speak, cannot speak a Lie, so he cannot
Forswear who does not Swear (so he goes on to excuse Paul for saying (...),
etc. and calling God to Witness, etc.) saying, That an Oath is not of good
things, or among good things; but of evil things, or to be reckoned among evil
things. And says, Let a man refrain to use it, but upon Necessity, for the
Infirmity of others, which is Evil; from which we pray, that we should daily be
delivered.

Augustine. on Jam. 5. de verbis Apostol. sermon. 30. Perhaps it is only for God
to Swear, who cannot Forswear. And so he goes on to show how hard it is for men
to avoid Perjury.

Augustine. de mendacio Retract. lib. 1. c. ult. He says, is obscure and
intricate.

To our Instance of the Albines in France, An. 1176.
and Mich. Sadler, an eminent Martyr in Germany, that they held it was unlawful
to Swear; and that one Article alleged against him was, that he had said [That
men should not Swear to, or before the Magistrate.] To these J. S. answers,
Your Authors say only, that That Charge was alleged against them; but not,
that it was proved.

Repl. Neither do we read that the Authors say, That that Charge was denied by
them; and then, what need was there of proving it before it was denied?

To our alleging Jerome, Chrysostom, Justine Martyr against Swearing, our
Adversary answers, viz. When you name the Texts of these three Fathers we shall
examine whether you faithfully report them.

We Reply, Let him examine then the Report and Citation already given of
Chrysostom: And now of the other Two (we hope, more faithfully then he has
done of B. Usher and diverse others.)

See Jerome's Commentary on Mat. 5. on the place, Swear not; thus, This was
granted as to little ones by the Law, that as they did offer Sacrifices to God,
lest they should offer them to Idols; So they were suffered to swear by God,
not that they did this rightly, but that it was better so to give it to God
then to Devils: But the Truth of the Gospel does not receive an Oath, seeing
every faithful Speech (or every Speech of a faithful Man or Believer) is for
(or instead of) an oath.

Justin-Martyr. Apolog. for Christians, page 63. printed at Paris, 1615.
summing up the Doctrines of Christ to the Heathen Emperor, says, He commanded
us, not to Swear at all, but always to speak Truth; Swear not at all, but let
your Yea be Yea, and Nay, Nay; for whatsoever is more comes of Evil.

As for Walter Brute in his Testimony against Swearing, is as plain, positive
and rational as any of them; see Act. Mon. 1 vol. fol. 653. J. S. says, As to
Walter Brute, it is true, he affirmed what is alleged, but with Protestation,
That he would retract that Opinion if he were convict of the Error of it; and
accordingly did, upon Conference with the Bishop of Hereford, submit himself to
the Determination of the Church* as appear^ from your own Author, Fox v. 1. p.
653.

Reply, This is just the manner of the Papists undervaluing the Martyrs
Testimonies, by endeavoring to fasten Retractations and Recantations upon
them; and because this man has thus darkly and unfairly represented Walter
Brute as so doubtful in that Particular Opinion against Oaths, and so ready to
retract it, be pleased, Reader, to hear Walter Brute's own words in the page
before cited, and how far he submitted in saying, I Walter Brute submit my self
principally to the Evangely of Jesus Christ, and to the Determination of holy
Kirk, and to the Sentence and Determination of the four Doctors, viz.
Augustine, Ambrose, Jerome and Gregory. Judge, we pray, what Retractation is
this: And should not our Opposer have showed us, where he retracted that
Opinion aforesaid against Oaths, if he could? or where ever he acknowledged
himself convinced that this was an Error? His Submission was principally to the
Evangely (or Gospel) of Jesus Christ, which J. S. leaves out, as he does [holy]
before [Church] we hope he will not charge W. Brute, that he designed a
Submission contrary to the Gospel of Jesus Christ, being that principal thing
without which the other could not determine. But we do not find that W. Brute
retracted any more in the words above, then he did sometime before, Act. Mon.
I^V. f. 623.
when he told the Bishop thus, If any man will show me that I Err in my Writing
or Sayings by the Authority of sacred Scripture, or by Authority of Reason
grounded thereon, I will humbly and glady receive his Determination; But as for
the bare words of any Teacher, Christ only excepted, I will not simply believe,
except he be able to establish them by the Truth of Experience, or of the
Scripture. Now consider, Reader, that this was but a Submission conditionally
proposed, any more then the other; Fol. 653.
and that some time after this he positively wrote against Oaths, for which we
refer thee to the Quotations: And this conditional Submission seems rather to
argue his Belief, that they could not convince him of Error herein, no more
then the Bishop of Hereford did, when he could not confute Walter Brute's
Exhibits on his own Defense. Fol. 625.
And has it not been a common thing with many established in the Truth, to
propose such conditional Submissions to be convinced, and receive Information
by or according to the Holy Scriptures? For our parts, we do not find this
man's Representation of Walt^r Brute to have so much as a face of Truth in it,
or that he was either doubtful of, or did recant of that Opinion charged
against him by the public Notary, viz. That he held that it is not lawful for
Christians for any Cause in any Case, to swear by the Creator, neither by the
Creature; But rather that he was positive in this amongst his last Testimonies
against the Pope and Church of Rome; see Act. Mon. vol. ^. fol. 653.

As for J. S. his Conclusion, page 43. it savours both of Scorn, and Envy, and
a Persecuting Spirit, that would instigate the King and Parliament to afflict
us, as if we were not Conscientious in what we profess, but we knowing the
contrary in our Consciences, as being therein obliged to Christ and his
Command, we slight our Enemies Flouts and Revilings.

To his saying, The Order of Middleburgh is no ways applicable to the Quakers
Case, who have refused to pay Church duties.

The man seems herein wilfully to shut his Eyes; for the said Order is very
plain for Liberty of Conscience, and Freedom from the Imposition of Oaths, unto
those Inhabitants who refused the taking the accustom^d Oaths, and who instead
thereof, proffered as the Quakers do That their Yea should stand instead of an
Oath, and the Transgressors thereof be punished as perjured Persons; which with
the Advice of the Governor and Council of Zealand was accordingly ordained and
confirmed, That this Peoples Yea aforesaid should stand instead of an Oath
before the Magistrates of the said City [A Noble President to our Purpose]

Obj. But the Quakers have refused to pay Church-Duties, and thereby Rob the
Royal Exchequer, which is partly supplied out of Tenths and First Fruits.

To the first, of refusing to pay Church-Duties; it seems he means Tithes to
the Priests: And must we therefore not be allowed the Liberty of our
Consciences, but be exposed to Ruin, Loss of Estates and Livelihoods, because
we cannot pay Tenths to the Priests? Oh hard Man and unjust Judge! that
respects more the Pope's Yoke and Antichristian Imposition, then the Lives or
Liberties of Protestant Subjects and True Christians: And his implying an
Indulgence for us, if we did not refuse to pay the Priests Tithe, is like as to
tell us, We may have the Liberty of our Consciences if we will be Conformable:
Oh generous Indulgence to such as need it not! Could our Consciences serve us
to Conform, Pay Tithes, Uphold Priests, etc. what needed we make Address for
Liberty? His charge of Robbing the Royal Exchequer is envious and false,
showing a Persecuting Spirit: The Priests ^yth-Barns are not the Royal
Exchequer; we cannot help to fill them: They demand Tyths of us, not only of
our Lands, but of the Fruits and Increase of our Labors and Industry (a
manifest Extortion) and their Demand of them is as Ministers of Christ, and on
a Religious Account, as claiming a Divine Right, in neither of which are we
sati^fied, nor can we own either; and we have reason to think, that the King is
more Merciful to them about the First Fruits, then they are to us, and does not
so severely prosecute or strictly look after them as they do to us, having
caused many deeply to suffer both in Persons and Estates, and made grievous
Havoc by taking away and spoiling men's Goods, driving away their Cows, Oxen,
etc. many times more then the value of the Tvthe, besides the sweeping away
Household Goods, and exposing many poor industrious Families to Ruin; as also
the many long and tedious Imprisonments, which they have caused many to suffer
in till Death. But when have we refused to pay our Civil-Duties or Taxes, being
in a Capacity, that is, out of Bonds and Sufferings, which have disabled many?
And if the King and Great Council of the Nation were pleased to repeal those
old Laws enforcing the Payment of Tithes, and to convert them into some
necessary civil Use, as for the Poor, or some National Service and Benefit, it
would appear whether we should not pay our parts, and whether the Royal
Exchequer would not be conveniently supplied without the Tenths from the
Priests.

As for our Desire of being exempted from taking an Oath, because our
Consciences will not allow us to swear, to this our Adversary adds, viz. When
you actually do Swear in as solemn and august a Form, as its possible for the
Tongue of man to express, even then when you say, You dare not Swear; God, who
is the Searcher of Hearts, knows, that it is with a Holy Respect to the
Reputation of Christianity, the Evangelical Dispensation and to Christ's
express Prohibition, etc. This Person has given us various Definitions of an
Oath; of which he reckons that to say, God who is the Searcher of Hearts knows,
is a most solemn and august Form of Swearing: But surely he egregiously misseth
in this; for at this rate of defining a solemn form of an Oath, we shall scarce
know how to mention the Name of God in any serious or solemn Way, either in
Prayer, Thanksgiving, Appeal to him either as witness for us, or singly as
desiring that the Truth may be discovered in any case; but this must all be
looked upon as a most solemn and august Form of Swearing, if the Name of God be
but mentioned, when no Swearing is intended, nor any Imprecation or Ceremony of
an Oath used: But how manifestly does this contradict his granting, there may
be a confessing the true God in Prayer, in Thanksgiving, etc. without Swearing,
in his counting such Confession of God not sufficient or acceptable, except
they add Swearing by his Name; so that however the Name of God may be solemnly
confessed without Swearing: And if on some weighty Occasion a Christian be
moved to say, God knows I Lie not, God is my Witness: How can this be a solemn
Oath or Swearing, when he neither intends it nor uses the Ceremony of an Oath,
nor any Imprecation or Curse?

For there is a plain Difference between a man's earnestly appealing to God by
way of Imprecation, as the great Judge of Heaven and Earth, Avenger of Injury
and Falsehood; And tenderly committing or resigning his Cause unto God, that he
may discover the Truth (being Witness thereof) to others, when it is or may be
doubted or questioned: As in a Case of moment, wherein I know and am sure the
Truth is on my side, while others may doubt or question me, if I appeal, commit
or resign my Cause to God* (as knowing him to be my Witness therein) it is
singly with a Desire, that he may enlighten their Understandings, and bring
them to know the Truth of my Cause; and for that End I both trust him, and
leave it with him; and not at all with any Ceremony of an Oath, nor any
Imprecation, Invocating of God for Witness (or Judge) against my Soul; for what
need of that when I know I am clear? What need I be under any such Bond, as the
Fear of a Curse to bind me to speak the Truth, whenas I am both ascertained of
and engaged in the Truth, and my Christian-Reputation and Soul's Peace is
naturally concerned in it? And on the other hand, if any should wilfully or
knowingly utter false Things without binding their Souls with an Oath or
conditional Curse, that will not hinder the Curse, Judgment or Reward of false
Swearers from coming upon them, nor secure the Guilty.

THE END.

