A BRIEF DISCOVERY OF THE Dangerous Principles OF John Horn (a Priest in Lin)
and Thomas Moore junior, both Teachers of the people called Mooreians or
Manifestarians, (and called by some Freewillers or Independants.) In Answer to
their Book Called A brief Discovery of the People called Quakers, and a Warning
to all people to beware of them and of their dangerous principles, etc. Which
Book is a false Narrative of two Disputes, the one which they had with John
Whitehead at Gedney in Lincolnshire, and the other with Geo. Whitehead and
Geo. Fox the younger, at Lin in Norfolk, both in the seventh Month, 1659.
Also Priest Horns Testimony against his brethren the Priests. This is to go
amongst the Professors in England in Discovery of the Truth; For in this Answer
the Truth is cleared, and John Horn and Tho. Moors Ignorance discovered
concerning Perfection, and the Resurrection, and the Body and Blood of Christ,
and his Light, and other things of concernment, and their abusing the Truth
(which is set over them and their deceits) made manifest.

By the Truth* which is in George Whitehead. John Whitehead. George Fox the
younger.


Jer 10. 21. For the Pastors are become brutish and have not sought the Lord,
therefore they shall not prosper, and all their flocks shall be scattered.
Printed for Thomas Simmons at the Bull and Mouth near Aldersgate, 1659.

TO THE READER.
THat all People who reads this Treatise may see the confusion and Ignorance of
John Horn and Thomas Moore, who long have been owned as eminent Teachers by
many that are deceived by them, it is seen sit that they seriously here take a
view of some of the Principles affirmed by the said John Horn and Thomas Moore
at the dispute that we had with them (as ordered of the Lord,) at Lin in
Norfolk, the fifteenth day of the seventh Month, 1659. for their book which
is hereafter confuted, has some relation to their Principles, which are laid
down as follows.

Thomas Moore affirmed, That sin is a natural Heritage in the believers while
they are here.

That their nature is restored in Christ, (speaking of their own nature) and
that their nature is a filthy nature, and Christ took upon him their nature.

John Horn, That they that had no guile in them had sin in them; That every
sin is not guile.

T. M. That the blood of Christ shed is not in his Person in heaven, but the
virtue of it.

T. M. That the blood of Christ shed is the foundation of their faith, (but
where it is they answered not, nor could they tell.)

T M. That the Life of Christ is not in the blood of Christ, (so from this then
the foundation of their faith has not the Life of Christ in it.)

T. M. That the Light with which Christ lights every man is both natural and
spiritual.

T. M. That the Person of Christ (viz. of flesh and bone) is a quickening
spirit and dwells in the believers by faith; and to prove it, he said That the
Corinthians dwelt in the heart of Paul.

J. H. To that of 1 Cor. 15. 45. The last Adam was made a quickening spirit,
John Horn said That he was distinct from the Eternal Spirit.

T, M. To prove sin a natural heritage in believers so long as they are here,
he brought that of Romans 7. 17.

These Doctrines (with many such like) were taken notice of by many as they
were asserted by the said John Horn and Thomas Moore, and contradicted by the
Truth at the Dispute aforesaid, wherein it is so easy to see their darkness
and confusion, that we need say little about them at present, but proceed to
Answer their Book which in effect has the very same Doctrines in it, with
many such like; so that we desire that our following Answer may be seriously
read without prejudice or envy against us, and let the Light of Christ judge
between us and our Accusers; whereby the Readers hereof may see the errors and
confusions of these men aforesaid confuted by the Truth, and us who love it
cleared from their slanders and revilings.

ANd now John Horn and Thomas Moore, you have charged us called Quakers, with
being guilty of great errors. 1. In that you say we plead for, and maintain a
perfection of sinlessnesse in our selves in this life; and to prove this a
great Error, you say that the Apostles never said of themselves, or any other
man or woman besides Christ. Jesus, that they had no sin in in them.

Answ. Here you are found in the great Error your selves, who deny the
perfection of sinlesnesse in the believers in this life; the Apostle said, he
that believes has the witness in himself, 1 John 5. 10. which witness is
perfect and sinlesse, so not without the perfection of sinlesnesse, and he that
believes, has obtained witness that he is righteous, and having this perfect
witness in himself, he is not without the perfection and purity of it in
himself, for the witness of God cannot be divided from the nature of it, and
John said (speaking of Christ) as he is, so are we in this world, 1 John 4. 17.
so you have manifestly wronged both us and the Apostles, and we do not say that
there is any perfection in ourselves without Christ who is our righteousness,
and we the righteousness of God in him.

Again to prove our maintaining perfection in this life an Error, you say
Christ was manifested to take away sin, and in him is no sin. 1 John 3. but
never is it said so of any other, and that it is no where said by any one of
the Saints of themselves, or of any of their Brethren, that they had no sin in
them, or were not sinners.

Answ. Here you would accuse the Saints or Brethren with having sin in them,
and with being sinners while in this life; But mark how fairly you have
contradicted your own doctrine, you tell us, It is said indeed, that he that
abides in him sins not, and he that is born of God, does not commit or
worksin, because the seed of God abides in him; neither can he sin, that is,
commit, work, or yield up to sin, because he is born of God, you say: So you
may here see what J. Horn, and T. Moore have confessed, that he that abides in
Christ sins not, and that he that is born of God cannot sin, nor yield up to
sin, because his seed remains in him; whereas before they have counted our
maintaining a perfection of sinlesness in this life a great error, and would
accuse the Saints and Brethren with being sinners; so any that are not wholly
blind may see their confusion, and how they have broken themselves upon the
stone which they have been making war against; for if Christ be made manifest
to take away sin, then they in whom he is made manifest are not to have sin
remaining in them so long as they are in this life; and if he that is born of
God cannot sin, nor yield up to sin; then he is not a sinner, but clear and
perfect from sin, And whosoever sins has neither seen Christ nor known him.
Now they that affirm that the Saints or they that be born of God are sinners,
they might as well say that the Saints have neither seen Christ nor known him;
And where it is said, he that is born of God cannot sin, John Horn and Thomas
Moore have given their meaning to it, which is, it is no more then a man acted
and led of God cannot therein sin they say; which is no more then to say, that
a man that is acted of God cannot sin in being acted of God, or he that does
righteousness does not sin in so doing; so that still they reserve an
accusation against him that is born of God for being a sinner; whereas John
says, be not deceived, he that does righteousness is righteous even as Christ
is righteous in whom is no sin, 1 John 3. 7, 8. And now further see how they
have accused the Apostle Paul.

J. Horn and T. Moors words are these; Yea in 1 Timothy 1. 16. he says he was
then, when an Apostle, the chief of sinners.

Answ. So here they have accused Paul to be the chief of sinners when an
Apostle, when as the same Apostle says in that 1 Timothy 1. 12. That Christ
counted him faithful, putting him into the Mi^istry; but these accusing Paul
then to be the chief of sinners, when an Apostle, they might as well say, that
he that is faithful to Christ is the chief of sinners, when as it is said that
Christ came to save sinners, of whom I am chief, and says, he had obtained
mercy; now it does not follow that Paul was then one of the chief or greatest
sinners when faithful, but he was one of the chief of sinners that were saved
by Christ, who saves his people from their sins, and does not suffer them to
remain the greatest sinners when they are saved from sin, as they here have
accused Paul. And as for these Scriptures you bring, 1 John 1. 8, 9, 10. and
James 3. 1, 2. these prove not what you would have them, that the Saints were
not perfectly freed from sin in this life; they did not preach up sin, and
imperfection to remain in them while in this life as you do, for both James and
John exhorts them otherwise for said James, let patience have her perfect
work, that you may be perfect and entire, wanting nothing, James 1. 4* and John
said, If we walk in the light as he is in the light, we have fellowship one
with another, and the Blood of Christ cleanses us from all sin, 1 John 1. 7.
and chap. 2. 1. My little children, these things write I unto you that ye sin
not, and if any man sin we have an Advacate with the Father. So he did not
include them all as to remain sinners, for they were all sinners while they
were not cleansed by the blood of Christ. Now we ask these men aforesaid,
seeing Paul was counted faithful, and James a servant of Jesus Christ, and
John the beloved of Christ, what one sin or sins can they lay to their charge,
or to any of them which they were not freed from before their decease? let them
prove some sin which was not destroyed in any of these before their decease,
(and who can lay any thing to the charge of Gods elect?) let them speak out and
answer directly, or for ever be silent from pleading for sin and accusing the
righteous as they have done; John did not say, if we say we are not all
sinners, we deceive our selves, but if we say we have no sin, and if we say we
have not sinned, which if the little children whom John wrote unto that they
might not sin, had sin, then John might say we have sin, for he numbered himself
with them as friends, or those whose sins were forgiven, and yet the young men
and Fathers he wrote to had overcome the wicked one, and had the word of God
abiding in them, 1 John 2. and as for that of Prove. 20. 9. who can say I have
made my heart clean? this is not against us, for we do not say that we our
selves have made our hearts clean, it being Christ's work to cleanse, and for
ever to have perfected them that are sanctified, Heb. 10. 14. and Solomon
says, the just man walks in his Integrity, and the righteousness of the
perfect shall direct his way, Prove. 11. 5. and 20. 7. And as for that of
Eccle^. 7. he says, all things have I seen in the days of my vanity; there is
a just man that perishes in his righteousness, and a wicked man that
prolongeth his life in wickedness, but he that fears the Lord shall come out
of them all, forthere is not a just man upon earth: Mark for there among them
that were in the changeable state, not among them that are borne of God, for
they cannot sin, because the Seed of God abides in them, and they in it,
neither can the wicked one touch them, 1 John 5. 18.

J. Horn and T. Moore say, There is no man that sins not; It is true indeed
that Christ said of Nathaniel, that he was an Israelite in whom was no guile,
John 1. 47.

Answ. Here you may see how they are confounded, in what they themselves bring,
there was some in whom was no guile, contrary to what they affirmed before
against perfection; and as for that 1 King. 8. 6. it is said, if they sin
against thee, for there is no man that sins not; Mark the words (for there)
again, among them that sinned against God, and this was in the time of the old
Covenant Solomon spoke these words, which Covenant they brake; but now the Lord
makes a new Covenant with his people, when he takes away their sins, not
according to the old Covenant which the Israelites brake, Heb. 8. and Solomon
also said, let your heart be perfect with the Lord your God, and walk in his
Statutes, and to keep his Commandments, as at this day, 1 King 8. 61.

J. Horn says, It is not said that there was no sin in Nathaniel, and though I
pleaded that all sin is guile, yet the contrary was testified from 1 Pet. 2. 1,
2. where hypocrisy, and envy, and malice, and evil speakings are
distinguished from Guile, Guile being a deceitful hiding a man's sin or deceit.

Answ. Here John Horn would accuse Nathaniel to have sin in him, when as
Christ said there was no Guile in him, John 1. 47. and so here he has affirmed
as much as that all sin is not Guile, and so would distinguish hypocrisy and
envy from being guile, and yet confesses Guile to be a deceitful hiding a
man's sin or deceit; now let any that have understanding see these men's
ignorance; what is not hypocrisy a deceitful hiding a man's sin? and is not
every sin deceit, and deceit Guile? see their confusion; and this being John
Horns reason to prove all sin not Guile, because it is said in 1 Pet. 2. 1,
2. laying aside all malice, and all guile (mark all guile) and hypocrisy, the
word (and being his distinction, he might as well say that envy is not malice,
because there is (and) between them, but in that thing many saw his folly at
the dispute, in his affirming that all sin is not guile, when as all guile does
only include one sin as he would have it; but all sin, and any one sin makes a
man guilty, and so he has guile in him, so that he that had no guile in him,
had no sin in him, and also John Horn has turned George Whiteheads words
about this thing, in saying that be said Guile is a transgression of the Law,
therefore guile is all sin, which is falsely framed, for the words were to this
effect, every trangression of the Law is guile or sin, and all guile includes
all transgression of the Law, therefore every sin is guile, and what sin can
they prove had Nathaniel in him when he had no guile in him? they must either
prove some sin that was then in him, or else see themselves confuted.

J. Horn and T. Moore in the 3. and 4. pages of their Book, say: That in the
Declaration by Edward Borough page 4. that we believe the Saints upon earth
may be perfectly freed from the body of sin and death, herein we are concluded
to be Preachers of Lies and Errors (this they charge the Quakers with) and yet
they say, We are complete in Christ, and by the Grace of Christ received, shall
be and may be here made perfect hearted with Christ, but that some are sinlesse
here, neither Christ, nor any Apostle or Prophet ever preached of any,
therefore the Quakers are deceivers.

Ans. Here they might as well have accused the true Prophets and Apostles with
being Preachers of Lies, and deceivers, for they witnessed to the same the
Quakers witness to, as said the Prophet, blessed are the undefiled in the way
(mark undefiled in the way) they also do no iniquity, Psalm. 119. 1, 2, 3. and
says the Lord, ye shall be clean from all your filthiness, Ezekiel. 36. 25. and
Christ exhorted his to be perfect, as their heavenly Father is perfect, Matt.
5. 48. and every one that is perfect shall be as his Lord, and the same Apostle
who said, ye are complete in Christ, said in whom also ye are circumcised with
the circumcision made without hands, in putting off the body of the sins of the
flesh, Col. 2. 10, 1.

Now the same spirit in J. Horn and T. Moore, that has accused the Quakers
with being deceivers, for bearing witness to these Truths, would have accused
the true Prophets, Christ and his Apostles for being deceivers; but their
confusion and railing against the Innocent is here made manifest, who
notwithstanding have confessed a compleatnesse and perfect heartedness with
Christ here, and so in pleading for sin in this life, are sighting against
their own words, for they who are complete in Christ, are perfectly freed from
sin, being complete in Christ in whom there is no sin; and know this, that
sinners are out of the compleatnesse which the Saints have in Christ, and the
hear that has sin dwelling in it is not perfect; much more might be said to
this.

John Horn and Thomas Moore p. 3. to prove, that they who have believed in
Christ, comes not to prove the first Adams state before the fall; say, that
Adam before his fall had neither sin in him, nor death upon, but surely the
Quakers must die as well as other men's Adam also before his fall was under a
Covenant of works, do this and live, and might possibly sin and dye, but not
so the believers.

Answ. Mark their heap of confusion here, they own that the Believers in Christ
are come to a further state or Covenant then Adam was in before the fall, who
then had no sin in him, and yet have accused the Believers with having the body
of sin, or not being perfect while they are here; and Adam might possibly sin
and dye, but not so the Believers they say; And as for the Quakers dying,
because of which they would accuse them with being sinners, here their
darkness appears, for Believers dying the natural death, does not prove them
sinners while they are here, for through death they gain more of the Peace and
Glory of God which they partake of in their life time, and what does John Horn
believe that Adam might not have dyed the natural death if he had not sinned?
for Christ dyed who had no sin, that he might destroy the death which came by
sin, and him that has the power of it, and they who dye in the Lord are
blessed, and to dye is gain unto them, Phil. 1. 2^. so that righteous men's
dying was not charged upon them as a reward for their sin, but witnessed to be
gain unto them, before whose decease their sins are done away, and he that
believes has everlasting life, yet the wages of sin is death to them who are
not freed from it by the gift of God which is life; and God said to Adam in the
day thou eatest thereof thou shall surely dye; but Adam lost not his natural
life in the day he eat of the tree of knowledge, for after that he lived in the
body; and as for the Covenant that Adam was under before the full, it was a
Covenant of life; for he was in the image of God, and a living soul, having
the breath of life in him, and had dominion in it while he stood in his
habitation, and this state have the true Believers proved and witnessed that
life, and nature, and image that was in man before the fall, though they be
come further in the second Adam, who is greater then the first Adam; and as for
Adam before the fall, being under a Covenant of works do this and live (as if
he had not lived when he was in innocence, till he did something to merit life)
you have here spoken ignorantly, for that Covenant of works was established by
the Law after the fall, and the Law entered because of transgression till the
Seed came, which Seed destroys sin and redeems the Creature out of the fall,
and out of the death which came by sin.

P. 4. And in their second charge against us called Quakers, J. Horn and T.
Moor have accused us to be reprobates concerning faith, as touching he person
of Christ; for they say, we did not, nor could be brought to acknowledge that
Christ is glorified in the heavens, without all men, the heavens above the
clouds, and distinct from the visible earth in the same body which suffered,
was crucified, dead and buried, etc. And this have they questioned several
times altering their own words, and then in page 5. asking whether Christ has
any body of flesh and bones, distinct from all other bodies and spirits of m^n,
to which they say, we would by no means be drawn to give a direct answer. But
then mark how they have again contradicted themselves; they say, that we said
the same body that suffered was glorified at Gods right hand in heaven; yet
still (they say) we meant but his Church either by his body or by the heavens,
and then they charge it upon us as a fundamental error.

Answ. Now they that discern the body of Christ, may see how these wise men of
Babylon have confounded and stifled themselves in their own confusion, one
while saying that we would not be drawn to answer their question, another while
confessing that we said the same body that suffered, was glorified at Gods
right hand in heaven, and now when they can get naught against our words, they
charge us ignorantly with what we meant, and here it appears they hold that
Christ has two bodies, in telling of a mystical body, and not receiving that
as an answer that his body is the Church, the fullness of him that fills all
in all, so that from their words they would have Christ to have a body besides
(or distinct from) the fullness of God, when as the Scripture does not say that
Christ has two bodies, nor that his body is a body of flesh and bones without
the blood in it in the Heavens, as John Horn and Thomas Moore have told us,
for its not proper to say that a body of flesh and bones is in the Heavens, as
if it were in many places at once, for Heavens are more then one, and the body
is one and has many members, 1 Cor. 12. 12. and this body is not carnal but
spiritual, which they who were carnal as these men are, could not discern,
though the outward bodies of believers they might discern, and yet this body of
Christ is discerned by the believers who are led by the Spirit of God, and its
in the heavens above the clouds, which they who are gazing abroad and looking
carnally to see Christ they discern not the Lords body, for they see not through
the Clouds into the Heavens, so Christ is taken out of their sight; But Stephen
who was full of the Holy Ghost saw the heavens opened, and the Son of man on
the right hand of his Father, and John in the spirit saw into heaven, and a
door opened in heaven; and Christ's body is not distinct from the spirits of all
men, as it is distinct from carnal bodies, as you imagine by your Question; for
the just men who are come unto mount Zion where the Lamb Reigns in his glory,
I say their spirits rejoice in him, and the true Church in Christ which
discerns his body in his fullness, is but one complete body in the fullness of
God which fills all in all (both in Heaven and Earth) though you imagine two
bodies of Christ. And this know, that what the Scriptures do declare of Christ
and his body we own; and the same that descended into the lower parts of the
Earth is he that Ascended far above all Heavens that he might fill all things;
the same Christ that suffered in the body at Jerusalem who appeared in diverse
forms after his Resurrection, and in the transfiguration before, the same rose
again, and was taken in his Ascending out of the sight of them that gazed after
him, and is glorified in the same glory which he had with the Father before the
world was, John 17 and as he who is the Word became flesh, so when the days of
his flesh were finished he was translated into his own glory which he had with
his Father from Eternity, and so the second Adam is a quickening spirit and his
body is spiritual, not discerned by you whose minds are out from his spirit,
neither can his glory by which he was transfigured and is glorified, be seen,
but by them who pass through death, and follow him into the mount. And now you
who so much contend about the body of Christ, we ask you this Question; whether
do you believe that the body of Christ which the Saints upon earth do discern,
and which the world cannot discern, is a body of flesh and bones in the Heavens
yea or nay? seeing you own the believers or the Church to be a body of Christ,
and plead for another body of Christ distinct from them.

John Horn and Thomas Moore, p. 5. Say that believers are members of his body
(namely his mystical body) of his flesh and of his bones, not flesh of his
flesh and bone of his bone.

Answ. This is gross confusion to say that believers are members of Christ's
flesh and bones, and then to say they are not flesh of his flesh, and bone of
his bone, as if Christ had two bodies of flesh and bones, one of which the
Saints are not members, when the Apostle says as much as they were flesh of
his flesh, and bone of his bone, in his saying no man ever hated his own flesh
but nourishes it, and cherishes it even as the Lord the Church, for we are
members of his body, of his flesh and of his bones, Ephesians. 5. 30. J. Horn, and
Tho. Moore bring 1 These. 4. 15. 16. and Phil. 3. 20. 21. where it is said
Christ shall descend from Heaven; not from but to his Church (say they) yea
this of the Quakers denying that body glorified does at once turn up by the
roots all the faith of Christ's appearing in the presence of God to mediate for
us.

Ans Was there ever the like confusion and falsehood uttere'd, as these men do
appear in? a little before they say of the Quakers, that they said the same
body that suffered was glorified at Gods right hand in Heaven; and now charge
us with denying that body glorified, it were well they would be ashamed of
their lies and confusion; and as for that, 1 These. 4. 15. Concerning the coming
of the Lord from Heaven, which these men aforesaid would blindly put afar of,
as to a coming of Christ with flesh and bones, the Apostle says we which are
alive and remain unto the coming of the Lord, shall not prevent them which are
a sleep; so that coming of Christ, the Saints who then were alive remained unto
it: and in that of Phil. 3. 20. 21. there it is said our conversation is in
Heaven from whence also we look for the Savior the Lord Jesus Christ; so their
conversation was in Heaven, and there they looked for the Savior, they did not
say their conversation was at a distance off above the Clouds, from whence you
look for a Christ like your selves (but that he has no blood in his body as
you imagine) whom we desire not the knowledge of, and that your Faith which is
not grounded in Christ's appearing in you, is to be turned up by the roots.

Again, J. Horn and T. Moor do accuse us to be Reprobate concerning the Faith
touching the Resurrection of the dead, as chiefly they accuse us for affirming
that the same body that dies shall not be raised again, and that George Fox
would not be brought to say, whether the spiritual body was ever dead, but
answered in general equivocal terms.

Answ. They have changed G. Foxes words; for he said, That which is raised is a
spiritual body, and that which is raised was dead; and we answered them plainly
to these things according to the Scriptures, but like fools whom the Apostle
reproved, they would not be satisfied when we told them it is sown a natural
body it is raised a spiritual body, and receives life and spirit by the Power
of God; there is a natural body and there is a spiritual body, howbeit that was
not first which is spiritual but that which is natural, and afterward that
which is spiritual; so the Apostle distinguishes between the natural body and
the spiritual body, between the earthly bodies and the heavenly bodies, and the
glories of each, and does not say, that which dies or is sown which is earthly
shall rise, as we told these said accusers according to the Apostles
comparison, thou fool, that which thou sowest is not quickened except it dye,
and that which thou sowest thou sowest not that body that shall be, (mark, thou
sowest not that body that shall be) but bear grain it may chance of wheat or of
some other grain, 1 Cor. 15. 36, 37. contrary to which they have affirmed, that
the same body that dies or is sown in the earth shall raise again, when the
Apostle says, thou sowest not that body that shall be, and his comparison is
of the grain of wheat and the like, to which Thomas Moor answered, That the
same kirnel of wheat rose up again in the blade, when it is known that the same
kirnel does not rise, but another body or ear of Corn grows forth in the nature
of that which is sown, and yet we say that God gives a body as it pleases him,
and to every seed his own body, which seeds being known, and and the nature and
kind of each seed discerned, the body of each may be discerned in the
Resurrection by the light which crosses men's carnal imaginations, by which they
must never know the Mystery of the Resurrection of the bodies nor the seeds,
which the Lord knows how to reserve every one in its own center and habitation
till the sounding of the last Trumpet at the last day, and there shall be a
Resurrection both of the just and the unjust, and many that sleep in the dust
of the earth shall rise, some shall come forth to the Resurrection of life, and
others to the Resurrection of Condemnation, every one to be rewarded according
to their works; and John said, The Sea gave up the dead which were in it, and
death and Hell delivered up the dead which were in them, and they were Judged
every man according to their works, and death and Hell were cast into the lake
of fire, and whosoever was not found written in the Book of Life, Rev. 2. And
now this being an answer to their Question about the Resurrection, note, that
when Thomas Moor was asked what was the seed of which the Apostle said God
gives it a body as it pleases him? Tho. Moor answered, that the seed was the
body that dies or is laid in the ground, which he pleaded for the rising of, to
which it was Replied then, that every man must rise with two bodies, if that
body that is terrestrial must rise and have another body given it, but herein
his ignorance was seen; and again, he and John Horn have confuted themselves,
for in their Postscript they say, That the Apostle implying plainly, that the
raised body in the Resurrection shall not be flesh and blood; Then how is it
that they have pleaded so much for the same earthly body that dies to rise
again, which is a body of flesh and blood, when the raised body in the
Resurrection is not a body of flesh and blood they say? these men are much shut
up in Babylon, as their confusion manifests.

An accusation of John Horn and Tho. Moor against John Whitehead to prove him a
Reprobate, p. 6. Is that John argued against the Redemption of the body to be
waited for or expected after death, and said, The Apostle had it before the
death of the body; and in p. 10. They tell of the nature or being of man, that
in the Resurrection it is discharged of sin, and Law, and death.

Answ. So here they expect not the Redemption of the body nor their discharge
from sin till after death, wherein they have discovered themselves to be
Reprobates and not John Whitehead, and their expecting the Redemption of the
body to be waited for after death, is contrary to the Saints expectations, for
they waited and groaned for the Redemption of the body from under corruption
when they were upon earth, and the Creature it self was to be brought into the
glorious liberty of the Sons of God, which state was witnessed by as many as
were led by the Spirit of God who were sanctified throughout, in Body, in Soul
and Spirit, and put not Redemption afar off till after death, as these men
aforementioned have done.

Again, They have accused us for Antichristians, from a passage in Edward
Buroughs Book, where it is said, That Christ is to be known after the Spirit
as he was before the world was, and that is the knowledge of him which is to
eternal Salvation. On the contrary they have affirmed in page 7. That the
knowledge of Christ after the Spirit as he was before the world was, is not the
knowledge of him to eternal Salvation, but on the contrary (they say.)

Answ. In this they have showed themselves to be both abusers of the Truth and
Antichristians; for to know Christ as he is the power of God, is to know him
after the Spirit as he was before the world was, and this is the knowledge of
him to Eternal Salvation, it is the Power of God that saves, and we trust in
the living God who is the Savior of all men, specially of them that believe, 1 Timothy 4. 10. Now as Christ is the living God, he was before the world was, and
we are in him that is true, even in his Son Jesus Christ, this is the true God
and eternal life, 1 John 5. 20. And now I say, they that receive this knowledge
of Christ, do not deny his knowledge in his flesh, but witness to the same
eternal Power that was manifest in his flesh, and through his sufferings, which
Power was before the world was, and has the same glory that it had then, and
is the same for ever.

And in page 7. it is said against the Quakers, That they can and may in their
canting language say, he is manifest in England, and is persecuted, and dies,
and rises as well as in Judea and Jerusalem, however they make nothing of his
being born, suffering and dying in the flesh.

Answ. Now when J. Horn and T. Moor can truly prove nothing against us called
Quakers, they have invented these wicked lies against us, which we utterly
deny, and here charge them for forgers of lies; Job 13. 4. for we never used
any such canting language, as they call it, against Christ, but own his
sufferings in Judea and Jerusalem, as he was a true offering and propitiation
for the sins of the whole world, whose sufferings were effectual both for the
pacifying of his Fathers wrath and for the reconciling of the whole world, as
is witnessed by them who receive the Power of his life, which was manifest
through death to them that truly believed through Christ's sufferings; and in
page 9. the said J. Horn and T. Moor have belyed George Whitehead, in saying
that he alleging 2 Cor. 5. 16. to prove that the Apostles did not know Christ
as one that suffered in the flesh, or to be in the flesh; which is exceeding
false, for that Scripture henceforth we know no man after the flesh, and though
we had known Christ after the flesh, yet henceforth know we him so no more, it
was brought against your knowledge which is but carnal, and stands in
imaginations, who neither truly know Christ as he was in the flesh, nor after
the Spirit, but contend against the knowing of him as he was before the world
was, (and as you say you neglect Christ) and so against the knowledge of the
glory of God, as a knowledge to Salvation; when as they neither knew Christ,
nor any man after the flesh, but after the Spirit, they knew Christ and one
another in that Spirit and Power in them which was before the world was, but
this knowledge you are out of, who know but naturally.

In page 9, 10. J. Horn and T. Moor again affirm, that the nature of man as in
Christ, is perfectly freed from sin and curse, and without spot of sin, and the
same nature of man, even in believers, having sin in it as a natural Heritage
from the first Adam fallen.

Answ. See their gross error and confusion, which is as much as to affirm that
as the nature of man is in the believers, it is separate from Christ, and so
believers in Christ having sin in them originally from Adam as a natural
heritage, so they would make believers have two heritages, a natural, and a
spiritual; an old delusion of the Priests; for the true believers are in
Christ, and by his power do witness their nature purified, by that which brings
out of Adams fallen state, to witness a better heritage then sin in their
nature; for they that are in Christ, have escaped the corruptions of the world,
and witness an incorruptible heritage in the divine nature, and this is known
as there is an biding in Christ, the power of God.

And in page 1^. they charge us with denying the humanity of Christ, and say we
judge him only a spirit.

Answ. We never denied the man Christ, for his flesh is our food; and for our
owning Christ to be a spirit, the Apostles owned him to be the same, the Lord
is that spirit, and the last Adam was made a quickening spirit, 2 Cor. 3. 1^. 1
Cor. 15. 45.

Again they have affirmed that Christ is personally in heaven, and yet by faith
in the believing heart; and that he is not really and personally in believers,
as in heaven, but by faith; and yet Moor before said, that Christ's person of
flesh and bone is a quickening spirit.

Answ. If Christ is not really in the believers, and if his being in them by
faith is not real, then it is but imaginary, herein J. Horn and T. Moore, have
manifested their faith to be no better then the Papists faith, as I told them,
wherein I did not belie them as they accuse me, for the faith of the Elect does
really evidence to them Christ in them the mystery, and the power of God, and
this faith is not divided from Christ the object or foundation of it.

And now concerning the blood of Christ shed, which T. Moore at the dispute
owned to be the foundation of your faith, and yet affirmed that the body of
Christ is in heaven, with flesh and bones, but not the blood in it, and so knew
not where the blood is; Now they tell us in page 11. that his blood was shed or
powered out for the Remission of our sins, and in the virtues of it is with the
Father, and so in and with Christ.

Answ. Herein they have plainly confuted themselves; for they also confess that
they could not assert where the material blood (as they call it) or blood of
Christ shed is, and yet now say, that in the virtues of it is with the Father,
and in and with Christ; so J. Horn and T. Moons hearers may now see how they
have confuted their former Doctrine, who before would not own that the blood of
Christ shed is in the body of Christ, yet now say it is with the Father, and in
Christ in the virtues of it; and now to clear themselves from our telling them
that they preached a foundation of Faith which they knew not where it is, and
which according to their own confession before, they knew not whether it is in
being or not.

They tell us, That the dying of Christ or his death is the foundation of their
faith, and yet this dying as to the act of it is not always in being, nor is
the blood simply the foundation of their faith.

Answ. Here again they have preached that to be the foundation of their Faith
which is not in being, when as the foundation of the true Faith is Christ, who
is in being, and another foundation can no man lay, then that which is laid,
which is Christ; and as for what he acted in sufferings, that was done that
through his sufferings and works men might believe in him who works Faith in
them, and know him to be the foundation of Faith who is in being, and not that
which is not in being, as they imagine and have declared, and they now owning
the blood of Christ shed not simply to be the foundation of their faith, then
if they own it as part of the foundation of their Faith, then are they still at
a loss, for they know not where it is; and so according to their own words they
want part of the foundation of their faith, we blame them not, neither did we
blame them for not asserting that the blood shed is in the body of Christ, but
for calling it the foundation of their faith (whether they own it so simply or
compoundedly seeing they know not where the blood is, nor whether it is in
being; and so we blamed them for their confusion, and establishing a blind and
dead faith.

T. M. his instance for Christ's being in Heaven with a body of flesh and bones
without blood in it, was, that we do not read that there was any blood in Adams
body in Paradise; for which he might as well have said, that then Adams body in
Paradise had no life in it (and such a body they imagine Christ's to be) when as
the blood is the life, and all Nations are made of one blood, Acts 17. 26. Now
we ask them if they believe that there was no blood left in Christ's body when
he was crucified? And when T M. had pleaded for a body of flesh and bones in
the Heavens, he did not own that Christ's body there is a carnal body; see how
flatly therein he contradicted his own words and the Priests doctrine, for
Priest Higginson and others affirmed, that Christ is in Heaven with a carnal
body; but his body i^ a Mystery which these men of Babylon can never know, who
are thus in confusion; for Christ's body is only known with that by which God
is seen and known, who is not the Author of their confusion, but of peace.

And in page 12. T M. and J. H. speak as that Job said, Behold, God is great,
we know him not, and to prove it, bring Job 36 26. which is a sad mistake
against Job. for it was Elihu that spoke these words who was one of them that
spoke against Joh, Joh 35. 2 and 26. 1. for Job knew God when they that came
against him did not; but this their Accusation against Job is even like John
Horns pleading for sin in a Letter to Eliz. Underwood, for which he brought
Eliphaz his words, (who was one of them that came against Job, and sooke not
the thing of God that was right) where he said in Job 4. 1^, and 15. 14, 15.
Behold, he put no trust in his servants, and his Angels he charged with folly,
which were none of Jobs words, but his against whom the wrath of God was
kindled, Job 42. 7. and in like manner has John Horn often belyed the servants
of the Lord, both in his Book and ^a^se Letters which he sent abroad in the
Country to several that were brought to see his deceit, and therefore are
turned from him, and many more of his lies in several of his Letters against us
I could produce i. occasioned to it.

In page 12. J. Horn and T. Moor say, That it is rather a virtue to which we
are advised not to be wise, or think or guess above what is written; but
presently they begin to guess that which is not written, and so confound
themselves in their saying, That there are indeed very probable arguments used
to prove that that precious blood was reunited again with the body of Christ in
the Resurrection.

But how shall any that are ignorant believe them, or be instructed with their
confusion? For again they have (to mend this their matter) confuted these they
call very probable arguments, to prove that Christ's blood was reunited again
with the body of Christ, for in contradiction to this, in their Postscript
they say, But these being but probabilities at most, and on the other side the
Scriptures speaking of Christ's Resurrection, mentioning only that which was
buried, without any mention of his blood reunited; So from hence we clearly see
that J. Horn and some of his Company have had much reasoning about the blood of
Christ, and are in themselves confounded about it, one while saying that there
are very probable arguments to prove that it was reunited again with the body
of Christ, another while not owning that it was reunited again, and with that
they conclude; See what blind guides these men are, we might have received as
good an answer from School-boyes about the blood of Christ, as they might have
guessed at it, as J. Horn and T. Moor has done, and have told us, that it is
either in the body of Christ, or not in it; But mark how again they have
guessed about it, They say in page 12. Again that which was blood before may be
in the changed state turned into pure life and spirit, the thing or substance
remaining.

Answ. Here again they have guessed, and thought above that which is written,
and how can blood be turned into spirits and the substance of it remaining?
this is a mere dream and one of John Horns divinations, and it contradicts
Moors words, for he said that the life of Christ is not in his blood; Again if
the blood that Christ shed be turned into pure spirits and life, what is his
body of flesh and bones turned into? or what reason is there that his blood
should be altered more then his flesh and bones? but all this confusion and
dirty stuff of John Horns and Thomas Moors is seen through and made manifest
with the true light, in which they that walk shall feel the blood of Christ,
which cleanses from all sin, and know that the spirit the water and blood,
which bear record in the earth agree in one, and the blood is the life, which
is in Christ, whose body is not a body without the blood in it, as these
dreamars aforesaid imagines; and as the Prophet said, we witness, that by the
blood of the Covenant the prisoners are sent out of the pit which can hold no
water.

Again in page 14. We are falsely accused with denying what the Scripture
asserts about the body of Christ, and the Resurrection of men's bodies, and
about the knowledge of Christ.

Answ. Here we see plainly that this John Horn, and Thomas Moore, do love
lying rather then to speak righteousness, for we own what the Scripture asserts
about the body of Christ, and the Resurrection, but deny their imaginations;
and here again I shall bring their own words to confute them, in page 5. they
have confessed that we said (of Christ's body) that the same body that suffered
was glorified at Gods right hand in Heaven, which might have stopped their mouths
from accusing us as they did; and as for our not asserting that the same
earthly bodies of men shall rise again, they have in their postscript
confessed, that the raised body in the resurrection shall not be flesh and
blood; to which I say, then not that body which is sown or buried, for that is
a body of flesh and blood; Again touching Christ's appearance after his
resurrection, when he showed his Disciples his hands and his feet, we do not
believe that his body then had no blood in it, for he then did eat before them
of the broiled fish and honny comb which they gave him, which is nourishment to
both flesh and blood, Luke 24. 41. 42. and the blood is the life of that which
has need of such outward nourishment, yea the life of all flesh is the blood,
Genesis 9. 4. 5. Levit. 17. 14. but as Christ is Ascended into his Fathers glory
in Heaven, he is in a further state, for he has not need now of such outward
nourishment as broiled fish, or a honey comb, for he is in the same glory which
he had with the Father before the world began; and as for the Saints also,
their bodies in the resurrection shall as far exceed these our earthen bodies
in glory, as the glory of the Sun, Moon and Stars do exceed the glory of Birds,
Beasts, and Fishes, but the mystery of these things is for ever sealed as in
Parables from such blind guides as these aforesaid, who have long abused the
truth of Christ.

In p. 14. John Horn and Moore have affirmed, The Scriptures to be the Medium
of Faith, from John 17. 20. where its said, neither pray I for these alone, but
for them also which shall believe on me through their word, and Acts 17. 11.
12. of the Bereans searching the Scriptures, etc.

Answ. There is no such Scripture as says, that the Scriptures are the Medium
of Faith, for they through whose word many believed were not Ministers of the
Letter, but of the spirit, and their Word was before the Letter or writing was,
and it came in Spirit and in Power, and this Word which they Preached was nigh
people, even in their hearts, Romans 10. And as for the Bereans they first
received the Word with all readiness of mind, and then searched the
Scriptures, whether these things were so; so it was the Word which brought them
to believe and to search the Scriptures, and so we say the Scriptures are
truly to be believed and fulfilled, but that which brings any truly to
believe and fulfill them, is Christ the Word, the Author and finisher of faith,
unto whom they would not come for life, who thought they had Eternal life in
the Scriptures, Joh. 5. 39 40.

In page 15 John Horn, and Thomas Moore have accused John Whitehead with
saying that the Apostles did not bring light to men, but only pointed to what
they had before.

Answ. John Whitehead does witness against them for perverting his words, as it
has been examined; the words are not so affirmed by him, but this we say, that
the Apostles did not bring another light to people then that which had
enlightened them before they Preached to them, and though the light was more in
the Apostles then in them they Preached to, yet it was the same in nature in
both, though known in several measures, and they who will not own the light in
the least measure of it in them, they must not know the greater, nor the glory,
which the light of Christ shining in the heart gives the knowledge of in them
that receive it.

Again, Horn and Moore say, Indeed this is a main piece of corrupt Doctrine
(that we Preach) that all have the light of Christ in them, and that that is,
whatsoever reproves any sin in men.

Ans. Here they might as well have accused Christ and the Apostles for using
corrupt Doctrine; for Christ says, I am the light of the world, and John said
of him, that was the true light which enlightneth every man that comes into the
world, and that which may be known of God is manifest in them who are in
unrighteousness, and like not to retain God in their knowledge, Romans 1. and the
grace of God which brings salvation has appeared to all men, and this is the
free gift of God, which if it were not given to all men, then wherefore shall
the wicked be condemned? and what is it in them that must leave them without
excuse, and who can you show us that have not a light of Christ in them to
reprove them when they have done evil? And you have again here wickedly wronged
us, for we do not affirm that whatsoever reproves any sin is the light of
Christ; but whatsoever makes manifest things that are reproved is light, and
the light reproves every sin; But such as you that are in deceit and out of the
light, do sometimes reprove sin when you live in it your selves, but the light
of Christ in you will reprove you for it.

Again in p. 16. You John Horn and Thomas Moore say, That this way of ours
exposes men to follow their own spirits, which we represent as a candle in
every man.

Answ. This is false, for our way exposes men not to follow their own spirits,
nor sparks of their own kindling as you say, but to follow the light of
Christ, which lights the spirit of a man, and makes it become the candle of
the Lord, that it enlightens the inward parts. Another of your lies against us,
is, where in page 17. you accuse George Whitehead with deriding at men's faith
in the death and bloodshed of Christ beyond the Sea, for they who truly have
faith and hope through Christ's sufferings which reaches within the vail, that
is to say Christ's flesh, that faith we own, as knowing the Word of it to be in
the heart, that we have it not to fetch beyond the Sea, nor from above, nor
from beneath, but its nigh in the heart and in the mouth. And to our question
which was, whether the light that lights every man, be a natural light, or a
spiritual light?

You John Horn and T. Moore answers (page 17. 18.) That that light is Christ,
and the light with which he lights men is both natural and spiritual.

Reply, Here again you are taken in your own snare, for in your saying the
light is both natural and spiritual (mark, it is not the lights are both
natural and spiritual, but the light is so) here you could not prove one light
that is both natural and spiritual, and contrary to the Scriptures have you
spoken, for in Christ was life, and the life was the light of men, which is not
natural but spiritual, therefore this your error may lie upon you.

In page 18. You say, That for so much as all men receive not Christ and his
light, therefore all have not his light in them.

Answ. This is a poor Argument; the Spirit of the Lord, and the grace of God
has appeared in many who have resisted it and not received it, and a measure
of it is in such to condemn them, as the Kingdom of God was in the Scribes and
Pharisces, and yet they received it not nor Christ, when they hated him; And to
that of Isai. 8. 20. where it is said there is no light in them, John Horn
says the word in the Hebrew is sometimes used to signify the morning (and we
have read it, no morning in stead of no light) but then says he, Christ is
called the morning Star, so that if there be no morning light in man, there is
none of his light who is the morning light.

Answ. Here his ignorance appears again, for the light of Christ shines in
darkness in some before the morning, and that led some to the arising of the
Day Star in their Hearts, and so the light of Christ, who is the morning light
to some, appears as a Candle in the darkness to others, and is not the morning
light to them, until they by it see the morning in them, and the light which
has shined in darkness arising out of darkness, so that the light of Christ is
both the evening light and the morning light.

Page 19. Again John Horn, and Thomas Moore have accused us, with telling Mr.
Townsend, (as they call him) That the light was wholly departed from him.

Answ. Herein have you impudently belyed us; for the words against Townsend are
not so spoken, but that from the light of God in his Conscience he is departed;
so blush, and be ashamed of your lies; for in like manner did a false Priest in
Cambridge belie us, (in a lying Pamphlet) with the very same thing.

In Page 20. you John Horn, and Thomas Moore, have accused James Nayler with
his discovering more fully the mystery of Deceit, (in his Book called, Love to
the Lost) in saying, That the Seed to which the Promise was made, and which few
know, is a certain Seed or Principle in man, desiring to follow after God, and
to be free from sin.

Reply. Here you are seen to be ignorant of the Seed of God, and enemies to it
in his People, which Seed is Christ, and wherever he is known in such a low
measure, as a Seed that suffers, and is burdened in man by corruption, there
he desires to be free from the burden of sin, and always to do his Fathers
will, and this Seed the power reaches to, where it is begotten, and in the
power it arises in them that believe in the light for their Redemption; and the
Apostle traveled again for the Galatians until Christ was formed in them, who
first is known as one without form or comeliness; and so the seed of God suffers
in some, and in others it reigns, and is known to be Prince of Peace; and this
is no Mystery of Deceit (as you say) but a mystery that has discovered your
Deceit, who know not the Seed of the Kingdom, nor the power wherein it rises;
and have you never known what Christ is without the Camp? But before you (who
are neglecters of Christ, and abusers of his truth) can know the Seed of God,
and what it is in you, you must come to the light which will condemn you for
your Deceits and Lies with which you have abused the Truth, and then learn to
know what and where the grave is which Christ has made with the Wicked.

J. Horn, and T. Moore, in Page 20. says, But I shall add no more, but only
desire People to beware of them as a heavy judgment of God, that he has
ordered to us, to punish us for our neglect of Christ, the Salvation of God,
and the Truth of him so long abused by us.

Answ. Here you have made manifest your selves indeed, ye Hypocrites; what have
ye been crying out of the Quakers calling them deceivers, and warning the
people to beware of them, and Writing against them, and judging them to be in
delusion and error, when ye your selves neglect Christ the Salvation of God,
and have long abused his Truth? (as ye are made to confess) consider your own
Conditions, ye are in great delusion and error your selves who neglect Christ
the Salvation of God, and have long abused his Truth, and ye are not like,
neither can ye bring people to Christ the Salvation of God and his Truth, who
are neglectors of Christ Gods Salvation and his Truth your selves; Therefore
people had need take heed and beware of following you, lest ye lead them to
neglect Christ the Salvation of God, and to abuse his Truth more and more; you
are the Hypocrites that are not to judge, whose beam is yet in your own eyes,
for wherein ye judge others for error and delusion, ye condemn your selves, ye
being such (as ye confess) that neglect Christ the Salvation of God, and abuse
his Truth, and if we be (as ye say) a Judgment ordered of God to punish you for
your neglect of Christ the Salvation of God, and the Truth of him so long
abused by you, Why do you not then bear the Judgment of God more patiently,
seeing ye have sinned so against him in abusing his Truth, and in neglecting
Christ the Salvation of God? Why do you rage so against Gods Judgment? Here all
People may see, That ye are not satisfied nor content with what God has
ordered unto you for your neglect of Christ the Salvation of God, and the Truth
of him so long abused by you; but we shall yet be a heavier Judgment upon you,
for we are a burthensome-Stone to all the ungodly, and the more ye strive
against us, the greater will be your Torment; therefore give over your Teaching
of others, and be ashamed of your blindness and wickedness and repent, and
cease striving and raging against the Truth of God, and us his People; for the
more ye strive against us (and the Truth which we live in, and are Witnesses
of, which Truth is Christ, who also is in us, which is the Riches of the
Mystery which has been hid from Ages and Generations, but is now revealed in
the Saints by the light) Mark, the greater will be your Judgment and burden;
and this ye shall witness to be true: so abuse Gods Truth no longer, neither
neglect Christ the Salvation of God as ye have done, but submit to Gods
Judgment, and learn to prize Christ the Salvation of God and his Truth, and
believe therein, and fight no longer against the Lord and his Truth and
Servants, lest he shorten your days and cut you off: So remember you are
warned, whether you will hear or forbear.

John Horn and Thomas Moore, And indeed the cause of then prevalency is, partly
in the Teachers, and partly in the people.

Answ. The cause of our prevailing is not in man, but in God, even the mighty
powerful prefence of the Lord which does accompany us, whereby we reach the
faithful Witness of God in people, which answers to the Truth of God declared
by us, and thereby many are turned from darkness to light, and from Satan's
power unto God, and we must prevail more and more, for the Lord is opening
peoples eyes, and he will teach them himself, and many people begins to see the
deceit and wickedness of such Teachers as ye are who abuse Gods Truth, and
neglect Christ the Salvation of God; and although you have a form of godliness
(and have stolen many true words) yet many people sees you to be out of the
power, (and fighters against it, and them that be in it) and so they will turn
away from you; and all that sets themselves against us shall fall before us,
for the Lord is with us and takes our part.

See J. Horn's Testimony against his Brethren the Priests.

John Horn, Thomas Moore, page 20, 21. Too many of the Teachers are such as
Isaiah speaks of, Isa. 56. 1^, 11, 12. his Watchmen (which should watch for
the good of men) are too generally blind, the Vision of all the Preaching of
the Cross of Christ is a sealed Book to them, they are ignorant, they are dumb
Dogs that cannot bark, (to give warning of these Beasts, or to set themselves
to discover and detect them) sleeping in their security, and lying down loving
to slumber, to take their ease and peace, and to content themselves with Dreams
instead of searching out Truth, and giving it forth to the People; yea, they
are Dogs strong to appetite, greedy Dogs, hunting after Livings and
Maintenances, more Means, and so never have enough, too many of them Shepherds
that cannot understand, they all look to their own way, every one for his gain
from his Quarters; that is, are more mindful of the Fleece then the Flock, and
many of them given to voluptuousness; Come, and I will fetch Wine, etc.

Answ. Many true words have you here uttered against (your Brethren) the
Teachers, but if ye be thus divided against your selves, surely ye are not like
to stand; the hand of the Lord is turned against you who would stir up your
Brethren, the Dogs, to bark against us, and to bite and devour the Lambs of
Christ, and now ye lay open one another nakedness; but as for your railing and
calling of us Beasts, that will come upon your own heads, and your words shall
become your burden. And as for thee John Horn especially, thou can not clear
thy self from being one of those Dogs, (which ye say look for their gain from
their Quarter) for thou look for thy gain from thy Quarter, and art an
Hireling, who pleads for (and takes) Tithes; And it is true, That ye (who
pretend your selves to be watchmen) are too generally blind and ignorant, and
ye have no true vision, for Night is come upon all the Hireling Teachers, yea
the Sun is set upon you all, and so the blind leads the blind, and both falls
into the ditch; So poor people may see, how they have given their money (for
that which is not bread, and their labor for that which could not satisfy)
even to uphold a company of ignorant blind watchmen that could not understand;
for the Preaching of the Cross of Christ (which is the power of God) has been
a sealed Book to them, even to uphold such as have contented themselves with
Dreams, and have been given to voluptuousness, and have long abused Gods Truth,
and neglected Christ the Salvation of God, as ye confess of your selves and
others; so ye are witnesses against your selves: Ye Idol Shepherds (who have
not profited the people) the Lord is stretching out his hand, to gather and
deliver his Sheep out of your mouths, that ye may no longer make a prey upon
them, who through your Covetousness and fained words have long made Merchandise
of people.

J. Horn, T. Moore, The Lord help us to search and try our ways, and to see
how much (any of us) have contributed to the overflowing flood of this
ungodliness.

Answ. The Lord has searched and tried your hearts and ways, and he has
found you guilty of much ungodliness, and his light has often made you
sensible of it, and judged you for it; and the Lord has often called unto you to
forsake your ungodliness, though ye have long slighted the Call of the Lord,
and hardened your hearts against his reproof; Therefore repent and dread the
Lord, and take heed lest that come upon you, that when ye call upon the Lord he
will not answer you.

John Horn, Thomas Moore, Surely some men's Principles that would be counted
Orthodox, give, and have given them great advantage.

Answ. Many corrupt Principles do you and your fellow-Teachers hold, which we
are made to witness against, (that so the People may see your Deceits, and not
be led into your Imaginations any longer) several of yours are made manifest in
this Book, as about Christ's Body, and Blood, and Resurrection of the Body, etc.
And after ye have reckoned up many things which ye say those that would be
counted Orthodox hold, whereby ye say we get great advantage, ye then proceed
as follows.

John Horn, Thomas Moore; But besides this, too general Ignorance, Sloth,
Covetousness, Pride found in too many Ministers, gives advantage to them; even
like Foxes and Wolves, to ^^^laim against the vigilent Shepherds too, as if all
were but Hirelings, and so that the Flock ought rather to betrust themselves
with them.

Answ. Great is the Ignorance, Sloth, Covetousness, and Pride which is
generally found indeed in you who are called Ministers, which in the power of
the Lord we are often moved to declare against; but we do not take Advantage
thereby, (as ye Lyingly and Railingly accuse us) to declaim against the
vigilent Shepherds, as if all were but Hirelings; for we put a great difference
betwixt the Proud, Covetous, Slothful Hirelings, and the vigilent Shepherds;
for we own the vigilent Shepherds, whom the Holy Spirit has made Overseers
over the Flock of God, and have true Unity with them, and we know that they are
not Hirelings, for they have freely Received, and they freely Give; and covet
no man's Silver, Gold nor Apparel, but seeks the People, and not theirs; for
having Food and Raiment, they are therewithal content, and receives it of them
also that do receive them and embrace the Truth; and we labor to bring People
unto Christ the power of God, that People may betrust themselves with him, who
is the good Shepherd, and Bishop of the Soul.

John Horn, Thomas Moore; But it is good for People to mind first, That all are
not Hirelings that take Hire, witness Zach. 11. 12. 2 Cor. 11. 8. Secondly,
That it is safer for the Sheep to a^ide with their Hirelings, if their
Shepherds be such, then to l^ave them, and go to Foxes and Wolves; Christ
faults the Hir^lings for leaving the Sheep to the Wolves, but never wills his
Sheep to leave Hirelings if they will feed them in the Pa^^ures of Israel.

Answ. Here the people may see your exceeding ignorance and blindness in your
pleading for taking hire, who say that all are not Hirelings that take hire,
and for your witness and proof, you have brought that Scripture in Zach. which
although the Prophet spoke those words, yet it is evident that he spoke them by
way of prophecy concerning Judas (who afterward should ask a price for Christ
and fell him, which prophecy came to pass; for Judas said to the Jews who
sought to take Christ, what will you give me, and I will deliver him unto you?
and they covenanted with him for thirty pieces of silver; so it appears by your
words that you would persuade the people that Judas was no Hireling; for it is
evident that that which ye bring for your witness, was spoken concerning Judas,
who asked for the price or hire, and received it; so Judas is your witness and
example for asking and taking of hire (and not Christ) Mat. ^6. 15. so the
people may mind this, (mark) that it was Judas the betrayer of Christ, that
asked for the hire and covenanted for it, and those that rejected Christ and
were chief actors in the murdering of him, they gave the hire; and then was
fulfilled that which was spoken by the Prophet, read Mat. 27. and what the
Apostle took of the Churches (for his relief) which received the truth, amongst
whom he sometimes labored, that will not prove that it is lawful for the
Priests to take Tithes and Hire of all sorts of people that have Land in
Parishes whither the people own them or not, as it is evident that the Priests
do; And the Hirelings and all devouring Beasts are in one Nature, and it is not
safer for the Sheep (as ye have falsely said) to abide with the one then the
other, for neither of them cares for the Sheep no further then to make a prey
upon them, and all such we bear a Testimony against, being redeemed out of
their Nature; and it is the will of Christ that his sheep should leave the
hirelings (for they care not for the Sheep) and that they should follow him and
hear his voice, and Christ's sheep do so, they hear Christ's voice who have
called them from the Hirelings and Strangers, and their voices they will not
regard; And such as Christ sends to feed his Sheep in the Pastors of Israel,
they are no Hirelings (as ye foolishly imagine) but they have freely received,
and they freely give, and such are not greedy of filthy lucre, neither do they
receive Tithes by a corrupt unjust Law made by Apostates (as thou John Horn
do) but they do what they do of a willing and a ready mind, and are not hired
to it for a certain sum, but such if they have not of their own, may and do
receive Food and Raiment of such as receive them and their Testimony; and this
is according to the Apostles Doctrine, and is owned and practiced amongst us
the Servants of the Lord (called Quakers) whom ye in your railing, lying
accusations liken unto Foxes and Wolves, but your words shall become your own
burden, and with the Spirit of the Lord we see you in the devouring beastly
Nature which the Lord is against, and will rent.

J. Horn T. Moor, the people are too generally guilty too, and lay themselves
open to these delusions and deluders, because too generally they neglect Christ
and his Truth, take no pleasure therein, but rather in slothfulness,
formality, covetousness pride and vanity in apparel, and in many other things,
by which means they are in danger to perish, whether they keep out of these
men's snares or falls into them; howbeit they are exposed to their snares
thereby, because they afford the deceivers matter to work upon, can find many
faults in them, many things to accuse them of, though some things that God
never charged them with before these men came and set themselves Masters; but
in many things really evil, they have too great advantage, and men's consciences
by the effect of the law in them (which is not Christ) bearing witness that
they say true in those things that they fault them in.

Answ. Here it is manifest by your own words, that ye are the false Prophets
that have not profited the people, that notwithstanding all your Preachings,
the people still neglect Christ and his Truth, and take no pleasure therein,
but rather in slothfulness, formality, covetousness, pride and vanity in
apparel, and in many other things, and are in danger to perish whether they
come after us or not as ye confess; so it is clear to all that have any
understanding, that ye have not stood in the Counsel of God, for if you had,
then you should have turned the people (that had received your Doctrine) from
the evil of their way, and from the evil of their doings, Ier. 23. but People
have long received you and your Doctrine, and yet live in their evil ways:
Therefore be ashamed and stop your mouths ye Hypocrites, who also speaks
against covetousness, pride and vanity in apparel in the People, and of their
neglect of Christ and his Truth, when many of you their Teachers are found in
covetousness, Pride and vanity in apparel, wearing your Cuffs and Ribbands,
(and White Boot-hose-tops) and Teaching for Tithes, and Gifts, and Rewards, and
most of these in particular thou John Horn art guilty of, and in the twentieth
page of your Book, ye confess your selves to be guilty of the neglect of
Christ the salvation of God, and the abuse of his truth; so here it is plain,
that wherein ye have judged others, ye have condemned your selves, Romans 2. 1.
and made it appear that you are like Priests like People, Hos. 4. 9. and we
whom the Lord have redeemed out of the vanity and wickedness of this world, do
judge you for your wickedness, and bear our Testimony against it in that which
has redeemed us from it; and although we are counted by you to be deceivers
when we judge you for your wickedness, yet the Lord owns our judging of you,
because it is in that which answers the effect of his Righteous Law in men's
consciences, which bears witness that we speak true, as you our enemies are
made to confess; And it was the Ministers of Christ that were manifested to
Peoples consciences in the sight of God, and not the deceivers, for the effect
of the Law in people where it was witnessed or was, did not nor do not cause
their consciences to bear witness to the deceivers Doctrine but against it; so
it is manifest that you judge contrary to the effect of the Law who have judged
them to be deceivers, whom men's consciences by the effect of the Law in them
bears witness unto; And the Law in men (which witnesses unto the truth and
against sin) is light, and it is the Law of the Spirit of Life which is in
Christ Jesus, which freeth (those that believe and walk in it) from the power
of sin and death, but those that believe not in it, but hate it, it bears
witness against them and their evil deeds, and remains their condemnation; and
it is you that have set your selves masters (and not we) who exercise Lordship
one over another, and have men's persons in admiration, and respect men's
persons, and calls (and are called of) men Masters, contrary to Christ's
Doctrine; but we, although we be the Lords free men, yet we are become servants
unto many in the truth, Ministering, and laboring for the gathering of the
scattered Seed.

John Horn, Thomas Moore, They to get a party (as the Jesuits do) exposing
themselves to some abuses and sufferings from the rude people, make themselves
more like Chri^is Ministers to the simple people.

Answ. We indeed suffer much for righteousness sake, and for bearing our
testimony against unrighteousness, and you who are Teachers often causes our
sufferings to be the greater, by your lying and railing against us, thereby
stirring up the rude people to abuse us, even as your forefathers the Priests
and Pharisees did, who stirred up the rude people against our Master Christ and
his servants in former days, for which the Lord will assuredly reward you in
righteousness; But we will in all things approve our selves as the Ministers of
God, in much patience, in affliction, in necessity, in distresses, in stripes,
in imprisonments, in tumults, etc. 2 Cor. 6 and our lives are not dear unto us,
but are freely given up to serve the living God, in spreading his living truth,
and it is for no other end, God is our witness, though ye wickedly judge
otherwise. And then John Horn, and Thomas Moore goes about to show the cause
why, and how the people are overcome, and led captive by the Quakers, and say,

John Horn, Thomas Moore, Its through their own carelessness and formality, or
also through their Teachers, they are not so instructed, as to be able to
examine and discern them; Through their carelessness, and weakness therethrough
in their understanding of the things of God, and conceiting themselves to know
and be able to judge and discern of spirits, they neglect the helpfulness, and
gifts of brethren, as also the advice of their Teachers and instructors that
have the oversight of them, and spoken to them the Word of the Lord.

Answ. Oh be ashamed to see what a bad crop is brought forth; what have you
been Teachers so long, and taking peoples money for this, that notwithstanding
they have owned you and your Doctrine, and followed you so long that yet they
should bring forth no better fruits then these, as carelessness, and formality,
and conceitedness, and neglect, and weakness in understanding the things of
God? ye have sown but to the fleshly part, and that's the cause you have such a
corrupt crop; And now we see your Kingdom is near falling, who are accusing
your fellow Teachers for not instructing the people, so as to be able to
examine and discern us, and the people are led captive already who brings forth
such bad fruits as these, and had you spoken the Word of the Lord to them, and
they had believed it, surely they would have brought forth better fruits; but
because you have but stolen from your neighbors much of what you have spoke,
and added your own imaginations thereto, and has run but the Lord has not
sent you, that is the cause you have not profited the people, though you have
believed what you have spoke, and have contended much for your Doctrine, yet ye
receiving it not from the Lord, it was without life and power, and so was not
effectual to the people.

John Horn, Thomas Moore, Oh that all both Ministers and people would yet be
awakened to search and try our ways, and to make straight steps to our goings.

Answ. Yes, ye had need to be awakned indeed; for it is manifest that ye both
Teachers and people have been asleep in the night of thick darkness, and you
have brought forth night works, neglecting Christ the salvation of God, and
abusing his truth, taking no pleasure therein, but rather in slothfulness,
formality, covetousness, pride and vanity in apparel, and many other things,
and Teachers not instructing people, so as they might be able to examine and
discern such as come unto them; Ye sluggish Shepherds, who are yet to be
awakened, what have you taken peoples money and goods for all this time, was it
for your sleeping and dreaming? awake, awake ye sluggards, and own the light of
Christ which he has enlightened you withal, and that will show you your
dreaming, and the deeds of the night, and that will teach you to make straight
steps to your goings, and to search and try your ways.

John Horn, Thomas Moore, Look to your selves, whosoever transgresses and
abides not in the Doctrine of Christ has not God, he that abides in the
Doctrine of Christ, has both the Father and the Son.

Answ. Then it is manifest that you Thomas Moore, and John Horn, have not God,
and out of your own mouths ye shall be Judged; for in the 20. page of your
Book, you speak of the heavy Judgment of God that he has ordered to you, to
punish you for your neglect of Christ the Salvation of God, and the truth of
him so long abused by you, now it is plain to any that have any true
understanding, that such as neglect Christ the Salvation of God, and abuse his
truth, that they transgress and abide not in the Doctrine of Christ; and this
you have confessed your selves to be guilty of, and now your blindness and
folly, and confusion, and wickedness is discovered by the spirit and wisdom of
God, which abides in us who abide in the Doctrine of Christ, and have both the
Father and the Son.

Many more of your lies and slanders and confusion we could show you in your
Book, but that they are not worth the mentioning; And think not with your
selves, that because we reckon not up the rest of your accusations and railing
against us, that therefore we consent to them as truth, for we know that the
Lord God will judge and punish you for your perverting the truth, and your
railing against us, and slandering and belying us called Quakers as you have
done, both in your Book and in many Papers of John Horns that were posted up
against us in Lin; and this know that the Lord God of power has by his mighty
power and wisdom armed us to make War against you and to manifest your deceits,
who are found to be forgers of lies and deceivers, and in enmity against the
living truth of God; and the longer you proceed therein against us and the
truth witnessed by us, the more will you be confounded, and your folly made
manifest, that so the honest hearted will begin to loath you, and you had
better have put your mouths in the dust and been silent then to have blasphemed
against the truth of God and against his people, as you have done; leave your
hypocrisy and deceit wherewith you blind the people, and feed them no longer
with your dreams, lies, and (stolen) dead words, least the Lord cut you off in
your iniquity, for a time of withering is already come upon you.

And as for you who are the Hearers of the said John Horn and Thomas Moor, our
Souls pity you, knowing you are under a vail of thick darkness and bondage, as
we can no otherwise conclude, seeing your leaders are tried, and found so much
in ignorance and confusion, and we wish rather then you would remain under
their darkness and deceits, that you would come back to the witness of God,
which has in many of you been often moving, but often has been quenched
through yielding to the sleights and deceits of men, and striving to get more
into knowledge then into the life and power; and now you are but feeding death,
and seeking the living among the dead, while ye go to them for help, who are
out of the power of God, in their own imaginations, wherein they are
confounded, and if ever you come to the Fathers House, and there to find the
spiritual nourishment, you must first return to the light of the Lord in you,
which you have transgressed and grieved, when often it has appeared against
your ungodliness.

And we would not have you think much against us, because we have here dealt
plainly by your Teachers, in discovering them, for we were first occasioned to
give forth this, because of their false railing book against us, or else we had
not thus appeared in public against them; and compare this and their book
together, and you may soon see (if you read them sincerely) how deservedly we
have dealt by them, more then they have by us, for we sent Queries to John Horn
and Thomas Moor in manuscript for them to answer, not expecting they would have
wronged us, as they have done in Print; And therefore if they in like manner do
again proceed against us in Print, we purpose in the Lord further to have their
deceits discovered publicly, that the truth which is professed and dearly
owned by us, may be cleared, and its enemies have the fruits of their own
doings.

Postscript.
AND seeing that ye (called Moorians) hold forth, That flesh and blood cannot
inherit the Kingdom of God, yet flesh and bones may; we ask you these Questions;

If Elijahs flesh and bones could enter into Gods Kingdom (when he was taken
up) and if his blood could not, then when, and where, and how, and by whom was
his blood taken and separated from his flesh and bones? And what is become of
his blood?

And what is it that hinders the blood, that it may not enter into Gods Kingdom
as well as the flesh and bones, which ye say may? Is the transgression of the
blood greater then the transgression of the flesh and bones? And shall the
flesh and bones be redeemed and delivered from corruption, and shall not the
blood? What is the Cause? For although the Lord does what he please, yet, does
he do any thing without a Cause?

And whether do you own that Doctrine, that when Christ appeared amongst the
Disciples after his Resurrection (when the doors were shut, John 20. 19.) that
then his body being spiritualized, it glided in at the keyhole of the door?
Which doctrine Thomas Moor sen. has formerly preached, as some has affirmed
who heard him.

And where do the Scriptures say, That flesh and bones may in herit the Kingdom
of God?

And where you John Horn and Thomas Moor in page 16. say, That Satan doubtless
may reprove of some sins, and press to some duties; Now have you not here shown
your selves to be Ministers of Satan, and not of Christ? And we ask you what
duties (or any things that are duties) does Satan press men to? Answer
directly, or let shame cover you, which at length will come upon you for your
deceits.

THE END.

