Judgment fixed UPON THE Accuser of our Brethren, AND THE Real Christian-Quaker
VINDICATED From the Persecuting OUTRAGE of Apostate Informers; Chiefly from W.
Rogers, F. Bugg, T. Crisp, John Pennyman and Jeffery Bullock, their Malicious,
Confused and Unjust Opposition and Imputation of Apostasy, Imposition, Popery,
etc. in their abusive Books and Pamphlets herein specified. Beginning with W.
R's Seventh Part. By that Contemned Servant of Christ, George Whitehead.

Psalm. 109.3. They compassed me about with words of Hatred, etc. verse. 4. For
my Love they are my Adversaries, but I give my self unto Prayer. Jude v.13.
Raging Waves of the Sea, foaming out their own Shame, etc. London, Printed and
Sold by Andrew Soul at the Crooked-Billet in Holloway-Lane, near Shoreditch,
1682.

An Introductory Epistle. To my beloved and tenderhearted Friends, called
Quakers, who are lovers of Peace and Unity in our Lord Jesus Christ; Greeting
in the holy Spirit of Life.
IF I did not feel the Lord my God laying a real necessity upon me to be
publicly concerned in this Controversy (and that for the sake of simple
Hearts and poor Lambs, to warn them against such grievous Wolves as seek to
prey upon them, rend and tear them; and that the weak of the Flock may not be
hurt, scattered or perverted by those that speak perverse things, to draw
Disciples after them) I would choose rather to sit down mute, and silently bear
the Revilings, Outrage and fierce Despisings of crooked Spirits, than spend
time in Controversy with them or against them. But the Lord has laid the
necessity, and knows best my Conscientious concern, and for what end, and to
what effect, and for whose sakes. And in discharging my Duty, I neither consult
Events, nor fear Effects, but leave all to God; for I feel his divine Power and
Counsel; In whose Name, and in the Patience, Forbearance, Long-suffering and
Bowels of our Lord Jesus Christ, my Soul has had a share in deep Travail and
Exercise (with many more of his faithful Servants, my Brethren) for a quiet
Composure of this Breach; 1st, With Respect to Truth's Reputation: 2dly, With
respect to that Compassion that is to be had on some, where a difference ought
to be made for the regaining and delivering them who have been at unawares
taken captive by the Enemy. I have no self-Interest nor end, but the Churches
Peace and the Salvation of Souls, and Prosperity of the Lord's Work in the
Earth. God does bear me Record, I have not been awanting in Christian
Endeavors, private and friendly, with diverse principally concerned in this
Opposite, Rending, Self-Separating Spirit. Christian Patience and Forbearance
have not been awanting in the Exercise of my Spirit and Testimony. But when all
our Christian Endeavors on these accounts have been rejected by some
Conceited, Exalted, Pufft up Luciferian Spirits, Despisers and Mockers, that
have of late time lusted to be Contentious, and at open War and Defiance
against many of the faithful Ministers and Servants of our Lord Jesus Christ,
who have kept their Garments and Stations in Truth and Uprightness, and whom
they have most grossly abused in Print in their Books and Pamphlets: On this
extreme Occasion and Offense given against the Truth and Gods Heritage, I find
my Spirit stirred and moved within me by and in the same Long-suffering tender
Spirit and Power of Christ Jesus my Lord, (saying, Why should God's Heritage
lie under their public Lies and Defamations, without open Rebuke?) and to
withstand, oppose, weaken and repel these their Wicked Attempts and Insolent
Abuses, and to vindicate the peaceable Christian People called Quakers, in
their blessed Society, Order and Church Discipline, etc. from the cruel Envy,
Scorn, Outrage, Madness and Confusions of certain Persons turned Apostate
Informers, Treacherous Hypocrites, False Brethren, and Deceitful Workers,
Betraying Judases, Devils Incarnate (for Christ called Judas a Devil) who
having lost their First Love to Truth, and gone out from us, are become
Degenerate, without Natural Affection, Dogs that are without, Wolves, and
Raging Waves of the Sea, that foam out their own Shame; whom the strength of
Truth is turned against in Judgment, and God in ten Thousand of his Saints is
coming to execute Jude 13, 14. verse.
Judgment upon them, as the Patience of Christ in his Saints comes to be
fulfilled toward them, and their Iniquity ripened for open Discovery and
Condemnation, as they have not spared publicly to defame the Innocent. [But
they that are at unawares betrayed, deceived or only mistaken, (and not willful
and contentious) are to be had Compassion of, and distinguished from the
other.] And in Righteous Judgment will the great Judge of all decide the
Controversy with all them who would be counted true Jews and are not,
Christian-Quakers, and are not, but of the Synagogue of Satan and Antichrist;
whose Works the Day of Christ our Lord will yet more clearly declare and fully
manifest, and the Day and Time hastens, blessed are they that watch, and keep
their Garments, that their Nakedness appear not, Amen.

Ingenuous Reader, Note, that the Contents of the ensuing Treatise are mostly
placed before each Chapter, respectively in several Sections, directing to the
Passages therein. And also please to take notice, That William Rogers, (who is
first concerned in this Treatise) is not ignorant what great Labor and Pains I
have taken with him more privately, to inform his Understanding and allay his
Heat, by diverse large Answers in Manuscript, (unto his Gainsaying, Accusing
and Reviling Letters and Papers) amounting to much more than what is herein
contained in Answer to his seventh Part of his Christian-Quaker; but instead of
any fair ingenuous Reply, or acknowledgment of the Truth from him, he has
slighted me and my Christian-Labours and Endeavors, sometimes casting Dirt
upon me, yet giving the GO-BY to the greater part of my Writings, seeming
rather desirous to be somebody in Print against us, as one affecting
Popularity (though in a perverse Work) the more publicly to manifest his
Revengeful Spirit, in Abusing, Scandalizing and casting undeserved ODIUMS upon
those whom his Spite and Malice is most bent against; and I expect no better
Treatment from him, and such exalted Spirits; I expect the Hatred of Scorners
for rebuking them, and for this my Christian Conscientious Labor. Howbeit, I
doubt not but this shall have its Effect, for the clear Information and
Advantage of many simple honest Hearts. And I can say, Surely my Judgment is
with the Lord, and my Reward is with my God, Isa. 49.4.

Several Testimonies and Answers are already extant in Print against William
Rogers's wicked Books, as by Thomas Ellwood (his ANTIDOTE) and diverse others.
Surely it would be more reputable for him to desist and lay aside his daring
Confidence and evil Attempts against the Servants of Christ, and ingenuously
and humbly submit to the Truth; for our God (n^ doubt) will finally and
signally rebuke that Rebellious, Exalted Spirit of Strife and Contention.

To him who is the Righteous Judge of all I freely commit my Cause (with my
Friends) in this Concern, for it is his own. And I do tenderly refer the
spreading of this Treatise to the Discretion of faithful Friends, where they
shall see a Necessity and Service for the Truth. I not designing nor desiring
this may be otherwise or farther exposed to the view of the World, but where
any of these Adversaries or their Party have given (or do give) occasion by
spreading theirs; as there are some busy Agents among them, that neither
regard the Fear of God therein, nor the Reputation of his Truth or People, in
spreading their defaming Books and Pamphlets: for which Treacherous Injurious
Work, I am assured the Righteous Judge of all will Reckon with both the Authors
and Spreaders thereof. To each of whom this Scripture appears justly
applicable, viz. Jer. 2.19. Thine own Wickedness shall Correct thee, and thy
Backsliding shall Reprove thee; Know therefore and see that it is an Evil
thing and bitter, that thou have 6forsaken the Lord thy God, and that my fear
is not in thee, says the Lord God of Hosts. I wish they may yet find a place
of Repentance and Forgiveness, before the Judgment be executed which hangs over
their Heads.

G. W.

Judgment fixed upon the Accuser of our Brethren
CHAPTER I
. 1. W. R's Hue-and-C^y (...) emp^y Flourish.. 2. His (...). 3. He i^ proved
guilty of (...) the People called Quakers (...). 4. His Concessions to Truth do
(...) him conscientious in his writing, nor (...) man guilty of Blasphemy.. 5.
His slighting and insulting way of writing, his own abasement.. 6. His writing
in's own Justification to clear himself from giving Judgment on Reports and
Jealousies, called in question, and proved untrue by diverse Instances.. 7. His
Reflection on G. F. A. P. and my self about the Barbados Subscription, (which
we had denied) proved Malicious and Unjust.. 8. His comparison between some of
our Friends and Pope Leo the tenth; showing more favor to the Pope than to
Friends, etc.. 9. His rendering R. R. (and the Penman) like Papists, for
quoting some of their Authors, brings great Reflection and Contradiction on
himself.. 10. He upbraids us often with the words [Learn'd Friend] yet uses
the same word Learned to a Friend.. 11. His false Suggestion and Jealousy of
great Idolatry, touching G. F. and his sordid abuse of John Blaikling, and foul
Untruth and Infamy therein manifest.. 12. His Charge against J. B. about
ascribing eternal Honor, and Perversion of his Intention; and against G. F.
about Infallibility, distinguished.. 13. His denying the sense of his and
party's own words for a select Company of Elders and Deacons, to order in
Church Affairs.. 14. His pretense for amicable Conference, Hypocritical: His
charge of mere Hypocrisy and Deceit, and the Fruits of manifest Injustice,
abusive and unjust.

. 1. AS concerning William Rogers's Hue-and-Cry after the Name of the Penman
of a Treatise entitled, The Accuser of our Brethren cast down; and that this
Hue-and-Cry is in pursuance of his Name, because not subscribed thereunto, page
1.

How Insincerely and Fallaciously does he herein begin with a silly Boast, an
empty Flourish and Vapor, containing also an unjust Reflection, compared with
his false Scoff, (page 21.) i. e. That the Penman was ashamed that his Name
should be published with the great Bull, entitled, The Accuser, etc. Which is
a falsehood also. And why an Hue-and-Cry after his Name? He is not fled into
Obscurity, nor any Criminal, Treasonable or Fellonious Person in any sense,
that an Hue-and-Cry need to be divulged in Print after his Name. Nor has he
either denied or concealed his concern in that Book which W. R. falsely terms
The great Bull, when modestly asked. But why is W. R. so very ignorant of his
Name, that he must needs make the noise of an Hue-and-Cry after it? when but in
page 25. he pretends a Description of the Person, and of his Habit, to wit, As
being one that has forgotten his low and mean Estate, and arrived to a
Beautiful City-dress, etc. And this is not all; but in page 34. he queries
about the Penman, as having been that no mean Person (viz. of our Society)
that has solicited the Powers under which we have peaceably lived, etc. Could
he so positively describe the Pen-man's dress and condition, and yet not find
out his Name without an Hue-and-Cry in Print after it? What empty Flourishes
does this Person dress himself in? But what Beautiful City-Dress is that he
reflects upon the Penman, that becomes not Humility, or his Call to the work
of the Ministry, or his soliciting the Powers on behalf of suffering Friends?
And wherein is he condemnable of Excess in that case of his Habit or Dress? And
wherein does he exceed all W. R's Brethren, even them he has counted
Honorable? I would have him speak out plainly in this matter, and not to
mutter and smite in the dark.

. 2. He says, He will not conclude the Penman to be a Vagrant, a Night-Bird, a
Wanderer, etc. because his Name is not to his work, page 1. And what, if he will
not thence conclude him such an one, what better Character does he give him,
both by the Instance and comparing his or his Brethren's Actions to the ugly
Vizzard of a Night-walker? page 3. Thus he detracts and reviles.

. 3. He affirms it A notorious Untruth, that his Book contains Reproach against
the People called Quakers in general; and that the Penman quotes not a word to
show it so, page 2. But his Affirmation we may rather justly conclude a
notorious Untruth. For in his Preface, p 6. to the first part of his (falsely
styled) Christian-Quaker, he thus reflects upon the People called Quakers
(which was quoted by us) viz. These kinds of Declarations frequently published
amongst the aforesaid People, viz. Let Us exclude the Wisdom, and have an Eye to
the Brethren, etc. I* cannot but be full of Jealousy, that these things have a
tendency to insinuate Submission without Conviction, and nurture up Ignorance
instead of Wisdom, as much as ever was, where this Maxim, to wit, Ignorance is
the Mother of Devotion, is, etc. By all which it is apparent, that his Book
contains unjust Reproach upon the People called Quakers in general, as being
under such a Popish blind Ministry. For what means [ the aforesaid People] but
the People called Quakers in general? See now, that which he calls a notorious
Untruth, is proved apparently true from his own Reflection on the People called
Quakers, and therefore he himself thereby proved in the notorious Untruth. Was
it not a Reflection upon the Church of Thyatira to suffer the woman Jezabel to
teach and seduce, etc? And what better does his Reflection on the said People
render them?

. 4. He says, He finds what is cited out of his Book of above Eighty Sheets, is
less than Two, and one considerable part thereof acknowledged to be Concessions
to the Truth, so that the Light sometimes interposeth. But then he judges this
Inconsistent with that sense, viz. That his way of writing is void of
Conscience, Reason and Religion. From whence he infers upon the Penman (as he
calls him) Is it not hence plain, that such a sense renders those very things
acknowledged to be interposed from the Light it self, to be void of Conscience,
Reason and Religion? And then cries out at an hideous rate, as if he had wholly
knocked down his Respondent; O notorious Blasphemy! -- The Penman acted in the
Dark, shown himself unworthy of the name of a Man -- May without abuse be
numbered amongst such sort of Beasts at Ephesus -- Unreasonable men -- I have
already proved the Penman Unreasonable and Blasphemous; yet he may be termed a
man, though a very Wicked one, etc. page 2, 3. with more Aggravations. This is
the Person that complains of a great Bull against him; but observe his furious
Bull here, and what a wild one! and how outragiously mad and false in his
Inference! What Is the matter with him on which he is so furious? It is that his
way of writing is deemed void of Conscience, Reason, Religion, etc. because it
has been confessed, That the Light sometimes interposeth and makes him concede to
Truth. But does it hence follow, that these very things interposed by the
Light, are esteemed void of Reason or Religion in themselves? No such matter:
The major part of this work appears such, and he is measured by the major part
thereof. A man may justly be adjudged a Wicked Person, when the greatest part
of his life is such, though he may both speak and act some right things, when
the Light comes over him, and convicts him, as Balaam did, and some of the
wicked Kings of Israel, with many others: Yea, and the Devil himself, though a
Liar from the beginning, yet is made to grant and speak some Truths, when
overpowered, though contrary to his Nature. Besides, we do not believe our
Adversary to be Conscientious in what the Light interposeth through him, any
more than that Balaam was a good man, when his heart was evil: Nor can the
Devil's confessing to Truth at any time render him a good Devil, nor of tender
Conscience, his Nature being contrary to Truth and Goodness.

. 5. But there lies another great Reflection in the case upon W. R. in his
charging the Penman (suppose my self or any other of our second day's Meeting)
with Notorious Blasphemy, acting in the dark, being unworthy the name of a Man,
numbering him among the Beasts at Ephesus, with whom Paul fought; having
already proved him Unreasonable and Blasphemous, as boastingly and falsely he
pretends; comparing this also with what he says of the said Treatise
entitled, The Accuser of our Brethren cast down, viz. It Is with me to take a
little notice thereof; I say again, a little notice, that so the Reader may not
think me so Impertinent as to trouble the Press with so great a Volumn, as a
full Answer to every Impertinency, etc. Thus W. R. p. 14. chap. 2.

See now, at what a Villifying and Insulting rate this man writes, and how
Wicked and Despicable he has rendered the Penman, (as his term is.) Now [ W.
R.] supposing thou take my self, or any other of my Brethren to be the Person
thou chiefly smites at, how consistent art thou in thy work to spend so much
Time, Labor and Cost in writing and printing against such a mean,
inconsiderable and undeserving Person, in thy account, as unworthy the Name of
a Man, but rather to be numbered among unreasonable Beasts? One would think it
should be far beneath a Person of thy Hight, Rank and Quality, as thy
flourishing Vaunts bespeak thee, thus to abase thy self, as to spend so much
time and cost upon such an Inferior, Irrational and Inconsiderable Person in
thy high Thoughts. But art not thou a great Defamer and Opposer in thy said
Charge of Notorious Blasphemy, and of being unworthy the Name of a Man, etc? Is
this thy Christianity? Who will believe thee, think thou, that are not of
thy own Party? And seeing thou art pleased to signify what little notice it is
with thee to take of our Treatise, we cannot but take notice of thy lofty and
slighty way of writing. However, we have no reason to take this thy little
Notice for an Answer; for thou have collected and replied to so little of the
matter, and have so much given the GO-BY to the principal and greatest part of
our said Treatise, as one that has found out the craft of Evasion, that it is a
little notice indeed thou have taken, and thy work deserves but little notice
to be taken of by others, unless to evince thy Envy and its Falsehood, etc. Thy
pretense of Unreasonableness in thy Respondent, will not hide thy Loftiness and
Contempt, nor excuse thy shifting Evasions from those things that are most
material and weighty upon thee; which every Ingenuous Reader may easily
perceive, in comparing our said Treatise against the Accuser of the Brethren,
and thy Seventh Part against ours together.

. 6. Thou writes much in thy own Justification, and to clear thy self of giving
judgment on Reports and Jealousies, though frequent in thy great Book: Thou on
thy own behalf say, I can in Truth delare, that I have not at any time
positively asserted any thing, but what I either know, or have had sufficient
proof, as may render my Pen blameless therein, page 3.

Upon which I would seriously ask thee, What sufficient proof have thou that
that was E. Burrough's Epistle, which thou have cited for his Epistle, and
positively asserted it two or three times to be E. B's Epistle in thy first
part of the Christian-Quaker (falsely so called?) which I and many more do not
believe it to be E. B's for diverse causes; having seen John Parrots Name only
to a Transcript of it in a Persons Hand, writing, i. e. J. Batho's, that was
for a time an Admirer of J. P. How durst thou be so positive in asserting it to
be E. B's? I dare Challenge thee to produce it under E. B.'s own hand, to any
of us that knew his hand, if thou tookest it not up upon an Implicit belief,
trust and report. As we can prove, thou have written many things from thy own
Jealousies and Reports, only with this provision in some other things, If
Reports be true, etc. to save thee from the censure of drawing a positive
Conclusion; and then what weight or credit does this add to much of thy Work?

And I would know, what sufficient proof thou have of thy Story, That a Friend
of known credit did declare, that twelve pence was paid in London, on demand of
so much for a Certificate, in order to the Accomplishment of his Marriage,
which otherwise might have been obstructed, p. 5. I pray thee produce thy
Author and Informer for this Story, and what Friend of known Credit did so
declare? for it is not credited by many. However, thou art positive in it, by
the following words, viz. This being done under the form of Government
contended for, etc. Which I am sure is a positive Lie; for we have no such
Action under the form of Government contended for among us, as to obstruct any
Marriage for Non-payment of twelve Pence for a Certificate. Such practice is so
far from relating to Church Government among us, that 'twas never owned by us,
as to obstruct any Marriage on that account.

And what positive Proof have thou, That the Manuscript of the Primmer,
subscribed by G. F. and E. H. was sold for thirty Pound? Enquiry has been made
about this Accusation, and it is positively denied by the Person concerned;
though these Stories thou have instanced as tokens of Apostasy and Innovation,
p. 5.

And what if E. H. was a Clark for his yearly Salary, does that hinder his
Credit in his signing our said Treatise on behalf of our Meeting? Or was his
yearly Salary to extend to pay for all the many Certificates relating to
Marriages, and the Expenses thereupon, who many times was known to be deprived
of his natural Rest, in writing to serve Truth and Friends? And was it not
lawful for him to have a Livelihood for his great pains in Truth's service, who
lost his place and livelihood for Truth, and ended his days in Peace? One
would think, that W. R. should be ashamed to asperce or cloud his Reputation
after his Death.

. 7. His Reflection upon the Barbados Mee^ers (as he calls them) about a
Subscription, and upon G. F. my self, (and consequently on A. P. who also was
concerned with us) as seeming to sew Pillows under their Armholes, p. 4.
appears Malicious, as well as Unjust, being a Subscription from the first
exploded by us, and since seen in its defects, and condemned by themselves on
our Christian Advice and real Dislike shown them in our Epistle, which W. R. is
so partial and unjust, as to omit the words containing our Judgment and Dislike
of it. Has not he and Francis Bugg and Tho. Crisp herein exactly resembled the
Devil, the old Accuser of the Brethren, in accusing the Innocent, and charging
Persons after Repentance, with that which they have repented of, which is
Satan's unjust Prosecution? And W. R. unjustly also lays hold of these friendly
and tender Expressions, wherein we showed regard to Friendship, and answered
that which was tender and good in them: For instead of showing himself
impartial and just, he minces and clouds the matter on our parts, only telling
the Reader, We seem to dislike the latter part thereof -- And in other parts,
seem to dislike the wording thereof, p. 4, and 28. But is not so honest as to
give the Reader a particular Citation and Notice of our real judgment in our
own words in that case. As in dislike of their opposing the Judgment of the
Spirit of God in the Meetings to any particular Measure. We plainly signified,
That this would be the way to bring them all from the measure of the Spirit in
their own parti^^lars -- (...) all must be left to the universal Spirit in
their own measures thereof -- Now this would make the Belief, which is in the
Light, and the measure of the Spirit in their own particulars, not one with the
universal Spirit, etc. The universal Spirit of God has unity with the least
measure now, as it was in the Apostles days, who kept every one to their own
measure; which was both the great Rule and Line of the New Creature in the
Believers and Saints then.

And in dislike of their subscription, we signified, That all are to give up to
the Universal Spirit of God in their own particulars, in which spirit they have
unity and fellowship, without outward subscription -- And further, Now as for
your Subscription to an outward Tie, be above such things.

Now let the serious and impartial judge; Is not here a manifest Dislike shown,
and Judgment given? And therefore the greater Injustice in our Adversary to
cite the Paper from Barbados, either to prove us guilty of Aiming at Dominion
and Lordship over Faith, Conscience and Property, page 4. or that the said
Paper is one part of the fruits of the pretended established Government, as he
most falsely says, p. 27. And the Lordship over Estates and Consciences, he
infers thence. He would deceitfully insinuate and charge upon us sewing Pillows
under their Armholes, calling them dear Friends, with other tender Expressions;
which when he has cited, without the words containing our Judgment, as to Fact,
he then says, THIS shows no dislike to the said Paper. Which is a very
deceitful and unjust way of writing in Controversy: I would not deal thus by
the worst Adversary in the World, to entitle him to that which he has disowned,
and to leave out the words of Dislike and Judgment on the Mistake or Error so
disowned, and to pick and take up those other words which are tender, relating
to the Persons, and not to the Fact; and then to cry, This shows no dislike
thereof, etc. What if THIS shows it not, when enough besides shows it? But is
it indeed a Crime to call any dear Friends, who do commit an Error or Mistake?
No sure, that will not hold. Did not Paul call the Corinthians, DEARLY BELOVED,
1 Cor 10.14. (see James 1.16. compared with cap. 5.) and yet some among them
did Err, were in Divisions, etc. 1 Cor. 3. And did he not call the Galatians
BRETHREN? Gal. 6.18. yet charges them with being Foolish. Were not the seven
Churches of Asia commended in many things, when yet there were a few things
against diverse of them? Rev 2 and 3 chapters. O Dis-ingenious Person, ( W.R.) I
am ashamed of thy Partial, Unconscionable and Unjust dealing! Is this thy best
way to prove us guilty of aiming at Dominion and Lordship over Faith, Estates
and Consciences? How miserably come thou off in thy Evil Attempts!

. 8. That We have given occasion to be rendered in some things as bad as Papists
(or as having a Papistical Countenance, p. 5.) is a notorious Slander: And that
in some other things we have given occasion to be rendered MUCH WORSE in our
Practices and Treatments, than the very Papists themselves, (p. 6.) is also a
foul Reproach. And his excusing Pope Leo his Bull against Martin Luther, rather
than our Friends, is no Proof, but rather shows himself more on the Popes side
than on our Friends, having spoken more for Pope Leo the tenth than our
Friends, A Pope reputed no better than an Atheist, a Prophaner of the holy
Scriptures, a Person careless of Religion and Piety; an Avaritious Corrupt
Person, who made great advantage of his impious Indulgencies and Pardons, etc
How unjust and impious therefore is our Adversary W R. to rake so many
Instancies (as he has done) out of the History of the Council of Trent, of
Wicked Popes and their Agents, to compare, brand and scandalize Us or any of
our Friends withal, who abhor Popery and all the Popes Corruptions.
on the instance he gives, to wit, That in the Popes Bull forty two Articles of
Doctrine, held by the said Martin, were mentioned, and declared Erroneous; by
which the World was notified of the reputed Crimes laid to his Charge. But in
the Papers subscribed by Charles Marshall and Sixty five more, against J. W.
and J. S. nothing that may properly be termed particular matter of Fact, or
Erroneous Doctrine is therein laid down, unless their general words now
following may be termed such, to wit, That they have Evil Designs, despise
Heavenly Dignities, promote false Iealousies, set up a kind of a standard of
Separation, page 6. And is not this matter of Fact, to set up a standard of
Separation? Where then is his Comparison between Pope Leo the tenth, and us?
And how were the Pope's proceedings in that respect, far more just than our
Friends? (as he signifies) p. 6. See what Favor and Charity he has for the
Pope, more than for our Friends. The causing or making Divisions and
Separations in the Apostles days was then such matter of Fact, as that they
were to be marked and avoided that did so; though our Adversary does not own
this to be properly termed particular matter of Fact laid down, when plainly
mentioned in writing.

Thus I have considered him on his own terms, and taken notice how he justifies
the Pope's proceedings, as far more just than our Friends, whilst he would be
reckoned against Popery.

. 9. That we would not be rendered like Papists, is true; but that the Penman
seems to mar it all again (in refering the Reader to a short Tract, writ by
our Friend R. Richardson) is false: And though both Heathenish, Papistical and
Protestant Authors of diverse sorts (as he says) are quoted in the said Tract;
it is no reasonable Inference, that therefore R. R. is like a Papist, or like
all those he quotes, unless W. R. would like it well to be so reflected upon (
Argumentum ad hominem) as resembling a Papist in his quoting Pope Leo's Bull
against Martin Luther, as having some more pretended ground whereon to place a
Judgment, and as far more just in his proceedings than C. M. and sixty five
Friends more. As also in his quoting the Parliament of Papists at Paris, p. 31.
Does not this then by his own reflection, render him more like to a Papist than
a strict Quaker? Whilst he will needs have R. R. etc. like Papists for quoting
Heathenish, Papistical or Protestant Authors; yet he himself quoting Pope Leo's
Bull against M. Luther, and the said Parliament of Papists against our Friends:
Let him wind himself out from a Self-condemnation in this, and other points of
like nature, if he can.

. 10. He seems much to upbraid us with the words, Learned Friend R. R. he
throws them over and over upon the Penman: he often twits us with them, and
yet but in his 8th page he tells us of the Memory of the Learned Samuel
Fisher. See how the man makes work to his own Confutation. Though our words in
the Copy were Learned in the Truth; how the words [ in the Truth] were left
out, I know not. And yet a Person being Learned in any respect, it can be no
sin to say, He is Learned; whilst it is not to admire outward Learning or
Acquirement above its place; which I am sure was not intended on our parts.

. 11. Of our saying, That it is at least suspected for a great Slander, viz.
That some do look upon G. F. as that Prophet, whom the Lord by Moses
prophesied, he would raise up: Aad that he is not ignorant, that such there
are, etc. Our Adversary in his inference has perverted the words from [ at
least suspected] to [ only suspected, and bear suspicion] when as [ at least
suspected] implies more than a bear Suspicion: And therefore his supposition
thereupon (and his Jealousy) That the secret Reason was, that on Conference
with G. F. he could not in Truth deny the same; And that he will not deny it,
p. 9, 10. This is a Presumptious Imagination: for I affirm, G F. does deny the
same, in reference to himself, as a particular Man or Person, whose days and
years are limited; only the Truth of the Immortal Seed, Christ in him, (as he
is in every true Believer, Male and Female) he stands to maintain, against all
Opposers, and persecuting Gainsayers and Apostates. And therefore his
Jealousy, That at length this Controversy, as managed, etc. will occasion
the discovery of great Idolatry, page 10. shows, that he suggests false things
still upon Jealousy, to render G. F. etc Odious and Obnoxious.

That the Penman offers not a word to prove him ^uilty of sordid and foul
Abuse against John Blaikling, p. 10. is a sordid and foul Untruth; see our
Treatise against the Accuser of our Brethren, page 246. where we offer what he
says against J. B. and others, Writing or Signing any thing, right or wrong,
and comparing him to a Parasite, to an Earthly Prince: Here Is more than one
word offered to prove W. R's foul Abuse against J. B. etc. who to add to his
Abuse, now says, J. B. has acted the part of a Sycophantizing Parasite in
writing touching G. F. And what is this but to render him a mere Talebearer and
Flatterer, or an Informing Flatterer for his own Ends and Advantage? This still
appears sordid and abusive, thus infamously to brand any Friend or Person
Conscientious toward God.

. 12. As for his ascribing Eternal Honor either to G. F's Life, or to him or
his Soul, as joined to the Spotless Life; wherein J. B. can mean no other than
the Life of Christ Jesus in him, I do not understand that this can prove him a
Sycophantizing Parasite. For that Christ is our Life, the Life of every true
Believer, is plain; that Eternal Honor belongs to him, is not disputed. In the
next place, He that Honors me, says the Lord, him will I Honor. The Question
is, Whether this Honor is not Eternal, (a part post) that is, Everlasting to
the Souls of the Righteous, whom God never forsakes? Then how can any such ever
loose that Honor that God gives? And does our Adversary believe, that nothing
may be said to be Eternal, that had a beginning, as to Man? Had not Eternal
Salvation and Eternal Redemption a beginning, as to the Creature, yet Eternal?
But W. R. notes in the Margent, That Eternal Honor is due to none but God, who
alone, and not the words of Mortal Man, is able to nourish the Soul which is
Immortal: And all this to confute John Blaikling. Wherein he greatly perverts
J. B's Intention, and misrepresents his words; for he spoke of the dropping of
his tender words in the Lords Love; and W. R. tells of the words of mortal man.
When the Apostle said, Hitherto I have fed you with Milk, and not with strong
Meat; Was this a Soul's feeding or nourishing, yea or nay? And was the
Apostle's preaching the Gospel in a living Ministry only the words of mortal
mam? No sure: For our Gospel came not unto you in word only, but in Spirit and
in Power.

His charge against G.F. that he has described himself one unto whom
Infallible Judgment has been committed in all things, is denied by G. F.
though he owns the Judgment committed to him of God in matters of Salvation and
things Spiritual, to be Infallible.

. 13. His Marginal Note appears manifestly untrue, viz. That he has not written
one word to show that such a sense is his sense, to wit, That he and some
others of his party seem to be only for a select company of Elders and Deacons
to order in Church Affairs about the Poor, Marriages, etc. p. 11. What then
means his exclaiming so much against our Meetings about Church Affairs, as
being an uncertain number of uncertain qualified Persons? and his Brethrens
Paper of Separation in Westmerland, quoted by him, plainly limiting to Chosen
men, Chosen, Employed and Authorized by the Churches? see our said Treatise,
page 119, 120. Now if his sense was not for a select company, then he and his
Brethren Subscribers of the said Paper, are of contrary senses. But then how
does he consist therein with himself, in his charging us with Usurpation, and
upbraiding us, p. 19. with such a form of Church Government, as has admitted
of no rightful Succession or Constitution by Election, etc? What Foundation or
Certainty can we find in this man's writing? One while he is comparing us with
the Pope, another while he charges us with Usurpation, for want of rightful
Succession or Constitution of any Supreme Person or Persons, page 19. This is
the man that would seem to oppose Popery so much, whilst he is bringing a
Popish plea of Succession against us. But this is like much of his Work: I wish
he were better composed.

. 14. He pretends greatly to be for an Amicable Conference, p. 12. whilst he is
so far from Amity, that he has appeared an open Enemy, abusing and reviling us
in Print

And what, if his Letter was not read publicly at our yearly Meeting, at the
time of its being delivered? What reason had Friends to interrupt their public
and weighty concerns of Truth with the then reading of an Adversary's letter?
especially seeing diverse of us took care to answer him therein so soon as the
Meeting was over; and were not wanting afterward to give him a Meeting
thereupon.

His charging us with a piece of mere Hypocrisy and Deceit for pretending to
Amicable Conference, is a sordid Abuse to my knowledge: For many of us have not
been awanting in that case, but have been ready to Amicable Conference, before
W. R. and some of Party with him, turned open Adversaries, Gainsayers and
Enemies to us, whose Enmity has made them, (especially him) incapable of
Amicable Conference. And he may be ashamed of his pretended seasonable Hue and
Cry after the Name of the Penman; his Hue and Cry shows his own Complexion and
Image not to be innocent.

And his Charge of the Fruits of manifest Injustice, that his Letter was not
read in our yearly Assembly, being (he says) a Letter from a Friend, especially
when not Excommunicated. This is unjust and untrue in the first place, and
shows an imperious, Lordly, Exalted Spirit, thus to charge us with manifest
Injustice: And why so? but because we did not serve his turn, we did not
observe his time and manner in reading his Letter, when and where he would have
had us: We did not lay all the weighty Affairs of Friends and Truth aside
presently to read William Rogers's Letter; we did not gratify his Irregular
interposing; and therefore we must now be censured in Print, charged with
Irregularity, Answering without order of the Meeting, Lordship and slavish
Submission, fruits of manifest Injustice, etc. He seems very hot on this
occasion, and a Person very strict and zealous for Regularity and Order of the
Meeting, when he thinks it may serve his own turn: But at other times he hugely
exclaims against Outward Uniformity, Orders, outward Rules, Prescriptions,
Directions, Imposition, etc. But now it seems, it is against such as are not of
his own setting up or imposing. And yet he most highly justifies whatever he
has written; which we either pretend to answer, or to show dissatisfaction in,
as remaining undetected, and in no respect unbecoming a Christian Pen, p. 14.
We have only his own Self-commendation for this; wherein his Self-confidence
and wilful Blindness is to be wondered at.

CHAP. II.
. 1. W. R. questions Ellis Hookes's Credit, and grossly abuses our Meeting in
London, for writing in behalf of our public Meetings and People called
Quakers.. 2. Of the inward Government and spiritual Kingdom of Christ in his
Church. How far his Ministers or Servants are concerned therein as Instruments
in his hand: Not strictly Representatives thereof. Our Propositions therein
unanswered by W. R. He evades and gives the GO-BY to them.. 3. His late
opposition to visible Persons being invested with Power from Christ to execute
outward Laws, Orders, etc. in an outward form of Government, now Overthrown by
himself, and the point gained upon his own Variation and Concession, and he
farther questioned in the point.. 4. His mistake in his Allusion against
representing the Government of the King, and concerning his Prerogative, W. R.
unskilful in the point.. 5. Of the Cause espoused by us, no other than the
Cause of Christ his Church and People. W. R. like a persecuting Informer, his
work tending to bring more severe Persecution upon us; his representing us as
in seeming Union with the Papistical party, and comparing us with Popes, the
Church of Rome, etc. Devilish, Malicious and Fallacious, yet most silly and
impertinent, and his Resemblances full of Falsehood, and his Similitudes abusive
and shallow, bringing great Reflection upon himself, acting the part of a silly
Sophister, yet proud and scornful.. 6. W. R's Cry for Justice against G. F. and
who must be the Judges, and what Judicature, qustioned. His malicious, dubious
and proofless Reflections upon the Penman, Ministering Friends and yearly
Meetings, and comparing them to the Popes General Councils; and his Instance of
the Bishop of Bitonto's Commendation of Pope Paul the third (with his
Blasphemous Doctrine about the Light) proved unjust, and the Similitude
impertinent and grossly false, etc. His accounts against Popes, etc. (gathered
out of the History of the Council of Trent) he unjustly applies to our
Friends*. 7. His Similitude of Disumon, with the Pope, to render us worse than
he: And his Comparison between our Friends and the Popish Lords Inquisitors,
and his uncharitable Censure about punishing his Body, and taking away his
Estate, all unjust. Of our standing by our Treatise entitled, The Accuser, etc.

. 1. HIs questioning the Credit of Ellis Hooks, A Clark for his yearly Salary
(as he calls him) and insinuating against the Meeting, for whom he was a
witness, as not meriting the Name of Sober Conscientious Quakers; and as being
infatuated, etc. cap. 2. p. 15. And why so, but because they wrote in the Name
of public Meetings, and in the Name of the People called Quakers? Does this
prove them Infatuated, or unworthy the Name of Sober Conscientious Quakers?
It Is a wonder he is not ashamed thus manifestly to scandalize and abuse so many
Conscientious, Sober and Understanding Persons, when he knew not who they were
in particular. Have we not often writ in the name and behalf of our Friends and
People called Quakers, in their Vindication from the opposition and abuses of
Opposers and Gainsayers of Truth, in matters known to be universally owned by
them; and this both with their tacit Consent and Approbation? Must we seek for
a Deputation from the People called Quakers throughout England, etc. in all
Cases wherein there is a present necessity of their Vindication, when generally
abused in Print by Adversaries of diverse sorts? For I tell W. R. he merits not
so much as the Name of a Quaker, in abusing at least the major part of them in
Print, as he has done, to render them Popish, Odious and Infamous, and rather
justifying the Pope, and Lords of the Spanish Inquisition, p. 21. than many of
them. And his disaffected Party are not so numerous as he would have us think,
p. 23. far short (to be sure) of those he writes against and abuses in Print;
for his smiting at the public and faithful Ministers (who are approved of most
generally by the People called Quakers) is a Reflection and Scandal upon that
People.

. 2. Our observation on the 42d Disaffection shows, that our Objection lies not
against the outward Government under which we live, nor yet against the inward
Government of Christ; for Christ's inward Government in his Church, and his
spiritual Kingdom and extent thereof, as also our innocent Conversations
toward the outward Government, we have plainly asserted in our Treatise
against the Accuser, page 114, 115, 116, and 118. Though W. R's words are cited
at large, more fully to show his sense and distinction upon the inward
Government of Christ, where he adds, viz. Which is not represented by Persons
visible by carnal Eyes, invested with Power from him to execute outward Laws,
Prescriptions, Orders, Edicts or Decrees, in an outward form of Government
visible. Wherein we reasonably took his Objection to lie as much against
visible Persons being so invested with Power from Christ to execute outward
Laws, Prescriptions, etc. and against an outward Form of Government, visible in
his Church, as against Christ's Government being Represented by Persons
visible. But now he pitches his Objection upon the word [ REPRESENTED]
questioning, Whether it is not a Contradiction in common sense, to conclude,
That Persons visible can be the Representatives of the inward Government of
Christ? Which was not our Assertion; nor did we conclude, that Persons visible
are the Representatives of Christ's inward Government, in a strict sense,
absolutely or solely as in Christ's stead: And therefore his Objection supposes
that to be our position, which we never asserted. Yet not to loose nor lessen
any part of Christ's Government, we have plainly asserted, That it is exercised
by him both Immediately and Instrumentally in his Church: Immediately and
principally by himself; and Instrumentally (in some measure) by his Ministers
and Servants, as well as he teaches and instructs both Immediately and
Instrumentally; as in our first and second unanswered Propositions about Church
Government. And therefore as we prefer Christ's inward and immediate Government
by himself as Principal, and his governing Instrumentally by his Servants: But
in some Measure (as our words are) this shows, that we do not render them the
absolute Representatives of his inward Government and spiritual Kingdom; though
we may truly and tenderly assert, They do by the inward Assistance of the Power
and Spirit of Christ, in some measure livingly represent or signify, declare
and show forth the inward and spiritual Government of Christ, as being his
faithful Servants and Ambassadors; yea, some are called Ambassadors in
Christ's stead, in and through whom Christ ministers, instructs, commands,
orders and rules. And the holy Ghost made some Overseers, and appointed Helps
and Governments in the Church (as we have laid down in our third Proposition)
Especially for the sake of the younger and weaker Members, Children and such as
are of under Age, as to Truth and experience in the work of the Lord. Our
Adversary answers not this Proposition, which is so plain, tender and
submissive to Christ, in his behalf and preference: And therefore W. R's
inferring and charging the fruit of a confused Anarchical Principle on us (in
reference to our said Disaffection) follows not in Truth, but rather shows it
to be the fruit of his own Prejudice and Enmity. From whence also his scornful
Question proceeds, viz. Whether the Penman has known, and has in pivate a
Catalogue of the Names of such visible Persons, whom he may esteem the
Representatives of Christ's inward Government? page 16, 17. He fallaciously
obtrudes and imposes his word REPRESENTATIVES still in this case upon us,
extending it beyond our Intention, and what our words will bear; craftily
evading and giving the GO-BY to our Propositions in the Case, where we
signify, That IN SOME MEASURE Christ governs Instrumentally, etc. see our five
Propositions in our said Treatise against the Accuser of the Brethren, p. 114,
115, 116.

. 3. Whereas we took his opposition to be against visible Persons being
concerned in an outward form of Government, and order in the Church of Christ.
Hereupon he shows himself very angry, and exclaims against the weight of the
Pen-man's Iniquity, charges him with Prevarication, insinuating, as if
according to my Principle (says he) there were not visible order and form of
Government under Christ's Dominion, nor any visible Persons exercised in any
outward Order under his Government, p. 43. Whereby he has now plainly granted,
that according to his Principle, there is both visible Order, and a form of
Government under Christ's dominion, and Visible Persons exercised in an outward
order under his Government (for in the two contraries, his disowning the one,
owns the other; his opposing the Negative grants the Affirmative herein.) But
he then should have writ more distinctively, consistently and plain, in telling
us, What visible and outward form of Government and Order* he would set up? And
what has he so much exclaimed against, and not to have appeared so general in
his opposition to outward Orders, Forms, Rules, Prescriptions, Decrees, etc. as
he has done in diverse passages of his Book; and particularly, that in his first
part of his Christian-Quaker, p. 73. in his opposing the Establishment, or
giving forth of outward Orders, Prescriptions, Sentences or Decrees, as a Bond
on the Consciences of Believers, rendering this more like the Old than the New
Covenant. And his opposing Visible Persons being invested with Power from
Christ to execute outward Laws, Prescriptions, Orders, Edicts or Decrees in an
outward form of Government visible; as it is plain in the Title Page of his
third part. The frequent Reiteration of these and such like passages and Words,
show his Objection was against Visible Persons being empowered by Christ to
execute (or minister) By [ Execute] I understand minister or put in Practice,
and not in the common Law sense of inflicting corporal or pecuniary
Punishments; for that is not consistent with the Government of a Christian
Church.
outward Laws, Orders, etc. in a visible and outward form of Government; else
what needed he write so slightily and frequently against outward and visible
form of Government, outward Laws, Edicts, Prescriptions, Orders, Decrees, etc?
What Is all his Noise come to on this account? Now he would not be thought, that
his Principle is against visible Order and Form of Government under Christ's
Dominion; Nor against some visible Persons being exercised in some outward
Order under his Government: Thus far the point is granted and gained upon him,
and his Concession thereto the farther confirmed, in deeming our rendering his
great Book to be against Church Government, outward Methods, Orders and Rules,
etc. A false Assertion; Though we cannot reckon that Book of his to look with a
better Face in the mian purport and Series of it, especially considering his
Third part, from what is mentioned in the Title, and against R. Barclay's Book
for Church Government, and in many other places and passages of that Book, and
in his Epistle in this his 7th part he is smiting at Establishing an outward
Uniformity, outward Things, outward Directory, etc. But now we must take his
meaning and principle to be not against visible Order and visible Form of
Government under Christ's dominion, nor against visible Persons being exercised
therein; How then shall we understand his meaning and principle? Why did he not
then more plainly distinguish it first, and brought the Controversy into a
more narrow compass, and not have writ thus confusedly and shatteredly, one
while against, another while for visible outward Order and Form of Government
under Christ's Dominion in his Church. [As in this Treatise the matter is
further Evinced against him hereafter.]

But wherein lies his Charge of Prevarication? He gives us to know, it is in
twining the Word REPRESENTED into CONCERNED, page 43. We are yet to seek and
study, how to find this Prevarication pretended, considering the purport,
tenure and conexion of his Words. For though now he owns visible Persons to be
exercised or concerned in an outward Form of Government and Order under
Christ's Dominion; yet not that his inward Government is represented by them;
yet his Distinction before excluding visible Persons not only from representing
Christ's inward Government, but also from being invested with Power to execute
(i. e. to minister, give forth, or put in practice) outward Laws, Edicts, etc.
in an outward Form of Government Visible, appears to bespeak his sense than to
exclude them from being concerned in an outward Form of Government and Order in
the Church of Christ under his Dominion. For if they do in no sense or degree
represent Christ's Government, how are they concerned in it? And if they have
no power to execute (minister, or put in practice) outward Order and Form of
Government visible: How are they either exercised or concerned in an outward
form or order of Government under Christ's dominion? But this is now granted us
in the Affirmative So then, wherein must we understand W. R's opposition to lie
against outward Order, outward Form of Church Government, outward Laws, Edicts,
Rules, Prescriptions, etc? I presume, not against any of his own making, but
against such as he calls G. Fox's, etc. as he has told us of a slighting G. F
's Rules, Methods and Orders, with respect to Church Government; see the
Accuser, etc. page 83. But then I would know, whether it is against all, or
some, that G. F. has writ or given out? If he says, not against all, but some;
then I entreat him to let us know, what SOME they are particularly? What
Instructions, Rules or Methods they are he Condemns, and that he deems
condemnable, as evil or unlawful in themselves? We have diverse times pressed for
a Catalogue of them, that the Controversy might be more plainly
distinguishable, and brought into a narrow compass, which now lies not only
prolix and tedious in W. R's Books, but also scattered, confused and ambiguous
in his Writings, wanting in many places the supplement of his latter Thoughts
and Meanings: So that when he has write one Book, it wants another to declare
its meaning; he has taken a great compass to write a very little matter in.

. 4. For his distinction between the words Represented and Concerned, he says,
That many thousands are exercised in an outward Order, under the Government of
the King, who if they should thence declare, that they are the Representatives
of his Government, 'twould be deemed a Mood of Speech, tending to the
annihillating of the King's Prerogative: And concludes the like in relation to
Christ's Prerogative, p. 43. But herein the man is under a Mistake; in this
Allusion, his skill in the Law, and the King's Prerogative and Government has
failed him in this point. For the King's Government is represented in all
Courts of Judicature, legally acting in his Name and by his Power, whereby the
King is looked upon to be present in all his Courts: Yea, every legal Minister
and Conservator of the King's Peace, even from the Justice to the Sheriff and
Constable or Peace-Officer does in his place and legal Office in some degree
represent the Kings Government, in the doing Justice and Conservation of his
Peace: And this no ways lessens, but promotes the King's legal Prerogative. For
the King in the Eye of the Law is Justitiarius Capitalis, the Head or chief
Justice, and has his subordinate Ministers and Justices under him, legally
empowered by him, according to his just and legal Prerogative. Now seeing W. R.
is so much out, and has lost his aim in his Comparison, these things are
mentioned to rectify his Judgment; And the Comparison, as now stated, may be
better applied to Christ's Kingdom and Government, who though he be the chief
Overseer and Shepherd, the great Apostle and Minister, the great Ruler and
Governor, etc. he has his Overseers, his Apostles, his Ministers and Servants
and Helps in Government, which is none other than Christ's Government in his
Church and Kingdom, and under his Dominion; which I hope our Opposer dare not
deny, however he differ with us in the Application.

. 5. As concerning an Angry Waspish Pen, wherewith thou twice over chargest the
Penman, adding, That the more he stirs therewith, the more will the Cause,
which he espouseth, stink, page 17, and 44. I must tell thee, first, I never
met with a more Angry Waspish Pen than thy own; though thy Malice and
Wickedness has been (in diverse parts of our Book) deservedly reprehended, thou
have in much thereof been mildly treated. 2 dly, I know no cause espoused by us
therein, than the Cause of Christ his Church and People, which will live and
remain sweet and precious to all the upright in Heart, when thy malicious Work
and corrupt Cause will more and more appear naucious, loathsome, and stink above
ground, till swept into the Pit from whence it came, and which thou art very
near, and without Repentance can not escape it. 3 dly, What occasion have we
(or any of us) given thee to rage and roar against us, and like a persecuting
Informer, to go about to expose us in Print, tending to disgust Authority* and
to bring more severe Persecution upon us, as seeming to be at Union with the
Papistical party? pretending to discover Principles and Practices relating to
George Fox and hi^ Party (as thou call them) that run parale^ with the
Church of Rome. And then to excuse this thy persecuting Cain-like and
Judas-like work against us, thou falsely placest it on the Will of the Lord,
saying* The Will of the Lord be done, p. 17. (whils^ thou art doing the Will of
the Devil, thy Master and Father of Lies and Liars) adding, That it is but just
that Deceit and Idolatry should be discovered in whomsoever, etc. p. 18. But
come on; That thou do, do quickly. Let Us see what exact Similitudes and
eminent Discoveries thou have shown and made of our seeming Union and Parallel
with the Church of Rome. Thus thou attempts it, viz.

1st, It Is affirmed of the Pope, that he is Christ's Vicar on Earth -- Accounts
himself invested with Power to execute outward Laws, Edicts and Decrees: Herein
(say thou) I place not much difference between the Pope, on the one part, and
the Penman and some of his the Brethren on the other. And why so? The Penman
and his Brethren (say thou) account themselves the Representatives of
Christ's inward Government over the Conscience, p. 18. That Is an Untruth by the
way, and none of our words, but a scornful Pervertion: Where did we so account
our selves? It Is improper and unsound to say, That visible Men or finite
Creatures are the Representatives of Christ's inward spiritual Government over
the Conscience; which is endless, and where Christ himself reigns. Where did we
ever assume a Government in Christ's stead over the Conscience? But only as his
Servants and Witnesses, by his Spirit do commend our selves to every man's
Conscience in the sight of God, and thereby only represent or show forth by
sound Doctrine and good Conversation, That Christ must rule and be obeyed as
the Head of his Church; which vastly differs from the Pope's false sense of his
being Christ's Vicar or Representative on Earth. Thou addest, viz. And that
they are invested with Power to execute outward Laws, Edicts and Decrees. And
what follows on thy discovery and similitude? Therefore the Pope and G. F. and
his Party seem to be in Union, and run Parallel with the Church of Rome: That Is
false. The true Apostles and primitive Christians had outward Laws, Commands,
Decrees, etc. which they practiced: So has the Pope and the Church of Rome
(though not the same.) What follows? Did they therefore seem to be in Union?
Thy Similitude and Inference are fallacious. We differ in the Power and Manner
of Execution; and our Laws and Decrees, which Christ has given us, differ from
the Popes. The Popes Power is Carnal and Coercive: Ours, Spiritual and
Persuasive. The Popes Ecclesiastical Laws, Edicts, Canons and Decrees are to
promote a false Church, Idolatrous Worship and Superstition: Our Laws and
Decrees, etc. are first written in our Hearts, and taught us by Christ Jesus,
enjoining us to eye, believe and follow him, as our Rock, our Way and Leader in
Holiness and Purity of Life and Conversation. Therefore thy Comparison is silly
and abusive here, as well as Malicious: The Pope claims a succession from Peter
and Peter's Primacy, See Rh^. Annotat. fol. 572.
(as their term is) as the Rock and Foundation of the Church: So do not we, but
deny that Doctrine as false, believing and owning Christ to be the Rock and
Foundation; nor yet do we assume or pretend any Privilege, Power or Authority
over Christ's Church from an outward succession, but only being Christ's
Witnesses, Ministers, Servants and Ambassadors, are assisted by his immediate
Presence, Power and Wisdom with us, to assist, order and govern us in his
service, and the service of one another in love.

Again, thou proceedest in thy Similitudes, viz. 2dly, The Pope likewise
affirms, that the Church of Rome is the true Church, and -- in the true Faith:
The Romish Clergy teach, that we must believe as the Church believes. Herein I
cannot justly place much difference between the Popish Clergy and Penman, if
he approved this Doctrine; viz. The true Church is in the true Faith that is in
God; and we must either believe thus as the true Church believes, or else it
were but both a Folly and Hypocrisy to profess our selves Members thereof,
page 18.

Thus thou would make me (whom I presume thou intendest) to resemble the Pope
and his Clergy, and to seem to be in union with them: But do thou not own the
Doctrine to be true in it self, viz. 1 st, That the true Church is in the true
Faith that is in God; And dare thou deny this? What say thou to it? Speak
out man, and be plain to the Point. 2 dly, That we must either believe THUS (
i. e in God) as the true Church believes, or else 'twere Hypocrisy to profess
our selves Members thereof. If thou can not deny the Doctrine in it self, why
have thou made this an Instance of our seeming to be in union with the Popish
party? For thou know in thy Conscience; first, That it was not spoken of the
Church of Rome, but in general of the true Church, whose Faith is IN GOD, which
we neither believe of the Church of Rome, nor does the Church of Rome believe
so of us. Where Is then our seeming Union? secondly, To believe in God as the
true Church does, herein the true Church is made an instance and example of
Faith in God, not to make the Church's believing this or that, the sole Reason
and Cause of my (or our) believing the same, this were Implicit; it is as, not
because; for Christ, who is God, is the original and efficient cause both of
the Church's and my Faith, which is in him, which is the one, living,
substantial Faith, wherein is Unity. Whilst thou can not confute the said
Doctrine, behold thy Similitude, what an empty FALSE SHOW it is: What real
Protestants in Europe could escape thy Censure of Resembling the Pope and his
party (nay, how can thou escape thy self) upon such Fallacious Similitudes as
thou have invented against us? The Pope and his party believe there there is a
God, a Christ, a Heaven, a Hell, Immortality, future states: So do all true
Protestants. What follows according to thy Similitude? Ergo, all true
Protestants seem to be at union with the Pope and his party. The Pope and his
party believe there is one true ^^iversal Church, and one true Faith: So do the
Protestants, but not so of each other, they are not in Union; no more are we
with the Pope or his party, but with the best Reformed Protestants, wherein
they differed from, and opposed the Church of Rome. The Pope believes he is a
true Christian, and no Apostate: So do thou (W. R.) believe thou art a true
Christian, etc. What follows? Ergo, thou do Resemble the Pope, and seem to
be at Union with the Papistical party: Is not this ( argumentum ad hominem)
like thy Similitudes? and more resembling them, than thou have resembled G. F.
and his party to the Pope and Church of Rome. How like a silly Sophister have
thou argued? May thou not blush and be ashamed of such silly Impertinent,
yet abusive Scri^ling, vain Shows, fallacious and abusive Similitudes? But
Truth has defaced thy Pictures and Images, and discovered thy empty Shows and
Legerdemain Tricks, thy Pride and Scorn against the Innocent.

Thou proceedest in thy Similitudes, viz. 3dly, The Popish Clergy think it not
fit that the Laity should undertake to treat on points of Divinity, or concern
their heads with that, otherwise than to receive those things in the sense the
Clergy teaches. This bespeaks little of any difference at all between the
Penman and the Popish Clergy (and why so?) The Penman on the occasion of my
writing somewhat touching Doctine, thus says, viz. This man who is thus
discomposed in his work, should not have meddled so much with points of
Divinity, which he appears so little skilful in, p. 18.

What was thy design in this Instance, but to render the Penman and our second
days Meeting so far at unity with the Popish Clergy, as not to allow the Laity
to treat on points of Divinity? Thou might as well have said, that we think
not fit that any Laymen should preach among us, which were notoriously false,
and against our selves and Practice, and contrary to our constant Testimony,
who are no Clergymen, but Laymen But I suppose he has a reserved and other
sense for his Distinction between Clergy and Laity here, than the common sense
and distinction: It Is some reflecting reserve no doubt. He may tell his mean-in
his next Book.
(so called) Besides, our saying, Thou should not have meddled so much with
points of Divinity, was not because thou art one of the Laity, and not a
Clergyman, but because of thy discomposedness in thy work, and thy appearing
so little skilful in some points of Divinity thou did meddle in. See now how
perverting and fallacious still thou art in thy similitudes.

But to proceed on thy Fallacies, viz. 4thly, Some have esteemed the Authority
of the Pope above the Authority of an Ecumenical or General Council, but some
others the contrary; yet both have agreed, that the Authority accompanying the
one of them, has been the highest in the Church, from whence no appeal on
Earth In this I cannot of knowledge place much difference between my
Adversaries and the Romish Church, because I know not but that G. F. may be by
some declared to be invested with a greater Authority than the General Meeting;
neither can I deny, but that the General Meeting may be by others esteemed to
be invested with greater Authority than he, p. 19.

See now, what amounts thy Similitude unto here? Thou can not of knowledge
place much difference, etc. because thou know not but that G. F. MAY BE by
some so declared, etc. Instead of showing Resemblance or a Similitude and
seeming Union between us and the Romish Church, now thy proof is come to [ I
KNOW NOT BUT, etc.] and to a [ G. F. MAY BE, etc.] And then again, thou can
not deny but that the General Meeting may be by others esteemed, etc. as
before. So thy May-be's are thy Discoveries before pretended: See thy
impertinent trifling. But thou know, that the Authority and Power of our
Meetings has been frequently declared to be the Power of God, which is the same
in all Meetings of his faithful People: We place not the Authority upon any
Meeting or Number of Persons, merely as a Meeting, but upon the Presence and
Power of Christ in that Meeting; for he is our great and wonderful Counselor.

. 6. 5thly, What Cry for Justice is it thou complainest has not been hearkened
unto in London, when relating to G. F? Was it a Cry for thee to be heard
against G. F. in his presence or absence? or was it Justice for thee to be
heard read the Papers or Indictments against him, when he was many Miles
distant? It seems thou art for Judgment against G. F. but who must be the
Judges, and where the Judicature? Not thy self and Party, for ye are a party
extreme against him; not those thou have judged Apostates and of party with G.
F. for they are incompetent (in thy own account) for thee to appeal to; not the
World, for they are unmeet to judge of spiritual differences; for the Saints
shall judge the World. If thou say, It Is the Church of Christ thou would
appeal to for Justice against G. F. this grants the Church a Power of Judgment
and Determination in matters relating to Conscience, contrary to thy own
Principle and Doctrine. And then, where is that Church of Christ thou would
appeal unto, that is neither of thy party, nor of G. F's? Now consider where
thou art run. And why do thou go on with thy jealous Reflections upon the
Penman, when thou can neither write positively, nor have proof against him,
saying, It is well if the endeavors of the Penman (who peradventure may
expect advance by Usurpation in the Government contended for) be not as great
to keep off the stroke of Justice, when as relating to G. F. as Cardinal
Scomberges were to keep off the Reformation from the Court of Rome, etc. p. 19.

What proof is all this against the Penman, but to expose thy Malice and
dubious (as well as proofless) Reflections to open censure? Instead of Proof,
thou presents us with thy [ If] and with thy [ Peradventure] Whereas the
Penman can appeal to the righteous Judge of all and Heart-searcher, against
thy Defaming and false Insinuation of expecting advancement by Usurpation in
Government, keeping off the stroke of Justice; both which my Soul loathes. As an
humble Subject under Christ's Government, I only oppose the stroke of the
envious revengeful Spirit in thee and other Apostates, etc. as I really judge
it my Duty.

5 thly, And what if it be reputed, That G. F. originally called Ministering
Friends to General Meetings Yearly? (or was Instrumental therein) as thou
say, p. 20. Does this seem to have union with the Popes calling General
Councils consisting of the Clergy? Did not the Primitive Apostles and Elders
sometimes assemble, and that long before there were Popes or their Councils?
Were they therefore to be compared to the Popes and their General Councils? Our
placing the Ground of the Controversy on an opposite dark Spirit on thy and
thy Abettors part, is true; and so it is also, that thy opposition to many
Faithful Servants of Christ, was the Fruit of Darkness, and no just comparison
with the Bishop of Bitonto's commendation of Pope Paul the third, nor with his
exhorting all to submit to that Council, which if they do not, it will be
justly said, the Popes Light is come into the World, and men love Darkness
better than Light, (as thou cites him in this blasphemous Doctrine) and to add
to this Unjust and Impertinent Instance or Similitude, thou insinuatest by
Query, Whether that Expression may be a proper Looking-glass for the Penman
and G. Fox, to see their Faces in, when they conclude it the Fruit of Darkness
not to submit to their Councils and outward Directories? I shall leave to the
consideration of the unprejudiced understanding Reader. [Thus far thou] p. 20.

What expression a Proper Looking-Glass? The Bishop's saying, The Popes Light
is come into the World, and men love Darkness better than Light? Is this thy
proper Looking-Glass to see our Faces in? It Is but a dull one. Where did we
ever in all our Councils, Expressions or outward Directories (as thou call
them) so much as resemble such false Doctrine and Blasphemy? No, we abhor it.
What a false Looking-Glass have thou presented here? It serves only to show how
Evil and False thy Eye is, and how bad thy Sight is; how Impertinently and
Sordidly have thou cast upon many Servants of Christ those accounts against
Popes, etc. which thou have gathered out of the History of the Council of
Trent? And how easy is it to make Books at that rate? Thou have known better
things of the Ministers of Christ's Light among us, than thus to represent them
with thy false Similitudes; and may remember, that our frequent Testimony
has been (as still it is) to excite People to Christ's Light within, as being
that true Light which is come into the World, and to his Counsel that proceeds
from his Light; and not to the Pope nor any of his Councils. And thy pretended
Godly Jealousy, That G. F. has been endeavoring to exhalt his own
Imaginations instead of Christ's Light, appears Ungodly and False, as many more
of thy Jealousies (which are no Proofs) do.

. 7. And now thy Similitudes of Disunion or difference between the Pope and G.
F. and his Friends, p. 21, 22. to render him and them worse than the Pope, are
as scornful and wicked as thy former; as for instance, to thy saying, The Pope
publishes his Bull or Decree in his Name; and does not usually say, it is not
for want of freeness in Spirit that I desire my Name should be hid: But it
appears to me that the Penman was ASHAMED that his Name should be published
with the great Bull, entitled, The Accuser of the Brethren cast down. [Thus
thou] wherein thou have told a gross Perversion and Untruth; for the Penman
neither said, I desire my Name should be hid, nor yet was he ASHAMED that his
Name should be published with that Book thou falsely and scornfully call, The
Great Bull; nor does he or any others concerned therein, find any Cause to be
ashamed thereof, but to stand by it against thy Malice and Abuses in thy Great
Bull, as it may be rather termed, for thy attempting therein to Unchristian and
Unchurch a great number of faithful Servants of Christ.

Again, the Reason thou give, why thy Adversaries (as thou call us) have
not punished thy Body, nor taken away any of thy Estate, is, But blessed be the
Lord, they have no Power so to do. Herein thou accountest is some little
difference between them (thou smites at) and the Lords Inquisitors of the
Popish Inquisition, p. 21. I must tell thee, I think this a very Uncharitable
censure and smiting, implying that they would both punish thy Body, and take
away thy Estate, and so be as bad as the Lords of the Spanish Inquisition, if
they had but Power so to do. Which bespeaks great Prejudice and Darkness to
have entered thee. And then, to aggravate the matter, thou turnest it about
again, That they (i. e. thy Adversaries) have not suffered thee to see the
Faces or know the Names of thy Judges: In that respect (say thou) the Lords
of the Spanish Inquisition have been ore just, p. 21.

How odiously and grossly have thou here represented thy Opposers, who have not
divulged their Names against thee, of whom I take the Penman (and thee to mean
my self) to be one; And if so, I must tell thee, thou have insinuated a gross
Slander, to render the Lords of the Spanish Inquisition more just; and by a Lie
justifiest the Papists, who clap men up in Prison all their days, never
letting them know their Accusers; (see the History of the Inquisition) for
though the name of the Writer was not divulged with that Treatise entitled,
The Accuser, etc. Many others have given their Names in the same judgment
concerning thee and thy work of Discord and Enmity, and many more also do own
and stand by that Judgment and Treatise: And I must farther tell thee in the
sight of God, I see no cause to retract, but to stand by that Treatise, and own
my share in it, notwithstanding thy opposition to the contrary, picking, and
nibbling, and quarrelling here and there, but giving the GO-BY to the most
material parts thereof, wherein the Controversy is most fully opened and
distinguished.

Of those Popes with whom W. R. compares our Friends.

. 8. Seeing W.R. esteems the Popes, (yea, even the worst of them) good enough
to bring us in comparison with, and to cite and make them as Instances against
us. As,

Pope Leo the Tenth, p. 6, and 22.

Pope Paul the Third, p. 19, and 28.

Pope Julius the Third, p. 31.

It may not be amiss to give some description of these Popes, according to a
late History or Abstract of the Lives of the Popes, printed Anno 1679.

Among the Atheists

Leo the Tenth is ranked, who hearing Cardinal Bembo speaking to a point
concerning the joyful Message of our Lord, answered most dissolutely, It is
well known to the World, through all Ages, in how great stead that Fable of
Christ has profitted us and our Associates. This man neither believed Heaven
nor Hell after our departure out of this Life. And such were Alexander the
10th, Sylvester the 2d, PAVL the 3d, Benedict the 19th, John the 13th, Clement
the 7th and Gregory the 7th.

Among the Magicians and Conjurers

Paul the Third is ranked, as having obtained the Garland in Astrology, and in
that kind of Speculation which is assisted by the Ministry of Devils. He
altogether kept familiar Acquaintance with Negromancers, and such like
Imposters, etc.

Among Warriors and Blood-succors.

Paul the Third was also accounted, viz. A great Persecutor of the Saints of
God, raised and fomented the German War, which proved the Destruction of many
thousand Families.

Among Paricides and Impoysoners.

Paul the Third also impoisoned his Mother and Niece, that the whole
Inheritance of the Farniesian Family might accrue to himself. His other Sister
also, whom be carnally knew upon fancying her freeness to others, he slew by
Poison. And so he is recorded among Incestuous Persons also.

Among the Favorites of Whores.

Its said, That Paul the Third kept a Roll of forty five Thousand Whores, who
paid him a Monthly Tribute.

Among Sodomites.

Julius the Third used one Innocent as his Minion, and created him Cardinal. Of
whom this account is also given (in Dr. Gilb. Burnet's History of Reformation,
Book 2. Abridgment, page 121.) viz. That Pope Julius the Third (when Cardinal
Pool was rejected for his being too good) was chosen for his Badness, who gave
his place of Cardinal to his man that kept his Munkey, saying, He saw as much
in his Man to make him Cardinal, as the Cardinals saw in him to make him Pope.

Query, What worse Persons upon Earth could our Adversary have compared G. F.
and Friends unto, or brought in Comparison against them in Church Proceedings
or Spiritual Censures? Behold his horrid Injustice and Envy!

CHAP. III.
. 1. W. R's Accusation of endavouring to take away his Credit: Next, to
depriving him of his Estate, examined; and the justness of our dealing with
him, vindicated. What sore Reflection he has brought upon himself by his
Complaint, and his acting the part of a Persecuting Informer, to render his
ancient Friends called Quakers, Obnoxious in the Eye of the Law and Authority..
2. His bitterly Inveighing against C. Marshall and many other Brethren. His
unjust Instance of Pope Leo's Bull again. His and F. Bugg's Contradiction about
W. Penn. Schism condemned in and by the Church of Christ, as well as Heretical
Doctrine and Scandalous Living. The decrease of W. R's Number, and the increase
and gathering of many faithful to Christ and us his followers, foretold.. 3.
The Pen-man's writing in behalf and in the name of the peaceable People called
Quakers, vindicated from W. R's severe and seditious Inferences.. 4. W.R.
called in question upon his own Principle, for writing in the name and behalf
of (and representing) diverse Persons, who never chose nor gave him Power, nor
allowed him so to do (and his abuse of E. Buroughs and I. Pennington)
whereupon his severe Charge and Inference is all returned upon his own head..
5. W. R. and F. Bugg, their Reflections upon the Meeting in the Isle of Ely, no
proof of Friends Apostasy, but of their own Partiality and Injustice in their
Representation of the matter.. 6. W. R's again recited Lie about the Paper from
Barbados, as being one part of the fruits of the pretended established
Government, with other unjust Aggravations thereupon, farther detected.

. 1. TO prove that thy Adversaries would cause thee to suffer in Body and
Estate, if they had Power; thou say, They have endeavored, as much as in
them lies, to take away thy Credit, which is next to depriving thee of thy
Estate. And wherein to take away thy Credit? Thou say, The Penman has
given thee this sort of Treatment, either in relation to thy self or thy Book,
viz. Hellish Iealousies, Fiery Agent and Incendiary, his Heart is filled with
Pride and Envy. As for William Rogers's Book against Church Government, it is
outragiously Wicked, Clamorous and Abusive. I cannot suppose, (say thou) what
he means by these his very words [He is here treated far more mildly than his
work deserves] unless he believes that my work deserves corporal Punishment, or
Confiscation of Estate. I cannot but again say, Blessed be the Lord, that the
Rigid Uncharitable Penman has not Power so to do. [Thus far thou] p. 21, 22.

To all which I say, and that in the sight of the Righteous God, who is Judge
of all, that I know no Treatment given thee, in these and the like Passages in
our Book, than what thou and thine justly deserve, though in much else of ours
thou art treated far more mildly, yea, more kindly than thy work deserves. And
do thou indeed judge, that we have endeavored to take away thy Credit by
such kind of Treatment? And that it is next to taking away thy Estate? What have
THOU then done against us; yea, against many of the peaceable People called
Quakers? Have not rendered us Unchristian, in notorious Blasphemy, Apostates,
Innovators, Imposers of blind Obedience, Popish, Papistical Track, in Union
with the Pope and his Party, more unjust than the Lords of the Spanish
Inquisition (Yea, and at such a time as this, when I presume thou can not be
ignorant, how that many of our Innocent Friends are under severe prosecution
and suffering, both in their Persons and Estates) in the reign of Q. Elizabeth
and K. James? How Uncharitable and Unjust? How persecuting Informer-like (all
circumstances considered) is thy Treatment? And how Inhumane, tending to add to
these our Afflictions? And yet complainest of our Endeavors to take away thy
Credit, and consequently thy Estate, when thou art but justly reprehended, and
no other Characters placed on thy Work and Envious Spirit, than what are just,
and naturally belong thereunto. Has it not been our practice from the
beginning, to testify against our Persecutors, and to reprove their Envy and
Cruelty? Did we therein go about to bring corporal Punishment and Confiscation
of Estate upon them? No sure. Can thou take liberty to abuse and villifie so
many Servants of Christ in Print, and think they must all be mute under thy
Abuses, and none to reprehend thee? No such matter. They that have but the
least spark of holy Zeal, or but any Life or Soul for God, must needs be
kindled in some measure against thy abominable Abuses and Injurious persecuting
Work. It seems, thou valuest thy own Credit and Estate at a high rate above
others: Thou seem little to value the Credit, Liberty or Estates of many
others, (even of thy ancient Friends, called Quakers) to brand and stigmatize
them, as thou have done, with as Infamous Characters, yea, and as Obnoxious in
the Eye of Law and Authority, as thou easily can, and yet complainest of
Endeavors to destroy thy Credit and Estate, when thou have given the first
occasion of the Reprehension and Judgment given upon thee and thy work of
Malice. Thou have begun the Fray publicly, and broke the Peace; now
complainest of Uncharitable Treatment. First thou art Barking, Snapping and
Biting, then art Complaining and Whyning, when a little Whipped for thy Folly,
thy Pievish and Ugly Behavior. Oh! Injurious and Partial Man! Have thou done
as thou would be done by? For shame give over thy malicious and fruitless
Attempts.

. 2. Again, it is observable how bitterly thou still inveighs against Charles
Marshall and the Sixty five Persons more, about the Paper touching J. W. and J.
S. as judging it In some respect to be much like the Bull given forth by Pope
Leo the Tenth, against Martin Luther, Anno 1520. But yet in one main Point
greatly differs; for (say thou) in the Bull there are Forty two Articles of
Doctrine condemned, and the Bull ordered to be read in every place, that the
matters for which he was prosecuted as an Heretic might be known. But in the
aforesaid Paper, subscribed by Charles Marshall, etc. There is no mention of
any particular Doctrine, or Vitiousness of Life, for which they are persecuted
by their Brethren, p. 22. [Thus far thou.]

Whence three things are to be observed, 1 st, That the said Paper is compared
to the Pope's Bull, as much like it in some respect: 2 dly, That its deemed
worse than the Pope's Bull, in not mentioning any particular Doctrine or
Vicious Life against J. W. and J. S. 3 dly, That they who subscribed the said
Paper, were persecutors of their Brethren. Whereof thou know William Penn
was one: How foully have thou asperst and represented C. M. and W. P. etc. in
these things? And how do these Comparisons against him, and thy rendering him a
Persecutor of his Brethren, agree with his being Dear W. P. This Noble man,
etc? as thy Brother F. Bugg, and consequently thy self, have rendered him, being
in thy Book, page 73.74.

As for their not mentioning any particular Doctrine or Vicious Life, that
others might know the matters alleged against them; what, would infer that
therefore the Pope's Bull against M. Luther was more reasonable or just? That Is
a mistake, for thou confessest a Judgment to be given against that jealous,
rending and separate Spirit from which thou have not cleared them (but rendered
them the more Guilty, if thou be their Representatives, as empowered by them
to write in their Vindication, according to thy own reflection on us.) And was
that no Reason then to give others notice and warning against such a Spirit? Is
Schism no Sin, or not reproveable? But how Unjust is thy Comparison? I ask
thee, if thou dare say, that Pope Leo (that Atheist) was in the same Sense,
Religion, Gravity and tender Exercise toward M. Luther, that in thy own
Narrative thou have rendered these Friends in, that were concerned in dealing
with J. S. and J. W. at Drawell? And I ask thee further, If ever thou readst
any such Acknowledgment, Submission or Condemnation made by Martin Luther to
the Church of Rome, as the said J. S. and J. W. with thy own assistance, made
as satisfaction to their Brethren, and the Church of God in general? Though
afterward thou comparedst it to a Rattle to please Children. And has a
Christian Society no Power to reprove and judge a dividing, self-separating
Spirit, (in whomsoever it be) that makes Rents and Schisms, as well as
Heretical Doctrine, and Vicious or Scandalous living? Mark them that cause
Divisions and Offenses, and avoid them, etc. If thou grantest the Principle,
and such power in a Christian Society or Church, what will thy attempts to
Unchristian and Unchurch us avail, unless thou can prove us guilty of Vicious
Lives and Heretical Doctrine? Which if thou can not, then have thou and thy
party assumed a Power to judge of Spirits, wherein you fairly give away your
Cause, and overthrow much of your own opposition to the Churches Power and
Determination in such cases? And your Judgment to Unchristian us or our
Spirits, being but your Imposition, we shall as little value; and the day will
yet farther discover whose Spirits are Unchristian, and whose Spirits are
Christian. And it is not thy boasting either of the Numerousness or Scores (of
thy party) p. 23. that will decide the Controversy; nor would thou accept of
such a Plea on our parts, but doubtless esteem it no Christian Proof or
Argument, but an Imposition, and begging the Question: But seeing thou layest
so much stress on thy Numbers and Scores, I must tell thee, that if they
amounted to as many as the third part of the Stars (which yet they are far
short of) that followed thee, or owned thy Work of opposition and strife, they
would be but wandering Stars, and have lost their Habitations and Glory, and are
darkened, whom the Dragon's Tail has drawn and cast down to the Earth. But
blessed be the Lord our God, the greater part of the Stars, among us his People
called Quakers, have kept their Station and Splendour in the Firmament of his
Power, and in living Union, Concord and Love, wherein they live above that
Spirit of Enmity and Discord which thou and thy party are in, and which the
Lord will yet farther discover and deliver those who are at unawares betrayed
thereby, yet have some secret Breathings unto him, and that they may come into
clearness of Judgment, so as on the Restoration and increase of the number of
the Faithful and Upright: And by the spreading of the Gospel day, thy Numbers
shall decrease; and many will come to see thee more and more in thy dark and
mischievous attempts, and how insuccesful and disappointed thou will be
therein. And those that come to be recovered, and many Thousands that shall be
gathered to the Lord and us his People, shall be found better, and more worthy,
than thy self, and those that go out and separate from us.

. 3. W. R. is pleased to make a Charge, and draw severe and seditious
Inferences upon our Advertisement, and conclusion of our Introduction,
especially against the Penman, for vindicating the People called Quakers in
their Church Order and Discipline, and writing in the Name of the People called
Quakers, when vindicated from his Scandals. But he has very unfairly and
dis-ingenuously left out the distinguishing expressions in the first, as [
Peaceable, Christian, Conscientiously, Christian Society, p. 23.] in the
passage of ours, viz. We the peaceable Christian People called Quakers are
Conscientiously vindicated and cleared in our Christian Society. Where Is then
his exception against our vindication and writing in the Plural, in the Name of
the peaceable People called Quakers? But that, 1. We could not write in the
Name of such as encouraged the publication of his Treatise entitled, The
Christian-Quaker, in five parts, who yet are a part of the People called
Quakers. (says he) 2. Nor in the Names of such as are disaffected with laying
Marriages before Women's Meetings; And these are numerous, and called Quakers
(quoth he) To the first; Answer, No: How should we write in their Names, who
encouraged the Publication of his said Treatise against us (if any such were,
for they keep very obscure, as not willing to be known in such encouragement.)
It is a Book of Envy, Strife and Discord, and they no Peaceable Quakers who
encouraged it. 'Twas the Peaceable People called Quakers that were concerned in
our Vindication: And therefore W. R. says true, as't happens; The Penman
could not write in the Name of such as encouraged the Publication of his Book.
Whence it follows, they were not of that Peaceable sort which he vindicated,
nor W. R's Book a work of Peace, or in the least tending thereto, but a great
Abuse and Scandal to, and against the very peaceable People called Quakers.
Secondly; Nor are they who oppose our Godly Women's Meetings, and laying
Marriages before them, so peaceable and clear in their minds (in that point) as
we could wish they were, and they should be better informed, and hear
Instruction: However, they also are concluded by W.R.'s words, not to be of
that Peaceable People called Quakers intended in our Vindication, in that he
says, The Penman cannot be understood to write in their Names; when it is most
evident he did write in the Name of The Peaceable Christian People called
Quakers. Though W. R. as one in some wise Conscious, leaves out the word [
Peaceable] that he might with the greater color draw his Charge and severe
Inferences upon the Penman, etc. But such kind of slighty mean shifts will
stand him in no stead, when we strictly look into his Fallacious dealing.

And granting him that we cannot represent (nor be understood to write in the
Name of) such Quakers (so called) as encouraged the publication of his
persecuting Books and Pamphlets against us, nor of such as either oppose our
Women's Meetings, or laying Marriages before them, or are disaffected
therewith, nor in the Names of the several Scores he tells of, who gave
Testimony in Writing against Charles Marshall and Sixty five more. (The
greatest part whereof being known to be Faithful men of Sincerity and service
in the Lord's work) Nor in the Names of such as he says appear Neutral in the
present Controversy, and yet own the same Principles which he and his party
do. Where is then their Neutrallity? is it in having no concern of Conscience
outwarly to appear on either party, as W. R. says? Then they are only Neutrals
in appearance, but secretly of his party and Principles, some whereof are very
perverse and unpeaceable, as well as unsound. Now I say, we grant that we of
the Second day's Meeting did not represent such kind of Quakers as those of W.
R. his party; nor could they empower us in our writing for, and representing
the peaceable People called Quakers, or that peaceable sort of Quakers, who are
for Unity, Love, Concord and Peace in the Church of Christ among us, nor was it
our intention to represent, personate or vindicate such pretended Quakers, as
are in a Spirit of discord and strife, causing and making Divisions, Rents and
Schisms in the Church (first disturbing and troubling, then reproaching the
Society they sometime owned) but only those of a peaceable Mind and Spirit; and
therefore his not knowing that we can represent any under that Name, more than
our own Second day's Meeting, is a false insinuation; for there are many
Thousands of the People called Quakers, yea, of the most sincere and peaceable
minded, besides our said Meeting, whose real sense and judgment (in the matters
treated on in our Book, against W. R's great Book) we have represented, and who
really do and will own the same. Where now has W. R. shown the Penman guilty
of great Impudence, in writing in behalf of the peaceable People called
Quakers? The word Peaceable in our Advertisement, left out by him, does really
distinguish it, with respect only to the peaceable sort, which are they that
live in Love and Unity, who may properly be termed The PEOPLE called Quakers,
as united in one Society, and become one People, and not dividing separate
Spirits, who are gone out from us. And though in our Introduction, we say the
terms We and Us are used, sometimes in the Name of the People called Quakers,
when vindicated from his Scandals. I say so still. And this intends no other
than the Peaceable People, (as before explained in our Advertisement) and not
any such pretended Quakers, as W. R. his party and Abettors, who are
unpeaceable and turbulent to the Society and People among whom they sometime
walked. And therefore his roaring and clamouring out great Impudence, Pride,
and height of such towering lofty spirited Persons as the Penman, etc. are but
empty Clamours and Abuses, as is also his Jealousy, That the Penman counts
himself one of the Representatives of Christ's inward Government, who alone is
Lord over the Conscience. Whereas the Penman never so accounted of himself,
nor ever assumed to himself any such Government or Lordship over the
Conscience, as is peculiar to Christ alone; but only accounts himself a Servant
of Christ, and a Subject under his spiritual Government: And therefore W. R's
still proceeding in his roaring and bitter Exclamation against him, as That he
would represent in Print, as if the People called Quakers, without r^^triction
(a Lie still) were Persons impowering such an imperious Map of Pride and
Drollery, as the Penman shows himself to write in their Names. The matter is
answered before; but yet I may further add, as the Envy and Malice of this
Adversary appears swelling high, so his confidently repeated Falsehoods and
Abuses are numerous; for we would neither so represent in Print, nor yet did
the Penman so much as pretend to be empowered to write by the People in
general, or without restriction; and yet both in Charity and Christian duty,
might vindicate all them as the peaceable People ca^^ed Quakers, who are really
peaceable in their Spirits and Conversations: And though there be some called
Quakers, who are unpeaceable in both such as W.R. and his party; yet that
cannot unpeople the other, who are truly peaceable, but rather unpeople
themselves, who are unpeaceable, from being of that People: Such our
vindication of a peaceable People from the unpeaceable, proves none of us
Impudent, nor any imperious Map of Pride and Drollery, notorious Falsehood, etc.
as most unjustly rendered by an imperious proud Adversary. For has it not been
frequent with us, to vindicate the People called Quakers? intending all those
that might properly be counted a People in Peace and Unity, and that from the
general Aspersions and Calumnies, both of open and secret Enemies: And in this
Controversy we vindicate them as that peaceable People, who are sincere and
faithful to God, lovers of Peace, Unity and good Order, and whom W. R. and his
party, in their dividing and perverse gain-sayings, are not able to unpeople,
nor justly to render themselves that People. As for him and those of his party,
who promote his malicious, persecuting, defaming Books, etc. We cannot look
upon them worthy to bear so much as the Name Quakers, muchless to be deemed
that People under the Title of Christian-Quakers, whilst in their Unchristian
spirit of strife and discord: And they will yet more manifest themselves to be
further remote from that peaceable People called Quakers, if they Repent not;
and the peaceable and faithful, who love unity and peace in our Lord Jesus
Christ, shall remain a people, and live when all such spirits as lust to envy
and contention, shall be confounded, scattered, wither, be driven back and come
to naught in their evil Designs and wicked Attempts; the Breath of the Lord
shall scatter them; for no Weapon formed against his Heritage shall prosper.

But alas! our Adversary is still in a great fude and fret for our writing in
behalf, or in the name of the People called Quakers, (reiterating his Falsehood
again) without Restriction, p. 24, 25. he should have said, Peaceable People
called Quakers. But he goes on at an outrageous rate on this subject,
confessing, He wants words to represent the Action in as ugly a dress as it
deserves. And therefore when he has as falsely asperst the Penman, and set him
out in as Ugly a Dress as he can (so that the Devil and William Rogers have
done their worst hitherto) he supposes a Comparison in the case against him,
but very unjustly in these words, viz.

Suppose a company of men, never chosen according to Law, should meet at
Westminster, and call themselves the Representatives of the People of England,
and accordingly in the Name of the People of England proceed to act as such:
Would thou not abhor and detest the Action? And how can thou think that we
can do less than detest thy insolent Spirit, by offering to write in the Name
of the People called Quakers, without Restriction, when they gave neither thee
nor any of thy Brethren such Authority? Had the fear of God been before thine
Eyes, thou could not have attempted to have done so Wickedly, p. 25.

Here it is probable he thinks, he has given the Penman a deadly Blow; but
when the Devil and William Rogers have done their worst, it comes to little
Execution, but to manifest his Envy and Folly. He only shows his Teeth, but
cannot bite nor fasten; for there is no just parallel in the case; there is no
such kind of Treasonable proceeding justly chargeable upon the Penman, as is
inferred in the Comparison: The Penman did not call himself the
Representative, nor write in the Name of the People (or of all those) called
Quakers, without Restriction, as he falsely says, nor pretend an Election or
Authority from them so to do; the matter is distinguished and answered before,
and yet the Penman might lawfully represent the Innocence of all true
peaceable Quakers, both as to Principle and Practice, when abused and
calumniated, either as Unchristian or Popish Imposers, etc. without Conviction
(like as this Adversary has frequently misrepresented them) And this may be
done charitably, freely and voluntarily in their Name and Vindication, and in
true Unity, from a right knowledge of their Innocence, declared Sense and
Principles; And has not this been the Practice of many faithful Servants of
Christ among us, ever since we were a People, to write both in the name and
vindication of the People of God called Quakers, or of the Innocent People
called Quakers, etc. as the Lord has laid a necessity upon them, and yet not
to include those who are unfaithful or scandalous to Truth, or any who are
turned into Envy and Strife, though they go under that Name? Nor yet have they
sought or needed to seek Commission from the whole People, to write in their
behalf, being required of the Lord to write. And did not many of the best
reformed Protestants and Martyrs write in the name and behalf of the Protestant
Church and Religion, as the Book of Martyrs and other Histories, and their own
Writings show; of which numerous Instances might be given. And did not the the
Apostles of Christ often write in the Plural, both in the name and behalf of
themselves and the rest of true Believers and Fellow Members, under the terms,
We, and Us, and Our, etc. especially in that of 1 John 2.19. They went out from
Us, but they were not of Us; for if they had been of Us, they would no doubt
have continued with Us; see chap. 3.14. and 4.6. Here John wrote in the Name of
his Brethren and Fellow Members, and distinguished themselves from those that
went out from them, as we have our selves, as a peaceable People, from you that
are gone out from us, into a Spirit of Enmity, Discord and Self-separation.

. 4. But ( W. R.) since thou countest it such a horrid Crime, such great
Impudence, Pride, ugly Action, Insolence, etc. to write in the name or on the
behalf of People or Persons, or in their Vindication, without being empowered,
authorized and chosen by the same Persons or People. Now observe well upon thy
own principle and way of arguing, what a Reckoning I have with thee: Let us
seriously enquire of thee, Have all those Persons in whose behalf and Name thou
have written in the Plural (under the Terms We, Us, etc) given thee Authority,
or chosen thee to write in their Name and behalf? Did John Story, John
Wilkinson, and now the person in Cambridgshire (whom thou and Francis Bugg
contend for, against the Record about his Marriage) all give thee Authority (or
choose thee) to write on their behalf, and to expose their Names in Print, as
thou have done in thy state of the Controversy on their behalf? Did they give
thee Authority to write in their names and behalf, as those Other Friends in
Truth thou tellest of and representest? Either they did, or they did not; if
they did, then they may be entitled to, and are justly chargeable with thy
work, how perverse and abusive soever it be; If they did not choose nor
authorize thee to write in their behalf and name, then thy own Judgment returns
upon thy own head, as one guilty of great Impudence, Pride, towering lofty
Spirit, notorious Falsehood, ugly Dress, etc. to write in the name and
vindication of Persons, and to represent them who never gave thee Power, nor
chose thee to thy work. Did not thou pretend to write on behalf of thy self,
and other Friends in Truth concerned, as in the Title Page of thy great Book?
and now to use the words Us, We or Our, with respect to such as encouraged the
giving forth thereof, as in thy Advertisement to thy seventh part? When now
diverse noted Persons, who have appeared of thy party, refuse to stand by thy
Books; and we know none of them that dare say, they gave thee any such
Authority, or chose thee to be their Representative to write in their name and
behalf, as thou have done (against many faithful Friends, whom the Lord is with
and will stand by, against thy crooked Spirit and Opposition) but rather, those
thy Friends in Truth pretended (on enquiry, if they own and will stand by thy
Books) as it has been often asked them, particularly at Devonshire-house, in
1681. have answered, That William Rogers must answer for himself, if he has
done more than he can answer, or wronged any: They will not stand by him; It Is
his own Act, he must look to it, etc. Thus upon a pinch they leave him in the
lurch to shift for himself; they will not stand by him openly however; they own
him not for their Representative, though he has represented them, and written
as in their Name, Person and Vindication; as also represented them as
Encouragers of the giving forth of his great Book, falsely styled, The
Christian-Quaker, etc.

But to deal more closely and positively with thee in this matter, how came
thou to expose Edward Buroughs Name in Print, and to represent him as a Person
of thy Principle and Judgment, by a confused, unsound whimsical Paper, which
thou have printed in thy great Book, with Edward Burrough's Name put to it, and
represented it as his Testimony, and even in thy Titlepage say, it was given
forth in the year 1661. by Edw. Buroughs, and since the same is reprinted over
and over by thy busy informing Agent Thomas Crisp, as E. B's Vision; but I am
persuaded thou and he have grossly abused and misrepresented that Servant of
the Lord E. B. by rendering him the Author of such Absurdities as are contained
in that same Paper about the Shepherd and his Dogs, etc. particularly in that
passage of the Shepherd's gathering the Sheep with the many Goats, that did
push, trouble and hurt the Sheep with their Horns, and putting them into the
Fold; and that he made fast the door, and would not separate them until he had
the other Sheep also, that did not come with the Flock. See what Doctrine this
is, as applied to Christ, the good Shepherd, rendering him so severe to his
Sheep, as to gather, shut up and keep so many Goats, so long among them in his
Fold, to trouble, bruise and hurt his poor Sheep with their Horns. And also,
that Warning and Precept given in the said Paper to Friends, for all to forbear
judging any man any more, upon any pretense whatsoever: Can any that knew E. B.
and the soundness of judgment and understanding that he was attained to in the
year 1661. believe that he was the Author of such Doctrine to all Friends, as
to judge no man under any pretense whatsoever? A man well known severely to
judge deceitful Workers and rebellious Ones, as (yea, he testified plainly
against John Perrot's spirit of Division) is fully evinced in his Books and
Writings. And I dare presume E.B. never gave thee authority, nor chose thee or
Tho. Crisp to represent him in print (so many years after his decease) as the
Author of the said Paper or warning to all friends, To judge no man under any
pretense whatsoever: And yet thou art severely judging and reproaching others
that are not of thy party as Apostates, Innovators, etc. contrary to such an
express precept and doctrine espoused by thee, as E.B's Testimony. Besides the
express contradiction to thy self in thus representing E. B. in print, without
his leave, authority or consent, what great abuse have thou done to him, his
Memory, Name and Testimony, in exposing him in Print, as Author of that which
does not so much as look like him or his Testimony, or any Vision of his, but
in the said Doctrines both contrary to his Judgment and Practice? I say, what a
horrid Abuse have thou done to the Name and Memory of the dead in Christ, and
that by promoting a forged Subscription, if thou can not give sufficient
demonstration and proof, that Edw. Buroughs was the Author of the same Paper
aforesaid, which thou have exposed in his name in Print? If thou say, it was
delivered to thee with Edw. Borough 's name to it: I say, that is no proof of
its being his; for both I and diverse others have seen a Copy of the same only
with J. Perrots name to it; and this more probably true, that he was the
Author, for diverse reasons, than thy rendering E. B. the Author.

Again, thou have also exposed that honest and innocent Person Isaac Pennington
in Print, to serve thy own turn and thy parties, as a Confirmation of thy work,
and that after his decease also, for which I dare presume he gave thee no
authority, nor chose thee so to represent him in Print, or to pick out of the
middle, diminish or curtalize his Writings or Testimony, by leaving out the
most material and explanatory precedent and subsequent Passages thereof, to the
great injury and abuse of his Intention; for which his Son John Pennington was
stirred up to vindicate his deceased Father, and to detect thy abuse and
Prevarication. And am satisfied, that neither Edward Buroughs nor John Crook
gave thee Authority to quote or cite them, or either of them in opposition to
G. F. as thou have John Crook especially, in thy Epistle, page 3. nor to tell
the World in Print, That his Testimony is agreeable to thy sense: I do not
believe J. C. will in the least own thee in thy work of Opposition, and strife
against many faithful Servants of Christ.

Also, thou and Francis Bugg have represented William Penn in Print, on some
passages picked out of his Address to Protestants, as in thy 66 and 73 pages,
which he never gave you power to do, much less to represent him (as if he were
one in Judgment with you against his Brethren) nor did he give thee or F. Bugg
leave to discant upon and turn his words to serve your own turns, nor to apply
them against such his Friends in the Isle of Ely or elsewhere, who are for
Women's Meetings, and laying Marriages twice before the Men's and Women's
Meetings; it is not to be supposed, that he intended [ Fly Rome at Home] as
proper Admonition to them, as thy Brother F. Bugg applies them, as in the
Authority and genuine sense of Dear W. P. p. 78. calling William Penn, Dear
Friend, p. 65. This Noble Man, etc. p. 73. Which is to render W. P. exactly one
of your own party; and all this without his authority leave or consent.

But how comes he now to be Dear William Penn, Dear Friend, and This Noble man?
Have not thou numbered him among the Persecutors of J. S. and J. W. as thou
esteemest Charles Marshall and Sixty Five more (as thy phrase is) who signed
the Paper thou art so much offended at? p. 22, 27. Was not William Penn one of
those sixty six Subscribers? And do not thou on this very occasion retort his
words [ Let us fly Rome at Home?] What! must he therefore be a Persecutor of
his Brethren, and yet a Dear Friend, Dear William Penn, This Noble man, etc. in
thy Book? What Self-contradiction and manifest Flattery art thou and thy
Brother Bugg (like Parasites) guilty of? Pray lift up your Eyes and see your
selves, if not judicially given over to blindness and hardness of heart.

Take another Instance or two of thy Self-contradictory dealing; Did not thou
expose a Certificate or Testimony (as thou esteemedst it) of Nathaniel Crips in
Print against G. F. without any Authority from Nathaniel for so doing? I am
sure he confessed as much to me and John Bouldron the 6th Month, 1679. against
thy publishing it in Manuscript, as that thou did it without his advice,
knowledge or order; see our Book, Accuser, etc. p. 172

And likewise, that pretended Certificate or Testimony of Edw. Perkins, which
thou printedst against G. F. Edward confessed to me at sundry times and before
diverse Persons, that he did not give any advice or consent to thy printing it;
for 'twas printed without his knowledge. And so, we may question or suppose
thou have done the like in the rest, or most of the pretended Testimonies
against G. F. etc. from those Women and others of Bristol, etc.

Now may not I rationally take leave to reflect and argue, ad hominem, upon
thee, and according to thy own Terms thus, Oh! thou Imperious Map of Pride,
towering lofty and Lordly Spirit, insolent and conceited, proud Usurper! how
durst thou either write in the name or behalf of so many, whom thou countest
Friends in Truth, and numerous too? or expose the names of so many deceased
Servants of Christ in thy Quarrel, as if they were all on thy side and party,
when thy gave thee no power, nor deputed thee so to do? And thou must answer
for thy misrepresenting them, and abusing their Names, Memories and
Testimonies, when the chieftains of thy own party dare not stand by thy work,
nor own thee for their Representative, but leave thee to stand by it thy self,
as thy own. What an unjust and false Representative have thou shown thy self,
by thy own rule and manner of Reflection upon others? though I am apt to think
that some few have privately encouraged thee in thy travail, who now are afraid
publicly to stand by thy deformed, inform unshapely and monstrous Birth,
begotten and brought forth by the old Accuser of the Brethren; though some are
not ashamed to promote and expose it to Sale, but it will turn to their own
shame, and be their burden at length.

. 5 Again, to prove thy false charge of Apostasy and Innovation against us (p.
26.) thou insistest on a Record in the Quarterly Meeting Book at Hadenham in
the Isle of Ely about I tenderly forbear exposing the Person's name at present,
believing that 'twas not by his order or consent that W.R. and F B. have made
him such a subject of printed controversy; as also hoping that he has more
charity and tenderness in him than to allow of their malicious Books.
a Marriage, showing Friends dislike of the manner of proceeding and disunion
therewith. The Question is, Whether the person concerned gave thee Authority
to expose this in Print to make him a subject of the Controversy, and proof of
our Apostasy? If not, as I presume he did not, but rather F. B. from whom, thou
say, thou receivedst it; then have thou shown thy self no Friend to the
Person concerned, in exposing his name in Print, in a matter that tends to his
disrepute and disgrace, and that in plain contradiction to thy own Principle
and Judgment against us; and yet the ground of Friends dissatisfaction in that
case, thou do not demonstrate, (wherein thou have done partially and
unjustly, which necessitates this discovery) but say, It is for not
proceeding exactly in that outward new formed Method: Whereas 'twas an
Innovation or new Method that Friends were offended at, viz. propounding the
Marriage but once to the Meeting, and that in the Woman's absence (with whom he
intended Marriage) which is both a new Method and Imposition on Friends, upon
his bear word and credit, without the Woman's Testimony from her own Mouth,
which should have been allowed Friends, and that at two sundry Meetings, from
both the Persons concerned; which is no new formed Method, but that which has
been many years among us, and is a necessary and commendable Method, both for
enquiry into the Persons clearness from other Engagements, and tending to a
general satisfaction of Friends in Truth. And this Method does neither
invalidate nor derogate from that ancient Advice of Friends, cited in thy 4th
Chapter concerning Marriage, page 66. viz.

Let it be made known to the Children of Light, especially to those of the
Meeting, to which the parties are Members, that all in the Light may witness it
to be of God, and that no Scandal may rest upon the Truth, nor any thing done
in secret, but all things brought to the Light, etc. This is general, and was
wholesome advice. And there is no particular Method used among us, but it tends
to the same good end, ( viz. for the satisfaction and Testimony of all in the
Light) and does not in the least contradict or lessen it* Where Is then the
Antichristian Imposition, Apostasy and Innovation, thou chargest in the
Contents of thy fourth Chapter? Is it in proposing Marriages twice (or at two
sundry times) to the Meetings the parties b^long to? and that by both the
parties concerned, to prevent Scandal and Clandestine proceedings, and that
Friends in the Light may witness it to be of God, which is our Method; and in
which the Person aforesaid did not proceed, in his proposing his intention of
Marriage but once, and that in the Woman's absence (as Friends have given
account) and for which cause Friends expressed they had not Union with him in
so doing: But it seems thou have, in being so officious an Advocate for him
against Friends for their Conscientious dislike recorded against such an
Example or President; and scoffing at our Women Friends in the Isle of Ely, as
(thou say) may be accounted of the QVORVM, p. 24. Is this thy proof of
Antichristian Imposition, Apostasy and Innovation against us? Where Is thy
Christianity, Conscience, Religion and Order pretended? Oh! be ashamed of thy
Scornful, Unchristian and Infamous Attempts. And also it was no Friendly part
in thee, to endeavor to expose the Quarterly Meeting of the Isle of Ely in
Print to public censure, on the bare Information of Francis Bugg, thy
Informer, (who has shown himself, a Party and open Adversary against that
Meeting) rendering it no better than an Imposing Church, a False Church, p. 74.
against whom thou have joined in Judgment with him, without hearing that
Meeting's own defense and answer to Francis Bugg in the case: is this thy
judicial and equal proceedings? Oh for shame, give over thy partial and
impertinent Scribbling! And what if the said Quarterly Meeting, would not once
hear F. Bugg's Letter, nor suffer it to be read? It appears he has not behaved
himself so well and obligingly to that Meeting, as to engage Friends there to
lay by their other concerns, to hear his Letter against their proceeding: They
were not ignorant of F. B's turbulent Spirit; witness his troublesome work, his
ignoble, base and crafty dealing against Samuel Cater about the Fine, etc. a
particular account whereof is expected from G. Smith and Friends of the Isle of
Ely, who know the transaction in the Circumstances of the subtle Intreague,
which possibly may be a Rebuke to Francis Bugg his Immorality in the ^ase, and
corrupt Conscience, as well as to his Pride and Insolence, as an Ensample to
Posterity, which I really think he deserves, if he will not study to be quiet
toward Friends his peaceable Neighbors.

In his said Letter to the Quarterly Meeting at H^denham in the Isle of Ely
(and which is printed in thy Book, part 7. p. 72.) though he flatteringly
begins with Dear Friends, he accuses them about the Record against J. A. as
excluding him out of the Unity of Friends, and with Excommunication, etc.
Wherein he has dealt prevaricatingly and falsely, as appears by his and thy own
account of the Meeting's Record, which is, That they have no Union with him in
THIS HIS SO DOING: Which relates to that particular Act, and not wholly to
exclude the Person out of the Unity in all other things as one Excommunicate,
etc. Yet he proceeds Reflectingly, telling them of Stigmatizing, laying stress
where God has laid none -- Excommunicating about such things which are at best
but men's Traditions, and Impositions -- Imposing false Church. Applying William
Penn's words, This noble Man's words (as he flatteringly styles him) [ Fly Rome
at Home] to the said Quarterly Meeting, which were never so intended by W. P.
Thus thou and F. B. have abused W. P. in Print, shamefully perverting his words
and intention, who never could intend to bid a Quarterly Meeting Fly Rome at
Home, either for testifying against such Irregularity as proposing a Marriage
but once to a Meeting, and that in the absence of the Woman concerned; nor yet
for justifying upon the Method of proposing the Marriage twice before
consumated. Is this that Rome at home which Thou and F. B. would have Friends
to Fly? (for I take thee and F. B. to be in great Union now in your work,
seeing you appear so jointly together in Print, and to charge Friends with
Imposition, Immorality, Page 27.
etc. as thou have done.) But he deals partially, as thou have done, in not
manifesting the occasion of Friends dissatisfaction, he charging them with
Excluding the aforesaid Person, what in them lies, out of the Unity,
Excommunicating, etc. In which he places the Controversy but about
manifesting his intention to Marry; P. 72.
and then cries, Behold the Crime! But shows not what it is in the manner of
circumstances of it. Thus partial and covered you are in stating matters.

But the said Meeting would not hear his Letter: What great Crime was that? To
this thou say, viz. Should the Supreme Power in this Nation have treated our
Friends so as not to hear our Addresses, P. 26.
many Goals might at this day have remained full of honest Friends, who have
been discharged from their sore Imprisonments. There Is no parallel in the case
between Friends tender Addresses to Authority for Relief of Friends in
Distresses, Goals, etc and F. Bugg's ^^^lecting abusive Letter to Friends, in
vindication of an Irregular Practice, unwarrantable, and tending to a corrupt
fleshly Liberty, as that of Proposing the Marriage but once to the Meeting,
etc. Howbeit, it is a marvel thou will grant us so much Truth, as that our
Addresses have at any time had so good effect with Authority, as to obtain the
enlargement of so many honest Friends out of their sore Imprisonments. This is
more than some of thy Party have owned. However, considering thy Concession
herein, it is the worse requital in thee to villifie and abuse such in Print as
have been most industrious with the supreme Power in the Sufferers behalf, as
to my knowledge thou have very evilly requited and treated some such, rather
like a revengeful Persecutor, than a Helper of the oppressed.

So thy Charge of Immorality on the Quarterly Meeting in the Isle of Ely, for
not hearing F. B's Letter, and instancing the Parliaments admitting us to
represent our Agrievance, P. 27.
etc. are still both unjust and no ways parallel. For if we had given the like
occasion against the Parliament, that thou and F. B. have against us, they
might very well have rejected our Applications, as Persons insolent to, and
contemning of Government; should we have rendered them no more rightly in
Government than you have our Meetings for a Church of Christ, how should they
have accepted our Addresses? As if we should have told them, they were a false,
usurping, imposing, apostate Parliament, they might justly have rejected our
Addresses.

. 6. Moreover, it is a shameful Lie and Abuse for thee again to recite the Paper
from Barbados, As one part of the fruits of the pretended established
Government, p. 27. since that Paper was so far from being owned as any part of
the fruits of that Government established (which was by Christ, we affirm) among
us, that we have both plainly manifested our dislike thereof; and the Persons
concerned in it in Barbados have themselves retracted it, as is since
publicly evinced in Print; yet thou art so unconscionable as to render both G.
Fox, my self, etc. as showing no dislike to the said Paper, p. 28. Oh shameless
Prevaricater and Abuser! Thou can not but otherwise understand diverse
Passages in our Letter about it to Barbados, which clearly bespeaks our real
dislike of it, as thou confessest G.F. etc. would seem to discourse a little of
something amiss, etc. It Is evident G. F. etc. dislike some part of the said
Paper, etc. p. 29. Seem to dislike the latter part thereof, p. 4. But little
indeed thou make of that part of our discourse, but art rather willing to
expose us unjustly to public Censure, on those words of ours which appear most
friendly, tender and obliging, and falsely to represent us, as showing no
dislike to the said Paper. Adding also another gross Untruth and
self-contradiction in the case, viz. That the Penman is espousing a cause
contrary to ancient Testimonies, etc. p. 30. And further say, G. W. smoothed
up the Barbados Meeters with this Expression, We know you aim at the best
things, p. 82. What smoothing was this, when we had plainly showed them their
Mistake? We are sure then 'twas not to smooth them up therein: And may not some
aim at good (yea, the best) things, and yet be mistaken in some cases? What
Absurdity then have I committed, in telling them (whom I believed had a good
meaning, though otherwise mistaken) they aimed at the best things. Thou have
put my Name with G. F's at length, with an etc. instead of A. Parker's, to two
or three ^ines thou have cited in the conclusion of our Letter to Barbados, as
an instance wherein we show no dislike to their Paper, because we call our
selves Their dear Friends, etc. Is this thy [ More anon] to show that I would
now be as a Lord over my Brethrens Consciences and Estates? p. 25. For I
presume it is me thou intendest; and if so, it is false and abusive. [O righteous
Judge of all, and Heart-searcher! plead thou my Innocence, and rebuke this
Spirit of Envy, Falsehood and Slanders that is risen upon against thy faithful
Servants.]

Whereas our charitable, tender and friendly Treatment of them in Barbados
rather shows, that we were not willing to reject, exclude or unfriend Persons
for one or two Mistakes, than to seek Lordship over them or theirs, who
otherwise were so well meaning, as that we had cause to believe, that God would
rectify their Judgments, and set them to rights in all their Undertakings. So
that 'twas enough for us to show our dislike or disunion with them in that
particular thing wherein they were mistaken or erred.

CHAP. IV.
. 1. The great ends of Christian Religion and Society being eyed, a more easy
condescension and concurrence follow in lesser matters. Things necessary for
good order, not doubtfully recommended. Our consistency in the condescension
proposed, and how; explained and cleared from W.R's mistaken Objections.. 2. W.
R's judging and censuring a Person (and that falsely) whilst unheard in defense
of himself, condemned by himself as a grand Mark of Apostasy, and he proved
guilty thereof in fact.. 3. W. R's Charge of false Suggestion, Prevarication
and Forgery (reflecting on himself) proved notoriously false by diverse
Instances recited out of his own Book, showing his general Opposition to
outward orders, form and discipline, etc. relating to Church Government: And
then unsaying that opposition again by his finally granting both outward Order,
Methods, Forms and Discipline under Christ's Government: How far binding on the
Conscience of others, enquired into. And he must grant Liberty of Conscience in
preaching and exhorting to things just, honest and needful, or else he
interfers with himself in his plea for liberty of Conscience*. 4. W. R's
Confutation to himself apparent, in confessing, That God has afforded those
helps and governments in the Church, which are not to be despised, in a Paper
signed by him among Friends at London, 1673. His instance of W.P against the
Penman groundless. We cleared from imposing a b^ind Obedience, and W. Penn's
own words farther cited to clear his intention for liberty of Conscience, and
from what.. 5. W. R's unfair dealing and mistaken opposition against R.
Barclay's propositions concerning the Power, positive Sentence and Judgment of
the Church of Christ, as being binding in SOME CASES of consequence upon
Believers, the Spirit of Christ being the only proper Judge, etc. The point at
length granted by William Rogers himself.. 6. Wherein W. Rogers's discourse
tends to Libertism, blind Opposition, Confusion and Ranterism. A blind Refusal
of Submission to what the Lord in his Servants requires, condemned, as well as
blind obedience. A Medium between both proposed, to prevent a blind Refusal and
blind Obedience. Of W R's wrong Measures, false Judgment and Suppositions, Envy
and Scorn, Laughter, hypocritical Lamentation, Praying, Cain's Sacrifice, his
lofty conceited and contemning way of writing.

. 1. IT is true, and I am still of the same mind, that having the great ends of
true Religion and Christian Society in our Eye, viz. An unspotted Life, Love
and good Works, etc. as the very intent of our care and proceedings in the
Church of Christ, we can the more easily concur and accord as to Circumstances
and outward Methods, and in the Wisdom of God so condescend one to another, and
accomodate matters as not to divide about them, etc. And I do not find that our
Opposer produces any seeming Contradiction to this Citation out of our Book,
as he endeavors upon our following words, viz. We would be understood that
those things commended among us as necessary for good Order and Holiness of
Conversation are not recommended doubtfully, or upon mere Supposition, nor as
matters of indifferency to be practiced or rejected, but in faith and full
assurance, as answering Gods Witness and Truth in the Consciences; and that
such will meet with a tender Reception, and not Opposition in all tender and
upright hearts. Where Is now the seeming Contradiction in this to the precedent
Passage? See what observation our Opposer makes upon them. He observes, That
the Penman seems thereby to look three ways at once, p. 36. [though his sight
and observation has greatly failed him herein] as first, In commending things
necessary for good Order and Holiness of Conversation, NOT as matters of
Indifferency. To this W. R. thus says, viz. Wherein I take the truest sense of
his mind to be (and that the first citation importing his readiness to
condescend) was to cover himself and others from the guilt of Apostasy and
Innovation.

He is mistaken in his observation here; there was no such intent nor necessity
for the Penman to cover himself or others from that guilt, for to commend
things necessary for good Order and Holiness of Conversation, not as
Indifferent, but Essential to such Order, etc. and a Condescension in
circumstances, and accomodating matters, so as not to divide, etc. may very
well stand together, especially where there is unity of spirit and affection;
for if there be true love and unity in the greater matters, essential to good
Order, etc. it is more easy for such as are tender and upright-hearted to find
out accommodation and concurrence in lesser circumstances. So that still it is to
be understood, they must settle in an union and concurrence at last; otherwise,
how should they jointly do business or service for the Truth or each other?
There Is no concurrence nor joynt-service where there is confusion and
contradiction.

But W. R. proceeds in his observation against the Penmen, viz. 2dly, By his
readiness to condescend to his Brethren (which doubtless in that place he
intends such as are upright hearted, and mean well for it is not fit to
condescend to others) and therein the indifferency before excluded is employed.

He Is mistaken again in's observation; for there may be a tender and Christian
condescension of the upright hearted among themselves, in two respects:

1 st, In the stronger bearing with, and helping the weak, bearing the burden
of the weak, and not laying more upon the weak than what they are able to bear.

2 dly, In the wisdom of God finding out such accommodation, in some lesser
matters and circumstances not so essential and indispensible; so that there may
be a general concurrence, ease and peace of spirit in such lesser
circumstances, implying or including that indifferency before which is excluded
the greater, more weighty and necessary things relating to good Order, holiness
of Life, etc. For there may be such an indifferency in some circumstances,
wherein we may condescend to weak Brethren so far as the spirit of Christ will
admit; they being such as may not alter the property from being good and
lawful, nor disturbing to our Christian-society. Yet there are other material
things and circumstances relating our Christian society, good order and holy
living, that cannot be made Indifferent. And we plead not at all for empty
Ceremonies in Church order or discipline, but such as have a real service and
good end in them; nor are we for a Church whose ornaments are superstitious,
but for a Church which is gravely and purely adorned with Righteousness, the
fruits and services of pure Religion.

I confess W. R. has writ one remarkable Truth, i. e. That it is not fit to
condescend to others, viz. That are not upright hearted, that do not mean well:
Very true. And we have cause to keep to that Doctrine, in reference to such as
are turbulent and contentious Troublers of and scandalous to our society and
profession.

See his third Observation on the same subject before, as shallow as the rest,
viz.

3dly, By the Pen-man's last cited Lines, it is plain, that in his sense things
recommended for good Order will have a reception with all upright Hearts: Which
compared with his readiness to condescend, etc. (as before) shows, as if his
condescension was intended to Brethren that were not upright hearted.

Here his sight fails him, and he is greatly mistaken again, perverting the
Pen-mans sense; for though I affirm, that those things recommended among us by
Divine As our words are, Accuser, p. 136.
Authority and Evidence (either as duty to God or Man, or as necessary for good
Order and Holiness of Conversation) will have reception with all upright
Hearts. Yet it follows not, that the condescension was intended to Brethren
that were Not upright hearted, or false. For first, Here Is not a limitation of
time when all things necessary (as before) will have reception with all upright
hearts: So that there is a time and cause for condescension to them of low
degree, in regard of their weakness (not insincerity.) Secondly, Many upright
ones do not presently or immediately see every thing that is recommended in the
wisdom of God to be practiced, but must have time to weigh and consider matters
before the Lord first, in order to receive a clear understanding and judgment
from him, before they act therein. So that in the mean time there must be a
tender condescension, patience and forbearance on all hands toward such, not
to look upon or judge their want of present clearness (and their present fear
to act because thereof) an act of Refusal or Rebellion on their parts: No, no,
far be it from us; knowing that such upright hearted ones, even when but in a
poor low and weak state, will not oppose, refuse or gainsay any thing they at
present see not that is either in it self good and honest, or necessary for good
order and society, their uprightness, tenderness, honesty and fear toward God,
preserves them from contention and blind opposition in such cases, whilst given
up tenderly to wait till God reveal that unto them (whether immediately or
instrumentally) which for a time they have not clearness in: And be sure, he
will not be awanting in his divine counsel and openings to such.

. 2. To his charging the Penman with a groundness Complaint of Printing
against G. F. without first proceeding judicially, or hearing of matters face
to face, p. 39.

[ Groundless Complaint] is an untruth; there was manifest ground for that
complaint on W. R's own confession and principle, viz. his enveighing against
judging any man without hearing him: Judging the merit of the cause without
hearing the same: Judging and Censuring a Person unheard in the defense of
himself, as being a grand Mark of Apostasy, as in his Preface to his
Christian-Quaker. That W. R. has so ( ipso facto) judged and condemned G. F.
and others in diverse things unheard in their own defense, we have produced
diverse sufficient and unanswered Instances in our Treatise entitled, The
Accuser of our Brethren cast down; and particularly his false construction on
G. F's words, viz. [Do not make Bargains with that which is out of the Truth]
On which W. R. concludes a design of Imposition, and so far as in G. F. lies to
obstruct Friends from bargaining with such whom he condemns, as having no right
to bargain, buy or sell, until they answer by Condemnation; or else, that his
meaning was, that G. F. would not have Friends discourse with such, nor yet to
agree about any orderly Conference, in order to a Reconciliation or Hearing of
Differences, etc. concluding it must be one of these two meanings, because a
third he could not think of, as the matter is fully treated on in our said
Treatise, Accuser, p. 146, 147, 148, 149, 150, etc. in which W. R's judgment,
and both his supposed Meanings are proved untrue. But still, to aggravate the
matter against G. F. he says, He has used the utmost of his endeavors to
obtain a Meeting with him for such an end (that is, for a hearing of matters
face to face) at several times since his last being in Bristol in the year
1677. and it will not be condescended to, (says he) p. 39, 40. This still the
more confirms the Complaint against him, viz. his Printing against G. F. (yea,
judging and condemning him without hearing the matters face to face, for which
he is condemned; which is an extradicial and injurious proceedure, and grand
Mark of Apostasy so to do, according to W. R's own judgment. And his pretense,
That such a Meeting will not be condescended to, will not excuse the fact, that
is, his judging and censuring a Person unheard in his own defense, etc. as a
grand Mark of Apostasy. He might have had patience, and rather waited an
opportunity for meeting with G. F. than have condemned him in Print in diverse
things, unheard in his own defense, and that on his own false Suggestions,
Meanings and Constructions) contrary to his own Doctrine, which is become his
own Self-condemnation.

. 3. Now wherein does the Pen-man's false Suggestion and Vnchristian-like
Treatment consist, to prove him an Impious Prevaricator, or downright Forger,
as W. R. terms him? p. 41. See how he attempts proof, in these words, viz.

I shall at present cite only a few Instances thereof in his own words, (quoth
he) viz. p. 73. His main work is still to invalidate the Authority and Sentence
of the true Church. Page 87. Which answers and confutes W. R. in opposing
outward Directions, Methods and Forms relating to Church Government. Page 88.
His principal Objection against outward Orders, Prescriptions, Sentences,
Decrees, Form of Church Government, Discipline, etc. P. 91. His gainsaying and
general Objections against us in relation to Church Government and Order
amongst us the People called Quakers. P. 261. Which answers his general
opposition to outward Order, Form and Discipline. [Thus has W. R. cited our
words by pieces.]

Now if it be made appear, that these things are justly laid to W. R's charge
from his own words and sense thereof, I hope he will see cause to be ashamed of
his clamor of false Suggestion, impious Prevaricator, etc. In order to which I
thus directly proceed:

First, That his work has been to invalidate the authority and sentence of the
true Church: On Mat. 5. and chap. 6. he says, Wherein there is not the least
tittle to countenance this sentence, That the positive Sentence or Decision of
the Church in matters of Conscience, may be obligatory on Believers, as in the
third part of his Christian-Quaker, p. 64. And his contest against those, who
(he says) have approved a Plea for such a Church Government as claims a power
of deciding matters relating to Conscience and outward things, on occasion of
Differences about worldly Estate; and that others ought to obey such Decisions,
which says he) in its natural consequence has (as we take it) no less tendency
than to claim Power over our Properties as well as Consciences, as in the first
part of his Christian-Quaker.

[ Note; A sad, but fallacious consequence, detected in our Treatise, Accuser,
from page 53, to p. 76.]

Is it not plain, that W. R. has here endeavored to invalidate the authority
and sentence of the true Church (by us pleaded) if neither obligatory on
Believers in matters of Conscience, nor in outward things? Or if the Church may
not be allowed a Power of making decisions in matters of difference, either
relating to Conscience or outward Estate, according to Mat. 18.17. and 1 Cor.
6. of what validity is the authority, sentence or power of the Church with W.
R? What Is more plain against him than his own words before recited?

Secondly, That he has opposed and objected against outward Orders, Forms,
Discipline, Prescriptions, Sentences, Decrees, his Gainsaying and general
Objections and Opposition to outward Order, Form and Discipline relating to
Church Government, etc. see how he argues the case against outward Orders,
Prescriptions, Sentences, Decrees, etc. under the new Covenant, viz. because
the Apostle's labor was to draw the outward Jew off from the observation of
their outward Ordinances, to the Word and Law in the heart; and because the new
Covenant was not to be like unto the old; he therefore appeals To every
Ingenious and Impartial Reader, whether it can consist with the tenor of the
new Covenant for ANY to attempt the establishment or giving forth of outward
Orders, Prescriptions, Sentences or Decrees, to be a Bond upon the Consciences
of those who have believed in the Everlasting Light, especially those of the
Gentiles stock, his Chr. Qua. part 1. p. 73. How now William? Is not here
general Opposition, etc. detected and answered in our said Treatise, Accuser,
etc? p. 88, 89.

Another Instance is where W. R. says, viz. We have no ground either from the
Word of the Lord, the appearance of Christ, or from the Scriptures of Truth,
since Christ's appearance in the flesh, to expect that any should be invested
with Power from on high to establish such things relating to the Conscience (i.
e. outward Orders, Prescriptions, Sentences, Decrees, as before) much less that
the Children of Light under the new Covenant should be led by the eternal
Spirit and Word in the heart unto such Conformity; his Chr. Quaker, part 1.
page 75.

What say thou yet William to these plain Instances out of thy own great
Book? Surely had thou but taken a more strict and serious notice of them, as
plainly cited in our Treatise, thou would not have charged any of us with
false Suggestion or Forgery, in representing as if thou had wrote against
outward Orders, Forms, Discipline. This is no Forgery nor Prevarication
(William)* Peruse thy great Book a little better, with our Observations upon it
in our said Treatise: Consider in calmness, if thou may not be ashamed thus
to evade and deny thy own words? and of thy clamor, and saying, That not a
word is cited, nor yet can be, out of any thing thou have written, that may
carry such an import, viz. as if thou had wrote against outward Orders,
Forms, Discipline, etc. in a general way, p. 41. Thou writest That in one Book
which thou denyest the plain import of (as well as the matter) in another,
saying and unsaying. Be ashamed therefore, and also of thy roaring and belching
out such Slanders and Falsehood also, as The impious prevaricating Penman --
does not quote any sentence of mine confuted, etc. p. 42. What have thou done
less than wrote against outward Orders, Forms, Discipline, etc? What means thy
saying before, That we have NO GROUND either from the Word of God, Christ or
Scriptures, to expect that ANY should be invested with Power from on high to
establish such things (as before?) Is not here general Opposition, both to such
things and to such a Conformity?

Please to review another instance or two of thy Opposition, as before, viz.

1 st, Where in the Title Page of the 3d part of thy Christian-Quaker, where to
the inward Government of Christ thou opposest visible persons being invested
with power from Christ to execute outward Laws, Prescriptions, Orders, Edicts
or Decrees in an outward Form of Government visible, etc. See now how general
thy opposition is, and detected in our Treatise, Accuser, p. 117, 118, 119, to
p. 137.

2 dly, The comparison before-cited between the Pope, who is a visible man, in
accounting himself invested with Power to execute outward Laws, Edicts and
Decrees, on the one part, and the Penman and some of his Brethren on the other
part; herein, thou say, thou placest not much difference between them, etc.
p. 18. of thy 7th part. Who can here reasonably understand thee otherwise, than
that thou opposest the Doctrine or Principle it self, as well as the Pope, viz.
That any visible man is invested with Power from Christ to execute outward
Laws, Edicts and Decrees under Christ's Government, lest thou should resemble
the Pope. For we may rationally take it for granted in those things, doctrines
or principles wherein thou comparest the Pope and any of us, thou would be
looked upon as of a contrary mind and judgment, that thou might not be thought
like the Pope in any thing whereof thou condemnest others, as either like him,
or as not much differing from him, otherwise thy comparisons or similitudes do
condemn thy self as well as others, whom thou smitest at. And so, if thou
countest it Popery or resembling the Pope, to say, That a visible man or men
are invested with power from Christ to execute (or put in practice) any outward
Laws, Edicts or Decrees under Christ's Government, then we must take thee as
saying (and as we have understood thee) That no visible man or men are so
invested with Power from Christ to execute outward Laws, etc. Which still shows
thy oppositions and objections before rehearsed, and clears thy opponent from
the foul Imputations of Impious Prevaricator, down right Forger, Impious
Prevaricating Penman, etc. and thy self a notorious Slanderer therein, as well
as shows thy inadvertency and overly shuffling, and foully slubbering over
matters under debate and controversy, and with what blunt and dull tools and
weapons thou art toiling and fighting.

Howbeit, we may hear W. R. a little further, in his attempts to clear himself,
and prove his charge of false Suggestion, Impious Prevaricator, etc. he
alleges chiefly two things, viz.

1st, That he owns the Government of Christ in his Church, knowing that it is
his right to govern his Church; which W. R. also confesses, The Penman
signifies he understands by Church Government.

Observe by the way; this is general, and not an Answer sufficient to clear
him; 'twill not do his business. Against whom did he allege this, when we
never questioned Christ's Government in his Church? But the Penman and his
Friends ( viz. the peaceable People called Quakers) own Christ's Government,
both in the inward and in the outward parts of it, both as he governs and rules
immediately by his Spirit, and instrumentally by his faithful Servants invested
with power and wisdom from him, as before explained; which I find not that W.
R. has owned with any consistency or clearness, but has appeared very
inconsistent, opposite and frequently contradictory both to us and to himself in
the matter, saying and unsaying (first in one Book, then in another) as is
fully evinced in our Treatise, entitled, The Accuser, etc. (as from p. 83, to
p. 91. and from p. 204, to p. 227.) and also in this.

2 dly, He alleges, that he has testified, That the Apostles labors were to
establish the Churches in the Faith and in the Power, leaving them so
established, to be in the practice of THAT FORM which the Power either had or
should lead them into. Moreover, (says W. R.) My proceedings in the Marriage
of two Daughters within three years last past, and frequent concern amongst
Friends in taking care that no proceedings in Marriages may be permitted in any
such private Methods as may be scandalous to Truth, shows my practice and
principle to be otherwise -- And indeed I can in Truth say, That I never had a
thought entered in my Breast, that OUTWARD ORDER, Methods, Forms and Discipline
were not to be exercised, and proceeded in Who must so exercise and proceed in
them if no visible man or men be invested with Power from Christ to execute
them, or put them in practice?
under the Government of Christ, according as the Spirit of the Lord should
direct and guide, p. 42. [Thus far W. R]

Observe; He has here given a very fair and ample concession to Truth in words,
viz.

1st, To the Apostles labors for the Churches establishment in the Faith and
in the Power.

2dly, To the practice of that Form which the Power should lead them into.

3dly, To his care in the Marriage of his two Daughters, and others, that NO
Proceedings in Marriages may be permitted in any such private Methods as may be
scandalous to Truth.

4thly, To outward Order, Methods, Forms and Discipline, that they are to be
exercised and proceeded in under Christ's Government, according as his spirit
directs and guides.

Are they so? A fair confession! Had he always kept to this method and
language, and so been consistent with himself, the Controversy had been in a
narrow compass. But though he seems seriously to say, That he never had a
thought entered his breast, that outward Order, Methods, Form and Discipline
were not to be exercised and proceeded in under the Government of Christ, I
query, (on his contradiction) how they should be exercised and proceeded in
under Christ's Government in his Church, if so be it cannot consist with the
tenor of the new Covenant for any to give forth outward Orders, Sentences,
Decrees, etc? Or if Christ does invest none with Power from on high to
establish such things relating to Conscience (as outward Order, Methods, Forms,
Discipline, etc?) Or if no visible Persons be invested with power from Christ
to execute outward Laws, Prescriptions, Order, etc? How then are outward Order,
Methods, Forms and Discipline to be exercised and proceeded in under Christ's
Government? And who are to exercise and proceed in them, if not visible
Persons? May not they declare and practice outwardly what they have received
from Christ inwardly? How then shall the Law go forth of Sion, and the Word
from Jerusalem? But if he grants that some persons are made instrumental under
Christ's Government, to give forth good outward Methods, Forms, Order,
Discipline, etc. but not to be a bond on the Consciences of others who have
believed in the everlasting Light: This appears contradictory again: ( William,
was thy proceedings in the Marriage of two Daughters, and thy care that Truth
might not be scandalized, no bond upon thine or their Consciences?) How are
outward Methods, Forms, Order and Discipline then to be practiced and proceeded
in under Christ's Government? Must they be so practiced, exercised and
proceeded in by Believers, without Conscience, or without Obligation, or being
binding upon their Consciences? Strange Doctrine, loose and confused, and not
consistent with any Religious tender Conscience toward God or Christ, which
requires all to be done in his name, and to his glory.

But after all our Opposers variations, inconsistencies and whirlings, he is
fled to this Refuge, or rather Subterfuge, viz. That his writing shows dislike
to Man's Pretense to establish outward Orders, relating to matters of
Conscience, as the Order of the Gospel, or to take upon him the giving forth of
any outward Rules, Page 41.
etc. relating to Faith and Discipline in the Church, with intent that they
should become a Bond upon others to submit thereto, further than from a
Recommendation unto the Conscience, a service may be seen therein, according to
the measure of Light given, etc. page 41.

Observe, 1 st, This censures only MAN's PRETENSE to establish outward Orders
relating to Conscience, etc.

2dly, Man's taking upon him to give forth any outward Rules in Faith or
Discipline in the Church, with intent they should become a Bond upon others, to
submit further than (from a Recommendation to the Conscience) a service MAY be
seen therein, according to the measure of Light given, etc.

Whereupon it is to be noted, first, That this does not oppose the Spirit of
Christ, making use of man or men, as instrumental to establish or give forth
outward Orders, Rules, etc. relating to Conscience, Faith or Discipline in the
Church, to be submitted unto.

2 dly, Nor such outward Orders, Rules, etc. as a service may be seen in,
according to the measure of the true Light given. But only a dislike to MAN's
PRETENSE and TAKING UPON HIM therein. Which I understand is intended, as
without the true Spirits Guidance. Which appears still to be an Abatement and
Extinuation of his more general reiterated Opposition and Noise against ANY
giving forth outward Orders, Prescriptions, etc. or being invested with Power
from Christ to execute outward Laws, Orders, etc. under Christ's inward
Government, because the new Covenant and its Law is inward. For now he only
opposes Man's Pretense and Taking upon him in these cases; and who must be
Judge that he is but a Pretendor, and an Actor in his own will, if the Rules,
Directions or Laws he declares or gives out be in themselves Honest, Lawful and
Just, yea Convenient and Needful, not of Man, nor by the Will of Man? Were not
this to judge of Spirits without outward evidence or proof against them? But if
our Opposer would place the Controversy against some Rules, Orders, etc. among
us, as being in themselves either unjust, unlawful or dishonest, and could make
sufficient proof thereof, that would both greatly narrow and soon determine the
Controversy: For that can be no good nor true Spirit that gives forth bad or
unjust Laws, otherwise we have no reason to give credit to him in his bitterly
smiting with words of hatred against any Men or Persons among us, whilst
speaking, ministering or acting things just, lawful or honest, and needful, as
bound in Conscience to declare and advise others to practice, (and which he
must grant them Liberty both to speak and act, or else he will miserably interfer
with his pretended Liberty of Conscience) Seeing whatsoever things are honest,
just and of good report, are to be thought on and practiced.

That W. R's great Book aforesaid (as it is against R. B's Book for
Church Government) is against Church Government, so far as it relates to an
outward Form of Church Government, outward Order, Rules, Methods, etc. And this
is no Prevarication, as now he renders it, as is evident from diverse passages
before recited, page 42.
and by himself frequently contradicted.

. 4. Also, it is a manifest falsehood, where W. R. says, That the Prevaricating
Penman does not quote any Sentence of his, confuted by his asserting, (in a
Paper dated London, 26th of the 3d Month, 1673.) That God has in his Wisdom
afforded those Helps and Governments in the Churches, which are not to be
despised, being in subjection to Christ the one Head and Lawgiver, etc. [This
was signed by W. R. among other Friends] page 42. If no visible Persons be
invested with Power from Christ to execute outward Laws, Orders, etc. in an
outward Form of Church Government; Or if it be Popery, or like the Pope, or
inconsistent with the New Covenant so to do, (as he has insinuated) what and
where are those Helps and Governments, which God in his Wisdom has afforded in
his Churches, in subjection to Christ? Are no visible Persons instrumental
therein by the Power of Christ? Or are they Helps and Governments, or helpers
in Government without visible Persons? Were Apostles, Prophets, Teachers,
Elders, Overseers, etc. in the Christian Churches no visible Persons, or not so
endued with Power from Christ to be helpers in the Government? See 1 Cor. 12 28.

I confess I know not how to reconcile our Opposer to himself in these matters,
no more than I can find Reason or Proof for his black Charges of Impious
Prevaricating Penman; Oh Impious Prevaricator! perverse and hard Heart;
qualified like a proud Prelate; The Pen-man's Iniquity; angry Waspish Pen, etc.
[Thus he.] I must needs say, he is far more loud in his Censures than in's
Proofs.

If our Opposer did impartially consider and compare William Penn's Address to
Protestants, quoted by him, he would see there is no Lash to the Penman (as he
falsely affirms) seeing W. P. grants, that the one Shepherd may have many
Servants, p. 44. And on 2 Cor. 4.1, 2. He further says, Here is the utmost
Imposition the Apostle makes use of; He requires not men to receive him without
Evidence, etc. p. 44. No more do we, whom Christ has called forth in his
Service and Ministry, in this his day, who by the manifestation of Truth,
commend our selves to every man's Conscience in the sight of God, having
renounced the hidden things of Dishonesty, etc. Here Is no cause to complain for
want of Evidence, or of Imposition without Evidence, in plainly discovering or
showing the hidden things of dishonesty. Truth in its manifestation, both in
the Ministry and in the Hearers Conscience, is Evidence, both against what is
Dishonest, and for what is Honest: God would not have Men blind in their Duty,
their own Negligence and Prejudice is cause of blindness. Nor has this Person
convicted us of pleading for or setting up Imposition without Evidence in the
Conscience, or of Imposing a blind Obedience, or putting any Persons thereupon;
No, my very Soul is against that. And though W. P. also has writ against
Imposition without Conviction; the Penman seems to have no other sense, nor
does it follow that he is either against Church Discipline, outward Order or
Form of Church Government (but for these) in the Church of Christ and Christian
Societies; he being Principl'd for the true Church, having Power from Christ to
give Judgment, spiritual Censures and Sentences against all dark Spirits that
sow Discord and make Division, and against all ungodly, loose, disorderly and
scandalous walking and walkers under profession of Truth. I Will adventure to
quote William Penn's Address to Protestants, to show his Principle and Sense in
these matters: In page 214. he says, No Scripture-Church-Discipline is hereby
oppugned or weakened: Let not the Sentence end in Violence upon the Conscience
unconvinced. Let whosoever will expound or determine, so it be according to true
Church Discipline, which can be exercised on them only, who have willingly
joined themselves in that Covenant of Union, etc. P. 215. Let us observe what
sort of Church Government the Apostle recommends; Avoid foolish Questions and
Contentions, etc. A man that is an Heretic after the first and second
Admonition, reject, etc. And on Phil. 3.15. He did not say, You shall be Fined,
Pillaged, Excommunicated, and flung into Prison, if ye be not of our mind. P.
216. on 2 Timothy 2.22, 23, 24, 25. Here is both Faith and Government, Religion
and Duty, all that becomes us toward God, our Brethren, our Neighbors, yea,
our Opposers and Enemies. And W. P. in his Brief Examination and State of
Liberty Spiritual, he does more particularly explain and clear the Point, to
Friends, first in his Epistle, saying, Christ's Liberty is obtained through his
Cross; they that would be his Freemen must be his Bonds-men, and wear his
blessed Yoke: His Liberty is from Sin, not to Sin; to do his will, not our own.
And secondly, he speaks farther to it in the said Examination.

Observe; Here W. P. pleads not for a Liberty of Conscience, in opposition to
true Church Government, Discipline or Order, but to those outward Penalties,
Persecutions and Punishments, corporal and pecuniary, mentioned and opposed by
him and the rest of us, which is no Liberty to make Division or Discord in the
Church of Christ or Society of Believers,

. 5. To the Question, Whether the Church of Christ has Power in any cases,
that are matters of Conscience, to give a positive Sentence and Decision, which
may be obligatory upon Believers? To this R. B. answers affirmatively, SHE
HAS, Anarch. p. 48. And,

Whereas R. B. pleaded for the Church of Christ having Power in SOME CASES of
Conscience to give a positive Sentence or Decision, which may be obligatory
upon Believers. (To this W. R. says) Which clearly shows to us R. B 's meaning
to be, That in some cases the Consciences of Believers ought to be bound by the
positive Sentences of others. (To which he adds) Without leaving any Liberty
for a Believer to refuse to submit on the account of not seeing it his duty to
submit. This meaning and Government (says W. R.) over Believers, we take to be
contrary to the Principle of Truth and Liberty we have in Christ Jesus, etc. p.
44.

Herein he appears both unfair in his citation, and mistaken in his
construction: For 1 st, The [ some cases] intended, (wherein a positive
Judgment or Sentence from some Members or Believers is binding upon others) are
such Cases, Wherein only the Truth, the Spirit of God does give the Judgment
through some or other in the Church of Christ. The only proper Judge of
Controversies in the Church, is the Spirit of God, and the power of deciding
solely lies in it (says R. B.) Anarch. page 66. As also, That God has
ordinarily in communicating his Will under his Gospel, employed such whom he
made use of in gathering his Church, and in feeding and watching over them,
though not excluding others. Thus R. B's Anarchy of the Ranters, p. 67, 68.
Observe here, that he places the Judgment or Sentence (as binding, and to be
submitted unto by others) professing the same Faith) on the Truth, the Spirit
of God, the Will of God.

2 dly, And therefore the Judgment is not placed upon any Imposition of
Government over Believers, contrary to the Principle of Truth or Liberty that is
in Christ Jesus; for the Judgment of Truth, or of the holy Spirit, which unites
in one Mind and Judgment, cannot be contrary to that Principle, nor without
evidence in the Conscience for conviction to oblige, and the Conscience thus
obliged is not without true sight, sense or knowledge of duty therein, because
it is Conscience obliged, not a blind affection. So it is not to impose a blind
Submission, though some's want of persuasion may probably proceed from their
being hardened (through Rebellion) as R. B. intimates, Anarch. p. 67. And their
contradiction in that case will not excuse them from being guilty of disobeying
God, because it is from his Spirit the sentence proceeds; and it is their duty
both to see, receive and submit to what is justly required. The intent of the
Spirit of God in giving forth Judgment or Sentences through his Servants (to
end Controversy, etc.) does not bespeak or intend any design of such
Imposition, as to enforce any upon a blind Submission or Obedience, in such a
hardened Condition; for the Spirit of Christ strives with them to open their
Eyes, and enlighten their Understandings, that they may see and know in their
own Consciences first, their Duty, and then submit in what is according to the
will of God, being the judgment of his Spirit, which makes its way with its own
evidence to the Consciences and Hearts of Persons, if not wholly hardened
through Rebellion against God's Spirit in themselves: For the Testimony of the
Lord is sure, making Wise the Simple. The Commandment of the Lord is pure,
ENLIGHTENING the Eyes, Psalm. 19.

3 dly, Then what power or freedom can any Minister or Servant of Christ have,
to leave any liberty for a believer to refuse submission to the judgment of the
Spirit of Christ in his servants or believers where Christ leaves none? or to
grant that he may not see it his duty to submit, and thereupon to refuse when
the spirit of Christ (who knows the Creatures capacity) gives the Judgment, and
requires Submission? There Is no just ground nor pretense for such Indulgence,
which tends to Rebellion and Ranterism, but rather for the Servants of Christ
to be faithful and steadfast in their Testimony and Judgment, which they know is
both in it self Just, and proceeding from his Spirit. Whether it be by others
received or rejected: He that has an Ear to hear, let him hear what the Spirit
says unto the Churches; which does many times speak through Instruments as
formerly.

And further, it is neither a false sense, nor wicked construction, to say, That
our Opposer being for a Liberty for Believers to refuse to submit on account of
not seeing it their duty: Therefore, that Believers (who are members of
Christ's Church) may refuse submission to their Brethren in things that are in
themselves Just and Reasonable, according to the Law of Truth in the
Conscience, on pretense of not seeing it their duty, etc. I do sincerely
profess, I do not find a more natural construction that our Opposers own Words
(being without distinction) will bear, all material and precedent Causes and
Circumstances of this very point in Controversy considered.

For first; The Submission pleaded for by R. B. among Believers, and in the
Church, was to the Judgment and positive Sentence proceeding from the Spirit of
God or Christ in his Church and Servants.

Secondly; Our Adv^rsary's opposing the Church of Christ's having Power in any
cases of Conscience, to give positive Sentence or Decision, which may be
obligatory on Believers, rendering this a Government over Believers, contrary to
the Principle of Truth and Liberty in Christ Jesus: See Accuser, etc. from p.
62, to 81. When no other Submission is pleaded for, nor any other intended by
us, than to such Judgment or Sentence as originally proceeds from the Spirit of
Truth, which is agreeable to the will and mind of God. Now, does not our
Adversary's opposition tend to divide Believers and the Church of Christ, as
well as from a true sight and performance of their Duty, in cases wherein the
Spirit of Christ gives the Judgment (which must needs be just and reasonable.)
For to the Question, Whether the Church of Christ has Power in ANY CASES of
Conscience, to give positive sentence, which may be obligatory upon Believers?
R. B. Answers affirmatively, SHE HAS, Anarch. p. 48. To which W. R. replies,
This Government over Believers is contrary to the Principle of Truth and
Liberty in Christ Jesus. Does not this plainly imply, that in NO CASES of
Conscience a Believer is bound to submit to the positive sentence of the Church
of Christ, or other Members thereof, but that a Believer may refuse Submission,
On the account of not seeing it his Duty to submit. (This is W. R's great
pretense and supposition) and this [ in ANY CASES of Conscience] without
distinction. (The terms of the Question and Opposition before cited being
general:) Which supposed Blindness and Discord in Believers I cannot grant him
against any true or sincere Believers, who are faithful to Christ in their
measures of Grace received; such will neither want a sight of those Duties, or
things the Spirit of Christ teaches and requires of them; nor submission one
to another therein, but in humbleness of mind submit themselves one to another
in the fear of God, Rom 2 8. 1 Cor. 16.16. 1 These 5 12, 13, 14. Heb. 13 17. 2
Pet. 3.2.
Ephesians. 5.1.21. Here the Younger submits to the Elder, and all one to another,
being clothed with Humility; for God resists the Proud, but gives Grace to
the Humble, 1 Pet. 5.5. This Humility and Submission was among the Primitive
Christians, and was very commendable among them; and none but the Proud oppose
it. And farther, the Sentence, Judgment and Determination proceeding from the
Spirit of Christ in the midst of his Church, is Binding in Heaven and Earth;
and he that will not hear the Church (where Christ is in the midst) is to be
accounted as an Heathen Man. Moreever, our Lord Jesus Christ knows how much or
how little a burden to proportion and lay upon his sincere and true Followers,
from the greatest to the least of them, suitable to their Capacities: He knows
our Weaknesses, and is touched with the feeling of our Infirmities, and has
raised up a Spiritual fellow-feeling of one another states and conditions,
that we might bear each others Burdens, the strong to bear with and help the
weak, and so fulfill the Law of Christ.

But seeing our Opposer at length (to acquit himself) gives us this Concession,
page 45. viz. I do say, a Believer in Christ ought to submit to any reasonable
just Judgment (answering the Truth in the Conscience) when it relates to him,
let it spring from whom it will, I shall say the less in this point. But (
William) have thou been always of this mind? If thou have, thou art very
inconsistent in thy writing, and greatly wrongest thy self by
Self-contradictions; and then what signifies all thy opposing R. B. for
pleading a conscientious Submission in Believers to the positive judgment or
sentence, which (as he says) proceeds from the Spirit of God in some or other
of their Brethren in the Church of Christ? What amounts all thy work of
Opposition and Gainsaying unto? Now a Believer in Christ ought to submit to
any Reasonable just judgment, let it spring from whom it will. And sure, all
judgment proceeding from the Spirit of God (in any of his Servants) is just and
reasonable; for whatsoever is unjust, is not of God, but to be rejected: The
Controversy is not there.

. 6. Again (William) upon our words, viz. [God preserve his people from this
Libertine Spirit] thou falsely notest, That (by the Pen-man's discourse) a
Believer's refual to submit to the Church, on account of not seeing it his Duty
to submit, is the fruit of a Libertine Spirit, etc. p. 45.

[ A Believer's refusal to submit to the Church] is a begging the Question, and
fallacy; for I do not own that any true Believer will REFVSE to submit to the
Church of Christ in any thing that Christ, commands, or is in it self his just
duty toward God or his Neighbor [ on the account of not seeing it his duty]
is again a begging the Question. If it be his Duty and required of him by the
Spirit of God in his servants, the same spirit (if he minds it) quickly makes
an immediate discovery of it to (and impression on) his Conscience, it being
his duty both to see and submit to what Truth and Justice require of him; so as
the sincere and tenderhearted, though but weak in the Faith for a time, are
preserved on the one hand from Rebellion, and from Refusing that submission
which the Lord requires, and on the other hand from running into a blind
Obedience. For put case there be a little space of time, that one weak in the
faith sees not presently every thing that may be required by the Lord in his
People, as duty, he does not therefore REFVSE Submission, but waits patiently
on the Lord, to clear up his way, and reveal his duty therein; and though
whilst thus waiting for satisfaction and clearness, he is neither refusing nor
opposing that which he has not a clearness of judgment in. Want of sight, or
clearness in such cases of Conscience, is no just ground for Refusal, Rejection
or Opposition, no more than for any to act in a blind Obedience or ignorant
Devotion, without satisfaction in Faith or Conscience. Let but blind Opposition
and Refusal as well as blind Obedience be laid aside, and we shall have
quietness; for though neither be good, yet blind Opposition is the worst of the
two. For there is yet a Medium between Refusal and Active Submission, viz. A
WAITING passively and patiently until God reveal his will in this or that
particular thing required by him as duty.

Again, thou do both scornfully and fallaciously proceed against the Penman
in these words, viz. It Is plain to me, that he (reputing himself a
Church-Governour) is thirsting after such a sort of Subjects that may be
willing to follow his Track, though they know not whether it be right or wrong,
p 45.

I presume thou meanest my self, as that Penman that so affects being a
Governor, or so reputeth, as thou have before twitted the Penman with having
forgotten his low and mean Estate (telling him how the very conceit of being a
Governor in an outward Government, is very apt to puff up Persons of some sort
of Qualifications, page 25.) If thou intendest me herein, thou have taken wrong
measures, and have given me Scurrillous and Abusive Characters; and then thou
art grossly mistaken in thy judgment, That I thirst after such ignorant
Subjects, as thou importest. The Lord has raised me up to open peoples Eyes,
and to turn them from Darkness to Light; and God, the Righteous Judge, who
knows my heart, and whom I serve with my spirit in the Gospel of his Son, he
knows it is my delight in Humility, to serve him therein, and to see People
turned from Darkness to the true Light, and from their Ignorance and Error to
the knowledge of the Truth in the spirit and power of it in themselves, that
they may walk in the Path of Life, and be saved; and no otherwise to follow me,
than as they may see me walk therein. So knowing my Integrity and Humility in
the sight and presence of God, who has thoroughly searched and tried me, that I
affect neither Popularity nor Greatness, I do the less value thy Reproaches,
and all the bitter Invectives that thou can bring forth against me. My
innocent Life reigns over thy hatred, and shall outlive thy envy and scorn.

And as thou have laid a false foundation against the Penman, as judging him a
Person thirsting after such sort of ignorant Subjects, as before related; so
thy Superstructure raised by supposition is impertinent, trifling and
fallacious. For,

1 st, Where have any of us (whom thou smitest at) either from a Meeting
yearly, or elsewhere, in giving forth (as thou call them) certain
Sentences, Decrees and Orders (directed to the rest of the People called
Quakers) therewith signified to them, It Is your Duty to submit, whether you see
it your Duty or no? p. 45. I am sure, this is foreign to my (and my Brethrens)
Language and Intention. If it intends an active Obedience before men see their
real duty, which none can acceptably perform, nor is it my Principle to urge
them upon practice until their Eyes be opened to see their duty therein, yet
peoples present Ignorance of their Duty (when proposed or told them in the
spirit of our Lord Jesus Christ) is no warrant for them to oppose, refuse,
resist or reject it, but rather tenderly and quietly to weigh and consider of
it before the Lord, and wait in his Light till he reveal it, resolve the doubts
and remove the scruples.

2 dly, Moreover, that which has a tendency to Confusion, Rebellion and
Ranterism, was thy undervaluing the Authority of the Church of Christ in such a
Judgment or Decision given thereby as proceeds from the Spirit of God, page 45.
(for 'twas no other that R. B. argued for in the case) by thy pleading (in
opposition) for leaving a liberty therein for a Believer to refuse to submit on
the account of not seeing it his duty to submit, with other circumstances of
Looseness and Confusion, proceeding from thy opposite, loose confused Spirit of
Prejudice and Division: This has a tendency to Confusion, Rebellion and
Ranterism, which we placed not merely on a Non-submission or Forbearance of
Practice, for want of seeing it their duty to act therein. For it is possible
some Members may want a present sight in some things required by the Church of
Christ and his Spirit, and yet they not thence allow themselves a liberty to
Refuse submission, but rather to wait in their measures till God reveal his
mind therein, in which cases there is a tender sense and forbearance one to
another* and this does not tend to Confusion, Rebellion or Ranterism; but thy
plea for the leaving a liberty for Believers to refuse to submit to the
judgment and decision of the Church of Christ, and for the same insisting on
their not seeing it their Duty to submit, when the judgment of the Church of
Christ, pleaded for on our parts, is no other than what proceeds from his
Spirit, or Christ himself as being present in his Church. This thy Libertine
plea tends to divide the Church of Christ, and to leave Believers, (who are
Members thereof) in a liberty both of denying submission, and in an ignorance
or blindness concerning what the spirit of Christ in his Church may require of
them, which I cannot grant thee that any sincere Believer is either so to be
left in such a liberty of REFVSAL, nor yet remains in such Ignorance; for he
that will not hear the Church (where Christ is in the midst) is to be accounted
as an Heathen man. Therefore thy Plea tending to divide and make Believers
Heathen, is contrary to our Principle and Testimony received from the
beginning, which is, That Life answers Life: The Spirit of Truth receives its
own in men; every living true Member in some degree feels what proceeds from
its Life in other Members, though all Christ's Members are not come to the same
measure and degree of growth, strength and understanding, yet there is so much
inward sense and nearness in his Life and Faith, as preserves them from
Confusion, Rebellion and Opposition to one another, or to any thing the Spirit
of Christ says unto the Churches by any of them.

Thy putting and supposing Cases against us that are not, thy arguing from
Generals to Particulars, from Principles to Persons, from a Plea for the Church
of Christ (and its obliging Judgment proceeding from his Spirit) to reflect
upon particular Persons (as the Penman and his Brethren, John and George and
Stephen, page 45.
etc. p 45.) are empty, trifling and impertinent, and as vain and silly is the
Laughter and Scorn which thereupon thou supposest, and would stir up against
the Penman, and his Brethren, all grounded upon a false bottom, namely, thy
uncharitable and false sense and censure against the Penman, viz. That he is
thirsting after such a sort of Subjects that may be willing to follow his
Track, though they know not whether it be right or wrong: Which is so utterly
false (if thou intendest me) that such a desire never entered into my Heart; my
Soul abominates such a Principle as to lead People on in such blindness. Again,
I do not make the reason of my Discourse depend on a mere supposition, nor yet
on a bear affirmation, that I and my Brethren are the Church, and thou and
thine not; we are now on the defensive part, and thou art not able to unchurch
us; we may give testimony of our Faith, and to our sense of the presence of
Christ with us and among us, and of our continuance in Love and Unity in him,
and against thine and others Apostasy, and thou not able to confute us. The
reason of our Discourse (in the present Controversy) depends not on Persons,
but on undeniable Principles and Practices, agreeable both to divine Testimony,
Revelation and undeniable Evidence amongst men. And wherein any of us have been
moved of the Lord in his holy zeal to give positive Judgment, either concerning
Spirits, Persons or Practices, that appear not yet so evident to some as to us,
the day will make further discovery and declare it, and the Lord will appear
witness and evidence in the case. And thou shall then find, that thy Scorn, and
the Laughter and Scorn thou have supposed (and sought to stir up) against us,
will be turned into sorrow on thy part; and thou may be ashamed of thy scorn
and laughter, and of comparing our Treatment with the Papistical Parties
toward the Protestants, and telling of following the Pen-mans Papistical
Track, p. 46. All grounded on thy false sense before-cited, though to me all
thy Scorn, Laughter, false Comparisons and Rattles (thou know what I mean)
are all but like the Crackling of Thorns under a Pot. It Is observable, that in
thy Epistle to the Reader, etc. thou art for taking up a Lamentation for the
Apostasy of your Brethren, as thy pretense is: Now thou art for Scorn and
Laughter against them thou so censurest; yea, to the Presbyterians Laughter and
Scorn thou art exposing R. R. and for those Instances he gives for Deconesses
in the Gospel Times, p. 33. though this be a Truth, which many Protestant
Authors have confirmed, besides Paul's own commendation of their Sister Phebe,
whom he called, (...), Ministra, A Servant of the Church at Cenchrea, Romans
16.1, 2. There were Women-Deacons, who in their places did service in the
Churches, with respect to the Sick and Impotent, etc. But to return, one while
thou pretendest to pray for the Penman, That the Lord would mollify his hard
heart, p. 42. another while art for causing Scorn and Laughter against him
[Thus but in page 46.]

Thus thy hypocritical Lamenting, Praying and thy Scorning do much resemble thy
confused Work.

And what such things are they thou insinuatest against the Penman and his
Brethren? Of which thou say, Thou could soon lay a new Foundation to prove
him and his Brethren guilty of such things, as by his Rule would tend to
Confusion, Rebellion and Ranterism, and what not? p. 46. What things are those?
We expect no mercy nor favor from thee; thou have rendered us as obnoxious, I
think, as of thy self thou can. And this thy general and dark way of smiting
(with what things thou could prove the Penman and his Brethren guilty of, as
tending to Rebellion and Ranterism, without mentioning what things, is very
unfairly to raise great suspicion against us, and to render us highly Criminal,
Odious and Obnoxious, somewhat like the Treatment we had in those Abusive,
Scurrillous, Atheistical and Slanderous Pamphlets, styled, The Quakers Qu^bbles.

How now William! Is this thy Conscience, thy Charity, thy Christianity, thy
Love pretended? and the end of thy feigned Lamentation and Praying for us, thus
to abuse us, and cast dirt upon us, after this general implicit and suspicious
manner? Is not such deceitful, injurious and contradictory Dealing rather
contrary to common Morality and Civility amongst men?

Thy Prayer, conclusive of thy second Chapter, page 46. is mixed with as much
Falsehood and Envy (as the other stuff is with Scorn) in these words, viz.

The Lord preserve us all from following the Pen-man's uncharitable Papistical
Track, lest thereby we should not only merit the Indignation of God, but justly
be accused by men of understanding, of so much Delusion, Weakness or
Wickedness, as (considering our ancient professed Principles, and Practices)
might render us unworthy the favor of a true Protestant, a derision to the
Heathen, and a scorn to Fools themselves.

I am sure this Prayer appears not without Wrath and doubting; it is not offered
in Charity, nor with Holy Hands; it is more like a Cain's Sacrifice; it is to
slay the Christian and Protestant Reputation of him (and those) thou writest
against, to render him not only one that has merited the Indignation of God,
but one in a Papistical Track, unworthy the favor of a true Protestant, and so
obnoxious to the outward Penal Laws, seeing (by thy Words) If you should follow
his Track* you should SO merit, be SO justly accused and rendered, as thy Prayer
intimates. Herein thou do not only assume the place of a Judge over us
(contrary to thy own Principle, especially that in the Paper which thou have
exposed as E. B's to Judge no man under any Pretense whatsoever) But also thou
have set the Heathen to judge and deride such among us as (in thy account) go
from their ancient Principles and Practices, and such also to be a scorn to
Fools. But must the Heathen and Fools be such absolute Judges in
Church Affairs, as over Apostates, etc? Why do thou then so much contend
against and oppose R* B. for pleading the authority of the Church of Christ, as
having power in some cases of Conscience to give positive Sentence or Decision
obligatory upon Believers? Or why have pleaded a Liberty for a Believer's
refusing submission thereunto, on account of not seeing it his duty to submit?
Must the Heathen be allowed a greater Power and Clearness in positive Judgment
than the Church of Christ or Believers? But if the said Penman has rendered
himself so deluded, so weak or wicked, so unworthy the favor of a true
Protestant, such a derision to the Heathen and scorn to Fools, as thou do
import. Then it must needs be a great undervaluing to such a great and popular
Person of Knowledge and Parts (as thou would seem to be) so much to trouble
thy Head, and to spend so much time, toil, labor and charge (as thou have
done) against such an inconsiderable, weak, mean, contemptible Person (as thou
do represent the Penman) yet one whose writing does not show him a mere
Fool, (thou say) P. 45. It seems he is one who is but a little wiser or
better (in thy esteem) than a mere Fool. How lofty and high art thou? How
conceited and wise in thy own Eyes? God will abase thee, I am persuaded.

CHAP. V.
. 1. W. R's Trifling against the Penman about his own Concessions to Truth.
His abuse of the People called Quakers, as having such kinds of Declarations,
frequently published among them as are unsound (and of a Popish tendence) about
shutting out the Wisdom of all kinds, without distinction, and his now mincing
the matter reflecting about proving Negatives, and his shufling and shifting,
on his not mentioning Time, Place or Persons.. 2. About his mis-expressing
himself, how it might be excusable. W. R. can never come off clearly by those
Instances he gave in his Postscript, to prove his proceeding to Print,
Righteous. But his Fallacy still remains upon him, in that his chief Instance
of the printed Epistle of two Sheets, by Anne Whitehead and Mary Elson, not
Writ nor Printed till long after he had proceeded to Print; His Fallacy therein
made more and more notorious. 3. About the Tree of Knowledge: W. R's late
Doctrine rendering it good for Food; but now denying that he has written any
thing to show his own sense either way. His saying and unsaying, Fallacy and
Impertinency apparent in this point.. 4. Of his straining G. F's Words (about
setting up outward things) besides his Intention; His gross and reproachful
Construction; His dark smiting and suggestion against Preachers among the
Quakers, to render them exalted and imperious Imposers, WITHOUT GIVING A REASON
WHY, etc.. 5. His Story of Jealousies being entered Thousands against our
traveling Brethren, and what Jealousies incredible and unreasonable.. 6. About
the Tree of Knowledge again, Whether W. R. esteem it good for Food or not: He
still shifts and writes manifest untruth, in denying his own Words, to show
either opposition or assent to such Doctrine ( i. e. that it is good for Food.)
His fallacious Evasion and Impertinency returned more home and closely upon
him.. 7* Concerning Tithes. W.R's late Objection and loose Answer farther
examined, and the tendency thereof (and of what he now further says) for the
Payment of TITHES FREELY to the National Ministry, and now to any use
whatsoever, without regard to humane Institution or claim of divine Right. His
Apostasy and evading our ancient Testimony in this point; and his fallacious
Insinuations and Reflections made obvious.. 8. W. R. cannot clear himself of
his Erroneous Doctrine of Circumcision being a Christian Liberty, or in a
Christian Liberty, etc. which was a legal Bondage and Yoke, observed for a time
in submission to Moses's Law, and not to Christ's Doctrine, wherein was a
Christian forbearance, not Christian Liberty in the Practice. W. R's scorn and
falsehood about the LAITY, to render us Popish, etc.

. 1. TO thy occasion taken on the title Disaffection in the Contents of our
Treatise [viz. That if the Writer's words may be taken, to show the meaning of
his mind, then he is disaffected with thy very Concession to Truth, etc.] page
46. cap. 3. This is mere trifling and idle* Those Concessions of thine to the
Truth are so excepted, by being distinctly noted both in the Contents and Book,
as being Concessions to the Truth (in Confutation to thy self and much of thy
Book) which being thus plainly expressed by the Writer, thou can not justly
construe his Words, as showing his meaning to be that he is disaffected with
such Concession to Truth. This is an abuse to be sure.

Because that in our observation on the 5th Disaffection, we utterly denied and
judged as a falsehood and abuse to the People called Quakers, thy saying, That
these kinds of Declarations frequently published amongst the aforesaid People,
viz. Let us exclude the Reasoning, the Wisdom and the Jealousy, and let us
have an Eye to the Brethren; yea, to shut out the Wisdom and Reason of All
kinds, without Distinction, [according as thou relatest in thy
Christian-Quaker, part 1. Pref. p. 6. and p. 18, and 27.]

On our denying and judging this as a Falsehood, and horrid Abuse and
Scandalous, thou art pleased to reflect upon the Penman as very ignorant, void
of sound Argument, and Obnoxious to the censure of ingenious Readers, as being
in his own sense capable to prove any sort of Negatives whatsoever, p. 47.

That Is a falsehood William, the Penman has no such sense: But by the way
observe how unfairly thou art shifting here instead of proving thy Charge, That
these kinds of Declarations are frequently published amongst the aforesaid
People called Quakers. Now in thy last citation, where thou say, viz. I
intimate as if this Doctrine had been published amongst us, etc. p. 47. Here
thou mincest the matter, and leavest out the Words frequently, and the said
People, which do render the Fact more notorious and general, and the more
rational for us to deny it, and to judge it as thy gross abuse against the said
People, which is not to prove any sort of Negatives whatsoever; We first give
our Negative to thy Charge in the terms of it, then our Judgment: It concerned
thee to make it good then, and not to put us off with Flams and Jeers; and now
tell us, Thou did not mention either Time, Place or Person: At that rate it
may be a hard matter to prove Negatives against thee indeed. -- Though thy
charge be never so false, so long as thou can prevaricate, and also vary the
matter from a popular and publication, to a particular Person, Time and Place,
(and neither tell us who, when or where) -- as FROM these kind of Declarations
frequently published among the People called Quakers. TO this Doctrine had been
published amongst us: Yet I did not mention either Time, Place or Person, p. 47.
Like as to say, You must take all the matter upon my Credit: You must pin your
Faith upon my Sleeve: If you deny and judge what I say as an abuse, I have a
cunning way to shift it, instead of making probation. I can tell you, I did not
mention, Time, Place or Person: It Is void of sound Argument for you to go about
to prove any sort of Negatives, etc. But William, this kind of shifting, and
then retorting and scorning, will not gain thee Credit nor Reputation, in thy
mean and feeble attempts to prove the People called Quakers frequently under
such a kind of Ministry as is in it self Popish, and tending to Introduce
Popery it self (according to thy own Inference) that is, Ignorance instead of
Wisdom, Bondage instead of Freedom in Christ, Ignorance as the Mother of
Devotion, etc. Answered in our Treatise, ACCVSER, etc. p. 6, 7, 8, 9. And not
only so, but that some blind Zealots are Principled to have an Eye to the
Brethren instead of the Light in himself; as in thy Postscript to thy
Christian-Quaker. But we can as well and truly deny that such Declarations (as
before) are frequently published among the People called Quakers, and judge it a
horrid abuse and reflection on the said People, as we can deny that Jesuits
frequently Preach among them, which is also an Abuse of some, and which thy
Charge resembles. And it is no absurdity to prove Negatives in some cases,
either in Popular or Personal actions, if Testimonies of Eye and Ear witness
may be of any Credit. As for Instance:

The Question was put to a Meeting here in London (the greatest part being
ancient grave Friends) Where ever they heard such Doctrine preached among the
People called Quakers, as, To exclude or shut out Wisdom and Reason of all
kinds, without Distinction, and to have an Eye to the Brethren, instead of the
Light in themselves? And they never heard such Preaching, nor any such Doctrine
preached among the People called Quakers at all, either in City or Country,
much less frequently. And their (with many others) negative Testimony, may be
of credit in this case, else how should we answer those that falsely accuse us
with Jesuits frequently preaching among us, but by our negative Testimony from
our certain knowledge of those that do preach among us, that they are no such?
Put case any of our peaceable Meetings should by our Persecutors be charged
with committing a Riot at such a time* and place; We deny the Charge and
declare it to be utterly false, and produce evidence and proof sufficient and
credible, (in contradiction to it) that our Meeting at such a time and place
was in a peaceable posture, and nothing of violence or hurt done, offered or
threatened, etc. Here* we prove a Negative, that our Meeting was no Riot, by
proving the Affirmative, that it was Peaceable. And what is frequently preached
among us in our public Meetings is as public as they. And set case a Person
be falsely accused for committing Burglary at such a time and place, and he
produces sufficient Evidence, that he lodged at an Inn twenty or thirty or
forty Miles off at that very same time when the fact was done. Here he proves a
Negative, i. e. that he did not commit the fact.

. 2. To thy saying, viz. If in his sense I mis-express my self, then my meaning
shall not be taken to excuse the defect, p. 47. That Is not true; for would
thou be so low in thy Mind, and so ingenious as either to confess such
mis-expressing or defect, where we meet it, and clogg thee with it in thy
writings, and not be tenacious therein, it would the more excuse thee, and
shorten the Debate.

I do not at all find, that thou can come clearly off, as either a just or
righteous man in thy Allegations and Instances in thy Postscript, for thy
proceeding to print and publish thy great Book, by thy principal instance of
the printed Epistle of two Sheets by Anne Whitehead and Mary Elson, which thine
(when nigh printed) did occasion; for that could not be the occasion of thine,
when 'twas not in being till thine was almost finished in the Press. Thou
producest no Plea to clear thy self, but what is presupposed, anticipated and
waylaid in our said Treatise, page 26, 27. However, by thee impertinently
slighted as Impertinent. That the said Epistle was thy principal Instance for
thy so proceeding, is no false Assertion, as thou would make it, is evident
from thy own account, on which it is grounded: The matter is fully evinced in
our said Treatise, under the tenth Disaffection, from page 19, to page 37.

Thy alleging, Thou only assertedst Promulgation of the said Epistle, to show
that they were the first Publishers in Print, but not the first Printers. Of
what? That there are Divisions, etc? This will not clear thee, nor evince thy
Righteousness in proceeding to print and publish thy Book, on thy Instance of
the said Epistle of two Sheets, which on this occasion was chiefly thy concern
to evidence and mention, and that in pursuance of thy own Justification, to
prove thy Righteousness in proceeding to Print, which the other Instances given
by thee (about the publication of Divisions by Declaration by Manuscript) do
not answer nor seem to parallel, but that chief one of Printing. And what? the
said printed Epistle of two Sheets, though the greatest part of thy great Book
was printed before that was writ? To thy now confessing, That they (i. e. Mary
Elson and Anne Whitehead, etc.) were the first Publishers in Print, but not the
first Printers. Then their Publication could be no just plea nor instance for
thy proceeding to Print, as thou did. Thy not being the first Publisher, but
they, does neither excuse thy intention as Righteous, nor thy act of first
Printing: 'Twas the bulkiness of thy Book that prevented its first Publication,
and the smallness of theirs (though not writ till after a great part of thine
was printed) that did expedite its publication.

Thy saying, Thou only assertedst Promulgation of the said Epistle, is an
evasion: 'Twas in pursuance of thy pretense of Righteousness in thy proceeding
to Print, as well as to promulgate or publish thy Book of Divisions, that thou
gave that instance of the said Epistle being printed. And as a supplement in
thy Postscript, to what thou had writ in thy Preface and Introduction (which
thou judgedst might give sufficient satisfaction to every Impartial Reader) but
lest the Ignorance of any should be so great, as not from thence to perceive
the Righteousness of thy proceeding to Print, they might by these Instances in
thy Postscript, which therefore relate to the same proceeding that the Preface
and Introduction do: See, the case is plain, it is no evading it. Therefore thou
appearest not ingenious in thy Allegation, viz. He represents not the state of
the case aright; for my own words were these, viz. My Present proceeding to
Print (the word [Present] they leave out) which could not relate to any thing
more than the Postscript, because the very Postscript informs the Reader, that
All the Treatise, excepting the Postscript, Index and Errata, was then printed,
p. 49.

This will not render thee either a sincere or just man in thy proceeding (
William) we do not leave out the word Present in the citation of thy words; for
it is incerted in our citation of thy own words, relating both to thy Preface,
Introduction and Postscript, all alleged for thy present proceeding to Print,
and to evince the Righteousness thereof; And thou know in thy own
Conscience, that either thy Word [ PRESENT] must relate to more than thy
Postscript, or else thou wast very Impertinent and defective. If when in a
Postscript, by additional and supplemental Plea or Reasons to all that precedes
in thy Preface, thou art going about to make out the Righteousness (pretended)
of thy present proceeding to Print and publish Divisions; we must thereby
understand it not to relate to any thing more than thy Postscript. Then we must
take thy meaning to be, as if thou must have more plain and convincing Reasons
for thy proceeding to Print thy Postscript of but four Sheets, than for all the
rest of thy Book of near four score Sheets: And yet the plea in thy Postscript
appears to supply what thou have said in thy Preface, in Vindication of thy
publishing in Print thy Historical Relation, or great Book of Divisions. I
cannot perceive that thou have herein writ either Ingeniously, Conscientiously
or Consistently. And thou might have seen how thou wast aforehand obviated,
which might have prevented thy present impertinent Excuses and vain
Allegations, if thou had but taken serious notice of the following recited
passage in our Treatise, viz.

And further, If to evade the charge of Fallacy and Injustice, Deceit and False
cover laid on W. R. in this matter, Accuser, etc. p. 26, 27.
he flies to his Grammatical sense of his Words, and pleads his Intention, etc.
as thinking himself safe in both.

1 st, We say, His present proceeding to Print cannot in reason be confined to
his Postscript, wherein the Words are, nor answer the SOME of the People called
Quakers he tells of, that have judged him wicked, as for intending to Print
against Friends, Post. p. 25. (whom he undertakes to answer in that case) nor
vindicate him as to his Historical Relation, (mentioned in the same page) which
includes his Book, which therefore cannot be confined to, nor included in his
Postscript.

2 dly, The Reasons he gives in his Postscript, to prove himself Righteous in
his proceeding to Print, cannot relate only to that his Postscript, but to his
whole Book, because they are added for a supplement to his Preface to the
Reader, and his Introduction to the first and fourth parts of his Treatise;
which Preface and Introduction concern his whole Book or Historical Relation
(as he calls it.) And which Preface and Introduction he thinks may give
sufficient satisfaction to every impartial and unprejudiced Reader: But lest
the Ignorance or Blindness of any should be so great, as not from thence to
perceive the Righteousness of his present proceeding to Print, etc. he gives
his additional Reasons and Instances in his Postscript; the chief whereof is
that relating to the two printed Sheets, which came to his Hands the 8th of
November, 1680. as aforesaid, wherein the supplemental Reason given, was more
clearly to evince the pretended Justness of his proceeding to Print, than he
had done before in his said Preface or Introduction, as that it was even to
prevent such great Ignorance and Partiality as would hinder any from perceiving
his Righteousness in proceeding to Print. [which therefore must needs relate to
more than his Postscript.]

And William, I find no Contradiction, as thou accusest, between our
signifying, That the two Sheets aforesaid was the Principal Instance for thy
proceeding to print and publish thy Book, (that is, to prove thy Righteousness
pretended therein, as 'twas made appear from thy own Words) AND signifying that
thou declaredst a far higher necessity, i. e. a great concern of Conscience,
etc. That the Epistle of two Sheets, aforesaid, was thy principal Instance,
Reason or Allegation, to prove the Righteousness (pretended) of thy proceeding,
is no downright falsehood (as thou falsely renderest it) but true; for 'twas
CHIEFLY thy concern to give that Instance of the said Epistle after other
Instances of less concern, and less to the purpose of Printing, etc. And that
thou also placedst a higher necessity on thy proceeding, than the said two
Sheets, is also true: The first was produced as a principal instance or cause,
to evince the Righteousness of thy proceeding to print an Historical Relation,
etc. The second was thy own Assertion for the necessity of thy proceeding,
pretending it for the clearing of thy Conscience, etc. Such necessity
(pretended) of proceeding was higher than thy said Instance or Reason for it,
as between an Immediate necessity of doing a thing, and an outward Reason or
Instance for doing it. Where Is now the Contradiction? If there be any, it must
be thy own, in placing such occasion on the said two Sheets, as to be so
chiefly concerned at them, and yet a more immediate necessity of Conscience,
etc. before that. The Premises of this point considered, in reference to thy
being so chiefly concerned, to instance the said Epistle of two Sheets, thy
Charge that a downright Untruth is the Subject occasioning his Words, p. 49.
(which thou call Drollery) falls to the Ground as a downright Falsehood.
That which thou call Drollery (in conclusion of that Detection we made of
thy unrighteous and fallacious Vindication of thy proceeding to Print, etc.) I
am persuaded it hit thee, and touched thee, as in a way of answering a Fool
(that is, such a one as is highly conceited, and wise in his own Eyes)
according to his Folly. And how natural and suitable that passage (thou call
Drollery) is to the subject and occasion given on thy part, unto which it
relates, I leave to the impartial and ingenious Reader to consider and judge,
upon perusal of the whole matter concerning that point, as it is handled in our
said Treatise, entitled, The Accuser of our Brethren cast down, under the 10
th Disaffection; from p. 19. to p. 37.

Unto all which ( William) thou have but given an Impertinent Fling, and the
sly GO-BY to the substance, even the most part thereof.

. 3. Whereas upon thy Confusion and Contradiction to many Friends about the
Tree of Knowledge, that God forbad Man to eat of: The Question was put
concerning thy self, thus, viz. What kind of Preacher would he make, if he
should tell People, The Tree of Knowledge is good for Food; the Tree of
Knowledge is not good for Food? This Question thou take to be grounded on a
downright Falsehood; for say thou, I never asserted that the Tree of
Knowledge was good for Food, and that it was not good for Food; neither have I
written any thing to show my own sense either way, p. 50.

No! That Is strange; and a gross and manifest Untruth and Shuffle, I am sure:
And I may ask thee, if thou have not belyed thy own Conscience in these Words?
How dare thou now utter in Print, that thou have not written any thing to
show thy own sense either way, i. e. Whether the Tree of Knowledge be good for
Food, or not good for Food? Have thou not (in the first place) written to show
thy own sense, That it is good for Food, by thy plainly opposing the contrary
Doctrine, as preached by diverse among us: ( viz. That the Tree of Knowledge was
not good for Food.) Have not thou plainly objected against this Doctrine?
Instancing, That a Father may command his Child not to eat an Apple; his
Rebellious eating no Argument to prove the Apple in it self not good for Food:
And we know not on what Foot of Truth any one can assert that the Tree of
Knowledge is not good for Food. And to prove the Tree of Knowledge in it self
good for Food, thou also did cite John 17. This is Life Eternal to know thee
the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent. Thence infering, so
that Knowledge is the way to Life. But did God forbid the knowledge of himself,
and of his Son, to Man in Innocence, when he forbad him to eat of the Tree of
Knowledge? Did thou not here plainly enough show thy sense, That the Tree of
Knowledge was good for Food? And does not this imply that the Serpent was more
kind to Man in moving to eat of it, than his Maker was in forbidding him?
There Is no need of thy adding [ as in it self] for the Tree is it self. With
what Conscience then durst thou adventure not only to say, Thou never
assertedst that the Tree of Knowledge was good for Food, but also, that thou
have not written any thing, to show thy own sense either way. Oh, wonderful! I
somewhat admire at such a manifest gross Untruth, that thou should undertake
in several Pages, with several Objections, to oppose a Doctrine, as thou did
that of the Tree of Knowledge not being good for Food: And now to flam us off,
with telling us, That thou have not written any thing to show thy own sense
either way? Have thou not here played Legerdemain, to write so plainly in
opposition to another's Position, and yet tell us, Neither have thou written
any thing to show thy own sense either way? For shame leave off such
Impertinent Scribbling, and spend thy time better in the Creation. But yet what
reason for the Question, viz. What kind of Preacher would thou make, if thou
should tell People, the Tree of Knowledge is good for Food, the Tree of
Knowledge is not good for Food? For the first, thou have shown thy sense
plainly, however thou would now smother it: The latter appears deducible from
thy finding out a Salvo, or Plea, for some that may declare, That the Tree of
Knowledge is not good for Food; for thou would not be understood to reflect
on all that have used that Expression, because thou questionest not but many
have so expressed themselves -- to show that if we should feed upon, or admire
any excellent Qualification or Endowment, and not have the Eye of our mind
Chiefly unto the Giver, we might then come to a loss; See the Second Part of
thy Christian-Quaker, p. 28, 29. Thus have thou excused the Doctrine before
opposed by thee, viz. That the Tree of Knowledge is not good for Food.

. 4. As for G. F's Epistle against the envious Spirits, and Persecutors of
those who could not observe their outward Things, Traditions, etc. thou do
much insist on these Words, viz. They that do so, viz. set up outward things,
gather People to themselves, not unto God, etc. If these be truly cited, G F.
best knows his own Intention, and in point of Justice ought rather to have been
enquired of, as to have been his own Interpreter, than to have been brought
forth in Print under the disguise of a prejudicial Interpretation and straining
his Words, and turning his sense besides whatever was intended in them, or by
him. And what have thou got by the said Citation, thou have so much insisted
on? If thou strainest the Litteral sense thus, That no outward things are to be
set up, nor outward Order practiced in the Church of Christ. Thou will therein
farther interfer with thy self, having already granted outward Form and Order,
etc. to be in the Church of Christ, yea, even the case of Marriage; as what
care thou tookest about the marrying thy two Daughters, etc.

But G. F's intention and sense in the words of his said Epistle, is by another
hand fully spoken to, and therefore I forbear enlarging on them. However thy
construction, That out of G. F 's Mouth he and his Brethren may justly be
compared to Cain for persecuting their Brethren, for no other cause than for
not submitting to outward things, etc. p. 50.

This Construction I look upon to be very gross and reproachful, and that it
proceeded from a persecuting spirit, that is, a false and unjust Judge.

And as false and malicious ( William) is thy dark smiting, in telling of such
sort of Preachers, (i. e. among the People called Quakers) whose Pride and
Insolency might prompt them at this day to say, -- Though you are our
Witnesses, that we have often declared that our Commission from God was to turn
People from the Power of Satan to God, that so they might all come to be
ordered and governed by the appearance of the Power in themselves; yet we did
NOT mean, but that when we had gathered any into the Truth, we should be those
who ought to have the RULE over them, and that such should observe our
Traditions, or follow us, Without giving a Reason why; and though they might in
Truth be submitting themselves one to another in the Lord (according to the
Apostles Counsel) yet all of them must submit to us, and reverence, honor and
obey us, etc. page 50, 51. Thus far thou ( William.)

But that any Preachers among the said People called Quakers have so said or
preached after this exalted, imperious and inconsistent manner, I must take
leave to deny, till I have better proof from thee, than thy quoting thy self,
or thy saying (that in the 48 and 49 pages of the 3d part of thy Treatise
entitled, The Christian-Quaker) It Is so written, which is thy own Book, making
thy self thy own Authority proof for thy self; and then thy saying, It Is as
naturally deduced from R. B 's discourse in his Book of Government; and then
quotest thy self again for Proof, bidding us see pages 41 to 49. in thy said 3
d Part. But still, we deny thy Credit in the case, thou art no sufficient Proof
for thy self against us; it is a mere begging of the Question. The Pride and
Insolency thou would now fix upon R.B. he utterly denies, as also, That those
whom we have gathered to the Truth, should observe our Traditions, Without
giving a Reason why. He also denis, that this is either naturally deduced or
justly deducible from any discourse of his in his said Book. And I must tell
thee (William) this looks like one of Tho. Hicks's Abuses and gross Forgeries
in his Dialogues; seeing it has always been our Principle to give convincing
Reason, where scruples or doubts are, first to remove them, and clear Peoples
understandings (so far as the Lord enables us) before they proceed to act in
any Religious Performances; and we being the Servants of our Lord Jesus Christ,
we utterly abhor and detest setting up our selves as Lords over God's Heritage*
or seeking to have the Rule and Dominion over them or their Faith; and we may
each of us conclude, and say with his Servant Gideon, I will not Rule over you,
the Lord shall Rule over you, Judges 8.22, 23. It Is not Man, but the Lord we
must exalt.

. 5. Thou (W. R.) still proceedest falsely and perversely in saying, viz. That
Jealousies have entered the breasts of thousands, that though these our
traveling Brethren exalted the Spirit of God in man, as the only sufficient
Rule for man, and declared, that the Scriptures were not a sufficient Rule to
man; yet instead of leaving us to the Rule which they have declared to be
sufficient, they strain that which they have declared not sufficient, to make
it (as much as in them lies) a Rule for them to rule over their Brethren, p. 51.

To all which I say, 1 st, We have no cause to believe thy story, that such
Jealousies have entered thousands. 2 dly, All traveling Brethren, approved
among us, exalt the Spirit of God in man as much as ever. 3 dly, Such do not
make the holy Scriptures (however truly owned in their place) any such Rule as
for them to rule over their Brethren, such being called to feed the flock, and
not be as Lords over Gods Heritage, nor as seeking Dominion over their
Brethrens Faith, but to walk in the Humility of Jesus Christ, as Ensamples to
the flock. Thy thoughts therefore to the contrary concerning those who gave
forth our Treatise, entitled, The Accuser, etc. are utterly wrong; and thy
quoting thy self in thy said third Part, is as feeble and impertinent as before
in thy Forgery against R. B. etc.

. 6. About the Tree of Knowledge again, thou (W. R.) again proceedest thus,
viz. p. 51. The Penman thus says, By all this opposition to the Doctrine,
That the Tree of Knowledge is not good for Food, William Rogers seems to
account it good for Food. Nothing said by me, or cited as my words by
themselves shows either opposition or assent to such Doctrine, p. 51.

That Is a manifest untruth again, and before detected: Many of thy own words
cited in our said Treatise, do plainly show thy assent to such Doctrine, and
that thou accountedst the Tree of Knowledge good for Food, especially in thy
opposing the contrary Doctrine. Review the Passage in thy own Christian-Quaker,
part 2. p. 27, 28, 29. with our Answer, Accuser, etc. page 109, 110, 111, 112,
113, 114. and page 222, 223, 224. If nothing said by thee, or cited as thy
words, show either opposition or assent to the said Doctrine; and that thou
have not written any thing to show thy sense either way, as thou have declared,
how have thou pursued thy charge of Apostasy and Innovation? Did thou not
bring in that Doctrine (That the Tree of Knowledge was not good for Food) among
other things to prove thy charge of Apostasy and Innovation against us, and
this as to Doctrine opposed by thee? But now wilt not own either opposition or
assent in any thing said or written by thee, to show thy own sense either way.
Oh William! where is thy Conscience, in writing not only thus insignificantly,
but thus evasively and prevaricatingly? And how have thou by such Impertinency
distinguished or proved thy self and party The Christian-Quaker, and those
against whom thou writest The Apostate and Innovator, either in Doctrine or
Practice, when thou have attempted it in Doctrine? Thy attempts and opposition
signify nothing; thou have not written any thing to show thy sense either way.
Then thou have produced nothing to prove nothing.

To thy saying, viz. If we had learned from the Scriptures, that the Serpent
had said, 'Twas good for food, yet it would not have shown me erroneous in my
Assertion, unless the words [as in it self] had been added, which are not, page
51.

Thy Assertion! What Assertion have thou made in the case, when thou have not
written any thing to show thy sense either way, either of opposition or assent
to such Doctrine, if therein we may believe thee? But how inconsistent with thy
self art thou, as between showing no sense, and thy Assertion in the same case?
And what if the word [ as in it self] are not added, for the Tree of Knowledge
being good for Food, as in it self, as thou have plainly enough employed? What
would that have added to the verity of thy Assertion, or to the weight of the
Doctrine, whilst the Controversy relates to the Tree of Knowledge, whether or
no it be good for food, it relates to it self, and not to another; for that
Tree is it self. However, thou may intend, [ as in it self] to be in its own
Nature, without respect to the Command.

The matter in Question is not Whether the Tree of Knowledge be good in it
self, but whether it be good for such an end and purpose, as for Food, i. e.
for the Soul of man, either before the Fall, or in the Restoration? Both God's
Prohibition and Experience teach the contrary, viz. That it is not good for
Food; though otherwise, Knowledge (rightly so called) be good as in its own
Nature. But the Knowledge of Good and Evil is a mixed Knowledge, not Food for an
innocent Soul; it is the pure unmixt Knowledge of the good only which springs
from divine Life that is its Food. The words [ Tree of Knowledge] are an
allusion, and is Mysteriously to be understood only in the Light of Christ.

To thy saying, It Is hard to know with what sort of Spirit the Penman, most
immediately concerned in the Accuser, etc. is at unity with; For it is evident
he does not give the Devil his due, neither does he give God or good Men their
due, page 52.

Is it hard to know? How came thou then so severely to censure and judge him
and his Spirit, as Impious, Wicked, etc?

But in humility and fear of the Lord, he is at Unity (and daily converseth)
with the Spirit of our Lord Jesus Christ, which is a Spirit of true
Understanding and Judgment, whereby he clearly discerns, and has Power to
judge thy dark, confused Spirit of Enmity, and its unfruitful Works of Darkness
and Division against Christ and his true followers.

. 7. Concerning Tithes, thou pretendest to except against the Payment of them,
P. 52.
That they are (as at this day paid under pretense of being Due, JVRE DIVINO)
-- Antichristian, and also against the Humane Institution and constraint to pay
them. [And thus far we do not oppose thee, nor have shown disaffection.] But
thou have found out another and more easy way to pay them: Thus, viz. Yet if
any Person will FREELY of himself give a Tenth part of his Estate, or of the
Increase thereof TO ANY USE WHATSOEVER; having no regard to any Humane
Institution or Claim by virtue of any pretended Divine Law, it can no more be
called Antichristian then, etc. p. 52.

No! not as given to any use whatsoever? That Is large and loose, and as
strange! Suppose some do freely pay Tithes to maintain an Antichristian
Ministry, without regard to the plea of Jure Divino, or humane Institution or
Constraint, but voluntarily and freely, which needs no constraint nor coertion:
Were not this Antichristian? And did not the Christian-Quaker bear Testimony
from the beginning against the Antichristian Ministry and Tithes paid to
maintain them, whether by some paid freely or not; the labor was to bring
People from them to Christ, the great Shepherd, and end of the first
Priesthood, Tithes and the Law that upheld them.

Art not thou now evading and shifting from our first Testimony, that was
absolute against the payment of Tithes in these Gospel days? And does not
these thy evasive Apostatizing shifts tend to draw others into Looseness and
Apostasy, to decline the Cross, and cast off the Yoke of our Lord Jesus Christ?

Again, thou give a recital of thy Answer to the Objection or Question of thy
own framing, in the case of Tithes; but now craftily leavest out thy Objection,
which concerned Tithes, as given to the National Ministry, thus, viz. But what
if it please the Supreme Power to bestow on the National Ministry Tithes? How
prove you from Scripture, that those who freely pay it, do ill? or that it is
not lawful for them, to receive it from such? These are thy own Words, (
William) to which thou made the following Answer, mentioned in our 40 th
Disaffection, and recited in these words, viz.

We are so far from condemning those who freely pay them, (i. e. Tithes) and
not as by Constraint, that we look upon it to be the Duty of all, Page 52.
professing Christianity, to contribute toward the outward Maintenance of such
whom they usually hear, and account to be the true Ministers of Christ, though
not obliged thereto by Law, in case they have need, p. 52.

We remain still Disaffected with thy Doctrine it this point, ( William) so far
as it relates to the paying of Tithes: Thy granting an uncondemned Liberty
therein, for them who can freely pay them to those they account the true
Ministers of Christ (though they be the National Ministry) I am sure is
contrary to the ancient Testimony of the true Christian-Quaker, and all
faithful traveling Brethren in the Gospel and Work of Christ, To contribute
toward the outward Maintenance, etc. is not the matter under debate. But the
Question immediately relating to the Payment of Tithes, as it is included in thy
own Objection in the case, which thou have craftily forborne to recite, and only
recitest the Words of thy Answer; both being compared together, do more clearly
evince thy Unchristian Liberty and Apostasy, in justifying Men's freely paying
Tithes to those they count Ministers of Christ, etc. yea, though it be to the
National Ministry, by thy Objection and Answer before. Thy varying the Terms
from [ FREELY PAYING them] i. e. Tithes, TO a CONTRIBVTING toward their
outward Maintenance, appears but a Prevaricating shift, and evading the terms
of thy own Objection and Question: Review the Point in thy own 2d Part,
Christian-Quaker, in granting a Liberty of freely paying Tithes to the National
Ministry, without condemnation (as before.) Thou have contradicted J. W. and J.
Story's Testimony, viz. As to Tithes, we can in truth say, 'twas never so much
as in our Hearts to strengthen any in the Payment thereof, nor yet to weaken
the Faith of any, having a Testimony in our Hearts that Tithes, as at this day
paid, are Antichristian. Mark, [ as at this day paid] is to the National
Ministry; by some freely, and by others by constraint. As also thou show thy
fallacious Insinuation and Prevarication, from the terms under debate, in
concluding, That the Penman would exclude such sort of Charity to any
ministering Professor of Christianity, besides such as he may account of his own
Brotherhood, whereby their outward Man might receive Sustenance; else if they
accounted it not Christian-like, to give on a Charitable score, TITHES, without
Compulsion; yet he might have shown his assent that their Conscientious Hearers
might (without Condemnation) have administered in another Method, p. 53. How
falsely have thou insinuated against the Penman, and daubed with the
Professors, as if now thou would ingratiate thy self, to come into favor
with the Professors, who are against the Quakers, and as if thou would please
them, by telling of giving on a Charitable score, Tithes. But William, I am
sorry thou should thus wrong thy own Conscience, (by such false Insinuations)
for therein thou know the matter in question; and our Observation was not
about (nor for) excluding such sort of Charity, as that of freely relieving or
contributing toward the Sustenance of the outward Man of any of them, in case
of need; for that Humanity allows, much more Christianity: But the matter in
question, was singly about the freely paying of Tithes, and that to the
National Ministry, (as thy Words were) against which our 40 th Disaffection was
directed. And thy insinuating expressions about giving on a Charitable score
Tithes, will not excuse thee, nor clear thee in this matter; as also on this
occasion thou fallaciously insinuatest in thy Prayer, viz. The Lord preserve me
and all true Christians from that Censorious Spirit, as may conclude, that
there are no other Sheep than of the Pen-man's Fold, p. 53.

Whom do thou herein accuse? We deny any such Censorious Spirit, with thy
terms [ Pen-man's Fold] for it is Christ's Fold we own. Thou art an uncharitable
censorious Spirit. We know there are other Sheep, as Christ declared, which he
will fetch home into his Fold: But thou appearest none of Christ's Sheep,
either in his Fold, or out of his Fold, whilst in such an Envious, Wolfish and
Scornful Spirit.

. 8. Whereas to our 44 th Disaffection, about Circumcision being a
Christian-Liberty, according to thy own Words; thou say, viz. Suppose I had
in any part of my Writings laid down, that the practice of Circumcision, by one
that was a Jew, and a believer in Christ, was in that day a Christian-Liberty:
I only Query, (not intending to quarrel with my Adversary about a Mode of
Speech, when our Meanings are the same) How can this be termed an Erroneous
manner of expression? -- Why might not the Practice of such a Christian, be
without offense termed Christian-Liberty? p. 54.

I Answer; Because Circumcision in the Flesh, was not only a Type under the
Law, but by Christians counted a Yoke of Bondage, not to be born by the
Disciples under the Gospel, being also among other Types abolisht by Christ in
his Sufferings and Death: Though some weak Believers, as those of the Jews did
for a time practice it; yet they did it in obedience to the Law of Moses, and
the Old Covenant; and not in obedience to Christ and his Apostles in the New
Covenant: And there was a Christian-forbearance and patience toward them, in
suffering Circumcision for a time to those of the Jews, when the Vail was not
wholly done away, nor they come clearly to see to the end of those things that
were abolished by Christ. (and yet no liberty nor way was given for them to
draw others into it.) Whence it follows, not that Circumcision it self was
Christian-Liberty, or practiced in a Christian-Liberty in that day, but with
respect to Moses's Law; but the forbearance toward them was Christian and
tender. I am not willing to make much ado about this thy Mode of Speech; though
I look on it to be an unsound and unscriptural Mode. To thy saying, Thou do
not say, that Circumcision practiced as aforesaid, is a Christian-Liberty; it is
the Pen-man's consequence, etc. What have thou said less? Thou have told us of
these Differing Exercises IN A CHRISTIAN-LIBERTY; When speaking of practicing
Circumcision, keeping a day, abstaining from eating Flesh amongst the Primitive
Believers; That Christian-Liberty, etc. See thy own Recitation, p. 53. 7 th
Part. Circumcision then was one of those differing Exercises, which thou
placest in a Christian Liberty, and which in thy next page thou termest
Christian-Liberty, as before: And thou say, If the mode of Speech be not
pertinent to express the matter in hand -- It Is our own approved Language. I
think thou mistakest here, (William) and the passage thou citest out of R. B's
Book of Government, p. 63, 64. proves it not from these Words cited, viz. There
is a certain Liberty and Forbearance also, etc. whereof we have the Example of
the Primitive Church -- viz. In suffering Circumcision to the Jews. [Did he
here term Circumcision Christian-Liberty? No sure, 'twas only permitted or
suffered to them, as was the Observation of certain Days, and abstaining from
Meats, which were not holden universally; but when laid upon others, then
preached down and reproved by the Apostle, Gal. 5.

Is there not a plain difference between a certain Liberty in suffering
Circumcision to the Jews, and terming it Christian-Liberty? Is this the very
same Language approved by the Second day's Meeting (as thou say?) p. 55.
Sure thou art much out here, ( William) to our saying, That this man, who is
thus discomposed in his Work, should not have meddled so much with Points of
Divinity, This passage W. R. has Printed diverse times over in his Book against
himself.
which he appears so little skilful in: He dreams so much of Liberty that he is
greatly bewildred in the management of it. Thou answerest, It Is Language more
like the proudest of Prelates, adorned with a pair of Lawn Sleeves, than an
humble Quaker, p. 53. To this adding also in p. 55. Will not the impartial
Reader hence be apt to suppose, that the Pen-man's design is to ingross
discourses of Divinity to himself and his Brethren, that so the Laity may
believe nothing but what proceeds from their Mouths and Pens: p. 55.
If they shall complain, that this renders them guilty of gross Popery; my
counsel is, Let them for the future cease giving occasion, p. 55.

This Question contains both scorn and falsehood, suggested against us, to
render us guilty of Popery, as before is discovered: We have no such design of
engrosement, nor Popish distinction among us, as between Clergy and Laity; the
Spirit of Christ, and true knowledge of Divinity, are not limited nor
engrossed in the will of man, to Persons; neither does our reprehending a
discomposed Person for meddling in things beyond his skill, prove us Guilty in
these cases.

Again, William, thou proceedest abusively and falsely in these Words, viz. For
it is well known, that G. Fox his party have been so Contentious, as that
nothing would content them but the introducing new Practices, P. 55.
under the Notion of Gospel-Discipline, in a Spirit of Strife and Contention,
concluding all to be dark that saw not with their Eyes, p. 55.

I shall say little to these Reproachful Censures. But the Lord rebuke this
false, malicious, censorious, judging, exalted, conceited Spirit: And he will
manifestly rebuke it, I doubt not.

CHAP. VI.
. 1. Of our Catalogue of some of W. R's manifest Falsehoods, notorious Slanders,
scandalous Abuses, etc. (which are numerous) to clear himself, and prove the
Penman to have played the Forger: He gives only three Instances, whereby W. R.
cannot clear himself.. 2. W. R. again opposing the Credit of the Pen-man's
method about proving Negatives: The supposed Absurdity and Immorality removed..
3. Concerning his Contradictions: His attempts only to reconcile the first
Instance, proved invalid, as between his placing the Disunion in Principles,
Doctrine and Life of Christianity, and placing it not in Principles of Truth,
nor in Christ's Doctrine, but in Ceremonies, the Shell, etc.. 4. His own
Affirmation to clear himself of Contradiction, no valid Plea or Argument. His
own dishonesty and injustice in accusing the Penman, for not informing the
Reader what is right and what is wrong in the matter of Contradiction. His
notorious Falsehood and Contradictions farther pursued (in judgment against
himself, on his own Censure) about the Apostasy entering the generality.
Christ's words, Mat. 18.15, 16, 17. Circumcision: The Tree of Knowledge: Freely
paying Tithes, etc.. 5. W. R's Postscript a slight and scornful Put-off to our
Friends of Bristol, their Book entitled, An Exalted Diotrephes Reprehended;
his miserable Evasion, manifest Fallacy, Falsehood, Abuse and Scorn against
them, detected.. 6. Of his Proposition to our Meeting in London. His
Insincerity, unrighteous Judgment and Conclusion against our Meeting.

. 1. BUt let us see how thou (W. R.) proceedest to prove the Penman to have
played the Forger in giving a Catalogue (termed) of some of W. R. his manifest
Falsehoods, notorious Slanders, scandalous Abuses, Perversions, Railing,
Scoffing, Flattering and Reviling, in the 4 th and 5 th Parts of his Book
against G. F. and others, in his own words and terms; which may be seen at
large in our said Treatise, Accuser, etc. from page 230, to page 255, etc. how
not only some of his manifest Falsehoods, Slanders, scandalous Abuses, etc. are
collected and stated in his own words and terms, but even all of them there
collected, are so far from varying his own sense, that his words or terms are
scarce varyed in two of them. I find not his sense or meaning in them varied or
altered at all, so far as I can understand or gather.

Now ( W. R.) in pursuance of thy charge before, thou engagest in these words,
viz. I shall now proceed to cite only three Instances in one Leaf of their
Catalogue, next to the Title, viz. One of their Forgery, another of their cript
Citations, and a third of their cript and non-sensical Representations of my
sound words, etc. p. 56.

Observe by the way, That seeing the Instances are so few, as only Three (and
though he calls them only a taste, etc. p. 58) the Reader may presuppose them
to be (in his thoughts) knocking ones, or the most likely for his purpose, and
the most advantageous for his turn that he could find or pick out, and such
palpable Forgery, etc. as nothing to be said for it. But see if it prove so;
see if he knocks us in the Head or down with it: Now observe his great and
chief Instance, viz.

They thus represent me to say in the Christian-Quaker, Part 4. page 4. That
they are persecuting Opposers who oppose John Wilkinson and John Story: My own
words are, Unless the Lord shall be pleased to change the hearts of the
persecuting Opposers of John Wilkinson and John Story. This Forgery -- to me
appears to render me a Persecutor; for, says he, would William Rogers be
counted a Persecutor for his opposing others more vehemently? I abhor
Persecution, and in this Controversy do act the part of a Defendant against
(and in discovery of) a Company of PERSECVTORS, p. 56.

Now let the Ingenious Reader observe, what great difference is there in thus
representing him? what variation of his sense? as between his saying, The
persecuting Opposers of J. S. and J. W. and saying, That they are persecuting
Opposers who oppose them? I must confess, I am not so critical as to understand
a variation of his sense, or much of his words, in this small Transposition,
though he now makes his exception, That there may be Opposition to each other,
from difference in Religion, yet not attended with Persecution. He should have
told us, that exception was included in his discourse before in this point,
viz. That only some of the Opposers of J. W. and J. S. were persecuting
Opposers, but not all of them: Some of their Opposers are not Persecutors: But
we must commonly be troubled with his colateral Meanings to supply his
precedent Defects. But then, what Company of Persecutors are those he now tells
of, against whom he acts the part of a Defendant? Are they not all he has
written against in this Controversy, both named and unnamed? And are not these
the Opposers of J. W. and J. S? Are they not those whom he calls G. F. and his
Party, G. F. and his Brethren? And has he not counted them Persecutors, yea, a
Company of Persecutors? Who then are opposers of J. W. and J. S. that are not
of party with G. F. (in W. R's account) and consequently no Persecutors? For W.
R. says, G. F. and his Brethren (out of G. F 's mouth) may be justy compared
to Cain for persecuting their Brethren, p. 50. And as plainly W. R. shows his
meaning, and the intent of his words (before cited) where in page 22. in his
comparison between the Paper signed by Charles Marshall, etc. and Pope Leo the
tenth his Bull against Martin Luther (Anno 1520.) W. R. says, But in the
aforesaid Paper there is no mention of any particular Doctrine or Viciousness
of Life, for which they (i. e. J.S. and J.W.) are persecuted by their Brethren.

Now wherein (I pray) is his meaning or sense of his words (about persecuting
Opposers) altered, or the intent of his Mind clouded, (as he complains) in what
we have represented? W. R* represents himself in this Controversy as one
acting the part of a Defendant, only against a Company of Persecutors. But I am
sure he greatly acts the part of an Offender and bitter Persecutor, with his
bitter words of hatred, to scandalize many innocent Friends, approved Servants
and Ministers of Christ among the People called Quakers with Popery, tending
greatly to render that People obnoxious. Whilst he is complaining of
Persecution, he is acting the part of a most bitter Persecuting Informer and
Incendiary. Apostate Judas's are the worst of Informers.

As for his Complaint of cript Citation and nonsensical Representation of
words; I must say, and that according to my understanding, his words are so
largely cited, as that the drift and scope of his Intention and Sense may be
understood, though some of his long Parenthesis and super-abundant Expressions
are left out. I would not desire to be more largely cited by himself, or any
Adversary whatsoever, than he is in his words. And for my own part, I sometime
think that I am apt to cite my Adversary's words too largely, but it is, that
both his sense may the more plainly appear, and what occasion he gives, either
for a judgment or inference naturally to be deduced. And I find not the Passage
non-sensically represented, which he recites, page 57. But in that he calls the
cript Citation (in the 6th line of the same page, I find his recital wrong,
viz. words for fruits) But how can it be cript, when the page is quoted, where
it is to be found at large?

Upon the serious perusal of our Adversary's reiterated black Charges of
Palpable Forgery and Prevarications, page 57, 58. together with his attempts to
prove them. I do solemnly profess in the sight of God, I do not find my self
conscious, nor justly chargeable therein; for I really am for giving the Devil
his due, and not to overcharge nor mischarge him in any case (how bad soever he
be in himself) much less to overcharge my Fellow Creatures, how much prejudiced
soever any of them be against me. Yet though I know my own Innocence, both as
to Intention and Principle, I impose not my bare sense and credit upon the
Readers judgment, but leave him therein free, to the light of Truth in himself,
to take impartial and just measures in what he reads in this Controversy,
relating either to Persons or Principles; and let the Light of Truth in all
judge, for to that I appeal.

. 2. To what W. R. says of the Pen-man's Method, If it should become of
Credit, 'twere then easy to undertake a Proof of any sort of Negative, etc.
page 58.

It Is a Mistake; for when I see a Person fearing God abused, scandalized,
defamed and misrepresented, contrary to his known Principle and Practice (as I
am really sensible and satisfied in my judgment, thou W. R. have frequently
dealt by G. F. and others) I may give my positive Testimony and Judgment
against such abusive and malicious Treatment, and yet not undertake a Proof of
any sort of Negative; and then it concerns thee W. R. to make Proof of thy
Charges and Accusations, when they are either denied, or a negative Testimony
given against them; otherwise not to think thy self secure by quarrelling with
Negative Testimonies, which in many cases are lawful and of credit, and not
Unchristian, nor Immoral, as thou seem to render them. Neither needed the
Penman therein to believe G. F. to be God or Christ that never erred, as thou
falsely (by way of supposition) arguest, page 59. to render us odious. For if
the Penman did but believe (as he does) G. F. to be a Servant of Christ, or a
real Christian, or a man fearing God, he might reasonably show an utter dislike
of thy scornful Abuses, Reproaches and Scandals cast upon him, to render him as
odious and obnoxious as thou can readily do in thy Books.

. 3. Then as concerning the Contradictions, collected in our Treatise
aforesaid, from page 204, to p. 227. thou citest only the first Instance, and
give us thy bare Affirmation, That the rest are as groundless, page 59.

The first Instance mentioned by thee is, BETWEEN thy telling of so great a
concern of Conscience on many to encourage the Publication of thy Book, lest it
should be reputed, That the Doctrine and Life of Christianity were wholly
extinct among the aforesaid People.

AND John Wilkinson's writing, That of late days the Concord we once had seems
much to be broken, etc. And the cause God has manifested to me, That it is NOT
IN PRINCIPLES OF TRUTH, NOR IN CHRIST's DOCTRINE, nor in any Practice which
Truth, in the Members of the heavenly Body leads into; but about
Prescriptions -- through the blind zeal of the weak, etc.

Observe; Has not the one plainly here placed the Apostasy (charged) to be
from the Doctrine and Life of Christianity; And the other not in Principles of
Truth, nor in Christ's Doctrine? W. R. as the great Asserter thereof, on behalf
of himself and his party, and those whom he writes against to be Apostates and
Innovators; and not only so, but has he not (in diverse things) contradicted
them both in matter of Doctrine and Practice in his Books?

Has not the other ( i. e. J. W.) placed the cause of the breach of the
Concord, and of the Jarr, as not being in Principles of Truth, nor in Christ's
Doctrine, nor in any Practice which Truth leads into? What Is more plain than
Affirmative in the one, and Negative in the other, on the same subject? Is not
here a manifest contradiction between presupposing such occasion of repute, as
if the Doctrine and Life of Christianity were wholly extinct; And, The breach
NOT in Principles of Truth, nor in Christ's Doctrine, etc. The second
contradiction does also make it more plain, BETWEEN W. R. his placing the
disunion in Principles, Doctrines and Practices, and his placing it in
Ceremonies, the Shell, not in Principles of Truth, nor in Christ's Doctrine;
See Accuser, p. 206, 207. As also Between the words [wholly extinct among the
AFORESAID PEOPLE] and [ Through the blind Zeal of THE WEAK;] for the weak among
them, includes not the said People.

But W. R. to save himself from a contradiction to J. W. in this case, pleads
the different dates of their Words, viz. that J. W's were written in the Year
1676. and W. R's in the Year 1680. -- and that when Differences in the Church
begin, they usually ascend higher and higher, and fresh and new occasions, are
often administered, p. 60.

Here he seems hard put to it, yet this will not save him, nor excuse him; for
he knows that the same Practices and Doctrines, for which he has rendered many
of the said People Apostate, were in being among them before the Year 1676. as
with respect to Women's Meetings, Marriages, Tithes, Tree of Knowledge, etc. As
for Priest and Professor reputing or supposing the Doctrine and Life of
Christianity extinct or suffering Shipwreck among the said People, p. 60. W.
R's rendering many, or the greatest part of them Apostate, was not the way to
prevent such Thoughts or Supposition in them, who were of the same mind against
the Quakers, long before he writ, as being no Christians, according as he has
rendered many of them: Nor will the rudeness of some in the public Meeting at
Bristol (whether of his own party, or any others) prove a just occasion of such
Repute against the said People called Quakers, as his words suppose, without
exception.

. 4. Of the Catalogue of his Contradictions, W. R. again gives us his own
Affirmation, That not one Instance mentioned therein, as contradiction, will
bear that term; and then cries out of fallacious Prevaricating Insinuations,
etc. p. 61. But would not W. R. have exclaimed against this method of Writing
in another (if against himself) as Imposition, begging the Question,
undertaking to prove any sort of Negatives, and not to be credited?

And now William, as for any of us challenging a Meeting with thee, and thy
proffering it in the City of Bristol; and thy instance of an incitement to a
Friendly discourse, p 61.

Thy Friendship being turned into Enmity, and thy Love into apparent Hatred
against us (thy ancient Friends) we have no ground to expect any Friendly
discourse from thee; thou have been sufficiently tried in that way: And it is
not thy endeavoring to flourish, vaunt and boast it off that will either
regain thy Repute among God's People, or restore that Friendship thou have
extinguished on thy part, by thy ungodly hard Speeches and Writings, words of
Hatred, Scorn and Pride, which thou appearest puffed up withal.

One passage I may not omit, touching W. R's contradictions, p. 62. in these
Words, viz. It Is well worthy the Readers observation, that though the Penman
adds in the Title these Words, viz. [with Questions, Notes and Remarks thereon]
yet none of the Notes or Remarks do inform the Reader what is right or what is
wrong, in the pretended matter of contradiction (more than in page 228. in
these words, A plain Concession to Truth. Now he speaks like some Ambassador
of Christ) For the aforesaid omission I do not commend either the Honesty or
Justice of the Penman to me, or his care over the Flock.

To all which I Answer; 1 st, This charge contains a notorious falsehood: 2 dly,
A self-contradiction and judgment against himself. For First, our sense of what
is right and what is wrong in his Contradictions, were not only declared in our
Treatise in many things, before the Contradictions were ranked together, but
also the Questions, Notes and Remarks upon them, do inform the Reader what is
right, and what is most agreeing to our sense as right, and what not. What we
oppose, commonly is first set down in the first Column, and the better part in
the second, for confutation of himself, as the nature of the Questions, etc. do
evince plain enough to the Intelligent: As for instance, where W. R. is set
against W. R. in his Contradictions; as BETWEEN his saying, This Doctrine
frequently published among us [That the Apostasy shall never enter the
generality more] does give us just occasion to be Jealous, etc. Part 1. p. 14.
AND, his saying, I would NOT be understood to say, That the Apostasy shall
never enter the generality again, Part 3. p. 74. Our Question on this
contradiction is, Q. Then why does he so often quarrel with the Doctrine
frequently published, as he says, viz. That the Apostasy shall never enter the
generality more? Which plainly shows, we own his assent to this Doctrine to be
right, and not his Jealous opposition to it.

Again, to his Contradiction, in saying, WE REASONABLY conclude, that the Words
of Christ and the Apostle (in Mat. 18.15, 16, 17. and 1 Cor. 6.1, 2, 4.) ONLY
hinted at Personal Offenses or Differences, touching worldly matters, Part 1.
p. 47. And confessing (on Mat. 18.15, 16, 17.) that EVERY CASE, wherein one
Brother may trespass against another, may in RIGHT REASON be comprehended in
it, Part 3. p. 36. Our Question on this contradiction is, Q. Whether EVERY CASE
be to be limited only to WORLDLY MATTERS, and not extend to any Cases of a
Spiritual nature? Which implies our accepting his assent to the latter, viz.
Every such case, etc. and not his limiting it only to worldly Matters.

Again, his placing CIRCVMCISION as exercised in a CHRISTIAN-LIBERTY; (and
calling it that Christian-Liberty) saying, This did not at that time condemn
that Christian Liberty, in such as made Conscience of Circumcision, (which were
some believing Jews) Part 3. p. 82. and Part 5. p. 74, 75. AND his contrary
confession, That the Labor of the Apostles of Christ in the Primitive days,
was to DRAW the outward Jew FROM OFF the observation of these Ordinances, which
were really established by the appointment of God himself, Part 1* p. 73.

Our Question on this Contradiction, is, Q. How can it be good Doctrine to
account Circumcision a CHRISTIAN-LIBERTY, and an Exercise not condemnable in
Believers, when the labor of the Apostles were to draw the outward Jew from
off the observation of these Ordinances?

This plainly evinceth, that we do not own his Doctrine to be right, that
Circumcision was a Christian-Liberty; though there was for some time a
Christian-forbearance toward them that observed it, in obedience to Moses's
Law in the Old Covenant.

Again, BETWEEN W. R's opposing that Doctrine, That the Tree of Knowledge was
not good for Food, as not knowing on what Foot of Truth any one can SO assert.
And his saying, I would not be under^^ood to reflect on ALL, that have used
that Expression, viz. The Tree of Knowledge is not good for Food, Part 2. p.
27, 29. Our Question on this contradiction, is, Q. 1. If he counts the Doctrine
erroneous, or not of the Truth, to say, that the Tree of Knowledge is not good
for Food; does not this reflect on all that have used that Expression? And 2
dly, In commendation of the Tree of Knowledge as good for Food, as in it self,
he instanced John 17.3. This is Life eternal, that they might know thee the
only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent; adding that It Is evident
that Knowledge is the Way to Life, Part 2. p. 28. Hereupon we put the Question;
Q. 3. Did God forbid the Knowledge of himself? the Knowledge which is Life
eternal? that Knowledge which is the Way to Life, to man in the state of
Innocence in the beginning? Let this be considered. And, Q 4. Can it be good
Doctrine to say, That the Serpent persuaded Eve to that Knowledge which is the
way to Life, or to the Knowledge of the true God and Jesus Christ, which is
Life eternal? Could THAT be the Knowledge that God forbad Man eat of? Were not
this very absurd, to render the Serpent more kind to Man than his Maker was?

Is it not here apparent, that we have informed the Reader, that it is not right
to esteem the Tree of Knowledge good for Food? As also on his contradiction in
pleading one while For them who Freely pay Tithes without constraint (i. e. to
the National Ministry.) Another while for J. W. and J. S. Their Testimony
against Tithes, as being (as at this day paid) Antichristian, Part 2. p. 43.
and Part 4. p. 39. On which we observe and question, Whether the Liberty W. R.
has here granted for the free payment of Tithes, be not an Innovation, tending
to beget into a Looseness and Apostasy from our ancient Christian Testimony
against Tithes? And whether it be not contradictory to J. W. and J. S. their
Testimony cited by himself? Accuser, etc. p. 224, 225.

What Is more plain, than that his Liberty or Freedom granted for the payment of
Tithes, is wrong and inconsistent with our ancient Christian Testimony?

2 dly, That W. R's Charge before recited, contains Self-contradiction and
Judgment against himself (though in it self untrue against the Penman) is
evident in his judging, that his Notes and Remarks do not inform the Reader
what is right, or what is wrong, in the matter of Contradiction charged against
him; and for which Omission he does not commend either the Honesty or Justice
of the Penman, etc. or his care over the Flock.

Now though the Injustice and Falsehood of this Charge is already fully
detected, observe how obviously W. R. has hereby brought Judgment upon
himself, concerning the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil, to his being told,
That he seems to account it good for Food. To this he answers, viz. Nothing
said by me, or cited as my Words by themselves, shows either opposition or
assent to such Doctrine, p. 51. Neither have I written any thing to show my own
sense either way (viz. whether the Tree of Knowledge was or was not good for
Food.) p. 50. This is all one, as for W. R. to tell us, That he does not inform
the Reader what is Right or what is Wrong, in this matter of Controversy; that
is, Whether it be Right or Wrong to say, the Tree of Knowledge is good for Food?

If nothing writ or said by him, does show his own sense either way, he would
be angry if I should make a Similitude Between him and the Jesuits, in his
reserve in this point; When they contend against the Opinions of others, but
reserve and hide their own: And if then it be both Dishonesty and Injustice,
not to inform the Reader what is right, or what is wrong, in things contrary as
before intimated) then where is W. R's Honesty or Justice in this matter? How
evidently is he here self-condemned and judged? How manifold and numerous are
his Contradictions! Now, William, consider what Labyrinths of Confusion thou
runnest into.

. 5. And William, I cannot well but take notice of thy Postscript, of somewhat
above a Page, what a slighty Answer and scornful PUT-OFF it is. To the Book
given forth by four of our Friends of the City of Bristol, entitled, An
Exalted Diotrephes Reprehended, against thy Christian-Quaker, etc. in five
parts. Instead of a solid Answer, or sober Vindication of thy self, from their
Charge against thee, as being of an abusive lavish Tongue, of a rude, insolent
and imperious Behavior in Men's Meetings, and speaking profanely of the Power
of God: To these things thou say, viz. All which I return as Dirt, unworthily
cast on me -- Such their Calumniations are merely because of my zealous
opposing them and others, etc. And then further say, There are few men so
weak as (on serious consideration) to believe GENERAL CALVMNIATIONS against a
man once well esteemed by the Calumniators: Let this be minded, and their
Answer duly weighed, and then 'twill appear that nothing of weight in the said
Book is written against me, p. 79. [Thus far thou.]

Oh miserable Evasion, Fallacy and Falsehood! with what Conscience could thou
thus write, (William) as if their said Book and Answer consisted but of General
Calumniations against thee, (What reason is there to credit thy general
denial?) which I am sure is a shameful and notorious Untruth. Take one instance
out of many more, wherein they charge thee with particular matter of Fact, and
that is about the Paper of Condemnation, or Submission, which was exhibited and
owned by J.S. and J. W. at the Meeting at Drawell in Yorkshire, Anno 1676. when
afterward they were minded to extenuate (or take off) the weight of it, not
owning it according to the common acceptance of A Condemnation, etc. as the
said Friends of Bristol relate: Hereupon they do particularly charge thee
(William) about the same Paper, in these Words, viz. And William Rogers, (who
confessed he drew it for J. S. and J. W.) reported, There was nothing in it,
and that the most Innocent man amongst us might own it, and never hurt himself,
and that it was not better than a RATTLE to please Children; See their said
Book, entitled, An Exalted Diotrephes Repre. p. 13. And not only in this, but
in diverse other particular matters they also charge thee home in their Book;
and also signify, that they do not think it necessary at present, to
particularize thy profane speaking concerning the Power of God, no more than
they have already done concerning thy horrible unsincere dealing with the
Brethren at Drawell, etc. Exalt. Diotreph. p. 17.

Now ( William) did not thou render thy self horribly unsincere, in declaring
the said Paper, (which thy self drew up) no better than a Rattle to please
Children? after thou knewst that J. S. and J. W. had tendered it as
satisfaction to their Brethren, and the Church of God in general (as their own
and thy Words are in it.) Did thou think to please those Brethren, and the
Church of God in general, with a Rattle for Children? Oh, William! was not this
particular matter of Fact, and that very gross and absurd? How did thou
resemble the Ranters therein, and bewray great and horrid Deceit to have entered
thee? I cannot in Charity think that the Devil had got so much hold of thee at
that instant, when thou drewst up that said Paper at Drawell, as to intend it
only as a Rattle to please Children; for thy own Narrative bespeaks better, and
more serious things of Friends and Brethren, in their proceedings there toward
J. S. and J. W. Surely then thou wast in a better and more serious and sincere
mind at that time: But I rather think the Devil prevailed with thee afterward,
after thou had eaten the Sop among the Disciples, and in the time of thy (and
parties) discontented and murmuring Consultations, Satan entered thee, to devise
that deceitful and Ranter-like cover and evasion of the said Paper, being but
As a Rattle to please Children; Though at first tendered as Satisfaction to the
Church of God in general.

Thus thy Fallacy, (in particular matter of fact) is detected, also in
slighting and huffing off the said Friends Book, but as General Calumniations,
and therefore nothing of weight in it; when there is such particular matter of
notorious Fact charged upon thee in it, as thou can not get over, nor acquit
thy self of.

And what men are so weak (on serious consideration) as to believe thy general
Calumniations against either Persons, People or Society, once well esteemed, by
thee a Calumniator? Or to esteem thee and thy Abettors The Christian-Quaker,
and all whom thou calumniatest to be Apostates and Innovators, according to thy
Judgment? How will thou clear thy self from a mere begging the Question in
both? which is never likely to be granted to thee as the case stands, according
to thy own terms, and supposition cast upon us for our owning our selves to be
the Church of Christ, p. 45, 61. thou having been once in society with us, and
did well esteem of us, but now not only gone out from us, but turned bitter
Enemy against us, whilst no probation made on thy part, either of our violating
or disserting our first Principles of our Christian Union and Society, which
thy Brother F. Bugg has most sillily, yet maliciously attempted to prove
against William Penn, Stephen Crisp, John Burnyeat, Alexander Parker, Thomas
Salthouse and My Self, from a Paper signed by us from a yearly Meeting, Anno
1675. wherein the sense and tender advice of the said Meeting is propounded in
several matters of moment, all which, (in conclusion) are recommended to the
Evidence of Gods holy Witness in the Hearts of his People. Where Is now the
Imposition, Antichristian Apostasy or Violence done to our first Principles of
Union, charged on us by Francis Bugg, from this very Paper aforesaid, in his
Book, De Christiana Liberate? W. R. do thou allow of the said Paper thus
recommended as a sufficient proof of the Subscribers Apostasy and Imposition? I
am sure thou have expressed the contrary. Now W. R. and F. B. clear your selves
from begging the Question, if you can, by plain Evidence of your own
Christianity and our Apostasy.

William, thou farther calumniatest and abusest our said Bristol Friends in thy
Postscript, saying, R. V. is known to be as busy to go in the Second day's
Meetings Errands, as an hired Apparitour is to go in the Errands of a Bishops
Court. And that R. S. and C. H. thou take to be fitly qualified, to say ANY
THING, right or wrong to defame thee; accusing one of them with a Lying Spirit
entered him, p. 79, 80

These Persons of Bristol, whom thou calumniatest are well known, both to their
Neighbors and others, who I am persuaded will not give credit to thee therein*
Thy scornful Invectives against them will go but a little way with those who
know the honesty and good Repute of the Persons whom thou here writest against,
and their deep suffering, with many more for Conscience toward God, which it
appears thou have little regard to, or sense of, who whilst they are suffering
under strait Confinement and Duress in a Nacious Goal in the City of Bristol,
for their tender Consciences (as they were when this thy Book (7 th part) came
forth, and as many yet are) thou art secure in a Corner, studdying and
scribbling against them, to calumniate and defame them in Print, as men of no
Conscience toward God, fitly qualified to say any thing, right or wrong, a
Lying Spirit entered, etc. Such is thy Treatment to the Prisoners of Jesus
Christ, to add Affliction to their Bonds, and to make void their Testimony and
Suffering for his Names sake. And not only thus, but thou art cruelly mocking,
flouting and deriding at them, telling a story against one of these suffering
Friends of Bristol, which thou say, occasioned Derision and Laughter; and
that by a Lying Spirit entered them (thou say) they may become a derision,
both to Professor and Profane, and a scorn to Fools themselves, p. 80. No
doubt thy scornful and malicious Work against them (though otherwise under
Persecution and Suffering) and against many others fearing God, is to make them
as ridiculous, and as much the Subjects of scorn and derision as thou can;
but 'twill all return upon thy own head, thou will reap the fruit of thy own
doings. Thy pretended Love, Christian Charity, Lamentation for thy Brethren,
etc. (in thy hypocritical Epistle directed to the flock of God) go but a little
way it seems; but that and other Instances of thy Insincerity and
Dissimulations are numerous.

. 6. And with what Sincerity or Conscience, could thou not only pretend an
inclination toward an accommodation of the Controversy, but also propose to
our second day's Meeting for thee To read thy Answer, (viz. thy 7th part, when
in Print) amongst us, and after so done to leave it with us, and to pretend,
thy end was, that if the Meeting should that day propose any expedient,
answering the Witness of God in thy Conscience, to stop the Publication
thereof, thou should then answer the same by forbearing a further Publication
thereof, as in thy Letter, dated, London, the 17 th of the 2 d Month, 1682?
page 80.

I do still question, with what sincerity or conscience thou could make such
Proposition, and pretend such an end in it to that our Meeting, when thou had
already prejudged the same Meeting in Print, as being Apostate Innovators, etc?
What capacity could such be in to answer the Witness of God in thy Conscience,
if apostatized from it in themselves? And what ground could thou have to
expect such a change in them from Apostasy, as that Now (when thou proposedst
the reading thy Book) they might be in a capacity to reach thy Conscience, as
thou say? p. 82. Besides, can any in reason suppose thee real or sincere in
thy Proposition for an expedient to stop the Publication of thy Book of about
twelve Sheets, when already Printed? Was not the design of thy Proposition
rather for a pretense to excuse thy self, and for a flourish over us, as thou
have made an empty one, and what have thou got by it?

And was it not manifest, that thou wast still at least jealous of our said
Meeting, as being Apostate, in thy not being free then to answer our three
Questions, which were very proper, to try the reality of thy own Proposition,
and thy end pretended thereof, in order to our hearing thy said Book read. The
Questions were these, viz.

Question 1. Whether thou art sensible thou have done evil or hurt to Truth in
the Publication of thy great Book, entitled, The Christian-Quaker
distinguished, etc?

Quest. 2. Whether thou have any better thoughts of our Second day's Meeting
now, than thou had when thou wrotest that Book, as not now to esteem the said
Meeting Apostate, etc?

Quest. 3. Whether thou look upon the said Meeting now in a capacity to
answer the Witness of God in thy Conscience?

To which thou only gave us this return, viz. I am not free to answer at
present.

Our Reason for the Questions was, That we might not spend our time in vain, or
to no effect, in hearing thy Book read, which we should do, if we should
undertake it, and have no assurance of thy having any better thoughts then of
our said Meeting, than to deem it Apostate? Or if thou did not then look upon
it as capable to answer the Witness of God in thy Conscience? To which thou not
being then free to answer, we might very well then not be free to hear thy Book
read among us, nor be so imposed upon, as to spend our time upon such
uncertainty, having no probability of thy performing thy own Proposition, with
respect to the end proposed, whilst not proved sincere or Christian on thy
parts Therefore thy Reflection upon our said Meeting, and supposing us like a
Company of lazy or guilty Priests, for our refusal to suffer the reading of thy
said Book amongst us, is both very unjust and scornful, and bespeaks thy
Lording Imposing Spirit, thus infamously to upbraid us for not implicitly
giving up to spend our precious time to answer thy prejudicate will and humor
upon thy reserved dark uncertainty. And also as a farther aggravation of thy
Injustice and Prejudice, thy taking our said Meeting's Treatment of thee on
this occasion, to be an Evidence of our affection to sit on the Seat of
Unrighteous Judgment. This also is thy unrighteous Conclusion and false
Judgment upon our affection, and is no ways naturally deducible from our
forementioned Treatment of thee.

I have omitted many other Instances of thy abuse of Truth and Friends, leaving
the righteous God to reckon with thee for all thy injurious dealing and hard
speeches, as thou seem to refer the Pen man to such a Reckoning, page 46,
63. The Lord awaken thee out of this hardened gainsaying state, and deliver
them that are betrayed by the Enemy, and preserve his Heritage in love and
peace over this scornful, exalted, conceited, crooked, quarrelsom apostate
Spirit. The Lamb shall have the Victory.

CHAP. VII.
A Letter in Two Parts, Which was sent in Manuscript to Francis Bugg, Except
two Passages left out in favor to him, unless he will further expose himself
to danger thereby.
IN the first part, his fraudulent dealing against Samuel Cater about the 15 l.
Fine. His Abuses against him and others. His Conceitedness, Pride, Scorn and
Shallowness are detected and reprehended.

In the Second part of the Letter, relating to Francis Bugg's Book, is evinced,
1. His unjust Reflection on the people called Quakers, and his being turned
Informer. 2. His Judgment in espousing and presenting false Doctrine against
the divine Light of the Son God in man. 3 His unjust Charge, and the collection
thereof against certain Persons among us by name, who are the Servants of
Christ, and against our faithful Women's Meetings. 4. His Instances for Proof of
his Charge and Contempt, no proof thereof. 5. His Opposition to our Testimony
for Men's and Women's Meetings in the Church of Christ; and his scoffing and
smiting thereat, no proof of his Charge, nor of their having No Relation to
Scripture. 6. His upbraiding our sober and faithful Women's Meeting as an Idol,
and comparing it to the Papists great Idol; rebuked. 7. The same Challenge
returned upon him, that we laid upon W. Rogers, being unanswered by either. 8.
His Rambling impertinently, not following the terms of the Challenge, which
therefore is further urged against him. 9. His charge of Imposition plainly
proved false by the conclusive Recommendation of our Testimony instanced by
him. 10. His grossly belying and abusing G. W. and his Conscience about
Condescension and Accommodation. 11. His scornful Forgery on a Certificate from
Huntington Meeting: His falsely representing them therein, proved very wicked,
on his own Concession. 12. His scornful detraction against R. Richardson, his
Impertinency and silliness in opposing DEACONESSES, as found out of some Popish
Author, etc. 13. His scornfully writing and reflecting on G. Whitehead; and his
insolent Reviling, Boasting, Abuse and Slander, confuted by Certificate from
diverse Persons of Credit. 14. His trumpeting abroad the Fame of Henry North,
Knight, etc. disgustful. A Proposition and Advice to Repentance and public and
plain Condemnation of his Wicked and Scurrilous Book aforesaid, with desire of
an Answer shortly, etc. [But no such Answer (nor any) as yet returned, being
now above six weeks since this Letter was left at Ely Prison with Samuel Cater*
to be conveyed to him] With a Postscript since added.

The First Part.
Francis Bugg;
UPon the perusal of thy two Letters lately sent me, the one directed to Samuel
Cater in Ely Goal, and the other to my self, and the rest of the second day
Meeters (as thy terms are.) And since thou art become such an open contending
Adversary, I thought my self the more concerned in Conscience to take some
notice, and give thee my sense of thy proceeding and treatment in the
Controversies thou have so confidently undertaken, and become an officious
Advocate in, that yet thou may be cautioned to stop thy pernicious Current,
and destructive Race thou art running, and seriously bethink thy self, and
Repent, before thy final Destruction* which I clearly perceive thy
extraordinary Conceitedness, Pride, Scorn and Envy, etc. do tend to bring upon
thee. By the way, I observe thy Allegations against Samuel Cater, about the old
Difference between thee and him so long depending, touching the FINE laid upon
thee for him, as a Preacher, for which thou confessest, That thy Cousin George
Smith, as his Wifes Agent, made thee Restitution; and yet I perceive thou art
uneasy under that Restitution (as thou call it) thou seem concerned that
several Friends now bring up that old concern, since thou published thy Book.
But how did George Smith make thee Restitution? Did not he proffer thee half
the Fine to stop thy Turbulency? but thou by Craft got beyond him for the
whole, etc. wherein he and many more are greatly dissatisfied; and which, if
the Friends in those parts give a circumstantial Narrative of the whole
transaction, and of thy Selfish Craft, Overreaching and Fraudulency in that
case, and be as free in their Publication, as thou have been against many
faithful Servants of Christ, in thy confused scurrilous piece of Impertinent
Prate, Malice and Scorn, I am persuaded it will greatly redound to thy
Dis-repute and Infamy in the Eyes of all sorts of intelligent Persons, and
lower thy Topsail to thy great abasement, shame and confusion of Face. Thou
make thy own terms for the repayment of the whole 15 l. that thy Cousin
George Smith (thou say) by S Cater 's Wifes order, paid thee in Satisfaction
for the Fine, thou suffered from him (as thou pretendest) And now I have the
Money (say thou.) But I never yet understood that Samuel Cater's Wife did
order him to pay the whole 15 l. neither would he have done it, but that thou
made him believe, It was not for love of Money thou would have the whole
tendered, etc. for thy Word's sake* Thou confessest he first proffered thee 5 l.
and when THAT would not do, he proffered thee 7 l. 10 s.

Thus far it seems was his proffer to pacefie the business on thy part: The
other part, to make it up 15 l. he did deposit, in expectation thou would
return it him, so he understood by thy smooth and crafty Pretensions, That THY
END WAS NOT FOR MONEY, etc. Thus he, poor, well-meaning man was ensnared, and
S. Cater become the sufferer. But upon what account got'st thou the whole 15 l
from him, seeing the Penalty of the Conventicle Act does not exceed 10 l. upon
a Hearer, for the Poverty of the Preacher, or in default of his payment? And
yet have thou the boldness to assert, That if the Justice please, he may lay
the 20 l. upon any single Person present, of the Hearers. But by what Law may
he do so; if the Pena^ty upon any one for another Offense amount not in the
whole, to above the sum of 10 l. as it is twice over limited in the Conventicle
Act? For though the Justice be empowered to levy the 20 l. by Warrant, as
aforesaid (as the Words of the Act are) Upon the Goods and Chattels of any such
PERSONS, who shall be present at the same Conventicle, in case the Preacher be
a Stranger, and his Name and Habitation not known, or is fled, and cannot be
found, or in the judgment of the Justice, shall be thought unable to pay the
same. Note, that it is upon any such PERSONS, in the Plural, not upon any one
Person the Fine is so to be levied; it is to be proportioned, so as that no one
Person shall be liable to pay above 10 l. for any one Meeting, in regard of the
Poverty of any other Person or Persons, as the express Words of the Act are.
See what a mistaken Lawyer thou art. And was not the said 15 l. an arbitrary
punishment of thy own inflicting, both Illegal and Extrajudicial? What an
arbitrary Persecutor wast thou therein? May thou not be ashamed to cry out
against Imposition, arbitrary Authority, and yet be such an arbitrary Imposer,
and thy own Carver, to serve thy own fraudulent Enterprises? IGNOBLE AND BASE!
And now to excuse thy arbitrary, extorsive Fraud, to assert that which is
contra formam Statuti^ in the case: Be ashamed of such Collusion. I cannot but
take notice of thy saying, Thou toldst him thou would have the whole tendered,
which done, thou should make it appear that thy End was NOT ONLY for Money.
And how rarely have thou mended the matter now? Thou made him believe 'twas
not for love of Money; but now to mince and smooth it over, thy end was not
ONLY for Money: It seems thy end was then in a great part for Money; but thou
should have told him plainly aforehand how far thy end was for Money, and how
far 'twas not for Money, that so he might not have been defrauded out of the
whole 15 l. and thereby poor Samuel Cater his Wife and Children sufferers in
their Estate, merely for quietness sake, from thy complaints and clamours; if
thy end was not ONLY, but PARTLY for Money, thou might have been content with
half of the 15 l. which G. Smith proffered thee; but it seems thy end was so
WHOLLY for Money, that thou would have the WHOLE Fifteen Pound, according to
thy own account: Thus Selfish, Arbitrary and Avaricious wast thou. What a mean
shift is it therefore for thee to say, Thy end was not ONLY for Money? We see
what sorry shifts and slighty Subterfuges a bad Cause must have. And as a
person conscious to thy self, disquieted and uneasy for a pretense, thou now
make this Proposition (namely) S. Cater 's signing a Paper like this which
follows, of thy own forming; and then thou will return the whole 15 l. Thy
Paper is this, viz.

Francis Bugg's Proposition implies a Contradiction; for if Samuel Cater
subscribe the Instrument, he ought not to have his Money by the tenure of it,
because he told not his Name. If he do not subscribe it as his judgment, then
he also ought to have his Money again, according to F. B's tenet of Christian
Liberty, As not seeing it his duty; ergo he may not, or at least ought not to
be compelled to suffer for it.

Another contradiction is from the ground of his Law or Canon, viz. the
equality in suffering For by his Rule a poor Minister must suffer 20 l when a
rich Hearer, whom he ministers to, but 5 s. And he on the apparent sight of the
Informer must tell his Name, when the other, but when he is asked it. Oh equal
levelling Law! Are not the children of the world wiser (looking on us as
Levellers) to make the rich Hearers pay the poor Preachers penalties, as well
as they look on them obliged to maintain them, on their own supposition.


Memorandum, That I S. Cater do hereby testify, that is my judgment, That all
Friends in the Ministry, where they are Strangers, ought to tell the Name and
Habitation upon the apparent sight of the Informers coming into a meeting,
taking friends names in writing, or otherwise, in order to convict the Meeting,
that so we may all stand in a like suffering capacity. Or if any have not
freedom thus to do, that then they ought to make satisfaction to such who
suffer for them through their concealing their Names and Habitations; and that
such as refuse to perform his or their part in either of these two
Propositions, ought from thenceforth to be reputed blameworthy, and noted as
such* Witness my hand, the day above-written, per me.

[Thus far thy Prescription.]

Further adding, viz. I say, sign this Paper, or one like it, and I will
return the said 15 l. for the reason aforesaid. And this thou esteem'st a
Condescension sufficient.

Thus art thou become a Dictator and Prescriber and Imposer upon others: Here
thou have made a general Rule and Prescription, as condition of thy returning
the 15 l. to S. C. [such an improbable condition as thou could not reasonably
suppose would be complied with. Thus insincere thou appearest.] Here Is a Canon,
an Edict of thy framing, who have made a great part of thy Book against Canons,
Prescriptions, Rules, Edicts, Orders, Excommunications, etc. How consistent art
thou in thy work? yea, and if the Ministers will not observe this thy Canon to
perform it, then to be reputed Blameworthy, and noted as such; and this thou
would have S. Cater subscribe. But thy Canon or Prescription is illegal, lame
and defective; yea, it exceeds the severity and extent of the Conventicle Act,
which no where compels all Friends in the Ministry, where thy are strangers, to
tell their Names and Habitations upon their apparent sight of Informers coming
into a Meeting and taking Friends Names in writing or otherwise; nor are any of
the Meeters compelled by Law to tell their Names to Informers.

Thus Arbitrary, Illegal and Foolish too art thou in thy Canon and
Constitution; thou would enforce upon Friends of the Ministry, where they are
strangers, who sometimes may be silent in a Meeting, and sometimes ministering
when Informers come in to take Names, by thy Canon the Ministers in silence
must tell their Names and Habitations to Informers, and those that are
ministering must stop to tell the Informers their Names and Habitations. This
illegal Imposition of thine I further except against, in that it tends to
gratify the Informers, and forward them in their designs and prosecution, for
a more speedy and easy Conviction; Marg. added, Yet I do not limit Persons in
this case; there may be a special occasion to tell Names for the sake of
others, but not to make that a general Rule -- Friends are to be left free to
Gods counsel.
for if they get their Names thus readily told aforehand, as thy Canon and
Prescription requires, they go presently to the Justices, swear the Offense,
and cause the Conviction in the absence of the party concerned. In
consideration of which, diverse of us, even of late time, in the Meetings at
Westminster have not had freedom presently to tell our Names to Informers and
Officers, to leave them to inform the Justices what they please upon Oath,
without control, in our absence, but rather we have chosen to go to the
Justices, that there we may tell our Names to them, and have opportunity to
object to their faces against any Mis-informations. Thus thou have failed and
showed thy shortness and shallowness in thy imperious and illegal Prescription
and Imposition.

As for thy pressing for the Preachers who are Strangers to tell their Names,
as aforesaid, and so to be in an Equal capacity with the Hearers in suffering.

1 st, We cannot make a Law to enjoin them to tell their Names to Informers,
which the Law requires not: I know none that refuse to tell their Names to the
civil Magistrate. We know the Preachers generally are most struck at, and most
liable to suffer, and the Penalties are most severe upon them, as 20 l. for a
first, and 40 l. for a second Offense (so called) and if Strangers, they are
not wholly free from Sufferings (as thou say.) But all Preachers more liable
in the first place to suffer Imprisonment, etc. than others, being most envyed
and aimed at by the Persecutors.

2 dly, We cannot in point of Christianity, Truth or good Conscience, deem the
Preacher an Offender, if we own his Ministry, So as to lay an Obligation upon
him not only to tell his Name to Informers, but to be the greatest Sufferer.
Truth's interest and cause is but one in Minister and Hearer, and Christian
love leads us therein to sympathize and suffer one with another in Spirit; yea,
and outwardly too, if there be necessity, and not to make preaching the Gospel
an offense, any more than meeting or hearing it Preached, seeing the Labor, and
Pains, and greatest Hazard commonly is the Preachers, the advantage thereof is
the Hearers. And if we have true Unity with the Gospel Preachers, we shall not
complain against them, because of the Fines, nor think our selves to be bound
under thy Prescription or Canon, who art both in Disunion with them, and
Enmity against them, much less to follow thy Crafty method, to pay our selves
out of their Estates, when fined for them, or for their not telling their Names
to Informers on sight, etc.

3 dly, If thou make the Preachers such Offenders, as that for want of
telling their Names to Informers, they must be Responsible to the full, or
wholly for the Fines laid upon Hearers on their account, and thereupon thy Eye
is so severe upon them, as if they were the greatest Offenders. This is but the
same Spirit that is in the Persecutors and Informers, that is not in unity with,
but in Enmity against the Gospel Ministers. This would not lay down its Life
for the Brethren, that will not suffer 5 l. or 10 l. for them: And then I
presume there is no danger of thy suffering much on that account, who could so
craftily repay thy self the whole 15 l. from Samuel Cater.

In this very Action, and thy malicious Book, thou appearest a Person more
ready to turn Informer against the true Ministers and Servants of Christ, than
to lose 10 l. on any of their account, by thy offensive Characters and Popish
Comparisons thou have put upon them, particularly upon George Fox, William
Penn, George Whitehead, Stephen Crisp, Alexander Parker, Thomas Salthouse and
John Burnyeat, whom thou have represented in Print as Apostates, Antichristian,
Innovators, Imposers, Popish, etc. for their Christian advice in diverse
particulars, cited by thee in thy printed Book, De Christiana Liberate, with
thy scandalous defaming Observations upon them severally, from page 32. to page
57. to prove thy Unjust charge of doing Violence to our first Principles of
Union, which they and we all utterly deny.

4 thly, And the more like an Informer have thou appeared, in ambitiously
dedicating thy Book to a Great Man, i. e. Henry North, Knight, and in showing
that thou designed it for the Magistrates, in pretending to have laid before
them a clear Demonstration for Liberty of Conscience; thy Book being in two
Parts, as is confessed in the Title, and both Bound up and made to go in one: So
that if the Magistrates see the first Part for Liberty of Conscience, (which is
not thy own) they are liable to see thy second Part, wherein (as an Enemy to
Christian-Liberty) thou art bitterly inveighing and clamouring against many
faithful Servants and Ministers of our Lord Jesus Christ (who are well approved
among the People called Quakers) for their signifying and giving their
Christian Advice and Sense, in things needful to be practiced in the Church,
whereby thou art opposing the Liberty of their Consciences, which they have in
Christ Jesus; and art endeavoring to expose them as obnoxious and offensive to
the Magistrate and outward Government, rendering them Tyrannical and Popish,
like the Pope's Councils, etc. Thus false Informer-like, thou have broke all
Bonds of Christian Friendship, Society and Church Order, and have acted the
part of a treacherous, persecuting Informer, in the very nature, purport and
series of thy Book.

And I doubt not, but thy Infamous work will become odious to all Serious,
Religious and Impartial Dissenting Protestants, the more it comes to Light, and
to be strictly scand, and that thou will appear thereby not only as a
turbulent, but perfidious, treacherous Person, and malicious Informer against
thy own Society, and therefore not to be trusted by any other Societies or
People, on any Religious and sociable account.

Thou have also in thy Letter scurrilously abused and misrepresented S. Cater,
J. Parks, and my self, and also the Women's Meeting, as That Samuel Cater had 10
l. presently sent him out of the Treasury from London: And that The Women's
Meeting gathered so much Money for James Parks, upon his pretense of being
Robbed. Both which I have made enquiry into, and find them false in Fact;
Samuel Cater belyed, the Women's Meeting belyed, and James Parks belyed, in the
state of these Accusations. Be ashamed therefore of such Abuses, or produce
Proof both of Fact and Circumstance, as stated by thee. Be ashamed also of thy
saying, James Parks acted the part of an Oliverian Preacher, or G. W. once at
Snare-Hill, or like some SVCH PENSIONERS.

Did thou ever tell me of any thing thou had against me at Snare-Hill? I am
not Conscious to my self, but am sure thou do shamefully belie me and J. P.
in calling us Pensioners. What Pension, Wages, or yearly Stipend do thou
charge me or us withal? What an unconscionable Defamer art thou? Do thou know
what Pensioner means? This is somewhat like thy espousing and printing the
Report of Nicholas Lucas's saying, That I went up and down to Cheat the
Country. And thy affirming, That truly my Behavior has manifested the truth
thereof, page 150. of thy Book.

Thus in thy Letter before, sent after me in Manuscript, without the least
occasion given thee by me, that I know of; since which to amend the matter of
thy Scandalous defaming abuse of me, before cited, thou addest this
Parenthesis, viz. [ I reckon he meant not of Money, but the People of their
Liberty they have right to] Which is also a Slander and base come-off, and
thousands of God's People are able to testify against these thy defaming and
insolent Lies. I never was accounted a Cheat and Pensioner before. As also in
thy calling Thomas Rudyard LYING LAWYER, for saying, Thou paidst thy Money
Voluntarily before Distress was made on thy Goods: This I showed Thomas
Rudyard, and he counts it a foul abuse, slander and defamation upon his Person
and Employment, to call him Lying Lawyer, supposing thou placest his Lying upon
the word Voluntarily. If thou did pay or deposit thy Fine on thy Appeal, and
so prevented Distress (as he understood thou then did at that time) he
accounted it Voluntary, in respect of the Law, because the Act of Parliament in
that case does not compel thee to pay thy Fine upon entering thy Appeal; for
that the Appeal may be entered within one weeks time after the Fine is paid, OR
Distress made; so that it is in the Appealants choice whether to pay the Fine or
suffer Distress first; for the Particle OR is disjunctive between both. Where
is now the LYING LAWYER? Art not thou herein manifest to be the LYING DEFAMER,
that have so little regard to the Reputation or Credit of others? Where Is thy
Conscience, or doing as thou would be done by?

Thy Envy and Defamation stops not here, but thou have falsely accused us (of
the Second days Meeting) with loving to have the Pre-eminence: He that searches
and knows our Hearts, sees and will judge thy false Judgment and Abuse in this
and many other things; as also in thy false and abusive Insinuation in telling
of the Sums, Gratuities and large Pensions, privately extended to such
(speaking of James Parks) and others of his Fraternity: And which far exceed
THAT of the Basin and Platter, we usually, and with too much confidence (say
thou) bespatter the Professors withal, seeing we do the same thing for which we
condemn them only a little privater. [Thus far thy false and abusive Accusation
against such as James Parks and his Brethren.]

Oh horrid Impudence and Falsehood! be ashamed hereof: Thou heapest up Slanders
and Defamations against the Innocent, for which God will rebuke thee. It Is not
unknown how many of us spend our Strength, Labor and Substance in the service
of the Lord and his People in many respects, wherein I for one have not had the
least share, though now by thee rendered a Cheat and a Pensioner. Oh! blush and
be ashamed of such abominable Lies and scurrilous Detractions.

To conclude thy Letter, on thy falsehood against the Women's Meeting gathering
Money, etc. thou scornfully inferrest, that therein they have forfeited their
Charter, mentioned in thy Book, p. 37. and deserves a COERANTO to be brought,
etc. I cannot but take notice what a liberty thou take to scoff, mock and
jeer against our Religious Christian Women's Meeting, and how abusive and silly
thou art therein, although thou have often scornfully twitted me with the words
LEARNED FRIEND, in thy Book and Letters, as if it were such a great Crime to
ascribe that to any Friend, whilst yet thou art ambitious to show thy self a
learned Person. Here to show thy Learning in the Latin Tongue, thou tellest us
of a COERANTO, which is no good Latin to be sure, and thou may be questioned
in what Language thou had the Expression. Q. added, If it be not Dog-Latin?
I suppose thou have lately heard Discourses of Quo Warranto about the
City-Charter, upon which from thy own imaginary conceit thou writest us
COERANTO in a large Italick Character, that it may appear how learned and
skilled thou art in Latin and Law; and likewise we must have a Latin Title to
thy Book, second Part, i. e. De Christiana Liberate: But where thou learned
this Title, and what stress or Emphasis can thou place upon its being in
Latin more than if it had been in English, i. e. Concerning Christian-Liberty?
For Liberty of Conscience asserted, is not the English of thy Latin Title, but
varies from it in the Terms, as well as in the Nature of it: And thy
prosecution for Liberty of Conscience, as asserted by thee, appears a Liberty
not only in opposition to Persecution, but also to our Godly Care, Advice,
Counsel and Admonition, relating to good Order and Church Government amongst
us, and testified unto in our Paper opposed by thee in thy Book (from page 41,
to page 51.) And if this must be the extent of thy Christian-Liberty, thou
might better have entitled thy Book, Pro Liberate Carnali; for it seems the
Liberty pleaded for by thee, admits not of Spiritual Censures, Reproofs, Advice
or Judgment, according to Christ's Law exhibited, as appears by thy scurrilous
opposition and infamous Characters thou give to our said Paper, partly cited
in thy Book, and most Unchristianly and Unjustly made thy great Proof of our
Doing Violence to our first Principles of Union, and consequently turned
Antichristian; and such thou renderest William Penn, George Whitehead,
Alexander Parker, Stephen Crisp, Thomas Salthouse, John Burnyeat, whose Names
thou have exposed in Print, as the Persons unjustly charged by thee. But we
have not yet concluded thy Learning in Coeranto, but must view a little more of
it in thy Book, on the passage thou have borrowed on trust from William Rogers
his Translation, as he confesses, for which we have only his own Authority in
these Words, (viz.) Which for the sake of some, I thus Translate, (7th Part,
Christian Quaker, p. 62.) It Is in thy 125, 126, 127, 128 pages, out of Bishop
Hooper; the first Words, Scitis quod res sancta, et vera quo magis examinatur.
Thou accepts his Translation hereof in these words, KNOW YE, that by how much
the more, etc. Here Scitis, the very first Word, which is, Ye know, in the
Indicative, is falsely translated know ye, as Site in the Imperative; whereas
by Scitis in this place was intended Indication, Demonstration, or Proof, and
not imperatively Teaching; and likewise Nam quod variis modis tentatur; ac
probatur, modo pium ac sanctum FVERIT, Jacturam ab hostibus nullam sentit, is
thus translated (viz.) For that which is tried and proved after various
manners, if IT HAS BEEN, etc. instead of IT SHALL BE; for FVERIT is exact
future (as they term it.) Many things of the Types and Shadows under the Law,
as Tithes and Offerings, etc. have been holy, but shall not be again, afficitis
is made afflict instead of affect, and also Legem and Evangelium Dei, are
translated The Word of God, instead of The Law and Gospel of God; then at last
Judicio, is, to the Judgment, when it should be more properly by the Judgment*
But the most material Mistake is in the very first word Scitis, falsely
translated, as to the Mood.

But these Instances are only to show thee what a ridiculous Novice and
Ludibrie thou have rendered thy self, both in Writing and Print, even to
Schoolboys: I saw lately a Schoolboy of Eleaven Years old Laugh at thy
Absurdity, as a Person wise in thy own Conceit. Yet whilst thou would make a
show and flourish of Learning, thou have here taken a false Translation upon an
implicit Faith and blind Credulity: Thou that art such a fierce opposer of
implicit Faith and blind Obedience, and have so often scoft at me for the
Words, Learned Friend, in reference to R. R. I wonder thou art not ashamed of
such scornful treatment, and meddling so often with Latin, when I find thou
can not write true English in many things.

This is only a small Check to thy Pride and empty Conceits, this not being one
of the absurdest Faults or Falsehoods thou have presented the World withal. Come
down and be humbled before the All-seeing God.

From thy ancient Friend, and yet Well-wisher, though insolently abused by
thee, G. Whitehead.
Middlesex, the 22d day of the 7th Month, 1682.
The Second Part of the said Letter.
Francis Bugg;
NOw concerning thy Book, styled, DE CHRISTIANA LIBERATE, or Liberty of
Conscience, etc. 1 st, I observe thou beginest unjustly to accuse and reflect
upon the People called Quakers in the very Title page, in these Words, viz. And
the mischief of Impositions amongst the People called Quakers, etc. In two
Parts. And that thou concernest the Magistracy with it, both in thy Epistle
dedicated to H. North, Knight, (as being obliged to publish it for the
Information of the Magistracy, etc.) as also in thy Epistle, directed to the
Noble Bereans, thou concernest the Magistrates, as having in the Book prefixed
(i. e. thy first Part) laid before them many weighty Arguments for Liberty of
Conscience, etc. So that to the Magistrates thou have given thy Information
against the People called Quakers, as having mischievous Impositions among
them; which we utterly deny; and thy Scornful Malicious Book proves it not.
Thus thou art turned Informer to the Magistrates against an Innocent suffering
People, whom thou have so long walked amongst: How dare thou appear in their
Meetings, and thus act the part of a treacherous, malicious Informer against
them, even to the Magistrates? Oh! Blush and be ashamed of this thy hateful
Work.

2 dly, Thou having entitled thy self to to the matters contained in a
Treatise, entitled, Liberty of Conscience asserted and vindicated, by thy high
Commendations given of it to H. North, as Being persuaded it will be of Good
Service; and (in thy Epistle to the Bereans) A clear Demonstration, etc. And in
thy Preface to the Reader, of the Author, thou thus say, viz. His Judgment
upon this Subject, is my Judgment.

Now observe what this Author's Judgment is concerning the Light in men,
whereupon he chiefly places his Demonstration for Liberty of Conscience. In
page 4. he says, viz. Their Natural Light, derived to them from their first
Creation, dictating to them what they ought to do, and what not, and enabling
them to pass a Judgment upon themselves of their due behavior toward God,
etc. With some other passages of like nature in the said Treatise.

Here ( Francis) thou have presented H. North, and the Magistrates with unsound
and unscriptural Doctrine, and appearest Apostate, and corrupt in thy Judgment,
in calling the Light in men (which thus dictates their duty) Their natural
Light, derived to them from their first Creation: Herein thou have wrongfully
informed H. N. and the Magistrates about the Principle, the Light in men,
contrary to the Quakers Testimony, born from the beginning concerning the Light
in men, which is according to the holy Apostle's Testimony, John 1.4, 9. that
In the Word, or Son of God, was Life; and that Life was the Light of men; And
that this is not a natural or created Light, but a Supernatural and Divine
Light of the Christ Jesus, the Son of God.

3 dly, And now ( Francis) having thus misrepresented our Principle to the
Magistrates, and so misinformed them about the Light in men. Thou proceedest
upon an unjust charge of Impositions against certain Persons, chiefly
concerned, owned and approved among the People called Quakers, whom thou
scornfully call G. Fox, and those of Party with him; and have exposed the
Names of some of them in Print, whom thou meanest by that Party, as William
Penn, George Whitehead, Stephen Crisp, Alexander Parker, Thomas Salthouse, John
Burnyeat, p. 51. And what have thou to charge all these with, that thou have
printed a Book and informed the Magistracy against them? It is The mischief of
Impositions; The inconsistency betwixt the Church Discipline, or Order and
Government erected by those, Thy Charge collected.
and THAT in the Primitive times (as in the Title of thy second part.) It is
also, That there is Violence done to our first Principles of Union;
Consequently Tyranny introduced, and our Society turned Antichristian, p. 32,
33. (According to W* P's Proposition in his Address, thus falsely applied by
thee against himself, and the rest of us before-named.) Now Francis, I must
plainly tell thee, this Inconsistency and Violence charged by thee against us,
we utterly deny, and the Instances thou give do not at all prove it, As
first, G.F's Paper for Women's Meeting distinct, that they might be in the
practice of pure Religion, to visit the Fatherless and the Widows, and to see
that all be kept from the spots of the World, etc. [As it is cited at large by
thee, p. 33, 34, 35, 36, 37.]

Now ( Francis) where is the Inconsistency charged? Can there be an
Inconsistency where there is no Contradiction, nor the least opposition? Thy
judging such Women's Meetings as are for the Practice or Promotion of pure
Religion, in the practical parts of it, inconsistent with the
Christian-Discipline, Order and Government in the Primitive times, does bespeak
not only that thou do not well understand what Inconsistent means, but also
that thou have undertaken a Charge thou art never able to make good. And thy
charge of Violence done to our first Principles of Union is worse than
Inconsistent. And thy scornfully telling of the Women's Charter and New Order,
is no Proof (man) of thy Charge: Where Is the Inconsistency and Violence that is
charged, done by the faithful Women's Meetings among us, or by any of us, by
encouraging them to meet for those Religious and Charitable ends and services
mentioned? How have thou acted the part of an ignorant conceited Scoffer,
instead of proving thy Charge before cited? Besides, the very self-same Paper
writ by G. F. which thou have cited as an instance of our Inconsistency and
Violence, was received, owned and approved at a Quarterly Meeting at Kendal in
Westmorland, in the Year 1671. And another written in approbation thereof, and
subscribed by some of thy own party, as John Wilkinson, Richard Stephanson,
Henry Garnet, and Twenty one more Friends, for encouraging of the Women's
assembling, and Religious Charitable Services before proposed, both which are
cited at large in our Book, Entitled, The Accuser of our Brethren, from page
98, to p. 102. Thus contradictory art thou to some of thy own Brethren, in thy
condemning the same Paper as an Imposition, Inconsistency and Violence to our
first Principles, which they so plainly approved of.

4 thly, Again, in pursuance of thy unrighteous Charge before cited, thou
recitest four passages out of a Paper of ours, dated, London, the 27th of the
3d Month, 1675. which was given as our Judgment and Advice in certain things
needful, for good Order among us (as we believed) The first Passage thou have
cited, is that for Marriages to be at least twice propounded to the Meetings,
that are to take care therein, etc. before they are accomplished, etc. Now
where is the Inconsistency here, with the Discipline in the Primitive Christian
Church, or the Violence done to our first Principles of Union? Instead of
proving thy charge by this instance, we have in thy Observation a piece of
Scorn and Mockery, viz. This notable, if not universal Council: Their new
stamped Government, p. 42. Oh! be ashamed of such Scorn and Folly! Is this thy
proof of thy charge? Is it a violation to our first Principles of Union, to
have Marriages proposed at least twice to the Meetings concerned? (both Men's
and Women's, where both are established) However, to be twice proposed to such
Meetings as are established, and to take care therein, to understand that the
Persons be clear, and Friends satisfied, before the Marriage be accomplished?
And this has been these many Years practiced among us; and I know no true Union
broken thereby, nor any violation done to our first Principles thereof: Be
ashamed therefore of thy fruitless attempts, in giving such an high charge
against us, when thou can make no proof it.

5 thly, Concerning our Testimony on behalf of Men's and Women's Meetings in the
Church of Christ; as for their Rise and Establishment, being in the counsel of
God, and for the encouraging Faithful and Grave Women therein, and to admonish
them that discountenance or weaken their Hands in the Work and Service of the
Lord, etc. Thou call this A Decree, a decretal Order; This New fashioned
Edict, p. 45, 46. And say, It has no relation to Scripture-Authority, Precept
or President; no relation to the Example of the Holy men of God recorded in
Scripture, nor any command of God or Jesus Christ. Why no Relation to them? How
provest thou that? what because we have not every particular circumstance of
Persons and things expressed? Whence it follows not that this has no relation to
Scripture or President, etc. Holy Women and Sisters in the Faith, Elder Widows
that were honorable, and Deaconesses, did many Religious and Charitable
Services in the Primitive Christian Churches: What then might they not meet and
confer together for one another help and encouragement in those Services they
had, and were frequently employed in? Can it either be a violence to their
Principles of Union for such to meet together? or have their Assemblies no
relation to Scripture? What contrariety thereto have they? Surely we always
accounted our Religious Meetings, to serve one another in Love, consistent with
our Union and the Principles thereof. And so for Godly Women to meet for those
Religious and Charitable ends and Services, for which their Assemblies are
intended, must needs be consistent with the same Principles of Love and Union,
and tend to the Increase thereof, and not to the Violation thereof, as thou
have falsely charged. Upon our Admonition, Not to discountenance or weaken their
Hands in the Work and Service of the Lord. Thou makes this observation, viz.
See what a strict and severe admonition is uttered forth, even as if it had
come from the Pope's Council of Jesuits and crafty Friars, [Scoffing and
Smiting still at the Women's Meetings] p. 46, 47.

How now (Francis) is this thy treatment and comparison of us? Had thou no
better than the Pope's Council of Jesuits and crafty Friars to compare us unto,
in our Testimony and Admonition? Oh! be ashamed of such foul, sordid, and
scornful, and false treatment, who instead of proving thy Charge of
Inconsistence and Violence, as before, now abuses us, mocks and scoffs, and
scandallizeth us, like a conceited proud Fool.

6 thly, Be ashamed also of thy scornfully upbraiding us with our Women's
Meetings, as an Idol of our own erecting; and asking, Why should it not
publicly be brought to Light, and made as manifest as the Lord Cromwell made
the Papists great Idol, to wit, the Rood of Grace (which had goggling Eyes, and
would smile when a good Gift was offorded to it) when he caused it to be
brought to Paul's Cross, where the People tore it all to pieces, in King Henry
the 8 ht's time, p. 47.

Oh, thou ungodly Wretch and malicious Informer! is this a fit Comparison and
Instance to present the Magistrates with, against our Christian, Religious,
Charitable and Sober Women's Meetings? And do thou under such an abominable
and odious Comparison thus expose them to the Magistrates, for their Meetings,
to be torn to pieces? Thou vile Wretch, blush and be ashamed of such malicious,
scornful and defaming Impertinences, thus instead of proving thy before-cited
Charge, to act the malicious, reviling and false accusing Informer against
God's People; then scornfully concludest thy Observation with these words, viz.
This notable, not Scriptural, but Anti-scriptural Edict, p. 48. Which is a
false Conclusion, without Premises, and a shameful begging the Question,
wherein thou art an Imposer; for not one sentence or word in all that said
Paper of our sense and Advice have thou proved ANTI-SCRIPTVRAL, or directly
contrary to Scripture, as thy terms are, p* 79. Thou should then have shown
us what Scripture forbids either faithful Women's Assembling, or those Religious
and Charitable ends and services proposed, which their Meetings are intended
for? I dare challenge thee in this to prove thy charge of Anti-scriptural.

7 thly, I do affirm, thou art so far from making good thy Charge, that for all
thy Attempts, I have still occasion to return the same charge upon thee that we
did upon William Rogers, which for a pretense thou citest, but do not answer
it, p. 39. viz.

What new and unchristian Doctrines and Practices are we fallen into? We find
no proof nor discovery thereof in all thy Book. I do profess seriously (however
thou scoffingly call me a notable serious George) I see no cause nor reason
thou show for the great noise and rumble thou make about outward Laws,
Prescriptions, Orders, Edicts or Decrees, outward form of Government, Apostasy,
Innovation, Impositions, Lording over Faith, over Conscience, etc. (To which I
may add thy terms, Women's Charter, Grant, Confirmation, New Order, Decretal
Order, New fashioned Edict, Popes Council, Papists great Idol, Canonical Rules,
New spiritual Lords, Decrees, Canons, Edicts of Men, Tyrannical proceedings,
etc.) whilst thou show to us no unjust, no unlawful nor uncomely Order or
Proceedings amongst us, as a People, nor yet give us any Catalogue or
Instance of those Impositions, Innovations, New Doctrines or Practices brought
in and received amongst us, which are INCONSISTENT with our first Testimony to
the Light and Grace of God within, and teaching thereof, or thereby condemned
as Evil, or wholly unnecessary in themselves (as our words are.)

8 thly, This thou do not answer, but Marvellest that G. Whitehead should
have the Confidence thus to call for a Catalogue of New Orders that are
introduced among us; or rather (say thou) Impudence to deny such things as
are every Month put in practice among us. And therefore say, thou will bring
forth Proof and President; first the Confirmation of the Foundation of the
Women's Meetings, namely, G. F 's Order by a general Council held at London,
1675.

To all which I must tell thee, thou do not follow the terms of the
Challenge, but ramblest impertinently, telling us of New Orders, such things,
the Confirmation of the Foundation of the Women's Meetings, etc. but provest not
those things (nor one thing) practiced among us as a People; or that first
Confirmation, as thou falsely call it, to be Inconsistent with (or contrary
to) our first Testimony to the Light and Grace of God within, and teachings
thereof. It Is not thy making a noise with New Orders, Decrees, etc. shall serve
thy turn in this point; but I challenge thee to prove that the setting up and
encouraging our faithful Women's Meetings are contrary to the Light and Grace of
God within and teachings thereof. This is matter thou have undertaken to bring
proof and president for. This is close to the terms of our Challenge, and thou
have but made shuffling, slubbering work about it.

9 thly, Moreover, what we propounded in our Paper aforesaid, (which thou
call The Confirmation by a general Council held at London, Anno 1675. and
which thou have instanced for proof of thy Charge of Inconsistency and
Violence, and consequently as Antichristian) was tenderly concluded in these
terms, viz. All which we recommend to the Evidence of Gods holy Witness in the
Hearts of his People. Query added. I do seriously ask William Rogers, if this
Paper of ours, thus Recommended, be sufficient proof of Imposition, and being
turned Antichristian? I desire plain Answer hereunto, in relation to what he
has granted for a Recommendation, etc.
Why did thou not take notice of this Conclusion, to have prevented thy false
charge of Imposition, wherein thou have contradicted thy Brother William
Rogers; for he has diverse times assented to and owned the giving advice and
counsel by way of Recommendation, distinguishing that from Imposition, as his
own Books and Words are evidence. But thou christ out, Impositions,
Inconsistency, Violence to our first Principles of Union, on that very same
Paper which is concluded by way of Recommendation to the Evidence of Gods holy
Witness in the Hearts of his People. And to this and other Papers of Advice,
Judgment, etc. thou have opposed Liberty of Conscience, and so made void
Spiritual Censures, contrary to the very Author thou have printed, owned and
espoused, as being of the same Judgment with thee, where he says, page 138.
part 1. It Is very fit, that wheresoever you will suppose Errors to be sprung
up, all the means Christ has appointed for that end should be used to suppress
them, and reclaim Men from them: Let their Mouths be stopped with sound
Doctrine and Spiritual Censures. The only Question is about the use of the
Temporal Power in such things. -- Principles and Opinions in the Mind were
never extinguished by the punishing the Body. Here his Liberty of Conscience
pleaded, is not from spiritual Censures, as thou have perverted it, but from
corporal Punishments.

10 thly, Whereas in our Book, Accuser, etc. page 127. we signified, that
having these things in our Eye, viz. The great ends of true Religion and
Christian Society, a godly Care over one another, provoking one another to Love
and good Works, we can the more easily concur and accord, as to Circumstances
and outward Methods; and in the Wisdom of God so to condescend one to another,
and accommodate matters, as not to divide about them, etc.

Against this thou exceptest, in these words, viz. p. 96. I marvel that the
Author of the Accuser, etc. which is said to be G. Whitehead, should have the
Confidence thus to appear in Print, when his own Conscience tells him the
contrary, instancing R. Smith of Colne, as not admitted to have his Wife,
because he would not go into the Women's Meeting: The grand Opposer was G. W. --
It may evidently appear how far G. W. was from Accommodation or Condescension,
which he fallaciously pretends to the World, in order to deceive them, to cover
their Deceit, Hypocrisy and Arbitrary Church Government, Dominion and
Lordship, etc. p. 97.

And to aggravate the matter against G. W. in page 129. thou say, That the
pretense of the Author of the Accuser, to Condescension and Accommodation is
fallacious and false, and a mere piece of feigned Hypocrisy to amuse the
Reader and delude the World. And likewise in page 150. thou art smiting at G.
W. on the same account.

Here thou have brought my name upon the Stage in Print, but have most grossly
belyed me and abused me, as to my Conscience, in saying it tells me the
contrary. Be ashamed of this thy presumptious bespattering and abusing me in
Print; for my Conscience tells me, I was real in what I proposed in
Condescension and Accommodating matters, and that I was no deceiver therein, as
thou proudly slanderest me. The Condescension and Accommodation was to those
that had the great ends of true Religion, Christian care and love one to
another in their Eye; it was to the upright and tender hearted, and not to the
exalted, hard and wilful. And I gave my Christian and tender Advice to the
Person who then proposed his Intention, in order to convince him of the
reasonableness of what I proposed, and he showed no reason against it, but
remained stiff and pertinacious, which I cannot impute to a real tender
Conscience; the woman was tender and flexible, and of a better Spirit.
Therefore be ashamed of abusing and belying me in Print, as for appearing in
Print contrary to my Conscience, as thou have shamefully belyed me, and so
falsely informed the Magistrates against me, as about Condescension and
Accommodation (and diverse other things) about which I must farther tell thee,
The condescension of primitive Christians was to them of low degree, the strong
in bearing with the weak, bearing one another burdens, and so fulfilling the
Law of Christ. The Persons unto whom the Condescension was, were in a measure
of the same faith and love; it was not to false Brethren (such as thou art) or
to false Apostles, deceitful Workers, who caused Divisions, etc. false Brethren
that watched with an evil Eye, to such the true Apostle gave not place by
subjection, no, not for an hour: What Apostolical condescension was then given
to them? There was an Apostolical authority and sharpness, against such evil
Agents of Strife and Division (such as thy self) that they should be marked, as
well as a condescension to weak (yet upright-hearted) Brethren.

11 thly, In the Certificate, printed by thee from Huntington-Meeting, to the
Quarterly Meeting in the Isle of Ely, about the said R. S. his publishing his
Intentions of taking to Wife A. O. of Aldred, but grieved some Friends by
rejecting their Counsel; After some Friends, there is this Parenthesis added,
viz. [ Perhaps Richard Jobson and Tobias Hardmeat, G. Fox 's two principal
Studs in that Country.] This looks like a scornful Forgery of thy own framing
and addition; And I find no Advertisement to distinguish or except it as thy
own, as thou have done in thy Letter to W. P. about the Copy of Orders Recorded
as Your Canon (as thou scornfully call them) in the Quarterly -- verbatim,
Parenthesis excepted (say thou) p. 139. Remember thou have confessed, That to
expose and falsely represent a People, would be very wicked; and such a Practice
is, and ever was hated of God and good men, p. 208. Yet after thou have
promised to recite the said Certificate, p. 96. thou have, as before, inserted
the said scornful Parenthesis, viz. [ Perhaps R. Jobson and T. Hardmeat, G. Fox
's two principal Studs in that Country] p. 97, 98. Unto which thou have
subscribed Jasper Robins, Edward Neel, William Whitehead, James Parris, Thomas
Bundy, Richard Tailor, Thomas Bagly, Nathaniel Cawthorn, Nathaniel Neel. Now I
am persuaded, that these very Persons, Jasper Robins, and the rest, if they
come to observe the said scornful Parenthesis inserted in their said
Certificate, unto which their Names are subscribed, as well as the rest of it,
and that without such Advertisement or Exception, as before, they will look upon
it, and judge it as thy own Scurrility and gross Forgery, and thereupon they
may testify against thee, for exposing and falsely representing them in Print,
to that which is none of theirs, and that therefore thou have done that which
is very Wicked, a practice that is and ever was hated of God and good Men,
according to thy own Sentence.

12 thly, Whereas in thy printed Letter to Friends of our Meeting in London,
thou say, That R. R. needed not be admired by G. W. in Print, for his great
Learning, nor perhaps had not, only he has found out some History, or Popish
Author, which says, there were Deaconesses as well as Deacons; which (say
thou) was helpful to G. W. in his Preaching and Disputing for Women's Meetings
lately in Huntingtonshire, and elsewhere, etc. p. 178.

Thou might have forborne these and other scornful Detractions, cast upon R.
R. and my self, and upbraiding him with, Oh! Profound Learning, Logic etc. He
can easily answer thy Impertinencies and Silliness, and evince thy Pride and
Conceit, in meddling with Learning and Logic, which thou have so little of. As
for R. R. he is known to be learned both as a Man and a Christian; yet not
admired by me for any acquired parts; though without offense, he may be allowed
his due in those things, without admiration or boasting, and therein to be
prefered to thy self, who neither writest good English, nor understandest
diverse words of Learning thou make use of improperly and impertinently, which
I do not mention to detract from and upbraid thee, merely because of such
defect in Learning, but rather as a Reproof to thy high Conceit, and busying
thy self so much in Scribbling, and that about matters beyond thy capacity to
manage, or render a Reason to decide, and that thou may see that there are
others can see and discover thy Ignorance and shallow Conceits, as even in this
thy Objection against Deaconesses, concluding, That only R. R. has found out
some History or Popish Author, which says, there were Deaconesses as well as
Deacons. In this thou have shown as well a great deal of ignorance of History,
as scorn and contempt; yea, not only Ignorance in that, but Presumption too,
and as little Learning to be sure, in other respects, to place the proof of
Deaconesses so indifferently upon some History or Popish Author, as if there
were so little difference or distinction, but that if it be some History, then
it may as well be said some Popish Author; however, thou know not whether it
be some History or Popish Author. But to correct such Ignorance and
Presumption, there are Histories and Authors which are not Popish, yea, diverse
Protestant Authors, which affirm Deaconesses to have been in the Primitive
Christian Churches, and they were called Diaconissae* and even in Romans 16.1.
Paul himself called Phaebe (...) (i. e. a Deacon, which is a Word borrowed of
the Greek) in Latin Ministra, in English A Servant or Minister. I hope thou will not call Paul a Popish Author, writing so to the Romans. And on Romans 16.1.
1 Timothy 5.9. Deacon is said to be a Title of Office or Administration, given
sometimes to Women, vide The Christian-Dictionary, by Thomas Wilson, Bagwell,
and Andrew Simpson; to which also agrees Edward Leighs Critica Sacra, and T.
C's Greek Lexicon on the word (...), (...) Mas. and Fem.
given to Sister Phaebe, in Romans 16.1. We have William Cave's Lives of the
Primitive Fathers for the three first Ages of Christianity, and that even in
the time of the Emperor Trajan, there were Deaconesses that suffered, that were
examined upon the Rack (see fol. 21.) As also I find in a Book, entitled A
Brief of the Bible's History, by Enoch Clapham, Printed 1608. who writ against
the Romish Idolaters, fol. 162. And in fol. 171. He thus affirms, For the
Deacons all almost easily grant, that there were two sorts of Deacons, or
Church-Servitors; the first of Men, Acts 6.3. etc. 1 Timothy 3.8. The second of
Women, 1 Timothy 5.9. etc. Romans 16.1. That the first had the charge of gathering
the Benevolence of the Saints (especially every first day of the Week, 1 Cor.
16.1.) -- That the second attended the Sick and Impotent, it is by many held.
[Thus far this Protestant Author, besides many other Protestants that might be
cited in this very point, some whereof I told R. R. of, who says, He has many
others he has not produced, and Challenges you to bring one approved Author, to
show that Women had no Service in the first Churches.] And though the Rhemists
grant there were Diaconissae or Deaconesses, I do not find that Dr. Fulk does
oppose them in that, but about their being concerned in the Sacraments, and in
their Superstitions, Nunneries, denying Marriages, etc. (as the Papists would
have them.) For as to Deaconesses, and their Services in the Christian
Churches, there is great concurrence of History, and ancient and modern
Writers, as well Protestants, (if not more) as Papists. And therefore thy
placing it upon some Popish Author, does greatly manifest not only Ignorance,
but rather Presumption, Pride and Contempt against faithful Women's service in
the Church of Christ: And I can assure thee, that I had not these precedent
(and other) Citations from R. Richardson, but mostly from my own search and
observations on the Authors themselves; though R. R. may be better credited in
his Affirmation on Knowledge, than thy self in thy ignorant Negation.

13 th, Again, I take notice of thy Charge against me, in thy said printed
Letter to our Meeting in London, p 178. where scornfully writing against, and
reflecting on G. W. his preaching and disputing for Women's Meetings in
Huntingtonshire. Thou go on in these words, viz. Where he took too much upon
him, and behaved himself more like a Lordly Bishop, or Popish Prelate, than an
humble Minister of Christ; and by me at this time is, and stands impeached as
an Enemy to Christian-Liberty, a Usurper over the Conscience, the which I stand
ready publicly to assert, maintain and vindicate, p. 178.

Thus far thou in thy insolent Reviling and Abuse, boasting of thy pretended
Impeachment against me: But I have met with no lawful nor due Impeachment from
thee in any Gospel judicial way. Thou writest thus against me to the Friends of
our Second day's Meeting in London, but they cannot own nor receive any such
pretended and proof-less Impeachment against me upon thy bare Accusation, nor
that thou have any Jurisdiction to impeach me, as by thy unjustly comparing me
to a Lordly Bishop, or Popish Prelate, and rendering me an Enemy to
Christian-Liberty, an usurper over the Conscience: But this is but like thy
accusing me as a Cheat, at having gone up and down to cheat the Country, after
thou had flattered and fawned in another Letter, and entreated my assistance
for the ending of the Controversy, as one that could do much in the matter;
but now revilest me all to naught, boasting how ready thou stands Publicly to
assert, maintain and vindicate. And what? But that G. W. took too much upon him
in Huntingtonshire, and behaved himself more like a Popish Prelate, etc. An
Enemy to Christian-Liberty. And what worse Marks and Characters of Infamy
could thou have cast upon me? and what more severe Excommunication or Bull
could thou have exhibited in Print against me? How like an exalted,
malicious, prating Diotrephes? how like a Pope? how like the Accuser of the
Brethren have thou acted? Thou accusest, scornest and railest, but provest
nothing of matter charged: And can any reasonably think thou have thy Proofs in
readiness against me out of Huntingtonshire, of these black and infamous
Characters thou have cast upon me? Thy own bare Accusations are no Proofs to be
sure. The Lord rebuke this thy envious dark Spirit: And he will rebuke it.

But ( Francis) art not thou thy self against Christian-Liberty of Conscience?
and an usurper over the Women's Consciences (so far as thou can) in thy
perverse and ignorant opposition against Women's Meetings, who have a Conscience
toward God, and our Lord Jesus Christ therein? What Liberty of Conscience
do thou allow them therein? or to me in preaching and discoursing in
Huntingtonshire, or elsewhere, thus to send out thy Roaring Bull against me in
Print, without first either enquiring of me, or hearing me and my Accusers (if
there be any besides thy self) face to face? What kind of illegal Precipiancy
art thou guilty of! and yet none more ready to make a great clamor against
Excommunications, Orders, Edicts, etc. than thy self? Oh Imperious, Proud,
Conceited Person! Blush and be ashamed of such Abusive, Inconsistent and
Self-contradictory Work! Be ashamed of thy assuming such Power of
Excommunication to thy self over thy Elders, Ancient Friends and Brethren, who
are approved Servants of Christ. How like a Popish Prelate, yea, like the Pope
himself have thou proudly, maliciously and imperiously acted against me and
others of the faithful Servants and Ministers of Christ Jesus? Be ashamed
therefore and confounded because of thy Insolent and Slanderous Abuses against
the Innocent; and particularly of thy gross Lie against me and others, viz.
That the holy Scripture is by us slighted, p. 152. Be ashamed, I say, of this
abominable Lie.

And for Confutation to thy abuse of me before, read the following Certificate
from Persons of better Credit than thy self.

Huntingtonshire. From our Monthly Meeting at Godmanchester, the 11th day of
the 5th Month, 1682.
WHereas George Whitehead has been evilly traduced in two Letters of Francis
Bugg's, and charged in one of them with behaving himself in Huntingtonshire
like a Lordly Bishop or Popish Prelate, lately. -- Now we whose Names are
subscribed, do testify, We never in this County, nor elsewhere at any time,
saw any such thing; and that he is a man far remote from any such matter; but
do believe he is a true Labourer in Gods service, and an humble Minister of the
Gospel.

Matthew Kay, Samuel Nottingham, Tobias Hardmeat, Robert Lister, Jasper Robins,
John Wilsford, John Aversett, John Marshall, William Starling, Richard
Snazdale, John King, David Tisoeth, Thomas Lyster, Richard Jobson.


14 th, And thy malicious scribbling tends, in diverse parts of it, unjustly to
render us Obnoxious and Offensive to Authority, by wickedly and falsely rendering
the Proceedings of some of our Christian Meetings Tyrannical and Antichristian,
and comparing us to the Popes Councils, to Popes, etc. And all this to Henry
North, Knight, and the Magistrates too, is next to prosecuting us for our
Liberties or Lives. --

So disgustful may be thy trumpeting and publishing in Print the Moderation of
H. North, Knight, (p. 194.) and his mercifulness in taking notice of our
threatened Ruin, and preventing it, etc. as in thy Epistle Dedicatory to him,
that doubtless we think Henry North as a prudent man will not thank thee for
thus trumpeting his Fame abroad in Print, on behalf of Dissenters; for such
kind of Ostentatious dealing is offensive and hateful to great Persons of
Prudence, who would not have their goodness exposed to public censure or
reflection, nor be represented as Persons Popular for any dissenting Parties.

I have many more things material against thy Book; but I desire thee to accept
of my Labor and honest Endeavors; and what I have written thus largely to
thee, as an act of Christian Condescension and good Will for thy Conviction,
that thou may yet be abased and humbled unto Repentance and public
Condemnation of thy wicked and scurrilous Book, if the Lord will yet please to
give thee an Heart to Repent and acknowledge the Truth, which thou have deeply
offended and sinned against with thy Lies and Lightness.

And I desire to know, if after the reading and perusal of this my large
Letter, thou art at all minded to relent and retract thy Book, or any part of
it, and accordingly to give forth a plain Condemnation or Recantation as
public. To this I expect answer shortly from thee, otherwise trouble me not
with any disingenious or scurrilous Letters.

Thy Abused (yet Well-wishing) Friend, George Whitehead.
London, the 3 d day of the 8 th Month, 1682.
Postscript since added. Wherein F. B's fallacy about the Record in the
Quarterly Meeting Book in the Isle of Ely, his abuse of the Servants of Christ,
his Contradiction about William Penn, his Scorn, Malice and Ranting Doctrine,
are detected and reprehended.
WHen I was lately in the Isle of Ely, I made enquiry about the account which
thou F. Bugg give in thy Observations, page 52. viz. concerning a Minister
(thou know who thou mentionedst) being recorded out of the Unity, for not
taking his Wife according to the Order of Friends (i. e.) not publishing his
Intentions before the Women's Meetings, as hereafter Yet I find it not So
manifest afterward in thy Book at all.
will be further manifest (say thou) but not one recorded that ever thou
remembrest for any breach of Gods Commandments, page 53. For which acount thou
referest any man to search the Records of your Quarterly Meeting Book in
Hadenham in the Isle of Ely, etc.

But upon my enquiry I find, that Friends do positively give a contrary
account, and do plainly affirm, that there were no Women's Meeting Then at that
time in being in those parts (or within that Monthly Meeting) in
Cambridgshire, where the said Person lives, who proposed his Intentions of
Marriage but once before the Men; And if so, thy account must be notoriously
false, and thou may be horridly ashamed to divulge it, as also of thy
frequently saying, He was recorded out of the Unity; whenas Friends only
recorded, That they have no Union with him in his so doing, as thou have cited
it, page 63. which is only relative to that particular Act ( viz.) of his
refusing to come twice to the Meeting, and not in such general Terms to exclude
the Person Out of the Unity in all respects: Therefore thou appearest
fallacious in thy account.

As concerning the Paper of our sense and advice, dated, London, the 27 th of
the 3 d Month, 1675. (consisting of diverse particular weighty matters) which
thou make thy principal Instance of our Apostasy and Violence upon our first
Principles of Union, and about which thou have so much scofft and derided at
us; I must tell thee that I know not one Person who subscribed tha^ Paper, but
have cause to stand by it, an^ will stand by it, though unjustly and defamingly
smote at, derided and contemned by thee. And why did not publish all our said
Paper? Thou say, Thou have taken enough to show our Innovations and manifest
Apostacies, page 50. as if all that Paper were matter of such Proof; which is a
most slanderous Insinuation; for thou have not proved one of these Instances of
our said Paper either a Violation to our first Principles of Union,
Antiscriptural, or Inconsistent with the Church Discipline, Order and
Government in the Primitive Times among true Christians, as thou pretendest,
nor in the least tending to Apostasy or Antichristianism. Thou have taken upon
thee to stigmatize, brand and defame both our Testimony and the Subscribers,
particularly William Penn, thou have compared and rank't among such Unchristian
Societies, Violators, Innovators, Apostates, Pope's Council, Arbitrary
Authority, etc. Thou art very loud in thy Charge, but mute in Proof, and
wanting in Argument. And how do thou herein agree with thy self, where in
page 133. thou call William Penn, This Noble Man, and in page 135. Dear W.
P. and in page 144. thou prayst for William Penn in these words, (viz.) I pray
God keep thee steady, and with a continual Dependency upon the Divine
Revelation, etc. when thou have represented the same Person W. P.
Antichristian, Apostate, Innovator, etc. as if thou should pray thus for him,
(viz.) Thou Antichristian Apostate, I pray God keep thee steady. Such Absurdity
does thy Contradiction produce, who thus one while calumniatest and revilest,
and another while flatterest and prayest for the same Person; one while judging
and condemning the said Person as Antichristian, Imposer, Innovator, etc.
another while counting him Noble Man, A Dear Man, etc. Thou exclaimest against
Religious Societies, Excommunicating, Condemning a Person as out of the Unity,
when it was but that They have no Unity with him in his SO doing, (i e. in his
irregular Proceeding out of Unity and Order with them, in proposing his
Intention of Marriage but Once to the Meeting, and that in the Woman's absence)
whilst thou thy self art (like an exalted Diotrephes, yea, like a Pope with thy
printed Bull) Excommunicating, Condemning, Deriding and Contemning the Servants
of Christ by Name in Print, as William Penn, George Whitehead, Stephen Crisp,
Alex. Parker, Thomas Salthouse, John Burnyeat, etc. for proceeding and giving
their Christian Advice, Sense and Judgment, according to their Consciences and
inward Persuasions, relating to good Order in the Church of Christ.

Thus inconsistent art thou, conceited proud Scorner and false pretender to
Liberty of Conscience, who have given more black Characters, and made a worse
(to speak ad hominem) Record even in Print against these and diverse other
faithful Servants of Christ, than only for a Meeting to Record in Manuscript
their having No Union with a particular Person in his Irregular Proceeding in
this or that particular act; for thou have recorded these before mentioned
Servants of Christ by name as Antichristian, Imposers, Innovators, etc. and
compared them to the Popes Council in Print, and that in thy Book intended for
the Magistrates, as by thy Epistle appears, page 3. Thus inconsistent and
contradictory to thy self art thou in thy pretended Plea for Liberty of
Conscience, whilst thou art Defaming, Condemning and Excommunicating many of
the Servants of Christ among us, for the exercise and testimony of their tender
Consciences in their Christian Advice and Admonition, which is all one as to
seek to stop their Mouths from preaching, exhorting others, etc. And this is
not all thy Inconsistency and Confusion, the fruit of thy Malice and Treachery;
but thou have presented such a one as Henry North, Knight, and the Magistrates
with such abominable Lies and Abuses, as if (like a malicious Informer and
Incendiary) the Devil and thou designed not only the perpetual Reproach of the
People called Quakers, but an Aggravation of their Sufferings and Persecutions;
against whom the chief ground of thy Book also is a gross Slander and great
Lie, (viz.) That their way of Compelling, and Antichristian way of proceeding
to bring to and force an Uniformity, Epis. p. 4. And thus raging against our
Friends in these terms, (viz.) These Tyrannical Proceedings have been used by
our New Spiritual Lords, Epis. p. 6. with much more Infamy, Slander and Scorn
cast upon us in thy Book, for which the hand of the Lord will be upon thee: Thy
Envy and Wickedness is judged of the Lord; take heed how thou persistest in it,
lest he make thee an Example.

In thy sixth Chapter thou art, according to thy wonted course of Malice and
Scorn, inveighing against our Women's Meetings, falsely charging them with
usurped Authority, unlimited Power and Rule, placed in their Meetings by G. F.
and others; which is a gross abuse and slander. Also thou art inveighing
against presenting Intentions of Marriage before them by both the Persons, p.
118, 119. And this is not all the Fruit of thy perverse opposition, but in the
same Chapter, p. 123. after diverse Citations, thou bring a comparison or
instance of eating Flesh or Fish, as being indifferent and free; and then
addest, that These with ALL other outward Works be Things Indifferent, and may
be used, and also left. I must tell thee ( Francis) that this Position makes
void all Christian-Discipline, good Order and Church Government, leaving all
loose and uncertain: And we are sure thou have here asserted corrupt Doctrine,
tending to practical Ranterism it self; for here thou make no exception; thy
assertion is general, not only of eating of Flesh and Fish, but of ALL other
outward works, that they be things Indifferent, that may be used, and also
left: See now if this be not sordid Ranterism; this loose, gainsaying Spirit
leads into both, to thy own contradiction, where thou pretendest for
Church Discipline, Order and Government, as in thy Title page thou seem to
grant were in the Primitive times, (i. e. among the Primitive Christians, as we
understand.) But what Discipline, Order or Government in the Church can thou
Conscientiously plead, and be consistent with thy Position (viz.) That all
outward Works be things Indifferent, etc? How contrary to the Apostles Doctrine
also is this? for all good Works, which God has ordained we should walk in;
these are not indifferent to be used, and also left; outward works of
Righteousness, Justice, Goodness, Charity, etc. commanded of God, are not
Indifferent to be used and also left: Solemn contracts and engagements in
Marriage are not Indifferent: Persons may not break solemn Contracts, due and
orderly Proceedings: Men may not leave their Wives when they please, as an
indifferent thing. But this Libertine Spirit that gave out and printed the said
Ranters assertion, in placing such Indifferency upon ALL outward works or
things, as that they may be used, and also left, has thereby cast off all
Bonds, Limitations, outward Discipline, Order and Government of Truth, relating
to Conversation.

We have much more in reserve against thy Book, which at present I do forbear
adding for brevity's sake, and refer the Reader to R. Sandiland's single
Answer, Entitled, Righteous Judgment placed upon the Heads of malicious
Opposers and persecuting Apostates, against thy malicious Book; and also to
Tho. Elwood's Antidote against the Infection of William Rogers 's Book,
miscalled, The Christian-Quaker, etc. Your Envy, Confusions, perverse
in-and-out ways and hard Speeches are judged by the Lord, and his Hand is
against you therein; and I question not but God will more signally determine
the Controversy against that proud contentious Spirit of Envy, Scorn, and
false Jealousy: And Truth lives, and shall live and reign over it all.

CHAP. VIII.
. 1. Thomas Crisp being joined with William Rogers as a busy Agent in
Division, as also his abuse of George Whitehead, by part of an old Letter from
B. F. The reason of their being linked together in this Treatise. B. F. his
late Testimony on G. W.'s behalf against T. C.. 2. Notice taken of a few
Passages in Thomas Crisp's Pamphlets: The reason thereof particularly about
Tithes: His unsound Proposition: His Injustice unto and abuse of John Crook in
impertinently quoting his Authority in the case, contrary to John's Principle
and Testimony. 3. How dis-ingenious Tho. Crisp is in his Authorities and
Citatio^s about Tithes; And how like his Brother John Pennyman, against our
plain Language. Of J. Pennyman's furious roaring Letter against G. F. etc.
containing the like unjust Reflections with W. R. T. C. etc. about Impositions,
Prescriptions, etc. The Spiritual Christian, who has the Power and Form of
Godliness, distinguished and vindicated, both from the Formal Christian and
Loose Apostate, who deny both Power and Form.. 4. The unsound Doctrine of
Robert Rich espoused by T. C. tending to Ranterism. About Forms, Prescriptions,
Impositions, etc. R. R. a false Accuser like the rest of these Apostates: His
Authority made use of by T. C. and F. Bugg, invalid. J. Perrot's Spirit and
Language appearing in these present Opposers.. 5. About T. C's Marrying by a
Priest, and his Wife's condemning it: His rendering the holy Spirit
contradictory to it self in the matter of Tithes: His Answer to John Field,
dirty, scurrilous, and impertinent: His abuse of his Wife and Friends in the
case, misrepresenting them in his Prejudice and Incharitableness; judging and
defaming others, contrary to his own warning. He himself reprehended and
warned.. 6. His endeavoring to extenuate his Offense about Marrying by a
Priest, and paying Tithes. His Instance and Allegation in the case, but slight
covers. And he proved Irreligious and Fallacious in his preceding and arguing
contrary to the Profession and Testimony of a real Christian-Quaker.. 7. His
Judgment about Tithes, as it accords with W. R's, still unsound and loose, and
they not excusable in the Declension and Apostasy.. 8. His Reply to Stephen
Crisp, disingenious and fallacious. A Catalogue of some of the notorious
Falsehoods and Slanders therein. His Reviling and foul Detractions against
Stephen Crisp.. 9. Concerning the Paper which W. R. and T. C. have published
and printed in Edward Burroughs's Name, To the scattered of Israel, etc. Their
implicit Credulity and Confidence therein, and abuse of Edward Buroughs, with
Reasons given by a Certificate and Testimony, to show it in most probability to
be John Perrot's, and not E. Burroughs's Paper: All which is recommended to
Serious Consideration.

. 1. WHereas Thomas Crisp has of late time struck in with William Rogers and
his party, as a busy Agent in Division, and as hot and violent in his abusive
Language and Reflection, as the most of them, for want of better Argument and
Reason, he is also gotten into the same kind of style and strain with W. R. and
F. B. against promoting Government, Orders, Customs, Forms, Prescriptions, etc.
as in several of his late Pamphlets, called Testimonies. I find also that these
Opposers have recourse to one another Writings, and quote each other, and
thereby show their own Authorities for themselves in the Controversy, for want
of better Proof, as W. R. cites F. B. in his seventh Part, from page 64, to
page 75. and F. B. quotes W. R. and Tho. Crisp's Babels Builders, in his 112
page of his said Book, De Christ. Lib. and Thomas Crisp in his fifth part
Babels Builders, quotes something he calls Q. Un. M. which I understand to be a
pernicious Pamphlet of John Pennyman's, which F. Bugg has threatened us with in
several Papers And whereunto we have a full Answer in being, in Manuscript,
reserved (about five Years) in order to pursue and detect that of J. P.'s, if
divulged abroad in Print.
so that these Opposers seem to be joined together in one and the same Spirit
of Division, Opposition and Separation, and therefore may well be linked
together as Persons concerned in one and the same Interest; and not only so,
but I find a Paper in T. Crisp's third Edition, which he calls George Bishop's
Testimony, against a Paper of Orders, which is the very same Paper that Jeffery
Bullock (some Years ago, cited against us, in his Pamphlet, styled,
Antichrist's Transformations, and which the said Jeffery Bullock did so publish
in Print against G. Whitehead, J. Whitehead, T. Green, T. Briggs, A. Parker, J.
Coule, R. Farnsworth, T. Lo, S. Crisp, J. Moon, J. Parkes, by Name, who are
struck at for no other cause, but a Paper, wherein we gave our Christian sense
and seasonable advice, which we see no cause to Repent of; and therefore G. B's
Paper cited by the said Jeffery Bullock and Thomas Crisp, in opposition to that
of ours, proceeded from a mistaken Judgment and is, Uncharitable against us, as
well as Erroneous in diverse parts of it As in his opposing Pastors, Teachers,
Elders, etc. in our day, and the Spirit to them, and rendering us at inforceing
Orders, and setting our selves in the place of the HEIR, etc. And he was
Answered in his Life time by several of the Servants of Christ w^^ withstood
his opposition in this matter.
But the Author is gone, I shall say the less, and charitably believe God took
him away in Mercy, and that if he had remained to this day, he would not have
stood by these Gainsayers, in the evil use they make of his Paper in Print
against so many of the Servants of Christ. But I have not done with T. Crisp
for his so often printing part of a Letter from B. F. to me, when he was under
a Cloud and mistake in the Controversy and Division occasioned by J. Perrot,
etc. against Friends for putting off their Hats in Prayer; in which Letter I
and some others are reflected upon, and charged, That if ever any separation
be, it will be through mine, and some lording, rigid, driving Spirits, against
which I have in humility appealed to the Lord, to plead my Innocence in the
Consciences of all concerned, my labor having been and still is, for Love and
Unity among God's People; and I take it not only unkindly from T. C. but as his
Injustice and an Abuse so often to bring forth that piece of a Letter in Print
against me, which was before published and printed more fully by some malicious
Adversaries, in their Pamphlet, styled, Tyranny and Hypocrisy, printed in the
year 1673. In answer to which, I desire T. C. and the rest of the party
concerned would now accept and consider B. F's own late Testimony, seeing the
Lord in mercy has reduced him to a better understanding and judgment, than he
was in when he writ the said Letter.

Benj. Furly's Testimony follows.
WHereas I understand that sundry persons, to me unknown, have diverse times
formerly, and now again lately published in Print certain extracts of a Letter
written by me, as I take it about sixteen years ago to G. W. keeping up and
feeding thereby a Spirit of Contention and Strife. This is in brief to
signify, That what has hitherto been done of this nature, has been altogether
without my order, consent or privity; for my soul hates that Spirit of
Prejudice, Enmity and Contention, by which some men (though perhaps, poor men!
not knowing by what spirit influenced, what spirit they gratify, and what
spirit they grieve and wound in this their work) so acted, led and driven. As
for so many of them that are merely under a mistake, I do from my heart pity
them, and am touched with the sense of their Condition, as having labored
under the same snares. Wherefore my earnest desire for them is, That they may
be made sensible of that which they seem so earnestly to contend for; yea, even
for them that are so tinctured and leavened with Prejudice, that they do
wittingly and with some degree of Malice, foment Contention. I cannot but
desire, if it be the will of God, that they may through Judgment come to know
Repentance, and through Repentance receive Mercy and Remission in and by the
Blood of Jesus Christ, to whom all such do do despite.

And as for those Papers so long since given forth by me, not discerning what
spirit did then influence me (for so it is, that the actions of men are many
times influenced both by good and evil Spirits, though they perceive it not,
how much soever the Notion of Spirits, ridiculed by the Atheistick
Philosophasters and wild Wits of this age) I did many years since recall them,
and make it my request, that any that had them in their custody might make no
further ill use of them; and to have found the contrary since, has been no
small grief to me, especially to see so often repeated these personal
Reflections by me used against G.F. and G.W. whom I truly honor in the Lord
for their works and labors of Love.

However, I would not have any malicious Persons from hence take occasion to
think, much less to say or represent, that I have hereby revoked, or do in the
least intend to inervate any of the words in that or any other Paper, so far as
they are assertive of a just and equal Liberty of Conscience.

For I do firmly believe, That there is no Principle maintained amongst Mankind
that stands upon f^^^er Foundations, that is more becoming the Rulers of this
World in their respective Dominions, nor more agreeable to the Life and Spirit
of Christianity, than is that of Liberty of Conscience. Neither let any man on
the other hand think or say, That I do hereby in the least hinder the Church of
Christ from judging, condemning and testifying against things and Persons by
the Spirit of Christ, for preaching things which those persons erring from the
spirit of Christ, may judge not only to be allowable as their Christian
Liberty, but even look upon to be their very duty.

For as the Principle of Liberty of Conscience is in it self most reasonable
and christian, so is this latter of denying All Judging upon any account most
unreasonable, blind and foolish.

And they that cannot see, that these two Principles of Liberty and Judgment,
are not only consistent, but very harmonious with each other, are to be pitied
for their weakness and half-sightedness; of which perhaps, God giving life and
ability, I may at another time say more -- In the mean while I wish heartily,
that all that profess and name the Name of Jesus, the Prince of Peace, would
seek peace and ensue it.

Benjamin Furly.

Now Tho. Crisp and the rest concerned, see by these Lines how far B. F. has
distinguished the point in Controversy, and cleared himself upon a better
understanding concerning the said Letter, and against the perverse use thou
have made of it in Print to reproach me withal.

. 2. And since thou have causlesly aspersed me with it, and so far censoriously
exposed me in Print, as thou have done, when I sought no occasion against thee,
nor designed Controversy with thee; and seeing thou art grown so hardy and
confident as to make thy self such a public Agent and Advocate for W. R. and
his Party in the Controversy, I have not yet done with thee, but am concerned
further to take notice of a few Passages in thy Pamphlets, which I look upon as
very corrupt and perverse, and contrary to our ancient and constant Testimony,
born among us on behalf of Christ.

The first is in thy Pamphlet, styled, Several Testimonies, 3 d Edition, which
is also printed in others of thy Pamphlets, in these words, viz. page 26.

I fear you take more care for the strict Observation of your own Orders and
Traditions than the Truth in the Heart; for if any use not your Language, or
observe not to do just as others, in Tithes or other CIVIL RIGHTS, which the
Laws of our Land require, and ought to be observed, (unless God by his Spirit
in the Heart does forbid, or any do really for Conscience sake refuse) But if
one cannot do so, must he therefore judge his Brother? That may be required of
one that may not be required of another; for Growth or Measure may differ, Romans
14.

AND J. Crook says, We read of -- Cain and Abel, two men performing the same
Action, attended with the same Formalities, etc. and yet the one accepted, and
the other rejected. In like manner may two Persons be found in contrary
Actions, Postures, Gestures, and yet both accepted of God; for if I should lay
a Bond upon my self therein, I transgress the liberty of the spirit, either as
to time, constancy or place; or if another should lay a Bond upon me, or put a
Yoke about the Neck of the Disciples, this is no more justifiable than the
former.

To the first part, being thy words, I must tell thee, thy Proposition is
unsound and inconsistent with our ancient Testimony, as well as Contradictory
in its self: Unsound in that it bespeaks thou art not principl'd against the
Payment of Tithes in this Gospel day, and have not retained a true or certain
Judgment against them in thy esteeming and accounting of them amongst Civil
Right, but Rites in thy other Pamphlet, which ought to be observed; and
implying, that a Brother is not to be judged for observing (or paying) them. I
am sure this is contrary to the Testimony born and received among us from the
beginning. And to thy granting, that God by his Spirit in the Heart may forbid
them, or that for Conscience sake some refuse them; as if the Spirit of the
Lord did allow one Brother to pay Tithes as a civil Right, and forbid another;
or that from a different Growth or Measure of Grace, one Brother may be
required to refuse the Payment of Tithes, and another Brother not so required,
and therefore not to be judged for the Payment of them, being both under the
same Profession and Dispensation: Is not this Inconsistent and Babylonish, yea,
and tending to apparent Ranterism, to render the Spirit and different Measures
thereof so contrary and opposite in its requirings, in a matter so eminent and
weighty as that of Tithes? wherein our manifest Testimony has been so
positive, and the Sufferings of many so deep and heavy for not paying Tithes,
and whereof the very first breaking forth of the Light and dawning of the
Gospel Day did convince many Thousands, when their Eyes were first opened to
see the Corruption of that Ministry which is upheld by Tithes and forced
Maintenance; therefore T. C. thou art gone from the Light that first convinced
thee, in thus confusedly arguing for Tithes; and thy Proposition is loose and
fallacious, and there is no such contradiction in the different Measures of
Grace and Spirit received from God, as thou absurdly implyest. If ever thou
knew'st or wast sensible either that Tithes were ended by Christ, or that the
Ministry upheld by them is none of Christ's Ministry, thou could never
suppose that any measure or degree of his Grace or Spirit would allow or lead
any (who have been really convinced of the Evil thereof) in the payment of
them, if thou were not gone from the true sense and measure thereof in thy
self; for the different measures or degrees of Grace do not alter the Property
of it; and whatever it once manifests to be sin, and forbids as such, it always
forbids, and allows none in the practice thereof; and whoever are truly
convinced by the Grace of God, and have their Minds turned to it, if they keep
in it, and walk in its way and teaching, they are principled by it, and are a
Law to themselves therein, against those things, ways and works which are
corrupt or sinful, and cannot place a slight Indifferency where the Truth has
made a real Difference; for what communion has Light with Darkness, or Christ
with Belial, or Truth with Error, or Sincerity with Hypocrisy, or Sobriety and
Watchfulness with Ranterism and Looseness? -- Consider how and from whence thou
art fallen, and Repent.

To thy subsequent Allegation of John Crook's saying, I must tell thee, that I
look upon thee to have dealt unjustly, disingeniously and injuriously by him,
and very impertinently alleged his words in this case, for thy unwarrantable,
confused and loose Proposition for the Observation of Tithes, as a civil Right
or Rite. I doubt not but he is better principled, even from the time of his
first receiving the Truth, than to grant or allow any such liberty to any
Christian Brother for the observation (or payment) of Tithes, as thy words
import; and that thy Allegation of his words in this case, is contrary to his
very Intention. I dare presume and appeal to his Conscience to give Judgment
against thee in this case, whether the different or contrary actions, postures
or gestures, relating to time, constancy or place, etc. mentioned by him, were
intended with respect to Tithes, For J. Crook has given public Testimony
against the Payment of Tithes in this Gospel day, witness his Treatise, i. e.
Tithes no Property, etc.
the Payment or Non-payment of them. I dare say thou have foully perverted his
words and intention in this case; for the different actions, postures and
gestures, relating either to time or place, may relate to diverse things only
circumstantial and indifferent, as to God, and not to things substantial,
wherein Truth's Testimony has made a real Difference; As I, or any other in
Truth, may be in different postures and places praying to God or waiting upon
him, in Closet, on our Beds, in Field, Highway, either kneeling, standing,
sitting or walking, and yet truly led, moved and exercised by the holy Spirit,
and accepted of God, But I must confess that in our public Assemblies for
divine Worship, such postures as bespeak the most Reverence to God and Union
among our selves, are most commendable, edifying and exemplary, etc.
which I cannot say in relation to the Payment of Tithes in this Gospel day, no
more than in Sacrifice and burnt Offerings, since Christ has put an end
thereto. Those things offered by Cain and Abel as the fruit of the Ground and
firstlings of the Flock, were things in themselves lawful, and allowed in their
day and time, and were also according to the Law of Moses, being Types under
the old covenant. But this can be no pertinent Instance, as alleged by thee (
Thomas) in the case of Tithes, to observe (or pay) them in this Gospel day, and
as now in Controversy; since both Tithes and Offerings were ended by Christ in
his Death; nor is there any parrallel in the case, unless thou could prove
that the Spirit of Christ does move Believers in this Gospel day, both to the
Payment of Tithes and the Non-payment (or refusal) of them, which I dare say,
thou can not prove. It Is not to be supposed that what Christ has abolished in
the old Covenant he will enjoin or command in the new; the Spirit of Christ is
not contradictory to it self, nor are Gods substantial Commands contrary one to
another, especially under one and the same dispensation and state.

. 3. Besides thy abuse and injury against John Crook, and Impertinency in this
case, I cannot but take notice how dis^ingenuous, covered and fallacious thou
art, in the management of thy loose design, in reference to the Personal
Authorities thou bring, particularly in thy citing part of John Wilkinson
and John Story's Paper concerning Women's Meetings, etc. in two of thy Pamphlets
(viz.) thy second and third Edition; in the 24th page of the last thou say,
These foregoing Testimonies are not transcribed at large, but abridged for
brevities sake, but the SENSE AND SVBSTANCE OF THE WHOLE included. But Thomas,
I must tell thee, this is a downright Untruth; the Sense and Substance of the
Whole of that very Paper of J. W. and J. S. is not included in thy citation,
although thou have confessed their Testimony to be weighty Truths, and have
cited more passages than that concerning Women's Meetings; for thou have left
out these Words of their Testimony, (viz.) As to Tithes, we can in truth say,
'twas never so much as in our Hearts to strengthen any in the Payment thereof,
nor yet to weaken the Faith of any, having a Testimony in our Hearts that
Tithes, as at this day paid, are ANTICHRISTIAN. (Thus far they.)

How now Thomas? Why did thou leave these Words out of thy Citation? Was here
nothing of the sense nor substance of their Testimony? or wast thou not
conscious to thy self, that their Position here against the payment of Tithes,
and thy Proposition aforesaid for the observation of Tithes, as a civil Right
or Rite, etc. were inconsistent and contradictory? their words are positive
against them, as Antichristian, but thine are partly for them, and but
doubtfully against them, that is [ If the Spirit of the Lord in the Heart
forbid the payment of them] or if the different measure of Grace require one
Brother not to pay them, and allow (or be silent at) another Brother's paying
them. Thus Thomas thou appearest in Confusion a BABEL-BUILDER.

And what is our Language thou reflects upon? Is it the plain Language of Thee
and Thou to a single Person? And what are those Orders thou complainest of, and
those Customs, Forms and Prescriptions? Have not thou appeared like thy Brother
John Pennyman, in thy empty and fruitless opposition? only he is a little more
plain in his furious Roaring Letter to G. F. dated the 27th of the 3d Month,
called May, 1680. printed among his other Letters to diverse Friends, he
furiously exclaims and roars out against us in these Expressions (viz.) Away
with your long Prayers, and long Preachings, for they are an abomination; away
with your Pride and Arrogance, sitting as Judges and Lords over your Brethrens
Consciences -- Away with your set Form of Words of THEE and THOU, calling it
the pure Language -- O ye Blind and Ignorant! how can you escape the
Condemnation of the Just and Righteous One; who have set up Shadows instead of
Substance, and Form instead of Power? -- Builders of Babel, or Babylonish
Builders -- All your Buildings, your Inventions, Imaginations and Conceivings
about your Forms, your proud self-conceited Modes, your Impositions, your
Prescriptions, Laws and comely Orders (as you in your fallen Wisdom call them)
must all be thrown down, laid waste, and become a Byword or Proverb of
Reproach N. C 's Epistle.
to the very Heathen, etc. (Thus far John Pennyman.)

These Words are cited to show how far you Backsliders and Opposers resemble
one another in Style and Language against us, crying out against Impositions,
Forms, Prescriptions, Laws, etc. but show no Unjust nor Unrighteous Law, Form,
Order or Prescription practiced among us; and therefore in your Madness and
Fury are but beating the Air, and unjustly and falsely accusing us with
Impositions, lording over our Brethrens Consciences: And John Pennyman he is
for crying out, Away with your set form of Words of THEE and THOU; he is
offended at the Form of sound Words; his Backsliding, Apostasy and vain
Imaginations have been these many Years openly manifest, and time will further
discover him to be a false Prophet against us: The Lord has brought us into
that Form and Order, which neither Apostates, fallen Spirits, nor the Father of
Lies shall ever be able to throw down or lay waste. We direct People to the
Light and Power of Christ within, to guide them both in the Life and Form of
Godliness, Form of sound Words, and to obey from the Heart the Form of Doctrine
received from Christ, and therefore we impose no blind Obedience, nor dark
Formality upon any, but desire that all may come to be living Christians in
Spirit, Life, Power and Holiness of Conversation, that their Conversations may
be as becomes the Gospel of Christ; but you Backsliders are of disobedient and
loose Spirits, else you would not rage, roar and foam out your own Shame as you
do against the Servants of Christ, or that Form and Order which we are sure he
has brought us into, and wherein we are Conscientiously concerned to follow our
Lord Jesus Christ in Humility; and herein we can distinguish between formal
Christians and living Christians, and would have none to enter into either
extreme of Formality without Life and Power, or under pretense of Life and
Power to deny or oppose all Form and Order; for there may be a formal pretended
Christian without Life and Power, but no real living Christian in Power without
true Form; And this distinction we had from the beginning, and therefore
always believed that the true Power would not lead into any false or wrong
Form, nor into any Disorder or Confusion, knowing that our God is the God of
Order, and not of Confusion; he is the God of Love, Peace and Union, and not of
discord or strife.

. 4. And Thomas Crisp had thou kept to that which first Convinced thee, and
raised up a love in thee to Truth, and the People of God called Quakers, thou
would not have espoused such unsound Doctrine as this of R. R. printed and
published in thy Pamphlets among thy pretended weighty Truths, nor reckoned it
among sound Doctrines, as thou have done even in thy third Edition, p. 22.
where after he has confessed in these words (viz.) I know that the Lord has
his People amongst them (meaning those called Quakers) as in All Forms, and
such as love and fear the Lord, doing the thing which is just and right. [The
words which I chiefly take notice of, are these of his which follow, viz.] And
such are accepted with me as bone of my bone, and as my Brother Benjamin that
came of the freewoman, and are in that freedom fitted to act in ALL FORMS, So
the Work of Backsliders and Apostates tends to fit them to hear and sit under
the Parish Priests, contrary to the real Christian Quaker; Witness F. Bugg's
Proposition, espoused by him as his own judgment, viz. Things Moral, under the
Gospel men may be commanded by the Magistrate, as HEARING is an act purely
Moral. A man may be commanded to hear the Gospel preached, without being forced
to give his assent to it. The Light of Nature guides the Magistrate to instruct
his Subjects in whatsoever he thinks for their eternal Good. And the Light of
Nature obliges every man to hearken, etc* A man that is only commanded to hear
and receive Instruction, is dealt with as a rational Creature, and forced to
nothing. The Judgment is still left in himself. [Thus F. Bugg's De Christiana
Liberate, or Liberty of Conscience, page 91, 92.] Whereby he has plainly given
away and betrayed the cause of all conscientious Dissenters. For what place is
left for Liberty of Conscience to dissent, if the Magistrate may thus enjoin
the Subjects to hear what he thinks is for their eternal Good, and they be thus
obliged to hear, when he thinks it is for their good to hear the Parish Priests?
By this Proposition, when the Magistrate commands Fr. Bugg to his Parish Church
and hear the Priest, he is obliged so to do by his own Proposition, and reserve
his judgment in himself, whether to accept or reject what he hears. Thus he may
be in a freedom fitted to act in ALL FORMS. But then let him not esteem himself
a Christian Quaker, but another sort of a (Latitude) Christian, whose Religion
and Principle, before cited, will not oblige him to suffer any more as a Quaker.
as the Lord their Light shall lead them, that they may replenish the Earth.

This Doctrine or Proposition I look upon to be very unsound, and tending to
plain Ranterism, making no distinction in Forms, but including ALL FORMS,
without Distinction, under the leading of the Light of the Lord: Which also is
an absurd begging of the Question; for his Light does neither lead nor fit the
Children of the freewoman to act in All Forms So the Work of Backsliders and
Apostates tends to fit them to hear and sit under the Parish Priests, contrary
to the real Christian Quaker; Witness F. Bugg's Proposition, espoused by him as
his own judgment, viz. Things Moral, under the Gospel men may be commanded by
the Magistrate, as HEARING is an act purely Moral. A man may be commanded to
hear the Gospel preached, without being forced to give his assent to it. The
Light of Nature guides the Magistrate to instruct his Subjects in whatsoever he
thinks for their eternal Good. And the Light of Nature obliges every man to
hearken, etc* A man that is only commanded to hear and receive Instruction, is
dealt with as a rational Creature, and forced to nothing. The Judgment is still
left in himself. [Thus F. Bugg's De Christiana Liberate, or Liberty of
Conscience, page 91, 92.] Whereby he has plainly given away and betrayed the
cause of all conscientious Dissenters. For what place is left for Liberty of
Conscience to dissent, if the Magistrate may thus enjoin the Subjects to hear
what he thinks is for their eternal Good, and they be thus obliged to hear,
when he thinks it is for their good to hear the Parish Priests? By this
Proposition, when the Magistrate commands Fr. Bugg to his Parish Church and
hear the Priest, he is obliged so to do by his own Proposition, and reserve his
judgment in himself, whether to accept or reject what he hears. Thus he may be
in a freedom fitted to act in ALL FORMS. But then let him not esteem himself a
Christian Quaker, but another sort of a (Latitude) Christian, whose Religion
and Principle, before cited, will not oblige him to suffer any more as a Quaker.
of Professions, but in its own form or way most proper and peculiar to it
self, as the Form of Godliness is to the Power of God and Godliness, for
granting the Lord may have a People that mean well under other Forms, as he has
other Sheep that are not of this Fold: Howbeit, many that mean well are clouded
and mistaken, under wrong Forms, empty Shows, Ceremonies and Circumstances,
only of men's inventions and imposing, which the Light of the Lord guides them
not into, being but humane Traditions and Impositions of men, neither proper
nor suitable to divine Worship, or to a true spiritual Christian state; and
therefore it is not the freedom of the Children of the Freewoman to act in ALL
or any such Forms, nor will the Light of the Lord lead them therein; nor may R.
R's words be applied to the Children of New Jerusalem, who under the
dispensation and order of the new Covenant, nor are they properly applicable to
them, where he says, Why may not God enjoin that as an Ordinance to day, and
give his Power to it also, which to Morrow he will lay aside as useless, and by
his withdrawing his Power from it, leave it no better than an Idol? as in page
19, 20. of thy 3d Edition. This cannot be truly said of the Ordinances of the
new Covenant, which are not to be compared to the Shadows under the old; and
therefore these his Expressions, as applied to this Dispensation which we are
under (which is that of the Gospel and new Covenant) do tend to lead into
Uncertainty, Instability, Looseness and Ranterism. Good Works are ordained of
God, the practice of pure Religion he enjoins us to walk it* and he will not
forsake the Children of the Freewoman, who therein serve him in his free
Spirit.

This R. R. whose pretended Testimony thou have espoused, his exclaiming,
accusing and smiting unjustly, also like the rest of you about Imposing upon
Brethrens Consciences, Prescriptions, Impositions, and falsely accusing Friends
with the Spirit of Dominion and Rule over the Conscience: Telling of the Yoke
of your Prescriptions, your carnal and literal Impositions: G. F 's comely
Order; G. F. and his Tribe of Proselites; creating a Dominion over your
Brethren, and the movings of God in them, and claiming a power to judge of all
Differences, prescribing Rules and Orders, etc. falsely comparing Friends with
the Pope himself, and accusing them with swelling Soveraignity over the Minds
and Consciences of men, heavily imposing upon others in such Circumstances and
Indifferences wherein the Kingdom of God does not consist, etc.

With many more Falsehoods and unjust Reflections, and Abuses, The substance
whereof is answered fully before to W. R.
without innumerating or giving particular Instances of those Impositions,
Rules and Orders complained of, only bids us witness the Hat; which I take to
be because we could not own J. Perrot and his party in their keeping on their
Hats in public Prayer: R. Rich being one of his Party, a Disciple and Agent in
his Cause, confounded in his Judgment with a Spirit (and Notions) of Ranterism,
though sometimes he confessed to the Power of God among Friends, but too lofty
in his Spirit; he now seems to be adopted by you in his opposition (in this his
Paper which thou have printed for a weighty and sound Testimony, I mean, Robert
Rich's, whom I take to be thy Author) Why did not set his Name, but R. R?
which may stand for another Name, as Richard Richardson; but we are sure he is
better principled than to write such Airy, Loose, Ranting stuff. One reason
that makes me take it to be R. Rich's Paper that thou have espoused, it is so
much in his floating, reflecting, accusing, lavish and conceited Style; and
also that thy Brother Francis Bugg makes use of his Authority in his Book De
Christ. Lib. p. 170. in these words (viz.) I begin to see the truth of Robert
Rich 's words in a Letter from Barbados, to his Friends, Abstracts, etc. page
20. viz. I can assure you, that who meddle with the Quakers, had need to be
fenced within and without with the whole Armor of God, Truth and love to
Righteousness, David 's Sling and Stone, etc.

These Passages are mentioned that it may the more obviously appear how plainly
you resemble one another, and tread the same Track, in the Style and Terms of
your Opposition, and that it is no new Controversy in the Substance; it is but
only John Perrot's Spirit of Division risen with some other Circumstances and
Pretenses, in a more Rough, Lofty, Contemning, Hectoring and Huffing Party,
daring and scornful, who have not that seeming show of Humility, Lamb-likeness
and Outside Demureness, that John Perrot had, For tho John Perrot placed his
opposition to the Putting off the Hat in Prayer very high, as on express
Commandment from the Lord God of Heaven, as against a Custom, Romish Tradition,
and Triffle in the Apostasy, as in his Paper which Richard Hubberthorn
answered. Yet he had more smooth and taking Expressions to temper and gloss his
matters withal* as, The Spirit of the Lamb is Poor, Low, Humble, Patient,
Content, Temperate, Chaste, willing to Suffer, full of Thanksgiving in all
things, and of Pity, Mercy, Forgiveness, Love unto all, not holding Prejudice
against any -- and ready to lay down Life for all. -- Now all that will follow
the Lamb wheresoever he goes, must be of this Mind, etc. as in a Paper of John
Perrot's. Now here was a more likely show and resemblance and pretense of
Christianity, than these Lofty Scorners do appear in, though he professed greater
things than he possessed; his Spirit was not in that Lowliness, nor was he
constant with God. His fall should be a warning to many.
the tendency and end of whose work, time will manifest more directly to center
in RANTERISM, as it now tends to FLESHLY LIBERTY, casting off the Yoke of
Christ, and causing the offense of his Cross to cease.

. 5. And now Thomas I am not willing at present to spend much farther time with
thee, thou having been so much answered by R. Richardson and J. F. only I would
show thee a little further, how unfairly and disingenuously thou dealest with
John Field in thy 5th part of thy Babels, etc. First, I take notice of the
account J. Field gives in the 3d page of his Book, entitled, Thomas Crisp's
Envy detected, about thy Doctrine, and then of what thou say in relation to
the same; and that which thou scornfully call J. F's Bull of Excommunication
against thee, his account is this, viz.

John Field signifies, That Friends have "no Unity with Tho. Crisp nor his
Doctrine, which is as follows,

The 8th day of the 9th Month, 1681. Thomas Crisp said, That he had lately paid
Tithes, and that the Spirit of God did or might allow him to pay Tithes, or
Marry by a Priest. And that by the same Spirit of God another might be required
not to pay Tithes, or not do the same Things.

This Thomas Crisp spoke the day and year abovesaid, and consented to have it
writ and printed, and took a copy of the aforesaid words. Witness,

John Field, jun.

Oh Thomas! How have thou lost true tenderness and the sense of Truth? How art
thou backsliden, and gone from that which first convinced thee of the way of
the Lord and his holy Truth, which is but one? And how variable do thou
render his Spirit, and contradictory to it self in these great concerns of
Tithes and Marriage? Is this like the Testimony of the Christian-Quaker, as
thou and thy Brother W. R. and his party would be rendered? Is it not more like
exact Ranterism? Let all tender Hearts and sincere Souls in the Light judge.
But what say thou to J. F's Question, Why did thy Wife condemn it? meaning
your marrying by a Priest: To this thou most unrighteously and scornfully
answerest in these Words, (viz.)

But may not those that pretend to sell Pardons, and pray Souls out of
Purgatory (your Brethren) say, that if their Prayers and Pardons be not
effectual, why have and do so many give so much Money for them? If a Woman
gives all she has to have her Husband out of Purgatory, an effectual Proof of
the worth of the Pope's Pardon.

Thomas, Thy Answer herein is dirty and scurrilous, and thy comparison with the
Pope, and those that falsely pretend to pray Souls out of Purgatory, most unjust
and slanderous: Be ashamed of such scribbling and abusive dirty Work, and falsely
calling such our Brethren: Be ashamed also of thus unnaturally exposing thy own
Wife to an unjust censure in this comparison (viz.) As to a Woman that gives
all she has to have her Husband out of Purgatory: Oh sordid and brutish! As
also in thy following Words, and foul Reflection upon thy Wife (viz.) It is
like SHE, as too many more have, gave too much credit to what some of G. F's
CHEATS said: And she is not the first that has been deceived by you, and
perhaps some among you, that have prated others out of their Money, might prate
her, unto the writing and giving you that Paper you pretend to. Thus far thou
in the 9th page of thy 5th part of thy Babel.

O Thomas! be ashamed of thus abusing thy Wife and others, (our Friends) with
thy Railery in Print, as if she were cheated or deceived into the giving forth
the said Paper in judgment against your marrying with the Priest; I am
satisfied thou have most foully wronged her, as well as abused her Friends
herein; for I am persuaded that the Lord made her sensible you had done amiss
in so marrying, that she was convinced in her Conscience of the Evil of it, and
of your wrong proceeding therein by the Light of Truth, before she gave out the
said Paper; and that therefore thou have not only abused and unjustly exposed
thy Wife, thy near relation in Print, but also that thou have abused the Truth,
and the real Conviction thereof in her: I dare appeal to the witness of God in
her Conscience against thy sordid abuse of her and Friends in this matter. I
find thou art a shallow impertinent Scribler and Railer, and uncharitably
Censorious and Reviling in much of thy Work; thou have an absurd and dirty
style of writing, if it be thy own, however it is patronized by thee. Remember
from whence thou art fallen, and Repent of thy hard Speeches, Prejudice and
Uncharitableness against Gods People, his Heritage. Thou have abused the
Servants of Christ, have a care thy days be not shortened in Darkness and
Sorrow. I am sorry for thee. Thou can advise and instruct others to Love and
Gentleness, and pretendest to show the necessity of bearing with, and not
judging one another about such things, wherein they differ in Opinion or
Practice in some things, viz. outward and circumstantial matters of Religion;
for that thou say, We may belong to one Shepherd, although not all in one
Fold; and confessest, That Love is part of the Seal in the Forehead of the
Lamb's followers; and so also Hatred, Strife, etc. the mark of the Beast, as in
thy Introduction to thy third Edition: As also page 13. thou give Friends
this warning, To forbear judging any man any more, upon any pretense
whatsoever, as in the Paper thou have cited, and falsely call E. B's Vision.
Yet contrariwise thou art severely judging and contemning us on some Pretense;
thou appearest in Hatred and Strife in the most of thy controvertial Pamphlets.
May we belong to one Shepherd, although not all in the Fold as yet? Why then
art thou and W. R. and F. Bugg, and John Pennyman, so severe in Judging,
Censuring, Reviling and Reproaching many among us, whom we know to be the
Servants of Christ? And thou telling of G. F's Cheats, rendering thy Wife as one
cheated and deceived by our Friends: Oh sordid and base Confusion, and
Babylonish stuff! Seriously recollect thy self, and give over thy false and
fruitless Attempts, Impertinencies, and confused Scribbling; for the Day is
dawned and broken forth, that has made a discovery of the miserable Apostasy
and Darkness, which you contentious and quarrelsom Opposers are fallen into.
Oh! come down, come down, and seek Repentance, and be humbled under the mighty
Hand of God: May the Lord in Mercy give thee an Heart thereto, my Soul
charitably wishes it for thee, etc.

. 6. In thy Fourth Part, page 19. thou art endeavoring to extenuate the
offense on thy part on thy Principle, that one may marry by the Priest, and pay
Tithes, and yet be a Christian; Thou should have added, [ One of the darker
sort of Christians.] But to excuse the matter on thy part, Thy Wife was not
then one called a Quaker, But it seems T.C. was one then so called; and if she
was instrumental to induce him to Marry by a Priest, contrary to his Persuasion
or Profession, she had also cause to Repent it, and may yet see more cause to
Rue it, because of his Apostasy.
And thou could not satisfy her, so that thou CONDESCENDED to take thy Wife
in the presence of a Priest, and acquainted him, that thou did it not on any
account of Religion, but to answer the LAW; and say, who (i. e. the Priest)
very Christian-like condescended to thee, so as not to say or do, or require
thee to do or say any thing thou should be dissatisfied with, etc. And you
did before him declare you took each other, etc. nor was there half the
Ceremony or Formality that is now practiced according to G. F 's Form, etc. Oh
Thomas! These slight Covers, and Linsey-Woolsey Garments will not hide thy
Disobedience, nor excuse thee from acting contrary to thy Conviction and
Conscience. It appears thou wast married by a Priest [but to mince it, 'twas in
the presence of a Priest] though not in all Formalities; and this was thy
CONDESCENSION: Was it so? Then thou wast come to a higher sight and state than
to be married by a Priest. May it not be said further, how could it be
consistent with thy Principle and Profession as a real Christian-Quaker or
Conscientious Dissenter, to be so Married? Mince it as much as thou can,
'twill not hold together. But thou did it not on any account of Religion,
etc. No! how could thou exclude that weighty concern of Marriage out of
Religion? How Irreligious wast thou then in it? Is there not as much need to
keep unspotted of the Word in the great concern of Marriage, as in any other
concern in this Life? How could thou then lay Religion aside in this weighty
concern? Is it not manifest Ranterism for a person to make so slight of
Religion, as at his will and pleasure to lay it aside, and that under pretense
of condescending in matters of greatest Moment here wherein all truly
enlightened and clear sighted Christians have most need to be Religiously
exemplary, and faithful in their Testimony, according to their Consciences?

But to thy Question; May not one Marry by the Priest, or pay Tithes, and yet
be a Christian? For thy Principle, That he may, (in thy 5th part, p. 14.) thou
give us this Instance, viz. I find George Keith very Christian like say, I do
not doubt but the Lord had, and I believe he now has many that are precious to
him, and that belong to the Catholick-Church, even as I believe the Lord has
many such among Episcopalians, Papists, etc. Also, I do acknowledge the Lord
has among the Presbyterians some who belong to the true Church. Surely then
(say thou) these must be Christians, and did and do Marry by or with a
Priest, and pay Tithes.

Now ( Thomas) this Instance, and thy Inference upon it, are the most cunningly
alleged of any thing I find in thy writings, and yet they will not do, they
will not serve thy turn; for granting some among all these to whom the Lord
has regard, and who in some sense may belong to his Church, it is with respect
to their Sincerity toward God, and their fear of him, Conscientiousness
springing from his own Seed in them; and not with respect to their Formalities,
cloud of humane Traditions and Inventions, which thy are led into by their
Priests, as Marrying by Priests, paying Tithes, etc. Therefore, however the
Lord in Mercy has a regard to them for the sake of the good in them, yet they
are but dim-sighted, and of the darker sort of Christians, who see not beyond
those humane Impositions and Traditions, as paying Tithes and Marrying by a
Priest, etc. And for thee to excuse thy self therein, who professest a higher
state and degree of Illumination (no doubt) as no less than that of a
Christian-Quaker, thou might as well argue, that there are some of the better
and more sincere sort of Papists that bow to Images, and use many
Superstitions, which their Priests have misled them into, and to whom God shows
Mercy in saving their Souls at length; therefore thou or any Christian-Quaker
may bow to Images, observe Popish Ceremonies, etc. Or thus, There are many of
the sincerer sort of Episcopal People that have their Children sprinkled by a
Priest, and signed with the Sign of the Cross, that hear Common Prayer,
conform, and do all Conscientiously, and are sincere to God in their Way; so
that in Charity we may conclude, that their Souls find Mercy with God at
length. And what follows? Therefore Thomas Crisp as a Christian-Quaker, and all
other Conscientious Dissenters, both Anabaptists and others, may carry their
Children to be Sprinkled by a Priest, have them signed with the Sign of the
Cross, hear Common Prayer, conform, etc. and yet be good Christians, precious
to God, while thus inconsistent with their own Consciences, dissenting
Principles and Profession. Thus inconsistently thou might as well argue for
the Christian-Quakers paying Tithes and Marrying by a Priest, etc. But I must
deny the consequence: Thou (as a Quaker doubtless) have known better things,
and that as to the knowledge of Truth and degree of divine Illumination. There
is no just Comparison between a real Christian Quaker and the best sort of
Papists and Episcopalians. Therefore thy pleading in thy 5th part of Babels, p.
19, 20. for charity and forbearance to be allowed them who think it as much
their duty to pay Tithes, as we do think it a sin (and to those who do Marry by
a Priest, and pay Tithes, being of different Persuasion from us.) Granting such
there are, who see no further, and are to be pitied; it is no argument for any
that are of our contrary Persuasion to take liberty to pay Tithes and Marry by
a Priest; for their sin is greater than the other.

Oh Friend! thy Disobedience, Declension and Apostasy from those Discoveries
the true Light has made, will not be excusable by all thy slight Allegations in
the sight of the All-seeing and Heart-searching God.

. 7. But -- T. C 's Judgment about Tithes accords with what is in the third
part of the Christian-Quaker, etc. by W. R. Christianly and largely treated on
(quoth he) in his fourth part, p. 19. And what is W. R 's Judgment or Doctrine
in that case? Is it not for freely paying Tithes to the National Ministry, i.
e. not as by Constraint; yea, if any Person will freely of himself give a tenth
part of his Estate or Increase thereof to ANY USE WHATSOEVER, having no regard
to any humane Institution, or claim by any pretended divine Law, etc. as his
words are, 7th part, p. 52. Compare his Objection and Answer in that case, in
his 2d part, Christian-Quaker, p. 43. and the Apology he makes for it in his
7th part, p. 52, 53. together with our foregoing Replies, then it will appear
how loose and apostatized thy Judgment is from the ancient Principle and
Christian Testimony of the truly Christian-Quakers, whose Principle never
allowed paying Tithes freely, (or otherwise) to the National Ministry, or to
any use whatsoever. Therefore how little excusable is your Declension,
Apostasy, and loose Doctrine in that case, who have seen and known better
things from a farther degree of Illumination, than either the best sort of
Papists or Episcopalians have as yet received? Wherefore you, in sinning
against Knowledge, are more condemnable in those things, than they in their
Ignorance, blind Zeal, or Dim-sightedness. So that it is high time for thee to
bethink thy self better, and Repent.

. 8. I could say much to thy Reply thou have given to Stephen Crisp, in thy
Babels, 4th part, to evince how disingenuous, fallacious and abusive it is; but
I find little necessity upon me therein, considering what little weight it is
of, and how that Stephen Crisp, the Person immediately concerned, did not look
upon himself so deeply concerned, as to think it worth the while to spend much
time about, or take much notice of: Only I must tell thee, thou have abused
both him, and those of us who gave our Testimony, and plainly showed our
dislike against the Paper and Subscription from Barbados, which was not First
ONLY a dislike of the Wording it, (as thou falsely say) but of both matter
and subscription: And therefore thy saying, First
There is no denial or disowning the Principle of giving up all (i. e.
Spiritual and Temporal) to G. F 's Men's and Women's Meetings (as thou scornfully
accusest us, p. 2, 3.) This is a gross Untruth and foul Perversion, and our
Consciences bear us witness to the contrary, that we do dislike and disown any
such Principle and Doctrine: Thou have mis-stated the case against us herein.

Secondly, As also thy Objection is false, That we were more afraid of the
Publication, than ashamed of the Matter, p. 6.9. Seeing we so plainly
manifested our Dislike of the matter, in our Letter to those of Barbados
concerned.

Thirdly, As also a scornful and twofold Slander it is, That we endeavor to
compel all to worship our Image (as thy false term is) of G. F 's Orders, p. 7.
We deny both by terms and matter herein.

Fourthly, And likewise a gross Slander and Abuse it is, That G. F. and his
Party sharply reprove others, who cannot against their Consciences give up as
the Barbados Church have done, and for not bowing to our Image, G. F 's Laws,
p. 8. What a scornful abominable Lie is this!

Fifthly, Also these are notorious Falsehoods; That we will drive them that will
not follow us, contrary, or before the Spirit of the Lord lead them into our
Ceremonies, else they must be Sons of Perdition, and all black Characters we
can find to vilify them, page 10. These are foul and false Accusations.

Sixthly, Again, That thou have to thy understanding endeavored the Advance
and Honor of that Truth we profess, (i. e. the Light in the Conscience) p. 11.
This is an untruth; thy Vilifying and Abusing (and Railery against) the
Servants of Christ; who truly own and profess the Light for their guide, proves
the contrary.

Seventhly, That we are zealous for Forms, more than the Power, p. 11. Is also
a false Accusation and Slander.

Eighthly, That Stephen Crisp is an Engine of Satan, p. 12. And A Forger, p. 2.
And A bold-faced Liar, p. 4. appear slanderous Abuses and foul Detractions,
also expressly contrary to thy own warning thou have given forth in E. B's Name,
for All Friends to forbear Judging any man upon any pretense whatsoever.
However, Stephen Crisp is known to be a man Conscientious toward God, a man
more Righteous than thy self, and I suppose better qualified, both as a Man,
and a Christian, than ever thou wast; and thy envious Detractions cannot lessen
his Reputation, where he is well known. For the rest of thy Abuses,
Perversions, foul Detractions, Railery, and bitter angry Stuff, (in thy
Pamphlets) which are not here recited, I leave thee to the Righteous Judge of
all to reckon with and judge thee, as I doubt not but in due time he will.

. 9. I hereby give the Reader further notice about that Paper beforementioned,
which William Rogers and thy self have printed and published in your Books in
Edward Burroughs's Name, as his Testimony, Vision, etc. concerning The
scattered of Israel, the Shepherd and his Dogs, and Sheep, etc. and which in
thy third Edition thou recommendest, To be considered by all, more especially
by us called Quakers, among whom (thou say) it is proved to be a true Vision,
and not a Dream of E. B 's making: Showing still thy confident Credulity, that
it is really Edward Burroughs's Paper. I am still the more confirmed that it is
none of E. B's, but John Perrots; and that William Rogers and his party (who
encouraged the Publication thereof) together with thy self, have been too
credulous and confident, both in receiving the said Paper upon trust, and
imposing it on others as Edward Burroughs's, and that therein you appear both
implicit in your Faith, and mere Imposers, as well as Abusers of E. B. and his
faithful Testimony, unless you can show more manifest Testimony and valid
Reason that the said Paper was E. B's, than we can show to the contrary that it
was John Perrot's. It shall not serve W. R's turn to slight a Negative
Testimony herein, unless he and his party can prove their Affirmative, that E.
Buroughs was the Author of the said Paper, and that with more manifest
Testimony and probable Reason than we have here to show to the contrary,
namely, that 'twas John Perrot's: For besides the Unsoundness of the said Paper
in Matter and Manner, before hinted, as one Reason that 'twas not E. B's;
observe the following Certificates and Testimonies from Bristol, viz.

I Having read and perused the Paper of The scattered of Israel, set down in W.
R's Book, styled, The Christian-Quaker, to which W. R. affixeth and subscribeth
the Name of Edward Buroughs, as the Author and Giver forth of the same. I
remembering that I had read a Paper of the like Import among the Papers of John
Batho, when living, did search into them after his decease, and among the
Letters of John Perrot, which John Batho choicely kept and transcribed with his
own Hand, I found the same Paper above mentioned, without any substantial
variation of matter, with John Perrot's Name subscribed at length, which if
duly weighed, and compared with the Writings and Style of E. B. and J. P.
seems, according to my best discerning, much more likely to be the Style of
John Perrot, than of Edward Buroughs. Further, I am well assured that the
Handwriting of that Paper is John Batho's, which I have reason to know, by the
many Years Co-habitation and intimate Acquaintance that I had with him and his
Handwriting, who has often expressed to me a more than ordinary respect to,
and admiration that he had of John Perrot his Ministry and Writings, which
occasioned his Diligence and Care in transcribing his Epistles and Writings, of
which he left a large Parcel behind him at his decease. This I am a Witness of,
and do give this Testimony, in order to the undeceiving of the Simple in that
particular, and the vindicating of that worthy Friend E. B. from W. R's
Mis-representations in this matter.

Bristol, the 2d of the 10th Month, 1682. Laurence Steel.

WE, whose Names are hereunto subscribed, have also perused and compared the
abovementioned Paper, touching The scattered of Israel, etc. with that William
Rogers recites in his Book, entitled, The Christian-Quaker, wherein he assigns
Edward Buroughs to be the Author thereof; And upon strict Examination, we find
it to be the same in Substance, differing only here and there in some Words,
which alter not the sense, and appears to be only by the Writers mistake on one
hand or other. We have also compared the said Paper with John Batho's Books of
Accounts, and diverse other Papers and Epistles transcribed under his own Hand,
and do most apparently discern that the abovesaid Paper is the same Character
with them, and the same Hand-writings. We also further testify, that at the
end of the said Paper, John Per^ots Name, as Author thereof (and not Edward
Buroughs) is subscribed at length by the same Hand: And if William Rogers, or
any else, desire a sight of the said Paper, Epistles and Books, we do freely
offer our selves ready to show it them.

Witness our Hands, Charles Harford, Richard Snead, Richard Vickris.

Dated in Bristol, this 2d of the 10th Month, 1682.
SErious Reader, please to take notice, that since the writing of the second
Section of the eighth Chapter, containing a Charge against T. C. for his
dealing unjustly and injuriously by John Crook in the aforesaid citation, which
I sent him a true Copy of about Tithes, etc. as stated by T. C. I received John
Crook's own Answer by Letter, dated, 6th of the 10th Month, 1682. plainly
importing his dislike, and Testimony against such publication of his Name and
Citation, contrary to his Principle and Practice, signifying, That if T. C.
has done him right in the Quotation, he is sure he has wronged him in the
Intention, by making his Words speak any thing at all touching Tithes: And that
his Paper, which is only in Manuscript, (near twenty Years since, writ on
another occasion) Cannot with any ingenuity be referred to the Payment, or
Non-payment of Tithes: And that by a Book writ by him, and Printed 1659.
against Tithes, together with his own clearness from the payment thereof, it is
evident He cannot reasonably be supposed to favor the Payment of them. Thus
far J. Crook has ingenuously and plainly intimated and given his judgment,
which (compared with my Exception before) does confirm it against T. C. his
disingenuous and injurious Citation, reflecting on J. C. and his Testimony, who
concludes his Letter and Account in these Words to me, ( viz.)

What I have said, may satisfy those that are willing to be informed aright;
and for others, that will not be contented, except their Humor of
Conceitedness be gratified, they need not greater Judgment here, than to be
their own Tormentors, and hereafter to be left to the Judgment of the great
Day, when every man shall receive a Reward according to his Deeds.

Thy Brother in the Truth of the Gospel of Jesus, John Crook.


CHAP. IX.
. 1. Why notice is taken of Jeffery Bullock, in this Treatise; some Reasons
given.. 2. His charge of men's Inventions, false Doctrines. Of the Church of
Rome, etc. Visible Church Government, that is altogether Antichristian,
testified against.. 3 Christ's Government in his Church, how Invisible and
Visible, vindicated from Jeffery Bullocks opposition to Elders, Men's Meetings
and Women's Meetings, etc.. 4. Our Reverence to God in our Prayers, and reverent
Deportment and Conscientiousness therein, both in uncovering our Heads,
Kneeling, etc. vindicated from his false Objections.. 5. His fallacious dealing
with our Doctrine about the Seed of God in man: The matter truly stated against
his Falsehood.. 6. Of his disowning the arising of the Seed of God in man.. 7.
Our preaching Salvation and Justification by the Man Christ, the Son of God,
and his being our Way to the Father, questioned by J. Bullock; here
vindicated.. 8. His Ignorance of the innocent Birth or Babe Immortal; and of
Gods appearance and speaking by his Son, and his opposing the inward feeling of
Life. His slanderous repetition against us about God being held in Bondage,
testified against, and the matter opened, as what it is that suffers, and what
is in Bondage in man. His denying Christ to be the only Way to the Father
again; with a Collection of his Erroneous and Atheistical Doctrines.. 9. His
opposing Justification, Salvation and Condemnation by that Christ that
suffered, proved Erroneous, and against his Mediatorship, and
Scripture-Testimony. J. B. confounded about two Christ's, etc.. 10. His opposing
Christ's coming of David, etc. And his asserting that his Soul dyed, that he
internally dyed. And his holding the Mortality of the Soul of man, proved
Erroneous and Atheistical, and abundantly contradicted by himself and his
Preaching.. 11. His asserting the Scriptures to be the Fruit of the Tree of
Knowledge, whimsical and erroneous; and disowning our Friends Book, Letter and
Testimony, and yet confessing them to be in the Letter of the Scriptures,
contradictory to himself and his Books against us.. 12. His practical
contradiction in separating himself from others, and preaching in our Friends
Meeting at Sudbury. His erroneous Denyings and Doctrines sumed up, and denied
by the true Christian-Quakers.

The Conclusion, by way of Solemn Appeal and Supplication to God.

. 1. COncerning Jeffery Bullock's four Pamphlets, slanderously charging us with
Antichristian Doctrines, and an Antichristian Government, or a visible
Church Government that is altogether Antichristian, as in his One Blow, page 9.
etc.

Some may ask me, Why I take notice of such confused, muddled, blind, dark and
mad Stuff, as his appears to be? To which I Answer:

First, Because neither the Truth, nor us, as a Religious People and Christian
Society, may lie under any Dis-repute, Blemish or Derision thereof, in the Eyes
of those that know not, nor rightly understand the Christian Doctrine,
Discipline, Church Government, and wholesome Order among us, seeing the said J.
B. has been for many Years conversant among the People called Quakers, and born
the Name of a Quaker (he says) this twenty Years, and more: Though he IS NO
QVAKER, but turned an open Enemy to them.

Secondly, Because the said Jeffery Bullock, in a great measure, runs parallel
with, and resembles William Rogers and his party, in his opposition and
gainsaying of that Order and Church Government that is among us, falsely
accusing us with Men's Inventions, Imitations, Traditions, laying aside the
Spirits Government, etc. as in his ONE BLOW, etc.

Thirdly, Because four Persons of William Rogers's Party Their Names I forbear
exposing at present to this monstrous Birth they have adopted from Jeffery
Bullock. But if they shall again suffer or encourage the reading of any such
Unchristian, disingenuous and malicious Books (or Pamphlets) as W. R's 7th
part, by any of their Party in Friends public Meeting, (as I understand, was
once done at Chippinham, which was a turbulent, irreverent, and mad Action)
then they will more manifestly deserve to have their Names exposed, both in
relation to that, and to Jeffery Bullock and his Books, etc.
of Chippinham in Wiltsshire have given their approbation in a Letter to the
said Jeffery Bullock of his Books, particularly that called, One Blow more
against Antichrist's Ministers; and have declared, that several Friends have
good Unity therewith; Which I do not believe: And not only so, but this in
opposition and contempt to others, whom they abusively revile in these Words
(viz.) But here are also a company of called Friends, which are very much for
Foxonians Orders, which may be called men's Inventions, that do make it their
work to Defame and Calumniate all them (...) do not conform thereunto. Some of
which thou, and most of which we are in our Hearts persuaded are Servants of
the living God, amongst which thou have a share of being villified to be a bad
man; although to us its no manner of Invitation for us to give Credit
thereunto, etc -- Barnadiston and another has been here, their envious Darts
fly very swiftly and secretly -- If thou please to send half a Dozen of thy
Books, etc. With other Aggravations in the said Chippinham Letter, showing not
only their approbation and owning of Jeffery Bullock and his Books, but also
their bitterness of Spirit in villifying and reproaching others; although I
understand they have been a little ashamed of their approbation of his Books,
yet not that they have repented of the bitterness of their Spirits, nor
condemned those villifying Reproaches and bitter Expressions in their said
Letter, as Foxonians Orders, Barnadiston and another; their envious Darts fly
very swiftly, etc. What scorn, bitterness, and rancor do such Expressions
bespeak? Christ never taught them to give such Names to Friends as Foxonians,
nor would they take it well to be so dealt by, nay, they would think much if
they should but be called Johannites, and their reviling Giles Barnardiston,
who was a peaceable innocent man, and of good Report, does bespeak a great
Prejudice and Enmity to have entered their Spirits, which they should plainly
have condemned; their Letter is all perverse, but I do not understand any
sincere or tender Retractation, or real Condemnation thereof given out by them.

Fourthly, Notice is here taken of Jeffery Bullock's Pamphlets, to manifest the
great Absurdity that opposite dividing Spirit leads into, and to warn others
against it. And why these Persons should so hastily approve of Jeffery
Bullock's Books, or say, that several Friends have good Unity therewith, I know
no reason, being in several things so Corrupt, Erroneous and Atheistical, as
they are, except it be with respect to the Oppositions therein contained
against the Church Government, Order and Methods among us, in opposing whereof,
Jeffery Bullock was these men's Elder Brother. Concerning which, take a view of
some Passages in his said Pamphlet, viz. One Blow more, in his own Words.

. 2. Jeffery Bullock says, And you my Brethren also ought to have Preached up
God's invisible appearance by his Spirit in our days, to be the end of men's
Inventions, Imitations and false Doctrines: But instead thereof, you have
preached up false Doctrines, and also set up your own Inventions among the
Quakers so called, p. 5.

Answer; His charge of false Doctrines, and men's Inventions, we utterly deny as
slanderous: God's invisible and spiritual Appearance, and the Testimony thereof
still lives among us in as high esteem as ever, against false Doctrines and
men's Inventions. But herein J. B. resembles the rest of the Opposers, in the
work of the false Accuser of our Brethren.

Jeffery Bullock. My Brethren, I fear you are not past the Doctrine of the
Church of Rome, nor yet of the Priests and Professors of England [a false Fear]
There is as great necessity of Preaching up Salvation to us Gentiles, by God's
invisible Appearance, who is a Spirit, and also his Spirit to be the end of all
men's Inventions, Imitations, Traditions, etc. page 6. [True, but misapplied]
Therefore I would have G. Fox, and the eleven Elders, who are preaching up
false Doctrines, and also setting up their Inventions among the People called
Quakers, as Rules, etc. p. 7.

Answer; Herein he is a false Accuser still like the rest, and he is far louder
in his Charges than in's Proof. False Doctrines and Inventions of men, both of
the Church of Rome and elsewhere, we utterly deny.

J. B. My Brethren your visible Church Government is altogether Antichristian,
because that every Member of the Church in God is to be both ruled and governed
by the measure of Gods Spirit in them; and it is none of George Fox 's, nor yet
the eleven Elders that is to be a Rule for the Quakers to walk by, p. 9.

Answ. His charge of Antichristian and Inventions we utterly deny, and testify
against as Antichristian; and he, and the rest of his backsliding Spirit, and
approvers of him and his Books, are never able to make his Charge good.
However, here its plain that he opposes visible Church Government, because of
the inward Rule by the measure of God's Spirit, wherein he argues Erroniously,
and contrary to the Apostles Doctrine and Primitive Christians Practice: Both
the inward Rule, and outward Order, and due Methods among them, all springing
from God's Spirit within, were not to draw them from a dependence on that
Spirit, but to show forth Obedience in Practice and Example to the holy Spirit
and pure Religion, and therein to help one another, for which purpose the Holy
Ghost made Overseers and Elders, The Elders that rule well are worthy, etc. He
that rules with Diligence, etc. I left thee in Creet to set in order those
things that are lacking, etc. But there were such Apostates then as despised
Dominion, and spoke Evil of Dignities, even of those Instruments and Ministers,
Helps and Governments, whom the Lord ordained and raised up and dignified in
his Church; and such are these Opposers now in the same Spirit of Opposition
and Contempt.

. 3. J. B. And she (i. e. the Church) has no need of your visible Government,
because she is the Bride, the Lambs Wife; and she has no need of the Light of
the Moon to shine in her, because the Lord is the Light, and the Lambs Spirit
is the Light of the Church that is in him: But your visible Churches make use
of the Light of the Moon, That Is a Whimsie; where proves he that? Or that the
Light of the Moon is Antichristian?
that is, your Men's Meetings, and also your Women's Meetings, and the Orders
which are set up by them, they are to be Rules for your visible Churches to
walk by: For the Women have power to order the Affairs of your visible Church,
as well as your Men; and this Practice of yours is altogether Antichristian,
and so also is your Church Government, because it is the Invisible man Christ,
who orders all things in his Church by his own Spirit. -- Those who are Members
of the Church in God among you, in time will abhor your Government, because it
is Antichristian; For you Elders do look upon your selves to be Judges, and
that you have Power to determine things in matter of Conscience, etc. p. 10, 11.

Answ. Christ's Government in his Church is both Invisible and Visible, he
governs by himself and by his Ministers: all are not come to a ripe Age in him,
there are many Children and weak Ones, who have need of helps in Government:
Our faithful Men's Meetings and Women's Meetings were set up by the Power of
Christ Jesus, and in his Light he governs and rules among them by his own
Spirit: And faithful, grave and sober Women have power to be Teachers of good
things, and to teach the younger Women. Christian-Church-Order and Spiritual
Rule were exercised among the Primitive Christians, both Men and Women, who
were Children of New Jerusalem, the free Woman; the Inhabitants of this City
are not without Order, or Ministers therein. And therefore this Opposers Blow
and Charge of [ altogether Antichristian] against our Men's and Women's Meetings,
is both Silly, Proofless, Slanderous, and altogether Antichristian, against
Christ's Work (and appointment) in Male and Female; and as the
Church Government among us is Christ's Government, both revealed, set up, and
ordained by him; none that are and continue true Members of his Church, will
ever abhor that Government, nor reject, slight or despise that promised
Dominion and Judgment that he has given to the Saints to determine matters of
Difference, but only Apostates, false Brethren and deceitful Workers, and loose
Spirits; these will be smiting and accusing the Brethren, despising Dominion,
and speaking evil of Dignities; yea, speaking perverse things to draw Disciples
after them, crying against outward Rule and Government, Forms and Order in the
Church, whilst they are seeking Mastery, Dominion, Rule and Government to
themselves. As for our visible Church and visible Church Government (or Order)
so much opposed by this Adversary, he talks blindly and ignorantly; for though
the Church be Invisible, as to the Spirits of Men, who are Members of it, and
Christ's immediate Rule and Government in the Heart be Invisible, yet there is
a Visibility both of the true Christian Congregation, and good Order and Rule
therein, proceeding from the Spirit of Christ within.

The People of God and their good Conversations and Order in Christ, are not
all shut up in an Invisibility, being as Epistles to be read and seen of all;
and they as a City set upon a Hill, etc.

J. B. You do prefer your selves, and the Church in the first place before God,
who is Light -- And have set up themselves and their Church as Head, instead of
God and Christ, p. 12. Their setting up themselves and their Government, and
are laying aside the Spirit's Government and Authority, p. 13. Those Elders who
call themselves Ministers, look upon themselves and their Image to be equal in
Power and Glory, both with the Father and the Son, Testimony against the
Quakers, p. 3.

Answ. These are notoriously false and slanderous; We prefer the living God,
and his Son Christ Jesus before all, and do not lay aside the Spirit's
Government or Authority, but in humility reverence, and desire ever to live
under the same, knowing Self abased, and Images defaced and rejected by the
Light of Christ Jesus.

. 4. J. B. If any of those called Teachers intend to speak a few words commonly
called Prayer, then the Women and the Men that are set in the Meeting, shall
rise up, and the Men will uncover their Heads. -- Their Teachers have judged
those Quakers not to be real Members of their Church or Body, that have not
done it (i. e. uncovered their Heads) And herein the Quakers in general have
given more Homage, Reverence and Respect to the Words or Prayers of another,
wherein there was no Life at all, than they have done to the Word of Life it
self in their own Particulars: And this is Anti-christ's work, p. 14, 15.

Answ. His conclusion is false and slanderous herein. We Reverence the Word of
Life in our living Prayers, and not Lifeless Words; And why does he thus judge
any Reverent Posture among us in Prayer, as that of Peoples Rising up, and Men's
Uncovering their Heads in our holy Duty of public Prayer? This is like John
Perrot's prejudiced Party. And how foully Contradictory to himself is he in
thus uncharitably judging us for our Reverent Posture or serious Behavior,
which is matter of Conscience to us, when yet he will not allow any Members or
Elders among us to judge or determine matters relating to Conscience? And
cautions us in Christ's words, Judge not, that ye be not judged, p. 12. Oh,
blind hardened Man! how dare thou thus judge over our Consciences, or falsely
accuse us with leading People from the Power, to worship and reverence the Form
more than the Power? And then most falsely to add, That this is the work of
Antichrist among the Quakers, p. 17. Here thou have slandered, and shamefully
belyed the People of God called Quakers, and have shown thy self not worthy of
so much as the Name of a Quaker. Thou have long been a Reproach unto them.

J. B. Postscript to his Antichrist's Transformations within, (viz.) If any
amongst you pretend to be moved by the Spirit to go to Prayer, then both Men
and Women, they either stand up or else kneel down, and the Men all pull off
their Hats, which own your Form of Prayer; and herein you do both Worship,
Reverence and Adore the Form outwardly, and the Words more than you do the Word
of Life in your own Particulars.

Answ. An erroneous Conclusion, and no natural Consequence, either of our
standing up, kneeling or putting off our Hats in Prayer; for all these may be
and are innocently and conscientiously performed with Respect (and in a holy
Reverence) to Almighty God, whom we breathe and pray unto by his own Spirit.
Besides, both Kneeling and being Uncovered have been practiced among God's
People and true Christians in Prayer to him; so that these Postures are not
condemnable in themselves. How blind and ignorant therefore is this Gain-sayer
in his Opposition? Read Psalm. 95.6. O come, let us Worship and Bow down* Let us
Kneel before the Lord our Maker. And Acts 21.5. And we Kneeled down on the
Shore and prayed; see also 1 Cor. 11.4.

. 5. Having thus manifested the Heads of Jeffery Bullock's Opposition to
outward Order and visible Church Government, etc. and how blind and irrational
he is therein, Inconsistent, Erroneous and Antichristian in his Judgment. Now
take a view of the Doctrinal part of some of those Doctrines he opposes, and
what Doctrines he asserteth.

J. B. The second false Doctrine by you Preached, and also Printed, is, That
the Seed, Spirit, Word, or God, is both in Prison, Bondage and Captivity, and
to be quickened, raised, etc. and that the Blessing is to the Seed, p. 2, 3. of
his ONE BLOW.

Answ. Herein he has dealt unfairly and fallaciously; he has not produced any
Book of ours, or our Friends, wherein this Doctrine is Printed, nor proved
where any of us have thus asserted in these very Words, though much of his
opposition in his Pamphlets depend hereupon. We deny the Doctrine that the
Word, God, is either in Bondage or Captivity in the Sons and Daughters of men,
but only that there is a Seed of God and of Christ that is oppressed, and
suffers in many by reason of Transgression [ a Seed of God] is commonly our
phrase and terms in this case: God is greater, he is above all, he is God and
Father of his own Seed and Birth in man, which is a tender Seed, a lowly and
innocent Seed, of the nature of Christ Jesus as Mediator, who has planted of
his own Seed in man from the beginning, even of his own Life, Soul and Image,
etc. who was The first born of every Creature, who said, My Father is greater
than I: A^^ from this Seed comes a holy Generation, in them that believe in his
Name and Power. Read also the Parable of the Sower, which was the Son of Man,
and of the Seed that fell, some on good Ground, some on stony Ground, and some
in Highway Ground, etc. Matthew. 13.
And also how the Kingdom of Heaven is like unto a Grain of Mustard Seed; as
also the Parable of the Pearl hid in the Field, etc. And further, the Seed of
God and Christ may suffer, and yet not be in Bondage nor Captivity; nor has
the Devil or Sin, power or dominion over Christ or his Spirit in man (as J. B.
falsely infers against us) but over the Soul and whole Creature in Sin, for whom
Christ laid down his Life, and took it up again, who gave his Flesh for the
Life of the World; And every one that sees the Son, and believes on him,
shall have everlasting Life; and I will raise him up at the last day, (says
Christ) John 6.39, 40, 44. and ver. 54. Christ Jesus is not brought into
Bondage or Captivity in man, though he condescends to suffer and bear
Affliction for his own Seed and Generation, to bring them forth; for his own
Arm can bring Salvation to him: he can take unto him his great Power when he
pleases: Though he was oppressed and afflicted, and his Soul was Sorrowful,
nigh unto Death, when he bore the Sin of many in the days of his Flesh, and
when the Iniquities of all did meet upon him, when he suffered on the Cross;
and he is also such an high Priest as can be touched with the feeling of our
Infirmities, suffer with us, and be afflicted in all our Afflictions; many are
also said, To pierce him, grieve his holy Spirit, crucify to themselves the
Lord of Life afresh, and to tread under Foot the Son of God, etc. These are
certain Allusions and Elegancies, intimating Christ's suffering, and also his
being offended and grieved by the Contempt, Despite and Enmity of the
Rebellious: And yet Christ cannot be properly said to be in bondage or
captivity in the Sons and Daughters of men; for (as in himself) he that was
dead, and is alive, ever lives in Dominion, having power over all Flesh, that
he might give eternal Life to all that come unto him, and truly believe in him:
It Is properly said of the Souls of Man and Woman in the Fall, that they are in
Bondage and Captivity; that they are in Prison and Thraldom, till Christ bring
them forth and deliver them: Psalm. 142.1. Bring my Soul out of Prison that I
may praise thy Name. And be sure he that brings the Soul out of Prison, does
condescend to visit it in Prison. He that brings up the Soul out of the
horrible Pit, does first descend or reach so low to fetch it up, or else it
would always remain th^re.

. 6. J. B. Antichrist's Transformations, page 9. The Seed is not to arise in
man -- And p. 25. I disown the arising of the Seed or God in man.

Answ. A sad Doctrine and State! That Is because the Enemy is arisen to such a
great hight in thee, that thou do not own the arising of the Seed of God in
thee: What Fruit can thou bring forth to God, if thou do deny the arising
of his Seed in thee? It Is evident thy Heart is bad Ground, stony Ground and
thorny Ground, in which the good Seed has not taken Root, so as to spring up,
and bring forth Fruit unto Perfection; for in the good Ground or honest Heart
it takes Root downward, and brings forth Fruit upward. And they that take heed
unto the Light of Christ in them, where it shines but as in a dark place, they
come to see the Day dawn, and the Day Star arise in their Hearts: And is not
Christ Jesus the bright and Morning Star? But thou, as an enemy to the Seed of
God, disownest the arising of his Seed in thee. Howbeit, that His Light does
ARISE: The brightness of his RISING: He shall grow up: Truth shall SPRING out
of the Earth: The Sun of Righteousness shall ARISE: The Day spring: Let God
ARISE and his Enemies be scattered, etc. The Word of God grew: So mightily grew
the Word of God and prevailed. These are Scripture Terms and Language, though
little heeded by thee: We shall see more of thy absurd and erroneous Disownings
and Denyings anon, concerning the very Christ of God, and the Soul, etc. But
how come thou to deny the arising of the Seed in man, when thou have espoused
and cited what G. B. writ as thou say, against that Paper of Orders, etc.
seeing he herein plainly says, The Revelation of God is to his Seed, and his
secrets he reveals to it, for which he made the World, and for whose sake it is
continued; And now the SEED IS RAISED to reign over all. (Thus far G. B. thy
authority.) But how shamefully have thou contradicted him in this matter, in
thy disowning the arising of the Seed in Man?

. 7. J. B. You do preach both Salvation and Justification, and also
Condemnation to us Gentiles, by the man Christ, the Son of God, as other
Professions do; and this Doctrine I would have you to prove, because you preach
Salvation by Christ the Light within. -- You Preachers do say in your
Declaration, that the Son of God is come, and has given you an understanding;
the which Doctrine I do deny, ONE BLOW, p. 20.

Answ. Thou that can not reconcile (or see the consistency of) Salvation by
the Man Christ Jesus, AND by his Light within, art gone from his Light into
Imaginations. Why have thou not better observed the Gospel preached by the
Angel of the Lord to the Shepherds, concerning Jesus Christ the Son of God,
Luke 2.11. For unto you is born this day in the City of David a Savior, which
is Christ the Lord; see also Mat. 1.21. Read also good Old Simeon's Testimony,
which he gave of the Lord's Christ, Luke 2.26, 27, 28. And also read Verse 30,
31, 32. For mine Eyes have seen thy Salvation, which thou have prepared before
the Face of all People, a Light to lighten the Gentiles, and the Glory of thy
People Israel. The true Christ of God is but one, though he has appeared in
diverse manners, both in the Flesh and in the Spirit; he is the Light; he is the
Way to the Father; he is the Savior; he is the one Mediator betwixt God and
Man, even the Man Christ Jesus, the heavenly, glorious Man, the Man that was
promised to be for a hiding place, who in the days of his Flesh, said, I am
the Light of the World -- And, He that is with you, shall be in you. As he was
the eternal Word, the Son of God; the Life that was in him was the Light of men
( John 1.) both before his coming in the Flesh, and ever since, and therefore
he was that true Light that enlightens every man that comes into the World; he
was given for Life and Salvation: This our one Lord Jesus Christ is our Light,
Life and Salvation, he is also Judge of quick and dead, that MAN by whom God
will judge the World in Righteousness; he that believes not in his Name, is
condemned already; and This is the Condemnation that Light is come into the
World (i. e. the Light of the Son of God) and Men love Darkness rather then
Light, John 3. see also 2 These. 1.7, 8. When the Lord Jesus shall be revealed
from Heaven with his mighty Angels in flaming Fire, taking Vengeance on them
that know not God, and that obey not the Gospel, etc. Then such shall know him
their Judge and Condemner unto their deserved punishment; see Verse 9.

J. B. You Teachers do hold forth to us Gentiles Christ the Son of God, to be
our Way to the Father; The which Doctrine I would have you to prove; One Blow,
p. 20.

Answ. What defidence and unbelief has entered thee? Christ the Son of God
testied, John 14.6. I am the Way, the Truth, and the Life: No man comes unto
the Father but by me; and no man comes unto me, except the Father which has
sent me draw him. Wherefore in that no man comes unto the Father but by the
Son, the Son is the way to the Father, and the Father's drawing or teaching
reaches unto man, before he come to the Son or Father, that he may be drawn
and come to both. No man's knows the Father, but the Son, and he to whom the Son
will reveal him. Therefore Christ the Son of God, is the way to the Father out
of Adam in the fall (if thou wilt believe him) and It Is by one Spirit through
Jesus Christ (the Mediator) that we have access to the Father.

. 8. J. B. In his gross Errors detected, or many of the Doctrines of the
leading Quakers disowned, as coming from an Antichristian Spirit, p. 1. he
says, John Webb's Doctrine was, That God's appearance in the Sons and
Daughters of men, is to beget and bring forth that innocent Birth and Babe
immortal, etc. This Doctrine does signify that God's appearance is to his Son
Christ Jesus, and for the begetting and bringing of him forth in the Sons and
Daughters of men; the which Doctrine I do deny.

Answ. First, God's appearance in the Sons and Daughters of men, is not to
bring forth a nocent Birth, nor a Babe that is mortal, but an innocent Birth,
and a Babe immortal. Except a man be Born of Water and the Spirit, he cannot
enter into the Kingdom of God: And whosoever is born of God, does not commit
Sin, for his Seed remains in him.

Secondly; This innocent Birth, which God by his Spirit brings forth in the
Sons and Daughters of men, who truly believe, relates to them and their souls,
as begotten and born of the immortal seed, by the living word: so that this
Birth is not Christ Jesus; for he is that incorruptible Seed and Word of Life,
which begets, forms and brings forth the Soul of man into his own Nature and
Image, and so he renews his own Image in man, that believes in his Power; and
so Christ may be said to be formed in us, as in a mysterious and elegant way of
speaking: the property and effect being put for the cause; for Christ in
himself has all Power in Heaven and Earth given to him, and it has pleased
the Father that all fullness should dwell in him.

J. B. That God's appearance is in and by his Son Christ Jesus to us, and that
all are to hear the Son in them, by whom the Father speaks to them, and that
the Son in us is our way to the Father; The which Doctrine I do deny. His gross
Error, p. 1.

Answ. Here thou have denied sound Doctrine, which is according to Christ's own
Doctrine, i. e. He that sees me, sees the Father also: who has shined in our
Hearts, to give us the Light of the Knowledge of his Glory in the face of
Christ Jesus: And my Sheep hear my Voice, says Christ: And God has spoken to
us by his Son. Thy denying God's appearing, and speaking by his Son, and his
Son to be our way to the Father* Herein thou have not only denied Christ's own
Testimony, but the blessed advantage we have by him as MEDIATOR.

J. B. Another of their Doctrines is, That the Quakers ought so to wait upon
God, as that they may feel the Life in them to flow from Vessel to Vessel,
whenas they are met together to wait upon God. This was Charles Marshalls
Wife's Doctrine, p. 2 ibid.

Answ. This is neither false Doctrine nor gross Error, as thou imaginest, but
sound Doctrine; Hannah Marshall knew better than thy self herein; for they that
truly wait upon God, both receive an increase of Life from him who is the
Fountain, and feel Life to flow from Vessel to Vessel; He that believes as the
Scripture says, out of his Belly shall flow Rivers of living Waters; This
spoke he of the Spirit, which they that believe should receive. And the true
Believers all drink into One Spirit. And there is among such a spiritual and
effectual Communication of Faith and Virtue, in the living Communion of the
holy Spirit; all which thy dark Imaginations have deprived thee of.

J. B. These Doctrines of the Quakers are false Doctrines and Antichristian,
because that God's Appearance is not by his Son Christ Jesus to us, p. 3.

Answ. Thou art guilty of Antichristian Doctrine, and Anti-scriptural also, in
denying God's Appearance to be by his Son Christ Jesus, The Mediator; for what
God is to us for our Salvation, and what good we receive from him for our
Souls, and what we are unto him in our Obedience (as acceptable to him) it is
all IN and Through our Lord Jesus Christ the Mediator.

J. B. That God, who is a Spirit, should be held in Bondage and Captivity by
his Creation, or by the Power of Darkness, is contrary to Right Reason -- So
that it must needs follow by plain Argument, that not only the Creature, but
the Power of Darkness too has had Dominion over God -- contrary to sound
Doctrine, and is Blasphemy, page 5, 6. GROSS ERRORS.

Answ. This thou have often unjustly and slanderously repeated upon the
Quakers; and herein I testify against thy Abuse, and dare Challenge thee to
prove out of any of our Writings, that it is the Quakers Doctrine, That either
God is held in Bondage or Captivity by his Creation, or that the Power of
Darkness has Dominion over him. We utterly deny the Assertion and Expressions
as Blasphemous; but do say, the holy Spirit is grieved, and the Seed of God
burdened by the Iniquities of the World, which suffering is in Condescension on
Christ's part, and not for want of Power or Dominion over the Devil or Wicked
men; for he bruiseth his Head, has Power to subdue, condemn and punish them,
and his own Arm to bring Salvation to him.

J. B. Another of their Doctrines, That all are to come to the Son of God,
Christ Jesus, whom they say is in them, and that he is the only Way to the
Father; which Doctrine I do deny, because it is God who both was and is a
Spirit, which has first appeared in and to the Sons and Daughters of men,
after sin, etc. -- Therefore every one is to be first turned to God in their
own particulars, and NOT to the Son of God, p 8. Gross Errors.

Answ. This Erroneous Denial and Doctrine of thine, against coming to the Son
of God, as the only Way to the Father, is but the same reiterated over and
over. The Father and the Son are not divided in the work of Regeneration. I and
my Father are one, says Christ: No man comes to the Father but by me. But
it is no marvel that thou have denied Christ ( the Mediator) to be the way to
the Father, and so opposed his Mediatorship; for thy Denyals and Oppositions
appear more Gross, Erroneous and Antichristian against Christ himself and the
holy Scriptures in thy Antichrist's Transformations.

1st, In thy not owning Justification or Condemnation by Christ N^ marvel if
Giles Barnardiston's Wife did say that she trembled to hear the Blasphemy that
thou heldst, as thou say; Antichrist^s Transfor. page 21.
that dyed without the Gates of Jerusalem; which thou confessest to be the
ground and main Difference that arose between some of the Quakers and thee, p.
10.

2dly, In thy asserting, That Christ's Soul dyed, p. 19. N^ marvel if Giles
Barnardiston's Wife did say that she trembled to hear the Blasphemy that thou
heldst, as thou say; Antichrist^s Transfor. page 21.
And so thy holding the the Mortality of the Soul in general.

3dly, Thy asserting, That the Book of the Scriptures both was and is the fruit
which the Tree of Knowledge bears, p. 22.

4thly, Thy affirming, That there is Two Christ's, p. 23. Thus thou arguest.

. 9. J. B. It is no where written in the Scriptures, that we shall either be
justified or condemned by that Christ which dyed without the Gates of
Jerusalem; but it is written, By Grace ye are saved, and by Grace ye are
justified; and it is also written, By the Light of the World ye are condemned;
and not by Christ that dyed without the Gates of Jerusalem, Antichr. Transf. p.
17.

Answ. Here again thy erroneous Blindness is apparent, who see not how
consistent being saved and justified by that Christ who is the very Christ of
God, to whom all the Prophets gave witness, AND being saved and justified by
his Grace; both which the holy Scripture testify. Isa. 53.11. By his Knowledge
shall my Righteous Servant justify many; for he shall bear their Iniquities.
This was a Prophecy of the same Christ that suffered; and Mat. 1.21. She shall
bring forth a Son, and thou shall call his Name Jesus, for he shall save his
People from their Sins; and verse 23. Behold, a Virgin shall be with Child, and
shall bring forth a Son, and his Name shall be called Emanuel, which being
interpreted, is, God with us: And Luke 2.11. For unto you is born this day in
the City of David a Savior, which is Christ the Lord. And that Grace by which
we are saved, is that Grace of God which comes by Christ; see also Tit. 2.11,
12, 13, 14. Where the saving Grace of God and our Savior Jesus Christ, who
gave himself for us that he might redeem us from all Iniquity etc. are
testified of; and therefore Salvation by that Christ, through his Grace are not
Inconsistent.

J. B. Now if Salvation be by that Christ that dyed without the Gates at
Jerusalem, then are all the Gentiles perished that were in the World before
that Body came into the World, Antich. Trans. p. 18.

Answ. Thy consequence is erroneous; for that very Christ, the Son of God, was
(and is) Mediator and Savior from the beginning; his outgoings were from of
Old, he was spiritually in being by his Life, Light, Spirit and Grace before he
took upon him that Body prepared of the Father to do his Will. John bore
witness of that Man Christ, saying, He that comes after me is preferred before
me, for he was before me, John 1.15. And again, verse. 30. After me comes a man
which is preferred before me, for he was before me: Therefore the Man Christ
Jesus was before he came in the Body or Flesh: He was that spiritual Rock which
all Israel drank of; his Life was the Light of men from the beginning, and all
the generations of the Righteous did spiritually p^rtake of the benefit of
Christ as Mediator, both before and after his Coming in the flesh they
vertually pertook of the Sacrifice of the Lamb, of the virtue of the Blood of
the Covenant for Remission, and were saved by the Life of this Mediator; by
Faith they pertook of the spiritual Advantage of his suffering and sacrifice,
who was as a Lamb slain from the Foundation of the World, and as (in the
fullness of time) his coming and suffering in the flesh, and his tasting Death
for every man, and his giving himself a Ransom for all, were for a Testimony in
due time of God's great kindness to Mankind. So Christ's coming in the flesh an
eminent Dispensation from God, ordained and decreed in great love to Mankind:
So that thereby a greater and more eminent discovery and breaking forth of his
Light and Glory in the Gospel Day and Dispensation was manifest in due time,
which Glory the holy spirit of Christ in the holy Prophets testified of, as
that which should follow his sufferings; and in him are all Nations and
Families of the Earth blessed and saved, who believe and walk in his Light.

J. B. All the World was freed from their Offerings for sin by that one
Offering -- reconciled to God by the death of his Son -- But we must be
redeemed, justified and also saved by a measure of the same Life that dwelt in
the Son, in which Life the Son of God offered up his Soul and Body to be
crucified to the Death a Sacrifice once for all These precedent words (except
that of his Soul) are true; but not the subsequent.
Then NO Salvation to the Souls of the Sons and Daughters of men by him that
dyed without the Gates at Jerusalem, p. 19. Anti. Transformations.

Answ. An erroneous Inference still, and most blindly reiterated; for if we
must be saved by that Life that was in the Son of God, how dare thou deny
Salvation to the souls of Mankind by him that so suffered and dyed? seeing we
are reconciled by his Death; who dyed and rose again, and Death has no more
dominion over him? And have not thou confessed that we are reconciled by his
Death, so we shall be saved by his Life?

Well, by whose Life? by the Life of the very same Christ of God, who (as
concerning the flesh) was put to Death. And was his Death then no ways
conducing to our Salvation? How are we then reconciled by it? Is Reconciliation
no degree of Salvation? Surely thou art under great Contradiction and gross
Mistakes in this matter.

To thy Objection, That Mary says, her Soul did magnify the Lord, and her
Spirit did rejoice in God her Savior, p. 21. And that God said, Look unto Me
all ye Ends of the Earth, and be saved, p. 23.

This is no proof that his Son Jesus Christ was No Savior; for God saves by
his Son; God was in Christ reconciling the World to himself; God works by the
Mediator; and Jesus Christ, who is the Savior and the Redeemer is both truly
God and Man Inseparable.

But how come thou off in answer to the Objection made against thee, (viz.)
If no Salvation by that Christ that dyed without the Gates of Jerusalem, then
thy Doctrine implies two Christ's, which we do not profess, nor preach, nor
own; for in words thou over and over tellest us of that Christ that dyed
without the Gates, and that he was the Son of God, the Christ of God, etc. What
say thou to this? Review thy following words:

J. B. (viz.) Now that there are two Christ's, it is plain according to the
Scriptures; for there is both the true Christ and Antichrist, p. 23.

Rep. Oh, sad and lamentable! How absurdly, blindly and erroniously have thou
answered here! The Objection or Question against thee was not about Antichrist,
but about the True Christ, who is the very Christ of God, who was crucified at
Jerusalem, and is in his Saints (by his Light, Life and Spirit) whom thy
Doctrine tends to render Two Christ's, and so to divide the True Christ; but we
testify he is but One; As to us there is but ONE GOD, the Father, of whom are
all things, and we in him; and ONE Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are all things,
and we by him, 1 Cor. 8.6. And of this ONE Lord Jesus Christ the true Apostles
testified as One and the same Christ, though he variously appeared, according
to what is written of him, (1 Cor. 15. and 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, verses) of his Death
and Resurrection, and how he was seen of many, And last of all he was seen of
me also, (says Paul) as of one born out of due time, v. 8. This was ONE and
the SAME CHRIST still.

. 10. J. B. Now Christ he neither came of David, nor yet of Israel, according
to the Flesh; not as to his outward appearance as he was a visible Man; but he
came of David and Israel both, according to the Spirit: And this is the Spirit
whom God has exalted, both as a Prince and a Savior; Anti. Trans. p. 23.

Answ. This is a gross Mistake, and Contradictory to plain Scripture; see Romans
1.3, 4, 5. Concerning his Son Jesus Christ our Lord, which was made of the seed
of David according to the Flesh; and declared to be the Son of God with Power,
according to the spirit of Holiness, by the Resurrection from the dead; by whom
we have received GRACE and Apostleship for obedience to the Faith among all
Nations for his Name; see also Romans 9.5. But thou say, He neither came of
David, nor yet of Israel according to the flesh, quite contrary to the
Apostle's testimony; Which shall People believe, thee or the Apostle? Surely
not such a blind, muddled, confused, dark and dull Soul as thou art. I wish
thee (with the Light of Christ within, on the holy Scriptures) to recollect thy
self better, that thou may repent, and condemn, and call in thy muddled,
confused, distracted, whimsical and mad Pamphlets, that would be the safest way
for thee upon all accounts; for thou have no matter of Religion to suffer for,
thy hope being in this Life only according to thy Principle of the Soul's
Mortality.

J. B. He that dyed without the Gates at Jerusalem -- he was the Christ of God,
being one with the Spirit of God; but it was the Woman's part What Scripture
has he that says His Soul was the Woman's part that dyed? The Scripture says
otherwise; That 'twas according to the Flesh, he was made of the seed of David,
Romans 1.3.
that dyed, that was his What Scripture has he that says His Soul was the
Woman's part that dyed? The Scripture says otherwise; That 'twas according to
the Flesh, he was made of the seed of David, Romans 1.3.
Soul and Body. -- Now Christ as he was a visible Man, and made of a visible
Woman made under the Law, he INTERNALLY DYED, as to his SOUL and BODY;
Antichrist's Transformations, page 19.

Answ. Oh poor Jeffery! Whither art thou run in thy whimsical Conceits, and
distracted Imaginations, one while to DENY Jesus Christ the Son of God, to be
the Way to the Father; another while to DENY Salvation by him; another while to
DENY the Immortality of his Soul; and here most erroniously to AFFIRM, That his
Soul dyed, and that he internally dyed as to his Soul. Oh! Antichristian and
Antiscriptural Doctrine! For though he was put to death only as to his Body,
his Soul dyed not with it; for he said, Father, into thy Hands I commend my
Spirit, Luke 23.46. see Acts 7.59. And to the penitent Thief, To Day shall thou
be with me in Paradise, Luke 23.43. Therefore his Soul (or Spirit) dyed not
with the Body, he did not internally dye, he dyed only as to the Body, being
put to death as concerning the Flesh, and rose again the third day, according
to the Scriptures; and Death has no more dominion over him. And although it be
said, He has poured out his Soul unto Death: This concerned the travail of
soul, and sorrows of death, which he was under the sense of, when he said, My
Soul is exceeding sorrowful, even unto death, Matthew. 26.38. whilst yet his soul
was living and immortal in its own being, praying and making intercession unto
the Father: For pouring out the Soul or Heart, sometimes (in Scripture) imports
an earnest supplication to God, and travail in Prayer; Psalm. 42.4. I pour out
my Soul in me. And Psalm. 62.8. Pour out your Heart before him, God is a Refuge
for us. The soul of Messiah was poured out in Prayer and Supplication to the
Father, whilst in great sorrow and deep suffering for Mankind, even when he
bore the Sin of many, and made intercession for the Transgressors. Isa. 53.
Thus his soul was poured out, and made an offering for Sin, that he might see
his Seed, and the effect of his Souls travail, and be satisfied, and through
all Reign with the Father in the same Glory which he had with him before the
World began. So that the Messiah reigns in Life, Glory and Immortality,
blessed forever; and his Saints shall reign with him for evermore.

But thy Error ends not here, in asserting that Christ's Soul dyed, seeing thou
have publicly opposed the Immortality of the Soul in my hearing, and the
hearing of many more, and have affirmed, The mortality of the Soul of man, that
it dies with the Body. And so denying future States, Beeings and Rewards of
mankind. Thou know (Jeffery) I have labored with thee at sundry times, and
before several endeavored to Convince thee of thy Atheistical Error in this
very point; and many are my Witnesses therein: But thou have appeared wilful,
dark and pertinacious in thy blind, dark and confused Imaginations, whereupon I
have exhorted thee, and do exhort thee, to give over Preaching, and telling
People of saving their Souls by the Word, and of raising of our Souls out of
the Grave of Sin and Death, by the Light and Power of God within, when thou
do not believe any Immortality of the Souls of Men, more than of a Beast, as
I have told thee to thy Face; when the Beast dies, there is an end. So what
gross Hypocrisy is it in thee so often to Preach in Friends Meetings at
Sudbury, in opposition to our Friends, and to pretend, as if thou had such a
great Regard to Peoples Souls, that they might be saved, raised up, and
delivered from Sin in this Life, when thou have nothing further to propose to
them, than only a Hope in this Life, a Happiness in this Life, a Portion in
this Life? which is so short and uncertain, that the days of Man here are
compared but to a Shadow, Psalm. 90.4, 6, 9. and 102.11. and 103.15. and 144, 4.
See Jo^ 7.6. and 16.22. Isa. 40.6 James 4.14.
and to a Cloud that vanishes, and as being swifter than a Post, or than a Tale
that is told, and swifter than a Weavers Shuttle, etc. So that if we have hope
in this life Only, we are of all men most miserable. But I cannot take thee as
a Person consistent with thy self, in this thy Atheistical Doctrine of the
Soul's Mortality, no more than in other things; for thou art manifestly
inconsistent and contradictory to thy self in this matter; for in thy Pamphlet
(i. e. GROSS ERRORS) thou have confessed, His Concessions manifestly
Contradictory to his Doctrine of the Soul's Mortality.
That Christ's Soul never was captivated, p. 4. And, That the Blessing is to
God's invisible Creation within the Sons and Daughters of men, as that comes
to be begotten by a measure of divine Life, into a true and living Faith; the
which invisible Creation (say thou) or the Souls and Understandings of men
and women, over the which Death, that power of Darkness has invisibly reigned,
p. 3. And, That Ministry which is sent of God, it is to the Souls and
Understandings of Men and Women -- That so their Souls may be turned to the
Light, or measure of divine Life which has appeared to their Souls, p. 4. As
also thou say, That God's appearance is both to the Souls and Understandings
of the Sons and Daughters of Men, even whilst they are altogether Children of
the Unrighteous Nature and Spirit, for that very end, that so they may be
quickened, and also raised up, and so come to be changed, they being made
partakers of the Divine Nature, page 7.

Query: How then do thou affirm that such Souls are Mortal? This change in
such Souls does not only bespeak their Immortality, but their being Immortally
happy: Is not that Soul or Birth immortal that is capable of partaking of the
divine Nature, or that does partake thereof? Can that Soul dye with the Body,
or end in Mortality? No, no; the very Souls of the Wicked, and impenitent
workers of Iniquity, shall live in Torment, where the Worm dies not, and the
Fire is never quenched; Christ's instance of Dives and Lazarus does really
intimate the two different states hereafter; see Luke 16.22, 23. etc. How
grossly Erroneous and Contradictory art thou in this point? and farther to thy
own confutation, addest, (viz.) Thus the Sons and Daughters of Unrighteousness
come to be made the Children of Righteousness, they being changed, and also
lifted up by the Spirit of Life from under the power of Death, into the Kingdom
of God, with him to reign over the Power of Death, even as the Son of God did
in the days of his Flesh, p. 7.

How now Jeffery? These passages relating to the Soul's conversion, and their
being made partakers of the Divine Nature, and being lifted up into the Kingdom
of God, are some of thy better sort of Preaching; but thy Doctrine of the
Soul's mortality, or the Soul's dying with the Body, does allow the Souls of
the Children of men, even of the Converted, but a very short share, and
uncertain time in the Kingdom of God, if but in this Life only. O Jeffery! give
over thy troublesome, hypocritical Preaching in our Friends Meetings for shame,
and never pretend such a concern for the Conversion and Salvation of Peoples
Souls, whilst thou hold this Atheistical Opinion, That they are all Mortal.
Keep at home, and give over such Hypocritical Preaching, for it is neither
Conscientious nor Religious.

. 11. Now concerning the Scripture, thy Doctrine follows.

J. B. (in his Antichrist's Transformations, p. 22.) says, (viz.) For the Book
of the Scriptures both was and is the Fruit which the Tree of Knowledge bears.
And in his Testimony against the Quakers false Doctrine (as he falsely calls
it) page 19. He says thus, viz. The Book of the Scriptures is part of the
Fruit of the Tree of Knowledge -- I say, that the Book of the Scriptures is the
Fruit that the Tree of Knowledge bears.

Answ. This Doctrine is not only Unscriptural, but a dark, erroneous
Imagination and Whimsie of thy own: Thou know not whereof thou affirmest,
and have plainly contradicted thy self herein, by confessing not only, That the
Scriptures are opened by the Spirit of Truth, but that They were given forth by
the Word of Life, p. 22. and 29.

Thou farther proceedest (like a whimsical, self-opposing and contradictory
Person) in these words, (viz.) Let all that read your Book, and also the Letter
that was given me, which I disowned (which Letter is printed in my first Book)
and they may easily perceive that the Line of your Testimony is in the Letter
and Book of the Scriptures, and not in the Light and Law written in the Heart.
Thus in thy Testimony, p. 19.

Here thou have at one dash confuted and overthrown thy own Work, and knocked
down thy own evil cause at one blow. Thou have undertaken to detect the Quakers
Errors, and many of the Doctrines of the leading Quakers, as Erroneous,
Antichristian, etc. And, To give a Testimony against the Quakers false
Doctrine, (as thou falsely call it) even in the Titles of thy Pamphlets) but
now confessest our Testimony is in the Letter and Book of the Scriptures.

Thus have thou denied and opposed that Testimony which is in the Book of the
Scriptures, and not only So, but most erroniously opposed the Light and Law
written in the Heart thereunto; when as they do agree, and the Scripture cannot
be broken. Therefore Repent of thy vain and Antichristian opposition. Another
Contradiction is in thy following words (viz.)

J. B. Your Paper to the Churches is not to be owned by the Churches, inasmuch
as it was written from a sight or a sense, and not in and from the Spirit of
Revelation: Now whatsoever is written, declared, or given forth in the sight or
in the sense, is not to be owned. Antichrist's Transformations, p. 2.

Contradictions.
And p. 25. ibid. I disown that to be any true Ministry for God, who in their
Declarations do exhort both Friends and other People, to come to a sense, and
to wait in a sense, and continue in a sense; for God is not a sense, neither is
his Spirit a sense.

But in plain contradiction ^ereto, p. 9. Lazarus was raised, and so must we be
raised by the same Voice, Spirit and Power, must we come both to FEEL and
Witness Christ the Light within, to be our Resurrection, and our Life, by
FEELING and Receiving his Power revealed from Heaven, etc.

Observe; Here thou have confessed to the Truth of Feeling and witnessing
Christ, Feeling and receiving his Power, etc. contrary to thy opposing and
denying what is written in the sense, and exhorting Friends, etc. To come to
wait and continue in a sense, whereas there is a spiritual sense and feeling of
divine Life; there are spiritual Senses to be exercised by the holy Spirit, to
discern between good and evil. There is a spiritual seeing, tasting and
handling of the Word of Life, but thou have lost these Senses, thou art out of
they right Senses, which makes thee so Senseless and Nonsensical in thy
scribbling, and full of rambling confused Whimsies, Delusions and dark
Imaginations, which are the effects of thy Disobedience to, and Apostasy from
the Light of Christ within, which convinced thee long ago.

. 12. And now I would have thee observe thy manifest and practical
Contradiction to a Passage in conclusion of thy Gross Errors, Postscript. The
Passage is this, ( viz.)

J. B. It is an Antichristian Spirit in all which leads People (under what
Profession soever) to think of themselves above others, or to be in a better
state than others, or to separate themselves from others, although their Souls
may have seen by the Light within them beyond others; yet these ought not to
separate themselves from others; for they have been Children of Darkness as
well as others; for if they do separate themselves from others, then this holds
forth a certain Testimony, that they do think of themselves above others, and
also to be in a better state than others are in; so that this is all
Antichrist's work.

Answ. Why do thou then separate thy self from others, that is, from the
Church of England? for by this Proposition thou oughtst not so to separate, nor
to frequent the Quakers Meetings, nor to preach in them, whether thou think
thy self in a better state than those of the Church of England or not, or that
thy Soul has seen by the Light within beyond them, as doubtless thou think
thy self herein above them: On this Proposition of thy own thou oughtst not to
separate, nor to preach in the Quakers Meetings. And if thou did not think
thy self to see with the Light within beyond them of the Church of England,
there were no reason for thee then to separate from them. Behold! thy Practical
Contradiction and Ranterism, in thy Proposition or Doctrine against separating
from others, on the account of seeing with the Light beyond them, which is to
maintain a confused mixture and society in Worship, between those that see with
the Light, and those that see not with it, between the Seeing and the Blind,
the Children of the Light and the Children of Darkness; for thy opposing a
Separation from others is without distinction, and yet thou art in a Separation
from others. Why separatest thou from the National Worship, and make thy self
a Preacher at the Quakers Meetings in Sudbury? when they disown thee, thy
Preaching and Corrupt, Erroneous and Antiscriptural Doctrine? As,

Thy Denying Christ, the Son of God, to be our way to the Father.

Thy Denying Salvation or Condemnation by the same Christ that suffered.

Thy Denying the Immortality of the Soul of Christ Jesus, or of any other Souls
of Mankind, and affirming, That his Soul dyed, and that he internally dyed, as
to his Soul, etc.

And thy asserting, The Book of the Scriptures to be the fruit of the Tree of
Knowledge.

And thy Denying the Arising of the Seed of God and Christ in man.

And thy Denying to come to a Sense, and to wait in a Sense in thy self, and
opposing preaching from a sight and sense; as in thy Antichrists
Transformations, p. 2, 25.

Thy dark and erroneous Doctrine and Preaching in these things the True
Christian Quakers utterly deny, with many other dark erroneous Positions,
Whimsies, Contradictions and blind Oppositions, Falsehoods and Abuses, foolish
and unlearned Questions in thy Pamphlets here omitted; as also thy Hypocritical
Preaching in pretense, For the good of Souls, For the quickening of Souls, For
the raising up of Souls, For the converting of Souls, That Peoples Souls may
partake of the divine Nature, and be lifted up into the Kingdom of God, etc.
Which though this be the best sort of thy Preaching, and in the best words thou
have, yet while thou denyest the Immortality of the Soul, and concludest, They
all dye with the earthly Tabernacles, and so a total end of all: This thy gross
and Atheistical Error is enough to evince thy abominable Hypocrisy and
Irreligiousness in the best sort of thy Preaching. And therefore give over thy
preaching in our Friends Meetings, hold thy Tongue, lay thy hand upon thy
Mouth, keep at home, and seriously bethink thy self, and remember from whence
thou art fallen, and then condemn, retract and call in thy Erroneous and
Antichristian Pamphlets. Remember I have herein given thee the safest Counsel,
in Love and Friendship to thee, and to thy Immortal Soul, which shall remember
me when thou art awakened under the hand of thy Righteous Judge, who is the
Judge of all, to whom I can sincerely appeal, and commit my Christian and
faithful Endeavors concerning these Controversies and Differences with thee
and the rest concerned in this Treatise, you being all concerned in one Spirit
of Opposition, Prejudice, Strife and Enmity, though thou have exceeded the rest
in thy Doctrinal part, in presumptuously attempting such an Antichristian
Confutation of the Quakers Doctrines. And with my solemn Appeal and
Supplication I do Conclude.

OH! Thou Heart-searching God and righteous Judge of all, unto thee I make my
Appeal and Supplication, against this Jealous, Dividing, Rending Spirit that
has appeared in Strife and open Contention against thy Servants and faithful
Witnesses, and against that good order and society that thou have been pleased
to gatber us into. Thou know the integrity of my soul before thee, and that
I have waited for thy Counsel how to act and behave my self in these matters,
and that I have not sought to exalt my self, nor any Popularity, Party or
Interest to my self, but only thy Glory and the good of Souls. Thou know,
that in the first place my soul has sought for Peace in the way of Peace, and
for a quiet Composure of Differences, occasioned by some Self-willed and
Lukewarm Professors of thy Truth, whilst there was any hope or probability
thereof, before the opposite Party became open Adversaries. And O Lord thou
know I am not alone in this concern, many others of thy faithful servants
have traveled in the same Christian Spirit with me, for peace and quietness,
and for a quiet end of Differences in Truth and Righteousness: But thine and
our Adversaries have rewarded us evil for good, and to me hatred for my love.

And now* O Lord, behold how true love and tenderness is rejected by thy
Adversaries, and how thy holy spirit is offended! Behold and judge the
bitterness of their spirits; Their Rancor and Fury, their Words of Hatred,
Reviling and Slander against thy faithful Servants and Witnesses; Their
Disregard to the Honor and Reputation of thy Truth, thy Name and People; Their
working against the Glory and Honor of thy excellent Name among us; Their
crucifying thy Son afresh to themselves, and putting him to open shame and
reproach in the Eyes of thy open Enemies and Persecutors of thy People.

Oh! Lord, Lord, look down, behold and judge for these things, show thy Power
in putting an end as openly to these Controversies, as they are openly forced
out into the World by Apostates and Adversaries of thy Truth and People.

Thou know, O Lord, that though thou have endued me with a Christian Spirit,
and with Faith, Patience and Rejoicing under all my Sufferings and Tribulations
for thy Name sake, and enabled me patiently to undergo the open Revilings and
Infamies cast upon me, both by open, professed (and secret) Enemies; in all which
I daily praise thy Name for thy Goodness. Yet thou have also endued me with the
Spirit of Righteous Judgment, Understanding and Zeal for the Glory of thy holy
Name and Truth, and have raised me up in defense of thy Gospel, to vindicate
thy Truth and innocent People, who are Lovers of Peace and Union in thy Son
Christ Jesus.

And now, O Lord, I humbly pray thee, preserve thy Lambs and tender Babes, and
open the Eyes and unvail the Understandings of all whom the Enemy has deceived
and prejudiced, who are mistaken in their Judgments, and not guilty of willful
Opposition and Hatred; That they that have not sinned out their day nor become
judicially hardened, may yet find a place of Repentance and Mercy, in returning
to thee with Humility, true Contrition and Brokenness of Heart, that thou
may heal their Backslidings, and love them freely.

O my God! in these my Labors and Endeavors, as I have eyed thee and thy
Counsel, and thou have been with me, for which I praise thy Name. So I
recommend all to thee, to manifest the real intent and end of all, and to plead
and justify my Cause, it being thy own Cause, and the Cause of thy whole
Heritage: Amen, Amen, says my Soul.

ADVERTISEMENT.
FIrst, Note, That where in page 158. of this Treatise, mention is made That G.
F 's intention and sense is by another hand spoken to. That and much more is
yet reserved in Manuscript against W. R's abusive Books.

Secondly, That whereas in page 205. it is said, It being now above six Weeks
since the Letter was left at Ely, etc. and yet no Answer. -- It is now above
three Months since, and yet no Answer received from F. B. being now (at the
Printing hereof) toward the latter end of the 11th Month, 1682.

Thirdly, That this Treatise has been long in the Printer's hands, and not
hastened in the Press, because of these Additions in the three last Chapters,
to Francis Bugg, Thomas Crisp, John Pennyman and Jeffery Bullock; for the
Answer to William Rogers's 7 th part of his Christian-Quaker, was writ in a
short time after it was out.

Fourthly, It is some question whether two or three of the Names in page 250.
be right, i. e. Averset, Snazdale and Tysoeth, by reason of their Names being
badly writ in the Certificate sent up.

Fifthly, Note, That where in the Postscript, after the Letter to Francis Bugg,
page 253, 4. and in his Book also, p. 52. he gives account of a Minister thus,
viz. That in the Quarterly Meeting Book at Hadenham, they shall find a Record,
wherein he is recorded out of the Unity, for not taking his Wife according to
the Order of Friends, i. e. not publishing his Intention before the Women's
Meetings. Which Account is excepted against upon Friends positively giving a
contrary one to me.

Let it be farther remarked, that Francis Bugg's pretended Proof appears not
from Evidence of the Fact, but is his consequence drawn from the Records. But
first, his Consequence appears not only fallacious, but false in Fact, in his
restraining the Order of Friends only to the Women's Meetings, which is not
consequent to the Record of the Quarterly Meeting, dated, the first of the 10th
Month, 1675. and cited by F. B. (p. 61.) for Proof; for the extent of that
Record is, For the consent of Friends at two Men's Meetings and two Women's
Meetings, etc.

2 dly, Neither can his Account be true, if there was not then a Woman's Meeting
established in that part of the County, but that the complaint of the Monthly
Meeting was, That the Person concerned did not publish his Intention above once
to the Men's Meeting, and refused to bring the Woman to any Meeting at all,
before the time of their Marriage.

3 dly, Since the said Exception was writ, I have met with a Certificate under
the Hands of several Persons of Credit, i. e. Phillip Tailor, William Brasier,
John Prime, and Jacob Baker, who do confirm the matter excepted against Francis
Fugg's said Account; whereby they declare it to be his false Insinuation, and a
manifest misrepresenting of Friends in those parts, and a malicious Falsehood.
For they affirm, That there was no Women's Meetings established in that part of
the County where it fell in course for the said Person to publish his Intention
of Marriage; and that because he refused to bring the Woman to any Meeting at
all (to manifest her consent and intention of Marriage with him) And his
proposing it but once to the Men's Meeting, and that in her absence, before he
took her to Wife. This they looked on as an irregular Proceedure and
Innovation, and no safe President or Example. For which cause, together with
his refusal to give the Monthly Meeting satisfaction for the Irregularity (as
desired) on complaint thereof to the Quarterly Meeting, a Record was made,
according to their Consciences and Care, That they had not Unity with him in
this his SO doing (as it is cited by Fr. Bugg himself.

Sixthly, Let it be noted, That Francis Bugg is guilty of notorious Falsehood
and malicious Slander, where he pretends to discover That hypocritical and
two-faced Practice of pleading to the Magistrates for Liberty of Conscience,
and at the same time using and exercising all Force, Rule and Dominion they are
capable to inflict upon their dissenting Brethren, who cannot fall down and cry
Hosanna to every Likeness, etc. And the Reason he suggests is, Lest the Ruling
Party should be encouraged to introduce a numberless Number of needless
Ceremonies, till at length Rome may, if possible, be outdone, page 115, 116. 2d
part. Thus like a false informing Judas he has belched out his Lying
Insinuations, tending to incense the Magistrate against us. For,

1 st, In the first part I take his Charge [ Hypocritical] to intend our
Applications to the Magistrates for Liberty from Persecution: and then it is
malicious, false and scandalous, and therein he has acted the part of a base
Informer against us, for which God (who knows our sincerity and consistency in
our pleading to the Magistrate on this account) will certainly rebuke his lying
malicious Spirit.

In the second part, I take his Charge [ Of using all Force, Rule and Dominion,
etc. upon dissenting Brethren for not falling down to every Likeness] to intend
that Church Government, Discipline and Order, and those Ministers concerned
therein which he opposes among the People called Quakers: And then he has
herein most wickedly and falsely informed the Magistrates, 1 st, To render our
Applications for Liberty of Conscience of no credit with them, but
Hypocritical: 2 dly, To render us guilty of that which we are pleading against,
i. e. Exercising Force upon our Brethrens Consciences, and that for not falling
down to every Likeness. Oh, horrid Abuse and Slander! And what lamentable
Blindness and gross Absurdity is this Adversary fallen into! like as if he
should thus argue, viz. You plead to the Magistrate for Liberty of Conscience
in the free exercise of Religion, from Persecution, Corporal and Pecuniary
Punishments on that score. Therefore you are Hypocritical, Two-faced and
Inconsistent in your Practice, whilst you exercise a Church Authority, by
giving true Spiritual Judgment, Admonition or Censures upon any that dissent or
divide from you, or cause Divisions or Offenses: Such are the Consequences of
his before-cited Charge, considering that he has not proved our Judgment
VNJVST, or Advice and Admonition ERRONEOVS or UNCHRISTIAN in any of those
things opposed by him; or our Paper, which he makes his great Proof against us,
and Scornfully calls, A Grant and Confirmation by a general Council held at
London, Anno 1675. page 41. For which he falsely accuses us of INNOVATIONS,
IMPOSITIONS, APOSTACIES, NEW-STAMPED GOVERNMENT, ARBITRARY RVLE, etc. comparing
us to the POPES COUNCIL. (page 42, 46, etc.) And then he might as well say,
It Is a great infringement of Liberty of Conscience for a Christian Society to
Reprove, Judge or Censure disorderly Walkers under the same Profession. And by
the same absurd way of Arguing and shallow Opposition he may as well assume a
Power to stop the Mouths of all Gospel Ministers for exercising their
Consciences in that divine Authority that Christ has given them, To renounce
the hidden things of Dishonesty, and to Exhort, Rebuke, Reprove, Admonish,
Command, etc. according to their Commission, both in the primitive Times and
our Day.

Thus we may justly conclude, that a corrupt, defiled, immoral Conscience would
have its unchristian Liberty.

Seventhly, Some Errors have escaped the Press, in this Treatise, both in
Points, Letters and Words, the most material whereof are here noted, which I
desire the ingenuous Reader accordingly to Correct; (the sense will show the
rest) wherein I do as I would be done to; for I examine the Errata's, even of
my Adversaries Books, as they are noted, before I answer the Matter.

ERRATA.
PAge 19. Line 4, 6. for bear read bare. p 26 l 10 r questioned. p 33 l 24 f
mian r main. p 34 l 17 f twining r turning. p 43 l 13 dele there. p 47 l 1 f
the r thy p 59 read by laws made in the reign of. p 62 l 3 f tives r tive. p 84
l 20 f bear r bare. p 88 l 16 f justifying r insisting p 144 l 10 r blind
zealot is. p 158 l 1 r in the case. p 167 l 9 f it r in. p 209 l 2 f Statutis r
Statuti. p 210 l 14 r their names. p 228 l 21 r upon W P's p 233 l 20, 21 r
abusest, scandalizest. p 237 l 3 r the matter. p 252 l 16 f disingenious r
disingenuous. p 254 l 10 r horribly. p 262 l 1 r Apostates. p 272 l 14 r
rights. p 279 Margent r Like the Postscript of N. C 's Epistle. p 284 l 3 r are
under. p 295 l 16 r their Conscientiousness. p 300 l 7 f by r thy. p 310 l 16 r
because thereof p 311 l 12 r and of p 315 l 14 r his pretense being, because. p
326 l 17 f herein r therein. The sense will evince the rest of literal fauls,
less material.

THE END.
BOOKS Printed and Sold by A. Soul at the Crooked-Billet in Holloway-Lane in
Shoreditch, 1682.
DVe Order of Law and Justice pleaded, against Irregular and Arbitrary
Proceedings. By George Whitehead. The Real Quaker a Real Protestant. By G.W. A
legal Examination of Abuses of Law. The Religious Assemblies of the People
called Quakers vindicated. The Christian-Quaker and his divine Testimony
vindicated; in two parts. By W. Penn and G. Whitehead. An Answer to a foolish
Libel, called, The Quakers Opinions. By William Penn. England's present
Interest discovered, with honor to the Prince and safety to the People. By W.
P. An Epistle to the Churches of Jesus throughout the whole World. By W. P. An
Epistle to the Children of Light. W. P. An Address to Protestants; in two
Parts. By W. P. A brief state and examination of Liberty Spiritual. By W. P. An
Epistle, containing a solemn Farewell, etc. By W. P. A Mite into the Treasury:
or, A Treatise concerning the seven Liberal Arts. By Thomas Lawson. A Testimony
against Tything among Christians. By R. Richardson. The Foundation of Tithes
shaken. By Thomas Elwood. Tithes ended by Christ. By W. Gibson. The great Case
of Tithes once more revived. By Francis Howgill. A Treatise of Oaths, etc.
Universal Love. By W. Smith. The Principles of Truth, or a declaration of our
Faith, who are called Quakers. An Epistle of Love and good Will to the called
and choson of God. By J. Songhurst. An Invitation of Love to all that hunger
and thirst after Righteousness. By Isabel Yeomans. A Warning to London in
particular. By James Parks. A Warning to England in general. By J. P. A
Testimony to the Lords Power and blessed appearance in and amongst Children. A
plain Pathway opened to the simple hearted, for the answering all Doubts and
Objections, etc. By S. Crisp. A Blast blown out of the North, ecchoing up
toward the South, to meet the Cry of their oppressed Brethren. The Lamentable
Cry of the Oppressed. H. Smith's Books collected into one Volumn. The Spirit of
the Martyrs revived. A faithful Warning, and Lamentation over England. By
William Bingley.

