Christ's Lambs Defended from Satan's Rage: IN A JUST VINDICATION Of the People
called QUAKERS, Their Christian Sincerity, Innocence and Respect to the Civil
Government, and the Good Ends thereof, from the Unjust Attempts of John
Pennyman and Abettors, in his Malicious Book, styled, The Quakers Unmasked:
Clearly evincing HIS Falsheartedness, Temporizing and Envy against an Innocent
People, Peaceable Subjects, certain Prophets and Servants of the Living God
herein Commemorated.

Accommodated to the Capacity of every Impartial and Intelligent Reader, by a
Lover of Truth and Peace, G. W.

Frowardness is in his heart, he devises mischief continually, he sows
discord; therefore shall his calamity come suddenly, suddenly shall he be
broken, without Remedy,

Prove. 6. 14, 15. Behold he travelleth with iniquity, and has conceived
mischief, and brought forth falsehood; he made a pit and dug it, and is
fallen into the ditch which he made; his mischief shall return upon his own
head, and his violent dealing shall come down upon his own pate,

Psalm. 7. 14, 15, 16. LONDON: Printed for Thomas Northcott, in George-Yard in
Lombard Street, 1691.

TO THE Impartial and Friendly READER;
A few Advertisements relating to John Pennyman's Book, styled, The Quakers
Unmask't; wherein the Reader is desired to Observe,

FIrst, That the said Book was sent in Manuscript to some of Us, in the year,
1677. except some Words and Passages since added, and others omitted in the
Printed.

2dly. That this Ensuing Treatise in Answer, was quickly writ in the same year,
1677. and kept private for many years, as it is said (in a written Note) his has
been, with an Intent to publish this Answer in Print, if I. P's Envy should
prompt him so to publish his.

3dly. Liberty of Conscience being established by Law, this is placed upon his
Book in writing, as the reason of its now Publication. Which looks as if he
envied our present Liberty by his pernicious Book, tending to bring Persecution
again upon us, by rendering us obnoxious to the Civil Government, as much as in
him lies. But we thank God we enjoy the Liberty we have by Law, and that we
have cause to hope the Government will not be so credulous of such odious
Invectives against Us, as to be influenced thereby to lessen our Christian
Liberty.

4thly. Note that this Ensuing Treatise being first writ in the year, 1677.
those Passages in it relating to our Sufferings then, as placed in the Present
Tence, relate to that time, and not to this now, wherein it is Printed: Wherein
we now enjoy our Religious Meetings peaceably and free from Persecution, for
which we truly bless God, and thank our Superiors in the Government.

5thly. Please to observe, that I. P. in his said Printed Book explains [ the
Quakers] by viz. [George Fox and his Party] and instead of I. P's. words in his
Manuscript [ this pretended change of Judgment in the Men that are Quakers, is
not to be taken for a change of Judgment in the Quakers.] He has it thus in
Print, p. 6. viz. [ This pretended change of Judgment in G. Fox and his
Preachers, is not to be taken for a change of their Judgment] which is still to
bring an Odium upon Us, and tending unjustly to render Us obnoxious and
offensive to the Civil Government, contrary to our Christian Testimony and
peaceable Living.

6thly. Instead of his own proper Name [ John Pennyman] which is set three
times over in his Manuscript, he has, [ by Philo Aletheia] in his Title Page
in Print; and afterward P. I. five times over in Print; which 2 Letters of his
name are transposed, as he understands, p. 13. which with the Publication of
his Book seems to be placed not upon himself, but upon another Person I. G. So
that John appears more cunning than innocent in this point: He has his
Publisher and Transposer of the two Letters of his Name, either to extenuate
the fact, or for some cover or subterfuge for himself; he has traveled in pain
to bring forth such a monstrous false birth, and accepted of another Persons
Aid to Midwife it into the World, for mischief and causeless Revenge. It seems
when his Book was printed, he had lost some of his Confidence and Zeal for his
work, or at least some of his Friends had not so much for him as he seemed to
have when he first writ it, in thus varying his Name in his Title Page and Book.

Concerning some Passages added in his printed Book, p. 10. about Jer. Ives his
Insinuation from a Book, titled, West answering the North. Where he says, I am
unwilling to write out, because I am not willing to expose you. To this I. P.
unjustly cites only a small part of G. W's Reply. -- Thus ( in his serious
search) I cannot but observe the Man's Dissimulation, etc. In this implicit
kind of accusing us to render us more suspicious and obnoxious, than if he had
dealt plainly. And then I. P. takes upon him to deal more plainly, by reciting
and observing some Passages out of the said Book, West answering the North. As
observing (as he says) with what strange kind of Confidence, deluding and
blinding our Proselites, not daring to do so before Authority, but rather down
upon his Knees and beg Pardon for his Audaciousness and Insolence, Fallacious
doings, etc. this against G. W. To all which we may truly say, that we have
cause to thank God we have more just and impartial Men in Authority, and more
just Judges than J. P. for he has dealt very unjustly and maliciously by G. W.
in this matter, as if he either spoke slightingly or assented to all those
sayings cited out of West answering the North. Whereas the contrary is
apparently manifest in G. W's. very following words, in his serious search, p.
37. After the words cited viz. hereby to render us more suspicious and
obnoxious than if he had dealt plainly. J. P. unjustly leaves out these
following words [which are explanatory to the matter, viz.] especially whilst
he accuses us over and over with Justifying the late Wars against the King,
when as that very Book quoted by him, entitled, The West answering to the
North, Printed 1657. does in the whole Tenor of it severely reprehend those in
Power, to wit, Oliver and his Ministers, for their Oppressions, Cruelties and
Arbitrary Proceedings, which they pretended to condemn in those before them,
though there might be some words too harsh in the said Book as reflecting
backward, but with an Intent to judge them then in Power: Yet it is to be
considered, as chiefly writ by two Officers or Captains of the old Army, being
Commonwealths Men (as I understand) who had not as then wholly got over the
Warring Spirit, however did simpathise with our Poor, Innocent Friends, when
they beheld their deep Sufferings, as in some degree sharing with them, though
it is probable some remainder of their former sharpness of Spirit was left,
wherein they had been animated by such zealous Chaplains as Jeremy; yet those
Books quoted by him were extant long before the King's Pardon, which he
pretends so greatly to respect. It appears that these Passages tending to clear
us, our Adversary designedly left out, the more to recriminate and abuse us. In
p. 12. he cites a Passage out of E. B's. Works, p. 442. That all Governors and
Rulers ought to be accountable to the People and to the next succeeding Rulers,
upon occasion; and that the chiefest of the Rulers be subject under the Law,
and punishable by it if they be Transgressors, etc.

No doubt when our Adversary writ this, he thought he had a great advantage
against the People called Quakers; but he argues nothing, nor infers any thing
from the words. If his Intention thereby was (pursuant to his general charge
against us) to render us guilty of double Dealing, false Heartedness and
Temporizing, this Passage cited by him against us proves no such thing, but is
a plain Indication to the contrary; or if it was to render us obnoxious, he
has missed his End. It plainly concerns such Rulers and Governments as were
Elective, as E. B. his precedent words ( for choosing them by the Consent of
the People) do plainly intimate, (and it was first writ in the Days of the
Commonwealth-Government.) And for Rulers (or Representatives) that are chosen,
being accountable to the next succeeding Rulers, if there be Cause, what has he
against the matter it self? What could be J. P's Design in this Citation
before, without Observation or Remark upon it? If he tells us plainly, and make
his Objection, I think it will be no difficult matter then to answer him, both
on a Religious Account and secundum Hominem, which at present I find no
necessity for.

Moreover, Reader, we find much of the same Stuff and envious Quarrels raked up
against us in diverse other Pamphlets as are in John Pennyman's Book,
particularly in Fr. Bugg, another Apostate, his Pamphlets, though not so
largely as in J. P's, but as malicious, which are elsewhere answered.

In p. 13. he again charges us with baseness and temporizing, and having
outdone and even surpassed the Deeds of the Wicked, that he says he is stopped,
for Words are too short to manifest us, (he says). Whereby it seems he wants
Words bad enough for us, in so much that he is stopped (he says): But how is he
stopped? Does his Envy and Malice rise up to his Throat, and like to choke him?
He has given us Language and Words hard and bad enough to render us as Infamous
as he can, as charging us with such Wickedness as can hardly be paralleld, and
as great Dissemblers, Deceivers and Deluders, as have appeared in our Age,
Liars, false Prophets; Hypocrites, etc. But now he wants Words to manifest us.
The Railery he has belched out has not manifested us; can he not study and
invent some worse and harder Language against us? However, he is far louder in
his Clamor and Revilings than in his Proofs.

In p. 13. he reflects upon a Book, entitled, Truth's Character of Professors,
for laying open the Addresses and Applications, which others had made to O. C.
and R. C. with long Animadversions thereupon; which he falsely says, was to
stir up the Powers against them, charging G. F. and his Friends, as having been
most highly guilty themselves of those very things.

Wherein he has also dealt very unfairly and unjustly; we do not believe there
was any such Design in W. C's setting out that Character as either to defame
others, or to stir up the Powers against other Professors, but that it was to
show their Priests, etc. their manifold Flatteries and Temporizing in their
superlative Characters, Applauses and Addresses, which he cannot parallel from
our Friends Applications either then or since.

In p. 14. our Adversary again deals very unfairly and unjustly by G. W. about
some of our Friends, saying, They give forth Writings from the Immediate
Eternal Spirit of God, and by the same Spirit and Power that was in the
Prophets, Christ and Apostles; unto which he falsely adds, viz. And their so
speaking ( G. W. says) is of as great Authority as the Scriptures and Chapters
are, and greater. His Words, [ and their so speaking] are J. P. his own Abuse
and Perversion; where did ever G. W. say, That the Quakers, so speaking of
their own Books and Writings, is of such Authority? He denies the Comparison
and Charge, as stated; and I, the person concerned, do solemnly declare, It was
never in my Heart, Judgment or Intention to undervalue the Holy Scriptures of
the Old and New Testament; but to esteem them not only as given by Divine
Inspiration, and to prefer them before all other Books and Writings extant in
the whole World. J. P. injuriously mistates the Case, and leaves out the
explanatory part of G. W's Answer in that Case; and J. P. has been better
informed therein, than now he represents it. Therefore Impartial Reader, please
to take our Answer in this Case, as it is laid down in our Book, Entitled, the
Christianity of the People called Quakers Vindicated, p. 13. We always confess
the Holy Scriptures of the Old and New Testament to be given by Divine
Inspiration, and prefer them before and above all other Writings or Books, and
in no wise question the Truth of them; yet we must needs allow the Holy Spirit
(from whence they came) the Preference, and its immediate Teaching and Speaking
in the Soul, as of greater Efficacy, Power and Authority to that Soul, than the
bare Writing or Scripture without, or only Reading thereof, though it contain
the same Words immediately taught. And so Christ and his Apostles living, and
powerful Preaching in and from the powerful motion of the Holy Spirit, as being
of greater Efficacy, Power and Authority, than the outward Writing or Scripture
it self, simply or abstractly considered, as distinct from that Spirit, though
the words preached and the words written may be the same: For the Gospel as
livingly preached, came not in Words only, but also in Power, and in the Holy
Ghost, 1 Thessalonians. 1. 5. For the real Authority, Efficacy and Service, the Holy
Scripture has upon a Soul, is from the Holy Spirit or word of Life, giving the
true belief and right understanding thereof.

Again our Adversary proceeds to give Judgment and Sentence against us, as
helping forward our own Destruction, and presumptuously adds these words; and
seeing there is no hopes of their Repentance or Forbearance (all other ways or
means that have been used proving ineffectual) It Is now thought meet thus to
expose them, etc. p. 14. Thus he has proceeded to give Sentence upon us, and to
justify his manner of exposing of us, and Printing his Invective against the
People called Quakers.

His Self-contradiction is notorious, where in p. 15. he says, I abhor that
Practice, that is, to render us obnoxious to the Government, when but in the
Page before, he concludes that there being no hopes of our Repentance, it is now
thought meet thus to expose us (as he has done) though he seems to extenuate
his own Fact and Concern therein, by placing the Publishing and Printing of it
upon another Person. Now he is for exposing and doing what mischief he can
against us, having presumptuously given Sentence of our Destruction, positively
concluding, that there is no hopes of our Repentance. The Lord rebuke the
Insolency, Pride, Presumption and Envy of this gainsaying Luciferian Spirit.
For what end does John Pennyman come so often into our Meetings, to Preach and
make a noise among us, smiteing and reflecting upon the Testimonies of the
Servants of Christ, exalting himself as Judge over all? What can his end be
therein? It cannot be to Preach us unto Repentance, which he has already judged
there is no hopes of; neither can We and our Friends receive him as either
Prophet or Minister of Christ, though he intrudes himself as into the place of
such an one, or at least as if he would have People believe that he had some
special Commission: But he appears so very empty dry and dead, that the least
Child of Light does see him, and his forced presumptuous Messages to be both
void of Life and Charity, as well as of Faith and Hope; having no Hope of their
Repentance to whom he Preaches. He has told us, the Righteous are as bold as a
Lion; but where was his Boldness in the times of our late Sufferings and
Persecutions when the Informers were abroad? He came not then to Preach,
Prophecy, or reprove among us; he would then rather keep obscure, than forfeit
his 20 or 40 l. for Preaching in our public Meetings. To whom I conclude, Oh
John! may thou yet be humbled unto Repentance: May thou yet find a place of
Repentance for thy great Envy, and all thy hard Speeches against the Lords
Servants and People: My Soul yet desires thy Repentance, if a place be yet to
be found, that thy Gray Hairs may not go down to the Grave in Sorrow and
Contempt; thy days are hastening toward a Period, recollect thy Self and
consider thy ways, and the evil and mischief thou have attempted and done
against the Lord's Heritage and Servants, not only against the Living, but also
against the Dead, who are at rest in Christ: The Lord open thine Eyes and
hasten thee to seek Repentance, if it may stand with his good Pleasure,
otherwise thy Destruction hastens: Remember and think of it.

From a Friend to Truth and thy poor Soul, G. W.
London, the 14th. 1st. Month, 1690/1
The Principal Passages OF A Letter sent to a Friend, And here placed for a
PREFACE.
Dear Friend J. O.
SInce that thou made Enquiry of me concerning the Book in Manuscript,
entitled, The Quakers Unmasked, etc. what we thought to do in it.

This is to acquaint thee, That though such kind of Controversies are not
desirable nor pleasant to me, any more than to thy self, whom I know to be a
Man of a peaceable Spirit; and unwilling, as well as I, that the Religion of us
and all Conscientious Dissenters should be exposed to open Contempt by such
Controversies, and raking up Occasions: Yet upon a serious and strict
Examination of the said Book, with the principal Quotations, Observations and
Argumentative Passages; I, with some others, have been stirred up and enabled
by the Lord, out of a Holy Zeal for his Truth and People, and from a Necessity
laid upon us, to draw up and compose an Answer to the said Book. First, To
reprehend his Envy and Malice: And Secondly, To vindicate our Innocence toward
the Government, and Consistency of our Addresses to the King, with our
Principle and Conversations, as a People from the beginning. And for thy
Information take the following Account and General Notes of our Proceeding and
Sense in this Matter, viz.

That we have an Answer in Manuscript, already prepared, to John Pennyman's
late Book in Manuscript, not willing to publish it until he first give us
occasion, by publishing his; and that therein we have by sufficient
Demonstration proved him guilty of apparent Lies. I. In the general Charge
against the People called Quakers. II. Against Particulars; as also of most
gross Hypocrisy and Contradiction to himself, Malice and base Temporizing, and
manifest Falsehood in diverse Particulars as to Matters of Fact, in clamouring
against the People called Quakers, for their Declarations and Addresses to the
King, of their peaceable Intentions, etc.

All his Allegations and Retortions upon any other whatsoever cannot excuse
(nor hold parallel with) himself, as to matter of Fact.

His Unjustness in making General Reflections from some Particulars.
That we reserve our Answer in readiness for publication if his Malice, prompts
him to publish his, not desiring or expecting any Mercy from him.

That his Book, some of the Persons concerned in it do detain it, being to be
communicated according to the Title Page.

That his Book, if published, may be prejudicial to thousands of Innocent
Unconcerned People in this Nation.

And no Advantage to the Author, but to his great and utter Disgrace, Shame and
Contempt, in the Eyes of all sorts of Moderate Indifferent People, it tending
to beget Jealousies and an evil Eye in the Rulers, and may bring in question
all Religion under the Name of Dissenters, etc. if the Lord prevent not.

That if John Pennyman will not be reduced to Christianity, but proceed on in
his Work, to render us obnoxious to the Government (which is the tendence of
much of his Book) some of our Friends, out of their Zeal for God and his Truth,
Religion and People, are resolved, through God's Assistance and with his
Permission, further to detect and unmask him, until he learns so much of
Morality and common Civility as to live peaceably among his Neighbors, and lay
aside this his Factious and Turbulent Work against peaceable Subjects:

This in have at present; I am thy assured Friend, G. W.
The 29th of the 9th Month, 1677.
Christ's Lambs defended FROM SATAN's RAGE.
HAving lately had some Opportunity and Occasion to view a Book in Manuscript,
entitled, The Quakers Unmasked, signed by John Pennyman, and charging the
People called Quakers with Double Dealing, Falsheartedness, Contradictions,
Confusions and Temporizing, such Wickedness as can hardly be Paralleld, as
great Dissemblers, Deceivers, Deluders of the People as have appeared in this
our Age, Liars, False Prophets, and to be avoided and witnessed against,
Deceitful Workers, Hypocrites; charging G. F. to be one of the greatest
Hypocrites and Deceivers in this Nation, deceiving the People, threatening him
with cutting down, etc.

Here Is a hideous outcry, but the Falsness and Malice thereof will appear
anon, when we come to his pretended Proofs, which consist of Collections taken
out of their own Writings (as he says); which he has so placed, that he
says, those of the meanest Capacity may easily discern and see them to be as
great Dissemblers, Deceivers and Deluders as have appeared in our Age: And for
all this he pretends the Discharge of his own Conscience. His placing his
Collections to make his Charge obvious against the People called Quakers, are
in two Columns about Contradictions and Temporizing; and this, as relating to
the several Revolutions and Governments since we were a People, together with
some Observations thereupon by another Hand (as he says); but we have only
Joh. Pennyman's Name to the whole Charge, so that what other Hand soever it was
that has helped him to compose this Piece of Malice, he has espoused the whole
Matter, not only against particular Persons, some dead and some alive, but also
against the People called Quakers in general; wherein his deadly Malice has
exceeded all common bounds. And yet upon his Paper against G. F. he has placed
this Note in the Margent, viz. But is this to render him obnoxious to the
Government? No, I abhor that Practice; but base and self ended Spirits are to
be humbled, says he.

Now I affirm, and it may be obvious to any unbyassed and intelligent Readers,
that John Pennyman has shamefully lied, dissembled and temporized; lied and
dissembled, in pretending that he abhors that Practice of rendering us obnoxious
to the Government; for a very mean capacity may see, that the tenor of his
work is to render us obnoxious; and particularly it is more apparent in certain
passages, as 1. from a Paper of one of our Friends, he questions us all in
these words, viz. How dare these Men appeal to the King and Council's
Consciences that they are harmless, and would do them no harm, etc. p. 9. Now
is not this to render us obnoxious as not being harmless, but such as would do
them harm? And yet this is the Man that abhors such a Practice as rendering us
obnoxious to the Government. 2dly. Whereas in the Quakers Plea, it is said on
the behalf of the Quakers, that though some that are now called Quakers were
once in the Army against the King, when their Knowledge and Judgment were not
otherwise framed, etc. yet being altered in their Judgments to the contrary,
and that it is not lawful in the Administration of the Gospel, to go to war
with carnal Weapons, and that there is now no danger of us, and now we are all
of that mind, etc. Upon this I pass this Note, viz. that this pretended changed
Judgment in the Men that are Quakers, is not to be taken for a change of
Judgment in the Quakers. etc. Oh Malicious Insinuation! Is not this to render
us obnoxious to the Government, as to make them believe, for all this, that the
Quakers count it lawful in the Administration of the Gospel, for them to go to
War with carnal Weapons? Yea, that themselves may take up Arms and fight
against the King, as some have done in the former Wars, before convinced and
brought under the Gospel Administration? And what is all this but to render us
the very People called Quakers as vile, perfideous and obnoxious to the
Government, as he could possibly do? And not only perfideous to the Government,
but to their own Gospel Profession and Principle; and what is the Nature and
Tendency hereof but to influence and incense the present Government with an
evil Eye, and prejudice against us, to ruin and destroy us; as a People not fit
to live in a Commonwealth or under any Government; but that blessed be the Lord
our God, he has raised a better persuasion and sense of us in the Hearts of
many in Power, with respect to our peaceable Conversations, which loudly have
all along proclaimed our Innocence and Clearness, from such Faction and
Perfideousness against the Government (under which we live) as this Apostate
Adversary would maliciously insinuate, so manifestly contrary to his own
pretenses, as abhorring the practice of making us obnoxious to the Government.
3dly. Against the People called Quakers, he observes, that they formerly
exhorted Men to fight and would fight themselves; and now deny all fighting on
any pretense, is to be imputed to their temporizing and deceit. See here again
how base and contradictory he is to himself; his objection lies chiefly against
their denying all fighting or to fight themselves; for this he cries out of
temporizing and deceit: Is not this still to render us obnoxious? Let the
Impartial judge, and see how he endeavors to invalid and bring contempt upon
all our Declarations and Applications to the King and Council, for our
Innocence and peaceable Living under the present Government, according to the
practice of the Primitive Christians. To his Accusation, that they ( viz. the
Quakers) formerly exhorted Men to fight, and would fight themselves.

I utterly deny it as a Slander, and put the Question to him; John, wast thou
of such a Principle whilst thou owned the Quakers, as to fight thy self and
exhort others thereunto? If thou wast, it was time for thee to be gone as one
not of us. We know none such in our Society; so its most wicked and unjust to
charge us as a People therewith: Another Instance he has in his Obeservations
of this kind, viz. again touching fighting, they have taken care to record what
one of their Ministry says; we directed all People to the Spirit of the Lord
God in them, and if that led them to fight, I had nothing against it, for this
he quotes Fol. 4. but tells us not what Book. This I do greatly question, for I
never read it that I know of; however I cannot believe without better evidence,
that any Minister of ours did ever preach such Doctrine to Friends or People, as
that the Spirit of the Lord might lead them to fight with carnal Weapons, etc.
since our Testimony and Judgmment has always been to the contrary; to wit, that
our Weapons are not carnal but spiritual, and mighty through God; and we
wrestle not with Flesh and Blood, but with spiritual wickedness; and we war not
after the Flesh nor with a carnal Sword, but with the Sword of the Spirit,
which is, the word of God.

And if any one has writ to any in Power, to this effect, viz. That if they
would walk with the Lord and preserve his People, the numberless number of this
now distressed People would be to them a Strength, and stand by them in the day
of Trouble, and be a Defense unto them according to what is cited. (This he
says, G. F. and E. B. told Rich. Protector, and quotes good Council and Advice,
p. 44. Which is a Falsehood touching G. F. for that was none of his Paper, nor
his Words or Style; here he has falsely entitled that to G. F. which was none
of his.)
Howbeit this is not a Proof that the People called Quakers, intended to fight
for R. Cromwell or any in Authority, seeing there are other and better ways of
defense for a Government, than fighting by carnal Weapons, as Righteousness
which exalts a Nation; the Prayers and Faith of true Christians and Believers,
which was the Mind and Practice of the Primitive Christians for those in
Authority; not excluding their civil Contributions, Taxes, Customs and Dues,
which has been our Practice to pay, since we were a People; and that Nations
and Governments are not always defended by fighting, carnal Weapons, etc. but
by a better way and means, to wit, the fear of the Lord according to his Law;
observe this instance in the time of King Jehosaphat's Reign, when he sought to
the Lord God, the Lord established the Kingdom in his hand, and when he caused
the Law of the Lord to be taught in Judah, that the fear of the Lord fell upon
all the Kingdoms of the Lands; they made no war against Jehosaphat, see 2 Chronicles. 17. and 10. and Chap. 20. 29, 30. therefore the fear of the Lord and his
Power, was and is a better Defense to a Kingdom or Nation, than Wars and
Fighting.

Now having proved from few Instances, what a manifest Hypocrite, and malicious
Temporizer John Pennyman is (as also his obscure Agent, who writ his
Observations) I shall proceed to evince more of his Falsehood, Slander, Baseness
and Shallowness in his Reflections and Observations, not looking upon it a
sufficient Vindication of our selves and our Innocence, only to discover his
Malice, Outrage and Inconsistency; but I have something to demonstrate on the
behalf of our Judgment, Practice and Conversation, as we are a People which any
indifferent and unprejudiced Reader may easily perceive or distinguish from his
envious Objections and Invectives, and how consistent we are, and have
all-a-long been in our Judgment and Practice, having still the Testimony of a
Good Conscience to rejoice in both in the Sight of God and Men, both with
respect to the Kingdom and Government of Christ, as head over his Church, and
Lawgiver to his People, and to the Governments among Men.

First then, to his Preface, on which much of his Work had a Dependence, where
he thus proceeds, viz. When I have considered how the Quakers have Writ and
Printed against the Presbyterians, Independents, and others, for being engaged
in the Late Wars, etc. it has exceedingly amazed and astonished me, That they
who were so great Justifyers and Encouragers not only of what had been done in
the Late Wars, but also did Incite, and Encourage those that were therein
engaged, not to leave off until they had set up their Standard at the Gates of
Rome, etc. And yet for them to upbraid others with that which themselves for
many Years were so deeply concerned and engaged in, etc. who had not been more
engaged, if so much, as themselves, in the late Wars -- When they themselves
had been engaged in the same Cause and Quarrel with those whom they now so much
reproach, etc. Thus far J. P.

To all which I do conscientiously answer, that he has most grossly and
palpably belied the People called Quakers in these Passages diverse ways: First,
in rendering them, without exception of Persons, not only Justifiers of the Late
Wars, and of what had been done therein, without exception of Things done; but
also equally concerned with the Presbyterians, Independents and others therein.

Secondly, In rendering the People called Quakers, as being as much (or more)
engaged in the Late Wars as the Presbyterians, Independents, etc. When in the
Time and Heat of those Wars, the People called Quakers were not a People, The
War began in 1641, and in the Year 1648 the King was beheaded, and all this
while no Quakers heard of in the Nation, nor till about 50, 51, or 52. when
there was no Wars in England for them to be concerned in; How false then is J.
P. to say, The Quakers were as much or more concerned in the War against the
King as any other?
nor so gathered and constituted as a People, under that Name, Principle or
Profession as now, as it is well known in this Nation; whereas it is not unknown,
That both Presbyterians, Independents and some others, were both gathered and
constituted as distinct Peoples, and as such both Ministers and their People,
many of them concerned in the Late Wars, how far both in Preaching,
Subscriptions and Actings, is also well known (yet hope that some of them have
learned better things ere this time a Day) so that in this Case there is a vast
disparity between them and the People called Quakers; therefore the very Ground
and Foundation of John Pennyman's Quarrel against us in this Matter (as being
so greatly engaged in the Late Wars, and Justifiers of what had been done, that
is, all that was done) in those Wars; This I affirm to be a great Lie against
the People called Quakers, and yet grant him, That diverse who have been since,
and now are of us the People called Quakers, have formerly been concerned in
the Late Wars, while under the Notion of Presbyterians, Independents,
Anabaptists and other Persuasions; yea many also who served the King in those
Wars, until they became better principled and of another Spirit, through the
Appearance of the Day of Christ and his Power unto them, whereby many were made
not only to lay down their Commissions and Offices, desert the Army, relinquish
Fighting, but also to break their Swords, Spears, and other Weapons of War, and
to convert them into necessary Uses, according to that Evangelical Prophecy of
Esaiah, chapter 2. as knowing that Christ's Kingdom is not of this World; and
therefore his Servants must not Fight, and at his Command every one must put up
and lay aside their Swords as well as Peter, yea Peter must not fight for
Christ, but suffer with him, if he intends to reign with him. Here many, who
had been concerned in those Battles that were with confused Noise and Garments
rolled in Blood, are now come to that which is with Burning and Fuel of Fire,
in order to the Consumption of all that Fuel, Lust, Pride, Enmity and Ambition,
from whence Wars have risen, and which have been the original Cause thereof,
though many were zealous and conscientious, according to what they believed, in
those former Wars, even of those several Persuasions beforementioned; and my
showing our Adversary's Falsness in his Comparison between the Quakers and
Presbyterians in this Case, is not to vilify or reproach them or any others,
because concerned therein, hoping some of them are now better informed, but am
necessitated to mention them in this Case, to show the Disparity and Falsness
of this Adversary's Comparison, who now appears as a rigid Persecutor, to take
up and maintain a distinct Quarrel against us, for the Presbyterians and
Independents against the Quakers, as for not only upbraiding, but reproaching
and vilifying them, for being engaged in the Late Wars, while he falsely says,
We were so great Justifyers and Incouragers of what had been done therein:
Hereupon, as the principal Occasion of all his Quarrel after, his charging us
with the most revengeful and highest aggravating Terms that was possible for
our Pen to express; He thus proceeds, viz. witness those Words to the
Nonconforming Ministers, in answer to Mr. Faldo, viz. But why, poor
Nonconformists, after all these preached-up Battles, etc. Again, they are true
Gospel Ministers, whose Gospel is Peace on Earth, and good Will toward Men,
and not Garments rolled in the Blood of Kings and Princes, Rulers and People,
no worldly Armies, Battles, Victories, Trophies, Spoils, Sequestrations,
Decimations, and the like, etc.

And then J. P. as a Person highly disgusted at this and as greatly
simpathizing, or rather temporizing with the Presbyterians, Independents and
probably some of his private discontented. Counsels or Cabals, to aggravate
this particular Instance against the People called Quakers, he adds these
Words, viz. What people, setting these aside, could have had the Face and
Confidence to have writ such Language as this? certainly not any, especially
when they themselves had been engaged in the same Cause and Quarrel, etc.

First, let it be here noted, That John Pennyman, in his great Zeal for the
Nonconformists, and enmity against us, has still proceeded upon his great Lie
against the People called Quakers, As what People, setting these aside, could
have had the Face, when they themselves had beening aged in the same Cause? See
what an apparent Lie this is, and I charge him with it, To prove where the
People called Quakers were so engaged in the same Cause, as to preach up
Battles, Spoils, Plunders, etc. Garments rolled in the Blood of Kings, Princes,
Rulers, and People worldly Armies and Battles, Victories, Trophies, Spoils,
Sequestrations, Decimations, etc. from which he does not vindicate and acquit
John Faldo and his Brethren, but only cries out of Reproach, Revengeful and
Aggravating Terms, vilifying, etc. Such an Agent have the Nonconformists as
John Pennyman, who instead of vindicating them from these Matters commemorated
against them (on their occasion first given) he belies the people called
Quakers, as being engaged in the same; and as if John Faldo and his Brethren
were so big and eminent in John Pennyman's Eyes, and such awful and formidable
Persons, he put this admiring question, viz. What people, setting these aside,
could have had the Face and Confidence to have writ such Language as this? Oh
wonderful! is John Faldo and his Brethren, the Nonconformists, grown so potent,
so awful, so austere or formidable, that it is such a dangerous business to
affront them, by reminding them of their former Concerns in the Late Wars,
their preached up Battles, etc. even at such a Time when John Faldo, Thomas
Hicks the Baptist Forger of Dialogues, and others, both Presbyterians,
Independents and Baptists, and their Learned and Reverend one and twenty
Divines, as they call them, have endeavored with all their Force not only to
unchristian us, but to render us as odious and obnoxious in the Face of the
Nation, not only to Religion, but to Government, as possibly they could, with
their Pens, as Cheats, Impostures, yea the vilest of Men, thus putting us in
Bear-skins, to make People destroy us in the open Streets, or as if they would
swallow us up at once; witness the mustering up their Forces at Barbican,
Thomas Hick's Dialogues, J. Faldo's Quakerism no Christianity, and his
Vindication thereof, there rendering us as inconsistent with Human Society,
destructive of Government, etc. in our Principles, wherein some Baptists and
other persecuting Spirits, plainly showed its Sting and Venom, but it cannot
penetrate our Armor of Light nor hurt us. These Occasions against us, John
Pennyman is pleased to take no notice of, and yet counts it a heinous piece of
Confidence, to remind such Nonconformists of their former Preachings, of
Battles, Sequestrations, etc. contrary to the Gospel of Peace and good Will
toward Men, wherein John Pennyman himself dares not adventure to excuse them,
though now he strikes in with them against us; however he may see that there
are some among us, that has the Face and Confidence, to oppose both John Faldo,
Thomas Hicks, and John Pennyman, in their great Enmity against us; and I do not
see that John Pennyman's espousing their cause and quarrel, and abusing us as
he has done, will stop our Pens, considering the many occasions given against
us, not only in their late Invectives, but also in the former cruel
Persecutions and Sufferings (which many of us endured) both by Presbyterians
and Independents, their Ministers, Magistrates and People in Oliver Cromwell's
days: Yea, how many caused they in those days to be Imprisoned till Death,
Stocked, Whipped; besides the Stoning, Beating and Abusing by the rude
Multitude, when incensed by their Ministers and Leaders, etc. of these things
John Pennyman cannot be altogether ignorant; nor of the Professors in
New-England's Cruelty, in putting several of our faithful Friends to death for
their righteous Testimony; whose innocent Blood the Guilty there, have not
washed their hands of, nor have they here given a public Testimony against
that cruelty, that we know of. So let John Pennyman consider what credit he
will gain, by closing in with such Presbyterians and Independents. I wish both
he and they who are alive, may examine themselves and repent, and if he and they
be still of the mind that our Pen has been too sharp, we are sure their cruel
Hands, their Goals in Old England, and Gallows in New England have been far
sharper. And now with their malicious Tongues and Pens (not having Power to
persecute as before) by their Forgeries, they would make the World believe that
we are no Christians, etc. but we are better known to Christ and honest Men: As
also our so much bearing and suffering John Pennyman and his Party, in their
public outrage and frequent disturbances and interruptions in our Meetings,
without exercising or seeking Revenge against them, being so far from
encouraging any to beat or lay violent Hands on them, that we have labored to
quiet those People, that have had much ado sometimes to keep their Hands off
them, by reason of their turbulent Provocations; all this sufficiently
evidences that our Principle and Spirit is against Fighting, for I am
confident, that had I. P. looked on us as Fighters, etc. he durst not have
adventured to have given us such frequent and public occasions of Provocation,
as he and his Party have done, which he knows his Friends the Nonconformists
would not suffer in their Assemblies, but would have paid him and his Company
off to purpose, had he abused them and their Meetings, as he has done us and
ours.

And to manifest John Pennyman and his two or three late Followers and
Disciples, what hideous disturbances have they frequently made, in some of our
public Meetings in London? And more particularly his Disciple B. Boyce, who
has shown a very venerable respect to him, and T. P. little less for him, in
proclaiming him openly to be an upright or sincere Man; and yet this John
Pennyman's upright Man, after his various attempts to the Magistrates, to swear
the Peace against diverse, that never did or intended him harm, his outrage and
violence in several Meetings has been notorious. And John Pennyman's own Envy
surpasses all this against the People called Quakers, in rendering them
obnoxious to the Government (contrary to his own pretense) as will yet further
appear.

Now we come to his pretended Contradiction and Temporizing, unjustly charged
upon us the People called Quakers from our Writings, which as he reckons are so
placed, that those of the meanest Capacity, may easily see them to be as great
Dissemblers, Deceivers and Deluders of the People, etc. and this hideous outcry
and clamor he makes, as 1st. wherein he set G. Fox against G. Fox. in his
judgment concerning Kingly Government; and withal let it be remarked, that his
Observations and Objections are chiefly made against those Declarations, made
to the King and present Powers, signifying our innocent Intentions of living
peaceably under their Government, our honoring the King, etc. Against this
lies the charge of Hypocrisy, Temporizing and Apostasy, etc. But why should it
become a heinous crime in his view, for Subjects to signify their Intentions
of peaceable Living, and respect to a King or Kingly Government, although some
of them have for merly expressed a Fear and Zeal, as he grants, about Kingly
Government, which is thus to be understood, of an Earthly oppressing King; as
it was feared some in O. C's. days would have constituted and set up, when they
were doting for an earthly King to establish and impose their own Religion upon
the Nation contrary to their great pretense to Jesus Christ his Headship and
Kingship over the Church; this was the very thing for which G. F. and others
forewarned and reprehended them Note that the words that most tended to clear
G. F's. intent in this matter, J. P. very unfairly leaves out, as after Earthly
King, he leaves out, ( and earthly Powers, and will change as they change) As
also, ( have put out Christ, and would not have him to reign) these words he
leaves out. As also, after ( all Kings made in Men's earthly wills) he leaves
out (THAT WILL NOT HAVE CHRIST TO REIGN) These with several other material
pasages, has J. P. very dissingenuously left out of those several passages
quoted by him, writ long before the K's. Restoration, though Printed the year
before.
Now where is the contradiction? Is it between opposing an earthly Kingship over
a Christian Church, and owning Jesus Christ as the only King, Head and Lawgiver
to his Church? Sure no true Christian nor reasonable Man will conclude a
contradiction here. And where is the Temporizing or Apostasy? Have we ever
declined Christ's Kingship over his Church throughout the whole World, and set
up an earthly King over the Church, instead of Christ? We affirm we have not,
and this is our present case, still having this distinction between Christ's
Kingly Office over his Church in Spiritual Divine Matters, and the Office of
National Kings or Rulers in Civil Matters; it having been always our principle
to render to God his dues, and to Caesar his dues distinctly. But to come more
particularly to the business objected against us, as contradiction and
temporizing, etc. the matter lies here, viz.

Between what one formerly said, some time before the King was Restored, viz.
do not the Priests and Presbyterians, etc. cry for an earthly King? Are not all
these Elders Christians, that will dote ^o much of an earthly King, Traitors
against Christ? And the Quakers declaring since* the King was restored, viz.
that our Intentions and Endeavors are and shall be good, true, honest and
peaceable toward the King and present Governors, and that we do love and
honor them, etc.

Where Is the contradiction here? Is it between warning Professors of going to
set up an earthly King in Christ's stead, and declaring our honest Intentions
toward the King, etc. after brought in and set up by a providential Hand of
God? Or does it follow that because some of us have declared, a dislike of
having a rigid persecuting King set over us, to entrench upon Christ's
prerogative, that therefore we must not submit to the overruling Hand of God
in bringing in a King, whether in Mercy or Judgment, or both? We shall not
dispute that now; must we be counted Temporizers, for quietly submitting to the
overruling Power of God in this matter? See how obnoxious our Adversary
renders himself; for those who formerly feared it would be worse for the Nation
to have a Monarchy, as to Impositions, etc. he has this Salvo, that it was out
of Zeal, that some particular Persons did write against Kingly Government,
among whom he ranks G. F. etc. The former Writings against Kingly Government as
he apprehends them, were out of Zeal and Fear of greater Impositions and
Bondage; but for such to signify their peaceable Intentions and Respect to the
King when restored, this is counted an earthly Temporizing. How now J. P. is
this thy Conscience that thou dischargest? What art thou offended at our
innocent plainness? But how shallow art thou, who when thou have excused all
that thou apprehendst against a Kingly Government, from G. F. or others, as
being from a Fear and Zeal, yet now makes it a contradiction and temporizing,
for the Quakers to declare their Truth and Fidelity, to the King and present
Governors, with their Intentions of Honesty and Peaceableness toward them? Oh
shallow Man! Is here either contradiction or temporizing? It had been
contradiction, if they had said they intended neither Truth, Fidelity, Honesty
or Peaceableness toward the King; and it had been temporizing, if they had
said they now submit all cases of Conscience, Religion and Worship, to an
earthly King to be disposed, ordered and determined at his discretion, and not
to Christ, the heavenly King and Head of his Church: But blessed be God we are
clear of these things, and out of the reach of thy malicious Spirit, who have
thus grossly slandered us with Contradiction, Temporizing, Dissembling, etc. and
thou can not be ignorant, how many of us have suffered for our tender
Consciences, under the several Powers since we were a People, and still daily
exposed to Sufferings; therefore thou art the Temporizer, in going about thus
to render us obnoxious to the Government, and thereby to add to our Afflictions
and Sufferings; and note, that whatsoever G. F. or others did formerly write
(to Presbyterians, etc.) which thou apprehendst to be against Kingly
Government, whether it concerns the Persecution, Oppression or Bondage, which
they feared might happen thereby, according to the instance given of Herod,
Saul, etc. this thou do not go about to disprove, as being from a fallible
Spirit, but have salved the matter with this, being out of a Fear, Zeal, etc.
But thy hideous outcry is against any of our Friends, declaring their honest
Intentions of Fidelity, Peace and Respect to the King; here thou art offended
at the words, Loyal Subjects, in a Declaration, which thou say, were highly
opposed in an Assembly: And I ask thee, wast not thou one of them, who opposed
and caused them to be left out? How now John, what a Labyrinth art thou fallen
into, through thy Envy and Malice? but to come yet more closely to the
business, to evince thy malicious silliness; set case that some of our Friends
did really fear, that a King set up by those that were then our Persecutors, as
a Creature of their forming, designed to carry on their own Interest, would not
be for the universal Interest and Liberty of the Nation, both in matters
Religious and Civil; and thereupon warned them (which is our present case in
debate) and yet when it pleased the Lord providentially to bring in the King
quietly, to acknowledge their Submission and Peaceableness, and to prevent
further censure of a temporizing Insinuation in this case -- I do declare that
what Form of Religion soever a King be of, he must so far distinguish between
his Regal Power and his Religion, as to be tender to his Subjects under several
persuasions, and grant a free Tolleration and Liberty of Conscience; or else if
he rule either as a Presbyterian, a formal Episcopalian, or severe Papist, etc.
and endeavor to enforce his form of Religion upon all, it will not answer the
wisdom of God or his Counsel, nor tend to the universal Good or Satisfaction of
the People; so not to his own Prosperity and Quiet, but on the contrary, an
universal tenderness and free liberty in Religious matters will. Now John,
dare thou yet say that our acknowledgment and submission, as before, is
Temporizing, or that they are Dissemblers and Deceivers therein? If thou dare,
let this one instance among many others, confute thy blindness and rebuke thy
malice; as namely the case of Samuel (that faithful Servant of the Lord) when
Israel cried to have a King set over them like other Nations, this thing
displeased Samuel, or was evil in the Eyes of Samuel (according to the Hebrew)
and yet for all this, when the Lord had commanded him to hearken to their
voice, and show them the manner of their King, etc. Samuel in Obedience to the
word of the Lord, anointed Saul and kissed him, and said, is it not because the
Lord has anointed thee? etc. see 1 Samuel chap. 8. 5, 6. and chap. 10. 1. Dare
John Pennyman say, that Samuel was a temporizing Hypocrite herein, or was
Samuel insincere in this matter? And may he not see how nearly this suits the
case of G. F. and others whom he so bitterly enveighs against? yea, did not
Samuel's concern herein exceed the occasion J. P. carps at? Which shows his
implacable Envy and Revenge, still to render us obnoxious to the Government,
contrary to his pretense of abhorring such practice. Now I. P. see what an
envious Hypocrite thou art, and how manifestly confuted: And yet further from
Scripture Testimony, which I must bring over thine head, see Dan. 2. 20, 21.
Blessed be the name of God for ever and ever, for Wisdom and Might are his, and
he Changes the Times and Seasons, he removes Kings and sets up Kings. See
here how plainly he confesses it is God that does these things; and also said
unto Nebuchadnezzar, the God of Heaven has given to thee a Kingdom, Power and
Strength, ver. 37. and yet for all this confessed, that in the days of these
Kings, the God of Heaven should set up a Kingdom which should never be
destroyed, and the Kingdoms shall not be left to other People, but it shall
break in pieces, and consume all these Kingdoms, and it shall stand for ever,
ver. 44. (And did not Nebuchadnezzar confess to God's Power and Kingdom as
above his own?) How plainly in his Visions did he see and confess to the
Kingdom of God and his Christ, as over all these earthly Kings and Kingdoms,
Beasts and Horns mentioned, Dan. chap. 7. yea concerning the Ancient of days
and the Son of Man; that there was given him Dominion and Glory, and a Kingdom,
that all Kingdoms, Nations and Languages should serve him; his Dominion is an
everlasting Dominion, which shall not pass away; and his Kingdom that which
shall not be destroyed, ver. 14. Did Daniel herein contradict himself or
temporize, in confessing, that it is God that changes Times, removes and
sets up Kings, and that even Nebuchadnezzar King of Babylon, had his Power
and Strength given him of God, Dan. 2. 37. and was not Daniel one of them that
stood in the King's Palace? And did not the King make Daniel Ruler over the
whole Province of Babylon? Dan. 6. 21. But Daniel sat in the Gate of the King.
Or did he temporize with King Darius, in saying, O King live for ever? And yet
for all this he confessed to the Kingdom of God and of his Christ, as above all
these earthly Kings and Kingdoms, and that it should stand for ever. And what
more has G. F. said, viz. That Christ will reign over all these Presbyterians
imitated Elders, their earthly Kings, etc. (knowing also that such Trees as
they were, would be more apt to choose a Bramble for a King, than the Vine,
Olive or Fig Tree.) And what he means by these earthly Kings, is apparent in
these words, Herod the King was mad at the Child Jesus, and sought to slay all
the Children in Bethlehem and Judea; there is the Fruits of earthly Kings; and
such a King, would our false Christians and Elders have; mark by [earthly
Kings] Persecuting Kings as the Kings of the Earth set themselves, and the
Rulers take Counsel together against the Lord and his anointed; yet he that
sits in the Heavens shall vex them, and his anointed shall break them, etc.
see Psalm. 2. throughout. And the Kings of the Earth were such that committed
Fornication with the great Whore, who was drunken with the blood of the Saints,
and who (as its said) reigns over the Kings of the Earth; see Rev. 17 and 18.
Chapters. And was it not the Apostate Christians that doted so much for
such-earthly Kings to be set over them, to enforce People by outward Coertion
to their form of Religion? Did ever the true Christians call out for such Kings
to be set over them? Did not Christ say the Kings of the Gentiles exercise
Lordship over them, but it shall not be so among you? Now where is the
Temporizing? We retain (and are not ashamed of) our Principles, for Christ and
his Kingdom above all the Dominions of the Earth; yea, and his Soveraignity and
Kingship over our Consciences, we cannot give to another; we trust in and serve
the Living God, and the Devil and all his Agents and Apostate Incendiaries
shall not deter us out of this. And yet our Adversary judges us Apostates, for
declaring our Love and Honor to the National King, saying, are not they in
their own judgments become Apostates, for now they say they Love, own and
Honor an earthly King. So that in this Man's Sense it is an Apostasy, for any
one to show Respect and Honor to the King (though by the Providence and
overruling Hand of God restored) especially so long after they have shown a
dislike to some Men's endeavoring to set up a King in their earthly Wills; but
if he make the worst on it, he might more safely have said, they are reformed in
their judgments who own the King after such dislike, than that they are
Apostates: But the Man's malice makes himself obnoxious.

And where do we use these very Words ( Earthly King) on this occasion, but
that we love, own and honor the King (whom here this Man has judged an earthly
King) does this show us to be Apostates? what a factious peevish Spirit is this
we have to deal withal? Could not the Primitive Christians show their Respect
and Honor to Kings and Governors, but they must be Apostates from Christ, or
his Kingship over the Conscience? or was their fearing God and honoring the
King, a Contradiction or Temporizing? as if we could not Fear God and Honor
the King too; Oh malicious Man! where have thou lost both Honesty and Wit? did
not Shadrach, Meshach and Abednego, yea and Daniel also, who were Children of
Judah, serve and attend upon the King of Babylon in his Court? dare this Man
charge them with being temporizers therein, whereas yet they could not obey the
King's Command, wherein it was contrary to the Law of their God, but must
rather incur the Penalty and Hazard of a fiery Furnace and a Lions Den than bow
to an Image, pray to the King, or worship contrary to the Law of their God; see
Dan. the third Chapter, and Chapter sixth; for their Adversaries could find no
occasion against them, concerning the Kingdom, but sought Matter against them
concerning the Law of their God; and God appeared for them in their
Faithfulness to him, to the Conviction of their Persecutors, insomuch that both
Nebuchadnezzar and Darius confessed to the Power and Kingdom of the God of
Heaven, who is God of Gods and Lord of Kings, saying, I Nebuchadnezzar praise,
extol and honor the King of Heaven, all whose works are truth, and his ways
judgment, and those who walk in pride he is able to abase: And said King
Darius, I make a decree that in every dominion of my kingdom men tremble and
fear before the God of Daniel, for he is the living God, and steadfast for ever,
and his kingdom that which shall not be destroyed, and his dominion shall be
even unto the end, Dan. 6. 26. So that he would have had all his Subjects
Quakers, when he saw the Kingdom of God above his own.

Again, although we are most unjustly traduced as Temporizers, because of our
Applications to the present King and Government, and partly because of some
former Letters writ by some Particulars to the Protector and Parliament,
warning them, etc. this is no proof of our Adversaries Charge against the
People called Quakers, their many and great Sufferings, both in those Days and
since, to keep a Conscience clear to God, still acquits them from being such
Temporizers, etc. as John Pennyman has infamously rendered them, since we the
said People have not looked for Salvation, from the Mountains nor from the
Hills, but from the Lord of Hosts; we have not reposed our confidence in the
Arm of Flesh nor in Princes, but in the overruling Power and Name of the Lord
our God: It is better to trust in the Lord, than to put confidence in Man; it
is better to trust in the Lord than put confidence in Princes, Psalm. 118. 8, 9.
Again, put not your trust in Princes, nor in the Son of Man in whom there is no
help; happy is he that has the God of Jacob for his help, whose hope is in the
Lord his God which made Heaven and Earth, etc. which execute judgment for the
oppressed, Psalm. 146. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. Moreover we have not been wanting, to warn
and admonish those in Power, both Parliaments, Protector and King, against
Persecution and Oppression, as the Lord has laid it upon us; nor has any of
our Addresses to the King, been to stop any Prophet or Servant of the Lord
among us, from warning him, etc. So that our clearness from our Adversaries
unjust Imputations, is manifest diverse ways; and of these things he cannot be
altogether ignorant. And as for his citing of G. F. to the Protector and
Parliament, warning him to keep Kingship from off his Head, which some would
have given, and his bidding the Powers of the Earth, take beed of making
earthly Kings, etc. And what can John Pennyman make of this? He should have
allowed this Construction as he has for others, that if O. C. had been made
King as some would have had him, he would have been the greater Hypocrite; and
it was his zeal for the good of those People, that had been against a King, to
warn them of setting up or making such an earthly King, in their earthly Wills,
as his Words are plain, as in the other passages cited before; and this Zeal
and Fear of the consequence, J. P. does not go about to disprove as erroneous
there, but would have it run most to our disadvantage, wherein he probably may
think his way secure, seeing us a People that have been trod upon as to our
Persons and Estates, being exposed to so many Sufferings and Spoils (as we
were) he can throw dirt upon us, render us obnoxious to the Government, and so
help to afflict us and trample upon us, our Testimony and Christian Reputation;
to bring us under Infamy, Reproach and Disesteem, if possible; yea, and the
severe displeasure of the Powers, (and yet pretend to abhor such a thing) this
is the nature of his Temporizing, Malice and Revenge; God will stop him and
frustrate him in his Carreer, with his private Abetters and Assistants, I doubt
not.

What he cites of E. Boroughs Answer to the Apprentices Petition 1659. against
bringing in a strange Nation, etc. an oppressing Monarchy, etc. this he might
easily have excused with that same Provision for others in the like Case, as
namely it was out of his Zeal and Fear, that it would have been worse with the
Nation, etc. But, says he, all these Lines are left out (and so he says of F.
H. in one Paper) And upon some other Passages in E. B's. Works, of diverse
Words, being left out, expunged, etc. This Man might very well have let E. B.
alone, since he is gone to his rest; if he had been charitable, or but as good
as a Moral Heathen, among whom it was a Maxim, de Mortuis nil nisi been, but
especially since J. P. had Time to have told E. B. of this in his Lifetime (he
being not here now to answer for himself) and doubtless he was so tender a Man
as he would have heard him, if he would have given him any friendly Caution;
but thus to clamor and abuse Honest Men, that are at rest, is very ignoble,
especially since J. P. owned them in their Lifetime, and some Time after, and
F. H.: Nor do we think our selves bound directly to prostrate our Judgments
concerning all particulars, before such a malicious Adversary as J. P. or so
far to own his Prosecution of Men so long after they are dead, when they cannot
be here to answer for themselves; however dare our Adversary say otherwise of
E. B. and F. H. than that they were sincere-hearted Men to what was then
manifest? and zealous Servants and true Prophets of God, and vindicators of
Truth in the several Currents and Streams of their Writings, as may be seen in
their Prophesies and Conditional Threats against the late Powers, etc. And did
not thou J. P. say, That E. B. was faithful in his Day? and I doubt not but
their Names are recorded in the Lamb's Book of Life, though abused by this Man;
wherein all may see his Malice is so deadly, that it extends to the very Grave,
as if he would hang us all up, even the Dead as well as the Living. As for what
he cites of G. F. to Oliver, dated the eleventh Month 1657. as to the Success
he might have had, if he had been Faithful, and thundered down Deceit, and
asking why they put such as feared God out of the Army? Sober Men and True
Hearts, such as the Lord owned, etc.

How plain is it that he judged O. C. as one unfaithful to his former Promises,
specious Pretenses for the Liberties and Properties of the Subjects, for
Liberty to tender Consciences, taking off Oppression, and particularly that of
Tithes, which he promised to remove, when he was low in his Mind, in the Time
of the Wars, praying to God, weeping, saying, Our Eyes are toward thee O Lord,
etc. Surely if J. P. cannot say, That he had no Success in those Days, much
less can he determine what Success he might have had against the Pope, as he
pretended, if he had performed his Promises; and he was reproveable for putting
out honest Men for their Consciences, the more, because that was a Breach of
his Promise of Liberty to tender Consciences; but there were many, when they
saw the Self-endedness of O. C. and his Apostasy from the Cause which so many
ventured and lost their Lives for, they deserted the Army, without being put
out of it; and I am persuaded, That reproving him for putting such out of the
Army for their Consciences, was more upon his Breach of Promise, than with an
Intent to have them always continue in it, in order to War, and fight,
especially under so much as the Notion of Quakers, who conscientiously deny
fighting and Bloodshed: But here seems to be the main Objection, They were
sober Men, and such as feared God, therefore they must need be Quakers, and to
continue them in Arms, to fight, kill and shed Blood, must needs be contrary to
what the Quakers have since declared to the King. That they must needs be
absolute Quakers; because faithful to what they then knew, does not follow; for
Paul was sincere, from his Youth upward, to what he professed before his
Conversion, and diverse had some Convincement and Fear of God upon them, in the
Army, before they were either converted so far as to be Quakers, or did clearly
see, That Wars and Fighting did not consist with the Gospel Dispensation and
New Covenant; but many, when they did see it, came out from them, and did leave
them voluntarily; therefore it is a false Observation and Inference that G. F.
his Judgment was, That Quakers might Fight, but rather that it was a Breach of
Promise, and reproveable in O. C. to turn truer Men than himself out of the
Army, before so far convinced as to lay down their Weapons: And if he should
argue, That Christ was contradictory to himself, in suffering Peter, one of his
Disciples, to wear a Sword (before fully converted) because he says, my
Kingdom is not of this World, this would not be taken for any good Argument,
especially among Christians; so that this Man's deridingly calling the Quakers
these peaceable Men, and maliciously inveighing against them as Temporizers,
because of their Declarations to the King, neither proves them such, nor can he
thereby invalid those Declarations, and particularly that to the King, in the
Year 1660. viz. All Bloody Principles and Practices we, as to our own
Particular do utterly deny, with all outward Wars and Strife, and Fighting with
outward Weapons, for any End or Pretense whatsoever; so those that use any
Weapon to fight for Christ, or for the establishing his Kingdom or Government,
both the Spirit, Principle and Practice that we deny, etc. And this Testimony
we still maintain and stand for; and where is the Contradiction and Temporizing?
Have we ever declared, That we have owned Bloody Principles or Practices? or
that we would fight with Carnal Weapons for Christ, or for the establishing of
his Kingdom and Government? while he cannot prove this, where is the
Contradiction? and then where is the Temporizing? is it in denying Bloody
Principles, and declaring our peaceable Intentions, to live quietly in
Godliness and honesty under the King and Government? or in giving Testimony
against those that would fight for Christ, or the establishing his Kingdom by
Carnal Weapons of War, and would build up Sion, with Blood? Have we not all
along been against such a Practice? And have not our peaceable Conversations
declared the same? Were not the Primitive Christians exhorted to be subject to
the Higher Powers, seeing they were ordained of God? And dare he say this was a
Temporizing in the Primitive Christians? No, does not the Apostle plainly say,
Ye must needs be subject, not only for Wrath but for Conscience Sake, Romans 13.
1, 2, 3, 4, 5. This Subjection for Conscience Sake surely was not temporizing,
and the Subjection we owe to the Civil Powers, whether Active or Passive, so as
we may keep our Consciences clear to God, in doing or suffering, and as the
Apostle further exhorted, put them in mind to be subject to Principalities and
Powers, to obey Magistrates, and to be ready to every good Work, Tit. 3. 1. And
this was without exception against the Name ( King) or other, and submit your
selves to every Ordinance of Man, for the Lord's sake, whether it be to the
King as supreme, or unto the Governors, etc. sent for the Punishment of
Evildoers, and the Praise of them that do well, 1 Pet. 2. 14. So that the
Primitive Christians did not boggle at the Name King; and for this Cause pay ye
Tribute also, rendering to all their Dues, etc. Ow no Man any thing but Love,
etc. Romans 13. 6, 7, 8. And the true Christians, though they suffered for
Christ, and underwent many Injuries from Men, yet they were to live peaceably
with all Men; they were not so much as to avenge themselves, but rather to give
Place unto Wrath, for vengeance is mine, and I will repay, says the Lord, Romans
12. 18, 19. Herein they granted a Vengeance was due, but were not to avenge
themselves.

To our Adversaries saying, That the Soldiers were charged to go forth with a
free willing Heart, etc. Here is a Perversion in this; for their Charge was,
they should keep in the Fear of the Lord, that they might not lose the Dread of
the Lord: And dare this Man say, That none of them had the Dread of the Lord,
at any Time upon them? And that Advice given to O. C. Do not stand cumbering
thy self about dirty Priests, etc. This he cites, but to what Purpose it shows;
for his cumbering himself with such Covetous Priests, he was reproveable, and
the setting up and promoting such Priests, has not consisted with the Good of
our Nation, under any Government.

Again, I find in his Notes against Francis Howghill, where it is said, That it
is no Rebellion to call away those in Power (he has this Aggravation added)
viz. by which he means to Depose those in Power, that perform not their Trust
for the Good of the People, p. 4. See here how obnoxious to the Government he
has gone about to render the Quakers, by this perverse addition of a meaning,
he has put upon F. H. as if to call away and to Depose were both one in common
Acceptance, and yet this is the Man that pretends to abhor that Practice of
rendering us obnoxious to the Government: Pray, how can we trust him, etc. he
should have been so charitable as not to have aggravated the matter with such a
Meaning added; especially since it concerned a Man who is deceased, and dyed a
Prisoner for the Testimony of Jesus, and at rest, and who in his Lifetime bore
a faithful Testimony for Truth and Righteousness.

It Is a most base and revengeful Spirit in J. P. to rake E. B. out of his
Grave, to bring Infamy upon his name, his Gospel Testimony which he bore, and
Prophetical Spirit which was in him now he is not here to answer for himself;
and not rather have prevented both by Friendly Advice in his life time, when
they were in Society; but instead thereof it may be rather questioned, whether
he was not in those Cases, too much beset with such unstable Spirits as J. P.
who now might have put more charitable Constructions upon E. B. and us, than he
has done, namely, that he feared the effects of a Monarchy, and that he was so
zealous against the great persecuting Whore, that has made her self drunk with
the Blood of the Saints, that therefore he would have had the Beast that has
long carried her, so to hate her as to cast her off; as being a Man who in his
Spirit simpathized with the Martyrs of Jesus, and those Souls under the Altar
of them that were slain for the word of God, who cried with a loud voice, how
long O Lord Holy and True, do thou not Judge and AVENGE our Blood on them
that dwell on the Earth, Rev. 6. 10.

And whatsoever in any of the Writings cited by J. P. may seem disgustful as to
Monarchy, we have still this cure for it all, that John Pennyman has
prescribed, namely, that these things were writ out of these Men's Zeal and
Fear, that Monarchy would be oppressive, and cause more Burdens or Impositions
to be laid upon the Nation than before. And this excuse was pretty warily
contrived; for if he had flung all that former Zeal and Fear into the dirt,
it is not unlikely but he might have highly disgusted his Friends the
Presbyterians and Independents, etc. And therefore as a Person that appears
rather affected with these former Passages, which intimate a Fear concerning
Monarchy, than with our late Applications to the King, etc. he has taken the
great pains to collect and transcribe them the more at large, and sorely to
chide us (the People called Quakers) for making Declarations and Applications
to the King, Council and Parliament, to persuade them of our faithful and
peaceable Intentions, or for any Relief from the Imposition of Oaths, etc. for
this we are sorely chidden not only as Temporizers, but also for a late fawning
flattering Address to the King and Parliament, as he is pleased to call it. We
meet with no such chiding for these particular Passages, that seemed to dislike
of a Monarchy in Cromwell's days; for the Fear and Zeal that was therein shall
either cure all that, or else John shall relinquish the Medicine of his own
preparing and wheel about again, and wholly desert his Friends the
Nonconformists, both Presbyters, Independents, and others of his private
Abetters and Cabalistick Council.

As concerning that passage to the Officers of the Army; where after they are
reproved for abusing the Power of God and loosing it, and putting them in
Prison that struck at the Root (meaning the Quakers) (says he) there is this
passage, viz. Had you been faithful to the Power of the Lord God, you had gone
into Spain, to require the Blood of the Innocent that there had been shed, and
have commanded them to have offered up their Inquisitions, etc. and knocked at
Romes Gates before now, and trampled Deceit and Tyranny under: And demanded the
Pope, and commanded him to have offered up all his Torture-houses, his Racks
and Inquisition, etc. Hereupon we have several questions put upon us, viz.
Could any People have declared themselves more for fighting? How should the
Army set up their Standard upon the top of Rome, but by fighting? How require
the Blood that has been shed in the Inquisition, but by fighting? Here he may
think he has sorely opposed and puzzelled us. But it is no very difficult matter
to answer with clearness herein, and safety to our Christian principle, against
killing and destroying one another; for either these Passages must be spoken as
from a Prophet of God, or only as a Christian, however conditionally. First, if
as a Prophet, then he speaks not always what is desirable or pleasant to him,
according to his Christian Principle, nor within the compass of his
Understanding as a Man, nor from any Human contrivance, but what is commanded
him of God, as relating to Judgments or Calamities which may be of diverse
kinds, and then he may Speak and Prophecy of Wars and Destructions, etc. and
yet not at all be of such a Spirit or Principle in himself, as to maintain or
desire Wars and Fighting; as the Prophet Isaiah, who was an Evangelical
Prophet, and against Wars and Fighting and saw the end thereof, Isa. 2. 3, 4,
5. and the Indignation of the Lord upon all Nations, and his Fury upon all
their Armies, Isa. 34. 2. yet this Evangelical Prophet said, O Assyrian, the
Rod of mine Anger, etc. I will send against an Hypocritical Nation, etc. see
Isa. 10. 5, 6. And further, all ye Beasts of the Field come to devour, Isa.
56. 9. And Christ Jesus, himself who said, my Kingdom is not of this World, for
if it were, my Servants would fight; yet prophesied of the sad and miserable
destruction of Jerusalem, and of those Murderers that slew the Heir; and said
to those Hypocrites, fill ye up the measure of your Fathers Iniquities; and
this was, that all the Righteous Blood shed, might be required at their hands.
And several Instances of Gods Judgments might be brought out of the Revelation
of John against the great Whore, etc. So that a Man may speak as a Prophet (and
be yet a Christian) of diverse Calamities and Judgments which he cannot be
active in, and yet not destroy his Christian Principle. Secondly, But if as a
Christian only, and within the compass of a Christian Freedom, and
understanding these aforesaid Passages are spoken; then I may lawfully
conclude, that the design thereof was not to incite to Fighting Killing or
Bloodshed, but rather that it was writ from a Belief that if they had eyed the
Lord, and aimed at the removing Oppression and Persecution, they might have
been such a dread of Nations, as is expressed in the same Paper, that possibly
they might not have met with such Resistance (if any) in that case; for who
knows not that they were formidable for a time? And what success they might
have had for such an end, our Adversary cannot determine. (However to require
their Inquisition and to knock at Romes doors, proves no violence; all this
might have been done by Embassies, as in the case of the D. of Savoy, that
persecuted the poor Piedmontors the Stock of the Waldenses.) For he proves not
an incitation unto Bloodshed and Slaughter in the said Papers, but only that
they should have required the Innocent Blood that had been shed, after they had
set up their Standard at Rome, according to what many of them had often
promised, before they fell on persecuting and imprisoning our Friends; and
herein they were reproved of breach of promise, that many of the old Army had
made, not to lay down their Arms till they had set up their Standard at Rome,
and broke down Oppression there. But on the contrary to fall upon Oppressing
and Imprisoning Men for Conscience here, might they not justly from their own
former pretenses and promises be asked, why do ye Imprison us, or suffer us to
be Imprisoned? (As many were in the Protectors name and time) why do ye not go
to Rome and break down the Popes Inquisitions, and in point of Justice require
the Innocent Blood that has been shed by that persecuting Power? And might they
not have required this as Magistrates, and seen what satisfaction would have
been made, according to their own engagements? But when they set up Persecution
in England, they lost their Power and Dread, and became Weak and Feeble, till
the Lord overturned them. And yet though it 'cannot consist with our Christian
Principle so much, as to avenge our selves, War with carnal Weapons, or incite
others to War and Bloodshed: And G. F. (who is the Man chiefly struck at in
this matter) even in Cromwell's days did manifestly testify against Wars and
Fighting, as also against Plotting and contriving Insurrections, and this both
by Words, Writing and Suffering; and exhorted the Soldiers to do violence to no
Man, neither accuse any Man falsely, and this in the same Paper wherein he
reminds them of Rome, etc. Howbeit there remains both Judgments and Vials of
Wrath from God, in store for the Persecuting Whore, or Mystery Babylon,
wherever she sits upon the many Waters, which are Peoples, and Multitudes, and
Nations, and Tongues, Rev. 17. and 18. Chapters. that has been drunk with the
Blood of the Saints, and made both Nations and Kings drunk with the Wine of the
Wrath of her Fornication: And whether at Rome, or throughout all Christendom,
that Spirit of Persecution cannot escape, nor they that join with it in acts of
Cruelty, whether Papists or Protestants, Kings, Princes or People. But as for
O. C. (and his Agents) though looked upon to be a Beast, yet he was not so
serviceable a Beast or Horn, as those spoken of in the Revelations, chap. 17.
16. that shall hate the Whore, and make her desolate and naked; and shall eat
her Flesh and burn her with Fire, because God has put it into their Hearts to
fulfill his Will, ver. 17. (too course a work for Saints and Lambs of Christ,
and yet Gods Will it should be done.) Now to foresee or foretell such a Judgment
to be of God is one thing, and to incite Men to Wars and Bloodshed is another:
And this latter I affirm, stands not with the Principle nor Practice of the
People called Quakers, nor do they declare themselves for Fighting, as they are
most falsely accused. And as to the question, How should the Army set up their
Standard at Rome, but by Fighting? There does lie a plain exception, and
certain Instances against the general State of this questionary Argument (which
yet I bring not as comparative altogether, but only with respect to that Dread,
that was believed by some would have attended the old Army, had they been
faithful to the cause pretended, and gone to Rome for that end declared.) My
exception is first in the case of Gideon, the Host of the Midianites fled and
were overcome, and yet not by Fighting on Gideons part, but by a mean
Stratagem, as to outward appearance, viz. that of their Pitchers, Trumpets and
Lamps; but the hand of the Lord was in it, see Judge. 7. And secondly, in the
case of Jehosaphat King of Judah, when the Children of Ammon, Moab and
Mount-seir came against Judah, the Lord told them by his Prophet Jehaziel, be
not afraid nor dismayed by reason of this great Multitude, for the Battle is not
yours, but Gods, 2 Chronicles. 20. 15. And did they then go against this great Army
to fight them? No, but having first sought the Lord, they sung Praises to the
beauty of Holiness; and when they began to sing, the Lord set ambushments
against the Children of Ammon, Moab, etc. see ver. 22, 23. And its said
concerning Barak, Jeptha, Sampson, David, Samuel and the Prophets, that by
Faith they subdued Kingdoms, turned to flight the Armies of the Aliens, etc.
Heb. 11. 32. which therefore was not all by Fighting; but that there has a hand
and power of God appeared in these things, and in Revolutions, most sorts will
confess except Atheists.

Object. The Army was made the Sword of the Lord against Papists and Bishops,
M. H. T. S. and the Lord is represented Fighting with Olivers Sword, G. R.

And what then? So the wicked are called his Sword, Psalm. 17. 13. And O
Assyrian the Rod of mine Anger, Isa. 10. 5. And Nebuchadnezzar the King of
Babylon my Servant, Jer. 25. 9. and 43. 10. See the places quoted. And also
Jer. 49. 28. and 50. 17. and Ezekiel. 26. 7. and 29. 19. and 30. 10. So that
sometimes God makes use of evil Men to execute such Judgments, as well as Men
zealous and sincere for a good end therein.

And also that Passage cited about inviting all Christians and Nations that are
against Popery, to come against it, etc. This is taken as looking somewhat
Warlike; however had they so done, in all probability they had been so
formidable and frightful to the Pope, etc. that he would have delivered up his
Mitre, etc. that there would have been the less occasion (if any) for War and
Bloodshed. But says our Adversary, they gave Directions and Charges to the
Protector and Officers and Soldiers concerning Fighting, exhorting thereunto,
etc. p. 13. I find no such Charge and Exhortation, and I cannot believe it
without more plain and direct evidence. As also that charge in his Book, so
often cast upon us, viz. That they (viz. the Quakers) approve of what the
Armies did against the King and his Party; which I affirm is utterly false, as
stated, and especially as charged in general: For we rather have lamented that
War and Bloodshed, as a National Calamity and Judgment for the Sins of the
People. And though we confess, and our Adversaries cannot deny, that the Sword
was one of Gods four Judgments upon Idolaters and Oppressors, Ezekiel. 14. 21. and
Jer. 34. 17. and so justifiable as from God, whose Judgments are all just; yet
it is possible Men may be Unrighteous and selfish therein, in killing and
taking Possession, and so not justified in their immediate acting therein.

That G. F. and many others concerned with him in the Testimony of Jesus
Christ, have not varyed from their Christian Testimony against Fighting, nor
Temporized, Apostatized or been deceitful therein, further appears,

I. First from his being cast into the Dungeon in Darby Goal, in the year 50.
where he lay six Months space, because he would not take up Arms for the
Commonwealth against the King. II. From his and others refusing considerable
Places in the Army, when invited by the Committee of Safety. III. From his
Answer then, that he abhorred it ( viz.) to accept of such Place or Preferment
in the Army, as that of a Colonel proffered him, and that he was in the
Covenant of Peace, that takes away the occasion of Wars; for he knew from
whence all Wars did rise, even from Men's Lusts.
Yet notwithstanding in the year, 1654. he was brought up from Leicester to
London, being accused for a Plotter to bring in King Charles. And in the year
1655. after Major Ceeley had cast him into Prison in Doomes-dale at Lanceston
(before Judge Glin at the Assizes there) he brought a Man of Belial to swear,
that he could raise 4000 Men to involve the Nation in Blood, and bring in King
Charles.

Now considering his deep Suffering then, as also that he was then suspected to
be as much for King Charles, as J. P. can suspect or insinuate that he was
against him, and yet now to own and honor him, which is the great crime in
this Adversaries evil Eye. But that he was then guilty of Plotting for the
King, and now (in his owning the King in the civil Government) a Temporizer,
are both alike unrighteous Calumnies and Forgeries of his, and our guilty and
Persecuting Adversaries. But that he and others refused Preferments in the old
Army, and to take up Arms in the Commonwealth's days against the King and his;
and our Testimony both then and now being to the Covenant of Peace, and against
even the very occasion of Wars, to wit, Men's Lusts; these are true, and still
do plainly evince our constant Consistency with our selves and Christian
Testimony, from the beginning, against all Plotting, carnal Wars and Fighting.

Moreover be it remarked, that after G. F. came to London, and was brought
before Oliver Cromwell, he said, That there was a People now gotten up or risen,
that he could not win with Gifts, Honors, Offices, or places of Preferment, as
he could all other Sects. To which G. F. answered, viz. That we have forsaken
our own and are not like to receive any thing of him, nor the Glory of the
World; and so he was not like to choke us with such things, as he had done all
others, etc. Observe here his and our faithful Friends faithfulness to our
Christian and Gospel Testimony, and clearness from Temporizing or aiming at
worldly Interests, which is the character and design of Temporizers.

Again, as to his hideous clamor against the Quakers, as far more guilty and
more abominable in these matters, than any other Party what soever, whilst they
so contumeliously upbraid others, and have done the same things themselves.
This is a plain lie against the Quakers, considering that but a few lines
before, p. 20. he tells the Readers, the Quakers reproach and rail on the
Presbyterians and Independents, for their joining to and abetting the late War,
and approving the Execution done upon the late King and his Party. Now that the
Quakers have so done and joined, is an apparent Falsehood before detected; and
that the Quakers have so done, to wit, approved the execution done upon the
late King, etc. is a most aggravating Falsehood, to expose us to the severity of
the Government, who were not then in being.

Now Reader, judge what is the tending of all this our Adversaries inveterate
work against us, but to expose and render us obnoxious to the present King and
Government, as possibly he can to ruin and destroy us, so directly contrary to
his pretense, of abhorring that Practice; do but see the Man's gross
Hypocrisy, deadly Malice, and most base Temporizing, to bring us under into
our Graves with contempt, if possible. Howbeit, as we fear not him, nor his
Invectives, nor the Devil that old Murderer, that has set him on work: So we
doubt not but through divine assistance, we shall still close to our Christian
Testimony; faithfully witnessing that Christ's Dispensation, Kingdom and
Government among his People, is above Wars and Fighting, for it is established
in Righteousness and Peace; and of the increase of his Government and Peace
there shall be no end; but God will make Wars to cease to the ends of the
Earth, and in Salem shall be his Tabernacle, where he breaks the Bow and the
Spear, and Weapons of War, etc. And we the People called Quakers, can in
defiance of all Envy and Malice, stand up for Christ Jesus and his Kingdom, and
still plead the same things that J. P. quotes out of our Friends Declarations
to the King of England, etc. and that with a good Conscience in the sight of
God and Men, both what he cites out of Quakers Plea, 1661. viz. No better
Testimony can be given of us and of our peaceableness; and that we shall not
Plot nor Rebel against the King, than experience it self; experience is the
best witness that we are peaceable, and free from Plotting and Rebellion; for
we have always been so since we were a People, both before and since the King
came in. As also a Declaration quoted by him, given forth in behalf of the
whole Body of the elect People of God, who are called Quakers, and signed by,
G. Fox and Richard Huberthorn, John Stubbs, Francis Howgill, Ger. Roberts, John
Boulton, Leonard Fell, Samuel Fisher, Hen. Fell, John Hind, John Furley,
Junior, Tho. Moore, these Names he has mentioned, to expose them to the World
as Temporizers, Appostates, etc. though Men far more Righteous than himself;
and I am persuaded, most of them, if not all, more Conscientious in what they
say, than ever John Pennyman was, since he entertained prejudice and envy: Hear
what he has against these Men, as Temporizers ( viz.) That they have suffered,
because they would not take up carnal Weapons to Fight withal against any; and
made a prey upon, because they say, we are the Innocent Lambs of Christ; and
cannot avenge our selves [as he cites] and further in the Postcript, All Wars
and Fightings with carnal Weapons, we do deny, who have the Sword of the
Spirit. Again, this the People called Quakers do witness ( viz.) and this is
both our Principle and Practice, and has been from the beginning; so that if
we suffer as suspected to take up Arms or make War against any, it is without
any ground from us; for it neither is, or ever was in our Hearts, since we
owned the Truth of God, neither shall we ever do it, because it is contrary to
the Spirit of Christ, his Doctrine, and the Practice of his Apostles, etc. Well,
this Testimony we stand by, against all the contrary whatever; and do affirm it
was conscientiously writ, and not from a Temporizing Spirit, as our Adversary
all along endeavors to insinuate, to prejudice and cloud our Christian
Testimony.

Again he cites these words to the King and Parliament, 1661. ( viz.) our
Allegiance to the King, our Lives have and shall manifest to him; and you, and
all Men subscribed he says, by George Fox, Edward Buroughs, Francis Howgill,
John Crook, Samuel Fisher, Richard Huberthorn, John Whitehead, Samuel Thornton,
Leonard Fell, John Boulton, and twenty more; and these he has ranked up for
Temporizers, Dissemblers, etc. having rendered all our Applications to the King
of this kind, but Hypocrisy and Temporizing Deceits as not to be trusted, and
this still to render us obnoxious; more especially if his Book be Printed; for
see what he says (not only to cloud, but to murder our Christian Testimony) (
viz.) and yet under all these Dissimulations and Temporizings, do like the
Whore in the Proverbs, wipe their Mouths, and proclaim themselves an innocent
and harmless People; and near his Conclusion, charges G. F. and his Adherents,
with a late fawning flattering Address to the King and Parliament. How now
John, is this thy abhorring to render us obnoxious to the Government? God will
smite thee, thou malicious Hypocrite; our Innocence shall outlive thy Envy and
causeless Revenge, and rise up in Judgment against thee. What will thou be
still be mad against us, because our Friends gave Testimony against the Man
that attempted to burn the Bible, among other Books at the Exchange? And will thou be still revengful, because some were moved to testify against thy
extravagancy and riotous work, with thy twenty seven Venison Pasties (or so
esteemed) exposed to the Multitude?

And was not this thy wedding Dinner for Jews and Gentiles, whom thou had
invited to Merchant-Taylors-Hall? And what was thy intended Mystery in all
this? Answer plainly, for it was a very public Frolic, and whether or no had
not the Bible been burned, if the Officer at the Exchange had not prevented? be
plain, and do not always smite at others and hide thy self; nor put us off,
with telling us, Thou would not do it at the Will of any Mortal: What
immortal one would move any to attempt it? An immortal God, or an immortal
Devil? Could thou imagine that the immortal God would ever move to it? And
what moved thee now thus to vent thy Malice and Clamor, not only against the
People called Quakers in general, but also against many particular Persons by
Name, the meanest of them more Righteous than thy self? Do thou not know that
Edw. Borough, Fr. Howgill, Sam. Fisher, R. Hubberthorn, Joh. Stubbs, Edw.
Piott, George Bishop, George Rose and Miles Hallhead are all deceased? Yea,
some of them many Years in their Graves, who dyed Prisoners, sufferers for
their Consciences toward God, and yet thou will rank them among Temporizers:
Oh unrighteous Man! is thy Conscience wholly seared, since thy Essay toward
the burning of the Bible? for thou have as little Recourse or Regard to the
Scriptures, or Truth's Principle in thy Writing (though once professed by thee)
as thou have to Conscience; which is none at all in sincerity: Malice and the
Gall of Bitterness has swallowed thee up, and Darkness is become thy
Habitation. Do thou not remember that Fr. Howgill, dyed in Prison, and that
both E. B. R. H. and others were Prisoners when taken sick, and dyed? And do
thou not know that not only Sam. Fisher but John Crook, John Boulton, and many
others, have been great Sufferers since the King's Restoration; and must all
these be now infamously ranked among Temporizers, Dissemblers, etc. Is this thy
Conscience and Charity John Pennyman? And is thy Malice so great against
William Deusbury, so that thou must needs endeavor to expose him to the
Displeasure of the present Government, to add Afflictions to his Bonds, who is
known to be a sincere, upright, peaceable Man, and great Sufferer, both in the
Time of the late and present Powers, yea and in present Suffering and
Confinement for his Conscience and Testimony. And what Hurt has honest Tho.
Salthouse done thee, that thou must needs go about to expose him too? And also
Isaac Pennington, who is known to be an Innocent Harmless Man, and has been a
great Sufferer, even under the present Power? What, would not thy Malice suffer
thee to let him alone, but thou must needs render him obnoxious for writing
something to the Parliament and Army? printed 1659. about their backsliding and
turning aside from the Good Old Cause, etc. And to aggravate the Business
against him, thou put the Question, Was not then the Armies Cause just in
his Opinion, and their Fighting Lawful, etc. p. 17. How now, John Pennyman,
have thou neither a regard to Men nor Truth? Have thou done as thou would be
done by, thus to expose Men, and question them for that which thou thy self
dare not adventure openly to oppose? Therefore I would ask thee, What is thy
Opinion concerning that Cause called the Good Old Cause, to wit, Liberty to
tender Consciences, removing Oppression, and preserving Men's Properties,
formerly pretended to in the Old Army, though not well managed and pursued,
was this Cause pretended to, just; yea or nay, in it self? Why do thou cover
thy Deceit, desert Truth in any Case, and peevishly expose Conscientious Men,
for formerly confessing it? One Passage to the Parliament and Commonwealth
1657. Let the Reader a little take notice of it; for perhaps he may smile at
John Pennyman's Design in citing it. The Passage, as he cites it, runs thus, p.
28. viz. Let all these Abbey-Lands, Gleab-Lands that is given to the Priests,
be given to the Poor of the Nation, and let all the Great Houses, Abbeys,
Steeple Houses and Whitehall be for Almshouses, (or some other use) for all
the Blind and Lame to be there. What could be J. P's Design in citing this
Passage? If it was to make the King and Court angry with our Friends, for
advising to make White Hall an Almshouse for the Blind and Lame (as that seems
most likely to be his Design) I dare say he will miss of it; for I am persuaded
the King would have been better pleased, and thought it more Charitable, that
his House should have been an Almshouse for the Poor, Blind and Lame, than
that Oliver and his Crew should there set up their Nests, pamper, feed and
gluttonize themselves; for the Humility, serious Praying and Tears were lost
when they had killed and taken possession, were got to White Hall, and there
settled at Ease in fullness, pride and idleness, even while many innocent Men
were deep Sufferers for their tender Consciences in cold noisome Goals, Holes
and Dungeons, with Bread and Water, their Victuals being snatched from them,
their Bed-cloaths taken from them by Force, and they forced to lie upon Straw
in cold low dark Goals, for above a Year together. In these and such like
Sufferings I my self, with many others of our Friends had a deep share in
Oliver's Days, and that under Presbyterians and Independents, I affirm; and yet
they have not manifested Repentance, nor made Satisfaction. J. P. has taken
share, and deeply drunk in that persecuting Spirit; and to aggravate his Matter
against us on their behalf, he has that Passage reflecting upon the
Nonconformists twice over, cited in his Preface from our Pen (as his Phrase is)
quoting, Quakerism a new Nick name: As also in p. 27. he has the same Passage
over again, with another out of William Penn's Book, styled, A just Rebuke to
one and twenty Divines, reminding the Presbyterians of their former
Proceedings, etc. so that he appears so much disgusted at a Reflection upon the
Presbyterians, etc. that he begins and almost concludes his invective and
bitter piece about it, as offended that they were upbraided; such a deeply
concerned and zealous Presbyterian Agent is John become.

I may give the Reader a hint of one Fling that John has at me, if he had had
Sedition or Treason against me, to be sure I should have heard of it, and many
more besides. His Fling is this, viz. about F. B. who (he says) was one of the
chief Preachers of the Quakers, and in very great esteem among them -- This Man
is charged, by Jer. Ives, to have justified the late War against the King, and
is defended by George Whitehead, another of their chief Preachers, p. 9. To all
which I answer, as a Man not Conscious to my self herein. Do but see how
fallaciously and deceitfully the matter is stated by this peevish Incendiary;
as namely, upon his repeating the Anabaptists charging E. B. with justifying
the late War against the King (without any Distinction he adds) and is
defended by G. W. which looks like as if I do defend such a Justification of
the late War against the King. What is this but Malice and Wickedness, to
render me obnoxious and seditious to the Government, and so incapable of so
much as the Act of Indemnity? As for a present defending of that War, which I
never was concerned in, nor is there any Words of that import in my answer to
Ives ( see Serious Search) which John quotes, but leaves out the principal
Matter wherein I defend E. B. in his testifying against the Men then in Power,
and the Quakers from Ives his most unjust Accusation against them in these
general Words, viz. You justify the late War against the King: What Impostors,
etc. This our Adversary has most enviously seconded, as one beholding to the
Anabaptist Preachers; and was not he a zealous Chaplain, more than a little
concerned in the Old Army, against the King himself? who not very long after
his open scurrilous Behavior, boasting, vapouring and malicious Work against
us, was soon cut off by Death. Now J. P. has enlarged upon his Work against us,
to render us odious to the Government; and me in particular, as defending such
a Justification of the late Wars against the King; as his Words may be easily
taken, rather than defending our Friend or Friends from that Charge which not
only my self, but also many thousands of us and among us are wholly clear of,
(nor did I ever like Wars and Bloodshed) being a simplehearted harmless People
toward the King and all Men, and do eye the overruling Hand and Power of God,
and daily fear him, for our Preservation being in his Holy Will resigned to be
patient and passive under what Government he is pleased to set up.

Moreover, let the Reader please to take notice how evident John Pennyman's
Abuse, Deceit and Falsehood is, on some Passages he cites out of a Paper,
entitled, A Declaration from the People called Quakers to the present
distracted Nation of England, 1659. p. 12. where, upon these Passages, viz. We
have chosen the Son of God to be our King, and he has chosen us to be his
People, and he might command thousands and ten thousands of his Saints, at this
Day, to fight in his own Cause -- and give them Victory over all their Enemies,
and turn his Hand upon their Persecutors; but yet his Kingdom is not of this
World, neither is his War-fare with Carnal Weapons, etc. neither has he chosen
us for that End; neither can we yet believe that he will make use of us in that
way, etc. -- But for the present we are given up to bear and suffer all things
for his Name's sake, etc. Upon which John Pennyman has this Observation, viz.
So that they were not then of that Mind, That the Spirit would never move them
to fight: And this he brings to contradict their Declaration to the King 1660.
Testifying that the Spirit of Christ which leads them into all Truth, will
never move them to fight and war against any Man with outward Weapons.

1. In the first place, I entreat all that read this, to take notice, That the
aforesaid Declaration which J. P. has the said Observation upon, ( viz. That
the Quakers were not then of that Mind, That the Spirit would never move them
to fight) was (as he says, true) subscribed by many, but tells not the Reader,
That he, even John Pennyman himself, was one of those many who subscribed it:
As I am sure his own Name is to it, with thirteen or fourteen more; wherein he
has dealt most disingenuously and deceitfully, thus to reflect upon the
Quakers and E. B. about it, without giving any notice how far himself was
concerned in it by subscription; which he must needs see and call to mind, if
his Malice did not befool him to overlook (or not heed) the Subscriptions; but
his casting it upon E. B. as being moved by his Spirit to give that Paper
forth, shows that he has of late looked on the Conclusion of it; it being there
said, That the Substance of this was given forth the twentieth Day of this
tenth Month 1659.
; being moved of the Lord, by his Spirit thereunto, through Edward Buroughs,
and is now judged meet to be published to the Nation, in the behalf of us and
our Friends, under our Hands, viz.

Ger. Roberts, Thom. Heart, Gil. Latey, John Anderdon, Joh. Osgood, Robert
Benbrick, John Boulton, Ellis Hooks, William Crouch, Gobert Sikes, James
Strutt, John Pennyman, John Crook, E. Billings, and Ben. Furley.
See now, here is J. Pennyman among the rest, espousing and highly owning the
Declaration aforesaid, as the Substance of it being then given forth, at the
Motion of the Lord by his Spirit, and published in the behalf of them who
subscribed it, and their Friends: Well, I have seriously perused the said
Declaration, and I must confess it looks so impartially, and with so much
Innocence and Freeness from a fighting Spirit, and so plainly confessing our
Choice of the Son of God to be our King, and his Choice of us to be a People,
and that his Kingdom is not of this World; and that his War-fare is not with
Carnal Weapons, as also that neither is his Victory by the murdering and
killing of Men's Persons, nor has he chosen us for that end, etc. with diverse
other Passages to the same purpose, as in p. 8. viz. We do not war against any
with Carnal Weapons, neither shall we ever provoke the Nation against us,
otherwise than by our Righteous and Holy Walking, etc.

That I wonder J. Pennyman should have or allow of such a Construction upon the
said Declaration, as, That the Quakers were not then of that Mind, That the
Spirit would never move them to fight: Unless John himself had such a Reserve,
when he signed that Paper; which if he had, it was most gross Dissimulation to
tell the World, That he, with the rest, had chosen the Son of God to be their
King; and that his War-fare is not with Carnal Weapons, nor his Victory by
killing Men's Persons; nor has he chosen us for that end. Now if J. P. when he
signed this, believed that the Spirit of Christ might, for all this, move him
(or any of them) to fight; What abominable Hypocrisy was he guilty of therein?

1. To proclaim to the World, That he and the rest are become subjects to such
a King, as will never allow them to fight. 2. And yet have this private
Reserve, That he may move him to fight: But I am persuaded the rest of the
Signers of the said Paper had no such deceitful Reserve; If J. P. had, he was
very deceitful, and has now bewrayed the foulness of his own Nest.
As for the Words he carps at in the said Paper, to which his own Name is, viz.
That the Son of God might command thousands and ten thousands, etc. That Is no
Proof that they then believed he would do it; unless it must be taken for
granted, That because he had Power to command thousands to fight, therefore he
would do it, and so argue from his Power to his Will, which but mean Logicians
would be ashamed of; when it is as plainly told, That Christ's Kingdom is not
of this World, and his Warfare is not with Carnal Weapons; and that he has not
chosen us for that End, as to kill Men's Persons, etc. As that Christ by Prayer
could have obtained more than twelve Legions of Angels to have rescued him:
Matthew. 26. 53, 54.
But how then should the Scripture be fulfilled, That he must suffer?

As for the other Words, Neither can we yet believe that he ( viz. the Son of
God) will make use of us in that way ( viz. of fighting). For our Adversary to
infer from the Particle yet, (where it is intimated, That yet they could not
believe that Christ would move them to fight) that therefore the Quakers were
not then of that Mind, That he would never move them to fight. He might as well
have inferred, from their saying, That yet his Kingdom is not of this World:
Therefore they were not then of the Mind, That Christ's Kingdom would never be
of this World, but that it might become a worldly Kingdom, and his Servants
turn Fighters. Thus absurd is our Adversary's Consequence against us, upon a
mere small Circumstance or Ambiguity of a Word; yet [ nevertheless] is
construed by him for yet [as yet] as putting the signification of adhuc for
tamen. And for the present we are given up to bear and suffer all things for
his Names sake: As for the Word present, I grant, if it had been left out, it
had appeared more absolute in concurrence with the Substance of the
Declaration, which, as it is said, was given forth by E. B. But that diminutive
Phrase (for the present) is not essential to the Substance of it, but rather to
the manner of speaking: John, it may be, can give account of those Particles,
which he has construed so much to the Disadvantage of the whole; seeing his
Name is to the Paper, and he can give or own such an Interpretation of it as
that they (the Quakers) were not then of that Mind, That the Spirit would never
move them to fight, though there be enough in the Paper to evince the contrary,
as is before hinted: And if John had any such Reserve, in espousing and signing
the said Paper, or did cause the putting in those Words, as that the Spirit of
Christ might move him to fight, it is high Time for him to write a Recantation
for that and many other Passages; wherein, while he endeavors to render us
suspicious and obnoxious to the Government, he has greatly bewrayed his own
dark, envious and perfideous Spirit, whose Practice and Method in his Book,
generally is to snarle, snatch and catch at such Passages in our Friends Books,
as he thinks most to make Advantage of, to render us Temporizers, odious and
obnoxious to the present Government, and commonly to pass by and leave out such
Passages, Threats and Prophecies as were directly against the former Men in
Power, and their Oppressions and Cruelties that were inflicted in the
Protector's Days. But as for the aforesaid Declaration to the distracted Nation
of England, subscribed as aforesaid, it is so Impartial and Plain, and against
the Oppressions, etc. under the several Governments in this Nation, lamenting
the Judgments and Calamities thereof, that I wish he had published it all to
the Nation, for it would very much have tended to clear our Innocence from his
unjust Imputations and Insinuations against us as a People. And to manifest our
clearness from Temporizing and Parties; and our Testimony against Fighting,
Warring and Killing, etc. as inconsistent with Christ's Government and Kingdom.

And now pray further consider, did not our Lord Jesus Christ in his Parable
concerning them that Entreated the King's Servants spightfully and slew them,
acknowledge the Justice of his Father, in sending forth his Armies, and
destroying those Murderers, and burning of their City? Mat. 22. 7. and also
against those Husbandmen who slew the Heir, whom the Lord miserably destroyed,
Mat. 21. 7. and Luke 20. 14. were not these Parables against Jerusalem, and the
Jews who persecuted and slew the Prophets of God, and his Son Christ the Heir?
Did not he therein Prophecy against Jerusalem, and of the destruction thereof,
and so far recognize that War, and miserable Destruction that came upon them,
as a just judgment from God? and yet his Kingdom being not of this World, his
Servants might not fight, being under an Injunction to the contrary; was Christ
therein contradictory to himself or to his Testimony, for his Servants not
fighting? no sure. And the Apostle Paul acknowledged the Magistrate or Rulers
place, as owning his Office in not bearing the Sword in vain, but as being the
Minister of God, a Revenger to execute Wrath upon him that does evil, Romans 13.
and yet exhorted his Brethren the Saints, not to avenge themselves, but rather
give place unto Wrath, Romans 12. 19. did the Apostle herein contradict himself
or his Christian Testimony? pray consider it.

Now suppose a Government (according to their own principles) in one Nation,
should require their Subjects or Friends innocent Blood unjustly shed, in
another Nation by Murders, Massacres, etc. would not this be just, and may not
God in vindictive Justice and Judgment, stir up a Power or Government, (whose
Principle is accordingly) to such an act, as he did the Romans against
Jerusalem, and the persecuting Jews? And for any of his Servants so far to
recognize the same, as a just Judgment; how do they therein either contradict
their Christian Principle, which is, not to avenge themselves, nor to use
carnal and destroying Weapons, either for Christ's Kingdom, or the Kingdoms of
this World? as being unsuitable Instruments for Christ's Lambs and Sheep to
make use of, whatever use God in Judgment may cause or suffer to be made
thereof among Nations in the Fall; it is not consistent with the saving Gospel
of Christ, or nature of his Lambs, Sheep, Innocent Followers and Sufferers, to
make use of the devouring Sword, to destroy others who cannot defend themselves
therein; and therefore is it not more just and warrantable for Governments (who
have a Power, and the Sword of Justice) to defend the Lambs and Sheep of
Christ, yea Nations and People (so far as their power extends) from devouring
Beasts of Prey, rather then to persecute, oppress or suffer them to be devoured
by any others, who seek their ruin? And yet we hope for the fulfilling of those
Evangelical Prophecies that foretell the end of Wars, Strife and Contention, and
Christ's Kingdom of Peace to be set up and exalted to the ends of the Earth:
Send Peace in our times O Lord.

That accusation, that the Quakers use Forms of Oaths, refuted.
WHereas John Pennyman has several times over an accusation against us, 1st. in
his Title Page, viz. Also one of the Forms of their Oaths used among
themselves. And again, p. 29. he says, here follows one of the Forms of the
Quakers Oaths, which S. Crisp one of their great Preachers, imposed upon one
called a Quaker, who had mortgaged his Land to him and others, for a Sum of
Money, but before he would let him have the said Money, he forced him (though
with dissatisfaction) to Sign and Seal this following, which by their own
definition of an Oath, is an absolute Oath, (says I. P.) The matter he intends
for an Oath lies in these words, viz. I do hereby testify in the Truth of my
Heart, and in the presence of him that knows all things, etc. that I have not
before this contract, sold or engaged the said Estate, to or with any Person,
etc. which being given under Hand and Seal, in the presence of two Witnesses;
our Adversary concludes it a Form of an Oath (and has made a hideous clamor
about this business) according to the Quakers own definition of an Oath,
quoting a second Testimony concerning Oaths, 1675. p. 3, 4, 5. viz. that these
Forms of Speeches used by the Apostles, and by Jacob and Laban are of
themselves (without the addition of somewhat more, as an outward Sign or
Pledge) neither Oath or Swearing, which somewhat more as an outward Sign or
Pledge, was that which gave the denomination of an Oath or Swearing, etc.

Answ. 1. As to the words [ one of the Forms of the Quakers Oaths] this is a
deceitful Aspersion, containing a twofold Falsehood, 1st. That the Quakers do
use Oaths or Swearing. 2dly. That they use several Forms of Oaths or Swearing,
and this from a particular or private act not of the Quakers, but of one called
a Quaker, which whether that was an Oath or not, we will enquire anon. 3dly.
That accusation that S. C. Imposed upon and forced him (though with
dissatisfaction) to sign and seal his Testimony. This S. C. absolutely denies
that he so forced him, or that he showed any dissatisfaction therein. And now
to come more closely to the cause alleged against us, to prove us Swearers, or
guilty of useing Forms of Oaths.

Answ. 2. In the passage before cited are two actions of different natures,
Religious and Civil, which must be distinguished; if a faithful Friend without
scrupling his Confession, containing the substance of the old Oath, had been
sufficient; otherwise his Hand and Seal, engaging both himself and his was
added. This is the same we offer to the Magistrate; if unfaithful, we engage
the penalty of the Law against Perjury. His Hand and Seal was not an outward
Sign or Pledge to make it an Oath, but to make the Penalty legal, as a witness
against him, to those to whom his verbal Confession could not, without them and
other Witnesses extend nor appear effectual. To confirm our Assertion, that
some outward Sign gives the denomination of Swearing (which some outward Sign,
or somewhat more is not any (or every) thing more) and that the Apostle's words
and others, were but Asseverations; see the Testimonies in our Treatise of
Oaths of Basil Nazianzen, etc. page 61, 65, 18. Bishop Sanderson de Jur. oblig.
about page 141, 142. and others there. If the Party were a real Friend he
confessed, if not, he engaged; besides we have more fully defined an Oath, and
the particular Ceremonies thereof, than what our Adversary cites amounts to, in
our Book in answer to I. S. entitled, The case of the Quakers concerning Oaths
defended as Evangelical. As first, concluding that only saying, God is my
Witness, Romans 1. 9. I say the Truth in Christ, I lie not, Romans 9. 1. And
calling God to Witness to the Truth of what we say, etc. are no Oaths; we
cannot be convinced that any of these, make up a formal Oath among Christians:
And then we give the definition of an Oath, as used among Men, ( viz.) That
first there is Swearing by the great God intended. 2dly. Ab Imprecation or
Curse contained. 3dly. Some Ceremony or Sign used, see Case of the Quakers
concerning Oaths defended, p. 6. And then for the several Ways or Ceremonies
expressing formal Swearing, they are signified thus, viz. Among the Heathen,
laying the Hands upon the Altars and Swearing by the Gods, Jurare aras, Horace.
Abraham's Servant putting his Hand under his Thigh, Gen 24. 2. and 47. 29. The
Angel lifting up his Hand toward Heaven. The professed Christians laying the
Hand upon a Bible and kissing it, or Swearing upon the four Evangelists,
according to the Pope's Imposition, p. 7. So that the somewhat else is here
restrained to such and such Ceremonies respectively, and here limited, and not
in general to any or every thing used in civil Obligations, not intending or
belonging to it, to the making it an Oath; as that of the Hand and Seal is a
Testimony to the Writing, to be a true Record of his Confession, both as a
civil Man, and also Religious. And therefore also an obligation to restitution
is faulty, both by the arbitrament and censure of the Religious, if brought
before them; and also of the civil, honest, if before such, and Courts of
Justice also: If not, it is through their defect, not admitting a Testimony
without Swearing and granting Restitution in case of Couzenage, which we
consider not; as when we bring Witnesses, or are brought as Witnesses before
them, or offer our Service in the Commonwealth; it is their fault in refusing
our just offer, not ours in refusing their unjust one. If it was I. P. (or
suppose such an one) had S. C. acted the wise Man, in taking his Confession
without such record with Hand and Seal? nay it seems he had more than ordinary
confidence in the Man, that he so much valued his Affirmation, and every
engagement that Men make under Hand and Seal (though God's Name be mentioned
therein) is not therefore an Oath. For are the last Wills and Testaments of the
deceased, Oaths or Swearing; which are made and begun [In the Name of God Amen]
and confirmed with Hand and Seal? Are these Oaths, or esteemed the Oaths of the
deceased, because mention is made of the Name of God, and Hand and Seal to
them? If Hand and Seal to any contract or promise (wherein possibly some
^ccasionally have made mention of the Name of God (which we are very tender of
using) make it an Oath, I confess this is a new definition of an Oath. And he
that assisted J. P. in this Accusation and other Notes, Observations, and most
unjust Inferences against us, may very well be ashamed of such malicious work,
and of his abetting him therein; and his sculking shall not excuse, hide or
rescue him (or J. P. either) from the righteous Judgment and stroke of God's
Hand. Let them note and remember this: I have not writ out of any ill will to
them or their Persons, but from a holy Zeal for Truth and Righteousness,
against the contrary in them,

Being a Friend to the Souls of all Men, G. W.

An Appendix to the Precedent Treatise:
Being a Collection of diverse Remarkable Passages, by several Hands, but
omitted and left out by our Adversary in his Quotations out of the same Books,
made use of by him, wherein his unfair Dealing and Abuse may the more appear,
and also the Innocence and Clearness of the People of God, and true Christians,
called Quakers, from Wars and Figbting, and their constant Testimony against
the Ground thereof; as also their plain and impartial Dealing with the former
Powers, in testifying against the great Persecutions and Persecutors in the
Protector's Days: All which being seriously considered, together with the many
faithful Warnings from the said People to those in Power, all-a long, ever
since they were a People, does show that there are Prophets of God among them,
and manifestly clear them from that most unjust Charge, of being Temporizers,
etc. And also shows the great Disingenuity of our present Adversary, in his
picking, carping, quarrelling and perverting, as much to our Disadvantage as he
can imagine, like those whom the Prophet complained of, Psalm. 56. 5. Every day
they wrest my words; all their thoughts are against me for evil.

OBserve the following Collections and Citations, with the brief Notes
thereupon.

Good Counsel (p. 37.) to O. C.
After the Words cited by J. P. p. 5. viz. That thou nor they may lose that
Dread of the Lord, J. P. leaves out, viz. for that strikes a Terror in the
Hearts of all People.

Observe. This Dread is preferred above the Arm of Flesh and Carnal Weapons.

And learn true Patience -- And the patient Spirit remains in the Lord's Work,
for that is it that tryes, stands and abides, which gets the Victory and
obtains the Crown. left out.

Observe. Herein he writ to them, as a Minister of the Gospel of Peace, and not
to incite them to fight and shed Blood, etc.

Hear the Voice of God, and it will keep thee from Hardness of Heart. Ibid. p.
27.

Observe. And consequently from Oppression and Cruelty, had he hearkened to it;
this was seasonable Advice, tho too much rejected.

The Lord has visited thy House, because thou have suffered thy Servants to
smite the Servants of the Lord and Lambs of Christ, and prisoned the Lambs, and
his Sons and Daughters, some until Death; therefore thy Sons and Daughters, and
Servants will I take away with Death, and visit thee and thy House with
Sickness, says the Lord; and thou shall know that I am the Lord, who reigns.
Therefore spare my Sons and Daughters, that I may spare thee and thy House, and
that thou may know, that I am the Lord. O how art thou fallen under Men, and
thy House will suffer as long as my Sons and Daughters, and Servants suffer by
thee and thy Servants, and dye in Prison, and you not visiting them, nor
suffering their own Friends to visit them, therefore take heed lest thou become
weak as Water, etc. Ibid. to O. C. p. 36. writ the 10th of the 6th. Month. left
out by J. P. p. 5.

Observe. What plain Reproof and conditional Threats the aforesaid Paper
contains against O. Cromwell and his Family, because of the Oppression and
Persecution in his Days; and how unlike a temporizing Spirit this was.

After (crumble Men under) he leaves out stand up in the Power of the Lord, and
the Lamb's Authority.

Observe. Which Power and Authority would have invisibly subjected Men's Spirits
to quietness, which I understand by the Phrase, as by the Dread of the Lord,
striking Terror into the Hearts of People; and not in a literal Sense to
crumble their Persons to Crumbs or small Pieces: That were a gross Sense
indeed, which the following Passages clear him of; for the Lamb's Power does
not destroy Men's Lives, but saves them.

1659. To the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England, G. F. p. 16.
He that fights with Creatures, with Flesh and Blood, he cannot fight with
Spiritual Wickedness and Powers of Darkness, with Swords and Spears: He that
fights with Swords and Spears, fights with Flesh and Blood, does not preach the
Gospel to that which is captivated with the Powers of Darkness: He that runs
against the Creature with Swords and Spears, and defaces and mars it, does not
go the way to bring it into the Liberty of the Sons of God. not in J. P' s

Observe. A plain Testimony to the Gospel Dispensation against Fighting and
Killing one another, plainly clearing G. F. in that Point.

G. F. To the Protector and Parliament, 1658.
After (lose the Power of God) these Words are left out, viz. When the Children
of Israel went from that of God in them, they would have Kings, as other
Nations had, as Transgressors had; and so God gave them one. J. P's Citation,
p. 3.

Observe. So when God has given one, is it temporizing or contradiction in us to
own and submit to him, as far as we can with clearness of Conscience?

After (take heed of putting honest godly Men out of the Army, J. P. p. 6.) J.
P. leaves out Or putting them out of their Places, being Justices of the Peace.
G. F. to R. Protector.

Observe. For such Army-Men and Justices there were turned out, that were
against Persecution, and did relieve and rescue many of us, when in great
Sufferings and Jeopardies by cruel Persecutors, who sought our Lives: Had we
not good reason then, even as Men, to oppose their turning out of such?

G. F. To the Council of Officers, p. 2.
After (the Power of God you have abused) J. P. leaves out, which had you lived
in, you and the Nations had been quiet therein, and all the Oppressed had had
Liberty, and the Lord had been the Joy of every ones Heart, and the Spoil of
the Enemies had not taken up the Possession of the Heart, as it has; so that
the Lord has no place, nor his People; but the just has been trodden under
Foot, and made a Prey on every hand. Left out by J. P.

Observe. A just reproof of, and Testimony against their Oppression,
Unfaithfulness and Persecution, when many of us lay in Goals at that Time, for
whom several hundreds went several Times to the Parliament, to offer up
themselves to lie in Goals and Dungeons for them, and in their stead that were
in Prisons, that they might come forth; but instead of granting Friends* Desire
in that Case, they threatened to whip them. And when our Friends were
excommunicated in Scotland, that they might neither buy nor sell; A poor Man,
who had bought a Loaf, had it fetched from him, because he was excommunicated
by the Presbyterians; upon which Colonel Ashfied, being a Justice of Peace in
that Country, made an Order, That in such Case People might buy and sell with
our Friends, though they were excommunicated; so that had not G. F. good reason
to write to the Council of Officers, against their displacing such Men that
were so tender toward us, when the ruder sort of Soldiers came with Swords and
Pistols, and tore Friends from off their Knees, when at Prayers? And the
persecuting sort of Justices and others, frequently breaking up our Meetings,
under pretense that we were plotting to bring in King Charles, etc.

And the Words (by which Nations about you are lifted up, and stand at your
Doors) are left out by J. P.

Observe. This came from a Prophetical Sense of their declining and downfall.

After (Cause of God and his Truth) he leaves out ( without any End to your
selves, but the good of all People; for the Releasement of all People out of
Thraldom, Bondage and Captivity.) J. P. p. 8.

Observe. This was the End for which the Army was told of going to Rome, etc.
viz. the breaking down Oppression, and not to destroy, kill and take possession.

But when you lost the Power, then came the Innocent to be cast into Prison;
above twenty hundred have been persecuted and imprisoned, within these few
Years, for Consciencesake, toward the Lord. Left out.

After (God's Cause) he leaves out That set open the Prison Doors; that will
let none be persecuted for Religion: But now you have Prisons to break down at
home, where lies about two hundred Prisoners in Dungeons and nasty dark Holes,
for the Word of God. Left out.

P. 3. Those things at home to be thrown down, which are destructive to the
being of Creatures.

Ibid. For above twenty of the Innocent Lambs have been persecuted, and their
Blood shed in the Streets, and high Ways, and imprisoned till death in this
Nation, within these few years: And godly and peaceable Meetings have been
broken up by Men, with Bills, Staves and Pistols, and their Blood lies upon
this Nation; and God has required it, and will require it of their Heads, who
might have stopped this Martyrdom a great while ago, which was in their power,
and did it not. For Bonds, Prisons, Fetters, Houses of Correction, Dungeons, do
yet attend the Lambs and Babes of Christ in this Nation, who have been tried
these several years, etc. whose Blood has been shed, and they beat and cruelly
bruised, and tortured, and whipped as Vagrants, their Flesh tortured, till it
has been ragged; and yet this has not assuaged the Adversary: For the Lord is
risen, who will plead the cause of the Innocent, not by Sword nor by Spear, but
by his power, etc. Left out.

Observe. Here was no cause for a charge of Temporizing, nor any dependence on
Sword or Spear, nor any siding with those Oppressors, but very plain and
faithful dealing.

Ibid. p. 5. Who obeys Christ, loves his Enemies, and is in him the Truth, who
saves Men's Lives; but who is out of the Truth will kill and compel and
persecute to death.

Observe. See how plain this is against Killing, Compulsion and Persecution, and
for the saving of Men's lives.

Before [many valiant Captains, etc] he leaves out [many Justices of Peace,
Faithful, etc. to keep the Peace, and to keep down the rude Multitude, you have
put out, whereby you have been the cause of letting all the Bruits upon them,
that matter not Law nor Religion, etc.] J. P. p. 8.

After (many For it was such as had been instrumental sometimes to save the
lives of many of our Friends, in rescuing them from the rude Multitude.
valiant Captains, Soldiers and Officers, have been put out of the Army) he
leaves out ( whereby the Rude have fallen upon them, and they been counted as a
thing of naught, etc. Oh the Blood that has been shed in this Nation for
Truths sake! (This related to the cruelty inflicted on many called Quakers) Oh
what knocking down in Markets and Steeplehouses and going to Meetings, and
sending Men up and down with Passes, as Vagrants, Men worth three or fourscore
Pounds a Year. -- These Men that persecute and whip Men of three or fourscore
Pounds a Year, etc. p. 5.

Observe. Was there not great Cause to reprehend them, for turning out such
Captains, Officers and Magistrates as labored to keep the Peace, to quiet the
rude Multitude, and to preserve the Innocent? And were not such to be commended
in their Place? Had we not cause to own and esteem such as endeavored our
Preservation, and not to show our selves ungrateful, much more than those that
sought to destroy us? What has J. P. against this, when we went in the hazard
of our Lives daily?

Oh, how are Men fallen from that which they were at first, when thousands of
us went in the Front of you! J. P. p. 8.

Observe. But this was not as Quakers, but before they were such, and it is
known G. F. was never a Soldier, as before.

(And were with you in the greatest Heat, etc.) Thus far J. P's Quotation.

The reason whereof was in the precedent Words, which he takes no notice of,
viz.

Oh what breaking of Windows, unthatching of Houses, Men coming in disguised,
with Swords and Pistols, into Meetings, binding some Hand and Foot, carrying
them into the Fields, leaving them there all Night in the Winter-Season. Oh
what Havoc has been made of the People of God, that they have rode in and
trampled among them with their Horses, and plucked him up by the Hair of the
Head, that was on his Knees, praying to the Lord; whereby the Persecution in
this Nation has given an ill Savor unto the Nations hereabout, and rings
abroad in the World: That when Friends are moved of the Lord to go into other
Nations, to declare the Truth of God and his Word, they cast it upon them, and
imprison many, and say they will serve them and do to them as their own Nation
does. Then follows, Oh how are Men fallen from that which they were in at
first, when thousands of us, etc. were with you in the greatest Heat! [Observ.
That was as zealous Army-men, before the People called Quakers were brought
forth] who looked not for the Spoil but the Good of the Nation, and now thus
should be served by those that are set down in the Possession of the Spoil,
that they should requite us so in the End: Oh, the Lord's Truth, the Lord's
Power, and the Lord's Arm is more dear to us than all; who have not sat down in
the Spoil, etc. who are come to the Lord, who has given us Victory, and has
brought us to the Light, that takes away the Occasion and Root of the War.

Observe. Those who zealously aimed at an Universal Good, and were not
self-ended, came to see the End of Wars, and ceased to be Soldiers then.

Oh what a sincerity was once in the Nation! What a dirty, nasty thing it would
have been, to have heard talk of a House of Lords among them? J. P. p. 8.

Observe. That was among them who made People engage against them, yet made
themselves Lords, so manifestly contrary to their own pretenses.

(And sat down in the spoil of the House of the Enemies. left out.

Observe. Thus J. P. has frequently abused us, in leaving out, and passing by
many material passages, and catching and snarling at others, occasional and
circumstantial.

E. B. to R. Cromwell.
After he tells him of his Fathers Victories and Prosperity, J. P. leaves out
the following remarkable words, viz. (But yet we know he abused his great
Deliverances and Authority; and did not set free the Oppressed, but left
Mountains of Oppressions and grievous yokes of Bondage, unbroken down and
unsubdued; and the Lord smote him, and took him away in judgment because
thereof. Left out by J. P. p. 13.

Observe. See how plainly this Protector was reminded of his Fathers abuse and
negligence, on purpose to warn him of the like evils and judgment.

(And before in the beginning of the Letter to R. C.) p. 52. The Lord God over
the Kingdoms See good Counsel, p. 53.
of Men Rules and Reigns, he Builds and Breaks down, and Planteth and
Plucketh up, he pulls down one, and sets up another; and who may say, what
do thou?

Observe. See here was an Eye to the Hand of the Lord in revolutions, from whom
both promotion and abasement comes; and this is no Temporizing, nor admits of
it.

West answering North. It Is said upon Peter Ceeleys falsely accusing G. F. with
telling him privately of a design, and persuading him to join therein. Which
design was, that he could raise four thousand Men in an hours warning, and
involve the Nation in Blood, and bring in K. Charles: And this he was accused
of before Judge Glin, Chief Justice of England, to take away his life. Note p.
27.

J. P. p. 11. 1656. Quoting G. Rofe to O. C. entitled, The Righteousness of
God to Man, viz. after (executed on them to the utmost) these following words
are left out by J. P. viz. (but thou art fallen from thy first Integrity and in
the spoil art exalted, and set up in the Glory of the World; in thy Name and by
thy Power do my pure Seed suffer, and Tyrants rule over my People, and by thy
Power and in thy Name do they persecute them, and imprison unto death, and have
spilled the Blood of my innocent People, to satisfy their corrupt desires; but
surely I will visit for these things; and much do they lie upon thee. And if
thou let Tyrants get rule in thy name, and by thy Power, on thee and thy
Seed will I require the Blood of the innocent, that has been shed in these
late days, under thy Government, etc.

Observe. How plainly the Oppressors in those days were charged and warned and
prophesied against, which in a great measure is fulfilled already.

F. H's. Information and Advice to the Army on both parts, and Committee of
Safety, 1659.
P. 2. Should not all Rule and Authority, be for the good and safety and well
being of a Nation or Commonwealth?

Observe ( The true end of Government always owned and desired by us.)

P. 3. Was not Israel governed sometime by Judges, sometimes by the Elders, and
sometimes by Kings? And while they stood in the Council of the Lord, and the
People hearkened to them, was not the Lord among them? etc.

P. 5. And this I have to say to that part of the Army, who stand so much upon
the Name Parliament. If you should manage your Weapons for a sound or a name,
or something that may suit you, though damnifie many thousands, it will not go
well with you; therefore be not rash nor hasty to shed Blood upon this account,
but take Counsel in time, lest an outstretched Arm stop you in your way, etc.
and you may repent too late.

Observe. How impartially he writes for the real end of Government, without
respect of Persons* or Names, when we were so much accused for denying
Government?

P. 6. After late King in J. P' s. Book, p. 15 he leaves out these following
words, viz. Yet the Ax must not boast it self against him that hewed only with
it, for a time, to accomplish his end, and when he pleases take up another
Instrument, and let the first lie still.

Observe. The Hand of God in setting up and putting down Men in Power, confessed.

Before the words (a Company of greedy Hireling Priests came from Lestershire,
to sound their Trumpet in the House, etc.) he leaves out these words, p. 7.
viz. But truly you stick in the Mire, etc. had your Ear open to them that could
complement and flatter, and their business you would hear and return them
thanks; but them who had been your dearest Friends, etc. coming in all Love and
Humility, and represented their sad Suffering unto you of their long
Imprisonment, and how above twenty dear precious Men suffered till death in
Prison, for that grand oppression of Tithes, could not be heard: And again,
when a Representation came unto you from many thousands, etc. it was laid by as
wast Paper.

Observe. How plainly they were reproved for setting up Temporizers, and
slighting conscientious Sufferers.

P. 10. Remove the present oppressions -- Satisfy the Nations with deeds,
words will not; with things, and not with names, that will not do; and it is
not a King, a Parliament, a Protector, a Council or a Senate we look at, etc.
for when Kings, Parliaments and Councils, are gone from the power of God, they
are for the Thraldom of a Nation, and not for its Liberty; but this I forewarn
you, what ever you do, meddle not in the things of God, or about Religion, etc.
let that alone, etc.

Observe. Still the good End of Government for true Freedom, was pressed for
more than Words or Names, when we were under great Persecution.

Several Papers, by G. F. 1659.
P. 42. After the Words (have not these been called Ministers of the Gospel,
but now how comes it that they preach up War) he leaves out these following
Words, viz. Is not the Gospel a Gospel of Peace?

Observe. How plain is it that his Principle was against War and Fighting, etc.
as not consisting with the Gospel of Peace?

Wounds of an Enemy by Miles Halhead and Th. Salthouse 1656. P. 76. After the
words ( Enemies of his Elect) J. P. leaves out, viz. And shall this Generation
who have exceeded what has been done by their Fathers, go unpunisht? After the
words Justice and Equity, he leaves out these, viz. And shall those whom he
has made the Rod of his Anger, and the Staff of his Indignation, upon their
doing the same things for which he judged and cast them out, escape? Has all
this Blood been shed, that unrighteousness may reign with oppression, etc.

After the words (Examples of his Vengeance) he leaves out these, viz. To make
way for others to rise up and commit greater Abominations; was persecution of
tender Consciences unjust in the Bishops, and is it righteous now in them who
suffered by them for their tender Consciences, to outstrip the Bishops?

Observe. The Persecutors in the Pretector's days, are more highly charged and
threatened, than those who went before them.

The Visitation of Ireland 1656. by F. H. E. B.
P. 21. Two Lines after the Words (true to the Commonwealth-Interest from first
to last, even until now) J. Pennyman leaves out these, viz. And you have judged
us before our Accusers came; And herein you do us great Injustice, and act
contrary to the Law of Equity, etc.

Observe. This relates to the Time when H. Cromwell banished them out of Ireland.

P. 22. After the Words (Bishops -- become a Reproach) he leaves out these,
viz. And will you tell of Reformation, and yet act in the same Footsteps? if
you go on you are at the Brink of Destruction, and at the Sides of the Pit --
was not Persecution ever blind?

Observe. How plainly they rendered those, then in Power, unjust and
self-condemned in their Persecution, and therein in the way of Destruction.

A Visitation and Warning, by E. B.
Fol. 537. After the Words (it would be your Honor to be made use of by the
Lord in any degree, in order to this Matter, viz. visiting Rome, and enquiring
after the Innocent Blood therein) J. P. leaves out these, viz. Whether the Lord
will Revenge the grievous Blood-guiltiness that lies upon them, by himself,
without an Instrument; or whether by you or others, as Instruments, whether
this way or another that God will do it, this I determine not.

Observe. First, It is plain that he believed it would have been an Act of
Justice to have made Enquiry for that Innocent Blood, mentioned, as they had
often pretended, and declared to the Nation; and this our Adversary has not
refuted, and therefore it may yet be queried of him, Whether he does not
believe that righteous Rulers or Magistrates may not in point of Justice
(according to the Law of God) require Innocent Blood upon Persecutors, or
Satisfaction in that Case, though it be not the Quakers Work to be employed
therein, in Point of Execution, if there be any for that. Secondly, Whether the
Lord will suffer Bloodguiltiness to go unpunished, either by himself or by
Instruments; it is plain that E. B. believed he would revenge it, but did not
determine which way; and has it not been always confessed that Rulers are for
the Punishment of Evildoers?

J. P. Observe. p. 9. against G. F.
On the Words (many have been put out of the Army, because of their
Faithfulness to the Lord) he adds this meaning, that is, For being Quakers,
as he intimates; Which is a Perversion, as if proved: It was faithfulness to
the Cause (viz. Liberty of Conscience) professed by them, as Army-men and not
as Quakers. On the Words, (the Power of the Lord will give you enough, etc.) he
observes, That he counsels them not to stop till they have set up their
Standard at Rome, and they shall have Gold and Silver enough: Which is a foul
Perversion; for G. F's Words are to look at the Power of the Lord God, and
never heed Gold nor Silver.

G. F's Book of several Papers, printed in 1659. to the Protector and others.
He writes to them in one Paper as follows, Wrestle not with Flesh and Blood,
ye Christians, for it is the Practice of Heathens, Apostates and Jews; but
overcome Evil with Good, receive Strangers and not kill them, etc. p. 48.

And again G. F. says, p. 44. of the same, Do to all Men as you would have
them do unto you, and on this hangs all the Law and the Prophets, etc. I say
unto you, Love your Enemies, for the Jews were to kill them, the Heathen, with
outward Swords: But the Doctrine of Christ was to love Enemies; who says, he
came to save Men's Lives, and gave his Body for the Life of the World: But the
Jews persecuted their Enemies, as you the Hypocrites and false Christians,
since the Apostles Days.

And in p. 43. And the Priests told you (to wit, the Powers) that the Quakers
would kill you, and Quakers would rise.

And in p. 41. Can you stop the Vials and the Plagues that are to come upon the
Persecutors, etc. Can you refuse the Cup of the Wrath of the Almighty, when it
is given to you, can you turn your Mouths and Heads aside, for not drinking of
it?

And in p. 31. The Apostles were Spiritual, and wrastled not with Flesh and
Blood, they had the Mind of Christ, that destroyed Death and the Devil, the
Power of Death; but you have disobeyed it, that persecutes your Brethren, the
Christians, to Death; you are not in the High Power of Christ, etc. but you are
in the Power that hates and destroys the Creatures, etc. out of the Love of God
to Enemies; and these will wrestle with Flesh and Blood, being in the Power of
Darkness, the Devil's Work, and so defaces the Creature, and does not bring it
into the Liberty of the Sons of God; these should be ashamed of their Work
before the Lord, etc. For whom he sends he arms ( but this is not carnal) but
your Day is come of Trial, the Day is come of Christendoms Trial.

And in p. 29. The Patience of the Sufferings of the People of God, that suffer
daily are Examples and Patterns among you, etc. which may convince you; not
threatening, not lifting up their Hands against you, but committing their Cause
to the Lord, who does avenge the Cause of his People. etc. and will overturn,
etc.

And in p. 28. Cain killed his Brother, about sacrificing, and how has the
Apostate Christians since the Apostles Days, killed his Brother Christian,
about Sacrifice and Religion, etc. this has been the false Church.

And p. 26. Is it not Time to awake out of this Murderers Power, into the Power
of Christ Jesus, etc. which is pure and Lamb-like, etc.

And p. 15. That which you ask is to be asked in the Son's Name, and what you
do, to be done in the Name of Jesus: And the Apostle does not say in the Name
of an Earthly King, Emperor or Protector; they were to do it in the Name of
Christ, who has all Power in Heaven and Earth given to him ( and was not this
when some would have made Oliver King, who was called Protector?)

THE END.
PAge 10. l. 10. f. B. Boyce, r. T. B. l. 11. r. J. P. p. 28. l. ult. r. keep.
p. 30. l. 27. f. wi^^ r. will. dele ^e.


