Innocence Triumphant OVER Insolency and Outrage OF A Self-condemned APOSTATE:
IN ANSWER To Francis Bugg's most Abusive and Scandalous Book, falsely Styled;
New Rome Arraigned, etc. AND In Defense of the Christian Testimony of G.
Whitehead and Eleven Witnesses, against the great Defamation of Perjury and
Pillory, unjustly cast upon them by the said F. B.

His Mischief shall return upon his own Head.

London, Printed for Thomas Northcott, in George-Yard in Lombard Street, 1693.

INTRODUCTION Our Christian Testimony reassumed in the Affirmative.
TO all Christian, Sober, Impartial and Judicious People, to whom these
Presents shall come, Salutation in the Love and Good Will of the only true God,
and his dear Son Jesus Christ, whom he has sent.

To prevent Mistake, and remove Misrepresentation in the Matters following,
these are sincerely to Testify and Declare, That,

I. We sincerely own, profess and confess Jesus to be the Christ, even the same
Jesus Christ who was born of the Virgin Mary at Bethlehem in Judaea, Matthew. 2.
suffered Death upon the Cross without the Gates of Jerusalem, was quickened and
raised again by the Power of God, and ascended into Heaven and Glory, according
to the Scriptures.

II. We give Witness only to this Christ, as being the very Christ, the only
Begotten Son of God and confess both his Coming in the Flesh and in the Spirit,
according to holy Scripture-Testimony.

III. Though this Christ the only begotten Son of God, took Flesh and came of
the Seed of Abraham according to the Flesh, and suffered death in the Flesh;
yet his Flesh (or Body prepared for him) did not see Corruption; it did not
corrupt, but was raised again from the dead; consequently did not perish, nor
is his Body of a perishing Nature, but a glorified Body, like unto which, we
believe, our's shall be changed and fashioned, Phil. 3.

IV. The Holy Scriptures of the Old and New Testament, namely, the holy
Doctrine and divine Precepts therein, were first given by divine Inspiration
(as we have confessed unto Authority) and in no wise to be contemned, but
seriously read, believed and fulfilled, as the Spirit of the Lord gives
Understanding and Ability, being the Life of the Scripture, and without which
the mere Letter and all Preaching therefrom in Man's Will is dead and
ineffectual.

V. The Protestant Religion considered in the primitive Purity of it (in
opposition to Popery) and all sincere Protestants, who desire a clear and
through Reformation from all Idolatry and Superstition, we have a tender Respect
to them, and sincerely desire, that the holy Scripture and the Gospel Ministry,
true Worship, Prayer, Obedience of Faith and Christianity in its purity may be
promoted, grow and increase in Spirit, Life and Power among Christians.

VI. The divine Precepts and Doctrine contained in the holy Scriptures, we must
needs believe to be Holy and Blessed, not only because they proceed from the
holy Spirit, but also because they require Holiness and Righteousness in Life
and Practice, under the several Dispensations of God to Mankind.

VII. We own no such Saying, as that the holy Doctrine or divine Precepts, of
Scripture is either Dust, Death or the Serpents Meat, but truly profitable to
us by the Assistance of God's Holy Spirit given to us; although the false
Prophets Preaching was but compared to the Chaff (or Husk) when they stole even
the words of the true, Jer. 23. And Men of corrupt minds, by perverting the
holy Scriptures, and Preaching in their earthly Wisdom from the Letter and not
from the Spirit of Christ, do bring Darkness and Death over many; and also
strengthen the hands of evil Doers, that they may not forsake their Sins,
whereby the Serpent, the Enemy of the Soul, is gratified, and many led
captivate at his will, when indulged and soothed up in their sins by such
literal and lifeless Preachers, as pervert the holy Scriptures to there own and
others Destruction.

VIII. The promised Messiah, of whom the holy Prophets give witness, is the
very Christ of God, even that Jesus Christ who was born of the Virgin, who in
the fullness of time came in the Flesh, and was made like unto us in all things,
sin only excepted, as the Scripture testifies. Yet,

IX. The glorious Body of Christ is not now like ours, nor of an Earthy
perishing Nature, but Heavenly, Spiritual and most Glorious, far excelling all
Terrestrial Bodies.

X. Our Ministers do not Teach, that the Name of Jesus and Christ belong to
every Member in the Body (or Church) as amply, as to Christ the Head; but that
the Divine Anointing (to which the Name Christ has relation) virtually is in
some Measure or Degree, afforded to every Member of his Body, but not so amply
as to Him the Head, (nor for any Member to be called Christ, but a Christian)
because Christ received the Anointing, the Holy Spirit, not by Measure, but in
Fullness; and because he is the Head of the Body the Church.

XI. It Is really contrary to our Faith and Principle, to make Christ Jesus
himself only a Figure, a Vail or Garment, He being the Substance and end of all
Figures, Types and Shadows; yet his Flesh was called the Vail, Heb. 10. and he
took upon him the Form of a Servant, and was made like unto Men, and was found
in the (...) Shape or Figure of a Man, Phil. 2.6, 7.

XII. F. Bugg's pretended Examination, Trial, and Conviction of Perjury against
G. Whitehead and Eleven Witnesses, and saying that, for the same they are put
in the Pillory, We sincerely and solemnly Testify against it all, as a great
Lie, Scandal and Defamation, and as a piece of Mockery, Romantic Forgery, and
Fools Tragedy, contrived by the said F. B. to render them Odious and
Ridiculous, and that no such Examination, Trial, Conviction or Penalty was ever
really Acted or Inflicted on G. W. or the Witnesses aforesaid.

Writ in the behalf of Truth, and it is Friends concerned, and hereafter
mentioned.

By G. Whitehead
I. The Testimony of the Twelve Witnesses against Fr. Bugg's great Abuse,
reassumed and enlarged in the Negative, or Denial of his false Charge and
Perversions.
WE whose Names are hereunto Subscribed, in behalf of our selves, and of the
Christian Society and People commonly called Quakers (to whom we belong) do
sincerely and solemnly, and in the Fear of God, testify and declare, That
Francis Bugg in his late great Book, styled, New Rome Unmasked, has most
injuriously and falsely Accused and Charged the said People and their Ministers,
as follows.

I. With denying Christ Jesus, who was born of the Virgin Mary, who suffered
without the Gates of Jerusalem, rose again and ascended into Heaven, etc. And
that they believe and say, That they cannot call Him Christ, Chap. 3. p. 16.
and Epistle to Bereans: P. 2. of his New Rome Unmasked.

II. That the Quakers Prophets give witness to G. Fox INSTEAD of this Christ;
that they call Him (G. F.) the Branch, the Star, the Son of Righteousness; and
put the North of England for the Town of Bethlehem. Epistle to the Bereans, and
p. 81.

III. That they (i. e. the Quakers) say, His Body ( viz. Christ's Body) was of
an earthly perishing Nature. Epist. ibid. Remark on Creed 3.

IV. That they say, The HOLY SCRIPTURE is Carnal, Dust, Death, and Kills,
etc. Epist. ibid. on Cr. 6. and p. 78. And to aggravate Matters against the
Quakers, F. B. most unjustly and maliciously affirms their Creed to be
Antichristian, Blasphemous, Idolatrous, if not a Compound of all Heresies.
Epist. ibid. on Cr. 6.

V. That if they should Sing, clap their Hands, or leap for Joy, then might all
true Protestants wring their Hands, mourn and lament; for they would soon see
ALL THINGS turned upside down. For instance (says F. Bugg) down with the Holy
Scriptures; down with the Ministers of the Gospel, etc. down with the Lord's
Prayer, the Ten Commandments, and the Apostles Creed, and all that bears the
face of true Christianity. [This he unjustly insinuates against the People
called Quakers in his New Rome Arraigned, Epist. to Bereans, p. 12, 13.]

VI. That they (speaking of the Quakers) do not believe the Doctrine and
Precepts contained in the Bible, to be Holy and Blessed. Apol. Introd. p. 7, 8,
9, 14. [He might as well tell us, we must not believe our own Eyes, but put
them out and see with his; he would destroy our own Belief, to impose false
Creeds on us.]

VII. That THESE Quakers, who pretend to own the PRECEPTS and DOCTRINE of the
Bible to be Holy and Blessed, yet say, it is Dust and Death, the Serpents meats,
and. Apol. Introd. p. 18. [We do not believe any of these Quakers ever so said
of the Precepts and Doctrine, nor do they own any such saying]

VIII. That this same Jesus (who was born of the Virgin, this Messiah or Son of
God) the Quakers say, they cannot call Christ. New Rome Arraigned, p. 26. [But
where do we thus say of this Messiah? F. B. falsely makes his own Consequence
our Saying.]

IX. That they teach, That the Body of Christ is like ours, of an earthly
perishing Nature. Ibid. p. 30. [Where do we teach that Christ's Body is so? We
deny it.]

X. That the Quakers teach, That the Name Jesus and Christ belong to every
Member in the Body, as amply as to Christ the Head. Ibid. p. 47. [Where proves
he as amply?]

XI. That the Quakers would make Christ only a Figure, a Vail, a Garment, who
is the Substance of all Figures (implied by way of Question Ibid. p. 58.)
[Where proves he only a Figure? etc.]

And now seeing F. B. pretends plain Matter of Fact against us, and says, viz.
That to My Knowledge I have not set down one Line or Word as their's, which is
not their's, p. 22. And also says, I love to keep to Matter of Fact, p. 59.
Ibid. Therefore we plead Not Guilty, both to the Manner and Form of these his
Charges (or Indictment) and to Matter of Fact, as in Words laid down by him;
and in the holy Fear of Almighty God, and in behalf of the said Christian
Society and People, declare and testify, That all these his recited
Accusations, and all other of the same kind, or naturally depending thereupon,
are utterly false, wicked and malicious; and never so believed, nor (in words)
affirmed or intended by us, nor as in the same words charged against us; but
expressly contrary to our Christian persuasion, Principle, Profession and
Testimony (as before reassumed in the Affirmative) as we also sincerely
believe, they are contrary to the Principle, Intentions, meaning and Profession
of our Friends and Ministers of Jesus Christ in Communion with us.

XII. And further, that the said F. Bugg (being pufft up with Pride,
Self-conceit, deadly Malice and abominable Outrage, scorn and derision against
the peaceable people called Quakers, and to the reproach of Religion and
Christianity) has most maliciously invented, framed and forged a fictitious
Judicature, an Extra -- Judicial and Mock -- Court or Tragedy, thereby
notoriously defaming and Scandalising Peaceable Subjects, not only G.
Whitehead, but Eleven Witnesses, who Signed the aforesaid Testimony, who (he
falsely says) are examined, tried and convicted of Perjury, and for the same
put into the Pillory, as in his Title Page. And to make a flourish upon such
his Scandalous Forgery and Romance, he has erected the Form or Figure of a
Pillory, and twelve Pictures in it, with the first Letters of their Names over
there Heads, and the word Perjury set over them in the middle; which is all but
an Idle fictious Romantic Tragedy of his own malicious inventing and framing;
never such a thing having been in reality.

He proceeds to his Ridiculous Trial and Examination as follows, viz.
F. Bugg, come Tho. Green, what can thou say for thy self? How came it to
Pass that G. W. drew you into this snare? You cannot but know that he has as
little This is a deceitful and false Insinuation, I have a true love and
respect to them both, and a real honor to the very Memory of W. D. If he means
William Dewsbury.
Love for you as he had for W. D. who when a false Report was once raised on
him (as there have been of others) he and A. P. laughed I positively deny this
Story against A. P. and my self, as a base lying Story, and demand of Bugg to
produce his Author for it.
and rejoiced at it, you must needs also know, That when W. D. came to London,
it was frequent with G.W. to go I know in my own Conscience these to be lying
Stories; and again, Challenge Bugg to bring out his Author for them.
out of Town he was observed to avoid his company; and do you think that he
has more Love for you J. C. This also is as deceitful and false an Insinuation
as the first, and I do not believe that either T. G. or J. C. (if he means John
Cook) do question my love to them. By me, George Whitehead.
and others of your frame and temper than he had for W. D. I tell you nay.

Tho Green. I know George Whitehead as well as thee, he never could draw me in
before, and if thou will excuse me now, I hope it will be a warning to me never
to commit the like Error.

F. Bugg, well Thomas, I cannot but discharge you, and you are discharged; go
in peace, and do no more so, least a worse thing come upon you.

F. Bugg, come James Park, thou dry Stick, thou formal insignificant Preacher;
who not only imitates G* W. in his preaching, but follows him in his lying;
what can thou say, why Sentence of Perjury may not be pronounced against you?
come, do not hang down your Head, but look uP like a Man, and let me hear what
you can say for your self.

James Park, I am a lover of the Women's Meetings, for when I was robbed, I
felt benefit of them: I will stand by G.W. what he is, I am; what he says, I
will avouch; what he writes, I will Subscribe; whither he goes, I will go; I
will stand by G. W. in all things what ever I suffer.

F. Bugg, come Benjamin Antrobus, what say thou for thy self, why Sentence
of Perjury should not be pronounced against thee? Come stand up, speak like a
Man, answer for thy self.

Benjamin Antrobus, I once committed a fault about taking up my Freedom, and
they constrained me to acknowledge my transgression against their Orders, or
else I had lost a good prize, I am now their Servant. If they write, I dare not
but subscribe, what ever I suffer, do as thou will.

F. Bugg, come Samuel Waldenfield, thou seeming Zealot, and John Vaughton, and
John Butcher, Gilbert Laity, Theodore Eccleston, Richard Needham, Francis
Etteridge, John Bowater, William Robinson, etc. what can you say, why Sentence
of Perjury should not be pronounced against you upon your own proposals to
Authority?

S. W. And the rest, we are like Children sitting in the Market, if G. W. Pipe
we Dance; if he write a Certificate, whether true or false, we Subscribe; and
now according to the old Proverb, the Blind leads the Blind, until we are
fallen into the Ditch of Error and Perjury together, and We are fallen into a
sad Dilemma, and none will help Us, nor none will pity Us.

F. Bugg, Come G. W. thou old Makebate and Cunning Sophister, what can thou
say for thy self and thy Proselites, who write after thy Copy?

After other Fictions, and Bugg's pretending to sum up the Evidence, and to
speak both to matter of Fact, and matter of Law to his pretended Jury; he
feigns his Jury to bring us in Guilty. Thus, viz. Jury, Guilty of the Matter
charged, and all things relating thereunto, or depending thereupon, and that of
PERJVRY.

Against all which pretended Proceeding, Trial and Examination invented and
feigned by F. Bugg, we solemnly and sincerely testify, as both a wicked, false
and malicious Forgery, to defame and scandalize both our Christian and Civil
Reputation, and against the said F. B. as an unjust Judge, false Accuser and
false Witness; and that his Proceeding, Trial and Judicature are both Illegal,
Presumptuous and Arbitrary.

Signed in behalf of our selves, and the rest of our Friends concerned. George
Whitehead, Gilb. Latey, John Bowater, John Butcher. Rich. Needham, William
Robinson:

I do further solemnly and in good Conscience Testify and Declare, That I find
no cause in the least to retract or receed from our Negative Testimony before
recited against Fra. Bugg's Perversions, and his grossly Misrepresenting us
about Jesus Christ and the Holy Scripture; and for which our Testimony, F. B.
has most unjustly rendered us Perjured Persons.

Hereunto I subscribe, G. Whitehead.



II. The aforesaid Testimony Vindicated against Fr. Bugg his gross Abuses and
foul Perversions herein examined.
BY the way it is to be noted, That in this mock Trial and Court of Judicature,
presumptuously Erected and Feigned by Fr. Bugg. He makes himself both Judge,
Accuser, Witness and Jury, and also forges the Quakers Answers (without taking
the least Notice of our own proper Answers to his Objections in our Books, only
impertinently cites three or four Lines out of G. W.'s Charitable Essay for his
Answer, p. 7. Though in none of these Instances cited against us, can we find
those words as charged by him, viz. That the Quakers say, The Holy Scripture is
Carnal, Dust, Death and Kills, etc. or that they deny Jesus to be The Christ,
etc.

And it is evident, That F. B. is not able to make Replication or Answer to our
single sheet, Entitled, A Charitable Essay. Nor to clear himself from the
Arguments and Inversions upon him therein, concerning his feigned Creed and
false Charges against the Quakers, but gives the greatest part of that Sheet
(and the most substantial Matters that are in it to clear us) the go by; so it
remains against him unrefuted.

His pretended Evidence, That we deny Christ Jesus, etc. and that we cannot
call Him Christ, is from Isaac Pennington's Questions to Professors, wherein he
calls the Body or Flesh (which the Son of God took upon him) the Vail, etc. And
what then? Does this prove we deny Christ Jesus, that was born of the Virgin?
Did not the Apostle say, he consecrated a new and living way through the Vail,
that is to say, his Flesh? Heb. 10.20. Did the Apostle herein deny Jesus to be
Christ? No sure.

But what if I. P. said, he could not call the bodily Garment or Vail Christ?
(that is) the entire Christ; or the Body (which was prepared for him) chiefly,
and in the first place, Christ; as he Explains his own words. Does this deny
Him (the Son of God) to be Christ? Surely no. Is the masculine [ Him] properly
relative to the Neuter [ Body] distinct from the Soul? I do not think that to
be proper (or Grammatical) Sense. The word [ It] is relative to Body, but [
Him] to our Lord Jesus Christ himself. For Joseph went unto Pilate, and asked
the Body of Jesus, and took It down, and wrapped It in a Linen Cloth and laid
It in a Tomb, Luke 23.52, 53. Which is also called the Body of the Lord Jesus,
Chap. 24.3. Yet the entire Messiah or Christ of God, is not to be divided in
Body or Soul. And Isaac Pennington did not say he could not call Him Christ,
who was both God and Man, Immannuel and the Man Christ Jesus the Messiah.

First, His Charge; That the Quakers believe and say, They cannot call Him
Christ that was born of the Virgin. I cannot find these words either as
believed or said by the Quakers in any of Bugg's Quotations, either out of Is.
Pennington's Questions, or any other; and therefore I desire him in his next,
to show me expressly, where the Quakers say they cannot call Him Christ, that
was born of the Virgin, etc. if he can, I can as expressly deny that saying; for
I have told him the contrary in my Charitable Essay.

Secondly, I cannot find (nor believe) that the Quakers call Geo. Fox the
Branch, the Star, the Sun of Righteousness. In the Instance quoted by F. Bugg,
p. 34. I find not G. Fox mentioned in that Citation; but instead thereof F.
Bugg questions it in the Margin thus; viz. Pray who do you account this Branch,
if not G. Fox? I say, who else did you assign these Titles to? Was it to G,
FOX, or the Light in him? Pray distinguish in your next. Thus he now questions
that which before he has possitively charged over and over. Thus instead of
Proof, he merely beggs the Question, and so whirles about begging Questions;
and not only so, but (like an unjust Judge) has condemned us as perjured
Persons, yea, even a pack of false Witnesses and perjured Persons for denying
his Charge, p. 33. And this is not all, but he has condemned us to the Pillory
too with his ridiculous Figure thereof, in his Epistle to the Bereans (as
before) But now, upon Trial and Enquiry, he is fain to question Matters of
Fact, after his Condemnation and such his Execution. Thus preposterous is this
unjust Judge in his arbitrary Proceedings, and scandalous Treatment against us.
And his Consequence of the Quakers giving Witness to G. Fox Instead of Christ
follows not from such his begging Questions, his lame Defective and false
Evidence; and we are sure it is contrary to our Faith and Testimony -- For our
Blessed Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, of whom the Holy Scriptures Testify,
who is the Branch, the Morning Star, the Sun of Righteousness, and has
spiritually risen both in the North, South, East and West of England, and other
Parts, even in the Hearts and Souls of many Thousands, and G. F. and many
others only his Servants and Ministers.

F. Bugg's other consequence, That they (i. e. Quakers) put the North of
England for the Town of Bethlehem. It Is also a notorious falsehood deduced from
his other falsehoods, which is but adding one Lie to another.

Thirdly, I neither do believe, nor can find, that the Quakers say, Christ's
Body, either was, or is, of an earthy perishing Nature (as F. B. has
frequently charged it upon Isaac Pennington, and consequently upon the Quakers
Ministers, for his sake, but that the Flesh and Blood of our Nature (and as
it is in us) is of an Earthly perishing Nature, whereas Christ's Flesh saw no
Corruption, it did not Corrupt; Psa. 16.10. Act. 2.31 and 13.37.
And therefore it were a very great Ignorance and Absurdity for any to say,
that his Body (which is changed and glorified) is of an Earthy and perishing
Nature, he being Ascended into Glory. This is answered in our Charitable Essay,
p. 4. and Unrefuted by F. B. And I still charge it upon him as a Lie, that the
Quakers say Christ's Body, either was, or now is, of a perishing Nature.

Fourthly, I do not find in F. Bugg's Instances and Quotations, nor yet in any
of our Friends Books, that the Quakers say, The Holy Scripture is either
Carnal, Dust, Death, or kills, etc. (These are not our Words, he wrongs us in
Fact) but that the Letter kills, and is dead. And did not the Holy Apostle
say, The Letter kills, but the Spirit gives Life? And did he not speak of
the Ministration of Death Written? 2 Cor. 3.6, 7. Yet he did not contemn, but
own the Holy Scriptures, as able to make the Man of God Wise unto Salvation
through Faith in Christ, 2 Timothy 3.15, 16. In the Book Cited by F. B. News out
of the North, p. 14. the Words he chiefly picks out, and Objects, are, viz.
Their Gospel is dust [it's not the Gospel] Matthew, Mark, Luke and John, which
is the Letter [not their Doctrine, but the mere Letter or Writing.] The Words
should rather be thus Transposed, viz. Their Gospel is dust, who put the Letter
(or four Books of Matthew, Mark, Luke and John) for the Gospel, without
distinction. Such also have put the Letter or Writings for the Light, and the
Letter for the Word, and for the Gospel, yea for Eternal Life, consequently for
Christ, etc. Some clapping hands upon the Book, saying, This Book is the Word
of God, the Gospel, you must have Eternal Life here, such Life-less Preachers
we have often met withal.

Though it is not my place Literally to excuse these Expressions as laid down
before, yet I cannot take this Instance for any real Proof or clear Evidence of
matter of Fact as charged, viz. That the Quakers say, the Holy Scripture is
Carnal Dust, Death, etc. as he charge Us; yet if F. B. can fairly prove that
any of Us have expressly said, or said That the Gospel-Doctrine contained in the
four Books of Matthew, Mark, Luke and John is Dust, or but the Letter that
kills. We do, and shall positively disown it: This I fairly proffer him:
However, the said Author's intention and meaning ought justly and charitably to
be considered and compared with some other passages in the said Treatise which
I take to be thus, viz. by Their Gospel is Dust, i. e. the false Ministers
Preaching their own conceivings and immaginations on Scripture for Gospel, and
by Matthew, Mark* Luke and John being the Letter, as not meant either of those
holy Men or their Evangelical Doctrine, but to the mere Letter or Writing in
the four Books abstractly considered as in Paper and Ink; and false Ministers
dead Preaching and Commenting thereupon, without the Spirit, Life or Power of
Christ Jesus; like as the false Prophets, who though they stole the true
Prophets Words, yet their Preaching was compared but to the Chaff (or Husk,
etc.) Jer. 23.28, 30. Accordingly the same Treatise before quoted the Reflects
on these Hipocrites, Proud, Covetous and Idolatrous Priests, who Preach their
own Words, Imaginations and Conceivings, painting themselves with the Words of
the Prophets, Christ and his Apostles; and teach People, They shall never
overcome their Sins in this Life, calling such Preaching the Gospel. This is
their Gospel intended before ( News out of the North, p. 12, 13, 14.) yet
falsely pretend Matthew, Mark, Luke and John to be their Gospel.

There are many substantial living Truths and divine Openings declared and
testified in that Treatise, which no doubt proceeded from a Divine Motion. And
supposing some accidental Mistakes and Mistranssposing of Words, and Defects in
Grammar and Syntax (in the manner of wording) have happened, either in
Printing, Transcribing or otherwise, is it just to charge our Principle, or the
Author's Intention, therewith.

The Scriptures themselves have not been wholly free from vain Carpers and
Caviller; our Adversary when he has declared positively, That he is not endued
with that Spirit the Holy Apostles bad, and that his Reasons against us must
needs be defective. Yet now we must take his meaning, that he has it not by way
of Eminency as they had, Apol. p. 2. Yet pretends the Assistance of God's holy
Spirit, p. 46. Now let us but have the same Liberty to construe our Friends
Words as he takes here for his own, and we shall make them look far better then
he does, no doubt.

Concerning G. F's. respect to the Holy Scriptures, I further add, That it is
well known, it was his frequent and public Testimony; and in his Books also,
That Holy Men of God gave them forth from the holy Spirit; and that they spoke
and prophesied as they were moved by the Holy Ghost; and that the Scriptures
were thus given forth to be Read, Believed and Fulfilled.

To return, though it be improper to say, the four Evangelists are but the
Letter, because they were holy Men who Preached the Gospel; and their
Testimonies and Declarations contain evangelical and lasting Truths as
declared; yet the four Books, as made up of Paper and literal Characters, will
decay, wear out and turn to Dust, as many good Bibles have done; as in my Just
Enquiry is more fully answered, with due respect to the holy Scriptures; to
wit, the Holy Doctrines and divine Precepts thereof (and to the Books also) as
F. Bugg also confesses, viz. G. W. says, Though he does not ascribe Holiness to
the Paper and Ink or dead Characters; no more do I, nor do I know any body
does; but (says George) to the holy Doctrine, and blessed Precepts therein
contained. which therefore are called holy Scriptures: Very well; here we
agree, if G. W. etc. speak as they mean, Apol. Introd. p. 6.

[Thus far F. B,] Pray observe, then both we and he agree in this, not to
ascribe Holiness to the Paper and Ink or dead Characters, but to the holy
Doctrine and blessed Precepts therein contained. How now F. B. where art thou
now with thy Charge and Condemnation of Perjury and Pillory upon us? Thou have
fairly given away thy Cause, and discharged us whom thou had unjustly
Condemned. Thy Charge is now more remote from Proof than ever it seemed:
Therefore I challenge thee to prove that we say, The holy Scripture, namely,
the holy Doctrine and blessed Precepts, are either Carnal, Dust, Death,
Killing, etc. We still deny thy Charge herein as false and slanderous,
considering the Nature and Import of it, and thou do but clamor and foam out
thy own Shame, in crying out of Impudence, and such a notorious Lie, as the
very Heathens would abhor; and all this for our denying thy notorious Lie, in
charging us with saying that which we never said nor believed, viz. That the
holy Scripture, namely, the holy Doctrine, etc. is Carnal, Dust, etc. And thy
pretended Ten Reasons to prove thy other false Charge, That we do not believe
the Doctrine and Precepts contained in the Bible, are Holy and Blessed: They
are so shallow and impertinent Reiterations, and begging the Question, (as also
clamorous) that they are not worth answering, the substance being already
answered.

Only to thy first pretended Reason: There is no proof, that by the Letter any
of our Friends cited, meant the Doctrine and divine Precepts contained in the
Bible, nor that the Ministers of the Letter only were true living Ministers of
the Word of the Gospel, or of Christ Jesus, who is the Word of God. Though some
Priests in the North, in and before the Year 1653, when those Books, News out
of the North, and Readiness Errand, etc. were Printed, were so ignorant, as to
call the Bible, namely, the Books made up of Paper, and Ink, and literal
Characters, the Word and the Gospel: Wherein they were opposed, Christ being
the Word, and the Gospel the Power of God which endures for ever, which the
Books and Letters or Characters cannot.

Of his charging these Quakers who pretend plainly to own the Precepts and
Doctrine of the Bible to be Holy and Blessed; yet, that in other Books they
say, It Is Dust and Death, the Serpents meat, etc. and that to preach out of
them, is Conjuration, Apol. Introd. p. 18. I want still plain Proof of Matter
of Fact herein, that we, who are these Quakers (so called) say, The holy and
blessed Doctrine, etc. is Dust, Death, etc. Let him produce plain Proof that we
say so, or else be ashamed of this his horrid reiterated Slander.

Whereas Is. Pennington did in his Questions, take it for granted, that the
Names and Titles Jesus and Christ, chiefly and in the first place, belong not
to the Body which he took, but to him who took the Body, namely, to Him the Son
of God, who said, A Body have thou prepared me. Now, F. B. grants, viz. I own
the Son of God was before the Incarnation; then I ask, if he was not the
Anointed of God, and a Savior before his Incarnation? If he was, then he was
Christ before, cons^quently, the name Christ in the first place belonged to
Him, who took Flesh, and not chiefly, nor in the first place to the Body which
he took on him; tho his Words chiefly and in the first place imply that the
Titles Jesus and Christ did also belong to the Body, when he took it upon him,
and sometime given to it. Again, F.B. grants, That the names Jesus and Christ,
are given to the Word, the Son of God after he took a Body, and so neither to
the Body which he took, nor to him, before he took the Body, p. 4. Apol.
Introd. But I ask, was Jesus Christ the Word, and Son of God, before he took
the Body? If he was, did not both the Ti^les of Savior and Anointed belong
unto him, as being the Son of God? What does this Man quarrel at? What against
I. P. for implying that the names Jesus and Christ do not chiefly and in the
first place belong to the Body, but to him that took it? Is this such a great
Error of the Quakers? And must they be Prosecuted for Perjury and unto the
Pillory for testifying against F. B. for his falsely charging us with denying
Christ Jesus, who was Born of the Virgin Mary? etc. O what sad Envy and
Confusion is this, poor dark Backslider run into! Who also grants, That there
needed not many Arguments to prove, what he never denied; whereas the Arguments
were to prove both, that Jesus Christ was before he took the Body of Flesh, and
that the names chiefly and in the first place belonged to him that took the
Body, yet the Body not denied them, Charitable Essay, p. 3, 4.

Object. But further, he inveighs against Isaac Pennington, viz. Isaac
Pennington's Words are, He took the Flesh and Blood of our Nature, which is of
a perishing Nature: Now if he took ours, and ours be of a perishing Nature,
Ergo, his was perishing, or it was not of our's, so that G. W 's Evasion will
not do. Ibid. p 4.

Here F. Bugg, by his kind of Logic, has run himself into the same Snare and
Error (as he deems it) which he has unduly charged Isaac Pennington withal,
namely, That if Christ took upon him the Flesh and Blood of our Natures, and
our's be Perishing, Ergo, his was perishing; but he took our's, he cannot deny,
he took part of the same Flesh and Blood the Children had, Heb. 2. 14. Then by
F. B's. own, Ergo, his must needs be of a perishing Nature, unless he will
whirl about, and unsay what he has said, namely, that it was not of our Nature
which Christ took upon him: And then he must deny him to be of the Seed of
Abraham according to the Flesh.

But I deny F. B's Argument in this case, as neither very good Logic, nor true
in its self; I deny his Ergo: Though the Flesh of our Nature be perishing, as
in us, yet it was not perishing as assumed by him (Christ,) his Flesh, his
Body, which he took upon him, saw no corruption, it did not Corrupt;
consequently was not perishing, much less is it now, his Body being changed
into a Heavenly, Spiritual and Glorified State; and therefore called, his
Glorious Body, like unto which our low body shall be changed and fashioned,
Phil. 2.21.

The Premises considered, we do solemnly, and in the holy fear of God, both
testify against F. Bugg's precedent Argument, viz. 1. That because Christ took
upon him the flesh and blood of our Nature. therefore his was perishing. 2.
Also against his false Affirmation and Testimony against us, p. 25. viz. And
thereupon I do affirm and testify, and charge it upon them in the presence of
God, Angels and Men, that they disown and deny Jesus Christ, whom God has
ordained to be Salvation to the ends of the Earth, and a propitiatory,
Sacrifice for the Sins of the whole World to be CHRIST.

[Thus far F. B.] But this we utterly deny, and sincerely testify against, as
abominably false and presumptuous, as well as Antichristian in it self.

And to his saying, the names Jesus and Christ, are given to the Mediator, etc.
[True, but what follows?] Therefore, quoth F. B. It Is no absurdity to say, It
was not Jesus Christ for whom the Body was prepared; It was not Jesus Christ
that came in the Flesh, but the Word, Joh. 1.1. Apol. Introd. p. 3.

And yet he has confessed, it was the Son of God that took the Body, p. 4. What
confusion and Self-contradiction does the Man blindly run into? And how
contrary to the Apostle John's Testimony is his Doctrine herein. See 1 John 4.2,
3. Every Spirit that confesses that Jesus Christ is come in the Flesh, is of
God, and every Spirit which confesses not, that Jesus Christ is come in the
Flesh, is not of God; but this is the Spirit of Antichrist. What Spirit is
this in our Adversary, which says, It was not Jesus Christ that came in the
Flesh, who was it then? It was the Word the Son of God; as if Jesus Christ were
neither the Word, nor the Son of God: O horrible Anti-Christianism!

And contrary also to that Martyr Dr. Barnes his Confession, as cited by F.
Bugg himself, p. 45. viz. I believe, that without Man's will or power, Christ
Jesus was Conceived by the Holy Ghost, and took Flesh of the blessed Virgin
Mary, Acts, and Mon. p. 610. Now, if Jesus Christ took Flesh of the blessed
Virgin Mary, then it was Jesus Christ that came in the Flesh: But it was Jesus
Christ that took Flesh; Therefore 'twas Jesus Christ that came in the Flesh;
consequently F. Bugg's Doctrine, That is was not Jesus Christ that came in the
Flesh, is Antichristian, Anti-Apostolical and contradictory to the said Martyr
's Doctrine.

Note. His accusing us, That we own no other Christ than He that appeared in
the body, Introd. p. 5. It Is well he grants we own that Christ, what other
Christ would he have us own? For his Light, Spirit, Heavenly Treasure,, that we
have in our earthen Vessels, is neither any dividing of Christ, nor any other
Christ, but of the same Christ Jesus who came in the Flesh, was born of the
Virgin Mary, etc. and spiritually manifested, and partaken of in his Saints (in
Measure) by his Grace and good Spirit, where the Spirit of Christ is, there is
Christ.

I observe, that much of F. B's former Book is reprinted in this; at which rate
it is an easy matter to make Books, to print and reprint the same things over
and over again; and when Answered (as in my Charitable Essay) instead of
Replication, to impose the same things refuted, over and over again: And this
is F. B's manner of troubling the World with his Impertinent Scribbles, and
Scandalous Books, tending to divide and make discord, Sedition and Strife among
the People; as may be easily made appear, that the very Nature and Tendency of
them is Seditious, to cause Discord, most falsely to render the People commonly
called Quakers Obnoxious, and so much Popish as Rome's Sister* New Rome,
Babylon the Whore, a Cage of unclean Birds, among whom he has croswise placed,
the names of many honest Men (far more Righteous and clean than himself) in the
Figure or Form of a Cage, p. 50. maliciously invented by him (as his Pillory
is) to Reproach and Scandalize Men, fearing God, and of good Repute and Esteem
in their day; as G. Fox, John Audland, Francis Howgil, Samuel Fisher, Edward
Buroughs, Jo. Blaykling, Isaac Pennington, Richard Hubberthorn, Stephen Crisp,
William Gibson, John Whitehead and others, having in all to the number of
Thirty Four Persons names in his Cage. Thus he can Pillory, Stage and Cage-Men
at his pleasure to defame and scandalize them!

His Accusation, that the Quakers insinuate in a Book, called, The Quakers
Refuge, That what the true Prophets spoke, was false; and what the false
Prophets spoke was true, p. 47. We disown these Expressions as laid down; and I
think they are not duly Inferred from the said Book; questioning, Whether some
Words in theirs were not spoken by Wicked Men, some by Wise Men, ill applied;
some by good Men ill Expressed; some by false Prophets, and yet true; some by
true Prophets, and yet false (or rather mistakes) yet this questioned but of
some words in Scripture, not all, as what the true or false Prophets spoke, as
he states it in his New Rome Unmasked, p. 23.

Of the false Ministry ( Introd. p. 9.) He is offended at some of our Friends
formerly calling them The Priests of the World, Conjurers, raising dead
Doctrines out of the Letter, Theives, Robbers, Antichrists, ravening Woolves,
greedy Dogs, etc. (Introd. p. 9.) But who were these names given to? Not to
all other Ministers in general, that are not of us, or not in outward Society
with us: Who to then? F. B. Answers They (i. e. Quakers) give them generally to
all the false Ministry, Apol. Introd. p. 10. And why is he offended then? Have
our Friends wronged the false Ministry therein? What need he be so much
concerned for the false Ministry? But he Objects, They account none true
Ministers but themselves, which is not true: There were sincere and true
Ministers under several Dispensations, as among the Puritans, Protestant
Martyrs and others, according to what the Lord had made known to them: And
there are diverse true in Words, who have a Zeal of God in some measure; but too
many who Preach true and good words, live bad lives.

But F. B. it seems is rather willing to rake up the Characters given of the
false Ministry against us, than to answer what he calls our false Glosses,
Evasions, and subtle Turnings (Ibid. p. 12.) which appears to be his Evasion
and Shuffle, when he cannot answer my Arguments, but is put to a Ne plus ultra;
then he rambles, rakes up, picks, and reiterates Stories, scraps and broken
Sentences, and pieces out of old Books, and so patches up his Dirty and
Scurrilous Books against us, and then gives us all the ill names he can, and
cries out against us as New Rome, Impudence, Impudent Impostors, Cowards,
cunning Sophisters, Jugglings, Legerdemean, a pack of false Witnesses and
Perjured Persons: And says, Surely Simon Magus never exceeded these Impostors,
Act. 8. (Introd. p. 11.15.18.47.) Thus his great Outrage and Implacable Malice
appears.

And like a furious Incendiary, to blow up the Fire of Contention and
Persecution again, and to incense the Government and Magistrates against us; he
does not only call us New Rome, Rome's Sister, comparing us with the Papists,
as coming, not one jot behind them, but harmonising with them (Ep. Ded. p.
3.4.) and most unjustly accusing the Quakers with condemning the Protestant
Religion in general terms ( Ibid.) and with accounting Magistracy a cumbersome
Tree, that must be cut down, and our Principles he maliciously accuses, as
both Anti-Magistratical and Anti-Monarchical, Ep. to Bereans, p. 12, 13. How
much resembling an Incendiary and Seditious Writer has our Apostate Adversary
appeared in these Invectives against a peaceable People fearing God, and by his
Divine Providence recognized by the Government as Protestants also? Though this
Incendiary will needs have us Papists. But pray does he therein befriend the
Protestant interest, or Government either?

By thus magnifying or falsely Greatening the Popish Interest, as in (and by) a
People who are wholly averse to Popery: Let the wisest in Heart, and impartial
Judge, the Nature and tendency of this Adversaries work of Division and
Discord, and whether it will excuse him therein to shelter and shroud himself
in the Church of England, and to assume the Testimonies of Protestant Martyrs
and Authors for his cover and Authority. Also he might have been so discreet,
as not to question, nor upbraid us about, paying Ten Pounds, etc. toward
carrying on a Vigorous War against the French King, because scrupling to pay 2
d. or 4 d. toward the Militia-Arms, accusing us with deluding the World (p.
65. and 49.) He might in prudence have considered, how far this may affect the
Government, under which we live, and Charitably have excused those, who
conscientiously scrupling actively to raise or bear Arms, yet in a sense,
quietly pay the penalty by patiently suffering distress. Christ and his
Servants of old would not Fight, yet paid Tribute to Caesar.

Because of our Solemnly declaring to the King and Parliament, that we believe
the Holy Scriptures of the Old and New Testament were given forth by Divine
Inspiration, and that they have accepted this our Declaration. F. Bugg thus
grossly reflects upon us, viz. The more shame for you to be so deceitful, to
give in a Testimony so contrary to your belief, p. 40. further, That this we
pretended to the Parliament to serve a Turn, p. 24.

Pray observe the horrid Envy and Insolency of this Incendiary herein, and not
only the reproach he casts upon us, but what reflection upon the Civil
Government? as if the same were deceived and cheated by us, and thereupon
granted us our Liberty. O horrible, Mischievous and deadly Malice! What, will
nothing less satiate his Fury, but our Destruction by Persecution again? Oh! O
thou Backslider and malicious Man, the Lord rebuke thy envious Spirit, thy
deadly Hatred and Outrage! And he will signally rebuke thee, I doubt not.

And moreover, thou F. B. have no great cause to boast, nor thy Priests to
glory in thy Conversion to the Church of England, from the People called
Quakers, with whom thou wast conversant for twenty five Years (as thou
pretendest,) if such thy Conversion was a being Sold into Egypt, as thou have
granted in thy Pamphlet, Styled, The Quakers detected, p. 8. by thy applying to
thy self Joseph's words, Genesis 50.20. and Chap. 45.5. on which thou say, thou
can say as Joseph did to his Brethren, viz. But as for you, ye thought evil
against me, but God meant it unto good. Now, therefore be not grieved, nor
angry with your selves, that you Sold me hither. Did not think this
Applicable to thy Condition? If thou did, then where art thou now, but in
Egypt? But we Sold thee not thither; thou art gone down into Egypt for help,
and therefore art not a Joseph, who trusted in, and feared the living God. And
woe is to them, that go down into Egypt for help! Art not thou rather like
Judas, turned to the Priests to betray and persecute the Innocent, and to
gratify them that hate us, with thy refuge of Lies and Calumnies? Even against
Innocent People, unto whose Principle, Foundation, Doctrine, Ministry, Faith,
Love, Unity, Spiritual Testimony (and as being the Church of Christ Jesus) Thou
have made large and solemn Confession, both sometime before thou quite left us
(in thy Book De Christina Liberate, Printed 1682 Chap. 1. p. 24, 25, 26, 27,
etc.) as also in thy said Quakers Detected, Printed in the Year 1686. about two
Years after thy Conformity to the Church of England; wherein thou have given
large Testimony to the Truth of our Principle, and high Commendations of the
People called Quakers, their Doctrine and Ministry, as in the beginning, even
as being a Dispensation of the Love of God, sent as a Visitation to Mankind;
together with their Christian Society, love unfeigned, and blessed Estate for
many Years, and how God blessed their Meetings with the comfortable Enjoyments
of his Presence; as may be seen more at large in the said Quakers Detected.
Insomuch, that thy Self-condemned Backsliding, Apostasy and Envy against God's
People, and Heritage is the more apparent in thy now exclaiming against us for
dangerous Errors, pernicious Principles, Blasphemies, Heresies, Impostures, and
saying, thou wast more than 25 Years a Member of their Society (meaning the
Quakers) being carried away with their Dissimulation, see Title Page of thy New
Rome Arraigned; thus self condemned, and self-contradictory thou art.

And I cannot rationally Perceive; how F. B. can warrantably excuse himself, by
pretending the Approbation of his Minister Isaac Archer for the Substance of
his Book, or the Approbation of another Divine of the Church of England, (as he
calls them) and of Letters, both from Conforming and Nonconforming Ministers,
which he pretends, brevity constrains him not to recite: Epist. to Bereans, p.
12.

1. As to Isaac Archer's Approbation, F. B. says, he recites only an
Abridgment thereof, viz. I do own the substance of this Book, as a defense of
those Eternal Truths, by which I hope for Salvation, etc. But why did not F.
Bugg recite the whole? Was he so tied up to brevity in this concern, that he
allowed his Teacher no more room in a Book of ten or eleven Sheets? But it was
very warily done of Isaac Archer to own the substance of F. B's Book, that is
so much of it, as he esteems to be in defense of those Eternal Truths, by which
he hopes to be Saved; that is, so much of it, as is Scriptural, in behalf of
Jesus Christ. But this will not Excuse nor Warrant those circumstantial
passages of F. B's, in his Book, which consists of Perversions, Railery and
false Accusions, and of his Errors justly Inverted upon him, in my Charitable
Essay.

2. That Divine of the Church of England (so called) who gave his Approbation
of F. B's Book, as a most acceptable piece of Service to his Country, in
unvailing the falsehoods, errors and hippocrisies of the Quakers, as he says;
pray; what is his name? Why does not he appear, and make proof of F. B's
malicious confused Work against the Quakers? He may be ashamed of such his
Approbation, if any such pretended Divine did give such Approbation.

3. And if F. B. has Letters by him of the same Import, both from Conforming
and Nonconforming Ministers, what are their names, and why do not they appear?
I am persuaded, many of their Brethren would be greatly ashamed of such their
Approbation upon serious perusal of F. Bugg's bitter Invectives, and our
Answers, and see that all such Approbations will be of no Reputation or Honor,
either to Conforming or Nonconforming Ministers.

As to Bugg's comparing the People called Quakers, with the Papists, as he has
frequently done, he has fairly contradicted himself therein, by quoting W. P's
Caveat against Popery, saying, Let them renounce their Errors, etc. And what
follows, but, Therefore the People called Quakers are no Papists, according to
F. B's way of arguing; concluding all by one. But many others of our Friends,
have sincerely testified against Popery, Superstition and Idolatry, both in the
root and branch, and for the Protestant Religion, considered in the purity of
it; and therefore free from excusing Idolatry, as falsely charged on their
Teachers, in his third charge, p. 23.44. which has been refuted, both in some
other answers to this false Accuser, as also in our Answer to the Athenians (so
called) and more particularly in my Just Inquiry into the Libeller's abuse from
p. 17. to p. 30. concerning the pretended Letters of John Audland and Jos.
Coal.

Now Bugg acknowledges himself to have a Hand in, and to own the Composing the
Book (he should have said Scandalous Libel or Pamphlet) Entitled; Some of the
Principles and Doctrines, Laws and Orders of the Quakers, etc. ( Introd. p.
10.) which is fairly answered in the said Just Inquiry.

Some of F. B's Abuses in Citation.
1. OBject. p. 33. News coming out of the North, p. 15. He cites G.F. thus I am
(says G. Fox) The Door that ever was, the same Christ yesterday and for ever.
This is a plain perversion, rendering G.F. to speak this of himself; whereas
these quotations in the Margent, John. 14.6. and Chap. 10.3. Luke 11.34. and
Joh. 1.9. clearly shows that he speaks it of Jesus Christ, and not of himself,
and so do the foregoing words, viz. Jesus Christ is the Way, the Truth and
Life, he is the Door that all must pass through; which words are very unfairly
left out, in Bugg's citation.

2. Risen up out of the North, which was Prophesied of but now is fulfilled.
Here he leaves out The Armies coming out of the North, against you terrible
ones. This was Prophesied of, see Jer. 23.8. Isa. 43.6. Jer. 16.15. and 51.48.
he could not mean that G. Fox's being risen up out of the North, was Prophesied
of by Isaiah and Jeremiah.

3. [ Your Baptism is Carnal.] Here he leaves out [ Sprinkling Infants, which
God never Commanded.]

4. Their Sacrament [as they call it] left out] Is Carnal, and their Communion
is Carnal. [a little Bread and Wine, left out.] Query, if their Bread and Wine
be Spiritual? If he says it is, Query then, is it Transubstantiated? Are there
not Carnal Ordinances, and Washing mentioned in Scripture? Their Church is Dust
[ a heap of Lime and Stones gathered together,] left out.

5. That the Quakers Teach that the Gospel is Dust, p. 47. This is false also,
here he puts [ the Gospel] for [ their Gospel] whose Gospel? The Covetous false
Minister's, who put the Letter and their own conceivings thereupon for the
Gospel.

Moreover F. B. pursuant to his old Lie, viz. That we deny Him to be Christ,
who was born of the Virgin Mary, etc. says, It does appear by Jo. Coals
Testimony, that Christ after he Ascended, had no other Body but his Christ;
consequently did not Ascend in his Body, which was seen apparently, Act. 1.9,
10, 11. (Quoting, p. 332. of Josiah Coales's Works.) Which consequence, I must
needs look upon as unjustly deduced from J. C's words in the very Page Quoted.
For he does not only own the Church of Christ as his Body under Affliction, now
on Earth, but also that this his Body shall be Fashioned like unto his glorious
Body, whereof notwithstanding, all they are Members, who are Members of the
true Church. So that the Body of Christ in it is Union and fullness, is one Body.

I take notice of what an Abusive fling he has at me, about a little Book,
Entitled, The Christian Doctrine, and Society of the Quakers, etc. relating to
some differences in America, Accusing me with Peeping and Creeping, and with
Turning and Winding this way and that way, hither and thither, and centring no
where, but Janus like, looking two ways, etc. with other false and scurrilous
detractions. And why so? Why am I vilified in this Case also? Bugg says, He
(meaning my self) seems to own the Doctrine, i. e. of one Party, but dare not
own his Testimony, nor him in it: He seems to blame the Doctrine, i. e. of the
other Party, but dare not blame their Persons, nor give Testimony against their
Doctrine, as their's, etc. page 37. To pass by his scornful Abuse of me herein.
Did not the Holy Apostles testify against Divisions in the Churches, sometimes
without naming or reflecting on the Persons (by name) concerned therein? Did
Paul name those of Corinth, whom he charges with Strife and Devision, etc. and
therefore Carnal? Where one says, I am of Paul, another of Apollo, etc. was
this to reflect on them by name? And what is more usual among Judicious and
Impartial Men, who know common Law and Justice, than to give Judgment or
Counsel, only upon the Case in difference, where the Parties differing are
absent, without reflecting on the Persons of either Party? Because it is not
Judicial nor Just, to pass Judgment on Persons unheard, Face to Face in their
own respective Pleas and Defense. But such an Imperious Arbitrary and unjust
Judge is this our Implacable Enemy, that he can presume, not only to be both
Accuser, Judge and Jury, but also to Try, Sentence and Condemn Persons in
their absence, both to Perjury, Pillory and Cage, without either hearing their
own Just Defense, or taking Cognizance of their respective rational Pleas and
Answers for themselves: But instead thereof, Forging and Framing Answers in
their Names, which never were their's, nor in the least resembling them, as he
has done against us, whom he has most ignominously and scandalously Traduced,
Condemned, and Sentenced, both to Perjury and Pillory. And this is not all: But
because I cannot be as Unjust and Wicked as himself, to Condemn Persons in
their absence, and they as far remote as America: Therefore he Flouts, Scoffs,
Scorns, Rages and Rails, Foaming out his own Shame. -- And I doubt not, but the
Just God will rebuke him in his own time, for his Injustice and Cruel Envy,
with all his Secret Abettors therein, let him Scoff, Boast, Insult and Scribble
out of old Books as long as he can, it will not rescue him from the stroke of
that Divine Hand, that will seize upon him, I wish it may at last humble him
unto Repentance. -- If yet there be a place thereof, to be found for him. --

He complains of Personal Defamations and Detractions, which have had such an
Effect, not only (says he) of our profession in Religious Matters, but upon
our Persons and Employments, which in time may be farther taken notice of, p.
37. It Is very strange, he should thus complain of Personal Defamations and
Detractions, when he is so deeply and notoriously Guilty thereof, who has used
Personal Defamations and Detractions so gross as he himself? What, presume to
set himself up, as both Accuser, Judge and Jury, and Sentence and Condemn
honest Men of good repute, as a pack of Perjured Persons to the Pillory, and
also to the Cage of unclean Birds, and yet complain of Personal Defamation and
Detractions! What horrid Hypocrisy, Insolency and Self-contradiction is this!
Can he rationally suppose, that such his foul Defamations and Detractions may
not affect both Religion, Persons and Employments of those Men he has thus most
Injuriously treated? And can he think himself secure from having his Insolency
therein, in time further take notice of? Though some among us be loath to be
Vindicative upon him, according to his Demerits, especially for the sake of his
honest afflicted Wife. Yet I would advise him (if he be not past it) not to be
so foolhardy for the future, nor to Act any more Fools Tragedies, to Reproach
and Scandalize others.

THE Self-condemned APOSATE, OR Francis Bugg AGAINST FRANCIS BUGG. In His
Apparent Contradictions.
His Confession in his own Words.
F. B 's New Rome Arraigned, p. 45. and they ( i. e. the Quakers) often as a
Decoy [false, by the way] Exorted us to obey the Light, the Spirit of God in
our Hearts, and to observe the dictates of our Consciences to abstain from Evil
and pursue what was Good, and to follow the Leadings and Guidance of the Light
within, which was sufficient to lead unto Salvation, etc. And this being a
general Truth and a Duty upon all Christians, and no less than the public
Ministry does, yea, and ought to exhort to.

His Opposition, with Additional Notes (enclosed in Square Parentheses) from
his Confession.
F. B's New Rome Arraigned, p. 68. For as it is false Doctrine to Teach, that
the Light being obeyed, is sufficient to lead to Salvation, for then your
Obedience is meritorious, and Christ Dyed in vain.

Observe. If the Light within followed, be sufficient to lead to Salvation, and
this true Doctrine, then it is not false Doctrine too, that the Light within
being obeyed, is sufficient to lead to Salvation; neither does it invalidate
Christ's Death, Merits or Deservings for Man to follow and obey his Light
within to lead to Christ, who is Gods Salvation to the ends of the Earth: For
Christ deserves to be Obeyed, and it is our Duty, and without believing in his
Light, there is no Salvation received from him.

F. B's One blow more, p. 5. Artic. 3. In the Beginning, G. Whitehead and many
others, came through the Country in plain Habit, walking on Foot, content with
Mean Accommodation, Apt to Teach: Not given to filthy Lucre, often Visiting the
Sick, the Poor as well the Rich, Working often on their Trades, that they might
not be Chargeable.

F. B. Battering Rams, p. 14. I mean Guilty in that they ( i. e. the Teachers
among the Quakers) always pretend to Preach and Teach freely; but contrary to
all these their Pretensions, have all along taken Money for the same.

Observe, The latter is a notorious Falsehood, as well as contradictory to the
former: How all along take Money for Preaching and Teaching, and yet not given
to filthy Lucre? and so Industrious and Careful, not to be Chargeable, when
thus we Traveled and Labored as before.

F. B.'s Quakers detected, p 3. In the Beginning, they ( i.e. the Quakers
Ministers) Taught, That all Men were Enlightened, according to Joh. 1.9. and
that this Light wherewith Christ had enlightened them, was sufficient, if
obeyed, to lead to Salvation; and that it was the work of the Ministers of
Christ, to turn the Peoples minds from darkness to light, and from the power of
Satan to God; affirming, that this Light was a sufficient Teacher, Leader, and
Guide to every Believer, without the help of outward Prescriptions, Forms,
Orders, and Decrees of Men; upon these and the like Notions, I became persuaded
to make Trial of their Doctrine; and when I came to see and observe their
Practice, Conversations, and Deportments in the Beginning, and what simplicity
and plainness attended their Ministry, I was still more Confirmed, that it was
a Dispensation of the Love of God; sent as a visitation to Mankind; and being
thus persuaded, I was resolved to bear the Cross; and did utterly despise the
shame that attended them and their Message; and was not behind any of my
Equals, both in doing and suffering for the Testimony thereof; as some amongst
them can still bear me witness. And in this manner we went on for many years,
and Loved one another with Love unfeigned; and doubtless God blessed our
Meetings with the comfortable Enjoyment of His Presence. [ Thus far Fra. Bugg.]

F. B. New Rome Arraigned, and out of her own mouth Condemned: containing, A
farther Discovery of the Dangerous Errors, and Pernicious Principles of the
Teachers and Leaders of the People called Quakers; which tend to overthrow the
Christian Faith: In Answer to G.W's. Charitable Essay, etc. [Wherewith he has
not proved any one Pernicious Principle,] Who for his false Testimony, together
with Eleven of his Witnesses, that came in to his assistance, are Examined,
Tried, and Convict of Perjury, and for the same put into the Pillory, by one
who was more than twenty five years a Member of their Society, being carried
away with their Dissimulation. Francis Bugg, (Title Page,) [When they Preached
Christ the Light, and in the Work of his Ministers, and in a Dispensation of
the Love of God.]

F. B. Ibid. Epist Dedicat. The Quakers come not one jot behind the Papists, in
Condemning the Protestant Religion.

[Which is a great Lie by the way; It Is Popery, and Humane Prescriptions in
Worship, that we condemn, by our owning the Light, and Holy Spirit's conduct
therein.]

[These Confessions F. B. made in his said Book, Quakers Detected, Printed in
1686, about two years after his forsaking the Society of the people called
Quakers, and conforming to the Church of England.]

And farther, F. Bugg, in his Book De Christiana Liberate, printed 1682, has
also made these Confessions to the Principles of Truth, Professed among the
People commonly called Quakers; and to them as a True Church, a Church of
Christ, Built on the True Foundation.

Second Part of his said Book, Chapter 1. Treats of Principles of Truth, received
and believed in the Beginning, as follows, viz.

That in the Beginning, the Inshining Light of Christ Jesus, by his heavenly
spiritual Appearance in the Hearts and Souls of his People, was our Principle,
the very Foundation, Principle, and Cornerstone in our Building, there are yet
many living Witnesses; and our Work and Labor in that day, was, to turn
peoples Minds thereunto, as to the more sure Word of Prophecy; whereunto as
many as took heed, did well; and that there was sufficiency in it (being
obeyed) to lead to Salvation. And as our Minds came to be turned to this Inward
Teacher; and as we came to experience the Virtue and Excellency of this Holy
Unction; so we held a Public Testimony thereof to others, that they might
thereby be provoked to make Trial thereof: that so they might have the Witness
in themselves, and see for themselves, and taste for themselves. And to this
Word, nigh in the Heart, were we committed and recommended; suitable to the
Doctrine and Ancient Prophesies of Christ Jesus our Lord, and his Blessed
Apostles and Prophets. And in that day, how did our Harmony sound in our
Assembly? and how did our Love abound one toward another! and our Zeal for the
Holy Name of our God! In this stood our Unity, in this stood our Fellowship;
even in that Inward Testimony, which God committed to us to bear for His Name
sake. [ From all which F. B. is now apparently Apostatized, and gone into Envy
and Malice, as appears on the other side.] Here was the moving Cause of our
Love to God, and one toward another: Even the inward Testimony, or
Manifestation of his Spirit; which God in his infinite Love has given us to
Profit withal; pursuant to his former Promises to our Fathers by his Prophets;
saying, I will give him for a Light to the Gentiles, and to be my Salvation to
the ends of the Earth: I will give him for a Commander and a Leader to my
People Israel. And as we came to believe this Report, and to experience the
fulfilling of these Promises; and to be Witnesses of the virtue of his blessed
Appearance; so we declare to others, that they might also believe, and have
Fellowship with us therein. [ I never understood that F. B. was a Preacher.]
And the more we came thus to be spiritually minded, and spiritually exercised;
and the more we came to take delight therein, and to meditate therein, the more
the Lord manifested his Love unto us, and his pure Power amongst us; and became
a Hedge about us, and a Wall unto us, and gave us favor in the sight of the
People. Blessed and Praised be his Holy Name for ever.

And in that day, when others would boast, of their Church Authority, and
Church Discipline, useful Ceremonies, comely Orders, decent Vestments, etc. We
told them, the Spirit of God was the Foundation of our Church, as well as the
Foundation of the Prophets and Apostles. That Christ Jesus, the second Adam,
the Lord from Heaven, who is a Quickening Spirit, was Head of our Church,
Lawgiver to our Church; on whose shoulders the Government and Authority of our
Church is laid; yea the Hedge and Pale of our Church, and able to preserve it;
and in this Faith we Lived and walked in pure and undefiled Love. If any said
to us, Lo here is Christ in this Ordinance, or in that Observation; we told
them, Nay, Christ is within; and there they must wait to know him, except they
were reprobates; for the kingdom of heaven is within, and there they must wait,
to receive the Earnest of it; for it comes not by outward Observations. This,
we told People, this we Proved to the People out of the Holy Scriptures. This
upon all occasions we Testified to all People, Professor and Profane, bond and
free, noble and ignoble.

F.B. Epis. to Ber. p. 9, 10. These Books wrote by G.F. Is. Pennington, and
other Eminent Quakers Erroneous, [who have given Testimony to the Spirit of
God,] have not been Burnt, either by the Common Hangman, or some other Officer,
then you are to bring these Impudent men in Guilty. [What, for owning Jesus
Christ, and the Holy Scriptures, and standing by their Testimony?]

F.B. Apol. Introd. p. 11. Surely Simon Magus never exceeded these Impostors.

[Yet Christ's Ministers, and in their Work, Preaching Christ, and his Light in
Men.]

F.B. Ibid. Intr. p. 15. Good God! how have these Impostors prevailed upon the
People? And how was my Understanding darkened by their Sleights for many years?
[since they turned me to the Light of Christ within.]

F.B. Ibid. Intr. p. 18. Whoever observes these Quakers turnings and windings,
in all their Juglings and Legerdemain, will find, they tread the same Path,
(i.e. with the Papists. [How then Living Witnesses to the True Foundation, the
Inshining Light of Christ Jesus, the Holy Unction, the Spirit of God, the
Inward Testimony, as sufficient without Outward and Humane Prescriptions and
Decrees? etc.]

F.B. Ibid. Epis. to Ber. p. 13. Silent Meeting (meaning of the Quakers) those
Nurseries of Ignorance, where they sit until they are weaned from the
Principles of true Christianity.

[Which Meetings, God Blessed with the comfortable Enjoyment of his Presence.]

F.B. Ibid. Book, p. 33. And this I charge upon them, as a Pack of False
Witnesses, and perjured persons.

[Yet Living Witnesses of Christ Jesus the True Light, and of that Inward
Testimony, which God committed to us^]

F. B. Ibid. p. 44. They (i.e. the Quakers) have False Witnesses at their beck,
to justify G.W. and back his work with the most notorious Lies that Men can be
guilty of.

[How then Living Witnesses of a Dispensation of the Love of God to Mankind?
Yea a True Church, whereof the Spirit of God and Christ is the Foundation.]

F. B. Ibid. p. 46. Their Blind Guides. [Who turn Peoples Minds from Darkness
to Light.]

F. B. Ibid. p. 47, 48, 49. The Quakers are of the World, and are Deceivers and
Antichrists; the Quakers are Great Deceivers, and Horrible Blasphemers, and
Impostors, Deceivers and Impudent Impostors, Blasphemers, Deceivers, Deluders
and Impostors, etc.

[Whose Church (nevertheless) Christ is the Head, and Lawgiver of; and even
the Hedge and Pale thereof; who is able to preserve this our Church in true
Faith, Pure and Undefiled Love.]

F.B. Ibid. p. 48. Such a Generation of Teachers among the Quakers, who exceed
all that ever went before them, Professing Christianity, the Papists only
excepted, both in Idolatry, Blasphemy, and Superstition; yea and other gross
Enormities.

[What? both Christ's Ministers, and Church, all thus miserable, fallen and
degenerate, and F.B. only standing in the Faith? When backslidden from the
Love, and from the Testimony and Practice of this Church of Christ (that was at
least) among us; for and with which, F.B. suffered, (as he has confessed.) This
is new Doctrine! Oh! sad, Self-condemned, and woeful Apostasy!]

F. B. Ibid. p. 50. Babylon, a Cage of every unclean, hateful Bird.

[And then he has made the form of a Bird-cage, with the Names of many faithful
and good Men in it; as Is. Pennington, Fra. Howgill, Edw. Buroughs, Ric.
Hubberthorn, and others; the Truth of whose Testimony he has owned and
confessed.]

F. B. Ibid. p. 54. G.F. and his Preachers, would seem to Justle Christ out of
his Place.

[Yet their Ministry, a Dispensation of the Love of God.]

When they told us of their Articles of Faith, and how many they had; and the
Scripture being the Rule, etc. We told them, that Faith was the Gift of God,
and to be waited for; and that Faith was the Evidence of things not seen: And
that although in the World there were Faiths many, and Lords many, yet to us
there was but one Faith, and one Lord Jesus Christ, who was the Author of that
Faith. And that although the Scriptures were good, and a true Declaration of
those things which were most surely believed by the Apostles; and by us ought
to be believed; yet not the only Rule. But still the Spirit of God, which was
the first Principle, the Foundation-Principle, the Pale and only Hedge of the
Church and Sanctified People of God. So likewise it was the Rule of Life and
Practice first, and before any other Rule; and always had the Pre-eminence in
our Testimony from the Beginning.

F. B. p. 68. Ibid. To me it seems easy to write a History of the Rise,
Growth, and Progress of their Church Government; and that monster Women's
Meetings, etc. and how the Spirit of Persecution has been among them from the
Beginning.

[Even when we loved one another with love unfeigned, and how did our love
abound one toward another? and when doubtless God blessed our Meetings with
the Comfortable Enjoyment of his Presence.]

And if any question the Truth of what I have here affirmed; then for Proof
thereof, I referr them to the Testimonies of Isaac Pennington, Edward
Buroughs, George Bishop, etc. (Published by T. Crispe) together with the
Writings of Francis Howgill, Richard Hubberthorn, and many other Ancient
Friends, etc.

[Thus far Francis Bugg's Confession to the Truth of those Testimonies and
Authors which he has now declined; and not only most basely Revolted from, but
Opposed, and shamefully Reproached diverse of the same Authors, (as with his
Mock-Cage, Scorn, and Envy, etc.) whose Testimonies he has here so manifestly
Assented unto, Owned, and Asserted; which shall Rise up in Judgment against
Him; whose Judgment lingereth not, and whose Condemnation slumbereth not.]

SOME REMARKS Upon F. B.'s former CONFESSIONS; FARTHER Arguing and Evincing his
Self-condemnation and Apostasy, his Hypocrisy and Temporising.
PRay, impartial Readers, observe what excellent Testimonies and Characters he
has here before given of the Principles, Foundation, Faith, Religion,
Profession, Church (and Christ as Head thereof) Ministry, Christian Love,
Society, Enjoyment and Conversation of the People called Quakers, both as in
the Beginning and for many Years together, wherein he walked among them.

Come, F. B. now do thou observe and consider well,

1. That in all these foregoing, ample and solemn Confessions and Commendations
thou have given of the Christian Doctrine, Society and Conversation of the said
People, and their Ministry (both before and after thou forsook them, and
conformed to the Priests, etc.) Thou wast either Sincere or Insincere therein.
To be Insincere therein, I suppose thou will not charge thy self: If Sincere,
then thy Conformity was Insincere and Hypocritical, and Self-condemned; it
being thy own and our professed Principle and Testimony in the beginning, and
for these many Years, when thou wast conversant among us, according to thy own
Confessions made in the Year 1684 and 1686, before and since thy conformity.

2. Thy new Pretense, Thou art not now of the same mind thou wast in, in 1686,
concerning us in the beginning, and that thou had then a charitable Opinion,
and better Thoughts of us, with respect to our beginning than now thou have;
and that thou wast in an Error, mistaken, etc. As in thy New Rome Unmasked, p.
12, 13, 16. Then thy good and charitable Thoughts of us, our Ministry, Doctrine
and Society (respecting our beginning and for many Years) continued until Anno
1986, until near two Years after thy conformity. Wherefore thy turning to the
Priests and Church of England in 1684. proceeded not from inward conviction of
Conscience, nor from the Spirit of Christ, but self-condemned Hypocrisy and
Temporising: For in the beginning the Quakers were in a clear Separation from
the National Priests, etc. And the same is continued by all of them who are
sincere and faithful to their Principle. And that thou knew, when thou
suffered among them for Meeting and Nonconformity, then thou had a Testimony
against all Mercenary Priests, against Tithes and their Persecutions,
Oppressions, etc. Wast thou mistaken therein all that Time? and mistaken in thy
Testimony for the Light of Christ and our Ministry and Doctrine (as in the
beginning) both before and since thy conformity? If so, then why do thou not
retract thy mistaken Books in that Case? And then who will credit thy
Scribbling? It seems thou knew not thy pretended mistake, till some Years
after thou had turned about and conformed, which if so, it was therefore in a
blind Obedience: Did thou go blindfold to Church? (so called) Such slim
Shifts and mean Subterfuges will not cover or acquit thee from
Self-condemnation; nor thy telling us, Thou art not of the same mind thou were
in in 1686, concerning us in the beginning, p. 12. [Thou art very mutable then,
no doubt thy Thoughts grow worse and worse, and thy Charity very cold,] and why
so? Why are thy Thoughts grown of late so bad of us? Thou say thou have of
late examined our ancient Errors, and observed the Consequences of them. New
Rome unmasked, p. 12. that is, when we were a true Church, and Christ our Head
and Lawgiver, found in Doctrine, and Christian in Conversation, Love and
Society, according to thy own Confessions in 1682. before thou went out to the
Parish Church (so called) and in 1686. after thou so went out and conformed
thereunto. It seems then, thou knew no such pretended Errors in 1686. two
Years after thy Revolt and Conformity; then 'twas not Error in Doctrine that
was the cause of thy deserting us, and turning to the Priests; what then was
it, outward Prescriptions, Forms, Orders, Decrees of Men, Laws, Canons,
Ecclesiastical, etc. as thou pretendest, Qua. Detect. p. 3.4.

Thou cannot be sincere in any such Pretense, unless thou had conformed to a
Church, that has no Order nor Discipline; Canons or Rules in it; and where is
that Church that will own its self to be without Order or Discipline in it?

Thy comparing thy Case with Bishop Cranmer's and the Protestant Martyrs, p.
13, 14. appears more thy Ambition, then Pertinent or Sincere. If Bishop Cranmer
said, in the Beginning the Church of Rome thought pure and sound Doctrine, but
did he say he was mistaken, and in Error in so saying? No, he owned her as
such; But after the Church of Rome fell into that new unsound Doctrine of
Transubstantiation, etc. He disowned Her. He could be no self-condemned
Apostate therein, whilst he neither diserted the pure sound Doctrine nor
conformed contrary to his own Testimony thereunto, (as thou have done) Thou in
Words, have owned and commended of a Church and People, ( i. e. called Quakers)
as once pure and sound in Doctrine and Conversation, both before and since thou
left them, and joined to another in Opposition to that Church and People; and
now to excuse thy whirling about and base temporizing, pretendest thou wast
mistaken, even in such thy solemn Commendation. Thus uncertain Unstable,
Self-contradictory, and self-condemned thou art both ways; Insincere and Self
condemned, in acting contrary to the Principle, Profession and Conversation of
a Church and People, whilst highly commended by thy Self; and thou appearest a
Self Condemned Temporizer, in retracting that Commendation, as an Error and
Mistake; Self Condemned, in now pretending thou have of Late, examined and
observed our ancient Errors (as thou call them.) Being some Passages in some
ancient Books, writ by some particular Persons, even when we were a Church pure
and sound in Doctrine and Conversation, in thy own account, (and as still we
are.) That God Blessed Us, and our Meetings, according to thy late Confessions,
as thou have unfairly snapt and carpt at some Passages or Words out of G. F.'s
Great Mystery, Printed in 1569. Isaac Pennington's Question to Professors. Some
of Edward Burrough's Books, with more old Books, many Years ago printed, being
writ within the compass of those many Years, wherein thou had such sweet
Conversation, and Divine Blessing among us, long before thou left us, we may
believe thee therein; therefore the Fallacy and Deceit of thy now pretense of
ancient Errors, will not excuse thy Backsliding, nor absolve thee from
Self-Condemnation, in thy acting against Light and Conviction, which will
pursue thee. Besides, thou yet confessest a party of Christian Quakers, who
hold what is sound, and that though they dissent from the established Religion,
yet they hold the true Faith for Substance. New Rome unmasked, p. 68. and yet
actest contrary to the Faith, Profession and Practice of those Dissenting
Christian Quakers, in thy going to Parish Churches (or rather Steeple Houses)
wherein they do not follow thee, for according to thy own Confession, thou art
gone or sold into Egypt, as in thy Qua. detected, p. 8. In applying Joseph's
Words to thy Self; Namely, that thou can say as Joseph did to his Brethren,
Genesis 45.5. Now therefore be not grieved, nor angry with your Selves, that you
sold me hither, though very greatly misapplyed, for we did not sell thee into
Egypt, but (to evade the Cross and shun suffering for it,) thou wentest down
voluntarily thither for help, which woe is to them that do, and do thou
remember it. Nor is thy Case like that of Joseph; for he confessed, as that God
had a hand in sending him thither before his Brethren, for their Preservation,
but thou art gone down into Egypt, to Revile, Reproach, and Rail against thy
Brethren, as if thou would incense Egyptians against them, even the very Mob
or Rabble to destroy them if thou could, with thy Pillory and Cage, etc. to
excuse and cover thy wilful Revolt and Backsliding, and to extenuate thy
Judgment, and Self Condemnation; but the Lord will find thee out, and thou
shall know that thine own Wickedness shall correct thee, and thy Backsliding
shall reprove thee, and the Witness of God will pursue thee to thy Anguish.

And further to give a summary Demonstration of thy Self-Condemnation and
Apostasy, and where thou art. Thou call Conformity the monstrous Womb, de
chr. Lib. p. 81. and confessest that Conformity is a Monster, conceived by the
great Whore Mystery Babylon, p. 83. Yet in Self-contradiction to thy Self, art
since conformed, and consequently joined to a Monster, if Conformity be it,
though thou might better have distinguished Conformity.

Thus thou art Conformed to shun Conformity, thus confused and into Babylon
thou art run, and in the Cage of unclean and hateful Birds left among whom thou
have unjustly pretended to Cage and number us.

Thou have not only in contempt writ against Conformity, outward Prescriptions,
Forms, Orders, Decrees of Men, Canons, Rules, Laws, Impositions, etc. ( i. e.
in Church Government and Discipline) in thy several Pamphlets, as Q. detected,
B. Rams, one Blow, etc. but have charged us with Apostasy therein, and turned
from us on that Pretense. Yet in contradiction to thy self, art conformed to a
Church and Ministry, which have all these ( i. e. outward Prescriptions, Forms,
Orders, Decrees of Men, Canons, Rules, etc.) in Church Government and
Discipline, whilst thou can prove no unjust or unwarrantble Canons, Rules,
Laws or Methods in our Church, either in Government or Discipline.

Thy now Pretense of false Doctrine, Error, Heresy and Imposture against us,
is a new Pretense lately taken up for a Cloak to thy Backsliding and
Temporizing, and contrary to thy own Confession as before cited, and therefore
no just Pretense, nor true Excuse for thy deserting (or going out from) us, and
turning to the Priests. Our Principle, Ministry and Doctrine were true, when
thou wast amongst us, when thou left us, and since thou left us; (the same
considered as from us Beginning according to thy own Confession) and therefore
thou appearest a self-condemned Hipocrite. 1 st. In conforming contrary to thy
own Testimony against Conformity to outward Canons, Prescriptions, etc.

2 dly. In thy now Reproaching us as Erroneous and Heretical, contrary to thy
own solemn Confessions, both before and since thy conforming (as before
mentioned:) So that into Egypt and Babylon thou art gone, and miserably fallen,
and shall see and know that it is an Evil thing and bitter that thou have
forsaken the Lord God, and that his Fear is not in thee.

And may thou not justly expect that a certain fearful looking for of
Judgment and fiery Indignation, which shall devour Truths Adversaries will
surprise and seize upon thee? And I wish all others concerned may take timely
Warning by thy Fall and Misery.

Thy poor Soul's (and all Men's) Friend, G. WHITEHEAD.

POSTSCRIPT.
THere are yet two Things remarkable to manifest what Perfection of Malice and
Impudence this our persecuting Adversary, F. Bugg, is arrived unto:

First, His dedicating his scandalous Book, (hereby answered) unto Henry
Goldwell Esquire A Justice of Peace, and A Member of the House of Commons, with
this Complement, viz. I have been the bolder, Honored Sir, to present you with
the ensuing Discourse, in hopes of your favorable Construction of my weak
Endeavors, and that under your Patronage they may appear, etc. Now I am
persuaded from some late Discourse which I, and some others of our Friends, had
with the said H. Goldwell Esquire that he is a Person so rational, that he must
needs justly resent Bugg's boldness herein, as no small Reflection upon him and
his Reputation; to be thus rendered a Patronizer of such a wicked, scandalous
and abusive Book, as that of Bugg's is, against a peaceable People, fearing
God. But to do the said H. Godwell Justice and Right in this Matter; When three
of us showed him the Injury Bugg had done him therein, he signified to us, That
he was not made privy to his Dedication, for he knew not of it before it came
forth; and had showed his dislike thereof. What a Shame and Insolency was it
then in Bugg, so publicly in Print to hope for his Patronage, to make a Person
in his Station suspected, for encouraging this our implacable persecuting
Adversary, in such his scurrilous and most calumnious Book; hoping that not
only this Account may be some reprehension to the said Bugg's presumptuous
Insolency: But also, that the said Justice Goldwell will farther (in point of
Justice) reprehend him, for Imposing such a Dedication upon him for his
Patronage.

Secondly, It is farther remarkable, how the said Bugg, to vent his inveterate
Malice, had the Impudence to deliver an envious, perverse and lying Phamphlet
of his own, against the People called Quakers, to the Members of the House of
Commons, the 16th Instant, [stiled, Something in Answer to the Allegations of
the Quakers, in their printed Case presented to the House of Commons, December,
1693,] on purpose to Calumniate the said People, and to interrupt and gainsay
their Conscientious Case for their not Swearing, etc. before presented as he
says: Whereby Bugg did not only show himself a busie-body in other Men's
Matters, but also in the very height of deadly Malice. Therein falsely accusing
the said People, 1. With Contempt of Scripture and Ordenances (without
exception.) 2. With Contempt of the Public Ministry (without exception also.)
3. With Denying Jesus of Nazareth. 4. With Contempt of Governors; as if he
eagerly thirsted for Persecution again for our utter Ruin. Some of his
Instances to prove, that the Quakers deny Jesus of Nazareth, are,

1. William Smith 's asserting something of God in Man, for him to wait to know.

2. Our knowing Christ the foundation in us.

3. Our believing that Christ in us does intercede the Father on our behalf.

5. Edw. Borough 's confessing, the very Christ of God to be in us, and that
we dare not deny him.

5. The Answer formerly given by James Naylor; viz.

If I cannot witness Christ nearer than Jerusalem, I shall have no Benefit by
him; but I own no other Christ but that (i. e. Christ) who witnessed a good
Confession before Pilate, which Christ I witness suffering in me now.

These are some of his Instances to prove, that the Quakers deny Jesus of
Nazareth. Wherefore, according to F. Bugg's Doctrine (since he turned from the
Quakers to the Church of England) the ancient Christian and Apostolical Doctrine
and Confession of Jesus Christ in you, except ye be Reprobates, and Christ in
you, the hope of Glory, and the Spirit of the Son, as sent into your Hearts,
crying Abba Father, and making intercession, etc. This all (with Bugg) is a
denying Jesus of Nazareth. Oh! horrible Antichristianism and Apostasy. The Lord
preserve all honest simple Hearts, from such gross darkness of Envy and
Apostasy, against which I propose, 1. That Christ's being in Glory and Majesty
in the Heavens, does not wholly exclude him out of the Souls of his People. 2.
That Jesus Christ, who is in his own Glory and Majesty in the Heavens, yet is
spiritually in the Hearts of his true Followers, in his Church and Sanctuary,
and Minister thereof. See Heb. 8.1, 2.

London the 19th. 10 month 1693.
FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 5. line 24. for be read he: p. 17. l. 4. for to read of; l. 14. dele the:
p. 18. l. 9. read Cavillers: p. 14. l. 21. for 2. read 23: p. 31. l. 2. read
wise: P. 38. l. last, for Christ read Church: P. 42. l. 15. read taken: P. 46.
l. 5. 2 Col. for wherewith read wherein.

BOOKS Printed for, and Sold by Thomas Northcott, in George Yard in Lombard
Street.
THE Works of that faithful Servant of Jesus Christ, Robert Barclay, in Folio
Price Bound 13 s.

Truth Exalted, in the Writings of that Eminent Servant of Christ, John
Burnyat, in 4 to. Price bound 2 s. 6 d.

Robert Barclay's Apology for the People called Quakers, in 4 to. Price 4 s.

Francis Howgil's Works, in Folio, 10 s.

Samuel Fisher's Works, in Folio 12 s.

The Spirit of the Martyrs revived, in 4 to. 4 s.

George Keith's Visible Churches, in 80. Price bound, 1 s. 6 d.

-- His Way to the City of God described, in 80, Price bound, 1 s.

-- His Fundamental Truths of Christianity, by way of Question and Answer, in 8
vo, 8. d.

-- His true Christ owned, in 8 vo, 4 d.

Stephen Crisp's Epistle, concerning the present and succeeding Times, 2 d.

Robert Barclay's Possibility and Necessity of Inward and Immediate Revelation.
Price 3 d.

Just Measures, in an Epistle of Peace and Love, by G. P.

The Harmony of the Old and New Testament, by I. T. with an Appendix, by W. P.
Price 9 d.

Some Fruits of Solitude, in Reflections and Maxims, relating to the Conduct of
Humane Life. Price bound 9 d.

A Key, opening a Way to every Common Understanding, How to discern the
Difference betwixt the Religion professed by the People called Quakers; and the
Perversions, Misrepresentations and Calumnies of their several Adversaries. The
Third Edition, with Additions. By W. Penn. Price 3 d.


