THE LEVIATHAN Found out: OR THE ANSWER TO Mr. HOBBES'S Leviathan, In that
which my Lord of CLARENDON has past over.

By John Whitehall of the Inner Temple, Barrester at Law.

Job 41. 33. Upon Earth there is not his Like. LONDON: Printed by A. Godbid,
and I. Playford, dwelling in Little-Britain, 1679.

To the Right Honorable HENEAGE Lord FINCH, Baron of Daventry, Lord High
Chancellor of England, and one of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council.
THE Shunamite was so great a Favorite to the Prophet Elisha, that he
commanded his Servant to ask her if he should speak for her to the Captain of
the Host. I not being so much the Favorite of any that has familiar access to
your Lordship, make a bold address of this little private Piece to your Favor
and Encouragement, without any Prolocutor or Master of Ceremonies to introduce
it: presuming that your Lordship, the Captain of our Host, (who think it,
except I be deceived, not only the Honor, but encouragement of their Gown to
follow you) would not reject the good Intentions, how defective soever, of one
that has had his Education for several Years in the Honorable Society of the
Inner Temple (which may truly with many other Worthies, boast you their Member)
when your Lordship did then preside. But, my Lord, there is not only this in
the matter: for if I have done ill, in addressing this to your Lordship against
Mr. Hobbes his Leviathan (in all things past over by your Noble Predecessor my
Lord of Clarendon, as ridiculous in themselves and not worthy of his Pen, he
intending as I suppose only to Answer his Civil Politics) I may plead this a
little in my excuse: First, That your Lordship accidentally gave me the
encouragement of the undertaking, for that (amongst other things I have had the
happiness both in private and public to Learn of your Lordship) once you Taught
me as well as the rest of your numerous Auditors (when the present Lord Chief
Justice of England was called to be Judge of the Common Pleas) that it was not
only the duty of every good Man but of every wise Man to endeavor the support
of the Government he was protected by. Whereupon, my Lord, I having (after many
repeated Discourses and particularly of Learned and excellent Divines of the
impiety of this Book) got a sight of it, and being as much surprised with the
obliquity of it as the Queen of Sheba (may I make Sacred contraries my
illustration) was with the Wisdom of Solomon: I perceived that that which I
heard was not half, that was true, either in respect of Mr. Hobbes his
endeavors to supplant all true and faithful Subjection and also Property (both
which as I apprehend ought to be equally Sacred in their bounds both to King
and People for their mutual preservation) or in regard of his damnable Opinions
concerning God and Religion mixed with a Mohammedan endeavor, by ill words, to
supplant the greatest part of Civil Learning: I thought I could not better
employ part of a very long Vacation, it now being more than usually seasonable
to express my Affection to the Government I have so long lived peaceably under,
then to make it manifest to the World (to prevent future mistakes in that
matter) that under the name of Leviathan are couched the most horrid and
execrable opinions that were ever suffered to see the light in any Christian
Kingdom, and only fit to make one upon the holiday of the Hangman: and
importing so many Errors and Blasphemies against God and the King, and so much
tending to the extirpation of all sense of Religion out of the minds of Men
(which is the basis of Government) that I thought the forementioned saying of
your Lordship, which sharpened my undertaking, might in the second place a
little entitle me to a submissive claim of your defense not only by your
Eloquence but Power: especially you being, Sir, so great and high in the favor
of your Great and Royal Master, and so much entrusted by him with the affairs
of Church and State, both which, if I take right measures, have in times of
danger approved you their friend: and no wonder, Sir, since your high and
generous Education as well as Converse in great Affairs cannot but have
Instructed you in the only and infallible Remedy against the inroads of the
People their greatest danger (to wit) the keeping up and within the bulwarks of
the Law, which I have seldom seen any Man (and hope I never shall) attempt a
breach upon, but that he has proved the rubbish of his intended ruins; and how
it will at last fare with the Leviathan, Mr. Hobbes I know not, for I trust
your Lordship when you have perused this little piece will say, There is not
his like upon all the Earth. Which I shall without more (knowing how tedious
prolixity is to your Lordship) refer to your great Learning and Wisdom, and
only beg pardon for the adventure of the subscription and intitling my self,

Your Lordships Most constant and obedient servant
I. WHITEHALL.
THE LEVIATHAN FOUND OUT.
MOnsters in Nature, usual productions of Excess or De^ect of Matter, upon
Festivals and Iollities are exposed to show for the Pleasure of the Spectators
and Gain of the Possessors. Monsters in Policy, usual Productions of Excess or
Defect of Government (Tyranny or Anarchy) are in Times of Danger and Conspiracy
to be exposed for the Pleasure of the Wi^e and Settled, and for the Benefit of
those that are Unstable, and subject to embrace novel though erroneous
Opinions. Examples of the first have been frequently produced, but the Year
1651 (a time when our Nation groaned under the Dissolution of all Ligaments of
our ancient Government, having nothing in it like the Sunshine of Authority,
save the Tyranny of the Sword) only produced such an Example of the latter, I
mean Mr. Hobbes's Leviathan, as no Antiquity ever I believe saw nor no
Posterity when exposed will e're approve of; which I imagine will be the delight
of the Wise, and benefit of others, not obstinately bent upon Errors^ Upon this
conceit, and the rather in this juncture, have I undertaken Mr. Hobbes in his
Leviathan, who I can compare to nothing better than the Title of his own Book,
I mean the Leviathan, for there is not his like upon the Earth, Job 41. 33. And
when I have done, I hope the greatest of his Scholars will not dare to say that
I have wronged him in the Title of mine. Censure I expect, not only because
there are many who think, the easiest advance of their own Wit is to depress
others, whereby they may be taken into the Mouths of Buffoons, the Worlds
Would-be-Wits, (who in defect of Learning and Sense draw regard by mouthing and
noise) whereby they may be made ridiculous; but also in respect of the many
apparent Objections against this Undertaking, as first, that my Studies have
been bent another way; secondly, my confidence to attaque Mr. Hobbes, so great
in reputation (why I know not) for Parts and Learning, that many of his
detestable Errors and monstrous Opinions have been embraced, and are daily
undertaken to be defended, not only by many that would seem witty in the World
by discoursing and maintaining things, because not learned in their Catechisms,
but likewise by those (I hope but few) that desire to retain the reputation of
Wise and Prudent. Thirdly, that my Lord of Clarendon, so eminent in Parts and
Wisdom, has written in answer to Mr. Hobbes before; yet I hope no one will be
so violent against me for this, ^which I thought the greatest Objection against
this Undertaking) when it is con^idered, upon the perusal of his Lord^hip's Work
and mine, that I have ^ntermeddled with nothing his Lordship ^hought worth his
Answer, only that which his Lordship has either wholly ^mitted, or mentioned
as absurd, and so ^ast over: Besides, the great Intent of ^is Lordship, as I
suppose, was to an^wer Mr. Hobbes in his Civil Politics, and erecting of
Governments, which, as his Lordship has shown, are so full of contradictions
in themselves, and inconsistencies to all manner of Method and Peace, in any
Christian, or indeed Pagan Commonwe^lth, that it is not possible ^or me to say
more, who have been so little conversant in things of that transcendent Nature,
in which his Lordship has testified to the world himself so great a Master, at
the King's most happy Restoration. So then, to that which his Lordship pleased
not to think worth his Answer, in Mr. Hobbes his L^viathan, I shall apply my
self, ^aking the entire Sentences, which are not too tedious, or the true Sense
(so far as he is intelligible) of such as be, with the addition of any thing
that he shall explain himself in upon the same place. But if Mr. Hobbes has in
any place said that, which he in another remote contradicts, (as he has often
done) I hope no one will say, that his H^resies, Errors, or Blasphemies, ought
to be spared, and not laid open to the world, for the sake of the
contradiction, considering, that it is not necessary that every one that reads a
Chapter or Sentence, and may receive the infection naturally resulting from it,
should read or consider that which is manifestly to the contrary, thereby to
make him consider, and prepare him for an Antidote or Enquiry; and in things of
this nature Mr. Hobbes is very frequent. And to give an instance of this, he
page 268. denies absolutely the personal Existence of the Divinity of God the
Son and Holy Ghost, as I shall show in i^s place, and yet p. 204. he calls the
two second Persons God the Son and Holy Ghost. Now I hope no good Man will say,
that the denying of the Godhead of the second and third Person in the Blessed
Trinity is therefore not to be exposed, and answered with such severity as is
proper for such monstrous though old Opinions, because Mr. Hobbes in another
place contradicts himself. Nay, I think the Fabric of his Civil Politics
(which I suppose was the Drift of his Book) is founded upon things
incompatible; for he says, p. 88, 89. That the People upon submission to their
Prince, contract one with another to submit themselves to him, (and indeed all
their properties, which is the labor of his Work) and cannot be obedient to
any other without his permission; and that the Prince makes no Covenant with
the People: And yet p. 114, 174. he says, That that Subjection lasts no
longer than his Power to protect himself and them, and then they are absolved,
and may submit to any one else that can protect them; forgetting the consult of
the P^^^ces permission, which he spoke of p. 88, 89. which permission be sure
no People shall ever have from their Prince to desert him, and then how can the
People be absolved from their contract, the Prince having made no covenant as
he says with them? Which I leave any reasonable Man to judge of, whether it be
not impossible. This Absurdity I believe Mr. Hobbes little thought of at the
time of writing his Book, bending his Mind as I suppose to the establishing a
new Government, to be then erected, and the advance of himself in it, when our
King was murdered, and his Royal Son beaten from his Rights, whereby they were
incapable to protect us. I shall not stay upon this, but refer my Reader to my
Lord of Clarendon, who has I think, as to all Matters of this nature, made
such a Creature of Mr. Hobbes, that I can think him capable of no other Name
than Leviathan. Only let me observe, what Stuff this is, when searched to the
bottom, to ground any Government upon: First, it is to give the Property of the
People to the Prince, (like a dear Son of Sibthorpe and Manwaring) which will
make them not only weary of his Government, but also to ^^deavour to throw it
off, that they may have something to call their own: And in case their
Governor shall be imprisoned by a Popish Plot, or by any Invasion or
Rebellion, though but for a Week, be made otherwise incapable to exercise his
Authority, the Subjects are absolved (which nicked with Oliver Cromwell then,
and the Papists now) from their Allegiance: Which is so monstrous an Opinion,
that it is only to say, That Subjects may desert their King or Governor when he
has most need of their Assistance; which is undoubtedly against all the Laws
of Reason as well as Charity: For it is as if Mr. Hobbes should have said, That
our obligation to our Benefactors lasted no longer than their power to do us
good, and that we might desert them in their adversity, whose prosperity we
reaped so much advantage from. And it is little less than to say, That a Son may
desert his Father, and is absolved from his Obedience, when his Father is
fallen into poverty. This Doctrine (^ly and Iesuitical) in short is to set the
Prince against the People, and the People against their Prince, to the ruin of
them both, in English, to the ruin of his native Country; for it is to decoy the
Prince into the hatred of his Subjects, and to teach the Subjects to desert
their Prince at their own will and pleasure, they only being left Judges when
their Prince is incapable to protect; for be sure, as I said before, no Prince
will ever say that he is incapable to protect, when he is sure thereupon to be
deserted by his Subjects, and thereby made no Prince at all. This Doctrine
makes Mr. Hobbes's learned train of Thoughts, mentioned p. 10. work wonderfully
in me, viz. the Crime, the Officer, the Prison, the Judge, and the Gallows; for
Mr. Hobbes could not but know, that it is the greatest Interest of a Prince to
support the Property of his Subjects, that they might rejoice in their
subjection, and consequently desire to stand by him in his greatest
Necessities, and redeem him by their Blood and Fortunes (as the People of
England are now resolved) from any unhappiness that might befall him, and
thereby restore him and themselves into their mutual happiness. I think in this
last matter I have been so far from wronging Mr. Hobbes, though I have not
repeated his very words in several parts of his Book, that (it is plain) his
particular pages make his opinion look much worse than any thing I have said.
And I intend not to tie my self in every place to particular Repetitions, which
would be too tedious; but I challenge any Man when I have done, to say either
in this, or any subsequent matter, that I have wronged Mr. Hobbes in the least,
(though I believe many will doubt whether the Positions be any English man's,
they are so gross, till read in his Book) in that which I shall repeat of him
in words or substance. And to lay more weight upon Mr. Hobbes than he has laid
upon himself, would be further to load the oppressed, and like laying Felony to
a Man's charge, that was really guilty of high Treason. And as I shall lay
nothing falsely upon Mr. Hobbes intentionally, so shall I not quarrel with every
thing in his Book; for there are many things which show Mr. Hobbes a Man of
tolerable parts, though little in it shows him a Man willing to converse and
digest his notions, which would have freed him from the delivery I suppose, not
only of so many gross, but supercilious Errors; besides, no Book was ever so
false, but had some Truths and Orthodoxality in it, and that may be seen in the
Alcoran, and the Mass Book. Neither shall I often quarrel with Mr. Hobbes's
Book in things, the truth or falsehood of which, are of no moment; but with his
gross and dangerous Errors, or that which tends to support them. As for his
Liberty and Necessity, I shall not engage in, hearing it is fully answered by a
Learned Bishop already, no more than with what my Lord of Clarendon has been
pleased to answer; and other Writings against Mr. Hobbes's Leviathan did I
never hear of, or see so directly to fall in with Mr. Hobbes, page after page.
He ( p. 1.) calls Nature, The Art whereby God has made, and governs the World.
Here at first he is got into such a Rapture, that he has lost his Reason: for
how God can be said to make the World by the Art called Nature, is
inconceptible; for that the Nature of things suppose the preexistence of those
things in which Nature must exist, and indeed is nothing else but an Energy or
force given to things at the Creation, for the acting of such things as they
are adapted to; whether of Generation, or otherwise, and is subsequent to the
thing made. And this Position of Mr. Hobbes is but another manner of saying,
That God did not make the World by the Word of his Power, but had some
Instrument preexistent to work with; which is his first attack upon the honor
of his Maker.

Mr. Hobbes, p. 2. says, That what the Passions of a Man, as Fear, etc. are in
himself, he may judge what are the Passions in another on the like occasion.
But certainly, common experience teaches every considering Man the contrary:
for who knows not that knows any thing of the difference of the Constitutions,
That one fears, etc. that which another does not, and that under the very same
circumstances? For does any Man think, that because he dares not get upon his
Horse back, that therefore another dare not. This would be one way to lose him;
but such inconveniences I believe Mr. Hobbes never thought of, only ventured
the conceit, supposing himself infallible.

Mr. Hobbes, p. 3. says, That the appearance of the objects of sense to us is
fancy, which is the same waking that dreaming; and p. 5. says, That
Imagination and Memory are but one thing, which for diverse consi^erations has
div^rs Names. These assertions I should not trouble my self to show the
unreasonableness of, no more than with his condemning all the Universities of
Christendom, p. 4. with impropriety of Speech, grounded upon the position of
Aristotle, (the greatest Natural Philosopher that ever the World produced) viz.
That Sense is caus^d by a Species resulting from the object, and yet shows no
reason for his contrary conceit. Whereas had Mr. Hobbes had any modesty, or so
much learning in the Law, as in other places he pretends to, he would have
thought it hard to explode an old opinion without a better reason, and would
have known that a prior Possession is the best Title against all but him that
has right. This tends only to disparage the way of Learning, but I am afraid
his saying that Sense is Fancy, and memory Imagination, strikes higher, and
that thereby he intends to enervate the authority of the Scriptures, (which he
so much endeavors through his Book) if not utterly to supplant them; which
will make him the easier task hereafter to maintain, that only that is
Canonical Scripture which is authorized by the civil Sovereign, as he affirms,
p. 199, 205, etc. For the Argument lies thus; It must be agreed on all hands,
that the things done and delivered to us in the Scriptures, were for the most
part but the things they who delivered them saw and remembered; which is a great
groundwork of the Scriptures Authority. Then, h^^ p^sito may Mr. Hobbes, and
his Disciples say, If the Relators of the Scriptures only saw and remembered
these things to be so, they only fancied them and im^gined them; and what a Man
phancies or imagins, may be, or may not be. But it is most plain, that seeing is
one thing, and fancy another; memory one thing, and imagination another. As
for instance, before I saw Mr. Hobbes's Leviathan, I fancied and imagined by
wh^t I heard, that it was an ill Book; but when I had seen and read it, and
remembered the Contents of it, I was certain that it is as full of
contradictions, execrable, detestable, and damnable Opinions, as a Toad is of
Poison. So I hope it appears, that the Authority of the Scriptures is not
lessened by this conceit of Mr. Hobbes, which in it self is contrary to sense;
but that every good Man will think, that the Penmen of them had a better
certainty than fantasy and imagination.

Mr. Hobbes, p. 7. says, That Witches Witchcraft is not any real Power, but
that they are justly punished for the false belief they have, that they can do
such mischief joined with their purpose to do it if they can. I will not
controvert with Mr. Hobbes, whether there have ever been Witches or no. Neither
should I controvert with Mr. Hobbes the dueness of their punishment, which is
death, and that only (as he says) for belief they can, and their desire to do
mischief; only in this he meddles a little with our profession of the Law, (and
I could wish for the sport-sake he had dipped a little more into it than he has
in his Book.) But this let me tell Mr. Hobbes, that no Man ever was by our Law
put to death for believing he could, and desiring to do mischief; for the case
of high Treason goes farther than belief and desire; and Mr. Hobbes would think
it hard else, especially in this case I shall put him, viz. when Mr. Hobbes
only believed he could, and desired to write such a Book as the Leviathan,
(which tended in the year 1651. to keep both Church and State subverted, or to
resubvert them, if restored) had it been known, the Law of the Land would not
have taken his life for it; but when his Book was published by him, and the
mischief had spread it self, had the Law been unmusled, he would scarce have
escaped with his life, except his Pocket or Legs had proved better than ever I
perceived his Head. But why Mr. Hobbes should be so much against ill desires in
this page, as to make them capital, when in p. 26. he denies any Iniquity to be
in them, as I shall show in its place, is not to be answered: save that Mr.
Hobbes must be allowed to forget himself in the space of 19 pages.

Mr. Hobbes condemns the Schools in p. 8. and I will refer it to any reasonable
Man, whether he condemn them for any thing that is rational or sensible. And p.
10. he says, That the best Prophet naturally is the best Guesser. I suppose he
means the best natural Prophet, and so his ill methodised words may be true;
but '^is false to say (as I shall show anon) that the Prophets of the Old and
New Testament were only Guessers, that is, only fancied and imagined what they
wrote was true.

Mr. Hobbes, p. 11. says, That there is no Idea or Conception of any thing we
call Infinite. This he follows with a blaming the Philosophers and Schoolmen,
for saying there is, and indeed presses this Position with a company of words,
that are enough to make any Man's Head to run round, that is not used to Mr.
Hobbes's Notions, that m^ke often a great noise, and signify nothing, which
will appear fully in this Paragraph: Where he confesses a God, but denies us
any (in effect) conception of him, (and p. 16. he says, that Infinite is a
Negative word.) So there is an end, if Mr. Hobbes say true of praying to, and
worshipping God; for what we can have no Conception of, we can never Worship;
for such a thing is nothing as to the worshipper, and consequently cannot be
worshipped, nothing being incapable to be passive. It Is true, we cannot
conceive the infinity of God terminatively, that is, the extent of it, which
are terms contradictory; but we may conceive a God or B^^ng that is infinite,
that is to say, a G^^ that can do or does know every thing, and is not bounded
or stopped by any p^^ticular, so that he can go no farther; ^^t we cannot know
how far that Pow^^ or Knowledge does extend. This Po^^tion Mr. Hobbes grounds
much upon a former Notion of his, which one would not easily think he would
have made such a wicked and unreasonable use of, ( viz.) That whatever we
conceive, has been first perceived by sense. Which Tenet is very plausible and
true as to our reasonings from matter of Fact, whereby we create in our selves
deductions appertaining to Sense and Reason, and the government of our
Conversations with Men and things that we can definitively know; but what is
this to things above definitive Knowledge? For what we cannot definitively
know, is not the object of Sense, and yet we may conceive there may be
something done or known that we cannot do or know, and a power or knowledge
capable to do and know, as far as it is possible for any thing to be done or
known, though we know not the extent of the Capacity either of the Agent or
Patient, and this we call infinite Power and Knowledge. I think Mr. Hobbes in
his Paragraph is setting up the Athenians unknown god, which they ignorantly
worshipped, but St. Paul declared him unto them, and I have so good an opinion
of St. Paul that he would declare nothing but what was conceptible; nay Mr.
Hobbes himself in his 12 page approves very well of the word Infinitive (though
he buggards at the word Entity) as useful; but I would know of any rational Man
of what use the word Infinitive is, if we can conceive nothing by it; for if we
cannot conceive infinite, or a thing that is infinite, what do we do with the
word infinitive, that signifies something not bounded, that is infinite. And
now I am upon his condemning the word Entity, which he says as well as
Intentionali^y and Quiddity are insignificant words of the School, p. 12.
Because I see Mr. Hobbes has no infinite capacity, I will tell him the best I
can, that Metaphysics may not be quite exploded by arrogant Ignorance, what is
meant by Entity and Quiddity; and as for Intentionality I do not remember it to
be a word used in Philosophy, it being near 20 years since I left Oxford, or
read any thing of that kind; but as to Entity (much the same with Quiddity)
it is a word to express our conceptions by of the nature of any thing, though no
such thing was in being. As a Man may conceive the nature of a Dog under such
shapes and qualities, though there was no such creature; and the general Answer
for this upon the ^uestion Quiddity is Entity, the parti^^lar Caneity. And
further to illustrate i^^ we may conceive a Man of an Opinion that there are no
such persons in the Godhead as God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost; or of an
Opinion that all the World past and present were fools and mistaken, and that
he only could give just measures to Words and Learning, and subvert all things,
though in reality there was no such Person; and this the Schools would call
Atheisteity, Arroganteity. And if Mr. Hobbes or any one else should conceive a
new Leviathan, before it is made, the Schools would call it Leviathaneity, and
after Mr. Hobbes his death Hobbeity: but it is not good for Mr. Hobbes to write
such an other Book, lest the Lawyers, though they be so ignorant as he says
they be, p. 50. be ready with a Penaity, and the Kings Majesty (who has
suffered so much by Mr. Hobbes's first Book) be not so ready with a Pardoneity,
which on such an occasion I believe Mr. Hobbes would own as an Entity, though
told him by a Schoolman, and that a material Entity.

Mr. Hobbes, p. 19. says, That the words a Free Subject are words without
meaning, and this he says in his Chapter of Reason, where one would not expect
such Nonsense (only it is an Abridgement of his Doctrine tending to set Prince
and People together by the Ears). For, I say, I am a Free Subject, and it is as
good sense as ever Mr. Hobbes spoke in his Life. For I am a Subject of the
Kings, and free, I bless God, to enjoy my Property and Liberty according to the
Laws of my Native Country. And observe, that the Egyptians, nor their Lands,
were not Pharaohs before Joseph bought them for Pharaoh.

Mr. Hobbes, p. 20. quarrels at any ones saying, That Faith ( and Sanctity, p.
169.) are infused or inspired; for says he, Nothing but Body can be breathed
into any thing. This is I think rather better Divinity than Philosophy. For in
Divinity it may be true, quoad hunc, (viz.) that Mr. Hobbes had never any Faith
or Sanctity infused into him, especially considering that he denies the
existence of the Person of the blessed Spirit in an other place. But I would
know, if Faith cannot be infused, and if any Man be admitted by Mr. Hobbes to
have Faith, how he came by it; certainly not as Mr. Hobbes says, p. 169. By
education or external helps, for we see many virtuously brought up, void not
only of Faith but common Civility: Nay Mr. Hobbes so far in that p. 169.
contradicts himself, as to say, That God by outward means works them in his
Elect. So God is the infuser though he work by means, and the 2 Cor. 3. v. 5.
is an express Text, That we are not sufficient of our selves to think any
thing, but our sufficiency is of God. Now if we cannot think, how should we
believe, but that Grace is given us of God of whom is our sufficiency. And the
2 Cor. 12. v. 9. Gods grace is said to be sufficient for St. Paul; if it be
God's grace how came St. Paul by it, except it be infused? And Luke 17.5. The
Apostles prayed for the Increase of their Faith, which must be by Infusion
increased, or no way that I can imagine; and it is plain the Apostles expected
the increase of it not by Education or other External helps. But Mr. Hobbes his
Philosophy in this place never can be true, for a Body can never be breathed
into a Body, for that would be to make two Bodies in the same place, which Mr.
Hobbes disallows. This is much like him in the next page, where he calls the
words Transubstantiate, Consubstantiate, Hypostatical, the canting of
Schoolmen, and words that signify nothing; and p. 22. his calling Metaphors
Ignes fatui, and their end Sedition, and all this without any color of Reason;
although Metaphors are so frequently used in Scripture, as Abraham calls
himself Dust and Ashes, and Abraham never rebelled against God his King (as Mr.
Hobbes elsewhere styles God to be). And Saint Paul calls himself the Prisoner
of Jesus Christ; and Mr. Hobbes in his Book often uses Metaphors, which I will
allow him if they be like the rest, and do tend to Rebellion.

Mr. Hobbes says, p. 24. That there is nothing simply or absolutely Good but
as Men account things so to themselves, or as they are made so by the Person
representing the Common Wealth, or by an Umpir^^ This is the best part of Mr.
Hobbes his Divinity. But I would know of Mr. Hobbes, whether there was any such
thing as a Law to the Children of Israel, or other people, before the
Decalogue. If Cain had lain with his Mother, there being no positive Law to
prohibit it at that time, that we know of, had it been no sin? Or how came the
Heathen to be a Law unto themselves, 2 Romans 14. when they had not the express
Law or Decalogue, except there is something Good or Evil of it self simply and
absolutely? For a Law supposes a transgression, and in this place it must be
intended the Law of Nature, for they had it in themselves, which only can
reflect upon what is Good or Evil by Nature, that is simply Good or Evil. This
Doctrine is as dangerous as false, for it tends to encourage Men inclinable to
be vicious in several wicked Desires, Words or Actions, which they find the Law
of the Land does not extend to punish, nor the Scriptures plainly or expressly
forbid. And Mr. Hobbes might have remembered that there is such a thing as
unnatural Lust (that is Lust against the Law of Nature) spoken of in Scripture.
But this is as true as his calling in the next page sudden Courage, Anger.

Mr. Hobbes says, p. 26. That the desire of Riches in it self is to be blamed
or allowed, according to the means by which those Riches are sought. And p.
151. he has a Tract much to the same purpose, And p. 62. says, That desire
and other passions of Man are in themselves no sin. Mr Hobbes but two pages off
was against any sin, till there was a positive Law; now he is for making
Covetousness no sin though it be by a positive Law made so (viz.) the tenth
Commandment, (as other passions are forbidden by other Commands) which says
expressly, Thou shall not covet what is thy Neigbours. Now the desire of Riches
says Mr. Hobbes is not the sin but the means by which they are sought. So the
sin, as he says, only lies in the act of acquiring, not in the desire which
the tenth Commandment expressly contradicts. As if he should have said, if you
pick not your Neighbors pocket you may desire his Money. If you cut not the
Husbands throat you may lust after his Wife; nay for ought I know he may
intend, that you may actually lie with her, if you do it not by force or fraud.
(Though Mr. Hobbes says, p. 179. That not only unjust facts but intentions are
injustice.) These Positions of Mr. Hobbes's against sins of desire and other
passions, makes an end of all sin of thought, though Romans 2. 1, 2. be a Text
expressly, as I think, to the contrary, and though our Savior elsewhere says
expressly, That he that looks upon a Woman to lust after her, has committed
Adultery with her in his Heart, Matthew. 5. 28. But to this Mr. Hobbes may
perchance say, That heart-Adultery is no sin. And it is no matter what he ^aith
in matters of Religion, when to bring Religion it self into contempt, defines
it, (viz.) A Fear of Power invisible, feigned by the Mind, or imagined from
Tales publicly allowed; not allowed, Superstition; and when the Power imagined
is truly such as we imagine, true Religion. And with this he ^ccords, p. 51. So
that Mr. Hobbes in other words calls Religion (which is the Apprehension in a
good Christians mind of his duty to serve the great God, and his hearty
performance of the same,) first, only a fear, no love in the case. And
secondly, of a Power invisible, let it be of God or the Devil. Thirdly, this
fear says he is fained by the mind (which excludes reality) or imagined from
Tales publicly allowed, that is, stories people generally believe, no matter
whether true or false, and when the Tales are not approved of it is no Religion,
as he says, but Superstition; and when the Power we fancy or imagine is truly
such as we imagine it, then it is true Religion. So if the Indians by Mr. Hobbes
his rule fancy the Devil is able to do them hurt, then theirs is true Religion.
Well done Mr. Hobbes, for he has made Religion in general much like his own,
and that except I be deceived is none at all, and this without vouchsafing a
Reason of such an idle conceit. And let Mr. Hobbes say what he can, or any one
for him, this Paragraph tends only to draw wicked or unwary Readers into
contempt of Religion, and to make a mockery of it; which must tend to their
Eternal misery, and to keep them from that beatifical vision which Mr. Hobbes
page 30. without Sense or Reason calls a word of the Schoolmen, and
unintelligible.

Mr. Hobbes, p. 32. says, That when we believe the Scriptures to be the Word
of God, we believe the Church or a Prophet, (except some immediate revelation
intervene,) so far as it is possible to know what he means. He says, That if we
believe not the Scriptures, the affront is done to the Church or a Prophet, and
not to God, as the not believing the Stories of Livy concerning the gods, the
affront is done to Livy and not to the gods. This is to undermine the
Scriptures before he comes to blow them up. But let Mr. Hobbes look the 5 th of
Ephesians. and he shall find, that the Church has handed down the Scriptures to us
so united to Christ, and the Union so firm there expressed between Christ and
the Church, that he must needs conclude, that any affront done to the
Scriptures must necessarily be done to Christ and to God. And I do affirm
against all the conceited Irreligionists in the World, that the Scriptures
would have been the Word of God, and the Rules of Salvation, although our
blessed Savior had not appointed any Church to have handed them down to us;
not that I say every cavilling Atheist would have assented to them. But then as
Mr. Hobbes plentifully urges in his Book, How shall we know that they are the
Word of God? And of this I shall say something more hereafter. But at present,
say, that I think it is sufficiently satisfactory to any rational Christian,
that they are the Word of God, because they teach us our misery by sin, to
which our mortality is so subject; our Redemption by Christ, and appoint us a
Pious and Virtuous way of living here, and the way to an happy immortality
hereafter. Besides, what rational Man can suppose, that the good and wise God
would leave mankind without a guide to a blessed immortality, and what guide is
there like this? So that any Man that is not frantic or resolved to quarrel
with every thing other people assent to, but must say, that God is the Author
of them; and consequently the disbelief of them is an affront done to God if we
deny them, and not to Man only. And I think good King Josiah and all Judah with
him believed the Law to be the Word of God, and thought the contrary would be
an affront to God, upon less or at least upon less inviting grounds, 2 Kings
21. than we ought now to believe the volume of the Bible to be so. But if we
believe not the Fables of Livy concerning the gods, the affront is only done to
Livy and not to his gods, for they were no gods at all; and so Mr. Hobbes's
Example is at best but a fallacy, which he is very frequent in; and I have so
much charity for him as to believe, that it is not always out of design, but
sometimes caused by his want of a clear Judgment; for Mr. Hobbes cannot but
know, that a juggling Cock is often hit.

Mr. Hobbes after a long discourse of the passions, the absurdity of which is
not worth the answering, p. 38. says, That the Scriptures, by the Spirit of
God in Man, mean a Man's Spirit inclined to godliness. And for this he cites
Exodus 28.3. which is nothing to his purpose, though not so much against him as
other Texts are. As 31. Exodus 3. which says expressly, I have filled him with
the Spirit of God, to work; which as Mr. Hobbes says, Is Man's Spirit inclined
to godliness. And the 51. Psalm. 11, 12. where David prays, That God's Spirit
may not be taken from him, but that he may be upheld by it; is as Mr. Hobbes
says, David's own Spirit; without doubt David thought it God's Spirit, or he
would have called it by an other name; and I believe David knew as well as Mr.
Hobbes how to express himself. So to make this Opinion sufficiently ridiculous,
look Judges 15. 14. where it is said, The Spirit of the Lord came mightily on
Samson, and the cords brake, and he killed the Philistines; that is says Mr.
Hobbes, Samson's Spirit was inclined to godliness. And from hence Mr. Hobbes
may raise this Observation, That a man's godliness makes him able to pull cords
asunder, which perchance Mr. Hobbes trusted to when he wrote his Leviathan.

Mr. Hobbes says, p. 38, 39. That all those that our Savior is said to cast
Devils out of were nothing but mad Men. And I will deal plainly with Mr. Hobbes
and tell him, that none but mad Men think so. For was he only mad that was torn
by the evil Spirit before he came out of the Man possessed? Or were they only
mad that were possessed by the Devils, 8. Matthew. 31. when the Devils spoke, and
after Christ permitted them to go into the herd of Swine, and why ran the herd
of Swine thereupon into the Sea? To this Mr. Hobbes may say, That they were mad
Swine to do so. And in the 12. of Matthew. 27. our Savior says, If I by
Beelzebub cast out Devils, by whom do your children cast them out? Here it is
agreed, both by our Savior and the unbelieving Jews, that our Savior did cast
out Devils, therefore the Men were something else besides mad, out of whom
Devils were cast. And why Mr. Hobbes should be wiser, or undertake to be so,
than either the Jews or our blessed Lord and Savior, is an hard matter to
know; except it be that after his labor to bring Religion and the Scriptures
into contempt, now thinks by a side wind to debase our Savior in his Miracles,
(whereof one of the most eminent was his casting out Devils) before he strike
at his Godhead.

Mr. Hobbes in his tenth Chapter has much to do with Power and Honor, and
says, That good success is Power, p. 41. and to flatter is to Honor, p. 42.
and that an action whether just or unjust, if great and difficult, is
Honorable, p. 44,45. Of which last I will give an Example, If two highway Men
rob six honest Men, or a Ruffian ravish a Woman of great Quality, it is
Honorable. And this I have Mr. Hobbes's warrant for. But in short I repeated
these last sentences to show his vain humor.

Mr. Hobbes says, p. 50. That Ignorance of the causes of Justice disposes a
Man to make custom and example the rule of his actions, and to judge that just
or unjust of the punishment or example of which they can produce an example; or
(as the Lawyers, which only use this false measure of Justice, call it) a
precedent. Thus far he. I thank Mr. Hobbes that whilst he is condemning the
vices of the Lawyers argues us possessors of one virtue, and that is modesty in
regarding what was said or done by others before; which had Mr. Hobbes had the
least sh^re of, I think he would never have put forth his Leviathan; and we
ought to thank him for affording us so good company in our sufferings of ill
Language, as Religion in general, and our blessed Lord and Savior in
particular; yet see the charity of the Lawyers since to Mr. Hobbes in being
mainly instrumental in the Act of Oblivion, which Mr. Hobbes, will call just,
because as to him 'twas without precedent. But Mr. Hobbes, as in many other
places, makes himself the sole authority in this matter; for why the word
Precedent is so Barbarous a word, for what has been done in matters of Justice
I know not; for praecedo is to go before. But to tell Mr. Hobbes what use the
Lawyers make of a precedent (or as some call it a president) is not to be
better done than putting his own Case: as suppose Mr. Hobbes was now to be
arraigned for his Book (and that no Pardon had intervened) so full of
blasphemous Opinions against God, the King, and his People. The Judges would
look to see the punishment of such a precedent Malefactor, the better to direct
themselves in such a Case, and if they could find no such Malefactor (it being
impossible as I think) then they would judge what was the Law and punishment
due in such a Case: Not that they would condemn Mr. Hobbes, could they find a
precedent, because of that precedent, but they would first ex^min whether that
precedent was agree^ble to the Law of this Nation, and ^n case it was they
would proceed ac^ordingly, and in case it was not, would ^eject it and judge
the Law without it. Where is then the false measure of justice making use of a
precedent? I think no one will say there is any, except he have a design, like
Mr. Hobbes, to ruin the Law by making it odious, and thereby open a gap for a
standing Army; which in probability would ruin both Prince and People: to the
security of both which the Law is so main a bulwark.

Mr. Hobbes, in his Chapter of Religion, amongst a company (I hope the word is
not Barbarous) of Notions, which only I suppose have sprung from his own
whimsical Fancy, has p. 54. this Paragraph, In opinion of Ghosts, ignorance of
second causes, devotion toward what Men fear, and taking of things casual for
Prognostics, consists the natural seed of Religion; which has according to
the difference of passions grown into different Ceremonies. Now I absolutely
deny, That the seed of Religion consists in any of these: But the first seeds
of Religion were first sown in Adam by the Knowledge of the great God, who made
him and all the World; and was capable to punish or destroy him and the rest of
the World, as well as to bless, when it should be his good will and pleasure,
and from thence, together with his favors received, sprang the reasonable
deduction or consequence in Adam (which was communicated to his posterity) that
it was his duty to serve, and please his Creator, that was capable at pleasure
to destroy, or preserve him. Secondly, The seeds of Religion are in every Man
either from this Ancestral relation, or else from the very sense of mankind of
a Power and Goodness above them; which is naturally implanted in them, as all
other faculties are, that are natural; which begets in all mankind a Veneration
toward that Power and Goodness; and this is it, conjoined with works, we call
Religion. But the opinion of Ghosts, ignorance of second causes, Devotion to
what Men fear and other casualties, are subsequent in the minds of Men to this
natural seed of Religion, and are rather the Suckers than Seeds of Religion:
But I confess that from these seeds many several ways of Worshipping this God
through Men's ignorance, have been set up in the World. Mr. Hobbes, I suppose by
this conceit of making Ghosts and Ignorance, that is Fancy and Mistake the
seeds of Religion, thought he could the more easily prepare Men to be of any
Religion or none, according to the subsequent humor of Mr. Hobbes's civil
Sovereign. For why should People stickle for that whose ground is Fancy and
Mistake? And Mr. Hobbes may make the natural seeds of Religion to be what he
pleases, since in this Chapter, p. 61. 62, 63. he makes the effects of those
natural seeds none at all. For he says, All Men by nature (till under a
Governor) may do what they can each to others persons (as particularly in p.
64.) or goods, being in an estate of war by nature each against other. This is
the substance of most of those leaves and particularly he says, p. 63. That
the notions of Right and Wrong, Justice and Injustice, have there no place; and
Where there is no common Power there is no Law; no Injustice. Force and Fraud
are in War the two cardinal Virtues; Justice and Injustice are none of the
faculties either of Body or Mind; if they were, they might be in a Man though
but one in the World. With much such stuff as this is, although to do him
right, he so far contradicts himself, p. 185. as to say, That Conscience ought
to govern where there is no Commonwealth. I thank Mr. Hobbes for instructing me
in two cardinal Virtues, I never heard of before ( viz.) Force and Fraud; which
are two precedents the Lawyers (though so guilty as Mr. Hobbes says, of false
measures of Justice) never make use of. But let us observe what turns upon
these excellent hinges. First, That a Man may by nature do that to another that
he would not have another do to him. He may take his Neighbors goods or life
by deceit or violence, though he would not have an other take his; for would
any Man have an other take his goods or life by fraud or violence? It Is
impossible to humane nature to suppose it. Secondly, Observe that Cain's
killling Abel was lawful; and that Oliver's Army might in the Year 1651. take
all the propriety of the people of England, as they had taken the King's; all
Subjects according to Mr. Hobbes Positions, being absolved from their
Allegiance, and so were returned into an estate of Civil War, each with other;
there being no Governor at that time in England set up, except the Army. This
makes me think what a good Trade a Captain of Horse of the same Faith with Mr.
Hobbes might have had at that time; and what a lawful calling a Highway Man was
then of, and how much he might have deserved with a true Son of Mr. Hobbes's as
an Apprentice. This, I suppose, was written to satisfy the Consciences of
those Men that enjoyed most that they had at that time got by Force and Fraud;
and I wonder they did not make Mr. Hobbes, for his healing Divinity, a
Superintendent of Canterbury, with the power of a Troop of Horse to get as many
other inferior Ecclesiastical Lands into his Hands, as he could by force; or
that they did not give Mr. Hobbes a Patent under the broad Seal of the Sword to
cheat all he could for seven Years. But, I suppose, the Soldiery then thought
it no sin to cheat Mr. Hobbes of his due reward, since by his own Doctrine it
was Lawful for them to cheat all they could; and there Mr. Hobbes was caught.
But in this Chapter I perceive in Mr. Hobbes one virtue, that I seldom observe
of him elsewhere, and that is that in this Chapter he agrees in substance with
himself in the precedent; and that is in making natural Religion a mere Fancy,
and a thing that can give no check to the natural vicious inclinations of Men,
but that by Nature they may do what they please, according to his Position,
That Justice is none of the faculties of the Mind. It Is strange a wise God
should create the rational Creature, Man, and not give him one of the best
effects of reason, ( viz.) Justice, and a thing which tends so much to his own
preservation; nay that Man should be created in the Image of God, and yet be
wholly so unlike him in one of his great Attributes. And let Mr. Hobbes say
what he will to the contrary, a Man may be unjust to himself, though there was
no more Men in the World. As if Adam had cut off one of his limbs in Paradise,
it had been injustice to himself, being unnatural, that is, against the Law of
Nature. But how come the Gentiles, that have not the Law, and by Nature do the
things contained in the Law, Romans 2. 14. to be a Law unto themselves; if there
be nothing in a Man's nature to restrain him from injustice? And if it was not
justice the Heathens natural Law was conversant about, what was it? For 'twas
that which was contained in the Law, which is the Decalogue; both parts of
which relate wholly to justice, either to be done to God or our Neighbor. But
to conclude, The Positions in this his Chapter are much like the rest of his
Book, that is, little but the empty speculations of his own irreligious Heart
and shallow Head.

Mr. Hobbes, p. 64. says, That Law and Right are inconsistent in the same
matter. Certainly he said this, when he was not in his right Reason; for
nothing is more apparent, that Right is worth nothing, except there be Law to
recover it, and therefore they must go together; and in having of Law to
recover Men's rights, lies the grand foundation of peace, which is the greatest
worldly happiness of mankind; and so are clearly consistent in the same matter.

Mr. Hobbes says, p. 69, 89. That to make a Covenant with God is impossible,
but by mediation of some one which God immediately speaks to, or by the civil
Sovereign, for else we know not that our Covenants are accepted. Mr. Hobbes I
perceive by this is very willing to renounce his Baptism, and to say, That his
Covenant by his Parents or Godfathers, to renounce the Devil and the Word,
signifies nothing; yet I perceive he renounceth not his Name of Thomas. And I
also see that Mr. Hobbes is willing to free himself of all Covenants of better
obedience at his coming to the Lord's Table. But let him say what he will, it
is the duty of every good Man to make Promises or Covenants of Obedience to
God, and to perform them too; as every good Man does at his coming to the
Sacrament: and it is impossible to interest the civil Sovereign in all matters
of that kind. It Is true that the Israelites made a Covenant with God, by the
mediation of Moses, but follows it therefore that no private Man can covenant
with God without interesting the King as to the matters of his own Soul? It Is
nonsense to say so, and nothing but the trick of giddy headed People to say,
that because a thing has been once on this manner, that therefore it can never
be otherwise.

Mr. Hobbes says, p. 71. That an Oath adds nothing to the obligation. That is
to say in the Year 1651. when people, according to Mr. Hobbes's Positions, were
absolved from their Allegiance, they ought not to regard the Oath which they
had taken for it; whereby no scruple might be left upon any Man's Conscience in
respect of his Oath to adhere to the King, or to act against him. But certainly
all wise Men, and that in several ages, have thought, and do think, that our
obligation to our Prince, or any obligation made each with other, is stronger
by an oath, as to oblige the Conscience, which guides every good Man, and the
more unquestionably will be performed. And for that let any one look the 6 th
of the Hebrews 16, 17,18. v. and he will be satisfied that an Oath adds to the
obligation; and wherein it is particularly said, That God confirmed his promise
by an oath: and certainly if the obligation was confirmed by God's oath, the
oath added something to it in respect of God or Man: And if an oath add
nothing, why did David swear, and say, He would perform? But this pretty
Position of Mr. Hobbes in 1651. was to adapt the people for a new government,
and it is very like that he was too fond of the notion to examine the truth of it.

Mr. Hobbes says, p. 71. That the Definition of Injustice is no other than the
not performance of covenant. If he had said, that the breach of all lawful
covenants had been unjust, he had spoken truth. But there may be injustice
without any covenant, and that even by the Law of Nature, as I have said
before, and so I shall pass it over. And though Mr. Hobbes says in this page,
That before the breach of covenant can be unjust, there must be some coercive
power, to compel Men equally to perform their covenants. I absolutely deny it:
For first, if a Man covenant though never so privately, and no witness present;
yet he is bound to perform what he covenants to do, or else he breaks the Law
of Nature in doing that to others, which he would not have others do to him.
Secondly, David says in his 15. Psalm. They shall dwell in God's hill that
swear to their own hurt and change not; Implying at least, that they will not
go back from what they promise, though they might; yet Mr. Hobbes is resolved
to give wicked Men their liberty, if they can escape the lash of the Law. And
though Mr. Hobbes says in the next page, and often in his Book, That where
there is no Commonwealth, there is no propriety nor any thing unjust: yet it is
only his saying so, and for which in no place he gives any reason; for properly
Just and Unjust were in the World before any such thing as a Commonwealth was
thought of: as Cain and Abel had their distinct properties, and offered
accordingly, when there was no Commonwealth formed, that we know of; and in all
probability there was none. But Mr. Hobbes thinks he may say what he will, or
else he would not reproach my Lord Cokes opinion in the same page without
giving any reason, or circumstantiating the thing with any connective sense.
Which opinion he says is (though it is much older than my Lord Coke) that when
the Crown descends to one attainted of Treason, it avoids the attainder; and
why it should not be so I know not; only Mr. Hobbes had a mind to show his
ignorance, in respect of Antiquity, and his arrogance to quarrel with any
thing, because found in the Works of so learned a Man.

Mr. Hobbes says, p. 81. When an actor does any thing contrary to the Law of
Nature by the command of the Author; if he be obliged by covenant to obey him,
not he, being none of his action, but the Author breaks the Law of Nature.
The English of this I conceive to be, That when a Man covenants to do any thing
wicked in it self, as to do that to an other, one would not have done to him
(which Mr. Hobbes, p. 79. admits to be a Law of Nature) as to break ones trust
with a third person; because he has covenanted with a second person so to do,
is no fault in the actor, but in him that set him on. This opinion is so
unreasonable that it is worth nothing but laughing at: For it is apparent that
both the Actor and the Author are guilty, and the making a covenant to do a
wicked thing is wicked, and cannot excuse the Actor from guilt. And is a Man's
action less his action, because he has covenanted to do it? It Is rather more
his action, because he has done it on that deliberation and voluntary
undertaking.

Mr. Hobbes says, p. 102. That the Parent has not dominion over the Child,
because he beg at him, but from the Child's consent either express or implied.
But to do him right, in the next page he so limits this, that he makes what he
has here said to signify little or rather nothing. Yet this let me say, that
a Parent upon the knowledge that he is such, has the dominion over the Child,
because he begot him; and ought to provide for the Child, although the Child
never assent to it (which cannot be supposed in young Children) either expressly
or impliedly. And if it should not be so, why should Children be bound to
honor their Parents by the Law of God; or by the Law Civil why should Parents
be bound to provide for their Children? It must be either upon the account of
generation or no way; for there is no other reason to be given for the said
Laws.

As Mr. Hobbes before called Metaphors causes of Sedition, now p. 111. says,
That the reading Greek and Latin Authors has begotten in Men from their
childhood an habit of favoring Tumults and controuling Sovereigns. This is
like a Mohammedan to discourage all kind of Learning; for he knew well enough
that as many things are written of the Liberty of the People in other Languages
as in Greek or Latin; which liberty never was inconsistent with the true
rights of Sovereignty, that ever I knew of. But Mr. Hobbes may be allowed to
say this, when he has the confidence to say, p. 108. That liberty and
necessity are consistent; which I pass over as an absurdity by any capacity to
be perceived, and also because I hear a late Bishop has intolerably baffled
him in that matter. Yet I cannot but observe that this Position is as good as
his exposition, p. 106. of Matthew. 21. 2, 3. That because the people let the
Asses colt go to serve our Savior (which I think was miraculous) That
therefore the King's word is sufficient to take any thing from any subject,
when there is need, and the King is Judge of that need. Ingenious Mr. Hobbes
could find one argument for the Ship Money Case, and for the justifying of
Sibthorp's and Manwaring's Sermons, that I never heard of before. But the
nonsense of the Exposition cannot be made more gross than it appears in it
self, and so I pass it by, with a great many such extravagant and arrogant
humors in this part of his Book; because my Lord of Clarendon has sufficiently
exposed him in things of this kind.

Mr. Hobbes says, p. 116. If a Corporation vote any thing not warranted by
their Patent, this is not the act of any one that voted to the contrary, or is
absent; though it is the act of the Body, and he that voted to the contrary is
innocent; and if a pecuniary mulct be laid upon the Body, nothing shall be
taken, the innocent person has share in, though a common stock. Mr. Hobbes I
perceive thinks all he says is Law as well as all is Gospel. Yet I think him
not wise in this Paragraph to put the People into a way to cheat Caesar of his
due; when in the last Chapter he gave Caesar so much more than ever any King of
this Nation pretended to. For by this means taking the case as Mr. Hobbes
states it; If a pecuniary mulct be laid upon a Corporation, the King can never
know how to levy it upon the common stock; for says he, If that person, a
member of the Body that voted contrary to the rest, has any propriety in the
common stock, (which I think is by the way impossible he should not have, as
long as he is a member of the Corporation) then that stock is not to be meddled
with; and then it follows that the King cannot have his fine out of the common
stock at all; and Mr. Hobbes assigns him no other place to take it in, and
consequently Mr. Hobbes has left his Sovereign without remedy for his right.
But Mr. Hobbes ought to know, that if a Corporation run into a pecuniary mulct
by any vote, (which is a case very unusual) that in that case, all the goods of
the stock in general or of any particular Man of the Corporation is liable, as
well he that voted one way as the other, (which the King's Officers cannot
distinguish of) because that every Man that is a Member of a Corporation does
come in voluntarily, and consequently must be supposed to submit himself to the
actions of that Body, and intends to be bound, stand, and fall with them that
are of it, as to all acts that are done by them as a Body; and therefore if the
Body borrow money of a stranger, he that voted against the borrowing the money
(though Mr. Hobbes, p. 117. say the contrary) is as well bound to the payment
of it as he that voted for it.

Mr. Hobbes, p. 122. says, That if a particular Man's Right be to be
determined in an Assembly, he may make as many friends as he can, nay may hire
them with money, and it is not unjust, without a Law to the contrary. That is to
say, A Man may bribe all the Judges of his case that he can, and so he that
has the best Purse, not he that has the best Right, must carry it; except the
Judges be so honest as not to take bribes, which must be supposed as lawful as
the giving them. Mr. Hobbes though he ventured upon this Position could not but
know how odious bribes are accounted in the Scripture, as 1 Samuel 8. 3. where
bribes and perverting of Judgment go together. And a gift Deuteronomy. 16. 19. is
called, The blinder of the Eyes and the perverter of Judgment; and is expressly
forbidden, Exodus 23. 8. But as Mr. Hobbes before had labored to destroy all
Religion, so now he is endeavoring to destroy all common Honesty; and dares
say that which never any Man before durst, but was ashamed to own, though
perchance he might be so wicked as to do it. And Mr. Hobbes gives no reason for
this Position, but because, says he, perchance Justice cannot be had without
it; that is to say, every Litigant may be wicked, because it may be some Judges
are. But though this opinion I believe has been as successful as any wicked
opinion of Mr. Hobbes in all his Book, complying so much with Men's interests;
yet he and every other Man ought to know, that a Man ought rather to venture
the loss of his Right, than to do any thing repugnant to God's Word and common
honesty, except Mr. Hobbes will inve all, and say, That it is better to gain
some of the World, though he lose his own Soul.

Mr. Hobbes says, p. 133. That the words, Repent and be Baptized, are in
Scripture Counsil and not commands: So, by his Rule, we may neglect either
Repentance or Baptism without sin; but for this gives he no reason; Nay, he
has formerly allowed of the word Imperative, and yet now he will not allow of
the Imperative Mood to bid or command; for it is Repent and be Baptized in
English, and in Greek (...), which are Aorists of the Imperative Mood, and why
then they should not be words of command, I know not; except because Mr. Hobbes
in his new Models has otherwise est^blish'd it. But observe Mr. Hobbes hi^
reason why it is no command; Because, says he, it is not to the benefit of God
Almighty, but of our selves, that we do Excellenty argued Mr. Hobbes, for by
the same reason we have no command upon us to obey any of God's Commands; for
it is not for God's benefit but our own: Nay, we need obey none of them (as Mr.
Hobbes frequently argues) because there is no Law enjoins them, except where
there is a Sovereign power that so commands. I suppose that his chief intent in
this is to ease Men's Consciences, and to give wicked Men liberty to sin,
having no command, as Mr. Hobbes here says, from God to the contrary; what
else should put this ^rotchet into Mr. Hobbes his Head, I know not. For if a
Law be made for the good of the People, every Man is bound to perform it, and
it is a command as well as an advise. The People asked St. Peter what they
should do? Repent and be Baptized, says he. And suppose a Child, being at the
brink of River, should ask his Father what he should do; if his Father should
bid him go over the Bridge, would it not be a command? And certainly Peter had
as much Authority in matters of Faith, as a Parent has in common actions. But
I think this Position of Mr. Hobbes's is as true as his saying, p. 135. That
passion makes Men eloquent; which is contrary to experience, except he means by
Eloquence making a Noise, as he has with his Leviathan, without sense or
reason.

Mr. Hobbes, p. 139. says, That Customs are not Laws, by virtue of
prescription of Time, but by constitutions of their present Sovereigns. Here I
suppose Mr. Hobbes principally aimed at the supplanting of our Common Law, and
thereby make the readier way to bring all Men's Properties into incertainty and
confusion; which was at the time 1651, the readiest means, and most plausible,
to vest all in the Army, or him that should be turned up trump. For it is by the
Common Law, that is, the general custom of the Nation, that most Men enjoy
their Estates, either real or personal; now if length of time should not
justify that property, without the constitutions of the Sovereign; and such
constitutions could not be found, as it is most apparent they cannot, down goes
the Common Law, and Property with it, and then let the strongest take all.
Witty Mr. Hobbes! that can in a Treatise of Law lay down a Position that would
destroy the Law of his native Country, and thereby make way for an arbitrary
Power. But Mr. Hobbes, in the same Paragraph, makes a little amends for this;
for though he had given the Common Law a box on one Ear to make it stagger, he
hits it a clap on the other to set it upright again; for he says, That when an
unwritten Law shall be generally observed, and no iniquity appear in the use of
it, then it can be nothing but a Law of Nature, and obliges all mankind. Well
said Mr. Hobbes; for now he makes every Custom (which an unwritten Law implies)
unalterable by Act of Parliament; for an Act of Parliament against the Law of
Nature is void. This was a perfect rapture of Mr. Hobbes's without
consideration; for is any thing more apparent than that generally Customs are
no part of the Law of Nature, which is universal, and that customs of all
Nations differ, according to the convenience of the several People; and that
which is good for one People (though the Law of Nature be the same to all) is
ill for another; and that appears by the practices of all Nations that ever I
heard of. But if Mr. Hobbes mean by the unwritten Law, the verbal command of
his Sovereign, it is grosser nonsense than the other; for a Law of Nature, ex vi
termini, can only be produced by Nature, and not by any humane Institution;
Nature being previous to policy, and every thing being productive of its own
Laws, or else they would be the Laws of others. But Mr. Hobbes says excellent
well, p. 143. That all he says is not presently Law; and it is the greatest
piece of modesty I think in his whole Book; and if he had but added, that his
Incongruities had been innumerable, and not worth answering, in this Chapter,
it had been fit to be ranked with his greatest Truths.

Mr. Hobbes, p. 144. says, That if ^ Man, accused of a capital Crime, fly for
fear of the event, seeing his enemies Malice and Power and frequent corruption
of Judges; and makes it appear upon his Trial he is not guilty, and be
acquitted, yet by the Law he shall lose his Goods; and this, ^aith Mr. Hobbes,
is against the Law of Nature. I cannot say but that a case may be made, that a
general Law may seem severe in, but therefore is a general Law against the Law
of Nature, which is adapted to the generality of cases that may be supposed to
happen; as in this case, it is adapted to persons flying, and not to the chance
of every extraordinary, scarce to be supposed, particular. Yet even in that
case the Law has provided a remedy, and that is a power in the King to pardon
upon such an occasion. But if Mr. Hobbes had not been resolved to quarrel with
the Law of his native Country, he might more reasonably have said, That the Law
in this particular is rational, because guilt makes a Man fly, and why should
an innocent Man fly? And although one that fled may be acquitted upon his
trial, yet it may be supposed that it was by reason that such a person had
bribed the evidence or prosecutor, or the thing perchance might be so done in
the dark, that although there was probable evidence to commit him, yet there
might not be sufficient evidence to convict him as to the capital punishment,
although he had convicted himself as to the loss of his goods, by giving such
evidence of his guilt against himself as flying was; and the person has reason
to acknowledge the mildness of the Law, that makes not his flying sufficient
evidence against his life and real estate, as well as personal: But to give an
example of this; When Mr. Hobbes had written his Book, and was in France, he
was (as my Lord of Clarendon says) sought for to be attached, but then he fled
into England; would not any body swear that Mr. Hobbes knew himself guilty of
the abominable Doctrines in that Book? Or why should he fly if he thought
himself innocent? And if Mr. Hobbes had been caught and arraigned for it, and
there had wanted Evidence to prove him the Author, yet would not his own flight
have been an evidence of guilt against him; though perchance not of conviction
as to Treason and Blasphemy, in case the French Laws be as mild and gentle as
the English? So I think the Law in this point is rather a probable sparing the
guilty, than as Mr. Hobbes terms it a condemning the innocent; and though he
inveighs so much against this Law in many peremptory words, (as is frequent
with him upon all occasions) yet it is good for more innocent Men than he, that
it be continued, lest the flight be adjudged evidence above all evidence, and a
presumption of fact for absolute condemnation as well as for loss of goods,
against which no proof shall be admitted, and the person condemned, as it were,
out of his own Mouth. And though Mr. Hobbes, in the next page, rails against
the saying; That this is a presumption of Law, against which no proof shall be
admitted; yet suppose a Man confess a fact (as the Amalekite to David) is it
unjust to deny any proof to the contrary? I think scarce, admit the person be
in his wits; and this flying is a confession of the fact, as far as it is
possible for actions to be equally significant with words. But Mr. Hobbes, to
show his farther Learning in the Law, says, p. 145. That there is a Law
written, that a Man expelled by force shall be restored by force: When as the
Law is, That he shall be restored by the Justices and the Sheriff, which are
Officers of Law, and in execution of their authority, wherein there is no
force, as force is commonly taken, and that is unwarrantable violence.

Mr. Hobbes, p. 149. says, That a Man that has no supernatural revelation of
the will of God, is to obey for such the command of the Commonwealth. And this
he deduceth from two Texts; one that where God says to Abraham, I know thou will command thy Children, and thy House, to keep the way of the Lord: (which
was only, as I conceive, God's witness of Abraham's fidelity to him). The other
Text he cites, is the peoples saying to Moses, Speak thou to us, and we will
hear, but let not God speak to us, lest we die: (which was only, as I think,
and expression of the fear of the people at the mount of the Glory of God's
Majesty, which before had been so terrible to them.) And upon these two
basis'es it is, that he founds several assertions of this kind in several parts
of his Book; In which for once I will deal with Mr. Hobbes by whole sale, as p.
149, 199, 205, 232, 237. are to the same purpose, and in p. 241, 252. he
something amplifies upon the Text, and says, That he, at the time of his Book,
would affirm nothing that was novelty, or a paradox in Religion, but would
attend the end of that dispute of the sword, concerning the authority by which
all sorts of Doctrine are to be approved or rejected, (though to do him right,
p. 186. he has a whole Paragraph against this) and whose commands, both in
speech and writing, must be obeyed by those that in^end to be protected. And
further says, p. 193. Except where God is temporal King, it is better to obey
Man than God. And p. 249. says, That the Laws of the Sovereign are to be
obeyed in external acts and profession of Religion. And p. 360. says, That we
ought to pay Divine Worship to a Sovereign if he command it, but Men may
believe otherwise. And p. 250. he says, That none can take notice what is, or
what is not the Word of God, but the Sovereign. And p. 322, 323. says, That
the Bible is only Law, where the Civil Sovereign has made it so. And in
several places he says, That no Man ought to regard Miracles or Prophecies,
without supernatural revelation, because he cannot tell whether they are said
or done to deceive. And many other places to the same effect: Thus, he. When
this present Turk was in danger of being murdered by the treachery of the
Captains of the Ianizaries, to reduce the multitude to their obedience they did
hang out Mahomet's banner, which many ran under out of Devotion, to be
protected by it, and to defend Mahomet's Successor. But I dare say, none said
more in defense of Mahomets Doctrine than Mr. Hobbes has here done, nor yet I
believe so much; and no wonder, a Renegado Christian being always observed to
be worse than a Turk. And thus much he goes further, than I believe the
generality of the Turks will: for they will stick to Mahomet's Doctrine in the
Alcoran, let the Grand Seignior say what he will, but Mr Hobbes is for changing
as often as the power of the Sword shall command. And one would have thought,
that no man had been so impious, in so high a measure to have affirmed, That
it is better to obey the commands of Men than of God: whereby he lays all under
the dictates of the Sword; and makes the truth of God wholly to depend upon the
power of Men; especially as to external acts of Worship, and that he himself
1650. attended to determine all. According to this Doctrine, if a Papist and
been commander, we ought to have embraced Romish Idolatry; if a Jew had come to
have been General of the Army, and had bidden him be circumcised, and by words
renounce the Faith of Christ, he would have done it; If a Turk had been turned
up trump, and bidden Mr. Hobbes go to Mecca and worship at Mahomet's tomb, he
would have done it; If a Persian had proved uppermost, and had bidden him
worship at Haly's shrine, and say Haly was a greater Prophet than Christ, he
would have done it; Nay, he would have asked no petition of God or Man for 30
days, save of Darius, had he been in the days of Daniel: So I hope would no
body else, for all the Example of Naaman, which Mr. Hobbes makes such use of,
to justify all external acts of Idolatry: The Text is in the 2 Kings 5. 18,
19. where Naaman, after profession to serve no God but the true one; says,
When I bow my self in the house of Rimmon ( my Master leaning on my hand) the
Lord pardon thy servant in this thing; And Elisha said, go in peace. Therefore
it is lawful in external acts to worship (as Mr. Hobbes says, p. 271.) an Idol,
and deny the true God in effect, if we keep our Hearts close to him; and such
an action, says he, if done according to the Law of a Man's Country, is not
the Subjects act but the Sovereigns. But if the Devil take a Subject for his so
doing, I would know, whether the doing by the Sovereign's command will redeem
him. And as to the Text, it is impossible to plant the legality of Idolatrous
external Worship upon it; for the Prophet's bidding Naaman go in peace might be
an Error in the Prophet, created by his conceit that he should hinder the
propagation of the Worship of the true God in Syria, if he should deny so great
a Man ^his request; which was a failing in the Prophet's Faith in God: or
perchance the Prophet only took the request to be, that he might bow in
reverence to his Master, when his Master bowed to Rimmon; as it is a custom
amongst us, for Inferiors to rise from their seats, when Superiors do, out of
respect to their Superiors, and whether way it is taken, no matter, for it can
be no warrant for Idolatry when the Sovereign commands; and it is plain no
otherwise can it rationally be understood. But observe, the Prophet gives not
Naaman leave to bow to Rimmon but in the house of Rimmon, which may be done
upon other accounts, and the words are constructive: who then, but Mr. Hobbes,
would have founded the legality of external acts of Idolatry upon such a
ground? Which is certainly, if there be any such thing in the World, a denying
of God before Men, and that is the way to be denied before God in Heaven;
Matthew. 10. 32. Luke 12.8. and expressly, Romans 10.8. Confession with the Mouth
and belief in the Heart go together, and are made the prequesites to Salvation;
and Mr. Hobbes admits, That confession with the Mouth is but a kind of External
worship; and see the 3 d of Daniel, and there we find, that the three Children
refused to Worship Nebuchadnezzar's Image, and rather chose the furnace; and
God in approbation of their so doing delivered them, by not suffering the fire
to do them any harm, though it consumed their enemies; and Nebuchadnezzar was
the Sovereign at that time that God had set over those three Children. And
Daniel himself chose rather to be thrown into the Den of Lions, than to neglect
the Worship of God, according to the Statut made by Darius and his Princes, as
it is in the sixth of Daniel. Now then, let any rational Man judge, what a
strange creature Mr. Hobbes has made of himself, to take a Text of Scripture
to warrant external acts of Idolatry, which from the Text it self appears
otherwise constructive; and is not capable to be taken in the sense he would
have it, to warrant this cursed and damnable opinion; when there are these and
many other plain Texts of Scripture against this construction; though I am
afraid that this gin has caught near as many, as his assertion of the
lawfulness of bribes. But he thought he would secure himself in the Year 1651.
let the Turk, a Jew, or the Devil wear the Sword, for he would do as they bid
him; for he says, All sorts of Doctrine are to be approved or rejected by the
authority of the Sword; which will let in the Mohammedan, Bannian, or Jewish
Doctrine, to be, at any change of State, equally capable as the Christian to be
approved as true, and so ought to be followed by Mr. Hobbes his rule; For,
(says Mr. Hobbes) how shall we know what are the commands of God, but by
supernatural revelation, (such I suppose he intends, as was to St. John in the
Isle of Patmos, and supposes there is no such thing now) or by the command of
the Sovereign, and who but the Sovereign can take notice what is the Word of
God? Which I admit none can do so wicked as Mr. Hobbes, because their foolish
hearts are hardened. But I would have Mr. Hobbes know, that the Books of the Old
Testament were the Word of God, when there was no King in Israel, but every Man
did that which was right in his own Eyes; and that the Books of the Old and New
Testament were the Word of God, and so taken notice of, and obeyed by good Men,
in the Year 1651. when there was no civil Sovereign to tell in England what was
the Word of God, and what not; and the Epistles of St. Paul were the Word of
God when he wrote them, although Christianity was then disowned by the Roman
Emperors: Nay, they are the Word of God, and would be in the furthest part of
America, (for a word is a word though there be no Body to hear it) where it is
supposed there are no Inhabitants, were they thither carrried. And it is but
like the rest of Mr. Hobbes his Philosophy to say, that the Existence or Being
of things depend upon Political Institution, when as the Being of things ever
was, and ever will be absolute, let a Sovereign be or not be, say or not say.
But a civil Sovereign has power to model things indifferent in themselves, and
to put them into such conjunctions as may be for his own and the good of those
he governs; but has not power to alter the beings of things, or at his
pleasure to make that not to be that is, or to be that is not. And as to Mr.
Hobbes his desiring to know, how we may know what is the Word of God, I have
said something to it before, I hope that is satisfactory to any but a cavilling
Atheist, in my Answer to his p. 32. and shall say little more here; save, that
suppose there was a Country in which the People were Christians for the most
part, and the Sovereign a Mohammedan, that the delivery of the Bible, as the
thing believed to be Gods Word by the consent and approbation of those
Christians, is a sufficient testimony of its being the Word of God, joined with
the matter contained in it, which is so apt to beget in every good Man a
testimony that it is the Word of God; and we have a greater testimony, by the
general consent of Christian mankind that has ever admitted them, since
written, or the greatest part of them to be so; besides, we have the
improbability of the penmen of them to be corrupted, for which plentifully see
the most Learned Dr. Stillingfleet's Origines Sacrae, and to the same Learned
Book shall I refer my Reader as to the regard of miracles and prophesies; yet I
will observe, that though Mr. Hobbes frequently says, Miracles and Prophesies
are not to be regarded without supernatural revelation, yet he says, p. 187.
That God reveals his Word by those that work Miracles; which admits the
credibility both of one and the other, without supernatural revelation; and is,
in my opinion, like the rest of Mr. Hobbes his contradictions of himself.

Mr. Hobbes, being an excellent Man at all kind of Laws, says p. 152. That the
Ignorance of civil Law shall excuse a Man in a strange Country till declared to
him. But Mr. Hobbes never tells whose part it is to watch all strangers that
come into England, and to tell them the Law, lest the King's Subjects suffer
loss, and the stranger offending be indemnified. And I believe few strangers
will venture the punishment for breach of the Law, presuming to be justified by
Mr. Hobbes his authority. And doubtless it is the duty of all Men to acquaint
themselves with the Law of the place where they come, and expect protection, or
else no State, Sovereign, or People, can be safe; but Mr. Hobbes is generally
for Positions that tend to unhinge all the foundations of Government: yet Mr.
Hobbes seems to say, which I cannot omit, That no stranger ought to endeavor
the alteration of Religion where he comes, (how congruously to the precedent I
leave others to judge) because it is against the Law of Nature; and this he does
say, or his words are not sense. But clearly, as the case may be, it is against
the Law of Nature and of God not to endeavor to alter the Religion of a place
by teaching; as suppose a true Christian should go into Aurenge Zebe's Country,
he ought to teach the true worship of God, out of charity to their Souls, that
they might be saved by Jesus Christ; and out of charity to their Bodies, that
the Heathen Women amongst them might desist from burning themselves at the
death of their Husbands; and indeed, in this Position, Mr. Hobbes is more
uncharitable than a Jesuit.

Mr. Hobbes says, p. 156. That when a Man is in the power of the enemy, the
obligation of the Law cease, and obedience to the enemy is no crime. I
suppose Mr. Hobbes means, that the obligation of all Law, both Natural and
Civil, cease, of which he treated just before; and this is but to say, that a
Child being in the custody of his Fathers enemy, may (if so commanded by the
enemy) kill his Father; or, to come closer to Mr. Hobbes, it is to say, that
the murder of the old King was lawful by any Man that was under the power of
the Army. O what comfort this was to those that did it! But Mr. Hobbes ought to
know, that the Law absolutely Natural, as between Children and Parents, and the
Law suppositiously Natural, as between the Subjects and their King, is
everlasting and universal, and that Children and Subjects are bound by that Law
not to injure their Parents or Sovereigns, let what will happen to them, or
into what ever Power they come; because that Nature never cease (though
sometimes it may be suppressed) in any Man: Nature ever being in any thing, as
long as the thing has existence, as it is natural for a Tree to bud as long as
it is a live, and for a Child or Subject to love his Parent or Prince as long as
they are in this World, to which the destruction of either is exactly opposite
and contrary to his Nature, and consequently the doing of it is against that
Law, and a damnable Sin. And further observe, that by this rule of Mr.
Hobbes's, if a Papist get a Protestant into his power, that the Protestant may
without sin worship a Crucifix or Wafer^cake, in case the Papist bid him.

Mr. Hobbes says, p. 158. That a crime that has been more frequently
punished, is greater than that of which there has been many precedent examples
of impunity. By this Argument, Plunder (Military robbery) was little less than
lawful during the War, because seldom punished. And Duels, so contrary to the
Nature of any civilized State, are lawful; and the killing of Men in them,
little less than warrantable, because so few have suffered for the fact of late
days; but certainly the escape of offenders alters not the crime, things being
the same let external accidents happen this way or that.

Mr. Hobbes says, p. 163. That if a Subject deny his subjection, he may be
proceeded against as an enemy, and suffer at the Sovereign's pleasure, let what
Law soever be ordained against Treason. There is no authority for this but Mr.
Hobbes his saying so, and as little reason. For a Subject cannot cease to be a
Subject when he pleases; (no more than a Son cease to be a Son at pleasure:)
Nay, he can never cease to be a Subject to his natural Prince, except the Laws
of the Empire he is born in so limit subjection; and therefore whatever such a
Subject does, or says, he ought to be condemned or cleared by those Laws under
which he was a Subject. And if this saying of Mr. Hobbes was true, no Man could
tell who was a Subject to his Prince, and who not; who was to be Arbitrarily
punished, and who not; but (God be blessed) there is no such thing as Arbitrary
punishment in England to be inflicted upon any person whatsoever, or in any
case whatsoever.

Mr. Hobbes says, p. 168. That it is a Seditious Doctrine to say, that every
private Man is judge of good and evil actions: but shows no reason for his
saying so, neither can he. For it is most apparent, if he mean private
particular Men's actions, every Man is judge of his own, and it is impossible
for any Commonwealth to take notice of them in particular; except Men act
things contrary to Law, and then there are persons in all Nations appointed to
take notice of the irregularity of those actions to punish them, and every Man
must judge of his actions whether they are good or evil; that is against the
Law of God or Man, or adventure the punishment. What else Mr. Hobbes should
here mean than particular Men's actions, I know not, and then certainly it is
nonsense for him to say, It Is Seditious for a Man to judge of the good or evil
of his own actions. But this is as true, as his saying in the next page, That
it is no sin for a Man to act against his Conscience where there is a
Commonwealth; Although St. Paul, when he was at Corinth and wrote to the
Romans, who were all at that time under a Commonwealth, thought the contrary,
or else he would not have said, Romans 14. 23. That he that doubts is damned if
he eat; certainly much more he is damned, that not only doubts of the
illegality of an action, but believes that it is unlawful to eat, and is
satisfied in his Conscience of it. And certainly from the reason of the thing,
to act against a Man's Conscience must be a sin, because it is a daring to do
that which is displeasing to God (whether the particular act in it self was
displeasing to him or no) and consequently an affront to God, and a not setting
a due estimate upon his Power and Goodness.

Mr. Hobbes has several leaves together, and in other precedent parts of his
Book, been laying down Rules for a Government, and p. 176. says, That those
Principles of Reason which he lays down will make the constitution of his
Government, except by external violence, everlasting. And what those Principles
are, my Lord of Clarendon (a Noble and equal Adversary, both to absolute Power
and confusion) has fully set forth, and made sufficiently ridiculous. But Mr.
Hobbes, after his long Treatise of an Earthly, comes to an Heavenly Sovereign,
and that is God himself, and cites places of Scripture, p. 186. very devoutly,
even before the Sword in 1651. had determined what was Scripture, and what not.
And the first onset Mr. Hobbes makes for erecting the Kingdom of God, is the
telling us, that God's Kingdom over Vegitables and Beasts is but Metaphorical,
for he only is properly said to Reign that Governs his Subjects by his Word and
Promises, which things Inanimate (says Mr. Hobbes) are incapable of. But why
he says, That God is not properly but Metaphorically King of Beasts and
Inanimates as well as Men, he gives no reason; and Psalm. 47. 7. says, That God
is King of all the Earth expressly; if of all the Earth, then of Beasts and
Inanimates: And it is further plain, that God is King of Vegitables and Beasts,
for that he Rules them by his Word and Power, and provides for them as well as
Men, and it is the property of a King to Govern, and what he Governs he is King
of, and may as well be said to be King of these as of Men; the Word King being
but a contraction of the Saxon word Cyning, which signifies Chief.

Mr. Hobbes says, p. 187. That the right of Nature, whereby God Raigns over
Men, and punishes them for breach of his Laws, is derived not from Creating
them, as if he required obedience as of gratitude, but from his irresistible
Power; as if a Man had had power above all the rest, there had been no reason
but that he should have Ruled according to his own discretion. And to
irresistible Power (further says he) the Dominion of all Men naturally
adhereth; hence it is, that God's Kingdom over Men, and his right of afflicting
them at his pleasure, belongs naturally to God not as Creator and Gracious,
but as Omnipotent, and his right to afflict Men is not always from sin, but
from his Power. Thus ends this abominable Paragraph, which I almost tremble at
when I read it; yet he endeavors to confirm it by places of Scripture in the
next page, (which by and by I shall come to) which makes me think it impossible
for the Devil to raise any Heretic so abominable, but that he will find Texts
of Scripture to cite in favor of his Opinions; and if any Heretic ever
deserved to be burned, certainly the Author of this Paragraph does; it being a
Text from which naturally arises these four Doctrines, first, That Mr. Hobbes
or any Man else (if Mr. Hobbes here says true) may without ingratitude
dethrone his Maker if he can; because Man is obliged to God, as he says, only
because of his Power. Secondly, That all right of Government, or acting (which
he makes the same) what any one pleases; is from Power. (There Is an end of Dr.
Gosdwin's Dominium fundatur in gratiae.) So that ten highway Men have right to
take all they can get from any two other Men, because they are stronger. And
any Subject may depose his King, if he be able, (good Doctrine for a Popish
cabal) and as long as he is stronger than the people may Rule them at his own
discretion. Thirdly, That it is consistent with the Nature of God to be cruel
to Man, although Man had never offended him. Fourthly, That no gratitude is due
to God by Man for Creating him, though he has made him little lower than the
Angels, in his own Image, and Crowned him with glory and honor, and made him
capable of being blessed for ever. The Impiety of all this is enough to put any
Man into an amaze; But he must be out of an amaze that Answers Mr. Hobbes in
this place, for observe how subtle he is, (being led by the instigation of the
Devil) to put the right of Government and Power of puni^hment together, as if
they were expressive of the same thing, and necessarily connext, it being
impossible for a King to govern without a Power to punish; when as the right
and the Power to act, may be as far distant as right and wrong, though
frequently in Civil actions they are conjoined. As for Example, When a Sheriff
executes a Man for Murder, he has both right and Power to do so; But when Sir
Edm. Bury Godfrey was decoyed into Somersethouse, and there strangled with a
twisted Handkerchief, by Romish Priests and Jesuits, there was irresistible
Power to do the fact, but no right to do it. So it is apparent, that this
putting Power of punishment and a right of Government together, is nothing but
a fallacy; the Proposition having Truth in it only pro hic and nunc, not
universally. But to reason the case a little with Mr. Hobbes, as to Gods right
of governing of us, because he is our Creator and gracious. Suppose a company
of Men were here together upon Earth, and all of equal Power, and one in
particular had conferred signal benefits upon all the rest, and they having no
King or Governor were resolved to choose one from amongst themselves; Ought
they not in gratitude (which I think little less than creates a natural right)
to choose their Benefactor to that honor before any one else? Certainly they
ought, in any sober Man's judgment. Why then is it not naturally right, that
Men obey God out of love, because he has done so much for them, as to create
them in such a sublime State, and his continuing still to be gracious to them,
(to which Mr. Hobbes to do him right agrees, p. 190.) as well as because he is
Omnipotent, and by consequence has Power to punish their disobedience. I might
here say, That it is as natural for Man to obey his Creator, as it is for a Son
to obey his Father; but that Mr. Hobbes before (so far as he is intelligible)
has denied any obedience due to a Father upon the account of generation. Now
since Mr. Hobbes for this Paragraph cites places of Scripture, even in the Year
1651. before the Sword had determined what was Scripture and what not; let me
cite some (now it is the Year 1679. and all Men have agreed the Bible to be the
Word of God) to prove, that God has a right to Rule as he is Creator and
gracious, and to show the apparent falseness of what Mr. Hobbes has said in
this page^ Romans 9. v. 20,21. clearly shows, that God as Creator has power or
liberty, as the word (...) signifies, to order his Creatures as he pleases,
and that upon the account as Creator, for he is there compared to the Potter.
It Is true, those Texts speak only of making of Men, and Mr. Hobbes is now upon
the governing of Men; but observe, those Texts relate to the future state of
Men, which God as Creator has liberty or power to order as he pleases. And
Isaiah 37. v. 26. There God says by the Prophet, That he had formed the Earth,
and brought it to pass that Sennacherib should lay wast Cities. Where observe,
That God's creating the World, and his Government of it, go together, which to
my apprehension shows his right to Govern upon the account of creating. It Is
true, irresistible power God is pleased to make use of, to punish wicked Men,
as in this last mentioned Chapter he is said to do, by putting an hook in
Sennacherib's Nose, and a bridle in his Lips, and turning him back, like an
unruly strong beast; but God rules his own People by love, and they obey him
upon the account of his Goodness, ( for the love of Christ constrains Men) and
as he is their Creator, and thereby has the right to govern them: But it is
true, wicked Men obey him because they cannot help it; yet from thence it
follows not, that God has not right to govern wicked Men as he is their
Creator. And to stop Mr. Hobbes his mouth, let him read the 20. Exodus v. 2. 3,
4, etc. and he will find, that God tells the Israelites what he had done for
them, and immediately ensues his commands; which clearly tells any rational
Man, that God has right to govern upon the account of his Goodness, and with
this accords all the Chapters in Deuteronomy that treat of obedience, and
clearly show that it is due upon the account of God's goodness. But now I come
to Mr. Hobbes his Texts of Scripture, which he cites for his opinion, and they
as little justify his opinion, as his opinion is agreeable to Truth. He
introduces his Texts by saying, that it staggered all sorts of Men, The
prosperity of the wicked, and the adversity of the good, and particularly
David, Psalm 73. v. 1. 2, 3. which verses treat of David's wonder at the
prosperity of the wicked, and never goes on to the 17. 18, 19, 20. verses,
where David expresses his satisfaction as to that matter. And then Mr. Hobbes
proceeds to Job's Expostulation with God about his afflictions, notwithstanding
his righteousness; and this, he says, God answers not by arguments drawn from
Job's sin but his own power, and quotes, Job 38. v. 4. where God says, Where
wast thou when I laid the foundations of the Earth? In which Text, I think (as
well as the whole Chapter) Mr. Hobbes answers himself, and shows God's
Sovereignty by reason of his Creation; but Mr. Hobbes says, this approved
Job's innocence; why I know not, either from the Text or Context, and Job says
himself, Chap. 40. v. 4. I am vile and cannot answer. And then Mr. Hobbes cites
the saying of our Savior, it is the 9 th of John v. 3. That our Savior says,
That neither the blind Man nor his Parents had sinned, but that the works of
God might be manifest in him. Therefore he would conclude, that sin is not
always the cause of punishment. Why? For no reason, but because God was pleased
to make this Man without sight, (as he might have done all the World) that his
son Jesus, our blessed Lord and Savior, might afterward work a Miracle upon
him for the settling the Gospel; Or it may prove, that God may make Man as he
pleases, as the Potter may order the clay. Is this any thing to punishment at
all? It is impossible, for it is no punishment to be created as God pleases;
for punishment is a deprivation of some good a Man has had, and it is no
punishment for a Man not to have that which he never had, or had any right to
till God gave it him; and Mr. Hobbes might as well have said, that it is a
punishment for him not to be born to 1000 l. a year because his Neighbor was,
as that it is a punishment for a Man to be born without Eyes, because his
Neighbor was born with Eyes. One would wonder that any Man in his wits should
cite so many Texts of Scripture, and so little to a purpose. And then, says
Mr. Hobbes, Though death entered by sin, yet God might have afflicted Adam
though he had never sinned; and here Mr. Hobbes breaks off, without giving any
shadow of reason or authority for his assertion. What God might have done by
his Prerogative, I know not; but this I say, that I never read in the Bible of
any affliction upon a people, but it was for sin, at least sin preceded; and
all along the Bible, God lays the reason of his punishments upon his peoples
sins, as well as the punishments of other Nations upon their sins; and why then
Mr. Hobbes should say, That punishments are not always from Men's sins, is
impossible to find a sound reason; and admit God should lay some affliction
upon an innocent person, were there any such, (which is absolutely, or the next
to blasphemy to affirm) yet this would not be punishment, but an act of his
Will and Power; and admit he may do such a thing, it does not therefore follow,
that ever God did, as Mr. Hobbes has affirmed, but not proved.

Mr. Hobbes says, p. 190. That knowledge and understanding cannot be
attributed to God; and to justify himself, gives a definition of them, and
that is, That they are nothing in us but tumults of the mind, raised by
External things that press the Organs of the Body, and there is no such thing
in God. I doubt when Mr. Hobbes wrote this he had a tumult in his mind, for any
rational Man would think him mad, who confesses a God, that notwithstanding
shall deny God one of his great Attributes, and one so great, that without it
all the rest would signify nothing, and that is Knowledge or Understanding;
and this for no reason, but because God cannot be said to understand things in
the same manner that we do, (admitting Mr. Hobbes his definition true, which is
false, Tumult being an enemy to understanding) God having no organical parts.
For is it not possible, that a Being more excellent should understand things in
another manner than one that is less excellent? It Is rational to suppose it
may. Besides, the Scriptures expressly ascribe knowledge to God; as amongst the
rest, Amos 3. v. 2. Gal. 4. v. 9. expressly mention God's knowledge. And to deny
God's knowledge, is to deny God; that is, a Being infinitely wise. So that I
may truly (if not improperly) changing the Text of Scripture say, that Mr.
Hobbes acknowledges a God, but in words denies him. And in the next page, to
prevent being confused in this matter, Mr. Hobbes says, It Is a dishonor to
God to dispute about his Attributes. Certainly then Mr. Hobbes is guilty of a
greater dishonor to God, to deny his Attributes.

And in p. 192. Mr. Hobbes says, That only those Attributes of God are to be
allowed in public worship, which the Sovereign ordains. So now it is uncertain
whether he will allow him any Attributes of perfection in public worship, or
no; for in case the Sovereign prove as bad, or worse than Julian, and command
Injustice or Ignorance to be those Attributes, that are only to be allowed or
used for signs of honor, (as he says Attributes are) no other must be used.
And now he has made the honor of God wholly to depend on the will of Man,
that is the Sovereign; yet in this Mr. Hobbes grows a little better, for here
(though before he had denied God his Attributes) he gives the Sovereign power
to restore God's Attributes to him again. But what nonsense is this, that a
Sovereign, that is a Man upon Earth and God Almighty his creature, should be
said to have power to dispose of God's Attributes, who is the commander of all
the World. This is against the nature of Powers dispo^al, for he disposes only
that has the supreme Power of disposing. And the sense of this, is the like
Divinity of this, as well as of that which follows, and that is Mr. Hobbes his
interpretation of the Text of Scripture, ( viz.) It Is better to obey God than
Man; which he says has only place in the Kingdom of God by pact, and not by
Nature. That is to say, (as I suppose that am a little acquainted with his
language) when a people have made an express covenant with God to obey him, as
the Israelites did by Moses, they ought rather to obey God than Man; but all
other people, over which God has only a natural Kingdom, that have made no
particular covenant (as none can now a days as Mr. Hobbes said before) with
God, ought to obey Man rather than God. So now we may lawfully be Papists,
Turks, Jews, Infidels, or any thing that Man commands us; and this place opens
Mr. Hobbes to the life in what I have spoken to before about this matter; and
so I shall say no more of it in this place.

Mr. Hobbes, p. 195. coming to handle the Nature and Rights of a Christian
Commonwealth, calls our natural Reason the undoubted Word of God. So I thank
him that something he allows to be the undoubted Word of God, and that God has
not wholly left us without his Word to direct us; though Mr. Hobbes would not
allow us the Scriptures to be so, without Man's approbation. But I think Mr.
Hobbes had done much better, if in this place he had set up the Light within
us, and thereby turned Quaker, to be the undoubted Word of God; for then he
would have had George Fox of his side: Or if he had said our senses had been
the undoubted Word of God, I should sooner have believed him; for that all
mankind (as we see daily) is less apt to err in matters of sense than matters
of Reason. And according to what Mr. Hobbes says, If a Man's natural Reason
tell him, that the World is eternal, a part ante and part post, it is the
undoubted Word of God, and accordingly to be believed; for I suppose Mr. Hobbes
will grant that God is to be believed: I not remembering that ever Mr. Hobbes
has denied God his Truth, though he has denied him Understanding and
Knowledge. And by the same argument, if the Israelites natural Reason had told
them, that the Calf brought them out of the Land of Egypt, it was to have been
believed even by Moses and Aaron: And if a Man's natural Reason should tell
him, that for gain he might cut his Neighbors throat, we ought to believe it,
for that the Word of God is in every place and part of it to be believed. But
suppose a Man's natural Reason should tell him, that Mr. Hobbes his Leviathan
is a Book not only full of Blasphemy but Nonsense, and particularly in this
Paragraph, (where he goes with a great deal of other unintelligible matter from
calling Reason the Word of God, to say Reason is to be made use of in acquiring
of peace, etc. and saying, When in Reason there is any thing contrary to God's
Word, the fault is either in ill interpretation or erroneous ratiocination,
(which makes all he said signify nothing,) would Mr. Hobbes admit, that this
Man's Reason was the Word of God? No, I believe he would say, That there was a
fault in this Man's ratiocination; as I am sure there is in Mr. Hobbes's in the
next page, where he says, That God may speak to a Man by Dreams, Visions or
Inspiration, but no other Man is bound to believe it; which taken as an
universal proposition, makes an end of all belief in the Scriptures. But of
this I have spoken before, and referred matters of this nature, as well as the
knowledge of a true Miracle or Prophet, to the Learned Origines Sacrae; which I
hope any rational, or good Man, will rather read and regard upon that subject
than Mr. Hobbes his Leviathan: So little consistent with it self, or
intelligible by any rational Man, besides the Errors and foolish
Interpretations of Scripture, and particularly of Deuteronomy. 13. v. 5. which says,
That a dreamer or a Prophet, that seeks to make Men revolt from God, shall be
put to death; Mr. Hobbes says, That that place is equivalent to revolt from
the King. And also his interpretation of the 1. of Gal. 1, 8. where Paul says,
That he that preaches any other Gospel let him be accursed, that is, says Mr.
Hobbes, that Christ is King; and hence he infers, That all preaching against
the Power of the King is accursed; which let it be as true as it will in it
self, is such an unreasonable inference, that it is not capable to be more
exposed. But now I think upon it, it is probable Mr. Hobbes looked into
Scripture to find a Text which may maintain, that they were accursed in 1651.
that Preached revolting from Oliver's Army; or that the said Army (who had the
Power, and consequently was Mr. Hobbes his King, which he attended to determine
matters of Religion) could not settle any thing for Scripture, or Religion, it
pleased; or that Preached that any thing ought not to be observed of Mahomet's
doctrine for Religion, that the Turk teaches within his Dominions, or that a
Papist should teach, if uppermost. So now Mr. Hobbes has done like a Scholar,
as he may well think, to find a place in the Bible to prevent Preaching against
the Alcoran or Mass: Yet to do Mr. Hobbes Right, after his so many assertions,
that that only is to be acknowledged as Canonical Scripture which the Civil
Sovereign says is so, and that in 1651. he attended the determination of the
Sword to decide all Doctrines, he says, That he can acknowledge nothing to be
Canonical Scripture, but that which the Church of England has commanded to be
acknowledged for such; and I think there is nothing so near an Orthodox opinion
in all his Book: but I suppose he meant, that he would acknowledge it to be so,
only until the Sword had at that time determined it.

After Mr. Hobbes had laid down positive general Rules for enervating the
Scriptures, in saying, That the Authority of them depended upon the
determination of the Sovereign; now in his 33. Chap. he comes to the
particulars of the several Books of the Scriptures, and hopes there I suppose
to complete the work: For he says, That the several Books, especially of the
Old Testament, were not written by those that are commonly supposed to be the
Penmen of them, but by others a long time after their deaths, (which, if true,
may raise a scruple to the truth of them) only he says, That he supposes
Moses wrote the greatest part of Deuteronomy, else that the Old Testament was
penned generally by Esdras, for which he cites the Apocrypha, Esdras the 14 th
Chapter; and when he has done so, takes it for granted, that Esdras penned
them after the captivity. To answer particularly Mr. Hobbes in this, would
require a very large Discourse, enough to tire out both Me and my Reader;
besides I think it not worth my while to answer general assertions in matters
of fact, which are contrary to the general admissions of the most Learned Men,
with long Discourses; but rather content my self with saying, that they are not
to be credited, but rejected. Yet to that which Mr. Hobbes is particular in, I
shall answer particularly. He says, The Pentateuch was penned long after Moses
death, and for this he cites the 12. of Genesis v. 6. which says, That when
Abraham passed through the Land to the plain of Moreh, the Canaanite was then
in the Land: Which shows clearly, says Mr. Hobbes, that this Book was written
after Moses time, because the Canaanite was not displaced till after Moses
death. But if Mr. Hobbes had well considered, and looked into the 7 th verse,
he would have found that God promised Abraham the Land, in which at that time
Abraham built an Altar unto the Lord; which was as it were a taking possession
of the Land, and by God's gift he had a better right to it, as to futurity,
than the Canaanite had: whereupon Abraham by Faith looked upon the future time,
and saw the Canaanite displaced, and knew that by force of God's promise the
Canaanites ancient right, to them and their posterity, was changed. So that the
Canaanites as to the succession, might be rather said to have had the Land than
that they had it, and so is the 48. Genesis 21. to be understood. Or may not the
Text be rationally intended, that Moses said this to declare that the Canaanite
was then in the Land, and not any other people. How unreasonable then it is,
for Mr. Hobbes to change a general supposition, at the best but upon a doubtful
Text of Scripture, and an Apocryphal story, I shall refer to any Man that has
his reason; and if reason be on my side, Mr. Hobbes ought to be so too, because
he said before, that Reason is the Word of God. The rest of Mr. Hobbes his
Texts to prove this, are nothing to the purpose, and so I pass them over. As to
the Penmen of the Books of the New Testament, he determins nothing, but says,
That they were made Canonical by the Church, and that the writers of them were
endowed with God's spirit, in that they conspire to the setting forth the
rights of the Kingdom of God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. Let me then ask
Mr. Hobbes, why they need to be made Canonical, and to be approved or rejected
by the Sovereign, or his reciprocal Word, the Sword?

Mr. Hobbes said, p. 38. That the Scriptures, by the spirit of God in Man, mean
a man's spirit inclined to godliness; the falsness of which, I have upon that
page spoken to. Now p. 207. he comes to treat of Spirits in general, what they
a^e, and says, if I rightly understand him, (which I think is difficult in so
perplexed a discourse as he makes all over this his 34. Chapter) That they are
bodies, for he says, that substance and body are the same thing. And p. 17,
53, 214. says, That all substances must be bodies, and that the words
incorporeal substance joined together, are unintelligible, nonsense, and imply
a contradiction: And so runs on further in his old vein of making positive
affirmations, contrary to the general received opinion of all Christian Men,
without giving any reason at all for his so ^aying. But to reason the matter a
little: why are the words incorporeal substance contradictories? Why may there
not be a substance that has no Body, as well as a substance that has one? For
substance is nothing but that which does substare such and such qualifications
as are proper, and do belong to the being or nature of the thing in which those
qualifications are, and without which those qualifications could not be, for
want of something to support them. As we may say that Iron, which is a
corporeal substance, is hard, so we may say, that a thing of a more subtle
existence or substance is intelligent, rational, or wise; For that it may be
equally capable to support these, as the Iron does hardness, color, or any
other qualification. Now then to say, that body and substance are the same
thing, is only a positive saying, and if the words had been never thought on
before, might as well signify variously as the same. Then certainly it is a
strange piece of confidence, to obtrude such a position upon the World without
any possibility of reason, which is contrary to the sentiments of all Learned
persons that ever I heard of. But if Mr. Hobbes ask me, what a Spirit is, if it
be not a Body? I must say, that I can no more tell the likeness of it, than Mr.
Hobbes, supposing he had never seen by some external obstruction any thing, nor
spoken with them that had, could have told what a like thing an Horse, or a
gray Hound is; things incapable, and things obstructed, giving the same account
of their proceedings. But it is apparent, that there is such a thing as a
Spirit, for our Savior says, Luke 24. 39. Handle me, and see, for a Spirit
has not Flesh and Bones, as ye see me have. And if not Flesh and Bones, of
what must a Spirit consist that is corporeal? I hope Mr. Hobbes will not say,
that it is made like his deciding Sword, of Iron and Steel. But the apprehension
that we can have of a Spirit is, that it is something that is no object of our
Senses, and so not Mathematically descriptable, but an object of our
Understandings; which apprehend that a good Spirit is wise and knowing, and
that an evil Spirit is subtle and cunning. But what shall we say then of Mr.
Hobbes his Spirit, (that is his Soul) which is neither wise, subtle, nor
cunning? To this I shall only say, that I think it is no Body, by reason it has
actuated every part of his Body, and been in the same for near 80 Years
together, which it could not have been had it been Body, for this would be to
make several Bodies in one place at the same time, which Mr. Hobbes disallows
of. So then, the Soul of Man must be something that is not Body, that is as we
call it Spirit or Spiritual substance, created by God in Man, as Life was
breathed into Adam and all other living creatures. But Mr. Hobbes, after his
Philosophical discourse concerning the corporeousness of a Spirit, cites Texts
of Scripture to show what the meaning of Spirit is there: His first is, Genesis 1.
2. where it is said, That the Spirit of God moved upon the face of the Waters.
This, he says, is meant a wind wrought by God, because motion is attributed to
it, and consequently place, and nothing can be moved that changes not place;
or has not dimension, and whatsoever has dimension is Body. Admirable
Philosophy! For mark the Argument, motion and place belong to Bodies, therefore
nothing but a Body can have motion or place. Suppose a Man should reply upon
Mr. H^bbes and say, Ears belong to an Ass, therefore nothing but an Ass can
have Ears: what a trouble would this be to Mr. Hobbes, to be made an Ass by his
own Argument; which supposes all things to be the same, to which any one
circumstance or qualification equally belongs. But fully to answer Mr.
Hobbes, motion in this place of Scripture is intended, as I think, of the
special and extraordinary operation of God's Spirit, (though some Interpreters
take it, I confess, to be a wind impulsed by God's Spirit, like Genesis 8.1.) upon
the Waters, and not to denote God's moving from place to place as Bodies do;
for in that sense neither motion nor place can be attributed to God, who is
every where, but in no place either circumscriptively or definitively, as
Bodies are. But it follows not therefore, that God by his Spirit cannot
extraordinarily act in one place more than another, without becoming a Body, as
he did in the creation upon the Waters. And it is not sense to say, that of
necessity dimension m^st belong to that which has motion or place; because
that Bodies that have motion and place have dimension; for it is to make a
general conclusion of the Being of a thing, from a particular qualification,
and that would be to make Men Beasts, and Beasts Men, as I hinted before. But I
confess, that the word Spirit in Scripture and common discourse has various
significations, as Mr. Hobbes has plentifully discoursed; but what that makes
to the impossibility of a substance being incorporeal, I know not, neither do I
think it conceptible. And I cannot agree with Mr. Hobbes, in his several
quotations of Scripture that mention our Savor, who was endowed with God's
Spirit, and it is abominable to question it, and several eminent Persons, as
Gideon, etc. to be endowed with God's Spirit; that those places, as he says,
only mean, that our Savior and others had special virtues for such purposes
(but that God had not inspired his Spirit into them) to enable them to perform
such and such things; as when he cites the 6. of Judges v. 34. which says,
that the Spirit of the Lord came upon Gideon, that is, says Mr. Hobbes, Gideon
had courage to defend God's people. And this let me add, that if it was barely
courage in Gideon, it was the strangest courage that I ever read of (except
that of Jonathan) to attack so great an host, as that of Midian was, with only
300 Men, and the arms of them nothing but Trumpets, Lamps, and Pitchers. But if
this Interpretation of Mr. Hobbes was true, Oliver Cromwell, or any other
valiant Man, might be said to have God's Spirit as well as Gideon, although we
do not find that so much as any of David's Worthies, in the repetition of their
great acts, are said to have it; when we cannot suppose, but that they had as
much courage as Gideon, and upon that account might as easily have been said to
have God's Spirit, if by God's Spirit in such Men is only meant courage. What
folly then is it for Mr. Hobbes to affirm this, having no warrant for it but
his own fancy? To which he has given so great a latitude, as in this Chapter
most damnably and profanely to make nothing of the blessed Spirit of God, but
a Ghost, as p. 209. which in other places he makes the companion of Goblins,
both which he takes to be, as indeed they are, the imaginations of distempered
brains, such as Mr. Hobbes his was when he wrote this interpretation of places
of Scripture of this kind; when in p. 58. he says, That the Scriptures mean by
the Spirit of God in Man, a Man's Spirit inclined to godliness; and here he
says, they mean the particular virtues Men are endowed with for such purposes;
and whether this be not the next thing to a contradiction, I shall refer to any
one that has so much virtue and godliness as to speak true: for a godly Man,
that is, one devout toward God, may not be endowed with any other virtue. And
then Mr. Hobbes comes to Texts of Scripture concerning our Savior, as to this
matter, it is Luke the 4 th v. 1. and Matthew. 4. 1. that express our Savior to
be full of God's Spirit: This, says Mr. Hobbes, was a zeal to do God's work,
but (says he) to say God was filled with God, is improper and insignificant.
And this last I shall be beholding to Mr. Hobbes for hereafter, when I come to
p. 268. where Mr. Hobbes denies the existence of God the Holy Ghost, and the
Godhead of the Son, for here he confesses the Godhead of both of them. But to
return to this page I am now upon; Mr. Hobbes is certainly upon a wrong ground
(though I will not say how the blessed Spirit of God is communicated or infused
into Man, or was in our blessed Savior) to suppose, that God the Holy Ghost
must be infused into the Godhead of the Son, and that the Godhead must be full
of the Godhead, for our Savior had an humane Nature, which he might not out of
his good pleasure indow with all the graces of God's Spirit upon the
assumption, but sufferr'd it rather to attend the blessed Spirit for the
plenitude of them; and this is agreeable to all the Interpreters of those Texts
that ever I saw, except Mr. Hobbes his Leviathan. And Mr. Hobbes says further,
That in these last mentioned Texts the word Spirit either signifies a real
substance, (which he said before must be a Body,) or else metaphorically
signifies some extraordinary ability. This I mention to show, that taking Mr.
Hobbes together he calls God the Holy Ghost a Body; though hereafter p. 268. he
denies him any real existence at all.

Mr. Hobbes in this Chapter cites many Texts, to prove that Angels have Bodies
and dimensions, as those that went to Lot into Sodom, and other like. This I
shall not dispute with Mr. Hobbes, though it is more probable and agreeable to
the opinion of the generality of the World, that they assumed Bodies upon those
particular occasions by the direction of God Almighty. But then with another
argument, he thinks to make it sure that Angels have Bodies, because Hellfire
is prepared for the Devil and his Angels, and fire, says he, can only work
upon a Body. I suppose Mr. Hobbes means our fire can only work upon a Body, and
then mark the strong consequence; Ergo, God cannot make any other sort of fire
that can work upon something not Body. Mr. Hobbes might as well have said, that
if we never had had any fire, God could not have made such a thing as fire.
Nay, Mr. Hobbes in this place confesses, That the evil Angels shall not be
consumed in this fire; and this shows it is a fire not like ours, and so Mr.
Hobbes has answered himself, in which faculty he is the happiest Man that I
ever knew. But to come closer to Mr. Hobbes, he I think would be troubled to
make out, that our fire cannot work upon a thing that is immaterial; for it
follows not, that because it burns wood, it will burn nothing that is not in
the same manner substantial. But after all, what is this (taking it as Mr.
Hobbes would have it, that Angels have Bodies and dimensions) to prove that the
words incorporeal substance imply a contradiction? That is, in plain English,
there is no substance but has a body, that is to say, the great God of Heaven
and Earth (though Mr. Hobbes speaks plain only concerning Angels) has a Body,
and consequently, as Mr. Hobbes says, has dimensions and consequently is
finite and not infinite. So Mr. Hobbes may in time deny all the Attributes of
God, for before he has denied his Knowledge, and now his Infinity by direct
consequence. But whether Mr. Hobbes never thought of this sequel, as I have so
much charity for him (knowing his weakness in other places) to believe he never
did, or whether the Atheism was so gross that Mr. Hobbes durst not speak out
plain, I shall leave to the Reader to determine.

Mr. Hobbes now comes to tell what the meaning of the words Kingdom of God
signify in Holy Scripture, as he calls it properly; which he defines to be, p.
217. God's dominion over a people by special contract; As the people of Israel
were subjects, by the special covenant made by God with Abraham, as in Genesis 17.
whereby Abraham and his Seed were obliged to obey God's positive Law, as by an
oath of Allegiance; for to the Moral Law they were obliged before. This I
suppose Mr. Hobbes intends for a foundation of God's distinct Kingdom, as will
appear by and by, never distinguished from his general Dominion before, that
ever I heard of; neither is there any cause to distinguish it now, as he does,
by necessary supposition, or else all he says signifies nothing. But methinks
this is too slender a foundation for such a work, and the supposition (that is,
that Abraham and his Seed were not obliged to obey God's positive Law before
that special covenant) is false: For without doubt God's Dominion over the
Earth, as he is styled Lord of all the Earth frequently in Scripture, puts a
duty, not only upon all the Seed of Abraham, but all the Seed of Adam, to obey
his positive Law as well as the Moral Law, in case that positive Law be
appropriated to them, either in general, or to any of them in particular, as
the Ceremonial Law was appropriated to the Jews, and there needs no special
contract to oblige any sort of Men to obey whatever God commands; for he is
Lord and Creator of all the Earth, and the disposer and orderer of all things
in it, and has a right to do so, which Mr. Hobbes acknowledges, p. 187. and
says, It Is naturally upon the account of his Power, that God reigns and
punishes the breach of his Laws; and this Mr. Hobbes says without any
limitation. So before I give a further answer in this, Mr. Hobbes must be
reconciled to himself. But Mr. Hobbes goes on in this his fabric, and after
several Texts cited, that the Jews were God's peculiar people, boldly
concludes, p. 218. That by the Kingdom of God, is properly meant a Commonwealth
instituted (by consent of those that are to be subject thereto) for their Civil
Government; which properly was a Kingdom, wherein God was King, and the High
Priest his Viceroy. And for this, thanks to his grace, he vouchsafes a reason,
(which he never did that I remember before for any of his crotchets) which is,
That the Jews in Scripture are called an Holy Nation. Now holy, says Mr.
Hobbes, signifies that which is God's by special, not general right. Put this
into a Syllogism, and let us see how natural the consequence will be: By an
holy Nation in Scripture is meant a peculiar Nation to God; But the Jews are an
holy Nation: Ergo by the Kingdom of God is properly meant a Commonwealth. If
Mr. Hobbes had made this Syllogism, any one would swear that Mr. Hobbes,
although he railed against Aristotle, had never read him, or else not
understood him. And it is not less absurd out of a Syllogism, than it is in; for
what has an holy Nation, which are God's people because they serve him in the
way of Piety, (which respects mainly their future state) to do with a
Commonwealth, and God's being Monarch upon Earth, which he has left in the
Creation to the government of Men? But Mr. Hobbes p. 218. cites diverse Texts of
Scripture to confirm his Position; of which Texts I shall only answer two,
which seem to bear most in his advantage, and the first is, 1 Samuel 12. 12.
where it is said, upon the Israelites desiring a King, that God was their King.
Hence Mr. Hobbes collects, That God was their King, and governed the Civil
State of the Commonwealth, and that the high Priest was his Viceroy. I shall
agree with Mr. Hobbes, that God so far governed the State of the Commonwealth,
as to appoint who should govern it; but it is most apparent, that he no
otherwise governed it, than by appointing who should govern, as he does in all
Commonwealths, (for by him King's reign.) For there was a certain time when
there was no King in Israel, and God appointed sometimes Judges, Chiefs, (that
is Kings) to govern them: between which Judges there was intervals; and I would
know, what temporal Jurisdiction God exercised over them in those intervals, or
at that time when there was no King: Certainly none that we ever read of in
holy Writ, and it is reasonable to suppose God exercised none; for that the
people of Israel were then grievously oppressed, and so continued sometimes
for^y Years, before a deliverer rose up; which they needed not to have done, if
God had undertaken the temporal government; for that God by his Power was able
to have delivered them, which we see he never did, but by a temporal Governor;
in the time of which Governor, the high Priest was not God's Viceroy, but
rather the Governor's, and the 17. Deuteronomy. 9. and 12. v. clearly makes the Priest
and the Judge, which should then afterward be different persons, and different
Emploiments. So it is most apparent, that God was no otherwise the temporal King
of the Israelites, than he was King of all the Earth; nor the high Priest, as
high Priest, his Viceroy; though the Israelites were his chosen people, as to
Religious worship. And as to the 1 Samuel 8. 7. which Mr. Hobbes cites, where God
said to Samuel (when the people asked a King) They have not rejected thee, but
they have rejected me; that I should not rule over them: it is no more, but
that God was angry with them, for not taking such a Governor as he was pleased
to set over them, as Samuel then was, and Baruck, Ieptha, and Samson had been;
but that they would have one, not only of their own choosing, but also after
the similitude of other Nations, which God had rejected, and had chosen them
for his peculiar people; and so in that sense they may be said to reject God,
in that they rejected those he did set over them. As to Mr. Hobbes his other
places of Scripture, I think them nothing to the matter, and so I shall pass
them over, as he says he does many more places for this purpose not cited, but
instead of citing them slily (as I think) claps his hands at the Clergy, p.
219. and says, It Is a wonder no more notice is taken of this, but that it
gives too much light to Christian Kings to see their right of Ecclesiastical
government. To this I will answer for the Clergy of England, that those that
are not infected with a spice of Popery, as I am afraid some such there are,
(God make them fewer) or some for want of due consideration, always acknowledge
the King for supreme Head of the Church, and by that Title pray for him, and
not by that sleighty Title of Supreme Moderator of the Church; and the English
Clergy, if some few do otherwise, are no more to be blamed for this, than the
English Soldiers were in the blessed Reign of Queen Elizabeth to be blamed in
Holland, because Stanly and York delivered Towns up to the Spaniard; or English
Writers, because one English Man has written such a Book as the Leviathan, who
after his Learned Discourse of the Kingdom of God comes to tell us, p. 219.
what the Kingdom of Grace is, and says, Those are in it that promise obedience
to God's government (I suppose he means temporal of which he has been treating
before) to whom, says he, God has gratis given to be his Subjects hereafter,
which is called the Kingdom of Glory. Now certainly the Kingdom of Grace, by
all Men before Mr. Hobbes, was taken to be God's Spiritual government; which he
exercises in the Hearts of good Men, by his commands, threats, and promises;
to which if they yield obedience, in and through the mercies of our blessed
Savior they are made inheritors of the Kingdom of Glory. And what a quibble
this is of Mr. Hobbes, from the word gratis to change the sense of the Kingdom
of Grace, I shall refer to any intelligent person.

Mr. Hobbes coming in his 36. Chapter to treat of ^he Word of God and the
Prophets, comes to show what Word signifies in Scripture; of which I do think
he has given a true account in several Texts, but is not able in any kind of
Truth to hold out long: For p. 224. he says, That the Word of God, in several
Texts of Scripture, signifies (which I never observed in any) such words as are
consonant to the dictates of right Reason; and the first Text he cites is 2 Chronicles. 35. 22. where it is said, That Josiah harkned not to the words of Necho
from the mouth of God; which, says Mr. Hobbes, were but the dictates of
Reason. This is most palpably unreasonable; for there was no reason for Josiah
to forbear fighting with Necho (the Kings of Judah having beaten as great Kings
as the Kings of Egypt, and the Jews being then in a powerful condition) when he
came into his Country with a great Army. So this Text must either be intended,
that the words of Necho were but what God had told him, or that they were
revealed to Josiah to be God's mind by some Prophet, which most Interpreters
take to be Jeremiah; nay Mr. Hobbes himself cites Esdras for this last
Interpretation, but says, That in this he approves not an Apocryphal writer;
though before, when he had a mind to invalidate the Scriptures, by making the
Penmen of them uncertain, seemed strongly to incline, that Esdras was the
Penman of them after the Captivity, (when it might be supposed the certain
Truth was lost) and that only from the Authority of the Book of Esdras; whose
Authority, or rather Interpretation, he here rejects. And then Mr. Hobbes goes
on to cite several other Texts of Scripture to prove, that in Scripture by the
Word of God is meant the dictates of Reason or Equity, as Ierem. 31. 33. and
other places, where God says, He will write his Laws in their Hearts. Which
places, by all other Men I think, have been interpreted the operation of God's
Spirit upon the minds of Men, by inclining them to obey his Laws, after God had
taught them by his Prophets or Ministers. And there is no cause to call that
reason, or the proceed of reason, which the Scripture terms the operation of
God. A Man bringing reason (or an aptitude to it) into the World, and so he
does not that which God effects in him after he is in the World.

Mr. Hobbes, p. 238. says, That a private Man has Power to believe, or not
believe Miracles, Thought b^ing free; but, says he, when it comes to public
confession, the private reason must submit to the public. Now by his Rule,
though a Man do not believe lying wonders, yet he may say he does, if any one
will believe Mr. Hobbes. In short, this is much like his precedent Doctrine of
practice, and serves to authorize the grossest hypocrisy in the World, in case
the public, which he calls God's Lieutenant, say contrary to his belief. This
will make Mr. Hobbes safe, either in Turkey, though he be a Christian; or at
Rome, though he be a Protestant. Yet Mr. Hobbes ought to remember, that in holy
Scripture, belief in the Heart, and confession with the Mouth, go together. But
this conceit of Mr. Hobbes puts me in mind of a story of Bernier's, a French
Man, who when he travailed into the Mogol's Country, happening to be Physician
to Danech-Men-Kan, chief Minister of State, was sent by him to see a Mohammedan
Miracle, and discovering the cheat of it (which the Priests of that Temple
observing) was forced to cry, Wonder; Wonder, as the custom there is, in token
of assent, and immediately to take Horse, for fear of being knocked on the Head
because of his discovery. Now that which Bernier did do out of present fear,
Mr. Hobbes here gives an express toleration ^or, and lays it down as
universally lawful. Of this I shall say no more, only refer my reader to my
Lord of Clarendon upon this place, who has exposed him sufficiently.

After Mr. Hobbes has been laboring to make Religion nothing, the authority
of the Scriptures doubtful, and endeavoring to deprive God of the honor of
his greatest (if any excel) attributes. Now in his 38. Chapter he comes to
deprive Man of his hopes of a great part of his eternal felicity, and says, p.
239. concerning the place wherein Men shall enjoy eternal life, which Christ
has obtained for them, That several Texts (he there cites) seem to make it on
Earth: which afterward he concludes upon, p. 241. with the mortality of the
Soul till the Resurrection. I must confess, that I wonder that any Man in his
wits should raise such an opinion from Texts that look nothing like it, which I
will refer to any sober Man. So I shall not trouble my self with any of them,
save the 3 d of John 13. which says, That no Man has ascended up into Heaven,
but the Son of Man, which came down from Heaven. Whereupon Mr. Hobbes says,
That by the way he observes, that these are not the words of our Savior,
though the words before are, but of St. John himself; for Christ was not then
in Heaven. And now the implication from this, as I suppose is, that if none but
Christ shall ascend (which is meant by has ascended in this place, Christ
being then on Earth) then the place of eternal Life for Men shall be on Earth.
This looks pretily, but has nothing of an objection in it against Man's going
into Heaven for eternal Happiness^ when the Text is compared with what went
before in the Chapter. For there was a discourse between our Savior and
Nicodemus about his being born again, and Nicodemus asked, how these things
should be? Our Savior replies, verse. 12. If you believe not when I tell you
Earthly things, how will you believe when I tell you of Heavenly things? And
then comes the 13 th verse, which says, No Man has ascended, etc. which are
plainly the words of our Savior, being they refer to the precedent discourse;
and are no more than if our Savior had said, No man can tell these Heavenly
things which I speak of (and it is like were mysteries belonging to the Kingdom
of God not to be revealed) save my self, who came down from Heaven, when I took
the humane Nature upon me. And it is not improbable, that he spoke this to give
Nicodemus to understand, that he was God as well as Man. And as to Mr. Hobbes
his other Texts to prove, That the future state of the blessed shall be upon
Earth; I think them only set down for number or sound sake, and so I shall pass
them over. And as to the Text in Job to prove the mortality of the Soul, till
the Resurrection, it is this, That Man lies down, and rises not till the
Heavens be no more. Which receives a short answer ( viz.) that it is meant only
of the Body of Man. But now to confute Mr. Hobbes, I shall only lay down some
few Texts of Scripture. First, as to the place of happiness eternal, to prove
that it is in Heaven, and that our Bodies may ascend thither, as it is plain the
Bodies of Enoch and Elias have already done, and why not ours as well as
theirs? And 1 These. 4. 17. says, That we which are alive, and remain, shall be
caught up together with them (that is, the dead in Christ as the verse
precedent expresses it) in the clouds, to meet the Lord in the air, and so
shall we be ever with the Lord. How shall we be with the Lord; upon Earth? No
it is plain in the Heavens, which is signified by the clouds; and this further
shows the possibility of our Bodies ascending; for the Text says expressly,
joined with the precedent verse, That we shall be caught up in the clouds. I
shall cite but one Text more, and so leave Mr. Hobbes and his new opinion to
stare one upon another: It is 2 Corin. 5.1. where the Apostle says, For we
know that if our earthly house of this tabernacle were dissolved, we have a
building of God, an house not made with hands, eternal in the Heavens. This is
so full in all the parts of it aginst Mr. Hobbes, that I think it impossible
for any evasion to be made out of it in behalf of Mr. Hobbes his opinion. But
Mr. Hobbes, though he be unkind to the Saints, is very kind to the wicked, (and
this I think ought to be ranked in the front of his Domestic Politics) for he
says, p. 242. That Earth is the place for the damned: And p. 243. says, That
fire in Scripture, which is mentioned as a punishment in several Texts, is to
be taken metaphorically, and may be expressed in proper terms; which, he says,
p. 244. is no more but vexation of mind to see others happy, and that the
condemned person shall not be ever in it, but dye, never to live again. (And
now Mr. Hobbes living or dying may think he has made himself a safe bargain.)
What can more encourage wicked Men to go on in their sins than this? Or not to
value, whether they assent or no to Mr. Hobbe's his damnable Doctrines, both of
belief and practice? But the rational or argumentative part of this I shall
pass over, because my Lord of Clarendon has said so much upon this matter, and
only cite some few Texts of Scripture, to satisfy any Man that the place of
future torment is not upon Earth, and that the Soul of Man is immortal, whether
it be the Soul of a wicked person, or a righteous, as well before as after the
resurrection. The first is Matthew. 5. 30. which says, It Is better that one of
thy members perish than that thy whole body should be cast into Hell, (and the
wicked shall be turned into Hell, and all the Nations that forget God) which,
as the Learned Mr. Hobbes says, is as much as should be cast upon the Earth,
where it is already. And to show that there is now, and was then, such a place
as Hell, look Prove. 15. 11. where it is said, that Hell and destruction are
before the eyes of the Lord, that is, he knows what the wicked there suffer. To
end this, see Mark 9. 44^ 46, 48. where it is said, the worm dies not, (that is
the lash of Conscience) and the fire is not quenched; speaking of a Man's being
cast into Hell. So then, if the worm dies not, the subject of that worm must
live, that is, the wicked person; and the fire of Hell is said to be as
everlasting; For it is not quenched, which must be intended never shall be
quenched. And to stop Mr. Hobbes his Mouth, as to the eternity of punishment
and reward, look Matthew. 25. 46. These shall go into everlasting punishment, but
the righteous into life eternal. And that the Soul lives after the death of the
Body until the resurrection, see, Eccl. 12. 7. where Solomon speaking of Man's
dissolution, says, The dust (that is the Body) shall return to the Earth, and
the Spirit to God that gave it. And Acts 7. 59. Stephen when stoned said, Lord
Jesus receive my Spirit. These two Texts must be intended of living Spirits,
for what should God do with dead Spirits, which are nothing, who is God of the
living, and not of the dead? None of which Texts Mr. Hobbes takes any notice
of, save that in Mark of the worm not dying. To which he says, it is
metaphorically to be understood; and this answer would serve for any thing
else, as well as this. I shall pass the rest of Mr. Hobbes his absurdities in
this Chapter about these matters, save one at the latter end, where he jumps
again into setting the place of Men's eternal happiness upon Earth, and p. 246.
cites Isaiah 33. v. 20, 21^ 22, 23, 24. to be full in the matter; which is so
far from the matter, that it is only Scripture to signify God's destruction of
the Assyrians, and the Jews deliverance from them. But whether the punishment
be by fire, or without, I shall not argue, (though the Texts say it is, which
are better authority than ever I heard to the contrary) only I hope no Man will
venture upon the punishment which is everlasting, Matthew. 25. 46. presuming upon
Mr. Hobbes his assertions to be true. Neither do I think any good Man will
think the merits of our blessed Lord and Savior the less, for what Mr. Hobbes
in this Chapter says, who after he has been endeavoring to make all Religion
a foppery, to set up Idolatrous worship, to debase our Savior in respect of
his miracles, to make the credibility of the Scriptures questionable, to
deprive God of his Attributes, now comes p. 248. to undervalue the sufferings
of our Savior; and says, That the sufferings of our Savior were no
satisfaction or price for sin, whereby Christ could claim right to a pardon for
us from his offended Father, but that price that God in mercy was pleased to
demand. And this he further explains himself in, p. 261. I acknowledge that the
sufferings of our Savior were all that God demanded as a satisfaction for sin,
but when our Savior had performed what God did require, it was an absolute
satisfaction. And this is clear reason in the transactions of Men: when the
debt is paid by ones self, or an other, or that is paid that is required, there
is a full satisfaction, and the prisoner, or he that paid the debt may of right
claim his discharge. So may Christ of right claim a pardon for us from his
Father, when the satisfaction for sin is paid: For although there was no reason
that our Savior should suffer for us, but mere mercy, as 'twas God's mercy to
accept of Christ in our stead; yet it is great Reason, that when he has
suffered for our sins, he should of right claim to have us delivered from the
punishment of them. And he was the true Scapegoat that carried all our sins
into the Land of forgetfulness. And Matthew. 1. 21. He shall save his people from
their sins, that is, by his merits defend them from his Father's wrath: With
which Text agrees 18. Matthew. 11. 1 Timothy 1. 15. He came to save sinners; and
multitudes of Texts to this purpose. And besides, God when he first promised
Christ to mankind said, That he should break the Serpent's head; that is, by
his own efficacy, for he was God as well as Man, and that gave power to effect,
and value to satisfy. But Mr. Hobbes his conceit had been good, in case that
after a sinner had lain in Hell seven years, God had said, this is enough, and
had freed him. Here it is true the sinner could not have claimed a right to a
pardon for what he had suffered, but that suffering was all that God was
pleased in mercy to demand; for that a sinner can never make a full
satisfaction for his sin. But here we cannot but suppose God the Father and his
Innocent Son as it were making (I speak it with reverence) a contract: The
Father as it were saying, If you will suffer, I will take it as a satisfaction for
Man's sin; And his Son saying, I will (for he voluntarily laid down his life,
it was not taken from him, and those sufferings God would not dispense with)
suffer for sinners, or in their stead. Certainly now he has suffered, he may
of right claim a pardon for sinners. But as to this matter I wave further
Discourse, there being so many Treatises upon it.

Mr. Hobbes, p. 250, 251. says, That the Israelites obligation to obey Moses,
was only from their desire and promise at mount Sinai, Exodus 20. 18. where they
said, Speak thou to us, and we will hear; but let not God speak to us, lest we
die. Certainly any rational Man would wonder at such a fancy, when it is
apparent, that Moses was God's messenger by the many miracles wrought by his
Hands, both in Egypt, from whence he led them, and at the red Sea, where they
were miraculously saved and the Egyptians drowned, and by many other miracles
before they came to mount Sinai. And upon that account (as so apparently sent
by God) they were bound to obey Moses, or disobey God himself; and this promise
at mount Sinai was only to free them from the terror they had undergone before.
But that which Mr. Hobbes drives at in this conceit may be to persuade Men,
that they need not obey any of the Prophets, Apostles, or Ministers of the
Gospel, since, without their express promise so to do. And so further labors
to enervate the authority of the Scriptures and Gospel Ministry. But as Mr.
Hobbes gave Moses a smaller authority in this than one would have expect^d, so
in p. 252. he gives him and all succeeding Monarchs a greater trouble than it is
reasonable to impose upon them; For he says, That all Sovereigns are the sole
interpreters of God's commands, and that no man ought to proceed further in the
interpretation of Scripture, than the Sovereign limits. So that a Sovereign
ought to be either a more exact Divine than ever I heard of in the World, to
interpret all places of Scripture that a question is demanded of, or else of a
most exact and quick Judgment, to limit others how far they shall go. And
suppose a Sovereign prove a fool, or like an ill Steersman always turning the
boat round, uncertain in his resolves; who must interpret the matter then^ But
I shall pass this over without more saying, as one of the chances of Mr. Hobbes
his fancy.

Mr. Hobbes p. 263. says, That the end of Our Savior's c^ming into the World
was to restore unto God the Kingdom, cut off from him by the rebellion of the
Israelites in the election of Saul. So far he has renounced all Salvation by
Christ. But to do him right, he says afterward, That our Savior had an other
employ, and that was to Preach that he was the Messiah, and in case the Nation
of the Jews should refuse him, then to call to his obedience the Gentiles. So
now he seems only by the accident of the Jews refusal, to exclude them from
Salvation, and by the same accident only to make the Gentiles capable of mercy.
Now is any thing more plain in the World, than that he came into the World to
satisfy God's justice for the sins of the World, and with intent to bring in
the Gentiles as well as the Jews, and to make them one sheepfold under himself
the great Shepherd? And that appears from the first promise of him, viz. That
the Seed of the Woman should break the Serpents Head, that is, should take away
that misery from the Seed of the Woman, which the subtlety of the Serpent had
brought upon it; and I suppose Mr. Hobbes will not say amidst his new found
unreasonable Doctrines, That the Gentiles as well as the Jews were not the
offspring of Eve. And he was the blood of the everlasting covenant, and the
great Shepherd of the Sheep spoken of Heb. 13. 20. And John 1.29. he is called
the Lamb of God, which takes away the sins of the World; and this was before
he was rejected by the Jews. And all the Prophesies of our Savior in the Old
Testament express our Savior's bringing in the Gentiles, and the intent of God
to do so, as Isaiah 49. 22. I will lift up my Hand to the Gentiles, and set up
my Standard to the People; and this was before our Savior's coming into the
World. Texts for this I shall cite no more, it being a thing so plain against
Mr. Hobbes; and one would wonder ever such conceits without ground or reason
should come into any Man's Head.

Mr. Hobbes, after a great deal of stir about the Trinity, and the Unity of
that Trinity, which is hard to make any thing of, or rather impossible, by
reason his opinion was concealed, comes p. 268. to tell us his opinion in these
words following ( viz.) To conclude, says he, the Doctrine of the Trinity, as
far as can be gathered directly from the Scripture, is in substance this: That
the God who is always one and the same, was the person represented by Moses,
the person represented by his Son incarnate, and the person represented by the
Apostles: As represented by the Apostles, the Holy Spirit by which they spoke
is God; as by Moses, the Father is God; as represented by his Son, (that was
God and Man) the Son is God. These are his very words. So observe, he
absolutely denies in this the personal existence of the two last Persons in the
Trinity. And it is in short to say, as others have said before me, that there is
but one Person under different conceptions. And the inference is direct and
natural, for, says Mr. Hobbes, God was in three respects represented, which
excludes the real existence of three Divine Persons in the Godhead, and only
supposes three Persons that represented this one God, not that there are three
Persons in the Godhead, or that are God; for no one is said to represent, that
is the Person represented. Now to illustrate this, the King of England is
represented by the Lord Deputy of Ireland, by the Viceroy of Scotland, and by
his Governor of the Island of Iersey; But still it is the energy of the one
Person of the King that actuates them all, and there are not three Persons of
the King, nor any of those three Persons are the King; no more are there three
Persons in the Godhead, if we will believe Mr. Hobbes; who makes the three
Persons in the Trinity, but three Names to express one only Person of God. So
it is all one, as if he had said, the Son is not God as a distinct Person from
the Father, but that the only one Person of the Godhead was come into Man: or
at best had taken the Virgins Son into it; or, that he had said, the Person of
the Holy Ghost was not God as a distinct Person from the Father, but that the
only one Person of God inspired the Apostles. So then clearly here is a denial
of the two second Persons in the Trinity, for if there be only one Person,
there is not three in the Trinity. But Mr. Hobbes in this has the confidence
to say, That this his fancy is all that can be gathered from Scripture
concerning the Trinity: And that he may meet with his match, I will say the
contrary; and I doubt not, but my authorities for my opinion will prove better
than his. It is said in 1 Ioh. 5. 7. There are three bear record in Heaven, the
Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost, and these three are one. So this is
clear, that the Godhead is three Persons, not as it is represented at three
different times upon Earth, but as it is three distinct Persons in Heaven. So
this makes an end of Mr. Hobbes his conceit, that there are only said to be
three Persons in the Godhead, to be made out by Scripture in respect of the
three representations upon Earth; for they are in this Text said to be three in
Heaven, and all three are said to be in action, that is, to bear record; which
shows they are several and distinct Persons. And the 3 d of Titus 4, 5, 6. v.
clearly shows the Trinity of the Persons really existent; which Texts are (
viz.) After the love of God our Savior toward Man appeared, By his mercy he
saved us, by the washing of regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost: Which
he shed on us abundantly, through Jesus Christ our Savior. Here is God the
Father that saves his people by regeneration and renewing of the Holy Ghost;
and it is through Jesus Christ our Savior: So what can be plainer (besides the
Scriptures that speak of the descent and mission of the Holy Ghost) that the
Godhead has three Persons in it, in another manner than as it was represented
by Moses; for here is God the Father fully set forth a part, that through mercy
he saved us; and God the Holy Ghost in another manner set forth, than
represented by the Apostles, for this is spoken of the renewing of the Holy
Ghost in all believers; and Jesus Christ the meritorious cause of our
Salvation, which he could not have been, but as he was both God and Man, and
Mr. Hobbes calls him so in this Chapter. So that Christ, as Christ, Mr. Hobbes
makes mere Man, (as he styles him and would make him, Chap. 38. though
otherwise calls him in this Chapter) for he makes him^ only the representer of
God, as Moses was; and the Holy Ghost Mr. Hobbes says in effect, is nothing,
for he says that that denomination was attributed to God, as he was
represented by the Apostles: So that the Holy Ghost was only an Attribute of
God. But besides all this, Mr. Hobbes spoke before, upon his reliance upon the
Church of England as to matters of Faith, and that the Civil Sovereign is to
appoint what is to be taught for Doctrine. And the Church of England, and our
Sovereigns, have established Athanasius his Creed to be read, and as necessary
to Salvation to be believed, and that Creed, as well as the beginning of the
Litany, is expressly against Mr. Hobbes; for it says, That there is one Person
of the Father, another of the Son, and another of the Holy Ghost; which Creed
and Litany speak them in themselves three distinct Persons, and as such are
prayed to, without interesting Moses or the Apostles in the matter; and agree
to my interpretation of Scripture. So for once I hope, without boasting, I may
say I have got the better of Mr. Hobbes. Indeed this opinion of his is like the
rest of the abominable and damnable whimsies of his own brain, and ought to be
ranked in the front of them. And to give Mr. Hobbes a little over weight, I
will refer it to any rational Man, whether Mark 1. 10. Ioh. 1. 32. do not
absolutely show the distinction of the two second Persons in the Trinity; where
it is said, That the Spirit of God descended from Heaven like a Dove, and abode
upon Christ. Now taking Christ to be God, (as Mr. Hobbes frequently calls him
in this Chapter) what was the Spirit that abode upon him, but a distinct Person
in the Godhead, and Heb. 3. 7. conjoined to Psalm. 95. 7. to which it relates,
may fully conclude Mr. Hobbes: For the former Text says, That the Holy Ghost
said, To day if ye will hear his voice; which last words are the words of the
latter Text in the 95. Psalm. So it is apparent, that in David's time (which I
hope Mr. Hobbes will allow to be before the Apostles time) there was an Holy
Ghost. So I will leave Mr. Hobbes, in hopes he will live long enough to recant
this opinion.

Mr. Hobbes says, p. 282. That the four first of the ten Commandments were
particular to the Israelites, but the six latter obliged all mankind, being but
the Law of Nature. I shall agree with Mr. Hobbes, as to the six latter, that
they are but what Nature dictated before: But as to the four first, I would
know a reason, why they were not obligatory by the Law of Nature, at least
secondarily; that is to say, obligatory by Nature upon all Men that know there
was one, and only one living and true God, (as all Men may see there is by the
things that he has made) which knowledge makes it as natural, as to the three
first Commands, for us to be bound by those Laws, as it is for a Man naturally
to be bound not to injure his neighbor. As for Example, Is it not as natural
for the Creature to worship his Creator, and not to set up false gods to
deprive him of his honor, and not to use his Name irreverently, as it is for a
Man not to desire or take that which is an other Man's? It Is more natural, if we
will believe what Mr. Hobbes said before, ( viz.) That by Nature all Men were
in an estate of Civil War, and might catch what they could, and in that state,
all force and fraud were cardinal Virtues; but certainly never was any state or
condition so, where it was a cardinal Virtue to worship any god but the true
one, or to be irreverent to his Name. But Mr. Hobbes his conceit is good in
this place for one thing, and that is, that after he has been blaspheming God,
and taking from him his Attributes, and giving Men a toleration as to external
acts, or confession, to acknowledge any thing for God; that here he gives a
reason for all that he said, as to us Gentiles, for we may do or say what we
will, no^ being Jews, in respect of God Almighty, for that there is no Law, if
we will believe Mr. Hobbes, to oblige us Gentiles to the contrary; The four
first Commands not being by the Law of Nature obligatory to any Man; and being
particular to the Israelites, as made at mount Sinai. Now the Nature of a
particular Law, is only to oblige that particular people for whom 'twas
particularly made, and those were the Israelites in this case, if Mr. Hobbes be
an authentic Author. And as to the fourth Command I think, though the day be
changed, yet that in substance is as obligatory as the other three are by the
Law of Nature; for it is as natural to set a time a part for the worship of God,
as it is to worship him; and since God has limited the Jews a whole day, why
should not we take that as our pattern? For it is as natural to take God for our
pattern in this, as in other things, ( Be ye holy as I am holy.) And we have
not only his Command to the Jews for a pattern, but his own Example of resting
the seventh day, and sanctifying it; upon the knowledge of which, why should it
not be natural for Men to keep holy one day in seven? For the Law of Nature is
twofold, either primary, without any prerequisite, as it is natural for a thing
that has life to move; Or secondary, when something is requisite to give
liberty to Nature to work; as for Example, Men love their Children naturally,
but they must know first that they are their Children, before they love them as
such: For if a Father had never seen his Child from his birth till ten years of
age, and then should accidentally meet him, he would love him no better then
any other; but after he was acquainted by undoubted circumstances that it was
his Child, then naturally would result an emanation of affection: So after we
know that there is only one God, and that he has appointed one day in seven
for his service, though to another people, (which day he sanctified and rested
upon, Genesis 2. 3.) why is it not natural for us to serve him, (all mankind
having an inbred awe toward something above them) and that on one day in
seven, according to his example? Not but that I admit, that the fourth Command
as to the precise seventh day was ceremonial, and is determined since the time
of our Savior.

Mr. Hobbes, after he has denied the personal Divinity of our Savior, now
comes to tell us, p. 286. That our Savior, nor his Apostles, had any power to
make Laws, and that they that broke any of his dictates, did not sin in it; but
died in their sins, not being pardoned for their offenses to the Laws of their
respective Countries, or of Nature. And for this he cites John 3.18. which
says, They are condemned already, not that they shall be condemned, says he.
And this conceit Mr. Hobbes grounds upon our Saviors saying his Kingdom is not
of this World, and he that has no Kingdom, says Mr. Hobbes, can make no Laws;
so our Savior's precepts obliged not. And now one would think Mr. Hobbes might
rest satisfied; for after as he thought he had robbed Christ of his personal
Godhead, now he robs him of his Authority to make Laws, and so all the wicked
in the World are obliged to him for setting them free from the Gospel, in case
they will but go into any part of the World to live where the Gospel of Christ,
or his Apostles, are not made Canonical by the Law of that Country. But in
short, to answer Mr. Hobbes is to give the true interpretation of the words of
our Savior, Ioh. 18.36. where he says, His Kingdom is not of this World;
which is no more, but that he designed not to take away the Romans
Jurisdiction, in respect of the external acts and punishments of Men; but does
it therefore follow, that he that was Lord of the whole Earth, (who Mr. Hobbes
said before represented God) had no power, by his Word and Doctrine to oblige
the Consciences of those that submitted to the Truth of them, or to leave those
without excuse that refused, and that under the penalty of eternal Misery? And
that we may see that he took upon him to make Laws, look Ioh. 14. 15. 1 Ioh. 2.
3. and 3. 22, 24. which all speak of Christ's commands, and that it was the
token of peoples love and obedience to him that they kept them; and in another
place Christ says, A new command I give unto you, that ye love one another. If
Christ had no Authority to make Laws, why are his words called commands, even
by him himself? For had they been only directions, or beseechings, he and the
Apostles would have styled them so. Nay, Mr. Hobbes says, p. 308. That the
Command, is the style of a Law. So that it is clear our Savior had power to
make Laws, which he executed upon the Consciences of Men, which was the Kingdom
of Heaven at hand, preached of by St. John, although he was not pleased to
exercise a Temporal Jurisdiction, and we may suppose it was to show the
extraordinary Spirituality of his Government; in which sense he may be said to
be King of the Jews, though his Kingdom was not of this World. And as to Mr.
Hobbes his Text out of Ioh. 3. 18. whereby he would prove, that those that
obeyed not Christ's commands were not guilty of a sin, but were condemned
already for sin, as he says, against Nature or the Laws of their Country; Mr.
Hobbes cites so much of the Text, and no more than he thinks to his purpose,
and it is one of the pitifullest shifts in all his Book; for the latter end of
the verse says, the words were spoken of Men condemned already for not
believing in Christ, (not for disobeying the Laws of their Country.) Now who
would trust such a juggler, that has the confidence to cite part of a verse to
prove that which the residue proves the contrary? But hence it is manifest that
wicked Men and Seducers grow worse and worse.

And now Mr. Hobbes, p. 300. falls upon Cardinal Bellarmine, and continues
battering of him many pages together, about the Supremacy of the Pope over the
Church: I think it might be a greater question and harder to resolve, whether
Cardinal Bellarmine or Mr. Hobbes was the archer Heretic: That making more
God's than one, and this denying the one only God his Attributes, and the
existency of two of the Persons in the Godhead: That being a Papist and the
worshipper of false gods, as a Wafer-cake and Pictures, Angels and dead People;
This a worshipper of no God at all, a Stock, or a Stone, when the Sovereign
commands, or when he shall change a Chistian for an Heathenish soil: That being
obstinate in his Religion; and this ready to change, as to external acts, when
the Sovereign bids him? This question I leave to better judgments to decide.

Mr. Hobbes, p. 323. says, That there is nothing in Scripture, from whence may
be inferred the infallibility of the Church. If Mr. Hobbes mean the particular
Church of Rome, I shall agree with him; for as to so much as I know of it, it is
as full of Errors and unreasonable Tenets as the Quakers, or Mr. Hobbes his
Book: But as to Christ's Church in general, I would have Mr. Hobbes look Ephesians.
5. 35, 36, and 37. v. and he will find that Christ has purified his Church,
that it might be without spot, etc. that is, without Error. And in the same
Chapter he will find how Christ and his Church are one, as a Man and his Wife
are, and that Christ loves it and cherishes it; which either must be intended
in keeping it from Errors, or I know not what those Texts signify. For if
Christ suffer it to run into Error, it will be ruined or run into decay; and
God will deal with it, as he threatened to the particular Churches in the
Revelations, except they did amend. And Christ says, Matthew. 16. 18. That the
gates of Hell should not prevail against it. And 1 Timothy 3. 15. calls the Church
the pillar and ground of the Truth. Besides many more Texts of this kind; but
these are sufficient to show Mr. Hobbes his confidence, or ignorance, to s^y,
That the Scripture contained nothing in it from whence might be inferred the
infallibility of the Church: see then how dangerous it is to believe Mr.
Hobbes. Yet from this Position he infers in the next page, That Christians do
not know the Scriptures to be the Word of God, only believe it. He might as
well have said, that Christians do not know that there is a God, only believe
it, and it is like this he may aim at: Or he might have said, that I know not
(having never traveled thither) there is such a place as Spain, only believe
it. One part of this Proposition of Mr. Hobbes is true, ( viz.) That the
Scriptures are believed to be the Word of God. But the ignorance of Mr. Hobbes
lies in this, That in matters of fact, which our senses have not perceived, or
we have not been at the transaction or institution of, the best evidence the
thing is capable of (that is, unquestionable testimony) is sufficient to make
us know, and that in such things knowledge and belief are the same. As when we
say, I believe in God the Father Almighty, etc. It is the same with, I know
that there is such a person in the Trinity as God the Father, and so of the
rest of our Creed. But when we have not had full testimony, and something may
be for ought we know undiscovered that may alter the matter, then belief and
knowledge are no more the same than Is and may be. But to make Mr. Hobbes the
example in the matter, we will suppose that he before a pardon had been
indicted of high Treason for endeavoring to subvert by his Book the ancient
Government of this Nation, both in respect of the Subjects subjection to their
King, and the Peoples properties; and twelve Men had been of the Jury in
Middlesex, none of which we will suppose stood by when he wrote the Book, but
had testimony, all that the matter was capable of, to prove that he did write
it, and thereupon the Jury had found him guilty, and Mr. Hobbes had had
Judgment accordingly; certainly he would have thought, that the belief of the
Jury, and the knowledge of the Jury in this matter had been the same. The case
differs not (mutato nomine) as to the Scriptures, for that we believe and know
them to be the Word of God, they having been delivered to us by unquestionable
persons, and all the Testimony the thing is capable of. But of this I said a
little before, and to avoid a tedious Discourse, shall refer my Reader for a
perfect satisfaction to the Learned Dr. Stillingfleet's Origines Sacrae, and to
one of the Sermons of the Excellent Dr. Tillotson, another of our not only
Learned, but firm Protestant Divines; who are the rather to be regarded,
because they have neither feared to stand the Ire of a cloud full charged with
Popery, or provided themselves (by an halting Sermon) a shelter against the
rain: whose contrary are enough not only to fright Christians from the Altar,
but to make Men abhor the offerings of the Lord: And if any such be that will
not repent, let them not despair, but dye.

Mr. Hobbes, p. 324. says, That the only Article of Faith, which the Scripture
makes necessary to Salvation, is this, that Jesus is the Christ. If an other
Man had said this, I should have taken little notice of it, because I should
have supposed that he had meant, that Christ was the corner Stone and Captain
of our Salvation. But I doubt Mr. Hobbes says this to encourage Men in
Idleness and Ignorance, which the Papists say is the Mother of Devotion. And
though Mr. Hobbes was so much against Bellarmine in his last Chapter, yet he is
so much a Papist in this (that he may taste of all Errors) that he uses but the
same saying here that Papists use against Reading of the Scriptures, and
whether he intend it so far, or that the notion was set down by chance, is
doubtful. But it is plain in our Creed,) and by the Doctrine of our Church,
which Mr. Hobbes allows of) that there are other points necessary to Salvation
besides this. As we must believe in God the Father and the Holy Ghost as well
as in God the Son; and this Mr. Hobbes acknowledges in p. 328. only under his
own limitations, which are hard to be understood. But then p. 331. he strains
my Faith upon one Article he lays down; For he says, That he has in all his
Treatise of Christian Politics, now run through, alleged no Text of
Scripture, but in such sense as is most agreeable to the scope of the Bible;
which I confess I cannot believe, or if he believes himself I shall change my
opinion of him, and instead of thinking him the grandest Heretic, think him
the weakest person that ever laid pen to paper, or at least that ever had any
reputation in the World, for so doing; except it be admitted me, that he is
given up to believe a lie in matters of Religion; and I pray God he be not.

Mr. Hobbes after his saying, p. 244. That the punishment of the damned should
not be everlasting, now he comes to p. 343. and goes over it again, (the fear
of the contrary I doubt running in his mind) and begins to interpret Scripture
concerning the immortality of the Soul in general, which he says, may have an
other interpretation than is usual, and first cites the 12. Eccles. 7. which
says, Dust to dust, and the Spirit to God that gave it; which, says Mr.
Hobbes, ought to be interpreted, That God only knows what becomes of Man's
Spirit, and not Man; and so of another Text he cites. Hence he infers, That
because God only knows what becomes of Man's Spirit, that therefore the Spirit
of Man lives not after the death of the Body till the resurrection. First, The
Interpretation is expressly against the Text, and absurd. Secondly, The
Inference is nonsense; for does it follow, that because God knows where the
Spirit of Man is, that therefore it is not with God himself? It is just as if I
should say to a Man, you know where your coat is, and from thence I should
infer, that he has it not upon his back. So I hope no Body will much heed his
interpretation of Scripture. But then p. 345. he tells us, That in the
resurrection, the Righteous shall have glorious and spiritual Bodies, and
eternal; but says, that it is not manifest by Scripture that the Wicked shall
have glorious and spiritual Bodies, or that they shall be as the the Angels of
God, neither Eating, nor Drinking, nor Ingendring, or that their life shall be
eternal; and so the reprobate, says he, shall be in the estate Adam was in
after he had sinned, and Marry and give in Marriage, only shall have no
Redeemer. I hope now Mr. Hobbes has perfected his safe bargain he before had
begun, let his opinions be never so gross as to God and Religion; for he shall
be still upon Earth and in no worse a condition than Adam was in after his
fall, and that was, for ought we know, free from torment, or indeed any trouble
of mind, save fear, and only at th time when he heard God in the Garden. But
Mr. Hobbes has not I thank him left us so much in the dark, for he goes on to
the particulars of the future torment, which, he says, are eating and drinking
(I suppose he means an appetite to eat and drink, when he has no Money in his
pocket) and ingendring: I suppose he means, that he is cruelly afraid of a
luxurious Wife, or else that he has been unneighbourly dealt with in his
Youth, and is afraid of the same hereafter: For otherwise cannot I imagine the
torment of eating and drinking and ingendring. And further he goes on, and
says, That the wicked shall not always personally be in this torment, but dye
after a time, and their Children shall succeed in the same torments. And all
this he seems to collect from Luke 20. v. 34, 35, 36. which says, The Children
of this World marry, but they that shall be accounted worthy to obtain that
World neither marry, nor dye any more. Hence he infers, That because the
Children of this World (that is people now alive) do marry, and those in Heaven
do not marry, that therefore the reprobate (which he would have understood by
the Children of this World) may marry: which is nonsense, and without ground:
it is ^rue that wicked Men in Scripture are termed the Children of this World,
but they are not those that are already in Hell, but those that are likely to
be so except they repent. And observe further, from the last mentioned Text,
which says That the righteous dye not; that he insers from thence, That the
wicked must dye in a future state. This sufficiently exposes it self. But the
substance of this his Discourse I have answered in speaking to his 38. Chapter,
which I now for that cause pass over; and for that my Lord of Clarendon has
spoken something to this, which I have omitted. But only this let me say, that
I hope no Body will be encouraged into a wicked life, presuming Mr. Hobbes
says true, in respect of the smalness or rather no punishment hereafter; for
it is apparent in this, that he has talked like a madman, and in few places of
his Book has he in matters of concern spoken true.

Mr. Hobbes, Chapter 45. drawing near an end of this wicked Work, is drawn so
dry, that he is forced upon repetitions, and falls again upon the Philosophy of
Sight which he had spoken of in the beginning of his Book; and says, That for
want of his understanding in it, the Jews, and all the rest of the World, have
been mistaken about Demons, and then falls again to the corporeity of Spirits,
which I have answered before. And here I shall observe a notable Collection of
Mr. Hobbes, from a Text of Scripture which says, that the Jews said to our
Savior, Thou have a Devil. Hence he seems to infer, that there was no such
thing as Devils (because our Savior had none) in any of those our Savior is
said to cast the Devil out of, but that it was a mistake of the Jews; and those
people said to have Devils were only troubled with some extraordinary or ill
Disease. So, see this Learned Gentleman holds his old method of arguing, That
because our Savior had not a Devil, therefore no other Man had, and because
the wicked Jews were mistaken, as to our Savior's having a Devil, that
therefore the good Jews and Penmen of the Scripture, were mistaken, as to any
one else having a Devil. But this I pass, having spoken to it before, only by
the way observe, that Mr. Hobbes coming again to Spirits says, That the
meaning of our Savior's being led by the Spirit into the Wilderness, and his
carrying from place to place, was a vision: So Mr. Hobbes, against the letter
of so many Texts, condemns the opinion of all Divines I ever met with, just as
a little before all Philosophers about Optics.

Mr. Hobbes, p. 360. saying, That it is not Idolatry to pay Divine worship to a
King, if he command it by terror of punishment (which I have spoken to before)
says here, That it is no casting a stumbling block before his Brother, for that
his Brother cannot argue from thence, that he, let him be never so Wise and
Learned, approves it, but does it for fear, (though to do Mr. Hobbes right he
in p. 362. says the contrary.) One would wonder, that any Man that admits of
such a thing as a stumbling block in his Brother's way, in a Religious sense,
and that was not distracted, should say so; for what can be a greater
encouragement to another to be Idolatrous, than his seeing his Wise and Learned
neighbor do the thing. Certainly it cannot be supposed, that there can be a
greater, and 1 Cor. 8. 10, 11, 12. v. is expressly against Mr. Hobbes; which
says, That the weak Brother, seeing one sit at meat in the Idols Temple, is
imboldned to eat things offered to Idols, whereby he may perish; which is there
said to be a sin against Christ. And how shall a Man know (admitting it was
lawful, as it is not, to be Idolatrous upon the account of fear) whether it be
done for fear, or no. It Is generally impossible, and not to be supposed. And
Mr. Hobbes, in this page, prosecuting his Idolatrous Doctrine, says, That to
worship God in a peculiar place, or to turn a Man's face to an Image or
determinate place, is not to worship the Image or place; but to acknowledge it
holy, that is, set apart from common use; and is not Idolatry, except done by a
private authority. I would now have any Man living tell me, whether any Papist
ever said more (as much as Mr. Hobbes is against Bellarmine) in justification
of their using of Pictures or Crucifixes, or the Heathens of their falling down
before Stocks and Stones, than he has here done; for my part I never did. For
I never heard, but that the Papists say they use them to put them in mind; and
the Heathens, as I have read, say, That they do not imagine that Stocks or
Stones can do them any good, as gods, or that they are gods. But if this,
allowed by Mr. Hobbes, be not Idolatry, I would know what is, and against the
second Command. But Mr. Hobbes here implies a Learned distinction, for he
says, This is Idolatry, if the Image be used by private Authority; but I
suppose he means, it is not Idolatry if set up by public Authority. For he
instances where 'twas lawful, upon the appointment of God Almighty, (which he
said before was King of Israel) and says, '^is no more Idolatry, than it was
for the Israelites before the brazen Serpent to worship God, or for the Jews to
turn their faces toward Jerusalem, or for Moses to put off his shoes, or for
people to worship God in the Churches.

Mr. Hobbes did well to condemn Aristotle, for that Aristotle has taught his
Scholars to condemn Mr. Hobbes. For such consequences did never Man in
Bethlehem put together, as he has in this Book frequently, and particularly
here. For does it follow, because God, the Law maker, can dispense by his Word
with any of his Commands, as this of the second Command, (admit the instances
Mr. Hobbes puts would hold) that therefore any Authority upon Earth can, which
was not the Law maker: This is to make Man in God's stead. And in a familiar
instance to say, that because the King, Lords, and Commons, can by an Act
dispense with a Law, or make one particular action Legal acted against that
Law; that therefore every Master of a Family can do it; which consequences are
ab^urd. And he might as well have said, that because God might lawfully command
Abraham to kill his Son, that therefore a King may lawfully command any of his
Subjects to do the ^ame. But the instances Mr. Hobbes uses are not to his
purpose; for the Israelites were only to look up to the brazen Serpent (when
stung) by God's command, and this God made the means of their cure, as he might
have made the looking up to an O^k Tree to have been, and there was no
worshipping of God before it allowed, that ever we read of; nay, after the
Israelites burnt Incense to it, it was broken to pieces. And Moses putting off
his shoes was likewise by God's particular command, upon a particular
occasion; as likewise God made a particular grant to Solomon for the peoples
praying with their faces toward the Temple, when they should be in a strange
Land; and the worshipping in Churches is but going into a convenient place to
serve God, which is set apart for that purpose. Now then let let any one judge,
whether it be lawful for any person upon Earth to authorize the use of Images
in the worship of God, from that which Mr. Hobbes has said; and whether
setting an Image apart for Divine worship be not Idolatry within the second
Command, let it be done by any Authority whatever. It Is plain against the
second Command, and no Authority can Authorize it.

Mr. Hobbes, coming in his 46. Chapter to the Kingdom of darkness, makes much
of it to consist (which one would not e^sily have dreamed of) in Philosophy;
and particularly rails against Aristotle, and takes his ancient privilege to
say this without giving the least shadow of reason: perchance hoping to make
himself all the World over as great as Aristotle is in Oxford, and to bring in
a new word of confutation ( viz.) Hobbes'^ Ipse dixit^ But methinks he deals
severely with Philosophy, to hang, draw and quarter it, by saying it is guilty
of frighting Men from obeying the Laws of their native Country, as he does p.
373. without telling why; which with submission to Mr. Hobbes is a falser
measure of Justice, than ever I knew the Lawyers use; for they hear a
Delinquent, and tell him a reason why they condemn him. But this is to show Mr.
Hobbes a dextrous Mohammedan, that after he has endeavored to extirpate all
true Religion, now, as in other places, he would do as much for humane
Learning, or else he would never call Philosopy the subject of the Kingdom of
darkness. And in this Chapter he comes to the debate again, how fire should
work upon a Soul: Whether it will or no, I shall not determine, and the
possibility of it I have answered before, and so pass this over.

Mr. Hobbes, p. 377. to show himself as Erroneous in Politics, as he has
hitherto proved in Divinity or Philosophy, tells us, That it is an other o^
Aristotle's sayings (viz.) That in a well ordered Commonwealth, not Men should
govern, but the Laws. And from this Mr. Hobbes railing at the absurdity,
infers, That words and paper affright no Body, but the Hands and Swords of Men.
And from this I collect, that it is not convenient for Mr. Hobbes to write any
more Books of Controvesie, till he grow better at a distinction. For it is true,
that the Law is a Politic thing, and can act nothing of it self, without
something that is natural conjoined to it; but notwithstanding it is properly
called the Action of the Law, though the Execution be by Men's Hands; because
it is the Authority of the Law that impowers them; and through its efficacy they
are justified in their actions. As a Corporation, which is a thing of Politic
institution, can really act nothing, yet notwithstanding the act of those they
empower, is said to be their act, though done by others Hands. And it is plain
what Aristotle (if he say so, as I believe he does, it is so well said) means,
viz. That a well ordered Commonwealth is governed, not by the uncertain will of
the Sovereign, but by Laws established by the Sovereign power to make Laws; in
which consists, as my Lord of Clarendon has shown, the greatest happiness both
of Prince and People. If Mr. Hobbes said this out of ignorance I am sorry for
him; but if he said it to cologue with Oliver's Army in 1651, and to persuade
them into that arbitrariness, which afterward they exercised (and the Popish
party have aimed at since;) I will leave any Englishman to judge what he
deserves from all lovers of their native Country. But Mr. Hobbes, though he
has been so violent against Aristotle, the Philosophers, and Schoolmen in
general, as the Authors of Sedition, yet p. 380. is as positive for Copernicus,
and would have the Earth it self turned upside down in Nature, (just as he has
been endeavoring to deal with the Policy of it) and says, Navigations make it
manifest, but tells not how, and that all Learned in humane Sciences
acknowledge that there are Antipodes; and that Years and Days are determined by
the motion of the Earth. This one now would wonder at, that a Man should
affirm, that all Learned Men agree that Years and Days are determined by the
motion of the Earth; when I think, there are but few Learned Men but hold the
contrary; and I confess for this opinion could I never hear any one convincing
argument. Besides, to reject an old opinion, without a better reason for a new
one, is difficult and strange. But this I will pass over, it being a thing
plentifully discoursed in Print.

Mr. Hobbes, after his 47. Chapter, which is his last, and in which he has
spoken much against the Priestly being above the Kingly Office, as I think all
good Protestants will admit, comes after all to a review and conclusion, (which
as my Lord of Clarendon has well observed, is but the poison of the whole Book
sucked into a narrower compass) and in the end of it says, That he has
finished his Discourse, without application or other design; and so shall I
mine, only referring it to the judgment of any Learned Divine, whether Mr.
Hobbes can ever more deserve Pulpit anger, and so much credit in wickedness, as
to be there styled the Debaucher of the Nation; or to the judgment of any good
and sober Man, whether Mr. Hobbes so far participates of the nature of the
Leviathan, as to have not his like in all the Earth.

FINIS.

