THE Quakers Plainness DETECTING FALLACY IN Two Short Treatises:

I. The First in Answer to an Abusive Epistle, styled, The Quakers Quibbles;
and the Comparison therein between the Muggletonians and Quakers, proved Absurd
and Unjust.

II. The Second, being a brief Impeachment of the Forger's Compurgators [in
their Quakers Appeal Answered] whose Injustice, Partiality and false Glosses
have given the chief Occasion of these late Contests.

By George Whitehead.

Ye have eaten the Fruit of Lies, Hos. 10.13. Printed in the Year 1674.

Unprejudiced Reader,
IF the TRUTH could have been overcome by Falsehood, or buried under Reproaches,
or stopped with Popular Clamours, or undermined by the secret Combinations of its
Adversaries, or suppressed by Injustice and Partiality; I confess, these
implacable and envious Men, who are chiefly concerned against us, would have
the Day, and their Iniquity been triumphant and remained uncontrollable: But
such their Weapons and Engines ^^ve not prevailed, nor ever shall effect the
Enemies Designs against God's Cause or Heritage. Had they been Men of Tender
Conscience, or respected the Honor of Religion more then Interest and
Popular-Fame, they would not have given us Occasion for these public Contests,
neither by abetting a manifest Forger, nor by lying Pamphlets or false
Relations that they so frequently bring forth, and cause to be spread against
us: But their hard Hearts, their fretful striving Spirits vent forth their
Envy, and declare their Spleen and Ill Will toward us, only that they want
Power to effect their Revenge upon us; to evince this I could give diverse
Instances, that an Inveterate Persecuting Spirit has long been, and yet lives
and works in diverse of these Baptist-Teachers and Leaders; such as cannot
suffer Persecution themselves for their Religion, but a little Storm or small
Gust would blow them into their Holes and Obscurities again, and yet they seem
to envy the Liberty, and grudge the Prosperity of others; we have Cause to
think, that even Ours is as an Eyesore to them: If they urge me herein, I
doubt not but I can particularly demonstrate it, and in some Measure show the
Antiquity of their persecuting Envy; and of late their Outrage is ominous of
their Decrease, Confusion and Ruin: I am sensible the secret Hand of God has
been, and is at Work against this Perverse Generation, because of their
Hypocrisy and Envy against us his People: And how do they Revile, Infamize,
Bait and Bark at that Sincere-hearted and Zealous Man William Penn? What
Libels, Pamphlets, Books, Squibs, Cantings, Jeers, Silly Drolls and Railing
have his Adversaries ( Baptists and their Assistents) let fly at him, as Men
full freight with Envy, by all which both He and many more are but the more
confirmed against them and their Way, resolving (if they were otherwise to
seek) they would never be Dipped by these Baptists into their Spirit, Religion or
Church. Of late I have met with a very partial and scornful Pamphlet, styled,
The Quakers Quibbles, said to be set forth in an Expostulatory Epistle to W.
Penn; unto which I thought meet to write this following brief Tract; though it
be not directed to me, I am concerned for the Truth and People of God, being
both abused through the Envy and Folly of their Confused Adversaries: We find
the said Pamphlet subscribed with the Name, Thomas Thompson, p. 26. And in
Conclusion, Thomas Thompson, whether this be the Real Author's Name some
question; however, some of the Baptists have commended and promoted his Work,
as an Ingenuous Piece, who have pretended themselves ignorant of the Author of
it: but whatever he be, he writes like a Confident Controuler of W. P. and the
Quakers, and would seem to be somebody; but his Complement of Sir, and thou
Sir, and thou, etc. as also, Mountebank, Fool, etc. with much more such
Language to W. P. looks but oddly; a strange Way of complementing from such a
Person as would be thought a Moderator and Indifferent Pen! But whoever the
Author be, his Work will further declare what dark Spirit it came from, and
that it much resembles that of a Prejudiced, Angry Anabaptist, only disguised
and mixed with a little of different Style and silly Drollery: However, he and
these Baptists that so much envy us, and out of their Pride and Emulation would
be smiting at W. Penn, because of his Testimony for the Truth among us, and his
Zeal against Truth's Adversaries, they do but strive and quarrel in vain; and I
must tell them, there was a Hand of the Lord in raising him up (as also will
appear in many more) to bear Witness against such a stingy Generation of
Hypocrites and Apostates, as of late do busy themselves and take Counsel
together like malicious Incendiaries against us, and their Counsel God will
bring to naught, and scatter the Proud in their Imaginations; yet I have a
secret Sadness and Sorrow of Spirit because of the great Loss, Declension and
Apostasy that diverse, even of these Baptists are fallen into. On the former
Zeal for Religion, Tenderness of Conscience and Desires after an Experimental
and Inward Knowledge of the Spirit, Power and Work of God that were stirring in
many (when they were in a Low and Suffering Condition) which now they have
lost, and the Zeal of several turned into Enmity, and they grown Cold and Dead
in the Earth and Spirit of the World! yet there is a Remnant among them, whom
the Lord will visit and gather out, as those other Sheep that desire to return
to the great Shepherd and Sheepfold, from off those Barren Hills, and out of
those Empty Professions, and Dead Forms, and Shadowy Observations under which
the Souls of many yet lie starving and pining, for want of the True and
Heavenly Bread, which is in the Father's House.

G. W.

THE Quakers Plainness DETECTING FALLACY.
Section I. Of the Partiality and Confusion of the Pamphlet, styled, The
Quakers Quibles, and the Authors Hypocrisy and Envy.
WHereas the Author of the Pamphlet (whoever he be) styles himself, an
Indifferent Penn, and would appear to be a very meek and moderate man, assuring
us he is neither Baptist nor Quaker, p. 37. implying that he is an Impartial
Person between both: But now, let the serious Reader consider and judge of this
Man's Moderation and Ingenuity, who instead of impartially relating Matters of
Fact (for others to judge of) all along bears upon the Quakers with hard
Language, Jeers, Taunts and Canting Quibles comparing W.P. with a Jesuit in
his Oration, and to a Mountebank or Stage Player, accusing him with Shuffles,
Railing, Clamor, less Railing at Billingsgate; the Author of a Lie, not only a
Fool, his unjust; and us, his Friends, with Foll, Immoderation, Rancor, Malice,
Obstinacy, Unreasonableness, not to say Madness, Passion, ^^gling,
Refractoriness, Ridiculous Fanc^^s, Weak^^ss, Q^^bling, base old Way of Evasion
and Sh^f^ing, perverse Generation, obstinately confident, and confidently
obstinate, without Order or Rule, Rhyme or Reason, Fools fit for n^ Man to
dispute with except some of Muggleton 's Disc^ples, Billingsgate Rhetoric,
misterious Subtit^^es, etc. Unjustly and wickedly comparing Muggleton and the
Quak^rs, or the Quakers and Muggletonians, insinuating, that both of them may
be Impostors; for its possible, says he, and all this to render us as odious
as may be.

How now Baptists! is this your indifferent Penn and ingenuous Writer? Can you
think he has well palliated Matters, either with Indifferency, Moderation or
Impartiality between us? Or that such Work will make a Pacification, or end the
Controversy? No, no; such deceitful Dealing and hypocritical critical
Pretenses will stand you in no stead. And pray further observe how inconsistent
your indifferent Pen is with himself in his self-Contradictions; as,

1. Between his commending W.P. for an excellent Rhetorician and fluent Tongue;
and so was Cicero, p. 6.

And his telling us, You give Occasion to Persons to think and judge you a
perverse Generation, without Order or Rule, Rhyme or Reason, p. 25.

Was Cicero such an one then?

2. Between his proposing, that if W. P. had this Gift of a fluent Tongue and
good Voice merely by turning Quaker, and not partly natural, and partly
acquired at Schools, that would more convince him of the Truth of W.P' s
Christianity, etc. p. 7.

And his confessing, That good Saint Paul says, Though I speak with the
Tongues of Men and Angels, and have not Charity I am become as sounding Brass
or a tinkling Cymbal, p. 9.

So then it is Charity, not the Gift of Tongues, that is a certain Proof of
Christianity.

3. Between his saying, Thou made thy self the Author of a Lie, and shewdst
thy self not only a Fool, but Unjust, p. 13.

And saying, To say it is a Lie, that is neither Answer nor Argument; therefore
in Love I should advise thee to leave off all such Billins-gate Rhetoric and
gross Language.

See here how he has condemned that as Billings-gate Rhetoric and gross
Language which himself has used.

4. Between his saying to W.P. Perhaps thou art of a different mind from some
of thy Friends as it is reported, thou have brought them off from some
ridiculous Fancies, p. 20.

And speaking of W.P.'s being engaged with such a People, and having received
their Principles, thereby thinking himself obliged now to maintain them, p. 26.

How should he so differ with us (his Friends) being engaged with us, and
obliged to maintain our Principles? Which we doubt not of his Sincerity in,
whatsoever be here insinuated to the contrary.

Now after the great Noise these Baptists have made against us, as being no
Christians, and the several Attempts made to prove us none; as also their
begging Questions, and calling for an Evidence to prove our selves Christians,
and not telling us what Evidence; the Author of the Quakers Quibles proposes
something as Evidence, in order to convince him of W. P's Christianity; and
what must that be? but the Gift of Tongues immediately inspired, which he
says, the Members of the true Church in the Apostles Time had, and that if he
can show any one in our Church that has such a Gift or Gifts given him upon
his Conversion to our Way, it would put a clear Difference betwixt him and the
Baptists, etc. p. 7. Also he asks, Where is the Demonstration of the Spirit
with thee in Power and mighty Signs? p. 9.

What say you Baptists to this Proposal? Must this conclude the Controversy
between you and us, that if we can produce such a Sign or Evidence, it shall be
taken as a Proof of our Christianity; but if not, then no Christians? And who
then shall escape your Censure in this Case that have not the Gift of Tongues
immediately inspired? Have not the Jesuits in this wise argued against the
Protestants and reformed Churches, calling for some such Sign or Miracle to
ascertain them of their being the true Church, or led by the Spirit, otherwise
have urged them to return to the Church of Rome?

And at this rate how will you Baptists escape your own Condemnation of being
no Christians or Members of Christ's Church, if you cannot exhibit such an
Evidence as the Gift of Tongues inspired among you? But to say, the Members of
the true Church (that is, in general without Exception) had that Gift, is a
great Mistake (though some had) see 1 Cor. 12.28, 29, 30. And what if God will
not bestow such Gifts and Signs now; must we therefore be no Christians? But
for ought he can learn, our Friends and Church is as low, poor, naked and
destitute herein as the Baptists Church ( viz. as to such former Signs and
Wonders) p. 8.

And what follows? Are we not therefore the true Church? Are the Baptists
willing to be thus concluded on this Ground?

By that Accusation (viz. Whilst you are both in the dark, you wrangle and
fight, confute and confound one another to little Purpose, p. 8.) He has
condemned the Baptists as well as us for wrangling and fighting in the dark,
etc. It were well, they would as well see themselves thus reproveable herein,
as promote the said Pamphlet as such an ingenuous excellent Piece, whereby
however they intimate to the World, that they are not come into the Light, but
are wrangling and fighting in the dark.

But what Clamor? what Noise? what Tautologies? what Disorder? what Discord?
what Confusion -- your Unchristian Carriage, etc. p. 10.

Oh partial Man! many hundreds can testify, that this Disorder, unchristian,
yea, and uncivil Carriage, and frequent Interruptions (to divert us from our
Charge against T. H.) were stirred up against us by our Adversaries, as I never
met with Disorder and unfair Dealing from Priests or others, mall the Disputes
I have been concerned in.

Touching the Complaint of our giving Occasion by a solemn Offer for Thousands
of People to meet together and that to the Hazard of their Limbs and Lives,
etc. p. 10. He tells us not who gave the Occasion of that Solemn Offer; was it
not the Baptists by their public Meeting at Barbican before for T. H. his
Purgation, and possessing the People against us, Boasting in our Absence,
aggravated with several apparent Lies spread the City and Countries by the
Baptists and their Agents against us, as purposely leaving the City, shifting
the Meeting, being afraid to meet them, etc?

And why did not W. K. and the rest seriously consider, and prudently foresee
the Danger of the Meeting at that Place, as also the Trouble that would follow
upon them by such injurious and base Attempts against us in our Absence? And
indeed it was not prudently done in them to occasion and appoint point such a
Meeting to be in such a slight and weak Meeting House as theirs at Barbican: Is
it not well known that we proffered them a Meeting House more secure, wherein
there was no such Danger?

For two of us speaking at a Time, and crying hear, hear (that was to hear him
that was to speak) p. 11. And what if many at once cried, hear, hear? that was
intelligible, and there was need enough; this was sometimes, when it was
supposed that nighan hundred of the Anabaptists would clamor together, and make
a hideous Noise and Bawling, to stop him that was about to speak; and in such
wise were we Beset, Interrupted, and Hectored by their Companies in the
Galleries, and near us, upon their Leaders Example, insomuch, that we must wait
a considerable time ere we could be heard.

The Charge of Shuffling and Bogling at one single Question, being afraid, etc.
page 12. is unjust, and scornfully aggravated; for though there was some
Intermission before an Answer was given, it was not at all out of any Fear, or
to Shuffle about it, but because 1 st, It was not W. P's place then to Answer
Interrogatories and unscriptural Questions, when his Adversaries had given a
Charge that we were no Christians, and upon the Proof, as they pretended,
instead whereof they fell to Catechizing us. 2 dly, And if we had not at that
Time answered one Word to the Question, but held them to the Proof of their
Charge, judicious Auditors would have held us excusable.

To that of T. H's saying, Most of the Particulars he would prove from our
Principles, and the rest by Testimonies, p. 13. he said, the rest by
Consequence. Though here T. H. made a Stop, yet W. P. is charged with an
Interruption, a Lie, a Fool and Unjust, when he did not insist on the Matter;
see their disingenuous Carping and Reviling.

Whereas many gross things were instanced and laid against him, wherein he had
most falsely and abusively personated us, as so speaking and being our own
Answers and Words, and our Method and Manner of Reasoning Dial. p. 63. and
Title Page.
even in many Particulars, which he had neither Testimony for, nor are they
deducible either from our Words or Principles.

However if he say, He will prove them by Consequence; this bewrayes his own
Falseness in saying, They were the Quakers Answers; when they were but T.
Hicks's Forgeries sta^^d in our Name and Person.

Sect. II. Of the Christ of God, etc.
THat we have denied Distinctions, p. 15. is false; for true and reasonable
ones we deny not.

But if our Friends Words have not deceived this Man (he says) we own nothing
but the Divine Nature to be Christ, p. 16.

Where proves he these Words to be ours? Have we not plainly and often confessed
also, that the Divine, Nature or Word, clothed with the most holy Manhood, and
as having taken Flesh of the Seed of Abraham, was and is the Christ?

Yet we must own that if he was the Son of God before he took Flesh, he was
Christ with respect to his Divine Nature, as proceeding from the Father; and
that he was the Son of God before, is not denied that we know of, in which
Respect he was not seen with Carnal Eyes, but with Respect to the Body which he
took upon him in Time.

And as for two Natures, viz. the Divine and Human united in one Person, being
the Christ, p. 16.

Then how consistent with this is it to say, that the Human Nature (or Christ's
Body of Flesh and Blood) is Christ? p. 17, 18. Which is all one, as one while
to say, that Christ is made up of a Divine and Human Nature; another while of a
Human Nature or Body, and yet that Body the Body of Christ. I must confess,
that if you impose upon us a Creed in such Impropriety of Speech, and besides
Scripture Language and Phrase, or otherwise unchristian us, we must tell you,
that until you bring us plain Scripture that says, the Human Nature is the
Christ (which Phrase some do conscientiously Scruple, at least, as being too
low to entitle to the Christ of God) we must rather patiently bear your Censure
or Damnation, then deviate from Scripture Language (in our Creed) which is,
that Jesus Christ is come in the Flesh, that he is God, Man, the Son of God;
yea, and God manifest in Flesh, "that as Mediator betwixt God and Man, he is
THE MAN Christ Jesus; that Christ's Body of Flesh and Blood that was born of
the Virgin - Mary, and that suffered, was crucified, dyed and rose again the
Third Day, is called, The Body of Jesus, this Temple, Mat. 27.58. Joh. 2.19 and
20.12. Luke 24.3.
and a Body have thou prepared me; Heb. 10.5.
was not this the Son speaking to the Father?

As for J. Ives's great Question so much insisted on, Whether Christ's Human
Nature was a Part of Christ? p 17.

As it was not a Question in Scripture Phrase or Language, so it was as
abruptly and sillily obtruded and begged instead of proving the Charge of our
being no Christians: As also thus to divine Christ into Parts, is a
Contradiction to the Human Nature being Christ.

Pray you Baptists, before you conclude a final Sentence upon us, agree upon a
consistent Creed that you intend to stand by, if you will impose upon us to
believe as you believe in Matter and Form upon Pain of Excommunication, as
Ethnicks or Heathens, and finally of Damnation, and then we may answer you
further as we see Occasion, you having already attempted to excommunicate us
from among all Christians chiefly about Words, Which having various
Significations, their being imposed has caused Divisions and fruitless
Contests.
wherein as yet you have not stated a plain and congruous Form among your
selves.

And we need not think our selves obliged further to answer you or defend our
selves from your bare Charge of being no Christians, until you have given us
such a formal Creed, and withal explain; prove and reconcile these your Terms
which you impose, question and strive about, and some of you have endeavored to
tie us up to answer Aye or No unto; as about your Expressions, viz.

Two Natures in one Person, the Christ. Christ's Human Nature Part of Christ.
The Body that was seen with carnal Eyes, the Christ. Christ's Body of Flesh and
Blood to be Christ, or Christ's Person. The true Christ a Person without us, or
a Personal Being without us.
But let it be further observed, that your Brother H. Grigg In his Book entit.
Light from the Sun of Righteousness, p. 94.
confesses [of Jesus Christ the Son of God] thus, viz. That he was of the same
Essence or Substance with the Father and the holy Spirit, and that he had a
PERSONAL EXISTENCE or Subsistence before he did assume our Nature, etc.

See here they own a Personal Being of Christ before he assumed our Nature;
they should have agreed upon the Definition of Words Person, and Personal
Existence, and Subsistence, and clearly explain them to us in their Nature and
Property; as also the Nature and Extent of the Word Human, both as they apply
it to Body, to Nature, and as it relates to Man, and not darkly and dubiously
to impose them upon us in their ^uestions, but rather be content with plain
Scripture Language, and Words which the Holy Ghost has taught, which it seems
these Men are not content with, as also appears, where W. Penn confessed his
Belief of Christ to be of the Seed of Abraham, yet God over all, blessed
forever, etc. This was and is excepted against, as not direct to the Question,
p. 18. Therefore upon their variable Terms about Christ, I Propose these few
plain Questions, seriously asking them: 1. If the Son of God was not in Being
in the Beginning, and from Everlasting? 2. If he was not truly the Christ of
God (being the Son of God) before he took Flesh upon him, or was born of the
Virgin Mary? 3. If Carnal Eyes could see him simply as the Eternal Son of God,
or his Glory, as of the only begotten of the Father? 4. Where does the
Scripture say, that the Human Nature is the Christ? 5. Or that Christ is a
Person or Personal Being, consisting of Human Flesh and Blood without us? 6. Or
that his Glorious Body in Heaven is a human Body? 7. Whether the Man Christ
Jesus, the Mediator, be really separate and remote from his Church or Members,
so as not to be present in his Church here on Earth? 8. If Christ be separate,
remote or divided from his Church, how is he the Head thereof, or his Church a
living Body without (or divided from the Head?)


If you profess you know Christ, do not impose your implicit Notions,
unscriptural and uncouth Terms about him, but declare your Experience of him.

Farther as to what we hold concerning the Christ of God, in Answer to his 20th
Page.

1. Christ (who was the Word in the Beginning) in due Time came in the Flesh.

2. That though the mere Body of Jesus was not the entire Christ, yet the Name
Christ, is sometimes given to the Body, though not so properly as to the whole
Man Christ.

3. That God was in Christ, and the Father and Son are inseparable.

4. That the Distinction of Father and Son, is not only nominal (as this
Opposer implies against us) but real in the divine Relation of Father and Son,
the Son as being the only-begotten of the Father, and also known as Co-Workers
in the Order and Degrees of Manifestation and Discovery.

5. The Man's accusing the Quakers with this Doctrine, That the Father is the
Son, and the Son the Father; and so God the Christ of himself, and Christ the
God of himself; Somewhat like as Muggleton does in this Particular, p. 20.

Though these are none of our Words, yet this favors of mere Ignorance and
Envy; we do not own any such Separation between God and Christ as these Words [
The Christ of himself, and the God of himself] do imply, Socinian-like; but
that the Father is in the Son, and the Son is in the Father; as also that the
Son is the mighty God, the everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace; see how
plain it is, Isa. 9.6.

6. That Christ is not a Person without us, p. 21. is not our Doctrine or
Phrase that I know of or remember; only that the Title is thought too low and
unscriptural, to give to the Christ of God, many Men having Gross Apprehensions
about the Phrase [PERSON WITHOUT]. But Christ is confessed by us, both as without
us, and within us.

7. We are charged that we must hold, That Christ dyed not, but only the Body
that he assumed, that was prepared for him, p. 21.

Now you Promoters of this Q. Quibbles, for an Ingenuous Pamphlet, I ask you if
any more of Christ properly dyed then the Body? Do you hold that his Soul,
Spirit or his Divinity dyed? If not, the Charge is foolish and silly; if you
do, then are you like Reeve and Muggleton, who have bla^phemously said, that
Christ's Soul and Godhead-Life dyed, When as Christ's dying and being buried, 1
Cor. 15. was properly, that the Body dyed and was buried, to wit, the Body of
Jesus: See Mat. 27.58. Mark 15.43, 45. Luke 23.52, 46. and 24.3. John 20.21.

As to what we say about seeing the Son of God spiritually and not carnally [Or
between the seeing him savingly, and not so seeing him, etc.] The Man is hugely
taken with J. Ives's Answer to our Distinction, That he cannot but own it to be
very good and pertinent: Jeremy' s Words were (says he) That then I, or any
man might say by the same Reason, that W. Penn or G. Whitehead was never seen
with bodily or carnal Eyes, because the Excellency and better Part of them,
viz. their Souls, was never seen, though their Bodies be seen, which is not the
Man, p. 23. To which I reply;

It Is not improbable, that if we had made such a Comparison, you Baptists would
have cried out, O Blasphemy!

1. To compare the Names W. Penn and G. Whitehead with the Name Christ.

2. To compare the seeing G.W. and W.P. with the seeing the Christ of God.

3. It implies, the Name of Christ to be no more excellent then the Name George
or William; Oh Ignorance in the Abstract!

4. Did not the Name of Christ as well concern the more excellent Part or
Divine Nature as the Manhood, and far Excel those fleshly or outward Names of
Distinction given to us as mere Men and Creatures? and that by Earthly Parents
or Relations, and not from a Spirit of Prophecy, as to respect some divine
Qualification or new Nature? for that must have a new Name; therefore I must
look upon J. Ives's Answer and Similitude to be both impertinent and irrational.

Sect. III. Our Opposer self-condemned; his irreverent Quibbling about Christ;
and their Ignorance of the Spirit's Evidence, who seek for Signs, etc.
AS for your standing Gaping well nigh an Hour for an Answer, p. 24. If many of
you had not gaped and hidiously bawled often to hinder our Answers, but had
been civil, you had been more answered then you were. His Charge, That we are
fit for no man to dispute with except some of Mugleton's Disciples, p. 25. is
far enough from approving himself an indifferent Penn: But will the Baptists
own this, that they are such as Muggleton's Disciples, when they propose for
(or admit of) Disputation with us?

As for W. Penn's using the Words Lying and Forgery, and Liar and Forger in his
Books against Thomas Hicks; this the Man accounts gros Language, that will
hard^y stand with good Manners, nor suit with a civilized man, much less with a
good Christian; and to say it is a Lie, is Billings-gate Rhetoric, more fit
for Scoulds that are duck'd, etc. p. 25. This is made a very capital Crime with
this Author, who bids us speak Evil of no man, but be gentle, showing all
Meekness, etc. And yet he himself calls W.P. the Author of a Lie, a Fool,
unjust, p. 13. and calls us Fools, Obstinate, etc. and so has condemned
himself, both as a partial and a self-contradictory Pen. But why is W.P. the
Author of a Lie? The Pretense is for taking the Words out of T.H. 's Mouth
before he had made an End of his Sentence; as when he said, most of the
Particulars he would prove; W.P. then saying, most of them? then not all; which
was upon a Stop that T.H. made there, as he and many others apprehended:
Howbeit, when T.H. added, The rest he would prove by Consequence, W.P. insisted
not on the first Words, but refused to admit of his Consequences, be having
told the World in his Dialogue, that they were the Quakers Answers, etc. but
this Writer against us, carps and traduces on every slight Occasions. Would the
Baptists think it fair to be published in Print for Liars, Fools and unjust on
such an Account? But for W.P. his accusing T. Hicks with being both a Liar and
Forger; he has both proved him such an one in his Books, and further urged to
prove his Charge against him publicly, since his Abettors have endeavored to
cover and uphold him.

But it seems it is the Language [ Lying and Forgery, and Liar and Forger] that
is found Fault with here, and not the Application thereof, when as the
Scriptures prove such Language; as, Thou love Lying rather then to speak
Righteousness; ye are Forgers of Lies, etc. See Psalm. 52.3. Job 13.4. Joh.
8.55. Rev. 2.2. and 3.9. and 21.8. Tit. 1.12.

His accusing some of the Quakers with quibling as much about the Word Body, as
about the Word Christ; I look upon it as no better then quibbling against us,
instead of proving us guilty by plain Scripture; for to say, the Church of
Christ is his Body, and that there is one Body and one Spirit, and that they
that are joined to Christ are Members of his Body; this is according to
Scripture Language; as also, that the Body is one, and has may Members, so
also is Christ; and are not the Saints spiritually united into Christ, and unto
his spiritual and glorious Body? Is Christ Head of his Church in any other
Body, then that whereof they are Members, and united to him? And will this
admit of Christ's being Head of two separate Bodies; or of Three Christ's? as
his stating the Distinction upon G. Keith, That Christ was most properly taken
for the Divine Nature, less properly for the human Nature, and least properly
for the Carkas^, page 28. whereas this is so far from G. Keith's proving Three
Christ's, that the words Human Nature and Carcass, were J. Ives's, not G. K's,
as the first is herein granted, though G. Keith owns the words Divine Nature,
Manhood and Body of Christ, and confessed the Name Christ, to be given to the
Body when crucified and dead, though less properly then to the Divine Nature
and entire Manhood; since that the Son of God was the Christ of God, before he
took upon him the Body prepared for him, as J.I. has granted in his Book,
Inocency above Impudency, p. 37. By his Argument, That Christ is the Son of
God, Ergo, the Son of God is Christ: and as I answered, though I could not be
heard, that the Name Christ was mutually and reciprocally given in Scripture to
the Body and Spirit of Christ; as, Christ dyed and was buried, when it was
properly the Body of Jesus; for his Soul or Spirit was immortal and did not
dye, but was in Paradyse when his Body was buried; and that Spiritual Rock
which ^ll Israel drank of, was Christ. Does the Scripture herein make Two
Christ's? No sure; No more will G.K. his Distinction bear Three Christ's in Three
d^stinct Persons, as the Man unscripturally and quibblingly words it, page 28.

And further, It is very strange that W. P. in correcting the Baptists and
others, to set up his own as the True Church, must be imposed upon to produce
some of those Gifts or Visible Demonstrations, or Eminent Signs, as were in the
Church in the Apostles Days, page 29. and 9. when as he never made that a
Reason, or Ground, to correct others for want of such Signs, as the Gift of
Tongues, Miracles, etc. but for some Un-Christian Principle or Practice;
however in this Case our present Opposers do argue as exactly like the Jesuits
and Papists against the Protestants, for correcting them, as if they had served
seven Years at Rome. But let it be remembered how the Baptists themselves were
in this manner excepted against after their first Separation from other
Churches, and gathering into a Church of their own: It was objected against
them, If the Lord be with us, where be all those Miracles which our Fathers
told us of? Where be the Gifts of working Miracles which were in the primitive
time, etc? And what Defense did the Baptists make for themselves herein? but
that the seeking after, and Working Miracles in that outward way (that is
sometimes in Scripture spoaken of and that these men intend) is not essential
to a Believer, and so not to a Church, nor an Administrator. See p. 69. of
their Book, entitled A Way to Sion, by D. King; printed at London, and
reprinted at Edinburgh, 1656. Also, That Miracles did not prove them Disciples;
That Miracles do not now distinguish a true Church from a false, Ibid. p. 135,
136. Yet, as if they had quite forgotten these things, and the Oppositions and
Sufferings which they formerly met withal, they bring their Adversaries
Objections against us.

And seeing if we should only tell men, We are in the Truth, the Light within
them will testify to our Way, it is demonstrable by the Effects; and that we
have the Spirit, and are in the Power of God, and that it is within, while the
Baptists so say they have it; as he says p. 31, 32. and that all this will not
decide the Controversy, or manifest to our Opposer a real Discrimination
between us, to demonstrate us to be in the Truth. Now as we have not this way
imposed a Faith upon our Opposers, so we shall not thus impose upon either this
man, or the Baptists; but desire he and they may without Prejudice seek and try
further, and Try all things, and hold fast that which is Good, and we doubt
not, but where or in whom the Spirit of Christ lives and rules, it will
manifest it self by its Fruits, for it is Self-Evidencing, and will discover
who are the Lord's peculiar People, and who not.

But this Quibbler imposes upon W. P. to bring something for Proof of his
Church which the Baptists nor no False Church can pretend to and produce, page
30. Though this seems to be a hard Task, especially as to what may be
pretended; yet it is no difficult matter for W. P. and many more to produce or
demonstrate some such Effects of that Living Testimony, Presence and Power of
God among us, as no false Church can produce; although herein neither W. P. nor
any of us, will admit of Prejudiced and Envious Spirits to be our Judges or
Witnesses in these matters; but we have a Record in Heaven, and also in many
Consciences of the blessed Power and Presence of God with us and amongst us,
Turning many from Darkness to Light, and from Satan's Power to God: And many
there are among us, gathered out from Baptists, and other Churches and Peoples,
who are Living Witnesses both of the blessed Operation and Effects of the Power
and Ministry of Christ Jesus among us, which yet if the Baptists should object
and say, They see no such thing, I answer, That is, because they have not
Honestly made Trial, but stood in Prejudice and Gainsaying, as many did against
Christ, the Apostles and Primitive Church of old: However it is very
Uncharitable for them, to conclude us No Christians; Either because They will
not see us to be such, or because that at their faithless Demands, We do not
produce such mighty Signs, as they call for in their own Wills and Times; But a
Foolish and Adulterous Generation seeks a Sign -- being in the Unbelief, not
acknowledging the Sufficiency of the Spirit's Teaching and Evidence, in that
they own not the SPIRIT to be their RULE.

Sect. IV. The Quakers clear from L. Muggleton's Principles, and the Baptists
Agent's comparing them together, proved Scandalous and Wicked, etc.
TOuching the Comparison that is made between the Quakers and Muggletonians,
it is both Idle Quibbling and Envious Canting to traduce and scandalize us; what
if W. P. does not pretend to more then Muggleton does (nor to so much in some
things) does it therefore follow, the Quakers are Impostors, or like him, who
holds apparent Blasphemies in many Things, wherein W. P. and others of us have
given public Testimonies against him? The Baptists may be ashamed of such
gross and abusive Insinuations as this, comparing the Quakers and
Muggletonians; yea, and that in some Things wherein the Baptists and
Muggletonians might as well, yea, and more truly be compared: As where it is
said, Muggleton says, He is one of the two Witnesses spoaken of in Rev. 11.
that God has given Power to prophecy; and the Quakers say, they are the true
VVitnesses to the Light, and have received Power to preach the Everlasting
Gospel, etc. And I may as well add, do not the Baptists profess themselves both
to be true Witnesses of the Christ of God, and Preachers of him too? Muggleton
has several Disciples and Followers that believe him, and so have the
Baptists. Muggleton curses and damns the Quakers; and what do Baptists less to
Quakers and all others that will not be dipped by them, or do oppose them. But 1.
Muggleton says, He has received Commission from Heaven. 2. That he had it by
divine Revelation. 3. That he is inspired by the Spirit of God. 4. That he
pretends to Infallibility.


And what if Quakers pretend to these, as led by the Spirit of Truth? The
Apostles and true Church did not only pretend to, but experience the same, does
it therefore follow that they must be compared with the Muggletonians, and be
deemed Impostors; And the Baptists the true Ministry and Church, and yet have
no Commission from Heaven, either to dip or damn People; but deny divine
Revelation, immediate Inspiration and Infallibility? Let them answer for
themselves.

It Is said, Muggleton denies that the Father and Son are two distinct Persons:
And have not the Baptists done as much in these Words; Jesus Christ, God, Man,
a Person without you? See Dial. 1. p. 9. wherein they imply the Father and the
Son, or God and the Man Christ, to be but one Person without us; whereas we
tell them it is not a Scripture Phrase.

But seeing Muggleton pretends some Things that both the Baptists and Quakers
hold; would the Baptists be therefore included in the Comparison with the
Muggletonians? Might they not at this rate as well make all Protestants to be
Papists; yea, Jews, Mahometans, etc. because all agree in some Truths?

But the Comparison-Maker was not so honest as to show wherein the Quakers
differ with and oppose Muggleton, as a Blasphemer and Impostor: As Muggleton
holds these false and Blasphemous Doctrines, which the Quakers utterly deny.

1. That the Breath of Life God breathed into Adam (which made his Soul to
live) is mortal and does dye. 2. That Adam' s Soul did dye, viz. with the Body.
3. That the Soul of Man is mortal. Do not some of the Baptists hold the same?
4. That to say, the Soul departs from, or slips out of the Body, when it dies,
is an ignorant, dark Opinion of most People, contrary to Sense, Reason or
Faith. 5. That Death took Christ's Soul into it. 6. That Lazarus his Soul was
dead in the Grave, where his Body was those four Days. 7. That not only Adam'
s Soul did dye, but also that the Soul of Christ did dye. 8. That all men's
Souls ever since are dead being mortal. Thus far all the Baptists, who hold the
Mortality of the Soul, agree with Muggleton.

9. That Solomon was ignorant in this Point (in saying) the Body to the Dust,
and the Spirit returns to God that gave it. 10. That God was born of Mary. 11.
That God is not an Infinite Spirit filling all Places. 12. That the Godhead-
Life dyed, that when Christ dyed, God dyed. 13. That Christ, being God embodyed
with Flesh and Bone (one Person without us) cannot be in the Quakers. 14. That
there are many vast Places in the Earth where God is not at all. 15. That God
himself is a single Person, in Form of a Man, and no bigger in Compass and Bulk
(and was so from Eternity) then a Man, even of the same Stature as the first
Adam was. 16. That Reason is the Devil. 17. That all Men have received the Seed
(or Spirit of Reason) from the Devil or raprobate Angel. 18. That the Devil
became Flesh, Blood and Bone. 19. That Cain was none of Adam' s Son or
Begetting, but the first Devil in Flesh. 20. That Eve was with Child of Cain by
the Serpent-Angel before Adam knew her. 21. That then the Condition of Eve was
much like the Condition of Mary the Virgin, being with Child by the Holy Ghost
before Joseph knew her. 22. That the Devil that tempted Christ, was a Man.
Thus far of Muggleton in his Looking-Glass for G. Fox; and other Books of his
and John Reeve's, are replenisht with such absurd and blasphemous Stuff which
we never were guilty of, but always abhorred, and often testified against, as
we have had Occasion; therefore let the World judge how grossly and wickedly we
are dealt with and scandalized in the Baptists or their Abettors, comparing us
with Muggleton, between whom there is as much Distance and Opposition, as
betwixt Heaven and Hell, Light and Darkness.

Sect. V. The Quakers furher unjustly compared, and Baptists proved to Deny the
Divinity of Christ.
Page 36. BUt we are further catechized: If our Ministers ought to be believed
on easier Terms then Christ and ^is Ministers were (that is, on such Signs, and
Wonders, and Miracles, and Gifts of the Holy Ghost, as God did bear them
witness with, Acts 2.22. Heb. 2.3, 4.) And why must we be put upon this Proof,
or else be judged not only No Christians, but Impostors? but because we bring
New Doctrines and New Revelations (as we are accused) But what these New ones
are, and wherein contrary to the ancient Christian Apostolical Doctrines, we
are not yet convinced by all the Oppositions we have met withal.

It is further added, That some of which are not such New Discoveries from
Heaven manifest by the Light within, as pretended, being in Truth but the Old
Fancies of Sabellius revived and new vampt, not heard of till long after
Christ, and then quickly exploded the Church about 1400. Years ago, page 36.

I must needs say, that as this Accuser's smiting at us is in the dark herein;
for he does not lay down these old exploded Fancies of Sabellius, or tell us
particularly what they are, but thus in dark and general Terms is smiting and
squibbing at us, and abusing his Readers, as if they were all bound to believe
his Accusations on his bare Word: But what were those Fancies or Opinions of
Sabellius, and such others that were exploded as Heterodox or Heretical? It Is
reported, That their Books contain many Blasphemies against the Almighty God,
and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, and withal, much Incredulity touching his
only-begotten Son and First begotten of all Creatures, and the word Incarnate,
and senseless Ignorance of the Holy Ghost, Eusebius. lib. 7. fol. 125. chapter 5. As
also those that denied Christ to have been God from Everlasting, and affirmed,
that by Nature he was but only a bare Man; as it is said the Followers of
Paulus Samosatenus did: Such disapproved the Essence and Divinity of Christ,
which has been before all Worlds; and such as confound the Father, the Son and
Holy Ghost, imagining Three Names in One Thing and in One Person, Soc. Schol.
l. 2. chapter 15.

But we are sure that we are clear from all such Opinions, as Denying the Deity
or Divinity of the Son of God, or his being that Word that became Flesh, and so
from affirming him to be butonly a bare Man: As also we never went about to
confound the Father and Son, truly con^^der'd according to Scripture-Testimony;
or to deny either the Property, Relation, Manifestation or Operation of Father
or Son; though the one Divine Being of Father, Son and Holy Spirit from
Everlasting, we have and must confess; Let it suffice, that as we confess to
the Father's bringing or sending forth the Son, both from his own Being and
Substance; as also to his taking Flesh and the perfect Manhood upon him in due
time; and that we really believe his Sonship (and all this according to
Scripture) so that he was and is the Christ of God, the same yesterday, to day
and for ever; And therefore to compare us with Sabellius, or such as before
mentioned, is very Envious and Unjust.

But that Baptists have done no less then denied the Deity of the Son of God,
or Divinity of Christ, appears in what follows.

John Newman's Argument:

If Christ as Christ, was not from the Beginning; then Christ was not the Word
from ^he Beginning:

But Christ as Christ, was not from the Beginning;

Therefore, Christ was not the Word from the Beginning, page 52. of his Book,
entitled The Light Within.

Mark here, Though he grants Christ and the Word to be one and the same; yet
this Argument denies him to be either Christ, or the Word from the Beginning:
What was he then? He tells us not. Does not this oppose the Divinity of Christ,
or Deity of the Son of God? to affirm, that He was neither as Christ, nor the
Word from the Beginning; for, The Word was with God, and the Word was God.

And T. Hicks, among much more of his idle Quibbling and Opposition, thus
queries, viz.

I ask thee, if Christ signify Anointed, and God be Christ, as thou [Quaker]
affirmest, Whether God himself e anointed? Dial. 3. page 32.

Mark here who is the Quibbler irreverently reflecting upon Scripture Language,
But unto the Son he says, Thy Throne, O God! is for ever; a Scepter of
Righteousness is the Scepter of thy Kingdom; Thou have loved Righteousness and
hated Iniquity; Therefore God, even thy God, has anointed thee with the Oil of
Gladness above thy Fellows, Hebr. 1.8, 9. Psalm. 45.6, 7. But these Baptists are
willing to throw off God being Christ, with [ as thou affirmest] which is not,
as they affirm them; I ask then, If they own that Christ is God? Or that as the
Son ( who is God) he be anointed as he is the Son? And If He was the Son of
God, and so Christ, before his Incarnation or assuming Flesh? However these men
appear Socinianized now, and boggle at this Pre-Existence of Christ, and seem
to define or limit him, only as a Person without us in Flesh; yet formerly some
of their Brethren have confessed, That Christ is God, That Christ is called the
Spirit, 2 Cor. 3.17 yea, that The Father has put his Name upon him, Exodus
23.21. And that it is the Christ that is there spoaken of, is manifest, That
the Father has put his Name upon him, so far as He is called the Father, Isa.
9.6. See their Book, entitled, A Way to Zion, p. 102.

I pass by several Falsehoods, traducing and canting Language in the said Qu.
Quibbles; and grant that at length, that the Author has shown himself more
ingenious then in all the Book besides, where he concludes thus, viz. If I have
mistaken thee, or any of thy Friends, it is not willingly; and if thou shewst
me honestly wherein, I will beg thy Excuse; I not pretending to Infallibility,
my Opinion being still so long as we are men, in this Condition, Humanum est
errare. But he should have considered this at the Beginning of his Book, and
have been more submissive and gentle in his Work, being so subject to Mistake.

THE Second Treatise, Wherein the Forgers Compurgators Are IMPEACHED,

In a strict Examination of diverse Citations and Doctrinal Matters in their
Book, entitled, The Quakers Appeal answered, or a full Relation of the
Occasion, Progress and Issue of a Meeting held in Barbican the 28th of August
last past (as their Style is.)

Which Meeting was held by the Baptists to clear T. Hicks, to charge and insult
over the Quakers in their Absence, as the Mannagement and Issue thereof has
manifested

This is published not only for want of Justice from them, but because of the
Injustice of those Baptists so deeply concerned for their Brother Tho. Hicks,
against the People of God called Quakers

George Whitehead.

He looked for Judgment, but behold Oppression; for
Righteousness, but behold a Cry
Under Falsehood have they hid themselves.
THE Second Treatise, Wherein the Forger's Compurgators are Impeached.
A Brief Introduction.
THat these Men, who have undertaken to answer our Appeal against Tho. Hicks,
have pretended very fair in Words, is undeniable; but how they have performed
and answered is already manifest, and will further appear in diverse
Particulars, wherein I do complain against them both of their Injustice,
Partiality and false Testimony, and affirm that they have neither approved
themselves Just Judges, nor faithful Witnesses, in matters plain, and obvious
(nor yet cleared T. Hicks)

In their Title Page they say, Wherein the Allegations of William Penn in two
Books lately published by him against T. Hicks, were answered and disproved.

This is a manifest Untruth as any Impartial Eye may see who is willing but to
compare this their Barbican Relation, styled The Quakers Appeal answered, with
W. Penn's two Books, the one entitled Reason against Railing, and the other,
The Counterfit Christian detected; wherein many things are alleged and charged
against T Hicks, both of vile Forgeries, black Slanders, gross Perversions,
self-Contradictions, etc. which are not so much as particulary mentioned, or
touched in their said Relation; and some of those things they have meddled with,
were never so charged upon him, as under the Notion of vile Forgeries, etc. nor
in such things wherein he had truly cited our Words: We have not charged him
for True Citations, nor for mere Mistakes; but, for plain Forgeries, Falsehoods,
and Slanders wilfully contrived by himself (about which, and not to judge of
Doctrine, the Appeal was made) as does appear in the two Books, and our late
Charge exhibited against him, which we could never obtain a fair Trial of T.
Hicks upon, from these his Abettors and Compurgators, but Diversions and
Interruptions, as the late Meetings with them, at Barbican and near
Spitlefields, did witness, contrary to their fair and smooth Pretenses
following, viz.

Now forasmuch as T. Hicks is a Member with us, having so heavy a Charge
exhibited against him, viz. a FORGER and LIAR, we could do no less then desire
T.H. to give us a Public Meeting, that we might hear when it is probable, they
had heard that before the Meeting.
what he could say hereunto; and if he had done them ANY WRONG, either by
Misquoting of them in any of their Books, or Slandering of them in any thing he
had charged them with, that we might, if any such thing appeared, discharge
that Duty toward him as becomes us, viz. Either to bring him to acknowledge
his Evil as publicly as he had wronged them; or to have disowned him as a
Person unworthy of Countenance among us, in case he should refuse so to do, it
being altogether contrary to our Principle and Practice to allow any among us,
that shall either in WORD or DEED wrong any sort of Men.

To their Letter annexed thereunto these Names are subscribed.

William Kiffin, Thomas Paul, Henry Forty, Hanson Knowls, Laurence Wise, James
Jones.
And further in their Epistle they proceed, viz.

According to the Time appointed we did meet; T. Hicks charged them with
several Opinions, and produced the Books of such as have been and now are chief
Leaders among the Quakers, for his own Discharge from Forgery; and that all
Plainness might appear, we ordered another Person in the Meeting to read the
said Books according as they were cited by T. Hicks: Upon the reading of which
we found them to agree with what he had laid to the Quakers Charge, which the
following Narrative will give you a more full Account of; So that hitherto we
see no Cause of just Blame to be laid upon T. Hicks.

[And further they add] That if W. Penn, or G. Whitehead, or any other leading
Quaker have any New Matter to object against T. Hicks, of which he has not
cleared himself publicly: If they please to signify the Particulars thereof
to us in Writing, with their Hands to it, we shall return such Answer
thereunto, either by a Public Meeting, or otherwise, as to us may seem just,
and that may be to the Satisfaction of all indifferent and unprejudiced Minds;
for we hope that nothing shall lie upon us in point of Duty toward T.H. but
that by the Grace of God we shall be ready to do it.

William Kissin, Thomas Paul, Daniel Dyke, Hanson Knowls, Henry Forty.
From all which it may be observed their fair Pretense in the first place, That
if T.H. had done us any Wrong, either by Misquoting or Slandering us, their
Duty had been cut her to bring him to acknowledge his Evil as publicly as he
had wronged us, or to have disowned him, etc.

1. Neither of which They have done, though his Slanders are made appear in
W.P. and my Answers; as also when we pressed for a further hearing thereof in
public, we were by them diverted; and since, they proposed for a private
Meeting, to go through the Particulars of our Charge; but some of their
Proposals we could not yield to, and our particular Answer thereunto, with our
Reasons how far we could comply, they would not be so moderate as to treat
about when it was read, but parted in a Huff, and after sent us an Angry Letter
not at all tending to a Compliance, or further Treating for a Meeting.

2. And it is further to be observed, that these men take it for granted, that
for those Opinions T. Hicks charged us with, he produced the Books of such as
have been and now are CHIEFLY LEADERS among us, for his own Discharge from
Forgery, and therefore that hitherto they see no Cause of just Blame to be laid
upon him; Whereas it will further appear, that as to those Opinions he has
particularly charged upon us in their said Relation, diverse are Unfairly and
Falsely cited; others that concerned matter of Fact, not cited out of any of our
Books, or any one's that either is, or ever was Eminent among us as Leaders, or
otherwise, but Apostates and Adversaries; Other things also for which he
produces no Citations; others charged and cited out of his own Books, which
his pretended Proofs therein do not at all make good.

3. That concerning the late Trials that we have had of these Baptists in
Public, their Carriage toward us has not been to the Satisfaction of any
indifferent or unprejudiced Minds, who beheld them and their Injustice: But
however, this Good has been brought forth, That many are awakened, and the
Eyes of many are opened through these Bussels and Contests, to take notice and
s^e these men's Unfairness and Partiality; and also to enquire more after Truth
and Religion then heretofore.

After T. Hicks has gone through the 12. Particulars of his Charge that
concern Doctrine, and his 19. that concern Fact, together with those Quotations
he pretends for Proof, we have this Testimony given on his behalf: viz.

We whose Names are here underwritten, do certify, that the aforesaid
Quotations are truly recited out of those Books to which they refer, witness
our Hands,

Daniel Dyke Hanson Knowlls, John Gosnel, Thomas Paul, Henry Forty, John
Norcot, Thomas Wilcock, Robert Snelling, Maurice King, Jonathan Jenings, John
Singleton, Dr. Thomas Plant, Joseph Morton, Owen Davis, John Hunter John
Snelling, William Dix, John Vernon, Edward Noble, Robert Mason, James Barton.


My Occasion calling me from the Meeting before the End thereof; But since
having perused the Proofs, by Comparing them with the Quakers Books whence they
are cited, I find them to agree; witness my Hand, William Kiffin.

Observe here how all these Men have engaged themselves for the clearing of T.
H. and how they have espousd his Work against us, so that they are now
accountable for those his Miscarriages and Abuses in his Dialogues, which we
have charged upon him: And further see, how he and they had laid and fitted
their Matter for such a Public Meeting, managed on his Behalf in our Absence,
when W.P. and I were (as we had been some Time) remote from the City: And
although W. Kiffin left the Meeting before the End thereof, he could both be
Judge and Witness (as well as the rest) for him, from the Perusal and comparing
of his Proofs with the Quakers Books (which the rest might have done privately
as well) now my present Business is, to prove them both Vnfair and False
Witnesses, as well as Unjust Judges, even as to Citations, as will appear
plainly (although they would fain have had us acquiesced with their Judgments,
as being Infallible Judges, because appealed to) but here its proved, That the
Quakers Books do not agree with what T.H. has laid to their Charge, and that
all his Quotations are not truly recited out of their Books; take these
following Instances (being compared out of their own Relation aforesaid, with
what is briefly noted thereupon.

Sect. I. About the Soul.
BEcause T. H. has made a great a do diverse Times about the Soul, as charging
it as the Quakers Opinion; one white, that the Soul is God; another while, that
the Soul is Part of God, and of God's Being, without Beginning and Infinite.
Dial. 1. p. 16. Dial. 3. p. 2. I shall begin with this; where, after he has
cited W.P. as charging T.H. with Perversion, Iujustice, Misciting and Abusing
the true Meaning of what is truly cited: he here breaks off W.P.'s Words, and
then faith to his Auditors, You hear what W. Penn, has said touching this
Charge, p. 8. Whereas he has but cited the Preamble of W. Penn's Answer, and
left out the very Substance thereof: See Reas. ag. Rail. p. 65. Is this fair
Dealing, or true; to say, You have heard WHAT W.P. has said? when they have
not heard the very Substance and chief Part of what he has said in this Case,
which follows after T.H.'s Citation; W. P. thus, viz. G. Fox says thus; God
breathed into Man the Breath of Life, and he became a living Soul, and is not
this of God, of his Being? etc. and is not This that came out from God, Part of
God, and from God? Where nothing can well be clearer, then that G. F. intends
that Divine Life, Power and Virtue, by which Adam in Soul and Body came to live
to God (with other Passages about the Words Breathed, Inspired; after which he
adds) But this Ungodly Person would infer from our asserting, That the Breath
God breathed into Adam's Soul whereby it lived to God, was of God's Divine
Life, That the Soul of Man, as a mere Creature or created Capacity, is of God's
own Being and Substance, etc. See further Reas. against Rail. page 66, 67.

And further let it be observed, wherein T. Hicks has dealt Unfairly by G. F.
in this matter [Though it be true that G. F. says, That God breathed into Man
the Breath of Life and he became a living Soul; and asked, Is not this which
comes out from God, of God, being without Beginning, Infinis in itself, etc?
Gr. Mist. fol. 29, 68, 90, 100.] But then T. Hicks having left out those
Passages that chiefly explain G. F's Sense in this matter, takes it for
granted, without Distinction, that it is our Opinion, That the Soul is God (as
he has charged us) and this he has made one main Reason for his accusing us
with Denying all future and distinct Beings or Rewards of Men after Death
(which must proceed either from his Mistake, Dial. 1. p. 62, 75.
or wilful Perversion) he taking G. F's Question about the Soul, to intend the
mere Spirit of Man that God formed in him, or the Soul, that is, a Reasonable
Creature; which could not be intended in G. F's Question, which concerns that
Immediate Breath, or Spirit of Life, which came out from God, by which Man
became a living Soul; wherein what is more evident then that G.F. does not at
all confound the Being of Man with the Being of his Maker [though God may be
truly said to be the Being of Beings, the Life of Lives, and so the Soul (or
Life) of Souls, even of all Mankind] with respect unto this G. F's words appear
very plain, where he says, God breathed into Man the Breath of Life, and he
became a living Soul; for that which came out from God, was the Cause that MAN
became ALIVE, a living Soul; and is not this of God? Gr. Mist. page 68. See how
plain and distinct these words are, between That which came out from God, and
Man himself; and whether it was not an Abuse in T. Hicks, to leave out those
G.F's explanatory words, which are in the very same Page that he quotes, and
misconstrue his Question and Words to another Intention then they will bear;
while G. F's words relating to that which came out from God, do not at all
mention Man's Soul or Spirit, that I do or can find. Although T. H. and his
Brethren take Soul (in G.F's Question) for the Spirit of Man, or the Reasonable
Creature, so far as I can gather; as W. Kiffin and the rest do in their
Epistle, entitled Heart-Bleedings for Professors, Abominations, and annexed
unto their Confession of Faith, printed 1651. where they have these Phrases,
viz. The Spirit which God forms in Man; Our Spirit or Soul; a Creature; The
reasonable Soul, etc. Here they grant man's Spirit or Soul to be the same;
whereas when G. F. speaks of the Soul in that sense, he has this Phrase, The
Soul being in Death, in Transgression, man's Spirit there is not sanctified,
Gr. Mist. p. 91. These plain words T. H. also has left out though in the very
next page to what he quotes: What is more plain then that G.F. could not intend
that Soul or Spirit of Man (which could be in Death, in Transgression) to be
either God, his Divine Life, Being, or Part of God, but of Man only; for the
Being of God can never be either in Transgression, or Corrupted; because God is
Incorruptible: And now from the Understanding that I have of G. F's words about
the Soul, as in diverse places of his said Book; He speaks of the Soul as under
a two fold Consideration; 1st, with respect unto that Breath of Life, which God
breathed into man, by which MAN became a living Soul, 2 dly, with the respect
to Man himself, as being thereby made a living Soul: And of Man, as under a
three fold Consideration; 1. As Man was in the Beginning (before the Fall)
being made Alive, a Living Soul, by the Breath or Spirit of God. 2. To Man
fallen, and in the Fall, from God; wherein his Soul or Spirit is brought under
Death in Sin and Transgression, and so is polluted with Sin while Unsanctified.
3. To Man as restored, and his Soul quickened to God again by the Spirit of
Life, and so saved by and in Christ Jesus, who is the Bishop of the Soul. This
I do understand and plainly gather from the Tenor of G. F's Words and Answers.

But since Thomas Hicks's Charge against the Quakers was, that they are No
Christians, and that one of his principal Allegations for Proof is, that their
Opinion is, That the Soul is God, or part of God, and of God's Being without
Beginning and Infinite, which perversely and darkly he has drawn from G.F's
mere Question (as plainly appears before) we had need to look the more strictly
into the matter; Upon which I ask, If to put this Question [ Is not THAT of
God, and of his Being, which came out from God, by which Man became a living
Soul?] be an Opinion sufficient to prove Us No Christians? Then, Whether or no
they are Christians, who say, that the Soul of Man is a Spirit of the NATURE of
God, which returns to God that gave it? And whether this be not as high an
Assertion of the Soul of Man, as can be supposed G. F. ever asserted? And that
some Baptists have thus asserted of the Soul, see what they say in their own
Instances and Words, viz. That this is a known Truth, that every thing at its
Dissolution dissolveth into its first Principles:

1. The Springs and Rivers run into the Sea from whence they came out, Eccles.
1.7. 2. The Ice, Snow, Hail, that are congealed of Water, dissolve into Water,
and out of Water they are congealed again. 3. The Light centereth into the Sun,
which is the Fountain of Light, therefore in the Night time it is dark, and
Moon and Stars give Light, as they are aspected to the Sun. 4. For Man at his
Dissolution; 1. The SOUL being a Spirit, of the NATURE of God, is said to
return to him that gave it; and the Body being made of the Dust, returns to the
Dust again, Eccle. 12.7. and Genesis 3.19. says God, Thou shall return to the
Ground; for out of it thou wast taken. Thus far Dan. King in his Book,
entitled, A way to Sion, p. 92. printed at London, and reprinted at Edinburgh
Anno 1656. and highly approved and commended by T. Patient, J. Spilsbury, W.
Kiffin and J. Pierson who in their Epistle dedicatory give this Commendation,
viz.
It has pleased God, to stir up the Spirit of our Brother Dan. King, whom we
judge a faithful and painful Minister of Jesus Christ, to take this Work in
hand before us; and we judge that he has been much assisted of God in the Work
in which he has been very painful.

Observe here, how it is affirmed, that the Soul is of the NATURE of God; and
that according to the Instances before, of these things that return into their
first Principles.

See now Baptists your own Doctrine about the Soul or Spirit of Man! Were you
well advised to suffer your Brother so highly to charge and taunt at us about
the Soul, because of G.F s Question which concerned the Breath or Spirit of
Life from God, by which Man became a Living Soul; when you tell us plainly,
that the Soul is a Spirit of the NATURE OF GOD? You would take it ill, if any
should scornfully Dialogue upon you for this, as your Brother Hicks has done
upon us for G. F's Question; Is not That of God, which came out from God? etc.
to wit, the Breath or Spirit of Life: with whose Words also about the Soul,
agrees Wisd. 15.11. Forasmuch as he knew not his Maker, and him that ^NSPIRED
unto him an active Soul, and BREATHED in a Living Spirit. See also VAVASOR
POWEL'S Concordance about the Soul, viz. The Soul is put for the whole Person,
Acts 2.41. and 7.14. it is put for Life, Isa. 53.12. it is put for Breath, Acts
20.10. marg. it is put for a Reasonable Creature, Genesis 2.7. it is put for GOD
HIMSELF, Prove. 6.16. marg. Hebr. 10.38.

I suppose these men are not ignorant, both how this Concordance is approved,
and the Author of it esteemed by them.

Sect. I. About the Person of Christ.
WHereas T.H. to prove the Quakers deny Jesus Christ to be a distinct Person
without us, quotes these words, viz. Jesus Christ a Person without us, is not
Scripture Language, and for it quotes Dip. Pl. p. 13.

Whereas the Words there are, Jesus Christ, God-man, a Person without thee (as
in his Dia. 1. p. 9.) is not Scripture Language, etc. Mark, he has left out
the Words [GOD MAN] in the Citation; and in his two last Dialogues likewise,
Dial. 2. p. 10. Dial. 3. p. 7. So that it appears these Witnesses have either
taken this defective Citation upon trust from T. H. and not from their own
Sight and Knowledge, or else they have knowingly born Witness to this Abuse,
and owned this defective and false Citation for a Blind. But how comes his
Charge now to be so Low against us, as only denying Jesus Christ to be a
distinct Person without us, and he so hard put to it to prove this, when before
he charged us in these Words, viz You reprobate the Scriptures and the Person
of Jesus Christ without you, Dial. 1. p. 62. O wonderful Impudence and
Falsehood! The Reason of my Answer in this Case before to T.H. as also my owning
the Man, Christ Jesus as to his Being without us as well as within us, is
plainly shown in my Appendix to Reas. against Rail. p. 17. my Words being thus,
viz. Jesus Christ, God-man, a PERSON without thee; which Phrase I did, and do
say, is not Scripture Language; but the Anthropomorphites who profess a
Personal God, denying him to be an Infinite Spirit; does it therefore follow
that I deny the Man Christ Jesus in his being either without or within us?
Append. p. 17.
But T. H's Words, God-man, a Person without thee, equally excluding God under
the Limitation of Man and Person without us; he is pleased now to leave out the
word God-man, and to accuse us of denying the Person of Christ without us: He
should have explained what he means by the Word Person; for though we are not
satisfied with the Words before (being unscriptural) this is no denying of
Jesus Christ in his being either as without us, or within us; we confessing,
that he is ascended into Glory far above all Heavens, and that he is at the
Father's right Hand of Power in his Glorious Being -- which yet does not
exclude or limit him from being within us. And its false that we deny Christ to
be a Man. Appendix, p. 20, 21, 23.
-- His Exaltation and Glory (into which he is ascended not only into the
Heavens, but far above all Heavens) transcends that Degree attained in these
suffering earthly Tabernacles; his inaccessible Glory is above Men and Angels,
etc.

Again T. H. has very unfairly cited but the Beginning of a Sentence of mine,
leaving out the latter and chief Part thereof, viz. at [ It Is a Design of Satan
to keep Men in carnal Imaginations and dark Thoughts of a Human Personal
Christ] And here they break off, leaving out the following Words of the same
Sentence, which are [ Consisting, See Hen. Grigg's Light from the Sun, p. 30.
31, 33, 34.
either of Flesh, Blood and Bones LIKE THEIRS, or of Flesh and Bones without
Blood, and so of God's right Hand, as limited to that Remoteness That they See
J. Newman's Light within, p. 55, 66, 72. answered by me in my Book, Christ
ascended, p. 18, 19, 20, 21.
neglect to wait for Christ's inward and spiritual Appearance, and the
Knowledge of God's right Hand near them, to save and preserve them from Sin and
Death: See my Appendix to Reason against Railing, p. 27.

Now you that are T. H. his Compurgators, Abettors and Witnesses, See here how
he and you have left out the very principal and explanative Part of the same
Sentence; is this your Care and Justice? Would you be thus served, both to
wrong me, and abuse the World or your Readers, to tell them, The Quotations are
truly recited out of our Books? But if you take this kind of unfair curtailing
(which destroys the Sense) to be significant, to give the whole Sense of the
Clause or Sentence before, and all this to prove us No Christians; Then it must
be contrariwise given as your Opinion for Christianity, That it is not a Design
of Satan, to keep Men in carnal Imaginations of a human personal Christ,
consisting of Flesh, Blood and Bones LIKE YOURS; but a Christian Opinion so to
think of Christ and of God's right Hand, as limited to such Remoteness, as that
you thereupon neglect to wait for Christ's inward and spiritual Appearance, or
the Knowledge of God's right Hand near you to save you from Sin and Death; but
that you may be good Christians, and yet guilty of such carnal Imaginations and
sinful Neglect: If this be your Christianity, I hope, through the Grace of God,
never to own it, any more then your unjust and partial Proceedings against us,
to uphold and cover a Forger, to keep back Judgment from passing upon, contrary
to your fair Pretenses before cited: But T. H. has declared, Dial. 3. p. 33.
That he no where accuses us for denying Christ's bodily Appearance; How then
do we deny his Person? What was his Person, if not his Body?

Sect. III. About the Bible and Scriptures.
AGain you give this Passage, as truly recited among the rest, viz. G. W.
accounts it Idolatry to call the Bible a Means of our knowing God, for which
you quote Dip. plung. p. 13. Wherein is a manifest Untruth and Abuse; for in
Answer to T. Hicks affirming, That the Bible is THE Means of our knowing God,
Dial. 1. p. 41. My Words were, He idolatrously sets up the Bible in the Place
of Christ; for no man knows the Father but the Son, and he to whom the Son
reveals him, Mat. 11.27. Dip. plung. p. 13. Mark the Difference betwixt A Means
and THE Means, as between the BIBLE, and CHRIST: That may be A Means which is
not THE Means, Christ being the absolute Way and Means by Way of Eminency (for
Man to come to and know God) and not the Bible, though it may be a Means
instrumentally, as God bestows a Blessing upon (or acpanies) the serious
Reading thereof, as it directs to Christ Jesus, or to his Light and Spirit,
which opens the Understanding in the holy Scriptures.

P. 17.
Again, about my owning the Speaking of the Spirit in any to be of greater
Authority then the Scriptures or Chapters [you unfairly leave out my following
words, which explain my Sense and Intention, which are] viz. as received, and
proceeding from that Spirit and spoaken in the Senee thereof; as, Christ's
words were of greater Authority when he Spoak, then the Pharisees Reading the
Letter, Ser. Apol. page 49.

And we might farther add, that the same words of the holy Scripture are of
more Authority and Efficacy, when the Spirit in any speaks them, or sets them
home to the Conscience, then when any one Reads or Speaks them without the
Spirit; and this not at all to undervalue the Truth of what is written: Nor did
we ever prefer our Books before the Bible, as unjustly we are charged, but do
prefer the Bible before all other Books extant in the World, as we can
sufficiently evince out of our Friends Writings.

And as for Titles given upon some of our Books, which is alleged as Proof
against us, viz. Voice of Wisdom; Breathings of True Love; A Shield of Truth;
Light risen out of Darkness, etc. but, says T. Hicks, The Scriptures are
called, Dead Letter; Paper, Ink, and Writing; Carnal Letter, etc. and all this
to prove, P. 26.
That we give the Preference to our own Books; but he gives us not any
Quotation for all these Words or Titles, nor shows us, on what Occasion any of
them were spoken; however his Brethren undertake to be Witnesses for him in
these Things with the rest: But herein he has grossly abused us, and our
Intention and Principle, which never was to bring our Books in Comparison with
the Scriptures; nor have we given any such Titles, so to prefer our Books, but
with respect unto the secret Breathings of True Love, and the Arising of the
Light, or Signification of God's Voice in our Souls; Such Titles therefore have
been not strictly, but figuratively placed upon some Books, and the Letter only
made mention of in the Sense of the Apostle, in Distinction between the Law and
the Gospel, or as between the Letter and the Spirit, Romans 2.29. and 7.6.
Circumcision in the Letter, and Circumcision in the Spirit; 2 Cor. 3.6.
and so between Baptism in the Letter, Hebr. 9.10.
and Baptism in the Spirit; and between Carnal Commands or Ordinances, and
Spiritual; and this chiefly to those, whose Minds have been too much in the
Shadows and Letter thereof, neglecting the Substance. Power and Spirit. We
knowing also that in the New Covenant we must serve the Lord in the Newness of
the Spirit, Romans 7.6.
and not in the Oldness of the Letter: But more over, would T. Hicks and you
his Witnesses, take it well, if you and the World should be told, that the
Baptists prefer their own Books before the Scriptures, when they entitle their
own Books, Light from the Sun of Righteousness; The Light within; The Marrow of
Christianity; A Way to Sion; Some Beams of Light, etc.? But the Scriptures they
have called the Letter, or the Oldness of the Letter, Marrow of Christianity,
page 35.44.

And say, The Scriptures may be and is corrupted by Man, having been in the
hands of corrupted Men; and the Spirit in the Rule of more Efficacy then the
Letter, St. John Newman's Light within, p. 19, 20, 104, 105, 106, 108, 110, 112.

Judge Reader, how these Baptists are fallen into the Pit which they have dig'd
for others, and how they are more highly concerned in the same thing that they
allege against us, to prove us No Christians; But should any hereupon make a
Comparison between the Titles they give to their own Books, and those they have
given to the Scriptures, and thereupon should positively charge them with
giving their own Pamphlets the Preference, they would take it very hardly; But
if they can find any reasonable Allegations to bring themselves off from this
ensnaring Objection that is retorted upon them, according to their own Method,
they might in Charity have reserved a better Construction for us in the Case.

Sect. IV. Of the Light within.
I May not well omit one Passage which is cast upon me, as an Absurdity in
their fourth Page, viz.

If the Life be the Divine Essence, the Light must be so also; On Joh. 1.4.
for such as the Cause is, such the Effect must be: Thus G. W. in a Manuscript.

Whereas it is not thus laid down, either in this Method or Form of Argument in
any Manuscript of mine that I know of, or an remember, or find out; and yet I
do own, That the Life which is the Light of Men (that true Light wherewith
every man is enlightened, Joh. 1.4.9.) in its own Being is God and Christ, and
not a mere Effect of Power, as a made or created Thing, but Divine and
Increated: It appears that these Witnesses have received diverse Things on the
Credit of their Brother T. Hicks (who in like Manner lays down the Argument in
his first Dialogue) yet they have the Confidence to subscribe thereto; though I
confess I laid down my Reason to prove that Life (which is the Light of, and in
Men) Divine; thus far, viz. If that Life, which is the Light of Men, be of the
divine. Being, then the Light must be so also [Unto which I may now add the
following Proposition] But that Life is of the Divine Being (or of a Divine
Nature) therefore the Light of Men ( spoaken of Joh. 1.4, 9.) must be so also.

I also grant that the Cause and Effect were spoaken of, upon T. H. his
esteeming the Light within but an Effect, etc. to explain my Sense of the Cause
and Effect (though not laid down in such an inconsistent Argument is placed
upon me) It was only admitted a^ between that Divine Life and its immediate
Illumination or Lightning in Man, which naturally flows or proceeds from the
Life; So that if I should go merely in the Form of Argument, there being
different Causes and Effects, I should first distinguish between them: As there
are Causes and Effects or Products of one Kind or Nature; so there are of
different Kinds: As, the Sun and the Shining or Beams thereof are of one Kind,
and the Fountain and Streams thereof are of one Kind or Nature; but so are not
the Carpenter and the House that he makes, etc. as I plainly signified my
Intention and Sense about that Immediate Light in Man, being Divine and
Supernatural; by a Reason of the contrary; As the Light or Immediate Shining of
the Sun in the Firmament is Natural, because the Sun it self is a Natural
Light; so the Immediate Illumination or Shining of God in Man's Heart or
Conscience, must needs be Divine and Supernatural, because he himself is so,
who is the Fountain of Light; That Eternal Life which was with the Father, 1 John 1.2. is Divine, and that Life was and is the Light of Men, Joh. 1.4, And
so it is God who has shined in our Hearts to give the Light of the Knowledge of
the Glory of God in the Face of Jesus Christ, 2 Cor. 4.6. And his shining (we
hope) will not now be denied to be Divine, being immediately of and from
himself; and he so shined in their Hearts before they were come to the
Knowledge of the Glory of God in the Face of Christ Jesus, in Order to give
them that Knowledge: And I further add, let it therefore suffice that it is my
Principle, That the Life, which is the Light of Men, mentioned Joh. 1.4.9. is
Divine, Supernatural, and so Increa^^d; and it was never my Judgment or Words,
that it was but a mere Effect (as a Thing made) but that in its own Being it is
no other then the Life of God, and so himself; and that every Measure or Degree
of his Immediate Light, Inshining or Illumination in Man is Divine and
Spiritual, and able to direct the Soul to God and Christ from whence it comes,
knowing also that God's Love and Grace in Christ is universal and free to all
Mankind. And why we should be Vnchristian'd for confessing, Christ to be that
Light which enlightneth every Man that comes into the World, or for saying,
that the Light in Men is Divine, I do not understand, since T.H. himself has
confessed, That Christ is the Life and Light of men, Dial. 1. p. 22. Though
this he has often contradicted, and since made it an Article against us to
prove us No Christians, that we hold, That the Light wherewith every Man is
enlightened, is God, when he himself has confessed, that it is Christ; as
namely, That Christ is the Life and Light of Men.

Sect. V. A slanderous Accusation of T. Hicks's against the Quakers, removed.
AS to Matter of Fact. Whereas we are charged to say, That it concerns us to
render our Adversaries as ridiculous as we can, and to make our Friends believe
they do nothing but contradict themselves; and if this fail, that we will
insinuate by way of Question something that may be a Slander to them, Dial. 1.
page 72. and Qu. Ap. answ. page 22.

To prove this Charge T. Hicks says, that G. W. in his Answer to Mr Danson
insinuates a Slander upon him by way of Question (by saying) That he styleth
himself Minister of the Gospel at Sandwich; but is not rather that Report of
him true, That he is given to Gaming and Bowls, etc?

And again, T. H. adds, This Question was put merely to slander him.

A notorious Untruth! It was not put with any such Intent as merely to slander
him; for it is true that such a Report was given to me of him, and seemed not
improbable, or then incredible to me, such Recreations (so called) being common
to men of his Coat. It is true that by the Question before, I did oppose a
Gamster or Player at Bowls, to a Minister of the Gospel; but that I neither
made the Report, nor designed to slander T.D. by way of Question, or otherwise,
as I am slanderously accused, see the following Certificate:

As concerning the Report that has been made Question of, touching T. Danson'
s exercising himself at Bowls, etc. when Minister at Sandwich; I can certify
that I had this Report from an Independent who was an Inhabitant at Sandwich,
and who, if Occasion require, I question not but will evidence it; and
accordingly I made mention of this Report to George Whitehead, witness my Hand,

Isaac Chatwode.

Now judge, serious Reader, how unjustly T.H. has represented me, as putting
the Question merely to slander T. D. (whether he be concerned, or not, I
determine not) which thing has been perversely hinted in several Pamphlets
against us: And whether or no, the said Question does prove it our Answer,
Words or Principle, to say, That it concerns us to render our Adversaries as
ridiculous as we can; or that we will insinuate by way of Question something
that may be a Slander to them, as T.H. has Dialogued the Matter in our Name
after a most abusive sort beyond all Bounds of Honesty or Civility; who farther
attempts to prove that my Question before was put, meerl^ to slander him, from
what W. P. alleges in this very thing, which is, Who knows not that the
Priests give themselves a Liberty in more than that? What Game do they almost
scruple to play at? which is so far from proving that the Question was asked,
merely to slander him, that it rather renders the Report credible, or at least
that we might suppose, there was some Ground for it; and to be sure, this
Instance is far enough from making good T. Hicks's Charge against the Quakers,
as before; but sufficient to show his great Malice and Falsehood; and these
Coverings will not hide him: It is his own Sin, to insinuate by way of
Question, to slander us; for thus he has done by us and our Sufferings,
witness his base and Deceitful Questions, insinuating, that the Satisfaction of
our Wills and Lusts, the promoting our Carnal Interests, is, or may be our
chief Motive or Inducement, to suffer as we use to do, Dial. 1. page 75.

This he has made no Scruple to insinuate by Way of Question against us, and
yet makes it a great Crime, to ask a Question that seemed probable about a
Report of a Parish Priest's Playing at Bowls.

And be it noted also, that for a further Proof of his Charge against us, he
brings this Instance, page 24. viz. If any Persons write or speak their Grief
that the public take notice of it, they will represent them under such Terms
as may render them Odious; and the more effectually to weaken their
Testimonies, they will fix upon them scurrilous and contemptible Appellations,
and to prevent any Inquisition into the Truth of the Matter they would make
People believe that they are Envious, Malicious, Dirty, Factious and Ranting
Spirits. And for these general Accusations (which we may say, are very Abusive
and False) he quotes Spir. of the Hat, page 36, 37. which is so far from being
any of our Books, or any one's Eminent among us, that it was an Envious
Apostate's, a Libellous Pamphlet, yet promoted and spread by some Baptists
against us, who are beholding to Apostates and Back-sliders for their Engines
to work against the People of God called Quakers, who have retained their
Integrity in the Truth; But the said Lying Pamphlet styled The Spirit of the
Hat, was plainly opposed and seriously answered by our Friends in their Book,
entitled The Spirit of Alexander the Coppersmith, etc. yet these Baptists in
their Preface, would make the World believe, That the Books ( produced and
cited by T. Hicks for his Discharge from Forgery) were the Books of such as
have been and now are Chief Leaders among the Quakers; but neither tell us Who,
nor What Chief Leader the Author of the Spirit of the Hat ever was or is among
us. Now you that have concerned your selves for T. Hicks, Do you think to
acquit him from Forgery by such Proceeding? Have you approved your selves either
Just or Impartial Men, to admit of our Adversary's Accusations for Proof, to
Clear your Brother T. Hicks, and Blemish us? No, No; Such Work will neither
clear you nor him, while Justice and Truth is fallen in your Streets, and you
have not suffered Equity to enter: You are Witnesses on behalf of a Forger, and
your Confederacy therein is Impious, and God will break it and bring you to
Judgment.

Sect. VI. About our Ministers and our owning the Scriptures.
ANd also Thomas Hicks having falsely accused us, That we appoint our Ministers
aforehand to speak in such a Place at such a Time, Dial, 2. p. 66. For Proof of
this he again cites that lying Pamphlet, Spir. of Hat, in these Words; What
means (says he of the Quakers) that certain Persons are appointed to spend
the whole Time in speaking in every Meeting, and all the rest to come as
Hearers, neglecting the Gift in themselves, only waiting upon their Lips,
Spirit of the Hat, p. 29.

Which is also as arrant a Falsehood as his Charge before; for 1 st, we do not
so appoint our Ministers or certain Persons before hand to speak in such a
Place and Time, or to spend the whole Time in speaking. 2 dly, Neither do the
rest of the Hearers neglect their Gift, or only wait upon their Lips, but upon
the Lord, and all are referred to the Guidance of God's free Spirit in
themselves, having a free Liberty therein to improve and make Use of their
Gifts, as God shall call, there being both Gospel Liberty and Order among us,
and the Spirit of the Prophets subject to the Prophets; and Gospel Ministers
have Unity in the Spirit, and with one another Testimony, which is not of Man,
nor by the Will of Man: However, these Baptists seek to clear their Brother by
such false Stories as before, scraped out of an Apostate and Enemies Pamphlet.

Another Charge, falsely insinuating, That we do not really or fully own the
Holy Scriptures, is this, viz. That the Quakers own the Scripture as far as it
agrees to the Light in them: And for Proof of this T. Hicks says, This is
proved in their asserting the Scriptures to be given forth from the Light
within.

Whereas this is a Proof, that we fully own the Scriptures without any such
Exception or Reservation, as is employed in the Charge before; for it is
apparent, that we fully own the Light within to be Infallible, and therefore
the Scriptures which came from it to be really true: However, the Dialogueman
would be accounted a very exact Drawer of Consequences, even such an one as
would not abate a Word of his Dialogues, but would have them be believed as
Real Truths, though they be no Real Discourses, as he has since confessed, in
Answer to T. R's Objection, That the Dialogue is presented to the World, as a
Real Discourse; to which he answers, I do assure him it was not so understood
or intended by me in the publishing of it (he should then have told the World
so) but then he adds, though it be as True and Real, as though it had been a
Verbal Discourse; whenas much of his Dialogues is made up of Consequences of
his own framing, yet he has sought to make the World believe, that the Answers
given are no other then what the Quakers give; and that the Matters he had
objected were Real Truths and no Factions: But does not his Charge and
Consequence before imply such Untruth as this his unjust Charge, That the
Quakers undervalue or slight the Holy Scriptures, or account them of no more
Authority then Esop' s Fables? And that all this follows from their asserting
the Scriptures to be given forth from the Light within, which they so highly
esteem of and own to be Infallible? Yea, and he has procur^d many Witnesses and
Abettors also to subscribe his Work; but they should more strictly have
examined his Proofs and Consequences.

Sect. VII. How T. H. begun his second Dialogue with a Forgery and his
Deceitful Shift for it.
WHeareas T. Hicks in his second Dialogue begun with this Charge and Question,
viz. I have formerly detected you of several pernicious Opinions concerning the
Scriptures, the Light within, the Person of Christ, and the Resurrection of the
Dead, etc. which I presume by this time you have considered, what say you
thereunto?

To which he gives this Answer in the Quakers Name, viz. I say tho Plagues and
Judgments of God will follow thee [and to this subscribeth] George Whitehead.

But T. Hicks's Abuse and Falsehood herein was detected in W. P's Answer to his
last Dialogue, Counterf. Christian, page 19, 20, 21. As also his Forgery herein
laid upon him in my Appendix to Reason ag. Railing, p. 13. Howbeit, he is not
ashamed in the Barbican Relation to say, The Truth of this Answer see attested
under Mr John Gladman' s hand, Dial. 3. page 85.

I do not think that T. Hicks can be ignorant of his wittingly wronging both me
and John Gladman in this case; for observe, does Jo. Gladman in the place
quoted attest, that this was G. W's Answer to the Question to which it is
annexed by T. H. in G.W's Name? No. But that G.W. spoak the Words in Discourse
with him, that is, with John Gladman; Not to T. H. in Answer to his Question:
If J. Gladman speak his Conscience, he dare not attest that this was G. W's
Answer to this Question to which it is here adjoined as his Answer or saying
thereunto; Therefore T.H. is a Forger, and has cheated his Witnesses, and
drawn in J. Gladman for a Cover to his Deceit; which shows his Spirit and Work
to be in the Dark, like that of an Impostor and Jugler in these matters; And
Men fearing God, would be ashamed either to be his Witnesses, or to
countenance, or encourage him therein. Although I deny not, that I spoke any
such Words against T. H. at any time, as J. G. has unfairly represented me, in
telling the World, That G. W. denies he said so (against T. Hicks) Dial. 3.
page 85. for my Answer shows the contrary in my said Appendix, p. 13. though
still I deny that to be my Answer unto T.H's Question before; however, as I did
not question (as in my Appendix) but that the Judgments of God would follow T.
Hicks for his Forgeries and Slanders; so I am of the same mind still, and my so
speaking I neither did give, nor do give for an Answer to his particular
Questions: But in his fictitiously placing it, as my saying to that one
Question before, he might as well have made it serve to every Question in all
his Dialogues, which was never so intended nor spoaken by me; but with
reference to his Forgeries and Slanders in general.

There are diverse other things in their Relation aforesaid, which concern Geo.
Keith, W. Penn and others, that we might justly except against, but they are
answered elsewhere, and we could have wished, that you who are T. H's
Witnesses, would have seriously perused our former Answers to T. H. wherein his
Forgeries, Slanders, Perversions and plain self-Contradictions are laid open,
particularly in those Books, entitled, Reason against Railing, and Counterfit
Christian detected, from page 6. to p. 54. this might both have prevented that
Disgrace and Trouble that is since befaln you, by engaging for such an Agent;
and that you would be pleased yet seriously to view all the Controversies, you
may perceive many Particulars charged against T. Hicks, which neither himself,
nor you have either answered, or in the least cleared him of: And further
consider those Particulars charged against him out of his fictitious Dialogues,
printed in our Friends late Account of the Meeting with you at Barbican, the
9th of the 8th Month, 1674. as in Page 8, 9, 10, 11. and 31, 32, 33, 34, 35,
36, 37, 38, 39. pages of the said Account; also George Keith's late Vindication.

I hope you have considered that moderate Account, which your Friend and
Brother, W. L. has given in his Book, entitled, The Twelve Pagan Principles
or Opinions, etc. and what a Serious Check it contains to Thomas Hicks, for
his Immoderation and Unfair Dealing.

George Whitehead.

Page 17. Line 13. there should be a noted stop (or this direction) after [
Proved] to which the Margent refers. p 28, l. 25. for every read very. p. 4^.
l. 5. for for 1. so.


