A Serious SEARCH INTO Jeremy Ives' s Questions TO THE QUAKERS: Who are herein
cleared from his Scornful Abuses, And Jer. Ives himself manifest to be NO
CHRISTIAN from his own Observations, Reviling, Ostentation, etc.

By a Witness for Christianity in Faith and Life, George Whitehead.

His Mischief shall return upon his own Head,

Psalm. 7. 16. Printed in the Year 1674.

A Serious Search INTO Jeremy Ives' s Questions to the Quakers.
SInce Jeremy Ives his late Daring Challenge under Pretext of a Sober Request,
and his attempting to prove the Quakers no Christians, is now changed into
Questions for the Quakers, which he says, are grounded upon some Observations
made upon the Papers lately published by Thomas Rudyard and one W. P. which are
pretended Replies to Jeremy Ives his sober Request to the Quakers, but will
appear by the Light of the ensuing Observations (he says) to be but Idle
Shifts and Evasions.

Seeing he begins at this contemning Rate against us, and vilifying and
slighting our Friends Answers, and pretends such Light in his own Observations;
it is needful they should be inspected and seriously examined, however he
reckon his Questions and Obserservations so very clear and lightsom Proofs
against us, I will assure him, we find no such Validity in them to u^c^ristian
us.

I observe two general Accusations on which his Matter much depends to render
the Quakers no Christians.

First, Condemning that in others, which they allow in themselves.

Secondly, Disdaining, Huffing, Slandering and Reviling.

Both which I grant with him, are so far from being either Characters of a
Chr^stian, or Infallible Marks of a Disciple of Christ, that they are wholly
inconsistent with Christianity.

The first Position is thus to be considered.

For Men to condemn that in others which they allow in them elves, is an
Inconsistency and a self Condemnation, where the Matter is the same in every
Respect, both as to the Nature and Circumstance; though that which is an Evil
in it self is condemnable, and not to be allowed either in one's self or in
another; much more is his Condemnation aggravated, who allows that Evil in
himself which he condemns in others: Other things that are Lawful in themselves
become accidentally Evil, through the Abuse or Evil-Mind that brings them forth.

But to the second Position; it is granted, that Disdaining, Huffing, Slandering
and Reviling are evil in themselves, if by Huffing he means a fierce Despising
and scornful Slighting those that are good, or that deserve it not; and by
Reviling, a making a worthy Man base, or calling a Man all to naught: The Truth
of it is, Jeremy, thou would appear in these Matters a very grave, sober
Christian, and a Man only for solid and savoury Expressions: But whether thou
have not played the Hypocrite in these Pretenses of Seriousness and
Christianity, and brought thy self under the Guilt, both of condemning that in
others which thou allowest in thy self, and of Disdaining, Slandering and
Reviling, will further appear in the following Examination.

Thou say, that these Papers, like all the rest of the Quakers Writings, are
stuffed with vain and frothy Expressions; and what those are thou instances W.
P's saying, that the Product of many days Travail was but a sorry Mouse [the
Product of Jeremy' s great Mountain.] Which was with Reference to thy daring
and vapouring Challenge, falsely termed by thee, A sober Request to the Quakers:
But it disgusts thee to use such a Comparison as that of a sorry Mouse, and why
so? Is it because of the Impropriety of the Speech, or that it is too Ironical
for such a grave, sober Christian as Jeremy Ives would be accounted? But I tell
thee, Jeremy, thou art one of them that str^ins at a Gnat, and swallows a
Camel, whether thou think these Expressions proper or not.

And secondly, to prove us guilty of thy second Position, thou say that Our
Friends Papers abound with Railings and bitter Invectives, thinking to raise
thereby a Dust (a plain Falsehood) to darken the Understanding of the unwary
Reader; and what are these? In calling thee Audacious, Privateer, Bravado,
Hector, Senacherib, Impudent, etc.

And further (to show thy self a very moderate and sober Christian) thou
say, That these Papers abound with Untruths, thou will not break the Laws of
good Manners, as they do, to call them LIES and FORGFRIES; And so that here thy
Modesty and Seriousness is such, as when thou have insinuated, that the Quakers
are No Christians, nor yet Followers of the Laws of Good Manners, for Charging
their Adversaries (such as thou and thy Brother T. Hicks) with Lies and
Forgeries; but thou would not be thought so to Unchristian and Unmanner thy
self, as to use such Expressions, as Audacious, Privateer, Impudent, Impudent,
Lies and Forgeries: Oh demure Jeremy! Hypocrita cupit se videri justum.

But first, If he be No Christian that condemns that in others which he allows
in himself, then is Jeremy Ives No Christian.

Secondly, If he be No Christian that is guilty of such Language as he himself
accounts Disdaining, Huffing, Reviling, Railing, and bitter Invectives, as
namely, Audacious, Impudent, Lies, etc. and thus to charge another, be
Unchristian and Unmannerly, then is Jer. Ives NO Christian, by his own
Observation; But that Jer. Ives is herein both Self-condemned and Guilty, take
a View of his Language against us in his Pamphlet, viz. Mcn of Lying Spirits,
gross Equivocations, idle Shifts and Evasions, Bedlam-man, audacious and
ridiculous, daring Prophets, your Baseness, wilful Baseness, pretended Impulses
and Enthusiastic Necessities, Lawyers Logic, Figments of thy Fancy, little
Wtticisms to please thy simple beguiled Clients, this Emperick of the Law
Thomas Rudyard, what Impostors, they pretend the Spirit to be the Rule, when
they can give no more Evidence of it then Mahomet or Muggleton, the sad Shifts
the poor Men are put to, their Enthusiastic Principles, such idle Enthusiasts.
Thus Jeremy Ives through his Observations.

Judge Serious Reader; Is not here both Huffing, Disdaining and Reviling, and
what he himself has accounted such? But if Jeremy think this not enough to
prove himself condemned, and guilty of both Disdaining, Huffing, Reviling and
Vanting, let his Salutation to Arthur Cook upon the Exchange be added, viz.
Thou Pitiful, Fool, thou Knave, thou Loggerhead; And if to call any Man's
Papers Lies, and Forgeries, be a breaking the Laws of good Manners, and to call
a Man Audacious or Impudent, bewray an Unchristian Spirit, and be corrupt
Communication, as he implies, then has Jeremy Ives both bewrayed an Unchristian
Spirit, and has broken the Laws of good Manners, and condemned that in others
which he has plainly allowed in himself; for in his Book entitled, Innocence
above Impudency, he does not only charge his Opposer with Impudency, but he
gives him the Lie near thirty Times; and likewise in his Quakers Quaking, he
has shown his Envy and Ill-Language sufficiently. Where art thou now Jeremy
Ives? Art thou not here found guilty, and allowing that in thy self, which thou
have condemned others for, as Unchristian? And also thy Brother T. Hicks, whose
Quarrel thou have espoused, has used such Language to some of us, as Knave,
Impudent Fellow, Audacius Fellow, Coxcomb, etc. which is much like thy Pittyful
Fool, Knave, Loggerhead, etc. See now Jeremy, how thy own Observation and
Charge is deservedly retorted upon thy self. Art not thou found a Huffer (yea
and a Puffer too) a Railer, a Scorner and Disdainer, and thinks it a great
Disparagement to be accounted short of an Honest Heathen; but I must tell thee,
that there are many Heathens that are a great deal more sober, serious and
fearing God then thou art, as thy Lightness and frothy Deportment at the late
Meetings did evince: However, thou braggest of thy being able, by the Grace of
God, to approve thy self as Honest in all thy Correspondencies in the World as
the best of them, and challengest us to produce the Person or Persons that
shall say otherwise of thee. How thou art able to approve thy self, and how
thou have approved thy self, have a different Sense: But however, I must tell
thee, It had been more proper and more credible for others to have thus
commended thy Honesty, then to have done it so highly thy self; but as for
these Things, it is not my present Business to seek or enquire out Occasions
against thee in the Concerns of this World; let those speak that are offended,
if they have Occasion given them, or have complained of thee, I have enough
against thee of other Concerns.

Whereas Jer. Ives untruly charge our Friends Papers too abound with
Untruths, pretending himself so much obliged by the Laws of Good Manners, as
that he will not call them Lies and Forgeries, of which he shall mention but
Two, which are,

1. That he pretended to be delegated by T. Hicks, but was not.

2. That in the Dispute, when he was to prove us No Christians, instead thereof
he put us to prove our selves Christians.

To prove the first, an Untruth, he says, he was concerned by their Consent,
else how came we to direct our Letters to him with Mr. Kiffin and others.

Jeremy, thou art besides the Business here, for thy pretending to be
delegated, was in T. Hicks's Cause at the Meeting near Wheeler Street; and that
he might be concluded by thee as personating him: Did not this concern those
Matters whereof we charged him? for thou may remember this was urged at the
Dispute; The Letters to thee and the rest, did not concern thee to personate T.
H. in his Absence there; but only as an Assister of him in his Presence amongst
the rest; but that thou wast not so delegated, to personate Thomas Hicks, nor
that he gave up his Cause to be concluded in Jer. Ives, seems evident,

1. In that Jeremy and those then with him durst not enter upon the Particulars
charged against T. Hicks, as Forgeries, nor would suffer them to be read.

2. In that we have a Certificate to the contrary under Tho. Chamberlain's
hand, signifying, that John Gladman told him, that T. Hicks said, That Jeremy
Ives was not deputed by him.

And to the second; I wonder that thou can call this an Untruth, that when
thou had said, Thou would prove us no Christians, instead thereof thou
calld'st for an Evidence of our Christianity, or put us to prove our selves
Christians, and W. Penn to produce Evidence to distinguish himself as a true
Minister (that has Immediate Inspiration for his Rule) from an Impostor; See
the Narrative of that Day's Meeting, from page 52 to page 56. in the taking of
which Discourse we had both Careful and Ready Writers; and I am sure that
Jeremy's Attempts, to prove us No Christians, and W. Penn an Impostor, did
amount to that miserable Shift of calling for an Evidence on our parts as
before, and he now confesses, That he did require an Evidence for the Rule of
our Faith and Practice by Inspiration, page 6. And was not this then for an
Evidence of our Christianity, while we do not profess any real Christianity
without Faith and Practice by Inspiration? An Evidence of our being Divinely
inspired must be an Evidence of our Christianity; for none are true Christians,
who deny Divine and Immediate Inspiration: And I do not understand what Jeremy
Ives scoffs at us as Idle Enthusiasts and for Enthusiastic Principles; but for
holding this of Immediate Inspiration, nor do I see but that his Charge of
Untruth (in those two things before) is justly to be turned upon himself as an
Untruth against us.

He concludes, That he might by all Laws of Dispute require Evidence of
Inspiration, being the Rule of Faith and Practice, he would make the World
believe that he is very expert in all the Rules of Dispute; but I tell him, It
had been more proper and reasonable for him to have required Evidence of our
being Divinely inspired, as a Man in an enquiring unsatisfied Condition that
wants Information, then as one that had given and promised before to prove his
positive Charge of the Quakers being no Christians. It was his Part to prove
this, or else to have acknowledged his Confident Rashness and Folly; for could
he with any Seriousness demand an Evidence of our being inspired of God (when
before he had concluded us no Christians, and promised Proof thereof) and
says, At this turn we could do no more then Muggleton, which is a Reviling
Aspersion: But we are sure it was a sorry Shift in him, instead of proving the
Quakers no Christians, to put W. P. upon either proving himself a Minister of
Christ, or to produce an Evidence for the Rule of his Faith by Inspiration; and
what that Evidence was he would have besides the Spirit's own self-Evidence,
concurring with a Holy Conversation, he did not show us, but this is like the
rest of his uncertain Work against us, to make a Buz and a Noise in the World,
to render such Odious as are more Righteous then himself, as in his
Hypocritical, Audacious, Daring Challenge he most falsely accuses us.

1. Where he says, That W. Penn' s Confession of his Faith, though in
Scripture-Expressions, was but a mere Equivocation.

2. That though our Discourses and Confessions of Faith be clothed with
Scripture Language now more then formerly, they are but gross Equivocations.

3. That our former Opinions [I suppose, since we were a People] were Vile,
Absurd and Nonsensical, and that he proved to our Faces to make Void all Rules
of Faith and Christian Practice.

4. That by Force of Argument he drove us to that straight, that we could make
no Reply.

5. He charge us with base and insolent Behavior in hic Absence.

These are notorious Falsehoods, and to these two last many Hundreds that were
present can testify the contrary, and that Jeremy Ives herein is a most false
and ridiculous Boaster.

These Falsehoods together with his daringly challenging and grossly reviling us
in his Paper, are notwithstanding entitled by him, A sober Request; but now
since we find upon the same Challenge another Title put before this, which is
[Quakers no Christians] Judge Reader, was this proper to such a Paper,
requesting a Meeting to prove us no Christians? He and his Bookseller might
very well have spared this Title until such Proof had been made, as it might
have been proper to, and not thus to cover their beggarly Shifts with notorious
Untruths, do but see how Jeremy's Work hangs together, viz.

Quakers no Christians.

A sober Request to the Quakers.

If you dare appoint a Time and Place, etc.

I earnestly request a Meeting with you, to prove, That you are no Christians.

I require an Evidence for the Rule of your Faith, by Inspiration.

I know no farther Proof we have as yet from him of his Charge that the Quakers
are no Christians. Is it not easy to see the Absurdity and Folly of these men,
and how they make Lies their Refuge, and cover themselves with Falsehoods?

For his daring us to appoint Time and Place, he querieth, If this Phrase
signifies any more then if you are not afraid to appoint Time and Place? As if
we could have no other Reason, but being afraid of Jeremy Ives to forbear
appointing Time and Place to meet him: Oh Insolent, Vainglorious Boaster! do
thou not know in thy own Conscience and by sufficient Experience, that we have
not been afraid of thee? I am ashamed to see such Proud, Insolent and Popular
Ostentation and Falsehood, and Groundless Insinuations against us under the
Profession of Christianity.

After the same rate he further cracks thus, viz. Whether I had not good Reason
to think, you were afraid to hear your selves proved No Christians, when all
your Wits and Time were chiefly exhausted in two public Meetings to divert us
from the Proof thereof, as Thousands can testify, page 7.

A most notorious Untruth and gross Abuse, as thousands can testify; For,

1. The Baptists Wits and Work was chiefly, to divert us from the pursuit of
our ^harge against their Brother T. Hicks, contrary to the Agreement upon which
the first Meeting was appointed.

2. Has Jer. Ives and his Brethren so far forgot themselves, as not to
remember how their Wits and Time were taken up at both Meetings, especially his
in the Latter, to prove the Quakers no Christians, and yet after Jeremy is fain
both to Dare us, and earnestly Request a Meeting with us, to prove us no
Christians; which if he had so rarely done at either Meeting before, he needed
not thus have Dared and Requested a Meeting, but only have shown the World, How
he had done it; instead whereof he has given them Ground to believe, that he
is baffled in his Attempts, which makes him so swell and bel^^h out Daring and
Reviling afterward.

But he takes it for granted, that the right spirited Christians were more
animated and provok^d by the Daring of their Adversaries to vindicate the
Honor of their Religion; But this is only employed in Jeremy's Question instead
of any general Proof: It is a Wonder that he and his Brethren were not more
provoaked to vindicate the Honor of their Religion in Behalf of their Brother
T. Hicks. in whom their Religion is so much concerned, as he is set up as an
eminent Agent of the Anabaptists, and Teacher among them; for was not the
Honor of the Baptists Religion at all concerned in this Person? J. Ives will
concern the Honor of our Religion in any particular Book of any one among us
that he thinks he has something against; but Jeremy let me tell thee, that thy
Daring has no such Impression upon ourSpirits, as to provoak us, either to
meet thee only as Jer. Ives, or upon thy own Terms: Nor do we at all reckon the
Honor of our Religion impared, either by thy Daring, Huffing, Reviling or
Deriding; but rather we count it Matter of Rejoicing, when such as thou art,
revile and speak all Manner of Evil of us, while we know you do it falsely, and
that we suffer it for his Name sake, who has upheld us through Sufferings and
Reproaches unto this Day.

Jeremy Ives, for Proof of his daring Challenge, and to stop T. Rudyard, quotes
Edw. Burrough's Invitation and Challenge to the whole Church of Rome, daring
them to suffer a certain Number of Quakers to come among them; and likewise,
that he challenges all the Priests of Dublin to meet him to try their God,
their Ministry and Worship.

It seems this daring Champion J. I. who would be accounted an eminent Warrior
for Christianity, must be beholding to such as he counts No Christians for
Proof of his Challenge, though if his and Edw. Buroughs be seriously compared,
a vast Difference and Disparity will appear between them, both as to the Nature
and Manner of them, and their different Spirits; for E. B. did in both plainly
and seriously design to oppose the Spirit of Persecution, both at Rome and
Dublin: As to [Daring] it is only a Proposition by Way of Question to the Church
of Rome, thus, And dare you suffer a certain Number of us to come among you and
preach what we hold, and a certain Number of you shall freely come among us,
and preach what you hold without Persecution or any Violence, as we would
expect and have the same from you? And this to try which would convert E. B.
being really satisfied they could convert no real Quaker to the Church of Rome.
the most, and which had the Power and Spirit of God with them, etc. E. B's
Works, fol. 470.

Now let any Reasonable Man judge whether this Proposition for a mutual Liberty
to preach without Persecution, and to see or try the Effect of each One's
Ministry, was not more serious and of another kind then Jeremy Ives's Daring
Challenge, mixed with Untruths and Abuses, favoring of a Boasting Scornful
Spirit.

And 2dly, for E. B' s Challenge to the Priests of Dublin to meet him and F.
Howgil, to try their God, their Ministry and Worship: This was when these two
were Prisoners in Dublin proposed to those of the persecuting Spirit; the
Reason whereof is plainly given, They being under Afflictions and Sufferings,
abundantly reproached, and the Lord's Truth greatly infamed by many Backbiting
and Slanderous Tongues, especially by professed Ministers in the Ears of their
People, slandering them, as being Jesuits, Seducers, Deceivers, Heretics,
Blasphemers and Witches, Fol. 90 of E. B's Works. See here, was it not
reasonable that these Sufferers should call out for a Meeting to clear
themselves from such Infamies and Reproaches in the Presence of their Accusers:
Had Jer. Ives been under such Suffering by the Quakers, and made such a
Proposition to them, he might have made this his Instance; but he and his
Brethren have not been willing thankfully to enjoy their own Liberties quietly
in a Time of Peace, but have endeavored to render us (who have been a suffering
People) as Odious and Obnoxious as they can, wherein their Design seems most
tending to stir up Persecution against us, like Ungrateful Men.

His other Instance is that of Solomon Eccles his Challenge, to fast seven
Days and seven Nights, etc. made to Papists and Protestants of diverse Sorts,
as Presbyters, Independents, Baptists, Fifth-Monarchy Men, etc.

Though Jeremy is pleased to render him like a Hector or S^ager, or rather a
Bedlam-man: He has herein condemned him before a Trial, which he might have
forborne until himself or some of his Brethren, had made Trial; but it is not
likely that they would expose themselves, their Bellies, or their God, to such
a Jeopardy: However, as to the Ground of S. E's Confidence, and how he might
have been born up in such a Case, it seems not reasonable that either Jeremy
Ives or I should determine to the World (whatever we think) while none of them
dare adventure upon such a Trial with him: I must confess, the Prophets of Baal
were rather to be commended 1 Kings 18.
for their Confidence in adventuring the Trial of their God upon Elijah's
Challenge, then Jer. and his Brethren, though those Prophets of Baal had but
ill Success: But if J. Ives objects that S. E. had no Scripture Instance for
such a Challenge, but only an Impulse by Inspiration without Evidence: I reply,
neither has Jeremy Scripture to control him herein, nor durst he adventure
upon Trial for the Proof or Evidence of such an Impulse (Yet Fasting is more
easily proved in Scripture then Jeremy's Challenge) However, it is not
reasonable we should send S. E. to Bedlam before Trial, or that he be found so
fit for it as Jeremy Ives has rendered him.

Another Instance is, G. Fox calling the Doctors in Europe to come forth, and
meet him in the open Field, and to answer him if they dare; and for this he
quotes A Primer for the Scholars and Doctors in Europe, in the Epistle, p. 4.
and in the Book, p. 40 and 41. Wherein J. I. has unfairly cited the Matter,
which is not at all of the Nature of his Challenge; for this Primer chiefly
consists of Queries upon their seven Arts and Terms, used in the Universities
and Schools of Learning: In the Place cited the Words are truly thus, viz.
These Queries are to call them out into the Field, that every one may see their
Garment, that they may give Answer to every one of these Words, Names and
Things; let them come out now to little Children; thus in Epist. p. 4. And
after diverse hard terms about Theology, in p. 40. he queries thus, Whether or
no they are the Words that the Holy Ghost has taught? answer me, if you can,
or da^e venture, what every Particular of these Words is, and what Center and
Ground they come from.

But here are not the Words, Come forth and meet me in the open Field, and
answer me if you dare, according to Jeremy's Citation.

Now consider what Parallel there can be between G. F's calling the Scholars
and Doctors to come out to little Children, to explain their Terms of Art; and
Jeremy's Insulting, Scornful and Reviling Challenge hypocritically named A
Sober Request; and surely, the Scholars and Doctors might have given a sober
Answer unto G. F's Queries, and explained their hard Words and Terms of Art, as
publicly in Print, in the open Field or Face of the World, without during them
to appointing such a Meeting as J. Ives dares and begs for in his Challenge, to
prove the Quakers No Christians, after he had several Opportunities, and made
diverse Attempts to do it before: G. F. used no such Uncertainty nor Hypocrisy
or Envy in his calling out the Doctors, as J. Ives had done against the
Quakers, as appears in comparing G. F's Primer (to the Doctors and Scholars of
Europe) with J. Ives' s Sober Request to the Quakers: We value not his Outcry
of Baseness, Railing, and Clamoring, and wilful Baseness; herein he shows but
his fretful Huffing against us, and himself guilty thereof.

As for our own Prophets outdoing of him twenty Times, as he says, their
outdoing is neither of the Nature of his doings, nor attended with those
Circumstances; for his (as has been told him) is False, Impertinent and
Impudent: He by daring us rendering us afraid to meet him, which is a gross
Untruth, and Reviling us, endeavors to make us Odious before Trial, and to
vaunt and insult over us in a frothy light Spirit, which has evidently
appeared in him.

In short: Further to show the Disparity of Jer. Ives his insolent frothy
Challenge to the Quakers, and our Friends serious Challenge and Propositions to
the Pope, Cardinals, and other Persecutors, as T. Rudyard, in his Book,
entitled, The Anabaptists Printed Prop^osas, p. 18, 19. answers Jeremy thus,
viz. If he means by Sober Request, that Expression of his, If you dare appoint
Time and Place, etc. it is past my Skill to find the Correspondency of the Body
of his Sheet to its Head or Title; but if Daring to appoint be the best Terms
the Anabaptists can invite us to a Religious Discourse, I must declare his
Language is so far from being scriptural, that it comes short of the common
Hectors or Swordmen of our Time, etc.

Now Jeremy's Daring Challenge shows it self not to be on a Serious Religious
Account, nor in the best Terms of Invitation thereto; but rather in this
somewhat like the common Hectors or Swordmen of the Times, that confide in
their own Strength and Art (as he does in his pedantick Knack of sophistical
Twisting and Turning in his Arguings) he provides, That none be admitted to
speak (as the Disputants) but himself and another, whom we shall appoint; as
also, that a certain Hour be agreed on for the Beginning, and another for the
Ending of the Disputation for that day, and that neither Party shall exceed
that Time, unless by mutual Consent: wherein he has very carefully contrived
his Matter, that he may not be spent, or beaten out of Breath; and as a man
that has no supernatural Aid to trust to, being Doubtful that his Natural
Strength should fail (in case his single Opposer should not be stinted to a few
Hours) which is quite contrary to the Nature of S. E's Challenge to Fast; for
Jeremy provides more carefully for his Carcass in this Case, then S. E. does to
be sure.

And our Friends E. B. or G. F's proposing to many Persecutors, both Papists
and others, to answer or meet them without such a Stint or Limitation of single
Person or ^ours (as Jeremy would bargain aforehand) ^rgues to me, that they did
rather confide in ^^e Power and Aid of God to assist them in ^^eir Testimony
against their Adversaries; ^^d not in their own Strength or Wisdom of ^^e
Flesh, as Jeremy's does, which makes ^^m be so careful that both the Time and
single Person be stinted and pitched upon: for otherwise he has Cause to be
doubtful, that his God would fail him. I will conclude, that the true God did
not call him to give forth such a Challenge as his is; for he has no Rule nor
Authority from the Scriptures for it, nor any Example from Christ's Ministers
for such a Daring Vapouring Challenge; nor can he Evidence any special Command
for it by immediate Inspiration or Revelation from Heaven (as our Friends
profess) for that is inconsistent with his Religion: Therefore his own
presumptuous Will is his Rule and Law for his Challenge, both as to the Matter
and Manner of it, as having no footing either in the Holy Scriptures or Power
of God.

Whereas from his Daring us to appoint Time and Place to prove the Quakers No
Christians, it was told him, that then it seems they are not yet proved No
Christians; upon which he demands, Whether a Truth may not be oftener proved
then once, especially where some stop their Ears, as the Deaf Adder?

Hereupon I ask him, if he had before proved us No Christians, or really judged
he did so, Was it proper for him to dare and beg for another Meeting merely to
prove us No Christians, which is not again to prove us none? or did he expect
to open our Ears by going over his Matter again? But if he reckoned us such
Deaf Adders, that would not hear him before, his Business had been rather to
let the World know how rarely he had proved his Charge against us, and not to
trouble the World, or alarm City and Country with his Cracking and Boasting
what he would do in his daring Vaunts, which favor of mere Pride, Vanity and
Impudence, and not of any Seriousness, or Good Will toward us; nor as a man
that would really seek our Conversion to Christianity, supposing us none; for
did ever the Apostles or Ministers of Christ thus dare vilify, reproach or
insult over the poor Ethnicks or moral Heathen (as we are counted) in the sight
of their Enemies, or open View of the World in order to their Conversion) as
Jer. Ives has dealt by the despised Quakers?

As touching the Question T. R. put to him, Whether this be that Jeremy, that
was cast into Newgate upon a Religious Account, and for his Testimony against
Swearing, in the year 1660. To this he answers, I am not that Jeremy that was
committed to Newgate for a Religious Refusing the Oath of Allegiance, etc.

On which I ask, if it was not for some kind of refusing the Oath? and whether
if a Conscientious Refusing, it was not Religious?

But that Jeremy got out of Prison by Swearing, this he denies not; for he
says, I am that Jeremy, that took the Oath of Allegiance, and writ a Book to
prove that some Oaths were Lawful, though all were not.

Well, I Will not press him, whether he did not once reckon the Oath of
Allegiance Unlawful (when he was committed to Newgate) but tell him, that
methinks he does a little like a Temporizer, color over and construe the
Business of his Letter to his Brother Pittman and Brother Sewel.

1. First, in saying, I am not that Jeremy that ever writ against the Oath of
Allegiance, either privately or publicly.

2. In saying, I am that Jeremy, that did in a Letter blame a Friend for
saying, He had rather have given Fifty Pound then have took the Oath of
Allegiance, and yet swore he took it Freely and Willingly, etc.

By which, Jeremy, thou seem only to strike at thy Brother's Hesitation,
Scruple and Dissimulation about the taking the Oath, and not at the mere taking
it, or Matter of Fact.

But methinks thy severe Letter to them sounds otherwise, as that it was for
taking the Oath, as well as their Scruple or Dissatisfaction in doing it; else,
what mean these Passages in thy Letter? viz.

I do well to be angry with you.

That you would be as easily persuaded to part with, as unwilling to suffer for
your spiritual Liberties.

How unlike the Christians in former Times are you, whose Zeal was so hot for
God that their Eyes prevented the Morning, that thereby they might prevent the
Rage of the Adversary.

I always did conclude, that those that would quit the Cause of Righteousness,
would quit the Ways of Holiness, as yesterday's sad Experience has taught, to
the perpetual Joy of your Adversaries, and the sadning the Hearts, and adding
Afflictions to the Bonds of the Prisoners of he Lord. Thus far Jeremy.

See here, was it only the Scruple of these Men in taking the Oath that is
opposed or reproved, and not their taking it? Or was it the Regret they had
upon them in the taking it, that would be such a perpetual Joy to the
Adversaries; or rather the Matter of Fact, as it appeared to them, namely, the
taking the Oath, and therein acting contrary to the Testimony of others that
suffered, to the sadning their Hearts, and adding to their Afflictions?
Besides, says Jeremy, My Bonds are my Crown, but your Cowardly Spirit is my
great Cross: But it seems he kept this Crown but a little while, if he in a few
Days after got himself out of Prison by Swearing: And wherein did their
Cowardly Spirit appear, but in their Swearing, contrary t^ their Consciences,
as Jeremy in his chiding Letter says?

Now God is proving to see if you will obey him or no; and did not yesterday's
Work witness that you are willing to prefer the Fear of a Man that must dye,
before the Fear of the great God; and the Fear of them that can kill the Body,
before the Fear of the Lord that can cast both Body and Soul into Hell? I have
no more to say but this, that your Cowardly Temporizing and Complying with the
PRECEPTS OF MEN, makes me jealous, that your Fear toward the Lord is taught by
the Precepts of Men. Thus far Jeremy again.

Now the Question is, did J. I. in all these Words bear upon their Hesua^^on or
Scruple in taking the Oath, or only reprove their Swearing they took it freely,
when they could not really do it? Methinks, if this had been the Thing, and
that Jeremy had really allowed of the Matter of Fact it self, as the taking the
Oath, he should have writ in another Strain then he did unto his Brethren for
taking it; he should not have charged them for quitting the Cause of
Righteousness to the Perpetual Joy of the Adversaries; nor with adding
Afflictions to the Bonds of the Lord's Prisoners; nor with yesterday's Work,
witnessing their Willingness to prefer the Fear of a Man that must dye; nor of
Cowardly Temporizing and Complying with the PRECEPTS of Men: for surely, here
is the Matter of Fact concerned; but if he had approved of the Oath it self,
and only disapproved of their Weakness in scrupling and taking it in an
unsatisfied Conscience or doubtful Mind, he should then have endeavored to
have removed their Scruples, and to have pacified their weak Consciences with
urging the Lawfulness of what they did, by demonstrating it to them; but the
Thing appears otherwise, and that Jeremy did fall under the Judgment that he
gave against his Brethren, as namely, that of Cowardly Temporizing and
Complying with the Precepts of Men; as may be suspected from his saying,

What if I had been once against the Oath, and afterward had took it, must this
needs make me an Impostor?

Surely this does not clear him, nor render him a Stable Christian.

His implying or insinuating Tho. Rudyard guilty of Forgery, for putting Men's
Names to own the Matter in a Book without their Consent or Privacy, p. 7. and
11.

I suppose Tho. Rudyard has answered for himself to this Matter elsewhere,
viz. to a Paper of T. Hicks that charged him with the same Fact: And for my
Part I do not understand that he his chargeable with Forgery herein, though he
had not their Consent or Privacy, seeing their Names were sent up Inhabitants
then present (with diverse others) at the Examination of the Anabaptists Lying
Wonder in Lincolnshire, that Richard Anderson (untruly insinuated to be a
Quaker) whose Child was falsely alleged to be cured of a Leprosy by Means of
the Baptists Prayers; and the Certificate being sent up to him with the Names
of those then present and Ear-Witnesses of that Account, and others that
subscribed their Hands, as further Witnesses thereto; whether they consented to
the publishing of their Names to the Man's Account or not, was not material, so
long as they knew the Thing was true; and what Reason had T. R. or any others,
to think that they would scruple their Names being printed (as Persons present)
at such Examination or Account when they were present Ear-Witnesses, and then
Assenters to the Credit thereof; all this does not render them No Witnesses,
much less T. R. a Forg^r for giving the World a true Account of the Matter, as
it was sent up to him (and not contrived by him) by publishing amongst other
Testimonies that Certificate that detected the Baptists Forgery from the Hands
of several Witnesses, who really subscribed thereto, who withal certified and
sent the Names of those Inhabitants present. The Baptists Boasts (about the
said Lying Wonder) are sufficiently detected in our Friends Answers thereto.

But Jeremy thinks he pays us off in several Passages we are now coming to, as
in asking, Whether it be not very Uncharitable for W. P. to Violate the Laws of
God and the Laws of the King, in remembering any thing against those whom the
King had graciously pardoned; else, that he would not have told Mr. Faldo in
his Rejoinder, page 406. of the Nonconformists preaching up Blood and Treason,
and Garments rol'd in the Blood of Kings, etc?

I must tell Jeremy, That he has herein dealt unfairly by W. P. and aggravated
his Words by adding BLOOD and TREASON] Whenas his Words are, They are true
Gospel Ministers, and their Feet truly Beautiful, whose Gospel is, Peace on
Earth, and Good Will toward Men; and not Garments rol'd in the Blood of Kings
and Princes, Rulers and People: No Worldly Armies, Battles, Spoils,
Sequestrations, etc. Though its true, that John Faldo and his Brethren are
retorted upon by W. P. for their Preaching up the former War; but this was not
to violate the King's Favor in pardoning them, but to give them a Check for
their being so busy against us in a Persecuting Spirit; and particularly, for
John Faldo's Abuse of William Penn, and meddling with his deceased Father; about
which I refer the Reader to W. P's own Answer to speak for himself, in his
Rejoinder to John Faldo) page 405, 406. And so W. P's Design might be rather to
Humble them, and to reclaim them from that old bitter Spirit, wherein they were
formerly Incendiaries, and yet bring forth their Invectives, tending to stir up
Persecution against the People of the Lord [And have not both the Holy Prophets
and Christ also reminded such a persecuting Generation, both of their own and
their Fathers former Iniquities, seeing them continuing therein in the same
Spirit of Envy?] But I doubt not but W. P. desires their Repentance, that they
may be converted from their Persecuting Spirit, that they may receive Pardon
from God as well as from the King.

But Jeremy, thou that would seem so Zealous against Uncharitableness, and
Violating the Laws of God and the King; have thou dealt charitably by E.
Buroughs, in saying, He does justify the late Wars against the King? and not
only so, but thou art pleased to tell the World twice or thrice over, that we
justify the late Wars against the King. How now, Jeremy! Is this thy Charity
and Respect to the Laws of God and the King? Have thou not herein shown a
persecuting Spirit to render us obnoxious? And why so? Because E. B. in
severely Warning the late Powers of their Downfall, did by way of Reproof tell
Oliver what God had done for him, even in the same Letter to him wherein he
plainly also tells him of the Great Oppressions which the People of God
suffered under him, both in their Persons and Estates; Saying also to Oliver,
If I perish I must speak the Truth; most of the Prisons this day in all thy
Jurisdictions do testify the Unjust Judgments and Great Oppressions and
Cruelties; yea, and further conditionally threatens Oliver, That God would
confound and him; see E. B's Works, from page 551. to page 583. how plainly and
faithfully he did warn Oliver, and those men then in Power, of their Overthrow.
To be sure E. B. was no Temporizer; neither have we forborne in dealing plainly
with those in Power, when we have had Cause, as the Lord has moved and
authorized us.

And further to clear E. B. and the Reprinter or Publisher of his Books, as to
their Freeness from being either a Factions Party, or Seditious to the
Government that now is, and to manifest what a True Prophet he was (and that
never man dealt more plainly) against the former Power and Government,
particularly in his Message to the then Rulers of England, fol. 594. viz. If
you of the Army be always Treacherous and Disobedient toward the Lord, and
abuse your Power, and trifle away your Hour about Places of Honor, and such
Self-seeking Matters, and the Cause of God be neglected by you, and his People
continued Oppressed Sufferers under you, as they have long been; even then
shall you be cast aside with shameful Disgrace, and the Heavy Hand of the Lord
shall be upon you in Judgment, and you shall be smitten more then any before
you; your Estates shall not be spared from the Spoiler, nor your Souls from the
Pit, nor your Persons from the Violence of Men, no, nor your Neeks from the Ax;
for if you be Unfaithful, and continually Treacherous to the Cause of God, then
shall you be left to the Will of your Enemies, and they shall charge Treachery
and Treason upon you, etc.

But our Opposer, who under the Pretense of Christianity and Charitableness,
shows himself void of both, tells us of a Quakers Book, entitled, The West
answering to the North, has much to this Purpose, which (says he) I am not
willing to write out, because I am not willing to expose you. I cannot but
observe the Man's Dissimulation and base Insinuation in this implicit Kind of
accusing us, hereby to render us more suspicious and obnoxious, then if he had
dealt plainly, especially whilst he accuses us over and over with justifying
the late Wars against the King, whenas that very Book quoted by him, entitled,
The West answering to the North printed 1657. does in the whole Tenor of it
severely reprehend those then in Power, to wit, Oliver and his Ministers for
their Oppressions, Cruelties, and Arbitrary and Tyrannical Proceedings, which
they pretended to condemnin those before them: though there might be some Words
too harsh in the said Book as reflecting backward, but with an Intent to judge
them then in Power; yet it is to be considered, as chiefly writ by two Officers
or Captains of the old Army, being Common Wealths Men (as I understand) who had
not as then wholly got over the Warring Spirit, however did sympathize with our
Poor, Innocent Friends, when they beheld their deep Sufferings, as in some
Degree sharing with them; though its probable, some Remainder of their former
Sharpness of Spirit was left, wherein they had been animated by such Zealous
Chaplains as Jeremy; yet those Books quoted by him were extant long before the
King's Pardon, which he pretends so greatly to respect; but we have not gone
about to serve him and his Brethren thus, as to rake up all the Baptists Books
that concerned the former War and Matters of State before the Kings coming in,
or Act of Indemnity: However, this we find Cause to believe, that, whatever
Respect J. Ives and his Brethren may pretend, either to the Kings Gracious
Pardon or the Law of Charity, they would show little Mercy if they had Power to
execute their Enmity, as well as to render us obnoxious to the Government; such
as Jer. Ives and his Brother T. Hicks, would in all Probability be as busy
Agents for our Ruin, as they are now to endeavor it by such an Indictment as
this (that is made up of their present Accusations against us) viz. That you
justify the late Wars against the King; that you are No Christians, nor worthy
of so venerable a Name; that your Doctrines are Destructive both to Scripture
and Christian Religion; that your Confessions are gross Equivocations; that
your Opinions do make void all Rules of Christian Faith and Practice; that your
Friends of the Ministry are Impostors, false Prophets and Men of Lying Spirits:
Thus far J. Ives. And then T. Hicks in his Dialogues against the Quakers, viz.
That you are Destructive to all Human Society, Inconsistent with Government;
that you are as vile Impostors as ever were; that your Religion is a mere
Cheat, calculated to the Service of the Devil and your own Lusts, horrid
Blasphemies; that your chief Motive and Inducement to suffer, is the
Satisfaction of your Wills and Lusts, or the promoting of your Carnal
Interests; that you are the Spawn of the wicked Brood, the Ranters and have
likt up their Vomit; Romish Emissaries; Heretics; Mad Men; Infatuated; such as
esteem the Holy Scriptures of no more Au^hority then Esop' s Fables, and the
Blood of Christ no more then an Unholy Thing, or the Blood of a Common Thief,
yea worse; that you reprobate the Holy Scriptures and the Person of Christ;
that you deny any future distinct Beings, Rewards or Eternal Advantages to Men
after Death; that your owning Christ, and the Christ you own, is a mere
Mystical Romance, and that your Meetings are to Inveigle and Trapan People; As
also he recriminates the Quakers in General with the Enormities of some
Particulars: These, with many more such like most bitter, false and absurd
Invectives by Tho. Hicks the Baptist-Agent. O Persecuting Baptists! But God be
thanked, that these Men's Horns are shortened; for if they were not, it is not
unlikely but they would push and persecute asc ruelly as their Invectives are
Inveterate, and tend thereto; or as their New England Brethren, whose
Persecuting Spirits would not be satisfied without Innocent Blood.

Again Jer. Ive, goes about to impeach us with an Inconsistency, and to exhibit
a pregnant Proof by Retortion of our being No Christians; In that the Quakers
refuse the Oath of Allegiance, because they are against all Swearing, as being
Inconsistent with Christianity, or living in the Life and Power of Christ, or
under his Government; and yet reckons that some among us swear, and for
Instance he puts this Question, What think you of William Mead, who with Others
took an Oath? And what think you of Gerrard Roberts, who together with John
Osgood, who with others took their Oaths, as appears by their Answer to a Bill
in Chancery. To all which I reply from what I think.

1. I tell this Inquisitor, that I think they are all honest Men, fearing God,
and Men conscientious toward him according to their Principle, and that they
would not injure, or defraud or wrong any in their Properties or Rights; and
for what they do they dare appear before and answer the great God in the great
Day of Judgment. However, if they were Conscious, they are resolved they would
not make this Inquisitor their Confessor; for they neither expect Mercy nor
Absolution from him.

2. I also think (and William Mead, John Osgood and Gerrard Roberts are
satisfied) that they are able to give an honest Account of their Conscientious
Tenderness in this Case, and that according to a good Conscience, if in Love
desired, or out of an honest Intention, or for a good End, without any Design
of Injury toward them or their Profession: But they have no Cause to think
that Ier. Ives does enquire or accuse them to the World for any good End, or
out of any Friendship to them, or Love to their Souls; but rather from a Design
of Mischief or Injury, as the Tenor of his Discourse against them imports:
Therefore they are resolved rather to suffer his Revilings, and endure his
Clamours, then gratify a mischievous Spirit, by giving him Account of their
Affairs or Proceedings for their Properties and Rights, which only they seek
for; and not to injure their Neighbors (or any Man else) in their Names,
Persons or Estates.

3. That if either Jeremy, or any Baptists, or others for him, have made Search
in Chancery, or do enquire of any Officers belonging thereto, whether any of
the Quakers have given in their Answer upon Oath? I think that he and such his
Enquirers are Busibodies in other men's Matters (while it is not their own
Concernments) And whilst their Design and End therein is for Evil against our
Friends, it might be supected by those Officers in trust concerned, as not to
be for Good toward them or us, in their Inquiry; and that therefore such busy
Inquisitors might justly have met with a Repulse, and been rejected, and not
answered in their captious Attempts.

4. To his falsely accusing the Quakers with daily impleading People at Law, I
say, That though some of them have Occasion sometimes to make use of the Law,
they are necessitated thereto, to maintain their just Rights and Properties
from such Unconscionable Men as would otherwise make a Prey upon them, to Ruin
them and theirs, and not to injure others, or defraud any of their Rights; in
such Cases the Law is used Lawfully, being for Justice and Right: Its probable
that if the Quakers could neither make use of the Law, nor have their Answers
accepted, for what is their own proper Rights, but be devoured by Unreasonable
or Wicked Men, our Opposer would not be so offended, nor inquisitive as he is
into our Friends Affairs; but he would think it ill to be so dealt by: If his
Brethren should be asked, What think you of Jeremy Ives, who boasts that he is
able to approve himself as Honest in all his Correspondencies in the World as
the best of the Quakers? But has he done so? has he performed Promise and
Covenant with all, and satisfied all his Creditors? have none of them had cause
to complain of him in those Matters? Its not unlike but he would be very short
at this, and give such an Answer as this, What Is that to you? meddle with your
own Business: I will not make you my Confessor; or, I have done what I can to
satisfy all, or so far as I was able: And so our Friends can easily answer,
What Is their Concerns to Ier. Ives? What has he to do to question or accuse
them therein? They have endeavored to keep their Consciences in-offensive
toward God and Men, as those that must give an Account to God, and not unto
their Adversaries, who have no Jurisdiction over them or their Consciences.

5. I must take Leave further to enquire, seeing that Jer. Ives and Henry Don
with diverse others, have thus defined an Oath, viz. to say, God is my Witness,
God is my Record; I speak the Truth in Christ, I lie not; my Conscience bears
me Witness in the Holy Spirit, etc. that these Expressions, with many more of
the like Nature, are equivalent to an Oath; and these to evince, That the
Apostle Paul himself swear; and that not only Christ, but the Apostle did both
practice, enjoin and exact Swearing upon others; and to prove, that he charged
others to swear, J. I. cites 2 Timothy 4. 1. and 1 These. 5. 27. [Also J. Tombs in
his Supplement about Swearing, says, That the using these Speeches, I affirm
before God, or this we say in the Presence of him that shall judge the Quick
and the Dead, etc. is plain Swearing.] Concerning which Definition and Plea for
Swearing under the Gospel, these men are answered by that faithful Servant of
the Lord, and Sufferer for the Cause of Christ, Samuel ^^sher, in his Antidote
against Swearing, and his Supplementum Sublatum. Now suppose that any of our
Friends find Freedom to use some such Expressions in their Testimonies before
Authority, as, God is my Witness; I speak the Truth in the Presence of God; or
I speak in the Fear of God; or God knows I lie not, and this without Regret or
Scruple of Conscience; and suppose what they say, be believed and accepted of,
as equivalent to an Oath; and that those Magistrates or Ministers in Trust are
satisfied therewith, and do not think it prejudicial to their Consciences to
accept thereof; what Instruction has Jeremy to give in such Cases? What has he
to do to show himself a Busy Body in other Men's Matters? And why should he
rake into his Neighbors Affairs; either to find out Occasion against them, or
to prejudice them in their Properties? Should not Jeremy's Business rather be,
to convince the Quakers of the real Definition of an Oath, that they may not
interfer with their Principle, rather then to seek to make them odious to the
World, as Men perfidious therein? For (this is not the Way to persuade them to
Jeremy's Christianity) they would not willingly or wittingly profess one Thing
and practice another: Thus far I have signified what I really think, in Answer
to Jeremy's Question.

As for his high Charge, viz.

1. How Impious then are the Quakers, who some of them swear themselves. and
most of them take Pleasure in them that do so?

2. Can Quakers be Men of Conscience and Integrity, that while they judge
Swearing, will procure Men to swear?

Both which are manifestly false; for they neither take Pleasure therein, nor
procure Men to swear: if any of them have Occasion for Witnesses that do not
scruple an Oath, it is the Magistrates, not the Quakers, that put them upon, or
tender them an Oath; for if their Testimony without an Oath might be accepted,
the Quakers would be better satisfied: Let the Magistrates enjoin them to speak
Truth upon what Penalty they shall see meet; we have proposed this for our
selves as well as others.

Whereas Jeremy takes the Grant, that W. P. gave to his Request for a Meeting
to be upon Dishonorable or Impossible Conditions, and so worse then a
Downright Denial; of which he first mentio^^th that, If Mr. Kiffin, Mr. Plant,
Mr. Dike and Mr. Hicks will give it under their Hands, that they will be bound
to stand to what Jeremy shall Answer, Propose, Affirm or Deny.

W. P's first Proposal runs thus: viz. 1st, Let Jeremy Ives make it appear to
us, that he is deputed to this Work; for it is beneath US to engage against a
single Person, as well as beside our Business, as the Case lies, to think our
selves concerned in his Rodemontado's and vapouring Challenges: He is Privateer
but for himself, and stands upon no Body's Legs but his own, and some think,
not always well on them neither.

And why is this Impossible? I suppose he does not count it Dishonorable to be
Deputed: But if them Impossible, it argues, they have not so much Confidence in
Jeremy as he has in himself, and that they think not fit t^ embarque their
Cause in that Bottom: And what Reason is there then for a whole Body of People
to subject themselves to the imperious Daring and Examination of such a
singular boasting Bravado, if his own Brethren cannot confide in, nor subject
their Cause to him; and then is it reasonable We should meet him alone without
a Deputation from them to this Work?

Another Condition is, That all we have against T. H. may be first debated; and
this is but reasonable, and J. I. unreasonable in interposing to divert our
Prosecution of this: The Condition is thus laid down by W. P.

2. That he (to wit, Jeremy Ives) pe^^sonate T. Hicks, as to the Matter charged
by us against him, to wit, of writing Forgeries, Perversions and Slanders.

3. That before he enters upon proving us No Christians, he would tell us what
a True Christian is, or we go by no Standard.

4. Prove to us that he is that Christian, or else he is unfit to prove another
No Christian.

5. That we are not such Christians, but Heretics and Impostors.

To our proposing that what we have against T. H. may be first debated, Jer.
tells us, that we will not vindicate the Honor of our Profession, till we have
vindicated the Honor of our Personal Reputations, as being more zealous
thereof then of the Honor of God and Religion. This is a gross and apparent
Untruth; for both our Religion and Principles, as well as our Personal
Reputations are concerned in our Charge against Tho. Hicks, as appears plainly
both in his Forgeries, Perversions, and Slanders, which concern both Doctrine
and Practice: but it seems Jeremy is very raw, and unversed in the
Controversies between us, and yet his Confidence will serve him to engage in
the Quarrel for Tho. Hicks.

To the second; He counts this another of our poor Put-offs, and Unreasonable,
that he should make good any more then he has charged against us: He counts it
unreasonable then to personate T. H. in the Matter that we charge against him,
was it not then Unreasonable he should so deeply engage for him before? But
Jeremy says, He is ready to make good what he has charged against us, by the
Grace of God, if we DARE meet him. But this is to be understood as a distinct
Offer of it self, without Respect to the Matter about Tho. Hicks: However, it
is but single Daring and Vapouring Jeremy still, whose Brags and Attempts we
value not, but slight his Folly therein.

To the third: He counts this impertinent, When, says he, we tell them they
are no Christians either of one sort or another; This he tells the Quakers, and
it is but his own telling; and I do not think but he does in this violate some
better Persuasions and Convictions, that he has had in himself: And while he
confesses, that he is a good Christian, that has a Rule for his Faith and
Practice in the Christian-Religion, and endeavors to the uttermost of his
Strength and Understanding to believe and live accordingly. He concludes, they
are No Christians that have no Rule for their Faith and Practice in the
Christian- Religion; and such are the Quakers, says he, page 14. See what an
Imperious and Censorious Judge this is: He says, we have No Rule, though we
prosess, believe and practically own the Guidance of the Spirit of Christ, and
in Subjection thereto do own the Holy Scriptures: And for our Lives and
Conversations, I hope he does not conclude, that either the People called
Quakers, in general are therein Unchristian, or that his own is more Christian
then theirs; how comes he then to presume, that we have not the Spirit of
Christ, or none of his Light in us for a Rule, in affirming, that the Quakers
have No Rule for their Faith and Practice in the Christian- Religion?

But this Presumption is not strange to us, since he could openly tell William
Gibson and me, that We were not enlightened with the Light of Christ.

I could not but then take notice of the Man's Insolency and Foolish
Censoriousness; but how does he prove that the Quakers have No Rule for their
Faith and Practice in the Christian- Religion, and therefore are no Christians?
He thus attempts it, viz.

That though George Keith, to keep up your Credit with the People, said, The
Scriptures were onned by you as a Seoundary Rule for your Faith and Practice;
yet Edw. Buroughs contradicts him, and tells us in so many words, That the
Scriptures are NO Rule or Guide of Faith and Life to the Saints; see his Works,
fol. 515. and reconcile your Prophets as well as you can. Thus far Jeremy.

He would make the World believe, that he has here given the Quakers a deadly
Blow, in rendering their Prophets irreconcilable; yea, and to fasten the
Contradiction, he says, that E. B. tells us in so many words, That the
Scriptures are NO RULE or Guide of Faith, etc. for this he bids us see his
Works, fol. 515.

How now, bold Jeremy! I have seen the place quoted by thee, and thou have
manifestly belyed Edw. Buroughs, to prove thy false Charge; for Edwards Words
in the place are thus, viz. The Scriptures are profitable, and were given forth
to be read and to be fulfilled; yet they are not THE RULE and Guide of Faith
and Life unto the Saints; but the SPIRIT of God, that gave forth the
Scriptures, that is THE RULE and Guide, Teacher and Leader into all Truth: See
also his following words in the next Clause, affirming, That the Scriptures are
the Words of God; that the Spirit of God is THE RULE of Faith and Life to the
Saints; that men ought to search the Scriptures, and believe what is therein
written, etc.

See now Jeremy, that Edward Buroughs his words are not as thou citest them,
that the Scriptures are NO RULE, but that they are not THE RULE and Guide of
Faith and Life unto the Saints, but the Spirit; and yet the Scriptures to be
Searched, Read and Fulfilled: so that he denies them not, but plainly implies
them to be A RULE, but not THE RULE, that is, not the most Eminent or Highest
Rule, but the Spirit: And how does this contradict George Keith's saying, That
we own the Scriptures as a Secundary Rule? which also implies a primary or
Principal Rule, to wit, the Holy Spirit, as well as E. B. does in his words
before. For my part, I cannot understand any more Contradiction between saying,
The Scriptures are a Secundary Rule, and yet not THE RULE and Guide of Faith
and Life unto the Saints, then there is between saying, Jeremy Ives is a
Baptist- Preacher, and yet not the principal Preacher among them; or between
Jeremy Ives's being a Man, and yet not the Chief (or Best) of Men; though I
confess this too mean an Instance for the Subject before, but only somewhat to
illustrate the Distinction. I was unwilling to have charged Jeremy with Forgery
(from the Place he quotes) in saying, that E. B. tells us in so many words,
that the Scriptures are NO Rule: But now upon Enquiry and Search into his
Falsehood herein, I am satisfied that I should do him no Wrong to charge It upon
him, and let the Place quoted by him in E. B's Works determine it.

Again, I find no Inconsistency between William Smith's confessing Christ and
the Spirit of God to be the Rule As in his Primer, page 10, 11, 12.
for trying Spirits, searching the Heart, and not the Scriptures (yet
confessing them to be of great Service) and G. K.'s owning the Scriptures for a
Secundary Rule, that Christ should be preferred before and above the
Scriptures, both as to trying and discovering, and yet they serviceable in
their place, as Christ opens the Understanding in them, can be no Opposition.

But Jeremy objects, That the Quakers deny the Scriptures to be a Rule of Faith
and Practice, comprehensive of the whole Duty of Man.

1. That they are so comprehensive as declaring the whole Duty of Man,
respecting Faith and Practice (as to the Sum and Substance thereof, respecting
Man's Salvation) I know none of us deny: But that they are not that Manifesting
Rule of every particular Act of Faith and Obedience that God may require
respectively, I think this Opposer cannot deny; but that he has granted thus
much at sundry Discourses, as with respect to such Prophets and Messengers, as
God might, for ought he knew, raise up in these days, and peculiarly
commissionate and send forth with extraordinary Messages to particular Places
and Peoples, in which God only (by his Spirit) is their great Rule and Guide.
2. And so God is in discovering to Man his inward Estate and Condition, even
the Thoughts and Inclinations of his Heart, with all his Particular Actions.

But says Jer. Ives, They pretend that the Spirit is the Rule, when they give
no more Evidence of it then Mahomet or Muggleton.

But this is manifest Reproach and Falsehood: We give as much Evidence, both in
Doctrine and Conversation, as is necessary to evince our Christianity; And as
Jeremy cannot disprove, nor does he appear to be a Man of that Spiritual Mind
and Judgment, as to know what Evidence we have given, or what Evidence we can
give, his Comparison is gross and impious; and Neither It, nor his bare Charge
(nor yet his calling upon us to produce an Evidence of the Spirit) shall serve
his turn to prove us either No Christians or Impostors.

Another Condition for a Meeting is, That Jeremy prove himself that Christian,
or else he is unfit to prove another No Christian: To this he says, But is not
this pretty? As they define a Christian, there is no Christian but themselves;
and when I have proved myself a Christian, which by Interpretation is a Quaker,
then I think the Question will be out of Question.

To this I reply: I must needs look upon this as a very sorry Shift; for, but
in the very Condition before he is told, That before he enters upon proving us
No Christians, he would tell us what a True Christian is, or we go by no
Standard. See now here, how plainly this provides, first, for an Agreement upon
the Definition of a True Christian, even such, as both Jeremy and the Quakers
might agree upon: Is it not reasonable, that the Terms of a Proposition, or
Matter in Question, should be explained and agreed upon in all Controversies?
and also reasonable, that when it is agreed what a True Christian is, that
Jeremy should prove himself one before he be admitted to prove others none? And
did the Quakers herein propose either to be the sole Judges, who is a True
Christian? or have they hereby demerited this man's Slight and Derision he
thus taunteth them with? viz. Would it not make one smile to see the sad Shifts
the Poor Men are put to? And what sad Shifts? What! to agree upon the
Definition of a Christian, as a Standard to go by; and then for Jeremy to prove
himself that Christian first? else, What Credit can his Attempts be of, while
he does not prosecute others as a Christian, or Partaker of Christianity
himself; Seeing he has so hideously charged others with being no Christians?

And further; It is not only the Quakers, but many others, that look upon Jer.
Ives to be no True Christian, or worthy to bear that Name, or undertake in the
Behalf of all Christians, to prove the Quakers none, as he promises, to
produce a Deputation from the Baptists, if he can obtain it. Well, I Will assure
him, if he does, we will take it for granted, that the Baptists make him their
great Agent, and we will look upon their Cause as highly concerned in him, and
so far resigned to him; let him do what he can to maintain it, we are not at
all doubtful on our parts of a good Iss^e for the Truth. And seeing Jeremy
pretends his Endeavors for such a Deputation from the Baptists, shall be to
leave us naked of all Excuse; we expect that it shall not be to evade those
Conditions before proposed by William Penn, in his Paper against Jeremy Ives
his Challenge; otherwise, if he should procure it to evade and shuffle off our
Proceeding on those Conditions, we shall but look upon it as a Flam, and a
vapouring Color, and Diversion, like his Interposing and Vaunting Challenge,
tending to Divert or keep us off from the Pursuance of our Charge against his
Brother Tho. Hicks, whom with his Abettors we charge with being guilty of
Forgery, Slanders, etc.

He has a Fling at S. Eccles, charging him, that he says of G. Fox, That it
may be said of him, as it was said of Christ, that the World was made by him,
though the World knew him not; and then adds, Is not this a rare Christian?
p. 15.

Unto which I must tell Jeremy, That in my Understanding he has both unfairly
cited and interpreted S. E. in this Matter; for if so be that he could say or
intend, that The World was made by him, did relate to G. Fox as well as to
Christ, then I must confess with Jeremy, that he was more fit for Bedlam then
otherwise: But if he alludes only to The World knew him no: (which related to
Christ) that so it may be said of this True Prophet, G. F. (as S. E's sense)
then I cannot see why Jeremy Ives should so deride him, although he might have
better and more safely worded his Intention: yet it is Uncharitable to reflect
upon a Man's Christianity for a little Failer in Syntax, As [the World knew him
not] should only be the Antecedent to [so it may be said of this true Prophet,
G. F.] and not that the World was made by him.
which can only be imputed to S. E. in this Matter, according to the Law of
Charity; let him speak for himself, see our Friends Book, entitled, Judas and
the Jews, p. 75. viz. I did not say, nor did I ever believe, that the World was
made by G. F. but by Christ, who was in the World, and the World knew him not;
so I say, it may be said of G. F. the World knows him not, though he be in the
World, as was said of Christ, He was in the World, though not of the World, and
the World knew him not; and he said of his Followers, Ye are not of the World,
as I am not of the World, Jo. 17. 16. and I have chosen you out of the World,
Jo. 15. 19. See here how plainly S. E. has signified his Intention in this
Matter: And what but Prejudice and Enmity can otherwise construe his words?

Finally, be it remembered, that Ieremy's Charge, that makes such a Hideous
Noise, viz. That our Ministers are Impostors, and Men of Lying Spirits, did
proceed from his Uncharitableness, or at least, his Breach of the Laws of Good
Manners, according to his own Observation, page 5. where he has promised, Not
to break the Laws of Good Manners, to call our Friends Papers Lies, and
Forgeries: So that herein he stands a Self condemned Person, not only
breaking the Laws of Good Manners, according to his own Confession, but
pursuing for a further Breach thereof; in which he also has bespoken himself
to be No Christian, condemning that in others which he allows in himself; as is
fully proved before against him.

To his POSTSCRIPT.
First, For Idle and Ridiculous Opinions and Practices, as he would charge upon
us in general: I do not yet find that he has found them, in such Books and
Persons as the Quakers declaredly own, as his words are; that Work is yet to do
for ought I see.

Secondly, Suppose there were any Absurd Opinions contained in any Book or
Books, said to be published in the Quakers Names and Behalf, if they have not
publicly declared against them, I deny that their Silence herein may
reasonably pass for Consent and Approbation, as Jeremy concludes; for its
possible there may be Books said to be published in the Quakers Names and
Behalf, which few, if any of the Quakers have ever read; and it were
Unreasonable to charge those things upon them, or upon the whole Body of them,
which they have had no hand in, nor been made privy to; neither would Jeremy
Ives or his Brethren be so served. Besides there may be Books writ on the
Behalf of a People by indifferent Persons, which are not wholely to be
condemned, or publicly declared against for some particular Faults or Escapes
where the Intent of the Writer was honest, and the greatest Part or Substance
of the Matter serious and true.

Thirdly Our Adversary asks, Why do not the Body of the Quakers meet together
and agree to publish an Index Expurgatorious, to clear themselves of such Books
they do not own; otherwise it will not be their Private Apologizing for
themselves, when their Credit lies at stake, to say, they do not own this and
the other Book, that will pass for Excuses among Wise Men.

1. I must confess, if he had good Ground for this Proposition, there seems to
be some Reason in it more then he has shown before: But I would ask this
Lawmakers, if he does really look upon the Body of the Quakers to be attained
to so much of sound Judgment and Understanding, as here he seems to imply, that
is as able to clear themselves of such Books and Things, as they are liable to
be called in question for, or as are unsound?

2. His granting that there are such Books as we do not own (and which tend to
the Hazard of our Credit, if we do not publish an Index to clear our selves
thereof: This implys, that we have a Judgment to clear our selves, and that so
far the Light or Truth is risen amongst us, as not to own those things which
may endanger our Credit; and then he should not charge us with those things,
unless we did own them.

Again, As we do not reckon our selves bound so far to take Cognizance of every
Book or Paper, so as to read all over that has been writ by all that have gone
under the Name Quakers; so neither do we know Occasion to write such an Index
as Ier^my prescribes, against any of our Friends Books that are declaredly
owned by us.

For those Opinions and Practices that are generally owned by us, we stand to
maintain, as neither being Idle nor Ridiculous, but Serious and Sound,
agreeable to the holy Scriptures, and consistent with Christianity, and value
not all the Gain-sayings of our Adversaries: But if any Practice or Signal
Thing extraordinary be laid upon any one Particular among us, we impose it not
upon others; and such must not stand or fall to Man's Judgment, but are
accountable to God for what they do; For to Man's Judgment and Earthly Wisdom
many things extraordinary or peculiar, which were required of God's Prophets,
might seem both Idle and Ridiculous, and those Prophets themselves seem Fools
and Mad Men, as they were accounted of old.

But further, seeing Jeremy Ives has before prescribed such a Method, as the
Body of the Quakers to meet together, and agree to publ^sh an Index
Expurgatorious, etc. They that prescribe Rules, should be regular themselves;
and they that make Laws should observe and keep Laws. Why do not the Baptists
(who deem themselves Christians and Us none) begin, and show Us such an
Example, as he has prescribed? since there are diverse Opinions Contradictory
one to another in the Baptists Books, both whereof cannot be true; as between
the Predestinarian* Principle and the Arminian (so called) or between an
absolute Predestination of particular Persons to Salvation or Damnation from
Eternity, and the General Grace of God, and Redemption in Christ for all men;
And between the Impossibility of Believers falling from Grace, and the
Possibility thereof, with diverse other things, about which the Baptists differ
among themselves. Why do not the Body of the Baptists meet together, and agree
first about their own Principles, and then lish a Declaration against those
Opinion*s which may appear inconsistent with Christianity, Truth and Reason,
and an Index Expurgatorious to clear themselves of all such Baptists Books as
are writ to maintain such an Exploded Opinion, that People may no longer be
deceived thereby? otherwise, if they refuse this Proposition, begun by Jeremy,
we may accordingly take the Baptists Silence herein, to pass for Consent and
Approbation of all the Baptists Books, which the Body of Baptists have not
publicly declared against: And then from hence I charge Jer. Ives and his
Brethren, with giving their Consent and Approbation to their Brother Thomas
Hicks his Three Fictitious Dialogues, and all the Absurdities, Contradictions,
Forgeries and Abuses therein contained, so long as they are silent, and do not
write an Index Expurgatorious, to clear themselves thereof; and so of all the
rest of the Baptists Books, that contain in them both Idle, Ridiculous and
Contradictory Opinions.

Further, Jeremy accuses us with Enthusiastick-Principles, and new Articles of
Faith and Practice frequently enjoined by Immediate Inspiration.

1st, What he means by the Word Enthusiastic or Enthusiasts, which
disdainfully he casts upon us, he seems to intimate, that it^^ such as pretend
Revelation from Heaven, and Immediate Inspiration for their Rule: It seems he
pretends to neither, but rather derides thereat, like the Scoffers of the
Times: And how came he to get this word Enthusiast? He should withal have told
us its proper Definition, and then it would have appeared more plainly in what
Sense he uses it. But I would ask him, if the Baptists at their first coming
forth were not counted Enthusiasts by their Persecutors, when they professed the
Help of the Spirit, or Immediate In piration in their Praying and Preaching,
and the Sufficiency of the Spirit's Teaching, as Samuel How, William Kiffin,
and many others did formerly? And how many of them did preach up and esteem the
Inward Work of the Spirit and Grace of God in the Heart? which, it seems
Jeremy, thou have either had very little Experience of, or else art greatly
apostatized, and become a Hard-hearted Mocker at the Acknowledgment of
Immediate Inspiration, which Principle thou will not confute by calling us Idle
Enthusiasts.

2. Its an idle Untruth in thee to accuse us with frequently enjoining New
Articles of Faith and Practice, either by Immediate Inspiration or Pretense
thereof; neither have thou shown us what those Articles are, that thou say
are thus frequently enjoined?

Again, I cannot but observe how Senselesly and Atheistically thou talkest, in
concluding, That if a man pretends a Revelation from Heaven, or Immediate
Inspiration for a Practice that is Absurd, the Quakers cannot Reprove him by
Immediate Inspiration, because he pretends to that for his Practice as well as
they.

It seems Immediate Inspiration is of a very little Esteem with thee, and of as
little Use with thee: If because some falsely pretend it for that which is
Absurd, others cannot thereby Reprove him for it; at this rate of Arguing the
True Prophets Mouths should have been stopped from Reproving the False, because
they pretended the same the True did, and could say, Thus says the Lord, etc.
And likewise the True Apostles should not have Reproved the False, because they
pretended the same thing doubtless, when they transformed themselves as the
Ministers of Christ.

But if by Immediate Inspiration Absurd or Evil Actions cannot be reproved
where the same is but pretended, then farewell all true Christianity, true
Savor, true Sense and Judgment. But does not the Spirit of God search all
things, and the Spiritual Man judge all things? Surely if this man did really
own that there is any such thing in being now, as either Revelation from Heaven,
or Immediate Inspiration, or that there is a True God, and that He is Known, he
durst not talk at this idle sleighting rate, as he does, about Immediate
Inspiration, as not a sufficient Rule to reprove Absurdities, where It can but
be pretended for them. But yet a little before he grants a supernatural
Evidence, that if we can give some supernatural Evidence why we should be
received, as namely, in writing against the absurd Opinions of such as pretend
they are revealed to them; but what Supernatural Evidence this is that he
means, he tells us not, while he does not own the Sufficiency of Immediate
Inspiration to reprove absurd or evil Practices and Opinions by: for if a
supernatural Evidence does not attend Immediate Inspiration, or Revelation from
Heaven, it is no where to be found; then it follows, the Spirit is insufficient
to evidence it self, or it is not Self evidencing, and such Doctrine as this
will at length lead some to be such Fools and Atheists as to say in their
Hearts, There is No God: But I tell this Adversary to Immediate Inspiration,
That the Spirit of God can no more be without a supernatural Evidence, then
the Sun can be without its Light; God has given an Universal Evidence thereof
by his Light in all men's Consciences, which answers to the Spirit's Testimony
and Ministry in the Ministers of the Spirit, which men may evidently see, if
they close not their Eyes, or harden not their Hearts to cause their own
Stumbling and Overthrow.

In order to a manifest Decision of the chief Matters in Controversy, I desire
Jez. Ives, or any of his Brethren for him, to give a plain and ingenuous Answer
to these Questions, distinctly.

I. Whether Immediate Inspiration and Revelation from Heaven, are in Being in
the True Church in these days, yea, or nay?

II. Whether Immediate Inspiration be not necessary to the being of a True
Christian or Jew inward?

III. What supernatural Evidence or necessary Proof does J. I. require of any
ones having Immediate Inspiration from God?

IV. Whether any one be fit to try (or judge of) a Supernatural Evidence, or
Immediate Inspiration in another, but such a one as does acknowledge and
partake of immediate Inspiration in himself?

V. Whether he that undertakes to prove others No Christians, ought not to be a
True Christian, and first to approve himself such a one upon a true and
undeniable Definition of a True Christian? [Thou Hypocrite, first cast out the
Beam out of thine own Eye, etc.]

VI. What is the true and proper Signification and Discrimination of Enthusiast
and Impostor? and so the real Derivation of Enthusiasm and Imposture? And
whether there be not a plain Difference in the Nature of the Words? For Words
and Terms, where either difficult or doubtful, must be explaind before Matters
can be clearly discussed thereupon.

VII. Whether it be not an Undervaluing of immediate Inspiration, for any to
hold, That thereby men cannot Reprove an Absurd Opinion or Practice in such as
pretend a Revelation from Heaven for it?

VIII. Whether the Apostles and primitive Christians were obliged to produce
an Evidence of their Faith and Practice by Inspiration at the Demand of their
Enemies, or only when God called them thereunto?

IX. Whether to require an Evidence for our Faith by immediate Inspiration be
not all one as to put us upon proving our selves Christians, or equivalent
thereto?

X. Whether it be proper or reasonable for one that has charged us with being
Impostors and Men of Lying Spirits, and promised to prove it, instead thereof
to require a Proof or Evidence from us of our being immediately or divinely
inspired; and if we do not at his Demand produce such Evidence as he requires,
to conclude us Impostors?

XI. And how does Jeremy Ives prove his Call to Dip or Plunge People in Water?
Or what Evidence can he produce for His particular Call thereto?

XII. And whether he does profess any Immediate Inspiration and Revelation from
Heaven for his Dipping People? if he does, what super natural Evidence can he
produce for it? if he does not, whether he may not be deemed an Impostor
therein?

XIII. Whether diverse of the Baptist-Preachers have not heretofore imposed
their Water-Bapitsm as Gospel, or as a thing necessary to Salvation, and so to
the being of a Christian and Church of Christ, threatening and affrighting many
simple People into Water upon pain of Damnation or the Curse; some by telling
them, They must Dip or Damn?

XIV. Whether the Baptists are of the same Opinion still, That their
Water Baptism or Dipping is Gospel, necessary to Salvation, or to be practiced
upon pain of Damnation?

XV. And how proves Jeremy Ives, that the One Baptism (spoaken of Ephesians. 4.) is
that of Water? And whether his Instance of Lords many for diverse Baptisms, as
of Water, and Affliction, and the Holy Ghost, were a pertinent and meet
Instance and Comparison, as between One Lord Jesus, and but One proper Baptism,
to wit, that of Water, and between the Lords many and diverse Baptisms, to wit,
of Afflictions, and the Holy Ghost? see his Quakers Quaking, p. 38.

XVI. And what Call, Gospel-Rule, or Precept, have Baptists for Night Dipping,
and Fleeing or Absenting from Meetings in Times of Persecution? And whether
their envious Invectives and abusive Pamphlets, now in Times of Peace against
their Neighbors, do not proceed from the same cowardly Spirit, which acted
them in Times of Suffering?

XVII. After the Baptists have tried their Strength, made Enquiry of Apostates,
and searched Books and Courts, to pick out Occasions against us, to render us
as Vile as they can, and not only no Christians, but inconsistent with
Government, and all this, if possible, to destroy us; May they not justly
expect, that their Mischief will return upon their own Heads, and that they
will fall into the Pit which they dig for others.

XVIII. If they persist in this their course of Envy against us, whether they
may not, as men conscious, justly expect a public Reprehension; we having
Occasion sufficient out of their own Books and former Proceedings, to exhibit a
History of Anabaptists, both with relation to Religion and Government? For our
parts, we value not their Envy, nor the Worst they can do, but are at Defiance
with it; knowing also that Christian-Life and Spirit, that shall outlive their
inveterate Enmity, who are Confederates a against us; and we shall therein be
further manifest, and Increase, but they shall Decrease.

XIX. I would further ask, if Jer Ives and his Brethren do not own them to be
Christians whom they Baptize?

XX. And what Evidence of their Faith or Christianity do those their Baptized
Believers produce? Answer these.

I have taken Occasion of late Time to take Notice of Jeremy Ives's former
Envy, Confusion, Ignorance and Abuse, that he has shown against the People
called Quakers in his two Books; the one entitled, The Quakers Quaking,
printed in the Year 1656. and the other entitled, Ianocency above Impudency,
printed 1656. which I had a mind to have given the Reader some Hints of, but
for Brevity's sake I reserve them to a further Opportunity, if Occasion be
given me; Though I am rather desirous, that our Daring Opposer may by the Light
of Christ consider his Ways, and Repent of his Evil, then be concerned in
Contests with him: For, God knows, I contend not for Contention, but for
Truth's sake.

Reader, If that Passage in the 8th Page of this Treatise touching Jer. Ives
his calling Arthur Cook, Pitiful Fool, and Knave, and Loggerhead, on the
Exchange, should be doubted of; This may inform, that I have several
Certificates thereof, under the hands of credible Persons.

G. W.

Page 12 lin 21. for of Faith read of our Faith. p. 16. l. 24. r. a Meeting
again. page 23. l. 12. f. had 1. has. p 30. l. 12 r. says, that now God is.
page 32. lin. 14. f his r is. p. 36. l. 7. r. confound and break.

THE END.

