THE Dipper Plunged OR, Thomas Hicks his Feigned Dialogue between a Christian
and a Quaker; Proved, An Unchristian Forgery, Consisting Of
Self-Contradictions, and Abuses against the Truth, and People called QUAKERS.
Wherein Tho. Hicks has Seconded (though in Envy Exceeded) his Brother Henry
Grigg, in his Babylonish Pamphlet, styled, Light from the Sun of Righteousness:
Howbeit, they have both Notoriously Contradicted themselves, and each other, as
is hereby Evinced. BY G. W.

Professing Themselves to be Wise, they became Fools. Romans 1.22. Printed in the
Year, 1672.

Unprejudiced Reader;
WHereas T. Hicks, reputed an Eminent Brother of Will. Kiffin's, has lately
divulged his Pamphlet (which we have been Threatened with for a considerable
Time before) styled, A Dialogue between a Christian and a Quaker: his thereby
not only Deceitfully feigning himself a Christian, but falsely insinuating
against the Quakers (so called) as being no Christians, is not so strange or
uncouth a Forgery (since the Baptists Malice is so high against them) as while
he is presenting the world with a Quaker, with his Method and manner of
Reasoning; he is only a Quaker of his own making and forming, to speak as he
pleases (for his own Corrupt Ends and Advantage) those Impertinencies and
Falsehoods, never uttered by any Real Quaker. Tho. Hicks's said Dialogue is a
mere Malicious Forgery and Fiction, stuffed with Manifest Slanders and Abuses,
both against Persons and Principles; perverting them, and their words: In many
things, Personating the Quakers with his own Ridiculous Falsehoods and
Consequences; together with scornful Canting Language, and Ridiculous
Contradictions and Inconsistencies; which surely will add no Credit to the
Baptists Cause, nor Convict others: Whilst he pretends to act a Christian and a
Quaker as opposite, he Antickly Abuses Christianity, and Scoffs at the Light and
Life of Religion; who, when he Scurrilously acts a Quaker, he himself is that
Nonsensical Quaker; who has designedly forged his Dialogue to his own Fancy,
so as not to puzzle himself with Problemes to be s^ure. This Feigned (though
Outside Dipped) Christian-Quaker, while he feigns his Opposer, and frames the
Contest, he will have it after his own Fashion, that he may, with Contempt and
Insulting deal with all Objections and Questions of his own coining: How deeply
soever this man be Outwardly Plunged, he is yet Unchristened; and all the Water
in Thames will not Wash his Defiled Conscience. But for these Dippers, and
Particular Electioners, to Revile and Belie their Neighbors in Print (in this
Time of Liberty) is no New or Strange Thing, whilst (upon their Partial Opinion
of Election) they believe themselves secure from the Reward of Liars, Rev.
21.8. by their Conceited Personal Election, Unchangeably Designed from
Eternity; in which they (viz. Baptists, and their Followers) must only be the
Sharers, if all that Oppose their Dipping be Accursed; according to their old
Brother, Hen. Grigg's Fatal Sentence, in his Book against his Sister, p. 24.
This their partial Conceit of an Eternal Personal Election of Themselves, and
of but very Few (if any) besides; and Blasphemously Imagining such severe
Partiality against God, as that from all Eternity he has Particularly Designed,
either the Reprobation, or Preterition of the Greatest Part of Mankind, thereby
leaving them to Inevitable Destruction: this Sad Sentence is one main Ground of
these Men's Inveighing so eagerly against the General Extent of Saving Grace to
all Mankind, and of their Opposing the Sufficiency of the True Light in all
men, which God has freely given them: But how Consistent they are in their
Work herein, I refer to the Impartial Reader to judge of, in what ^ollows in
Tho. Hicks's own words, Collected and Cited out of his said Dialogue, and
briefly Animadvertized.

Thomas Hicks his Assertions Contradicted by the same Tho. Hicks himself.
HE pretends to Query, Not to Cavil, but to understand the Truth -- and if
Demonstrated -- to be very willing to Subscribe to it, page 2.

But in Contradiction he says, All I intend is, only the Conviction and
Recovery, p. 10. He pretends the Conviction of Others, whilst he wants it, and
is to seek for a Right Understanding for himself.

Tho. Hicks says, Notwithstanding thy most Diligent Attendance to the Light in
thee: That which thou call'st the Light in thee, has in many things Mis^guided
thee, p. 3.

Tho. Hicks in Contradiction says, I Appeal to the Light in thee -- I grant it
ought to be Obeyed, p. 7.

Animadversion, See how palpably he Contradicts himself; as much as to say, It
is a Mis-Guiding Light; and yet, it is such (a True Rule) as to be Appealed to,
and Obeyed.

T. H. That which any of you have said (viz. concerning the Light within every
man) has been no more then what the Apostle speaks of the Man of Sin, 2 These.
2.9. and what may as well prove Mahomet to be the True Christ, as the Light in
you, p. 11, 12.

T. H. Contrad. How could you call the Light within Christ, if some Scriptures
had not mentioned Christ in you, and that he is the Life and Light of Men? the
Scriptures must be your Rule for this, page 22.

Anim. Gross Contradiction: I^s Blasphemy to Compare Christ to the M^n of ^in,
or Him, or his Life (which is the Light of Men) to Ma^o^et.

That (...) Ob^y the Commands of the Living Ete^nal Word in, us. In Answer to
this T. Hicks says, Its no other then a mere Mystical Romance, p. 10.

T. H. Contrad. It will be our Wisdom, yea, our Duty, not only to attend to the
Light Within, etc. p. 13.

Anim. Thou T. H. have acted the Profane Romancer, and Irreligious Miscreant
against the Light of Christ Within; which yet thou art made to confess it (in
part, at least) our Duty to attend to it.

T. H. The Scriptures are the Word of God, and the Rule of Faith, page 17.

T. H. Contrad. True; the Sayings of the Devil, and Wicked Men, are part of
God's History -- God has, by the Holy Penmen, given us this Relation of the
Words of the Devil and Wicked Men, p. 18.

Anim. The Word of God and the Words of the Devil are not the same, to be sure:
Christ is the Word; the Scriptures are Writings, containing words of God and
Holy Men.

T.H. The Word of God (the Scriptures are) the Sword of the Spirit, p. 18, and
87. the Rule of Faith and Practice, to Obliege your Faith and Practice -- The
Grounds of Faith and Hope, p. 19.

T. H. Contrad. This Rule must be the Will of God Revealed to us -- for it is
the Will of God which is the Formal Reason of the Obligation: The Will of God
being the Ground of the Creation of Men and Angels; therefore, as it is the
Ground of their Being, it must be the Rule of their Acting, p. 31.

Anim. But the Scriptures were neither the Ground of the Creation, nor of the
Being of either Men or Angels; but the Eternal Powerful Will and Word of God,
which Only and Effectually Obliges the Soul to Him.

T. H. I will suppose thee to be a Holy Man -- The Best Thing in thee cannot be
the Rule, p. 20.

Answ. A Gross Error: The Spirit of God can be the Rule, both in Power, and
Living Instruction (and that Above the Scriptures) for it can both Lead into
all Truth, and bring forth Living Fruits, and Acceptable Duty to God.

T. H. All things necessary to be Believed and Practiced, with Respect to
Eternal Life, is contained in these Holy Scriptures, and in no other Record in
the World, either without, or within Men, p. 20.

Answ. Yet thou have confessed, Christ in you, and the Spirit of God, p. 21, 22.
See how thou art in Confusion: Christ contains more then the Scriptures; for,
in him are all the Hidden Treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge. But this thy
Undervaluing Christ, and his Light Within, and the Spirit's sufficiency, is
plainly Contradicted in what follows.

T. H. Indeed, it is not to be Denied, but that Man was always under an
Obligation of a Rule; that God's Soveraignity over him, and his Inferiority
unto God might be acknowledged, p. 31.

Answ. By MAN, must be understood, Mankind in general* or else thou
Dissemblest: If then man was always under such an Obligation, God has
afforded that Light or Rule to all Men (even to those Nations that have not the
Scriptures) which is sufficient to Direct them to himself: and this Concession
destroys much of thy Work.

T. H. That of God in my Conscience is not sufficient, merely of it self* to
Direct me in those things needful to be Known, Believed and Practiced, p. 21.

T. H. Contrad. Some Scriptures mentioned, Christ in you, p. 22.

Anim. Is not Christ Sufficient? What Blasphemous Opposition against Christ is
this man guilty of?

THOMAS HICKS his Variations about the Scriptures and the Rule
He varies from the Scriptures being the Rule of Faith and Practice unto
Christians, p. 17* 19. The Grounds of our Faith and Hope, p. 19. (which the
Scriptures do no where assert)* To the Scriptures, being a Rule, p. 17, 21, 24.
And then to go round again, The Mind of God contained therein, p. 20. The Will
of God manifest in this Written Word, p 38, 39. And then in Flat Contradiction
to the Scriptures being the Rule of Faith, he says, This Rule must be the Will
of God, which was the Ground of the Creation and Being of Men and Angels, p. 31.

Reader, What Harmony can be found in this Man's Scribbling?

T. H. There is an utter Insufficiency in this mere Light Within, to Direct us
the Right Way of Worshipping the True God -- This is manifest from the great
Loss, that the Wisest amongst the Heathen have been, and still are under, about
this very thing, p. 35, 36.

T.H. Contrad. Christ is the Life and Light of Men, p. 22. Man was always
under the Obligation of a Rule; that God's Soveraignity, and his Inferiority
unto God, might be Acknowledged, page 31. as before.

Anim. What think thou, Will. Kiffin? Does thy Brother Hicks credit your
Cause in these manifest Contradictions? One while, to charge such utter
Insufficiency upon the Light Within; another while Christ is the Life, and
Light of men (this I urge the oftener upon him, that he and his Brethren may
see his Self-contradiction) Is not Christ ^ufficient? And why must the Wisest
of the Heathen be Excluded from the Sufficiency of such an Obligation or Rule,
as Man was always under? Are they No Men? and have they no Souls to be Saved?
or, Must they all be Damned for Want of the Scriptures (who have them not) if
they improve so much Light as God has given them? (see Acts 10.34. Romans 2.10,
11.) This is not yet Answered by you: Though the Cru^l Partiality that is in
your Electionary Opinion appears plainly against the Unive^sal Light or Grace
of God to Mankind? I cannot but believe, that div^^s of the Heathen (who were
Sincere to God) were both more Morral, and more Pious, (and therefore, more in
the Life of Christianity) then many of you Baptist Preachers are. Did Christ
Dye for all men? or, Is he a Propitiation for the Sins of the whole World? And
has not God afforded that Light or Grace to all that is able to convey or
discover the Virtue of his Blood, and Spiritual Effects of his Sacrifice to
Mankind? How Narrow and Partial are they who Deny this?

T. H. What Intolerable Pride and Arrogance have you arived to? and all this,
thy following the Light Within; improving it to the Subverting and Annihilating
the Covenant of Grace, p. 38.

H. Grigg, I really believe, That the Lord Jesus, as the Eternal Word, has
given Light, or Enlightened all Men and Women that come into the World, page 8.
of his Book, styled, Light from the Sun*

Anim. See here how plainly one Brother Contradicts another: Can it be less
then Blasphemy, to judge, That following the Light of the Eternal Word does
either produce such Pride, Subvert or Annihilate the Covenant of Grace? Is not
this to make the Light of Christ Oppose Christ?

T. H. Surely this Light, instead of Directing what you do in a way of
Subserviency to the Ends of this Covenant, does directly Oppose it, is in that
so far from being a Sufficient Rule, that it ought to be Rejected, page 38.

T. H. Contrad. Yet all this is no Disparagement to the Light Within, to say,
That God does make any thing more known of his Will, then is, or can be known
by this mere Light Within: for it is but to say, that Each Degree of Light is
Serviceable to its End, p. 36.

Anim. By this then the Difference is only about the Degrees of the Light, and
not about the Nature and Property of it; and then, if each Degree be
Serviceable to its End (as no Doubt it is) what Blasphemous Contradiction is it
to say, That any Degree of this Light of Christ (as the Eternal Word) either
does directly Oppose this Covenant, which is Christ, or is to be Rejected? Does
the Light of Christ Oppose Christ? What think thou, William Kiffin? Has not
thy Brother Hicks shown Intolerable Pride, Madness, and his Gross Darkness
against this Light Within? Can not see his Self-Confutation herein? Why
would thou suffer such a Contradictory Pamphlet, as this thy Brother's
Dialogue, to be divulged?

H. Grigg, The great Darkness of these Men, who cry up Light and Power Within,
this Wile of Satan, and Cheat of Antichrist, p. 31.

T. Hicks Contrad. I acknowledge there is something Within, that Checks for
many Evils, and Excites to many Good Things; and that I ought to Shun those
Evils, and do that Good, p. 8.

Anim. See here again the Contradiction that is between these two Brothers: Can
that be a Wile of Satan which thus Checks for Evil and Excites to Good? Oh!
that these men would Obey it, that they might be better composed in their
Minds, and not remain in this Bedlam frame of spirit; for, as yet, one acts the
Bedlam the one while, and the other another while.

T. H. This Light Within directs not our Actions to those Holy and Spiritual
Ends, which the Scripture does: Alas! whereto does the Best of Men's Actions
naturally tend, but to Swell them with Pride and Conceit of themselves? p. 37.

T. H. Contrad. The Heathen in many things, with Respect to Morral Goodness,
there was something Commendable in them -- The Jews had a Light in them, by
which they might acknowledge God ought to be Worshipped (contradicted again)
yet that Light could not direct them how that Worship should be performed, so
as to Please Him, page 36, 37.

Anim. In the first, he puts Corrupt Proud Nature for the Light; in the next
Contradiction, the Light is Commendable for Morral Goodness; in the last, he
Opposes the Sufficiency of the Living Word, Good Spirit, or Light, which was
given to the Jews: and this accuses Moses, and the Prophets, with directing
them to an Insufficient Light. See Deuteronomy. 30.14. Neb. 9.20. Isa. 2.5. and chap.
63.10.

T. H. We Oppose not the Scriptures to the Holy Spirit, but to the Light Within
p. 39. (which Opposing of theirs is thus explained, The Scriptures are the only
Rule of Faith and Practice, the Light Within to be Rejected.)

T. H. Contrad. Neither will this Common Light rise above its Source, Nature,
Use and End; wherefore Affront no more the Grace and Wisdom of God in
Superadding more, p. 37.

Anim. See how this Man's Plunged! One while he is setting the Scriptures in
Opposition to the Light Within; another while, the Degree of it is so far from
being to be Rejected, that it is to have more Added to: which granting, it
follows, that the Addition of more must come through the Improvement of the
Less Degree; and Degrees do not vary the Nature or Kind.

T. H. We see, that the Light in one man teaches one thing, and the Light in
another a direct Contrary; so that there can be no certainty of Truth or Error,
Sin or Duty by this: for, that which is Sin to one man, is and may be Duty to
another; and consequently, Sin is nothing, page 42.

Answ. Now he renders the Light within Men (so commended before) as no Real
Light, but as Corrupt and Variable as the Erroneous Minds of Men; and so
Blasphemously p^ts Dark^ess for Light: But how agrees this with his saying,
Christ is the Life and Light of Men, p. 22. no Disparagement to the Light
Within -- each Degree of Light is Serviceable to its End, p. 36. we being
Accountable for every Dispensation of Light, according to its kind, p. 13. But
if there be no such thing, as a Real Light, to Distinguish between Sin and
Duty, what should they be Accountable for? What Atheistical Bedlam Work has
this T. Hicks made against the Light Within!

H. Grigg, I affirm, That Jesus Christ is a Man, consisting of Flesh and Bone,
p. 30, 31. Humane, p. 33.

T. Hicks Contrad. The Son took Flesh upon him, p. 35. The Word took Flesh, p.
47. The Father did prepare Him a Body, p. 83.

Anim. There Is no small difference between Consisting of Humane Flesh and Bone,
and his T^king Flesh, or having a Body Prepared for him: As for the Son of God
to consist of such a Body, implies. He was not before that Body; but to say,
the Father did prepare him a Body, implies, That he was before, and so he was,
and is Ascended Up, where he was before Glorified with the Father, etc. John
6.62. chap. 17.5.

Whilst T. H. expects to be Perfectly Freed from Sin in Heaven after Death, p.
50. and yet questions, Whether it shall be the Privilege of any on this side
Death? p. 55. He is very Uncertain in his Opposing the Doctrine of Perfection,
as Attainable in this Life; to be sure, his Sinful Course here is not the Way
to Heaven hereafter; neither does his Rehearsal of Personal Mistakes, and
Failings in Motions or Actions (if granted against several Persons, diverse of
whom I believe he wrongeth, p. 26, 27, 28, 29, 52.) overthrow immediate
Revelation, or the Doctrine of Perfection; nor yet prove the Light of Christ
within so Uncertain, as to teach one man one thing, and another a direct
contrary; nor yet to show no certainty of Truth or Error, Sin or Duty, as
Erroneously he represents it, p. 42. As it is his Iniquity to Reflect upon a
People in general from the Failings of some, so he shows himself a Silly
Logition to Reflect upon Principles by Personal Weaknesses; though this is his
kind of Logic, whilst he sleights Revelation, and for an Instance against it,
tells us of a Revelation that came from Paul Hobson, who, on purpose to try
them, spoke through a Trunk yet could they not distinguish his Voice from the
Immediate Voice of God, p. 27.

And who was this Paul Hobson? Was he not an Eminent Baptist Preacher, and
Brother of these Men? It Is true, we have heard, that he served a Poor,
Shattered, Whimsical Man, as his Brother T.H. relates, viz. That he Feigned a
Voice, and called, as from God, through a Trunk; and so Deceived this Silly
Man: Do you think that this adds any thing to the Credit of the Baptists Cause,
thus to publish boastingly their Brother's Wickedness? And which was Worse,
think you, Paul Hobson the Deceiver, or the Person whom he Deceived? Is this a
Valid Argument against Revelation? And would T.H. and his Brother Will. Kiffin,
take it well, if I should make their Brethren's Miscarriages, and their Brother
Hobson's said Wickedness, an Argument against them, as never Called of God
either to Preach, Dip or Plunge people in Water? Judge, Reader, how Silly they
are in these their Attempts and Work against Us.

Here follows some of Thomas Hicks's Chief Assertions and Phraises, viz.
T.H. I. That the Light in every man is a Creature, p. 6. No more then a mere
Creature* p. 46.

Answ. Contrary to plain Scripture, which says, In him was Life, and the Life
was the Light of Men, John 1.4. This Life and Light of Christ is Divine and
Increated.

T. H. II. Jesus Christ, God, Man, a Person without thee, p. 9.

Answ. This is not Scripture Language; but the Anthropomorphites and
Muggletonians, who profess a Personal God, denying him to be an Infinite Spirit.

T.H. III. The Scriptures are the Word of God, the Rule of Faith, and Practice,
p. 17.

Answ. Do not these men count the Scriptures the great Rule of Speaking also?
Then by what Rule must we believe that the Scriptures are the only Rule of
Faith and Practice, while they no where do call themselves so? But Christ, the
Word, the Way, the Truth and the Life, etc. whose Divine Light being the Rule
of the Understanding, is therefore the Rule of Faith and Sound Judgment, which
only can truly open the Scriptures, and bring man to the right Use and End of
them.

T. H. IV. The Bible is the Means of our Knowing God, p. 41.

Answ. He Idolatrously sets up the Bible in the place of Christ: For, no man
knows the Father, but the Son, and he to whom the Son Reveals him, Mat. 11.27.

T. H. V. There is an utter insufficiency in this mere Light Within to direct
us the Right Way of Worshipping God; this is manifest from the Great Loss the
Wisest among the Heathen have been, and still are under, p. 55, 56.

Answ. Contrary to plain Scripture, which says, That which may be Known of God
is Manifest in them; and even as they liked it not to retain God in their
Knowledge, he gave them over to a Reprobate Mind, Romans 1.19, 20, 21, 28. and
see Romans 2.10, 11, 14, 15, 16. Therefore had those Gentiles truly Obeyed and
Followed that Light, and improved that Knowledge given them of God, they had
been preserved in his Way and Worship from Reprobation and Idolatry.

T. H. VI. The Apostles, and all True Christians, say, This Body of Flesh and
Bones shall Rise again, p. 59, 60.

Answ. Where do the Apostles say these words in Scripture? Let us have plain
Scripture Proof; or else, let him not pretend the Scripture to be his Rule: The
Apostle's words are, Thou Fool, thou sowest not that Body that shall be; but
God gives a Body as pleases him, unto every Seed his own (or proper) Body, 1
Cor. 15. verse. 35, 36, 37, 38, 40, 46, 47, 48. And the Spiritual Glorious Body
is not a Carnal or Natural Body, any more then the Bodies Celestial are
Terrestial [I have more to say to this Point elsewhere] But T. H. is pleased to
pass by my Question with silence, which was, Whether the Wheat, that is grown
up in the Ear, be the very same that was sown?

T. H. VII. This cannot be meant of a New Created Body, because such a Body
cannot be said to be either Vile or Changed, p. 58.

Answ. A strange Inconsistency, that they shall not be New Created Bodies, and
yet the same Carnal or Terrestial Bodies of all (how many Thousand soever be
dissolved to Dust) should rise complete without a New Creation! Man was formed
of the Dust of the Earth; What, must the Dust of Dissolved Bodies be raised,
without Creating a New? A strange Confusion and gross Imagination. He tells us,
The Apostles say, This Body of Flesh and Bones shall rise again: When the
Apostle says, Flesh and Blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God: Where proves
he then that Flesh and Bones without Blood shall? But if it cannot be a New
Created Body, it is not the same Carnal, Natural or Terrestial Body (of Flesh,
Blood and B^ne) that is given to every Seed, as it pleases God (nor is that
Body, the Seed spoken of, 1 Cor. 15.38. as some of these men have affirmed) or
that shall inherit his Kingdom: but a Spiritual Glorious Body, such as is the
Heavenly, 1 Cor. 15.48. This is a Mystery hid from such Carnal Sensual Men as
T. H. who cannot see any Eternal Advantage after Death, unless he enjoyes it in
this his Carnal Body, or Earthly Tabernacle: What then, shall the Spiritual
Existencies, or Sanctified Souls, reap no Benefit by the Dissolution of the
Earthly Tabernacle? Or is he of the mind of some of his Brethren, that hold the
Mortality of the Soul, that it Dies (or Sleeps in the Dust) with the Body;
and that it remains so till a future Day, expected for the raising up of both:
But we are not of their Mind and Opinion in this, but that there is an
Immediate Separation made between the Soul and Body upon Dissolution, Luke
16.22, 23.

1 King. 17.21.


and that the Soul is Immortal, being made to subsist in Immortallity by an
Unchangeable Power, either in a state of Felicity, or Misery according to the
Image that it did bear in the World. But, Genesis 2.7. Wisd. 15.11.
unless you come (in the Light) to know the Original, Life or Seed in the Soul,
which is Immutable: you can neither rightly know your own Souls, Deuteronomy. 4.9. and
6.5. and 13.3.
nor the two contrary Spirits, Natures and Images, in one of which every man
will be found, to receive his due Reward. So that the Soul of Man is neither
God, nor Christ, the Savior or Redeemer (as falsely it is insinuated as our
Principle) for we have always distinguished between the Soul, and the Savior
of it; the Soul being inferior to that Eternal Word, or Power, that Saves it:
see my Answer to R. Gourden, entitled, The Nature of Christianity, etc. p. 15,
16, and 73. in which T.H. his Cavil, and pretended Occasion against us is fully
answered, and taken off. Prove. 21.10. Isa. 66.3.
And as Tribulation and Anguish will be upon every Soul of Man that does Evil,
Romans 2.9. and Isa. 3.9. and God knows how to Reserve the Unjust unto the Day of
Judgment, to be Punished and the Wicked unto the Day of Destruction. So they
who truly love the Lord God with all their Souls, and continue in the Way of
Righteousness, shall not only Cease from their Labors and Travels, but receive
and eternally possess this Advantage, even a being ever with the Lord in his
Everlasting Kingdom of Glory and Triumph.

So we are still of the Apostles mind, expecting an Eternal Advantage after
Desolution; For we know, that if our Earthly House of this Tabernable were
disolved, we have a Building of God, a House not made with Hands, Eternal, in
the Heavens; for, in this we groan, earnestly desiring to be clothed upon with
our House, which is from Heaven, 2 Cor. 5.1, 2. For me to Live is Christ, and
to Dye is Gain, Phil. 1.21.

Now whereas T. Hicks assumes the Confidence to Justify his Work against us,
called Quakers, as being Conscious to himself, that he has not in any thing
Misrepresented us, p. 78. and that if the Quakers return him that Answer, that
they are Lies and Slanders, and that he is an Envious and Railing Man, he shall
not think himself concerned to give any Reply, because he is fully satisfied,
etc. p. 90.

To this I must tell him, Whether he will be pleased to Reply or no, he has
shown himself very guilty of both Lies and Slanders; and has as plainly acted
the Part of an Envious and Railing man, as ever any Opposers (have done against
us) wh^ profess Religion; and there are many Thousands, that can witness
against him for these his Lies and Slanders against us, among many more, as his
Accusing us, viz.

1. That the Quakers account the Blood of Christ no more then an Unholy Thing,
p. 9.

2. That they account the Blood of Christ, which was shed, no more then the
Blood of a Common Thief, p. 31.

3. He represents this as the Quakers words, viz. That we make use of the
Scriptures only to quiet and stop their Clamors that plead for it as their
Rule, p. 25.

4. That Fox, Dewsbury, Whitehead, Crisp and Penn, are exceedingly Corrupt in
Morrals, p. 43.

5. That the Quakers deny the Resurrection of the Body, and all future and
distin^t Beings and Existences after Death, p. 53, 57, 62. Because they say,
That Flesh and Blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God, p. 56. see 1 Cor. 15.50.

6. That the Quakers Opinion denies any eternal Advantage after Death, p. 75.

7. He insinuates, That the Quakers chief Motive and Inducement to Suffer is,
the Satisfaction of their Wills and Lusts, and the promoting their Carnal
Interests, p. 75.

Answ. It does very Ill become these Baptists, thus to Slander and Defame our
Sufferings, to render us Obnoxious to the Powers (though they will be of little
Credit herein) knowing their own Cowardliness, Creeping and Sculking into
Corners and Obscure Places in Suffering-Times: the Fruitlesness of Coertion
has not been manifest by these men's Valor; though now when they have gotten
up into their Pulpits and Pews, they are not content with their own Liberties,
but Envy us in ours; who have been Instrumental to stand in the Gap, in deep
Sufferings, with Resignation of Estates and Lives, and yet must be Branded by
T. Hicks, as Sufferers to satisfy Lusts, and to promote Carnal Interests: This
his Malice and Slander is so apparent and gross, that I need not Paraphraise
much upon it; but leave it to God, and his Witness in all to judge of.

For a further Answer to T. Hicks, I refer the Reader to these Books of mine,
entitled as follows, viz.

The Life of Christ Within, etc. in Answer to Will. Burnet, Baptist

Christ Ascended above the Clouds; in Answer to J. Newman, Bap.

The Nature of Christianity; in Answer to R. Gourdon.

The Principal Controversies, etc. in Answer to the Presbyterians of Scotland.

I would desire so much Reasonableness of Will. Kiffin, Tho. Hicks, Hen. Grigg,
and the rest of their Fraternity; That when any of them are minded to write
against the Quakers, about the Light of Christ Within, etc. that they would
seriously peruse and exam^ne their Work, and endeavor better to compose their
Matter, without Contradictions; that if they come ingeniously to signify the
good Use and End of it, and what shall be the End of all that improve it,
whether they have the Scriptures or not; it may prevent much further
Controversy: But if they are still minded to invalidate and deprave the Light
that is in all men: let us have their Work consistent to deal withal; otherwise,
by their Contraditions they show themselves uncertain and dubious, as T Hicks
and H.G. do; one while affirming, that the Light within every man is a
Creature, and Mis-guiding; another while, Christ is the Life and Light of men:
One while, the Light within is so uncertain, that there can be no certainty of
Truth or Error, Sin or Duty by it; another while, It Checks for Evils, and
Excites to Good: One while, It Opposes the End of the Covenant of Grace, and
is to be Rejected; another while, It ought to be improved and attended upon,
every Degree of the Light being serviceable to its End, and we being
accountable to God for every Dispensation thereof: One while they count it, A
Cheat of Antichrist, and Wile of Satan; another while, It is the Light of Jesus
Christ, as the Eternal Word, Enlightening every man that comes into the World.
Thus you Baptists are in apparent Confusion; and whilst you come forth thus
Contradictory to your selves, you are not worthy to be regarded, otherwise then
men in Babylon, confounded (which may be looked upon as a Just Judgment upon
you, for your Perverseness and Malice against the Truth, and its Children) you
being Opposing, Confuting and Warring against your selves, while you think to
Confute and render others Odious.

I do at present pass by diverse of Tho. Hicks's Personal Reflections and
Abuses, as to my own Particular (having a fuller Reserve against him, and
others more eminent among them and their Work, for a further Occasion) being
more concerned for Truth and Righteousness, then any Personal or Private
Interest whatsoever; knowing also, that Tho. Hicks's Morosity, Passion and
Choleric Humor (wherein his Tongue is at Liberty) renders him no Potent
Antagonist; being therein apt to break out in such Reviling Language, and
Tinker's Rhetoric, against his Opposers, as, You Are a Knave; You are an
Impudent Fellow; You are an Audacious Fellow; A Deceitful Fellow; You Are a
Cock's-Comb, and thus to diverse of us; which some of his Brethren have excused
as his zeal and manner of speaking; though this Hypocritical Covering (as also
his pretended Christianity) is too narrow to hide a manifest Woolf, however
sometimes Disguized, as in Sheep's Habbit. I would have T. H. to consider, That
his Belief of being an Elect Person, will not secure him from the End of
Railers and Revilers, who shall not inherit God's Kingdom, 1 Cor. 6.10. Nor
from the Reward of all Liars, which is the Lake that Burns, etc. Rev. 21.8.

Who is a Wise Man, and endued with Knowledge amongst you, let him show out of
a Good Conversation his Works with Meekness of Wisdom. But if ye have Bitter
Envying and Strife in your Hearts, Glory not. And Lie not against the Truth,
See Jam. 3.13, 14, to the end.
I am a Servant of Christ, and Lover of Souls, G. W.
London, the 12th of the 10th Month, 1672.
THE END.

