THE Contentious Apostate, AND HIS BLOW REFELLED: In a Brief NARRATIVE OF THE
Unchristian Deportment, Opposition and Disturbance made, By Francis Bugg,
Backslider. Isaac Archer, Priest or Vicar. Samuel Knowles, late Curate.


AT A Public Meeting of the People called QUAKERS, Held at Milden-hall in
Suffolk, the 30th day of the 2d Month, commonly called April, 1691. And in a
short ANSWER to F. B. his defaming Pamphlet, falsely Styled One Blow more at
New Rome.

By G. W.

Psalm. 52. 4, 5. Thou love all devouring words, O thou deceitful tongue. God
shall likewise destroy thee, for ever, etc.

LONDON: Printed for Thomas Northcott, in George-Yard in Lombard Street, 1691.

THE Contentious Apostate, AND HIS BLOW REFELLED.
SInce Francis Bugg to Excuse the shameful Disturbance and Malicious
Interruption he and his Abettors made at our Public Meeting at Milden-hall in
Suffolk, the day and year aforesaid, intended by our Friends for the Worship
and Service of Almighty God, the said F. B. his pretense is this, viz. That
they might not thrust me out of the Meeting (as their Practice at London has
often been) I got a Justice's Warrant, resolving that if they would not let me
stay, I would silence G. W. for that day, which after he perceived, he sat down
quietly.

Whence pray observe: 1st. F. B. got the Warrant. It seems 'twas upon his
Information to the Justice, and what the Information was the Warrant shows.
2dly, For what end could he therein turn Informer to obtain the Warrant? was it
only to secure himself from being thrust out of our Meeting? No, for no sober
person need fear that: Or was it to disturb the Meeting, and for himself to
Domineer and Insult, and Magisterially Command the Constable to take away Geo.
Whitehead, and Execute his Warrant, as (Persecuter-like) he diverse times did?
The Constable not Submitting to F. B. therein: Constable (quoth he) do your
Office, or I Will Complain of you. The Warrant it self, and F. Bugg's Insolent
and Turbulent Behavior at that Meeting will easily Evince his Information and
Excuse before cited, to be unjust and groundless, as is his Instance of one
sober Woman whom they commonly thrust out, and sometimes keep Prisoner, etc. p.
2. Whereas this his sober Woman is known to be a Turbulent, Wilful (and partly
Discomposed) Person, a Rayler, a Scold, a Striker, a Fighter, who also has
torn and pulled a Friend (or Friends) by the Head, Hair; ask Joseph North,
Dennis Dodman, and some other Friends about Spittle-Fields, etc. of her
Behavior. And F. B's Alleging the Trial of Peers is very Improper in this
case; for it is all one as to tell us that Mad or Malicious folks may not be
Restrained from doing Mischief and making Disturbance without the Trial of a
Jury: No sober Man would have thus Impertinently Argued.

The Copy of the said Warrant follows.
To the Constables of Milden-hall, and to every of them.
Suff ss. HAving received Information that there is a Meeting intended to be
Holden within the Precincts of your Town (either upon the Morrow, or within
some short time after) under pretense of a Religious Worship, in different Form
from the Religion Established, in a place not Licensed, and by persons not
qualified to hold the same, and who are under a great Suspicion of being
disaffected to the Government.

These are in their Majesty's Names to Authorize and Require you, and every or
any of you, to cause the said Persons and every of them to appear forthwith
before me or some other Justice of the Peace of this County to Answer to the
said Information, and to be dealt with therein according to the Law, and for
your so doing this shall be your sufficient Warrant. Given under my Hand and
Seal at Downham in the said County the 29th day of April, in the 3d Year of
their said Majesty's Reigns, Anno. Dom. 1691.

The Name of the Justice who granted the Warrant, is here Omitted, because we
esteem him wronged by Misinformarion; and also that when he understands the
Envy and Abuse of F. B. Gratified by the Warrant, and what Impious and Wicked
use he made thereof by Maliciously Interrupting and Disturbing a Religious
Meeting; we hope the Justice (on more mature Consideration) will be so
Ingenuous and Tender as to wish he had not Granted F. B. any such Warrant
against an Innocent Peaceable People, and that he may rather Reprehend F. B.
for being too Busy and Turbulent to his quiet Neighbors: For he must needs
understand that if there was a failure or omission (on our Friends part at
Milden-hall) in not Entrring their Meeting House upon Record (as the Law
Directs) yet that the Intent of the Government and Law is, that we should Enjoy
our Religious Meetings for the Worship of Almighty God without any such
Disturbance or Molestation as F. B. etc. made.

Here follows a brief Narrative of Francis Bugg's Deportment, and the
substance of what past between him and his Teacher Js. Archer on the one part,
and G. Whitehead, etc. on the other, the 30th day of the 2d Month called April,
1691, at the Public Meeting House of the People called Quakers, at Milden-hall
in Suffolk.

F. Bugg and his Company being got to the Meeting before G. W. and into the
Gallery where our Ministering Friends used to be; after G. W. came and was
waiting upon the Lord in Silence, F. Bugg having present a Constable and
Warrant (and first premising his Property as a Feoffee in trust for the
Meeting House, charged G. W. with being,

First, A Deceiver of the People.

2dly, A false Accuser of the Blessed Martyrs, etc.

3dly, A Favourer of such Principles as Border upon Blasphemy. And offering a
Paper of his Charge, which G. W. refused, desiring to enjoy our Meeting
peaceably, and answer F. B. afterward.


F. B. refused, and then asked if he would own certain Books which he had?


G. W. still pressed for a Peaceable Meeting, and told him he Interrupted and
Imposed on us unwarrantably on that occasion.


F. B. still refused to suffer us to enjoy our Meeting Peaceably, saying, I
will Impose upon you.


G. W. began to speak a few words unto the People by way of Exhortation, etc.


F. Bugg furiously interrupted, calling out, Constable do your Office, take G.
Whitehead and S. Cater away.

G. W. said, we come in the Love of God, thou come as a Persecutor; but I
fear not thy Persecution, nor what thou can do, thou'st but Discover thine
own Envy, etc.


Priest Archer, said, We know your Meeting is unlawful.

G. W. How provest thou that?


Priest Archer, Your Meeting House is not Recorded as the Law directs.

G. W. I knew not that, however our Meeting is for the Worship and Service of
Almighty God, and both the Government and the Law intend our Liberty; I was no
cause of that Omission of Recording the Meeting House.


Priest, You should have been better Informed aforehand.

G. W. It is not Lawful for you thus to Disturb our Meeting, and Interrupt our
Religious Exercise; we see by this what you would be at, you would be at even
the old work of Persecution again, if there were not some Restraint upon you by
Law, seeing you take this Advantage of an Omission of a Circumstance in Law
thus to Disturb us and put a force upon us; pray be so Civil as to let our
Meeting be quiet till we have ended.

Priest, Mr. Bugg I would have us withdraw and let them enjoy their Meeting
peaceably; let us not take the Advantage of the Law against them.


F. B. I will not suffer them, G. VV. shall not Preach here, he is a Deceiver;
now I have him here I will have him answer whether he owns these Books, and he
shall take the Test too, he is Disaffected to the Government.


G. W. See what a Convert thou have got of F. B. that thus contradicts his
Teacher; we are not come hither for Contention, nor am I willing now to answer
thee ( F. B.) nor to detain the Meeting about thy Brauling or Clamorous
Reviling, etc. I am willing to meet thee and answer thee at any convenient
place when our Meeting is over, and before any Judicious persons; pray let us
enjoy our Meeting quietly.


F. B. Thou art for evading, and going into Holes and Corners, but I am glad I
have got thee here, do thou own this Book? and this Book, etc.? (holding them
in his Hands.)


G. W. I am not willing to answer thee at this present, I have something to say
to the People (and began to Declare, but interrupted still.)


F. B. I will not suffer you to Preach here; Constable, Constable, where is
your Warrant? do your Office, take G. VV. away, or I Will Complain of you.


Constable, Pray look upon this Warrant. [But the Constable appeared wiser than
F. B. and not so busy.]

G. W. Pray let us enjoy our Meeting quietly, and then we will Answer you.


F. B. Constable do your Office, take him away, he will not own his Books
[which was a Lie, he only suspended giving answer at that present.]


G. W. being thus frequently and forcably interrupted when he would have
Declared the Truth; for a little space sat down in Silence, breathing unto the
Lord in Spirit, and then after a short space, was moved to fall down upon his
Knees in Prayer for some time: Whereupon the Priest thus made interruption to
the People, viz.


Priest, All you that are in Communion with me, withdraw, do not join with him
in Prayer, for he does not Pray in the Name of Christ, [which was not true, and
very unbecoming one that would be esteemed a Reverend Clergyman, and many did
not Obey him.] Prayer ended, F. Bugg began Disturbance again, saying, do you
own these Books, this, and this?

G. W. What are their Titles?


F. B. The one is Judgment Fired, and the other Innocence against Envy.


G. W. I know no such Book as Judgment Fired.


F. B. It is Judgment Fixed.


G. W. Is not my Name to it? F. B. Yes.


G. VV. What need'st thou question my owning it? I own that I Writ most or the
greatest part of that Book, and shall not disown it; and for the other,
Innocence against Envy, I also own it, the Errors of the Press excepted; and
this Answer I give, that thou may not go away with a Lie, and say that I am
afraid to own my own Books, nor any think that I am afraid to Answer thee, for
I have Discoursed many Greater and Wiser Men than thou art, who have shown a
great deal more Civility than thou have done.


F. B's Wife stood up to clear her Conscience, being under a great Burden and
Constraint in Testimony against her Husband's writing Books against Friends,
etc. contrary to Conviction, as having expressed some trouble he was in for the
same, and that if it had not been for Jo. Thrift (an abetter of his) he had not
done what he did; saying, she should have Burnt all his Papers, etc. with other
Words. To which he made little Answer, but gave her the Lie openly; but many
present did believe she spoke Truth, and in the fear of God, from a necessity
laid upon her at that time.

Priest. Mrs. Bugg, you should not Discover your Husbands Nakedness; and Mr.
Bugg you should not Reveal your Secrets to the Wife of your Bosom; but you may
see the Enemies of a Man are those of his own House, etc.


F. B. after several Reiterations of his gross Lie, that G. W. was afraid to
own his Books, and making a great Clamor and Noise with Reviling Detractions
and Personal Reflections, G. W. called to the Priest thus, viz. Thou that art
his Teacher or Minister, I pray thee speak to him, and teach him to keep within
the bounds of common Civility, and not to make this Clamor and these
scurrilous Detractions, and let us come to some matter in Controversy, seeing
we may not enjoy the intended end of our Meeting quietly.


Priest, Mr. Bugg pray forbear, etc.

F. B. I will not hold my Tongue.


G. W. See what a Convert thou have gotten of him, he will not be subject to
his own Minister: Do thou not think him somewhat Discomposed?

I desire on passage of his Book, for his Conformity, may be Read (Entitled
the Quakers Detected) it is that first page, (how he came to be a Member of our
Society) Thou have the Book F. B. I pray thee lend it me a little (but he
refused to part with it out of his Hand) whereupon a Friend present reached one
to us.


G. W. I desire this one Page may be read in the Meeting, which F. B. was very
unwilling to.


Priest. Pray let it be read, which accordingly was done: Which follows, viz.

F. B. Q. Detect. The first point under Consideration is, how I came to be a
Member of their Society (i. e. of the Quakers.)


In the Beginning they Taught that all Men were Enlightened according to John 1.
9. and that this Light wherewith Christ had Enlightened them was sufficient, if
obeyed, to lead to Salvation; and that it was the work of the Ministers of
Christ to turn the Peoples minds from Darkness to Light, and from the Power of
Satan to God: Affirming that this Light was a sufficient Teacher, Leader and
Guide to every Believer, without the help of outward Prescriptions, Forms,
Orders and Decrees of Men. Upon these and the like Notions I became persuaded
to make Trial of their Doctrine; and when I came to see and observe their
Practice, Conversations and Deportments in the beginning, and what simplicity
and plainness attended their Ministry, I was still more Confirmed that it was a
Dispensation of the Love of God sent as a Visitation to Mankind; and being thus
persuaded, I was resolved to bear the Cross, and did utterly despise the shame
that attended them and their Message, and was not behind any of my Equals, both
in Doing and Suffering for the Testimony thereof, as some amongst them can
still bear me Witness; and in this manner we went on for many Years, and Loved
one another with Love Unfeigned; and doubtless God blessed our Meetings with
the comfortable Enjoyment of his Presence, and gave us Favor in the sight of
men, and not a word of Conformity was heard amongst Us for many Years together,
nor no Lording over each others Consciences; but as every man was persuaded by
the Lord, so he was frequently Exhorted to walk, etc.

[Thus far Fr. Bugg.] G. W. The Question in Controversy between us is, Whether
the People called Quakers he Apostate from the Truth, or F. Bugg? Which may be
Resolved from his own Book here; since his Conformity he owns the said People
to have been once no other than the People of God, sound in Doctrine and
Practice in Christian Love and Society, and that God blessed our Meetings with
the Comfortable Enjoyment of his Presence: At which time the People called
Quakers were Dissenters from the Church and Clergy of England, and F. Bugg then
with them, and he writ then against the Priests and their Covetousness and
Oppression, etc.


F. B. I am sorry for that.


Pr. He is now of another Judgment.


G. W. When he so writ in the Commendation of the People and Society called
Quakers, he was turned from them to the Church of England, whom he (as well as
the People called Quakers) had Dissented from; and when Dissenters were in the
Truth, according to his own now Confession positive and high Commendation of
them; from whence I infer, That if he himself and the Quakers were once (for
many years together) not Apostates, but in the Truth when Dissenters, he must
needs now be the Apostate in his Conforming to the Church of England, contrary
to their Practice and Testimony when no Apostates, for he cannot be in the
Truth now and then too; if right, or in the Truth then, he is not right now; if
he says he is right, or in the Truth now and not then, this is to contradict
his own Testimony of the Quakers and himself, as having been a Christian
Society, and the People of God, (yea, and that for many years, as he says); so
that if right then, he cannot be right now (as aforesaid) being turned from
what he was, and owned then: I would have him Answer and clear himself of this
Dilemma if he can.

But instead of Answering, he set to Reading on in his Book; for that was much
of his shift to evade and take up time in Reading in his own Books and
Pamphlets, instead of giving fair Answer or civilly Reasoning the Case.


G. W. Seeing F. B. undertakes not to wind himself out of the Dilemma, see if
thou that art his Minister can do it for him.


Pr. Mr. Bugg is now of another Judgment than he was, as Paul was when
Converted; before he thought he might do many things, even against the Name of
Jesus, but he was of another Judgment when Converted.

G. VV. This instance will not hold parallel with the Case of F. Bugg, his is
not a Conversion as Paul's was; Paul did not say he was in the Truth (or a
Christian) before Converted; but F. Bugg as good as says he and the Society of
the Quakers were once the People of God, and enjoyed his Comfortable Presence
when Dissenters from the Church and Clergy of England; but now contrariwise he
is turned to them (and Conformed) and from the Society called Quakers, I do not
see how either he himself or thou can clear him or bring him from under the
Dilemma. Is F. B. of another Judgment concerning the People called Quakers now,
than he was when he writ this Book in 1686, wherein he highly Commends of the
Society called Quakers?


Pr. He is now of another Judgment.

G. W. Then he was of two different Judgments since he was Conformed to the
Church of England: Come F. Bugg, what say thou? Do thou now disown what
thou have writ in Commendation of the People called Quakers in 1686?


F. B. No, I own what I then Writ.


G. W. Then F. Bugg and his Minister contradict each other; he is of another
Judgment, says the Minister: No, I am not, says F. B. I own what I writ.


F. B. The Presence of God may be among other Societies, as Presbyterians,
Independents, Anabaptists.


G. W. By the same rule his Conformity is so indifferent, that he may as well
join with any of those other Societies whom he never so highly commended of as
he has of the People called Quakers; his Apostasy is apparent, he cannot clear
himself of the Dilemma before Rehearsed upon his own Confession, which is plain
an Argument as to Man, from his own Confession, which no doubt was from inward
Conviction.


Pr. He Is Apostate from you, but not from the Truth.

G. W. What says F. B. to it, could he be in the Truth, both when in Society
with the People called Quakers (being Dissenters from the Church of England)
and now in his Conformity thereunto?

Pr. He Argues -- Argumentum ad hominem, have a care how you Answer him,
there is a Snare in it: You are now of another Judgment.


F. B. I am of another Judgment.


G. W. Art thou of another Judgment than thou wast when thou writ this Book in
1686 concerning thy being a Member of the Society of the Quakers (so called)?
If so, at the same rate F. B. may alter his Judgment every two or three Years;
and thus he may write Books, and contradict them again; then what Credit is to
be given unto his Books or Scribbling against the Quakers? The cause of his
turning from us (as he pretends) is, that there are Canons or Rules among us,
required to be observed, and he assigns us only two of those Canons: First, Not
to forsake our usual Meetings in times of Persecution. 2dly, Twice Publication
of Marriages before our Men's and Women's Distinct Meetings.


F. B. They have no Foundation in the Scriptures.


G. W. Yes, but they have: 1st. Not forsaking the Assembling of your selves
together, as the manner of some is.


2dly, The intent and end our Women's Meetings, is good and Warrantable by
Scripture; it is Religious, and for the Exercise of a Christian Care, with
respect to Widows, Fatherless, Indigent, etc. And our Proposing Marriages twice
to both our Men's and Women's Meetings, is, that both may Inspect them, and see
that they be clear and free from all Prae-contracts, and have Consent of
Parents and Guardians, etc. This is a Just and Righteous end, which I hope you
will not deny; our Method herein has been laid before the Civil Government,
and approved of as Laudable and more safe than the Method of those Priests of
the Church of England who Marry persons Clandestinly without the knowledge and
consent of Parents, where Heiresses are Stolen and Marriages Theevish; we have
none such among us, but due Publication and strict Examination and Approbation,
before Marriages be Solemnized among us.

Pr. I am glad you have so much Discipline among you.

G. W. But F. B. has opposed it, and left us on pretense of being burdened in
Conscience with Canons, Rules, Laws, etc. among us, as if he were now joined to
a Church that has no Canons or Rules; but I think you have more than we,
though we have Good and Warrantable Canons or Rules and due Methods in
Discipline, which we will stand by in the Face of all Opposers; but if Canons
or Rules be the Burden of F. B.'s Conscience, then he should have gone into
some Society that has no Canons, Rules, nor outward Methods; and I know no
such Religious Society but they have both Rules and Methods in Discipline, but
the Ranters have not; so F. B. might have gone among them, and not have been
burdened with Canons, Rules and Methods, wherein he might have been more
consistent with himself as to his Reason for his forsaking our Religious
Society.


Pr. But I understood Mr. Bugg was dissatisfied with your Women's Meeting apart
from the Men.

G. W. Sometimes they meet together, and sometimes apart, and they may not be
refused that Liberty as an accommodation for good Ends and Services in the
Church. Good Women had a Service, and did good Offices in the Primitive
Christian Church formerly, as Phaebe and others, Romans 16. I remember when it
was told F. B. there were Deaconesses, or Women Deacons Romans 16. 1. (...). Mas.
and Fem.
in the Church of Christ: He Answered (in one Book) that we had this out of
some History or Popish Author, which was his ignorant Rashness, for I had it
first out of Protestant Authors, though both Protestants and Papists own that
there were such Deaconesses. Diverse more things passed, too tedious to Relate
here at large: Some time was taken up by F. B. to excuse his Compassing his 15.
l. Fine from Samuel Cater, wherein when his Cuning and Crafty Dealing was
Discovered both by himself, and laid open by Samuel Cater, diverse People
Laughed at him, and the Priest deemed it Wittily done, but it was by the Wisdom
of the Serpent, (said he).


G. W. Observe here F. B's own Minister confesses it was by the Wisdom of the
Serpent that he acted against S. C.


Pr. It is Lawful sometimes to use the Wisdom of the Serpent; our Savior said,
be ye wise as Serpents, and innocent as Doves.

G. W. Do thou really believe that F. Bugg was as Innocent as a Dove in his
Dealing, as he did by Samuel Cater?

No Answer to this.

Some time was also spent about Joshua Bang's his requiring Satisfaction of F.
B. for manifestly Injuring him in Print, which he could not Deny, but made no
Satisfaction for the Injury done.

Lastly, G. W. gave public Testimony in the Name of the Lord to clear himself
and Friends from Popery, and from being Popishly affected; And in opposition to
F. B's Malicious and Slanderous Charge and Reproaches, tending to render him
and his Friends Odious and Obnoxious to the Government and People, too large
here to insert particularly.

As for Samuel Knowles he said not much, he appeared somewhat Insignificant,
but only to help forward the lightness and laughter of some People present, by
his own Levity, lifting up his Eyes and Hands as one in Admiration (and
credulous of S. B's infamous Charge and Reproaches against the Quakers) who
being afterward Reprehended for his Levity and ill Example therein; he Excused
it as well as he could, with his smiling Countenance, which he Naturally had,
(as he said.)

The foregoing Narrative has been kept in reserve until F. Bugg appeared first
in Print, as it was expected he would.

Now Isaac Archer, thou having thus far appeared an Abettor and Assister of F.
Bugg in his Fruitless Quarrel and Contention against Us, and he being one of
thy Flock and Church, we may take it for granted, that he has secret
Encouragement from thee to divulge his Malicious defaming Pamphlets and Books
against Us, and his Work therein will not only become his own Load and Burden,
but thine also, if thou will not please to stop him from his Invective
Scribbling and Printing against Us (the People of God called Quakers) or
otherwise manifest thy public dislike thereof, for his Work is therein
scandalous to Religion, and he shall be laden with his own Iniquity; he will
never bring Honor to thee, or to thy (or your Church's) Interest. It Is
apparent that thou and he are not one in Principle, whilst he owns the Doctrine
and Practice of the People called Quakers in their Ancient Splendor, according
to his own Confession.

I may also remind thee of thy Position, the 13th of the 2d Month, 1688. at our
public Meeting at Milden-hall, i. e. That Judas his Transgression by which he
fell from his Ministry, was his Hanging himself (not betraying his Lord and
Master) and that a wicked man may be a Minister of the Gospel, and ought not to
be separated from: Against which Doctrine I left a note of these quotations for
thee, 1 Timothy 3. 2, 3, 4, 7. 1 Pet. 5. 2, 3, 4, Titus 2. 7. 2 Cor. 6. 3, 4, 5,
6. 2 Timothy 3. 2, 3, 4, 5. And now J. Archer, I must tell thee, it is a dangerous
thing to take Judas's (or wicked Men's) part.


A CERTIFICATE.
Milden-Hall the 25th of the 5th Month called July, 1691.
FRancis Bugg who for some Years walked in Friendly Community and Society
amongst Us, the People called Quakers; and after that for some time, under
pretense of siding with the Christian Quaker against the Apostate Quaker, and
having also wrote several Books on that Account, with subtle and various
Endeavors to make Division, Strife and Debate amongst Us; He the said F. B.
did on the 30th of the 2d Month, 1691. appear in our Meeting with a Warrant in
the hands of a Constable, abetted by Isaac Archer and Samuel Knowles, two
Priests, the former of this Parish, the latter his late Curate, accompanied
with many of their Hearers, to whom he has joined himself in their Church
Society, turning his back as well upon his Christian Quaker, as of his Apostate
Quaker (as he calls some) whose Countenance there, sufficiently manifested him
what manner of Christian he was as to his deportment and Religion, to the
Satisfaction of several who had retained some better thoughts of him, than that
he only Counterfeited the Christian Quaker, under a Malicious Disguise and
Subtle Design to make Division, Strife and Contention amongst us, though some
believed otherwise then. And at the said Meeting he offered G. W. a Paper,
which he refusing to accept at his Hand, F. B. said that it contained three
Charges: Concerning which, we Declare, That though at the fore-end of that
Meeting G. W. did refuse to Answer F. B's Interrogatories, but rather
endeavored by Arguments to obtain the benefit of the Meeting as to the end and
service intended, undisturbed; he offered to Answer F. Bugg after the Meeting
was ended; which not obtaining, G. W. did toward the conclusion of that
Meeting not only own that he Wrote most part of Innocence against Envy, but
also upon a Reflection of F. B. on him as not owning Judgment Fixed, did say,
the he owned all his Hand or Name was set to, Errors of the Press excepted,
which we take to be a full Answer, not only for Judgment Fixed, but for all
other. Books which he has wrote and subscribed his Name to; unto which we
subscribe our Names.

John Mason. Joseph Mason. Simon Burgis. James Burgis. Tho. Brewster. Hen.
Hogans. Rob. Hibble Ambr. Friend. Geo. Friend. Joshua Bangs. Edward Firth. Tho.
Fuller.


Now to Proceed to F. Bugg's One Blow More.
HE says he was resolved to go to the Meeting well Prepared, which it seems,
was with a Constable and Warrant, as before obtained by an undue Information as
well as Envious, against the persons met, as being under a great suspicion of
Disaffection to the Government. That for his offering to meet us to Prove
matters of Fact, his Challenge he here again renews on a Months notice, p. 2.
whereby he has Granted that he has not yet proved matters of Fact against us;
we have his Clamourous Accusations and Charges without Proofs; still he is more
loud in's Charges than in's Proofs, as was publicly told him.

That F. B. offered G. W. a Paper containing this Charge following, offering
publicly (he says) to prove it, [which he neither did nor can do.]

1st, That G. VV. is a Deceiver of the People.

2dly, A false Accuser of the blessed Martyrs, charging their Doctrine to be
Corrupt, tending to Practical Ranterism, and thereby siding with the Papists
against the Protestants.

3dly, That he is a favourer or an excuser of such Principles and Practices as
border upon Blasphemy and Idolatry.

G. VV. did and still does utterly deny these Charges as False, Slanderous and
Malicious, they remain still to prove, which F. B's says so, does not.

1. Wherein is G. VV. a Deceiver of the People in point of Doctrine or
Conversation? He utterly and Conscientiously denies the Charge, having
faithfully served the Lord in good Conscience from his Youth upward, and
rejoices that he is counted worthy to be thus Reproached for Christ Jesus, as
his Ministers of old were, 2 Cor. 6. 8.

2. Wherein does he accuse the blessed Martyrs, and charge their Doctrine to be
Corrupt? This Charge is General as well as in the Plural. What Doctrine agreed
upon and generally held by the blessed Martyrs, did G. W. ever so Accuse? But
only F. B's Misapplication of the Words, which he says were Dr. Barnes, viz.
That all outward works be things indifferent, and may be used and also left
Pray where did the blessed Martyrs agree upon or hold this Doctrine, as stated
by our Adversary? I am sure it is neither safe nor sound without some such
distinction, as all outward works not evil in themselves, or not prohibited by
the Law of God, be things so indifferent as aforesaid.

3. His third Charge is as notoriously False and Malicious as the rest: The
occasion whereof was my only Questioning him about two Letters, which he says
were sent to G. F. by J. C. and J. A. How proves he they are theirs as Cited,
etc? I do not believe they are, as I told him publicly, both which showed my
dislike of them, as Cited, especially the latter; besides there is now more
ground to question the Citations, since F. B. that varied in his last from his
first in several Passages, leaving out diverse words; and he has not yet proved
either of them true: I suppose if he has not forged the said Letters, he has
taken them upon Trust, as he would have the Reader and us take them from him
upon his own Credit and bare Affirmation, which is of very little value to us:
Thus he frequently imposes, and commonly refers us to his own Scurrilous and
Abusive Pamphlets, as if his own Authority and Ipse Dixit must bear down all
opposition to his bare and proofless Affirmations.

That G. W. did not own the Book wholly, Entitled Innocence against Envy, and
refused to own either in part or in the whole, his Book Entitled, Judgment
Fixed, are both false, for before the Meeting was ended, he openly owned both,
the Errors of the Press excepted, though unwilling at first to Answer F. B. to
that or any other Question, because he desired the Meeting might be kept quiet
and free from Contention, but could not obtain it, because of F. B's Turbulent
and Abusive Contention and Clamorous Reviling.

To prove that G. W. did both refuse to own his Book (Judgment Fixed) and
Answer the Charge before cited,


F. B. produces this Certificate, viz. WE whose Names are under written do
Testify, That on the 30th of April, 1691. George Whitehead did refuse to own
his Book, Judgment Fixed, etc. and to Answer to the recited charge which was by
Francis Bugg Exhibited against him.

Isaac Archer. Samuel Knowles. And Ten more.


1. This Certificate is very unfair, partial, and unjust in both, as I could
produce many more Witnesses to the Contrary, if I should go or send about to
get hands; for that I did publicly own the said Book, Judgment Fixed, and the
other also that very day and place (the Errors of the Press excepted) some time
before the Meeting was ended, as many can Witness: That at first I refused for
some time to Answer F. B. but refused not to own my said Books, or to answer
his Charge at a more convenient time, which I did before parting, but would not
presently be forced nor frighted thereunto by his peremptory demands and
threats (with Constable and Warrant) his imperiously imposing upon me, I did
not think my self bound immediately to Answer at his demand, and in his time,
but took my own time and method to give Answer. This is the very truth of the
Case.

2. That I did not only Answer his said Charge by way of Denial, but all the
rest of his abusive and proofless Accusations and Clamours in general.

And my Negation was sufficient, whilst his Affirmations were unproved, and yet
in many things he was answered by such demonstrations as he was not able to
refute. I had no cause to be Timorous or Cowardly from a Guilty Conscience, nor
ashamed of S. Cripe (in his being concerned with me) as F. B. most falsely
insinuates, p. 2, 3. And at length, against his abusive Clamours, That G. W.
was disaffected to the Government; Jesuitically siding with the Papists against
Protestants, etc. This proposition was fairly made and urged by me the person
abused, viz.

That seeing F. B. has thus publicly and highly reproached me touching the
Government, as disaffected to the same, Popish, Jesuitical, etc. I do sincerely
offer, that if F. B. or any that take his part (his Minister or any other) has
any thing to charge me with, relating to the Civil Government, or any
Complaint, Suggestion, or Jealousy against me touching the same, according to
his said Reproaches, if he or they will let me have a Lawful Summons (after I
am at London) to appear before the Secretary of State, or any of the Lords of
the King and Queen's Council, I shall (God willing) meet him or any of them
face to face, and Vindicate my own Innocence against his Malicious Charge. But
to this F. B. and his Party gave no answer; only S. Knowles said they would
consider of it. And indeed Isaac Archer and he might have been more Ingenuous
than to sign such an unjust Certificate as they have done, upon F. B's
Instigation; it will no way redound to their Reputation or Credit.

Again F. B. proceeds with his Clamours, charging us with being Deluders with
Abominable Lies, Manifest Forgeries and Gross Perversions; one instance whereof
he may Recite, as he says, out of our Book, Innocence against Envy, in Answer
to his Quakers Detected, p. 3. Where he says, We have grossly abused his
Intention, and by leaving out five words, (viz. in the beginning they taught)
have made him speak what is for our turn, saying, that he confesses to our
Doctrine, viz. That all men are enlighted by Christ, according to John 1. 9. And
to the Sufficiency of this Light of Christ to lead to Salvation, without the
help of Men's outward Prescriptions, Forms, etc. p. 3. That he did plainly
confess to our Doctrine herein, is true still; and our leaving out those five
words, does not lessen his Confession, nor will his now saying, We have grossly
abused his Intention, be any just excuse; but both idle and evasive, as if his
intention were not to confess that Doctrine or our Ministry (which we still
hold) as in the beginning we taught, whereas he has contrariwise granted, that
he was still the more confirmed that it was a Dispensation of the Love of God
sent as a Visitation to Mankind; and being thus persuaded, he was resolved to
bear the Cross, and did utterly despise the Shame that attended us and our
Message, etc.

And that in this manner (he says) we went on for many years, and Loved one
another with Love unfeigned, and doubtless God blessed our Meetings with the
comfortable Enjoyment of his Presence; and as every man was persuaded by the
Lord, so he was frequently exhorted to walk. See his Quakers Detected, p. 3.
before cited more at large; from all which, pray observe how plainly he has
confessed, since he was Conformed to the Church of England, in the year, 1686.
both to the Truth of the Quakers Doctrine, Ministry, Society, Blessed Meeting,
and Immediate Teaching of the Lord, which he says was in the beginning, as if
now they were Declined; however it was since they were a People Religious and
Christian Society, and he one among them (according to his own confession) and
both these People called Quakers, while in such Purity and Blessedness, yea,
and Ancient Splendour also, (as he says p 14. of his One Blow, etc.) were all
Dissenters from the Church of England, and bore Testimony against the Clergy,
and Priests, and Tithes, their Covetousness, Oppression and Persecution; but
now F. B. (and not the People called Quakers) is turned back to the Priests
whom he testified against, when he owned the said People to be the People of
God, and both sound in Doctrine and Practice (who still persevere in their
Testimony.) But F. B. is Fallen, Back-sliden and Apostatized from his Testimony
which he bore among the said People, therefore he is the Apostate and not we;
and yet as a self-condemned person even since his Conformity is made to confess
to the Truth of our Doctrine, Conversation and Sotiety, as it was in the
beginning, and for many years together, when he owned us: But now he walks
quite contrary in his Conformity and Temporizing, so that he cannot be Right
now, if he was ever Right among us. But if he says he is now of another
Judgment, as his Minister J. Archer would have him, instancing Paul's saying,
He thought he might do many things against the Name of Jesus, but was of
another Judgment when Converted; then this is to condemn F. B's own Testimony
to the Truth of our Doctrine and Conversation, which he has given since he
turned to the Clergy and Church of England; and I could not find that either F.
B. or his Minister could clear him of this Dilemma, if ever he was in the Truth
while he was among the People called Quakers, or in Society with them, he must
be in Error now in his turning back to the Priests and Church of England; but
if he and his Teacher will conclude that he was always in Error while among the
People called Quakers, but now Converted and in the Truth; This is to Condemn
his own Testimony aforesaid, Printed in the Year, 1686. Quakers Detected, p. 3.
where since a Member of the Church of England, he has confessed to the
Doctrine, Ministry, Christian-Conversation, Love and Society of the People
called Quakers, and their blessed Meetings in the beginning, and for many
Years; so that take it which way he or his now Minister will, he is under a
manifest Snare, he is self-Condemned, and his slight evasion will stand him in
no stead, viz. That he is far enough from confessing to our present Doctrine and
Conversation; and saying, that though he did set forth what we held in the
beginning, yet that we teach the contrary now; and what though Rome was once a
glorious Church So the Quakers were once a glorious Church, by this comparison,
and both then and now clearly Dissenters from the Church of England.
endued with sound Doctrine, and many other excellent Ornaments; yet by
Innovatians and Mischievous Impositions, she is utterly Deserted. And his
saying, There is great difference between my saying in the beginning, that they
taught sound Doctrine, etc. and saying the same now. p. 4. These Evasions and
Shifts will not cover nor excuse him, nor warrant his Temporising, and turning
to the Priests and Church of England, contrary to that Doctrine and Testimony
which he says we Taught in the beginning, but still he appears a
self-condemned Person, guilty of deep Hypocrisy therein, acting contrary to
manifest conviction in his own Conscience; for wherein he falsely suggests we
now Teach and Act contrary to what we did in the beginning; he should rather
have endeavored to find out some other People whose Doctrine and Conversations
are both sound and agreeable, as he confesses the Quakers were in the
beginning; or to consist better with himself, he should see if he could find
out some other glorious Church endued with sound Doctrine and excellent
Ornaments, (but then it must be without either Canons, Rules or Discipline)
that is neither the People called Quakers, nor the Church of England, which he
Testified against when he was in Society with the Quakers in their Ancient
Splendor, according to his own confession, otherwise he is still in the Mire,
and yet to seek, being in Egypt, sold thither. As he says, Quakers Detected,
p. 8. and therefore no real Convert of the Church of England, while he would
make the People believe that he is for the Quakers in their Doctrine and
Practice, when most Glorious and Splendid, and yet continues a pretended Member
of the Church of England, contrary to both.

But dare F. B. in Conscience now say that he is more Just, more Pure, more
Clean in his Life, than when he walked among the People called Quakers, and
owned them as the People of God, a Glorious Church, etc.?

Now he proceeds to prove that we do not teach now as in the beginning, and
that our Practice, Deportment and Conversation, is not now as in the beginning,
nor attended with that Simplicity and Plainness, etc. For which he has framed
six Articles.

The first, against the Quakers late Doctrine, viz.
In the beginning they taught that all Men were Enlightened according to John 1.
9. And that this Light wherewith Christ had Enlightened them, was sufficient, if
obeyed, to lead to Salvation without the help of outward Rules, Laws and
Directories of Men's Prescribing; but now they teach the contrary (says he) and
wherein contrary? They have Declared such out of Unity who discountenance
Women's Meetings, etc. Wherein we have but his own say so, or proofless
Affirmation that this is a contrary Teaching to the former. In the beginning we
Taught that all Men are Enlightened by Christ, and so do we still; and that this
Light of Christ is sufficient to lead unto Salvation, if obeyed without outward
Rules, Laws, etc. of Men'sprescribing or making, or without Human
Prescriptions; and so we say still, this Light is sufficient; and yet by this
Light reprove dark and envious Opposers of Women's Godly Meetings (gathered in
the Name and Light of Christ Jesus by his Power) which have been among us many
years, before F. B. left us, even in such times, wherein he has granted us to
be in our Ancient Splendour, a Glorious Church, etc. yet now in contradiction to
himself, is both an Opposer of our Women's Meetings, and an Adversary to our
Christian Discipline and good Order; else why does he oppose the Doctrine of the
Light within thereunto? And that such Opposers are both Disobedient unto (and
out of) the Light and Unity of Christ's Church, and consequently in Darkness,
is as certain, as he that says he is in the Light, and hates his Brother, is
in Darkness, as F. B. is, in his dark Opposition without Proof or Reason; he
might as well have argued thus, viz. That if the Light of Christ within, be
sufficient to lead unto Salvation, if obeyed without Human Laws; then it is a
contrary Doctrine, to testify against the Spirit of Envy, Division and
Darkness; but the Light of Christ is sufficient, Ergo. Let him bring a better
Argument upon his own Article and Opposition if he can, and his Fallacy will
easily appear as it does.

His Second Article, Charging us with Popish and Antichristian Practice,
Is both False and Slanderous; In his falsely accusing us with Imposing on each
others Consciences, for the strict Observation of Women's Meetings, as contrary
to what in the Beginning we Taught against Imposition upon another Man's
Conscience, etc. Nor has he proved any Imposition upon our Friends Consciences
in this Case, either to observe, or act without or contrary to Inward
Conviction or Persuasion by the Light of Christ within: Therefore his Charge
without Proof, is a blind Imposition. But says he, They are for Nonconformity
Record out of the Unity, etc. He should have said rather, that some for
Opposition and Gainsaying of good Order and Discipline (as that of twice
Publication of Marriages before Solemnized) agreed upon and practiced by the
Church of Christ among us, have therein (or in that matter) excluded themselves
out of Unity (and if some such have been so recorded, that excludes them not so
much as their own cross Actions) and this had been true in Fact; for if they
had been in entire Unity with their Brethren, they would not have made any such
Opposition or Breach upon any due or necessary Method, Order or Discipline,
agreed upon by them, or in a Christian Society, which they pretended to be
Members of; and such gain no Reputation by such Advocates as F. Bugg. And
further the true State of the Case in Opposition to his False and Partial, is
this: In the Beginning we declared against Human Impositions on Men's
Consciences, and against Persecution thereupon also, and so we do still; and
yet it is no Contradiction, to be for the strict Observation of Faithful
Women's Meetings, sometimes distinct from the Men; where they are persuaded by
the Light of Christ so to Meet, being gathered by the Power and in the Name of
Jesus Christ, (which cannot be an Effect of my Imposition contrary to good
Conscience) and for those good Ends and Services propper to them, which F. B.'s
new Minister could not deny, when those good Ends were Demonstrated.

His Third Article against their Deportment and Carriage, Runs thus.
In the Beginning G. W. and many others came through the County in plain Habit
walking on Foot, Content with mean Accommodation, apt to Teach, not given to
Filthy Lucre, often Visiting the Sick, the Poor as well as the Rich, Working
often on their Trades, that they might not be Chargeable; But now they are
grown Great and High, and instead of a plain Gray Cloth Coat and short Hair,
they are now Clothed with the finest of the Fleece, the best of Hair Camlets,
well-set Periwigs; instead of going on Foot, they generally have the best
Horses they can get; yea, some of them have their Coaches, Callashes, Foot-boys
and Servants to attend them, and instead of Cold Water, the best of Spirits.

Observe what Commendation he still gives of us as in the Beginning, but now
what a Story he has told, to prove us declined in our Conversation; but still
short of proving us Apostate and New Rome, etc. As to our Deportment and
Carriage, we have plain Habit still, and are content with mean Accommodation;
and some of us can and do Drink Water, as we have occasion: We have learned
both to Abound and to Want, Phil. 4. 12. But for the best of Spirits instead of
Cold Water, it is a false Insinuation, as well as Nonsense; Who can drink the
best of Spirits instead of Water? And we covet no Man's Meat, nor Drink, nor
Gold, nor Silver, nor Apparel, but Preach the Gospel freely as ever; yet are
necessitated to Ride on Horseback sometimes, because not so able to Walk on
Foot, as in the Beginning: And some have better Clothes than at first, for some
had their Clothes torn among Briars and Thorns, by the Woolfish Persecutors and
Followers of Persecuting Priests; others their Clothes much Worn, by lying in
Prisons upon Straw, Boards, Floors, etc. for their Christian Testimony; and
they could not always wear their old Clothes, they must sometimes have new
ones; these are no Proofs of their Desertion or Apostasy. And for Periwigs well
set or ill set, we do very little affect or care for them, we like no
extravagant or unnecessary ones, though probably some who have lost their own
Hair, either by hard Imprisonment or Sickness, or by outward Weakness,
Infirmity or Age, may have necessity to wear some short Wigs, to keep their
Ears from Deafness, and Heads and Necks from Cold, who otherwise had rather be
without them. Now if F. B. or any other should judge such as guilty of Pride or
Apostasy therein, when their Consciences in the sight of God witness the
contrary; such his and their Judgment would be very Unjust, and judged of God
and his Truth, as well as extravagant, ranting and unnecessary Wigs.

And as for Coaches, Callashes and Foot-boys, we know of few among us keep
them, to be sure not G. W. nor others that came out when he did in 1654. though
probably some few, that are come to own the Truth since, that have Estates
answerable do keep Coaches, for the necessary Accommodation of themselves and
Families, to carry them to Meetings (and where they have occasion) which can be
no Proof of their Apostasy neither, but rather the contrary; that their Zeal is
such, they spare no Cost to accommodate their Families to Meetings.

This Confession, That in the Beginning we were apt to Teach, not given to
Filthy Lucre, not willing to be chargeable, contradicts his Charge in his other
Pamphlet, B. Rams, p. 13. where he calls our Ministers Hirelings, taking Money
fo Preaching, and p. 14. says, They always pretend to Preach, Teach, etc.
freely, but yet contrary to these their Pretentions, have all along taken Money
for the same. -- How agrees this with his now confessing that in the beginning
they were apt to teach, not given to filthy Lucre, not willing to be
Chargeable? Yet have all along taken Money for Preaching. O! horrid and shameful
Lie, and self-contradiction.

His fourth Article against their taking Money, contrary to their Pretenses, viz.
In the beginning they taught, that nothing amongst them as a People should be
Recorded for Money, But since that work is become far more than in the beginning
they may allow poor Men something to live upon, who spend their time in
Recording matters for them. We hope there is no hurt nor Apostasy in that.
but freely a free People, and in Love to serve one another, G. F's Order,
Printed, 1650. ( We think this is not true, we know no such Order Printed that
Year, if at all;) And also that it was a breach of Christ's command to take Money
for Preaching. And under this Notion exclaimed against the Presbyterians for
their Basin and Platter; and against the public Preachers for their settled
Maintenance, as Tyths, etc. But now they can take 50 l. per Annum, 30 l. for
Writing a Manuscript of five or six sheets to teach Children. -- I say their
Ministers take Money for Preaching. Thus F. B.

Now pray observe his Charge and the Nature of it, how general both against our
Ministers and others, viz. They can take 50 l. per Annum, speaking both before
and after of taking Money for Preaching: We deny his Charge, because utterly
false, and a gross Slander, and challange him to prove where our Ministers take
50 l. per Annum for Preaching, or any of them 30 l. for Writing the said
Manuscript either? He has been already Reprehended for this Lie of 50 l. per
Annum, unjustly charged upon our Ministers, and yet persisteth in it. See our
Answer, Innocence against Envy, p. 14. Where we charge him therein with a gross
Lie, Defamation and Scandal. -- We have not so learned Christ, we Preach freely
as he has commanded, etc. But in stead of Proof, we have F. B's own Ipse
Dixit, i. e. I say their Ministers take Money for Preaching. But I say this is a
Lie of F. B's. which I hope is of as good Authority as his, and better than his
bare proofless say so. He has likewise shamefully perverted Tho. Elwood's
words, As making an Apology for his Brethren, taking Money for Preaching, from
T. Elwood's only Pleading for a supply of the Needful Wants of Christ's
Ministers, as Cited more at large in his B. Rams, p. 13, 14, 15. Thus this
backsliding Apostate has frequently shown himself a Perverse, Fallacious and
Impertinent Scriber.

His fifth Article.
That they receive Honor of their Servants and Apprentices, (this is general,
which I do not believe) contrary to what we taught in the beginning against
Respecting Persons, receiving Honor one of another. To prove this he Accuses
S. Duncon about his Apprentice; thus he Accuses the Dead, as he has
frequently done, who are not here to Answer for themselves, which renders his
Work of the less credit.

If any of our Friends Servants sometimes are without their Hats in their
Shops, etc. I should rather think it is for their own Convenience, than from
any Injunction of their Masters for their Honor, as he has Accused J. C. and
J. A. both long since Deceased; with Idolatrous and Blasphemous Names and
Titles given to Man; Prayers Given or Offered to G. F. Deifying and Adoring
him, etc. p. 7. in two Letters before mentioned, which I have not only
questioned the Truth of his Citation thereof, but Disown, especially the
latter, as Cited by F. B. who has also varied in his Citation thereof; nor
has he gone about to prove, either that they are truly Cited by him, but
rather the contrary by his manifest variation therein; so that still it remains
for F. B. to prove that the persons Charged, i. e. J. C. and J. A. were the
Authors of the said Letters, as Cited by him, which I do not believe nor own
them, nor can I understand them to be Prayers, (as he calls them) when there is
not so much as the Form of a Prayer in them: These things considered, F. B's
Clamours against us of justifying Idolatry and Blasphemy, cunning Evasions,
Quibbles, and Jesuitical Reserves, Sculking to Decieve the Simple, p. 7. 8. do
all fall to the Ground as mere empty and envious Railery and abuse.

The sixth Article.
They sometimes Taught that Reflecting upon Persons, was a mark of a false
Prophet, and never the way to beget to God, quoting G. F's. great Mystery, etc.
p. 237. and that to call Names for Religion, were no Christians of Christ's
making.

He has dealt unfairly by G. F. in his Citation, leaving out his first words,
viz. The work of the Ministers of the Gospel was not to reflect upon Persons or
Creatures, but struck at the Power which Captivated the Creatures, which
intends not to strike at the Creature distinct from that Power that Captivates
it; and to prove that we Practice contrary, he quotes a Book, Truth's Defense,
calling a Minister, i. e. Camelford, filthy Beast, Impudent, Enemy of God, etc.
And E. B. for calling Bennet, Reprobate, Child of Darkness, Blasphemer, etc.
And another Book Entitled A threefold Estate of Antichrist, for calling the
Priests of the World Thieves and Robers, Antichrist's Liers, Viperous
Generation, Babylon's Merchants, Ravening Wolves, Greedy Dumb Dogs, etc. To all
which I thus briefly Answer.

1. That personal Reflections and calling Names merely for Religion, is neither
the way to beget to God nor Christian; but Reflections and Names suitable to
the ill Qualities, ill Natures and corrupt Practices of Persons. This is not to
strike at the Creature distinct from that power that Captivates it, but chiefly
at that power of Darkness in its own birth and depraved Generation; And such
Reflections or Names are not given for Religion sake; but because of some
Persons Depravity and Degeneration. F. B. knows that some in the Scripture are
called both Bulls, greedy dumb Dogs, ravening Wolves, generation of Vipers,
Serpents, evil Beasts, Antichrists, Reprobates, etc. And I would ask F. Bugg if
he did not Believe the covetous Priests of the World were such, when he was in
Society with the People called Quakers, and owned them both in Doctrine and
Practice in their Ancient Splendor and Glory, as he has since confessed they
once were? I suppose within that time wherein he walked amongst them for many
years, (I suppose above Twenty) and when he himself writ against the said
Priests, did not he then think that many of them deserved such Characters as
before mentioned, and in Scripture given to the false Prophets, false
Shepherds, and covetous Watchmen of Israel? And it is further observable, that
those Books mentioned and charged by F. B. as Truths Defense, E. B. against
Bennet, Threefold Estate of Antichrist, and Samuel Fisher's Rusticus, were
first printed many years ago, and in such times as F. B. no doubt, owned the
People called Quakers to be in their Primitive Purity, Splendour and Soundness,
both in Doctrine and Conversation, especially in those many years he walked
among them, and owned them; why did he not tell the World what years those said
Books were first printed in, which now he has accused? that his Inconsistency
and Self-contradiction might more plainly have appeared, in his commending and
condemning a People for things Writ by some of them, even when they were so
commendably owned, and highly approved of by the self same Judge or Person,
even F. B.

He puts a Slight on our Answer to his Pamphlet, B. Rams, as so impertinent and
short of an Answer, as not worth Replying to, yet thinks it necessary to make
some few Observations on it, p. 10. I am sure that his Observations are both
Impertinent, and contain diverse Falsehoods in a little compass, and far short of
a Reply.

As 1st. That G. W. will not own our said Answer to his B. Rams, only a part of
it, is a gross Lie diverse times Reiterated.

2dly. That G. F. and E. B. Encourage O. C.'s Army to a Practice they believed
was not Lawful, i. e. to Fight; how proves he this? And that they did so
Encourage them then in the Present Tense, and Future Tense (as he says) Did
not G. F. say to O. C. Arise and come forth? etc. But did he say, Arise and
come forth to Fight, Cut and Slash as F. B. confidently inferred, and told the
Meeting at Mildenhall aforesaid? But it is not needful for me to insist on this
point, the Matter being sufficiently spoke to, and answered in our late Book,
Entitled, Christ's Lambs Defended from Satan's Rage, against John Pennyman's
envious Invective, falsely styled, The Quakers Unmasked.

3dly. I do not believe that one of our Ministers said to the Court at
Barbados, That if the Spirit of the Lord God in them, led them to Fight, I had
nothing against it, or that we Recorded any such thing in our Book of Foreign
Letters, as F. B. says: I know no such Record, nor do I believe it till I see
it; and if I do, we shall disown it, as none of our Doctrine nor Principle.

4thly. F. B. has another strange Story against S. Fisher, viz. That he said
he believed or expected that the People called Quakers would be Instrumental by
Force (with others) to turn out or overturn the then Government, and that this
he spoke to Mr. Osgood (after the Rising of the Fifth-Monarchy Men) and Mr.
Pennyman, as I am Informed; pray ask them if they do not remember it, p. 10.
Thus far F. Bugg. I have showed Jo. Osgood this Story, and asked him about it,
and his Answer is this, viz. I do not remember that S. Fisher spoke them, or
such words, and I do not believe he did; and I am not apt to believe he spoke
such Words, for if he had, I should have opposed them. Wherefore we have Reason
to think, this was some forged Story against S. F. who was a peaceable harmless
Man, and that this Apostate may be ashamed to charge the Dead, and the Memories
of the Living, with old defaming Stories.

5thly. After he has pretended his Concern for many called Quakers both of his
near Relations, and many of the Hearers being honest People ( as he Confesses)
but have their Eye too much to such Teachers and Leaders as G. W. and his
Brethren, etc. p. 11. He insinuates a want of Union, in affection to the
present Government; and says, not one Epistle, not one public Prayer, etc. i.
e. for King William and Queen Mary, which is more than he knows or can
demonstrate. His envious and unjust Insinuations therein, have been already
answered in our half Sheet in Print, Entitled, The Quakers Answer to a
Scandalous Libel, styled, A Letter to the Quakers, which he has since owned by
offering to prove what we deny in it, B. Rams. p. 19. And also in our late
Answer to his B. Rams, he does but reiterate the same thing over and over
against us; and then to color over his envious and injurious Insinuations
against us, touching the Government, he tells us thus, viz. But I will not
insist too much upon this point, lest you say I expose you, and would set the
King against you, which is not my desire, as well as below the dignity of his
Person and Station.

Thus when he has endeavored to expose us to all the Reproach and Infamy he
can, and to render us Disaffected and Obnoxious to the Government, he can thus
Hypocritically pretend, it is not his desire to set the King against us. O false
hearted Man! What better Tendency is thy envious work of! It Is well it is below
the Dignity of the King's Person and Place, to be influenced by the Malice of
such Apostates as thy self, or by such false and infamous Characters, unjustly
cast upon us, as Disaffected to the Government, New Rome Painted Harlots,
Deluders, Deceivers, Jesuitical deep Hypocrisy, etc. And yet thou would be
glad we would publicly Address the King and Queen, and pray for them publicly
and heartily, and therein be Example to our Hearers, who are honest People. p.
11, 12. Wherein thy Hypocrisy and Inconsistency against us (being set
together) Runs thus, viz. Thou Painted Harlot, thou New Rome, thou Antichrist,
Deep Hypocrite, Deluder and Deceiver, disaffected to the Government, etc. --
Pray Publicly and Heartily for King WILLIAM and Queen MARY. And is this thy
Affection and Friendship to the King and Queen? These may evince thy Folly,
Confusion and Madness against an Innocent People, whom thou have causelessly
Deserted and unjustly Defamed. We grant it is our Christian Duty to Pray for all
Men, for Kings, etc. But where are all required by Christ or his Apostles, to
pray for them by Name? Or charged as Offenders, for not Naming Persons in our
Prayers? May not we pray acceptably, unless we tell God the Name of those we
pray for? Surely we need not a False Hearted Apostate to dictate our Prayers to
us. Thy Hypocrisy and self-Contradiction also appears, in one while seeming to
be against Personal Reflections and calling Names, etc. And another while
calling the People called Quakers, Painted Harlot, New Rome, Rome's Sister,
etc. which to excuse, among other false Allegations and Defamations, thou
give this for one Reason, viz. By their valuing their own Traditions above
the Scriptures, p. 12. which is a notorious Lie, and utterly denied by us as
the rest of thy Lies and filthy abuses are, with thy Lying conceited Rimes
against us, being not worth Reciting.

I leave thee and thy Works of Darkness and Envy, to the Righteous Judgments of
the Heart-searching God; and thy Judgment lingereth not, and thou shall be
Rewarded according to thy Evil Deeds; it is high time for thee to seek
Repentance, before thou be cut off, for thy Day hasteneth; if thou will not be
Humbled nor Repent, Remember thou have been, and art Admonished and Warned: And
with what Face or Conscience can thou finally appeal to God, as knowing thou
have no Malicious intent, nor nothing of Revenge; or to pretend to be, or Write
without Prejudice or Malice? And art not thou Joined to such as say Prophesying
and immediate Revelation are Ceased? How then come thou to take upon thee to
Prophecy, That our Mountain shall be laid wast, and that we shall become like a
wast howling Wilderness, Dead, Dry and Barren? Which is thy own Condition, thou
art Dead, Dry and Barren, and yet presumest to be a Judge or a Prophet, against
others more Righteous than thy self; our Mountain is the Mountain of the Lord,
it is Mount Sion, that shall never be removed, nor laid wast, and it is Exalted
above the Top of Esau's Mountain, and in vain do thou strive against the
Lord's Mountain; thou art not only Fighting and Striving against Man or Men,
but against the Lord, his Truth and Power, which is and will be too strong for
thee; thy great Iniquities are before him, and thy Secret Sins are set in his
sight, even in the Light of his Countenance, and both thy Secret and Open
Wickedness is seen and Judged by the Lord; look at home, examine and consider
thy own corrupt, perverse and crooked Ways, and seek Repentance, if a place may
yet be found for thee, which I sincerely wish, if it may yet stand with the
good Pleasure of All-mighty God to Grant it: And consider if thou have not
cause to fear thy day hastening.

Middlesex, the 7th and 8th of the 5th Month, 1691. From a Servant of Christ,
and Friend to thy poor Soul, G. Whitehead.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 11. l. 7. r. F. B. l. 29. r. 30th, l. 30, r. 1691, p. 15. l. 21, r. Crisp.

A Catalogue of Books Printed for and Sold by Thomas Northcott in George-Yard
in Lumbard-street.
JOhn Burnyeat's Works, Price 2 s. 6* d.

G. Keith's Presbyterian and Independent, Visible Churches, is New England, and
elsewhere, brought to the Test, and examined, according to the Holy Scripture,
Price 1 s. 6. d.

-- His Way to the City of God, 1 s.

-- His Fundamental Truths of Christianity, Price 8 d.

Stephen Crisp's Alarm Sounded in the Borders of Spiritual Egypt, which shall
be heard in Babylon, Price 3 d.

-- His Epistle concerning the Present and Succeeding Times. Price, 2 d.

G. Fox the Younger's Works, Price 1 s. 8 d.

Elizebeth Bathursts Truths Vindication, Price 8 d.

Sam. Fisher's Works, Price 12 s.

William Tomlinson's Innovations of Popery, Price 6 d.

Buds and Blossoms of Piety, Price 1 s.

G. F's several Treatises, worthy of every true Christian's serious
Consideration, Price 6 d.

R. Barclay's Apology for the True Christian Divinity, Price 4 s.

There is now in the Press Robert Barclay's Works, which will be Finished in a
short time, and will be a Book of 12 s.


