THE CASE Of the Suffering People of GOD, Truly Stated: And their Innocence
vindicated from the false Aspersions and Pretenses (under which the Persecuting
Spirit seeks to cover it self, to make the Nation believe its Proceedings
against them are just) that it may be unvailed, and appear as it is in its
self, and the Cause for which Gods People suffer made appear, according to the
nature of it.

Wherein also The Persecutors in ENGLAND are warned, before the Day of the Lord
overtake them, as a destruction from him.

LONDON: Printed in the Year 1664.

The Case of the Suffering People of God, truly Stated.
OH! what hardness of Heart, searedness of Conscience, and benumedness is come
upon them that have set themselves in a Spirit of Enmity, against such as fear
God, and keep their Consciences void of offense toward God and man? and how is
the Righteous sought to be made a prey upon, and to be destroyed by such as
have set themselves in a Persecuting Spirit, to Persecute, oppress and injure
the Righteous? Surely this hardness of heart, and persecuting innocent men for
their Consciences (that is got up among the men in this Generation, who profess
Christianity) does fore-run heavy and severe judgments from the Righteous God,
upon all them whose hearts are filled with cruelty and malice against tender
Conciences, whom nothing will satisfy, but even the rooting out of the
Righteous, and of the Truth it self if it were possible; and the defacing all
appearance of Sobriety, Faithfulness and Sincerity, where it appears under a
differing Form or Way from that which the persecuting Spirit would impose and
confine all to; The Righteous God who beholds and weighs the Actions of men,
who will judge righteously and without respect of persons (be they never so
high) takes notice of these injuries, and wrongs, and oppressions that his own
tender Seed suffers under. And he that hears the sighings of his Prisoners,
will call all to judgment that are partakers of this great iniquity, of
persecuting and oppressing his People for matters of Conscience and Worship;
And though this Spirit that thus highly appears against the Righteous, be
subt^l and crafty in its instruments, in going about to ensnare and persecute
men, and to spy out occasions against such as appear against its Ways and
Oppressions, yea if it be but such as are for a general good, in a civil way,
as among men, that have an inspection into the indirect ways, and corrupt
proceedings of that Spirit of Persecution, it will endeavor the stopping their
mouths, and seek their overthrow; And yet for all its subtilty, and its colors
and pretenses, it cannot hide it self nor them that are in it, neither under
the profession of Christianity, Justice, or Legal proceedings; for all whose
eyes are open, and who retain but a common understanding without prejudice, see
what the Persecutors work tends to, as to endeavor the rooting out of the
Good, and the giving Life and Liberty to the bad and profane; for why else are
we persecuted and cast into Prisons, and many of us thronged up together in
Holes and nasty Places, for peaceably meeting together in the Service and
Worship of the Living God, to wait upon him, or to edify one another in that
Faith and Love received in Christ, as the Saints and true Christians have done,
when Drunkards, Swearers, Ballad-singers in the streets, Stage Players,
Puppet-players, Fiddlers, Bear-baiting, and such like have their liberty (yea
and some of them Licenses too) to uphold their profane Meetings and Practices;
do not all rational and sober men take notice of these things? And do you (who
have set your selves to persecute us) think that the God of Heaven and Earth
will not be avenged on such a people, and severely judge for such doings? Oh!
consider these things, and let not presumption and pride of heart so far
over-whelm you, as either to say within your selves there is no God, or that
you shall not be called to an account for your proceedings.

For the injury or wrong that we (the Lord's People, called Quakers) suffer, is
a twofold injury. First, By persecuting and imprisoning, and going about to
exile or banish us for our Consciences, and so debarring many of us of the
benefit of the fresh Air, and keeping many in nasty Holes, which tends to
destroy the outward man, which oppression and suffering cries in the ears of
the Lord, and is so far from Christianity, that it is below humanity it self,
and natural affection, tenderness or respect to the Creation it self. And
secondly, we suffer injury from our Persecutors, by their mis-representing us
as Jujurious and Criminal, so to bring us under that, called the Civil or
Temporal Law, as Offenders, (which does not at all reach our Case) and not as
those that suffer upon a conscientious account, or for a matter of tender
Conscience, that the Persecuting Spirit may (under such false glosses and
deceits, and wronging the Innocent and their Cause) color over its proceedings
as Legal and Just, the injustice whereof who is it cannot see? For what evil,
Sedition or injury against any man's person have our Meetings produced, let our
Neighbors and the whole Nation bear witness, and the just Witness of* God in
men judge, and Conscience speak, or any who have beheld our deportment and
behavior? have we not been all along a suffering people, and exposed to great
sufferings since we were a people, for matters of Religion and Conscience?
wherein we must give account unto God, and answer his Will and not man's; and
have we not borne our Suffering patiently without resistance? Has not long
experience (and that under the several Governments or Powers since we were a
People) showed that our deportment has been peaceable and harmless in the
exercise of our Consciences? so as we have still innocence for our Plea in the
sight of our Enemies, and so have not forfeited our interest in that Liberty so
often promised to tender Consciences, which is to be left free to God to* Rule,
and Order, and not for man to limit to his will or lord over.

And those that persecute tender Consciences, or Gods People (who are harmless
and innocent) break our peaceable Meetings by rude Soldiers, Armed men, or
otherwise, and oppress and imprison us, and go about to banish us, under notion
of being Seditious Sectaries, disloyal Persons, and our Meetings, as being
Seditious Conventicles, Tumultuous Assemblies, tending to Rebellion and
Insurrection; and accuse us for meeting under color or pretense of Religious
exercise, (as if the contrary were intended) and so to sentence us to suffer
for unlawful Assemblies, when no unlawful Act can be proved against us, that we
have committed, or ever met about. Now whilst upon these accusations, and in
this wise branding us, Reason, Justice and Legality is pretended in their
proceedings against us; This is but a Cloak, and a Cover, and a false gloss,
whilst no such criminal matters can be proved against us, or any of the People
of God, who are peaceable and innocent, and desire the good of all men in what
we do; and our Case is a Spiritual Matter, relating to Conscience, and the
Worship of God, which is out of the reach of any Temporal or Civil Law, which
was made, or added, because of outward Transgression; so as our Cause is out of
your sight, and beyond your Sphere, who persecute us in this wise, and not to
be judged of by such whose judgment is but fallible, whether they profess
themselves to be Spiritual or Temporal Judges; for the Spirit of God which is
infallible, in which we serve and worship him, is our Guide and Leader, and
thereby we know him to be our Lord and Lawgiver, as he is to his Church.

And our being persecuted as being obstinate or wilful, and Contemners of
Authority, for not swearing, as some of us have been, when we have been
indicted for refusing the Oath of Allegiance, (which is said to be a promissory
Oath) as wilfully and obstinately refusing it, and in contempt, etc. as also
for refusing those called Judicial Oaths, we are liable to be exposed to
Banishment; (as being represented not to refuse them out of conscientiousness,
but obstinacy, and the like) which is an apparent wrong done to us, and our
case herein is misrepresented, and such things have been laid as snares* on
purpose to make us suffer; for the Lord knows our hearts and consciences in
this matter, that it is not out of obstinacy, nor wilfulness, nor contempt,
that we have refused to swear, but singly for Conscience Sake to Christ, and in
obedience to him, (see Mat. 5. 33, 34. James 5. 12.) as those that know the
Love of God, which ends the strife that was the occasion of Oaths, and must
hold forth a Testimony of that Love both in Word, in Doctrine and Example.

And albeit we have been rendered as Criminal Offenders in these Cases of
Conscience, and as Contemners of Authority, and seditious, etc. in our meeting
together (which is in the Worship of God) and Decrees or Laws have been
intended against us thereupon; it has been seldom (in many places) that the
Prosecutors of them (or our Persecutors) would keep to their own Law, when it
was brought forth, as to suffer a fair trial according to the letter or words
of it; but sometimes when some of us have been taken in a Meeting for matter of
Worship, some have had also the Oath of Allegiance tendered them; and that the
Persecutors might be sure to make them suffer as much as they could under
color of legality, they have committed them to Prison, both for meeting and
refusing to swear, and afterward sentenced some thereupon to a Praemunire: And
after that some have been taken and imprisoned for matters of Worship, as
supposed Transgressors of an Act of Parliament, when they have been brought to
Sessions they might not be tried upon the Law upon which they were first taken
and imprisoned, but have been indicted at common Law (as was pretended against
them) for meeting to the terror of the people, by force and arms, etc. and
thereupon sentenced, and their suffering increased; when all that could be
proved against them, was, That they were at a Meeting which was peaceable,
(where it may be some were preaching the Truth, or praying, or all sitting
together in silence:) And thus we have been wronged, and falsely rendered, as
criminal, and our Case is misrepresented: And all this is, that these men may
oppres^ (...) as much as they can, and that under the show of Reason and
Justice; that they may be taken as those that are just in their proceedings,
when there is no Reason nor Truth in the ground thereof, but Justice turned
backward amongst them, and Equity cannot enter.

And now many of the innocent Servants of the Lord suffer imprisonment, some
being committed for three months, and some for a few days, which is all in
enmity against them, with an intent, in those that deal so by them, to suppress
them, or to rid the Nation of them the sooner: and this is done against them
for meeting together in the Worship of God, under pretense against them, that
their Meetings are seditious Conventicles, or tumultuous or unlawful
Assemblies, or under color or pretense of Religious Exercise not allowed by
the Lyturgy or Practice of the Church of England, etc. when as all that could
be proved or evidenced against us, was, That we were in a Meeting, or met at
such a place (which was in a peaceable manner, and neither seditious nor
tumultuous) where it may be some might be preaching Righteousness and Truth, or
praying to the Lord by his Spirit, or in some place sitting in silence, waiting
upon the Lord, where no color nor pretense at all of Religious Exercise or
Worship could be proved; for what as was, must be really in our hearts to the
Lord God in that Case, without any color or pretense as to their view or
capacities who have taken us, or witnessed against any of us; yet the bare
proof that we were at a Meeting (as mentioned) serves them to make us suffer
upon, they not regarding whether the Religious Exercise or Worship which we are
in, be according to the Scriptures of Truth, or the practice of the primitive
Christians and Saints, who met in Houses, Fields, and the like, and worshipped
God in the Spirit and Truth, and therein waited, preached and prayed, as the
Spirit taught them, and gave them utterance, and as they had received the gift,
etc. which we own, and many of us suffer for, and which our Persecutors will
not in words seem to deny, when *it is put to them, nor say that their Lyturgy,
or public Service or Prayer -- does not allow of that Worship or Religious
Exercise which is according to the Scriptures, which stands in the Spirit and
in the Truth; for they would be taken as those that own the Scriptures for
their Rule, and their Lyturgy not to disown the Scriptures, and yet persecute
and oppress us for practicing according to what is written (...) the
Scriptures, in point of Worship, as therein we are led by the Spirit of Truth:
For though the Devices, Ceremonies and Traditions of men in matter of Worship,
and formal praying and confessions, etc. we cannot be tied unto, lest we should
quench or limit the Spirit of prayer and supplication, which God has poured
upon us, (which to do, were against God and his Worship, and so Antichristian)
yet the Lyturgy, as it allows of the Scriptures both to be read and practiced,
it must consequently allow of what the Scriptures allow of; and though we meet
not at those places called Churches, (which were the Popes Mass-houses) yet the
Religious Exercise and Worship we are in, is according to the Scriptures of
Truth, and therefore should not be disallowed of by the Lyturgy, nor any Law
made by man whatsoever, whether it be called Civil or Ecclesiastical: for the
Law of God (in which our eternal felicity is concerned) has no man power to
dispense withal, nor ought any Law to oppose it.

And though it may be objected, That we do not worship or pray in the express
form of the Lyturgy; It does not follow that what we do, is not allowed of by
it: for diversities of forms, or varieties of things, do not make such a
disallowance between them; for where the disallowance is, there must be a
prohibition; but neither the Lyturgy, nor those that conform to it, will seem
to disallow or prohibit the reading or practicing what is written in the
Scriptures of Truth; and therefore how unreasonable a thing is it that they
should go about to destroy their Fellow Creatures (who are both freeborn
Englishmen, and Christians in life) for worshipping God according to the
Scriptures, according to which we can prove our practice, if so much Reason and
Equity might be admitted of, as that the case might be fairly discussed between
Us and our Adversaries.

And if the practice and Canons of the Church of England should be objected
against us, etc. Wherein they are alleged or brought against what we practice
according to the Scriptures of Truth, (which the Lyturgy in many places does
both allow of, and refer to) they are insignificant, and so far contradictory
to the Lyturgy: For if it says, The Scriptures are written for our learning,
and that the Worship of God is perfect freedom, and that his Church is governed
and sanctified by his Spirit, and that men ought to perform duty to God at all
times and in all places; and we for worshipping God in the Spirit, and freedom
of it, be persecuted and oppressed under pretense of not conforming to the
Practice or Canons of the Church; how will these hang together? and what
confusion is it, that men should pretend to a Divine Service, and their
Practice and Proceedings contradict it? or be contrary to much of the matter
contained in their Divine Service, especially in the Collects, wherein many
Scriptures pertinent to our Case, are made use of?

And moreover, How many Innocent Men in this Nation have suffered both from the
Temporal Courts, and Spiritual Courts (so called) for their obeying God in his
Way and Spiritual Worship? As, some have had their Goods taken, and others
imprisoned for meeting together in the Worship of God apart from those places
called Churches, (knowing that God is not to be limited to a place) and at the
same time when they have suffered upon that account, (to loss of Goods and
Imprisonment) they have been proceeded against in the Spiritual Courts, (so
called;) and so double snares laid upon them to increase their suffering: Is
this Christian-like? or the way to establish a Church or Religion? No, no; It Is
the way to set all Sober and Moderate Men further off, and the more to make
them believe that that Building or House is upon no good Foundation, that must
be thus propt or maintained with Persecution, and such ha^sh Proceedings; and
whilst men are seeking out and contriving snares one after another, and many
times will not stick to their own Law, when they have made it, (if they think
it not severe enough) but if they can find any more severe to afflict their
Fellow Creatures by, for their Conscience, they will make use of that: This shows
want of Tenderness, Love or Pity to the Creation of God, and manifests
exceeding hardness of Heart, which the Righteous God sees and takes notice of.

And what Decrees soever be made against us, whilst Reason is pretended as the
ground of all Laws, (and which there is an appearance or show of, in the
Preambles of Laws, as showing the Cause of them) there is none in Reason or
Equity that can reach us: and if one be devised after another against us, the
Lord will clear us, and none ought in Equity or Reason to be inflicted upon us,
we being innocent in our Behavior, and peaceable in our Deportment, which
answers our Principle; so that whilst we do suffer, it is clearly for
Conscience Sake, and for serving and worshipping the Living God, though we and
our Cause be misrepresented by our Persecutors, whose Spirits and Proceedings
are against God, his Truth and Worship, by their persecuting tender
Consciences; though they would not be seen to persecute upon that account, but
as being Seditious or Rebellious, (when no such thing can be proved against us)
which is worse than the Heathen, or King Darius his Presidents, Princes and
Counselors, that sought occasion against Daniel: For when they could find no
occasion against him concerning the Kingdom, (or Civil matters) but he was
faithful, neither was there any error or fault found in him; then they took
occasion against him for praying to God, to have a Decree made against him: and
so did not set a false gloss upon their proceedings, to render him criminal or
obnoxious to the Government, but cleared him from that, but in their way dealt
plainly, Dan. 6. saying, We shall not find any occasion against this Daniel,
except we find it against him concerning the Law of his God, which Law he
chused to obey and to suffer for, rather then any contrary Decree of man, as we
have chosen, who suffer for obeying the Law of God; and none other occasion
have our Persecutors against us, what ever falsely and unrighteously be
pretended against us. And whereas some have alleged that Scripture, Ezra. 7.
26. where Artaxerxes King of Persia said unto Ezra, Whosoever will not do the
Law of thy God, and the Law of the King, let Judgment be executed speedily
upon him, whether it be unto Death, or to Banishment, or to Confiscation of
Goods, or to Imprisonment, etc. This makes nothing for them that persecute,
imprison, or go about to banish, or destroy innocent persons for obeying the
Law of God in Spiritual Matters; for here he prefers the Law of God, and takes
it and the Law of the King together, (as supposing that the Law of the King was
not to contradict the Law of God) and the executing of judgment (though the
Kings Law might relate to civil things) was not to contradict the Law of God,
for the King did refer it to such Judges as knew the Law of God, verse. 25. and
that they might teach them; so as he was more ingenuous and moderate then those
that will not suffer our Case (when upon our Trial) to be examined or disputed,
whether it be according to the Law of God and Christ, or not, which we are
willing to be tried by.

Now, O England, and thy Rulers, consider these things, and what you are a
doing; and consider your sad estate and condition, whiles endeavors are used
amongst you to root out the Righteous out of the Nation, and to make them
Transgressors, when nothing of the breach of any just and civil Law, either of
God or man can be proven against them; for these things God will assuredly
visit, who has a people among those you persecute that are dear unto him, who
can neither comply with men's wills or ways, contrary to his Light or Law in
them, nor be leavened with that Spirit of envy and profaneness which is broken
forth, to the dishonor of God and his Name; and if God had not destroyed
Sodom, had there been ten righteous persons in it, what will become of you, if
you go on to root out and banish or destroy such as fear God, and live
righteously and soberly amongst men, against whom you have no occasion, but
concerning the Law of God, and his Worship? Therefore repent, repent, and fear
and dread the Living God! for a heavy day will come upon all Sion's Oppressors,
and all Workers of Iniquity, who, because that judgment is not speedily
executed upon them, their hearts are hardened, and set in them to do wickedly.

From a tried Servant of the Lord, in suffering with his Seed, for his Name and
Worship.
G. W.

