THE Whole Duty OF A WOMAN: Or a Guide to the Female Sex. From the Age of
Sixteen to Sixty, etc.

Being Directions, How Women of all Qualities and Conditions, ought to Behave
themselves in the Various Circumstances of this Life, for their Obtaining not
only Present, but Future Happiness.

I. Directions how to Obtain the Divine and moral Virtues of Piety, Meekness,
Modesty, Chastity, Humility, Compassion, Temperance and Affability, with their
Advantages, and how to avoid the Opposite Vices.

II. The Duty of Virgins, Directing them what they ought to do, and what to
avoid, for gaining all the Accomplishments required in that State. With the
Whole Art of Love, etc. 3. The Whole Duty of a Wife, 4. The Whole Duty of a
Widow, etc. Also, Choice Receipts in Physic, and Surgery With the Whole Art
of Cookery, Preserving, Candying, Beautifying, etc.

Written by a Lady.

The Second Edition.

London, Printed for J. Gwillim, against the Great James Tavern in
Bishopsgate-street, 1696.

LICENSED according to Order.

D. Poplar

THE PREFACE, TO Ladys, Gentlewomen, and others, of all Degrees.
HAving had a Liberal, Education and many Opportunities to Improve what my
Younger years were Seasoned with, I have been no ways Neglectful to my self or
others, in Gaining Knowledge and Experience in such useful things, as not only
already have, but further will, prove Advantageous to both; and much Oblige
Posterity, when I am Resting in a Silent Grave, by a Seasonable Publication of
them. For, since Age grows fast upon me, it is but Necessary I should do all
the Good I can, before I go out of this World, that I may find the Comfort of
it in another.

Three things we are Chiefly Born for, Viz.

1. TO Serve GOD.

2. Our Country.

And Lastly Our Slves.

Though some, not minding this Rule, make the Latter the only Scope of their
Lives; but are more Lightly concerned about the two Antecedents: Yet their
Practices ought to be no Discouragement, nor Example.

You will find in this Work, such Variety of all things, properly Adapted to
our Sex, that you must (I believe) Confess, there is nothing that Reasonably
Contributes to a perfect Accomplishment, or Management, in the several Stages,
or Stations of Life, Omitted, And therefore I could Frame to my Self no
properer Title, than that of The Whole Duty of a Woman. Especially from the Age
of Sixteen, to Sixty: For between these periods there is found the Truest
Portion of Good in this Life. If it be Considered, that on the other side,
first the Vnderstaning is Weak and Green, Incapable of forming Sound Notions,
of things Solid, and Substantially profitable; either as they tend to Outward,
or Inward Tranquillity. And passing the Latter, Age, and its Uneasy Attendants,
frequently Debilitate the Faculties; and as it were, Seiz on, and Carry away
the Memory, in a large Degree; However, it may Tollerably in one Sense or
other, suit Tender Years, and Extreme Age, by Directing them in such Ways and
Methods, as cannot but reasonably Afford them all reasonable Advantages, and
Satisfaction; especially to keep up a Healthful Constitution here, and Teach
them to Trace those paths of Virtue, that Lead to the Well-Springs of Life, and
Endless Health hereafter.

But not to Delay your Expectation, in dwelling long on a Preface, never
doutbting, but it will sufficiently commend it self, without any further
Apology, I Bequeath it to you as my Legacy; and indeed, the last in this kind,
I shall be capable of Presenting you withal; Hoping you will Seriously Weigh
and Consider it, as it was Meant, and Intended for your Good and Singular
Advantage.

THE Whole Duty OF A WOMAN.
CHAP. I. Directions how to Obtain the Divine and Mortal Virtues of Piety,
Meekness, Modesty, Chastity, Humility; Compassion, Temperance, and Affability;
with their Advantages: And how to Avoy'd the opposite Vices, as Impiety,
Obstinacy, Immodesty, Uncleanness, Pride, Incharitableness, Intemperence, and
Disdain; with the Mischiefs that attend them.
BEING to Treat of the many Graces and Virtues that are required to be strictly
Observed by our Sex, I think I cannot do better than to ^egi^ with that which
more, immediately ^s r^^^ired to Beautify the Soul; and so o^ ^he ^est in order.

Piety then is an excellent adornment to the Soul and Body. And indeed Sollomon
well Admonished, when he bid you Remember your, Creator in the days of your
Youth, for your Duty to God is an Introduction to all other Felicities in this
World, and that to come

Be therefore mindful of this, Pray earnestly, that he may enable you in the
performence of it. Meditate on this Love and Kindness toward you, that he may
continue his Blessings, and increase them to your comfort. Consider you are
wholly Gods Portion, by title of Creation; and that whatever you enjoy proceeds
from him, as the Waters Flow from the Fountain: And therefore all your
Endeavors Faculties, and Powers must be entierly employed in his Service, in
doing all the good you can, our Sex being privileged with great advantages of
this Kind, by reason of the leisure that have to proceed in it.

2. It is not alone sufficient that the Service of God is imprinted in our
Minds, but it must be put into Practice, and nothing that is in your power
omited; and if you fail in either, you must re-double your, diligence, to
re-call the time you have spent a miss; with full resolutions and purposes to
be more cautious for the future. And be often in Meditation and Prayer, That no
Temptation may find an opertunity to six upon your wandering Thoughts; these
two are the main Pillars of Religious Duty. They are like the Spies that
searched the Land of Canan, the one views and the other gathers and brings it
home as the sweetest Fruits of Heaven. Meditation like the Eye, views our
Mercies; and prayer, like the Hand, reaches to us those Mercies: Or Meditation
is like a Factor, who goes abroad to gather in what you want; and Prayer, like
a Ship, goes forth and brings to you what you desire: And is both the Duty
of the soul and Body.

3. Let God be all in all with you; set your affections upon nothing that may
divide you from him, for that is a Robing him of his Honor; and then Remember
he is a Jealous God Love him with all your Heart, and all your Soul, and all
your Strength.

Be in Kindness and Charity with all People. Relieve those that are in want
according to your Ability. Instruct those that do Amiss; and Persuade them to
amend and reform their Lives. Give no occasion of Scandal or Reproach: but let
your Conversations set an Example to other (...) your Private Devotions be
Frequent (...); and in the public Assemblies of (...) Worship, behave your
Selves with all (...), Modesty, and becoming Decency (...) neither your
Thoughts nor Eyes warder. Be attentive and fix your mind on what was the
occasion of your coming thither, that Gods Grace may flow to you, and so his
Word may be Imprinted in your Hearts. Forget not to Communicate; but above all
be sure by Prayer, Self-examination, Works of Mercy and Charity, to prepare
your selves for the reception of that Adorable Mystery. Let not Anger nor
Passion prevail over you, but be Humble and Meek, and so shall you prosper in
all your ways. You shall have a goodly heritage, and your line shall fall
happily in a fair Land: For the Lord shall be your Portion, and your exceeding
great Reward. He will give you the Blessings of the Right Hand and of the Left;
Protect and keep you safe in this life, and in the next make you to Dwell with
him in Eternal Glory. When on the contrary

Impiety is that which Poisons the Sweets of Life, Taints you Names and
Reputations, and Wounds your Souls; Lays perpetual Snares and Stumbling Blocks
in your way, to make you fall into various mischiefs. But that which is most
grievous to be born, it makes God your Enemy in the end; whose Anger is sharper
than a two Edged Sword. In brief, Sin is a Monster that came into the World by
the disobedience of our first parents; and brought with it a world of woes; and
though the Devil, who is its Parent, labors, by his Agents, very
industriously, to cover its Deformities, under borrowed names and specious
pretenses, yet, to the Eyes of the Virtuous, it is so Ugly and Deformed, that
it is to be loothed and abhored; for besides the innumerable mischiefs it
compasses here, to unthinking Souls, as it at its first entrance brought our
Temporal Death along with it, so, if you hug it in your Bosom, and carry it out
of the world with you, it will lead you into Eternal Death and Damnation.
Therefore as it is an Enemy to God, be you always at enmity with it, so that at
last you may arive at the end, of Glory, by all the ways of Grace, Prudence and
Religions.

Meekness is not only Recommended to all, as a Christian Virtue, but
particularly to Women, as a peculiar Accomplishment of the Sex. And St. Peter,
after the mentioning of all exquisite and costly Deckings of Art, commends to
you above all, this one Ornament of a Meek and Quiet Spirit; with this eminent
attestation, That it is in the sight of God of great Price. And therefore to
all that will not enter into Dispute with God, and Contest his Judgment, it
must be so. But although Meekness be in it self an entire single Virtue, yet it
is Diversified according to the several Faculties of the Soul, over which it
has Influence; so that there is the Meekness of Understanding, a Meekness of
the Will, and a Meekness of the Affections; all of which concur to make up a
meek and quiet Spirit. And of these in their Order.

1. The Meekness of the Understanding consists in a pliableness to Conviction,
owning our Faults and unworthyness without repining.

2. The Meekness of the Will lies in its subordination and submission to a more
supreme Authority, which is, Divine things, is The Will of God; and in Natural
and Morral, Reason; and in Human constitutions, the Command of Superiors: And
so long as the Will Governs it self by these, in their respective orders, it
transgresses not the Meekness required of it.

3. The Meekness of the Affections consists in reducing the Passions to a Calm
Temper, not suffering them to make uproars within, to disturb ones self, nor
without, to disquiet others; and to this Regulation Meekness is generally
Subservant. Its Opposites are then to be computed Threefold, viz.

1. Conceitedness, That is a Fancy that all you do is stamped as Standard, and
passes Current in your own Conceit, how bad soever your Actions appears in the
Eyes of others, or are really so in themselves, being your own Judge without
harkening to convincing Reasons, or just Reproof.

2. Obstinancy in Resisting the motions of Gods Holy Spirit, or harkening to
the wholesome Advice and Directions of those he has set over you, to watch for
your Soul. And in the Second Branch, in Resisting the Powers he has Ordained,
and put in Authority over you, spurning against Reason and Justice.

3. Inordinate Passions troublesome, to your selves and others as Revenge,
Fury, etc. But that you may Avoid these, hear what our Savior says, viz.
Blessed are the Meek in Spirit, for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven.

1. Modesty is properly termed, The Science of Decent Motion; as being a guider
and regulater of all decent and comely Carriage and Behavior; Checking and
con^^ouling Rudeness, and any thing tending to Confidence and unmannerliness;
and is held the great Civilizer of Conversation; Ballancing the Mind with
humble and sober thoughts of your Selves, and Ordering every part of the
outward frame, in the most winning and obliging manner.

2. It appears in the Face in calm and comely Looks, where it makes due
impressions; so that it seems from thence to have Acquired the Name of
Shame-facedness. And truly, what ever the Modern Opinion of some may be, there
is nothing adds a greater Luster to Feminine Beauty.

3. Modesty confines it self not to the Face only, for there it may, in some
sense, be said to be in Shadow and Effigy, but ^preads it self in life, Motion
and Words: banishing all Indecency and Rudeness; all Insolent Vauntings and
Supercilious Dains, or what else may render our Sex troublesome or uneasy to
Company or Conversation. It Refines and Tunes the Language, Modulates the Tone
and Accents; not admitting the Intrusion of unhansom, earnest, or Loud
Discourse. So that the Modest Tongues is like the imaginable Music of the
Spheres, sweet and charming, but not to be heard at distance.

4. As Modesty prescribes the manner, so it also does the measure of Speaking.
It restrains all excessive Talkativeness, for that indeed is one of the
greatest assumings imaginable; and so rude an imposing on Company, that there
can scarce be a greater Indecency in Conversation.

Modesty therefore ought, if you have respect to Virtue and a good Name, to
appear in it is highest elevation. Your Looks, your Speech, and the course of
your whole Behavior, should own an humble distrust of your selves; rather
being willing to learn and observe, than to dictate and prescribe, unless upon
very Emergent occasions, and that to those that are rambling in the Paths of
looseness. And therefore, as you value your Reputation, keep up to the
strictness of this Virtue, least when you conceive it not amiss, in trivial
matters, to launch beyond the bounds of Modesty, you are violently carried too
far to Retreat before you are aware; as I shall show you in the contrary on
this Excellent Adornment of our Sex.

Immodesty is held, even in Heathen Nations, a great Reproach and Scandal,
especially where it is found in Women; and St. Paul, who spoke by an excellent
Spirit, Commands, That Women Adorn themselves in Modest Apparel, with
Shamefacedness, and Sobriety; not with Broidered Hair, or Gold, or Pearl, or
costly Array, but (which becomes Women professing Godliness) with Gods Works,
1. Tim. 2.9. So that when those that are not well affected to Modesty, have
strained their Art to the highest pitch, an Innocent Modesty and native
Simplicity of Looks, will Eclipse their Imaginary Splendour and Triumph over
their Artificial Beauties. And indeed, if a Woman be Adorned with all the
Embellishments of Art, and care of Nature to boot, yet, if Boldness Scorn, and
haughty Looks be imprinted in her Face, They blot out all the Lines of
Comeliness, and, like a dark Cloud over the Sun, shade the view of all that was
otherwise Amiable; and renders its blackness but the more observable, by being
placed nearer somewhat that was apt to attract the Eyes, and leave a strain on
their Names and Reputations. (...) burning desires and impatient waitings,
Tediousness, Delay, Sufferance of Affronts, and Amasement of Discovery.
Chastity, above all, is so essential and Natural to our Sex, that every
declination from it, is a proportionable receding from Whomanhood; but the
total abandoning it, ranks you among Bruits, and sets you as far beneath those,
as anquired vileness is below a native. An Unchaste Woman is looked upon as a
kind of a Monster; a thing divided and distorted from its proper form,
espicially by Chaste and Virtuous Persons. And I dare Appeal to the forwardest
of them, that thus go astray (and in dishonouring themselves, give occasion of
Scandal to our Sex) whether, at first, they could not with more ease have kept
their Virtue than have lost it? Certainly such are the Horrors and Shame that
preceeds those first Guilts, that they must, as it may be termed, commit a Rape
upon themselves, (force their own reluctance and aversions) before they can
become willing Prostitutes to others; this their Seducers seem wellenough to
understand, and upon that score, are at the pains of so many preparitive
Courtings, and expense of presents, as if this was so uncouth a Crime, that
there were no hopes t^^ ^^troduce it, but by a Confederacy of some more
familiar Vices, as Pride, or Covetousness: Therefore have a care of the Snares.

2. Know you not, says St. Paul, That your Body is the Temple of the Holy
Ghost? (...) this be so, will you defile it, when God himself threatens to
destroy you if you do? But I shall conclude this Section Briefly, in the words
of St. Gregory, Uncleanness, says he, is the Parent of these Monsters, viz.
Blindness of Mind, Inconsideration, Precipitancy or Giddiness in Actions, Self
Love, Harred of God, Love of present Pleasures, a dispight or despair of the
Joys of Religion here, and of Heaven hereafter. Whereas a Pure Mind, in a Chaste
Body, is the Mother of Wisdom and Deliberation, Sober Councils, and Ingenious
Actions, Open Deportment and Sweet Carriage, Sincere Principles, and
Vnprejudiced Understanding, Love of God, and Self Denial, Peace and Confidence,
Holy Prayers, and Spiritual Comforts, a Pleasure of Spirit infinitely greater
than the Foolish and Beastly Pleasures of Unchastity. And therefore to overcome
it, is certainly the greatest Pleasure; for indeed no Victory is greater than
that which is gotten over Lustful Inclinations.

Humility is a great Ornament to your Sex; and the Graces of it are Exercised
by the following Rules.

1. Think not your selves better for any thing that happens to you from
without, for though you may have many Gifts bestowed upon you better than
others, yet consider you are a Mortal Creature, wholly relying; as well as
others, upon Gods Protection, Mercy, and Providence; and have nothing to
commend you to your self, but that you have a little time to employ in his
Service who brought you into the World, and in whose hands are all your Riches,
and Honors; and even your Breath of Life: Who can, if he pleases, take from
you what he has given, and bestow it on the Poorest and Meanest Person on
Earth. However, Humility consists not in Railing against your self, or in going
in base Apparel, walking softly or submissively, but in a hearty and mean
Opinion of your selves; being content to want Praise or outward Applause, not
troubled or angry when you are slighted or undervalued. Never be ashamed of
your Birth, or Parents, or Calling; for the Meanness or Poverty of any of them,
but speak as readily and indifferently of Meanness as you would do of Greatness
Primislaus, King of Bohemia, was raised (by the Queen casting her Affections
accidentially on him as she passed by his Field) from the Plough to the Throne,
yet was so humble, That he kept his country Shoes always by him, to put him in
mind of his lowly condition. And King Agathoeles Furniture of his Table
demonstrated that he was raised from a Potter to be King of Sicily. But why
need I insist upon these? When the King of Kings propounded himself to Imitable
by his Disciples, so Signally in nothing as in the Twin Sisters, viz. Mee^ness
and Humility, Learn, says he, of me, for I am Meek and Humble, and you shall
find Rest to your Souls

2. Never speak any thing directly tending to your own Praise, that is, on
purpose to be Commended; and when you have said or done any thing for which you
cannot avoid receiving Praise, take it indifferently; and then disrobing your
self of it return it to God; Reflecting upon him as the Giver of the Gift, or
the blesser of the Action: And give him thanks for making you an Instrument of
his glory, or the Benefit of others. Secure a good Name to your selves, by
living Virtuously and Humbly, but let it be Nursed abroad, and not in your own
Bosom. Let your Faces, like Moses, shine to others, but make no looking-Glass
for your selves. use no Stratagem or devices to get praise, nor seek for any
reward here, but walking uprightly and humbly with God, and those you Converse
with here, you shall one day be exalted to Heaven, when the Proud and haughty
shall sink in the depth of Misery.

Pride is Opposite to humility, as Light is to Darkness; and indeed in the last
day, The latter will lead you to the first, and the former, those that court
it, to the last.

1. Consider then what such vile Creaturs, who are but Dust and Ashes, have to
be Proud of: If of our Bodis, those are week and impure, subject to Diseases,
Decays, to Die, Corrupt in a Grave, and turn to Rottenness.

2. Is it your Strength you boast or grow proud in? In that you are inferior
to many Irrational Creaturs: Nay, That which makes too many of our Sex Proud
and look down with disdain, even the conceit of beauty, is of no value, to make
such a swelling in their minds, seeing, in color and fragrancy, they are
Rivalled and out done by various Flowers; and when it is most florid and gay, a
few Agus Fits change it into paleness, and Wrinkles of Deformity.

3. If Proud of Learning or Parts, the first of these, in its proper sphere,
runs contrary to Pride, teaching Humility, The second, Civility and a modest
behavior. To be Proud of Riches is yet more Foolish; for if you will exalt
your self above others because you have more Gold, consider, at your own rate,
how much you are inferior to a Gold Mine; how much you are to give place to a
Cabinet of Jewels. If Proud of your Birth, you are Proud of the Blessings of
others, not of your own; For if your Parent were more Eminent in any
circumstance than your Neighbors, you are to thank God, and Rejoice in them
more than any value in your self. Remember then to check all pride in your
mind; For what were you before you were begotten? Nothing. What in the first
Regions of your Dwelling, before your Birth? Uncleanness. What for many years
after? Weakness. What in all your Life? A great Sinner. What in all your
Excellencies? A mere Debtor to God, to your Parents, to the Earth, and to many
Creatures. Mediate but on these things, and you will soon find there is nothing
more reasonable than to be Humble, and nothing more foolish than to be Proud.

1. Compassion seems-Natural to our Sex, whose soft Breasts were made to
entertain tenderness and pity So that I find Solomon could not conclude the
Character of his Virtuous Women without it, Prove. 31.20. She stretches forth
her hands to the Poor; and rea^heth her Bread to the needy. That is, She was
Compassionate, and had Bowels full of Mercy; and when she saw any poor object,
it did, as it were, command an Alms. So that the Application is very obvious,
and Admonishes all that own the title of Virtuous Women, to prefer the
Necessities of others before their own Superfluities and Delicacies. Nay if you
look further, and consider who it is that is Personated in the Poor, that Beggs
in every needy distressed suppliant, and that will own every act of Mercy as
done to himself, you will moderate your Enjoyments, and exercise yous selves in
this act of Compassion, as ashamed to serve your selves before the Poor, or let
them stand Naked, or Hungry, whilst you are sollacing whith that which would
Relive them; least at the General Day, when you stand in the greatest need, you
be justly upbraided with this want of Compassion; and Eternally excluded from
all Comforts, because you refused to lend my succor to his Distressed Members
on Earth, which he takes as done unto himself.

2. Consider if the Bowels of Gods tender Mercy should be shut up toward you,
in what a miserable condition you would be, when from his bounty proceeds all
that you Enjoy. Look up to the giver with a serious Contemplation of Mind, and
you will soon perceive to what end his Donations are bestowed upon you; and
find the Stock he has Lent, is mainly to Try you in this Virtue of Compassion
or Charity, to those he has restrained the things of this World from; And then
you will find it a very commendable Industry, to qualify your selves to be
helpful to the poor, in as many Instances as you can: In not only opening your
Purses, but Dispensatories, to provide Medicines for such as by Disease or
Casualty want that sort of Relief. A Charity which I dare not belive but is
practiced by many, and I wish it ware by more; That our Niser Dames who Study
only Cosmeticks for themselves, would change the Scene, and instead of
Reparing, or rather Disguising their own Complections, Study the Reparation of
the Decrepit Limbs of poor Suppliants: And certainly, though it be less
Fashionable, it is a much better sight to see a Lady binding up a Sore, then
Beautifying her Face; and she will cast a much sweeter favor in Gods Nostrils,
with the Smell of Unguents and Balsams, then with the most exquisit Odours and
Perfumes. For since God professes, Isa. 1. That the very Incense designed for a
part of his Worshhip, was an Abomination to him, because not accompanied with
the Acts of Mercy, we cannot imagine he will better approve of those, who have
no higher aim then Delicacy and Sensuallity.

3. Besides this part of Compassion, there is another act of Mercy; which is to
forgive Injuries, laying aside all resentments and thoughts of Revenge, though
to some of the hot Spirits of our Sex, this may be thought a very hard Lesson,
yet if they do not, they must confess they dissemble with God, when they say
The Lords prayer, or at least not expect to be forgiven those Trespasses which
they implore a Pardon for. Consider yet again, That God knows the Secrets of
all Hearts, and if we forgive not others, we cannot expect to be Forgiven.

1. Uncharitableness is that which Strikes at the Foundation of Christianity.
And those that divest themselves of Mercy and Compassion, but in vain declare
them selves to be Christians. For, what can you think of your selves, when you
wilfully disobey what Christ has chiefly Enjoyner you, and in Lieu of it,
promises Salvation And more specially, How can you answer it if you suffer him
to be Supplanted in his poor suffering Members, not only be your Needs, but
Excesses, who have so devoted your Hearts to Vanity and Luxury, That you have
neither Will nor Power to succor the wants of others? How unequal and
disproportionate is it, That those that Study fling away Money on themselves,
cannot be tempted, by any oppertunity or distress, to Drop an Alms to the Poor!
What a Proposterous sight, it is, to See a Lady whose Gay Attire gives her the
glittering of the Sun, yet has nothing of its other Properties, never to cheer
any Drooping, Languishing Creature by her Influence? It is the Council of the
son of Sirach, Not to give the Poor any occasion to Curse you Eccl. 4.5. but
sure such Persons do it, if the Poor have not a greater Charity than they
exemplify to them; for when they find such Hard Hearts under such Soft
Raiments, and a Poor, Starving Wretch shall look upon such Gay Creatures, and
see that any one of their Baubles and Loose Appendages, or Dress, bear a price
that would warm their Empty Bowels, and refreth their Fainting Spirits, it is a
shrewd trial of their Meekness. Poverty is apt enough of it self to imbitter
the spirit, and needs not such an additional Temptation. Let this, I say, be
now seriously Remembered, least you fall hereafter under the same exprobrating
Remembrance with the Rich Man in the Gospel, Luke 16.25. Remember that thou in
thy Lifetime receivedst thy good things, and Lazarus that which was Evil; but
now he is comforted and thou art Tormented.

2. Besides this part of Mercy in giving Alms, there is another, which is
forgiving Injuries to Persons of all Ranks: This is that part of Compassion
which we peculiarly call Clemency; a Virtue which not only Christianity but
Morality recommends. The Heathens were admired in this; and the Christians far
exceeded them in the Primitive Times, following the Example of their great Lord
and Master, who prayed for his Crucifiers, viz. Father forgive them, etc. Luke
31.34. But now we find it much altered, and therefore it ought to be amended by
those that expect to be forgiven of God, Revenge and Malice being the offspring
of Satan, having innumerable Mischiefs and Miseries attending them; and
therefore they must be avoided as Monsters made for Ruin and Destruction. It
should therefore methinks be an easy determination, whether to Embrace that
Clemency and Compassion which you see Exemplified in the Wisest and Best of
Men, or that Savage Fierceness of the Ignoble Creatures. This is certain, That
there is not any Woman would be contented to assume the outward form of any
Ravenous, Revengeful Creature. Why then should you subject your Nobler Parts
and Mind to such Transformation? For as there is no Monster so Deformed as
those Compounded of Man and Beast, so nothing can be more Unnatural, or Odious
than a Woman Tiger.

Temperance, as Sobriety is the Bridle of the Passions of Desire, so Temperance
is the Bitt and Curb to restrain us to a moderate use of Meat, Drink and
Recreations, so that they may best consist with our Health, and not hinder, but
help the work of the Soul, by the necessary supports they administer; and this
principally consists in the Act of the Soul, for it is a Grace that chooses
natural means in order to promote Natural and Holy Ends. It is Exercised in
Eating and Drinking, because they are necessary, however it permits the use of
them only as they Minister to Lawful Health; but when Delight is the only End,
and rests and dwells there long, tending to Riot, there it is the contrary; for
such Eating and Drinking is not a Serving God, but an Inordinate Action,
because it is not in the way to that end: And to avoid these Latter,

1. Be not often at great Feasts, nor at all in Dissolute Company, for variety
of objects Steals away the Heart; and Company is either Violent or Enticing.

2. Be severe in your Judgment concerning your Proportion, and suffer no
occasion to make you enlarge beyond what is ordinary, lest you exceed the
bounds of Moderation; and as you take this caution your self, never urge any
one to Eat or Drink beyond their desires. Take, in this, St. Paul's Advice, Let
us, who are of the day, be Sober, etc.

3. Begin and end your time with Thanksgiving, so that you may carry your Mind
and spirit to the Celestial Table, often thinking on it, and often desiring
it, that by enkindling your desires to Heavenly Banquets, you may be
indifferent and less Passionate for the Earthly. Mingle Discourses pious, or in
some sense profitable, and in all sense; charitable and innocent. To Conclude,
Let your Drink so serve your Meat, as your Meat does your Health, that it be
apt to convey and digest it and refresh the Spirits, but let it never go beyond
such Refreshment as may a little lighten the present Load of a Sad or Troubled
Spirit; never to Inconveniency, Lightness, Sottishness, Vanity or Intemperance.
Be not Impatiently desirous of any thing, so that you cannot Abstain from it,
for that is to lose your Liberty and to become a Servant to Meat and Drink.

Intemperance is hurtful to Nature, by Creating Diseases; to your Good name, by
bringing a Scandal on it; and to your Soul, by clogging the Spirits and
hindering it in the Offices of its Devotion, especially Intemperance in
Drinking, a Vice Detestable in all, but prodigious in a Woman, who in that case
puts a double violence upon her Nature, the one in the Intemperance, the other
in the Immodesty; and though such may take their Copy from Men, yet nothing
Human is such a Beast as a woman who gives her self every way up to
Intemperance.

Affability, is so becoming our Sex, that it is one of their Chiefest
Ornaments, in Moral Virtues; and more absoluely necessary in them than in Men.
As for its Cause, it derives it self either from a Native Candor and Generosity
of Mind, or from a Noble and Ingenious Education, or something jointly from
both; and these are as good Originals as any thing Merely Moral can flow from:
And this Virtue reaches further, and grasps at that which is Divine, for as far
as it partakes of Humility: it must of Sincerity also, that being a Virtue
whose very Elements are Plainness and Simplicity; for as it has no designs that
want a cover, so it needs none of those Subtilties and Simulations, those
Pretenses and Artifices requisite to those that do. It Is the Precept of the
Apostle, Philip. 2.3. In Lowlyness of Mind let each esteem others better than
themselves.

2. Courtesy and an Affable Carriage and Behavior are such Charms, that they
Endear all, but especially your Inferiors, to you, and keep up a Reputation in
spite of many blemishes: A kind Word or Look from a Superior is strangely
taking, and Insensibly Steals away the Heart. The Grecians comparing the
Affability and Easy Access of Cleomene, with the Sullen State and Pride of
other Princes, were so Enamoured with it, that they judged him only worthy to
be their King; and as there is no certainer, so also no cheaper way of gaining
Love, and winding into the Affections of those you Converse with: A Friendly
Salutation is as easy as a Frown, or Reproach; and that Kindness may be
preserved by them, which, if once forfeited, will not at a far greater price be
recovered. Besides, when Vicissitudes are considered, it may be a Providence to
you, the greatest Persons, upon the turns of Fortune, often stand in need of
the assistance of the meanest, and then you will be sure of Friends at need to
Comfort you; and Rejoice that by your Affability you have Linked them to your
Interest.

Disdain is contrary to this, and will not fail to procure you Enemies, as it
is it self an enemy to Civil Society and Conversation: Frowns, Haughty Looks,
Surly Words, or an expectation of more Cringing and Submission than is due,
cannot be well relished or digested. A Proud Temper is hateful to all,
especially that are of an Affable Disposition, it shows the Birth, or Spirit
mean or poor; and gives a suspicion that it is but a Pageantry of some Mushrome
newly sprung up that stands so stiff. So that instead of keeping others at
distance, this invites them to a nearer inspection, that if there be any flaw
either in their Life or Birth, 'twill be sure to e discovered, there being no
such prying Inquisitor as Curiosity, urged (...) a sense of Contempt.

CHAP. II. The Duty of Virgins: Directing them what they ought to Do, and what
to Avoid, (...) gaining all the Accomplishments Requir^^ in that State. With
the Whole Art of Love Being Directions how to Receive the Addresses either of a
Nobleman, Gentleman, o^ Tradesmen, with that Prudence, as not (...) be
accounted Scornful, Morose, or Fond^ Whereby Persons of the Meanest Rank, man
Raise their Fortunes to the highest pitch o^ Honor and Greatness.
HAving given you an Account of thos^ General Qualifications which are a^ once
the Duty and Ornament of your Se^ there are notwithstanding Specific
differences arising from the several States and Circumstances of Life, some
whereof, may exact ^reater degrees even of the former Virtues, and all may have
some distinct or particular Requisites adapted to that particular State and
Condition; and therefore of these my purposed Method engages me to Consider in
their Order; That is of Virginity, Marriage, and Widowhood. Which as they
differ widely from each other, so for the discharging their respective Duties,
there are particular Cautions worthy to be Adverted.

Virginity, or the Virgin State, is first in ^^der, (the Infancy and Childhood
of which ^^illingly pass over, and Address my self ^^ou, when it is supposed
you are at Years (...) Discretion; and that may be properly ^^anted at the Age
of Sixteen, and so onward.) This is that part of Life that claims ^ great share
of Virtue and Innocence to set ^t off with a true Luster, but above all
Modesty, as it relates to Chastity and Decent behavior, in which you in this
State are ^ore especially concerned, for the very ^ame of Virgin imports a
Critical Niceness in ^s Point. Every Indecent Curiosity, or Im^e Fancy is a
Deflowring of the Mind; and ^ery the least Corruption of them gives ^me Degrees
of Defilement to the Body too, or between the State of Pure Unspotted (...)
Choosing Imployeth an Approving, and if you six on any against whom the World ^
as given Judgment, it is not so well natured as altogether to believe you are
Averse to the way of Living they follow, ^nce it does not Discourage you from
ad^itting such into your Bosom Secrets; and (...) least you will be looked upon
as a well ^isher, if not a partner in their Faults, if ^ou can forgive or
slightly pass them over, (...) is not presumed you be less Indulging to our
self.

If it happen after your Engagement, that ^ose you have Contracted Friendship
with ^ould Deviate from the Rules of Virtue, ^ou ought however not to be over
Credu^us by show of Belief in the beginning of ^e Discovery, but being well
informed of ^e Truth, you must, without breaking too ^oughly, make a fair and
quick Retreat ^om such mistaken Acquaintance, least in ^eing too trady, the
Scandal and Guilt re^ect upon your Good Name and Reputati^n: And this is so
nice a Point, That as ^ou must not be too hasty to join in the ^ensure of your
Friends, so on the other side, ^ot to Defend them with too much warmth; or if
the Report be True, you will draw ^n ill Appearance upon your self, and it will
be Conjectured you Plead in this Case not without some Consideration to your
self; your Ignorance may lessen the Guilt but will improve the Censure of the
Just upon you. Let the Good Sense of thosE you contract Friendship with, be a
chief Ingredie^^ in your Choice of them, else let your Reputation be never so
clear, it may (...) Clouded by their Faults.

Censure is to be avoided as much (...) may be, either by you on others, or in
L^ving so that you give no Occasion for i^ And before you give it on others,
let the cause of it be considered, and then you a^ not to give Sentence as a
Majestrate, or as ^ you had special Authority to bestow (...) your Discretion,
a good or an ill Name; an^ when you do it, dwell not too long upon (...) but
give a gentle touch and so pass it over unless you can do good by it, in
Reclaiming Vice and promoting the ways of Virtu^ and this must be done as
privately as m^ be, lest the Party Judging Uncharitable of your Intentions,
runs into worse Occasi^^ of Scandal, and it Reflect upon your for making your
ill-timed Reproaches. A V^tue stuck with Thorns is too rough for the Age, and
therefore it must, to make (...) more pleasing, be Adorned with so^^ Flowers,
or else in these particulars it will be unwillingly Entertained; so that where
it may be sit to strike, do it as Easily and Gentle as you can, do it in the
Tenderness of our Sex, and so you may assure your selves, That where you care
to do it, you will wound them more, and do less Hurt to your self, by a gentle
Stroke, than by being Harsh and Violent; Be therefore quick in seeing Faults,
that you may avoid them in your self, but slow in Exposing them: You are in
this, as in all other Cases, to consider the Invisible thing called a good
Name, it is made up of the Breath of Numbers that speak well of you, so that if
by a Disobliging Word you silence the Meanest, the Gale which is to bear up
your Esteem will lose of its Strength, and let it a little flag; and though
nothing is so vain as the two earnest pursuit of Empty Applause, yet to be
kindly Used and well thought on by the World, is like a Glory above a Woman's
Head; it is like a Perfume that Scents wherever she goes; it is a Charm
against Spite and Ill Will; Malice may empty her Quiver without Wounding, for
without the consent of the World, a Scandal does not go deep, it is only a
slight stroke upon the injured Party, Returning with greater force upon the
Inflictor.

Behavior and Conversation, in this you must take Virtue and Prudence along
with you for your Guard: Be Vigilent and Cautions, because in this particular
you will have many Eyes upon you, and therefore it must incline strangely
toward the Reserved Part, yet not altogether Excluding a mixture of Freedom,
so far as it may be Innocent and Seasonably Timed; yet if you find this makes
your Carriage subject to Censure, you must in some measure restrain it; for if
you see the Danger at never so great a distance, you are at that time to
shorten the Line of Liberty; for if you allow your self to go to the extent of
every thing that is Lawful, you are so very near going farther, that thosE who
lie at Watch will begin to count upon you, Mankind, from the double Temptation
of Vanity and Desire being very ready to Construe every thing a Woman does to
the hopeful side; and few will make an Impudent attempt till they have some
Glimmering of Encouragement. It Is more safe therefore to prevent such
forwardness, than to go about to Cure it; because from the first Allowances it
gathers strength, and so claims a Right from having been at any time suffered
without Impunity. Therefore in all your Conversation avoid such a Civility as
may, in this matter, be taken for an Invitation. Beward how you bring a Cloud
upon your Reputation, in giving way to that which many Women call an Innocent
Liberty or Freedom; for there are many of our Sex that will be very ready to
help on the least appearance that gives a Handle to be ill Turned. They will
not be displeased to Improve their own Value at the loss of your Reputation,
when there is a fair occasion given, for it distinguishes them the more, Exalts
their Credit higher, and, like a Picture set off with Shades, they seem Fairer
when they make your Actions to be less innocent than theirs; and it seems to
them, That their load of infamy is lessened by throwing part of it upon others:
So that they will not only Improve when it lies in their way, but take pains
to Find out the least Mistake an Innocent Woman Commits, in Revenge of the
supposed Injury she does, in leading a Life which is a Reproach to them.

However, even to the other Sex, you must shun Illbred Affected shiness, nor
use an unsuitable Roughness to your own; for these are unnecessary to your
Virtue. But you must take up a way of Living, that may prevent all course
Raileries, or Unmannerly Freedoms; carry Looks that may forbid without
Rudeness, and Oblige without Invitation: But this is so very Nice that it must
Engage you to have a perpetual watch upon your Eyes, That no careless Glances
give more Advantage that Words, for those may be thrown out a^ random, and bear
doubtful meanings: but Men look on the Eyes as the Hearts Interpreters, and
gather more Assurance from them of Encouragement, than from the Tongue, their
Language being more significant and observable to Men.

Your Civility, which must be always preserved, must not by any means be
carried to a Compliance, which may Betray you into irrecoverable Mistakes; for
the doubtful word Compliance has lead more of our Sex into blame than all other
things, carrying them by degrees, into a thing called a good kind Woman, an
Easy, Idle Creature, that bath neither Good nor Ill but by Chance, not having
Judgment or Choice, but leaves those to the Company she Converses withal to
frame and determine for her.

Diversion is an easement and satisfaction in the Toiles of Live; a Refreshment
both of the Body and Mind. But then it must be Moderate and Suitable, not too
Eager in the pursuit of Pleasure; for that, whilst you are young, is Dangerous,
and to catch at it in Riper Years, is grasping a Shadow; for then, being less
Natural, it grows Indecent; and indeed though you suppose you have it, you will
find your mistake, or at least cannot hold it.

Diversions are the most properly applied to Ease, and Relieves (as I have
hinted) those that are oppressed by being too much Employed. Those that are
Idle have less need of them, though above all others they are most given to
them. To Unbend our Thoughts when they are overstretched by too much Care, is
not more Natural than it is necessary: But to turn your whole Life into one
large Holiday, not only palls the Pleasure, but renders you Ridiculous.

The Mind as well as the Body is tired by being always in one posture, too
Serious Breaks, and too Diverting Loosneth it; it is only variety that gives
the Savoury Relish; a frequent repetition grows first to Indifferency, and
after that becomes tedious, but whilst they are well chosen and well timed,
they cannot be blameable, yet to make your self cheap by tiring others with
your Diversion, in one of the meanest things that can be done.

To Play sometimes to Entertaim Company, or to Divert your self, is not to be
Disallowed; but to do it often, to be called a Gamester, is utterly to be
avoided, next to the things that are Criminal. It Engages you to a habit of
Idleness; and ill Hours Introduce you into ill mixed Company, whilst you
neglect your Civilities abroad, and your Business at home, draw you to
Acquaintance that will not be for your Credit. And indeed if you should see
your own Faces upon an ill Game, at a deep Stake, you would certainly desist
from any thing that could put your Looks under such a disadvantage.

To Dance, or Play on any suitable Instrument of Music is commendable; but, in
the first place, Remember the end of your Learning of it was, That you might
the better know to move Gracefully, for it is only an advantage so far, and
when it goes beyond it, one may call it Excelling in Music, which is no great
Commendation. As for the latter, it is to Delight the Sadness of the Mind, and
Tune over Melancholy Hours; but be careful not to do these often, because you
do them well; the easiest and safest Method is to do it in Private Company,
amongst particular Friends, and then Carelessly like a Diversion, and not with
Study and solemnity, as if it was a Business, or your self over much Affected
with it.

Bebaviour to Superiors, etc. As to these in the first place, you must render
what is seemly, that is, such Civility and Obliging Respectfulness, as may win
upon them, not only to Esteem you, but rank you among the number of their
Friends, and speak well of your deportment and demeanor, as one of an Ingenious
Education and good Parts.

Equals must be treated with all Civility and Freedom the occasion requires,
lest you be reflected on, as Proud and Conceited. A young Lady, or Gentlewoman,
will find a great uneasiness in conversation, if she appear solli^itous to
ingross respect to her self: You therefore ought to be content with a
reasonable distribution, and allow it to others, that you may have it returned
to you. You must not be troublesomly Nice, nor discover your self to be too
Delicate, as if ordinary things were too course for you: This is an Unmannerly
and an Offensive Price; and where it (...) Practiced, deserves to be Mortified,
o^ which indeed it seldom fails. You are not to lean too much upon your
Quality, but seem rather mean in your ow^ Opinion, that others may exalt you;
you^ Fame founding far more sweeter in the Mouths of others, than in your own.

Inferiors expect Courtesy and Obliging Condescensions toward them; and in
doing them all the good offices you can it will much endear them to you: And
indeed, this many times keeps up a Reputation in spite of Blemishes. A kin^
Word, or pleasing Look from a Superior is strangely Charming; and rivets their
Affections to you: Which consideration made the Wise Man Prefer a good Wor^
Before a Gift. It is a cheap way of gaining Love. A Frown, or a Reproach, put
you to more trouble than good Words, o^ an affable smiling Temper. It was the
saying of a good Emperor in this case, The be would so entertain the Addreses
of his Subjects, as if he were a Subject, he would wish the Prince should
entertain him; a Ru^ very worthy to sway all persons, especially those of
Honor, in their intercourse with others. And when you meet with a cold
neglectful treatment from any above you, examine your own resentments, and then
reflect, That if you give the like to those ^elow you, they will doubtless have
the same Sense; and therefore resolve never to offer, what you do so much
dislike to bear; and when you do thus, such Inferiors will convert an Injury
into a Benefit. You will Civilize your self by the Rudeness of others, and make
that ill Nature your own Disci^line. Some indeed, make Quality an Idol, and
then their Reason must fall down and Worship it. They would have the World
think, that no amends can be made for the want of a great Title, or an ancient
Coat of Arms. They imagine, that with these advantages they stand upon the
higher Ground, which makes them look down on Merit and Virtue, as things
inferior to them. This mistake is not only senseless, but criminal too, in
putting a greater-price upon that, which is a piece of Good Luck, that upon
things which are valuable in themselves.

The whole Art of LOVE
HAving understood and duly weighed these things with the former Virtues and
Accomplishments both Divine and Moral, I suppose yon now at years capable of
entering into the Holy State of Matrimony, Ordained at first by God in
Paradise, and since not only in Sacred Writ^ but highly esteemed by all the
Civilize^ Nations. And that you may not rush upon so weighty a thing rashly, or
unad visedly, I shall (to conclude the Virgin-state, lay down some Rules and
Directions, tha^ will not only be a sure and safe Conduct to such as are placed
in stations of Eminency, but even to those of Lower Degrees: so that the
meanest may raise he^ Fortune by them; For I have often observed, through
Cautions and Pruden^ Management in matters of Love, many Poor Virgins,
Initiated into Families by Marriage, that have not barely enriched them, but
given such Reputation and Credit to their Virtues, that they have out^ shined
those, that a little before looks down upon them with Disdain and Contemp^
(...) upon examination it will be found, that Nature is to far from being
unjust to us, that she is partial on our side; and for the seeming injustice
has made large amends for one other advantage, the right of complaining by that
means being come over to us, it is in our power, not only to free our selves,
but to subdue our Masters; and without Violence throw both their Natural and
Legal Authority at our Feet: The Sexes are made of different tempers, that the
Defects may be the better supplied, by mutual assistance. Our Sex wants the
others Reason for our Conduct, and their Strength for our protection. Their
want our Gentleness to Soften and Entertain them, our Looks have more Strength
than their Laws; there is more power in our Tears, than in their Arguments; and
therefore things prudently managed, will by degrees, bring over a Husband to
see his Errors; and by acknowledging his failings, take care for the future, to
amend them; but then the Wifes Gentleness and Virtue, must be the Mirror.
wherein he must see the deformity of his Irregularities.

4. Something more must be said in this point, in the Conduct of your Behavior
to his Relations and Friends: For many times a neglect, or slight regard of
the^ makes wide breaches in a Family: Yo^ may be sure they will not fail to
resent any sensible disrespect, and complaints: O^ will not always fail to stir
up your Husbands Anger against you, especially when he concludes himself
injured by it: And therefore you must consider to carry you self even with
them; for the Family into which you are ingraffed, will generally be apt to
expect, that like a Stranger in a Foreign Country, you should in (...) great
measure conform to their methods, (...) they are of any considerable degree;
and not bring in a new Model, by your own Authority: And therefore that you may
with the less difficulty afterward give your Directions, you ought to take
them first from your Husbands Friends, if an opportunity offers, gain them by
early applying to them, and they will be so satisfied, that as nothing is more
thankful than Pride, when it is complied with that they will strive which of
them shall most recommend to you; and when they have contributed to your taking
firm root in your Husbands good Opinion, you will have the less dependence on
theirs, though you ought not to neglect any reasonable means of preserving it.
Consider where a Husband is Governed as it were by his Friends, he is easily
inflamed by them; and he that is not so, will notwithstanding for his own sake
expect to have them considered, it is easily improved to a point of Honor in a
Husband, not to have his Relations neglected: and nothing is found more
dangerous in this kind, than to raise an objection grounded on Pride; it is the
most stubborn and lasting passage we are subject to, and where it begins a War,
it is very hard to make a secure Peace: therefore use them well, and be well
with them, and they will not fail to support you in your Husbands Love; and
then if Discontents arise, it is your own fault.

The next thing I am to lay down in the State of Marriage, is, The Office and
Duty of a

Mother: And this may be branched into many severals; but many of them being
not very significant, I shall only reduce them under two Heads, viz.

Love, and Care. A Mother is a Title of so much tenderness, that we find it
borrowed by our common Dialect to express the tenderest of all kindnesses So
that Nature seems sufficient to have secured the Love of a Mother toward the
Fruit of her Womb, without the ai^ of any positive Law, unless where Monsters
in Wickedness, and that very seldom give contrary precedents, to the Blot
(...) Name, Abhorrence, and lasting Infam^ The Love of a Parent, however the
Children may afterward prove, ought, and indeed naturally is descending, and a^
things move most violently downwards So that whereas, that of Children to their
Parents, commonly need a Spur, this o^ the Mother frequently requires a Bridl^
who by strength of Feminine passion, usually exceeds the Father.

Therefore to regulate this Affection you are to Advert to these two Rules.

1. That you hurt not your self by this excess of Love.

2. That you hurt not your Children.

Of the first you are in danger, if you suffer that human Affection to swell
beyond its Banks, so as to come in any competition with the Divine, for then
you dishonor God by making an Idol o^ your Child; and for this cause,
Covetousness is in one sense called Idolatry, because what any one sets his or
her affections upon entirely, he or she is supposed to Idolize, and frame it in
their Imaginations as a God, though in reality, it be nothing so; and I cannot
but fear, God, upon this account, has been displeased with too many Mothers,
and sent them Afflictions even to Humbling, by (as in some Sense I may term it)
untimely taking from them those Children they Idolized, to the prejudice of his
Honor, and even of their own Souls; for indeed every thing is so accounted,
that Rivals the Love of God in our Hearts; and he who owns the Title of a
Jealous God, cannot be reasonably thought to bear it, without one way or other
Punishing us.

By this however I do not mean you should follow the Example of those, who
immoderatly love their own pleasure, and do not in the least regard their
Children, (which God has given them as immediate Blessings) looking on them as
a Clog, to keep them within doors; and think their Adverting to them will
hinder their Gadding Abroad; turning them over (for that Reason, which indeed
is but a very slender one) to the Care of a Nurse, or a Maid, whilst perhaps a
Dog or Mon^cy, as thought worthy their own Attend^nce. This is too much in the
extreme of the other side, and seems beyond the Bowel^ of a Motherly Tenderness.

But as to the former Matter, whether Beautiful or Homely, make no different in
your Maternal Care and Affection, (...) cause they proceed from you, and it is
(...) in the power of the Infant to Form it Self but it is formed in the Womb,
by t^^ wonderful working of Almighty God, a^^ Shaped as he pleases: And many
times (...) mend the Defect, a Distorted Body, Rump^^ in the cells of Nature,
is Endowed with^^ Beautiful Soul, when that Cast in a Fai^^ Mould, to outward
appearance, is an Id^^ or like a Picture, only representing a P^^ portion and
Statute to the Eye, without Intellectual Faculties to make it what it R^^
presents.

In this case a Mother that pretends^ Virtue, must make no difference, but div^
her Affections equally, yet so that the may be Moderate, and not infringe (...)
that Love she owes her Maker. Wh^ the acts of the Soul are considred, the must
be no Competitor in Affection with the ^mighty, but he must be all all, as to
Divine Love, for he is the o^ unlimited Object of it; and if you ex^^ in this,
you hurt your self, and bring on his Wrath, in Punishment here, and if not
Repented of, perhaps Eternally hereafter.

Secondly, as I have already hinted, you hurt your Children in not bringing
them up in due Obedience and Respect toward you, whereas, when you generally
Dote upon all, or more particularly on one, it cannot be brought to pass, for
then, through want of that, strict Government which in many cases is required,
and an over Indulgence will not permit you to excerise your self, nor you
others to do it, they will, without a wonderful Providence, grow Stubborn and
headstrong as they grow in years. The only Justifiable ground of partiality, if
you single out any of the number of your Children as a Favorite, must be
Virtue, and this must only extend top provoke a Virtuous Emulation in the rest;
and then you must so manage it, as to evidence it is no inequality in your own
inclination, but merely the force of the others Deserts; not the Person of your
Child, but the Goodness, that Biasses you; and when Virtue is known to be the
only Ingratiating Quality, the rest may labor perhaps to become yours and Gods
Favorites. Therefore show them early an Example of Piety, in your own Life and
Conversation: And in the Decorum o^ your Family keep them out of the hearing of
Vain Words, or any thing that may ten^ to Vitiate their tender Years, by which
they are too apt to take deeply the first impression of Words or Actions, not
by time so easily Obliterated as may be imagined. And in matters of the
Virtuous Education of your children, you are no^ only Accountable to your Self,
but God He seems to say to you, as King Pharoabs Daughter did to the Mother o^
Moses, Take this Child and Nurse it for m^ The end for which he gives them, is,
That they should be brought up in his Fear, that they may Live, Grow up, and
Dey in his Favor: And then you may have the Comfort of meeting them again in
an endless Eternity of Blessedness, nevermore t^ be Separated: And this will
certainly add to those Joys, that in themselves are very Excellent, That you
have Brought forth, an^ Trained up Children to Live and Reign wit^ Christ in
his Kingdom of Glory.

The best way of approving your Love toward them is, by the Duty of Care
Without this, all the most Passionate Raptures of Kindness are but an Airy
Apparition, a Fantastical Scene, and will no more advantage a Child, than the
Picture of Food will Nourisn it. Nor is this Care a Temporary, Momentary Duty,
but it must be taken through the several Stages of Infancy, Childhood, and
Youth.

The first of these is a season only for those Cares that concern the Bodies of
your Children. Providing for their careful Attendance, and all other things
conducing to Strengthen their Constitutions; laying a foundation for future
Health and Vigor; which is your Interest not only upon the Body, but upon an
Intelectual account: The good Temprature of the Body being a great Aid towardss
the free operation of the Mind. But this Health is not always the consequent of
a Nice Breeding, for that many times overthrows it, when Inuring them to
Moderate Hardships seldom fails of giving a Strong ad Healthful Constitution.
Too much Feeding and Delicacies breed Humors, by reason of a weak Digestion,
to which most children in their Infancy are subject; and the superabundance of
Humors breeding Diseases, which often become Habitual, or too sadly end in an
Early Death, when moderate Feeding, and exposing them to the fresh Air abroad,
and not Mewing, or as it were Stifling them in a Nursery, gives them strength
and Refreshment; for when Nature is not over-loaded, she makes a due Digestion,
which turns to Sweet and wholesome Blood, and kindly Humors; but being
over-loaded or oppressed, she is in a manner Suffocated, and cannot exercise
her Function to proper advantages: And as for a free breathing Air, refined
from Damps and Groceness, it rarifies the Lungs and Vital Spirits, and is the
great refresher of Life. But of these I shall Speak more, when I come to Treat
of Ordering Children, as to their Health in Diet and Physical matters.

Secondly, when they are past Infancy, if you Dote so as to Hoodwink you self,
because you will not See their Faults, or Manacle your Hands that you cannot
Chastise them, then it will be Imputed your Fault if their Vices grow up with
them; and you will find little comfort of them in the end, though you promise
your self never so much in lieu of your kindness toward them; For when the
Mothers Affections are Unbridled, the Child's will be so too. The wise Man, in
this case, gives you better advice, viz. Bow down the Neck of a Child from its
Youth, that is, bring it up to strict rules of Virtue and put a Bridle on its
Stubborn Iuclinations; and so when it grows up it will Bless you, not only as
its Parent, but Preserver; and Secure to it the future Happiness of Life. For
if you permit them to run on in their own Vain Devices, in hopes time may alter
it, by making them see their Folly and grow Wiser, you will be too often
miserably mistaken, for as their Joints knit and gather strength, so do their
Ill Habits, till at last they are Confirmed in an Obstinacy; and by that means
you set them in a perfect opposition to the Pattern they should Imitate. For as
Christ's Childhood increased in Wisdom, and the Divine Favor, Luke 2. so will
theirs in all those Provoking Follies which may Avert both the Love of God and
Man. And then alas what recompense can the little Blandishments and Caresses of
a Mother make her Children, for such important, and inestimable Mischief? So
that if you would be really Kind, you must temper your Indulgence with a
Prudent Severity, or else you eminently violate this Second Rule, by which you
should Regulate you Love, and so do that to them which Jacob feared from his
Father, Genesis 27. Bring a Curse upon them and not a Blessing.

Thirdly, In the next Period of their time, when they are arrived at Years of
Reason and Growth, Then you may be more Familiar with them, they having before
been Seasoned to know their Distance and Duty. Allow them such a Kind, yet
Modest Freedom, that they may have a Complaisancy in your Conversation, and not
be tempted to seek it amongst their Inferiors. That the belief of your
kindness may supplant the pretensions of those mean Sycophants, who by little
Flatteries, endeavor to screw themselves into their good opinion, and become
their Confidents; than which, especially to Daughters, there is nothing more
Mischieveous, in teaching them Disobedience, and rendering them Mutinous
against their Parents, by buzzing into their Ears the wild notions of Unbounded
Liberty and Freedom, which Lectures they should not so soon be trusted withal.
Besides, those Intimacies are often Introductions to worse; many Scandalous
Amors, and unequal Matches have had their rise from them. It must therefore be
your Business to prevent all such pernicious Leagues, in preingaging them in
more safe Familiarities, either with your self, or some others, of whose
Virtues you have reason to be Confident.

But the most Infalible Security against this, and all other Mischiefs, is, to
bring them to an Intimacy and Conversation with their Maker, by fixing a true
sense of Religion in their Souls; for if that can effectually be done, it will
supersced all other Expedients; for if they duly consider they are always in
Gods Presence, they will want no other Inspector; nor much need Monitors, if
they seriously attend to the advice of their own Conscience. Neither will it
tend only to the securing of their Innocence; but their Reputation; it being
one part of the Christian Law, to Abstain from all appearances of Evil, 1.
These. 5.22. To do things that are of Good Report, Phil. 4.8. So that Piety is
the only Complete Armor, to defend at once their Virtue and their Fame; and it
is extremely necessary they should be furnished with it, at this Age especially.

It is sad to be Considered indeed, That some Mothers neglect this most
Important Concern in their Daughters, though Nicely Curious in their other
parts of Breeding, They give them Civil Accomplishments, but no Christian;
those are excluded by them out of the Scheme of Education; and by that means
lie under the prejudice of being not only Unnecessary, but Vngentile, below the
regard of a Person of Quality. I suppose this is often increased by a little
Vanity they have in seeing them excel in some o^ those Exterior Qualities,
which may recommend them to the Humor of the World upon the Improving whereof
they are (...) intent, that more Material things are over looked. And so this
part of the Busine^, or Duty of a Wife, I shall Conclude in Advising you to be
careful in Placing, or Bestowing your Children in the World either in Marriage,
or Business, that the may Flourish in Piety and Wealth; and b^ the lasting
Comforts of your Life.

A Mistress is another Obligation Incumbent on you when Married, if you Live in
any Quality or Repute in the World; for in such a case the Inspection of the
Family is usually your Province; for though you are not Supreme there, yet you
are to improve your Delegated Authority t^ the Advantage of them under it; And
you more Constant Residence gives you more opportunities of it, than the
frequent Avocations of your Husband will perhaps allow him. St. Paul sets this
as the Calling and Indispenable Duty of a Married Woman That she Guide the
House, 1 Timothy 5.1^ Not thinking it a Point of Greatness t^ remit the
Mannagement of all Domestic Concerns to a Mercenary Housekeeper.

Now, as to your well Guiding of your House, I know no better Rule Than that
you endeavor to make all that are yours to be Gods Servants also. This will
secure you of all those Intermedial Qualifications in them, in which your
Secular Interest is concerned, their own Consciences being the best Spy you can
set upon them, as to their Truth and Fidelity; and also the Best Spur to
Industry and Diligence.

A Christian Family should be the Epitomy of a Church, It is not only the Duty
but Interest, of all that have Families, to keep up the Esteem and Practice of
Religion in them. It was one of the greatest Endearments of Abraham to God,
That be would Command his Household to keep the way of the Lord, Genesis 18.19.
And Joshua undertakes no less for the Piety of his House than himself, As for
me (says he) and my House, we will Serve the Lord, Jos. 2. (...) 5. But when
Pie^ is planted in a Family, it will soon wither, if it be not kept in Vigor by
Discipline: This you must promoreby^ your own Example to your Servants, calling
upon them to mind their Duty to God; and observe they do not neglect it, or do
it Hypocritically, for Form and Compliance only which may be discerned in their
Conversations elsewhere.

You must Remember not to fall into Mistakes, of thinking because they receive
Wages, and are so Inferior to you, they are therefore beneath your Care, to
know how to Manage them. They are the moving Engines of your Family, and let
your Directions be never so faultless, yet if they Stop, or Move Irregular, the
whole Order of the House will be at a stand, or discomposed. Besides, the
Inequality which is between you, must not make you forget that Nature makes no
such distinction: But that Servants ought at least to be looked upon as humble
Friends; and that good usage, and returns of kindness, are as much due to those
that deserve it, as their Service is due to you when you require it. A Foolish
Haughtiness in the Style of Speaking, or in the manner of Commanding them, is
in it self very unseemly, and frequently begets aversion in them, of which the
least ill effect to be expected is, That they will be slow and careless in all
you Enjoin them: And by Experience you will find it true, That you will be so
much the more Obeyed, as you are the less Imperious.

Be not too hasty in giving your Or^^^^^ not too angry when they are not
altogether observed; much less be not Loud, or appear too much Disturbed: An
evenness in distinguishing when they do well or ill, will make them move by a
Rule, and without Noise; and will the better set out your Skill in Conducting
matters with Ease and Silence. Let there be well chosen hours for the
inspecting of Household Affairs, which may be distinguished from the rest of
your time, that the necessary Cares may come in their proper place, without any
influence upon your good Humor, or interruption to other things. By these
Methods you will put your self into a condition of being valued by your
Servants; and you need not doubt but their Obedience will naturally follow.

The Art of laying out of Money Wisely; must be one of your greatest Cares; it
is not attained without considerable Thought; and it is yet more difficult in
the case of a Wife, who is accountable to her Husband for her Mistakes in it.
In this therefore you are to keep a Mean, between the two Extremes of
Profuseness and a Niggardly Temper, and if you cannot hold the Balance even,
let it incline rather toward the Liberal side, as more suitable to your
Quality, and less subject to Reproach. A little Money misspent is sooner
recovered, than the Credit which is lost by having it unhandsomly saved; and a
prudent Husband will less forgive a shameful piece of Parsimony, than a little
Extravagancy, if it be not too often repeated. Give no just cause to the
meanest Servant you entertain, to complain of the want of any thing that is
necessary. Above all six it in your Thoughts, as an unchangeable Maxim, That
nothing is truly Fine, but what is Fit, and that just what is proper for your
Circumstances, of their several kinds, is much finer than all you can add to
it: For those that break through these Bounds, Launch into the wide Sea of
Extravagancy; and then every thing will become Necessary, because they have a
mind to it; not so properly, because it is fit, but because some body else has
it. This Ladies Logic sets Reason with its Heels upwards, by carrying the Rule
from Things to Persons, and Appealing from what is Right, to every Fool that is
in the Wrong. Rememnber That Children and Fools want every thing that they See,
because they have not Wit to Distinguish what is reasonably necessary: And
therefore there is no stronger Evidence of a Crazy Understanding, than making
too large a Catalogue of things Necessary, when indeed there are so very few
that have a right to be placed in it. Let your Judgment first make a Trial of
every thing, before you allow it a place in your Desire, else your Husband may
conceive it as necessary to Deny, as it is for you to Crave what ever is
Unreasonable; and if you should too often give him that advantage, its ten to
one but the habit of refusing, may reach to things that are not unfit for you

CHAP. IV. The Duty of a WIDOW.
THE State that suceeds that of Marriage, is Widowhood, which though it
supersedes those Duties which are terminated immediately in the Person of the
deceased Husband, yet endears those that may be paid to his Ashes, For Love is
streng as Death, Cant. 8.6. And therefore where it is pure and genuine, cannot
be extinguished but by Death. It Burns like the Funeral Lamps of old, even in
Charnel-Houses and Vaults. The Conjugal Love (transplanted into the Grave, as
into a finer Mould) improves into Piety; and lays a kind of Sacred Obligation
on the Widow to perform every Office of Respect which his Remains are capable
of. And this may be Considered in a Threefold Manner, Viz. 1. To His Body. 2.
His Memory. 3. His Children.


As to the First, it must be in giving it an honorable and decent Interment,
according to the Quality he Lived in; this being a very commendable Respect to
the Deceased: Yet it must be so proportioned, that your Respect to the Dead,
may not Injure a Nobler Relic of him viz. his Children, by an Expensive
Extravagancy, beyond what he leaves will properly bear. And in the Loss to
Carry you self with Decency, and a Modest Sorrow; not by a frantic excess of
Grief to destroy your Health, or putting your self out of a capacity of minding
your affairs, since by such a Separation a double Care is reuolved on you: Some
that have expressed such an excess of Passionate Sorrow, have rather disgraced
themselves by it, than it turned to any Advantage to them, by letting those
Thoughts too soon Vanish in a Second Marriage.

2. The more Valuable Kindness is therefore his Memory, which you must
endeavor to Embalm, and keep from Perishing: And as the Custom holds, not to
Embalm without Odours; so you are not only to Preserve but Perfume it, and
render it as Fragrant as you can; not alone to your selves, but to others, by
reviving the Remembrance of whatever was Praiseworthy in him. Vindicating him
from all Calumnies and False Accusations; and even Stiffling, or allaying True
ones as much as you can. And indeed you can no better provide for your own
Honor, than by this tenderness for your Deceased Husbands Memory. And to add
to this, you must be careful not to do any thing below your self, or that your
Husbaed could he have foreseen it, should justly be ashamed of. It was the
Dying Charge of Agustus Caesar to his Wife Livia, viz. Beha^^ thy self well,
and Remember our Marriage.

3. Yet the Best and Last Tribute you can most suitably Pay to him, is in the
Care of the Children he leaves behind him, Those Living Images of himself; They
claiming a Double Portion of your Love, one upon their Native Right, as yours,
the other as a Bequest in Right, their Deceased Father: And indeed, since by
this Mournful Separation, you are to Supply the part of both Parents, it is
very necessary you should put on the Affection of a Father and Mother;

First, in a Sedulous care of their Education, and then in the Frugal and
Prudent Management of what is left them by their Father, or what is Legally or
Reasonably their Part of Portion; For if of the first you are not Cautious and
Diligent, you will find the Grief and Remorse of it when it cannot be
Redressed. For being Grown up, they will follow the Habit of their Youth: Some
out of Fondness, not to part with their Children, and others out of Neglect, or
too Frugal Sparing, that they may have great portions, have been Fatally
overseen in this particular, denying them the advantage of an Ingeious (...)
Ge^nteel Breeding, to Swell their Estates, etc, but so contracted and narrowed
their Minds, that they know not now to dispose the Fortune to any real Benefit
of themselves: Sometimes, as I have said, this defect proceeds from Feminine
Fondness, they know not how to part with them out of their Sight, though for
their more immediate advantage, the Souls of such Mothers being Bound up in
their Children, as that of Jacobs in Benjamin. In this case, the Sons at least,
by being Confined at Home, are so Blown up and Corrupted, with the Flattery of
Servants and Tenants, etc, who think these the best expedients to secure their
own Stations, that as if their Estates were the Confines of the World, they
fancy to see nothing beyond them: So that when at last such, an Heir breaks
loose from his Mothers Arms, he expects scarce to find his Equals, much less
his Betters, he thinks he is still to receive the same Fawning Adorations, and
will scarce be undeceived but at the price of many Affronts, nay, perhaps, he
may Buy his Experience with the loss of his Life, drawing on Quarrels by his
ill Manners, wherein he finally Perishes; and this is no Impossible Suppsition,
many unhappy Mothers have found to their unutterable Affliction; which
Deplorable Misfortune, a Liberal Education might have prevented.

Secondly, to be Frugal in managing what is your Childrens due, is very
commendable, and must by no means be neglected: But in doing it you must not
Prejudice them the other way, nor indeed, Incroach upon any thing that is
theirs, to advance your self in a Second Marriage, or to maintain your own
State and Grandeur, for this not only Cancels your pretended Love to your
Deceased Husband, in violating his Will, and the Trust reposed in you, but a
manifest Defrauding of your own Children, which is the highest Injury of all
others, for it envenoms the Crime, and adds Unnaturalness to Deceit: Besides,
it is a Preposterous sort of guilt, Orphans, and Widows, are in Scripture,
linked together, as Objects of Gods and Good Men's Pity: A Widow to injure her
Orphans, is like that Uncouth Expression Solomon speaks of Prove. 28.3. A Poor
Man that Oppresses the Poor, is like a Sweeping Rain, that Leaves no Food.

Consider then, Seriously, in thus proceeding, that Injustice of any sort, is a
grievous Sin.

Secondly, When it is Complicated with Treachery also.

Thirdly, That of all Trusts, those Entrusted by the Dead, have ever been
Esteemed, and the Violation of them accounted in a manner Sacriligious; and if
any Widow can find any allay to these, by the two remaining circumstances, That
it is the Trust of a Husband, and the Interest of a Child, I shall acknowledge
her a very Subtle Casuist; but I think it is beyond her Skill, by Rules Divine
or Moral.

Having only hitherto spoke of what you owe to your Deceased Husband, I now
proceed to what of peculiar Obligation, relates to your self. God who has
placed you in this World, to pursue the Interests of a Better, directs all the
signal Acts of his Providence to that end, and intends they should be so
Interpreted; That every great change, that occurs, is designed either to call
you from a wrong way, or to quicken your pace in the right. And you may the
more conjecture when God takes away the Mate of your Bosom, and reduces you to
Solitariness, he sounds you a Retreat from she Gayeties, and Lighter Jollytries
of the World, that with your closer Mourning, you may put on a more retired
Temper of Mind, a Stricter and Soberer Behavior, not to be cast off with your
Vail, but to be the constant Adornment of your Widowhood,

As this State requires a great Sobriety, and Degrees of Piety, so likewise it
brings with it many Advantages and Advances toward them. The Apostle tells us
1 Cor. 7.34. She who is Married, Caret^ for the things of the World, how She
may Please her Husband; But in this State, that care is overpast, and Heavenly
things, by the removal of this Screen, stand fairer to view. You may now
decline Martha's Care of Serving, and choose Mary's better part.

Shake off those Cares that Cloggs the Souls with a Hurry of Encumbrances in
Domestic affairs; and consider of more Refined things, that bring true
Happiness with them, to Joy and Rejoice the Mind. We find God himself
retrenches the Wife's Power of Binding her own Soul, Numb. 30. Her Vows were
Insignificant, without her Husbands Confirmation; but the Widow might Devote
herself to what Degree she Pleased. Your Piety in this State has no Restraint
from any other inconsistent Obligation, but may Mount as high as it can. Those
Hours that were before your Husbands Right, seem now to be Devolved on God, who
Promises, To be a Husband to the Widow, and a Father to the Fatherless; so he
is the grand Proprietor of your Time; you may now convert the time, Spent in
former Entertainments of your Husband, into Colloquies and Spiritual
Entercourses with your Maker: So that that Love which was humane, may by the
changing of its Object, acquire a Sublimity, being Exalted to that which is
Divine; and what before was Expended in Gayeties, and Necessaries, now not
requisite, may be Improved in Works of Mercy and Charity: That so his
Corruption you have lost, may help you to put on an Incorruption; and your Loss
of a Temporary Comfort, state you in one that is Eternal: Whilst your Loyalty,
Duty and Conjugal Affection, becomes the External Work and happniess of Angels,
the Ardour of Cherubims, and the Joy of Saints, in Endless Glory.

And having thus showed what relates to Education, and a prospect of Happiness
here and hereafter, I now proceed to Treat of such things as may be useful,
though some what in a lower degree, and may be advantageous to you in Household
Affairs.

CHAP. V. I hysical Waters, and Cordial Drinks, conducing to a Healthful
Constitution, from the Choicest and Approved Receipts, of the most Eminent
Persons of this and former Ages: With their Proper Virtus how they ought to be
taken, and the Distempers they are Good in, etc.
Apoplectick Water.
TAke four pound of Black-Cherries, bruise, and take away the Stones, add of
the roots of Valerian and Fartshorn shaved, each three ounces, Rosemary,
Lavender and Sage, each a handful, Cloves and Mace beaten fine, each an ounce,
Saffron (...) drams, flowers of the Lilly of the Valley, a handful; bruise
these and mix them well together, and distilled, drink a quarter of an ounce
fasting, in any convenient liquor, as warm Ale, Thea, Coffee, Wine, etc. and it
will help the Apoplexy, Pa^ie, or any destempers proceeding from the
Affliction of the Brain.

Aqua Mirabilis, to make.
Take an ounce of the best Cinnamon; Nutmeg and Citron peel, each six drams,
Gallingal, Cubebs, Cloves and Mace, each two drams, bruise them grossly, and
infuse them in a gallon of White Wind, and a quart of spirit of Wine, and so
distill them: this taken half an ounce et a time, fortifies the Heart, resists
contagious Airs, Plague or Pestilence, Fever, or any venomous Infections.

Elixir Salutis.
Lake four ounces of Senna, Elicampain roots and Guaicum two ounces, Anniseeds,
Carraway, and Coriander seeds, each the like quantity, Raisins of the Sun
stoned, half a pound, Liquorice sliced, two ounces, Rheuburb thinly sliced half
an ounce, bruise and infuse them in Brandy or a spirit drawn from Fruit, Malt,
and Molosses, five or six days, then draw off the liquid part, and put it up in
bottles closely Corked. This is excellent in the Chollick, or other pains in
the Belly, for cleansing the Stomach, and causing a good digestion, helps in
all cold diseases, and brings away the Gravil in the Kidneys or Bladder.

Antinepretick Water.
Take of clarefied Honey, half a pound, Venice Turpentine, two ounces,
Nepretick wood, and Rest-harrow roots, of each, an ounce and a half, Mastick,
Galingal, Cloves Cinnamon, Cubebs, Mace, of each half a^ ounce, wood of Aloes,
an ounce, bruise them grossly, and let them infuse in two quarts of rectified
Spirits, and so distill them. this is excellent good against the Stone or
Gravel, eases pains of the Cholick, and all other pains of the Bowels.

Elixir Proprietatis.
Take Alexandrian, Myrrh, Aloes, Succotrine and Saffron, of each two ounces,
bruise them very fine, put them into a gallon of White Wind, and a quart of
rectified Spirits, let them infuse eight days, then distill them in a
moderately heated Sandhath. and so preserve the Spirit, mixing amongst, when
taken, some of the volatile spirit of Hartshorn, viz. six drops to a quarter of
an ounce. This purifies the Blood, and is exceeding good against the Sourvey,
and all Distempers proceeding from corrupt humor; if it prove too hot, you may
take it in Wine, or other palatable Liquors.

Dr. Butler 's Ale.
Take Sarsaparilla two ounces, Polypody of the Oak and Sena, each four ounces,
Licoris two ounces, Carriway seeks, and Anniseed, each an ounce, Agrimony, and
Maidenhair, of each a pugil, or little handful, Scurvy Grass leaves and
stalks, a quarter of a peck, bruise them grossly together, and put them into a
thin Canvas bag, into six gallons of New Ale, and at three days end, draw it
off and fine it in Bottle. This purges the Urin, and gentle breathing Sweats,
it expels Scorbutic humors, and helps much in the Dropsy, and all watery
diseases, etc.

Purl-Royal.
Take two ounces of Coriander seeds, a handful of stripped Roman Wormwood, an
ounce of Senna, a little handful of Balm, an ounce of Horse-Raddish-root,
thinly sliced, bruise these, and infuse them in two gallons of White Wind, or
Rhenish-wine, six days, take away the liquid part, drink a small glass full in
as much other Wine. It fortifies the Heart, cleanses the Stomach, and very much
helps Digestion. These ingredients may likewise be infused in Ale, or any
other Liquor; in Ale it is called, Common Garden-Purl, a liquor very much
esteemed in London.

Spirit of Scurvey-Grass.
Take the bark of the root of an Ashtree, the root of Fraxinel, Capers, and
Tamarisk, each an ounce, Oak Polypode, two ounces, wild Radish 3 ounces,
Scurvygrass-leaves, one pound, Sorrel, Watercresses, Brook-lime, and
spleenwort, three handfuls each, Bayberries, and Berries of Juniper, of each
half an ounce, a handful of the tops of the lesser Centaury, the seeds of
Mustard, Citron, Cardus, each half an ounce, Cinnamon, Cloves, Ginger, and
Nutmeg, each three drams, bruise these, and digest them in a warm Sand-bath, in
a gallon of Rhenish-wine, and three pints of true Brandy, three days, then
distill them in an Alimbeck. Twenty drops in any Liquor is a sufficient dose,
in case of the Scurvey, shortness of Breath, pricking Pains, foulness of the
Lungs, Yellowness of the Teeth, easing pains of the Belly, killing Worms in
Children; and for it is rare Virtues, is called, The Golden Spirit of
Scurvey-Grass.

Pligue Water.
Take Balm, Mint, Rhue, Cardus, and the green husks of Walnuts, or
Walnut-leaves, of each a good handful, bruise them and infuse them 24 hours in
a gallon of Canary, add bruised Mace and Cinnamon, each half an ounce, distill
them, and drink an ounce of the Water fasting. It resists all Pestilential
Airs, Infectious or Nauseous Vapors, that offend Nature, is good in Surfeits,
Pains of the Head, or Ascending Vapors, that occasion Dizziness, the Megrim,
etc.

Surfeit-Water.
Cut off the bottoms of Poppy-flowers, infuse two large handfuls in two quarts
of Brandy, 24 hours, wring them out, and put in as many fresh ones, till the
Brandy has the Red Tincture of them, then slice in Nutmeg, Ginger and Cinnamon,
each a quarter of an ounce, press out the liquid part, drop in a few drops of
Oil of Cloves, and sweeten it with Loaf Sugar; keep it close stopped, and take
an ounce at a time; It Is a great Healer of the Stomach, gives Rest, cause
Sweat; and Rarifies the whole Mass of Blood.

Vsquebaugh.
Take three gallons of neat Brandy, or good rectified Spirit, Spanish juce of
Liquorice six ounces, Raisins of the sun stoned, a quarter of a Pound, sliced
Dates, the Stones taken out, the like quantity, the tops of Thyme and Balm,
each a little handful, the tops of Rosemary, and Rosemary flowers, two ounces
each, Mace Cinnamon, Coriander-seed, and Anniseed, grossly bruised, each half an
ounce, scent it with Orange or Citron water, or the flowers or peels of either,
let this Mass infuse 5 or 6 days, in a Glass or Earthen Vessel, put in six
ounces of white Sugar Candy, beaten in fine powder, then draw or pour off the
liquid part, as fine as may be; and what remains will make a weaker sort, by
putting other spirits to it. This is a pleasant Liquor, a great friend to the
Lungs, preventing cold distillations, and bringing away Phlegm or Rheum; it
removes obstructions in the Liver, helps shortness of Breach, and sweetens it;
it ^hears the Spirits, and taken fasting, prevents the bad effects of evil
Airs; about three spoonfuls at a time, is a sufficient Dose.

Dr. Stephen 's great Cordial Water.
Take a Gallon of Claret, Canary, or Rhenish Wine, Gallingal, Grains of
Paradise, Cinnamon, Nutmegs, Ginger, Anniseeds, and sweet Fennel-seeds, of each
three drams, Mint, the leaves of Red Roses, Sage, Pellitory of the Wall, the
tops of Rosemary, Thyme, Wild Marjorum, Chamomile, and the tops of
Lavender-cotton, shred the Herbs, and grossly bruise the Spices, infuse them the
space of two days, and distill them in an Alimbeck This mainly resists
Infectious Airs, is an Antidote against the Plague, and very advantageous: And
ounce of it taken just before the coming of a cold fit of an Ague, and if it
appear too hot, you may palliate it with cooling Liquors, it easies mightily,
likewise pains in the Bowels; and is good taken by those that are apprehensive
or fearful of the Small pox, when they go abroad, in times when its rife.

Metheglin, White.
Take sweet Marjorum, Violet and Strawberry leaves, and flowers, the tops of
Thyme, Rosemary, Burrage, and Agrimony, of each a little handful, the seeds of
Coriander, Carriway, and sweet Fennel, each half an ounce, a quarter of an
ounce of beaten Mace, boil them grossly bruised in eight gallons of Spring Water
gently, about an hour scumming and straining them, being strained, put into the
liquor as much fine Honey, as will make it bear an Egg, so that some part of it
may appear above the liquid, boil it again as long as any scum will rise, when
it is cool, put it up into a Vessel, with about a pint of Ale Yeast; let it
work three days, then hang five days, a bag of Spice in it, draw it off, and
bottle it up.

Mead.
Take Sweet-Briar, rosemary, and Thyme, Agrimony, Bettony, and Eyebright, the
tops of Scabious, each a pugil, or as much as may be lightly held between the
Forefinger and thumb, put them in Spring Water, and lay a Stone or some heavy
cover to sink them, infuse them 48 hours, then take them out and boil them in
another water, till the water be colored with them, very high, let them stand
off the fire a day and a night, to infuse in a third water, then boil it up,
and to every gallon of Water, put a pound of Honey, that is into the strained
liquor; and when it will bear an Egg, work it together till the Honey is well
dissolved, let it sees 12 hours, and boil it up with the whites and stells of
half a dozen Eggs beaten together, then beat up the whites of two or three
Eggs, with half a pint of Ale Yeast, put up the Liquor into a Cask, let it work
three days, then hang a bag of Spices in it, grossly bruised, ten days: so draw
it off, and bottle it. It is an excellent cooling liquor in Feavours, and most
hot Diseases, as also is the former, it Tempers and Allays the Heat of the
Blood, etc. (...) of Rheuburb, then boil them with a few Chamomil flowers, over
a gentle fire, and drink off the liquid part very hot, repeating it morning and
evening.

For the Chollick.
Take the oil of sweet Almonds, three ounces, Pelletory Water and White Wind,
each a quarter of a Pint, Anniseeds, and Chamomll flowers, eatch two drams, let
them simper an hour over a gentle fire, then pour out the liquid part, and
drink it very hot.

For pains in the Teeth.
Take Henbane seed, and Hysop seed, beat them together small, dissolve Gum
Arabic in a little Water, and so drop it on the beaten seeds, so that it may
make them up into little Pellets, if the tooth be hollow, put one of these into
it, and stop it close with Lint, if not, place it to the root of the Tooth,
between that and your Cheek.

For an Ague.
Take a handful of the tops of the herb Rue, bruise them grossly, boil them in a
quart of White Wind, till a third part be consumed, and when the Ague sit is
coming, drink.

Noise in the Head.
Take a Clove of Garlic, peel it, and prick three or four holes in the middle,
dip it in Honey, and put it into your Ear, stop it with black Wool; and so
continue, at times for a day or two, and the noise will cease.

For a Fellon.
Take flower of Malt, a handful, Soap about the bigness of a Walnut, boil them
together in Beer, till it is as thick as Paste, then spread a Plaster, and lay
it to the part grieved; and by often changing it, will draw it to a head an
break it, then lay on a Plaster of Diaculum, and it will heal it up.

Lasks to stay.
Take Burdock-roots, half a handful scrape them and wash them clean, the sees
them in fair water, till half be consumed, and bath your belly and the sol^ of
your feet, with the Decoction, very warm.

For the stinging of any Venomous thing.
Bruise sweet Almonds, and Ash-tree leaves, or for want of them the inner bark,
make a poultis with a little Honey and the juce of Rue, and apply it.

Bloodshot Eyes, or Sore Eyes.
Take Lapis Calaminaris, half an ounce, white Sugarcandy the like weight,
White Wind one ounce, heat the stone almost red hot, in a clear fire, beat it
very fine, then mingle it with the rest, and strain the liquid part through a
linen cloth, put it into a Glass, and use it with a feather as you see
occasion. Note, the stone must be without red spots, white and clear, or it may
prove hurtful.

For a Burn, or Scald.
Take two ounces of old Cheese, an ounce of Olive Oil, an ounce of Honey, and
half an ounce of Bole Armoniak, mix these together, till they may be spread
like a Poltis, and apply it to the place; for want of some of these you may use
Oil, white Lead, and Snew water, beaten and tempered together.

For Blasting, or St. Anthony's Fire.
Take a new laid Egg, roast it hard, then take the White from the Yolk, put it
into a Mortar, with half its weight of Copperas, bruise them together with some
Oil of Roses, and apply the Mass to the place afflicted, and it will allay the
Swelling, and take away the Heat, it is also good to prevent all Flushing in
the Face; and cause Redness to disappear

Small Pox to Prevent, its Scarring the Face, etc.
Take two ounces of Hogs-Lard, a quarter of a pint of Rose Water, Tuttia ^
dram, Oil of Rosemary half an ounce, the powder of an hares Liver, or Hares
blood dried, two drams, make these up into a^ Ointment, over a gentle fire; and
when the Scabs are drying on the Face, anoin^ it with it pretty warm, and let
the^ fall off of themselves, then anoint yo^ Face with Oil of Roses, beaten up
wit^ a little White Wind; and no Scars, de^^ Pits, or Disfigurement will appear.

To Prevent Hair falling off, in the Smallpox.
Take the inward Rhind of a Young Oak-tree, a good handful, beat it small then
take half a handful of tops of Balm, (...) Vervine, boil these in a gallon of
fair spring water, till a third part or more be consumed, strain out the liquid
part with ha^^ pressing, and wash your head with (...) when the Distemper
declines, and is going off, twice a day, pretty warm; a^^ it will not only
fasten the roots of the Ha^^ but refresh and revive it.

Sore Mouth, or Throat.
Take Marshmallow tops, boil them in Whitewine and Honey, dissolve as much Alom
as will make the Liquid part somewhat rough in the mouth, then strain out the
thinnest, and gargle your mouth and throat with it often, pretty warm, and the
Soarness will cease.

To procure Sleep or Rest.
Take half a handful of Water-Lillys, bruise them in three pints of Malmsey,
and let them infuse twelve hours, add a dram of Opium, as much Poppy-seed, and
Lettice-seed well bruised, and then distill them, and take (going to bed, or
when rest is required) of the distilled water, from half a dram to a dram, in
any convenient Liquor.

For the Weakness of the Sight.
Take Eyebright, fine Sugar, and sweet Fennel-seed, beat these together, and
drink about two drams of it in a morning Fasting, in a glass of Wine, or Beer.

Ague to Cure.
Boil a good handful of the tops of Rue, in a quart of White Wind, till half be
consumed, and when you feel the cold fit coming, strain it, and drink it as hot
as may, walk about the room as fast as you can, and being somewhat tired, get
into a warm Bed; in twice or thrice thus doing, the Ague will decline and go
off.

To Refresh the Senses, and Restore the Memory, etc.
Take Balm, Bugloss dried Roses, and Frankincense, beaten into Powder, of all
about six ounces, infuse them in three Pints of White Wind, when they are well
bruised, and when they have infused twenty four hours, put them in an Alimbeck,
and of the distilled water, take a spoonful every morning fasting; and fast an
hour after it.

For the Scurvey.
Take the juice of Scurvygrass, Watercresses, and Brooklime, each two ounces,
let them settle, and poor of the clearer part, Renish-wine a quart, the roots
of Elecampain, Horseradish, and Flower-deluce, thinly sliced, each half an
ounce, two Nutmegs, well bruised, put these into a stone Vessel, that may be
stopped very close, and morning and night drink a quarter o^ a point of it
pretty warm.

To Expel Sadness, or Melancholy.
Take Rue, Cranes-bill, a herb so called and Pulegium, of each a pugil, dry
then in a Stove, or Oven, and beat them into powder, mix the powder with powder
of Licoris, and Loaf-Sugar, sinely scraped, make them up into Lozenges, with
Cinamon-water, and a little Saffron finely beaten, and eat about a quarter of
an ounce every morning, fasting.

To Cure the Headache.
In the first place wash your Temples with fair water, then take Saffron
Frankincense, Vinegar, and Roses, or Rose-cake, beat them together, till they
may be spread on a piece of Linen Cloth, spinkle this over with a little
Powder of Copporas, and lay it to the Forehead and Temples, Renewing it as you
see occasion; and it will take away the Heat, and ease the Pain.

For the Plurisie.
Take the Distilled Water of Burnet, wherein Cinnamon has been infused, an ounce
at a time, three times a day, fasting each time, two hours after it.

For the Green Sickness.
Take Extract of Mars, prepared with Musk, one ounce, Alloes Succotrine,
prepared with the juice of Succory, six ^rams, the Extract of Rheuburb, half an
ounce, and of Saffron two drams, Oil of Cinnamon, six drops, mix them well, and
make them up into small Pills, each weighing about a Scruple, take one of them
fasting, in a morning, drink about a quarter of an hour after it, a glass of
Wine, and walk about till you begin to be heated, or sweat; and this repeated
several mornings will, with the Blessing of God, answer your expectation in a
wonderful manner.

To Stench Bleeding.
Take the tops of Young Nettles, and of Ash leaves, dip a Linament in them and
apply to the Nostrils, Wound, or any other part that effuses Blood, if the
Bleeding be Internal, mix some fine Sugar in it, and drink an ounce of it
Blood-warm at a time.

For a Prick under the Nail.
Make a Plaster of Turpentine, Beeswax, Mutton-suet, and the juce of
Housleek, this also will draw out Splinters small pieces of Iron or Thorns.

Melancholy to Suppress.
Take Clove-gilly-flowers, Couslips, Borrage-flowers, Conserve of Roses, each a
ounce, Alkirms half an ounce, preserve Citron, and Nutmeg, each an ounc^ Beazar
fifteen grains, Tincture of Saffro^ half a dram, make these up into an
Electuary, with Syrup of Clove-gilly-flowers, adding a drop or two of oil of
Cinnamon; and when you find the Melancholy come upon you, which you may
perceive by the Dullness or Lumpishness of your Spirits, take three drams of it
in a Glass of Muscadel, or old Malaga.

For the Megrim.
Take a handful of Ground Ivy, wash it clean, bruise it and boil it in a quart
of Fine Ale, to the consumption of a pint, drink it hot in a Morning Fasting.

For a Fever.
Make a Decoction of the tops of Rue, in Spring water, till it be very strong,
then strain it, and add Wood Sorrel, and Maidenhair, each a little handful,
add more, some Slices of Liquorice, Nutmeg and Sugar, strain out the liquid
part, and drop ten drops of the Spirit of Vitriol, into half a pint of it, and
take half in pint at a time Morning Noon and Night; applying to the Soles of
the Feet, Tobacco leaves, beaten into a Moisture, with a mixture of Blew
Currants.

Falling Sickness.
Take the Leaves and Berries of Oak Misleto, with the top tender Branches, dry
them in a Stove or Oven, beat them into Powder, and Sift it finely, and take
about two drams in a Glass of of White Wind, of for those of tenderyears, one
dram: Do it Morning and Evening, especially three days before and after the
Full of the Moon, often repeating it; and it will prove very advantageous.

Diseases in the Eyes.
Take the Water of Eyebright, a quarter of a pint, drop into it five or six
drops of clarified Honey, the Powder of prepared Pearl and Coral, each a
Scruple, shake them well, and often drop some of the water into your eyes: It
helps Inflammations, takes of Spots, and Celars the Sight.

For the Evil.
Take Cuttlebone, uncalcined, scrape off the outside, dry the white part, beat
it into Powder, very fine; and often take half a dram into a spoonful of Aqua
Maluae.

For the Dropsy.
Take the Roots of Gors, scrape them clean, and cut them into thin slices, the
tops of Thime, Hysop, Pennyroyal, and Netties, of each a handful,
Carrawayseeds, Elicampain-roots, each an ounce, bruise them and boil them in
fair water, till the liquid part is near consumed, then strain out what remains
into two quarts of Rhenish-wine, bottle it up close; and take about nine
spoonfuls in the Morning fasting, two hours after dinner, and going to bed, use
it often; and the watery humor will abate.

To help Hearing.
Take the Chive in a Clove of Garlic, run a piece of fine Silk thorough it,
that it may be easily pulled out upon occasion, then crush it between your
Fingers, put it in anointed over with the Oil of Almonds, when you go to Bed,
and stop your Far with Cotton, or Black Wool; and in twice or thrice doing,
your Hearing, if not utterly lost, will be quickened.

For a Consumption: an Excellent Receipt.
Take the Herbs Lungwort, Liverwort, Rue, Hysop, Sage, each a handful,
Elicampain, and the roots of Sweet Flag, each half an ounce, Anniseeds,
Carraway-seed, Sweet Fennel seeds, each the like quantity, Burrage, and
Bugloss-flowers, each two drams, infuse them 24 hours in two quarts of Old
Maliga, or good Canary, being well bruised, add then Scabious, and
Cardus-water, each two ounces, then distill them, and drink about two ounces at
a time, especially fasting. This is a great Strengthner of the Lungs, and
attenuates the vicious humors from the Liver, expels VVind out of the Stomach
and Bowels.

Biles to Break and Cure.
Roast white Lylly-roots in soft Embers, bruise Figs with Fennel-seed, and
Hemp Seed, each a quarter of an ounce, beat them together, and boil them in new
Milk till they thicken, then add 2 ounces of Hogs-Lard, and lay it to the
Grieved part.

CHAP. VII. Cookery: Or, the Art of Dressing Fish, Flesh, and Fowl, after the
Newest and Exactest way, with their Proper Sawces, Garnishes, and manner of
Serving up.
To make a Strengthening Jelly of Flesh.
TAke a well Fleshed Cock, and a Knuckle of Mutton, or the Sinews and Knuckle
of Veal, and little Mutton, Raisins of the Sun stoned, half a pound, bruise
these to pieces in three Gallons of Water, then stamp the Meat, etc. in a
Mortar and boil it with the Liquid part up to a pretty thickness, then run it
through a strainer, with hard pressing, and when it has stood all night, skim
off the top, and season the rest with Sugar and little Nutmeg sliced with some
small pieces of Cinnamon and a blade or two of Mace, boil it up and strain it
again; and this being eaten in a Morning fasting, is wonderfully Strengthening
and Restoring to Nature.

Lobster Stewed.
Take Butter, Salt and Red Wine Vinegar, and put into your Stew Pan, then
grate a little Nutmeg, so cut the Flesh of the Tail and Claws of the Lobster in
square thick bits, the fashion of Dice, put them into the Stew sauce, covering
it with a Dish, then when it begins to grow dry, run it over with Butter,
Garnished with slices of Lemon, and so serve it up with grated Manchet, it
being seasoned with Grape Verjuce or VVhite-wine.

To hash a Lobster.
Clear him of the Shell as soon as boiled, and cut the meat in fine thin
slices, put it into a Earthen Vessel, near covered with Claret, then put a
sprinkling of Salt, a good piece of Sweet Butter, and the juce of a Lemon,
being stewed, put it upon Sippets, and run it over with Butter, and Garnish the
Dish with slices of Orange; and so Serve it up.

To Collar Beef,
Take Sinews out of the Flank piece, as also the most Skinny part, and some of
the Fat, then cover it with Water and Salt, and steep it twenty four hours: So
hand it a draining in a Linen Cloth, in the Air, shred the tops of Mint, Sage,
Savoury, Marjorum, and Thime, beat a quarter of an ounce of Mace, half a
quarter of an ounce of Cloves, a slice or two of ginger, and half an ounce of
Pepper, mix these with Salt, and rub over the Beef, rolling it up hard, and
baking it in a Soaking Oven.

To bake a Wild Coose, or Mallard,
Par-boil either those, then break the Breast and flat it down, then season
them with Pepper, Nutmeg and Salt, within and without, if they be not very Fat
of themselves, Lard them, and put them into a deep Coffin, with Butter above
and beneath; and when they are well Soaked poor melted Butter, with a Funnel,
into the vent you have left open on the top of the Lid.

To Souce a Pig.
Scald a large Pig, and having take off the Head, slit it in the middle, take
out the Bones, and wash it in warm water, then with strewing of Salt, grated
Nutmeg, and beaten Mace, roll it up as you do Brawn, into a Collar; hinding it
round with Bass cordage, then boil it in spring water, till it be tender, so
being taken up, put it into cold water, wherein a handful of Salt or two has
been dissolved; and this will make the Skin very white, then take about two
quarts of the water wherein it was boiled, as much White Wind Vinegar, a Race
of Ginger sliced, and two Nutmegs, so ordered, a quarter of an ounce of whole
Pepper, and half a handful of Bay Leaves, sees these well together, and being
cold put the flesh into it, and it will keep half a Year.

To Souce a Pike, Carp, Breem, Tenth, Trout, or Barbel,
Dar^v either of these, but scrape not off the Scales, wash the Roe and Liver,
and slit them into long pieces, then take two quarts of fair water, one of
White Wind and a bundle of sweet herbs, set them over a quick fire, and when
they have boiled a little, put in the Fish, and pour in half a pint of Vinegar
to harden them; being boiled, but not tender, take them up, and put into the
Liquor whole Pepper, Ginger and Cloves, adding some salt, and being well
boiled, pour it hot to your Fish, and cover them with Mint, Balm, Fennel, or
such like sweet herbs; and when you serve them up, shred the herbs, sprinkle a
little Ginger on them; and pour Vinegar to them in Sawcers.

Woodcock, Larks, Blackbirds, or Sparrows, to Bake, the best way.
Truss them, Parboil them, and so season them with Pepper, Salt and Ginger, and
if you please, Lard them, then put them into a Coffin covered with Butter,
mixed with a few sweet Herbs, all shred and beaten in a Mortar; and being Baked
enough, draw them and pour in other Butter, beaten with the Yolk or two of an
Egg.

Red Deer to make: Or make Beef look like it.
Parboyl it, and Press it, and let it ly all night in Red Wine, and a small
quantity of Vinegar, then Lard it thick, and season it with Pepper, Salt,
Cloves, Mate and Nutmeg, or if you will, a little Ginger finely beaten, then
lay it into your Pie or Pasty, with store of Butter; let it be well soaked, and
when you draw it out of the Oven, pour in at the Vent, Butter, Nutmeg, Sugar
and a little Ginger, beaten together; and so put it into the Oven again half an
hour, and thus you may make Tender Beef pass for Venison.

Neats Tongues to Hash.
Boil and Blanch them, and slice them in slices, then put the pieces into a
Pipkin, with Raisins of the Sun, large Mace, three or four Blades, blanched
almonds, Claret, boil them altogether, and add a proportion of sweet Butter,
some Verjuce and a little Sugar, strain a Ladle or two of the Liquor, and beat
it up with the Yolk of two or three Eggs, place it on carved Sippits, and
Garnish with slices of Lemons Parsley, and pickled Barberries.

To Collar Eles.
Take the largest silver Eles; cut then open with the Skin on; take out the
bones, then beat some sweet Herbs, with Pepper, and a little Ginger, and strew
them on the inside of the Eels, then roll them up three in a breadth, and bind
them up with Bass flag, boil them in three parts Water, and one Wite-wine; and
as the boil gently, put in some slices of Nutmeg, Ginger, and whole Pepper,
being somewhat tender, cool them in water, then drain that from them, and put
in the Liquor they were boiled in, with a little White Wind Vinegar: Serve it
up, garnished with Bay Leaves and slices of Oranges: and for Sauce Oil and
Mustard.

Giblets to Dress with Herbs, and Roots, etc.
Parboyl them and put them into a quart of Claret in a Pipkin, or Earthen
vessel, add an ounce of Sugar, some Pickled Barberries, and Spinach, a faggot of
sweet herbs and such roots as you think convenient, sliced, then take strong
Broth, Verjuice, and the Yolks of two or three new laid Eggs, strain them and
put them into the Pipkin, and let them stew together: So Serve them on Sippets,
Garnished with Flowers or Greens.

Chickens and White Broth.
Truss and Parboyl your Chickens, till they become very White, then shred sweet
Herbs to them, with some blades of Mace, and pieces of Cinnamon, shred a little
Parsley, then strain the Yolks of four or five Eggs, with some Virjuce, which
you must put in when they are ready to be taken up, place them on carved
Sippets, and Garnish with Parsley, Hysop, and sliced Lemons.

To Hash Deer, Sheep or Calves Tongues.
Boil either of these pretty well, then Blanch them, draw them with small sprigs
of Rosemary, then put then on a Spit, till they are half Roasted, then slice
them and put them into a Pipkin, or another Earthen Vessel, that will endure
the fire, with as much Claret, as will cover them, put in after they have
boiled a while, some Cinnamon, Ginger, and sliced Lemon, a little Mace, and some
Sugar, boil these altogether, and Dish them upon Fried Toasts, Garnish with
slices of Lemon, and grated Manchet.

To Boil a Wild Duck or Mallard.
Truss and Parboyl it, then half roast it, carve it, and let out the Gravey,
which you must save, then take Onions, Parsley, Ginger, and Pepper, boil them
together, then mix the Gravy with them, being chopped, or bruised very small
then add a few Currants and some grated White-Bread, make these thin with Broth,
and so on Sippits serve it up, being first run over with Claret and Anchovey
beat up together; and this is a very good way to boil a Tame Duck, Widgeon, or
Moor-Hen, to be received very acceptably.

Pigeons or any small Fowl to Boil.
Parboyl them with beaten Parsley and Butter in their Bellies, then put them
into your Boyler with strong Broth, add a blade of Mace, and some gross Pepper,
with half a pint of white wind, grate a little bread into the broth to whitten
the Fowl; and so serve them up with the Gravy and a dissolved Anchovy,
Garnished with Parsley and Violets, or their leaves.

Sausages to Boil.
Put a pint of Claret to a quart of Water, put in some sweet herbs finely
shred, a blade or two of Mace, and some Cinnamon, let them boil about a quarter
of an hour, then serve them up with beaten Ginger, Cinnamon or Mustard and
Sugar, in Sawcers.

To Stew Trouts, Carp, Tench, etc.
Draw them and scrape them well, wash them in White Wind, then smeer them over
with a piece of Sweet Butter, and lay them orderly in a Stew Pan, putting in as
much water as will cover them above an inch, with a little Salt, a bundle of
sweet herbs, and some blades of Mace, take them up, and make your Sauce of
beaten Butter, Claret, yolks of Eggs, and Sugar.

Lamb to make like Venison.
Bone it, and take the side or quarter, and dip it in its Blood, sprinkle it
over with Salt, Cinnamon and Pepper, roll it up, and parboyl it, adding some
Vinegar to the Water you boil it in, a sprig or two of Hysop and Thyme, let it
stand six hours in the water when it is off the Fire, put it into a coffin, and
pour to it when half Baked, Claret and Melted Butter, with some Cloves Mace and
dried Rosemary, finely beaten.

A Shoulder of Mutton with Oysters.
Stuff your Mutton with strong Oysters, of a moderate size, and sweet herbs,
roast it before a pretty quick Fire, basting it with Butter, and saving the
Gravy which falls from it, separate from the Fat, make it into a Sauce, with
Claret, Pepper, and grated Nutmeg, then lay the Oysters that you pull out about
the Mutton, Garnish it with Parsley, and slices of Lemon; and so serve it up.

Chikin in Whito-Broath.
Put three points of Strong Broth, to a quart of good white wind, then put it
into a Pipkin or some other Earthen Vessel, as many Chickens as it will
Conveniently boil, and when it begins to simmer slice some Dates, and put into
it, with three or four blades of Mace, and half a pound of Beef Marrow, shred
some white Endive small, and strew in a few sweet herbs; let them stew over a
moderate fire, and the Broth being a little strong, strain in the yolk of two
or three Eggs, stir them about till enough, then take them up, Dish it with
Marrow, Dates, large Mace, the Broth, and Sippets; Garnish with pickled Grapes,
and Barbaries, or for want of them, Parsley, and red Beats.

To make China Broth.
Take an ounce of China-root, thinly sliced, steep it twelve hours, in two
quarts of fair water, on moderate Embers, and then put a pretty big
Cock-chicken into it, put Maiden hair, and Wood Sorrel, beaten with Raisins,
Currants, and Dates into the Belly, tying up the vent, add a handful of French
Barley well bruised, and when the chicken is boiled almost to a Jelly, strain
out the Broth, if there wants water, you may add more in the boiling. This is
an excellent strengthener restorer of Nature, when decayed or wasted.

A Hare Hashed.
Cut it out in quarters, chine it, and lay it in Clarret, mixed with three
parts of water, and parboyl it, then slice the flesh in thin pieces, and lay it
n your stew pan, let this be off the Body, but the legs wings, and head keep
whole, almost cover it with some of the liquor it was boiled in, add some
Butter, sliced Nutmeg, the juce of Lemon, and a little beaten Ginger, serve it
upon Sippets, Garnish it with Lemon, and sliced Onion.

Carp to Roast.
Beat Blanched Almonds into a past, with Cream, grated Bread, sweet Herbs,
finely shred, Currants, Salt, a little beaten Nutmeg, and Ginger, draw you Carp
at the Gills, and put in the Pudding at the same place, fastening it to the
Spit, without running it into it, do it by tying on, prick the belly to let out
the Gravy, the sauce it with the Gravy, powder of Cinnamon, sweet Butter and the
juce of Oranges, beat up with a little Claret and sweet Herbs, shred small and
boiled tender: Garnish with slices of Lemon.

To Stew a Carp.
Scrape off the Scale, make it clean with in and without save the Blood, and
mingle it with a pint of Claret, lay i^ in a stew pan, with as much water and
white wind as will cover it, sprinkle it over with beaten Cloves, Ginger,
Nutmeg and sweet Herbs, quarter in a large Onion, put in about half a pound of
Butter, and when it boyls up, put in the Blood and Claret; and when it is
enough serve it up, Garnishing with slices of Oranges and Greens. And in this
manner you may Dress a Breem, Barble, Salmon, Trout, Pike, or any not over
large Fish.

A Cods Head to Dress.
When it is fair and largly cut, boil it with all its appurtenances, in Spring
or Conduit-water, with a seasoning of Salt, and about a pint of VVhite-wine
Vinegar, fill the mouth with stewing Oysters, and close it with a string, put
in a faggot of sweet Herbs, and a quartered Onyon; when it is boiled, take it
up carefully, ^et it to draining, take Oyster-pickle, or ^aw liquor of Oysters,
the Boiled Onyon, three or four Anchovies, a quarter of a ^int of VVhite-wine,
shred into these the ^aggot of sweet herbs, clean stripped from their stalks,
beat them up with a pound of sweet butter, lay the Oysters in order, about and
upon the Fish pour on the ^auce, Garnish with Lemon and red Beets. Thus you may
dress young Codlins or large Whitings, adding to the stewed Oysters, some
Shrimps, or Prawns, unshell'd.

To Roast a Salmon.
Take it either whole or a Jole, or Rand, season it with Salt Ginger and grated
Nutmeg, stick it with whole cloves Bay Leaves and Rosemary-tops, spit and bast
it with Butter, sprinkle a little with the juce of a Lemon, and what drops from
it, beat up with Butter, and the juce of Orange, for Sauce; as also the Yolks
of two or three Eggs: lastly add Verjuce, powder of Cinnamon, and Claret;
Garnishing with Fennel, and slices of Orange.

To Fry Salmon.
Take the Chine, or Rand, cut in fine the pieces, put it into fresh Butter,
when moderately hot in your Pan, keep it turning till it grows somewhat Crisp,
Sauce it wi^ sweet Butter, Nutmeg, and Claret, we beaten up with the juce of an
Orange, and pickled Oyster Liquor; Garnish with fried Bay Leaves, and Lemon
peel.

To Stew a Tnrbut.
Cut it in fine large pieces, fry it a little in fresh Butter, then drain it
well, take ^ out and put it into your stew pan, wi^^ beaten Nutmeg, Claret, the
Juce of Orange, add a sufficiency of sweet butte^ and being stewed, put more
melted butte^ and Orange Juice: Garnishing it, wi^^ slices of Orange, and serve
it up.

CHAP. VIII. The Terms and Art of Carving, of Fowl, Fish, Flesh, etc. With
Proper Sauces, and Garnishings, more Particularly, than Sweetracats, and other
Rarities.
To Lift a Swan.
LAy it on the Back, and slit it down in the middle of the breast, and divide ^
from the Neck to the Rump, without breaking or tearing it, place the two
halves, the slit side downard, strew some Salt and Cinnamon about it, and serve
up Chaldron Sauce, in Saucers, Garnishing with water-Lillys, Watercresses, or
any suitable flowers, or greens, growing in or by the water.

To Cut up a Turkey, or Bustard.
The Legs being raised up very fair, open the joint with the point of your
Knife, but take them not off, proceed to lace the breast down on both sides,
open the breast pinion, but not take it off, so raise the Merry-Thought,
between the breast bone and the top of it; and on both sides the breast bone,
lace the flesh that is called the brawn, and turn it outward^ on both sides,
but neither break it, no^ take it off. Then take off the VVing^ pinions at the
joints next the body, and place on each side the pinion, where the brawn was
turned out, but cut off the sharp end of it, and sit the place with the middle
piece. Make your sauce (...) Gravey, Pepper, Red wine, a slice or tw^ of
Nutmeg, or the yolks of Eggs beaten up with Red wine Butter and Vinegar^
Garnish wiih Fennel, Parsley and slice of Lemon. This way you may carve (...) a
Pheasant or Capon, but of the latter, c^^ not off the Pinions, but in the place
where you put them in the Turkey, etc. place the Gizzard; Sauce these with
Gravy and Anchovy Sauce; and Garnish with slices of Orange and Greens.

A Horn to Dismember.
Take of the Legs, disjointing them with the point of your Knife, lace it down
the breast, and raise up the flesh take it away with the pinion, and place the
head in the breast, and place the pinions on the contrary side of the carcass,
and on the other side the Legs, that the ends of the bones may meet cross over
it, and the wings over the top: Sauce it ^ith the juce of Lemon, Sugar, Cina^on
and Claret, a piece or two of Onyon, ^oiled in fair water with the Neck, and
^izzard added to them; and Garnish with any pleasant Flowers or Greens and
Lemon peel.

A Mallard to Unbrace.
In doing this raise up the pinion and ^g, but take neither of them off, after
^at the Merry-Thought, and so lace it ^own on either side on the breast bending
your Knife too and frow; Sauce it ^ith the boiling of the Neck, Gizzard, ^iver,
Pepper, and Claret, Garnish with grated Bread, Salt and Slices of Oran^es; and
so order a Duck if roasted, if ^oyled, with Sippits Sugar and juce of ^emon.

To Wing a Partridge.
Raise the VVings and Legs, take off the rest of the Flesh, Mince it and Sauce
^t with Claret, beaten Ginger, Salt, a little grated Nutmeg, and the gravy that
^omes from it; Garnish with Parsley, Vi^lets or Marygold flowers.

To Vnjoyn a Bittern, or Wing a Quail.
Raise the Legs and VVings and Sauce them with Salt, and the Grave without
Garnish.

To display a Crane.
Take off the Wings by the body-point unfold the Legs, then take up the Legs a^
wings, Sauce them with powder of Ging^ Vinegar, Salt and Mustard well beaten ^
gether; Garnish with Manchets, pickle Lettice-stalks, or Purslain-stalks.

To untach a Curlew
Raise the Legs and wings, sprinkle^ with Salt, Sauce it with grated white-bre^
Claret and grated Nutmeg, Garnish it wi^ slices of Lemon.

To Mince a Plover of any Kind.
Raise the legs and wings, sprinkle it w^^ Salt, Sauce it with the juce of
Lemon, Pe^per, white wind, and a Shalot boiled ^ them.

To Thigh a Woodcock
Raise the legs, dot his Brains, sprink^ him with Salt, and powder of Ginger,
Sa^^^ him with Anchovie Sauce, and gravy, (...) for want of these with Butter
and Vinega^ in which, stripped Thime, is shred ve^ small, being first boiled;
Garnish wi^ Lemon Peel.

To Cut up a Snite.
Raise the legs, wings, and Breastpei^^ ^divde the remainder in four parts,
Sauce ^ with beaten Parsley, Butter, Vinegar, and ^e gravy.

To Sauce a Cock, Capon or Pullet.
Take off the legs and wings, place them in either side, then raise the Merry
thought, after that the side pieces down the Breast, ^hen take off the
belly-piece, so turn up the Carcass, cut the back asunder, and divide ^^ in
four pieces, placing them between the ^ings and the legs: Sauce them either
with ^gg Sauce, or the Neck and Gizzard, boyl^d with pepper and water with the
gra^y; Garnish with slices of Lemon and Parsley.

To Allay a Phesant.
Raise the legs and wings, as of the former, ^rinkle Salt round it, and Sauce
it with Chichup, Claret, Sugar, and thin slices of Nutmeg; garnish with
bay leaves and (...) of Orange, or Lemon.

To Rear a Goose.
Take off the legs, cut off the belly-peice, close to the lower end of the
breast, ^ace her down on both sides the breast, ^ Tliumbs-breadth, from the
breast-bone-ridge, take off the pinions on each side, and the flesh which is
laced, raise quite from the bone, cut up the Merry thought; take off the slice
on the top of the brea^ from the carcass, and cut it in halv^ long ways, lay
the rump in the fore-e^^ of Merry-Thought, and before it the bell^ piece, place
these in decent order, a^^ sauce it with Mustard and Sugar, in s^cers,
Apple-sauce or Gravy, Pepper a^ Shallot as you like best; and no Garnish.

To Thigh a Pigeon.
Take off the Legs and Wings, and c^ the carcass in four parts, and lay the^
decently in order, as if it was still whole.

And thus you may do with Thrus^ Blackbird, Teal, Widgeon, Wheat-Ears,
Chickens, Ducklins, Turkey-Pouts, Dottrel, Pushins, and all others of the like
bigness; b^ for all smaller Birds, as Larks, Sparron, Finches Wood-peckers,
etc. only cut them in four quarters, sauce them with ^^ter, Vinegar the juce of
a Lemon, and Parsley boiled, and finely shred; and b^ this method you have the
general and particular terms of Carving, and may order it accordingly; and in
the cutting up and carving other Fowl not here mentioned these being the
principal, in use at Feas^^ of all sizes.

For Fish there is no great difficulty in cutting it up, because it is
generally ordered when brought to the Table, and therefore I shall only note,
that the best piece is that next the Head, the next the Middle-peice, and the
Tail by many not much accounted of: If a Fish be large turn it on the belly,
divide it down the back, and laying the sides open, divide them into three
parts; yet for your better insight into something you may meet withal one time
or other, and think difficult I shall not so silently pass over this part of
Carving.

The madner of Carving, Fish, with their Proper Sauce, etc.
Hack Herring, and lay it whole on a Trencher, or Plate, the Backbone and Roe,
being taken out of all salt Fish, salt Salmon Green Fish or Conger, pair away
the Skin; Mackerel Marling, and Stock Fish, lay it flakes. And Pike must be
laid on the belly on a plate, the back opened, the bone taken out, and Sauced
with Clarret, Nutmeg and Ginger, Butter and the juice of a Lemon. A salt
Lamprey must be Skinned, and cut in Seven or eight pieces: As for Pince Boiled,
pour out the water from them, cross them with your knife, Sauce them with wine,
salt butter and vinegar, and garnish with green things. And so you may order
Dace, Gug^ons, Roach Mullet, Chiven, Perch, Sole, Whiting, Haddock and
Godleng; only raise either of these by the back, clean the belly, and take ou^
the backbone.

Bream Carp or Trout, must be boned, and so laid whole together again. But as
for Conger, Salmon, Sturgeon, Turbut, Toornback, cut them up and lay them in
order, as i^ the dressing of Fish, is in many particular more plainly directed.

The Sauces for Fish are these, Viz. Musta^ for Salt Conger, Oil Vinegar and
Mustard with Salmon, Herring, and Sparthings, Sa^ Eel, and Ling, Verjuice, and
Butter; wit^ Roach, Dace, Bream, Mallet, and Flounders Gallenti^e, with Salt
Lamprey, and Sturgeo^ Crab, and Chiven, with Vinegar, beaten Cin^mon, and
Ginger; with all Green Fish, Gre^ Sauce is proper: Though with Fresh T^ but,
usually Mustard; and so of others to tedious here to^ be mentioned, but man
better occur in other parts of thi^ Work.

As for Butchers Meat it greatly concer^ you, not as to the rules of Carving,
^o^ that is so commonly seen, and easy to b^ performed, that I believe none
can miss it; only the Cutting up of a Coney or Hare, which is something
difficult, I have not yet spoken off.

To Unlace a Coney.
Lay it on the back, cut up the belly, then raise the wings, and sides, take
off the legs, and lay the four part of the body and chine together, and the
belly pieces on each side: Sauce it with Butter Vinegar, the Liver shred small,
with boiled Parsley, and some powder of Ginger, Garnish with Lemons, Salt, and
of Ginger.

To break a Hare.
Lay her on her belly, cut her down the chine, then take off the shoulders,
legs and belly pieces, lay them in order on the sides of the Dish, cut off the
Tail-pieces, or Huntsmans piece; divide the chine and the hallow trunk, split
the Head, and lay it in the fore part of the Dish. Sauce it with Gravy Pepper,
Ginger, Clarret, Vinegar, Gallantine, and crumbs of White Bread; Garnishing with
thin slices of Red Beets and Red Cabbidge.

Pickles for Sauces; and keeping Summer-Fruit, all the YEAR.
Cucumbers to Pickle.
Take them of a small size, or indifferently well chose to your purpose, wash
them clean from dust, and let them lay four hours in Salt and water cold, then
boil up good Rape Vinegar, or White Wind Vinegar, with some Salt, Ginger, Dill,
a little whole Pepper, and Coriander-seed, scum off the froth that arises, then
put the cold water and salt, from the Cucumbers, and put the hot liquor to them
into a close Cask or Vessel stopped, and they will not only be very green, but
keep all the Year. Thus you may pickle French-beans, slices of Turnip,
Purslain, Lettice, or Endive stalks, only these must be pretty well scalded in
fair-water, before they are put into the Pickle, Do Broom-buds, as you do
Cucumbers.

To Pickle Barberries.
Boil water and salt, scum it well, and let it boil till it will near bear an
Egg, marst some Barberries into it, and Boil them to color it, and when it is
cool, put it to your other Barberries. Thus you may Pickle Samphire, only
adding a little Vinegar to the Brine: Also green Grapes, Plumbs, Cherries,
Peaches, Quinces, young Apples, Green Apricocks, or the like.

Mushrooms.
Must be just Scalded in fair water, then put in cold White Wind Vinegar with
Pepper, Mace Ginger and Coriander-seeds, cover them with Bay Leaves, and keep
them close scumming them and putting a little fresh Vinegar once a Month. This
way you may keep them, at least three quarters of a Year.

Clove Gilly Flowers.
When you have infused them for Syrup and pressed the Flowers hard, Boil up
vinegar and Sugar gently, and scum it, put the flowers into it very hot, with
some Blades of Mace, and bit or two of Cinnamon: And thus you may pickle any
sort of Flowers. For Garnish, Sallade, or Sauce, which at all times would not
be had.

To keep Fruit for Tarts as they Grew, etc.
Take large Stone-bottles, with extraordinary fit Corks, well boiled, that they
may swell close when thurst in, put them into an Oven, after you have clean
washed them, dry and evaporate the gross air, then immediately fill them with
unripe Gooseberries, Damsons, hard, Cherries, Apricocks, or such like fruits,
used in Tarts, and at many times not to be had, stop them up close, set them in
a dry, but not a hot place, and they will keep their natural taste and color, all
the Year; only they often happen to shrivel a little, which in haking, etc.
Plumps up again; and by this means the noted Pastry-men have them at all
Seasons, which makes the Ignorant fancy they have them brought from a far
Country, in which at that time it is Summer, Grapes if not too pripe, may be so
kept till Christmas.

To Pickle Oysters.
Boil up water and Pepper, grossly bruised, scum it well, and when it is strong
of the Pepper, put in some slices of Nutmeg, Ginger, a few Bay leaves and the
liquor of the Oysters, with a sprinkling of Salt, strain out the liquor when it
tastes well of the spices, take stewing Oysters, perboyl or scald them in fair
water, so put them into the warm Pickle, and barrel and pot them up for your
use, So you may Pickle Muscles, Cockles, and any small Shellfish, of the like
Nature.

CHAP. IX. The Art of Pastery: Or, Direction for making Pyes, Tarts Custards,
etc.
Custards to make.
DRy the Past when you have formed it to your mind, till it grow stiff, then
break about a dozen Eggs, beat them up to a thinness, and put them into two
quarts of new Milk, omitting half the whites, and if you will have it a Cream
Custard, put no white at all in, add to these a pound of fine Sugar, and two
ounces of Rose water, mix them very well, and strain out the liquidest part
very hard; and so fill up you Coffins of Past: Or, if you please you may put it
into Pans: if you make a Cream Custard, you may put into it, Nutmeg, and Cloves
finely beaten, and sifted through a Lawn Sieve.

A Pear Pie.
Take hard Winter Pears or Warden, put them into an Earthen Pan, with a little
water and set them in an Oven, covered with a dough lid or brown Paper wetted,
till soaked, then skin them, cut them in sunder, and take out Coars, lay in
your Coffin some fine Sugar, and place them in halves, or quarters, neatly upon
them, scatter between each laying, fine beaten Sugar, Cinnamon, and scrapting of
Lemon or Citron peel, then cover them over with Sugar, having put the liquor,
that Issued in Baking, to them, and set the Pie in a pretty quick Oven.

A Pigeon Pie.
Draw your Pigeon, dry them well, season them with Pepper and Salt, and put
some fine Pepper, in rowlers of Butter, into their Bellys, mixed with a little
fine shred Parsley and Pennyroyal, between them make laying of Butter, and
close them up with the lid, putting Butter melted and beaten well, when they
come out of the Oven.

A Pork Pie.
Skin the Pork, and cut it in thin slices season it with Ginger, Pepper and
Nutmeg, sprinkle it with Salt and fair Water well Boiled and scum'd, lay it in
with Butter and the yolks of Eggs well beaten up, and some fine grated Manchet,
then put in a little Claret, and let it soak very well; and it will Eat
Exceeding Rare.

Quince Pie: Or Tart.
Boil your Quince in Water, Sweetened with Sugar, till they be soft, then skin
them and take out the Coars, after that Boil the Water with a little more
Sugar, Clove, Cinnamon, and Lemon peel, till it becomes of a thickness of Syrup,
when cold, lay your Quinces in in halves, or quarters, scattering Sugar between
each laying, put in a pint of the Syrup or more, according to the Biggness of
your Pie or Tart, make the Coffin round with close or cut covers, and Bake it
pretty well; and thus you may do with Pippins and Pear-mains, or any Winter
Fruit, as also with Green Codlings.

An Oyster Pie.
Take large stewing Oysters, parboyl them, putting into water, a little Pepper,
Salt, and Ginger, and being taken out season them lightly with the same, and
little grated Nutmeg, roll them up in little balls of Butter, and beaten Thime,
laying them in your Coffin, and pour in a little Claret, and Gravy of Mutton or
Beef, close up the lid, and bake them in a gentle Oven.

A Rice Tart.
Dress the Rice very clean, boil it with new Milk till it swell very much, then
sea-it with grated Nutmeg, beaten Ginger, and Cinnamon, beat up six yolks of
Eggs, with a little Salt, Sugar, and the juice of two Oranges, close up these
Materials, and when it is to be served up, scrape a little fine Sugar over the
lid of it.

A Tongue Pie.
Take a large Neats-Tongue, or other Tongues, well boiled and blanched, cut it
in thin slices, lay layings of that, and thin slices of sat Bacon, but of a
lesser quantity, season them with Nutmeg, Pepper, pour upon them some dissolved
Anchovy, beat up the yolks of five or six Eggs Claret and Butter, boil them up
to a thickness, and pour them in when the Pie is baked: So a Hare Pie, or lean
Venison may be ordered.

A Venison Pasty.
Bone your Venison, beat it thin, season it with Pepper, Nutmeg and Salt, lay
it with layings of Butter, or Marrow, on your past you design for the bottom,
close up the lid, and bake it in a soaking Oven four hours, then boil the bones
in a pot, with Clarres, Nutmeg, and a little Pepper, and when it is hot strain
it, and pour it into the Pasty, and cut it up hot or cold, at discresion.

A Lumber Pie.
Take the Umbles of Deer, cut them in thin slices, season them with Salt,
Pepper, Nutmeg, and Ginger, lay layings of them with interlarded Bacon, sliced
Dates; Raisins, and Current; and when it is going into the Oven, pour into it,
Gravy, Claret, and Butter beaten up together prity warm.

A Minced Pie.
Take a Calves Chaldron, Beef, or Neats Tongue, parboyl them, blanch the
latter, and mince either of them small, put to a pound half a pound of Currants,
and a quarter of a pound of Beef Suet, or Marrow, some thin slices of Canded
Orange peel, or Lemon peel, a little fine grated Bread, and a gill of Canary,
sprinkle them with Sugar, beaten Mace, Nutmeg and Cinnamon: So close up the
whole and bake it in a gentle Oven.

Putt-Past to make.
Take a pound and a half of the best Butter, and six Eggs, well beaten up, when
they are mixed with new Milk into a past, beat them together with a Rolling
pin, adding more Flower, Butter and Eggs, as you beat them; and when the past
is soft, and Pliable, Roll it very thin, for Tiffany Tarts, Cheesecakes, or the
like.

A Hern Pie.
Break the Breast Bone of the Hern, parboyl it in water and salt, shred sweet
herbs with Onyons, and make them up into little Balls, with Butter, put them
into the belly, and season it with Pepper, Salt and Nutmeg.

Cheesecakes.
Take a Gallon f new Milk, put to it a quarter of a Pint of Runnet, and if the
Milk be a little warmed, it will presently curdle, then press it in a linen
cloth, till all the Whey be run out, beat up the Curd with beaten Cinnamon,
grated Nutmeg, the yolks of half a Dozen of Eggs, finely beaten, and gill of
Canary, add a quarter of a pound of picked and washed Currants, and three ounces
of Sugar a pound of Curd, and a gill of Canary to the whole, mix them well, put
them in Puff-past, and fashion them as you please; sprinkle a few Currants on
the top, and wash them over with a feather dipped in Yolks of Eggs, beaten up
with Canary.

Gooseberry Tart.
Pick your Gooseberrys clean, lay them in the Sun to dry a little, lay them
into the Past, with layings of Sugar, sprinkle them with Rose Water, and
sccater a few perfumed Comfits amongst them, bake them in a gentle Oven. Thus
you may use Cherry Tarts, Curran Tarts, Apricocks, Damson Tarts, and Tarts of
all soft Plumbs.

Chicken Pie.
Draw your Chickens, break the breasts or flat them, season them with Pepper
and Salt, shred Parsley very small, roll it up with Butter, and put it into
them bellys, lay a laying of Butter between them, close up the Pie, and bake it,
pouring in a supply of melted Butter when it is baked; and thus you may order a
Hen-Pye, a Goose Pie, a Turkey Pie, a Rabbit Pie, only avoiding the parslley;
and with parsley a Lark Pie, or a Pie of any small Birds.

CHAP. X. The Currous Art of Candying, Preserving. Conserving, Drying, and
Confectioning, of Flowers, Fruits, Roots, Stalks, Peels, Seeds, etc. Making of
Pasts, Marmalades, etc.
Flowers to Candy.
TAke Cowslips, Violets, Clovegilly-flowers, or any other that are of pleasant
taste and smell, pick them clean from the Stalks, and clip off that end that
groes in the Husk, dry them moderatly in the Sun, by spreading them on a clean
linen cloth, then put two pound or more of Sugar, according to the quantity of
your flowers, to as much Rose Water, as will just dissolve it, boil it up into
a Syrup, and then put in your Flowers, after that, boil it up over quicker
fire, till it Candys, so take off, stir them with a spoon and bruise the Sugar
from them, and they will be Candy'd without any clog of Sugar upon them, put
them up in papered boxes, and set them in a warm place, and they will keep good
and dry all the Year; and thus you may order any Flowers, or Blosoms,

Rucket, Orange, or Lemon Peel, Citrons, Erigngo-roots, or Lettice-stalks to
Candy etc.
Cleanse either of these from superfluity, and dry out part of the moisture,
then boil them tender in fair water, Shifting the water once or twice, then
wash them in cool water, and dry them with a cloth, cutting them into what
convenient pieces you think fit, take twice so much as they weigh in Sugar,
refine your Sugar, and boil them in one half, till they be tender and clear,
make your Syrup first, with half Rose Water, and the other half fair-water, and
when they are clear, let a Syrup be made of the other half of your Sugar, and
boil them up, shake them afterward till they be cold, and so place them on
Paper in a warm place, till they be dry and keep them as the former.

Barberrys, Grapes, or Gooseberrys to Candy.
First preserve them by boiling them up in a thin Syrup of Sugar and Water,
after they have been boiled a little tender in water only, and having washed
off the Syrup in a little warm water, strew them over with searsed Sugar, and
set them in a warm Oven or Stove three or four times, not letting them cool
till they be dry, and they will sparkle very curiously, and keep long.

Rock Candy very Clear.
Take Spices or Flowers, or any dry Suckets, or Fruits, after they are
preserved and dried, lay them upon a Wier Grate, over an Earthen pan, take
refined Sugar, and as much Water as will dissolve it, viz. near half a pint to
every pound, then beat into it the white of an Egg, when it is hot, and set it
on the fire again; and when it boyls up, drop a little cold Water into it set
it off the fire again, and scum it, so boil it to a candy height, till it will
draw like a hair between your fingers, then pour it very hot into an Earthen
pan among your Fruits, set it in a warm place, and cover it close with a
Blancket, the next day pour out all the Syrup that will run from it, and set
your pot in a warm place again, to let them dry, prick up your Wires, take off
all the fruit, and lay them in Papers, and when they are through dry, they will
be a curious Rock-candy then box them up and keep them for use; and by these
rules you may candy any other things that are proper so to be ordered.

Cherries to Preserve.
Gather your Cherries, when Ripe, in a fair day that the moisture may be off
them, cut off the tops of the stolks, and lay them in a pan upon a thin bed of
Sugar, put a pound of beaten Loaf Sugar to every pound of Cherries, and as you
boil them up, sprinkle some Sugar on them, and scum them when they are ready to
sees over, let it be a over quick fire, and they will not break, if you do not
too many of them together; two pound is sufficient at a time, then put them
into a broad dish a cooling, till the next day, and if there come any water
from them, sees them a little more; and so put them up in the Syrup of Sugar
for your use; and in this manner you may preserve all sort of Plumbs,
Apricocks, Peaches, or Nectrals.

To Preserve Quinces
Wipe them clean, cut them in four quarters, and take out the coar, place the
quarters regularly in an Earthen pot, and put as much Conduit-water or
Spring Water, as will cover them, then set them one a gentle fire, and let them
sees till they be soft, but not break, so lay them in a dish, and when they
are cold take off the skin, let the water boil after to the Consumption of a
third part, then put a pint of it to a pound of fine beaten Sugar, and when the
Sugar is dissolved, then sees it till it boil up into a Syurup, scum it and
put in the Quinces, and let them sees softly a considerable time, and you
perceive them red, then turn them that they may be all of one color, and so
keep them in the Syrup close Stoped for your use; and in this manner you may
preserve Pippins, and all other winter Fruits.

Marmalade of Quinces.
Take three Gallons of Spring, or Running-water, pa^e sixteen pound of Quinces,
quarter them and cut out the Coars, put to these eight pound of fine Sugar, and
^et them all boil softly, till half the wa^er be consumed; and if you would
have ^our Marmalade white, cover them very close during the boiling, and being
of a good color, break them with your spoon, ^^d boil them up to the thickness
of a Mar^alade, then if you please to have it scented, you may dissolve into it
a little Musk, Ambergreese, or Rose Water, and when (...) begins to cleave to
the spoon take it from the Fire, fill it into boxes or pots, smooth it and
cover it over with a little fine Sugar; and thus you may make Marmalade of
Pippins, Apricocks, Plumbs, etc.

Marmalade of Oranges, Lemon, or Citrons, etc.
Take the Peels of either, clean scraped within, and thinly pared without, boil
them tender, shifting in three waters, to take away the bitterness till they
have lost a great part of their taste, then mash them in a Mortar, with a
wooden pestle, boil up Syrup with half a point of water to a pound of Sugar and
when it is of a good thickness, put in the Orange pulp, etc. and boil it up,
scumming off the Froth, to the thickness of Marmalade, and scent it with
Rose Water, or Orange water, and put it up in Boxes, or lay it on a Plate and
dry it into Past.

Past of Oranges, and Lemons. etc.
Boil the Peel tender, as the former, putting into the first water a handful of
Bay Salt, and shift them often till the biting taste is gone, beat them to Mash,
and strain the Pulp through a Cushion of Canvas, and mingle something more then
the weight in Sugar, then boil it up till you can spread it in cakes, and
Fashioning it as you please, pretty thin, dry it in places, and keep it in a
warm place.

Past of Plumbs.
Take tender Plumbs, as many as you please, put them in an Earthen pot, and put
that pot into a pot of boiling Water, but let no water come to the Plumbs, and
when they begin to dissolve, press out the thinner part from them through a
fine cloth, then strain the Pulp through a canvas, take as much Sugar as it
weighs and put to it as much Water as will melt it, so boil it to a Candy
height, then having boiled the Pulp very well, put that and the Sugar hot
together, so boil them with sturring, and lay them out to dry on plates, in
what form you please. And thus you make Past, of Cherrys, Rasberys,
Strawberrys, Currants; and indeed, of most pleasant Pruit, and Flowers, and by
making them somewhat thinner, they will be a fine Marmalode: Or thus, by only
putting them in the Syrup without Mashing, they may be preserved.

To Conserve any hard Fruits, etc.
When you have brought them to a past by the beforementioned ruley, read to
fashion upon your plate, instead of drying it, put it up in a well glazed pot,
strew it over with a little fine Sugar, and Rose Water; and this way will take,
especially with all hard Fruits, as Pippins, Oranges, Lemons, etc.

Conserve of Tender Fruits
Dissolve these especially Plumbs Cherrys, etc. as you did for the past, strain
the Liquor and Pulp together, putting to every pint three quarters of a pound
of Sugar, so boil it up till it becomes indifferent thick, then lay it on a
cold dish till it will spread no broader, and so put it up in your pots, strew
it over with Sugar, and tie it over with a paper, and over that a Leather.

To Preserve Fruits Green.
Take Pippins, Apricocks, Peaches, Pear-plumbs, or as you please, when, gree^
scald, them till they will peel pretty eas^ly, then being peeled, boil them
very tender, take their weight of Sugar, and disolv^ it in as much water as
will cover them then boil them something leisurely, take them up and boil the
Syrup until it b^ somewhat thick, that it will button upon the Dish-side; and
when they are coo^ put them up together, keeping them clo^^ stopped.

To preserve Ripe Plumbs, or other Fruit.
Take their weight in Sugar and put b^^ a little water, for these will yield
liquo^ of themselves, boil them pretty quick^ or the Syrup will turn red; and
when you see they are enough, put them up i^ pots, and keep them stopped; and
s^ you may preserve any Ripe Fruit that requires it.

To Dry Pippins, an Amber Clearness.
Take Yellow Pippins, pare them th^^ and cut them in halves, taking out the
Coar, lay them in a basin of water, the^ take their weight in Sugar, Clarify
it, an^ boil it almost to a Candy height, then dr^ the Pippins with a clean
linen cloth, pu^ them into the Hot Sugar, permitting them to boil as fast as
they can, when they raise take them ^ff the fire and scum them, turn them and
set them on again; and when the Sugar i^ Candy height, lay the Pippi^s in a
broad Dish, and place them in a warm Oven, or Stove, turn them often, and at
three days end they will be Dry and Transparent.

Princes Biscuit.
Take a pound of Sugar, as much fine Flower, eight yolks of Eggs and 6 whites,
beat the Eggs, and make these two a Batter with Milk, mix with it some
Carraway-Comfits, put it into Tin Coffins, and run it over with a little
Canary, and the yolk of an Egg, beaten together.

To make March-pane of Rashers of Ba^on.
Take some of the March-pane, and knead it in Saunders till it be red, then
roll abroad three rows, of the red and four of the white, lay together a white
and a red roll, until all are laid, then cut them overthwart in thin slices,
and dry them; and they will deceive the curious, who cannot but take them for
Bacon, unless you taste or smell them, the Composition is as the other
Macrhpane, only in this the color added.

Comfits to make of any small Seed, as Carraway, Annis, Coriander, etc.
Boil your Sugar to a Gandy height, which is, when it will draw at the end of a
spoo^ like a Hair, then your Seeds being dried fling them in, and stir them up
and down till they have taken up the Sugar, and are run into small divisions,
then put them between two covers and shake them together to loosen them form
each other, run them through a Sieve, and dry them in an Oven or Stove, Thus
Almonds, or greater Comfits are Sugared over, and afterward perfumed, by
putting a grain of Musk into the Box wherein you place them, keeping them close
for three or four days. If you would have your Almonds very smooth in the
Sugar, only dip them into it.

Rowl-Wafers to make.
Take a quarter of a peck of the fines^ Flower, make it with whites of Eggs and
a little Isinglass dissolved in water into a kind of a Puff-past, by
extraordinary beating; and if you would have them sweet, or Scented, you may
add Sugar or Scents, at your discretion; roll them out as thin as may on your
rolling board, and having made what impressions you ^ease on them, roll them up
in hollow ^owlers, like rowls of Paper, dry them ^ a warm Oven; for their
thinness re^ires not baking in a hot one; and so ^e them, either to eat, or
rather to Gar^^n, or set out Banquets of Sweet^eats.

A Cake-Royal, with Comfits.
Take a peck of fine Flowers, the yolks ^^ two dozen of Eggs, four pound of
^urrans, two pound of Comfits, 1 pound ^ Orange peel, Lemon peel, Citron,
E^ngo, and Orris, cut it in little long ^ts, with two pound of sweet Butter,
and ^ little Cinnamon, and Mace, finely beat^^, and sifted, make it about two
inches ^^d a half thick, place it in a Tin Hoop, (...) for want of that in a
Wooden one, ^^ke it in a brisk Oven, till it be half enough, then draw it
forth, and Ice it ^ver with Canary, Rose Water, the white (...) an Egg and
Sugar, beaten up together: So set it in till the Icing becomes ^ white as Snow,
and it ceases to swell ^^y longer.

Your small Toys, made of Sugar in the ^ape of Birds, Beasts, Flowers, etc. are
made of melted Sugar, in Rose Water, Cast in moulds, and Gilded or Painted
afterward at Discretion.

To Blanch Almonds.
Or take off their Husks in order to use them, is no more than Putting them
into warm water till they swell, and the^ by sifting or rubbing them with a
Canvas, the husks will separate.

Syrup of Roses.
Gather Damask Roses, the Dew being on them, about six pound, or according to
the proportion of the quantity of Syrup you intend to make, cut away the
Whites, at the bottom, then boil them in as much spring water, as will cover
them an Inch in a Glazed Earthen Vessel do this over a gentle Fire for three o^
four hours, then take out the Roses, and wring them into the water as hard ^
may be with a Cloth, put in fresh Ros^ till it be very strong of the scent, an^
turn redish, then to six pound of the water, put four pound of Sugar, an^ boil
it up to a Syrup. This is a pleasant purging Syrup, not any ways offe^^ sive to
the Stomach, and is therefore usually given to Children on that occasion; and
this way, or by infusion in co^ water, Syrup of Violets, Couslips,
Clovegilly-flowers, and other simple Syrups, of Flowers, Herbs, Fruits, and
Roots, are made.

Cordial Syrup of Poppeys.
Take the heads of white poppeys, not thoroughly blown, eight ounces, the heads
of black ones, six ounces, Aqua Coelestis, two quarts, simper them over a
gentle fire, to the consumption of a third part, then add 3 pound of Sugar to
the liquor, the poppeys being squeezed out, some blades of Mace, and bits of
Cinnamon boiled in other water, to the quantity of half a pint, poured into
this, then boil it up to the thickness of a Syrup: It is exceeding good against
Cattars, and Coughs, and in Fevers, mittigating the heat and pain; it helps
Frenzies, and Watchings, and procures Sleep. And thus with Coelestis, Brandy,
or Aqua-vitae, you may make any Cordial Syrups.

A Syrup for any Cold, Cough, or Cattar.
Take one ounce of Cetrack, Coltsfoot, the herb so called, and Maidenhair,
each one ounce, boil them in three quarts of water, till it wastes to three
pints, with one pound of Elecampain roots sliced, then strain out the liquid
part, and (...) it up with a pound and a half of Sugar, to a Syrup, and take a
dram of it in any covenient warm liquor, Night and Morning.

Honey of Raisins to make.
Take Raisins of the Sun two pound, stone them and infuse them 24 hours in six
pound of warm water, then boil it to the consumption of half, so strain and
press it out, then adding two pound of dispumated Honey, boil it to the
thickness of Honey. And thus you may make Honey of Violets, Roses, or other
Flowers, sweet Fruits, or Herbs, proper to any uses.

To make Marchpanes.
Blanch your Almonds swelled in cold water, beat them in a stone Mortar, and
drop in your beating, some Rosewater into them, keep them from Oyling, and
strew now and then a handful of fine sifted Sugar, and when by working you have
brought it unto a Past, roll it thin, and make it into its form; Ice it over
with Rose Water, Sugar, and the white of an Egg beaten together, put it into a
moderate hot Oven, and when the Icing begins to rise, take it out.

To make Makroons.
Take to a pound of Blanched Almonds, half a pound of fine Sugar, beat them in
a Wooden or Stone Mortar, with whites of Eggs, and a little Rose Water, till
they come to be as thick as Batter for Fritters, ^^en lay wafers on your Tin
Plates, put on this Batter in little spoonfuls, sprinkling it over with a
little fine Sugar and Rose Water; and so Bake them in a Gentle Oven, about a
Quarter of an Hour.

To make French Biscuit.
Take half a peck of Flower, four Eggs, and half a pint of Ale Yeast, an ounce
and a half of Anniseeds, make them up into a Past, with a little Cream, and
cold water, fashion it like a long Brick^ and when it is a day or two old cut
it out into thin slices, like Toasts, being strewed over with beaten
Loaf-Sugar, set them in a warm Oven or Stove, till they are dried; and so put
them in boxes for use.

To make Naples Biscuit
Take Almonds beaten very fine, one pound, fine Flower a pound and a half,
Sugar one pound, whites of Eggs half a Dozen, make them into Batter with fair
water, and put the Batter into your Tin Coffins, so bake them, glazing them
with the white of an Egg, and Rose Water

CHAP. XI. Artificial Embellishments: Or, the Art of Beautifying the Hands,
Face, or any other part of the Body; Restoring a good Color, taking away
Freckles, Spots, or any Deformities in the Skin, etc. Making Perfumes,
Essences, Sweet-bags, Sweet-balls, Pomatums, Washes, etc.
To Beautify the Hands and Face.
TAke two handfuls of Rosemary Flowers, one handful of the tops of Fumitory,
and an ounce of Blanched Almonds, grossly bruised, boil these in a quart of
spring water, and a pint of White Wind, till a fifth part be consumed, then
strain out the rest, let it settle twenty-four hours in a Glass, then pour it
off from the setlings, and use it as an excellent Beautifier, and great
Restorer of a good complexion.

To make the Skin soft, and White.
Take Neats-foot Oil, one ounce, Oil, or the Fat that swims upon the boiling of
Sheeps Trotters, a like quantity, mix these in half a pint of Rose Water, over
a gentle fire, and supple the parts with it very warm, chafing or rubbing it
in, a few times doing it will answer your expectation.

To take away Morphew, Scurff, or other Deformities of the Skin.
Take Comphire, two drams, two Lemons, viz. the juice of them, Loaf-Sugar an
ounce, mix these in half a pint of fair water, put it into a Glass, and shake
it often, suffering it to stand eight or ten days in the Sun, or some warm
place, then add a scruple of white sublimated Mercury, shake it about and
strain it, and when you would use it, put it softly to your Face, with a linen
rag or cloth, or upon any other place, and it will take off the Deformity, and
under that, there will as it were, a new Skin appear, very Fresh and Lively.

To take away Redness, or Pimples from the Face.
Take Camphire a dram, Copperas half an ounce, Wine Vinegar half a pint, add to
these the Rhind of Citron thinly pared, one ounce, boil them to the consumption
of a third part, then strain and press out the liquid part, and wash the Face
with it, anointing it afterward with Oil of Roses, and Tuttia, mingled
together, and let it lie on all night, and in a little time the Redness, or
Pimples will decline, and the Skin recover its smoothness, and natural
Complexion.

To take away Freckles.
Take the Gaul of a young Cock, the Wool of a Hares foot, burnt to powder, by
wrapping it up hard in a Brown paper wetted, as in Burning Silver Lace, that it
may not Burn to Ashes, but Moulder, and so be reducible into Powder, add to
these an ounce of Rye-Meal, beat them together with the Pulp of a Lemon, and
Wine Vinegar, till they may be spread Playster-wise, spread this composition on
soft Leather, and lay it on the Freckley places; and in twice or thrice
applying, you will see a strange Alteration.

To cause a curious White, Shining Complexion.
Take Peach Blossoms, two handfuls, the Sap that drops from a cut Vine, 4
ounce, the seed^ of Mellions grossly bruised, one ounce Gum Tragacanth, beaten
finely into Powder, half an ounce, put to these, when well beaten, or bruised,
two quarts of Clarified Whey, let them infuse twenty-four hours in a warm
place, then press out the Liquid part as hard as may be by pressing, and use it
as you see occasion.

To make the Hands or Face Plump.
Take of the Marrow of the Bones of Hogs Feet two ounces, Oil of Almonds, and
Oil of Roses, each half an ounce, Flower of Almonds finely sifted, half an
ounce, make these up into an Unguent, and chafe it in often, and it will Supple
and Plump the Skin, etc. to a curious Softness.

A curious Perfume against ill Scents.
Take Frankincense, a quarter of an ounce, in Powder, Myrrh, the like quantity,
Lavender flowers, and Rosemary leave, beaten into pwder, mix them together, and
put them into an Incense pot, or sprinkle them on a Chafing Dish of Coals.

A Sweet-Bag to Scent Clothes etc.
Take tops of Hysop, Winter Savoury, Rosemary, Lavender, and the chippings of
Cassa Ligna, Cedar, and Sassafrax, few them up in thin bags, and lay them among
your Garments, and they will not only give them a curious Scent, but preserve
them from Worms, Moths, or any other Insects.

Sweet Balls to carry in ones Hand, for the Prevention of ill Airs or Scents.
Take Past e of Almonds four ounces, mingle with it a little Bean-Flower, then
knead it, being made wet with Orange, or Jessime water, and drop two or three
drops of the Oil of Cloves, Nutmeg, Cinnamon, or any other Scents as you will
please to have it Scented with, and make them up into Balls, or hollow Boxes.

Sweet Powder.
Take Rice grounds, beat them, dry them, and sift them often, till they become
very fine, then dry them again, scent a pound of this with two grains of Musk,
a dram of Rose scent, or other scents proper, that is pleasing to you. This may
be done for want of Rice grounds, with White Starch, finely sifted.

A Perfume to Drive away Vermin,
Take Storax a quarter of an ounce, Assafoetida, as much, the Bark of
Elder-root, and a few tops of Southern-wood, dry the latter, and beat them
severally into powder, then mix them and sprinkle them on a hot Fire-Shovel, or
Chafing Dish of Coals, keeping the place, Close, and either, Mice, Rats, Bugs,
Flies, Moths, or Worms, that are within the scent of it, will avoid the place;
and if it be often continued, never return again.

A Bath, to soften, Cleanse, and Refresh the Body.
Take the roots of White-Lillies, and Marshmallows of each two pound,
Grounsil, Pelletory of the Wall, and Violets, each half an handful, Linseed,
Fenugreek, and Coriander-seeds, each four ounces, Flowers of Camomile,
Mellilot, and tops of Fennel, each half a handful, boil about two hours in a
sufficient quantity of water, then add Oil of Lillies, and Lindseed, each a
pound, and either bathe your self in it in a Bathing-tub, warm, or apply it
with Linnen-cloths.

Water of Talc, a great Beautifier.
Take the best Talc, slit it in thin pieces, hang it up in a thin Linen Bag in
a very damp place, with a Receiver under it to receive the droppings, when if
sweats, or dissolves, then distill it, and it produces a curious Shining
Beatifying Water, to set a Lovely Whiteness on the Skin, and keep back the
signs of Age.

To take Spots, or Stains, out of Silks or Stuffs, etc.
Take a Trotter-bone, burn in and beat it to powder, mix it with Fullers earth,
and a little Casteel Soap, wet it in fair water, rub it on the place, and then
dry it in the Sun, or by a gentle fire, then rub it over hard with a wet Brtsh,
and when it is dry again, the Spot or Stain will disappear.

To take out Pitch, Wax, Posin or Tar.
If any of these happen on a Garment either Silk, Linen, or Woollen, pour a a
little Oil of Turpentine on the place, and let it soak in about half an hour,
then rub it out, but not too hard; and you will find the Turpentine has Soaked
out the Gluttonous quality, so tht it will crumble out, like small bits of dry
Dirt, or Clay.

To take Spots, or Stains out of Linen.
Take the juice of a Lemon, and red Onyon mixed together, put into it a-little
Gum Sandrack, and Crumbs of Stale White-bread, heat these gently over a Fire,
and then dip the part that is stained often in it, let it then dry, and have in
readiness a hot Lather of Soap and Water, to wash it immediately; and doing so
in two or three Washings, it will quite disappear.

To Source, or Clean, Gold and Silver Lace.
Lay it on a Carpet very even, then with a soft Brush run it over with fine
Bran, three or four times, to take off the Dirt, then to brighten it, take
burnt Alom, beaten to fine Powder, and sifted, rub this powder on gently with a
Brush, in all places where the Tarnish is, and it will answer your expectation.

Faided Linen to recover.
If Linen by being too much exposed to the Weather, or received Damage by Sea,
or Scorched, etc. Make a Lather of Costeel Soap, boil your Linen in it, then
immediately throw it into cold water and Fullers-earth pretty hot, and thickly
mixed, then wash it out in the first Lather, and wring it lightly, hang it to
dry in the Shade, and it will not only thicken, and whiten, but be fresh and
strong.

How to make a Starch, that will preserve Linen.
Take the Bran of the first fine Wheat, steep it in water two days, then let
that water run through 2 or three fine Sieves, so put it in an Earthen Dish,
and set it in the Sun, or over a gentle fire, till it dry, and become a Starch.

To make your Teeth as White as Ivory.
Take Lapis Calaminaris, burnt and beat to fine Powder, also Powder of fine
Pumice-Stone, put them into a little White Wind, and being Moistened, dry them
again in an Oven or some warm place; and so reducing it to powder again, rub
your Teeth with it, either with your Finger, or a little Brush, and then wash
your mouth with Small-beer, wherein Sage has been boiled; and by this means
they will not only become white, but fast.

To take Spots out of the Face, or Hands.
Take a Burdock-root, scrape it and slice it thin, boil it in Sheeps Milk, and
bruise into it two or three Galls of the French Oak, and with the Liquid part
wet the Spots often, and they will fade by degrees, and at last disappear.

A Pomatum for the Hands, to Prevent Chopping, or Roughness.
Take Deer-suet half an ounce, white Beeswax a quarter of an ounce, Sperma
Ceti an Ounce, Oil of Amber 2 drams, Oil of Almonds an ounce, incorporate these
over a gentle Fire, and make them into a convenient thickness, and Anoint the
Hands or Face with it.

Notwithstanding I have given you Directions for the making several sorts of
Cosmeticks, there is one already prepared, called. The VENETIAN WASH, etc, And
^^s sold for Twelve-pence the Bottle, by S. Cla^^e in George-yard in
Lombard Street, Mr. Levingston 's Fruit-shop, the South Entrance of the
Royal Exchange. Which I know to be Extraordinary Good, for Clearing and
smoothing the skin; and Rendering the Face very Beautiful and Lovely.

At the same Places are sold, a Most Admirable Powder called, A Dentifrice for
Whitening the Teeth; which will make Teeth though as Black as Ebony, as White
as Ivory. Price Six Pence the Box.

Thus have I made Good my Promise to you in laying before you such things as I
thought would prove acceptable to you: So not Doubting you will Improve them,
as they were intended for your Good; and so Profit by them, that you may have
the Benefits I Wish you, grown Weary with Writing I put and End to this Book.

FINIS.

