A Choice Drop OF HONEY From The ROCK CHRIST. OR, A Short Word of Advice to all
Christians, of what Persuasion soever, in order to a thorough Reformation.

By T.W. late Preacher of the Gospel.

The Fifth Edition.

Deuteronomy. 32.31. For their Rock is not as our Rock, even our Enemies themselves
being Judges.

LONDON, Printed and Sold by B. Harris, at the Golden-Boar's-head against the
Cross-Keys Inn in Grace Church Street, and at the corner of
Grace Church Street, next Cornhill. 1699

A Short Word of Advice to all Christians, etc.
A Word of Advice to my own Heart and thine; thou professes Baptism,
Church Fellowship; thou do well, they are glorious Ordinances; But if thou
have not the Blood of Christ at the Root of thy Profession, it will wither and
prove but painted Pageantry to go to Hell in.

If thou retain Guilt, Self-righteousness under it, those Vipers will eat out
all the Vitals of it at length. Try and examine with greatest strictness every
day, what bottom thy Profession and Hope of Glory is built upon, whether it was
laid by the hand of Christ; if not, it will never be able to endure the storm
that must come against it. Satan will throw it all down and great shall be the
fall thereof, Mat. 7.27.

Glorious Professor, thou shall be winnowed: Every vein of thy Profession will
be tried to purpose: Terrible, to have it all come tumbling down, and to find
nothing but it to bottom upon.

Soaring Professor, see to thy waxen Wings betimes, which will melt with the
heat of Temptations. What a misery to Trade much and break at length, and have
no Stock, no Foundation laid for Eternity, in thy Soul?

Gifted Professor, look there be not a worm at the root that will spoil all thy
sine Goard, and make it die about thee in a day of Scorchings. Look over thy
Soul daily, and ask, where is the Blood of Christ to be seen upon my Soul? what
Righteousness is it that I stand upon to be saved by? Have I got off all my
Self-righteousness? Many eminent Professors, have come at length to cry out, in
the sights of the ruin of all their duties, Undone, Undone to all Eternity.

The greatest sins may be hid under the greatest duties, and the greatest
terrors: See the wound that sin has made in thy soul, be perfectly cured by
the blood of Christ, not skinned over with duties, humblings, enlargements,
etc. Apply what thou will besides the blood of Christ it will poison the sore.
Thou will find that sin was never mortified truly; that thou have not seen
Christ bearing for thee upon the Cross: Nothing can kill it but the beholdings
of Christ's Righteousness.

Nature can afford no balsam fir for soul-cure. Healing from duty, and not from
Christ is the most desperate disease. Poor ragged nature, with all its highest
improvements, can never spin a garment fine enough (without spot) large enough
(without patches) to cover the soul's nakedness. Nothing can fit the soul for
that use but Christ's perfect Righteousness. Whatsoever is of nature's spinning
must be all unravelled before the Righteousness of Christ can be put on.
Whatsoever is of nature's putting on, satan will come and plunder every rag
away, and leave the soul naked and open to the wrath of God. All that nature
can do will never make up the least dram of Grace that can mortify sin, or look
Christ ^n the face one day.

Thou art a Professor, art baptized, goes on hearing, and praying, and
receiving, yet miserable may thou be. Look about thee, did thou ever yet
see Christ to this day in distinction from all other excellencies and
righteousness (...) the world, and all of them falling before his Majesty and
Grace, Isa. 2.17.

If thou have seen Christ truly, thou have seen pure Grace, pure Righteousness
in him, every way infinite, far exceeding all sin and misery. If thou have seen
Christ thou can trample upon all the righteousness of men and angels, so as
to bring thee into acceptance with God. If thou have seen Christ, thou would
not do a duty without him for ten thousand worlds, 1 Cor. 2.2. If ever thou
did see Christ, thou did see him a Rock higher than self righteousness,
satan, sin, Psalm. 61.2. and that Rock does follow thee, 1 Cor. 10.4. And there
will be continual drops of Honey and Grace out of that Rock to satisfy thee,
Psalm. 81.16. Examine if ever thou beheld Christ as the only begotten of the
Father, full of grace and truth, Joh. 1.14.16.17. Be sure thou art come thou
art come, to Christ, that thou stand upon the Rock of ages, have answered his
call to thy soul, have closed with him for Justification.

Men talk bravely of be lieving, (whilst whole and found) few know it. Christ
is the mystery of the scripture; Grace the mystery of Christ. Believing is the
most wonderful thing in the world. Put any thing of thine own to it, and thou
spoilest it; Christ will not so much as look at it for believing. When thou
believe, and comes to Christ, thou must leave behind thee thy own
righteousness, and bring nothing but thy sin, O that is hard, leave behind all
thy holiness, Sanctifications, duties, humblings, etc. and bring nothing but
thy wants and miseries, else Christ is not t for thee, nor thou for Christ.
Christ will be a pure Redeemer and Mediator. and thou must be a pure sinner, or
Christ and thou will never agree: It Is the hardest thing in the world to take
Christ alone for righteousness; that is to acknowledge him Christ, Join any
thing to him of thy own and thou Un-Christ's him.

Whatever comes in when thou go to God for acceptance, (besides Christ)
call it Antichrist, bid it be gone; make only Christ's righteousness
triumphant; all besides that is Babylon, which must fall, if Christ stand, and
thou shall rejoice in the day of the fall thereof, Isa. 1.10.11.12. Christ
alone did tread the winepress, and there was none with him, Isa. 63.3. If thou
join to any thing but Christ, Christ will trample upon it in sury and anger,
and stain his raiment with the blood thereof. Thou think it easy to believe;
was ever thy faith tried with an hour of temptations, and a thorough sight of
sin? was it ever put to grapple with Satan, and the wrath of God lying upon the
Conscience: when thou wast in the mouth of hell and the grave, then did God
show thee Christ a ransom, a righteousness, etc. Then could thou say, O I
see grace enough in Christ; thou may say that which is the biggest word in
the world Thou believe. Untryed faith is uncertain faith.

To believing there must be a clear conviction of sin, and of the merits of the
blood of Christ, and of Christ's willingness to save upon this consideration
merely, that thou art a sinner; things all harder than to make a world. All the
power in nature cannot get up so high in a storm of sin and guilt as really to
believe there is any grace, any willingness in Christ to save. When satan
charge sin upon the conscience, then the soul to charge it upon Christ, that
is Gospel-like, that is to make him Christ, he serves for that use. To accept
Christ's righteousness alone his blood alone for Salvation. That is the sum of
the Gospel, when the soul in all duties and distresses can say, Nothing but
Christ, Christ alone for righteousness, justification, Sanctification,
Redemption, 1 Cor. 1.30. Not humblings, not duties, not Graces, etc. That Soul
has got above the reach of the billows.

For all temptations, satan's advantages, our complainings are laid in
self-righteousness, and self-excellency, God pursues these, by setting satan
upon thee, as Laban did Jacob for his Images which Rachel hid, Genesis 31. these
must be torn from thee, be as willing as thou will, these hinder Christ from
coming in, and till Christ come in, guilt will not go out, and where guilt is,
there is hardness of heart, and therefore much guilt argues little, if any
thing of Christ's blood, that will tend to hardening. Make Christ thy Peace,
Ephesians. 2.14. not thy duties, thy tears, etc. Christ thy righteousness, not thy
graces, etc. Thou may destroy Christ by duties, as well as by sins. Look at
Christ, and do as much as thou will. Stand with all thy weight upon Christ's
righteousness; take heed of having one foot on thy own righteousness, another
on Christ's. Till Christ come and fit on high upon a throne of grace, in the
conscience, there is nothing but guilt, terrors, secret suspicions, the soul
hanging between hope and fear, which is an un-gospel like State.

He that fears to see sin's utmost vileness, the utmost hell of his own heart,
he suspects the merits of Christ. Be thou never such a great sinner, 1 John,
2.1. try Christ to make him thy advocate, and thou shall find him Jesus Christ
the Righteous: In all doubtings, fears, storms of conscience, look at Christ
continually. Do not argue it with satan, (he desires no better) bid him go to
Christ, and he will answer him, it is his office as he is our Advocate, 1 John.
2.1 his office to answer law, as our surety, Heb. 7.22. his office to answer
justice, as our Mediator, Gal. 3.20. 1 Timothy 2.5. and he sworn to that office,
Heb. 7.20.21. Put Christ upon it; if thou will do any thing thy self, as to
satisfaction for sin, thou renounceth Christ the righteous, who was made sin
for thee, 2 Cor 2.21.

Satan may allege, and corrupt scripture, but he cannot answer scripture. Its
Christ's Word of mighty authority, Christ foiled Satan with it, Mat. 4. In all
the scripture there is not an ill word against a poor sinner stripped of
self-righteousness; nay, it plentifully points out this man to be the subject
of the grace of the Gospel, and none else. Believe but Christ's willingness,
and that will make thee willing. If thou find thou can not believe,
remember its Christ's work to make thee believe; put him upon it, he works to
will and do of his good pleasure, Phil. 2.13. Mourn for thy unbelief, which is
a setting up guilt in the conscience above Christ, an undervaluing the merits
of Christ, accounting his blood an unholy, a common, and unsatisfying thing.

Thou complainest much of thy self; does thy sin make thee look more at Christ,
less at self? That Is right, else complaining is but hypocrisy. To be looking at
duties, graces, enlargements, when thou should be looking at Christ; that is
pityful: Looking at them will but make thee proud, looking at Christ's grace
will make thee humble. By grace you are saved Ephesians. 2.5. In all thy temptations
be not discouraged, Jam. 1.2. those Surges may not be to break thee, but to
heave thee off thy self on to the Rock Christ.

Thou may be brought low, even to the brink of hell, ready to tumble in; thou
can not be brought lower than to the belly of Hell, many Saints have been
there, even dowced in hell, yet there may thou cry, there may thou look
toward the holy Temple, Jonah, 24. Into that Temple none might enter but
purified ones, and with an offering too, Acts, 21.26. But now Christ is our
Temple, Sacrifice, Altar, High Priest, to whom none must come but sinners, and
that without any offering, but his own blood once offered, Heb. 7.27. Remember
all the patterns of grace that are in heaven. Thou think, O what a monument
of grace would thou be: there are many thousands as rich monuments as thou
be. The greatest sinner did never oppose the grace of Christ, do not despair:
Hope still, when the clouds at blackest, even then look toward Christ, the
standing Pillar of the Father's love and grace, set up in heaven, for all
finners to gaze upon continually. Whatsoever satan or conscience says, do not
conclude against thy self. Christ shall have the last word, he is the Judge of
quick and dead, and must pronounce the final sentence, his blood speaks
reconciliation, Col. 1.20. cleansing, 1 John, 1.7. purchase, Acts, 20.28.
redemption, 1 Pet. 1.19. purging, Heb. 9.13.14. remission, v. 20. liberty, Heb.
10.10. justification, Romans 5.9. nighness to God, Ephesians. 2.13. Not a drop of this
blood shall be lost. Stand and hearken what God will say; for he will speak
peace to his people, that they return no more to folly, Psalm. 85.8. He speak;
grace, mercy and peace, 2 Timothy 1.2. That Is the language of the father and of
Christ. Wait for Christ's appearing, as the morning star, Rev. 22.19. He shall
come as certainly as the morning, as refreshingly as the rain, Hos. 6.3.

The sun may as well be hindered from rising as Christ the sun of
righteousness, Mal. 4.2. Look not a moment off Christ. Look not upon sin; but
look upon Christ first: When thou mournest for sin, if thou do not see
Christ, away with it, Zach. 12.10 In every duty, look at Christ before duty, to
pardon. In duty, to assist. After duty, to accept; without this it is but
carnal, careless duty. Do not legalize the gospel, as if part did remain to
thee to do and suffer, and Christ were but an half Mediator; and thou must bear
part of thy own sin; make part satisfaction. Let sin break thy heart, but not
hope in the Gospel.

Look more at justification than sanctification. In the highest commands
consider Christ, not as an exactor to require, but a debtor, an undertaker, to
work. If thou have looked at workings, duties, qualifications, and such like,
more than at the merits of Christ, it will cost the^ dear; no wonder thou go
complaining. Graces may be evidences, the merits of Christ, (only without them)
must be the foundation of thy hope to bottom on. Christ only can be the hope of
glory, Col. 1.27.

When we come to God, we must bring nothing but Christ with us. Any ingredients
of our own qualifications, will poison and corrupt faith; he that builds upon
duties, graces, and the like, knows not the merits of Christ. This makes
believing so hard, so far above nature; if thou believe thou must renounce
(as dung and dross, Phil. 3.7.8.) thy privileges, thy obedience, thy Baptism,
thy Sanctification, thy Duties, thy Graces, thy Tears, Meltings, thy Humblings,
and nothing but Christ must be held ^p: Every day thy workings, thy self
sufficiency, must be destroyed. Thou must take all out of God's hand, Christ he
is the gift of God, Joh. ^.10 Faith the gift of God, Ephesians. 3.8 Pardon (...)
free gift, Romans 5.16. Ah how Nature storms, ^ret's rages at this, that all is
of gift and it can ^urchase nothing with its actings and Tears, and ^ears, and
duties, that all its workings are excluded, and of no value in Heaven.

If nature had been to contrive the way of Salvation, it would rather have put
it into the ^ands of saints or Angels to sell it, than of Christ (who gives
freely) whom therefore it suspects; ^t would have set up a way to purchase by
doing; therefore it obminates the merits of Christ as the most destructive
thing to it, would do any thing to be saved, rather than go to Christ, or close
with Christ. Christ will have nothing, the soul will force some what of his own
upon Christ. here is the great controverse. Consider, did thou ever see the
merrits of Christ, and the infinite satisfaction made by his death? did thou
see this in a time when the burden of sin, and the wrath of God lay heavy upon
thy Conscience. That is grace. The greatness of Christ's Merits is not known,
but to a poor soul at the greatest loss. Slight convictions, will but have
slight low prizings of Christ's Blood and merits. Despairing sinner; Thou art
looking ^n thy right hand, and thy left, saying, Who will show us any good?
Thou art tumbling over all thy duties and professions, to patch up a
righteousness to save thee. Miserable comforters are all those to thee. Look at
Christ now. Look to him, and be saved, all the ends of the earth, Isa. 45.22.
There is none else. He is a Savior, and their is none besides him, ver. 21.
look any where else, and thou art undone; God will look at nothing but Christ,
and thou must look at nothing else. Christ is lifted up on high (as the brazen
serpent in the wilderness (that the ends of the earth, sinners at the greatest
distance, may see him and look to wards him. The least sight of him will be
saving, the least touch healing to thee, and God intends thou should look on
him for he has set him upon a high throne of Glory, in the open view of all
poor Sinners. Thou have infinite reason to look on him, no reason at all to
look off him. For he is meek and lowly of heart, Mat. 11.29. He will do that
himself Which he requires of his creature, bear with infirmities, Romans 15.1.
not pleasing himself, not standing upon points of Law, ver. 2. He will restore
with the spirit of meekness, Gal. 6.1. And bare thy burdens, ver. 22. He Will
forgive, not only until seven times, but seventy times seven, Mat. 18.21.22. It
put the Faith of the apostles to it, to believe this, Luz. 17.4.5. Because we
are hard to forgive, we think Christ is hard. We see sin great, we think Christ
does so too, and measure infinite love with our line, infinite merits, with our
sins, which is the greatest Pride and Blasphemy Psa. 103.11.12. Isa 40.15. Hear
what he says, I have found a ransom, Job. 33 24. In him I am well pleased,
Mat. 3.17. God will have nothing else; nothing else will do thee good or
satisfy conscience, but Christ who satisfied the Father, God does all upon the
account of Christ thy deserts are hell, Wrath, rejections. Christ's deserts, are
life pardon, and acception. ^e will only show thee the one, but he will give
^ee the other. Its Christ's own glory and happness to pardon. Consider, whilst
Christ was upon the earth, he was more among Publicans ^^d sinners than Scribes
and pharisees, his professed adversaries; for they were righteous ^^es. It is
not so as thou imaginest, that his ^ate in glory, makes him neglectful,
scornful (...) poor sinners; no he has the same heart now (...) Heaven, he is
God, and changes not, He is ^^e Lamb of God that takes a way the sins of the
^orld, John 1.29. He has gone through all thy ^emptations, dejections, sorrows,
desertions. ^^jections, Mat. 4.3 to 12. Mark. 15.14. ^uke 22.44. Mat. 26.38.
And has drunk ^^e bitterest of the cup, and left thee the sweet; ^^e
condemnation is out, Christ drunk up all the ^^thers wrath at one draught, and
nothing but ^^lvation is left for the; thou say, thou can ^ot believe,
thou can not repent, fitter to re^ent, fitter for Christ if thou have nothing
but ^n and misery, go to Christ with all thy impe^itency, and unbelief, to get
faith and repentance with, from him; that is glorious. Tell Christ, Lord, I
have brought no righteousness, no ^race to be accepted in, justified by; I am
come (...) thine, and must have it. We would be bring^^g to Christ, and that
must not be; not a penny (...) nature's highest improvement will pass in
heaven. Grace will not stand with works. Tit, 3.

Romans 11.6. That is a terrible point to na^^re; which cannot think of being
stripped of all (...) having a rag of duty, or righteousness lest (...) look at.
Self-righteousness, self-sufficiency, ^^e the darlings of nature, which she
preserves as her life: That makes Christ such an ugly thing to nature, nature
cannot desire him; he is just directly opposite to all nature's glorious
interests. Let nature but make a gospel, and it would make it contrary to
Christ. It would be to the just, the innocent, the holy, the righteous, etc.
Christ has made the gospel for thee, that is, to needy sinners, the ungodly,
the unrighteous, the unjust, the accursed. Nature cannot endure to think the
gospel is only for sinners, it will rather choose to despair, than to go to
Christ upon such terrible terms. When nature is but put to it by guilt or
wrath, it will to its old haunts of self-righteousness, self-goodness, etc. And
infinite power must cast down those strong holds. None but the self Justiciary
stands excluded out of the gospel; Christ will look at the most abominable
sinner, before him, because to such an one Christ cannot be made justification:
He is no sinner To say in complement, I am a sinner; is easy; b^t to pray with
the Publican indeed, Lord be merciful to me a sinner, is the hardest prayer in
the world. It is easy to say, I believe in Christ; but to see Christ full of
grace and truth, Of whose fullness thou may receive grace for grace. That is
saving. Its easy to profess Christ with the mouth; but to confess him with the
heart, as Peter, (to be the Christ, the Son of the living God, the alone
Mediator) that is above flesh and blood. Many call Christ Savior, few know him
so. To see grace and salvation in Christ, is the greatest sight in the world;
none can do that, but at the same time they shall see that grace to be theirs.
Sights will cause applications. I may be ashamed to think, that in the midst of
so much profession, yet I have known little of the blood of Christ, which is
the main thing of the Gospel. A Christless, formal profession will be the
blackest sight next to hell that can be. Thou may have many good things, and
yet one thing be wanting, that may make thee go away sorrowful from Christ.
Thou have never sold all thou have, never parted with all thine own
righteousness, etc. Thou may be high in duty, yet a perfect enemy and
adversary to Christ in every prayer, in every ordinance. Labor after
sanctification to thy utmost, but make not a Christ of it to save thee; if so,
it must come down one way or other. Christ's infinite satisfaction not thy
sanctification, must be thy justification before God. When the Lord shall
appear terrible out of his holy places, Fire shall consume all that as Hay and
Stubble.

This will be found Religion only, To bottom all upon the everlasting mountains
of Gods love and grace in Christ, to live continually in the fight of Christ's
infinite righteousness, and merits (they are sanctifying, without them the
heart is carnal) and in those sights to see the full vileness, yet littleness
of Sin, and to see all pardoned; In those sights, to pray, hear, be baptized,
etc. Seeing thy polluted self, and all thy weak performances continually; in
those sights to trample upon allthy self-glories, righteousnesses privileges
as abominable, and be sound continually in the righteousness of Christ only,
rejoicing in the ruins of all thy own righteousness the spoiling of all thy own
excellencies, that Christ alone, as Mediator, may be exalted in his throne,
mourning over all thy duties how (glorious soever) that thou have not performed
in the sight and fense of Christ's love. Without the blood of Christ on the
Consciences all are ^^^d services, Heb. 9.14. opinion of Free will so cried up,
will be easily confuted as it is by the Scripture in thy heart who has had any
spiritual dealings with Christ, as to the application of his merits, and
subjection to his righteousness. Christ is every way too magnificent a Person
for poor nature to close withal, or apprehend. Christ is so infinite holy,
nature durst never look at him; so infinitely good, nature can never believe
him to be such, when it lies under full sights of Sin. Christ is too high and
glorious for nature so much as to touch. There must be a divine love first put
into the soul to make it lay hold on him, he lays so infinitely beyond the
sight or reach of nature.

That Christ that natural Free Will can apprehend, is but a natural Christ of
man's own making, not the fathers Christ, not Jesus the Son of the living God,
to whom none can come without the Father's drawing, John, 6.44.46. Finally;
Search the Scriptures daily, as mines of Gold, wherein the heart of Christ is
laid. Watch against constitution sins, see them in their vileness, and they
will never break out into act. Keep always an humble, empty, broken frame of
heart; sensible of any spiritual miscarriage, observant of all inward workings,
fit for the highest communications. Keep not guilt in the conscience, but apply
the blood of Christ immediately. God charge sin and guilt upon thee to make
thee look to Christ the brazen Serpent.

Judge not Christ's love by evidences, but by promises. Bless God for shaking
off false foundations, for any way whereby he keeps the soul awakened, and
looking after Christ: better sickness, temptations, than security and
slightness.

A slighty spirit will turn a profane spirit, and will sin and pray too.
Slightiness is the bane of Profession, if it be not Rooted out of (...) Heart,
by constant and serious dealings with and beholding of Christ in Duties, it
will grow more strong and more deadly, by being under Church Ordinances.
Measure not thy Graces by others seize, but by Scripture-trials. Be
serious, exact in Duty, having the weight of it upon the Heart; but be as much
afraid of taking comfort from duties, as from Sins-Comfort from any hand but
Christ is deadly. Bemuch in Prayer, or you will never keep up much Communion
with God. As you are in Closet-Prayer, so you will be in all other Ordinances.

Reckon not duties by high Expression, but by low frames, and the beholdings of
Christ. Tremble at duties and gifts. It was the saying of a Saint, He was more
afraid of his duties, than his sins; the one often made him proud, the other
always made him humble. Treasure up manifestations, they make the heart low for
Christ, too high for s^n. Slight not the lowest, meanest evidences of Grace.
God may put thee to make use of the lowest, as thou think; even that 1 Job.
3.14. That may be wrath a thousand worlds to thee. Be true to truth, but not
turbulent and scornful. Restore such as are sallen. Help them up a gain with
all the bowels of Christ. Set the broken dis-jointed bones with the grace of
the Gospel. High professors, despise not weak Saints. Thou may come to wish
to be in the condition of the meanest of them. Be faithful to others
infirmities, but sensible of thy one. Visit sick beds, and deserted Souls much;
they are excellent schools of experiences. Abide in your calling, be dutiful to
all relations, as to the Lord, Be content with little of the world: little
willserve. Think every little of earth much, because unworthy of the least.
Think much of Heaven too little, because Christ is so rich and free. Think
every one better than thy self, and carry ever self-loathing about thee, as one
fit to be trampled upon by all the saints. See the vanity of the world, and the
consumption that is upon all things, and love nothing but Christ. Mourn to see
so little of Christ in the world, so sew needing him. Trifles pleases them
better. To a secure soul, Christ is but a Fable, the scriptures but a story.
Mourn to think, how many under baptism, church order, that are not under Grace
looking much after duty, obedience, little after Christ, little versed in
Grace. Prepare for the Cross, welcome it, bear it triumphantly like Christ's
cross, whether scoffs, mockings, jeers, contempts, imprisonments, etc: But see
it be Christ's cross, not thine own. Sin will hinder from glorying in the cross
of Christ. Omiting little truths against light may breed hell in the
conscience, as well as omitting the greatest Sin against light. If thou have
been taken out of the belly of hell, into Christ's bosom, and made to sit
among Princes in the household of God: O how should thou live as a pattern of
Mercy redeemed, restored soul, what infinite sums, do thou owe Christ? With
what singular frames must thou walk in, and do every duty? Sabbaths, what
praising days, singing of halelujahs should they be to thee?
church-fellow-ship, what a heaven, a being with Christ, and Angels, and Saints?
Baptism, what a drowning the soul in eternal love, as a burial with Christ,
dying to al^ things besides him: Every time thou think on Christ be
astonished, and wonder; and whe^^ thou see sin, look at Christ's Grace, that
d^^ pardon it; and when thou art Proud, look (...) Christ's Grace, that shall
humble and strike the down in the dust. Remember Christ's time of love when
thou wast naked, Ezekiel. 16.8.9. and then he chosethee. Can thou ever have
aproud thought; remember whose arms supported thee from sinking, and delivered
thee from the lowest hell, (Psalm. 86.13.) and shout in the ears of Angels and
Men, Psalm. 148. sing for ever praise Grace. Daily Repent, and Believe and Pray;
and walk in the sight of grace as one that has the anointings of grace upon
thee. Remember thy Sins, Christ's pardonings; thy deserts, his Merits; thy
weakness, Christ's strength, thy pride, Christ's humility; thy many infirmities
Christ's restorings: thy guilt, Christ's newapplications of his Blood; thy
failings, Christ's raisings up; thy slightiness, Christ's sufferings thy want,
Christ's fullness; thy Temptations, Christ's Tenderness; thy vileness, Christ's
righteousness.

Blessed Soul! whom God shall find not having on his own righteousness, Phil.
3.6. but having his robes washed and made white in the blood of the Lamb, Rev.
7.14. Woeful, miserable Professor! that has not the gospel within, rest not in
Church-tryal, thou may pass that, and be a cast away in Christ's day of
trial. Thou may come to Baptism, and never come to Jesus, and the Blood of
sprinkling, Heb. 12.24. Whatever workings or seize come not up to clear
distinct apprehensions of Christ's blood, merits, righteousness, (the main
object of the Gospel) falls short of the Gospel, and leaves the Soul in a
condition of Doubtings and Questionings, and Doubtings (if not looked unto
betimes) will turn to rightiness of Spirit, one of the most dangerous Frames.
Trifle not with ordinances. Be much in Meditation and Prayer. Wait diligently
on all hearing opportunities. We had need of Doctrine, Reproof, Exhortation,
Consolation, as the tender Herbs and the Grass has of the Rain, the Dew, the
small Rain, and the Showers, Deuteronomy. 32.3. Do all thou do as Soul work, as unto
Christ, Zach. 7.5, 6. As immediately dealing with Christ Jesus, as if he were
looking on thee, and thou on him, and setch all thy Strength from him.

Observe what holy Motions you find in your Soul to Duties. Prize the least
motion that is from a sight of Christ the least good thought thou have of
Christ, the least good word thou speak of them, sincerely from the Heart, is
rich Mercy, O bless God from it. Observe of every day you have the Day spring
from on high (with his Morning Dews of mourning for Sin) constantly visiting,
Luke 1.17. the bright Morning Star (with fresh influences of Grace and Peace)
constantly arising, Rev. 22.16. And Christ sweetly greeting the Soul in all
Duties. What Duty makes not more spiritual, will make more carnal, what does
not quicken and humble, will deaden and harden.

Judas may have the Sop, the outward privilege of Baptism, Supper,
Church Fellowship, etc. But John leaned on Christ's Bosom, John 15.23. That Is
the Gospel-ordinance posture, in which we should pray, and hear, and perform
all Duties. Nothing but lying in that Bosom, will dissolve hardness of heart,
and make thee to mourn kindly for sin and cure Slightiness and Ordinariness of
Spirit, (that Gangrene in Profession) that will humble indeed, and make the
Soul Cordial to Christ, and Sin Vile to the Soul, yea, transform the ugliest
piece of Hell, into the Glory ^f Christ. Never think thou art right as thou
should be, a Christian of any glorious attainment, until thou come to this,
always to see and feel thy self lying in the Bosom of Christ, who is in the
Bosom of the Father, Job. 1. ^8. Come and move the Father for Sights of
Christ, and you shall be sure to speed: You ^an come with no Request that
pleases him ^etter. He gave him out of his own Bosom ^or that very end, to be
held up before the ^yes of all Sinners, as the Everlasting Monument of his
Father's Love.

Looking at the natural Sun, weakeneth the Eye. The more you look at Christ the
Sun of Righteousness, the Stronger and clearer will the Eye of Faith be. Look
but at Christ, you will Love him, and Live on him. Think on him continually,
keep the Eye constantly upon Christ's Blood, or every Blast of Temptation will
shake you. If you will see Sin's Sinfulness, to hate it and Mourn, do not stand
looking upon Sin, but look upon Christ first, as Suffering and Satisfying. If
you would see your Graces, your Sanctifications, do not stand gazing upon them,
but look at Christ's Righteousness in the first place (see the Sun and you see
all) then look at your Graces in the second.

When you act Faith, what you first look at, that you expect Settlement from,
and make it the bottom of your Hope. Go to Christ in sights of thy sin and
misery, not of thy grace and holiness. Have nothing to do with thy graces and
Sanctification, they will but vail Christ, till thou have seen Christ first. He
that looks upon Christ through his Graces, is like one that see the Sun in Water,
which wavereth and moves as the Water does. Look upon Christ only as shining in
the Firmament of the Fathers Love and Grace, you will not see him but in his
own glory which is unspeakable. Pride and unbelief will put you upon seeing
somewhat in your self first; but Faith will have to do with none but Christ,
who is unexpressibly glorious, and must swallow up thy Sanctification, as well
as thy sin; for God made him both for us, and we must make him both, 1 Cor.
1.30. 2 Cor. 5.21. He that sets up his Sanctification to look at, to comfort
him, he sets up the greatest Idol which will strengthen his doubts and sears.
Do but look off Christ, and presently (like Peter) you sin.

A Christian never wants comfort, but by breaking the order and method of the
Gospel, looking his own, and looking off Christ's perfect righteousness, which
is to choose to live rather by candlelight, than by the light of the sun. The
honey that you suck from your own righteousness, will turn into perfect gall,
and the light that you take from that to walk in, will turn into black night
upon the Soul. Satan is tempting thee by putting thee to plod about thy own
graces, to get comfort from them, then the Father comes, and points thee to
Christ's Grace, as rich and glorious, infinitely pleasing him, and bid thou
Study Christ's Righteousness (and his biddings are enablings) that is a blessed
Motion, a sweet whispering, checking thy unbelief, follow the least hint, close
with much Prayer, prize it as an unvaluable Jewel: Its an earnest of more (...)
come. Again, if you would Pray and cannot, and so are discouraged. See Christ
Praying for you, using his interest with the Father for you. What can you Want?
John, 14. and chap. 17. If you be troubled, see Christ your Peace, Ephesians 2.14.
leaving you Peace, when he went up to Heaven, again and again, charging you not
to be troubled, no not in the least sinfully troubled, so as to obstruct thy
comfort, or thy believing, John, 14.1.27. He is now upon the throne, having
spoiled upon his cross, in the lowest state of his Humiliation, all whatsoever
can hurt or annoy thee. He has born all thy Sins, sorrows, sears, disgraces,
sicknesses, troubles, temptations, and is gone to prepare mansions for thee.
Thou who have seen Christ all, and thy self nothing, who makes Christ thy life,
and art dead to all righteousness besides, thou art the Christian who has
sound savor with God. Favorite of Heaven, do Christ this Favor for all his
Love, love his saints and churches, the meanest, the weakest, notwithstanding
difference in Judgment, they are engraven on his Heart, as the Names of the
children of Israe, on Aaron's Breast Plate. Exodus 24.21. Let them be so on
thine. Pray for the Peace of Jerusalem, they shall prosper that love Her, Psam.
122.6.

FINIS.

