A SERMON Preached before the GARRISON OF Londonderry, IN THE Extremity of the
SIEGE.

Wherein is briefly and truly represented, The Deplorable Miseries and
Calamities which they endured before the Arrival of Maj. Genesis KIRK.

By the Reverend Mr. SETH WHITTLE, late Rector of Balliachy, in the County of
Londonderry.

Licensed,

James Fraser.



Edinburgh, Re. Printed in the Year, 1689.

A Sermon Preached before the Garrison of LONDONDERRY, etc.
JER. I. Verse. xviii, xix. For behold, I have made thee this day a defenced
City, and an Iron Pillar, and Brazen Walls against the whole Land, against the
Kings of Judah, against the Princes thereof, against the Priests thereof, and
against the People of the Land.

And they shall fight against thee, but they shall not prevail against thee:
For I am with thee, says the Lord, to deliver thee.


Dearly beloved Brethren, Fellow-Actors, and Fellow Sufferers.
THE Holy Scriptures are so universally reaching, and comprehensive, so adapted
to all the Necessities and Occasions of Mankind, that whatsoever his Station,
Calling or Employment be, or whatsoever Temptation he may ly under; he shall
there meet with Caution, Instruction and Direction, pertinent and sufficient to
guide him in all the Intricacies of Worldly Accidents, and humane Transactions.
From this Fountain do spring Cordial-waters for the fainting Souls, healing for
the wounded Spirits, purging for superfluous and peccant Humors. In them we
meet with Documents to Teach us; Precepts to awe us; Warnings to admonish us;
Promises to encourage us; and Examples to lead us. We are humbled by them in
Prosperity, and revived in Adversity. When the Contrivances of our Enemies are
arrived at the utmost pitch of Malice; When we are neglected by our Friends,
persecuted by our Foes, reduced to the utmost Extremities, which are the usual
Concomitants of War, and Famine; when we are deprived of all visible
appearances of safety, and all probable means of escape; He that watches over
us, and without whose superintendency the Watchman waketh but in vain, descends
to visit us, to Relieve us in the Extremity of our Distress, Refreshing us with
this comfortable Assurance. For behold I have made Thee, etc.

The Text divides it self easily into three Parts. First, a Gracious
Declaration of the Mercy and Goodness of God to his People, in these Words; For
behold, I have made Thee, etc.

Secondly, A firm Assurance of Protection, and Relief, in these Words: And they
shall fight against Thee, but shall not prevail against Thee.

Thirdly, An infallible Reason to fortify their Hopes: For I am with Thee,
says the Lord, to deliver Thee.

The first may be subdivided into these Considerations; First, a relative Word,
For. Secondly, a Word of Attention, Behold. Thirdly, a Narration of what is
done, They are made a defenced City, an iron Pillar, and brazen Wall. Fourthly,
the Author and Original of this Strength, I have made Thee. Fifthly, the
Adversaries against whom this Strength and Defense is made; The whole Land, the
Kings of Judah, the Princes, and the Priests. Sixthly, the Time when, This Day.

The second consists, first of a Denunciation, or Warring, They shall fight
against Thee. Secondly, a Prediction, or Incou^agement, They shall not prevail
against Thee.

T^^ third contains a Notice given of the Presence and Assistance of God, I am
with thee; Secondly, the Effect and Operation of his Presence, To deliver thee;
Thirdly, the Reason and Cause, why they may expect Deliverance, says the Lord.

The word, For, has a Relation to the antecedent verse^ of the Chapter, where
the Prophet enumerats the Actions and Practices of the People of the North,
That they sha^^ come and set every man his Throne at the entering of the Gates
of Jerusalem, and against the Walls thereof, yet the City shall be delivered,
the enemies of the North shall not prevail against it, for it is made a
defenced City, an Iron Pillar, and Brazen Walls, etc.

The word, Behold, commands an attention; Look to it, and observe it, it is the
Lord has spoken it, and it shall surely come to pass.

The time when, ought to be regarded with the greatest Joy, and Satisfaction;
there shall be no delatory Proceeding, nor obstruction in their Deliverance and
Safety, they shall suddenly escape, for it is done, This Day.

Though the Princes of the Land, confederating with the Priests, and followed
by the People, shall besiege Jerusalem, cast up Trenches about it, assault the
Walls, and execute all the Mischiefs, that Rage and Malice can inspire them
with; it is to no purpose, the Attempt is altogether vain: For it is a defenced
City, an Iron Pillar, and Brazen Walls.

The Enemies of the Lord, and his People, may fight against Jerusalem; they may
possess the adjacent Country about it; they may prevent all Succors and
Approaches for Relief; they may annoy them with continual Batteries without;
and reduce them to Extremities by Want, Famine, and incommodious Habitation
within, yet they shall not prevail, all their Endeavors and Designs shall be
frustrated, and rendered of no Effect.

Let no Man entertain the least umbrage of fear or Dismay; let no man despond
or be perplexed with anxious Apprehensions, though their Enemies proceed with
Check or Interruption; though their Friends and Allies may seem to neglect or
forget them: yet they are secure from all inger and Surprise; their Force is
irresistible, and their Success unquestionable; For the Lord is with them, and
will deliver them. Nay, they may assuredly rely upon it; all the Powers of the
Earth cannot hinder, or disapoint it, For the Lord has said it.

To apply this Text to the present Circumstances in which we are.

We have been surrounded in this poor City for diverse Months; beleaguered by a
multitude of merciless and implacable Enemies; exposed to Danger, without
ceasing or intermission: we have been deserted by those who came to our Relief;
tempted by Parlies, and specious Terms of Capitulation; undermined by
treacherous Contrivances among our selves; exercised with all the varieties of
Terror and Amazement; the small Shot has poured upon us like a shower of Hail;
the great Guns, like Thunder, have shaken our Walls; and the Bombs, like
Lightning, have ruined our Houses; we have seen Death in all its horrible
shapes, and we are every Moment entertained with spectacles of Misery and
Mortality; Sickness and Diseases are entered within our Gates; and pale Famine
is visible in very Countenance; the fond Mother has not a Morsel of Bread to
appease the languishing cry of her starved Infant: the grateful Son has not
wherewithal to sustain his aged Parent: one Friend looks upon another, and sees
his Misery, but cannot prevent a lingering Death; he that formerly had his Table
covered with variety of Dishes, knows not where to satisfy Nature with one
wholesome bit; we cannot refresh our selves with such Scraps and Morsels, as we
formerly allowed to our Dogs; nay, we are constrained to eat of such thing as
at another time humane nature would nauseate and abhor. Nevertheless God has
made us this day a defenced City, and an Iron Pillar, and Brazen Walls against
the whole Land.

He that was our King, and should have treated u^ like a nursing Father, who
solemnly promised, to defend the Established Religion, and maintain us in our
Properties, has unnaturally bent his Forces to destroy us. He has set up
Idolatry in all corners of the Land; he has animated the Natives to wreak
their Malice and Revenge upon us; he has brought in the bloody Frenchmen and
Fo^reigners to repeat those Cruelties here, which with s^ much Barbarity they
have acted in our Neighbour-Countrey; the Irish Skene is added to the
French-Bayonet; and the Rappeeres outdo the Dragoons. The Lords and Gentry of
the Irish Nation, are as one Man combined against us; the Popish Priests, like
the Bell-weathers of Sedition and Tumult, have led their Flocks, and involved
their whole Nation in an unsatiable Thirst after our Blood, and an implacable
Resolution to destroy us; ou^ Friends round about us are plundered, driven from
their Habitations, and the whole Country is desolate and depopulated. Yet for
all this, the Almighty God has preserved and defended us, against the Kings of
Judah, against the Princes thereof, against the Priests thereof, an^ against
the People of the Land.

And tho hitherto (by the Mercy of God) we have been successful in our
Resistance, and prosperous in our Sallies against them, yet they are inexorable
in their Wrath, and restless in their malicious Designs; they mean to storm us,
or starve us; they presume upon their great Strength, and mighty Numbers; they
flatter themselves with an assurance, that we must one day fall into their
hands; that one poor City cannot long resist the united Forces of a whole
Kingdom, and the auxiliary Aid of France. Therefore we are to expect the utmost
Trials, that their Hatred to our Religion and our Country can inflame and
prompt them to. But let this be your comfort, though they shall fight against us,
yet they shall not prevail against us.

For the Lord is with us, the Lord is on our side, we will not fear what Man
can do unto us. Let them trust in Princes, and boast of their Horses, but we
will put our trust in the Lord. Let them fall down before their Images, and
vainly invoke the Angels and tutelar Saints; let them cry to the Holy Virgin to
help them, and to St. Patrick to save them; We will make our Adresses to Him,
who is only able to relieve us; our whole dependence shall be upon Him, who
never fails them that put their trust in Him, who has said, He is with us,
to deliver us.

Wherefore, my Beloved, let me exhort you to be steadfast in your Duty; to be
importunate with God in Prayers; to cast your Care upon Him, with a lively
Hope, and well-grounded Faith, to rouse up your wonted Courage; to arm your
selves with your accustomed Resolution; to fall upon the Enemies of God and
Religion, the Destroyers of your Estates and Country, the inhumane Murderers of
your Friends and Brethren. Proceed with a steady assurance of Success and
Victory, For the Ford is with you, and will deliver you.

FINIS.

