A DISCOURSE OF The Duty of showing forth a Good Example in our Lives;
Delivered in a SERMON AT St. Mary le Bow Church, March the 28th School.

By WILLIAM WHITFELD, Chaplain in Ordinary to His Majesty.

LONDON, Printed by Tho. Warren for Thomas Bennet at the Half Moon in St.
Paul's Churchyard, School.



TO ALL That are Concerned in the Societies for Reformation of Manners.
I Will not make any excuse from the suddeness of the warning given me to
Preach this Sermon; for the Subject requisite for your Auditory, is so Constant
a Theme of our Pulpits in our own Parish Churches, that there are not any of my
Brethren, I believe, unprepared in a less time to give you a Seasonable
Discourse, suitable to the Occasion of your Meeting.

I have taken the Liberty to alter the Wording of some very few particulars in
my Transcribing it for the Press; that it may give the same satisfaction to
those of your Number who shall Read it, as it seemed to do to some that heard
it Preached: to the end that it may have its due Effect upon all those that are
Sincere and Wellminded in this Undertaking, for their instruction; as it will
most certainly have upon them that are not, for their Condemnation.

Matt. V. 16. Let your Light so shine before Men that they may see your Good
Works, and Glorify your Father which is in Heaven.


THese Words are part of our Blessed Savior's Sermon upon the Mount, and the
Doctrine delivered in them concerns all Christians; for as Grotius observes, it
is a multitude of Disciples, to whom Christ here Preaches; not only the twelve,
or the seventy, but to Disciples of all Conditions, Ages and Sexes. It Is
likewise all Christians in general, who are exhorted by St. Paul, to Shine as
Lights in the World, amidst a Crooked and Perverse Nation. Phil. 2.15.

We may understand from hence, how far these Words of my Text are suitable to
the present occasion of our Meeting. They are addressed to an undistinguished
Assembly of Hearers, (the Representatives of the whole Body of Christians;) the
force of them therefore reaches to every individual Member of these Societies,
whatsoever their Characters and Employments are. The Subject of them, is to
teach all those that are Disciples of Christ, what their Conversation ought to
be in this World; that in order to propagate the Faith, and Establish the
Precepts of the Gospel, they must make themselves the Light of the World, and
the Salt of the Earth: which Doctrine is most proper for their Instruction, who
have engaged themselves in a work of Reformation of Manners, for the promoting
Virtue, Piety, and true Religion.

Now to be the Light of the World, and the Salt of the Earth, may be understood
of having something analogous to their good and useful properties of
Enlightening and Seas'ning; the Excellency of which Qualities consists in
spending themselves, not for their own, but the great Benefit of others:
intimating that no Disciple of Christ is born for himself alone. It Is required
by his Master, that his Life should be a public and communicable Good, and
himself that thing, of all others, which is most eminently visible, most useful
and diffusive of its Virtue; conspicuous, as the high situation renders the
City built upon an Hill; and beneficial, as Light and Salt are in their
usefulness to Mankind.

Each of these similitudes is a true and lively pattern of a Christians
Conversation in this World, and signifies something more than our being merely
harmless, retired, and inoffensive in our Lives; for so is the Candle that is
put under the Bushel, and the Salt that has lost its Savor: But then the Salt
is good for nothing, but to be cast out and trodden under Foot of Men, having
lost its Virtue of Seasoning, and Preserving from Corruption; and the Light is
hid, which is not set on a Candlestick, that it may give Light to all that are
in the House; it is useless, when it does not so shine before Men, that they
may see our Good Works, and Glorify our Father which is in Heaven. In which
Precept I will only observe in short some few things that have been the Subject
of another Discourse, about the manner of our Light Shining, and so pass on to
the Substance of what I intend at present to speak to.

1. Our Light is to Shine before Men. Men, who cannot know the secrets of the
Heart, and intention of the Mind. This Light therefore, is to consist in Things
done outwardly, which they can see and know.

2. Our Light is to Shine in Works, which may be seen, and will remain; and not
in Works, which are to be heard only, and vanish.

3. This is to be done for the Glory of God, and not for our own Vainglory.

Each of these Particulars do immediately respect you Brethren, who are of
these Societies; wherein I may presume that you are so well inclined of
yourselves, and have been so Faithfully instructed by others, who have gone
more worthily before me in this Exercise, that I shall not spend any time in
enforcing them, but pass by these Circumstances to speak of the Duty it self:
which I take to be a strict obligation upon every Christian, to lead a Life
exemplary and shining in the ways of Virtue, true Piety, and all manner of
Goodness.

And I look upon this to come home to the present Business of the Day, and more
nearly to concern you that are of these Societies. It is a great Undertaking in
which you have voluntarily embarked; the Suppressing of Vice, and setting your
selves as a Bulwark against an inundation of Profaneness and Atheism, which
threatens destruction to these Kingdoms. But you ought to consider, Brethren,
with the Wise King going to War, whether with your 10000 you are able to meet
your Enemy that comes against you with 20000. for many are the Wild Beasts
with which you are to fight; many the bold and hardened Vices which you are to
encounter: you must expect to meet with great Resistance in this Enterprise,
and to be pressed with all the Storms of Envy and Malice, which the Stratagems
of the Devil, or the Impetuous Lusts of Wicked Men, can raise against you.

Give me leave therefore to recommend unto you one Piece of necessary Armor in
your Warfare; (necessary, both to your own Defense, and to the Overthrow of
your Enemies,) which is your own good Example going before you, in all those
Virtues you would encourage, and in refraining wholly from those Vices, which
(by the Blessing of God,) you may be happily instrumental in subduing.

I do not recommend this as if I feared your want of it, or suspected your Care
of carrying it always about with you; but I would fain endeavor to show you
the Force of this single Weapon, and its Power (far greater than any that is
coercive and compulsory) to reform the Manners of this licentious Age: I would
convince you of the wonderful Influence of a good and virtuous Example, and of
how great Account it is, in directing the Actions of Life aright. For such is
our Perverseness and Peevishness, that we are Obstinate against all Force,
though it be used to keep us from Destruction! Such is our Blindness and Pride,
that Precepts are either obscure to us, or else we deaf to them, though they
admonish us of our Eternal Welfare! But now, a good Example, calls to the Eyes
of the Learner, and sets forth Virtue in a visible shape before him; it
insinuates it self where force is denied an entrance, and becomes more
beneficial and instructive than Precept; as our going along with the Traveller,
and Accompanying him in his Road, is a safer and kinder direction, than giving
him Rules to find out his way alone, our selves taking a contrary Road, when we
profess at the same time, to be going the same Journey.

Wherefore, let your Light so shine before Men, that they may see your Good
Works, and Glorify your Father which is in Heaven.

From which Words, I shall in my following Discourse, endeavor to show you
these three Things.

I. The great Prevalency of Example in General.

II. That it behooves all Christians to be very careful that they show forth
themselves examples of Good, that is of Virtue and Piety, both in their public
and in their private Capacities.

III. That it is their Duty likewise to restrain all vicious and bad Examples
in other Men, to the utmost of their Power.

I. To show the great Prevalency of Example in General.

There is naturally a strong influence arising from the Example of a Superior
or Companion in whatever we see them do; for all Men have the same Affections
planted within them, and it is not to be expected, but that the same Objects
should move them, and that which has raised a Passion in one Man's Soul,
should strike upon the same string in another's. Thus another Man's Sorrow
naturally excites Trouble in the Beholder, from whence proceeds Compassion: A
Friends Joy warms our Heart with Cheerfulness, and encourages Mirth: Whatever
we see done, to which (either from Nature, or from the Corruptness of it) we
have any Propensity, there is so near an alliance in Humanity, that it calls
upon the same affection in our Souls, to bear it company and sympathize with
it. In this manner does the force of Example work upon us, by having power from
any external Objects, to move our outward senses and strength from thence, to
wind up our Passions.

Indeed it prevails most over us, when we make the least use and application of
our Reason; and accordingly there is one part of our Life, (not inconsiderable,
if compared with the span-length of our Days, but of great moment as it is the
Foundation of the whole Structure) that is capable of knowing nothing but from
Imitation. Besides in our Infancy most documents are instilled into us this
way, and the first dawning of our Reason shows it self by a ready aptness in
acting those things over, which we see others do before us. These rudiments are
sure to take place in the Child, and to grow up in the young Man; from hence
the one is taught to Speak, and the other learns in time to Sin: And though the
Lines which Nature draws in him may be sometimes found weak, and unresembling
his Father, yet the Impressions from an ill Example are commonly strong, and
lasting, and always show the Parent in the likeness of his Vices.

From this first Seas'ning, we receive the Tincture of our whole Lives, and are
never afterward wholly freed from the servitude of Custom and Imitation. These
alone are the Masters of our tender Years, and the great Instructers of our
Youth. having once taken Possession, they Insinuate themselves by gentle and
easy steps, and their Precepts sink insensibly into our Souls; unless it be
where our own Corrupted Nature joins forces with them, and there they carry us
irresistibly, and throw us headlong down the precipice. When our Ears have been
much used to any kind of Imperfection of Speech our Tongues by degrees will
frame themselves into the same way of Utterance, and from Stammering Lips learn
to Stammer. But let such Vices stand before us, wherein it is hard to resist,
and we prone and obedient to meet them half way with delight, how rapid then is
the stream in which we are carried? how impossible is it, that we should carry
Fire in our Bosom, and our Clothes not be Burnt? Or touch pitch and be
undefiled?

Even so impossible is it that the pernicious Example of any Vice should not
leave some footsteps of its Acquaintance, wherever it has had an intimate
Conversation: and (to show its great Dominion) it does not fail usually to lead
us captive even in those things where there is no allurement or temptation from
pleasure, and much less no inducement from Reason; for the doing of which, no
other plea can be assigned, but that we blindly give ourselves up to Imitation,
and Naturally turn mimicks. Nevertheless to this cause, the propagation of many
grievous Sins amongst us may be justy Attributed, which I am confident would
never find a place in the Catalogue of our growing Transgressions, but that
others are seen to commit them.

To instance in one, too Common and much increasing amongst us. No other reason
I suppose, can be given for the profane and Customary Sin of Swearing, and for
those execrable Oaths and Curses, (the Vomit) which even Children lick up.
Whatever Blaspheming Fiend was the first Author of them, it is I believe
demonstrable, that Imitation only keeps them now alive amongst us Men.

For it is plain, that neither Reason nor Pleasure goes along with any of them:
there is no delight that I ever heard of, in the pronunciation of an Oath; nor
are there any of those Men I believe, who have habituated their Mouths to these
Customary Prophanesses, that either mean or speak any thing by them. For let us
Consider any of these Oaths or Curses as Words, and parts of Humane Speech; and
we shall find that Words, were first of all taught Mankind to an useful
purpose, and far different End. They were instituted to represent Things in
discourse, and to stand in the place of those Objects, which we cannot bring
into sight so often as we have occasion to talk of them. But what Object in the
Creation does an Oath or Curse stand for? What Being, does an hasty Adjuration
of the Name of the Almighty, imprint an Idea of in his Mind who hears it?
Surely it cannot give him any Representation of God, if he considers his awful
Majesty and Honor, and at the same time, the Mockery and Contempt to which his
Holy Name is exposed. What particular conception then, does it convey of his
Mind who speaks by these Oaths and Curses? No image surely of his Reason, who
dares to make sport with that Great Name, by which alone he must either be
Happy or Miserable to all Eternity. It may perhaps be said that it is to
express the fury of his Passion, that He vents himself in these Blasphemies of
Hell; but how strange would this Language appear to sober Men and Serious
Christians, if Custom had not made it too Familiar to our Ears!

In like manner may be shown the Dominion of Example over Men's Minds, and
Actions, and our slavish imitation in many Sins of another Nature for there is
nothing so Absurd or Wicked to which we may not be led by it. Indeed it chiefly
takes the Rule when our Reason sits the loosest, and therefore governs us more
especially in our follies and irregularities; but if we consider well, we shall
find that it is not without Power of giving Laws to the serious and better part
of our Life, in which therefore the Prevalency of a good Example, may be of an
inestimable Benefit. But yet, such is our Natural Propensity to Sin, and so
much more of Evil than of Good, does this mirror represent unto us in this
World, that I much fear the disadvantages of a bad Example, must be allowed to
weigh down the Scale.

God has been pleased indeed in all Ages of his Church, to raise up Persons of
an excellent Spirit, in times of the most general Corruption: Men, who not
being carried away with the stream of popular Vices, make the right use of the
Faculties they are indu'd with by Heaven, in thinking, reasoning and acting for
themselves in Justice and Integrity; not guided by the Influence of other Men's
Example, but by the Dictates of Reason, and Precepts of Religion. Such Persons
will always distinguish themselves from a crowd of ill-doers, and may by the
Blessing of God, become the good Genius of the Age they live in. But alas! in
proportion to the great H^^^ these leaders in Virtue are but very few; and
genenerally speaking, the Chains of this servile Folly of Imitation in ill
things, Fetter down the most of Mankind to Corrupt Manners, and an Irreligious
Life.

II. And now, if the Example of others be thus prevailing, it concerns all
Christians to be careful that their Light shine before Men, and that they set
forth themselves Examples of Good, both in their public and in their private
Capacities. Which is my second particular.

The Example of a Good Life is so far influential, as it can be seen, known, or
read of; for so Light directs the Eye as far, as ever the Eye possibly can
follow it. And the Lives of the Apostles and other Holy Men, cease not at this
day to call upon us to imitate them.

And herein the Duty of every Christian may be considered two fold.

1. A general Duty to lead a good Life, to the End that all Men may be
benefited and no one scandalized by the Example; an obligation to walk with
Sincerity and Uprightness in the view of all Men alike: for being our Savior
has Commanded his Disciples to be the Light of the World, the whole World has
an undoubted claim to the benefit of their Light.

2. A Particular Duty, to which every Christian is bound from the several
Relations he bears to others in this Life, either in his private Capacity, or
from any public Character; that is, in any station whatever, wherein he is
immediately appointed by Almighty God to be exemplary to those under his care,
or where, of themselves, any shall be prone to Copy after his Actions.

Thus whosoever shall commit any Wickedness, whereby others are in danger of
being corrupted, Transgresses this general Duty; but with regard to such who
stand more nearly related to him, he violates his particular Duty. For as a
Parent, the Authority of his vicious Example is more immediately destructive to
his Tender Children; as a Master of a Family, it easily Commands the obsequious
Servants. If he shall be the Supreme Magistrate, his Example is in the highest
degree fatal to his Subjects; If a Minister of the Gospel sets himself an
Example in any Sin, He is no long the Shepherd of his Flock, but the Pest and
Rotteness of it.

This shows the Reason of our Obligation to both the parts of this Duty, and
why we are to set forth ourselves Examples for Good in our private capacities
and most retired conversation, as well as in public view. As Christians, we
are to enlighten all Mankind; but these, and several other (whether Domestic
or Public) Characters, do much enhaunce the obligation, in respect of those to
whom we stand thus related: for considered only as Christians, this Duty lies
upon us in Common with all our Fellow Christians; but now from these Relations
added to that Consideration, a good Example is every particular Man's
particular Duty, and the performance of it belongs to no one but himself alone.
No one in the World bears properly a share with the Parent in the Duty and
obligations of a Parent; no Man can supply the Example of the Magistrate, but
the Magistrate; nor any, the care of the Master of the Family, but the Master
himself.

And under some one or other of these like Considerations, there is no Person,
but must acknowledge it his Duty to be pious, virtuous and exemplary in his
Life: for his Condition can never be so obscure, nor his Conversation private,
but that He may be a shining Light in it: nor can his Example ever become so
profligate and contemptible, but that there will be those, who may be led
astray by it. If his Character is not large enough to fill a Country, or to be
looked upon by the whole City, yet to that House he lives in, he may give a
good and wholesome Example; wherever the pious Christian converses, he is in
a capacity of enlightening by his Reproofs and Advice; and his Children,
Servants and Companions, will by the Grace of God, become the better for those
Lessons in Virtue, and Patterns of Goodness which he shall set them.

So on the contrary, though thy vicious Habits shall have made thee the Scorn
of Mankind, in so much that the shame which encircles thee, keeps all Wise Men
at a distance; yet Children and Fools are in danger, and thy constant
Companions in Sin will still be depraved, and every day grow worse by thy
Vices. In short, it is hardly possible but that the Example of an holy Life,
(however private and mean it be), must do some Good; and I Am sure it is utterly
impossible, but that a vicious Example, though it be to the last Degree
contemptible, must do hurt to Mankind.

But then, the more eminent the station is, the farther will the Example be
seen, and the wider will its Influence spread: if Good, so much the more Good
it does; if Evil, so much the more Hurt; for the City that is set on an Hill
cannot be hid. And such have you made yourselves Brethren, by placing
yourselves in this Station of overlooking other Man's Lives and of reforming
their Manners.

Here indeed is the proper Sphere for Virtue, Piety and Goodness to shine
brightly in; but on the other hand, there is no soil more Fruitful for Sin for
that seed falls into good Ground, which brings forth Fruit, some an hundred,
some sixty, and some thirty fold; and such may the Produce of Vice be
calculated from any one of your Examples; it hardens those you would reform;
and betrays the innocent, who think themselves secure by treading in your
steps. Such is the return of Vice from a Parent's or a Master of a Family's
Example; it springs up with this entrease in his Children and Servants, and
like some Hereditary or Pestilential Distemper, runs in the Blood and through
the Family. Such is its multiplication whenever it is sown in the Supreme
Magistrate, or in any Person in an high-place; from whence the Great-Man
showers down his Vices upon all that are around him, the Nation is overspread
with his Profaneness, and his Uncleanness as with Waters, and his Sin runs
down like a mighty Stream. It is no longer a single Vice when it is in
possession of these strong holds, the name of it is Legion, for they are many:
even as many as it has propagated in many others, and each of them goes still
on to multiply in their Followers; it is as many as its Imitations are. And if
there are degrees of Torments in another World, proportionable to the
Aggravations of Guilt, a Sin thus complicated will meet with as great a
Punishment, and we shall suffer under the Torments of those Men's Damnation,
which by our Example we have farthered, as well as under the weight of our own.

The reason therefore is twofold for our Obligation to this duty of setting
forth ourselves a good Example. First, because we are answerable for all the
pernicious consequences of our Vices Corrupting other Men. And secondly,
because our good Example may by the Blessing of God, become an inducement to
others, to walk in the Paths of Virtue and Holiness, who by seeing our Good
Works, may Glorify our Father which is in Heaven, by transcribing after these
Actions of Virtue, Piety, and Goodness, wherein God is chiefly Glorified by his
Creatures.

But we must take great heed, Brethren, that it is not the effect of a
Pharisaical Righteousness, or of Pride and Ostentation, which raises this
Spirit in us; but a Principle of true Piety, and an humble Desire of doing real
Good. For the one of these, is the Religion of the Hypocrite, and aims at
nothing more than to be seen; but the other is the Piety of the hearty
Christian, and the only end is to serve God, and benefit Mankind. The one,
indeed, may possibly break out frequently into sudden gusts and flashes, and
into violent and uneven heats of Holiness; but it will end like the crackling
of Thorns under the Pot, consuming it self in a blaze and noise, the sure
signs of the weakness and short continuance of the flame. But your duty,
Brethren, is to show forth a Prudent and Uniform Zeal, and a well-weigh'd
Resolution in the ways of Virtue and Piety: it is to be an eveness of Temper,
and sedateness of Mind, arising from firmness and constancy in the Soul.

This will make your Light Shine always before Men, Burning constantly, but
never Blazing, and will be the Lamp which shall never want its Oil.

III. It is likewise every Christians Duty to restrain all Vicious and bad
Examples in other Men, as far as he can.

We cannot hope wholly to extirpate Sin in ourselves; and much less can we
propose to root out all Vice and Profaneness from the Land: But yet we may
endeavor to break their Force, and by the Blessing of God hinder their
Increase; and if we unite ourselves strongly to keep them under, and resolutely
engage ourselves never to suffer them to appear but in their own proper colors
of Shame and Confusion, we shall in time tread upon their Necks.

And this is our Duty under all the same Obligations, and in all the same
Stations of Life, both private and public, from the self same Considerations,
and fully in every circumstance our Duty, as much as my last particular was.
The end of that, was to show forth the Example of a Blameless and Virtuous
Conversation, for the public Benefit of Mankind, and for the private Good of
our Friends; and such is the tendency of this Duty: that was for the
maintenance and improvement of Holiness, and for the Honor and Glory of God;
and this is for the rescuing of oppressed Virtue, and for the discouragement of
Profaneness and Atheism. And though we cannot expect (as I have said) to make
all Men sincere Believers, and true converts to Virtue; (for neither had the
Holy Example, the Divine Precepts, nor the Severe Rebukes of our Blessed
Savior such an Effect:) nevertheless, we may endeavor (and I trust with some
good success) to brow-beat the Vicious and Profane, that by our over-civil and
servile Compliance with them in their Impieties, they may not bear themselves
as Conquerours over Religion and Virtue: we may blast the Reputation which Vice
would get by a Good-Man's smiling upon it; and we may do our parts in hindering
its spreading into a Fashion, under our Protection and Connivence.

And since we have the Laws of God and Man on our side in fighting in this
Cause of true Virtue and Piety, it is necessary that we should exert this
Power, and make the right use of our several Talents; that Drunkenness,
Profaneness, and Uncleanness, (and all the bold Offspring of open Wickedness)
may be kept under this Curb at least, of being discountenanced and punished, as
far as Authority shall be put into our hands to that purpose. We may lawfully
join our endeavors to confine these Works of Iniquity to their Native
Darkness, and not suffer them to become Companions of Noonday. For why should
it be permitted in a Christian Community, to Wicked-Men to appear barefaced
and braving in their Shame? Daring in their defyance of God? Recounting their
Victories, and boasting of their Trophies in all manner of Vice? Any Sin that
shall get the ascendant thus far in a Nation, becomes a Triumph of the People,
and is a sure sign that the majority or governing part, are themselves deeply
touched with the same Disease; (whether it be Profaneness, that they are
Profane; or Uncleanness, that they are Unclean; or Corruption, that they are
Corrupt;) as surely, as if Men should walk the Streets with their Plague-sores
fresh upon them, no one would doubt, but that the Infection was general, and
that the Sick of that place, out-number'd the Sound.

And it concerns us not only as Christians, but as Lovers of our Country, and
as Friends to Ourselves and Posterity, to be Hearty and Zealous in these
Endeavors: for we may assure ourselves that every Sin becomes a National
Crime, whenever it shall be accompanied with these Aggravations: the Guilt is
only private when it is committed in a Corner and secretly; but the public is
to be accountable unto God, when by their Impunity and Encouragement they shall
make the Sin their own: For then it begins to call loudly to Heaven for
Punishment, and the Cry enters into the Ears of the Almighty. Lord! how long
will thou look on? How long Lord? forever? Arise, O God, in thy Righteousness,
and make bare thy Arm to Judgment! Behold the Children of Men are all
Backsliders; They encourage themselves in their own Wickedness, and say Tush!
God shall not see. But arise O Lord in thy Fury, and scatter them in thine
indignation, for there is none that deals righteously, and Loves Judgment;
No, there is not one Godly Man left.

This is the Cry of a public National Guilt; that is, of unpunished, spreading
and triumphing Vice and Atheism. The Justice of God requires that the community
should suffer, and the Punishment become as general as the Offense. His Wisdom,
Equity and Providence are then at stake, and must be made good, by a Visible
and Public Execution of Justice; which comes down upon a Nation in Famines or
Pestilences, in the Sword, in Earthquakes, and in other great desolations,
which are the usual Judgments of Heaven, and Terrible Vials of God's Wrath,
poured out upon a Sinful Land and polluted People.

And let us not deceive our selves! there are Family Sins as well as National,
and the same Rule holds with proportion, in every private Household and lesser
Company of Evildoers: but the more populous the Society is, the greater is the
danger in permitting the Trangressions of the People to be seen in the Gates of
the City, and to walk our streets publicly; for there is as certain a
Contagion in some sorts of Sins, (which Men catch by looking on,) as there is
in some diseases. These therefore are to be suppressed, if they cannot be
wholly extinguished; that they may be like those subterranean Fires which burn
slow, and prey only upon their own Fuel, whilst pent within the Bowels of the
Earth, but when they once take air, break out into a Flame, laying all things
before them in Ruin.

And there is no great difficulty, if we knew but our own strength, to keep any
Sin thus far at least, under our Feet; for there is a Natural shame which
attends every dishonest Action: Vice is conscious of its own deformity and
loathsomness, and by instinct requires darkness and a Vizor: but it may be
flattered by great Examples into a good Opinion of its own Excellencies; it may
be Cherished by Complaisance and and hardened by Familarity into such an
Impudence, as to appear before the Sun and without its Mask. However since God
and Nature have stamped shame upon every Vice, Let us know our own Right and
Dominion over it, and keep it within its Natural bounds of shame! Let every
honest and Virtuous Man set his Face directly and boldly against Atheism,
Profaneness, and Immorality! assuring himself that there is no Sin so daring
and hardy, which a Man resolutely-good and pious may not dash out of
Countenance and strike into Confusion.

I need not tell you Brethren that it is Lawful for you to do this, and that it
is Just to use all the power which the Laws have vested in you, to restrain all
such Immoralities, for I hope I have proved it to be your Duty: and believe me,
it behooves us all to consider seriously, the several opportunities and
advantages God has put into our hands, to discourage and prohibit Atheism,
Profaneness and Debauchery, and faithfully to discharge our Duty herein; for
this likewise is one way of making other Men's Vices our own, when they thrive
and propagate by our connivence; for be we well assured, that whosoever has it
in his Power, to forbid and hinder a Sin, and does not when he can, he invites
and commands it.

And thus I have showed you how Powerful and Influential example is in most
things we do; how effectually that teaches, and how addicted we are to learn;
and that therefore it does concern us all very much to set forth ourselves
Examples of Virtue and Holiness, and that of consequence it is our Duty to
restrain all Examples of Vice and Wickedness in other Men to the utmost of our
Power. When you shall do this, Brethren, ye are then what our Blessed Savior
requires his Disciples to be, the Light of the World which Shines before Men,
and the Salt of the Earth which has not lost its Savor.

I will conclude with some serious Considerations upon the whole.

1. We must not expect from what has been said, that the ill Example of other
Men should excuse the Followers, though it will most certainly condemn the
Authors of it. The truth is, we readily catch at the least Shadow of excuse for
Sinning, and so lay hold upon this Pretense. The Woman, says Adam, whom thou
gave me, gave one of the Tree, and I did Eat. But yet, neither the Woman's
Temptation exempted Adam from the Punishment, nor the Serpent's Temptation the
Woman. And as long as we have a Judgment rightly informed to discern between
Good and Evil, and are constantly instructed from the Word of God, what are the
Bounds of the one, and of the other, what we are to do, and what to avoid;
other Men's deviations can be no real excuse for our Transgressing. When the
Precepts of the Gospel have chalked me out the Paths of Virtue and Holiness
which I am to walk in, it is my own fault, and the proneness of my own Vicious
Inclinations, if I follow him that shows me other ways. By this, God has given
me sufficient Light to secure me against error, and if I am mislead, I seduce
my self. All Men would commiserate the sad fate of a Blind-Man, to be led by
others unknowingly to the edge of a Precipice, and to break himself in pieces
by his fall from thence; but they will condemn it for Self-Murder in one that
is not Blind. Remember therefore young Men, that whosoever has Eyes, leads
himself to his own Ruin, even when he follows another that tempts him to it.

2. If we are convinced of the certainty of a future State, and of the Rewards
and Punishments after Death; no Argument can be more forcible against our
Tempting others to Wickedness, than this Consideration, that by the same act we
increase our own Guilt, and mightily further our Brothers Damnation; knowing
the Judgment of God, that they which commit these things are worthy of Death,
and yet not only do the same, but have Pleasure in them that do them.

Those, indeed, who have gone so far beyond the Bounds of Shame, know no
measure: it is the less wonder therefore, that their own, and other men's Sins
become their triumph and sport; that they magnify themselves upon their
Victories in the lists of some beastly Vice, and make it their mirth to have
been successful in tempting others; in having compassed Sea and Land to gain
one Proselyte, whom they make many-fold more the Child of Hell than themselves.
But the commonness of this Sin cannot exc^se it. When seriously considered, it
is but a melancholy subject for Mirth, and a most shameful one to boast of. For
it is not the part of an honest Man to take the advantage of his Brothers
Weakness, and ensnare him into Sin; nor of a Modest Man to Glory in his Shame;
and it should be the pleasure only of the Devil to seduce the Innocent.

Wherefore, let these prostitute Wretches reserve their boasting to the proper
time; when of it self, every Sin shall claim its right Father, and each
particular Vice, of its own accord, discover the enticer to it: then it will
appear how much more innocent Satan himself is, than this tempter of his
Brother to Wickedness; when other Men's Consciences shall accuse, and other Men's
Sins call for Judgment against him; amidst the sad Lamentations of many crying
about him: I owe more of my Sins unto thee, O my Companion, who temptedst me;
and to thee, my Friend, who did set me thy Example for my Vices, than I do to
the worst suggestions and strongest Temptations of the Devil. Thou art He, to
whom I owe my Damnation?

3. Let us consider the Advantages and great Comforts of a Virtuous and Pious
Conversation. There can be no Good more truly beneficial, or of greater extent;
for it is so diffusive, that all Men may partake of its Influence, without ever
lessening the store: It diminishes nothing from the Sun, that by it all Men are
enlightened, and all Creatures cherished; nor from Virtue, that others are made
better by partaking of it.

And this Good proceeds from the Good Example of an Holy Life; a constant and
exemplary Devotion in the Worship of God, may by his Blessing contribute to an
awful Reverence in the whole Congregation, and recommend our Holy Religion to
those, to whom our Indevotion renders it now contemptible. A Life of Exemplary
Piety, is a standing Rebuke to the Profane, and a constant Curb upon the bold
Atheist. An Exemplary Virtue, will either convert the Sinner, or shame him at
least into an outward compliance of Holiness; and will secure the Innocent, if
it cannot reclaim the Wicked.

In short, a good Example is of that general prevalency and Influence, that it
calls to all that see it, and invites them in the words of the Apostle; Come,
Be ye Followers of me, as I am of Christ. And when we shall be called at the
last Day to give up our Account of all that has been entrusted to us in this
Life, we may do it with unspeakable joy, in the words of our Blessed Savior.
Those that thou gave me Holy Father, I have kept, and none of them is lost,
but the Son of Perdition. Those Servants which thou gave me; Those Children
thou have blessed me with; Those Friends thou have made me happy in; Not one of
them is lost through want of my endeavors to reclaim them; None of them has
my Example led astray, or my Conversation Corrupted; None of them has my
Connivence encouraged, or my Temptations seduced into Sin; Not one of them,
Holy Father, but by my goings, I have endeavored to keep Upright.

This is the comfort which arises here from our doing this Good, and which will
meet us hereafter in receiving the Reward. For they that turn many to
Righteousness shall shine as the brightness of the Firmament, and as the Stars
of Heaven for ever and ever. And they shall Cause Joy in Heaven over every
Sinner that Repents.

Lastly to Conclude by applying my self more particularly, to you Brethren, who
are Members of these Societies for the Reformation of Manners. I have Chosen
this subject, of the Necessity and Efficacy of a virtuous and pious Example in
your Conversation, as the most successful means for your carrying on this good
Work. And God grant, that I my self may be endued with a sufficient portion of
his Grace, to follow those precepts which I have now delivered to you!

Herein alone will you lay a sure foundation for that structure which you are
designing: This (with the Blessing of God) is to be the Cornerstone of that
Virtue, Piety, and true Religion, which you are endeavoring to rear up in
these Nations. Without it you build on the Sand; every Tempest will shake, and
at last throw it down; and great will be the Fall thereof, to the Triumph of
your Adversaries, and discouragement of your Friends.

I have not time left to give you Rules for that Moderation, Integrity and
Charity which are necessary qualifications for all such as are Sincere in this
Undertaking. But I must crave your Leave and Patience, whilst I mention one
Blot, with which all such kind of endeavors for Reformation of Manners,
(justly or unjustly) will not fail to be Charged by all that are Enemies to it;
from which all its good purposes have been too Commonly blasted; and that is
Hypocrisy, and Sinfulness in yourselves.

Some of you I see are Young Men, and of an Age, most liable to those
Temptations which you are to encounter with in others; and it is not impossible,
that yourselves may take the Infection from your applications to cure the
Disease.

But then consider what the Apostle says, Romans 2.20. Thou that say a Man
should not commit Adultery, do thou commit Adultery! Thou that abhorrest
Idols, do thou commit Sacrilege! through you, (says the Apostle) is the Name
of God Blasphemed among the Gentiles. Not only through them who are openly
Profane and Vicious, but through you chiefly, who having professedly set
yourselves to reform these Vices, are guilty of the same Wickedness. But I say
unto you, it shall be more tolerable for the Land of Sodom in the day of
Judgment than for you: the Publicans and Harlots shall go into the Kingdom of
God before you; for these Sinners Christ came to call to Repentance; but the
Hope of the Hypocrite shall perish.

My Charity would oblige me to hope, that there are few or none of your number,
Brethren, upon whom this can be justly charged, but that experience shows us,
many will be bad in all Societies of Men whatsoever. I must therefore here
solemnly adjure you, let not that Vzza put forth his band to hold the Ark: For
in such hands Reformation of Manners becomes the greatest Scorn, and the most
prevailing encouragement to Vice.

And not to flatter you, the best of Men will find this but a difficult and
invidious Work; for they must expect that their own Infirmities should be
narrowly pried into, and all their Failures exposed nakedly to the World. It
becomes him therefore to be truly a Good Man himself, whoever shall undertake
this Office of Reforming and Correcting others: For it is Envy, or the love of
Gain perhaps, or the desire of seeming more Holy than your Brethren, but not
the love of God and service of Virtue which engages you in this Cause, if you
indulge yourselves in the same Sins which you condemn and punish in other Men.
We must therefore be sure to cast the Beam out of our own Eye, before ever we
offer to pull out the Mote from our Brothers; we must be free from Sin, before
it can be lawful for us to cast the stone at the Adulterer.

Fatal to Virtue, Piety, and true Religion have these Corruptions always proved
in the most Sanctified Professors, and the more holy they have appeared, the
more destructive has been their Hypocrisy. For I may with confidence affirm,
that it has never yet failed of being the bane and ruin of all public
Endeavors, which have hitherto proved successless toward a true Reformation
of Manners; and that the scandal arising from such ill practices has produced
more avowed Atheists, and professed champions in Vice, than all the open
assaults and batteries of the most Wicked-Men against Religion and Virtue. And
therefore, till it shall please God to correct this in all our Magistrates, the
People will still Sin on. The Magistrate may execute the Good Law given into
his Charge, but his own Example in Sinning shall encourage more, than his
Punishment can ever deterr from Vice. All manner of Zeal will be accounted as a
feintshow in Religion, and must be looked upon as downright Hypocrisy in him,
who is not serious, sincere, and firm himself in the Worship of the true God;
and Atheism and Profaneness must prevail under such a Governor, who lays all
the stress of his Religion only in Reforming others, himself being abominably
Corrupt.

The consequence of this cannot but be exceeding mischievous; for Reformation
of Manners does indeed principally belong to the Magistrate, and to you
Brethren, only as Volunteers, acting Lawfully under him; His is the Commission,
and Yours, the assistance of him in the Execution of his Office. But from hence
the Good Example of your own Lives becomes alike necessary to you both, and I
have thought it my Duty to show you both, (as far as I might presume) what your
own Qualifications ought to be in the first place, before ever you can propose
to amend others.

May God in his Infinite Mercy, strengthen the hands, and confirm the Souls of
all them who are truly Good and Sincerely Conscientious in this great Work!
that some stop may be given to those Vices and Blasphemies, and to that General
Corruption of Manners which have defiled and overspread our Land! and as for
all those, in whom this great trust of Reformation is chiefly Lodged, the
Magistrates and Senators, may God give them all Grace to forward this Work by
reclaiming themselves first of all, and by reforming all of their own Number
who are Evildoers! by making them serious themselves in that Holy Religion, of
which they are Appointed the Defenders under our Prince! by making every one of
them sober, who forbid Intemperance! and Pious, who prohibit Swearing! and
Chaste, who punish Adultery!

So (and not otherwise) shall God prosper this good Work in the hands of the
Magistrate and of the People. And do thou, O Lord, thus prosper our handiwork,
for Jesus Christ his sake!

To whom with the Father and Holy Ghost, Three Persons and one God, be
ascribed, as is most due, all Honor, and Power, and Glory! Amen.
FINIS.

