FOR THE VINEYARD OF THE Lord of Hosts, To be Read in Their MEETINGS.

The BREATHINGS of a PRISONER for the TESTIMONY of JESUS, who in the Deep has
seen the Afflictions of his People, and cannot hide his Praise who supports
them, nor-with-hold his Complaint because of the hardness of men's hearts, but
cries unto the Lord God of Righteous Judgment, for the Deliverance of his own
PEOPLE.

With a few Words of Exhortation and Advice, given forth as a Testimony of my
dearest Love to the whole Seed of God; because I cannot otherwise communicate
it in this time of my Restraint, I have been the more large, that I may be
refreshed with you, and you with me, in the overflowing Fountain of our Life.

By JOHN WHITEHEAD.

Printed in the Year, 1662.

For the VINEYARD of the Lord of Hosts, to be Read in their Meetings.
O Vineyard of the Most High, wherein I have labored according to the ability
which God has given me since the appearing of the Bright and Morning Star
which has enlightened the World, in whose Joy I am now at rest, and my Peace is
as a River, because I hid not my Talent in the Earth, nor have stood idle in
the Marketplace, but have improved what was given me for my Master's use; and
for the increase and watering of thee his Vineyard, which I cannot in any wise
forget now when trouble is near, and all the Beasts of the Field do compass
thee about, and with their whole Power do seek to break down thy Hedge, crop
off thy Leaves, devour thy Fruit, tread under thy tender Plants, cut off thy
flourishing Branches, and make thee as a Wilderness: For in the everlasting
Love of one God I think upon thee, remembering the kindness of thy youth, and
the love of thine Espousals, wherein thou were betrothed to the Lord with
Judgment and Mercy, in the day that thou sat solitary in the Wilderness, and
had none to help: my heart is broken within me, and does with thy breathing
Babes and tender Mourners (whose Cry has reached unto Heaven) send forth these
Breathings, that in the Spirit of Supplication we may have fellowship together,
whilst my soul says unto God, Surely thou have no cast off the Beloved of thy
Soul, nor sold the Heritage (to be trodden down) for a thing of naught, neither
given the Plants of thine own right hand for a spoil to their Enemies: Shall
they then prevail, which come gnashing with their teeth to devour us? and will thou let thy Name be blasphemed, wherein thou have gathered us, in which we do
trust? for thy Presence is yet amongst us, and thou withholdest not the Riches
of thy Mercy from us, but openest thy Treasure to us; and of thy Fullness we
have received strength, else we could not have escaped in the hour of
Temptation, nor stood upright in the time of our deep Trials, but when thou
saw us weak, thou turned not away thy Face from us, but ever have stretched
out thy right hand to uphold us, and have helped us with a little help; when we
call upon thee, thou bowest down thine ear to hear, and give us also to
understand the words of thy mouth. But why do thou not show thy self unto the
World, for they understand not thy way? For, though thou have given thy Light
into the World, they love Darkness rather, and that blinds their eyes, that
they know not thee, nor us whom thou have sent, and therefore do persecute and
seek to root up, not believing that we are thy pleasant Plants; although thou
have created us anew in thine own Image, and showed thy Light, Life, Love,
Virtue, Power, Patience and good will toward men, through us, yet do they not
consider, but think they do thee good service, when they kill us all the day
long: And when we do speak to them in thy Name, and would turn them from their
Envy, Anger, Pride, Covetousness, Murders, Thefts, Lies, Adulteries,
Fornications, Oppressions, Injustice, and the evil of their Inventions, unto
the Light wherein thy Fullness dwells, that therein they might walk with thee in
newness of life; They reject our Testimony, and say we would delude them; and
when we do declare thy Righteousness, and show thy Judgments at hand, because
Transgressions are multiplied, and Iniquity drunk up as water; their hearts
they harden against us, and mock at fear, neither do they prepare to turn unto
thee, but for our love in warning them, give us the water a Affliction to
drink; and when we call them that are yet wandering with a heart panting for
living water (but being gone astray from thy ways, do drink of the Whores Cup,
or, at best, that Water which men have fouled with their feet) and say, Turn ye
again to the Lord, and defile not your selves with the Inventions of men,
neither touch any unclean thing, but come forth and be ye separate, and our God
will be a Father unto you, and you shall be his Children: Then they reproach us
a factious, sowers of Sedition: but if any do lay it to heart, and believe our
Testimony and return, they meet them first with flatteries, then with threats
and cruelties, which they spread, as the snares on Mizpah, for their feet, like
the chief Priests Pharisees, and Lawyers of old, who would neither enter into
the Kingdom themselves, nor suffer those that were entering to go on: And when
we are gathered in thy Name, and do silently wait to feel thy Power, that in it
we may edify one another, and drink at the Fountain of Life, which thou have
opened unto us, without reverance to thy Name, they come upon us with open
violence to devour thy Lambs, merely for drinking at the Fountain; yea, their
stroke upon us is very cruel, because we love thy Precepts, and cannot derogate
from the glory of thy Verity, who have made out Yea, Yea, and our Nay, Nay; and
said unto us by thy Son since the Law, Swear not at all; and though we have
given our cheeks to the smiter, our bodies to prison, and exposed our goods to
the Spoiler, and patiently born many other grievous sufferings for the Truths
sake, whereof thou have made us Witnesses; yet will they not believe those
things which thou have spoken by us, and what have we more to seal the
Testimony with which thou have given us? unless thou will suffer the Whore to
drink more of the blood of thy Saints before thou bring thy long and often
threatened Judgments upon her, who yet fears them not, but says, I sit a Queen,
and am no Widow, neither shall I see any sorrow: And by what means will thou
plead with Babylon that says she is the Lady of Kingdoms, or who shall
persuade men to fly out from her, that they perish not in her plagues, for they
are mad upon her Idols, and do mock thy Messengers, and do shamefully entreat
and stone those whom thou have sent to forewarn them, that they may escape the
wrath to come; Yet with thee is mercy and forgiveness, and I know thou would
not their destruction, but rather that they may turn and live: Therefore hear
my Complaint, and bow thine ear to my Request, for I groan within my self and
my spirit breathes that thou may arise in thy Mighty Power, and speak by thy
righteous Judgments, that men may fear before thee, and the Nations be
persuaded to come to thy Light, and Kings to the brightness of thy rising. Let
thy right hand rent the veil from off all hearts, that thy Salvation may be
showed openly, and Satan trodden under foot, for who else is sufficient for
these things. But in the day of Indignation, O Lord, Remember thine Heritage,
and let not thy Vineyard be rooted up, but spare thy People, and cause thy
tender Plants to grow: Chain the Dragon, and let the Earth drink up the floods
that would hinder thy Spouse from returning out of the Wilderness, where her
place has been in the long dark night of Apostasy: but since the breaking up
of the day, thou have said unto her that sat solitary, I am the Husband of thy
youth, therefore walk with me, and I will not leave thee nor forsake thee, but
lead thee unto the Mountain of my House, and my Banner over thee shall be Love,
and herewith thou have allured her, and she follows hard after thee: But now,
O Lord, our Shepherd, we are compassed about with Adversaries, and grievous
Wolves are gathered to prey upon thy Lambs, Therefore abide thou with us, and
break their teeth, O God, that thy Flock may not be meat for them; for our
expectation is from thee alone, and we have not made flesh our Arm, because our
hope is in thee; neither tribulations nor afflictions can separate us from
thee, for we have appealed unto thy Righteousness, who searchest the hearts and
tryest the reins of all men, that thou may give Judgment between us and
them that do afflict us; and if thou have not sent us and commanded us to
speak, or if in heart we be not innocent toward men, and no way guilty of
doing or intending those evils wherewith they charge us, Then let out hearts
fail, and confusion cover us before them in the day of our Trial; but and if
thou have sent us and commanded us to speak, and by thy own Power begotten us
into an innocent life, Then open thou our lips, and let the words of thy mouth
break through us, and stick in the hearts of our Enemies, that they may be
pricked like the Persecutors of old, and not have ability to resist the Spirit
and Wisdom by which thou leadest us: for though we our selves know that we are
of thee, yet do we patiently wait till thou decide the controversy, and in the
sight of all men show who are thy People; yet can I not cease to breath, that
thou may shorten these days of trouble for thy Elect sake, in whom thy soul
delights, that no more may be laid upon thy little ones than they can bear,
lest they faint, and their Adversaries triumph and say, Where is now the God in
whom they trusted? O let them know that thou art near, and do hear the cry of
the Oppressed; and upon the Glory of thy Name let there be a defense, and so
keep us in it, to the end that it may never be dishonored.

Now having refreshed my full heart, in spreading our Cause before the Lord, O
ye his People bear with me a little, and let your ears be inclined to hear a
few things which concerns your peace: for, because I love you, I cannot
withhold from you, that it is signified unto me, That whilst you are beset with
Adversaries on every side, the Enemy will bestir himself-with all subtilty and
violence to make a breach amongst you, and also will tempt to every thing
whereby he may weaken you, and let your Adversaries in upon you; but he shall
not be able to effect his purpose, whilst you all, in that Faith which works
by Love, Meekness and Gentleness, do hold the one Head, which is Christ the
Light, and neither the Planters nor the Waterers: for Him we preached, and in
Him we have believed who is the Author of Eternal Salvation from Sin, and
perfecter of Man's Redemption up to God, and you are Witnesses that we have not
preached up our selves, neither labored to set up him that planteth, nor him
that waters, as any thing in comparison of the precious Truth of God, for
which we now suffer, but in plainness and sincerity, not with wisdom of words,
but in the demonstration of the Spirit we have manifested the Life and Power of
God, that ye may know, believe, and be guided by it in your selves, and so
inherit Rest and Peace with God, and not always stand afar off, in the
expectation of somewhat to come, which is an unsettled state, wherein they that
stand may easily be deceived with swelling words, or good pretenses, wherewith
the strange Woman (whose ways are movable) decketh her self, lest those whom
she seeks to catch in her snare should ponder the path of Life, and see that
her ways do lead to the Chambers of death, and that her steps take hold on
Hell.

But dearly belove Friends and Brethren, seeing we know that the Son of God is
come by an, innard feeling of his Presence in spirit, that has given us an
understanding that is true, and we look not for another, but are rooted and
grounded in him, Let us hold fast our confidence, and faithfully follow him,
and patiently endure the Cross, that we may ever be his Disciples, who is a
quickening Spirit and does dwell in us; then shall we no more wander amongst
briars and thorns, but (...) amongst the Lillies of the Valley, and drink of
the Water of Life.

But Friends, because all of you that are convinced are not yet come into the
savoury Life, to discern of things that differ, you must sake heed of presuming
to judge of things that are, beyond your measure, for your principle, strength
and safety is to be still, and wait in he Light of the Spirit within, that both
your Faith and Wisdom from above may be increased, and that will open you more
and more to receive instruction, but will never let you slight nor reject the
Spirit's Testimony in the Elders and Brethren, whom God did use as Instruments
to turn you unto him, which still in the same. Love do watch over your Souls;
Neither shall you despise Prophesying, not quench the Spirit that speaks in the
mouth of Babes who are of stammeting lips; but as Friends of the Bridegroom,
rejoice to hear his Voice in any instrument, by whom, or to whom never he
speaks* But take diligent heed lest you set tip any Instrument above its place,
or give unto it any part of the Glory that is due unto him that uses it, lest
thereby ye kindle his Wrath, and cause jealousy to burn like a Fire: for if
his Glory he given to, and received by the most precious Instrument in his
hand, be will cast it away from him, and suffer it to be trodden under foot as
the mire of the streets. Therefore be tender of one another preservation, and
let all your affections be guided with Justice, Equity and Moderation, so shall
you never puff up any above, not cast down any below the in measure, which does
much tend to preserve the Body in the unity of the Spirit and bouds of Peace.

And you that are his Children in simplicity, wait that ye also in
understanding may be Men, and take heed of being so affected with simplicity,
as to despise or hate knowledge, like those to whom Wisdom cried, and
Understanding uttered her voice, and they would not hear; who stood conceited
in ignorance, till calamity came upon them, like an armed man, but always bow
down your ears to the Instruction of Life, and do the Will of God, that ye may
understand Doctrine and be of a sound Judgment to try Spirits and Doctrines,
whether they be of God or no: but in so doing, be sure to keep your own
habitations in a measure of light, and see that neither prejudice nor
immoderate affections bear sway in you, so will you see what stands in Unity
with the first Principle, by which you were turned toward God, and is approved
in his Light, and tends to stablish you in Righteousness that you may safely
embrace; but whatsoever does jar with the first Principle, and would dis-settle
and remove you from the Light within (wherein that which may be known of God is
made manifest) either by drawing into uncouth and singular outward
Observations, or by promising Liberty, or a greater Glory than that which the
Light of the Spirit within has given us to behold with open face, as in a
Glass, and is translating you thereinto; I say, that which by these things
would work discontent in your present measures, and let you loose from waiting
in God's Fear, into the comprehension of things above your measures, is
dangerous, and to be eschewed: And if any do hold forth such things, they, as
well as such which would draw you back into the Rudiments of the World, do
speak of themselves, and seek their own glory; but he whom God has sent,
speaks the words of God, and seeks his Glory that sent him.

And if Contention, Strife, Wars, or Commotions do arise in the Earth, betwixt
Man and Man, or People and People where you inhabit, dwell you in that Power
which has redeemed you out of the Earth from amongst Men, and that will keep
you sensible that you are not your own, but bought with a price, that you may
be unto God a peculiar People; And therefore you shall not defile your selves
with their Contentions, nor strive, nor side with Parties, which fly to that
Sword for refuge by which they may perish: but we having received and trusted
in the Sword of the Spirit, by which we can never perish, let us sit down in
that which keeps holy and harmless, and separate from sinners; so shall his
wonderful Counsel, who is Prince of Peace, be with us, wherein we may be
Peacemakers, and obtain the blessing to be called the Children of God.

And you that are as yet not much exercised with Sufferings, but are at peace
in your dwellings, none making you afraid, Take heed lest at any time you be
secure; for then may the Enemy entice you from a sense of God's mercy to look
out at Creatures, and to set your heart on Earthly things, and then if a trial
come suddenly and unexpected, it will be the heavier upon you; and if through
want of preparation ye fall under in it, then it will be hard for you to be
raised up again to stand faithful unto the End, whereon your safety and the
possdession of the Crown of Life depends: and if you be not constant and
faithful in these last trials, you lose your reward, for all that ye have gone
through: for, if any do put his hand to the plough, and look back, my soul has
no pleasure in him, says the Lord. Therefore, as I would that you should not
be dismayed, nor fear the Threatenings, Excommunications, Fines and
Imprisonments, or any other thing which you may suffer by the wicked hands of
mortal men; So would I that you may both inwardly and outwardly be prepared to
suffer what man can do unto you: And whilst ye behold the Lord restraining
their wrath from breaking out against you, bear a part with your Brethren that
are suffering under it, and God shall reckon it to you in the day of your need.

Finally, dear Friends and Brethren, be of one mind, and live in peace, and in
the Name of the Lord keep your Meetings, that Love and Life may abound amongst
you, and therein faithfully instruct, admonish, and (if need be) reprove one
another; but let the Spirit judge all things, and with an open tender heart
receive Instruction and Reproof one from another, pondring it in deep silence,
and not measuring it in the reasoning part, for that will grow high and work
prejudice against the Admonisher and Reprover, if you see not a present cause
or need of such a thing, and thereby you may both hurt your selves, and
discourage those that in sincerity sought your good, whereby they may be caused
in silence to lament when they see you in the like danger, and say, We called,
but they would not hear: therefore measure and bear all things in the meek low
spirit. And you that are strong and spiritually minded, being come over all
these things, labor to restore and raise up them that fall, and comfort the
feeble-minded, and say to them that stand afar off, Draw near and walk with us
in the Light, and the Lord will also give you rest; and wait on your Ministry,
that ye may preserve that which is gathered in the savoury Life, to shine as
Lights before men; For there is a Seed sown in this Nation and elsewhere, which
begins to bud forth in thousands, who having not seen, yet love; which gives me
sufficient ground to believe that when the Winter is past, and the latter Rain
comes upon the Earth, the shall be a plentiful Harvest, wherein every one that
has been faithful in a little, shall reap much, and give thanks unto God which
has blessed the Seed sown, who will send forth such, as in the furnace of
Affliction he has fitted for his use, faithfully to labor, that every eye may
be opened to see the common Salvation (that God has prepared for all People)
is the Light that does enlighten the Gentiles, and the Glory of Israel.

Written in Lincoln-Castle the 24th day of the sixth Month, 1662. John
Whitehead.

THE END.

