THE Humble Addr ess OF THE VVidow VVhitrowe TO King William:

With a FAITHFUL WARNING To the Inhabitants of England, TO Haste and Prepare by
True Repentance, and Deep Humiliation, to meet the LORD, Before His Indignation
burns like Fire, and breaks forth into a mighty Flame, so that none can quench
it.

Printed in the Year, 1689.

THE HUMBLE ADDRESS OF THE VVidow VVhitrowe TO King William, etc.
GOD SAVE THE KING FOR EVER: For that is the desire of my Soul to GOD for thee,
and for all Mankind, which is the chief end of my Writing to the King at this
time: And my humble Petition and Request to the King is, that his delight may
be in the Law of the LORD, and in HIS Law to have thy Meditation day and night.

For this was the Word which GOD put into my Heart for thee, when I was going
on the Way near Putny; and hearing the King was to come that way, I stood still
to see him; and whilst I stood still, these were the Words that did rise in my
Heart to thee, Oh King.

Blessed is the Man that does not walk in the Counsel of the Wicked, nor stand
in the Way of Sinners, nor sit in the Seat of the Scornful; but his delight is
in the Law of the LORD, and in His Law does he meditate Day and Night; For this
is he that shall be as a Tree planted by the Rivers of Water, that will bring
forth his Fruit in due season, whose Leaf shall not fade; so that whatsoever he
shall do, it shall prosper: but the Wicked are not so, but are like the Chaff
which the Wind drives away.

These were the weighty Words; but I saw not thy Face at that time: But another
time, as I was going by Water, I met thee going to land at Whitehall, and our
Boat standing still, I felt the power of GOD's Love so to thee, that it
transported my Spirit into a Heavenly Joy; I was drawn forth into Prayer, and
these were some of the Words; LORD be Thou his Counselor: LORD be Thou his
Directer. And so I departed in this holy Ecstasy, making my request to GOD for
thee: Put after this, I saw thee upon East-Sheen-Common, where thou wast taking
thy pleasure in Hunting: I was much grieved to see the King spending his
precious time in such a vain Exercise, in such a day as this, when the Nation
lies bleeding, the People wallowing in their Blood of Uncleanness, and all
manner of Abominations, whose Sins are of a Scarlet Dye, and cries aloud in the
Ears of the LORD GOD for Vengeance: Oh King! is this a day for Pleasure, when
the Righteous GOD is oppressed under the Sins of the People as a Cart is
pressed with Sheaves? I beseech thee consider the end of the LORD, in bringing
thee into this Nation, was it to do thy own Will, or the Will of Him that sent
thee? For thou have lived to see some of the great Acts of the LORD in this thy
day, as others did in the days of old, when one chased a thousand, and five put
ten thousand to flight; yea, how did the Mighty fly before thee, when none
persued them? And if GOD prolong thy days, thou will see greater things then
these; for the LORD will work Wonders in this the day of His mighty Power, as
He did in Egypt, and at the Red Sea; and for this end, to get Himself a Name
above every Name, to exalt His glorious Name in the Earth, that all may know
that He is the LORD, and that man is but man: As thou, O King, art a witness,
that it was not thy Sword, nor thy Might that brought thee hither, but the
LORD's own Arm which He made bare in the sight of all. And now I beseech thee
consider how highly thou art engaged to the LORD for all his Goodness; and what
will thou return to the KING of Eternal Glory, but to love Him with all thy
Heart and Soul, Strength and Might, and thy Neighbor as thy self; and to do
Justice, and love Mercy, and to walk humbly with the LORD; for this is the
whole Duty of Man, to love GOD and keep his Commandments, to visit the Widow
and Fatherless in their Afflictions, and to keep thy self unspotted from the
World; to love our Enemies, to do good for evil, to overcome evil with good; as
our blessed LORD and Savior Jesus Christ commanded, Whatever ye would that men
should do unto you, do ye that unto them: Oh these are blessed Rules for men to
walk by, for the King and his Nobles to put into practice: These are the Rules
that the holy men of GOD gave forth as they were moved by the Spirit of GOD, as
the holy Apostle says, That the man of GOD be perfect, and entire, wanting
nothing, but furnished for every good Work. And says our LORD and blessed
Savior, Be ye merciful as your Heavenly Father is merciful. And King David
says, LORD with the merciful Thou will show Thy Self merciful, and with the
pure Thou will show thyself pure. This made David call upon GOD so earnestly,
to make him pure, even as GOD is pure; and this made him merciful to forgive
his Enemies so often; for he knew the benefit would return to him again, both
from GOD and Man; and as there was great Goodness in it, so there was great
Policy, for it won the Affection of the People, so as that there Hearts were
bowed to him, as the Heart of one man. And now O King, seeing thou art
compassed about with so great a Cloud of Witnesses, encourage thy self in GOD,
as David did, and let the Power of the LORD GOD be strong in the King, to throw
down Sin, and to root out Wickedness out of this Nation: For be it known unto
thee, O King, this Nation at this time is fitter for Judgment then for
Deliverance; for how does all manner of Wickedness reign, both in Professors
and Profane, for the one is given to their fleshly Pleasures, as Drunkenness,
Feastings, Whoredon, and all manner of beastly lacivious Talking, Swearing and
Lying, Cheating, and all manner of Deceit: It would amaze one to s^e how Youth
and little Children are debaucht, their Mouths filled with Cursing and
Swearing, and all manner of wicked Words, as Dam, and Rot them, and such
Hellish Words; and the Professors of Religion outstrip the Profane: for O the
Deceit, the Double-dealing, Cheating and Cousening: and if their evil ends are
not answered, then the Malice they are filled with, even seeking to destroy one
another: And the ground wherein all this mischief grows, is Covetousness, which
is Idolatry, and the root of all Evil every one seeking themselves, and not the
things of Christ, who said, Ye cannot be my Disciples, except ye deny your
selves, and take up my daily Cross, and follow me: But instead of this, they
are become Enemies to the Cross of Christ, whose God is their Belly, as says
the Apostle, whose Glory is their Shame, who mind Earthly things. And is it not
a shame that men that call themselves Christians, should mind their Honors and
Preferments into great Places? Did Christ and his Followers leave such a
Pattern? Let them bring their Lives to the Life of Christ, and see how like
they are to His; this is the cause why they do not profit the people, because
their minds are in the Earth; and behold, oh King, what preaching and praying
here is in this Land, but how little practicing? What Fruits are brought forth
to GOD by all this praying and preaching? did ever pride abound as it does now?
the holy Scriptures of Truth speaks of the Jews, Isa. 3.16. to the end, when
they were departed from the Law of GOD they went a Whoring after the
Abominations of the Heathen, and one of their Whorish Inventions was, they made
them Round Tyers like the Moon; for which the Prophet proclaims the heavy
Judgments of GOD against them.

But what may we call the Dresses of the professed Christians of our Time? the
Tower of Babel, or the Whore of Babylon's triple Crown? Oh ye Rebellious
Daughters, who have Ears but hear not, Hearts but do not understand, that the
long Suffering of the LORD should lead you to Repentance; Oh ye Proud
stiffnecked and Rebellious People, do you thus requite the LORD for all his
kind and gentle dealing, which should humble you in the dust before Him; ye
Rebellious Ones, with what face or pretense of Piety can you appear before the
pure and holy GOD in your Congregations to worship? with your proud Hearts,
your staitly Carriages, your lofty looks, your towered Thoughts, thinking you
are Gods with your high towered Heads, which makes you look exalted to the
Skies, with all the rest of your rich and gorgious Attires, fitter for the
Heathen Stage Players than for Christians: I say, can you approach before this
great and Almighty GOD, and not be abased and confounded before Him? Know you
not that His all-seeing Eye beholds your Idolatry? and if his MAJESTY looks
upon you in Anger, ye are consumed to nothing, and must return to the Dust from
whence ye came, for the Worms to feed on your delicate Carcasses, for which
your precious time has been spent in taking care for to feed it Voluptuously,
and to adorn it excessively, and then to love and admire it so, as to worship
and adore it: Now which are the greatest Idolaters, they that worship the Sun,
Moon and Stars, the glorious Creatures, which represent the Glory of GOD, or
you that worship your sinful Flesh? Ye great Idolaters, do you think that GOD
created you for this purpose, to Love your selves, Admire your selves, to Kiss
your own Hands, saying to your proud Flesh; I will Honor and Worship thee,
thou art my God, (for this know, his Servants ye are, whom you obey) and then
go and stand in your Idols Temple, to Mock GOD, and bid Defiance to His Spirit
of Grace, saying, we are delivered to do all these Abominations!

I speak this to all sorts of Professors, from the highest in profession to the
lowest of them that call themselves Christians, for the one is as deeply guilty
of loving themselves, their own Ways and evil Works of earthly Mindedness and
Covereousness, which is Idolatry; as the Prophain is of their Prophainness: Oh
Everlasting GOD, what Lamentation shall be taken up for both these, which are
gone away from thy VVays like lost Sheep! But oh ye Idolaters, who call your
selves Christians; go you to the Wars of Jerusalem, and read there what the
LORD did for the wickedness of that People who were called Jews: and do you
think to escape the just Judgments of GOD for your Sins, because you are called
Christians, though out of His Life, No, No, that Covering will be too short in
the Day of Account; and though some of you may say, We have Eaten and Drunk in
Thy Presence, and in thy Name done many wonderful Works, yet not persevering
to the end of all Iniquity, this will be your Portion, Depart from me ye
Workers of Iniquity, I know you not.

And now having in some measure cleared my Conscience, by doing as I am
commanded, to speak the Truth to my Neighbors, I Expect the same measure from
those that are guilty in this matter to cast a Stone at me, as they did at the
faithful Servants of the LORD of old: Poor suffering Jeremiah, was so sorely
tried, that he said, Woe is me, my Mother, that thou have born me, a Man of
Contention and Strife to the whole Earth. And that holy Prophet Isaiah, who
said to the Scoffers of his time, Isa. 57.3. O ye Sons of the Sorceross, the
Seed of the Adulterers, etc. On whom have ye jested? upon whom have ye gaped
and thrust out your Tongues? Are not ye Rebellious Children and false Seed
instan^ed with Idols? And my blessed Savior, the Everlasting GOD manifest in
Flesh, when He went to Dye upon the Cross for their Sins, they beat Him and
mocked Him, saying, Prophecy who smote Thee; so I must take my Lot among these
blessed Ones, though unworthy; but I will get me into the secret of His
Pavilion, under the Shadow of the Almighty, where I shall be hid from the
strife of Tongues.

And now, O KING. I hope thy Goodness will pass by my Trespass in this long
Discourse, wherein I have been engaged to bear my Testimony against the Sins of
the people of this Nation, which cries aloud in the Ears of the LORD for
Vengeance; and seeing I intend nothing but what is good for the King and his
People, I desire to have Liberty to ease my self of the burden which has lain
upon me many years before thou came into this Nation. For be it known unto
the King, I have feared the LORD, and loved the holy Scripture from my Youth up
until this day; and in my searching after the LORD I past through many things,
which would be too tedious to mention here.

About a quarter of a Year before the Plague began in London, the LORD
commanded me to go to Bristol, and call them to Repentance, before the terrible
Day of the LORD, and so I went a Foot, and when I came thither, at the Command
of GOD I put on Sackcloth on my Body, and Ashes on my Head; and when I had
delivered my Message, the next day I returned toward London, where I came to
my Husband and Family in ten Days time, or the tenth Day of my parting from,
them, leaving a young Child of a Year old that sucked at my Breast, and found
all things well, my self also, so well as if I had not gon^ one Mile, although
a weak Woman of Body, and not able to go two Miles without Pain, yet in the
strength of the LORD I went almost two Hundred Miles a Foot, Glory be to GOD
forever.

And after a great Exercise of Fasting and Prayer which lay upon me, I was
commanded to go out of my own House Sackcloth and Ashes, and proclaim the
terrible Day of the LORD, that should burn as an Oven; crying Woe, woe, woe unto
the Inhabitants of this City, Desolation upon Desolation, and Woe upon Woe; then
presently the Plague began in the City; and for too Weeks after the Plague
began, I thought I should never have had rest more, for day and night I was
like a Woman in strong Travel, all over in ra^king Pain, I trembled that my
Knees struck one against another, and as the weight of a Mill Stone upon my
Spirit, I cried bitterly to the LORD, and said, Oh Righteous LORD, if Thou
remove not this burden, then I cannot live; then the LORD answered, and said,
It is the burden of the Iniquities of the Nation I have laid upon thee, and
thou must bear my Indignation, for thou art their Sign of the Repentance and
Humiliation I require of them: then I knew what the Prophet Habakkuk meant when
his Lips quivered, his Belly trembled, and rottenness had entered his Bones;
then I had a little ease for the present, but the great Exercise remained
still, going in Sackcloth and Ashes, and calling the People to Repentance; but
when I had performed my Service, and done all that the LORD required of me; Oh
the sweet melting consolating Love my Heart and Soul was filled with to GOD for
His goodness, in giving me strength to do His blessed Will, and was so humbled,
I could have licked the Dust; then I threw my Body upon the ground, and my
Mouth in the Dust, that GOD might be Exalted; then I had Beauty given me for
Ashes, yea, the Beauty of His Holiness; I had the Garment of Praise for the
Spirit of heaviness, for my Mouth was filled with Praises, and my Heart with
Heavenly Halaluj^hs; I went about doing Good, visiting the Sick, and relieving
the Poor; I had the Word of the LORD to many Families, to tell them that their
Visitation drew near, calling them to Repentance. Praises be to Him that lives
forever; for the LORD had not only sh^d his Love in my Heart, but filled my
Heart and Rains so full, that it run as a River to ill mankind, for their
Redemption out of their fallen Estate; but this increased my outward
Afflictions, and the inward Travel of my Soul, so that I never heard of any
that went through the like in this latter Age: I was much exercised with
fasting, at the Command of the LORD I Fasted three days, and three nights,
without any Sustenance; and eat Bread and drank Water six days together, for a
Witness against their Feasting and Drinking high Spirits, to keep the Plague
from their Hearts, but alas, they were Physicians of no value; but it pleased
the LORD to preserve me and mine, at that Time, and for many years after, until
it pleased Him to prepare my dear Children for Himself, and then He took them
out of all the Sa^res and Temptations of this sinful Life, to their everlasting
Joy and His eternal Praise, World without end, Amen, Then I enquired of the
LORD why He took them away in their youth; and He said, Because of their
Fathers evil Life, and in order for my deliveran^e to the Work He had called me
to; then the LORD Commanded me to depart from the Multitude, and from all the
concerns of this World, to seek H^n apart; to give up Name and Fame, and
whatsoever was dear to me in this Life, Body, Soul and Spirit, to serve the
LORD as he required me, (that was in Fasting and Prayer) which was also to be a
sign to the Multitude, of the Worship which the LORD required of them; but the
Afflictions I went through at that time is beyond my Tongue of Flesh to
declare; then after all this the LORD commanded me to go in Sackcloth and shes
three days, and to wear Sackcloth three years, which I did, till after the
death of King Charles the second.

And now, O KING, I am required to visit thee, and to lay before thee what the
LORD requires of thee, which is, To do Justly, and to show Merry, and to walk
humbly with thy GOD, and not to fear Man, whose Breath is in his Nostrils, nor
to put thy trust in the Arm of Flesh, but in the living GOD; for it is written,
Woe unto them that go down into Egypt for help; It is also written, Blessed be
the Man that trusts in the LORD, and whose hope the LORD is, for he shall be
as a Tree that is planted by the Waters, which spreads out her roots by the
Rivers, and shall not feel when the heat comes, but her leaf shall be green,
and shall not care for the year of drowth, neither shall cease from yielding
Fruit, yea, Blessed shall he be in his going out, and in his coming in; for the
LORD shall bless him with an everlasting Blessing, which shall be better than
the Blessing of his Ancestors: Therefore O King, be Valiant for the Truth upon
Earth, and give not thy Strength unto others, nor thy Power and Wisdom to Men,
but serve the LORD with all thy Strength, and with all thy Might, for this the
LORD requirs of thee, and give it not to Men to serve their evil ends.

And in order to the carrying on of this great Work which I have been treating
of, my humble Request to the King is, that he would be pleased to take Christ
for his Example in this thing, to withdraw often from the Multitude, and to
retire into his own Soul, there to attend upon the Lord very deligently in
Fasting and Prayer, asking Counsel of the LORD how to order his Affairs as may
be most for the Glory of GOD, and then The GOD of Peace make the King* perfect
in all good Works, to do His most acceptable Will, working in him that which is
pleasant in His sight, to whom be Everlasting Praise for evermore, Amen.

From one that is of no Sect or gathered People whatsoever, yet I love the good
in all, but the evil I ablior; so I walk alone as a Woman forsaken; I have
fellowship with them that Lived in Caves, and in Dens, and desolate places of
the Earth, of whom the World was not worthy.

J. VV.

Postscript.
O Ye Church and People of England! what did you send for King William our of
his own Country, and turn out King James? You said it was to set up the
Christian Religion, and to Establish it: Why is it not done? What have you been
a doing all this while, making provision to set up your selves? For the
Christian Religion is not set up: you know what that is, To forsake the Devil
and all his W^rks, the Pomps and Vanities of this wicked World and all the
sinful Lusts of the Flesh, and to keep GOD's W^ll and Commandments, and to walk
in the same all the days of your Lives. So you see the Christian Religion sh^ws
you what the Devil's Works are, that they are the Pomps and the Vanities of
this wicked World, and the sinful Lasts of the Flesh. And Christ's command is,
Learn of me, for I am Meek and Lowly, and you shall find Rest to your Souls:
And Christ's command is, Love your Enemies, do good to them that hate you: And
Christ's command is, Let your Light so shine, that men may see your good Works,
and glorify your heavenly rather: These are the Commands of Christ, with all
the rest that I have been treating of. And these are the Vows you have vowed in
the Name of GOD, in your Baptism, To forsake the Devil and all his Works, the
vain Pomps and Glory of the World, with all the Covetous Desires of the same,
the Carnal Desires of the Flesh, saying, I will not follow, nor be led by them:
I forsake them all: This is your Promise. Therefore, oh ye Church and People of
England, perform your Vows which you have vowed to the GOD of Heaven, and put
into practice what you have promised the LORD; but if you will not, then will
it appear to all the World, that you did not all this to set up the Chrian
Religion, but to set up your selves, which if you do, GOD will pull you down;
for says the LORD, Them that Honors me I will Honor: but they that despise
Me shall be aespised, 1 Samuel 2.

And oh ye Church and People of England, I am to acquaint you, that the last
Lord Mayors Day I bore a heavy burden for your Feasting: The LORD calls for
Fasting, and you go to Feasting: so that ye are guilty of the same Iniquity
that your Forefathers were, for said Isaiah the Prophet in that day, Did the
LROD GOD of Host call into Weeping and Mourning, and Baldress, and t^^ garding
with Sackcloth; but behold Joy and Gladness, slaying Oxen and killing Sheep
eating Flesh and drinking Wine, Eating and Drinking, for tomorrow we shall dye:
That was all that presumptious Generation valued, either the command of the
LORD, or His just Judgments, to make a mock at that weighty Message; and yea
do the same in your Actions, breaking Christ's commands, who said, When thou
make a Dinner or Supper, call not thy Friends, nor thy rich Neighbors* lest
they bid thee again: But when thou make a Feast, call the Poor and the
Distressed, for they cannot Recompense thee again, but thou shall be
Recompensed at the Resurrection of the Just. So remember your Vows which ye
have vowed, oh ye Church and People! to keep GOD's holy Will and Commandments,
and to walk in the same all the days of your Lives. And now, oh ye Churches
and Inhabitants of England of all sorts and Sects, be it known unto you, that
thus far I am clear of your Blood by performing my Service to GOD, and my Duty
to my Neighbors, whom I desire the welfare of as my own Soul; yea, I can call
Heaven and Earth to witness, that this is my end, even your Salvation, which
will be more to you then all earthly crowns.

And that this Message to you may prove so effectual by the Power of GOD, that
you together with me in the Humility of our Souls, may cast our selves with all
Self-interest at the Feet of Christ Jesus, as a second Mary Magdalen, washing
His Feet with our Tears, and wiping them with the Hairs of our Heads, that our
cries may pierce through the Heavens to the Throne of his Grace, to move His
holy and glorious MAJESTY to be merciful to us, and this poor Nation, that it
may not be made an utter Desolation for the Sins of them that live therein.

Your Friend, ready to serve you to the utmost of my Power according to the
Will of GOD. J. Whitrowe.
East-sheen, near Mortlock, the 2d of the 10th Month, 1689.

