A Letter to a Gentleman elected a Knight of the Shire to serve in the present
Parliament.
SIR,
WHen you were chose by the Majority of the Freeholders for the Counts of --
you were pleased to express your self on that Occasion. That though you were
very sen^^^^e of the Kindness of the Country in pitching on you to represent
them; yet, at the same time, th^^ was ^ great Burden laid upon your Shoulders;
a mighty Trust reposed in you; and which required the utmost Care and Vigilance
to discharge faithfully. For that the Nation was in such a Posture, and the
Matters that would come before you were like to be of such extraordinary Weight
and Moment, That all the Powers and Virtues of a Man, The greatest Prudence,
The most upright Sincerity, and the steddiest Resolution, were little enough to
grapple with, though all the Members were singly endowed with these great
Qualifications, and which was rather to be wished for than expected, in so
numerous a Body. Upon the whole, you desired my Opinion with ^^^pection (...)
Conduct and Management in so difficult^ (...) Juncture, which I shall
faithfully give you. And I shall the more cheerfully obey your Commands,
because I know you to be a Gentleman of such Qualities, as very well enable you
to serve your Country, and particularly at this time. For,

First, you are a True English man, who always have, and, I doubt not, always
will aim at the Welfare of your Country, separate from all Parties of all
Denominations. The Interest of England is an entire Thing, and subsists of it
self; it supports all Parties, but is of none of them; it is neither a Courtier,
nor a Countryman: the Public is the Whole and can therefore be of no Side,
nor Faction. The late Parliament has furnished us with a Distinction between
the Court and the Country Party, the Church and the Commonwealth Party: But if
there be not a third Party independent of ^^ther, the Whole is like to be torn
to pieces by particular and factious Interests: So that whatever Party a Man
may be of in his private Judgment, he ought to be of none in his Representative
Capacity, which is, contrary to all distinction and partiality, and invests him
with the same public and common Relation to the whole Body. I will not presage
of the Temper of your House; but this I will venture to say, That if any Man
comes there, with any other Biass besides that of the Public Good, he is a
thousand times fitter to sit as a Delegate from Thieves and Pick-pockets, than
to represent the Freeborn People of England.

Secondly, your Honesty is inflexible, not to be bended with Frowns or Favors;
you will not be threatened nor cajoled to act against your Judgment, or to
decline it by silence or absence, when it is fit to declare it, much less will
you be warped by Bribes, or any thing equivalent to Bribes. I know you never
took the House of Commons for a Shop to sell Votes in; your Estate is above it,
and your Conscience abhors it. There is nothing more free than a House of
Commons; but if the Persons shall suffer themselves to be frighted, tempted, or
bought, there is nothing in Nature more Slavish; such mercenary Tools are not
Representatives: For whatsoever Formality passes at the Election, the Writ
instead of a Member returns only a Broaker, or a Chap man, who first sells his
own Liberty, and then that of the People.

Thirdly, your Judgment is sound, clear and peircing, able to dive into the
Depths of Business; to unr^^el the Webs of Cunning and Artifice; to see through
the Mists and Obscurities raised by a contriving Party, to clog and hamper the
best Designs. Wisdom is as necessary in a Senator as Honesty. Tricks cannot
pass upon a Man who has a due presence of Mind, and a steady Judgment: And he
will pursue a good Cause through all the Mazes and Labyrinths, the Embroilments
and Intanglements of crafty and winding Interpositions and Obstructions. Nor
will he be diverted by Noise and Clamor; a Method (however practiced) more
becoming a Mob, or a Tumult, than the Gravity and Wisdom of an august Senate.

These, Sir, are Qualities which as I know you are possessed with, so do they
very well suit with your present Character, and enable you to become a very
useful Member of that honorable Assembly. A complete Body, or but a Majority,
of such Men would revive our drooping Spirits; and we might yet hope to see the
Kingdom set to Rights, the Ancient Glory of England retrieved, and the great
matters to come before you adjusted, to the Advantage and Satisfaction of the
whole Nation.

And which I shall now more particularly apply my self to, and for Methods sake
shall speak to them under several and distinct Branches.

In the first Place, there is no doubt but the great Business of Money, and
Supply, will be the main subject of the King's Speech, and with all Care
recommended to the Consideration of the House of Commons; and for this, you
must expect to be often called upon and reminded by the Court, if you do not go
fast enough of your selves. This indeed is a weighty Point, one of the Ardua
Regni, and more so now than ever; and therefore deserves your best
Consideration upon many Accounts, I shall suggest to you these following.

1. That whatever Supplies you think reasonable to Grant to the Government,
that it be done in such Order, that thereby the other necessary Affairs of the
Kingdom be not prejudiced, or wholly neglected. I need not direct to a Method
for managing this; Besides the plain reason of things, you have Presidents in
all Ages; the Wisdom of our Ancestors, and even of Parliaments within our own
Memory, have always thought it highly requisite to Postpone the Supplies to the
Redress of Grievances; that however Liberal they have been to our Monarchs,
they ever took Care in the first Place to secure the Rights of the People at
home. And the Reason of this is obvious, and undeniable; for Parliaments
sitting purely at the Will of the King, when once the Ends of the Government
are answered, there is no further need of you; and it is no Prophecy to tell
you, That so soon as you have done with the Money Bill, the Court has done
with you for this time, and you shall be sent into the Country with the best
part of your Business undone. You have fresh Instances and Experiences of this;
our Grievances have been brought into the House, and debated sometimes warmly
enough by our worthy Patriots, but the Debates have always proved abortive, and
they left our Grievances just where they found them: And for this Reason, and
for this only, for that they had first perfected the Supplies. What therefore I
here recommend to you is nor an Opposition between the Supplies and Grievances,
but only matter of Method, and Order* and surely it will not need much
considering, in what Place to lay that, which either must be first done, or not
done at all. You have but one Season for this, and that is to begin with the
Grievances; which if you neglect, it is, like time it self, irrecoverable, and
will never more return this Session. And give me leave plainly to tell you,
That if you dispatch the Supplies, and then afterward fall upon the
Grievances, it is only to amu^e the People, and to stop their Mouths; but this
Covering is already worn so thin that every Man sees through it: For it is the
most visible Delusion to pretend to be earnest to do a Thing, and at the same
time to pretermit the only Opportunity in which it can be done.

2. The great Poverty, and low Estate of the Nation, is that which every
Englishman sees, and feels too; (except those only who have filled their
Pockets at the Kingdoms Cost) The prodigious Losses at Sea, the utter decay of
Trade, the excessive and constant Taxes, have drained the Kingdom to the very
Bones, and this sure deserves to be one Consideration, when the Case of the
Money comes before you. It Is not the Superfluities and Luxury, the Pride and
Wantonness of a People, that is to be the Matter of these Supplies; but our
Bread, and our Drink, the Necessities and Supports of Life: Whatsoever you now
give is drawn from the Quick, and is just so much paid from the Subsistence of
our Families. And surely there needs no Argument to persuade our
Representatives, when they come to give our Money, to take their Measures from
the Poverty of the People; and to consider what they can give, as well as what
is asked. Six or Seven Millions for one Year, would have been thought an
intolerable Burden in the most flourishing and prosperous Condition this
Nation ever enjoyed: But when we have born that Year after Year, besides the
additional Impoverishment of unspeakable Losses, to repeat the same, or to
advance upon us, is to confound all the Distinction of Things; to make no
difference between Prosperity and Adversity; to lay the same Load on a Man
languishing with Age and Infirmity, as upon the Healthful, Vigorous, and Lusty.
In short, Our Veins are emptied already, and you have now our Hearts Blood in
your Hands, and which certainly ought to be squeezed gently, that it may
preserve, and not utterly exhaust, the poor Remnant of Life that is yet left. I
shall not undertake to determine what Proportion is fit for you to Grant, only
I conceive in that Case the following Considerations on this Head may be useful.

3. A strict and impartial Enquiry what Proportion our Expenses bear to the
rest of the Confederates: And if it be found to exceed, to reduce it to equal
Bounds. For it is the most unreasonable Thing in the World, when the War is
primarily and principally theirs, and at their own Doors, that we must bear
three Parts of the Burden. If any Party must over-pay, that surely ought to be
the Part of those whose Interests and Effects lie immediately at Stake, Had we
never so much Plenty and Abundance, such a manner of Proceeding might make us
perhaps very kind Neighbors, but no very wise Men. And, in good truth, our
Conduct in this War is laughed at all over Europe, and we are become a Scorn and
Reproach, even to those who reap the Benefit of our Folly. The Concern of our
Allies in this War is ten times more than ours; it is flaming within their
Bowels, or at their Frontiers. Their Country and Interests are defended; and if
there be any thing gained by the War, it is theirs altogether: We neither have,
nor have any Expectation to get any thing but Blows. And yet (to the Honor of
our Discretion be it spoken) we pay two Thirds at least of the Expense. Let us
assist our Allies, but then let us do it by the Rules of Equity and Prudence:
Their Account in the War is Immediate, and Direct, ours only Remote and
Collateral. And it is the most unaccountable Thing in the World, That, in such
a Case, we must drein our Men, and our Money, and reduce our selves to Beggary,
only to save their Pockets, and that they may sit easy and flourish by our
Miseries. For it is as plain as the Sun, That the Advance of our Quota is a
Diminution of theirs; and we pay the more, that the Spaniards and the Dutch may
pay the less. And it is no wonder, That, by such an unequal Distribution, they
thrive and grow Rich under a War that is within them, and at their very, Doors,
while we at a Distance, and upon the most advantageous Circumstances, are
notwithstanding impoverished to the last Degree. Do we believe that if we were
attaqued at home, our Neighbors would, send us a double Supply of Men and
Money, and take upon them two Shares of the War; and not rather think they used
us well, if they gave the Assistance of a Sixth, or even a Tenth part? We have
a fresh and flagrant Instance to guide as in making a right Judgment, and even
to teach us Wisdom (if we will learn it) by the Practice of our Neighbors. At
this very time Namur, and its Dependencies is engaged to the Dutch, and
actually in their hands, to defray their Expencies of the War, and of its
Repairs: And yet it is a Barrier to their Country, and in that respect they
would have the same account in it, as well in the Hands of the Spaniards as in
their own. But for all that, they thought it Wisdom to take good Security even
of their Allies for Reimbursment. They are wise Men, and good Husbands, and
understand Things better than to think the Name of Ally means a Fool, to fright
and pay all for the Benefit of others, without taking some Share of it to
themselves. But what, I pray, have we got? We sight for the Spaniard and the
Dutch too, and yet we have no Mortgages, nor Cautionary Towns; nor so much as a
poor Hospital for our Sick and Wounded. Queen Elizabeth assisted the Dutch, not
when they were Great and Rich as now, but when they were as Low and Poor as our
selves are, and yet she thought good to take Cautionary Towns of them, although
she was at the same time actually engaged with their Enemy in the same War. But
we are grown of late mighty Generous; we fight and pay Gratis. It Is enough for
us to have Honor for our Blood and Money, let the Spoils go to the Mercenary;
and, in truth, our part in the War has hitherto been nothing else but
Knight-Errantry. We have rigged out Fleets, and sent out Armies, in quest of
Adventures, and to relieve distressed Ladies; but never had the least thought
of having any profitable return of our Arms, or making any Provision for our
selves. And however this might pass in heat of Blood, and when our Coffers were
full and ran over; yet sure it is now high time to take Example by our
Neighbors, and to have some Caution and Security for all the vast Expense of
Men and Treasure we have been at on their Account; or at least to settle Things
on such a Foundation, That our Allies, who have ten times the Interest in the
War, should at least bear an equal Share in the Expense: And for this you have
a very good President before you in a Vote of the last Parliament, April 18.
That this Kingdom be put upon an equal Foot and Proportion with the rest of the
Allies in bearing the Charge of the present War: Which Vote ought to be
revived, and insisted on: And it is of such great Importance, and of so much
Advantage to the Nation, that if it be effectually pursued, I dare promise you,
it will save the Kingdom near one half of this Years Expenses.

4. A General Excise likewise will require your Thoughts; not that I think it
will ever be brought into your House by any True Englishman: But it is so
generally discoursed of as a Project to raise Money, that it will highly
deserve your Consideration. And it is true, it will certainly raise Money, so
long as there is any in the Nation to be raised: But I hope that is not All
that is to be considered by an English Parliament, The Ease, Safety, and
Freedom of the People, equally deserves your Care, and especially when you are
giving away their Money. And what then will become of the so much boasted of
English Liberty, when Slavery shall be laid on us with both hands, and we shall
be sunk into the utmost Hardships of the Subjects of the Dutch Commonwealth:
English Liberty means the Liberty of the People: And if this load be once laid
on us, there will be nothing left but the Name, and we shall not in reality
enjoy any one Privilege above our Neighbors. Our Gentry will be as much curbed,
our Farmers oppressed, and our Peasants as poor as in any other Nation. For
consider how many are there of the lowest Rank of the People, who now under the
general decay o^ Trade, and dearness of all Commodities, with all their Labor
and Industry, cannot support themselves and Families? And what will their Case
then be, when every thing they Eat and Drink, and are Clothed with, and Use,
must over and above pay a Tax to the Government? So that this is a Tax that
will eat into the very Hearts of the Poor, and make their Condition desperate;
and, in truth, will ultimately redound upon the Rich. For it must of necessity
multiply the Poor, and consequently the Charges of every Parish, and will
thereby prove a double Tax to the Rich: First to pay their own Excise, and then
to maintain them who are beggared by it. Besides, it reflects Hardship upon all
other States in the Nation; upon another, and indeed a more stinging Accounts,
it subjects them to the Insolence and Sauciness of every pitiful Exciseman, who
shall enter and search their Houses when, and as often as he pleases; and they
can neither keep themselves, their Families, nor any thing they have, private
from every officious and domineering Rascal. But besides these (which are bad
enough) there are yet two other terrible Consequences that attend a General
Excise; the one is, That it infinitely multiplies absolute Dependencies on the
Crown: The Officers of all Sorts in their several Districts all over the
Kingdom will amount to many Thousands; and if it was thought to deserve
Complaint, that there were so many Officers in your House, what will it do when
there are so many Thousands throughout the Nation? This, in the first place,
will have a bad Influence on all Elections of Members of Parliament; for all
their Votes, in every County in England, will certainly be determined at the
Will of the Court: And I need not say what a dreadful Prospect this has on
that Fundamental Right of the English Nation, viz. Freedom of choosing their
Representatives. And the Consideration of their Numbers is full out as
formidable, that their united Strength may be able to endanger the Nation to
keep it under, and to rule it by a strong hand. It Is a kind of standing Army,
and which may be employed to other Purposes, besides collecting Excise,
whenever opportunity offers. And it has ever been the Wisdom as well as the
Jealousy of English Parliaments never to entrust the Prince with so much Power
as to enable him to govern Arbitrarily whenever he pleases. And which a
General Excise does also upon another Account, it lays in an eternal Fund for
Supplies, which will answer all the Ends of the Government, and utterly takes
off all the Need the Prince may have of the Peoples Assistance, and
consequently roots up the very Foundation of Parliaments, and makes them
perfectly useless: So that, at one Blow, this Tax destroys all the Rights and
Freedom of the Nation. I know to obviate this it may be said, That the Excise
may be laid to hold for a determinate time, and no longer, or during the War
only: But this is no answer to any Man that can see but three Inches before
him. For the King is left in Possession, and who shall dispute it with him, if
he resolves to have it Collected, especially being backed by a numerous Troop of
Officers, whose Subsistence and Livelihood depends upon it? A Parliament may
dispute it indeed, but then we may have none, or only such a one that shall be
composed of Excise-men, whose Interest it will be to continue it from
Generation to Generation. Methinks in this point we may take warning from our
Neighbors the Dutch; they began it in the Exigencies of their State, but have
continued, it through all their Flourishing and Prosperity, and no doubt will
never ease the People of it to the end of the World.

5. Seeing we are upon the Article of Money, it may not be reasonable to
pretermit the State of the Coin it self: I do not mean here only as it is
Embased and Clipped, (for which in a great measure we are beholding to our good
Neighbors, who have expressed their Gratitude to us in this Instance, as well
as many others.) And the Gold which is not clipped, the current Price is
Uncertain and Arbitrary, though it be advanced above the Standard of all
Europe; and the baseness of our Silver, and, the height and even uncertainty of
our Gold, have a mighty Influence on all Parts of Trade, but more particularly
on all Foreign Trade; upon the Account of which the Exchange is sunk, and there
is 20 l. if not 30 l. per Cent. difference, in all the Commodities the English
buy or sell, to what it was heretofore; and which therefore, and upon many
other Accounts, will deserve your Care to apply some effectual Remedy. But that
which I principally aim at, and is indeed proper upon this Head, is the
Scarcity even of that Coin, which is thus naught either in kind or degree. We
have scarcely bad Coin enough left to supply the absolute Necessities of Trade,
and of Private Families. And I was going to say, that when you are granting our
Money: This is a consideration, that must be thought upon, whether you will, or
no; for if you do not find Money as well as Votes, you may give as you Will, and
neither the Government nor our Allies will be much the better for it. And
therefore it seems absolutely necessary, as well with respect to the Government
as to the People thoroughly to consider both the nature and quality of our
present Coin, and also what proportion of it there is yet left among us; for if
the King wants it Abroad, and the Necessities of the People cannot spare it
from Home, it is plain, one of them must be great sufferers: For I shall take
these two things for granted; First, That the Nation cannot drive a Trade, nor
yet subsist with Copper Farthings or Halfpence. Secondly, That the Exportation
of our Coin, has been the only reason of that great scarcity that is now in
the Kingdom. And if it be suffered to continue, it is impossible but it must
drain away all that remains, for our Money is embas'd and clipped to half the
value, and consequently the Exportation must be double to what it was formerly,
one Million of our Money transmitted in specie, will prove but half so much in
the Expense Abroad, for though we take it by Tale, and according to the Stamp,
yet Foreigners will take it only by weight, and according to the intrinsic
value; so that if two Millions were Exported yearly to Flanders, to the Allies,
and to the Streights, now for the same purposes, must be Exported four
Millions, and then let any Man judge what will be left at home, for the
subsistence of the Nation. The King himself was so sensible of this, that (when
the Kingdom was in a better Condition then it is now;) He tells the last
Parliament in his Speech, That He could heartily wish some Expedient might be
found to prevent the Exportation of our Money. And such an Expedient I shall now
lay before you, and which is liable to no manner of Objection, but will answer
all the Ends of the Government, and also secure the remaining Bullion to supply
the Necessities of the People. And it is this, That we be obliged, either with
Clothes ready made, or else with Cloth, to Cloth all the Confederate Armies,
in Flanders, Piedmont, and on the Rhine, and to furnish them with Lead, and all
Warlike Provisions of our own growth, or of our convenience in point of Trade,
and to discount with our several Confederates at the same rate for these
Commodities, as they could have provided them in their respective Countries.
This no Englishman can except against, for the manifold advantages it will
bring to the Nation. This the Allies cannot except against for Money worth, and
of present and necessary use, is the same thing to them with Money it self, and
they may easily provide for the subsistence of our Troops, when they have a
full recompense by an equivalent. I know but of one Objection that can possibly
be made to this, That it will be more expensive to the Treasury, for that some
of the Commodities may be cheaper in their own Country, besides the charge of
Exportation. Let this be granted, and possibly it may be so in some measure,
and there will be so much lost by the discount. But this is of no great moment,
and will by no means serve to balance these mighty Conveniences that will
thereby accrue to the whole Nation, by the Consumption of our Manufacture, by
the reviving our decayed and almost ruined Trade, and (which at this time is
more than all the rest) by preventing the Exportation of our Bullion. Suppose
the Treasury be a little burdened, which receives subsistence, and all its
Supplies from the People, is that a Reason to lay aside an Expedient so every
way profitable and advantageous to them? And is it not a thousand times better,
that the Treasury bear a little burden, and which also the People must pay,
than for the small and inconsiderable Ease of that, an intolerable and
insupportable load be laid on the whole People. And in short, the Objection in
its full force is no more but this, the Treasury must not bear the
supernumerary Expense of five Shilings, though by so doing the Nation gains five
Pounds, and saves ten.

I have now done with the great Point of the Money, and shall proceed to another
general Head, viz.

2dly. There is a strong Report, of a very great, but at the same time a very
daring Project, to endeavor a new Settlement of the Crown. This is such a bold
attempt on the Constitution, that it never durst be set on foot, but by these
who think the English are grown so tame and weak, that they are sit to be made
a Property, and can be prevailed upon to do any thing in the World: What do
they think of us? When they can propose to us, to put our own hands, to the
overturning our Foundations, and breaking through our Establishments. The
unsetling the Foundations in any Government, is of that dangerous consequence,
and has such a train of unforeseen Mischiefs attending it, that there is not a
Wise man upon Earth, that will ever put his hand to it, and I cannot think so
meanly of your House, that there is one single Member will heartily engage in
an Undertaking so extremely rash, and unadvised. And (to speak the plain truth,
it is a thing you cannot do, though you had never so much mind to it, for
whatever powers a Parliament may have, they are all confined within the Terms
of the Constitution, you sit in Virtue of it, and derive your Powers from it,
and whatsoever you enact in concurrence with it, is valid, and binding, and
has the force of a Law, but whatsoever is in opposition to it, or in
destruction of it, is null and void of it self, and neither obliges your
selves, nor any body else. The utmost the Convention pretended (as appears
plainly by the Debates and Conferences between the two Houses) was a Power to
fill a vacant Throne; but they utterly disclaimed the Power of altering the
Constitution, and turning an Hereditary Monarchy into an Elective one: And
which this apparently does, for what is settled by Parliament to day, may be
unsettled by Parliament to morrow, and a new Settlement made a third day, so
that we may have not only as many Monarchs, but as many Monarchies too, as we
have Parliaments. And if this be not destroying the Foundation, and altering
the Constitution no man alive knows what is. And therefore before you enter
upon this dangerous Point, first ask your selves these Questions, How you came
to be a House? What Authorities you have there? What place you have in the
Constitution? Whether all your Powers are not purely and solely derived from
the Constitution? And if these be effectually answered, this attempt falls of
it self, as being not only besides the Constitution, but in plain contradiction
to it, and it is the most ridiculous thing in the World to think, that any Body
of Men whatsoever can derive an Authority from a Constitution in prejudice of
it self, much less to destroy it. Besides, this will not only destroy the
Constitution, but your selves also, as Branches of it, and dependant upon it,
it will undermin^ the very being of Parliaments, and all your Ancient and Legal
Privileges; for there is such an inseparable connection between the Fundamental
Constitution, and all the depending Branches of Authority, that they must of
necessity fall together, you cannot derive a Being and Powers from that which
is not, and consequently, whatever else you may be, you can be no English
Parliament, composed of Englishmen indeed, but not of the English Constitution.
And this sure is consideration sufficient to make you tender of all Violations
of the Constitution and of all steps toward it. Preserve the Constitution, and
it will preserve you, and support you in all your just Rights and Privileges,
but if you dissolve the Constitution, you cashier your selves, you will be no
longer our old legal Parliament, but must set up upon a New Title, even as new
as your New Settlement; and you will have but a Mushrom Authority, and but of
yesterday. But if your House should be so forgetful of it self, and its own
Being and Privileges, is it credible that the Lords will lower themselves,
their Honors, and Interests which they hold upon the old Foundation, they are
more nearly related to the Crown, are the Arms to uphold and defend it, they
derive all their Titles from an Hereditary Monarchy, and are more peculiarly
obliged to support it, not only from the nearness they stand to it, and
immediate dependence they have upon it, but also from their particular Oaths of
Homage; and it is by no means probable, that they will forego all these, and
whatever you do, there is no likelihood of meeting with any concurrence in that
House, which is sufficient to dash and discourage all such attempts, which will
only bring Honor to the Lords in standing by the Ancient Rights of the
Monarchy, and Shame to your selves in deserting them.

3dly. There is another flagrant Rumor, of a Design to Alienate the Revenues of
the Church, or at least to engage and pawn them for the defraying of great
Sums, either of which has a terrible Aspect upon the Church. And will in the
end prove the very same. The engaging the Church Lands, as a Fund for Supplies,
is the first stepped to their Alienation, and the next is to abolish Episcopacy
Root and Branch, and then the Lands come of course, the Office will soon be
found useless, when the Revenues are thought convenient, and the Inheritance
will endanger the Heir, so that what was designed by the Piety of Princes, and
of Good men, for the Honor, and Security of the Church, will prove the only
Inducement to destroy it, by the Covetous and Rapacious. I shall offer you
little on this Head, where the Consequences are so apparent; but beware what
you do, for you touch Fire, which at one time or other will burn your Fingers,
for Sacrilege never did prosper, nor never will.

I come to the Fourth and Last General Branch, viz.

4thly. The Grievances, And here is such a large Field of sad Matter, that if I
should enumerate all Particulars, I should never have done, I shall therefore
only select some few, and leave the rest to be supplied by your Memory, and
searched into by your Wisdom.

In the first place, besides the matter of our Grievances, there is somewhat of
extraordinary Malignity, with respect to the Season, in which they have been
committed, they have not grown upon us through long intervals and
discontinuance of Parliaments, but have been perpetrated in their very Faces,
have throve under the shadow of your House, and (to speak plain truth) have not
only grown under it, but in it, and some of our most Flaming Grievances have
been born, and bred within the Walls of St. Stephen's Chapel it self; and if
the Antidote be Poison, how great is that Poison?

For Bribes of all sorts, on all Occasions, and in all Persons, are of a very
black Complexion, but if it affects Persons of a high Station, in the greatest
Trust, and who are obliged by all Ties, Humane and Divine, to act sincerely,
uprighly, and indifferently, it is hideous, and monstrous, it is a crime that
wants a name, and incapable of representation, and it is no wonder it is so,
for it is perfectly new, and was never heard of in all the Ages before us. If a
Judge, sells Judgment, he deserves the utmost severity that can be inflicted,
but if a man in a Legislative capacity, sells a Law, it is a thousand times
worse, than Bribery in the Administration, as it corrupts the very Fountains of
Justice, and poisons the Springs, that are to convey the Measures of Right to
the whole Kingdom. The Cases of the East India Company, and that of the Orphans
are now notorious to all, as having, in part, been examined toward the latter
end of the last Parliament; and it is undoubtedly your Duty to proceed where
they left off, and to pursue it to the bottom; and for this you have a fair
handle, by calling for the Confession of Sir Thomas Cook, which he delivered in
Writing to the Commitee appointed to receive it, and one of that Committee is
your present Speaker. And it is my Motion, and I hope you will second it, that
whomsoever you find tampering in these lewd Practices, both Receivers, and
Givers, (as being both equally guilty) that you will proceed against them with
a severity as exemplary, as the Crime is abominable, that you may for ever put
an end to, and banish from the Kingdom, the most foul and scandalous corruption
in the World.

But there is another sort of Bribes, though called by the finer name of
Pensions, yet equally foul and corrupt, in this they differ indeed, that the
East India Pensioner is Bribed but once, whereas the other receives his Bribes
all the year, and by annual Allowance; however in this they agree, that the
formal Malignity of each, is the same, nay, the latter is of the two, the more
perfidious and treacherous, and together with his Vote, selling his Country,
and betraying the greatest Trust a People can repose in him. Several of these
were named in particular in the last Parliament, how easily soever they came
off, and if you please to inspect the List of Expenses in the Treasury, and
particularly the prodigious Sums for Secret Service, and critically examine
into whose Pockets that Money went, I doubt not, you will find many more.
However this Matter of Bribes (of both kinds) has alarmed all the Kingdom,
has reflected dishonor on your whole Body, and has weakened your Interest
among the People, insomuch that it is high time to purge the Infamy of your
House, and to take some proper and effectual Methods, that such Corruptions be
never more heard within your Walls.

2dly. The next thing, I know not what name to call it by, but it is a strange
and unpresidented action of some of your Members, to endeavor to be chose for
several places, and particularly Admiral Russel stood for Middlesex, when he
knew he was chosen before for Portsmouth, and also for the County of Cambridge,
and had furthermore declared that he would adhere to the choice of
Cambridgeshire, because his Estate lies in that County. This, how slight soever
it may appear at first view, is of very great consequence, not only as it
creates disturbances, and multiplies unnecessary expenses and trouble in new
Elections, but (what is infinitely more momentous) as it has a mighty
influence upon the freedom of Parliaments themselves, for if this Practice be
suffered to pass without Animadversion, a few popular Men, may ingross half the
Elections of the Kingdom, and so at first sitting down, the Parliament would be
only a Rump, a partial and incomplete Representation of the People, and before
new Writs could be issued out, and returned, the great Business of the Nation
might be transacted by half a House, and their Money be given away, and
themselves concluded by Laws, without having any Member of their own to
represent them, and act in their behalf. And this plainly strikes at the Root
of all Parliamentary Proceedings, deludes the People out of their Just Rights,
and if not timely prevented, may occasion more Mischiefs, than can easily be
foreseen.

3dly. And Enquiry into the State of the Navy, and particularly of the
Streights Fleet, seems more especially necessary at this time, not only because
the furnishing them with necessary Stores and Provisions at that great
distance, is treble the Charge to what it would cost us at home, and at this
time of day, it is absolutely necessary to retrench all the Expenses we can; not
only because a great part of that Fleet is disabled and honny-comb'd by the
Worm, by the long remaining in those Seas, as plainly all those Great Men of
War are, that are come back with Admiral Russell, which will require vast Sums
to repair, and make serviceable, and which inconvenience they were by no means
liable to in our own Seas, it need only be remembered, that the strength of
England consists in her Wooden Walls, and if these be suffered to be eaten up,
and moulder in the Service of Foreigners, half an eye can see, that in the end
it must prove fatal to the Kingdom. I know it is pretended that this Conduct
has broke all the Measures of France, by dividing their Fleet, and thereby
making them unable to offend us, which to me (which submission to wiser Heads)
is one of the strangest Assertions in the World, for if the Fleet in the
Streights be too strong for theirs at Tholoun, and if ours at home be superior
to theirs at Breast, it is little less than ridiculous to think that we cannot as
easily deal with their united Force in our own Seas, and that too without the
danger of exposing our Ships to Rot, and the dreadful Expense of maintaining
them in another Country. So that, whatever is pretended, it is for the Interest
of Spain, and for that only, that our Fleet was sent, and is still kept there,
we our selves reap nothing by it, but great Expense, and greater damage to our
Ships. But if this shall continue year after year, we may soon feel the smart
of this Conduct, and by the constant disabling our Men of War, together with
the draining of our Money (the Sinews of War) for their Supply and Repairs, we
shall be far less able to deal with them either at home or abroad: Their Ships
lie safe, while ours are eternally wasting, and what Tragical Effects this will
produce, a very ordinary foresight may easily determine. And I am pretty
confident, that if there be not speedily some other Measures taken, this one
thing, as it has already almost broken our backs (as you will see presently)
so in the end it will prove the utter overthrow and destruction of the Kingdom.

But besides these, there is another Matter that earnestly calls for, your
inspection, and remedy. Admiral Russell can tell you if he please, (and it is
highly reasonable that he should be pressed home on this Article) how the Dutch
have been furnished with our Stores and Provisions, without any manner of
Discount or Payment, how they detached their Men of War from the Grand Fleet,
to Convoy their Merchants, and carry on the Levant Trade, whilst ours remained
upon Public Duty. So that it seems, the Terms of Alliance with our Neighbors,
are, that we must feed them, and fight, while they mind their Business and
their Trade, and gain all the Profits, not only distinctly by themselves, but
by our Losses. And it is the same in all other branches of Trade, our Fleets are
stopped at home by high hand, or otherwise employed, to give them the best
opportunities, and the Cream of the Markets both for Buying and Selling. Now
this perhaps may appear to you as a mysterious Riddle in the Confederacy, that
we must fight, and pay all, and our Allies gain all; but it is unfolded by that
powerful and wise Maxim, We must oblige the Dutch, meaning, we must give them
all the Advantages, whatsoever becomes of our selves. And this sure is a new
way to make us a rich and flourishing People, to engage us in the greatest
Burden of the War, and at the same time to have our Trade wrested out of our
hands, even by those, for whose sakes we bear it, if therefore you would drive
these Mischiefs to their true Spring, and Original, you must rise as high as
the Councils by which our great Affairs, and particularly those of Trades are
managed, and it deserves your enquiry, whether our Allies the Dutch, instead of
minding their own business, have not too great a share in ours for they have
actually got the best of our Trade into their hands, and this can proceed but
from one of these two Causes, either from their Management of our Councils, or
from our own mismanagement of them. I must confess that beloved Maxim, which
can never be too often repeated, We must oblige the Dutch, has a very kind
Aspect on our Neighbors, although considering our present vast Expense both of
Men and Money on their Account, together with our former Services for that
Commonwealth. A poor Englishman may be so foolish to think, that the Point of
Gratitude is due on the other hand, and the Dutch should oblige us, and

4. These unparalled, and illegal attempts on the Lives and Liberties of the
Subject, call aloud to you, not only for remedy for the future, but for
punishment for the present upon the Offenders. The Case of Tooly, Provost
Marshal in Holborn, is one of the most dismal and tragical Stories that ever
came before a Parliament; to have Freemen kidnapp'd, and sold like Slaves, to
be immured, and starved, and suffered to dye like Dogs, is enough to make every
Englishman to tremble; and that which aggravates it, and adds to our amazement,
is the slight passing it over in the last Parliament. When a Complaint was
brought into the House against Captain Reyny (December. 12.) for pretending to
hire Thomas Atkinson as a Servant, and then putting him into the Custody of
Tooly. What became of this? Why truly three days after, in vindication no
doubt of the just Liberties of the People, Captain Reyney was called into the
House and Reprimanded. A most terrible Sentence, and which must needs prove a
mortal discouragement hereafter to venture on such villainies, to which there is
annexed the punishment of a Reprimand. In the mean time, if you do not go
thorough with them, and stigmatize such Crimes according to their guilt, it is
much better to let them alone, and leave them wholly to the Mob to redress; for
though I am not very fond of a Mob Reformation, nor I suppose is any Person else,
who considers it; yet it is much better to suffer them to take what vengeance
they please, than that such outrageous and impudent violations of our Liberty
should escape unpunished. And just such another Instance, but of a yet more
tragical nature, is that of the Lord Conisby and Sir Charles Porter, who hanged
a poor man (Gaffney) in Ireland, without Trial, Examination of Witnesses, or
any other Forms of Law, but by the most arbitrary Proceedings that ever were
heard of; the Fact and all the Circumstances were undeniably proved before the
last Parliament, and moreover owned by a Vote of the House of Commons, and yet
it was passed over with an excuse, and the Prosecution silenced, upon pretense
of I know not what necessity of the Times, and of which necessity no man can
tell one tittle, or ever heard the reason of; for I do not doubt to say, that
there never was, nor never can be such a necessity of any State in the World,
to hang up a man arbitrarily, in a time and place of peace, when the Courts of
Justice are open, and by Civil Magistrates, and not Military, which was
apparrent^y the case in every circumstance. Now, Sir, I do not know what you
will call this, but all the Nation has hitherto called it by the name of
Murder, and certainly so it is, if there be any such thing in the World; and
Murder, you know is a co^^^gious Sin, and affects all accessories, both before
and after the (...) and whosoever consents to it (as he certainly does, who
exe^^^^^ or does not punish it, when he is in a Station impowering him (...)
it, is involved in the Guilt, equal to the principal offender; and (...) them
who contrived, or admitted the excuse, wash their hands of it, as well as they
can, I am sure, if you do not take some effectual course about it, the Guilt
will be translated to your doors, and that vengeance which Blood cries for,
will be apt to stick, not only to your selves, but also to your innocent
Posterities, for above all other Sins, this leaves such a taint on the Blood,
as will not be purged for several Generations.

To this Head also belongs, the manifold illegal Imprisonments of the Subject,
and more especially the hardships, sufferings, and severities which have been
undergone in Prison, by those which have been, and by those which have not been
offenders against the Law, nor ever have been proved so, nor so much as any
attempt made to prove it, even to the loss of the Lives of some, the Limbs of
others, and the health of many; whereas the whole design of Imprisonment,
according to the Terms of our English Laws, is only to keep men in safe
custody, and that they may be forth coming, but has made all possible
Provision, that Prisoners may not want reasonable conveniences, and supports of
life, that they should suffer nothing hard, but the mere durance, and much less
that they should be used with the utmost inhumanity, and like the Slaves at
Argiers, so that if men are never so legally imprisoned, yet if they are
illegally used, if they are cooped up into holes, starved with cold or want of
sustenance, debarred of the necessary assistance of their Friends, and
Relations, and in fine, if they are treated like Beasts, by the barbarous and
inhumane Keepers, or by order from the Ministers, the Law is violated, and the
Freedom of an Englishman sacrificed, let his Crimes be what they will, and
which in truth are nothing in the Eye of the Law, till his Trial and
Conviction. If I should descend to particulars on this Head, they would fill a
Volumn, and therefore I shall only represent to you a very late and fresh
Instance. One Spencely; (who kept a Coffee-house in Little Wild-street,) was
taken up, upon a Warrant of High Treason, and carried Prisoner to the House of
Hopkins, the Messenger. He immediately fell sick of a violent and dangerous
Fever, his Wife made several applications to the Messenger, and to the
Secretary's Office, but could not get leave to come to the Speech of him, and
much less to administer to him, and give him that assistance his condition
required; But instead of that, Mr. Ellis (to whom she applied her self at Mr.
Secretary Trumbal's Office) reviled and reproached her with hard Language, at
length, and when he was passed hopes, she found means, by long and constant
waiting, to come to the Speech of Mr. Secretary Trumbal, (which before she
could never do through the behavior, and power of Mr. Ellis) who promised her
leave, and appointed Mr. Ellis to write her an Order to that purpose, but he
not only declined it, but plainly told her, she could not see her Husband, for
that Mr. Aaron Smith was out of Town. The same Evening she attended again, and
gave Mr. Hopkins a Reward, who took her to Mr. Secretary Trumball, and he again
gave her liberty, but with this express caution, that she should never be with
him her self, nor very long, and which tho Messenger punctually executed;
whereas his Condition required a Nurse, and not a Visit. But this is not the
worst of the Case, for she procured a Friend to write to Sir Hugh Chamberlain,
and state his Case, and desire his assistance, both with respect to his
Faculty, and also to his Interest at the Secretary's Office, and particularly
with Mr. Ellis. The Dr. fairly told her, her Husband was past recovery, and
very kindly went himself to the Secretary's Office, and spoke to Mr. Ellis,
that some Divine might be admitted to pray with him, and perform the last
Offices, but Mr. Ellis flatly refused it, and told him there was too much
granted already, and so in a few days he died; and in all probability for want
of seasonable and fit attendance, and the use of proper means for his recovery,
to be sure without that ghostly Advice and Council, and Spiritual
Administrations to prepare him for another World, which was never before denied
to the most notorious Malefactor, that ever was confined to an English Prison.
This is an action so all over barbarous, that it ought not be named amongst
Christian People, Savages and Turks use their Prisoners with more Humanity. If
it be said that Spencely was an Enemy to the Government, and so deserved no
favor nor compassion; but the Question is not about Favor and Compassion, but
common Justice, favor to be sure he had none, but had he Justice done him? Is
it just that a sick man in durance should be admitted to the necessary
Provisions for his Condition? Then the Prisoner ought to have had them, let him
have been what he would, his particular qualities (which I neither meddle with,
nor plead for) are quite out of the Question, for if Justice be any thing, it is
equal, indifferent, impartial. And if Justice once open her eyes, and weighs by
a false balance, if she can discern Parties, and Persons, and administer
accordingly, the Name and the Virtue is gone, it is Fraud, Oppression,
Partiality, Hypocrisy, or any thing but Justice. Moreover no man by the Law,
is reputed an Enemy to the Government, till he be tried and convicted, and if
this be the Case, what do Laws or Trials signify? There is a more expeditious
way, than by the dull formality of Judges and Juries, take him up by a Paper
with a Seal to it, and send him to the Goals or Messengers to be Murdered, and
there is an end of him; but withal, there is an end of all Justice too, and no
man can be safe one moment, for it is but clapping a hard name upon your back,
and calling you, or suspecting you for an Enemy to the Government, and then
away you go to the Cannibals, and are never more heard off.

5thly. The prodigious Losses at Sea, And these I call Grievances rather than
Misfortunes, for that they were occasioned, by miscarriage and mismanagement,
if not treachery in the Council. For in the first place the Petition of the
Merchants for Convoys could not be heard, nor answered; and Secondly, after the
Alarm given, and two East India Ships taken, Admiral Hobson was sent out with a
Squadron, and who returned home again, and gave the French liberty to take the
other three; but that which is the Fundamental miscarriage, is the sending our
Fleet to the Streights, to take care of Spain, while our own Interests are
neglected and laid open to the Spoil, if our Fleet had stayed at home, it is
impossible that such a Ravage could have been made among the Merchants, our
Coasts would have been guarded, our Seas cleared, and our Trade open, and
unmolested. And here you plainly fee the wonderful poling of this Conduct, our
Fleet was sent to the Streights, and for this reason, because it broke all the
Measure of France, yet their Measures must needs be broken, because that
thereby they have gained five East India Ships, and five hundred others, I dare
say the French King would be content to have his Fleet eternally cooped up at
Thoulon, if he might continue the advantageous opportunities, he has thereby,
of enriching himself by our Spoils. Alas, Sir, we are grown the kindest People
in the World, we will lop off an Arm our selves, to save the Finger of our
Allies, we have spent our Men, our Money, and our Ships too, for the advantage
of Catalonia, and for that very reason, have our selves lost ten times the
value of the whole Country. But I need not remind you of this, the whole
Kingdom is alarmed, and all on fire about it, and you cannot but hear of it,
and the dismal Effects of it from all Quarters, and by all sorts of Persons.

I conclude with telling you, that our Grievances are the Objects of your
Authority and Great Trust, about which they are to be exercised in order to an
effectual Remedy; for if our Grievances are only brought into the House at the
beginning of a Session, and then dropped or lost, it will not only be fruitless,
but pernicious to the People: For such pretermission, or connivance, will most
certainly be interpreted into a License or Authority to commit them, and
offenders, instead of being restrained, will be emboldened to act yet more
outrageous Villainies, in hopes of the same impunity. And therefore my humble
request is, that, in Justice to your selves, and in Compassion to the whole
Nation, you will pursue our Grievances till they are redressed in all Points,
that is till the remedies for our future security are ripened into such
provisionary Laws, as shall seem agreeable to the Wisdom of your honorable
House. I am in all respects,

SIR, Yours etc.

FINIS.

