Imprimatur.

May 16. 1693. Char. Heron.

Constantinus Redivivus:

OR, A FULL ACCOUNT OF THE Wonderful Providence, AND Unparalleled Successes

That have all along Attended the Glorious Enterprises of the Heroical Prince,
William the 3d, Now KING of Great Britain, etc.

Wherein are Many Curious Passages, Relating to the INTRIGUES of Lewis the
14th, etc. Carried on Here, and Elsewhere; Never Printed before, etc.

By Mr. JOHN WHITTEL, Sometime the only English Chaplain to the Army.

LONDON, Printed, and sold by Tho. Harbin, at the Wheat-Sheafe, over against
the Golden-Tun-Tavern in the Strand, 1693.

TO THE QUEEN'S Most Excellent Majesty.
August Madam,
IT being now about IX Years since I was first Conversant with Military
Persons, and heard the Sound of Drums and Trumpets, as well in the United
Netherlands, as Here, and in Ireland. And having the Honor to Bear in my Body
the Marks of Fervent Zeal, and Unshaken Loyalty to Your Sacred Majesty's; Which
is, I confess, the Principal Thing in this World I rejoice in, and value my
self upon. It has so far encouraged me, as to cast these Unpolisht Papers at
Your Majesty's Feet; Containing, an Account of the Miraculous Providence, and
Providential Successes, That have all along attended the Glorious Enterprises
of His Majesty King William, for the Public Good of Christendom; But
especially of the British Empire, together with the United Netherlands, and of
the Protestant Religion, as in the Rest of Europe, so particularly in Great
Britain and Ireland, it is most Secure and Triumphant Seat: And humbly to beg
Your Majesty's Most Gracious Acceptance thereof. I cannot say of this
Enchiridium, as the Jews sometime said to Christ, of the Centurion, (although
it Treats of so glorious a Subject,) Dignum est, It is worthy that Your Majesty
should accept it: But, I may truly speak in the Centurion's own Words, Non Sum
dignus, I am not worthy to be Graced with Your Majesty's Favorable Acceptance;
As being Conscious of my small Abilities. Neither are these Fragments
deserving, for Excellency of Style, or Elegancy of Phrase, which is not my
Ambition therein: Since the true Adamant is best polisht with its own Dust, and
Heroic Deeds are their own proper Encomium.

I have not for my own part, whereof I can boast, but the Honor of being
sometime, the only English Caplain to His Majesty's Army, in the late blessed
and memorable Expedition; and of reading and dispersing then some hundreds of
His Gracious DECLARATIONS, between Tor-Bay and London; to the Joy of all true
Protestants, and Dejection of their Adversaries.

To make no mention of my Service and Wounds received in Ireland, etc. There is
no Man that has endeavored to advance Your Majesty's most just Designs, more
than my self, according to the small Sphere of my Power, as is not unknown to
several Noble Lords, etc.

May then the covering of the Almighty Wings, be ever spread over your
Excellent Majesty's, and underneath the everlasting Arms; may your Royal
Persons be still most precious in the Eyes of all your Subjects, and your
Forces prosper by Sea and Land. May you be blessed with an Obedient, Religious
and Loyal People throughout all your DOMINIONS, and with a long and happy Reign
over them, in Health, Wealth, Peace and Godliness; and after this Life, may
Your Majesty's be Crowned with Glory and Immortality, is the Prayer of

Your Majesty's most Loyal, most Dutiful, most Obedient, Subject and Servant,
John Whittell.

THE Preface.
THE Author's Principal Design is not here to Form a History of our Present
Gracious Sovereign, who is the Main Subject of the following Discourse: Nor to
give the World any Exact, or Minute Account of His Glorious Actions; Knowing
well enough, that Task has been, and is, performed daily by many Abler and
Acute Pens, who have already Engraven them, with such Fair and Lasting
Characters, in the Adamantine Tables, laid up in Honors Temple for the use of
Posterity: That doubtless they will be found there Brightly Legible, when
Old-Time shall have Eaten out, and Effaced those of Alexander, and the Caesar's.

And, that for the People of this Present Age, and of this Part of the World,
there are few or none of them, but have either seen His Heroical Exploits,
heard the Fame of them; or felt, at least, their Comfortable Influence, which,
indeed, has proved Beneficial to all, but the Noxious part of Mankind; and such
as, like Fishes and Monsters, Prey upon the Rest.

And therefore knows well enough, that 'twould be Impertinent for him to
pretend to Write a History, in which, it would be altogether impossible, to say
any New Matter, or any thing, but what has been already much better expressed by
others.

No; his Aims in this Essay, are quite different from theirs; for, though he
has been himself an Eyewitness of some of His Majesty's Greatest
Archievements, having been with him in two Important Expeditions; and has
already given the World an Account of some of the Chief Passages in them; Of
which, be bears about him continually some very Uneasy, though Honorable
Marks: Yet, duly remembering, that he served Him, More in Quality of a Divine,
than a Soldier in His Army; And that the Present Age Swarms with a Race of
Men, that Attribute so much to Second-Causes, that they scarce ever look up to
God, who is Causa Causarum, the Author of All; and so much Idolaters of
Fortune, that they will hardly allow any Room to Providence, or an
Over-ruling-Power.

Therefore, the Author, upon this Consideration, has endeavored, so to Compile
this Relation of His Majesty's Actions, as it may be more a HISTORY of God's
Providence, and Over-ruling-Power, than of His Majesty's GLORIOUS
ACHIEVEMENTS: insisting properly upon the First, as his Text; and upon His
Majesty's Happy Successes, and His Enemies Motions, as only a good Comment upon
it; Needing (indeed) nothing else, but a Full and True Application: Being very
sensible, that herein, He is so far from detracting from, that he much adds to
that Glory, which His Majesty (without flattery) most Affects and Glories in;
Which is, to give all the Glory of his Actions to God alone; And being
thoroughly convinced, That His Majesty in that Point, is very much unlike to the
Vainglorious Monarch of France (Lewis the XIVth) who Arrogantly Ascribes all
the Honor of his Successes, soly and wholly to himself; as very properly he
may (all things well considered) because, whereas, King WILLIAM'S Great
Undertakings, are, All Men who love the Truth must own, really founded upon
most Just Motives, and directed purely, to Noble, Religious, and Generous Ends,
yea, even to the Common Good.

The French King's on the contrary, are Grounded upon so Wicked and Persidious
a Bottom, and tend so very much to the General Destruction of Mankind; that for
all his Innate Confidence, being ashamed to Attribute them to the All-righteous
God, who knows his inward thoughts; he, with an Insolent Mind, Arrogates them
very fairly to himself, for fear otherwise of being obliged to Father them upon
a Worse Author.

But to come to the Matter in hand, the Design of this Essay, in short, is, to
show the Triumphs of Providence over all Humane Prudence, in the late
Revolutions of Holland, and especially of these British Kingdoms; and how very
visibly the finger of God, has appeared in the Chief Transactions of His
Majesty's Life, and of our Great Deliverance by Him; by making so many contrary
Causes to Concur, to the producing that Mighty Effect; and directing the
Counsels of the Enemies, to steer their Vessels upon those very Rocks, which
they had used all possible Endeavors to avoid; And thereby, to move all Good
Protestants, of these Nations especially, Earnestly to Wrestle with Allmighty
God in Prayer, for a Long Preservation to them, of their Blessed Deliverer; by
Acknowledging Him, to be the Signal Instrument of the most High Lord, more than
of any mere Natural Causes, or pretended Influence of the Stars.

For, though the Author be absolutely persuaded, that Miracles properly so
called, are, at present, ceased; yet, he cannot but Believe, with all
Reasonable Men, That, God Almighty by his Extraordinary Providence, does still
oftentimes interpose, between both his Friends and Enemies, and bare natural
Causes; in order, to bring about his just designs, of punishing or favoring
them, and especially unusual Revolutions in Kingdoms and States.

And that these last Revolutions in the united Netherlands, and England, etc.
if well considered, in all their precedent, Concomitant, and subsequent
Circumstances, are such very evident and infallible proofs of that undeniable
Truth, that it cannot possibly but be acknowledged by all modest Men, who will
give themselves free leave but to think.

This he verily believes any impartial and unprejudiced Reader, will be fully
convinced, when they shall make due Reflection upon some Passages,
particularly, those which he has collected out of some very choice Memoires,
lent him by some Friends, who had more than ordinary opportunity, to enter
behind the Scenes, and view the secret Springs, that set some of the chief
Machines of those great Artificers on Work: So that, though they may perhaps
have read the Story of the same Transactions, elsewhere; yet, they will however
be obliged to confess, they never saw them before in the same Light, managed
with the same Method, nor applied with the same Reflections and Observations.

One thing he will only add, That if any well affected Person who is an
Israelite indeed, in whom there is no guile, shall think himself, or his Party
reflected upon, when mentioned herein, as intended to be made. Tools of, by
some of the late French and Jacobite Intrigues; that they would rectify that
mistake in themselves, by considering well, it is not any where here asserted;
that they consented to those Motions, nor yet, that they were actually put in
Execution, though it must be granted by all, that it was partly done in
CORPORATIONS; but only that they were intended to be made Tools of, as well as
some biased Church of ENGLAND Men, and to be played both of them, one against
another, in order to make way for their mutual Destruction, for the
establishing of Popery and Arbitrary Power.

And why, the affirming or proving of this should appear offensive to any sober
Man, that really believes, there was a most true, fair and justifiable cause
for this blessed REVOLUTION, the Author cannot well imagine.

And therefore hopes, all sober and unbiased Men of what persuasion soever,
that are Friends not only in Tongue, but in Deed and in Truth, to this present
GOVERNMENT, will lay aside all prejudice and partiality, and heartily accept
his honest and well designed Endeavors; which tend only to the laying open the
Enemies INTRIGUES, the cautioning Men of all sorts, from being any more drawn
in by them.

To alienate, their hearts, even from all thoughts of accommodation with the
French Harpies, till their Claws be cut close.

To show, the Moderate and equitable Carriage of our Representatives, in
re-setling the shaken Government, the very Just and Lawful Grounds, and
indispensable Obligations their present Majestys moved upon; in all the whole
course of their Proceedings, their Tenderness toward the person of the late
King; and their exceeding great Moderation, and Matchless Clemency to all their
dissatisfied Subjects.

To set forth His MAJESTY'S indefatigable Care, prudent Conduct, eminent
Courage, noble Resolution and Constancy, and happy Success; in all these
wonderful Occurances; and to do just Honor, to all other Instruments of our
present LIBERTY and HAPPINESS; and yet, reserve and attribute to almighty GOD,
the due Praise and Glory of all.

As for those few Malcontents that are blinded, by the God of this World, and
are Enemies to this blessed Government, if any Expressions in this TREATISE
displease them; he is not at all concerned at it, let them look off it, and
withal know, it was not calculated for their squeamish Palates; the Author
being very consident, there are honest Williamites enough in the Nation, to
embrace heartily the whole Impression, at least, if 'twere three times the
Number. And being no less assured, they are with all so generous and kind, that
they will read this Essay, for the sake only of the Authors good, and honest
intention, how mean a conceit soever they may have of his performances.

ERRATA.
PAge 15. l. 2. Artificis, for Artifices. p. 49. l. 25. and fare, r. of fare
and. p. 91. l. 22. is for, if to. p. 99. l. 2. five r. fire. p. 148. l. 15.
Convent r. Convant. p. 151. l. 6. Bavillon r. Barillon.

Constantinus Redivivus: OR, An account of the wonderful providential
Successes that have all along attended the Heroical Enterprises of his present
Majesty, King WILLIAM the III. Through the grand Revolution of Holland, England
and Ireland.
THE August and Glorious Hero, who is the principal Subject of all our
following Discourse, and also of the Love, Veneration and Admiration, of even
the better part of the Christian World at this very Day, as well those of the
Roman Communion, as of the reformed Protestant Religion; is lineally descended
from the most Ancient, and Magnificent House of Nassaw; a House, signally
honored and adorned, with most potent and splendid Alliances throughout
Europe; and whose truly noble Branches have spread themselves in several parts
of Germany, that was graced about four hundred Years ago, with the imperial
Dignity, in the person of Adolphus, Emperor of Germany, and Successor to that
famous Rodolphus of Habsburg; who, when a certain Man came to Him, to ask what
he would give him to kill Octocarus King of Bohemia, with whom he waged War,
answered, Et si noster hosts Octocarus, non tamen efficiet, ut praetergrediar
fines Justitiae atque Moderationis. In fine, whose illustrious Family has
flourished, in very remarkable and distinguishable Grandeur, for above a
thousand Years, as is Chronicl'd of it. How Prince Mauricius took the strong
Castle of Zutphen, and also the excellently well Fortified City of Breda, March
the 3d. Anno 1590. How his great Grandfather Prince William of ever glorious
Memory, after having furmounted numbers of sundry Obstacles, thought indeed to
be insurmountable, and with a prodigious and undaunted Resolution, Conduct,
Prudence, and Constancy, laid the Foundations of a flourishing Republic, that
now sends forth Ambassadors daily upon equal terms to the most puissant Kings
in the habitable part of the Earth, and even to the King of Spain himself, who
accepts the alliance and assistance of those his quondam Subjects, whom not
content to rule as such, his haughty and impolitick Progenitors, sometime
treated as Slaves and Abjects. And how his Warlike, Great and Famous Uncles and
Grandfathers, by the continued course of their Victories fixed and established,
the dear-bought liberty and greatness of their Country; by the hazard of their
Lives and Fortunes, and the vast expense of their Treasures, is amply set forth
by many florid and learned Pens. Nor have even the Writers of their very
Enemies side, been able to be silent of their Praises, and noble Acts, so
manifest to the whole World: And therefore, we judge it altogether superfluous
to say any more here, on this Subject. Nam Genus and proavos and quae non
fecimus ipsi, Vix ea nostra voco. Our main and chief design, in this small
(...), being only to show how our present illustrious Prince, after that he had
no less miraculously retrieved, not only the very Being, but even the
prosperity and greatness of the same State; when through the Treachery, and
sottish negligence of its then Governors, it seemed (as it were to the World's
eye) to be tumbled down to the very Foundations, and laid all in Rubbish by the
thundering and surpassing fury of a more powerful Monarch, than the former
Roboam of Spain; has still providentially advanced, by most glorious and
successful steps, against that formidable, and too much prevailing Nero of the
West, and alone given life to almost (if not) all, the efforts that have been
made against his uncontrollable power, which else would like an irresistible
Tide, or Sea, where the Banks are broken down, have deluged even all Europe.
And how at length in recompense of so many hard Toils, and Perils of his
precious Life for the Public Good, the almighty Lord of Battles, particularly
for the glory of his holy Name, and the welfare of his suffering Church, has
by a series of Providence, more wonderful than all the rest exalted Him, to a
station that is above many of his noble Ancestors, and placed Him on the
Sovereign Throne of the most Military and Formidable Kingdoms of the West; and
bestowed upon him yearly, still new and fresh earnests, or specimens of his
having really elected Him, to complete like the great Constantine (whose
Sovereign power likewise had its first rise in the warlike British Isles) the
full deliverance of his oppressed Children, and the Re-erection of his Church
in a Triumphant State, both of Purity and Prospirity, by (at least the crushing
under, if not) the utter subversion of that Babilonish Power and Authority,
which has been so long the Bar, which lets the growth of the Truth of the
Gospel, and the right understanding of the great Mysteries of Godliness, as
well as the Plague and Terror of all quiet and peaceable Christians.

This glorious Prince, I say, as if indeed God of his great Mercy and Goodness,
had removed all humane Tutelage and Protection on mere purpose, that he might
show us and all the World, that he himself took Him under his own immediate and
peculiar care and Guardianship, as a mighty Hero; by whom he graciously
intended to work or bring to pass, some Signal and Extraordinary Deliverances
to his own Israel, was most unhappily deprived of his Father (a Prince of a
truth of most hopeful and surpassing Courage, Prudence, Piety, and all other
very noble Endowments) even before he was brought forth into the World. Being
taken off by that common Distemper, the Small Pox, in the very Spring of his
Days, or flower of his Age; being but twenty four years Old when he died. And
our blessed Prince, coming into the World not till some few days after his
renowned Father's decease, viz. on the fourth of November, Anno 1650.

He was verily observed in his tender Years, or youthful Days, to discover a
Discretion, Moderation, sweetness of Temper, and a Reservedness, much beyond or
above his Age. And his Prudence, Valor, and other Princely Virtues, increasing
daily with his Stature; He gave his Relatives and Friends, as well as those
about him, all the Appearances of an extraordinary share of Courage, Conduct,
and all other Dispositions that could possibly be desired in a Prince, in order
to qualify him: As for an affectionate Father, so also, for a most powerful
Defender of his Rights and Country. And it is most peculiarly observable, that
though God has permitted sundry mighty endeavors, to have been made by
Domestic Factions, even from his very Cradle, in order to have oppressed his
growing Greatness, and several horrid and execrable Plots and Devices, to have
been carried on with great Secrecy, both by them and the Intrigues of Foreign
Princes, to defeat his grand Designs, and to bereave him of his most Just,
Lawful and Hereditary Rights and Honors, or of his precious Life it self. Yet
still (thanks be to God for it, and adored be his holy Name) the many
oppositions and hellish Machinations of his implacable and undeserved Enemies,
have been by good Providence made to serve even against their original
intention, only to his far greater Glory and Exaltation; causing his noble
Virtues to be more seen in the World, as the Stars shine brightest in the
darkest night.

For though the Faction of Barnevelt, continued and upheld afterward by the
De-wits, prevailed upon the States General in those days most ungratefully and
ungenerously, to deprive our accomplished young Prince of all his Hereditary
Dignities and Employments; yet at the same time, they thus took care to depress
the Prince, they were so infatuated and blinded with inveterate malice against
him, that they minded not at all to what Dangers they then exposed their State
or Country. To which end, they committed the greatest Blunders imaginable in
Politics; for after the Peace of Munster, foolishly believing they had no more
Enemies to fear, but the Ancient and Warlike House of Nassau, whose greatness
they conjectured, if not timely depressed, would be a perpetual Obstacle to
their unjust and ambitious designs, of grasping the Government entirely into
their own hands; they therefore rashly and without any consideration, disbanded
all their hardy Veteran Forces, and well experienced Commanders, by whose
valor and hard toil, their Country had been raised to that flourishing
condition it was then in; only for that very reason, because they looked upon
them as too much affected to his Highness, the Prince of Orange; and this was
done too, without the least care to procure, or provide any other old
experienced Troops in their Room. Moreover, they gave the chiefest Employments
in their Armies and Garrisons at that time, to the Sons of Burgher-Masters, or
Deputies of Cities that were very raw, and not well experienced in Martial
Discipline, being most of them such, as had never seen the face of an Enemy in
the Field, and so as unfit to Command as to Obey. By which means it shortly
came to pass, that when they were afterward contrary to their vain hopes,
invaded by a very subtle and powerful Enemy, even whole Cities and Towns,
though (of a truth) some of them were both Naturally (...) ^^^^ally well
Fortified, Stored (...) with numerous Garrisons, (...) or five thousand Men a
piece, besides Horse proportionable; yet yielded up even without the least
opposition, upon the first appearance, or summons of the Enemy, not so much as
striking a stroke, or firing one Gun against them. And thus Faction and cursed
Self-interest, with private Ambition, having reduced that, but very lately,
flourishing Republic to the very brink of ruin and destruction: It gave the
sore affrighted People of that Country a fair opportunity, for to see plainly
into what dreadful Dangers or Quicksands, their new Hair-brained Governors
(which were but of Yesterday and knew nothing) out of mere Spite, and Malice
to an Ancient and very illustrious Family, were now driving them and their late
happy Commonwealth, and so inspired them with Boldness as well as Foresight
at this time to apply a seasonable and fit remedy, by the quick destruction of
those notorious Domestic Usurpers, who had been the real occasion thereof; and
intrusting Him again with the recovery of their very much shattered and lost
State, who was the true genuine Issue of its first glorious and fortunate
Founders, and by sacrificing his most ungrateful Enemies, to the very angry and
enraged genius, of the poor injured Country.

Neither can it be fairly denied, but that the French King, even Lewis the
14th. himself, as great and mortal Enemy as he is to our renowned King William;
yet notwithstanding by Gods over ruling Providence, (as he has done since, to
that in England) did, though the World knows, most contrary to his own
Inclination and Intention, contribute as much or more to that first Revolution
in the united Provinces, and the subsequent Exaltation, Grandeur and Glory of
the Prince of Orange, than all other concurrent Causes put together; for having
by mere subtilty, far overreach'd those self designing Statesmen, that then
swayed so much in Holland, and induced them by his most specious promises, and
alluring pretenses, to stand firmly by them upon all occasions, as well as in
their late Usurpations; totally to neglect (as we have said) their old, expert,
and hardened Soldiers, and their frontier Garrisons; to turn all their Counsels
and Attempts wholly toward the famous Orangian Family, and the brisk Trade and
power of England, upon the vain confidence of effecting which, the crafty
Monsieur had already made them to build themselves a fools Paradise; for he,
all of a sudden leaguing on the contrary with England, attacks them most
sharply on their blind and defenseless side, and meeting with very little or no
resistance, from such raw Soldiers, and totty headed Commanders, as he then
knew to have the main Guards of their Garrisons and places, overrun their
Country with so rapid and surprising a swiftness, that he then forced the
People of necessity to have recourse to their last, but surest refuge under
God; to wit, the valiant Prince of Orange, and to restore Him whom their wicked
and treacherous Guides blinded with Ambition, had before so ungratefully and
impolitickly rejected. And so by half ruining a flourishing Republic, they
gave a meet opportunity to his Illustrious Highness, to show in the open sight
of the admiring World, the wonders of his Prudence, Policy and Magnanimity, in
restoring it to its former Power and Splendor. And withal, to let his
ungrateful and uncivil Countrymen know and see, that the great Triumphs of
their cruel Enemies, were caused for the most part by the wild attempts that
had been made upon Him and his Rights, and that the doing justice to the
ancient and warlike Progeny of the real Founders of their State, was the true
and only way unto its Restoration. But the last lift that was given toward
the advancing and securing his Authority and Power, still more and more in the
united Netherlands, was, the discovery of the horrid Plot laid against him by
the two De-wits, viz. Cornelius and John, who finding well that there was no
possibility for them of stemming the strong and violent tide of the Peoples
great Affection, tending wholly to the advancement of the Prince, which was to
them an insupportable Mortification; they thereupon endeavored to corrupt a
certain Chyrurgion, with the promised Reward of no less than 3000000 Franks, or
25000 pound Sterling to take away his most valuable Life; which matter being
disclosed, or providentially coming to light, and firmly attested, made out and
ratified by the said Chyrurgion; the forementioned De-wits, were, by the great
fury of the vulgar People (not content with the milder and slower Proceedings
of the Magistrate) torn presently all to pieces, and miserably put to Death
after such a manner, as now all the World knows. Namely, That they were hung up
by the Heels in the Marketplace, and being cut to pieces, their Joints and
Flesh sold by piecemeal at great rates, which were carried away by the Buyers
in a Triumph of Revenge. And the Prince himself, not long after, most firmly
fixed in the Hereditary State-holder-ship of all the united Provinces, and
Captain General of all their Forces by Sea and Land, with much more advantage,
than any of his famous Predecessors enjoyed it before.

Thus the Almighty and most wise Disposer of the World, returned the Malice and
Wickedness of the Princes Domestic Foes upon their own Heads, for they fell by
the Snare which they had laid for Him, according to the tenor of the holy
Oracles. Nec lex est justior ulla Quam necis artificis art perire sua. And
thus the just Judge of all Men, and avenger of all wrongs, punished the
perfidious and ungrateful; and at the same time, delivered the Innocent: Yea,
mortified all the Foreign Enemies by his own victorious Arm, and rewarded at
last, even far beyond all his hopes or desires, his unshaken Patience, and
unparalleled Generosity, in having born so long a time, with a forbearance
beyond Humane Example, the many base affronts, and injuries daily offered him
by the envious and self designing De-wits, and their upstart party. Nor were
the people (although they chose him in a great heat, and sudden fright, to
conduct the shattered and wheather beaten Bark, of their present forelorn, and
distressed State, into a safe Harbor or Port) in the least deceived, in their
expectations of him. The false and misguided steps of their late unhappy
Governors, had now by the rule of Contraries, instructed them in a few moments
space, in the very best and right measures that could possibly be taken. And
the furious alarms of the French Armies, had cooled them from the wrong
De-wits, into their right Wits again, and into their perfect Senses, out of
which they had foolishly by delusive, but more specious appearances been
decoyed so lately. For our young accomplished Prince, though made a General at
two and twenty Years of Age, as his great Grandfather had been before Him, in
the time of Charles the Fifth; quickly gave them such fair and Signal Proofs
and Specimens of his Prudence, Conduct and Courage, as sufficiently Entitled
Him to four of the most eminent Accomplishments, that qualify and consummate a
supreme Commander, viz. military Knowledge, undaunted Resolution, awful
Authority, and prosperous Success; so that like the youthful Alexander, or
Augustus, Nephew to Julius Caesar, he was no sooner in the Field, than ripe and
fit for Action, and the most daring Attempts and Execution. Which he so
fortunately managed, that He not only stopped a puissant, and insulting Enemy,
who till then, like a most strong or violent Torrent, carried all before them:
Nevertheless in a short time, our young Prince changed the Fortune of the War,
and forced the pride of Elder, and longer experienced Captains, flusht and
buoyed up with continual Victories, to submit to the more powerful and
prevailing Ascendant of his no less wisely guided Valor, and prosperous
Conduct.

And what was said of Alexander, and Julius Caesar, may not improperly be
spoken of him, concerning his Deligence and Conduct, (...), i. e. Nihil
procrastinans. He never delayed or let slip any occasion, as will most plainly
appear, if we will but take the pains, justly and impartially to examine the
several steps he has made, since he first set out on his Glorious Progress; we
shall then in large Characters, as bright as the Sunbeams, or in Capital
Letters, more beautiful to our sight, than Apples of Gold, in Pictures of
Silver. Behold, engraven in every Field, and before every City, Garrison or
Town, where he has appeared, his matchless Courage, and providential Success,
since he first undertook to fight the Battles of his Country.

For no sooner was he invested in the Office of Captain, and Admiral General of
all the Forces of the united Provinces, and was arrived in the Army, then lying
near Nienkop; but, He put a stop immediately to the whole power of France,
though commanded by Lewis the 14th. himself; and notwithstanding all their
Numbers of veterane and well disciplined Soldiers, and expert Officers, He not
only kept them from gaining any Advantage, but even repulsed them shamefully
with loss, to quit the attack they had made upon his Post of Nienkop; and
compelled them to retire toward their own Country, with such great
Precipitation, as to leave behind them their Spades, Shovels, Mattocks and
other necessary Vtensils, and implements of the Pioneers belonging to War.

And soon after this, as if the very Restoration of the Prince of Orange, the
true repairer of their Breaches, had already put new life and vigor into all
sorts of People again. A numerous party, of about 5000 French, were twice
repulsed from the Walls of Aerdenburg; and besides their slain, forced to leave
behind them, 500 Prisoners, among whom were, several Commanders, Officers and
Persons of Quality. And all this effected by the extraordinary Valor, of no
more than 200 Burghers, and 100 Garrison Soldiers, together with the small or
feeble Assistance of a few Women; for while their Wives filled their Bandileers
with Powder, the Children themselves carried the Balls or Bullets, to their
active and valorous Parents; nor did the Citizens of Groaning, with less courage
and good success, defend their Walls against the Bishop of Munster, forcing him
after having lain there a considerable while before it, with an Army of between
20 and 30000 Men to raise his Siege, after the loss of near half his Men, and a
vast expense of warlike Ammunition, and other Instruments of Destruction. To
which, they were chiefly encouraged, by the confidence they put in his
illustrious Highnesses good Fortune, and wise Conduct, and by the care and
vigilance he always took to supply them in time, with all manner of necessaries
for their Defense and Safety.

Upon the Promotion of our renowned Hero, or more properly upon the
reestablishing of him in his Hereditary Rights, Dignity and Employment, that
Great and powerful Prince, and wise General, the late Elector of Brandenburg,
wrote a Letter to the States General; wherein he Congratulates them upon the
Restoration of his Heroical Kinsman, the Prince of Orange, to the Power,
Grandeur, and Glory, of his Ancestors; adding withal, that he made no doubt,
but that such wholesome and just determinations, would be in the conclusion
prospered from Heaven for the Common Good; more especially, as knowing his
illustrious Highness, to be a Person that truly inherited all the Virtues of
his glorious Predecessors; and assuring them with all, that he found himself
obliged by his Cousin's Exaltation (or more truly Restoration) to contribute
his very utmost toward the Recovery and preservation of what his renowned
Ancestors had acquired, with so much Blood and Jeopardy of their own Lives.
About the same time, our young Prince fully resolving to remove the out-guards
of his most troublesome French Neighbors, gave them so sudden and fierce an
Alarm, with a party of Horse and Foot, that without dismounting off his Horse
all the whole Night, he never left them till he had driven them back again to
their Trenches before Vtrecht; and carried off with him several French Lords
Prisoners, who were Hunting at his arrival in the Woods of Amerong, whom he
sent away to Amsterdam; and so very courteously were they used on the way, that
not the least offer was made by any to rifle them.

Much about the same time, he made sundry necessary and wholesome alterations of
the Magistrates of many Cities, to the great and general satisfaction of the
Inhabitants, who now saw themselves by that means, in a very fair way of
recovering their former Peace, Glory, and Prosperity. And also among the
military Men, several faint hearted Officers, received the due reward of their
Pusillanimity and Treachery; His Highness being fully resolved to endure no
longer that corruption of martial Discipline, which had brought his Country so
very near its final ruin.

His next Action was, his vigorous attack of Woerden, then possessed by the
French, where he so very roughly handled the haughty Duke of Luxemburg and his
Army, that attempted twice to relieve it; that he killed two thousand of their
common Soldiers, even on the spot, maimed many of the rest, and slew or wounded
most of the Officers; in a manner, quite ruining five Regiments of their best
Infantry; which Heroical Action struck such a terror of him, afterward in the
minds of the French Officers at Vtrecht, that they would commonly draw Lots,
who should be sent against any Parties, where the Prince of Orange was engaged.

Thence after deliberate Consultations, and due measures taken in a Counsel of
War, held for that very purpose, he marched with an Army of about 24000 strong,
toward the Country of Liege, in order to fight, or at least to remove the
French Army there, under the Count de Duras, from the Quarters about the Meuse;
in which expedition, he had such remarkable Success, that though his Army was
composed of several Nations, and that his March was in the very depth of
Winter, into an Enemies Country, and along very bad ways; yet he effectually
removed that older, and more experienced General, Duras, out of his Post, or
rather strong hold, and hunted him up and down as a Partridge, till he retired
to Stassemburgh.

Terrified two strong Garrisons to the purpose, and then returned with the
Prisoners and Booty, of two fortified places; and all this was acted in the
space of nine days, with very inconsiderable or no loss of his own Men;
besides the terror he at the same time struck, in the Bishop-Elector of
Cologne, who thought himself secure neither at Bonne, nor any other part of his
Dominions, so long as so very active and vigilant a Chieftain as our Prince,
was quartered with his whole Army thus near to him.

After this, having repulsed the Duke of Luxemburg, who at that time by favor
of the Ice and Frost, had made an incursion into Holland, toward the City and
University of Leyden; in which Parts, and the adjacent Villages, he had made no
small Havoc, nor committed little Spoil and Barbarity, (these devastations of
a Country, being the peculiar pleasures of his Disposition, which is no less
crooked than his deformed Aesopian Body,) and forced him to retire in all have,
with the loss of above six hundred Men, and no small hazard of his own Life.

Moreover he most happily, and withal very expeditiously, recovered from the
Bishop of Munster, then leagued with the French, the strong and well fortified
City of Coevorden, accounted by those who pretend skill therein, one of the
noblest pieces of Portification, in all the Low Countries; which place had
fallen into the hands of that Bishop, not long before by Treachery: But now was
regained with such astonishing Valor and surprising Gallantry, together with
most signal Concurrence of the Divine Providence, that though it formerly
repulsed Verdugo, the Spanish General, after a fruitless Siege of one and
thirty weeks; and was now at this time, well furnished and stored by the Bishop
of Munster, with an exceeding great Magazin, of all sorts of Provisions for the
Mouth, as well as Ammunition and Artillery for Defense. Nay, he had in it even
then, a Garrison of nine hundred effective Soldiers; yet was it in one hours
time Stormed, and retaken by a party only of nine hundred and sixty, with the
loss only of sixty of the Assailants; as the History of those Wars most plainly
demonstrates.

Whereas quite contrary to what happens, almost in all other Seiges, there was
slain one hundred and fifty of the Defendants, besides Officers, and four
hundred and thirty taken Prisoners, among whom, also were many Officers, the
rest escaping out of the Town, when they perceived that it was absolutely lost.

The consequence of the regaining this important Place, was so exceeding great,
as to cast the Enemies then very much down, and put them into such a dreadful
Consternation, that presently after that, they deserted several of their
Garrisons, even upon the first news of it, and dispersed themselves here and
there, every man being glad to shift for himself.

Whereas on the contrary, it redounded so very much unto the Reputation of our
illustrious Prince, and so exceedingly enhans'd his Estimation and Honor,
among all sorts of People in Holland, and the united Provinces, that finding
such a continued and unexpected Advancement, such a happy chain of good
Successes, and withal so very prosperous an Alteration to happen upon his
illustrious Highnesses being advanced, to the supreme Management of their
Affairs, they could not but attribute them to the visible Benediction of the
most righteous Jehovah, upon the justice they had so lately done to the most
ancient and warlike Progeny of their first and chiefest Founders (and without
any Flattery, greatest Benefactors) and upon the most diligent, and vigorous
Efforts of that Courageous and prudent Prince, whose Noble and Divine Talent,
they had sometime despised and set at naught; nay, they themselves cannot deny,
but that they were most grossly ignorant of his enestimable worth, (like the
Cock in the Fable, of his precious Gemm) till angry and provoked Heaven, by
very amazing Judgments, roused them up to distinguish and employ his Royal
Virtues, and most noble Accomplishments.

Neither was he less happy in conquering Domestic Jarrs and Differences, than
foreign Foes; but gave the World a most important proof of the mighty Effects
of that sparkling golden Authority that is gained over the very hearts of Men
by Sweetness and Moderation, and of that grand Awe, Majesty and Reverence, that
is so deeply impressed and inculcated by an unfeigned Affection, or
undissembled Love. For when the mortal Feuds and Dissentions, between the old
and new Magistrates of Friezland were grown to that prodigious height and
degree, that representing the Sovereignty of that Province, they held then
separate, distinct Assemblies, and gave contrary Orders each to other, to the
very imminent danger of the public at the same time; and would in no wise
suffer themselves to be reduced into any good Order, neither by the Governor
of Friezland, nor his Mother: yet upon the very arrival of the Commissioners
dispatched to them, by the Prince of Orange, those heats were suddenly
dissipated, and the Breaches made up again, and the whole Province soon
restored to its former Unity and Love.

And afterward going himself in Person, to pacify the growing differences in
Zealand, He no sooner appeared in the Assembly of their States at Middleburg,
but their Dissentions as soon vanished away, like a smoaky vapor in the Air, and
all things thereupon were suddenly resettled, for the defense and safety of the
Country to the full; and general content and satisfaction of all Persons, and
his illustrious Highness's very great Praise and Glory.

By these Beginnings, having now given the World sufficient Proofs of his great
Capacity, in the Art of Civil, as well as of Military Conduct and Policy; He
was called daily to greater and more glorious Actions and Achievements: For
not only his own Countrymen, but even Foreign Princes, after this being so
fully satisfied of his most incomparable Abilities, that they scrupled not in
the least to entrust Him, with the sole command of their Armies, and to
adventure them and their Fortunes at Stake, in his most victorious and
successful hands.

Neither can it be possibly instanced, that ever he deceived their Hopes, or
that kind Providence ever failed his Rocky and firm expectations in any
occasions, were a full confidence was wholly reposed in Him, and that he was
well seconded by his Allies.

We shall only touch briefly upon some of the most important of the rest of his
glorious Achievements, passing by all lesser Occurrences and other
Circumstances, but such only as shall be purely necessary to set forth in
Crystal Characters, how wonderful careful the good Providence of the Almighty
has been all his whole life long, to present him with fair Occasions in order
to Signalize his most illustrious and incomparable Qualities. How very
industrious he has been always to cultivate those Divine Favors, not at all
for his own private Ends, but merely for the Public Good; and how he has been
commonly attended with Successes, much beyond the Hopes of his greatest
Friends, or Fears of his grandest Enemies, and the opinion of indeed the whole
World. Quid gaudium fando, etc.

To proceed then, though (by the watchfulness he was obliged to have upon the
Motions, not only of the Armies of the Prince of Conde, and Duke of Luxemburg,
but likewise of the English themselves; who at that Juncture, threatened a
Descent) he was hindered from affording any relief to Maestricht, besieged the
next Spring by a very powerful Army, headed by the French King himself in
Person; yet upon Lewis the fourteenth's retreat, after the taking of that
place, and upon the returning home of the English Fleet, after the last
Engagement on the Coast of Holland, he soon repaired that loss by the retaking
of Naerden; which although it had in it a Garrison of two thousand nine hundred
and thirty Men, and was very well Fortified and abundantly stored with all
manner of Necessaries, yet he took it in the space of four days, maugre all
Luxemburg's opposition, and that again even contrary to the usual fortune of
Sieges, with much less loss to his own Men, than to the besieged.

And not long after that, carried the great stroke in the no less speedy and
successful Reduction of the strong and famous City of Bonne, the Seat of the
Elector of Cologne, then in the French confederacy, which was no sooner taken,
but that famous old General Montecuculi, who was a proper Judge of Martial
Conduct, having left with him the command of the Imperial Army to join with his
own; He with them both made so formidable an Expedition toward the main Posts,
possessed then by the French upon the Rhine, the Meuse, and the Moselle, that
the French who wanted Men to re-implace those multitudes of good Soldiers they
had too profusely squandered away in their late rash and inconsiderate
Enterprises, not being able to maintain Garrisons and Armies in both Frontiers,
as the State of Affairs then required, rather than venture the loss of the
places, that composed the main Barrier of their Country, toward the Rhine in
this juncture of Distress, and Consternation, abandoned immediately Woerden,
Herderwick, Crevecoeur, Bommel, the City and Province of Vtrecht, and most of
all the rest of the places they had then taken, in the united Netherlands;
whose Example was soon followed by their Allies, the Munsterians.

And thus his Highness in some sense, out-did Coesar himself, vanquishing his
Enemies even at a distance, where he neither came nor saw; and forcing them
willingly to submit, by the only terror of his August Name, and made them
with a very mortifying reverse of Fortune, behold the period of their
Victories, in his bright and rising Glory; which the most florid copious Pen
can never sufficiently delineate to the Life.

In consideration of which, most great and unexpected turn of Affairs, from the
very brink of irrecoverable Ruin, and Destruction to a formidable State of
Power, Grandeur, and Prosperity, effected (next and immediately under God)
chiefly by the Policies and extraordinary valor of the Prince: The States
General as in Gratitude strongly bound, not only confirmed the Charge, of
Stateholder of the Provinces of Holland, and West-Friezland, in the person of
his renowned Highness during Life; but settled it likewise in the Heirs-male of
his Body, begotten in lawful Marriage by a public Decree, Dated the 2d. of
February, 1674. The tenor of which being so signal, and glorious a
Demonstration, of his high, and Unparalleled Merits; we thought, it would be a
piece of Injustice not to insert, and no small satisfaction to the Candid and
Impartial Reader to Peruse.

Friday, February 2d, 1674.
HAving taken into Deliberation, by way of Resumption, what the Lords Deputies
of the City of Haerlem Proposed to the Assembly, the 23d of January last past;
Whether it would not be expedient, that the Charge of Stateholder, and
Captain-Admiral, of the Provinces of Holland and West-Friezland; and Captain
and Admiral-General of the United Provinces, should descend upon the
Heirs-Males of his Highness the P. of Orange, begotten in lawful Marriage, as
by the Rolls of the same Date more amply may appear; We, the Body of the
Nobility, and the Deputies of the Cities, in the Name, and in the Behalf of the
Burghers, and Commonalty of the said Cities, have Declared, and do Declare by
these Presents, that having deliberately Considered the State and Condition of
the Government of these Countries, as it was in former times, by the blessing
of God, under the Most Illustrious Princes of Orange, of Glorious Memory, his
Highnesses Predecessors; and particularly, what has befallen this Republic for
these 23, or 24 years, last past, till now; we have observed, that this
Republic has been afflicted with several Calamities and Disasters, as well
Domestic, as Foreign, ever since the sad and unfortunate year 1650. That as to
our Foreign Calamities, we have never been without Wars, or the Fears of Wars.
More particularly, One most dreadful War, between the Kingdom of England, and
these States; which shook the very Foundations of the Government of these
Countries; So that it hardly has recovered Breath, ever since the said War; and
another against the Crown of Portugal, in the years 1656, 1658, and 1659; and
another occasioned by the Interest of the Northern Wars. That in the year 1664,
they had another New War with the King of Great Britain, and now this present
War, more sad and fatal than all the rest. And that during the whole Course of
the said War, this Republic has been forced to suffer many Affronts from her
Neighbors, to whom she was before a Terror. That as to our Domestic Affairs,
we have been overwhelmed with Intestine Divisions and Factions. That from the
year 1650, to the year 1660, several Members of this Republic have had a
particular Aversion to the Person of the present Prince of Orange, the only Son
of that Illustrious Family; and that Others, on the contrary, have zealously
maintained, that the said Prince ought not to be so ungratefully abandoned.
That the King of Great Britain being recalled to the Government of his
Dominions, and passing through these Countries, in order to his Embarking for
England, this Republic testified, as well to his Majesty, as to the Princesses
Royal, and Dowager, that they would take particular care of the Interest, and
Education of his Highness; and to Restore him to the Dignities which his
Illustrious Ancestors of Glorious Memory had enjoyed. But that after the Death
of the said Princess-Royal, all Good will and Affection toward his Highness,
was lost, and no further notice taken of him; till of late, that some Care was
taken of his Education; and that, at length, toward the end of 1671, or 1672,
Great Contests arose, about the Election of His Highness to be Captain General
of the Militia of this Country. That we have found, by sad Experience, that
the said Intestine Divisions and Factions, have given an Occasion to the
Enemies of this Republic, to Affront us every moment, as knowing well, that
they render us incapable to mind our Own Defense, by the Violation of that
Union, which laid the Foundation of this Republic; and which God has so
Miraculously blessed. And that the Differences which arose every day, about the
Election of Captain General of the Militia, and these Discords, which happened
among the Principal Members of this Republic, were the Occasions, that
Retarded and Hindered these Deliberations and Resolutions; Which of necessity
ought to have been taken, to Repel Foreign Force, and made us spend in Idle
Disputes, that precious Time, that ought to have been better husbanded. That
the said Divisions were the Reason, that toward the year 1671, when the King
of France openly declared, That he would make a War against this Country; we
consumed whole Months together, in Deliberating about the Election of a
Captain General; and whether to pitch upon his Highness; which time ought to
have been spent, in providing for the Defense of the State. And that for the
same Reason it was, that the King of France invaded this Country, by Force of
Arms, in the Year 1672, and reduced us to the last Extremities, and hazard of
Total Ruin. That therefore the Lords and States of Holland have deemed it
necessary, as the only Expedient that they can imagine, or hope for, utterly to
pluck up by the Roots the Occasions of the said Factions and Divisions; to
prevent their falling any more into those Misfortunes and Miseries, to which
they have been hitherto exposed; And, on the other side, to acknowledge the
Great and Glorious Services, which the most Illustrious House of Orange, has
from time to time performed, for the Preservation and Establishment of this
Republic. For these Reasons, the Lords of the Body of the Nobility, as also
the Deputies of the Cities, have Unanimously Conferred, and by these Presents
do Confer, in the Name, and on the behalf of the Burghers and Commonalty of the
said Cities, upon His Renowned Highness, and his Heirs male, begotten in lawful
Matrimony; the Charge of Stadholder, Captain, and Admiral General of the
Provinces of Holland and West-Friezland, with all the Dignities, Preeminences,
Prerogatives, Rights and Privileges thereto belonging, without any exception or
reservation, in as ample, and in the same manner, as the same Charge is at
present executed by His Highness the Prince of Orange; And consequently, that
after the decease of his said Highness, (to whom, nevertheless, the States of
Holland wish a long and happy Life, in all health and prosperity) the said
Charge of State-holder, Captain, and Admiral-General of the Provinces of
Holland and West-Friezland, with the Dignities, Preeminences, Prerogatives,
Rights and Privileges thereunto belonging, without any exception or
reservation, shall devolve and descend upon his Heirs-males, begotten in lawful
Wedlock. In pursuance of which resolution, the said Lords of the Body of the
Nobility, have ordered Letters Patent to be drawn up, and Sealed with the
Great Seal of the Provinces, etc.

Upon the same day likewise, the States of Zealand conferred the same Dignities
upon him, and made him Hereditary Noble of their Province; upon which ensued
the recovery of all the rest of the Places and Countries yet remaining in the
Enemies hands; which our Magnanimous Hero showed as much Prudence and Policy,
in clearing from Abuses, and Remodelling to their Ancient Form and Order, as he
had before shown Courage, and Conduct in their Recovery.

Thus, did both the French, and the De-Wits, and their Upstart-party, by those
very Designs, that struck at the Ruin both of Him and his Country, by a
strange overruling turn of Providence, advance him to sudden Greatness, of a
much higher pitch, than that they attempted to dismount him from; And his
unjust Deprivation of all his Hereditary Honors and Dignities, became the
occasion of his being afterward invested with more abundant Honor: Which he
always studied to make redound to the advantage and prosperity, and not (like
his French Tyrannical Neighbor) to the Misery and Oppression of his Country.
After this, the King of France, to repair his late Loss in the United
Netherlands, by regaining fresh Ground in the Spanish Provinces, falling down
with his Power into La Franche Comte, and Mastering that whole Province, before
any sufficient Force could possibly advance to hinder him; and being returned
for Paris, leaving that experienced, and Renowned General, the Prince of Conde
in the Low Countries, with a Powerful Army of his Choicest Forces, to watch the
Motions, and thwart, if po^^^le, the Designs of the Confederate Ar^^* which now
consisted of the United Forces, of the Imperialists, Spaniards and Hollanders,
amounting in all to 60000 Men, under the Command of Three great Chiefs, viz.
General Souches, His Highness the Prince of Orange, and the Count de Monterey,
whereof, the Prince Commanded the main Battle, and the other Two Generals, the
Van and the Rear. There happened soon after, between those Two Potent Armies,
the most fierce and furious fight of Seneffe; wherein the Great Prince of
Conde's Valor and Courage was every way Matched, and his Conduct, and Prudence,
in several respects, outdone, by a General, who was yet but a Young Beginner
in War. By which means he put a check upon that Fury, which guided, as it was,
with so much skill in a General, equally fiery and experienced; and backed with
a numerous Army of veterane Soldiers, flush't, and bouyed up with continual
Victories: Had it proved successful, as but for the extraordinary Prudence,
Courage and Diligence of the Prince of Orange, it most certainly had, would
have overwhelmed Holland, and all the Low Countries, with a Second Inundation
of French Violences, much more dangerous and remediless (as all Relapses
commonly are) than the First. For, not to insert here all the particulars of
that Dreadful Battle, of which there are so many well-penn'd Relations extant,
it is certain, on all hands, That the Prince of Conde, tho he before were
averse to a Fight, as being very loath to expose the Glory and Honor he had
won in so many Battles, by encountering an undaunted and vigorous young Prince,
of Twenty three years of age, and knowing his Eagerness even in that early
beginning of his Mighty Career, by making his first Trial of a pitcht-Battel,
against so famous a Chieftain as the Prince of Conde, and by Victory over him,
to open himself a secure and easy passage into the very Bowels of France, in
order to revenge the Grand Injuries, both his Native Country, and his own
Hereditary Principality, and other Patrimonial Lands, had received so lately
from that Insolent and Unquiet Nation; and reflecting on himself, upon the
account of the Civil and Foreign Wars he had been engaged in, not many years
before, against Lewis the 14th, what severe Censures he would be obnoxious to,
more than any other Commander, upon any Considerable Misfortune to his Army,
which would have laid France open and Defenseless on that side, and would have
been thought in him, a wilful Miscarriage.

Though (I say) for these Reasons, that Great French Prince moderated his
Natural Impatience to Fight; And, with Design to avoid a Battle, posted his
Army so, that he could not be any ways forced to it; yet, when he heard of the
daily Clashings of the General-Officers of the Confederate Army; and how much
the Well-advised Measures of our Courageous Prince, were disjointed and broken
thereby; and found, that upon their Despairing to bring him to a Battle, they
were Marching to lay Siege to some important place, within their New Conquests;
and that in their March by him, they were forced to file through very narrow
and most difficult passages; Letting the Van-guards Politickly pass, and some
of the Main-Body too, quietly, without any disturbance, some Leagues before; he
thought he had then a very sure prospect, of cutting off securely and easily,
at least, their whole Rear; and accordingly fell upon them, with so much
vigor and fury, and with such success, that in a few Moments, he routed, and
broke in pieces, all the Spanish Cavalry, and the Foot sent to their Relief;
who being so broken, fell upon the Dutch, and put them into such a terrible
disorder, that could no ways possible be remedied by our brave young Prince;
though it must be granted by all, that he used all imaginable means to do it,
that Industry, Prudence, or Courage could suggest: And most certain it is, that
had the Prince of Conde been contented with the success of that first Action,
the Victory was his, and the Confederates could no ways, at that time, as their
Armies were posted, have Retaliated the loss to the French.

But the fiery General, of these last, being encouraged by the hopes of a
Complete Victory, as thinking the Dutch, whom he looked upon, to be very
despicable Soldiers, would never stand after the Spaniards were wholly
Defeated, would needs make his whole Army advance, and endeavor to force the
Prince of Orange out of some advantageous Posts he had Seized, to stop the
torrent of his Successes and Fury, and make a general Battle of it; whereby he
gave occasion to our illustrious Prince, to catch his Laurels from him, and by
main Force and Courage, to wrest the Victory from one who before had it in his
hands, and oblige him to retire with the loss of all the flower of his Army,
under the favor of the darksome Night; and to welcome its approach for saving
him from the disgrace of a total Defeat, tho it is most assured, he had not at
all missed of his aim, but had ruined that day with an irreparable Slaughter,
the whole Confederate Army, had he had to do with a Prince with the least
degree of less Vigor, Obstinacy, Activity and Conduct, than himself.

And most certain it is, the Glory and Renown our Heroical Prince gained that
day, is very great indeed; when so great a Master of War, as the Prince of
Conde was, thought it a glory not to be overcome by him.

And indeed the Prince of Orange's Conduct and Example, must needs be confessed
by all unbiased Writers, to have produced the mightier Effects of the two on
that occasion, since if the Prince of Conde's Behavior and Example, kept up
the Courage to admiration in an old Army, composed all (as 'twere) of Captains,
as much used to Victory, as to Fight: That of the Prince of Orange, restored it
to a Miracle, in men altogether dispirited and defeated; and in a few Moments,
made able Captains of those, who till that very Day, were hardly Soldiers, and
knew not what 'twas to be in a hot Engagement; and animated them with such
fresh Vigor, as to ravish away a glorious Victory, from an Army of old beaten
and long experienced Soldiers.

All the while this Action lasted, our undaunted Prince gave all necessary
Orders, with admirable Prudence, and extraordinary Skill; He neglected no means
nor advantage, he could possibly improve, opposed a fit and speedy remedy where
ever there was occasion, and charged the French several times at the head of
his Squadrons, with matchless Bravery and indefatigable Deligence; he stopped
even his own Fugitives, that fell upon him, as well as his Enemies; and
rallying them again, charged with them several times a fresh; he exposed
himself as well as the Prince of Conde, more than the meanest Soldier, and
Count Souches rightly said of him, That he fought with the Conduct of an old
General, and the Courage of a Caesar.

His very Enemies said of Him, that if their Prince of Conde had multiplied
himself, he had met the Prince of Orange every were; and the Prince of Conde
himself speaking of him, with admiration, said, That he had behaved himself in
every thing like an old Captain, excepting his exposing himself unto too many
Dangers, wherein he said, he had Acted like a young Man; though as old, as
himself was, he was as guilty of the same fault, as he, and had committed more
Blunders in Conduct.

In fine, the French Prince was glad to leave him the Field of Battle, and
Retire, and was so very cautious after that, of venturing another Engagement
with him, though after both Armies were well refresht and recruited, that he
declined it by all the ways and means he could possible, and contented himself
thence forwards with observing only his Adversaries motions, and covering the
Conquests and Frontiers of France, against him, which was the main design of
our redoubted Prince, could he have found so ready a Compliance, from the other
confederate Generals, as was absolutely necessary for so great an Enterprise;
however finding he could not draw the Prince of Conde, to any more Battles, he
laid a Siege to Oudenard, with intent to draw the French out of their
Re-trenchments to its Relief. Accordingly the Stratagem took so far, that the
Prince of Conde having strengthened himself with some Detachments of fresh
Forces, brought him by the Marshal D' Humiers, marching to attempt its Succor,
the Prince of Orange, presently summoning a Council of War, advised the
Confederates to march with him immediately out of the Lines, and attack the
French, while they were now weary with their long and hard March; which, had
they done in all probability and appearance, he had obtained a glorious Victory
over them; and the Prince of Conde was so sensible of the certainty of the
measures his Enemy had advised, that when upon the news they were broken, by
the ill timed opposition of Count Souches, and the Imperalists, and a French
Officer took occasion thereupon to tell the Prince of Conde, that our Heroical
Prince was unhappy, he is reported to have uttered this prophetical Speech of
him. It Is true, answered he, he is as unhappy as brave; but yet for all that,
he would in time prove a General as formidable to France, as his Forefathers
had been to Spain; such was the judgment of this great and knowing Enemy, of
his growing Honor, and blooming Glory. And what Alexander King of Macedonia
said to a certain Queen, that sent him most delicious and Fare, Junkets
curiously prepared, may at this time be truly applied to our illustrious
Prince. Respondit seipsum habere meliores obsoniorum artifices, ad prandium
quidem (...) i. e. Nocturnum Iter, ad Caenam vero (...) i. e. tenue prandium.

Finding himself then balkt in his Heroical Designs, and main Ends and Scope,
against the French Army, by the opposition of the Imperial Officers, suspected
strongly to be caused by French Intrigues and Insinuations; His Highness the
Prince of Orange moves toward Grave, the last remaining and strongest
receptacle of the Gallicans in Holland, and the most resolutely defended by a
stout Garrison of between 4 and 5000 Men, and took it in the space of about 16
days after his Arrival, where he found 450 pieces of Cannon, whereof 100 were
mounted, besides an infinite quantity of Corn and other Provisions; and of
Powder, Ball, Granado's, and all warlike Ammunition, the French having hoarded
up in that place, almost all they had brought away from their deserted
Conquests; and thus he happily and gloriously ended that Campaign.

After this, he faced more than once the main Power of France, led by the King
himself, who tamely suffered himself to be by him, even with advantage provoked
to Battle, without daring to accept the Challenge; and (it cannot be denied)
had most certainly been attacked by him, in despite of all his precautions
before Bouchain, had not the Town, contrary to Expectation, with too much
inconsiderateness and precipitation furrendred, before he could possibly
execute his great and noble Design; and indeed it must be acknowledged, that he
all along made much more vigorous and resolute Efforts, to relieve the besieged
Spanish Towns, than the Spaniards themselves did in defending them; whose
Officers were too often either corrupted by French Gold, or not sufficiently
provided for by the fault and negligence of their General Governors, or else
through the grand negligence and dilatory proceedings of the Spanish Court it
self, whose Motto may well be Festina lent.

What he did afterward in the Seige of Maestricht, is sufficiently
demonstrated to the World, that had the promised Re-inforcements arrived to
him, from the Dukes of Lunenburg and Bishop of Munster, upon which he depended,
he had not failed through God's blessing reducing it: Yet so formidable was his
Courage and Conduct, more than the number of his Forces, or the quality of his
Army, to the wary French General Schomberg then sent against him, that he was
contented only to relieve the Town without accepting Battle, though offered it,
as much fatigued and diminished, as were his Enemies Troops at that time.

The next Year, the French King making use of the great advantage, his absolute
Command over a formidable Body of experienced, well-disciplin'd and hardened
Soldiers; and over the Purses of all manner of Persons, in his Realms and
Dominions, had above those who acting in the Confederacy, met with a thousand
delays, caused by different Counsels and Interests; and the Poverty and want of
Power, in some of their Allies, falls in the very depth of Winter, with
numerous and prodigious Forces into the Spanish Netherlands, and taking the
strong Town of Valenciennes with an astonishing Celerity, sits down before
Cambray, takes the Town, distresses the Castle, and at the same time, sends his
Brother the Duke of Orleans, with another potent Army to besiege St. Omers,
which were all three Towns of mighty Importance, that formerly extremely galled
the Frontiers of France; and this before any of the Confederate Forces, could
be got together, but such as might be drawn out of Holland, and some
Neighboring Spanish Garrisons. Yet notwithstanding these grand Disadvantages
at this time our gracious and truly public Spirited Prince, not willing the
Interest of his Allies, and of his Country, should so deeply suffer without
some attempt, to repel the dreadful Storm; he assembles such an Army, as he
could possibly in so short a time, and in such haste, draw together, as we have
said, of Dutch and Spanish Forces; and though he understood the Duke of
Orleans, leaving only some Regiments to guard his Trenches, and keep the Town
blockt up, had posted the rest of his Army, in and about all the Avenues and
Passages to the place, which were difficult to force, and were besides that
strongly guarded with two Rivers, one behind the other; yet he passed the first
River, with such speed and silence, that all his Army were got over before the
Enemy perceived them; and afterward, though the French were all drawn up in
Battalia, not far from the very Banks of the second River, yet he most
successfully made himself Master of the Abbey of Pienes on the other side, and
lodged his own Regiment of Dragoons in it, which provoking the Enemy to march
out from an advantageous post to dislodge them, brought the Armies at length to
a Battle, wherein the Duke of Orleans found himself so hardly pressed by the
Prince, that his best Troops about his Person gave at one time so much way,
that (as I have been credibly informed) some persons of Note, that were of his
own party in that Battle, reported, that when Prayers and Menaces would not
avail or do, he had once Recourse to Sighs and Tears, to make them return to
the charge against the Enemy. For which he could not escape the Raillery even
of the King his Brother at his coming back, who could not forbear smiling at
his Conduct, tho perhaps Lewis the 14th. would have been as much frighted at
the Danger, had he himself been there as the other.

Certain it is, the French much exceeded in Number and Quality of Troops,
having received the very night before a Re-inforcement of 15000 choice Men,
from the Kings own Army; so that by the impartial report of the French
themselves, the Prince of Orange withstood that day, no less than 39 Battalions
of Foot, and an 100 Squadron of Horse: And though the loss on the Confederate
side was very considerable, yet several Squadrons of the Enemy were most
roughly handled, in so much that the Adversaries themselves scrupled not to say
and own, That if the Prince's left Wing had fought, with equal courage to the
right, he might in all probability, have relieved the Town, and obliged the
Enemy at that time to have quitted the Siege, if he had not entirely routed
them; but a Regiment of new raised Soldiers, planted or posted in that Wing,
were the real cause that his Highness had not all the Success in that Battle,
which indeed his wise Conduct undaunted Courage, and indefatigable Industry
deserved. However, all relations agree in this, That he performed all that was
possible to be done, with such a small Army, and in such a place and juncture,
against such a puissant Enemy, by the most Prudent, Courageous and daring
Leader in the whole World. And that in the main Battle, were he himself
commanded in Person, he did Wonders, leading on his Men at the very head of his
Troops to the Charge, and hazarding himself to that degree, that he received
two Musket Shots in his Armor. After the end of this Campaign, Heaven
determinating to lay the Foundation of his present Grandeur and Glory, by
giving a very precious Gage and Pledge of the Possession of those Crowns it
intended, as the due reward of his truly Royal Virtues, and indefatigable pains
for the weal of Christianity; so influenced the heart of our late King Charles
the second of England, that in spite of the French Intrigues, and the secret
Inclinations of the then Duke of York, her Father, to the Contrary, and to the
surprisal and mortification of the French King, he bestowed upon Him in sacred
Marriage, the no less Virtuous and Accomplished, than the beauteous Princess
his Niece, the Presumptive Heiress of the British Monarchy, an alliance of a
much more dreadful prospect to the Aspiring Monsieur, than the loss of all his
late Conquests in Holland, Flanders, Brabant and elsewhere, and which threatened
France it self, with an unpleasant Retaliation (in due time) for all her
notorious Violences.

This illustrious Alliance was solemnized on the 4th. day of November, 1677.
being the joyful Birthday of his illustrious Highness, at eleven at Night; but
so privately, that the People not knowing till the (Morrow, or) next Day, being
the Anniversary of the Gunpowder Treason, made it a double Holyday. (And since
that, he has made it a threefold Holy Day, or day of Rejoying, by his most
happy Landing at Tor-Bay, etc.) as well upon the usual occasion, as to testify
their Joy, for so Blessed and Glorious a Match, from which even then, the whole
Protestant Church throughout Europe, began cheerfully to hope for the crushing
of the Popish and French Power; as if the Protestants had known by some
Prophetic Instinct, that Heroic Prince, unfeignedly espousing their Interest,
as well as their religious Princess, would one day become their most welcome
and glorious Deliverer and Defender, and make the memorial of the famous 5th.
of November, once more sacred and dear to them, by public Benefits; no less
signal than those by which it was first ennobled, above the common days.

After which the Prince well remembering how very necessary his presence would
be in Holland, returned thither with all the haste he could, with his most rich
and gracious Acquest, that since has produced so much good to the common Cause,
and the benefit of the Confederates, as well as of the two most potent
Sea-Nations of Europe; where both He, and his Royal Bride were received with a
Magnificence suitable to their High and august Quality; and with all the
expressions and Demonstrations of Joy that could be expected from a People,
sensible of their great Happiness in so illustrious and powerful Alliance. Upon
their first public entrance into the Hague, the Bridge was crowned with
Garlands of Triumph, and an Arch was builded through which they passed, and on
it was written. Vxori and Batavis vivat Nassovius Hector,
Auriaco and Patriae vivat Britannica Princes.
And another Arch with another Motto. Auriaci his Thalamis Batavis dos Regia
pax est.

Soon after his return, the French King being alarmed at this Alliance, and the
consequent preparations made by the King and Parliament of England, to oblige
him to a just and reasonable Peace with his Neighbors, he himself with all
speed dispatched away a project of Peace to Nimeguen, and getting it after some
Demur, consented to by the States of Holland, by the influence of a Party that
still covertly opposed the Prince, and by the discouragement the then posture
of Affairs in England really gave the States, occasioned by the Disturbances
raised and fomented there, by the same French intrigues to prevent the dreaded
effects of the late Marriage; a Treaty was concluded soon after, that gave some
respite to our renowned Prince for several years, from his military Fatigues
and wearisome Nights. And now to signalize himself, no less by the Prudent and
advantageous reformation of abuses, and regulation of things relating to the
Civil State of his Country, than he had been vigorous, and successful in the
maintenance and defense of its Territories; but however, before that work was
perfectly finished, the delays and new difficulties made by the French King, to
sign the Treaty, though according to his own proposals, caused a new League to
be made between the States and King of great Britain; and gave the Prince
opportunity once more to show his wise Conduct, and matchless Prowess against
that insolent and powerful Enemy, in a more glorious and successful manner than
ever before; and well near to have made the French King pay dearly for his over
refined and ill timed Politics, with the loss of his now darling General
Luxemburg's whole Army; for the strong City of Mons having been long blockt,
and very much distressed by the French, and the Duke of Luxemburg, having taken
his march that way, to hinder all Succors from it; his Highness made haste to
the Army, then near the Canal of Brussells, where the rest of the Confederate
Forces, had newly joined the Spanish and Dutch Troops, and pursuant to a
resolution taken for that Effect, in a council of War, march with an intention
to attack and dislodge Luxemburg, after he was joined a little beyond Brussels
with a re-inforcement of 6000 Brandenburghers, and Munsterians; but upon Advice
of the Princes March, Luxemburg quitting his Camp, took up his head Quarters in
the Abbey of St. Denis, which was a Post he thought inaccessible, there being no
coming at him but through Woods and Defiles, surrounded with Precipices; yet
for all this, our redoubted Prince advanced to that Abbey with his left Wing,
and with his Right, faced Casteau, which the French likewise were posted in,
and which was as difficult to force as the other; and as soon as ever he had
ranged his Army, he first of all drove the Enemy from a certain Hillock, and
then with some Canon, played upon another Party of them briskly, that
endeavored to maintain themselves on one side of a Cloister near St. Denis,
who not being able to resist the vigor of the Confederate Dragoons, who drove
them from their holds, and mastered the Cloister; whilst Adjutant General
Collyers, backed by General Delvick, filed his men silently and speedily
through the narrow Passages, and sliding with an undaunted Courage down the
Precipices, repulsed the Enemy in spite of all the resistance, within their
own lines. In the very midst of which, our renowned Prince with eager warmth
and spirits enflamed, cried out aloud, to me, to me, to encourage the coming up
of the Regiments that were to back the foremost; this fight on the left Wing
continued till night with a great vigor, besides which Count Horn drew near,
and played with his Canon upon some French Batallions in the Valley, with no
small Execution.

From thence the Prince advanced to Casteau, which was Assaulted by the
Spaniards in the Right Wing; where his Highnesses Foot Regiment of Guards, and
a Body of English, through Fire and Smoke, after an obstinate Fight of Five
hours, Chased the Enemy, at last, from a Post they thought altogether
impregnable, and pursued them a Quarter of a League, through a Field, and down
a Precipice, where the River Haines runs, toward the farther side of Casteau.
And our brave Lord of Ossory did surprising things, with his English, at a
little distance from the Guards; where the French are said to have lost more
Men than any where else; Nor were there any other of the Generals that acted
not like Heroes; But more especially the undaunted Prince, who, through whole
showers of Bullets, thick as Hail, and Clouds of Fire and Smoke, adventured so
very far, and pressed on with so much vigor in the Crowds, that he had been,
in all appearance, slain, had not the brave Lord Overkirk interposed between
him and a daring Captain, that was running full tilt at his Highness, and laid
the bold Champion in the silent Dust, for his attempt.

The Cavalry, in this Fight, had no convenience to be serviceable, because of
the Narrowness of the Passages, and steep Descents of the Ground; but all was
acted by the Foot, and Dragoons. The Night alone put a period to the Bloody
Fray, and parted the Furious Assaults of each Valiant Captain, under the Covert
of which, the poor Surprised and Astonished Luxemburg, retreated with silence,
and extreme Confusion, nearer to Mons, to secure himself, between a Wood on one
side, and a River on the other, leaving to the Prince of Orange the Marks of
Victory, as the Field of Battle, and most part of his wounded Men, and part of
his Tents, Baggage, and Match, Powder and Ammunition.

The States General, on the News of this Fortunate Blow, to such a proud and
fierce Enemy, sent Commissioners to his Illustrious Highness, to Congratulate
his happy Victory, which he had won with so much Renown, and to thank him for
his most Careful and Prudent Conduct, in such a long, Bloody and Obstinate
Action; and also to Conjure him, in tender Consideration, to the Prosperity and
Tranquillity of his Country, and Welfare of the Reformed Religion, which
seemed, as 'twere, to be tied to the thread of his precious Life, that he would
be more careful of his own most dear Person; And accordingly to show the World,
how great a value they set upon his Preservation; they presented the Lord
Overkirk, who had so Valiantly Defended him, and saved his highly esteemed
Life, with a Rich Sword, hilted with Massie-Gold, a pair of Pistols, Richly and
Curiously Inlay'd with Gold, and a pair of Horse-Buckles of the very same.

Nor had our brave Prince contented himself only to have obliged Luxemburg to
retire, without further pursuing his Advantages; had not he, whilst he was
consulting what to do, Received Advice, That the Peace was really made and
Ratified, between the French King, and the States some days since, which made
the French draw off to the Sambre, and the Prince toward Nivelle; from whence
he returned to the Hague, applying his Care thence forward, solely to the
Management of the Civil Government; till the breaking out of this last
Perfidious War, upon Occasion of the Manifest violation of both the said Peace,
and Succeeding Truce, by the most Unjust Violences of the French, and their
Grand Barbarities; Renewed in the Palatinate, and the Diocese of Cologne; and
by the Siege and Surprisal of Phillipsburg.

But that which advances the Mighty and Glorious Achievements of this, now
most excellent Monarch, to a pitch of Glory and Greatness, above those of any
other Hero of this present Age, or perhaps of any former; is, that he has
given such Convincing Proofs, and Undeniable Testimonies, to the whole World,
of their flowing merely from a pure, and untainted Principle of zeal to his
Country, to true Religion, Virtue, and the Public Good. That he has left
neither Friends nor Enemies, any room to doubt of it, or call it in Question;
since in the very lowest Ebb of his Fortune, neither the multiplied and
insulting Injuries, and repeated Affronts, of an Ungrateful Country; Nor, the
small prospect he had of saving even his Patrimonial Estate, any other way;
nor, all the fair ample and magnificent Promises of two Mighty Kings, could
make him accept of Grandeur, at the Expense of the Liberty and Privileges,
though of a very unthankful People, that had sometime stripped him of his Ancient
Hereditary Rights and Dignities; and since, no Motives at all could possibly
prevail with him, to accept of Sovereignty, in a Free State, that his Glorious
and Renowned Ancestors made, and himself found so; Neither from the full Grant
of a Conquering Invader; Nor yet, from the Free Donation of the People
themselves; And though the French Tyrant, even since the Peace of Nimeguen, and
the following Truce; and before the breaking out, or eruption of this last War,
most contrary to the express Treaty, very Notoriously oppressed, spoiled and
ravaged; not only his Sovereign Principality of Orange, but all his other Lands
and Lordships, Dominions and Privileges in the Netherlands, and elsewhere; yet
such was his Princely Mindedness and Patience, that he did never move the
States into any New quarrel, to redress his own wrongs; Nor so much as put them
upon proposing any New Articles, in his particular Cause, or Favor; Even at
the very making of the Peace, though all the Transactions of it were managed in
his Presence, and his Advice still asked about them. Yet, I say, such was his
goodness, never did he insist upon any peculiar Articles, to be inserted for
himself, That might be thought, peradventure, to retard the Conclusion of a
Treaty; but with a Generosity without, and beyond all Example; while others
preferred points of Honor, and private Interest, before the Common Peace and
Good; He even Quitted his own Pretensions, and Postpon'd the most Just Demands
of Reparation, for the Devastation of his own proper Demeans and Territories,
to the Necessities of his Country; like another Codrus, in some sense laying
down his Prerogatives and Privileges for their Benefit, and Jeoparding his own
Life for their Good: And what is said of that Noble Consul Publius Decius, may
well be applied to him; who, when he saw his Army greatly discomfited, and
almost Overcome, redoubled his Valor, Courage, and was most ready and willing,
to hazard his own precious Life, to save his Country from danger and
destruction.

How exceeding happy were it for their People, if all Princes; and how
wonderful happy for all Princes, if all private Persons, were but half so
publick-spirited, and so wholly and perfectly resigned to the Exigence of the
Common Good; as was this Great and Incomparable Prince, even from his very
Cradle? Whose Right-Noble, and Unparalleled steps, having traced through the
various and strange Revolutions of Holland; Let us now further pursue, in his
more Glorious Advances, in the most Memorable Revolution of Great Britain;
where his Gratuitous, and truly Heroical Charity, and not his Ambition, have
raised Him to a Throne He never sought for, but in Vindication of these Nations
Rights, more than His own private Ends.

Thus our Constantine had hitherto been chiefly on the Defensive part, and at
the Heads of Armies, He was not the absolute Sovereign of; yet, notwithstanding
all the many Intrigues and Factions, devised and formed against him, Maugre all
the Malice of his open, and secret Adversaries; He restored a Torn, and
tottering State, or Republic, to its former Peace and Prosperity; and forced
his own, and his Countries grandest, and most Politic Enemy, in the very midst
of his Triumphant Career, to give back, and even quit all his Encroachments in
the United Netherlands; with far more Precipitation, than he had at first
seized them with Celerity. Though it was such, as had at that time, surpised
the whole World. But (blessed, and for ever blessed be God) now a more
glorious, and delightful Scene opens it self; And to put him, in a fair, or
suitable condition, to attack that proud and insulting Adversary in his turn;
as well as tamely to ward off his furious and cunning passes; Kind Providence
leads him on, with a much more wonderful Career and Success, even swifter than
Fame it self, to seize the Enemies strongest Bulworks, (As was Great Britain to
the French Monarch at that time; If I may without offense call it so) by the
General Consent, and Invitation of his Nobles, Ministers, and Friends, made
privy to it; And there drops two Crowns (with a glorious and happy Reverse of
things, and an unexpected Liberty to all his Subjects) upon his Heroical Head,
shortly to be further Graced, and Guarded by the addition of a Third, to make
him the fitter Match, both to Grapple with the Tripple Crown of Rome, and the
Iron Scepter of France.

And in order to bring about this great and astonishing Design, which Heaven
seemed to have promised him sometime before, by those no less than Miraculous
Phoenomena's, or Apparitions of Glorious Crowns in the Air, over the City of
Orange, in two different years; As is related in two Narratives, of Authentic
Credit; to which, as well known to the Curious, I referr. The Great and
Almighty Disposer of Kingdoms, and Just Governor of the whole World, seems to
have employed a Chain of Causes, all composed of Miracles, from one end to the
other; or, at least, of Incidents, and Events, as much beyond the
Comprehension, as the Expectation, both of Friends and Enemies; For as when the
Tyrant Maxentius, and other Pagan Persecutors, had filled up the measure of
their Cruelties, God (in his infinite Goodness and Mercy) was pleased to make,
not only part of the Imperial Authority to devolve upon Constantine, the
Revenger of all his Churches wrongs, and Restorer of her Liberties, by the
death of his Father, and unanimous Election of the British Legions. But to
order and dispose of all things so, as most strangely to concur to the
elevating him to such a further power, (although he was but the least, amongst
the Seven Sharers of the Roman Greatness) as to trample upon the rest, and even
throw them all down, and set himself up, unrivaled in the Throne. Where,
fearless of the Attempts of any future Opposers, he might most effectually
protect, and propagate the true Religion, according to his pleasure.

So the most Barbarous Maxentius of our present Age, or Common Enemy of Truth,
and Oppressor of Peace and Religion in Europe, viz. the Gallick Tyrant having
now carried on his Fury to the greatest Extremities, that either his hellish
Hounds, or blood thirsty Dragoons could Act, or humane Nature possibly suffer,
both against his own innocent Protestant Subjects, and against those of all his
Neighbor Princes and States, of what Religion soever, that durst presume to
dispute his most imperious Orders. And having like the Dragon in the
Apocalypse, already beaten down with his Massy Tail, some of the supreme Powers
next him, which are the lesser Stars, of Europe's bright Heaven, and being in a
fair way to sweep down all the rest, sometime ago, and bring them at least
under Subjection; it pleased Almighty God in his due time, for to raise up
another Michael, or another Constantine (many learned Expositors thinking that
by Michael, in that place of the Revelation of St. John 12. is meant
Constantine) to stop the rage and fury of this French Dragon; who with his long
Train of bloody Miscreants, has so very much infested Christendom of late
Years, and totally to rout this new Maxentius and restore Peace, Justice and
Liberty to the Church and People of God; even out of that most ancient, as well
as illustrious House of Nassaw. A House that once before had stopped the
dangerous Torrent of the Spanish Power, and redeemed the Captive Netherlands
from its Yoke and Thraldom.

And to let the World know, that the All-wise Governor, and most righteous
Judge of the whole Earth, intended to make use of him, not only to retard the
Progress of the French Tyranny for a while, but (we hope) even totally to
destroy it; and that as the Tyrant himself had begun his own ruin, so like the
Champion of the Philistines, he should go on, and continue to complete it; and
make every Man's Sword in his Idolatrous Army to be against his Fellow,
insomuch that our happy Joshua's men may with Triumph trample upon their Necks.
The Almighty Avenger of the Injuries of his Elect, which cry day and night to
him in compassion to his suffering Saints, was not content to use the Valor
and Conduct of our warlike Prince, only to rescue the united Provinces, but
even the whole Protestant Religion, and the civil State of all Europe, from the
same Bondage and Oppression. And therefore that he might no longer at so great
a disadvantage, combat with such an overgrown Monster, he resolves to exalt
him to the sublime and sacred Station of Royalty, and that too, in those
Ancient and Warlike Kingdoms, which he was most rightfully entitled to (not
only by Consanguinity, but Affinity) and which had before been happily
instrumental to lower the Spanish pride, on the one hand, and so often to
chastise the insolency of the more formidable and crafty French on the other.

And if this work was great enough to amaze all beholders, and to put the
Historical Faith of all succeeding Generations, to the very uttermost proof;
the manner by which it was effected, must of necessity appear much more
wonderful, since toward his mighty and glorious effect, even the most
contrary Interests, Inclinations, Accidents and Events; and in a word, all the
most opposite Causes imginable, were made to conspire and concur with as much
Union and Harmony, as if they had been all (...) one and the self-same Soul or
(...), (who is Ens Entium, as well as (...) Causarum) for even Enemies,
Friends, Papists, Protestants, Winds and Seas, all acted toward, and promoted
proportionably, this grand and glorious design of Providence, even while they
contended most against it.

Because therefore it will not be a little edifying and instructive to us of
these Kingdoms, not only in our Religious, but also in our Politic and civil
Concerns, to understand rightly and comtemplate (in some measure) the most
miraculous method used by the Divine and overruling Power, in producing this
happy and never to be forgotten Revolution of great Britain and Ireland. Before
we proceed to give you any account of that, we shall (as far as we, in a
private Station could, or think fit, for particular Persons to pry into) give
you a short view of the several steps that were made on all sides toward it,
till at the last, they were all deceived; some very happily as being carried on
far beyond their first proposed ends, and the utmost of their hopes; and the
others with a more Melancholic Surprise, finding themselves defeated of their
Giant-like expectations, and driven upon such Rocks, as they thought they had
steered the surest course to avoid.

And first, we will begin with the French King, his illustrious Highness the
Prince of Orange's most inveterate and irreconcilable Enemy, ever since the
refusal of his Overtures for betraying his Native Country, and show what steps
he himself, though a great Master of Politics, made to this great and blessed
Revolution; which may (by God's blessing) prove in due time a means to bring
him to Subjection to this ancient and imperial Crown of England again.

In order to secure the success of the mighty Project, which has been so
eagerly pursued, and carried on by Lewis the 14th. for some Years past, of
attaining the universal Monarchy of the West; it is not at all doubted by any
well versed in Politics, but of all other things, it was most highly
necessary, that his surest Alley, the late King James, should be fully and
absolutely Master of his Kingdoms, and till that were effected and put out of
all danger of being Traversed; that it was no less needful for him (namely, the
French King) to treat his Protestant Subjects at home well, nay, rather better
than ordinary; to keep up a good correspondence likewise with the Pope, and
other Roman Catholic Princes; to have religiously observed the Truce with the
Empire; to have dissembled for some time at least, his resentments against the
renowned Prince of Orange; to have restored him the Principality of that Name,
which he most unjustly extorted from his noble Ancestors; to have persuaded his
Uncle to have caressed him; to have kept fair with the Hollanders; to have
terrified no body with Arms of Cruelties, but only to have supplied his
faithful Ally of great Britain, constantly and privately with sufficient
Moneys, and carried on all his Intrigues elsewere, only with the underhand and
potent charms of Gold; to have persuaded King James to have let alone the
Intrigue of the pretended Prince of Wales; to have abstained from multiplying
Popish Chapels, and public toleration of Jesuits and Priests; to have forborne
the planting a Jesuitical Crew in Magdalene College; to have abstained from
sending Mandamus after Mandamus, to violate the ancient Privileges of that
Loyal and Famous University of Oxford; to have forborne the sending of the most
Reverend and right Reverend, the Bishops ( those Pillars of our true Reformed
Church of England) into the Tower: In a word, to have contented himself only
with new modelling Corporations, and insensibly new regulating his Army and
Court, till all had been sure. Had he been duly cautious, and circumspect in
these particulars, it had been shrewdly probable, if not an assured thing, that
a great part of the Clergy, Nobility and Gentry of England, would not have seen
through the late king James's Designs, nor at least have believed them, till
perhaps they had felt the Chains about their Necks; that his Army would have
stood by him till at last, when things had been full ripe for it; they had seen
the greatest part of themselves shipped off, upon some sudden Foreign Quarrel,
and their places supplied at home, by Soldiers in French pay. And this might
have been peradventure, so politickly managed, as not to have alarmed the
illustrious Ancient and Warlike House of Austria; the Hollanders perchance
would have unconcernedly looked upon it, being so exceedingly busied about the
Indian Gold and Treasures; and the Kingdoms of England, Scotland and Ireland,
might perhaps have been lulled fast asleep, by their present Peace, vast
Trading and Plenty: And this step once gained, the subtle Monsieur could have
securely oppressed the Spanish Netherlands, once again, overrun Holland, and
have invaded the Empire when the imperial Forces should have been perhaps (as
dreaming of no danger from the Rhine) employed as far as Bulgaria or Romania in
chasing the Turks; and these were the Counsels of his wisest Ahitophel, the
late famous Louvois. But he that takes the wise in his own craftiness, and
makes Diviners mad, and brings good out of Evil, caused that vulgar Proverb
here to prove an Oracle, That Quos perdere vult deus, prius dementat, God first
blinds or renders foolish, those whom he has resolved to destroy; for the deep
and most surely laid Counsels of that great Statesman, were providentially
overruled by the fawning influence of Jesuited Heads, whereof some were on
Men's, and some more advantageously placed on the necks of the charming and
seldom failing Sex; who working upon the French King's unmeasurable Vanity, and
unlimitted Ambition, very easily persuaded him, that his Power was now grown so
Formidable, and all his Forces for Sea and Land so well disciplined, that he
needed not to be so much inslaved to those cautious Measures, proposed by his
Ministers of State, as he had been hitherto; but leaving those flow paces, to
the Sages of the House of Austria, who placed most of their Majesty in
deliberate Counsels, and more slow Executions; he might now resume his natural
briskness, and advance securely the nearest way to Glory; especially since
England was then under a Roman Catholic Prince, entirely at his Devotion upon
all occasions. And with all, seeing things at that time were in such a posture,
that the imperial Force was so wholly taken up in a War, in the remotest
Frontiers of Christian Europe, there was no other Power, that either durst, or
could timely and effectually oppose his Attempts, either in Religious or civil
Matters; and that the most active Spirits, that were best able, or most
disposed to obstruct the course of his prosperous advance, were many of them
(as well Princes, as their Ministers) now become wonderful docile and
disciplinable without word of Mouth, or beat of Drum, only by the bare Luster
and Loadstone of some choice golden Lewis's, Art fully brandisht before their
Eyes, by a French Emissary. And these plausible advices, which so tickled him
in his most sensible part, prevailed on him to Act in all things just the
reverse of what he had sometime before been counseled by those who best
understood, and had all along (when believed) most successfully pursued and
carried on the interest of that universal Sovereignty, which they would have
persuaded him to court gently; but his hot Jesuited Counselors, would needs
have him attempt to ravish; which impotent and ill timed Essay, has now so much
alarmed the Coy Lady (Universal Monarchy) that if we mistake not, having
providentially untwisted her self out of his Arms, and got clearly out of the
reach of his violence, she will not admit his cringing Addresses any more. For
looking, not without cause, upon both the Protestant and the Pope, though most
opposite in Principles, to be most mighty obstacles in his way to universal
Sovereignty, the one as being perfectly informed, in the knowledge of the truth
in Jesus Christ, and zealously affected to the Defense both of their Natural,
and civil liberty as Men and Subjects, and of their Spiritual privileges as
Christians; and the other pretending not only a kind of Sovereignty over a
great part of all Princes, Subject, of the Roman Communion (namely the Clergy,
both Secular and Regular) and all religious Persons; and by them a dangerous
rivalling influence over all the rest of their people. But also holding (as
it were) the Balance of power in his own hand, even in temporal matters, between
all Popish Princes and States; and being no less intress'd for maintenance of
himself and successors, in that Power and Figure, to hinder the growth of any
one Prince to an excessive Grandeur, than the Protestant were for the
preservation, both of their Civil and Religious Liberties; and therefore having
agreeably enough to the rules of Policy, resolved equally upon the removal of
both these dangerous adversaries, by totally destroying the Protestants, and
casting Popery it self into a new Model, that might dispose the whole body of
Christians, both Clergy and Laity, to such a tame and supple temper, as might
make them alike susceptible of his intended universal Yoke.

Thus it pleased the Almighty Being, to make him the very chiefest instrument
himself, in breaking the neck of these his greatest and ambitious Designs, by
leaving him to the infatuating delusions of new Jesuited Advisers, whereby he
forsook the more sure Maxims of his old sagacious Counselors, Richelieu,
Mazarin, and the Le Telliers; and to drive Jehu-like and rashly to attempt to
do all at once, what should have been enterpriz'd at very different Seasons,
and those wisely timed one after the other. For at the same time, the poor
Protestants were so hotly persecuted, and barbarously handled, the Pope's
Authority was then as briskly attacked, not only in the business of the
Ragalia, but in several other more fundamental points, importing no less than
the utter ruin of the whole Machine of that Ecclesiastical Monarchy; insomuch
that this great haughty Monsieur thought himself doubtless some prodigious
Giant, that could reach both poles at once, with each arm one, viz. That of the
Northern Heresy (as they term it) and the Southern Supremacy, and snapping
them off short, to make the World turn thence forward upon the sole Axle tree
of his Arbitrary and imperious will, as sufficiently appeared, not only by the
proceedings of the Sorbonne, of the Assembly of the Clergy of Paris, and of the
French Kings chief Advocate, Mr. Talon, and by the strange acting of Mr.
Lavardin at Rome it self, and the writings of Mr. Maimburg: The Writings and
Actings of all which, against the Authority of the Sea of Rome, were hardly
ever outdone by those they vainly called, and at the same time persecuted as
Heretics; but also by many odd Theses and Positions, then maintained in
several places up and down that Kingdom, whereof these were some, viz.

I. That as Princes had the Power of nominating other Bishops to the Sees
vacant in their Dominions; so the greatest Prince in Christendom, had a right
of ^^^^^inating the greatest Bishop, namely, the Pope.

II. That the Election of a Pope, by the private College of Cardinals, was an
Innovation.

III. That the Kings of France having some time delivered the Popes from the
oppression of the Lombards, and founded the new Empire of the West, acquired
thereby not only a right to choose future Popes, but that they are thereby still
the only Rightful Emperors, the eldest Sons of the Church, and the greatest of
Christian Princes.

Which by the way, would be a stronger Argument, to prove both the Empire,
Kingdom of France, and the Election of the Pope, etc. to belong to the young
Duke of Lorrain, than to Lewis the 14th. that young Prince, being Lineally
descended from Charles the great, whose race that of the present French King
supplanted.

IV. That the residence of the Pope, is not fixed any more to Rome than it was
formerly to Antioch; but that it ought to be in the capital City of the
greatest Christian Prince, pro tempore, or in such other place as he shall
approve of.

V. That the French King in his Right, may if he please divest the Cardinals of
Rome of the right of Election of Popes, or disown such as they shall choose,
and make an Archbishop of Paris, or any other prelate Pope; that such Pope so
nominated, would be a true Successor of St. Peter, though he should dwell at
Paris, or elsewhere, and have no temporal Dominions; and that he ought to be
owned as such, by all other Roman Catholic Princes, because nominated by the
Successor of Charles the great, and a Prince no less great in Power, than he
who was the restorer of the Papal Authority.

VI. That as the Temporal Dominions of the Pope, were at first given him by
French Kings, they may be forfeited, and taken back again; and that for the
peaceable enjoyment of them, the Pope ought to grant freedom of Quarters to the
French Kings Ambassador at Rome, as an acknowledgment of the Sovereignty of him
of whom he holds them, and that he ought not to grant the like privilege to any
other Ambassador.

These and many other such like Theses there were, about the Pope's Power and
Authority in Spirituals as well as Temporals, whereby they allowed him little
more than what is granted by some Protestants, and what any other Patriarchs do
enjoy, as is deducible from their own Writings; in this you may see an Image of
the new Popery, intended by the French King, who by this appears to be only so
far for Popery, as will serve his own turn, to make both Pope and Papists his
Vassals or Slaves; (what other meaning had he, when he treated the Nuns of the
Society so severely, called the Nuns of the Infancy of Jesus, and threw Madam
Mondeuville into Prison for mediating, etc.) Such is the favor he designs to
afford them, if ever in his power, and a great favor too; they that will be
Protestants, or will not be Papists, thus, Alamode de France, being both
equally destituted to utter Destruction. And to convince you further, that
these were the real and unfeigned Designs of Lewis the 14th. King of France; a
Friend of mine that intimately knew the Person, assured me that when the French
Clergy were assembled in the year 1682. he sent a skillful Antiquary into
England, to search diligently and most accurately our Records in the Tower, and
at Westminster; to see and learn what steps King Henry the 8th. had made in his
Rupture with Rome, and which of them might most effectually be put in practice
by him, in order to accomplish his foresaid ends.

But what followed from this Conduct, of driving on so very furiously at one
and the same time, two such contrary designs as these were one toward the
other, to bring about the same self purpose? Why, the same that is reported to
have happened to the famous Wrestler Milo, who in ostentation of his great
strength, endeavored to rive a sunder with his Arms, the main Limbs of adouble
bodied Tree. He made a shift indeed, to split them in part, but not being able
to go through perfectly with the Work, was, by their recoiling Force, caught
so fast himself between them, as to be made a defenseless prey to the wild
Beasts. Thus Lewis the 14th. by first persecuting the Protestants, and
attacking the Pope's Authority, has reduced himself into a Labyrinth, and
brought a general War upon his Dominions, etc. By his most severe Persecution,
and endeavor absolutely to exterminate the Protestants, he berest himself
wholly of some hundreds of thousands of his wealthiest and most useful
Subjects, consisting of many of the most trading Merchants, best Officers, and
expert Mariners and Seamen, to the strengthening of his Enemies round about, in
the adjacent Countries, and the utter ruin of many Roman Catholic Families,
their Creditors, or that were of their Dependence; and filled his Kingdom with
Hypocrites, and Malcontents, who required as many Troops, to watch over their
Conduct (which gave and will give continual Jealousies and Alarms) as would
have served him, to compose a good Army, to defend the largest of his
Frontiers, and that which was more fatal to him, than all the rest; these cruel
and most barbarous proceedings of his, exasperated the Spirits of the warlike
and valorous English, and thereby made it altogether impracticable; for his
great Ally King James, to make himself Master enough of his People, to be so
serviceable to him, in his Attempts toward universal Monarchy, as he perhaps
might have been, is to sweeten the minds of the undaunted British Protestants;
Monsieur Lewis had politickly (at the late King James's first accession to the
Crown) and voluntarily restored the French Protestants their old Liberties and
Privileges, which he solemnly swore to maintain at his Coronation. (For it must
be acknowledged on all hands, that they, namely the Protestants, were his
faithfullest Subjects, who put the Crown on his head) out of a feigned, or
pretended difference to the late King James's entreaties, and respect to the
intercession of the English Church and Nation. To have been thus before hand
with us in Civility, what savours would it not have extorted from the English
Protestants, toward the Papists here? And what Jealousies would it not have
suppressed? And how much more easily, might we have been caught by tickling,
than by scratching; especially, had he at the same time kept Quiet, and justly
observed the last concluded Truce with the Confederates. But acting the quite
contrary, it made the late King James's Conduct, by far the more narrowly
inquired into, and rendered all people both Jealous and Afraid, even of his
favors, and made them justly suspect the sincerity of such a Prince (though at
the same time declaring himself for liberty of Conscience) whom they saw so
visibly and amicably to correspond with a notorious Tyrant of the same
Religion, so very eager upon Persecution, as daily to fill his greatest and
best Friends Dominions, at so unseasonable a nick of time with whole Shoals, or
multitudes of Exiles, in such a miserable plight, as he knew could not but stir
up the resentments of the hardy English Protestants, against both Princes; and
thereby (as we have said) disabled his Ally from getting that power into his
hands, which was so necessary for his assistance, in the accomplishment of
those Ambitious projects, he since unprosperously pursues. And on the other
hand, by acting as we have instanced against the Pope, and offering so plainly
at a new Model of Popery; yea, and making such brisk attempts upon the temporal
Dominions and Territories of the Pope himself, and that in his own Capital City
of Rome, as he did by his Ambassador, the Marquess of Laverdine; who, not only
exasperated the then Pope Innocent the 11th. a person not of a temper, either
to be hectored, or to be wheedled out of the Rights and Respects he thought due
to him, from a Prince pretending to the Titles of Most Christian, and of Eldest
Son of the Church; one who not only very well understood his own Interest, and
the whole drift of Lewis the 14th. But likewise first of all, gave the alarm to
all other Princes of the Roman Communion, who thereby plainly seeing, that not
only their Territories, but their Religion also, was in no small danger from
such designs; and that the French Sultan intended, Mahomet-like, to have
exterminated Popery, properly so called, as well as Protestantism, and to have
introduced by the Sword, a third Religion hateful to both; which was to have
been Franco-Catholick, more than Roman Catholic, and to have been new
Christened by that Name, as soon as Paris, by the prevailing Arms, or more
availing pieces of Gold of Lewis Le Grand, should have been made the Metropolis
General of all Christendom. Hence he permits his Statue to be erected and
adored by his Subjects in the posture of Prosternation; he permits Holy Days to
be Dedicated to them, and Harangues to be made to them, as if they were really
so many Deities, so that upon the Basis of these base Idols, you may see these
Inscriptions in Capital Letters, TO THE IMMORTAL MAN.

Upon this Alarm of Pope Innocent the XIth, all Europe began to look with a
Suspicious Eye upon the Proceedings of the French Monarch, and his Ally of
Great Britain, and minded more sharply every passage between them: And though
Lewis the XIVth endeavored extremely to throw dust in their eyes, by
extirpating and destroying the Protestants in his own Dominions, out of a zeal,
as he feigned, or professed, to the Holy See; yet they could not comprehend how
that could possibly consist with his continual abetting, and corroborating the
Turks, and supporting Count Teckely, and his Protestant followers in Hungary;
and much less with his most Undutiful and Insolent Carriage to the Pope, and
with such formal Decisions, as struck at the very Foundations of his Authority,
and of the whole Fabric of the Roman Catholic Religion, as distinguished from
the Protestant. No, they now scanned every Period, and Expression of
Maimburgh's Works, and presently smelt out whose Sense, and in what view he
spoke; And that he depressed the Monarchy of the Roman Bishop, only to erect
upon its Ruins an Universal Empire, for his Master Lewis; They thoroughly
examined the Proceedings of the Sorbonne, and of all the French Clergy: Took
good notice of the many odd Theses put up, and maintained daily in that
Kingdom; And, in a word, let nothing pass of that nature, without the strictest
Observation; nor without preparing underhand, an Opposition ready to be
exerted, in fit time and place. The Pope, though indeed for his part, he could
heartily have wished that the Protestant Name were utterly abolished, and all
Christian States as firmly subjected to his See, as some Ages before; and
particularly, would have unfeignedly rejoiced to have seen the Return of so
important a Member of his pretended ancient Empire, to his Communion, as were
the British Dominions: Yet he could not well brook to see them, or the French
Protestants either, made but as Steps to raise the Throne of the French Monarch
high enough, to overlook his; And, of an Absolute Pope, to make him, but as a
Precairous Mufti, under a New Western Sultan.

He thought with himself, that it would signify very little for him to gain
ground upon the Quicksands of Great Britain and Ireland, where he could promise
himself no sure footing: Whilst he should lose his firmer Possessions in Italy,
and Rome it self: And took but little pleasure, whatever outward countenance he
showed, in the hopes that were given him by the French Tyrant, of the
Establishment of a Mock-Popery there, whilst the true one should be ruined, and
totally blown up by the Crafty Engineers of France. And the Apprehensions of a
Prevailing French Popery, were indeed to him far more dreadful of the two, than
that of the Triumphing of (what they foolishly called) the Northern Heresy.
And the Religious old Father thought (as well he might) that there was much
less danger, from an open and professed Enemy, than a secret Traitor; And that,
according to the Proverb, Ira quae tegitur nocet, There was less harm from an
openly assailing Lion, than a private Bosom Viper. Neither was he ignorant of
Lewis the XIVth's strict Confederacy with the Male contents in Hungary, who are
all Lutherans, or Calvinists; At the very same time he Persecuted his own
Subjects at home, and abolished the Foundation, and ordered the Nuns of the
Infancy, because they sided with the Pope, to go home to their Parents, or
wheresoever else they pleased: Commanded that their Altars should be pulled
down, the Ornaments and Holy Utensils carried away, and those Consecrated
Places to be most vilely profaned. And yet, at this very time, he suffered
himself in Public Theams, to be advanced above the Glorious Angels of God, and
to be looked upon as a Proof of the most sublime Mysteries: And those same
words, which were once spoken of the Holy Jesus, the Son of God, he allowed to
be applied to himself, Yea, (in some sort) Commanded it; My Works are for the
King; Who is the King? It Is Lewis the Great, the King of Glory. Nay, which is
much more, he suffered himself to be Worshipped like a Deity. You might have
seen this in the Five Works upon the Greeve, under the Title of the Temple of
Honor, which was made to Solemnize the Erecting the New Statue, that was set
up in the Court of the Common Hall of the City. The Inscriptiono which was upon
the Frize, and upon the Four Fronts of the Temple, was after the Jesuitical
manner, and no less Impious;

The City of Paris, Pious, Loyal,
Obedient, Devoted by Public Vows
To the Divinity and Majesty of --
Lewis the Great, the Father of his Country,
As a Monument of their Duty, Dedicate
And Consecrate a Temple.
The Pope, who was not half so timorous, as some of the other Temporal Princes
of his Communion, could not, nor did not look tamely on these Proceedings; but
opposed them with all his Might, and with a Vigor, that showed a Magnanimous
Spirit; and that waked all the rest of the Roman Catholic Princes, out of the
Lethargy they seemed to have been laid into by the Charms of French Sorcery.
For he Wrote vigorously against the Severities used against the Protestants,
causing his Beloved Daughter, the late Queen Christina of Sweden, to Write to
the same purpose; He disapproved the French King's Dragoon Conversions; loudly
declaimed against his Violences, and Sacrilegious Usurpations, Cloaked under
the Name of Regalia; Cited Father La Chaiese, and Father Maimbourg to Rome, to
Answer their Disobedience; and caused the latter to be actually thrust out of
the Jesuits Society. Takes away the Liberty of Quarters from the French
Ambassadors at Rome, which, with all their Hectoring, they could never yet
regain; Caused the Proceedings of the French Clergy to be Censured; Denies to
Preconize, or Confirm any French Bishops; stirs up the Illustrious House of
Austria to act vigorously against the French King. Fiercely opposes the
Election of the Cardinal of Furstemburg to the Archbishopric and Electorate
of Cologne, and lets all the Popish Princes of Germany, as well as the
Protestants, see their danger therein; and even does all he can, by his Nuncio
at London, and the Remonstrances of the Spanish and Imperial Ambassadors
there, to draw off King James from the French Interest, and from taking French
Measures, either in Religion or Politics; And to persuade him to forbear
making use of Frenchified Jesuits, or Priests, of what Nation soever; and use
only those of the Austrian Party; And to please his own People, by minding the
true Interest of England, and holding the Balance of Europe stiff against
France; and for that end, whatever Private Submissions he had made to His
Holiness, yet to have let matters in Religion throughout the British Dominions,
be in Statu quo prius, at least, till the present Great War, with both the
Western and Eastern Turk had been over: when by the Favor of a profound Peace,
Reigning among all Catholic Princes, he might have made use of their United,
and Concurring Assistance, to have securely Reestablished, not the French, but
true and Genuine Popery, in Great Britain and Ireland; without hazarding the
Diminution of the Majesty of his Crown, or of the Greatness and Independency of
his Power; or rendering himself to be but a Deputy, or Tributary King, as he
must do, if he went on to augment the already too formidable, and insolent
Power of France; and to take French Measures, and neglecting to use his own
Eyes, and the Advices of his own Agents, Spies and Intelligencers, to make use
only of French Spectacles, French Intelligences, and the Dictates of French
Ministers of State, and Frenchified Jesuits, or Monks, to steer by; which
would, at length, but make him Split against a Fatal Rock: a Ship fraught with
the fairest hopes, that ever set out in Great Britain, under St. Peter's
Banners, since Queen Mary's days.

These were the Actions of Pope Innocent the XIth. against Lewis the XIVth, and
such were the Remonstrances and Advices both of his Nuncio, and the Spanish and
Imperial Ambassadors in England to the late King James; Which His Imperial
Majesty afterward, in his Letter to the Late King, in Answer to one from him,
relating the Doleful Story of his Abdication, hints at; and tells him, Had they
been followed, he might still have been upon the Throne, with all the
Advantages of a Great English Monarch. The obstinate neglect of which Councils,
the most safe and prudent that could be given to a Popish King of England at
that time of the day, together with the formidable growth, and the aforesaid
Insolent Proceedings of the French King, caused both the Pope, and the Ancient
and Potent Houses of Austria and Bavaria, not only to League themselves
together, but also for their Common Defense, both against French Popery, and
French Power, which were advancing hand in hand to attack them; And which, if
suffered to fix footing in England, would shortly become altogether
irresistible to Confederate. Nay, even with the Protestant Princes and Powers;
the one (viz.) the Temporal Princes of Austria and Bavaria, Immediately; and
the other, namely, the Pope, Mediately, and Covertly; by abetting, and
underhand promoting the Intrigues and Attempts of the others, for the carrying
on such Designs as should divide England from the French Interest, though it
were by the Dismounting a Prince of their own Religion, and placing a
Protestant upon the Throne. They being very well satisfied it was much safer
for Popery in General, as well as for their particular Temporal Interests, to
see a Protestant wear the Crown of England, though to the seeming disadvantage
of the Popish Religion in that particular Kingdom; that would help them to
balance the excessive Power of France, than to suffer a Popish King of Great
Britain, of the French Stamp, to assist the French Monarch to enslave all
other, much more Catholic Princes; depress the Papal Power it self, and impose
a Popery worse to them, than what their erroneous fancies teach them to call
Heresy. But that which clincht the Nail home, and which not only confirmed
them in those Resolutions, but hastened them to a speedy execution of them, were
three very dangerous Attempts of the French King; the one was the powerful
Interest the French had made, to get their Devoted Creature, that ArchTraytor
to his Country, the Quondam Prince William, but now Bishop of Strasburg, and
Cardinal of Furstemberg, to be chosen Elector of Cologne, that he might be the
more able to back his old Benefactour Lewis the 14th. in all his Encroachments
upon the Empire, in awing the rest of the Electors on the Rhine, and by them
influencing the whole Electoral College, to deprive the House of Austria, of
the Imperial Dignity, by choosing Lewis the French Dauphin, for King of the
Romans, or Successor to the Emperor instead of the Archduke Joseph, etc.

The second was, his breaking so perfidiously the new made Truce, though sworn
to for twenty Years, and under the pretense of backing the Election of his dear
Cardinal, and pursuing some extravagant Demands, he was pleased to make in the
name of the Duchess of Orleans, of the present Prince Palatine, to besiege and
surprise Philipsburg, and committing a thousand Outrages, and Hostilities
elsewhere, at a time, when the Emperor trusting to the security of the twenty
years Truce, was employing his Arms to repel the Turks, the sworn Enemies of
Christianity in the remotest borders of Christendom.

The third was, his declaring War against Holland, because they seemed to
oppose his base illegal violences, in endeavoring to force an Election, which
ought to be free, and that in a Country, where the proud Tyrant had no right to
meddle, and which was so near their Frontiers; and that too, being not content
with that, as if he had had the late King James's Head under his Girdle, he was
pleased to threaten, that England should do the like; and as a forerunner of
it, persuaded King James, abruptly, and without any reason given, to recall his
Subjects out of the Dutch Service, at a time when he had no visible occasion
for them.

These Reasons all put together, made the Roman Catholic Princes to league
with Holland, and the Protestant Princes of Germany; and to favor the Blessed
and Glorious Design, of our present Sovereign Lord, King William, etc. to
endeavor to break the strong Chains that were preparing for all Europe, by
first breaking those of England, and by seizing before hand of the Reins of
Government, over those most willing Nations that were so exceeding glad of his
seasonable help in time of Need; the Succession of which should he delay a
Moment, was visibly going to be most unjustly alienated from him, by the means
of a supposititious Child, brought upon the Stage only for a blind, and to be
consigned unto the Tyrannical hands of the French Monarch.

And lastly, that which made an end of giving a through alarm to the Pope, was,
the French King's insulting and insolent proceedings, by his Ambassador at Rome
it self; his invading of Savoy and Piedmont, and carrying thereby the War into
Italy; which by the bye, is now one of the most troublesome Thorns, that he has
in his foot, and which he would most fain be rid of, it having proved
notwithstanding his Successes, the most chargeable and incommodious War to him,
next that of England, of any of the rest. Which considerations made the Pope,
and the rest of the Roman Princes, and particularly the Spaniards, employ
sundry Priests, devoted to their interests, but as so many Spies about the late
King James, to fish out the secrets of the Frenchified Cabal; and to
communicate the same, from time to time, to the late Spanish Ambassador, who
failed not to advertise the King his Master, the illustrious Prince of Orange,
and all the Allies, nor yet to communicate them to the Nobility, Gentry and
qualified Citizens of England; to whose secret advice, thus obtained (next to
God Almighty) we owe all the satisfactory light we have had into the dark
Intrigue of the pretended Prince of Wales, which above all things, gave the
last and most powerful Impulse to those Motions, that brought about the late
Happy and wonderful Revolution.

Having thus seen how the French King, by catching too eagerly at Universal
Monarchy, and his Ally the late King James, by adhering to the French Counsel
more than to his own English Subjects, stirred up the most zealous Princes of
the Roman Communion, and even the Pope himself, to side with the Protestant
Powers against them, and readily to concur with these last, even to the
suppression of all hopes of their own Religions, becoming predominant in
England; and rather than see it planted there by French hands. We cannot
therefore at all wonder, that the Protestant Foreign Powers, and the people of
Great Britain especially, who had much greater obligations to it, both from
their Civil and Religious Interests, should willingly unite to the same
purpose, and take the opportunity of entering into so potent a Confederacy, to
preserve their Religion and secure their Posterity, and all that was near and
dear to them in reference to both Worlds; when they saw the very Popish
Princes, and the head of that Communion so hotly take the Alarm, though nothing
so nearly, nor so deeply concerned in the danger as themselves; and by their
diligence in being so ready to join with them, Tacitly to reproach their
Dullness and awake them timely and vigorously, to second the noble Efforts, of
such a Wise and valiant Prince; whose known injurious Treatment, by both Kings
and very legal and rightful pretentions, to the succession of the British
Throne, as well as his Exemplary and Military virtues, had now gotten him so
large a share, or interest in the hearts of all the oppressed People of the
three Kingdoms, and gave them and all their Foreign Friends, such fair dawning
hopes of a most happy and glorious Success.

As for the Hollanders, they were moved to assist in this great Enterprise, not
only by the consideration of their general Interest, as one of the chief
Parties in War with France; nor yet, wholly and solely out of gratitude to the
courageous and illustrious Prince, who had so lately rescued them from imminent
ruin, and restored them to as great a Beauty of Order, and formidable Strength,
as any other Republic; (though no doubt these Motives swayed them very much.)
But being particularly pricked forward, and provoked by daily menaces from
France, and appearing and most convincing Mark from England, that the late
King, did not they first prevent him, would certainly declare War against them,
having for that purpose already recalled all his Forces, and made several other
steps that way by his Envoy Marquess D'Abbeville; they could not choose but
think it great Prudence, as well as Gratitude, to close with their renowned
Prince, and our mighty Deliverer, and answer the calls and entreaties of their
sore oppressed Neighbors the English. Who in former Ages, had given them a
lift, and partly delivered them from Bondage, and who being now once assisted
and freed by them, would in all probability, contribute most effectually of any
of their Allies, to the repulsing of that subtle encroaching Foe, that
threatened them with a second Slavery; and in order to prevent the fatal Stroke
intended against them, as the chief Obstacles of erecting Despotick Power and
Arbitrary Government in Great Britain, and from thence enforcing it upon all
Europe, by lending a powerful, timely and hearty Assistance to his Highness.

Add to this the Sympathy and feeling compassion, which the horrid sufferings
of the poor Protestants in France, many thousands whereof wearing the cruel
Marks and Badges of French Barbarity; were daily objects of their Eyes, moved
their Christian hearts, which last consideration, as well as that of their
civil Interest, of which the Spanish and Dutch Netherlands, were the great
Barrier and Bulwark, as likewise the Design they had discovered to be Hatched
by France to devour them all one after another, and to extirpate the Protestant
Name, (scurrillously nick-nam'd by the scoffing Enemy, the Northern Heresy)
from under Heaven, prevailed likewise with the rest of the German Protestant
Princes, especially the most wise and experienced Prince the then Elector of
Brandenburg, his Heroical Highness's illustrious Kinsman, and the Princes of
the Houses of Saxony, Lunenburg and Hesse, to contribute their best Helps as
well as Wishes, to the accomplishment of that great Heaven-inspired Enterprise.

Next the Causes that moved the illustrious Prince of Orange, besides all the
former considerations and motives, common to him with all the rest, were so
visibly sensible, and most just, and of so very cogent a nature, that to resist
them, had been to resist both Sense and Reason, and God himself who now seemed
to give him a Commission, to rescue his Church and oppressed People.

He saw the State, in which he first drew his Breath, which his warlike
Ancestors founded, and which he no less gloriously and miraculously had newly
raised again, into a stronger and more beautiful Structure than before, out of
(in a manner) a confused heap of Rubbish, menaced afresh by the same crafty and
powerful Enemy, backed with another potent Popish Ally, in a more formidable
manner than ever; he heard from a far, the dismal Groans of the miserably
afflicted and tormented Protestants in France; and especially of those of his
own Hereditary Principality of Orange, most unjustly wrested from him; and what
infinitely more sensibly touched him, the Slavery and more than Egyptian
oppression of his natural Subjects, crying to him for Justice, and saying,
Help, O thou mighty Prince of Valor, and nursing Father of God's true reformed
Church; it is high time for to lay to thy powerful and blessed hand, for
popish Judges and Seminaries have made void our Laws, Rights and Privileges.

He found the ruin of his Country levelled at, through his August sides; and
that the Gallick Tyrant would never pardon him, the unexpected ravishment of
his stolen and perfidious Conquests; nor the truly generous and Princely
refusal of purchasing a Sovereignty by the betraying of his own Country; nor
the terrible, smarting and disgraceful blow, he received from him before Mons;
nor his obstructing an uncomely peace at Nimeguen; nor finally his happy Match
with a most accomplished and amiable Princess of his own Blood, when the subtle
Monsieur least thought on it, and whom he had laid close Intrigues and subtle
Stratagems (had not they been Providentially prevented, by a speedy conclusion
of that blessed Marriage) to have spirited or stolen away, and made a
Sacrifice to the black Interests, concerted between him and her Father, which
was to have been the great Issue of that numerous and splendid Embassy of
French Lords, not long before preceding; had not God in his Mercy to our
Nation prevented it, by making the late King Charles, as much inclined as he
was otherwise, to favor them; to balk all their Projects by that sudden and
contrary jerk of Policy, which put them for the present, quite out of
countenance; and which all their Juggles knew not how to prevent.

He likewise saw plainly, that whereas besides the unpardonable crimes against
the greatness of Lewis the 14th. and the bigoted Inclinations of his Uncle and
Father-in-law, he was sensible he had committed a Third, which was greater than
all the rest, viz. Obstinately refusing to give his Assent, and Consent, to
take off the Test and Penal Laws, and give a new Magna Charta of Liberty to the
Papists of England, to supplant and overthrow the Rights and Liberties of all
others; He was therefore by those whose threatenings were never vain, when in
full power to execute them, menaced, that he should pay dearly for it; and he
saw they were going in downright earnest to be as good as their Words, by
popping up a Child all on a sudden, to act the Prince of Wales, and put him and
his Royal Princess, by the Succession of these Crowns, of which they were the
true undoubted presumptive Heirs; no less unjustly than they had deprived him
of his other possessions, and all this only to put him out of Power, and make
him incapable to vindicate his own and his poor Subjects former wrongs, to
protect any longer with success the Re-publick he had hitherto so prosperously
defended; to revenge the unspeakable oppressions of the people in France, or
support or retrieve the Protestant Religion, and civil Rights and Liberties of
the ancient and warlike people of Great Britain; whereof he appeared a kind and
powerful Defender, and who were his undeniable Subjects in Reversion, and whose
Interests he seemed resolved zealously to espouse, and as stiffly to defend as
his own.

And when he saw the people of all Ranks and Qualities, and of all Religions
and Interests, in the three Kingdoms, but one (to wit, the Papists) with one
common and earnest mind and voice, call to him as next undoubted Heir at Law,
to take care no Damage might be done by the present Possessour, in the Lands of
his Succession; to resist the most unjust Usurpation, or Alienation intended by
a Supposititious Child, and the malicious Intrigues of a Jesuited Stepmother;
and in a word, to redress all the manifold Wrongs and Oppression of the
Subjects; to save the Protestant Religion, and the civil Liberties of all
Europe, which depended chiefly in that dangerous Juncture, upon the
Preservation of Great Britain to (...) Confederacy from becoming a P^ey to the
overgrown Monster of France.

Of the loss of all which, and of the vast Detriment, that would have thence
happened to so many millions of precious Souls, and to the public Weal of all
Christendom, he would have been undoubtedly thought highly guilty; had he
neglected so many forcible Calls, and indispensible Obligations, both of
Nature, Duty, and Interest.

And lastly, when besides all these irresistible Motives, he considered, that
the danger was extremely pressing; that Ireland was already Haltered, and bound
as a Sacrifice ready to be offered; Scotland strongly manacled, and the
intolerable Chains just ready to be thrown over England's Neck; and the
terrible glittering Sword drawn out, and ready to be Brandished against himself
and his Republic; and that unless he would resolve to strike the first Blow,
it would be too late to strike at all. And Finally, that unless he made an
attempt upon England, while his Allys had Forces and time to spare for his
assistance, and the Armies in England, as well as the people of all sorts, were
in a Condition as well as Disposition, to second his noble and excellent
Efforts; that the very next Spring perhaps, some of the Allys might find an
English Army upon their Frontiers, intermixed with French; and an Army of
Frenchified Switzers, and Irish Tories, in possession of England; and the
English and French Fleets, masters of the Sea, asserting the Greatness of Lewis
the 14th; and Holland and the Spanish Netherlands, swallowed up by a sudden
inundation, breaking violently in upon them on all sides, before they were
aware; or that their nearest, and most powerful Allys, could come up within
sight, much less within reach enough to give them any Assistance; I say, when
our wise and presaging Prince, now his most Excellent Majesty, saw, and duly
weighed all this, how loath soever he were to do any thing, that might bear the
least Shadow, or Semblance of ill; or that might seem to violate, that
Tenderness and Respect, he had naturally for an Uncle and a Father-in-law, of
that great Quality: Yet now, when not only his private Interests lay at stake,
but the public Happiness and Welfare of so many Myriads of Souls; so many
Kingdoms and Territories, some of which, he had such an indispensible
Obligation to take care of, were in such extraordinary pressing Danger, and
Honor of Conscience, even of King James himself, basely beslur'd and abused,
by so gross a Cheat put upon him, by the subtle Intrigues of Jesuits, and his
Jesuited Consort, in prejudice of his own Natural and undoubted Issue, in order
to the inslaving Him, as well as his Subjects, every whit as much to the
Caprices of France, as he is now; and to the manifest greater peril of his
Life, than since has happened by the attempts his people would have made
against the Intrigues of his Deluders; had not they found a far more regular,
and legal Assistance otherwise. And considering that there was no other remedy,
but breaking the neck of their mischievous Proceedings, by some sudden and
surprising Master-stroke of Power and Policy; He now stood no longer,
consulting with Flesh and Blood, and parling with the unseasonable reasonings
of the tenderness we have been speaking of; but fully resolve with all
Expedition, to prepare for the prevention, and happy redress of so great a
storm of Evils; as otherwise he foresaw would most inevitably fall upon
England, Scotland, and Holland: Yea, on all the greatest part of Europe.

But leave we our Gracious Prince a while, making his war like Preparations,
and stuffing his stately Wooden Horses, with fierce courageous Troops, not to
Burn, but to save our otherwise lost Troy; and make a step back to England, to
see how all things there concurred and worked together, to meet his most noble
Endeavors, and Crown his so glorious and heavenly Enterprises, with a blessed
Success beyond all Expectation.

If we come then to examine things there likewise, we shall still find that our
Royal Hero's Enemies, whilst they were plotting his Destruction, and the
enslaving of these Nations, under a double Yoke of Popery, and Arbitrary power;
which were both to Cent^^ in an entire Subjection to the Tyr^nny of the French
King; made Tools of themselves, by an Overruling Providence not only to save,
but to exalt them, whose utter ruin they really designed; and even lift them
up, to such a Power, as to be able to throw down their New Erected Babel in
England, and to shake the very Foundations of their Old one, so long settled
(even) in France it self. For the late King James, besides the Mistakes and
Faults which he had all along fallen into, and daily persisted to commit; for
want of discerning his own true Interests from those of France; and, for lack
of seeing the Bottom of the French King's Designs, made all other steps, that
his Enemies could have wished him to take, toward the bringing upon himself
Swift Destruction; and the Advancement of that Warlike-Prince to the Throne of
Great Britain: which, against the strong Obligations of Nature, and without any
sense, or regard of his own highly injured honor thereby, his late Majesty
shamefully went about, by the subtle Stratagems of Jesuits and Priests, to
bereave him and his Royal Consort of.

For besides his ^^^ing so openly with France, and most highly disobliging
thereby the rest of the Roman Catholic Powers, as we have related; And besides
the Broad-Signs he had given, of making War upon Holland, on pretense of their
having Assisted the Duke of Monmouth, and Argile, and of some other Newstarted
Complaints of the Dutch proceedings against our Merchants at Musilipatan, etc.
and in the East Indies, whilst the Injuries done our People daily by the French
about Hudson's Bay, and elsewhere, and in the Insults they daily received by
the French Privateers, and Men of War, almost every where, were passed by
unregarded, and without any redress; And besides the particular threats he had
made against the Illustrious Prince of Orange; he had Dissolved that Parliament
that had so zealously stood by him against the late D of Monmouth; not only
because they would not grant him a Fund of Money to maintain a Standing Army,
above the Regulated number of Guards, and Garrisons, in time of Peace, Contrary
to the Constitution of the Government; But rather because, forsooth, they would
not let them be Manned, and Commanded by as many Popish and Foreign Officers
and Commanders as he pleased to stuff them with.

After this, he continued and put in as many Popish Commanders, and Governors
into his Army, Ships and Garrisons; And as many Popish Justices of Peace into
all Towns, Buroughs and Cities, all over England, as he could: And, in favor
of that proceeding, so contrary to Law and Justice, orders his Judges to
Declare a Dispensing Power, to be one of his Royal Prerogatives, in prejudice
to the Privileges of the Two Houses, and even of his own Power in Parliament.
And deals with all the Artifices imaginable, with all Qualified Persons, both
Clergy and Laity of the Church of England, to induce them to Consent to the
Repealing of the Penal Laws and Test; to the Countenancing of his Dispencing
Power, and the keeping up of his Standing Army, and putting down the Militia;
and when he saw them averse to it; though he had but just before, most highly
incensed the Dissenting party, by his MOST BLOODY, and Severe Execution of so
many Hundreds of them that had been engaged with Monmouth and Argile; and
though he knew them all bred up in an Inveterate Aversion to Monarchy; Yet he,
most Impolitickly, Quits his Best Friends, that had Set the Crown upon his
Head, because they would not humor him in things visibly tending to his own
overthrow, or destruction, as well as theirs; And has recourse by Fawning, and
most Unkingly, Mean, and Abject Solicitations, to those very Dissenters, whose
BLOOD he was still REAKING with; Thinking to do by them, his Sworn Enemies,
what he could not get done by his Friends, and weaken both them and the other
Party with Divisions, till he could reduce them both, by his Third Growing
party, of English, Scotch, Irish, and Foreign Papists, to be his Absolute
Slaves: To this end he New-models over again those Corporations, both he and
his late Deceased Royal Brother, had but lately Modeled before; and taking
away all the Old Charters, gives out New ones, by which, all true Church of
England Men, who stood for the Penal Laws and Test, were ungratefully turned
out; and Dissenters, and such as had been turned out before, were intruded in
their places; Thinking thereby to have such a Packt Parliament, as would take
away those Laws, and Destroy the Church of England, by laying it open, in
Common, and Defenseless; and make Room for the Introducing of Popery and
Despotick Power, when it should be least apprehended. He Granted out
Commissions, for the vexing, and calling to Account those, that in the former
Reign, though really set on by the Intrigues of himself, and his own Party; had
vigorously executed the Laws then in force against Dissenters; and that, not so
much out of Righting the Dissenters, for the Exactions that had been made upon
them; Or Reimbursing them, or the Crown, for what was pretended to have been
extorted from the one, and detained from the other; but merely to raise New
Animosities between the two Parties, and make the Dissenters, though but for
their own Ends, willing to be his Tools, in the Absolute Destruction which he
intended to both.

And to this end, of his own Single Authority, by virtue of the Dispencing
Power he procured to be invested in him, by Eleven Judges, though in spite of
the Unanimous Sense of Parliament, sufficiently declared against it, in the
time of his Late Royal Brother, King Charles the Second, he gratifies them, by
a Declaration for Liberty of Conscience; which some of them, though they
accepted with seeming Joy, and Thankfulness, and being no less skilled in the
Art of Dissimulation, than his Confessor F. Petres, and imagining it good
policy to flatter him, as he flattered them, according to that common saying,
Fallere fallentem non est fraus; thereby to find the easier Means to work their
Revenge, both upon him and the Monarchy, and Established Church; Yet, the Major
part of them received it rather with Silence, than any apparent Consent, or
Applause; and several of them, like true Christians, and brave Englishmen,
expressed plainly their dislike of it, and Renounced such an Opportunity of
expressing their Resentments, against the Ancient and True Reformed Church of
England, by any proceeding, that was like to prove such a Tool for the Erection
of Popery, Slavery, and Arbitrary Power; and rather began then to have better
thoughts of the Established Church here, than ever before: When they saw her
Chief Members so stiffly to stand up, and Defend the Protestant Religion against
the Mines, as well as the open Attacks of Popery and Absolute Power; and to
refuse all manner of Accommodation with the Church of Rome, or any Complaisance
though to their then King; that might any way evacuate the Law, or put them
under any Suspicion of their being capable to give up their Common Interest;
and saw well enough, that it was the real Effect of the Intrigues of a
Court-party, influenced and biased by designing Popish Emissaries; and not the
Body of the Church of England, that had raised against them those Severe
Prosecutions, under which they had smarted so much; Yet some Mercenary Men were
gained among them, and, to the no small surprise of the World, the old Monthly
Observator, that had stuck so close to Prerogative, as to forget almost the
Interests of his Church, was now laid aside: And the late Mr. Henry Carr, that
had formerly Written the Packet from Rome; and had, in the most invidious and
provoking manner imaginable, exposed all the Intrigues of the Popish Agents;
and all the Actions, and whole Conduct of that King, when Duke of York; and had
served, as a Trumpet, to the whole Party of the Exclusioners; was now Courted,
and Bribed, to Blazon forth the Graciousness of the New Declaration for
Liberty, and to Write, in Exchange, for their Observator.

The like Proceedings were acted in Scotland, where Despotick Power, and
Absolute Authority was Assumed, with a more Imperious Air; and then were our
Gazettes stuffed, with those many Fulsome Addresses, that Nauseated all Men of
Sense of both Parties; The hands to which, were most of them Suborned, and
hired; and the Hundreds and Thousands, that were not Named, set down with a
Bold Stroke, indefinitely, Cum, etc. Though no where yet Existing, but in
Nubibus; and which indeed, though they pretended to have devoted their Lives
and Fortunes to the service of their New Benefactor, for the Gracious Liberty
he had Granted them, yet proved but Troops of Air in his time of Need; the Main
Body of the Dissenting Party Wisely Concurring with that of the Church, to wish
well to the Arms of the Prince of Orange; and, in Scotland, doing indeed
themselves the whole Work for him.

And though the Church-Party would not give their Consent, to the taking off
the Test and Penal Laws; Yet he had some hopes, they, and especially the Major
part of the Clergy among them, would at least have gone such Lengths in Passive
Obedience, and compliance to Prerogative, as to have been tamely submissive
with the dispensing with them; and not to have withstood the Declaration for
Liberty of Conscience: But when he found by that Acute Letter to a Dissenter,
and some other Writings, Published on that occasion, that they Disavowed all
Complaisance with him, in those Points; that no Addresses of Thanks, excepting
one or two, came from any of the Church of England Party, upon the subject of
that Declaration; and that notwithstanding the many sham Addresses, wherewith
he sought to Delude himself, and the World; the Best and Wisest part of the
Dissenters Rejected his Declaration; as harboring a Secret Snake in the Grass,
and Underhand sided with the Church of England, in Disavowing any Liberty not
Granted in Parliament: He was extremely Uneasy, and many Projects were offered
to him, by his Cabinet Councillors, to Ward the Mischiefs these ill symptoms
Threatened, and make himself obeyed.

According to some of these Advices, to Revenge himself upon such of our Clergy
as stood Tight to the Protestant and English Interests, by the means of such of
them, as he thought would comply, which still he imagined would be the Major
part; and to make them, as his Jesuits phrased it, To eat their own Dung, by
forcing them to Excert an Active, or else to feel the smart of their own
Passive Obedience, the Principles of which he mistakingly fansied would have
carried the Main-Body of the Clergy; Just as great and extravagant lengths, as
some Tantivy-Court-Doctors, among them at that time, had laid out for them;
and, have persuaded them, that the same Absolute and Unlimitted Obedience, was
owing to the Bare Commands of the King; as to the Acts of the Three Estates,
viz. King, Lords and Commons, in which alone, is the fullness of Supreme Legal
Power, and Authority; and to which alone consequently, the Orthodox Christian
Duty of Absolute Active, or Passive Obedience is due; And that they were to
submit, as blindly and tamely to the King, acting without, or against LAW, as
by and with it; and that Active, or Passive Obedience, was as much due to the
King, out of, as in Parliament; and to a Word of his, an Order of Council, or a
Proclamation, as to an Act of Parliament; I say, erroneously thinking that the
Major part of our Churchmen were as much seasoned, with those Mistaken Notions
of Passive Obedience, etc. as some Court-Doctours, by ass'd then by the
Jesuits, and some of their Unthinking Followers seemed to be; He resolves to
Administer to the whole Body of the Clergy, such a Dose, or Pill, as should
infallibly search and try the Temper of them all; and therefore presently gives
Order to all Ministers, Pastors, and Curates, To Read Publicly in their
Churches his Declaration, for liberty of Conscience.

But finding that, Contrary to his Expectation, not only Seven of our
Principal, and Right Reverend Bishops, had the Zeal and Courage, to Address him
against that Declaration, as Illegal; and to Protest they could not Comply with
his Commands in Reading it, because against Law, as well as their Consciences;
And that the Main-Body of the Clergy, throughout the Kingdom, influenced by
their Noble Example, Refused likewise to Read it, and that in Nine thousand,
and some Hundreds of Parishes, there are in England and Wales, besides
Collegiate-Churches and Chapels, etc. there were scarely 500 Clergymen in all
that were weak and supple enough to Comply with his Orders in that Matter; He
and his Cabal were much enraged, And yet at their Wits end, what Measures to
take; How to Remedy so great an Evil, and how to prosecute a whole Body of Men,
so considerable, as that of the Clergy. They had not long before that set up,
though contrary to an Express Act of Parliament, a New High Commission;
thinking thereby to have awed the Clergy, and have Disciplined them so, as to
have disposed them for a Ready Compliance with the Declaration that was to
follow; And which, had they Complied, Was to have been the Dead-doing-Stroke to
the Churchof England: By which High Commission, they Censured and Deprived, the
Right Worthy and Magnanimous Prelate, the present Lord Bishop of London;
Notwithstanding his, and his Noble Families great Merits toward the Crown, and
several other worthy Clergy Men; Which Bold Attempts upon the Subjects Liberty,
and Prerogative of Parliament, did not a little move all Orders and Ranks of
Men in the Kingdom, and rather made them far more stiff, against all Compliance
with the least Motions made toward taking away the Penal Laws and Test; and,
with the Declaration for Liberty, than any ways frightened, or disposed them to
it.

Which made the Popish Cabal, tho they resolved to deal rigorously with the
Addressing Bishops, whom they committed to the Tower, not dare to employ the
Authority of their pretended Commission against them any more; But rather to
Impeach them at Law, which, when they were baffled in, they signified such
indiscreet Rage and Spite, at their Disappointment, that they could not forbear
letting the whole Body of the Protestants throughout Great Britain, etc. see,
that from thenceforwards they were minded, without seeking any more Umbella's,
or Disguises of Law and Justice, to prosecute their Revenge by Main Force; and
by Military and Dragooning hands to effect, what they could not do by their
High Commission, or any courses at Law.

I need not mention their Practices, in endeavoring to Poison the Fountains
that were to feed our Posterity, by Erecting Popish Schools and Seminaries in
diverse places; and by endeavoring to stuff our Universities with Roman
Emissaries; Nor the violences used toward those who withstood them: As to
those of Magdalen College, and others, because all those were but less matters,
in comparison of what they did afterward to the Right Reverend the Bishops;
and were going to do to the rest of the Clergy, and therefore shall only
proceed, to hint upon those other Extremities they openly, in the face of the
Sun, at last were driving us upon; And which even forced the whole Nation, most
Justly, in its Necessary Defense; after they had, out of an Excess of Respect
to the Late King, born, till a Remedy was within an Ace of being too late, the
Insolences of a few despicable, hotheaded Jesuits and Monks, influenced by the
French Father la Chaiese; whose blind Unthinking Passive Tool, P. Peter's was;
to call for Assistance to the Next Presumptive Heirs of the Crown.

These then were their further Designs upon the Clergy.

I. To New-Rate all Ecclesiastical Preferments, and make them pay Firstfruits,
Tenths, etc. according to their present yearly value, and not according to the
old Rates.

II. To examine at their Ecclesiastical Commission, the ways and means used by
Clergymen possessed of Benefices, to come into them; and if they could be
charged with the least appearance of Simony, to deprive them, and give their
Livings to Popish-Priests, or formerly deprived Nonconformist Ministers, or
others devoted to their Interests, to hold by Dispensation, or otherwise.

III. To Nose the Conformable Clergy, by allowing a Right to Papists and
Dissenters, to keep public Registers, and to pay but half-Dues to the Parish
Ministers for burying.

IV. To nominate no New Protestant Bishops, or other Ecclesiastical Dignities,
in place of those that should die; and to foist in as many Popish Priests and
Dissenting Ministers, as they could into all Ecclesiastical Benefices that
should be vacant from time to time, who were to hold them by Dispensation, and
supply them by conforming Curates, till they should be strong enough to
establish Popery by open Force.

V. To have the Jurisdiction of vacant Bishoprics administered by
Commissioners, and their Revenues employed for maintenance of Popish Bishops,
Priests, or Seminaries, etc. As likewise the Revenue of all vacant Deaneries,
Prebendships, etc. And to obtrude as many Popish Schoolmasters as they could,
into all vacant Free-Schools, with several other projects.

VI. To remove all Causes from the Bishops Courts, to their Ecclesiastical
Commission.

VII. After some time, to sieze the Cathedral of St. Paul's when it should be
Built, and the Abbey of Westminster for Popish use, allowing only the Dean and
Prebends, in case they quietly abandoned, the possession of them, their full
Revenues during life.

These things were really intended against the Clergy, over and above what was
actually already done; but then to Curb the Laity of all Degrees, these further
Measures were concerted to put in Execution, as fast as they could.

I. A new Court like that of the Star Chamber, though under a disguised name
was to be erected.

II. To Awe and Balance the Power and Interest of the Metropolitan City of
London, without the rougher Methods of a Tower or Garrison, etc. It was
resolved, to erect the City of Westminster into a Corporation, like to that of
London, to be governed by a Lord Mayor, Aldermen, common Council, etc. with as
ample Privileges, Immunities and Freedoms, as the ancient City of London
enjoys; in order to invite People of Wealth and Trade, as great Merchants, etc.
to settle there as well as in London, and thereby to cause an Emulation between
them, that might keep both Cities tight to the Crown, or at least to keep that
of London, from being potent enough alone to contest any more with their King,
or make too strong a party against him.

III. The Militia when they durst, were to be all Disarmed, and the Money
levied for the maintenance of them, applied for that of a standing Army.

IV. In case the Parliament to be called after the new model of Corporations
and Counties, that then was endeavoring was finished, answered not
expectation: Then a Parliament was to be packt, after the method of those of
Cromwell's, composed most of Army Officers, Courtiers, and such others as they
knew were disposed, vigorously to concur with all projects to the ruining of
the public Liberty.

V. After things were come to perfection, the House of Commons was to be
declared unnecessary and pernicious; and all Legislative Authority, to reside
in the King, and a select Council of Lords and Gentry.

VI. In order to this, the Army was by degrees to be new Modeled, and stuffed
with English, French, Scotch and Irish Papists, or Persons indifferent in
Religion, or of none at all, with some Dissenters, etc. And all Church of
England Men by little and little put out of the Council, and out of all places
of Trust both Civil and Military.

VII. That most of the English Forces, should be on some sudden pretense,
shipped over into French Service, and reimplac'd by as many French, who with
something a greater number of English, Scotch, Irish Papists, and Popish
Swissers, were to constitute the King's Guards, and the standing Forces of
England. And Scotland and Ireland were to be guarded by natural Irish, and such
others of English or Scotch extraction that were Papists.

VIII. A new Court of Wards was to be Established, by virtue of which, all
Minors and Infants being brought under the King's Tutelage, should be brought
up in the Romish Religion; as was already begun to be practiced in Scotland.

But notwithstanding all these Attempts upon the Rights and Liberties of the
Subject, contrary to positive Law, his own Solemn Promises, and his Coronation
Oath, so extremely affectionate, were the best part of the Nation to the person
of their Prince, and so wholly averse to the contributing any thing, to the
embroiling these Nations, a second time in Civil Wars, as being so very
sensible of the miseries of the last, whose deep Scars scarcely well healed,
yet remained in view, not without horror before their Eyes, and reluctance on
their Spirits.

That they were very hardly and with much difficulty induced to believe any
thing of their King, that savored of an ill design; and when they were
convinced of it by infallible Proofs, and the undoubted Testimony of their own
Senses, together with Church and State now smarting under the Burden: Yet
would they have thought it their most dutiful, safe and wisest Course, tamely
to suffer almost any Inconveniences and Insults from him, rather than to
involve the three Kingdoms in fresh dangers, by any active Resistance;
especially considering that he was already well stricken in Years, and could
not Reign long.

Had not they seen those very Princely Heirs, and Nursing Parents to the
Church, in whom they reposed all hopes of Redress, treated after the same
Injurious manner, as the Subjects; and not only Menaced, but plainly going to
be both for ever excluded of their Succession, by a Jesuitical imposture, or a
supposititious Prince of Wales, and driven even from their present possessions,
both in the Netherlands and Germany, as they had newly been already from those
in France, by a formidable Invasion; and that they (namely the Subjects) were
to be made Tools of both for their own Destruction, and that of those pious
famous and most gracious Princes, from whom only under God, they hoped for
Relief and Deliverance. And had not they had perfect Information, by means of
the Spanish Ambassador, as aforesaid, of all the Intrigues and Stratagems,
laid against the Rights of those Dear and Heaven-beloved Princes, the hope of
the Protestant Church throughout Christendom, as well as against their own
present Civil and Religious Liberties; and especially, receiving perfect
intelligence of the whole process of that Imposture, of putting upon them now a
Supposititious Heir, and had not King James himself, and his too precipitate
Counselors, taken very much pains to convince them, that the Spanish
Intelligence was very true to a Tittle in all particulars; and had not the
League with France to destroy Holland, and the manifest steps made then by our
Court, toward its Execution, beyond all Contradiction, demonstrated to them
that such Chains were (of a truth) prepared for them, as would not be of a few
years continance, but would be very lasting, and impossible to be shaken off,
if once wholly put on: And that they were just going to be thrown about their
necks, if not prevented, without further dallying in that very Nick of time.

For at the same time, a pretended Prince of Wales was started up, they found
their Pillars of the Church, namely, the Reverend Bishops, and the main Body of
their Clergy fiercely attacked; Ireland, and the Protestants there, put wholly
under Despotick Power, Arbitrary Dispositions, and the merciless Mercy of cruel
implacable Irish Papists; Scotland, wholly subjected already, under an open
faced Despotick Authority; the brave English Protestant Nobility, those
Ornaments of our Kingdom, for the most part slighted, and their Sage advices,
not at all heeded in Council; but all ruled by a Popish French Cabal, headed by
P. Petres and Mr. Barillon, and all Church of England-men already displaced, or
going to be removed, not only from Civil Employments, but as we have showed
from Military ones too, both in the Fleet and Army; and when the Army it self,
which was to have backed all these proceedings, saw, that for only opposing the
foisting in of Irish and French Papists among them, their most Eminent Captains
and Officers, though highly deserving in the late time of need, against the
Duke of Monmouth, were treated no better than the Bishops: That the illustrious
Princess Ann of Denmark her self, was so imperiously and disdainfully handled,
and neither she, nor any Person from their Serene Highness's, the Prince and
Princess of Orange, though so very highly concerned, suffered to be present at
the Birth of the pretended Prince of Wales. But that on the contrary, War was
plainly preparing against the Hollander, in pretense forsooth; but in reality
and indeed, against the precious Persons of the Prince and Princess of Orange,
whom they looked upon at least, as their Sovereigns in Reversion; and that they
were to be sent over Seas they knew not where, to fight French and Popish
Quarrels, never more to return, whilst their places were to be supplied here,
by French and Irish and other Popish Forces; I say, when the Army saw
themselves thus treated, and were convinced there were further designs, laid as
deeply and maliciously against them, as against any other body of men in the
three Kingdoms, and saw an Image of their future fate, by what they beheld
already done to the late standing Army in Ireland, and to some of the best of
their own Officers; and when they saw they began already to be distrusted, and
yet that the Court had gone so far, in the affairs of the Bishops, and the body
of the Church of England, both Clergy and Gentry, that in all appearance the
Lawyers having refused to do them the Justice, pretended in the Trial of the
Right Reverend Prelates; they would now have recourse to a French Army, as soon
as ever they had seen but a good part of the present one gone away, and the
Post new Modeled.

They, ( viz. the English Army) readily concurred with the rest of the Nation;
that is to say, Those of the Clergy, Nobility and Gentry, in sending
intentionally if not actually to the Heroic Prince of Orange to come, and
(immediately under the Lord of Hosts) to undertake their Relief and
Deliverance; and thus a good part even of the whole Nation, and of the Army and
Fleet too, even by the very proceedings of their Enemies, though much contrary
to their Intentions, disposed to wish success to the most generous undertaking
of our modern CONSTANTINE; who in Compliance with their hearty desires, and the
powerful Call of Self-preservation, as well as the Defense of his own Rights,
with the zealous Assistance of the States of Holland, and of the most Serene
Prince, the Elector of Brandenburg, and some other generous Allies, provided a
brave Fleet, consisting of Sixty five Men of War, five hundred Flyboates, ten
fire Ships, sixty Pinks, and as many Scheling Boats, etc. A good Army to be
before hand with the French, and their Creatures in England too, set sail in
the midst of Winter from the Brill, and whilst he was coming, and after his
first Landing, was still further favored, by the following Actions and
Behavior of his Enemies.

I. For upon the News of his Highness's intended coming, King James to augment
his Army, sending for considerable Numbers of the Irish Papists, and some
Scotch Highlanders, and visibly showing more confidence in them, than in his
own Native English; made an end perfectly of alienating the hearts of his
English Army from him, and gave them most just grounds to fix their affections
on the expected and blessed Prince, the hope of England's best People; nay
caused them now to believe entirely all that had been told them of the late
King James, and his Jesuits Designs, and Frenchified Priests Intrigues, against
them.

II. When our mighty Prince had set sail the first time, and was repulsed by a
grievous Tempest, the good Providence of the Lord turned even that to his
Advantage; for having had the Prudence to publish in the Harlaem and Amsterdams
Convent, that his losses and detriment by that grievous Tempest, were greater
much than they in reallity were. And making a face of things as if his grand
Design was thereby quite balked; it was very eagerly and readily believed,
especially by the Court Cabal of Jesuits and Priests; nay, they imagined them
still greater than was reported, and thereupon became so very secure in their
own thoughts, that they concluded all danger past, and thereby still more and
more alarmed the whole Nation, and kept their inclinations the more firm and
close, unto their Great and Heaven inspired Deliverer. For that hot headed
party, now as openly bragged in every Coffee-house, that God had defeated the
Heretics, and that the Noise of that Expedition, had only given the King a
fair opportunity to increase his Army, wherewith he would now make himself
Absolute; and by the help of them, and the French together, chastise the proud
Bishops (as they foolishly called them) and the whole Church of England, and
their Abettors, the Lawyers too; rout out the daring Prince out of the
Netherlands, and exterminate the States of Holland as an unsufferable
President, of prosperous Rebellion, and of pernicious Consequence to all
Princes.

And among other Troops, they just now raised a new Regiment of Horse-Guards,
all notorious Papists for the pretended Prince of Wales, and committed the
custody of his Person to them only, and to the Irish.

III. After the renowned Prince of Orange, and his Forces were happily landed
at Tor-bay, and had given Directions for the speedy landing the rest, and the
Canon to be unship'd for the more convenience at Topsham; the late King James's
Council, as influenced by the French, advised him to neglect sending the body
of Scotch and Irish Soldiers, in which he confided to attack the Princes Force,
while they were so fatigued and disabled, with the bitter Voyage they had
undergone, and were not as yet, re-inforc'd by any Refreshments or Rest, or
joined by any Malcontents (as they called them) out of the Country, or from
the late King's own Army; and rather to stay till he could assemble his whole
Army, and provide a sufficient train of Artillery, store of Ammunition, etc.
and be ready to March against them in Person to give them a formal Battle;
which must be acknowledged, gave our renowned Prince a convenient opportunity,
to refresh his Men and Horse, and recruit what were wanting; and likewise to
such as were well affected to him in the Country, and in the King's Army, to
go over to him.

IV. King James by a strange Fate, though so much Frenchified, yet being over
persuaded not to become too much dependant of the French King, refused till it
was too late, to receive a French Army, though often pressed to it by Barillon;
insomuch that the French King finding he could not have his Will, to have a
French Force admitted, strong enough to Master both England and its King, and
to have the English Forces instead of his own, to fight his Quarrels on the
other side, gave the aforesaid Counsel to the late King James, not to detach
his Scots and Irish, against the Princes wearied Forces, for fear his English
Army taking exceptions thereat might Rebel, and seize his Person in the mean
time; but to march with his whole Army against them in Person, where one Nation
might awe the other, and the English might have less cause of Exception, seeing
some confidence still reposed in them; and the Kings presence might keep them
all in due Decorum and Obedience.

The French, though fearing some would desert him, yet thought that enough
would still stay with the King, to keep up a Civil War, which would deprive the
Hollanders and Confederates at least of the Forces they had lent for that
Expedition; and which was more, of the Conduct of so great a General, as the
Prince of Orange, and force King James the next Summer, to admit what number of
French to help him, he should please to offer; and which he thought, he could
easily send him by his own Fleet, with that part of King James's that should
remain firm to him, and so he should have his long desired ends at last.

V. Because King James had so stiffly refused a French Army for that present,
and to part with his English, the French King in hopes that the late King would
however find Friends enough, to keep the valiant Prince of Orange and his
Forces employed for some years, without being able to assist the Confederates,
and make both England and Holland the eager Prey to him at last; though he were
in actual War with Holland, and had a numerous Army near their Frontiers, yet
forbore to make any Attempt upon them, for fear it should hinder the Prince and
his Forces from going for England; and so deprive him of the sundry advantages
he hoped to reap, by that Diversion.

So true a Friend was he at the Bottom, to his poor deluded Ally's Interest,
and so very much mistaken in true Measures for promoting his own, by an
overruling hand of Providence.

VI. And lastly, the strange unmanly fear, and unsteadiness that appeared in
the late King James, when he had the greatest occasion, to show that Courage
and Conduct, he had always before pretended to; in not appearing firm to stand
by those, that otherwise, in all probability would have stood to him; even
among the English Forces, as well as among the Nobility, Clergy and Gentry, and
his actual deserting them afterward gave the last finishing Motion to the
mighty and memorable Revolution that followed.

Thus you see, all these several steps of the Prince of Orange's very Enemies,
though directed as they thought by the best, safest and rightest measures of
Prudence and Policy against him, were all made by the Providence of Almighty
God (who takes the Wise in their own craftiness, and will suffer no
enchantment against Jacob nor divination against Israel) to contribute to the
more assured and speedy success of our noble Prince Enterprise, so very justly
and lawfully undertaken, by a loud Call and Commission from Heaven in his own
Defense, and likewise in the Defense and Safety of the People, Church and Cause
of God.

And by these strange means, it came to pass, that the magnanimous Prince,
setting sail a second time from Hellevoet-sluys, with a prosperous Gale, though
he suffered much again with his people afterward, by rough Weather, and the
incommodities of Landing in such a place, and his first uncouth Marches; yet
Landing upon the 5th. of November, in the famous Year, 1688. just 100 years
after the Spanish Invasion, and on the Anniversary of the Gunpowder Treason;
as if designed and ordained by Heaven to deliver us, both from the intestine
Contrivances of a Faction within us, and the approaching inundation of the
French without us, now much more formidable than Spain was then, in less than
six Weeks time, entered Triumph^^ly into the Palace of our Capital City, (...)
by almost universal Consent of the exceeding joyful Nation, of all Orders,
Ranks and Degrees, invested on the Anniversary of the Nativity of our Lord,
with the Administration of the Government; as if by Divine appointment,
preordain'd to be a temporal Savior to these Nations, and to all his chosen
People; and by the peculiar Deligation and Commission, of that King of Kings,
and Lord of Lords, that Rules over the Kingdoms of Men, and gives them to
whomsoever he will: And then after he had by the general desire, and humble
importunity of the Subjects, called a Convention of Estates, was by them on the
13th. of February, 1688. conjointly with his Royal and virtuous Princess,
declared the Rightful and undoubted King and Queen of England, France and
Ireland, and soon after of Scotland.

The late King James by sending his Queen and pretended Son, into France into
the hands of a known Enemy of these Nations, and who had been the cause of all
their manifold grievances; and by retiring thither afterward, voluntarily of
his own accord himself, having given infallible Evidence, to all the sober part
of the Nation, that the Birth of that pretended Prince, was too dark a
Contrivance to endure the clear light of a public Examination in Parliament,
and made all other expedients of resetling the shaken Government, redressing
the multiplied grievances of the Subjects, and doing right to the most
undoubted Presumptive Heirs of the Crown, altogether impracticable.

I forbear to insert here, all the particulars of his advances, toward the
effecting so great and happy a Revolution; because they are fresh in the
memories of all, and are known even to such as are but only mere strangers to
us in these days. And because I have already exactly enough, related them in
my late Diary, of that Memorable Expedition, Printed for Richard Baldwin, 1689.
To which for those points, I refer my Readers: The conclusion of all was, that
Their Majesty's were on the 11th. of April following, most Solemnly Crowned at
Westminster, by the Noble and most Reverend Father in God, the Bishop of
London, assisted with other Bishops, to the great and inexpressible Joy and
Satisfaction of all their People; the Terror and Amazement of their Enemies,
and the Wonder and Surprise of the whole World.

A Revolution, which if it were miraculous in the Concurrence of so many
seeming contrary, precedent and concomitant Causes, as we have showed, was no
less wonderful for the Laudable and Angel-like moderation of the chief
instruments of it; namely, of the People and of the Gracious and Heavenly
devoted Prince and Princess, to whom they humbly and earnestly Addressed. For
the People had so much Affection and Respect to their late King, that they
suffered so much, till they were almost reduced beyond Remedy, before they
would seek one; and when they sought and obtained one, sought such a one, as
was the most Natural and Consonant to the Duty and Respect they owed their
King, that could be Imagined: For they sought to the next presumptive Heirs of
his own Flesh and Royal Blood, against the false Game put upon them and the
people, and even upon King James himself, by the Intrigues of a Foreign Prince,
and a Subtle Popish Designing Stepmother, and Second Wife, together with the
Help of Jesuits and Priests: And that was done, not Tumultuously, or by a
Faction; but by the Main Body of the Nation, in the persons of their Chiefest
Men of all Orders, Degrees and Interests, and by as Legal Representatives as
the Juncture of Time and Affairs would permit (nay, I may assert, that that
Most Honorable and August Convention, were as Lawful Representatives, and as
Able Men, as the whole Kingdom could afford) And by their, Now, Most Excellent
Majesty's, with so much Softness, Care and Veneration, to the Person of the
Late King, as infallibly declared to all Mankind, that they (yet) had preserved
no small share of Affection, and Respect for him. So much, as it plainly
appeared since, he would not have reserved for them, had he but prevailed, or
got them within the Verge of his Power. For, as our present Gracious Queen,
then Princess of Orange, had earnestly entreated Her dear Lord and Husband, the
Prince, to be very careful in all the Course of His Expedition, of the Person
of Her Father; which was backed with the Instances of the Confederate Roman
Catholic Princes. Those Counsels, and Entreaties were, verily, so very
consentaneous to His own Sentiments, and Innate Inclinations, that he most
readily and punctually observed, and performed them. For, when the Late King
was seized and insulted by the Mobb at Feversham, as he attempted, in Disguise,
to have made his Escape, and pass the Seas; He was very sensibly Concerned, at
the Affronts and Indignities done him, and took special care he should be
safely Re-conveyed out of the dangers of the then Exasperated People, by his
own Guards to Whitehall. And when he saw him so fully bent to Retire for
France, Though it were, in many Respects, against his Own, and the Public
Interest; yet he would not cross him in it. And since he was so eagre upon it,
had him Safe Conducted, by his own Dutch Guards to Rochester; and from thence
to a Vessel he had himself underhand provided, to Waft him safe where he would
be; with private Command, He should not be Molested, or Insulted in his
Passage, either by Sea or Land: Thus the Late King ABDICATED the Throne, and
Retired to France; and so laudably and gloriously concluded this most Happy and
Wonderful Revolution:

An Appendix; Containing the Remarkable Providence that have continued to
Bless and Protect their Excellent Majesty's, King William and Queen Mary, since
their first Happy Exaltation to the Imperial Throne of GREAT BRITAIN.
THE Divine and Unsearchable Wisdom and Justice, having through Two Mighty and
Unparalleled Revolutions, safely Conducted His present Majesty to the
Sovereign Throne of Great Britain; And made even the Oppositions and Stratagems
of His Implacable Enemies of the Roman Faction, as he had formerly made those
Intrigues of the Great Constantine's Adversaries and Competitours, the most
Operative and Instrumental of any other Causes, to the Exaltation of him to be
a Caesar, that he might be the better able to Combat and Subdue the Enemies of
his Church: Has since, by so many Stupendous Proofs, showed it self so
particularly careful, as well of the Safety and Protection of Both their
Majesty's Sacred Persons, as of the Prosperity of their Designs; which, as they
are, without Contradiction, Just in their Causes, have been all along no less
Just and Glorious in their Ends: As being (without Controversy) in their whole
Aim, directed purely to the Glory of God, and the Common good of Mankind. So
that we may from thence, without any great Presumption hope; That the Supreme
Sovereign of the World, whose hand is not shortened, will not stop here; But
has entrusted so much Clemency, Power and Prudence, in the hands of a Prince of
such Matchless Moderation, Virtue and Integrity; that it might effectually be
made use of, to the utter Defeating and Suppressing of that Monstrous Tyrant,
against whom He has begun to give us such a Signal, and Remarkable
Deliverance. And we trust and pray, That this All-wise and inscrutable Being,
will never lea^e presiding in His Royal Councils, no^ going forth with His
Fleets and Armies, till he has by him, as another Cyrus or Constantine,
perfected our Deliverance, both from the French and Roman Tyranny; and placed
the state of these Three Nations, and of all Europe, upon so firm and even a
Balance, That no One Power on the whole Earth may ever be able to shake, or
disturb its Tranquillity, in a long Series of years. And till, like His Renowned
Predecessor in these Islands, the Matchless Constantine, He has to the full
deserved the Title of Restitutor Humani Generis, or Restorer of Mankind. To
proceed then.

The first thing His present Majesty did, after His Happy Accession to the
Throne, was, by the Unanimous and Deliberate Advice, and Desire of His People,
to Proclaim War against the French King; and enter into a strict Engagement
with Holland, and the rest of the Confederates, for the Common Defense of the
Liberties of Europe. And though His Majesty was forced a while to stay on this
side the Seas, till Matters in the Two Kingdoms of England and Scotland were so
composed, that it might not be unsafe to leave them; And so could not appear
for some time in Action against the Common Enemy. Yet he defeated the Gallick
Tyrant of his Two great Expectations, viz. (1.) Of seeing the Force of England
once more turned against Holland; And, (2dly,) Of seeing a Civil War ensue in
England, which might give him a fair opportunity, under pretense of Assisting
King James; of throwing in such a Force, that might, in the sequel, Enslave us
all. Which disappointment made the Monsieur to fret in his Grease; to think,
that by his neglecting, when time was, to Alarm the Dutch Frontiers with his
Army, he had thereby given scope to his most dangerous Enemy, to take free and
full possession, without hardly any Resistance, on the Kingdoms of his most
Devoted and Powerful Ally; and now, at best, he could no way possible divert
him, from turning his Force directly against France; but by Fomenting a War in
Ireland, which would be more difficult and expensive to him, to maintain at
that Distance, than to King William. Yet still he had Giant-like hope, to keep
him in play at least some years, till the Confederates should be wearied out on
the other side, and he might, by that means, retrieve all again in England, and
Re-establish his Ally King James with the higher hand. But even here too
Providence deceived him, and did that Work, as it had done the others before.
For our Victorious King William, much Quicklier, and by more effectual and
successful Means, than our Great Hero himself, or any of us all did, or could
in Humane Reason, or Prudence expect. But though the Almighty Creator was
pleased generally to give a most surprising Success, to all that our truly
Pious and Valiant King enterprized in Person: Yet, least those Prosperities
should lift up our hearts too high, and make us Attribute too much to our own
Strength, they were allayed by some Rubs, in some other Rancounters, where His
Majesty was not, nor could be present; As were sufficient to convince us, That
though God did indeed favor the Just Cause, and Well-intended Designs of our
Gracious Prince, whom His own Arm had placed over us: Yet, he was still Angry
both with us, and our Allies; since neither their nor our Arms were ever
observed to prosper so well under any other Chieftain, as that Great Prince,
whose Exemplary Virtues we might as safely Imitate, as His Civil and Warlike
Qualifications. England, it is true, had now by this time, excepting a very
inconsiderable and disarmed Party, unanimously Ranged it self under the Willing
Obedience of Their present Majesty's happy Government. But Scotland was still
disturbed, by the Influence of the late Viscount Dundee; And poor Irelrnd was
in a manner totally under the Enemies Power; and provided with such an Army of
Disciplined Natives, and so well-furnish'd with Warlike Necessaries, and
Officers from France, that it perhaps could never boast the like, and they
seemed at least irrecoverably to have Rent that Kingdom from the English
Empire. When it pleased Allmighty God to animate a handful of Men,
inconsiderable for all things but Undaunted Courage, and Zeal to their Religion
and Ancient Liberties; when all the rest of the Kingdom was already Subjected,
to shut their Gates against a Power, which then ruled every where else about
them: And even at a time, when they could have little or no hope of Relief from
England, or elsewhere; vigorously to Defend a Town, but meanly Fortified, and
worse Provided; with a kind of Supernatural and Wonderful Valor, against a
Numerous and Well-furnisht Army, headed by their King himself; and able
General-Officers from France, Renowned for their Conduct, and to hold it out
against all Disadvantages, to the Amazement of the Whole World, till Relief,
though very strangely by many causes delayed, much longer than 'twas thought
possible they could stay for it, was brought them; and by that means a Way
opened to deliver that very Kingdom from the Oppressors, when they thought
themselves most secure, and firmly Posted.

And, indeed, whosoever well considers the Vigorous Actions of the Men of
Derry, and of those of Inniskilling, who took Arms about the same time, cannot
but think they were influenced by something more than Humane Courage: Whilst
their Enemies at the same time, were not only Infatuated in their Councils, but
palled in their Valor, (though they had some very good Troops among them, both
English, Scotch and French; by the unexpected daring Magnanimity of a few true
Zealots for Religion and Liberty, whom, looking upon as Desperado's, they durst
not fight with, and yet were as much afraid to let alone. They were Infatuated,
I say, in their Counsels; For by the very best Relations, it appears, That, if
they had Besieged Derry with their whole Army, and employed their best
Disciplined, and most Warlike Troops to make the Attacks, they might easily
have taken it, before any succor had come: Or, if they had altogether let it
alone, or contenting themselves only with keeping a Blockade before it, and had
sent a good part of their Army into Scotland, to the Assistance of the late
Viscount Dundee, who was a Commander both of Courage and Conduct, and who had,
by his Great Interest in the Highlands, and other parts, Raised no despicable
Opposition against the Government: (I say) 'Twas the sense of very
Understanding Men, as well of our Own, as the Enemies side, That if they had,
in stead of Amusing themselves before Derry, sent Timely Assistance to Dundee,
as he often and earnestly pressed the Lord Melfort, they had at least removed
the Seat of the War out of their own Country; and found so much Work for King
William nearer home, that it had been impracticable for Him to send any
Succors at least that year to the Protestants any where in Ireland; So that
Derry, and the Iniskillingers too, must needs have been Reduced at last of
Course, and by Necessity, with little or no Fighting. But some of the Irish
Officers, forsooth, must needs, in their profound Wisdom, Advise the late King
James to a Medium, by making a slow and regular Siege with his worst Troops,
under pretense of teaching these Men to be better Soldiers thereby, till by it
he quite balkt and spoiled his poor Teagues at first dash, and lost his
Opportunity of Assisting so brave a Servant as Dundee was, and carrying the War
into Scotland, if not into England it self.

Which must be confessed by all sober Christians, was another Instance how the
Divine Providence, as it had begun, so continued still to Overruled the Actions
and Councils of the Enemies of our Blessed Joshua and Mighty Deliverer, and to
make them all Contribute to the Accomplishment of that Great and Glorious Work
it designed by him, in such a Manner, that the Finger of God might appear in
it, of more clear efficacy than the Power and Policy of Man. For, our Good
Theodosius was always prevalent with God in Prayer; And, Vbi Deus ardenter
invocatur, victoria stat a Bona causa. Therefore, as Marcellinus and Claudianus
Spoke, or Sang of this Battle, we may of this Irish War, etc. O nimium dilecte
Deo cui militat ether.
Et conjurati veniunt ad Classica venti.
At last, the Irish had strongly Fortified, and Barricado'd the River leading
to it; But notwithstanding all, that Distressed Town was Relieved by Major
General Kirk, after the Dartmouth Frigate had forced her way to it, over all
those Impediments, and the Siege was effectually raised. The day before which,
by another Strange Accident, inconsiderable in it self; But, by the Guidance of
Heaven, made Instrumental to the further Mortification of our Enemies; A choice
Body of about 6000 Irish, Commanded by one of their best Officers, Major
General Mackarty were defeated by about 2000 Inniskillingers; by occasion of a
mistake of the Word of Command among the Irish: For it seems Mackarty
perceiving the Courageous Inniskilling-Men Charge the Right Wing of his Irish
very desperately, ordered some of his Choice Men to Face to the Right, and
March to the Relief of their Companions; but the Officer who carried the
Orders, mistook, and Commanded the Men, in stead of Facing to the Right, To
Face to the Right-about, and so March; upon which, the Irish in the Rear,
seeing their Front look with their Faces toward them, and move, thought they
had been running, and so immediately in a Terror, threw down their Arms, and
run away; which the rest seeing, run after them for Company, and so were most
of them cut off, or Drowned in Lough's and Bogs; and Mackarty himself taken
Prisoner.

Afterward, when Duke Schomberg went over but with a small Army of new raised
Men, though, as it usually happens to English Armies new-raised, when they
first came into a strange Country, many of our Men died, and the whole Army
was brought into a low condition by bad Weather, Lodging and Diet; nay, and by
their own Laziness in great part, in not Hutting themselves like Men more used
to War. Yet the Enemies had not the Policy or Courage to make use of the many
advantages they had over us, in that long time that our Army was thus
languishing. But trifled away their opportunity, in hopes of the effect of a
Plot, laid by some French Traitors among us, which God seemed to have
permitted, in order to encourage them for to flatter themselves with vain
hopes, and to make them pass over, or slip those other seasonable and likely
opportunities they had to have destroyed us. Would they have been contented to
use fair Force, rather than Treachery, odious to God and Man.

But to pass by all those lesser events, and hasten to the main Action, in
which His Gracious Majesty was present; And which gave the Great Turn of the
Scale toward the Reducing of that Kingdom.

The next year being 1690, His Majesty King William, being fully resolved to
push the Irish War to an end, or fall in the Attempt; that so he might have
liberty, solely and wholly, next year, against his Capital Enemy the French
Tyrant, who had brought so many Miseries upon all Europe, and had occasioned
all the Misfortunes of his Deluded Ally King James, and having by, the Death of
Dundee, suppressed, in great measure, the Insurrection, or Stirs in Scotland,
left Kensington the 4th of June, 1690, and Embarking at Highlake on the 12th,
arrived on the 14th safely at Carrickfergus; And on the 27th of June following,
assembled a Royal Army of about 36000 as Brave Men, as Europe, or the World
could show; of English, Dutch, Danes, Germans and French, provided as well with
all Necessaries, both for the Mouth and War; as could be desired. So much of
Life and Circumspection had his Excellent Majesty's Presence given to all
Needful Orders for that purpose. When he was arrived at his Army, he was
continually in action, and observing the Goodness of the Country, as he rid
along; he admired the Fertility of its foil, and pleasing Aspect of its
Landskips; and said, it was well worth fighting for. And now, understanding
that the Irish Army was retired over the Boyn, He Marched with all speed and
diligence after them; And being advanced near the River, hard by a Pass, called
Old-Bridge, he was so Adventurous, as to stand on the side of a Bank, within
Musket Shot of the Ford, to observe the posture of His Enemies. Which, though
he saw well-fenced, and a River not easily passable, and that was
well-fortified with Canon, and other strong Defenses against him: Yet, knowing
that the safety of Europe, in great Measure, at that Juncture, depended upon
some bold Master Stroke, in that Country; without which, all that he had
hitherto done, and ventured for our Rescue and Security, would be but lost: He
resolved therefore to venture through all Difficulties whatsoever, obeying the
Great Call of Providence, rather than that so Noble and Happy a Revolution
should fail for want of Courage in him; Who is acknowledged by his Enemies to
be a Prince of no small Spirit and Valor, and had made it appear to the World,
in all the Course of His Life. After he had, with those Intentions, viewed them
a while, he was pleased to sit down on the Ground, to Refresh himself; which
some Principal Persons of the Enemies side having observed, they caused a small
Party of Horse to advance flowly upon a Plowed Field, over against where His
Majesty was, and slily to drop two Fieldpieces, undiscovered, by a Hedge in
the same Field, and so retired; leaving only some Gunners to Manage them, who
lay sculking, still and quiet, till His Majesty was Re-mounted; and, Dreaming
of no Danger at all, was Riding softly back again; But then the Rogues Fired
furiously, and, at the first shot, killed two Horses and a Man, about 100 yards
from the King; and, at the second, had like to have given a very fatal Stroke,
both to these Kingdoms and the whole Confederacy; by Quenching the Light, Joy
and Hope of our Israel; the Bullet Grasing upon the Bank of the River, and
thence Rising toward the King, with a slanting Motion, glanced over His Right
Shoulder, taking off a Piece of His Coat; Tore part of the King's Anointed
Body; But, being turned off short by the hand of some Guardian-Angel,
Commissioned by the Lord Jehovah, touched not His Precious Life; nor so much as
gave him any wound grievous enough to hinder Him from continuing with His Army,
and Ordering the Remarkable Action that soon followed. For as soon as he had
changed His Coat, and had His Wound dressed, He spent the most part of the
remainder of that Day in Disposing His whole Army for the next day's Work; and
then on the Morrow, being Tuesday, the first of July following, early in the
Morning, with full Trust in the Protection of the Lord of Hosts Himself, which
He had found so signally attended His Royal and Sacred Person, He very
Courageously forces His Passage over the Boyn, and gives such a sudden Defeat
to the Enemy, though Posted with all manner of Advantages on the other side;
That while History shall at all Subsist, will never be forgotten, neither by
Friends nor Foes.

I shall not here Describe that Famous Battle, which is so well Related by
other Pens, whose Writings are now in every ones hand; but shall only Remark
the Chain of Providence, that seemed still continuedly to run through that
whole Transaction, as well as the precedent ones.

It is enough to say, that in it, the King behaved himself, as always on the
like occasions, both as a valiant Soldier, and a wise General.

And though some out of pure Tenderness to his Royal Person, have presumed to
accuse him of Rashness, in exposing himself both to the Accident of the common
Shot, and venturing upon so desperate an attempt, as the passing such a scurvy
River as the Boyn, at such vast disadvantages; yet when it shall be well
weighed, that the French at that time, had given a very smart blow to the
Confederates, at Flerus in the Netherlands; that by Treachery or Cowardice, or
both among our selves, they had in some sense beaten the English and Dutch
Fleets, so that they hovered daily about our Coasts.

That Scotland was not quite appeased, and England at that time big, as was
strongly presumed of a horrible Plot, ready to break out upon the landing of
any number of the Enemy, who were now (as 'twere) Masters of the Seas, and were
thought in a posture after Flerus Battle, to have been able to spare Men enough
for such an Exploit; and when all Holland was in an Uproar, at the supposed
foul Play they believed they had received from the English, in the late Sea
Fight; and the all of the whole Confederacy, seemed to depend of some fortunate
stroke from him. Instead of taxing our Valiant and Politic Prince with
Rashness, we ought rather to admire and adore God's goodness, in inspiring him
with so much Courage, fit for such an extraordinary Occasion at that critical
time. And impute the strength and laudable warmth of his Faith in God, and Zeal
for his glory and servants good, in his victorious Majesty, in taking a
Resolution to fight at all Hazards on that pressing occasion, to be a call of
Providence; which for the common interest, he most willingly obeyed, relying
confidently upon the Protection of the Almighty alone, to go through with his
undertaking.

Most certain it is, that he thereby recovered both us, and the whole
Confederacy, from another very low ebb of Fortune, the public Enemy would else
once more have reduced us to, and put himself and them in a condition the next
year, to carry back Terror to the Triumphing Foe. But there was still as I
find by very credible Evidence, another main reason, that urged a necessity for
this Battle.

For that upon the News that Sir Cloudsly Shouel after he had landed his
Majesty, was ordered to sail immediately with his Squadron, to join the Grand
English Fleet, and that all our Ships with Provisions, and other necessaries
for the War, were left in Carrick-Fergus Bay, with little or no Convoy.

The French were sending ten small Frigates, and ten Privateers into the Chanel
to burn them; which if it had been done, then all our Communication from
England, had been cut in a manner off, and our Army forced to subsist upon the
small pittance they could find in a wasted Country, or else starve; or at
least we had been debarred of those necessaries, without which we could not
have made any Defense, nor Offense in War. And this design of the French, being
made known to His Majesty, who wanted not good intelligence, and that the
French and Irish Officers, as trusting in the Success of that Stratagem,
unanimously agreed to retreat toward Athlone and Limerick, in hopes that they
should have King William and his Army a much cheaper Penni-worth, when they
were half starved, than at that time; and though King James was against that
motion, yet for fear they should overruled him and be gone, and the French
should in the mean while, execute their Exploit. His Heroical Majesty is
supposed upon that as well as other Considerations, to have hastened the
Battle; in which these following things seem further very much resembling
peculiar effects of Providence; the one was, That in the Fight out of an
imprudent complaisance to the Irish, who would have the Post of Honor, the
Irish foot were set to guard the chief Passes; whereas, had the English,
Scotch, or French been put in their places, it is generally thought the attempt
would have been much more doubtful.

And the second was, that the late King without staying to rallie his Forces,
who were many of them still entire, made have to Waterford, where meeting with
some of the French Ships, designed to burn our Provision and Ammunition
Vessels; he told them 'twas too late, for all was lost, and so put them quite
off the design; whereas had he let them have proceeded, they might still have
done us that mischief. That together with the news of the defeat at Flerus, and
the French being masters at Sea, that presently after arrived among the Irish
and French too, after he and those Ships were gone, might have struck fair to
have put them in a Condition to recover their Losses, and repay themselves
doubly.

In fine, the sudden and unexpected arrival of King James in France, after the
French King had just before raised his depressed peoples Expectations so high,
as to make them believe King William was dead; quite slurr'd the mighty
Monsieur, and made him appear very sneakingly, and little to his own people,
and most ridiculous to Foreigners, and every way much broke his measures.

After which last pusillanimous and shameful fight, the late King fell into as
great Disreputation among the Irish, as he had before gained upon his first
Desertion among the English Army. Sarsfield, not long after speaking of the
Action at the Boyn, said thus much to the Honor of King William, and contempt
of King James, That if we would change Kings, they would fight it over again
and beat us.

Again, at the first seige of Limerick, as his gracious Majesty was riding
softly toward Cromwell's Fort, had not his usual good Angel, by God's
Commandment preserved him, he had been like to have been taken off by another
fatal stroke. The aforesaid sudden arrival of the late King James in France,
and the ill Character he gave of the posture of affairs there, and of the Irish
as Men that would not fight, was the cause that the French King, even after
King William had raised his Siege before Limerick, and was departed for
England, sent positive Orders to Count Lauzun, with all his French to quit
Ireland and return home, whilst there appeared fresh hopes of recovering in
part their former loss, and of protracting the War, at least defensively in
Connaught; though afterward upon better Information, he sent counter Orders,
when it was too late.

I shall mention but two more Observations, and then follow His Majesty to
another Scene.

Another great Blunder the French committed, was, That following the Irish more
than their own Interest, which must be acknowledged a fault not very usual with
them; they neglected to fortify Kingsale, one of the most commodious Havens,
for the convenience of their Fleets in the World, and whereby they might have
extremely annoyed our Western Trade, and secured their own Ships of War upon
all Accidents; and amused themselves with fortifying Limerick, which could be
of very little or no use to them in that Juncture. And secondly, after so much
cost and pains bestowed upon Limerick, they neglected to send the necessary
supplies to it, till 'twas too late, and thereby left King William at full
Liberty to turn all his whole Force toward themselves in Flanders, as he has
done since. These I conceive, considering all circumstances, are most
convincing Marks, of an Almighty and Overruling Power, that directed the
Counsels of the most Politic Court in the whole world, upon those occasions to
our magnanimous Prince's advantage, and even made them contribute very much to
the speedy Reduction of a Kingdom, they had the greatest inclination and
interest in the World, to preserve sure footing in.

The next year being 1691. His most Excellent Majesty, met and faced them in
Flanders, and though he was not so Fortunate, as to hinder them from taking
Mons, yet he acted so Wisely and Valiantly, as to let the whole World see,
'twas none of his fault that as brave and bold a stroke, was not struck there
in Defense of that, as at the Boyn, and he kept the formidable Enemy all that
Campaign, in such Awe and Terror, that their old Fox Lnxemburg, as able a
General as he is accounted, durst not venture Battle, so long as he continued
with the Army, though it were several times offered him with advantage; but
only to save his Credit, indeed when King William was gone, at the close of the
Campaign, he fell briskly upon the Confederates Rear, though he got nothing at
all by it. That his haughty Master, might have at least, some shadow of a
Pretense, to keep up his desponding Peoples sinking Spirits, with the Noise and
empty Sound of a pretended Victory. But to pass by that unactive year, when
they would not let His Majesty come at them, neither by Sea nor Land, and come
we to this last Campaign of, 1692. which was remarkable for the Enterprises of
three Kings, all stiling themselves Kings of France, viz. William King of
Britain and Ireland, in Flanders at the head of the Confederate Army. Lewis the
French King before Namur, with an Army of about 130000 French, Irish, and
Swiss, and the late King James at the head of 15 or 16000 French and Scots, on
the Coast of Normandy, with a Popish Plot in England to favor them.

Flanders was now filled with above 300000 armed warlike Soldiers and 100000
Horse, and the Sea covered with two of the most Numerous and Glorious Fleets,
that ever bespread the Ocean, consisting of above 150 great Men of War, the
most Beautiful and Magnificent that ever were; especially, the French Royal
Sun: The great Sea-wonder of the Age, admired by all for the Beauty of her
Shape and Proportion; the curiosity of her Painting and Carving, the Number,
Size, and Quality of her Guns, and the incomparable richness of her Gilding;
which made her of very great value, and emboldened her presumptuous Master to
inscribe on her this proud Motto; Je suis L'unique sur L' Onde Comme mon maitre
est dans le monde. i. e. I only on the Sea command, as my Master does on Land.
And both the French King, and the late King James trusting to such vast Forces
by Sea and Land, but more to their dark Contrivances, thought they had taken
such sure and infallible Measures, not only to reduce England to King James, or
rather to the French Power, but even to have blown up the whole Confederacy,
with one Summers Effort, that they bragged of it publicly before all the World
as of a thing done, and declared by their Ministers, in the Northern Courts,
that their designs were so surely laid, that nothing but God could defeat them.
Which Arrogance, the King of Kings and Lord of Lords, not suffering, by the
sequel showed them and us too, that his own omnipotent Arm defeated them of the
main and most wicked aims they levelled at, leaving to men, only to do the
remainder of the Work that had been insignificant without those happy
intervening Providence.

For whereas the French King trusted indeed, something upon the intrigues of
some Traitors in Namur, and among the Spaniards, and very much upon his
puissant Force by Sea and Land. Yet he reposed much more considence, in the
Execution of these four following Projects, for which he thought he had taken
infallible measures, if any of which, and much more, if all had taken effect,
he had most certainly compassed his most pernicious ends, either in whole or in
great part.

I. The first was, to get out his Fleet before the Confederates Fleets were
joined, if it were possible; and land an Army of 15 or 20000 Men in England to
join with the Jacobites here.

II. If they could not do that time enough, at least to debauch a part of our
Fleet, to desert and come over to them, and then to beat the rest, and land
their Army, and at least to raise a Civil War here, that should detain King
William, till they should subdue the rest of the Spanish Netherlands.

III. To seize our most gracious Queen Mary by the help of the Party, formed by
them here, in order to that end, and transport her into France, to be made a
Sacrifice to that Tyrant's Interest, or if they could not otherwise secure her,
most Barbarously to assainate her.

IV. And lastly, most barbarously to kill our gracious Deliverer, King William,
any manner of way. The first of these, viz. Their getting out their Fleet, and
landing an Army before ours could get to Sea, was only (all men know) hindered
by God himself; who sent not only contrary Winds in the Chanel, which hindered
the Fleet they had in the Ocean, from approaching us, but even shattered their
other Fleet, in the Mediterranean, with such an horrible Tempest, That two of
their biggest Ships, were miserably wreckt, and the others kept back, that they
could not come in any time to join the rest in the Channel, to prevent the
dismal overthrow they afterward received.

The second was disappointed by their failure in the first, and steadfast
fidelity of our Officers and Seamen; but the discomsiting or overthrow of our
Enemies at Sea, though the Courage and Conduct of our brave Admirals and
Seamen, had, it must be owned, no small share in the Execution of it; was in
some measure caused by a lying Spirit, which entered into the Mouths of the
Jacobite Correspondents, of those two Roman Catholic Kings; and by telling
them what Sea-officers they had gained, and how generally the English Seamen
were alienated from their Majesty's King William and Queen Mary, for want of
Pay, etc. which persuaded them to send Express Orders to their Fleet, though
scarce 50 Sail of Capital Ships, without staying for their Tholoun Squadron, to
fall upon ours, which was much superior in Number and much more in Quality, of
Experienced and Courageous Officers and Seamen, which proved an almost
incurable Blow, to their power at Sea, and dashed all their Projects upon
England into pieces, losing them 25 of their biggest Ships, some thousands of
their best Seamen, and particularly their gaudy Sea Idol, the Golden Sun, that
had been the work of twenty years, and had cost more than the Revenues of some
Kingdoms, which was Sacrified to the Flames in a few Minutes, as an earnest
perhaps of the Future Fate, of that presumptuous Phaaeton, its Master; who so
injuriously to the Bright Sun in the Firmament, and its most glorious maker,
has so long usurped the Title, and Character of the Sun, though like the
youngster he imitates, he has been Famous for nothing, but setting the World in
a consuming Blaze, and laying stately Palaces and Cities, into ruinous heaps.

And lastly, as for the Plots against both Their Sacred Majesty's Royal
Persons, which, had they succeeded, had proved more fatal to these Kingdoms;
nay, to the Common Interest of Europe, than all the rest: Can we pretend to
have detected them by any foresight of ours? If any of us do; it is more than I
am confident Their Majesty's themselves will; who thankfully own, that even
when they thought of no such matter, the Execrable Design, and Diabolical Plot
against His Majesty's Royal Person, was very Providentially Discovered by one
of the Accomplices: I pray, Who detected it, but (...), the All-seeing-Eye, and
Searcher of the Heart, when 'twas so very nigh its Execution? That it strikes a
Great Horror in good and honest Men, and makes my hands to shake, and joints
to tremble but to think of it.

So that the French Nero had some reason to brag, his Measures were so surely
laid, that none but Almighty God could defeat them. For I conceive it is plain,
and without Controversy, That none but the Almighty Being could Mollify one
of those Obdurate Sons of Violence, and bring him to so much Remorse, or
Compunction, as generously to detect his Comrade in Iniquity: Who, to the
shame, and eternal Ignominy of that Grand Engine of Satan, the French Tyrant;
sufficiently proved by his Chief Minister of State's own Hand, who set them on
Work. And had not this Discovery (so closely laid as 'twas) been timely made,
Alas! What would our Fleets or Armies have signified? but to Contribute the
more to our Swift Destruction, by the Mutual Jealousies and Divisions, attended
with Confusion, that would have ensued among them, upon so very Dismal an
Accident? The same Providence is no less Remarkable, in the Detection of the
other Plot, against our Virtuous and Pious Queen, and the Government here: Yet
so very Gracious and Merciful have their Majesty's been, even to a kind of
Crime, That none but their Princely Hearts would Pardon, etc.

That none but Granvale himself, that Hell-hound, who was to have Assassinated
our Sovereign King William, was Executed, for all these Horrid Contrivances.
And therefore, as we are in Duty bound to Pray; So we may, with Assurance hope
from thence, That those Darlings of Heaven, who are so very averse to all
Cruelty, will never fall by it; But that the Angel of the Lord will still
Encamp round about their Sacred Persons, to Protect them from all Dangers, etc.

Thus all these (Four) Fine Projects, to the Great Grief of that False Court,
were rendered Abortive, by the Care of Heaven. However the French King, what by
the help of his Golden Lewisses, and Intestine Treachery; And the
unseasonableness of the Weather, hindering our Great Prince from approaching to
Attack him, took Namur; God not being willing perhaps to destroy this Grand
Enemy of His Truth and Peace at once, for Reasons known to himself; but to let
this Proud Pharaoh have some encouragement, still to venture upon some other
Enterprise; till the Harvest of his Abominations is full ripe for the Sickle,
and to make his final Ruin and Destruction so much the more Remarkable, as it
is longer deferred. However, that very same year, at the ensuing Battle of
Steenkirk, Our Heroical King showed Monsieur Lewis's General Luxemburg, That
neither Hedges, nor Ditches, or any other Fences, were always sufficient
Obstacles against True Valor, once Resolved, and fully Provoked; and made the
French feel that day, that He was Born on Purpose, to be a Scourge to their
Insolence; and beat down their Pride. Since, with but a part of His Army, he
had put them so much in danger of a Total Defeat; that had not some Accidents,
or Mistakes, hindered the coming up of the rest of the Confederate Forces, the
Date of the Greatness of Lewis the XIVth, had, in all probability, Expired,
with the end of that fierce and Bloody Battle. Which, by the loss of so many
Officers, Nobility and Gentry as were there slain; made the Drapers of Paris
regain no inconsiderable part of the loss of Trade they had suffered by the
War, and secretly Sing Jubilate to the Courageous King William of Great
Britain, their Benefactor; whilst their Lordly Customers Sung a Melancholic De
profundis. Neither was Providence, in this hot Action, one of the Bloodiest,
and Fiercest since the War, less mindful of His Majesty's Royal Person, so dear
to a Multitude of Nations, than it had been, upon all other Occasions, tho he
was exposed to the continual Fire, both of the Great and Small Shot of the
Enemies; and was as deeply as any Engaged in the Warmest part of the Medley,
from the Beginning to the end.

And now His Majesty, with a Victorious Navy, and more Powerful Army than ever
yet, already ^^usht in French Blood, and Fired with Indignation, because they
were last time so unluckily Robbed of their Victory that was before them, had
not some of the Confederates made a False Step; is Prepared once more to March
against the same Enemies, and to Attack them briskly in their most sensible
part, even in their own Country; of whose Heroical proceedings, if any
Prognostics may be made, without offending the Most High God, I think, in
Humane probability, we may promise our selves all prosperous Success (if the
National Crying Sins do not hinder it) since Providence has already been
pleased to give us some Earnests and Pledges of the Continuance of her usual
Favors; that seem to me to Promise Greater Prosperity than ever to our Mighty
Monarch's Vigorous Endeavors for the Common Good. Since, the Monsieurs have
been terribly baffled at Rhineberg, by the Excessive Rains, that gave time for
Succors to advance, and the Troops of Hesse to come up. And the rest of their
Winter-Work in Flanders has been utterly spoiled, by the sudden and Prodigious
fall of the late Snows; And their Detestable Plots, the one upon Piedmont, and
the other upon the Spanish Fleet, in the Post of Naples, most strangely
discovered, just in the Nick of Time; The one, by false steps of some of the
Plotters; and the other, as we hear, and are informed, by Advice from the Pope
Himself; as much Frenchified as some report him to be; but six bare hours
before the French Squadron appeared there. And their Mediterranean Fleet,
almost as roughly handled, and as much Damaged, by another late Dreadful
Tempest, as 'twas the last year by our English Navy, being now driven back
again, in a very ill Plight to Thoulon: Where it must Refit, before it can
Rejoyn their Fleet in the Ocean; to the Great Retarding, and I Hope, and Pray,
to the Total Defeating of their Principal Designs at Sea this year. And their
Landforces are in such ill-plight, by the Foresaid Disappointments; that
(through God's Mercy to these Nations) they never were so backward in the Field
as now: And therefore having lost the Sole Advantage almost, they had always
over us, of taking Places, as well as the Field before us; We may justly hope,
that the French Pharaoh and his Armies are near an Overthrow; and their
Prosperities not far from a Period: And that the Eternal God, whose Eyes run
too and fro, throughout the whole Earth, will still be pleased to show Himself
Strong in the Behalf of our Gracious King (whose Heart no doubt is perfect
toward Him) and make all His Noble Enterprises to Succeed, till He has once
more added the Ancient Crown of France to the Three British Ones, which He
already has Given Him: Or, at least, that God of His Great Goodness will lower
it, so that it may pay Due Homage to England again; And be out of a Condition
any more, to Disturb the Tranquillity of God's Church, and the Civil State of
Europe.

GOD Save KING WILLIAM And QUEEN MARY. AMEN.
FINIS.

