A SERMON Preached to the SOCIETY FOR Reformation of Manners, AT NOTTINGHAM. On
the 25th of August, School.

By JOHN WHITLOCK, Minister of the Gospel there.

LONDON: Printed for John Richards, Bookseller, in Nottingham, 1699.

TO THE WORTHY MEMBERS OF THE SOCIETY FOR THE Reformation of Manners, IN The
Town and County of the Town of Nottingham.
Gentlemen,
SEeing it is upon your Desire, that I first preached and now publish this
Sermon, I shall not make any Apology for appearing in Print on this Occasion;
though there are so many excellent Sermons by my Reverend Brethren, both
Conformists and Nonconformists already published, for the encouraging and
exciting both Societies and Persons to, and directing them in that great and
good Work you and many others are engaged in for the Reformation of Manners. I
am sensible I can add little, if any thing, to what has already been preached
and published upon this Subject; yet was not unwilling to gratify you in your
Desire, seeing hereby I have an Opportunity to give my Testimony to this Work
of the Lord, and express my hearty rejoicing in it, and desire of the Advance
and Prosperity of it. I shall pray, that God would eminently bless what has
been preached and published concerning this Matter, to all, and especially to
you, to encourage your Hearts and strengthen your Hands. You have great
Encouragement to go on from the Nature of the Work, which is much for God's
Glory; and therefore very pleasing to him, if done sincerely, from right
Principles to right Ends, and in a right Manner: And it may be a means to do
good to Souls, in preventing further Sin and Guilt, yea, it may through God's
Blessing, bring Persons not only to outward Reformation, but to sound
Conversion; and you may hereby be blessed, not only to prevent a Multitude of
Sins, but also to save Souls from Death: And if it should be but one single
Soul, that you should thus win, it would be well worth all the Pains you take,
and the Difficulties, you are called to encounter with.

And this would be a means to prevent, or remove, public Judgments, and
further the continuing of present, and obtaining of more public Mercies.

And you and others engaged, have also great Encouragement, and great Matter
for thankful Acknowledgments to God, on account of his inclining the Hearts of
many Magistrates with a Pious, Christian Zeal, to promote this good Work, and
also on account of the Success, you as well as others, have been blessed with
by God, very discernably, in the considerable Restraint of many Sins.

And further, to excite you to a well-tempered Zeal, and vigorous going on in
the Work you have engaged in. Consider, you know not how little a while you
have to work in for God, and your own and others Souls, and for the public
good. God's late Providence should be laid to Heart, and greatly improved by
you; that very awful and cutting Stroke, I mean, the Death of that eminent
Christian, and eminent Member of your Society, who was so very active for God
in his whole Course, and in this Work in particular; Mr. Joseph Barrett,
Grocer, (Son of Mr. John Barrett, my dear Fellow Laborer, and one of your aged
Ministers) a great Loss to the Church, and a more particular Loss to your
Society. I do not know of any private Christian that laid out himself more in
promoting this Work, both by his Pen and Purse. How many Letters has he
written to Ministers and others in York, Hull, Lincoln, Leicester, Coventry,
Chesterfield, and several other Places, to excite them to the setting on foot
this highly necessary Work; and God has succeeded his Endeavors already, in
several of those Places: But God has taken him away in the prime of his Time
and Usefulness, in his Entrance upon the 34th Year of his Age. I mention this
to excite you to the greater Zeal and Activity, that you may stand in the wide
Gap, and make up the great Breach his Death has made; and also, That whenever
your Lord comes, he may find you so doing, intent upon the Work he has set you
to, as he did this precious Servant of his.

I shall add no more, but earnest Prayers for you, and all others engaged in
this Work of Reformation of Manners; that God would still more and more spirit,
conduct, strengthen and succeed you, which would much rejoice the Heart of,

Your Obliged, Affectionate, Faithful Friend, and Servant, J. W.
Not. Oct. 17, 98.
HOSEA 2.15. And I will give her her Vineyards from thence, and the Valley of
Achor for a Door of Hope.


THESE Words have a necessary Dependence upon the Verse foregoing, as appears
from those Words in the Text, from thence; that is, from the Wilderness, which
God had said he would bring her into, and there speak to her heart, that is,
speak to her effectually, in order to her Conversion to God, and through
Reformation after her horrible Apostasy from God; and in the issue, speak
comfortably to her upon her return to God by Repentance and Reformation. In the
first Chapter of this Prophecy, and in the former part of this, God had been
severely threatening the People of the Jews, denouncing Judgments against them
for their Idolatry, and other crying Abominations; yet intermixes Exhortations
to Repentance, and prophesies and promises of giving them Grace to return to
him, and of his returning to them in Grace and Mercy, and bestowing upon them
many both Temporal and Spiritual Mercies upon their return to him their only
rightful Owner, their first Husband. In the second Verse he calls upon the
Members of this Church of the Jews, to plead with their Mother. Particular
Members of a Church and private Persons may and ought, to the utmost of their
Power, and in their places (having begun at home, and first reformed themselves
and Families) set upon and further public Reformation: And as God calls on the
Members of the Church to plead with their Mother, so he himself calls on her to
put away her Whoredoms and Adulteries, threatening her if she did not, ver. 3.6,
9, to the 13th, and adds Promises too of reclaiming her by Afflictions: For
though the Expressions here used, look like a Threatening, and are in part so, yet
they are more a Promise than a Threatening, in regard of the gracious Issue and
Effect of it; he says he will hedge up her way with Thorns, yet promises this
shall be the Fruit of it, That she shall say, I will go and return to my first
Husband, etc. and in the 14th Verse he says, he will bring her into the
Wilderness, but it was to speak to her Heart effectually, both in way of
quickening and Comfort. When in the Wilderness she had brought her self into by
her Sins, and God had brought her into by his righteous Judgments; God
promises, That he would then bring her to Repentance and Reformation; and
thereupon, would restore to her the Mercies she had forfeited by her Sins, and
give her the Valley of Achor for a Door of Hope. A Valley of sore trouble, as
this Valley of Achor was to Israel at their first Entrance into Canaan; yet if
they did reform, if they did restrain and punish Sin and Sinners, as Israel
then did, and in that Course found, even this Valley to be a Door of Hope to
them; so it should be with the People of the Jews now, if they returned to God.

In these Words there is a plain Reference to that History, which we have in
the 7th of Joshua; where you have the Relation of Israel's being worsted by the
Men of Ai, upon Achan's Sin there recorded; for which, he and his whole Family
were, in this Valley, put to Death, which had this Name, The Valley of Achor,
given to it; partly from Israel's Trouble on the forementioned Account, and
partly from Achan's Punishment there inflicted on him.

It was a very fruitful Valley between Jericho and Ai; their entering into
which, and partaking of the Fruits of it, was a Door of Hope to them, a Pledge
and Earnest, that God would give them full Possession of the Land of Canaan:
But that Door of Hope was shut against them for Achan's Sin, till Judgment was
executed upon him for it; but upon that being done, this Door of Hope was
opened to them again, they succeeded against Ai, and had that given them as a
renewed Earnest of their enjoying Canaan.

So God promised here in the Text, in the time of Hosea's prophesying, That
though the People of Israel and Judah, had by their Apostasy, Idolatry, and many
other Sins, brought themselves into a Wilderness, a Valley of Achor, a very
troublous State, and dashed their Hopes of Mercy; yet if they would (as Israel
did in the Days of Joshua) reform and return to God, restrain and punish Sin,
that should be to them a Door of Hope, that God would return to them in Mercy,
and afford them an abundant Affluence of all Mercies temporal and spiritual. So
that this Text, and what may be gathered from it, affords great Encouragement
to all Societies and Persons, as do engage to promote Reformation of Manners;
by bringing to due legal Punishment Sin and Profaneness, Swearing, Drunkenness,
Uncleanness, Sabbath-Profanation, and those things and Practices that are the
Causes and Occasions of, and Provocations to these and the like Enormities. The
Doctrine I shall raise from these Words, and by God's Assistance speak to, as
the time will permit, is this:

(Doctrine.) When a People have, by their Sins, brought themselves into a
Wilderness-Condition, and into a Valley of Achor, into great Troubles and
Distresses; yet if they be brought to Repentance and Reformation, and that Work
be effectually set about and carried on, it will be a Door of Hope of God's
continuing or restoring his gracious Presence among them, and bestowing upon
them both spiritual and temporal Blessings. This Doctrine, both what is
implied, and what is expressed in it, does clearly arise from the Text compared
with the Context.

I. One Proposition implied in the Text and Doctrine is, That the Sins of a
People, yea of a professing People, may and often do, bring them into a
Wilderness-State, a Valley of Achor, into great Troubles and Distresses; the
Sins of a People provoke God to bring heavy Judgments upon them, which, though to
the true People of God, they are intended in Mercy and Issue so; God using
their Troubles and Distresses as sanctified means, to bring them to Humiliation
and Reformation, yet they are sharp Chastenings, and are for the present, and
to Sense, a Valley of Achor, not joyous, but grievous, Heb. 12.11. This is
clear, both from the History to which this Expression of the Valley of Achor
relates, Josh. 7. and from the present State of the Church of the Jews, in the
time when Hosea prophesied. In the History Josh. 7. we read, That upon Achan's
taking the accursed thing, a Babylonish Garment, and two hundred shekels of
silver, and a wedge of gold of fifty shekels weight, this brought Judgments
upon Israel; so that they could not stand before the Men of Ai: Yea, God
expressy threatens, That he would not be with them any more, unless the
accursed were destroyed, and Judgment executed upon Achan for his Sin, so to
prevent the like Sin in others for the time to come. And the thing is likewise
clear, from the Case of the Children of Israel, in the time of this Prophecy:
In this Chapter, ver. 2-14, and cap. 4. v. 1, 2, 3. when there is no Truth, nor
Mercy, nor Knowledge of God, but swearing, lying, committing Adultery,
Sabbath-Profanation, and the like break forth, God has a Controversy with such
a Land, and it shall be a Valley of Achor, it shall mourn.

II. Another Proposition which may be gathered, both from the History Josh. 7.
and the State of Israel, at the time of the delivering this Prophecy, is, That
when God has begun to show Mercy to a People, has brought them out of great
Distresses, out of an Egypt, and a Wilderness, into a Canaan; a pleasant Land,
and fruitful Valleys, such as this Valley of Achor was: Yet if a People then
fall into provoking Sins, and do not humble themselves, and reform their evil
ways; yea, if every one in their several Places, do not endeavor to bring Sin
and Sinners to Punishment, and restrain Sin and Profaneness in others what they
can; it provokes God to turn a fruitful Land into a barren Wilderness, a
pleasant Valley into a Valley of Achor. Thus it was with Israel in the time of
Joshua: God had delivered them out of Egypt, carried them through the Red Sea,
and Wilderness, and out of it through Jordan, as on dry Land; delivered Jericho
into their Hands, given them Possession, Livery and Seism of a fruitful Valley,
as a pledge of the full Possession of the whole. These were wonderful
Appearances of God for them; yet for the Sin of Achan, till by their punishing
him for it, they had cleared themselves from the Guilt of it, God turned this
pleasant Land and this fruitful Valley, into a Valley of Achor, a Valley of
great Trouble, and threatens to make it still more and longer so, if they did
not take away from the midst of them the accursed thing. And this Proposition
is also proved from the Case of Israel, in the time of this Prophet Hosea, who
prophesied in the Days of Jeroboam, the Son of Joash, King of Israel, cap. 1.
v. 1. There was a Door of Hope opened to them in a Valley of Achor, in a time
of great Trouble to the ten Tribes, as you may see, 2 King. 14.25. to the end;
the Affliction of Israel was very bitter, there was not any shut up or left,
nor any Helper for Israel; then God saved them by the hand of this Jeroboam the
second, he restored the Coast of Israel, as God had foretold by the Prophet
Jonah; yet by the Sins of Israel, this Door was soon shut, and they brought
into a Valley of Achor again.

III. Another Proposition, which is that I shall most insist on, is, That when
a People have sinned themselves into a Valley of Achor, in regard of Trouble,
yet if it prove to them as the Valley of Achor did to Israel, a means to bring
them to Repentance and Reformation of Manners, yea, both of Heart and Life, and
that Work be thoroughly and effectually carried on, it is, and will be to them a
Door of Hope, of the restoring of God's gracious Presence, and his bestowing
temporal and spiritual, yea, and Eternal Blessings upon them.

Now in handling this Proposition, I shall speak somewhat, God assisting, to
these particulars. (I.) Briefly show what kind of Reformation of Manners that
is, which will render a Valley of Achor a Door of Hope, and which all must
endeavor to set on foot, and carry on to the uttermost, as they would have
well-grounded Hopes that it will be so. (II.) Prove from Scripture, That the
right endeavoring, and much more the effecting such a Reformation, will open a
Door of Hope. (III.) Give the Reasons of it. (IV.) Show what it will be a Door
of Hope of, and (V.) Apply it.

(I.) What kind of Reformation it is, and what Attempts and Endeavors toward
it, are those, that will prove a Door of Hope of God's gracious Presence with,
and Blessing upon a People.

(1.) The Attempts and Endeavors after Reformation of Manners, that will be a
Door of Hope to those that engage in such a Work, whether Magistrates,
Ministers, or private Christians; and whether in Societies, or single Persons,
they must be vigorous, unwearied and persevering, not giving over upon any
Discouragements they meet with. All that engage in such a Work as the
Reformation of the loose, profane Manners of a degenerate, debauched Age, had
need be furnished with holy Courage and Resolution to go on against all
Discouragements: Weak and faint Endeavors will never prevail against strong
and rampant Sins, and raging Corruptions. Satan will rage and raise Opposition,
when he sees his Kingdom struck at and shaken; and wicked Men will struggle
hard, ever they will part with their beloved, reigning, pleasing, profitable
Sins that they have been long accustomed to, and see them dethroned and
restrained, 2 Samuel 23.6, 7. The Men of Belial are such as cannot be taken with
Hands, or gentle dealing, but he that touches them must be fenced with Iron,
and the Staff of a Spear. See therefore, all you that engage in this Work, that
you, and your Endeavors for Reformation of Manners be, and pray that they may
be, vigorous and unwearied.

(2.) The Reformation that will be a Door of Hope, and which you must endeavor
to promote, must be through, both in Heart and Life; not a Reformation by
halves, not only reforming the gross, outward Acts of more than ordinary
heinous, scandalous Sins, such as Swearing, Drunkenness, Uncleanness, open
Sabbath-Profanation, and the like; but even those that are lesser Sins, in the
Esteem of Men, such as unruly Passions, Covetousness, Pride of Heart and Life,
etc. These we must pray and endeavor to our utmost the Reformation of, first
of all in our selves, and then in others, as ever we would open a Door of Hope
for through Mercies, especially spiritual and eternal ones: There must be
Endeavors to promote a Reformation in our selves and others, of Sins of
Omission as well as of Commission: To bring our selves and press others, to the
conscientious Performance of Family Worship, of constant daily reading the Word
and Prayer, Morning and Evening; frequent instructing and catechizing Children
and Servants; strict Sabbath-Sanctification as well as reforming gross
Sabbath-Profanation; and the Performance of secret Duties. It is true, we
cannot reform others secret and Heart-Sins, the Laws of Men do not reach these;
but we must earnestly pray for, and press this Reformation. Nor can we compel
Men, by the Laws of Men, to Family and secret Duties, but we must exhort to
these Duties. Those Governors of Families that are known to live in the
Neglect of these Duties, may as justly be kept from Sacraments, as Persons
guilty of outward Acts of Sin, till they give Evidence of their Repentance and
Reformation. I grant that even upon the Reformation of Manners, as to outward
Acts of gross and scandalous Sins, God may suspend the Execution of temporal
Judgments for a time, and may vouchsafe some temporal Mercies, as we see
exemplified in Ahab's Humiliation, and Nineveh's Repentance and present
Reformation; but these were but Reprieves, both in the Case of Ahab, who
afterward was cut off by an untimely and violent Death, 1 King. 22.34, 35, and
so it proved with Nineveh, as the Prophecy of Nahum does emphatically show. It
is only through Reformation that can open a Door of Hope, to obtain through
Mercies, especially spiritual ones; this therefore you should be sure to labor
after your selves, and pray for, press, and endeavor to promote in others,
yea, carry on outward Reformation in order to promoting this.

(3.) That Reformation of Manners, which will be an effectual Door of Hope, of
obtaining through Mercies, especially spiritual ones, must be a sincere,
unfeigned Reformation, such an one as has the Heart engaged in it, so as that
Sin is not only left but loathed, Duties not only performed but loved and
delighted in; Sin forsaken and Duty performed from Principles of Faith and
Love. When Judah returned not with her whole Heart, but feignedly, Jer. 3.10.
out of Compliance with, or Fear of the Laws of Men, Judgment was suspended for
a time, during the Life of a good Josiah, but was executed upon Judah after his
Death: Therefore if any of you be reformed from gross Sins, see it be not only
from Fear of Men, or their Laws, or to procure their Favor, but that your
Reformation be sincere and unfeigned, as ever you would have it to be a Door of
Hope, of obtaining spiritual Mercies, or lasting temporal Mercies.

(4.) That Reformation that will be a Door of Hope of obtaining God's gracious
Presence, and spiritual Mercies, yea, temporal Mercies in Mercy must proceed
from and be accompanied with Faith in Christ. Men must not only come off from
the allowed Practice of Sin, to the Performance of formerly neglected Duties,
but they must come thoroughly home to Christ; so as not to trust in their
Reformation, as their justifying Righteousness, but trust in Christ and his
Righteousness alone for their Justification; trust in him, and him alone, as
the Lord their only Righteousness and their only Strength, Isai. 45 24. so as
by Faith to fetch Strength from Christ, to forsake Sin, do Duty, and exercise
Grace, and be able to say, as 2 Cor. 6.13. I have believed and therefore have I
spoken, I have forsaken such Sins, done such Duties, not only for Fear of
Punishment by the Laws of Men, or to please Friends, gain Credit among
Christians, or stop the Mouth of Conscience; but because I believed the
Precepts, Threatenings and Promises in the Word, yea, do believe in and rest
upon Christ for my Justification, Sanctification and Salvation; and rely upon
him for Strength against Sin, and unto Duty and the Exercise of Grace. It Is
true, such a Reformation we cannot produce in others, no, nor in our selves
neither; for Faith is the Gift of God, but this you may, and should pray for,
both for your selves and others, and this you should press: And Ministers
should in all their Exhortations of People to Reformation, press them not to
rest in any thing short of Christ, Faith in him, Union to him, and Communion
with him, as our Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification and Redemption; and let
us all see, that we take up in no Reformation short of this.

A Reformation in our selves and others, thus qualified, will be a great and
effectual Door opened to you, of Hope of obtaining spiritual and eternal
Mercies, yea, and temporal too, so far as shall be for God's Glory, and your
real good.

II. The second General Head is, to prove the Point, That the setting upon, and
vigorously and effectually carrying on a Work of Reformation, opens a Door of
Hope of God's Presence in and with, and Blessing upon a Place or People. It is
abundantly proved out of this Chapter, from many other Texts of Scripture; but
the Scripture Proof, I shall refer to three Heads.

(1.) It appears, That when a People are in a Wilderness-Condition, in a Valley
of Achor, and brought into such a State by their Sins; a right and through
Reformation is the way to make the Valley of Achor a Door of Hope, in that God
does in such Cases, require it as a Duty, and direct to it as a Means to open
to a People a Door of Hope, of God's removing Judgments from, and bestowing
Mercies upon a People: Thus, in the second Verse of this Chapter, he calls upon
the Children to plead with their Mother (even private Christians are, in their
place, to promote Church-Reformation) and directs what should be done by
Churches and particular Members, to prevent or remove Judgments, and obtain
Mercies; let her put away her Whoredoms out of her Sight, as the way to prevent
the Judgment mentioned in the following Verses.

(2.) It appears, That setting upon, and carrying on through Reformation in the
Hearts and Lives of Men, is the way to make a Valley of Achor a Door of Hope,
in that God promises to send Afflictions on his People, and vouchsafe a
sanctified Use of them for this end: Thus the 6th and 7th Verses of this
Chapter look like, and are delivered in the Form of a Threatening for the most
part of them; but they close with a precious Promise, That her having her way
hedged up with Thorns, shall have this gracious Issue and Effect, that she
shall say, I will go and return to my first Husband, etc. and this was to give
her a Door of Hope; so God promises, Ps. 89.30. -- 36. He will not take away
his Loving Kindness, but bring Meat out of the Eater.

(3.) It appears, That God will make a Valley of Achor a Door of Hope, when by
their Afflictions they are brought to Reformation, in that God has made many
gracious Promises, That when a People return to him by through Reformation, he
will return to them in Mercy. You have many such Promises in this Chapter, and
many other Scriptures; thus in the Text, when the Names of Baalim were taken
out of her Mouth, then God would give her her Vineyards, she should sing in the
Valley of Achor, where before she was troubled and mourned; and in the 18th
Verse, how many Blessings are promised God would betroth her to him in
Righteousness, and Judgments in Loving Kindness, and Mercies and Faithfulness;
and in the end of the Chapter, adds temporal Mercies too, and closes with the
best at last. So 2 Chr. 7.13, 14. Isai. 1.16, -- 20, and 25, 26. Jer. 3.12, 13,
14, 15, and 22. Mal. 3.10, 11, 12. All these Promises, and many more such, has
God made to a Peoples through Reformation and Return to God.

(4.) The Truth of the Doctrine appears from the Instances of God's dealing
with his People, and the Experiences of God's People to this purpose recorded
in the Scripture: What they by their Sins, had made to themselves a Valley of
Achor, God, when he has brought them to Repentance and Reformation, has made
a Door of Hope to them; this is clearly proved from that forementioned 7th of
Joshua, when Achan had sinned in the accursed thing that Valley, which was a
Door of Hope of their full possessing the Land of Canaan, was turned into a
Valley of Achor; but when Israel reformed and executed Justice upon Achan, the
Valley of Achor became again a Door of Hope to them. Another Instance of this
you have in Judges the 10th; Israel by their Sins, had brought themselves into
a Valley of Achor, into great Distresses, ver. 6, -- 10. and yet more, when
notwithstanding their Confession, they received that cutting Answer from the
Lord, ver. 10, -- 15. yet when they not only confessed and prayed, but heartily
reformed, and put away the strange Gods from among them, and served the Lord,
then there was a Door of Hope opened to them, and God's Soul was grieved for
the Misery of Israel, ver 16. But so much for the Scripture Proof of the
Doctrine.

(III.) The Third Head propounded to be spoken to, in the handling of the
Doctrine, was the Reasons of it.

(1.) One Reason why, when a People that by their Sins have brought themselves,
and God for their Sins, has brought them into a Wilderness, and a Valley of
Achor, into great trouble; yet when Repentance and Reformation are set upon,
and vigorously and effectually carried on, there is a Door of Hope opened them,
is, because by true Repentance, and right and through Reformation, the
deserving, procuring, Cause of God's Judgments and a Peoples Troubles, are
removed out of the way. Now the Cause being removed, the Effect ceases; Sins
unrepented of and unreformed, are the Causes of God's Judgments on a People,
and the great hindrances of God's Mercies to them; these are they that bring
them into a Valley of Achor, and keep them there, that shut the Door of Hope,
and keep it shut against them, till they are removed by Faith, Repentance and
Reformation. They are the Sins of a People that separate between them and their
God, Isai. 59.2. and cause him to hide his Face from them that he will not
hear; therefore Israel could not stand before their Enemies, Josh. 7.12. Jer.
5.24, 25, 26. Hos. 4.1, 2, 3. it is for unreformed Sins the Land mourns, and
God has a Controversy with them; these shut the Door of Hope, but when these
are removed by a right Reformation, the Door is opened again.

(2.) Another Reason of the Doctrine, is drawn from the Free Grace of God, the
Satisfaction and Merit of Christ, and the free and gracious Promises of the
Gospel; these are the only moving Causes, the chief ground and reason, why a
People's Reformation opens a Door of Hope to them. God's free Grace in making
Promises to Repentance and Reformation, and his Truth and Faithfulness in
fulfilling them, is the only moving Cause, and Christ's Satisfaction the only
meritorious purchasing Cause of a People's Reformation, being a Door of Hope to
them; it is not from any Worth or Merit in a returning, reforming People, as
though they deserved Mercy at God's Hand, or as if their Reformation was any part
of their justifying Righteousness; no, that belongs only to the Righteousness
of Christ. Sin indeed, is the true and proper, deserving, and meritorious Cause
of God's Judgments on People and Persons; and while the allowed Practice of
them is continued, shuts the Door of Hope against them, but our Repentance and
Reformation is no meriting Cause of God's Mercy, or of opening a Door of Hope
to us; this is reserved as the Prerogative of the Satisfaction, Merit, and
Righteousness of the dear Lord Jesus. Repentance and Reformation, Faith and
Holiness, God does absolutely and peremptorily require, and certainly work in
all that he pardons and saves, or in special Mercy vouchsafes even temporal
Deliverance to, and suspends the actual conferring of Saving-Mercy, till these
are at least seminally wrought in Men in Regeneration and effectual Calling, to
render them willing to accept of Christ, and of Mercy from God through Christ,
to make Christ, and the Mercy of God through him precious, and to fit them
rightly, to improve Mercy when they receive it: But he never intended these for
justifying Righteousness; therefore, in pressing Reformation on our selves or
others, we must be very careful not to trust in it as our justifying
Righteousness, or the Cause of God's Mercy, but to ascribe the opening of a
Door of Hope to us, only to the free Grace of God, the Merit of Christ, and the
Faithfulness of God in making good his free and gracious Promises, which he
has made to Faith, Repentance, and Reformation.

(IV.) A Fourth general Head to be spoken to in handling the Doctrine, is, what
a right Reformation vigorously carried on, opens a Door of Hope to a People of
obtaining: What such People or Persons may hope to receive from God, of his
free Grace and Mercy; which Particulars may, by way of Anticipation, serve as
Motives to every of us in our places to set upon, and to our utmost, forward a
through Reformation in our own and others Hearts and Lives.

(1.) When a People do sincerely and vigorously endeavor their own and others
Reformation, and God blesses these Endeavors, so that they take effect, there
is a Door of Hope set open, that God will remove and turn away his Judgments,
which by their Sins they have brought upon themselves. Repentance and
Reformation is a Door of Hope, as it is a Means of God's prescribing, to
prevent Judgments feared and threatened, and to remove such as are actually
inflicted on, and felt by a People; thus in the often fore-quoted 7th of
Joshua, when Israel took away the accursed thing, then God removed the Judgment
that was upon them, and now the Men of Ai fall before them; whom, till then,
they could not stand before.

(2.) Sincere Attempts and vigorous Endeavors for through Reformation, open a
Door of Hope of God's vouchsafing his gracious Presence with a People, even
after he was departed from them for their Sins, and his returning to them in
Mercy, and that both in Spirituals and Temporals.

(1.) In succeeding their Attempts against God's and their Enemies, either
preventing them, or turning their Hearts, making them to be at Peace with them,
or giving them Success against them, delivering them out of the Hands of their
Enemies; yea, delivering their Enemies into their hands, Prove. 16.17. Josh.
7.12, and 8.1, 2. though God said, I will not be with you any more, unless the
accursed thing be taken away; yet when that was done, God says to Joshua, Fear
not, I have given Ai into thy hand.

(2.) When a People are rightly and thoroughly reformed, it opens a Door of
Hope of God's Presence with them, in blessing them with able, wise, and
faithful Counselors, Rulers and Governors, and blessing their Counsels and
Government, both for the temporal and spiritual good of such a People, Isai.
1.16, -- 20, and ver. 25, 26. And this is a great Mercy.

(3.) This Reformation opens a Door of Hope to a People, that God will bless
them with Peace, Plenty, and Success in their Undertakings, so far as shall be
for God's Glory and their good: This second of Hosea proves this, ver. 17, 18,
21, 22. When God takes away the Name of Baalim out of her Mouth, he makes a
Covenant for them with the whole Creation, so Job 5.19, -- to the end.

(4.) It opens a Door of Hope, that God will continue the Gospel, and Gospel
Ordinances among them in Power, Purity and Liberty, and his Blessing upon them;
for they are the Sins of a People that provoke God to remove the Candlestick,
Rev. 2.5. I will remove it, says God, there, except thou repent; which
implies, That if they did repent, God would graciously continue it, Isai. 55.7,
and 10 to the end.

(5.) True Repentance and Reformation opens a Door of Hope, and is an Evidence,
that God is, and will be the God of such a People: Thus Hos. 2. v. 16. Thou
shall call me Ishi, my Husband, and v. 19, 20. God would bettoth them to him in
Loving Kindness and Faithfulness: Their Maker will be their Husband, Isai.
54.5. and in the last Verse of this second of Hosea, I will say to them, Thou
art my People, and they shall say, Thou art my God, and you have heard very
well; on a like occasion to this, that happy is the People whose God is the
Lord, such have a Door of Hope opened to them large enough, as wide a Door and
effectual, as they need or can desire. I now come to the 5th and last thing
proposed, viz. the Application.

And the only use I shall make of this Doctrine, shall be of Exhortation: To
all that bear the Name of Christians. Seeing when a People have brought
themselves into a Valley of Achor by their Sins, a through Reformation is a Door
of Hope, for obtaining God's gracious Presence, and Blessing both in temporals
and spirituals. Be ye all prevailed with, to set upon and promote this Work of
Reformation, both in your own Hearts and Lives, and to the utmost of your
power, in the Lives, yea, in the Hearts of others; every one of you in your
places, all joining Hearts and Hands in it.

(1.) Magistrates must be exhorted in their places duly, impartially, and
vigorously, to put in Execution the Laws against Sin; yea, and to give all due
Encouragement to all such as regularly endeavor to stem the strong Tide of
Irreligion and Profaneness, by bringing to Conviction and legal Punishments,
such as are guilty of Tippling, Drunkenness, Swearing, Uncleanness,
Sabbath-Profanation, and those things, Persons, and Places, that are Occasions
of, and Provocations to such Sins. If God stir up, and spirit Magistrates to do
their Duty in this Matter, it will be a Door of Hope, of God's continuing and
further vouchsafing Mercy to us, and our Land, Jer. 5.1. If you can find a Man
that executes Judgment, I will pardon; a Man, i. e. a Magistrate, or great Man,
as ver. 5. Blessed be God, we are not altogether without this Door of Hope, God
having stirred up our late Parliament to address to His Majesty, our Rightful,
Gracious, King William, to issue out his Gracious, Religious Proclamation, for
restraining and punishing Looseness and Profaneness; and blessed be God, that
has inclined our Gracious Sovereign to issue out such a Proclamation: But the
Execution of such Laws, for restraining and punishing loose and profane Persons
and Practices, lies in the Hands, and at the Doors of Inferior Magistrates,
such as are Justices and Magistrates in Corporations. And blessed be God, we
are not without such in many places; and in this place in particular; and so
not without this Door of Hope. Magistrates therefore must be exhorted,
prevailed with, and encouraged to go on vigorously, impartially, and
unweariedly in this Work.

(2.) And as Magistrates, so Ministers are hence to be exhorted, to promote
Repentance and Reformation in People, both by their Doctrine, Instructions,
Reproofs, yea, Discipline, keeping Persons guilty of any Imunfalities from the
Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, till they profess, and give Evidence of their
sincere Repentance and Reformation. And this the very Rubric of the Liturgy
gives them power to do, at least for a time, and in order to further
Prosecution: And they must especially, be sure to forward this good Work of
Reformation, by their burning and shining Examples, the peculiar
Unblameableness, Convincingness, Holiness, and Spirituality of their
Conversations; and Ministers should encourage and strengthen the Hands of their
People in vigorous attempting the Reformation of others, as by the ways just
now mentioned; so by inciting them to tell the Church, yea, and the Magistrate
too, in case of Obstinacy, and this for the good of Offenders, both of their
Souls and Bodies; and for the turning away of Judgments, and obtaining Mercies
upon the public.

(3.) Private Persons are to be exhorted in their several Scations and
Capacities to their utmost, to promote the Reformation of evil Manners, and to
restrain and bring to legal Punishment loose and profane Persons, in order to
their Reformation and the public good. They must promote this good Work by
their Prayers, Tears, Counsels, Reproofs and Examples, and when the Offense is
gross, and of public Scandal, by telling the Church as a spiritual Means to
bring them to Repentance; and by applying themselves also to the Magistrate for
the executing the Laws upon them, in order to the reclaiming the Parties
offending, the warning of others, and preventing God's Judgment on the Land and
Places where such Sins are committed. Dread not being reproached as Informers:
It is one thing to be Informers for filthy Lucre, and against Persons for their
Conscientiousness, and in Matters of Religion, where the difference is not in
Fundamental and necessary Doctrines, or in Matters of Practice and Worship,
wherein good Men may differ; there is a great deal of difference between
malicious and vexatious Informations and Convictions of that nature; and
endeavoring to put good Laws in Execution against Profaneness and Blasphemy,
and such things as are undeniably sinful, and provoking, and angering the
Sinners themselves and many others. As the Curse caufless shall not come, so
you need not fear (and must not be frighted from plain Duty, by) groundless
Slanders and Reproaches. It is no Matter of Reproach, but on the contrary, of
inward Satisfaction, and outward Reputation, with all serious, yea, sober
Persons, to be instrumental in restraining and punishing the Impieties of the
Age, in order to the reclaiming, yea, possibly eternally saving the Offenders,
honoring and pleasing God, and securing his Blessing upon the public, which
should be your ends in all you do in this way. But I shall not further insist
on this, nor at all mention several things which might have been instanced in,
because it is so well and fully done in those many excellent Sermons preached
by several, both Conformists and Nonconformists to the Societies for
Reformation in London; and also in that Sermon, which you of this Place lately
heard, and have also now in Print to recur to. All I shall therefore further
do, is to back this Duty with some Motives, and guide it by some Directions,
for your so ordering the Matter, as to open a Door of Hope to your selves and
the Nation.

They shall be fetched from the Text and Context, and the Particulars laid down
in the handling of the Doctrine.

(I.) For Motives.

(1.) Consider (as has been shown in the Doctrinal part) that they are the
unreformed Sins of a People that provoke God, and bring down Judgments; these
bring into a Valley of Achor, of great Distress, and shut the Door of Hope of
God's gracious Presence with a People; as therefore you would prevent or remove
the Judgments of God, and Tokens of his Displeasure feared or felt,
Magistrates, Ministers or People should set themselves every one in their
Places rigorously, to stem the Torrent of Looseness and Profaneness, and promote
the Reformation of the Manners of Men, by furthering the Execution of good Laws
for the Restraint and Punishment of Sin.

(2.) Consider, the more to stir you up to the Duty before you, that the
unreformed Sins of a People provoke God, even after he has begun to show Mercy
to them, and opened a Door of Hope; yet to shut that Door again, and being them
into a Valley of Achor, as has been proved under the second Proposition in the
Doctrinal part; and may be further proved from Ps. 107.33, 34. and Jude v. 5. O
therefore, as you would not have God thus to deal with us, do what you can to
further the Work of Reformation. God has opened to us a Door of Hope many
times formerly, but our Sins have shut it again; and God has lately, in a very
gracious and peculiarly remarkable manner, opened a Door of Hope again to us,
even in a Valley of Achor, in bringing, in preserving, directing and succeeding
our Gracious Rightful Sovereign King William. Was it not a Valley of Achor with
us, when we were so fast going back to the Egypt of Popery and Slavery; but God
opened a Door of Hope, delivering us from that Egypt, and those Iron-Yokes; but
if we remain an unreformed People, God can soon shut this Door again, and bring
us back into a Wilderness: Therefore, as you would not have God, after he has
begun to do us good, turn his Hand against us, and lead us back into deep
Distresses. Let every one of us set our Hands and Hearts to promote this Work
of Reformation of Manners God has so graciously begun amongst us, in the great
City, and many other places, and to our Comfort, in this place also.

(3.) Consider, (what was also told you in the clearing of the Doctrine) that
this Reformation if right and through, will open a Door of Hope of God's
Continuance of his gracious Presence with us, yea, of his restoring of it;
when, for a People's Sins, he had withdrawn it. Would you have God's Presence
with us in our Land, and the place we live in; O promote this, return to God,
this reforming Work, both in your selves and others.

(1.) This is the way to have God's Presence so far with a People, as to blast
the Attempts of God's and their Enemies against them, and bless them in their
Attempts against such. We are, praised be God, at present at Peace, but Enemies
both at home and abroad, question-less, are and will be at work, and our Peace
is like to be but shortliv'd, if God do not keep up in and amongst us a War
against our Sins, our worst Enemies. As ever you would have your Peace
continued, the Designs and Attempts of Enemies defeated and broken, and our
Attempts against God's and our enemies succeeded, carry on begun Reformation to
further Degrees to higher pitches.

(2.) Would you have God's Presence amongst us, to bless us with able, faithful
Counselors, and bless their Counsels? Would you have God's Blessing upon
public and Parliamentary Counsels, that under God, the Welfare of the Nation,
and the Security of Religion, Laws and Liberties do so much depend upon? Would
you have it with us as God promises, Isai. 1.25, 26, that he will give Judges
as at the first, and Counselors as at the beginning; then do as they are
exhorted to do in the 16th and 17th Verses of that Chapter, Wash you, make you
clean, put away the Evil of your doings from before his Eyes; cease to do evil,
learn to do well, carry on Reformation thoroughly.

(3.) This is the way to procure Plenty; it is for the Sins of a People that
God sends Scarcity and Cleanness of Teeth, viz. for the Abuse of Plenty by
Gluttony, Drunkenness, and feeding Men's Lusts. We have had some Scarcity, and
if God with hold a Season for the remaining Harvest, we may yet feel more of
that sore Judgment. O prevent it by doing your utmost, to reform the gross
Abuse of God's Mercies, and all other Sins amongst us.

(4.) As you would have God's Presence continued in the Enjoyment of the
Gospel, and Gospel Ordinances, vigorously prosecute this Work of Reformation;
for they are the unreformed Sins of a People, that provoke God to send the
worst sort of Famine (a far worse than that which the last Head mentioned) a
Famine of the Word of the Lord, Amos 8.3, 9, 10, 11, 12. All this is threatened
for the Sin of Sabbath-Profanation, ver. 5, 6.

(5.) Would you have God to be our God, our Husband; our Land married to him,
and us to be his People, his peculiar Treasure further this Work of
Reformation, do as Israel is directed, Hos. 2.2. and as it is promised she
should do, ver. 7. Put away our Sins, and our Iniquities far from us, and
return we to our first Husband, and use all the Advantages and Means you have
for forwarding others doing so.

(II.) I now come very briefly to speak by way of Direction, to all those that
are engaged in, or wish well to the carrying on this Work of Reformation, and
show what it is, that the Attempts for Reformation of Manners, give Hopes of in
themselves, and others, which if they do produce, will open a Door of Hope of
God's Presence amongst, and Blessing with us.

(1.) These Attempts for Reformation give Hope, That they who attempt the
reforming of others, and restraining and punishing the loose and wicked
Practices of others, their Drunkenness, Swearing, Uncleanness,
Sabbath-Profanation, etc. -- will be very careful to keep themselves from the
Guilt and Practice of these Sins, yea, to keep very far from an evil Matter,
from all Appearances, and Occasions of these Sins, vain Words, tippling, sitting
with any loose Companions, and the like. As you would have your Attempts for
Reformation be a Door of Hope, look very carefully to your own Conversations.
If Magistrates, that should punish these Sins, be guilty of them themselves,
how should it be expected that they should punish others, or that what they do
in it, should reform others, while they by their evil Example, harden them in
the very Sins they punish them for. If Ministers preach against these Sins, and
yet allowedly commit them, they are more like to draw Men into Sin by such
their wretched Practice, than to reform and turn Men from Sin by their
Doctrine: And so private Persons, if they prosecute others, and are guilty of
the same Sins themselves, how can they hope to be instrumental in reforming
others. -- Then will Endeavors for Reformation be a Door of Hope, when they
begin in those Persons themselves that promote it in others.

(2.) Attempts to reform the evil Manners of others, do give Hopes that all
engaged in this Work, will endeavor not only to keep from these gross Sins,
punishable by the Laws of Men, but even from all Sin whatsoever; from every
thing that may give just Offense and Scandal, and cause Men to reproach
Religion and the Professors of it; such as are Pride, indulging unruly
Passions, Injustice, deceiving, overreaching in our Dealings, making no
Conscience of Men's Words in buying and selling, in making good our Promises,
and paying of just Debts as far as able; yea, Hardness and Uncharitableness in
their Dealings: These things Men do often charge Professors with; see that you
give not any, no not the least just ground for such Charges: But be very just
in your Dealings, true to your Word and Promises, yea, merciful and
compassionate, as you would have your Endeavors for reforming the gross Sins
of others effectual, and to open a Door of Hope to our Land.

(3.) Men's Attempts to reform the Manners of others, give ground of Hope, that
they will vigorously endeavor to reform in themselves even Heart-sins, and the
inward as well as outward Acts of Sin. I am sure it should engage you to this,
and to set upon the conscientions, religious Performance of Duties; of Family
duties daily, Morning and Evening-Prayer, and Praises, and reading the
Scriptures in your Families, and frequent instructing and catechizing those
under your Charge, and to see to secret Duties, and to Sabbath-sanctification,
in Attendance on public Ordinances and in Family and Closet-duties of divine
Institution, and Acts of Worship, as well as abstaining from positive Subbath
profanation, by Thoughts, Words or Actions about worldly Employments or
Recreations. Yea, we justly hope, and expect from you, that you will endeavor
after Heart-holiness, after true Grace and growth in, and Exercise of it, as
well as keeping up the Form of Godliness, and the outward part of Religion, in
your Conversation before Men. As ever you desire your Attempts for the
Reformation of others, may open a Door of Hope of God's Mercy to the Land, see
that you set upon this thorow-heart and Life-Reformation in your selves.

(4.) The attempting, and especially the effecting the Reformation of the loose
and profane Manners of Men, gives hopes in relation to those whose Reformation
you seek, that it may, through God's gracious Blessing upon, and setting in
with it, bring them to sound Conversion to Faith in Christ, and a reform and
change of the Heart; this you should aim at, pray for, and press, that outward
Reformation may be a step in them to this through and inward Work, and to the
setting upon the Duties of Religion, and getting rid of that Hardness of Heart,
which their profane Practices had so deeply riveted. Though outward Reformation
may remove at present, some outward Judgments, or at least, reprieve from the
present full Execution of them, yet nothing can secure God's gracious, saving
Presence, but Faith in Christ accompanied with, and evidenced by Conscience of
Duties of our general and particular Calling, Exercise of Grace and Holiness of
Heart. In all your Attempts to amend the Manners of others, endeavor to
promote this through Heart-deep Reformation, pray for this, press to it. And you
that are reformed from, or have not been guilty of, those gross Sins of
Swearing, Drunkenness, Uncleanness, Sabbath-profanation, and other such like
enormous Crimes, but are brought to Civility, and moral Honeity, yet see that
you rest not in this, no, nor in any thing short of Christ, an Interest in him
by a true living Faith, and a through Work of Grace, and the Practice of
Holiness in Heart and Life: For though outward Reformation, a civil sober
Conversation, and moral Honesty be commendable, and your indispensible Duty,
without which, you can have no Evidence of the Truth of Grace, whatever your
Profession and Performances may be; yet if you go no further, such a partial
Reformation will never prove saving to your own Souls; nay, mere Civility,
Morality, yea, Gifts and external Performances rested in, are like to prove
hindrances of sound Conversion: Hence Christ tells the Scribes and Pharisees,
Mat. 21.31. That Publicans and Harlots repenting and believing, went into the
Kingdom of God before them who stayed and trusted in their Pharisaical
Righteousness. Promote therefore outward Reformation, but also to your utmost,
press and forward through conversion in others. Let Ministers press this on
People, and let private Christians press this too in their places; and you who
are more particularly engaged in this good reforming Work, do you press on
those Sinners you have to do with, to this through Reformation, to Faith in
Christ, the Practice of Religion, and the Power of Godliness. This is the way
to make Reformation a Door of Hope of God's Saving-mercy to your Souls, and of
his gracious Presence with the Land, and the Churches of Christ in it.

(5.) Endeavors for Reformation of Manners, are a Door of Hope, as the joining
together of serious, sober, and religious Persons (though differing in their
Persuasions in some lesser Matters) in this Work, gives hopes of uniting them
in Love and Affection one to another, and so far as they have attained walking
by the same Rule, and minding the same thing, Phil. 3.16. and bearing with each
other where there may be some difference in Judgment and Practice, while they
agree in the main, in all necessary things in Doctrine and Worship, and the
Practice of Holiness. When Divisions are healed, Animosities, Censoriousness
and Uncharit ableness laid aside, there will be a Door of Hope opened, that we
shall enjoy the gracious Presence of God and his Blessing upon us, in our
personal and more private, and in our National and Church-Capacity: Now joining
together in promoting Reformation, is a likely Means to this desirable
Christian-Union of Affections; for one great Cause of differences is the
Prejudices in Men's minds against one another, occasioned by Strangeness, and
not conversing together; but when sober Religious Persons join in promoting
Reformation, and see that they drive on the same good and holy ends, it breeds
better Thoughts of one another. Therefore labor to set open, and keep open
this Door of Hope, viz. Union in the main, among all that fear God, though
differing in some lesser Matters; for truly there is nothing that shuts the
Door of Hope against us more, than the Divisions, Heart-burnings, and
Animosities, among those that agree in the Essentials and Fundamentals of
Doctrine, Worship, and Christian Practice: Oh then, as you would have the
Reformation that is set on foot, be a Door of Hope, pray for and promote the
healing of the Divisions among Persons, professing the same Truth and
Godliness; endeavor to preserve the Unity of the Spirit in the Bond of Peace,
speaking the Truth in Love, Ephesians. 4.3, 15. Speak the Truth, and contend
earnestly for the Faith ( Jude v. 3.) yet speak it in Love. Put not the worst
Construction on Men's Words and Actions; but put the best Interpretation upon
doubtful Expressions, and Actions, that they will admit of, especially when in
other places and at other times, they explain what was possibly at first
delivered, so as to be somewhat liable to Exception. Fasten not upon Men
Consequences of Doctrine, which they never intended, nor ever saw in them: Men
may show the true Consequences of Doctrines, but should not charge the Persons
with intending and embracing those Consequences, which they renounce: Thus
heartily desire and endeavor to reform and heal the lamentable, sinful,
mischievous, and very threatening Divisions among Professors of the same
Religion, and serious in their Profession of Godliness. -- This would be a Door
of Hope indeed.

(6.) And lastly, Endeavors for Reformation of Manners, will be a Door of Hope
when they do (as to be sure they should) excite all those that are God's People
to be more eminent in the Profession of Religion and Godliness, more lively in
every Grace, more ready to and in ever good Work, when by seeing Sinners
reformed from Acts of Profaneness, true Saints are excited to more eminent.
Degrees of Holiness, to greater Exemplariness of Conversation, to repair their
Decays in Grace, to reform their Pride, and their too great Conformity to the
Spirit of the World, then (to allude to that passage, 1 Cor. 16 9) a great Door
and effectual of Hope will be opened upon us, as to the Continuance of God's
gracious Presence with us: And this should be a sour to Saints to great
Circumspection in their walk, and greater Fruitfulness in every good Word and
Work; for truly the Unreformedness of Professors, their Pride, Formality,
Decays in Grace, conformity to the world; their covetous, selfish frame of
Spirit, their losing their Zeal, and leaving much of their first Love, does as
much shut the Door of Hope, as any other sins, even the sins of profane
Persons, Rev. 2.5. Therefore all you that are Professors of more than ordinary
Strictness in Religion, while you would reform the Drunkenness, Swearing,
Filthiness, and Sabbath-profanation of gross Sinners, and see them in some
degree reformed: For shame, do you reform your Pride of Heart and Life, your
Conformity to the Customs, the garish Fashions and Dresses of the world; that
Pride that testifies to the Face of many Professors both Men and Women; Women's
high Heads, and Men's flanting Perukes, that hide their Faces, as if they were
ashamed, (as well indeed they may in such effeminate Dresses) to show them, and
make them look as out of a Prisongrate; so likewise, the Worldliness and
Selfishness of Professors, is much to be bewailed, and should be with the
greatest Vigor reformed. If you would do as the Church of Ephesus is by Christ
directed to do, Rev. 2.5. remember from whence you are fallen, and repent, and
do your first Works, it would be a Door of Hope. If while you desire and
attempt to break the Knots of Swearing, Tippling, revelling Companions, you
would also improve your Meetings together, and your friendly Visits, to
spiritual Purposes, to the sharpening and advancing Grace mutually, to the
provoking one another to love and good Works, Heb. 10.24. to the exhorting one
another daily, while it is called to day, lest any of you be hardened through
the deceitfulness of Sin, Heb. 3.13. to the lifting up of weak Hands and feeble
Knees, Heb. 12.12. to the building up one another in our most holy Faith; this
would open a Door of Hope indeed. Be prevailed with therefore all of you,
especially such as profess strictness, and such as engage in this good and
necessary Work of Reformation of Manners, labor to follow these Directions;
and then tho your and others Sins may have brought us and the Nation, in some
respects, into a Valley of Achor, on account of Afflictions and Distresses; yet
if it thus prove a Valley of Achor, in regard of Humiliation, and through
effectual Reformation above described and pressed, it will be a comfortable
blessed Door of Hope to us, that God will yet dwell among us, and be our God,
and that we shall be his People.

FINIS.

