A LETTER To the Author of the late Letter out of the Country, occasioned by a
former Letter to a Member of the House of Commons, concerning the Bishops
lately in the Tower, and now under Suspension.
SIR.
IN a Peevish discourse, I always expect to meet with more of Passion than
Reason. And you have given me no ground to alter my opinion, I confess at the
very beginning, you make an Apology for your Peevishnesses, but I think that
does not mend the matter, it only shows that some men know their own infirmity,
and yet cannot forbear to publish it to the world. And what allowances soever
you may bespeak and expect in a private correspondence and from your friend,
yet there is not the same reason to expect it from the world; and to Print and
Publish a peevish and fretful Letter, and then to cry out you were betrayed by
sickness, is a peevish, i.e. a ridiculous excuse. For if you were distempered
and peevish and knew it, why did not you stay till your thoughts were cooler?
Wise men have always judged that grave and serious matters require a free and
dispassionate mind. And your Letter gives us an instance, that in a peevish
fit, how much soever a man may be master of his Notions, he is not much master
of his Reason.

I cannot be persuaded, that you your self believe, that qualms and
indispositions are sufficient Licenses for Invectives, and that whenever your
Head or Toe aches, you are thereby dispensed with, to fall upon the Honor and
Reputation of good and excellent Men? and therefore pardon me, if I think your
peevishness has some other causes besides bodily temper. Envy is apt to raise
the Spleen, and men of great Ambition and no great Virtue, are always jealous
of other men's merits. There was an honorable character, (and which they very
well deserved) given of the Bishops in the first Letter: And it is a Query
(which you can satisfy) whether That was the sole, or the concurring Cause,
whether it made, or only contributed to your distemper, and meeting with
prepared matter, and the humors on the fret, has raised the ferment to that
pitch of wrath and bitterness, which every where discovers it self in your
Letter.

This is too invidious to be open and barefaced, and downright Detraction and
Calumny melts away before the Reputations of such Men, like Snow before the
Sun. But to pretend mighty respects and esteem, under that Vizor perhaps
something may be fastened, however it must be owned to be politickly done;
obliquely to attack That Reputation, which can never without palpable infamy be
directly attempted. You profess a particular veneration for these excellent
Persons, and not content with that you add, as true and great a veneration as
any body can pretend to. And I wonder how you would like to be thus reverenced
your self, to have such good words made an inlet to defame you: a crafty
artifice to cloud and eclipse the glory of your Actions, and to lessen (with
all imaginable peevishness,) your just value and esteem amongst men, I fancy,
in such a case you would be put hard to it to distinguish betwixt your Enemies,
and your Admirers.

It is not very long since that these great and Reverend Prelates had
signalized themselves by an unparalled act of Zeal for the Protestant
Religion, and for the Liberty and Property of the Subject, which the whole
Nation beheld and admired, and gave public demonstrations of their Affection
and Gratitude, suitable to so great and venerable an occasion: And now, out
come you with your Letter, and (out of pure Veneration no doubt) do all you can
to depreciate and undervalue the honor of it. Why. They did but their duty,
and other men behaved themselves as well as they. Such an ungenerous and
impious scorn was never before put on so glorious an Action, and can proceed
from nothing but a malice, or ingratitude, as unparalled as their Virtues. If
these be the effects of Veneration, give me the man that spits in my face; I
had rather be openly reproached, than to have the same thing done under fawning
complements and hypocritical Reverences.

You have got a fine expression for this and call it, placing things in a true
light; as if all the kingdom was blind before, in the unsiversal applauses and
regards that were every where paid to them. And now forsooth they must recall
their Praise and Thanks, and dance after your new light; which discovers that
it was their indispensable Duty, and the praise and thanks must be divided.

It was their indispensable Duty, and they own it, but is it the worse or the
less for that? I fancy you would be glad, if you could prove it had not been
their duty, for then you might have something to say against them. And is it
not very commendable, and praiseworthy, for a man to do his duty? But how poor
and thin (not to say base and unworthy) is your representation of this great
Action. As if they had performed only an easy and common duty, which
notwithstanding deserves a better acknowledgment, and treatment than you can
afford to this high act of Religion, you tell us, you desire to consider the
Actions in the naked Circumstances. And I must tell you, that you consider this
Action very nakedly indeed; for you omit the most material and pertinent
Circumstances, which are the generous asserting of the Protestant Religion, and
the English Liberties, to the apparent hazard of themselves, and all their
secular interests. You know these are Duties of great difficulty, and the
performance of them has been celebrated in all Ages of the Church. And when
the Fathers of our Church have demonstrated an invincible Zeal and Courage in
asserting Religion, and the Laws: To have this represented with peevish and
contemptible abatements, is a reproach to Christianity, and reflects dishonor
upon the blood of Martyrs, and the faith and constancy of Confessors.

You say, You cannot see why they should boast; and do they boast? of That all
the world, and even your self acquit them: but you would fain insinuate it by
proving from Scripture, they ought not to boast. It Is a Reflection upon humane
Nature to answer such insinuations, and I appeal to the candor of a Jew, for
the iniquity of them. What though men cannot merit from God, must they not
therefore have due praises from men? Envy and Detraction are no less Vices, and
far more odious than Boasting. S. Paul, That he might not be exalted was
buffetted, 2 Cor. 12.7.
but it is to be remembered, that it was by a messenger of Satan.

At this rate, there will be no such thing as Honor, Praise, and Reputation
amongst men, and the most renowned and illustrious Actions will shrink into a
narrow compass; you may try it in any Action that from the beginning of the
World, has had the reputation of Great and Glorious; and it is liable to the
very same that you object to the Bishops. Let us examine it in an instance of
your own allowance. This very Action (provided the Bishops may have as little
the honor of it as may be) you are content to own that it was ravishing and
transporting, and that a whole Nation was never more obliged. Now, Sir, let
there be as many sharers in this as you please, and let all the shares be put
together; let the Lords, the Lawyers and inferior Clergy, assert, defend and
assist, as much as you shall think fit, the upshot (in your way) will be no
more honor, than you will allow to the Bishops, a small question of yours will
rifle it of all the glory you pretend to give it: For (as you say of the
Bishops) I would only ask this Question, whether it was their duty or no? if it
was, then without admitting the Popish doctrine of supererogation and merit, I
cannot see why they should boast, or we magnify them so extremely for doing
that which was their indispensable duty. And so for any thing I can see, the
Lords, the Lawyers, and the inferior Clergy, (for all your ecstasy and
transport) must even go look for their honor, as well as the Bishops, for as
you have handled the matter, that glorious action is come to a fair issue, and
upon the foot of the account we have it, they did but their duty, and so need
not have been so extremely magnified.

Your pretending therefore to divide the thanks and praise, was not to give it
to any body else, but to take it from the Bishops. This is one of the crooked
and serpentine ways of detraction, when the merit of an action cannot with any
face be denied, then it deserves not so much, or others deserve it too, you
should (you say) be unjust to others, if you should suffer them to ingross all
the praise. But what injustice is it to others to suffer the Bishops to enjoy
what is their due. It can never be denied but they had a share in that action,
and the greatest share too; There were others concerned in it, but that (though
unawares to you) is so far from lessening, that it is a considerable advance to
the honor of these excellent Bishops; for if the particular acting in it
deserved praise and thanks, certainly some part even of that praise and thanks
is due to them who were the cause and occasion of it; so that besides the merit
of their immediate and particular actings, (which was far the greatest) there
is an additional honor due to them, from that which was effected by their
Authority and example, by their wisdom and conduct. For though (as you say) some
of their inferior Clergy, were as forward as themselves, yet I must tell you
(if you do not know it already) they were but some, and those (for the most
part) the very same who still in judgment and practice agree with the Bishops.
To instance in one, the learned and famed Author of these admirable Reasons,
for not reading the Declaration, in a Letter from a Minister in the City, to
one in the Country: But there were others, and those not inconsiderable, who
at first, were not so very forward, some thought the reading the Declaration to
be only a MINISTERIAL ACT, and others but MATTER OF PRUDENCE, what Readiness
therefore they showed after, was not Original, but derivative, and is owing to
the Influence and reasons of the Bishops, their seconding is to be ascribed to
the Principals, and they followed, but it was because they had such excellent
Leaders. And for the truth of all this, I appeal to the transactions and
debates at the several Consultations which were held about this matter.
Besides, it ought not to be forgotten, that these Bishops never transmitted the
Declarations to their respective Clergy, and each of them by that single act
secured a whole Diocese. So that what share soever others had in the action,
no body can pretend to an equal share in the Reputation. Had They complied, I
doubt the Number of the Non-Readers would have been much inferior to the
Non-swearers.

I know my Lords the Bishops envy not man his share and honor in that action,
and would have been glad if there had been yet more concerned in it. And there
were some (you do not mention) who notwithstanding as well deserve it, and had
as considerable a part as those you do mention; Those are the Gentlemen of the
Jury, who (to their immortal honor) brought in that just verdict, and though you
have left them out (and perhaps because they did so) their virtue and
uprightness is celebrated by the present, and will be celebrated by succeeding
ages. To give therefore the Bishops their just honor, does not deprive that
excellent Jury, nor any others concerned of what is due to them, nor does the
commending the Lords and Lawyers reflect upon the Bishops. They very well agree
together, and what is given to one, is not taken from another, Partnership in
virtue is not subject to the rules of Arithmetic, to adjust the quota's and
proportions of praise and thanks, they best subsist in the common stock; It Is
only your peevishness that talks of dividing. The action was united, and why
not the honor? and those that concurred in the action, will not be Rivals in
the Glory.

I am ashamed to have said thus much in so clear a matter, and I do heartily
and humbly beg pardon of my Lords the Bishops: To plead in such a case is a
kind of detraction, and to offer to wipe out stains, supposes a possibility of
their sticking. But I have this Apology, it is not so much the case of their
Lordships, (for that I know to be above Calumny) but the whole kingdom is
concerned, which has already given its judgment in universal approbation and
applause, so that to reflect upon, or to diminish the Bishops, is to disparage
the public verdict, and is a Libel upon the whole Nation.

Before I leave this, there is one thing more I shall acquaint you with, and
that is, that how much fidelity, zeal, and courage soever these excellent
Bishops have shown in this particular it is not the only instance they have
done it in, Their virtues have been tried before, there was a time when A
solemn League and Covenant, and another, when an Engagement was to be taken,
and then they gave admirable proofs of their Constancy, and even in their
younger years showed themselves to be men of Episcopal virtues, that neither
the Power nor peril of the times, nor the baits of interest, nor any secular
matter could prevail upon their Consciences, nor could they be any more
persuaded to swallow the Covenant and Engagement, than they were to read the
Declaration. Sir, you are very pert about filling their places with as good and
able men as they, I will not question your stock, but if you will count again,
I doubt (though it be but a small number) you will be put to it, to find even
four or five of such tried and experienced virtue, and who can come up to the
pitch and measure of their Courage and Constancy.

I come now to that you call a less pleasing Subject, their Refusing the Oaths.
I will not dispute with you whether they have done well, or ill, or whether
they ought, or ought not to take the Oaths. But whether you have offered any
thing considerable to convince them.

You say you will be so kind to them, as to make them Judges in their own
causes. Well that is a kindness, and in consequence of it, I pray let their
Lordships be asked, and the matter, I suppose, will soon be at an end. But you
do not mean so, only a Paper they set their hands to almost a Twelvemonth
since. If all the Declarations that men have subscribed must be their Judges,
(however the Bishops may escape,) I am afraid, those that are so hot upon this,
would not be able to stand the Trial themselves of their own Declarations and
Subscriptions. And yet there is a very great difference between those
Subscriptions, and this of the Bishops, and the other Lords. When that
Declaration at Guild Hall was made and subscribed, The times were in the utmost
confusion, the King was withdrawn, the Rabble up in all parts of the Kingdom,
the Necessities pressing and urgent: put all these together, and if there had
been any need, there is reason and ground enough for allowances; and however it
is very unseasonably urged by those, who themselves are so little tied to their
own solemn and deliberate Declarations and Subscriptions.

But I pray what is there in This DECLARATION that so warmly affects the
Bishops, as that they should refuse to be judged by it. The short of it is,
That they resolved to apply themselves to the P. of O, who had undertaken (and
promised by HIS DECLARATION) to rescue us, by endeavoring to procure A FREE
PARLIAMENT: That they would assist him in the obtaining such a Parliament,
wherein our Laws and Liberties may be secured, the Protestant interest
supported, to the glory of God, the happiness of the Established Government of
these Kingdoms. And now Sir, I pray tell me, what contradiction is there in all
this, to their present or to their former practices. Was it that they declared
to endeavor for a Free Parliament? That very thing, THEY had done in their
Advices and Petition not long before. Or was it that they applied to the P. of
O. and promised to assist him? Why they promised to assist him but in the
obtaining a Free Parliament, and such a Free Parliament as might secure the
Laws, etc. to the glory of God, and the happiness of the Established
Government. And what is all this to Swearing? how comes there to be such an
inseparable connection between the Oath and the Declaration? that the refusing
the one is a palpable violation of the other. Cannot a man endeavor for a Free
Parliament, and promise to assist the P. of O. in procuring one, but that in
his own judgment he must think himself obliged to take the Oath, and if he does
not, he recals his consent, and flies from his subscriptions? How you will
prove this, I cannot tell; and I am confident from these Premises all the
skill you have, can never draw such a Conclusion.

The next thing you proceed upon is, That Salus populi est suprema lex: and
upon this Maxim, you say, you will dispute the matter in cool blood. I am glad
of that, for hitherto your blood or your choler has been very hot: And (to do
you right) what follows is the coolest thing you have said in all your Letter.
You say, The saying is derived from the old Romans, among whom the People with
the Senate, had the face of the supreme Magistracy. So that in our
Constitution, the King is concerned in that Maxim, and is not to be shut out
from his share in it. Very well, Sir, hitherto it is very cool. But (say you) in
admitting a head, I would not exclude the Body. And so say I too, and (if you
please) add, that in admitting a Body, you would not exclude the Head: and then
it is as broad as long. You proceed with your Argument, Although it is possible
Kingdoms may have suffered by the Peoples encroachments, yet to say, that a
Government can suffer in no other instance, would be full as absurd, as to say,
That a man can be mortally wounded no where but in his head; but we are sure
there are parts in our body as fatal to be touched as the Brain, and therefore
ought to be guarded with equal care. That is, if the Mouth bites the finger the
Teeth are to be pulled out, if the Head sends defluxions upon the Lungs, the
Head must be cut off; because the Lungs are a Vital part, and ought to be
guarded with equal care. Sir, It is to be hoped after such clear
Demonstrations, that now my Lords the Bishops will be convinced and take the
Oath.

You say, In those cases we are not tied up to the rigor and words of a Law:
for if the moral Equity and the design of the Commandment is better observed by
breaking the Letter, it is lawful, nay our duty to do it; and to make good this,
you instance in the Sabbath, and the Maccabees breaking the letter of the
fourth Commandment: in which instances, the Rule holds good; as also in all
Ceremonial and positive Institutions. But how comes this Rule to be extended to
Moral Laws? The moral Equity of the fourth Commandment, we know; but I pray,
which is the moral Equity of the fifth Commandment? or of any other Moral
Precept, upon the account of which a man may break the Letter and act contrary
to it, and yet keep the Commandment? when you speak plain to this, you will
find your Account will reach all the Commandments as well as the Fifth; and in
virtue of it, a man may be permitted to take God's name in vain, to commit
Murder, Theft, or bear false witness as well as not honor his Father and
Mother.

You are a little pleasant, when you talk of being wise Martyrs to the Fifth
Commandment. But by this you do not only ridicule Passive Obedience, but also
all the Martyrs and Sufferers for Religion in the Primitive Persecutions; for
they were just such wise Martyrs and no other. For the Rule of breaking the
Letter of a Law by the Moral Equity of it, is sure full as early, and would
serve them as well as any body else? And these instances of Equity you mention,
That Kings were made for the people, not the people for Kings; that the Rights
of the Subject ought to be as Sacred as those of the Sovereign. That Government
was not erected for the aggrandising one single person or family. All these
were the very same in those days, as they are now. And I challenge you to name
one single instance of Moral Equity which did not equally affect them, as any
Persons since, and might not have been as serviceable to them. And therefore
('till you can show the difference) They will be even just such wise Martyrs,
ignorant of Moral Equity, and the advantages they might have had by that, to
release themselves from the rigor and words of a Law. Of all the men I ever met
with, you have a peculiar Talent in vilifying the greatest and most honorable
Actions. And my Lords the Bishops have reason to take it kindly, for you allow
that they did their duty, and that is more than you will allow the Martyrs. For
(says your Rule) if the Moral Equity (and which was the same to the Martyrs as
to any since) is better observed by breaking the Letter, it is lawful, nay our
Duty to do it: and then the suffering Martyrs, either did not understand, or
else neglected their Duty when they possessed their Souls in Patience, and
chose rather to suffer than (by Virtue of a Moral Equity) to break the Letter
of God's or man's Law. Your friend, Mr. Johnson, (who loves Passive Obedience
as little as you do) can tell you, Answ. to Jovian. p. 160.
that the Primitive Christians suffered patiently because the Laws were against
them, i.e. the Letter of the Laws. For Moral Equity was as much on their side
before, as after the Laws were made in their behalf. That indeed gave them a
Title to the Letter, but they had before the Equity.

I have now done with your Arguments: A Province I had much rather be employed
in, than in considering Reproaches and Scandals, but that cannot be avoided in
your Letter. For after you have said all you can to convince them; the next
thing is to say all you can to defame them. And I defy any man to say more, or
with Truth and Honesty half so much.

You have the strange confidence to charge these Reverend and Excellent Bishops
with having been the occasion of the expense of so much Treasure and Blood. And
you instance in Ireland. This is a very heavy charge, but it is as ridiculous
as it is scandalous. I wonder (when your hand was in) that you did not charge
them for having been the occasion of all that mortality in the Navy the last
Summer, or that the Pendennis was cast away, or (to come a little nearer the
matter, and because you talk of Ireland) that they were the occasion of an
unfortunate Gentleman's drowning himself. All this you might have charged upon
them, and a great deal more, and with the same truth and justice.

You have forgot what you said a little before, That they had no Partners, no
body pretends to share with them, and they must stand or fall by themselves:
and how does this account, and the present charge agree? Can men that are so
few and inconsiderable do such mighty things, as to stop Armies, and prevent
the relief of Ireland. A man would be tempted to call these contradictions, but
perhaps you that can join veneration and reviling, may reconcile it: in the
mean time, I pray Sir, Did they hinder the City from lending Moneys on that
occasion, or did they hinder the raising of Men, or was they any impediment to
the Parliament to promise assistance for the Reduction of Ireland, or finally,
did they hinder the Wind and Tides. Sir, the House of Commons is now inquiring
into the miscarriages concerning Ireland, and if you have any thing to say
against the Bishops, it is very proper to apply your self to the Committee, and
they have voted you shall have liberty of access, and be heard. But if you can
say no more than you do in your Letter, give me leave to tell you. It is a high
act of villainy to charge any Man, and especially Men of their station, honor,
and worth, with having been the occasion of spilling Protestant blood, and yet
have not one wise word to say in proof of it.

And what is this to their refusing the Oath which was not 'till after the
Protestants of Ireland were come over, and Derry was besieged, and relieved? I
do not know what placing things in a true light may do, but in the old way of
reasoning, the occasion cannot be after the fact: And I desire you would please
to show how the Bishops refusing the Oath in July, was the occasion that
Succors were not sent to Ireland the February or March before.

In the last place, I shall address my self to you, upon the end and design of
the first Letter, which is to recommend to the Parliament the mitigating or
releasing the rigor of the Oath Act, in favor of these excellent Bishops. This
you say you must approve of, and for the truth of it, appeal to your
Correspondent. But you do not approve of the method proposed. Well Sir, Methods
are not much to me. And if your method is better, you shall have my vote, if
you please, we will compare them. The first Letter (in pursuit of this end)
recommends them as Men who are the chief for merits, as well as Authority in
our Church. That their unparallet'd zeal for the Protestant Religion, and for
the privileges and liberty of the subject, deserved another kind of
acknowledgment and return from the Nation. That the zeal and courage they made
appear, cannot be so soon forgot. That it would be a wonder and astonishment
that these Prelates who had escaped the fury of Papists, and made so glorious a
confession for Protestant Religion and English Liberties, should in so short a
time be disgraced and deposed by Protestants, and when others that attempted to
enslave the Nation, and even the Prosecutors of the Bishops are received into
favor; The chief Champions of the Protestant Religion and Liberty, are the
only men that are ruined, etc. Sir, in my judgment, this is a pretty good
method; and now if you please, let us see what yours is. Instead of this, you
tell us they did but their duty, and need not be so extremely magnified, that
they are men of such a temper, that neither God nor man can do any thing for
them; you charge them with faction and schism, with the blood of Ireland, with
preferring their humor before serving God; and to carry the matter home, you
tell us, that the People would not be concerned for their Deprivation, and
there are many others as good as they to fill their places. Now Sir, what your
end is in this you best know, but if it be to procure favor to the Bishops,
you have taken the strangest Method that ever was heard on. Suppose a friend of
yours should undertake to recommend you to the favor of a third Person, and in
order to it, should mention your usefulness, and virtues, and former services,
(which in your own case, I suppose you would think might be done without
tempting you to boast) Suppose another pretending the same, should say, I
approve the design; and of any thing that sounds in his favor, but I do not
like the Method; For, Sir, This man did but his duty, he need not be so
magnified, nor was he singular in those services, and not content thus to
diminish you, should vilify, asperse, and belly you besides, I pray, when there
is another true light to be put out, give me your opinion, what you would think
of such an advocate, or of his method.

There is one thing more you and the Author differ upon in point of Method. The
Author recommends it to the Parliament, and thus far you seem to like it well
enough, but you would have the Bishops first petition. Now Sir, I am not Critic
enough in these matters, to know which is best: But this I know, that favors,
the more free and unconstrained they are, are always the greater and more
generous, and (if I mistake not) the favors to the Dissenters, and to the
Quakers, were enacted and made into a Law, without any previous Petition from
either of them. And why favors should come harder to those of the Church of
England, (and to such eminent Lights of that Church) as I do not undertake to
determine, so I leave it to them whose immediate concern it is to consider. I
am,

SIR, Your humble Servant.

FINIS.

