TO Queen Mary: THE Humble Salutation, AND FAITHFUL GREETING OF THE Widow
Whitrowe.

WITH A WARNING TO THE RULERS of the Earth, BEFORE The Day of the LORD breaks
forth, that shall burn as an Oven, and all the Wicked, and all the Ungodly
shall be as Stubble: The Mouth of the LORD has spoken it.

Printed in the Year, 1690.

TO Queen MARY: THE Humble Salutation, AND FAITHFUL GREETING OF THE Widow
Whitrowe, etc.
LET QVEEN MARY Live for ever, which is the desire of my Soul to GOD for Thee,
That the Crown of Righteousness Thou may Wear, and be Adorned with the rich
Jewels of Eternal Life; [which are the Heavenly Virtues of GOD in Christ] and
in Order thereunto, my Humble Request to the Queen, is, That She may live in
the Fear of the LORD, that She may be Rich in Good Works, that She may take the
Apostles Advice to the Primitive Christians, after they were called from their
Heathenish Ways, into that Honorable Pro^ession of the Christian Life: Not
fashioning your selves, says he, as you did in the former Vanities, in the
days of your Ignorance, but as He that has called you, is holy; so be ye holy
in all manner of your Life and Conversation; as it is written, Be ye holy, for
I am holy: And take the holy Women in former Ages for your Example, Whose
Adorning was not that of costly Jewels, or rich Attire, but the Hidden Man of
the Heart; that is, Christ in you the Hope of Glory: And surther, says the
Apostle Paul, Tim. Chap. 2. Let Men pray every where, lifting up pure hands
without wrath or doubting: Likewise also, the Women, that they array themselves
in comely Apparel, with shame-fac'dness and Modesty, not with broidred Hair, or
Gold, or Pearls, or costly Apparel, but as becomes Women that professes the
Fear of GOD with Good Works.

This is more, O Queen, than a pretended outside Holiness of Bodily Worship,
and voluntary Humility; and those that come no further, than to follow the
Precepts and Commandments of Men, may be vainly puffed up in Pride and
high-mindedness; and then in that Spirit, they are no more but as the Apostle
says, Silly Women, ever learning, but never come to the Knowledge of the
Truth; and this is but the out-ward Court, where the worst of Men and Women may
come, as that Pious Man, Bishop Usher, Charged, saying, Look you be not found
in the Out-ward Court, but a Worshipper within the Temple, before the Altar;
for, says he, Christ will measure all those that profess his Name, and call
themselves his People, and the out-ward Worshippers He will leave out: The
Out-ward Court, says he, is the formal Christian, whose Religion lies in
performing the outside Duty of Christianity, etc. Let the Queen be pleased to
hear this Good Man's humble Confession, which he made a little before his Death,
(though a Preacher 40 Years before the Rebellion in Ireland) to one of his
Friends that challenged a Promise made by him: He Replied, That he had not
writ, and yet could not charge himself with any Breach of Promise; for, said
he, I did begin to write, but when I came to write of Sanctification, that is,
of the New Creature, which GOD forms by his Spirit in every Soul, which He
does truly regenerate: I found so little of it wrought in my self, that I could
speak of it only as Parrots, by Rote, and without the Knowledge and
Understanding of what I might have expressed; and therefore, I durst not
presume to proceed any further upon it. And Added: I must tell you, we do not
well understand what Sanctification and the New Creature is, it is no less than
for a Man to be brought to an entire Resignation of his Will to the Will of
GOD, and to live in the Offering up of his Soul, continually in the Flames of
Love, as a whole burnt Offering to Christ: And how little (says he) are many of
those who profess Christianity experimentally acquainted with this Work in
their Souls?

A Man worthy of Honor: I question not, but HE that gave him that sight,
brought him into a good Measure of the Life thereof, before he departed this
Life: and I heartily wish; yea, with all my Heart, and with all my Soul, that
the Church of England, together with all the rest of the Churches of what sort
soever, that bears the Name of Christians, were in the Life of what this humble
Man had the sight of; then shall Wars cease, when HE comes to Reign, whose
Right it is; GOD over all Blessed for ever, Amen.

Therefore, O Queen, Live for ever in this Life, which this Humble Man had the
sight of, that is the New Creature, born again; not of that which is
corruptible, but of the incorruptible Life of Jesus, who said to Nichodemus, A
Man must be born again, before he can enter into the Kingdom of GOD. But this
was a Mystery to him: For said he, How can this be? Can a Man enter again into
his Mothers Womb? So ignorant was he of the Heavenly Life, though a Ruler in
Israel: And I wish too too many that are wise in their own eyes, be not covered
with this Cloud of Ignorance and Error, that whilst they Govern and Teach
others, they themselves have need to be taught.

But, O Queen, live thou for ever in the holy, humble, and self-denying Life of
Christ; that a holy Pattern thou may be, that thy Light may so shine, that
all may see thy good Works, and give Glory to GOD that ever the Queen came into
this Nation. In Order to this, I humbly entreat the Queen, That She believe not
every Spirit that shall come to her, and say, It belongs to the Queens Dignity
to take State upon her, and to go in Rich and Gorgious Attire: Know this, O
Queen, That there can be no more said to the Ignorant Heathen, that knows not
GOD: But I hope the Queen will have more of the Wisdom of GOD, than to suffer
her innocent Spirit to be betrayed, or captivated into such Trumpery and
foolish Fopperies; for She being a Christian, Christ is to be her Teacher, and
Christ to be her Pattern: And where was His State, and His Gorgious Apparel? He
wore a plain Garment without a Seam: It Is true, whilst they were a Crucifying
Him, they put on a purple Garment to scoff and deride His humble self-denying
Life: And does not the Christians of our Times do the same? And where was His
State; for He often sat on the Ground; and who His Companions? Poor Fisher
men, who left all and followed Him; the Lame, and the Blind, poor Publicans,
which were heavy laden; their Sins being a Burden too heavy for them to bear,
and so were glad of a Physician to Cure them of their Maladies; but indeed the
proud high-minded Pharisees, were offended with Him for this humility. But the
Queen keeping in the humility of Christ; She will place her Affections upon
more high and sublime things; for the Spirit of the LORD, is a noble Spirit,
High and Mighty above all transitory Things.

The Queen being of His Spirit, will be the same: She Will scorn the Pomps and
Pleasures of a poor, dirty, perishing World: She Will place her Delights upon
more high and excellent things, than the Pomps and Vanities of this wicked
World, wherein the worst of Heathens takes delight; but for the best of them,
they mind more Divine and Heavenly things: As Socrates, (that Divine
Philosopher;) Fine and rich Clothes, says he, are only fit for Commedians; and
being demanded from what things Men and Women ought to refrain, From Pleasures,
said he; temperate Persons become the most Excellent; they eat that which
neither hurts the Body nor Mind, and that which is easy to be got: The only and
best way (says he) to Worship GOD, is to mind and obey whatsoever He Commands;
that the Souls of Men and Women may partake of the Divine Nature; that GOD is
seen of the Virtuous Mind, that by waiting upon Him, they are United unto Him
in an accessible place of Purity and Happiness; GOD has asserted them always
to be near unto Him. These are they that were worthy of the Name of Christians,
because they imitate Him in their Lives, who were Plain, Humble, and
Self-denying, like Christ their LORD; who said, Learn of me, Learn of me; says
he, that was GOD over all Blessed for ever; yet, humbled himself to the Death,
yea, the Death of the Cross; before whom, let all Kings, Queens, and Potentates
of the Earth lick the Dust; before Him who is LORD and Governor of all things,
from whom the greatest Monarch in the Earth has his Breath, and He can take it
away at his pleasure; therefore, who shall not sear Him, the Everlasting;
before whom, all Nations are as a drop of a Bucket. Yea, let the Heavens and
Earth tremble before Him, who shall lay all Flesh in the Dust, and then, Where
shall its Glory be? Therefore, O Queen, live for ever in this plain, innocent,
and humble Life of Jesus, who made Himself of no reputation; and, said He, to
his Disciples, (when they were striving for the Mastership, one over the
other;) The Gentiles which bear Rule, exercise Lordship one over the other, but
with you, it must not be so; but he that is chiefest among you, let him be
Servant to all. And this did He in Practice, as well as Doctrine, when He
washed His Disciples feet; and so left them and all His followers an Example to
follow His Steps: He did not say, follow this Man, or that Man; no, nor the
footsteps of the Flock; no, for He knew that all Men might Err, therefore he
charged and commanded, saying, Learn of me, for I am meek and lowly, and you
shall find rest for your Souls. Oh! the Treasure of Treasures, the Pearl of
great Price, that whosoever has it, will Sell all for it; all their perishing
Glories, with all their fading Delights; and count it all, but dung and dross,
for the Excellency of this Life in Christ.

Therefore, hear O Princesses, and give Ear ye Ladies of the perishing Honors
of this World; Did Christ Jesus the LORD, and only Savior, the Immaculate Lamb
of GOD that takes away the Sins of the World; Consecrate a Way for you, through
His Agonies of Sorrows, and Griefs, bitter Death, and bloody Passion; for you
to live a Life of Vanities and Pleasures, the Pomps and Pride of Life, the Lust
of the Flesh, and the Lust of the Eye? Was all his strong Cries, Groans, Sighs
and Sobs, Watchings and Fastings, cruel Mockings and Scourgings; exposing
Himself to all the Malice that Men or Devils could Invent, Was all these
Miseries to End here? Or was this to be the End of all, to fasten you to your
cursed Plays, with your whole Life of sinful Pleasures? Ye careless Daughters,
ye Women that are at Ease, be astonished, pluck off your Gorgious Attire, put
on Sackcloth, and cover your Heads with Ashes, and sit on the Ground; and from
thence, take up a deep and heavy Lamentation for the miseries that are coming
upon you; when your Songs shall be turned into Howlings, your Joys into
Heaviness and bitter Lamentations; which shall be the Reward of all your vain
and wicked Pastimes, that has been spent in vain and wicked Recreations; of
which precious time, the least moment thereof upon a dying Bed, is more than
the Gold of Ophir. Then shall you call, said the LORD, but I will not answer.
You shall seek Me early, but you shall not find Me. And, why? Because you hated
Knowledge, and did not choose the Fear of the LORD: You would have none of my
Counsel, but despised all my Corrections, therefore shall you Eat of the Fruit
of your own ways, and be filled with your own Devices: For Ease, slays the
foolish, and the Prosperity of Fools destroys them; but they that obey Me,
says the LORD, shall dwell safely, and be quiet from the fear of Evil, Prove.
1. Chap. Therefore consider these things, all you that forget GOD, least I tear
you in pieces and there be none to deliver you, says the LORD.

But, O Queen, live for ever! The way for the Queen to obtain this Everlasting
and Eternal Life, is to watch against the Evil of her own Heart, for so the
LORD commands, saying, Watch, Watch, Watch, which He fulfilled before He gave
it out to others, when He was led into the Wilderness, and there thrice
tempted, as the Apostle said, He was in all things tempted as we are, yet
without sin, that He might be able to succor us that are tempted: For this
know, O Queen, it is no sin to be tempted; but the sin is to yield to the
temptation; as says the Prophet, When sinners inticeth thee, consent not thou
unto them; therefore the LORD commanded to make the Defense strong, double your
VVatch; yea, treble your VVatch; and says the Prophet, A threefold Cord cannot
easily be broken. O how good is the LORD, to give us these Heavenly Precepts,
and not only so, but to be our Strength in weakness. Thou have covered our
Heads in the Day of Battle, when the Enemy has come in like a Flood. Thou have
lifted up Thy Standard against him, Glory he unto Thee for ever. Thus has the
LORD stood by them that fear him in all Ages, to be their Preserver from the
Snares and Temptations of the Devil; but then, they must be found in His Way,
otherwise, He is not engaged to preserve them: The Way of Christ, is His daily
CROSS; You cannot be my Disciples, siath He, Except you deny your selves, and
take up My Cross and follow Me; (Whether must we follow Him?) Through all the
Travels of his Soul; as Isaiah the Prophet prophesied of him, saying, He shall
see of the Travel of his Soul, His righteous Soul shall be satisfied; and in
vain is all your Preaching, Hearing, Praying, and Praising out of his Holy,
Pure, and Incorruptible Life. And further of his Life, you may read in Isaiah's
Prophesy of Him, how He was a Man of Sorrows, and was well acquainted with
Griefs; and after he came into the World, in the Holy History of his Life of
temptations and miseries, he says, I am the Way, the Truth, and the Life; none
can come to the Father, but by Me, and he that climbs up another way is a Thief
and a Robber.

Another Way, O Queen! Then through his bitter Sufferings; a Way indeed, that
at the first Entrance, his Visage seems black, and his Form to be without
Comeliness; yet is he the Beloved of our Souls, and the Chiefest among
Thousands, to them that have followed Him through the many Tribulations, and
have washed their long-suffering Robes, and made them white in the Blood of the
Lamb: These shall walk with me, says He, in White, for they are worthy; for
because you have suffered with me, therefore shall you Reign with me for
evermore, says he, that is Holy and True.

But, at the first, you know, the Learning of any Language, or lawful Art, it
cannot be attained but with great Industry and hard Labor; so this inward
Exercise of the Soul, at the first, says the Prophet, She [meanng Wisdom] will
walk with him by crooked ways, and bring him into fear and dread, and torment
him with her Discripline until she have tried his Soul, and has proved him by
her Judgments: Then will she return the strait way unto him, and comsort him,
and show him her secrets, and heap upon him the Treasures of Wisdom, and the
Understanding of Righteousness: Oh! This was an experienced Man in the Work of
GOD, on the Soul; this I bear Record, is the way of the LORD, which He takes to
redeem Mankind to Himself, out of his fallen State: But, says the Prophet, if
he goes wrong, she will forsake him, and give him over to his Destruction:
Therefore, O Queen, live for ever in the holy and self-denying Life of Christ;
for be it known to the Queen, when I heard of the vain Pastimes, and sinful
Pleasures with the Excess of Finery, in Richness of Apparel, that was at the
Court, on the Kings Birth Day, which was Reported by one of the Ladies at
Court, to a Lady a near Relation of hers; which told me, that there was never
seen such costly Apparel at the Court. After I heard this, and that the Queen
went to Plays, Oh how was my Soul bowed down before the LORD, crying bitterly
to the LORD, that He would be pleased to forgive the Queens Transgression, as
hoping it was not in the Queens Inclination, but overcome by the Persuasions of
others: Oh Queen! Is this to return Thanks to the most High GOD, according to
the great Benefits she has received? Is this to Answer the end of her
Creation, and the King's safe Return from Ireland? Must all the Goodness of
GOD, and his manifold Favors, end here, in the Excess of Vanities, the
Abominations of England, as Plays and Dancings, the Two grand In-lets to all
other Abominations? I knew it once, to my Sorrow, as I could give a large
Account thereof, the Influence those cursed Vanities, as Pride, Plays, Dancing
and Singing, had upon me when I was young; but in my Youth, the LORD had Mercy
on me, and called me to himself, out of all those sinful Pleasures, into the
Pleasure of Waiting and Attending upon Him who is alone Worthy, to have all our
precious Time, Love and Delights, whose Right it is; and for that end it was
given us, to return it with that Increase of Grace, that shall never have an
end: For, O Queen, Wherein should Youth take pleasure,
But in seeking a Measure,
Of Wisdoms saving Treasure.
And says Christ, seek and ye shall find, knock and it shall be opened unto
you: But this know, O Queen, it must be a Heartbreaking seeking, that must
find the LORD: an inward seeking; yea, more inward, than our most inward Parts.
We must often retire alone, as Christ did from the Multitude, and inwardly into
our own Souls, to the Spirit of GOD in us, waiting upon the Spirit, to receive
Power to do the Will of GOD in all things; constantly watching against the Out
goings of the Mind to any thing, but to GOD alone: This is waiting at
Jerusalem, to receive the Promise of the FATHER. And in my seeking, I have
found this to be the Way, in which GOD will be found in: Here I have found, and
do sind, the Spirit of Prayer and Supplications poured into my Soul; here I
find my Heart and Mind taken off from all Visibles, and set upon GOD alone;
here I find my heart united to the LORD; here I find the height and depth of
His Love, that has so fastened me to Him, as a Nail is fastened in the sure
place; so that height, nor depth, things present, or to come, shall ever be
able to separate me from the Love of GOD, which I have received in Christ my
LORD, who has given me the Victory over Death, Hell and the Grave; so that,
here I can do as my Savior has commanded me, Love my Enemies, and Pray for
them that hate me; and so not to be overcome with Evil, but to overcome the
Evil with the Good. Glory for ever be given to Thee my Sovereign LORD, and to
Thy Glorious Power, from a Heart rended to pieces before Thee, in the sense of
Thy Gracious Goodness, and boundless Favors: Oh! When shall it be, that my
Tongue shall never cease praising Thee.

And this was the Way that all the People of the LORD ever sound him in; as the
Queen may be pleased to search the Scriptures, and she shall find what that
Holy Prophet Isaiah says; With my Soul have I desired Thee in the night, and
with my Spirit within me, will I seek Thee in the Morning: O LORD, we have
waited for Thee, in the Way of thy Judgments: The Desires of our Souls is to
Thee, and unto thy Name: Like as a Woman with Child, that draws near to the
Time of her Travail, is in sorrow, and cries in her Pains, so have we been in
thy sight, O LORD.

And David says, The sorrows of Hell has compassed me about; I eat Ashes as
my Bread, and mingled my Drink with my Tears: Besides, Time would fail to
Mention all the Travels of the Souls of the Righteous: But Queen Hesther, that
Honorable Queen, who was worthy of the Dignity she was brought to, for that
very Act of deep Humiliation; who with a holy Zeal, and courageous Spirit,
Commanded Mordecai, saying, Go and assemble all the Jews in Shushan, and fast
ye for me, and eat not, nor drink in three days, day nor night; I and my Maids
will do the same, and so will I go to the King, which is not according to the
Law, and if I perish, I perish: Now see the Effect of this holy Act; for it
prevailed both with GOD and Man: It had Power to change King Ahashuerus's heart
from a Lyon's to a Lambs; For this kind, says Christ to his Disciples, can
come out no other way, but by Fasting and Prayer.

And thus shall it be with Queen Mary if She follows Christ her Pattern. In the
first place, her Dominion will be great within, bearing Rule over her own Will,
Ways and Works, Words and Thoughts, not giving her self the least Liberty to
any thing, that shall bring the least Dishonor to the holy Name of the LORD.

In the next place, She shall have the Wisdom of GOD to Govern her People,
beginning first at the Court, Ruling in the Fear of GOD, keeping all in
Subjection by her pious Life, and heavenly Instructions, encouraging Virtue,
and suppressing all Vice; and great Necessity there is for the Reformation to
begin there: For by lamentable Experience, we have seen, that as it has been
at the Court, so it has been, for the most part, throughout the Nation:
Therefore, O Noble Princes, for the Glory of GOD and the Everlasting welfare of
thy Immortal Soul, and the Good of all these Nations; be not negligent in this
great Work; and this know, O Queen, there is more required of you; that is, of
KINGS, QUEENS, and POTENTATES of the Earth, than of others, for you stand in
the place of GOD to the People: Therefore, the blood of all must lie at your
Doors, if you do not quit your selves by your saithfulness to GOD and Man; for,
says Wisdom, Mighty Men shall be mightily punished: Therefore, Hear O ye Kings
and Queens, and Judges of the Earth: Give Ear, ye that Rule the Multitudes, and
Glory in the multitude of People, for the Rule is given you of the LORD, and
Power from the Most High, which will try your Works, and search out your
Inventions; for if you that are Officers of His Kingdom, judge not right, and
keep not His Commandments, to walk after the will of GOD, horribly and suddenly
will He appear unto you, and give you the reward of your Works; for He that is
LORD over all, will spare no Man's Person, neither shall He stand in awe of any
Man's Greatness. For He will take His Jealousy for his Armor, and shall Arm the
Creatures to be revenged of his Enemies, as might be seen in that astonishing,
amazing, great and wonderful (never to be forgotten) Thunders which were lately
in these parts of the World; and those horrible Earthquakes beyond the Seas;
for as by the greatness of His Eternal Power, He made all things, and upholds
all things by the same; so by the Word of his Power, can He consume us all, and
turn all things into nothing; and yet in this Work will He put on Righteousness
for a Breast Plate, and take true Judgment instead of an Helmet; He will take
Holiness for an invincible Shield, He will sharpen his fierce Wrath for a
Sword, and and his Angels (who are his Ministering Spirits) in Flames of Fire,
shall sight with him against the unwise. Therefore, be wise, O ye KINGS, and
understand; learn ye Judges of the Earth; serve the LORD in fear and rejoice in
trembling, kiss the Son least he be angry, and you perish in your ways; for
when His wrath shall suddenly burn, O then, blessed for ever will they be that
put their whole trust in Him; and that the latter may be your Portion, is the
desire of my Soul to GOD for you all,

Your faithful Friend, and the LORD's Servant, Joan Whitrowe.

AND further, to the Queen, my desire to GOD for her, is, That GOD would give
her another Heart, a heart to walk in all the ways of the LORD, and that the
LORD would pour out his Holy Spirit upon her, as He did upon all His Anointed
Ones; and that she may be an Instrument in His Hand to convert many to
Righteousness; then shall the Prophesy of Daniel be fulfilled on her, which
says, Those that convert many to righteousness, shall shine as the Stars for
ever more. And, O that GOD would touch the Hearts of them that follow the
Queen, as He touched the heart of those that followed Saul, after he was
Anointed King over Israel, and that the Spirit of the LORD would come upon the
King and Queen, and all that belongs to them, as it came upon David after the
LORD had Anointed him in the midst of his Brethren; that by the Power of his
Holy Spirit, they may follow the LORD fully, as Joshua and Caleb did; that they
may be possessors of the good and holy Land of everlasting Peace and Rest for
evermore.

This is the Land that flows with Milk and Honey, but not a Land for outward
pleasures, but the inward ravishments of the Soul, which is the reward of the
faithful, who follow their LORD through the strait and narrow Way, which is the
way to Eternal Rest; as their LORD said, Strait is the Gate, and narrow is the
Way that leads to life, and few there be that finds it. Ah! but broad is the
Way, and wide is the Gate that leads to destruction, and many there be that
goes therein.

Indeed, to Flesh and Blood, the Way to Life and Glory, seems strait, and
narrow at the first entrance, until the Soul is accustomed to bear the Yoke;
but afterward, it is Eternally true, as Christ said, My Yoke is easy, and my
Burden light. Yea, for ever, I am a Witness, That in all His Ways are
Pleasantness, and in all His Paths are Peace.

And this I declare, in the Power and Spirit of the LORD, there is no Tongue
can speak, Heart conceive, nor Pen can write the sweet Reposes, and Heavenly
Enjoyments in the Ravishments of His Love, which that Soul is a possessor of,
that keeps upon its Watchtower, whose Meditation is in the Law of the LORD,
Day and Night it enjoys Heaven, whilst it is on Earth: Well might David say, A
day in Thy Courts, O LORD, is more than a Thousand elsewhere: I had rather be a
doorkeeper in the House of the LORD, than to dwell in the Tents of the wicked;
and to this, Wisdom answers, saying, Blessed are those that hears me,
watching daily at my Gates, and giving attendance at the Posts of my Doors; for
he that finds me, finds life, and obtains favor of the LORD. And the
Apostle Paul, in a holy Ecstasy, cries out, O the height and depth, of the love
of GOD; neither can it enter into the Heart of man, the things that GOD has
prepared for them that love Him. No certainly, not the men of this World, who
have their Portions in this Life, which David desired to be delivered from: But
it entered into the Heart of Mary, when she sat so attentively at Jesus Feet, to
hear the precious Words that dropped from His Gracious Lips; where she received
the sweet in-comes of His Eternal Love, whilst the Martha's of this World are
hurried, encumbered, and distracted in their covetous, earthly Spirit, caring
how to add House to House, Land to Land, and one Thousand to another; and the
other sort, how to consume what they have upon their lusts, in vain and wicked
recreations; and both these, dispossesses the LORD of Life of his Right, and
robs him of his Glory.

And Farther, I am to acquaint the King and Queen, That the late Brewers-Tax
falls heavy upon the Poor; the general Discourse, is, the Rich will be richer,
but the poor Brewers, will not be able to hold it; and for the poorer sort of
the People, if they can get Bread for themselves and their Children, so; but
for Drink, they say, they must drink Water; if the Parliament had been pleased
to have laid it upon the Rich of all sorts, and upon the Drunkards, the
Feasters, the Swearers, Gamesters, the Whoremongers, the proud Persons that
goes in Rich and Gorgious Attire; but above all, that Monstrous Babylonish
Dress of the Head, the abomination of the Christians, (which if the King and
Queen will not bring down, GOD will, by his righteous Judgments;) and those
cursed Play Houses, and every one that goes to them; and the scant Measures,
with the false Weights (which Robs the Poor of their Right) If it please the
Parliament for the future, That these Taxes may be laid upon all these as heavy
as Lead; and this will be for the Glory of GOD, the Good of Souls, and the
Renown of the Kingdom: For these were the crying Sins of the Jews in their Day,
which brought that heavy Destruction upon them, Pride and fullness of Bread. The
Daughters of Zion are haughty, says the Prophet, Isaiah 3. They go with their
out-stretched-Necks, and their wanton Eyes, and then naming their abominable
Attire, as may be read at large. But those were the Rich, that are guilty of
these abominations; For they Ground the Face of the Poor, and kept scant
Measures, and false Weights, and sold the needy for shoes.

And thus far, I have cleared my Conscience to GOD, and my Neighbor, in making
the King and Queen acquainted with these things: And I humbly desire, That the
King and Queen may do the same, by using all means possible to rectify these
things; First, in their own Examples, then by Proclamation, and Penalties; And
I pray GOD, the King and Queen may not be slack in this their Work for the
LORD; For it is written, Cursed is he that does the Work of the LORD
negligently; and that it may be done in the LORD's time, for delays are
dangerous: As Christ said unto the Jews, You neglect the Weighty Matters of the
Law, which should have been done first, and not have left the other undone: and
the Prophet Haggai, says, Thus speaks the LORD, the LORD of Hosts, saying,
this People say, the time is not yet come, that the LORD's House should be
builded. Then came the Word of the LORD by the Ministry of the Prophet Haggai,
saying, Is it time for your selves to dwell in your Ceiled-Houses, and this
House lie waste? Therefore thus says the LORD of Hosts, consider your own ways
in your Hearts; ye have sown much, and brought in little; ye looked for much,
but it came to little; and when ye brought it home, I did blow upon it; and
why? says the LORD of Hosts, because of mine House that lies waste, and ye run
every Man into his own House.

O King and Queen, is not this the present State of the Nation? I beseech you
consider: My great Concern for the King and Queen, is, That they may not slip
their Time, or the opportunity GOD has put into their hands; for man has but
a Day or Hour given Him to do his work herein; and if he does it not in that
time, his Power is gone: Therefore it is, that the LORD calls so upon Mankind;
saying, Whilst it is to day, harden not your Hearts, as they did in the
Provocation, when they tempted and proved Me, and saw My Works. For although they
saw His wonderful Works, yet they believed Him not, but disobeyed His righteous
Laws; therefore, they never saw the good Land.

We see what a dangerous thing Unbelief is; but David believed in GOD: I
believed, says he, therefore have I spoken; and then presently, he longs to be
upon returns, saying, What shall I render to the LORD for all His Mercies, and
for all His Goodness? I will take the Cup of Salvation, and call upon His Holy
Name: I will set no wicked thing before mine Eyes: I hate the work of them that
turn aside; it shall not cleave to me: I will walk within my House with a
perfect heart, Psalm. 101. and so he goes on to the end of the Psalm. which may
be worth the King and Queens reading. And then after these Engagements, with
many more; he promises to pay his Vows to the LORD, in the presence of all: O
that this Holy Spirit of Life, and Love, that was in David, who loved the LORD
dearly, might Rule and Reign, and have the Dominion over all, in the King and
Queen, and all that belongs to them: For why, else, am I thus concerned, that
never was concerned with any King, Queen, or Prince, further than in the
general to all, of that, which my Eyes has seen come to pass; and now with you
in particular, of that which is to come? And that the Fame of your righteous
Acts, may Sound to the furthermost parts of the Earth, to alarm the Nations to
come up to the Mountain of the LORD of Hosts; to learn His Ways, and to walk in
the Paths of the GOD of Jacob; that as the Name of Christians has been a
stink, a proverb, a by word of reproach among the Turks; saying to Englishmen,
Do you think I am a Christian to falsify my word? So now by your holy Lives,
and worthy Works, that Name may be a good Savor, that the Nations on your
behalf, may have cause to Praise, Magnify, Worship, and Adore the Most High,
and Everlasting GOD for evermore, Amen.

Which is the earnest Desire of her, who does humbly Prostrate her self at the
Feet of Christ, on the King and Queens behalf:

Your humble Handmaid, Joan Whitrowe.
Putney-Park, the 14th. of December. 1690.

