A DISCOURSE OF THE NECESSITY OF Revelation, and an Holy Life. Delivered in a
Visitation-Sermon, AT GUILFORD, October. 7. 1697.

By WILLIAM WHITFELD, Chaplain in Ordinary to His Majesty.

LONDON, Printed by E. Holt, for Tho. Bennet, at the Half Moon in St. Paul's
Churchyard, School.

A SERMON.
PSALM. L. 23. -- To him that orders his Conversation aright, will I show the
Salvation of God.


SEveral Verses of this Psalm, and likewise this of my Text, seem to be spoken
by the Author in the Person of God; being ushered in with this solemn Preface
to command our Attention, The Mighty God, even the Lord has spoken; and my
Text is introduced with this, Thus says God.

The Psalm it self treats of calling all Mankind to Judgment, and of rejecting
the Jewish Sacrifices: From whence (as Cajet. observes) it is evident that the
Time of Christ's Coming is here described, and that it is the Messiah who is
this mighty Lord, brought in as an Interlocutor with the Prophet: He, who calls
the Earth from the rising of the Sun to the going down thereof, sending his
Summons forth, far beyond the Jewish Nation and Mosaical Law. All which seems
peculiar to the Promulgation of the Gospel, which was to take in all the
Heathen for the Inheritance of Christ, and the uttermost Parts of the Earth for
his Possession.

Now, if from the Person chiefly concerned in the Subject of this Psalm, we are
to learn what is meant by the Salvation of God mentioned in my Text, it is to
be understood of that Redemption, which was extended to all Mankind by Jesus
Christ: If from the Person that speaks in my Text, we may know who is to give
us the knowledge of this Salvation, it is God himself who has promised to do
it: And lastly, if the ordering our Conversation aright, be proposed as a
Condition necessary for this Salvation being showed unto us, we may be assured
that the Foundation of the Knowledge is to be laid in a Virtuous and Holy Life:
Which are the several Parts that I intend to speak to in my following
Discourse, by showing,

I. That it is most worthy of the Salvation of God, that it be understood of
the General Redemption of Mankind by Jesus Christ.

II. That the Knowledge of this Salvation is above the reach of Natural Reason;
and not to be attained but by Revelation from God.

III. That it is an Holy Life, which will render us the most capable of
receiving this Knowledge from God.

I. It is most worthy of the Salvation of God, that it be understood of the
General Redemption of Mankind by Jesus Christ.

Both in the Old and New Testament (as the Seventh Article says) Everlasting
Life is offered to Mankind by Christ, who is the only Mediator between God and
Man. And there is none other Name under Heaven given among Men whereby we may
be saved, neither is there Salvation in any other. Nevertheless, before the
Fullness of Time was come, wherein God sent forth his Son to redeem them that
were under the Law, this Knowledge was confined to very narrow limits; to a
Nation exceedingly small in proportion to the Inhabitants of all the Earth, and
very inconsiderable likewise in respect of the large Empires of the World,
which extended their Dominions wide, together with the knowledge of many useful
Sciences, by which they civilized a great part of Mankind.

The Revelation besides was dark, even where it was best known; particularly as
to the Resurrection of the Dead, which is the Anchor of our Hope after this
Life, (the glad Tidings of Reward to the Good, and the Terror and Punishment of
the Wicked:) as also by reason of the ambiguity of the Law under Types and
Shadows of things to come; which represented a Salvation to be given many Ages
after by this general Redeemer, who was not commonly believed in by the Jews
before his Coming, nor known by them when he appeared.

Such was the Knowledge of the Salvation of God (narrow and obscure) before the
Coming of Christ; which now is reached out unto all Mankind by our Messiah, who
is set for a Light to the Gentiles, and for Salvation unto the Ends of the
Earth. Now is this Salvation perfected in Jesus Christ, in whom God has
reconciled the World unto himself: And now is the Knowledge of it clearly
manifested, since the Dayspring from on high has visited the World, to give
Light to them that sat in Darkness, and Knowledge of Salvation unto his People.

Let this suffice to show in short, that it is most worthy of the Salvation of
God to be understood of this General Redemption, which is extended and
manifested to all the Race of Mankind in Jesus Christ; for Salvation was not to
be had in any other, but in Him it was completed, and perfectly known at his
Coming. And this, we may presume, is that Salvation promised in my Text, to be
shown unto us by God, if we shall order our Conversation aright; in which we
may assure our selves, that without an Holy Life we are not fit to be
instructed by God; and that without Instruction from God, we are not able to
attain the knowledge of his Salvation. For,

II. The Knowledge of this Salvation is above the reach of Natural Reason, and
not to be attained but by Revelation from God.

I will not dispute how far our Natural Reason, unassisted by Revelation, can
lead us on in our way to the knowledge of God's true Worship, and to the
attainment of eternal Happiness; but shall take it for granted, that our Faith
in Christ Jesus is now become requisite to Salvation; and that in all its
necessary Doctrines it was not fully known, either to the wisest of the
Heathens, or to the best of the Jews, before it was revealed by God.

And our Natural Reason is the same now as heretofore, and can show us nothing
new in this Disquisition, but as it shall please God to declare his Will
concerning it: So that, if any things shall remain still unreveal'd by God, or
made known by him but in part, though a Socrates, a Plato, or an Aristotle should
at this day set themselves to enquire into them, their Natural Knowledge could
carry them no farther now than it has done of old; nor even Abraham's Faith
him, without a more express Revelation from God.

Now of this Nature I take to be that hidden Wisdom of Almighty God, by which
he has ordained the great Work of our Redemption; several Articles whereof
(warranted by the Apostles of Christ) we call the Mysteries of the Christian
Faith. Concerning which St. Paul (the most Learned Apostle, inspired by God in
a most eminent manner, and ropt up into the third Heavens) does complain, that
in this Life We know but in part, we speak and understand as Children: We see
(God and Divine Mysteries) through a Glass, darkly. We know but in part; because
God has revealed them only in part, only in general, that there have bin such
Wonders wrought for our Redemption (which therefore we do believe) without
declaring any thing of his hidden Wisdom in their wonderful Production; which
therefore when we speak of, we speak and understand as Children.

Indeed, our knowledge in these things is much enlarged by the Revelation of
the Gospel of Jesus Christ, who has brought Life and Immortality to light; but
yet there are still remaining many Mysteries in the Work of our Redemption, far
above the reach and capacity of our Natural Reason to comprehend; which in this
Life, we must content our selves to view only in a Giass, darkly, and not
expect to behold them now, as we shall hereafter, Face to Face, and to see as
we shall be seen, And it is the high Privilege of the Gospel, that we may
behold these Wonders of the Lord in this Glass, which the Law (as the Apostle
says) looked upon through a Veil: but it is our advantage to see those Promises
of God fulfilled, which our Forefathers beheld at a great distance from their
Completion, and by the Light of Prophecy only (which shone in a dark place) or
else through Types and Figures.

But since it pleased God to require so strong a Proof of Abraham's Faith that
(hoping even against Hope, and not staggering at the Promise of God through
unbelief) He rejoiced to see the day of the Lord; and He saw it (even through
this thick and gloomy Veil) and was glad; much more reasonably may God expect
from us, that we should now be fully persuaded, that what he has promised, he
has been able also to perform; since it is given to us to see the performances
of our God; to adore his Goodness in the fulfilling all his Promises, and in
the completion of his Predictions, and to read the Mysteries of our Redemption
in the Gospels of Jesus Christ.

And this Information not coming otherwise unto us, but from the Revealed Word
of God, gives us a sure Ground for our Belief (and for our Knowledge likewise)
in these Mysteries; in which we cannot, with any shadow of Pretense, complain,
that we have not a good Foundation for our Faith; no more being required to be
believed concerning them, but as much as is Revealed of them by God; nor any
thing farther necessary to be known of them, but what is declared by him; nor
otherwise than as he has declared.

In this assurance we stand unmoved against all vain Suggestions of the
impossibility of there being any such Mysteries in the Christian Religion, and
of our own incapacity to believe things which our Understanding cannot
comprehend. Which assertions proceed from a bold, but mistaken Philosophy;
ignorant of the great Power of God; and not rightly distinguishing between the
measure of Knowledge, sufficient for Faith, and for Demonstration; nor knowing,
that where the Veracity of the Affirmer, and the Power of the Author of any
Miracle are unquestionable, there we have a good Authority to believe his
Relation of any thing, though it shall be wonderful, and far above our Capacity
to comprehend.

Now what God has affirmed, we have this reason to believe, and as far as we
are capable of apprehending the Truth of a Proposition in which any Mystery is
revealed by him, so far the Mystery becomes a necessary object of our Faith;
and we may be said to understand enough of it, to believe, even when we cannot
comprehend the manner and way by which it was produced; which (when they are
not Revealed) we say remain a Mystery still; and when they are Revealed, they
are often so likewise, being above our Understanding, in as much as the Power
that wrought, is infinitely superior to all our Faculties of Reasoning.

For Example. In the Incarnation of Christ, because God has declared this in
the Gospel, it is therefore an Article of the Christian Faith; but because the
incomprehensible Union of the two Natures (of perfect God and perfect Man) is
not shown, and would have far surpassed all our Knowledge, if it had been
Revealed; it is therefore (as the Apostle says) a Great Mystery without all
Controversy, God manifest in the Flesh. Nevertheless we may say, that we have
some Notion in our Minds of what we believe herein; for the Truth of this
Proposition, God took upon him the Nature of Man (being there is no
contradiction in the Terms) may be conceived in our Minds. And since we can
conceive the Truth of this Mystery, and have a full assurance likewise of the
Truth of that, which the God of all Power and Truth has declared, we may
affirm, that we do understand what we believe, in this great Article of our
Faith, and that we have a sufficient measure of Knowledge for our Belief, and
we may show the Reasons why we do believe it.

It is, I know, impossible for the Eye of Natural Reason to look clearly and
strongly into the Works and Counsels of Almighty God; but this can be no
Objection either against our apprehending the Truth of these Works and Counsels
so far as they shall be Revealed; nor can the weakness of of our Understanding
be any hindrance to our believing them, after they have been declared by God.
For Example, It will not be denied, I suppose, that Almighty God has Created
this World out of Nothing; and we conceive what we mean, when we profess in our
Creed, that we do believe it; But our Belief and Knowledge of this must depend
upon the Authority of Revetation, and not upon the strength and powers of
Natural Reason; for from this we can have no Idea in our Minds of this
beautiful Frame, produced to be, and arising up from the Term of not Being; but
we have from that an assurance of the Truth of it. We do in like manner agree
in believing the Omnipotence of our Creator; but what Notion can our narrow
Understanding receive of the ubiquity and plenitude of his Presence?

Now, if these things do far exceed all the Limits and Powers of Natural
Reason, more especially so does the wonderful Mystery of our Redemption by our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ (the greatest Work by far of God's Power and Love
to Mankind;) which in its full extent can never lie within the compass of Human
Knowledge, nor ever become naturally the Object of it; being that, which
neither Eye has seen, nor Ear heard, nor could it ever have entered into the
Heart of Man, without a particular Revelation from God: From whence alone it
is, that we come to know the truth of this Mystery, and to apprehend in some
measure, what is meant by the words of a Proposition, wherein we profess our
belief of a thing far above our Comprehension; and from whence we have, in like
manner, the same Notion of all the most mavelous workings of God's Love for
the completing our Redemption; which are, and will continue to be Mysteries,
so long as our Understanding is Finite, and not commensurate to the Power of an
Almighty Being, and Infinite Spirit, whose Mercies, as well as Judgments, are
unsearchable, and his Mightiness to save, past finding out.

This may serve to show in general, the insufficiency of many Cavils against
several Articles of the Christian Faith, raised mostly by natural Men, who have
the Pride to think above what is written: By one of which (measuring the whole
Power of God by the Scale of his own Reason) it is affirmed to be as Absurd to
say, that God has taken upon him the Nature of Man, as that a Circle should
put on the nature of a Square. Spinos. Ep. 21. ad Oldenb.

If this is a Jest of the Philosophers, it is very unbecoming the seriousness of
the Subject; and all good Men will abhor his profane Lightness in the main
Article of our Redemption. But if it shall be said in earnest by him, it is a
weak proof of his Judgment to argue from the Comparison of a Square and Circle,
whose Properties do lie within the compass of our Knowledge, to the Nature and
Power of an Infinite Spirit, which we cannot comprehend: And to measure the
extent of God's Power and Love to Mankind, by a similitude of things natural
and circumscribed, is truly absurd.

This may be one Instance, amongst many, of the weakness and pride of those Men
who set up without God to know and measure his Power, assaying without
Revelation to penetrate into the Counsels of Divine Providence, and into the
Mysteries of Man's Redemption, which even the Angels are desirous to look into,
but cannot. And when thou chargest thy Angels with Folly, what have we, O God,
to rely upon without thy assistance! How uncertain a Guide to eternal Happiness
(purchased to Mankind by so many amazing Wonders of Infinite Love) is the
single Clue of Natural Reason! in it self much depraved, and so unequally
divided amongst the Sons of Men, that it is not of the same strength in any two
Persons Living! And yet (how weak soever it may be in some, and how unequal
soever it is in all) is it said, that we must trust to it for the knowledge of
our Salvation, even before the Revealed Word of God.

For, Socinus dares to say (and that more than once) That though a thing were not
only once, but oftentimes revealed in Holy Writ, he would not believe it, if it
did not agree with his Reason, proceeding upon Natural Principles, (for Reason,
laying aside Revelation, goes upon no other.) Now granting to Socinus, that his
Reason ought to be the only Rule and supreme Judge to himself in these Matters
about which he voucher it; yet the Understanding of all Men is not alike good:
And therefore others who shall reason wrong, must believe falsely, and of
consequence hazard their eternal Happiness, if they go upon the same Principle,
and have no other Guide of their Faith to Salvation. For Socinus's Reason (though
it should be right) can never be a Rule to all; because in those Persons unto
whom it shall not appear so to be (and there are many distempered Minds and
differing Judgments in Mankind) another Man's Judgment can have no Power over
their Belief.

And how then can this Principle build us up in Unity of Faith and Spirit, and
in the Bond of Peace? and make us all to speak the same thing, and to be
perfectly joined together in the same Mind, and in the same Judgment? to which
the Apostle does passionately exhort us in the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ.
We cannot be united in our Belief by that, about which we shall perpetually
contend, and in which we do so far differ from each other. But we may
reasonably suppose, that St. Paul had a greater Authority and better Grounds to
prescribe Rules to our Faith than Socinus; and that in persuading all
Christians to Unity, the Apostle knew that there was one General Principle in
which they might all agree; a common Standard, which would regulate their
Belief, and give Law to the diversity of their Judgments, by delivering the
same thing to their Faith, notwithstanding the different Ways, and unequal
Strength of Mankind in their Reasoning. And if this Rule shall be no other than
the Revealed Word of God, we may surely, with more safety, rely upon it for
what is necessary to be known of our Salvation, than upon Socinus's Reason, or
upon our own.

For it is certainly more becoming the Truth of God, and more secure for
Mankind, that their Belief (upon which depends their everlasting Happiness)
should rather be founded upon that which is stable, and for ever fixed (as his
most Holy Word is) than upon the sagacity of Humane Reason, which varies, and
increases, and declines with Age, in all parts of which Salvation is alike
necessary. It is most befitting the Justice of God, and most equitable to
Mankind, that their knowledge of Salvation should be derived from thence,
wherein they all have a common Right and an equal Possession; as they all have
(or ought to have) in the Scriptures, who are to be judged by them; though
unequal to each other in the strength of their Reasoning, and differing much in
the natural Endowments of their Mind. But Justice and Equity will plead for us,
that this Knowledge should rest in something wherein we are all alike
Partakers, as we all are of the Revealed Word of God; and in something, wherein
no Man excels his Brethren, as no Man naturally does in the Power of believing
the Scriptures, nor (with Grace) in his Abilities of obeying God's Commands to
lead an Holy Life, and to order his Conversation aright.

And this seems to be the distinguishing Character of the Salvation of God by
Jesus Christ, as we may presume to infer from our blessed Savior's passing by
the Scribes and Pharisees, and Preaching his Gospel chiefly to the Poor and
Unlearned; where, not acuteness in Arguing, and largeness of Knowledge, but
Probity of Life, and Humility of Mind were the proper Virtues that fitted them
of all Mankind to be the first and the readiest Receivers of the Salvation of
God. And it is very remarkable that the Cross of Christ, which brought
Redemption and Salvation to the Souls of these Men, proved immediately after to
the Learned Greeks Foolishness; for they sought Wisdom, but these the Kingdom
of God; their Philosophy taught them to admit the Belief of nothing which was
not fetched from self-evident Principles, and from thence deduced into
demonstration; and therefore no sooner did they hear St. Paul preach of the
Resurrection of the Dead, but they (as some amongst us do) Marked.

As to the Mysteries of our Holy Faith, they received them with Contempt, being
hardened by their Pride against acknowledging any thing too sublime for their
Understanding, or believing any thing which was not consistent with their
fancied Schemes of Arguing: But as to the Duties of our Religion which lay
plain and obvious to the meanest Capacity, These were overlooked by the
high-minded Philosophers; their Heads were warm with Disputing, but not so
their Hearts with Charity; they trained and exercised their Reason, (as they
proudly imagined) but it was at the expense of their Humility; and so together
with the loss of the Gospel-Duties, they made Shipwreck of the Christian Faith,
and spent their time in nothing else (as the Apostle says) but to tell and to
hear some new thing. Which brings me to my last particular, to show,

III. That it is an Holy Life which will render us the most capable of
receiving this Knowledge. For to him that orders his Conversation aright,
shall be shown the Salvation of God.

But this may seem to raise the Objection still higher against us; inasmuch as
that sprightly Sense and Faith in the Gospel of Jesus Christ are not to be
reconciled: To be a true Believer is to quit our Reason; to be seriously
Religious is to be sunk deep in Melancholy, or prejudiced by Education, or
weakened with Age: It Is some way or other (they tell us) by impairing or
prepossessing the Judgment, and therefore we declaim so much against the use of
Reason, in our disquisitions of Religion.

It would be a most vain attempt to argue against the true use of Reason in any
thing, but more especially absurd would it prove, to banish it from the
Enquiries into the Christian Faith, whose Truths have been Vindicated from the
gross Errors of Superstition and Idolatry, by asserting to Humane Reason, and
the Holy Scriptures, their right use and free Liberty. Yet this is the unjust
Charge of our Adversaries; taking their advantage from this Controversy to
object it most unrighteously against those Divines of our Church, who have
appeared upon all occasions the forwardest, and (I may say) the most successful
Champions against blind Obedience and implicit Faith.

But it may be granted, a suppose, to be no hindrance to Knowledge in general,
to endeavor to assigh to Natural Reason its distinct Office, and to confine it
to its own Natural Objects; and it would prove the greatest advancement to
Human Learning in particular, to perform the same thing in its several
Sciences. Now, in all these, it may be demonstrated, that though all things fall
under our Understanding by the intermediate help of our Senses, yet that there
are many: things (through want of a fit Medium, or due distance) which cannot be
rightly judged of, unless an appeal shall be made from our Senses unto our
Reason. And the same Subordination that there is in our Senses to our Reason,
may be said to be in our Reason to Revelation, where it is owned. For as in the
knowledge of things Natural, we cannot be satisfied and determined by the
Information from Sense alone; but our Mind rests in a demonstration from our
Reason, notwithstanding it may seem repugnant to our Senses: so in matters of
Faith, being led to the knowledge of God's Word by our Reason, we appeal from
its final Judgment to the higher authority of Revelation in all the Mysteries
which that shall declare; and herein does our Faith acquiesce, notwithstanding
the Word of God shall propose to our Belief great Wonders, seemingly
disagreeable to our Reason. Now in the one, we do not reject our Senses, though
we are not determined by them in the last Resort, nor do we in the other reject
our Reason; but we make use of both in gaining the Knowledge proper for them to
comminicate within their respective Spheres, and proceed from thence, in
referring the several Objects to be judged and determined at their right Bar;
the Objects of Science by Reason, and the Objects of Faith by Revelation, with
submission to the Sentence which shall there be pronounced upon each.

And herein, if we may argue from the Judgments of Almighty God (which are
unsearchable by Human Reason) to the Mysteries of our Redemption, that which
Salvian says of our Submission to the Justice of Divine Providence, may be
fitly applied concerning the Resignation of our Reason to the Revelation of
God. That thing (says Salvian) is not therefore not just, which God has
brought upon me, because I cannot penetrate into the Method of its Equity; for
as God is more than Man's Reason, so that thing ought to be unto me more than
Reason, which I know proceeds from God. It is agreeable to God's Reason, though
not to Mine; and because his Knowledge, and Wisdom, and Providence do
infinitely surpass my Knowledge, and Wisdom, and Reason, I submit; because God
has done it, it is just; because God has said it, it is true.

Now in all these Matters a sound Mind is certainly one of the greatest
Blessings from Heaven, and never more needful than to pass a right Judgment
upon things of this Moment. Nor can an Inquisitive Head be ever employed to
better purpose, than in examining what the true Religion of the Gospel is, and
what is revealed by God. For (as I have said) our Reason brings us to the
knowledge of that which is Revealed; to which I may add, that a sound Mind is
never at odds with true Religion; that is, a Mind possessed with Humility and
Innocence of Life, and a steadfast relyance upon the Word of God; which are the
Mediums through which our Reason is to judge of all things Revealed by Him.
Without these Qualifications, Fancy and Ostentation too often usurp the place
of good Judgment and solid Reason; and not seldom does it happen, that the most
pregnant Parts, when accompanied with Profaneness, and Pride, and Impiety,
serve only to set the Owners of them so much the farther out of their way from
serious Knowledge and Divine Truths.

For the understanding of these things does not arise so much from high
Speculations, as from Conscientious Practice, and receives Improvement from
keeping the Commandments of God. And as to every Science, a particular Genius
and aptitude are required in the Learner, so there is to this, Piety, Humility,
and Uncorruptness of Life always necessary; without which, Knowledge puffs up
(as the Apostle of Christ tells us) but will never edify; unless to our
Faith we add Virtue, and then, (and after that) Knowledge to Virtue: And even
still we must be adding to our Knowledge; adding unto it Temperance, Patience,
Godliness, Brotherly Kindness and Charity. For if these things be in you and
abound, they will make you, that you shall neither be barren nor unfruitful in
the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ. But he that lacks these things (he
the Apostle says) is blind, 2 Pet. 1.5.

Indeed a full and clear perception of all the great Mysteries of our
Redemption is never to be attained in this Life, being (as we may humbly
presume) reserved to make up the greatest part of our Beatitude in Heaven, nor
even in that Estate shall the knowledge of all Men be equal, but proportioned
to the Capacity of the Vessel; yet theirs we may reasonably believe will have
the most degrees of Perfection, whom exalted Love and eminent Piety shall place
in the highest Stations of Glory; and that the same Virtues will in the best
manner prepare and enlarge our Souls in this Life, for the Reception of all
Heavenly Wisdom.

For a Good Man Experiences, that a Life spent in Justice and Integrity, tends
more to advancing his Knowledge of the Just one that inhabits Eternity, than
Memory or Wit: He finds that Chastity, Temperance, and Purity in Heart do best
dispose his Soul, to receive a most lively Impression of the God of all
Holiness: Universal Charity will display upon our Minds the brightest Rays of
Infinite Mercy: A constant, regular Worship in the House of God, and the
Returns which are made by him unto our daily Prayers, will show us truly God's
Goodness: And Lastly, a Worthy Receiving of the Holy Communion will make us one
with Christ, and Christ with us. This is to order our Conversation aright, and
from this Station God has promised to show us his Salvation.

I will conclude with some Considerations upon what has been said by way of
Application.

1. If we are firmly secure of our true Knowledge of the Salvation of God, in
the Faith of that Church which we do profess; Let us then keep this Faith in
Purity of Heart, and true Holiness of Life, without which no Man shall ever see
the Lord.

2. If any Man is doubtful, amidst the many Disputes which do at this time
wound the Christian Religion, and break the Bond of Peace; If he is serious in
his Enquiries after that Knowledge which is to lead him to Eternal Life, Let
him then in the sincerity of his Heart make this Trial; and, from a good Life,
begin his searches after the Knowledge of the Salvation of God. Let Piety,
Humility, Integrity, and Charity, be the Foundation upon which he builds a true
Faith; and let him firmly believe, and faithfully practice all that his
Conscience shall tell him God has assuredly revealed and commanded, with a
Mind free from prejudice, and ready to receive greater Measures of Knowledge,
as they shall be tendered unto him from his Word. And for his Encouragement, he
has an instance in the Scripture of a good and holy Man, who came to the
Knowledge of the Salvation of God this way. Cornelius a devout Man, one that
feared God with all his House, which gave much Alms to the People, and prayed
to God always. His Prayers were heard, and his Alms had in remembrance in the
sight of the Lord; and he was soon after this shown the Salvation of God: From
his sincere performance of that which he did know to be God's Will, he was led
on successfully to the Knowledge of the Salvation of Jesus Christ, of which he
was ignorant; from a Proselyte of the Gate, to be baptized into the Christian
Faith. And of a truth God is no Respecter of Persons; but in every Nation, He
that fears God, and works Righteousness, is accepted with him.

3. Wickedness of Life is the most fatal step to Infidelity, and sets us at the
greatest distance from this Knowledge of the Salvation of God.

For Vice, as the Platonists observe, does much cloud and weaken the
Understanding, and shows its Mastery and Dominion over the Mind by the
Captivity it has brought it under. And without this Natural Incapacity (if I
may so call that Inability which proceeds from the Corruption of Nature,)
impure Minds are very improper Judges of true Holiness, and the wicked Liver
insufficient for the Salvation of God; from the Knowledge of which he seems to
be particularly excluded; God saying unto Him in the Psalm of my Text, What
have thou to do to declare my Statutes? Or that thou should take my Covenant
in thy Mouth? Whereas thou hate Instruction, and castest my Words behind thee.

The wicked Man hates Instruction: Even He, that is often the much-boasted
Master of right Reason, and only impartial Seaarcher after Truth; He that sets
by himself as the best qualified for Knowledge, because he doubts and disputes
every thing, treading servily in no Man's steps, generously freeing his Mind
from prejudice, and raising his Understanding above all that have gone before
him. But still the wicked Man casts the Words of God behind him; the Words
which God has revealed to instruct him in His Faith, and to direct him in an
Holy Life; and he hates Instruction, hating (as the Psalter translates it) to
be reformed. For thou give thy mouth to Evil, (says God;) when thou saw a
Thief then thou consentedst with him, and have been Partaker with Adulterers:
And with these Qualifications, thou set up for a Reviler of Christ Jesus,
and a Director in Religion.

God forbid that this should be charged upon all Unbelievers! Many of which
have Modesty, and many, I hope, Virtue, whom God, I trust, in his Mercy will
bring home to himself in his appointed time. But yet the Observation which
Grotias makes upon the Nataral Man, from the comparison of the Greek
Philosophers, (most of which History delivers down as unclean and impure in
their Lives.) we find too often verified: It being a most just Judgment of
Almighty God, that the Despisers of his Word should walk in the Lusts of their
own Hearts, and be given up to the Vices, as well as to the Errors of corrupt
Nature; to show them, how uncertain a Guide they have to their Salvation, which
they experience to be so far depraved in their Morals.

And of all such, we may be bold to say (whosoever they are that shall join
Infidelity and a vicious Life together,) that their Enquiries into Divine
Truths are vain and absurd. It Is no wonder to hear them strenuously opposing
the Belief of a suture State; for it is necessary that they either stifle the
Thoughts of that, or else forsake the Enjoyment of their present Pleasures. And
it is no matter how they wrest and pervert, or wholly deny the Written Word of
God; which being denied, extinguishes the dread of Punishments to come; and
being perverted, takes away the Eternity of their Torments. It Is no more than
we may expect, to find them disputing against the Eternal Law of Good and Evil:
For these are the Barriers fixed against their Wickedness, which they would
fain have removed: And we may hear them (but with Horror) daily blaspheming the
Divinity of Jesus Christ, God blessed for evermore; whom they shall find their
Judge at the last Day, but never their Savior. Profaneness and wilful Ignorance
in these Men serve them for Pandars to their Lusts in this present Life, and
without severe Repentance, they are the Pledges likewise of the Outer Darkness
and Blasphemings, which shall be their Portion and Torments hereafter.

O that God in his Infinite Mercies, may forgive us these great Sins of
Profaneness in Holy Things, and Impurity of Life joined together! (Sins which we
see too closely united, and too much triumphant!) O that in his Goodness He may
preserve the yet Innocent and Faithful in their Integrity, Faith, and Virtue!
and open their Eyes to discover the Deceits, and to avoid the Lusts of these
impious Wretches! And may that good and gracious God, whose Mercies and Long
Suffering are boundless, give unto themselves a timely Repentance, before he
calls them to Judgment!

Lastly, As to our selves, my reverend Brethren, shall I call it our
Affliction, or our Happiness, that we have these Persons our implacable
Adversaries? It is to our unspeakable Grief, that there will always be such Men
(and that this Age and Nation do too much abound with them) Enemies to the
Religion of Christ, and to their own Souls: But it is I think to our Honor,
that the Christian Faith, and our Fanction, have one Common Adversary, and that
the Revilers of the Ministry are likewise Blasphemers of Christ.

To make our Glory the greater, we will be sure (by the Blessing of Almighty
God) to adorn our Profession with an unblameable and upright Conversation, the
true groundwork of all our Knowledge in that Salvation, which we are to teach
others, and to attain ourselves.

And herewith let us not be discouraged! They boast much of the strength of
their Reason; I wish it were sound and true, (for then there would be no Cause
of difference;) but we, I trust, have that on our side; experieneed from our
Education, how to wield the Weapon; and, from our Knowledge in the Scriptures,
where to let it fall in submission to Faith: To which let us add (what our Holy
Function indispensably requires,) a good Life, and our faithful Labors in the
Word of God; our best Security for our Knowledge in Jesus Christ.

Let these be our strong Hold, our Rock of Defense, and our Castle, in which we
will trust! from which nothing shall ever make us to recede, or draw us out
beyond our Lines: Not the Vanity of trying our Strength in New Schemes of
Divinity; not the Hardyness of rejecting the Received and Established Terms of
the Church of Christ; not the Deceitfulness of Philosophy to forsake the Word
of God. And then with all assurance, we may appeal to the good and unprejudiced
part of Mankind, which is the safest Guide to the Knowledge of the Salvation of
God, Reason with the Gospel, or Reason without it. It is the Cause of God in
which we are engaged, and the Redemption of all Faithful Christians through the
Blood of Christ, for which we contend: Let us therefore play the Men for our
People, and for the Cities of our God! But let God himself be the Director in
the Methods of his own Salvation. And the Lord do that which seems him good!

And if this be Priestcraft, may our Right Hand never forget her Cunning! May
our Studies be serious, our Endeavors strong, and our Prudence and Charity
always exercised in it! That by it we may catch Men, even them (if it shall be
the good Pleasure of Heaven,) who use their Craft for the destruction of those
Souls for which Jesus Christ died.

And now, O Lord, behold their Threatenings and Revilings! In thy Mercy renew a
right Spirit within them! And grant unto thy Servants that with all Boldness
they may speak thy Word in Truth and Soberness! That with Constancy they may
teach that Faith which was once delivered unto the Saints! That they may stand
up in defense of thy Holy Scriptures, not without much Blood, rescued out of
the Hands of unreasonable Men by our Forefathers of the Reformation. And of thy
Grace, add to these Mercies, Integrity of Life, and Purity of Manners in thy
Servants which wait at thy Altar! So shall we be able, O Lord, by the Soundness
of our Doctrine, and Holiness of our Lives, both to exhort and convince
Gainsayers, and to show forth the Salvation of God.

FINIS.

