A SERMON PREACHED Before the King and Queen AT WHITE HALL, On Sunday, Jan. 8.
1692/3.

By WILLIAM WIGAN, Chaplain to Their MAJESTY'S.

Published by Their Majesty's Special Command.

LONDON, Printed by R. Norton for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishop's Head in St.
Paul's Churchyard, 1693.

A SERMON Preached before the King and Queen.
MATTHEW vi. 34. latter part. The morrow shall take thought for the things of
it self; sufficient unto the day is the evil thereof.
OUR Blessed Savior, who knew that inordinate thoughtfulness for the things of
this Life was a very common and great hindrance of our Salvation; in this
Chapter uses many and powerful Arguments against it. He shows, ver. 25. That
his Disciples ought not to take thought for their Life what they shall eat, or
what they shall drink; nor yet for the body what they shall put on; because the
life is more than meat, and the body than raiment: That is, He, who before we
had knowledge of wants, gave to Man Being, Sense and Understanding; which are
of greater value, and show more power in Him, and goodness toward Us, will not
deny us the means of Food and Clothing, which are more easy for him to grant,
as He knows they are necessary for us to obtain. Which we may the rather
believe, because He has taken care (as our Lord teaches, 26, 27, to the
30th.) of the Fowl of the air, and the Grass of the field, and therefore will
surely be more mindful of them whom he has made after his own Image. Christ in
the 32. v. shows how fruitless also this thoughtfulness will prove, which
cannot add an inch to our Stature, or a minute to our Age. And in the 32. v.
that the Gentiles, (They who have no hope but in this Life, and who are
concerned there should be no other) They place all their happiness in making
provision for their stay here: But this sollicitousness ill becomes them who
believe they have a Father in Heaven, who knows their wants, and who, if They
seek first the Kingdom of God, and his Righteousness, has assured them, that
All these things shall be added unto them.

Since then all Christians have a higher object of their care, the Eternal
state of their Souls: of which if they are chiefly mindful, God is engaged to
supply what their bodies truly require: No Christian can justly complain that
the necessities of his Life are not supplied, unless he have first practiced
all that which Christ commands: and if any one has not first sought the
Kingdom of God, he has not yet a title to this Promise: But there is little
cause to fear any such complaints. They that have first served God uprightly,
have not wanted leisure for their just occasions, and also have had a special
blessing on their labors. Godliness has been profitable for this life: and as
it has engaged men more conscientiously and steadily to follow their callings,
so it has produced excellent fruits to the industrious Christian. For the
honesty and fidelity which our Holy Faith teaches us to observe, in our duty
toward man in our respective professions, as part of our Religion, are virtues
of such importance that they seldom fail to earn more than daily Bread. For if
as the Gospel enjoins, we are sober and temperate; meek and inoffensive, just
and charitable; If we are not as Eye-servants in our Callings, but servants of
the Living All-seeing God; if we possess our vessels in Sanctification, and our
Souls in patience, waiting for the coming of our Lord: Can we believe that we
shall want either Bread, or esteem, or protection in this Life? Are these so
cheap Virtues, that there is no need of them in any Family or Country? Are the
opposite practices of Vice, of Sloth, of Treachery and Injustice, so valued and
so truly profitable to Mankind, that they will procure, if universally
followed, a far surer livelihood than the duties which Christ enjoins his
followers to observe? Or does it appear that Epicures and sensual Persons, such
as have made their belly their God, and have valued neither Right, nor Wrong,
Faith nor Promise, Heaven nor Hell, have (generally speaking) been better
regarded, and their actions and examples been recommended by Parents and
Lawgivers, rather than theirs who, looking for a Life to come, have chiefly
strove to have a Conscience void of offense toward God and toward Man? God
indeed is pleased to suffer some wicked persons to prosper by their sins; but
how few are they in respect of the vast numbers of such as laying aside all
care of their Souls, abandoning themselves to voluptuousness and idleness, to
rapine and iniquity, have fallen into poverty, and come to miserable untimely
Deaths? And how few are they who by Prayer recommending their virtuous
endeavors to God, have not found his Providence a sufficient Inheritance?

Therefore in order to a more ready dependence on his Promise: As God has
appointed us an uncertain, and it may be a very short stay here; so he has not
made it necessary to have abundance. That we may be the better at leisure for
his Worship, and our preparation for Eternity; He has so ordered it, that our
Natures do not require such vast provisions, as Covetousness, or the fashion of
the World provoke us to seek after. Therefore Food and Raiment convenient are
to be had of the growth of all Countries: But they who will fare deliciously
and sumptuously, and be clothed to the height of their own or their
neighbors Vanity: They who set not their hearts upon what their health
requires, but what others do or wear; They are pierced through with many cares:
They must run great dangers, must make shipwreck of their Consciences, must be
slaves to other men's Vices, in order to content their own: And after all, find
that Luxury and Pride, and an Evil Eye, are never to be satisfied. And these
are the Men, who when their expectation is not answered, rave against God's
Providence, and question his Love to Mankind, for not giving what they neither
truly wanted, nor He ever promised to bestow upon them.

Therefore since the Health of the Body, and the Content of the Mind are best
promoted, by Simplicity of Diet and Moderation in our Desires: And since the
observation of Christ's Precepts tends to the advancement of Peace, Charity and
mutual support of Christians in lawful Vocations; justly may our Savior
require all who believe in him, after they have done their duty, to Take no
thought for the morrow. And yet after all these Motives, he uses Two farther
Arguments,

I. The morrow shall take thought for the things of it self. II. Sufficient for
the day is the evil thereof.
By these Two Considerations our Lord strengthens his Prohibition given 25 and
31 verses, and repeated in this verse, whereby we are not to understand that we
are to be wholly unconcerned for the future, as resolved Beggars are, or they
who take upon them the Vow of Poverty and Laziness, (the pests of
Commonwealths, and burdens of other Christians.) But we are forbid that pining
care which neither acquiesces in any, though large, provision already made, nor
in God's Providence. Christ does not forbid Industry, nor laying up any store
for another day: (For he himself had a bag, though Judas carried it) But Christ
forbids that distraction and unsatisfiable distrust, which never believes there
can be enough heaped up, nor that there is any wiser care than its own employed
and watching over us. For our Holy Faith requires Christians to Work, that they
may have wherewith to supply themselves, and give Ephesians. iv. 28.
to them that need. It forbids us not to sow or reap, or gather into barns (as
L. de Opere Monachorum, c. 1.
some vagabond Monks in S. Augustin's time interpreted the 26. ver.) imitating
the Fowls of the Air: But it requires us to believe, that having done what
lies in us, we should expect the increase from God; knowing that we live not by
bread alone, however multiplied, but by every word Matt. iv. 4*
that proceeds out of his mouth: and therefore we ought not to be thoughtful
for the Morrow, otherwise than we see Servants are who work for Masters whom
they have found just and bountiful: They question not their Wages* and are
therefore cheerfully industrious. Much more then ought Christians to banish all
carking, gnawing, despairing Fears, since they have already had such experience
of God's goodness, who has so often filled their hearts with food and gladness.

This being premised, We may consider, that we ought,

I. To take no thought for the morrow, for the morrow will take thought for the
things of it self.

By the Morrow here our Savior does not strictly mean the following day, but
that time to come in which we may be concerned. And when he says that to
Morrow shall take thought for the things of it self, He by a figurative
expression (as is observed) supposes the time or day to have a personal
knowledge of what belongs to it: Intimating that as certainly as the days come
on, and succeed each other, regular in their varieties, and true to their fixed
lengths in their several seasons: So certainly there shall appear the same
general steady care that has hitherto watched over the works of the Creation,
and more especially over the Church of Christ: and we can have no more reason
to doubt of the continuance of the same Providence in governing the World, than
we doubt of the return of Darkness or Light, each Day or each Night. If the Day
it self were, (as the Heathens imagined the Sun to be) a Deity, or God, it
could not more orderly arise; then during its revolution will be visible here
an overruling Sovereign Power and Wisdom. And therefore as we expecting the
goings out of the Morning and Evening perform, or design at least, all the acts
that our occasions may require: as we do not in the least question that Summer
and Winter, seed-time and harvest Genesis viii. 22.
will be according to God's Promise: Though all these Seasons may be sometimes
longer or shorter, more favorable, or more unkind than other while: As we see
periods of Life and Governments continue: So we ought not to doubt but that the
things of to Morrow, (whether they concern our Bodies or our Souls, our
Families or our Countries) will succeed as is appointed: They will not happen,
as an unsteady blind fortune shall confusedly throw them together. But as has
from everlasting been decreed by a much wiser Mind than any we can substitute
in its place.

Some Poets fancy that when Man first saw the Sun, he was mightily pleased at
the sight of so glorious an Object, and at its Light so charming: But that when
he beheld the Sun setting, he followed, looking after him as long as was
possible, and at the disappearing of the Light, despaired of day again. Though
this be but a fiction, it too truly represents the practice of too many. The
beauty of Order, and the blessings of Peace are so pleasing and desirable, that
some Christians can no sooner see them overcast or withdrawn, but they believe
them gone for ever; and lament, as if they could never be restored. But as the
first Man to his unspeakable Joy saw the Sun rising again where he did not look
for him, and afterward perceived that after darkness he would return; after
Eclipses he would Shine out again: So Christians who submit their wills to the
Will of God, will to their comfort find that Joy will come after Sadness; and
that as all the inanimate Beings and Creatures move and act according to the
simple Eternal Laws which God at first set down: So Men, with all their folly,
and Devils with all their rage can go no farther than was foreseen, and is
permitted: are acted by their own malice, yet execute God's decree, and reign
but for a fixed time. Generations shall go, and Generations shall come, Trouble
and Sorrow shall be very great; disorder shall seem to have got the full power
over the World: But though the Earth be never so unquiet, the Lord rules over
all: And the fiercer and violenter confusions are, the sooner they waste
themselves. Storms may arise so furious that young Mariners, who never saw the
like, may imagine Heaven and Earth are quite lost, and nothing be looked for but
another Chaos. But when He that sits above, the Ancient of Days, speaks the
Word, Let there be Light, there shall be Light: Let there be Peace, there shall
be Peace.

They therefore whose Faith is founded on this persuasion, are best secured
against fears and anxieties about the future: Since they are sure that he who
orders the present, has the same care of that which is to come, and the same
power over it: in which belief they are confirmed, by having been disappointed
in former amazements: God having by ways unthought of by Man, restored safety,
when all humane help was despaired of. Therefore they cast their burdens upon
him, committing their Souls to him in well doing; not doubting but he who
framed them, will watch over the work of his hands: He who preserved them
during their helpless infancy, and heedless youth, if they keep in his ways,
will be merciful to them, when their strength fails, and when the days come in
which they have no pleasure.

Moreover, God has so ordered it, that the Day may be said, in an especial
manner, to take thought for the things of it self. For the Day brings with it a
disposition of mind suitable to its occasions. Men need not distract themselves
with thoughts of what they shall do, if such or such Calamities befall them: for
time and place and immediate distress, often suggest properer Counsels than any
could otherwhile have been conceived. Sickness of it self inclines the Spirit
to a temper fit for that Trial: it makes it affect that privacy and silence
which conduce to recovery; and it causes that seriousness and submissiveness
to advice, which is agreeable to the dangers that attend it. So Necessity
infuseth into the Soul that decency of behavior, that watching of fit
opportunities, that courtesy and eloquence of Speech, which no pre-meditation
could furnish, and proves a kind of Inspiration.

Besides, There is so great variety in the affairs which any day may produce,
that the wisest of men cannot foresee, nor if they could, can they provide
against the evils thereof: and therefore, it is observed, that they miscarry
frequently in weighty concerns of Peace and War, who are strictly tied up by
Commission, and may not act as is plainly best, but as they are directed by
absent, though Wise, Superiors.

For there are Critical moments, as in diseases, so, in all concerns of Life:
and the wisdom of Man consists not so much in deep forecast, as in being
watchful and ready to lay hold on the present advantages. And accordingly God
gives his blessing, (not to them who by profound thought pretend to foretell
the designs of the Eternal Mind; But) to* them who diligently observe and
improve the opportunities his Providence offers. And therefore the Wise are
confounded in their Plots, the Achitophels are disappointed in their Counsels,
are still baffled by somewhat which with all their skill they could not
foresee: God thereby showing that, not the shallow and bounded capacity of Man;
but an infinite Spirit, only, can comprehend what is to come. For our Body is
contained in a very narrow space, and our Spirit moves in a very narrow sphere.
The entrances whereby we admit knowledge are straight, suited to our minds,
which can perceive but by degrees easy, orderly and simple; and are
overpowered with variety, when not leisurely offered. And therefore as our Eyes
are very serviceable, if their objects are presented successively, and in a
determined distance (beyond which all is obscure and uncertain.) So that Spirit
which God has placed in Man, perceives with much clearness what it considers
singly, and what nearly concerns it: But is amazed and in confusion when it
grasps at many things; especially what regards futurities. If therefore
Christians will distract themselves with the apprehensions of what may and what
may not happen: if they will extend their sollicitousness to after Years, and
to what as yet lies hid in its Causes; They will be convinced in time, that
their thoughtfulness increased their Sin, and no way prevented what they
feared: and that therefore it is Wisdom to let the Day take thought for the
things of it self; and that the rather, because as our Savior urges for a
Second Argument,

II. Sufficient for the day is the evil thereof.

By Evil here is meant, that Vaxation and Sorrow, which every day may bring
upon us: not that Evil of guilt for which we must answer* Is there any evil in
the City and the Lord has not done it? Says the Prophet Amos. Amos iii. 6.
He does not mean any Blasphemy or Uncleanness, any Rapine or Murder: Far be
it from God to be the Author of, though he for a time permits, such Crimes. But
the execution of Vengeance the Viols of Wrath poured out on Nations in
Pestilence or War, These are appointed by that God, who declares I make peace
and create evil, I the Lord Isai* xlv. 7*
do all these things. Forasmuch then as the heart of Man is on that Evil of Sin
continually, which God will certainly visit with the Evil of Affliction;
therefore as sure as wickedness increases, so surely will Tribulation and sore
Distress. For as God has declared he will send it: So Vice of its Nature
begets misery and anguish of Mind; as it does sickness of Body, variance with
Men, and confusion in Affairs. For this cause, since we cannot foresee That
truly Holy Day in which no Sin against God shall be committed, and by it his
vengeance provoked; who can promise himself that any day shall pass without
some Visitation?

The ancient Heathens imagined that every one who entered this Life had a Cup of
Good and Evil mingled, given to him: and that though some had a larger measure
of Sorrow than others, yet none escaped without a Dose of Evil, enough to
embitter all their enjoyments: We know from better Authority that, Man that is
born of a woman has but a short Job xiv. 1, 5, 7.
time to live, and is full of misery; and that He is born to trouble, as the
sparks fly upward. And we may judge by past experience, that no particle of our
Life can pass, but may have in it vexation sufficient to discompose the quiet,
and poison the comforts of so frail and perishable Creatures as we are* And
therefore since we are so weak and so transitory and nothing consumes our
strength more than anxious care for the future: It is very unadvisedly done of
us to anticipate our Sorrows, which will be grievous enough in their proper
time. They who must drink up a very nauseous potion, are not counseled to taste
of it often beforehand, and be disgusted at many parts of that draught which
they need but once take, and but once know its offensiyeness. Therefore as we
esteem them very indiscreet, who* having plenty for many years, waste all they
have in one riotous entertainment: or any moment any voluptuousness: So we may
look on them as extremely unhappy, who having allotted them a portion of
trouble in this World, which is to be taken by degrees and at several times,
through Fears and jealousies and over inquisitiveness bring all their Evil on
themselves at once, and are overwhelmed with a burden, which divided might
have been easily supported. If by much thinking and repining beforehand, the
sorrow that is feared may be prevented: if by taking the cares that belong to
the Morrow on this Day, they are ended; then sollicitousness for the future
will be singular Prudence. But (says S. Chrysostom) if you are never so
thoughtful for the Morrow, you must nevertheless bear its weight when it is
laid on you, and have also the grief of having bore it in vain* Why then do you
so greedily gain so great a loss? Why do you give way to Fears, which like
untimely preventive Physic, makes you actually ill, least it may be hereafter
you should be so? Be content with what is at present laid on you: that is
enough for a Creature who is but of vesterday, and, it may be, will not be here
till tomorrow* We know that there is no sort of affliction which befalls one
man, but may befall another: None have any exemption, privilege or prerogative,
whereby they are secured against Sickness however painful or loathsome* against
disgraces in their persons or relations, or the slanders or violence of wicked
Men: No one knows but he may be the next object of pity by sudden death: For it
is appointed for all men to die, Heb. ix. 27.
and no one can tell how soon. But how few in health disquiet themselves with
the apprehensions of what is most certain: and how wretched would they be who
should go about seriously to provide against all the casualties of Life? will
they not be distracted, who should fear all the Evil they see or hear overtakes
others unexpectedly: as loss of Limbs, Senses, Estates, Friends, good Name or
Life? And yet we know almost all sort of Afflictions fell upon righteous Job in
one day in perfection: The Sabaean, Chaldaean and the Devil, seized upon and
destroyed his Flocks and his Herds: his Sons and his Daughters: and he had only
time between, to hear distinctly his Losses; and then to be smitten with Sores
from head to foot: and to have all his Sufferings inflamed by miserable
Comforters. Who is insured that he shall not be oppressed or visited in like
manner? And yet scarce any are so unwise as to torment themselves with the
dread of the like. S. James reproves them who say to Morrow We will go into
such a City James iv. 13.
and buy and sell and get gain, whereas ye knew not what shall be on the
morrow: For what is your Life? It is even a Vapor, that appears for a little
time, and then vanishes away. If then we ought not to presume on the morrow
for the contingent enjoyment of what we believe profitable; neither ought we to
presume on it for a contingent evil: As it is sinful to imitate the rich man in
the Gospel, in promising our selves long to live, and enjoy Luke xi^ 19
the Goods that are laid up for many Years; since the following Night, or
sooner, our Souls may be taken from us: So it is sinful for any so to concern
themselves for what distress God may bring upon them, as not thankfully to use
what they are in possession of, and bless his holy Name for its continuance. We
are not indeed to put off the evil day, and flatter our selves that no harm can
fall on us: We are not to promise our selves peace, while God gives signs of
his near approaching Judgments: But yet we are still to be mindful, that God is
the same; and that we sin, by fancying that the Sons of Anak are invincible; or
by distrusting that He can feed us in the Wilderness; no less than we sin by
surfeiting in it of Manna. For still whatsoever the Lord appoints Psalm. exxv* 6.
shall be in Heaven and Earth, and in the Sea, and all deep places* He, expects
we should do what He commands, and leave secret things to Him: He loves to be
trusted; and we most effectually engage him to watch over us, when, having done
what lies in our power; we entirely recommend the Event to Him; firmly
believing that it is best for us not to know whatever He pleases to conceal
from us. For, since every day may be unconceivably fruitful of Calamities,
which by foreseeing, or but foreboding, are highly aggravated; it is compassion
in God to keep hid from us what we are to undergo, and cannot avoid. One of the
Ancients says, That he who allowed a day's space as sufficient to overthrow
the greatest Empires, gave too large time, and much more than was necessary: In
as much as a few Hours, nay Minutes, often determine the happiness: of Nations;
and as from slight and very contemptible beginnings, grievous divisions have
arisen; so out of the Brambles has fire broke, that has devoured the Cedare
of Lebanon; and there has been but a moment between the life and death of the
greatest* between Adoration and Oblivion. Since then God does not give man
power to remove the Evil that may befall him, if he could foresee it; we ought
to bless him for fitting us to bear each day's affliction in its due time; by
keeping us ignorant of it* till it must be undergone. For, if any do search
into His purposes, and attempt to know Euturities, their sin becomes their
punishment* They who consult Astrologers and Diviners, are either deluded with
false, or ill-grounded hopes, or are tormented with a dread of those miseries,
which they* have not the least direction how to escape, but are told will
inevitably befall them: Like Saul at Endor, who was confirmed in the belief of
all the evil he feared, and had the guilt of his accursed curiosity added to a
fuller knowledge of his dismal doom. Mind we then* what we are called to,
leaving the Issue of Affairs with Wisdom that is infinite, and with Goodness
that never fails: and so much the rather, because our joys will be higher, when
not palled by a long foretast; and our afflictions when not foreseen, will not
imbitter our present comforts. Moreover, as we know that our days, as they may
be evil, so they may be few; and that each day's trouble may be abundantly
heavy; in the midst of such possibilities of dangers, and such calamities which
others, as righteous as we, groan under; we have cause to praise that
Providence which keeps off the Evil which by reason of our sins, we may justly
fear, For to this purpose we may be allowed to be thoughtful of Judgments, that
may be poured out on us; that by the apprehension of them, we may be more
livelily stirred up to glorify the Mercy which suspends them; and may also, by
a holy life, move God to continue the blessings we enjoy, instead of provoking
Him by our distrustful thoughts to hasten the calamities we may dread. But if
on any other account we take Thought for the Morrow, we may justly fear a
reproach like that which God made to Ahaziah, by the Prophet Elijah. Is it not
because there is not a God in Israel, that ye go to inquire* of 2 Kings i. 3.
Baalzebub the God of Ekron? Is it not because there is no God in the World,
that you are so sollicitous for what shall happen in it? Is it because God has
abandoned the Helm, that you take His place? Or, because that you want full
Employment, therefore you overload the present day with the supernumerary
troubles of aftertimes? Rather believe, That as there was a Providence before
you was born, so it will not dye with you; cast the burden of to Morrow upon
Him, who only can, and will take care of it and you: And in some measure
resemble you the Israelites, who went out of their Camp and gathered Manna
sufficient for each day, as was commanded, not doubting but they should, as was
promised, find it there the next. Not but that the Scripture requires
diligence, in subordination to God's Sovereign care; and incourageth the
industrious Hand and provident Mind. For Joseph laid up stores in the City of
Egypt against the years of famine: and the Genesis xli.
Disciples hearing of the dearth that should be in the World, did not so
interpret Acts xi. 29.
Christ's doctrine, as not to think themselves bound to send relief to the
Saints or Brethren at Jerusalem. But too often, as riches increase, the heart
is more set upon them, and less upon the Living God: And it is hard to persuade
the wealthy, that The Life of a man consists not in the abundance Luke xii. 15.
of what he possesses. Therefore they provide as if they should live for ever:
although they see how little truly suffices, and know not how soon far less
may.

If therefore Christians were fully convinced, That their Lives would not last
for ever; and if they believed That an endless state is to follow, they would
proportion their thoughts to their Interests: a temporary concern should have a
transitory Care; and an Eternal concern should have their constant Care.

And therefore they would be mindful of the Present. For though we are forbid
to take thought for the Morrow, we are not forbid to take thought for the
immediate Day. At first view this may seem too narrow a compass for the large
and active Spirit of Man. But if it be seriously considered, it will appear,
That as the Evil, so the Duty of the Day is sufficient for it. For who is there
that can say, as in the presence of God, that He has, during that short space,
ordered a-right his Thoughts, his Words, and his Deeds? Who has not offended
in so few hours? If an ancient Christian found it hard to practice one short
lesson Socrat. l. 4. c. 23.
that was read to him, out of the Psalm. 39. 1. I said, I will take heed to my
ways, that I offend not with my tongue. If he was a long time before he could
fulfill that Precept: Surely then the guiding well the Lips and the Heart and
its Imaginations, that are set on Evil, will not be an easy task to perform,
though but for so short a time. Our Savior reproached his Disciples that they
could not watch with him one hour: and even, one hour well watched, the
Eleventh hour spent in God's Vineyard, will not be without a reward: The
penitent Thief who employed well the last Moments of, his Death rather than,
Life, was that day with Christ in Paradise. For God regards the sincerity of
Conversion and Perseverance after it, and not only the length of time wherein
he is served. And therefore they are sure to be blessed, who are faithful One
Day if it be their Last. A Heathen could cry out, that One Day led according to
the Precepts of Wisdom, was to be preferred before a sinning Immortality. How
highly then ought Christians to value and employ well One, the Present, Day,
which shall be rewarded with a holy and happy Immortality. And if after humble
Adoration of God, and praising Him who brings them to the beginning of another
day, (which they could not promise themselves,) they seriously resolved by the
assistance of His Grace religiously to serve Him that day in their Vocations;
and if in the Evening they examined themselves how they had past that day,
(which may be their last,) and found they had walked before God in His fear,
and as looking to give an account to Him of their deeds; with what comfort
might they lay down their heads each night, and wish they might wake in
Eternity? But when they review but one day's actions, too many will find much
cause of shame and grief; many failings to be confessed, and much pardon to be
asked. And yet, through God's blessing on this their inquiry, as they would be
more Strict in their Lives, Faithful in their Callings, Charitable in their
Censures, and Regular in their Devotions: so they would find that they had
little time to spare for unnecessary Thoughts of the Morrow. Nay, they would
then be convinced, That this World, in which our stay is so doubtful, and so
full of disappointments, (whose joys are so false and so short* and whose
sorrows so true and so lasting,) is not worth their utmost seriousest concern
for it; and no way deserves their being mighty sollicitous for what shall
befall them in it: And therefore they would, as Travelers, look transiently on
what past here; having their hearts set chiefly on their Country which is
above, and on that blessed state of Glory that hereafter shall be revealed.
Since then, we know that we dwell in Tabernacles of Clay, carrying in our
Bodies the Sentence of God, and liable to all the Evils that any day has
brought on any distressed Person, Family, or Nation; What is it that they who
pretend so much to be concerned for the future, ought to mind, but that Future
which shall never end; and to provide what will survive the great evil day? All
the good things of this Life, however eagerly sought, hardly obtained, and
carefully kept here, must be left behind: Only our good Works; Only the
Fruits of Faith in God, and Conformity to the blessed Jesus; Only our Charity
and participation of the Divine Nature, will accompany us to, and be of use at,
the Tribunal of Christ. Hear we then our Lord teaching us, while it is called
to day, to seek the Kingdom of God, and His Righteousness: and to look on this
Life only as a portion of Time assigned us to work out in it our Eternal
Salvation. And if mindful of this happy end of a Christian Race, we are sober
and just, humble and heavenly-minded; if we constantly do each day the duty of
the day, as if at night we were to answer for it; and live each day as not
knowing that any more may be allowed us; but in it our Lord may come upon us;
We shall then with mighty assurance, (though the Earth be never so unquiet, and
the Powers of it tremble,) commit to God's guidance our Bodies, Souls, and
Spirits, our Country, and His Church; and shall find that God will govern all
to His Glory, and for our Everlasting Salvation. To Him Father, Son and Holy
Ghost* Three Persons, and One God, be Glory and Honor for ever, Amen.

FINIS.

