A REPLY TO THE ANSWER OF Lieutenant General LVDLOW; Or his Answer to the
Officers at Dublin, examined: With a concluding Word to the present Authority
in Parliament.

By E. W. an Actor in the late change in Ireland.

Tempora mutantur, sed non mutamur in illis. LONDON, Printed by Tho. Newcomb,
over against Bainards-Castle in Thames Street. 1660.

A Reply to the Answer of Lieut. General Ludlow, or his Answer to the Officers
at Dublin examined; with a concluding Word to the present Authority in
Parliament.
THough, to the understanding Reader, who by comparing, knows when a Letter is
answered, I need have done no more, then to have taken the same Letter (which
he says is answered) and affix't it in the end, calling it a Reply to the
Answer; yet because those Worthies, to whom the Answer appeals for Justice, may
with the less expense of time see how insufficient the Answer is, and how
unjustly the subscribers of the Officers Letter, are aspersed almost in every
page of the pretended Answer, by the nickname of persons that have been for a
late single Persons interest, I have therefore assumed (though unwillingly)
this trouble by way of Replication: and therefore,

Sir; As I am not inclined to detract from your merits, wherein they are
praiseworthy, so I would have gladly seen the like ingenuity in your self,
toward the Gentlemen, who rather have deserved your praise hitherto, then to
have been the objects of your frowns and indignation, for what they have done.

It seems your stomach will not easily digest any that submitted to the late
Government of a single Person, though they had no hand in setting him up; but
why do you not quarrel with that Scripture, Romans 13. Let every soul be subject
to the higher Powers, for the powers that are, are ordained of God? Let me ask
you this Question from Commonwealth principles (though I doubt not but your
tart words would be silenced from that Text) Can you imagine, That if all such
were excluded, your petty peevish Interest (to say no more of it) would be
enough to carry on that Good old Cause so much pretended to? when yet you saw
by experience what knocking of heads there was at your
Wallingford-House-meetings, To which you so much frequented (though to the blot
of your former service) and when advised to the contrary by your known friends,
surely you that are ready to condemn the Parliament, for narrowing their
interest now, do much more condemn your self, if that be your opinion.

Your great care in your answer, is, to make the world believe, That you are
the only Person, that has stood unshaken (as to the Parliaments cause) in the
late Protectors day; But it is sufficiently known to many witnesses from your
own mouth, That your trouble was not, That Oliver had pulled out the Parliament;
But that he was seated in the chair of State, contrary to a former engagement,
and so your expected good things, were not like to be accomplished by him. As
for the Parliament, you could have been contented then (as well as since) if
they had never met more: and why then do you condemn others for the same
things you are guilty of your self, namely for want of affection to this
Parliament? Did not all the Armies of the three Nations, all the Fleets at Sea,
all or most part of the Cities, Burrows, Towns, and Counties of this
Commonwealth, yea, and all Plantations of English abroad own his Authority by
Letters and Addresses, and were there not in all these (think you) as faithful
men to the Parliament as your self?

I might here tell you that you acted sometime your self under him; for you
could be contented to receive pay, as Lieutenant General, Colonel and Captain,
and I believe you would have done so to the last day of his Reign, had not
Orders been given by Fleetwood to cross you out of the musters. Your
distinction here of being the Parliaments Lieutenant General, will not serve
your turn; for any sober man may see, That though you abhorred him (as the Jews
did swines flesh) yet you loved the broth of abominable things. In the front of
your second page you say, The Officers and Soldiers (within your precinct) of
Duncannon, at your coming expressed much grief and trouble for the Parliaments
interruption; But truly Sir, if their after-carriage be considered, which I
know you are bound to justify, I want faith to believe that their sorrow was
unfeigned.

But your Irish Harp will make no Music, unless you touch upon the same
string, and therefore you say in the same page, That you sent to Ross,
Waterford, and other places to press them to declare for the Parliament, not
in show only, but in reality. Answ. Truly Sir, if you might be Judge, no doubt
but you would pass as severe a censure upon the persons, as you do upon the
actions of those, which yet your Masters have judged to be real in what they
have done, witness their Thanks sent them for their good service.

But the Officers, you say, in declaring for the Parliament, designed rather to
take advantage against those the Parliament had preferred, Though the Officers
fidelity may justly merit the places, yet all is submitted to the Parliaments
pleasure, who in answer to the Armies humble representation, voted this as
answer to one of the heads therein contained, that such whose good service
should merit inc^uragement or re-reward, should accordingly have it; and though
they have merited their thanks, yet whether they have deserved their places, is
at their judgment
thereby to get into their places, then out of any affection to the Parliament.
Answ. Ill Will never speaks well, The best actions of the best of men shall
never clear their integrity, if a bare jealous affirmation shall serve as a
sufficient accusation. But in the mean time, Sir, those Officers so entrusted,
were very faithful to their Masters; were they not? when others less trusted
(as the like was here about London) must teach them in Commission, their duty,
how to obey their Masters: the best is, as often and highly as you reflect upon
them in Ireland, by an easy and due parallel, you reflect upon those few
faithful ones, that remained in England and Scotland.

But those in Ireland disputed your Authority, which was legally derived from
the Parliament, for whom in the worst of times you have born your faithful
witness. Answ. You are here mistaken in the dispute, which was not whether you
had not an Authority, but whether by your staying amongst the Parliaments
enemies, and acting as one of the new Lawmakers, you had not abused that
Authority to the forfeiting of it; But the Officers you say were not Judges of
that, but the Parliament. Answ. In case of Necessity, when there is no visible
Authority, as then there was not (when they past those Votes against you) they
were Judges of their own safety. And when afterward they heard of their
sitting, they appealed to Caesar, whether they desired your Return.

In the next, you tell them, That though the Officers disputed your Authority,
legally derived from the Parliament; yet they could yield obedience to Sir
Hardress Waller that had no Commission. Answ. His being respited by the
Parliament at present, did not make null his Authority, no more then the
present want of their Commissions could null all the Captains and other
Officers of the Army, for then they had been like sheep without Shepherds; good
reason therefore they had to own him (your Substitute having defected) who was
made privy to much of the Design, some weeks before it was executed, he being
next in Command. But Sir Hardress served a single persons interest whilst he
might. Answ. He did no more, then the Generals at Sea, who all engaged for the
service of their Country, under the Command of a single person: who I suppose
you do but equally asperse. But Sir Hardress, with others, subscribed a Letter
to the Army in England, and bid them good speed in their undertakings. Answ. In
that Letter the Army of Scotland was equally and jointly concerned and
included, and therefore that Salute, which is rather your own fiction (then any
thing in realitie) is to be equally shared between both. But Sir Hardress
clearly espoused the Armies interest, and cast off the Parliaments, by the
Letter sent to General Monk. Answ. The Letter mentioned was prepared by Jones,
and brought in for Subscriptions rather by way of surprise, then debate. And
though his policy did subscribe to a compliance, where his opposition would
have made him obnoxious, yet the honesty of his policy did quickly appear.

Object. But that excuse may as well serve the rest of the Subscribers as Sir
Hardress, and may justify all that joined with the Army; for they will all
say, they did it out of Policy. Answ. Had they taken an opportunity in season
to have opposed the Army, as he did, the excuse would be sufficient; but that
they did not.

In the next place you say, You did not own the Army in their late precipitate
undertaking, nor acted with them otherwise, then in a military capacity, but
refused to join in their Committee of safety, or Committee for Nomination.

Answ. It Is true, you did not so own them (I believe) as to contrive the plot
for setting up the Army as Legislators; as neither did the Army of Ireland, or
the Officers, that you say were for the interest of a single person, contrive
his setting up; but you could honestly submit after it was done, as they did;
nay, you could join with them in the same work of New Government-making. I
wonder from henceforth you should condemn others for that wherein you are ten
times more guilty in another kind, and equally in the same kind with
themselves, as before proved. But you acted with them only in a military
Capacity. Answ. Had Cromwell or Fairfax gone to the King at Oxford, and joined,
or acted with them in a military capacity, would this have served for an excuse
to the Parliament, or not rather as an aggravation to endanger their not being
welcome, when they should return to sit at Westminster, as you have done?

But what you did as to Government or Reformation, was always with an
intention to submit the same to this Parliaments Judgment.

Answ. A sorry excuse you think is better then none. But, 1. Who knew your
Intentions? 2. Who knew the Parliament would ever sit again? 3. You have here
coined an excuse (such a one as it is) for those that were for a single person;
for might not they say, they were for him, only with an intention to submit it
to this Parliament when they sat.

You say in Page the eighth, The Officers design is to make Mole-hills
Mountains, to asperse and not justify, and therefore they quarrel with the
title of Dear friend, written to Jones. Answ. They cite those words for this
end, to let you know what cause they had to be jealous that you, who were a
friend to their enemy, could be no good friend to them; had such a Title been
written by any member of this house to Inchequin after his Revolt, it had been
enough to have made the whole house jealous, that such a member was no good
friend to them (notwithstanding the pretense of private real friendship. But
what you did therein (you say) was prudential, he having your sword in his
hands. Answ. That is, you called him friend till you could appear his enemy, as
Sir Hardresse called General Monk Enemy, till he could appear his friend. The
difference lies only in this, Sir Hardresse made have to do the one, when you
delaied to do the other.

The next clause you say, that is aggravated against you is, That we seem to be
necessitated to look toward the long Parliament; it is feared, if they come in
without conditions they will be very high.

To which, whether you have given a sufficient Answer, let the world judge; for
who knew your Intentions to escape, or the way by Miniard, as you say in your
Letter; or who can believe it, that shall consider what you say afterward?
That when Fleetwood heard Dublin had declared for the Parliament, he sent you
away. The gloss by which you would evade this charge (if I should appeal to
your self) is such, that you will not allow to others, viz. You writ so to
Jones (out of policy) to let him see it was his prudence as well as his duty,
Not to do any thing in opposition to the Parliaments Authority, or to your
self, who was invested therewith. Answ. He was like to do but little either
against the Parliament, or your self, when before your going out of London, you
heard he was imprisoned; for the mischief he had done was before, of which you
had notice by several private letters. And had you went according to the
invitations in those letters, you had been most affectionately received,
whereas your mition from their enemy was reason to the contrary.

The last clause in your Letter; you say, the Officers have to object against
you, is this, I hope ere this the Commissions for setting of civil Justice on
the wheels, are come to your hands. At which you wonder it should be imputed as
a crime to you, by those who were free, that the Administration of civil
Justice should be derived from a military hand, during the Protectors Reign.
It Is therefore to be feared, you say, they rather dislike the persons then the
thing it self.

Answ. The Imputation of it as a crime to you, was, because the Authority of
that Sword, that pulled out the Parliament, was thereby justified, when yet you
would have the world to belive you were pleading against the Army to bring them
in; and if it were always your principle to oppose the swords Authority, why
was it not in this? the truth is, your words may here be justly retorted, That
you dislike persons and not things; for you can make use of it as a
discriminating Act against all that submitted to it in a single person, and yet
you can find Arguments to plead for it, when it relates to the Army.

But you say, It Is the Lawyers opinion, That whosoever is actually in power,
may set the wheels of Justice going. Answ. But the Army in England had nothing
to do with Ireland, nor could they be in actual power, when there was a
ballancing power in General Monk, that opposed them. And if the Army in Ireland
should have argued thus, to set their Wheels of Justice going, no doubt but you
would have had better grounds for those reports you have raised, then yet you
had. I wish it may be prevented by a timely a consideration of their
sufferings; Necessity is lawless.

But you seem much to rejoice that you have so just a Bar to appeal unto, as
that of the Parliaments, who you doubt not but will protect you against the
malicious prosecution of any Cavilerish spirit whatsoever.

Answ. In this you would insinuate the Subscribers to be Cavileers, and
therefore they may equally rejoice with you, as well for their own sakes as for
yours; they have that power to appeal to now sitting, for whose restitution
they have so freely adventured their All. 2. I will not say it is as strange to
see how you interfere in your Principles, who can now own them as a Parliament,
when not long since (you told some of themselves) you did not look upon them as
a Parliament, but as a Company of honest Gentlemen that met there for the good
of their Country, and upon that account you joined with them.

In concluding of the Paragraph, page 10. you say, If to be fai^hfull and
constant to the Parliament, in opposition to a single person, King-ship, etc.
If to bear witness against such as are disaffected to public interest, or as
are vicious in their lives and conversations, etc. be high Treason, you then
confess your self guilty.

Answ. If that were all, I should say the same with you; But stay Sir, there is
somewhat else: Is it fidelity to this Parliament, for a General of Ireland to
come from thence, and sit in the Counsels of their enemies? would this have
been judged so, had any Member of the house, or General of their Army gone to
sit with the Kings Counsels, as I said before, in Oxford? Nay, have not the
house already determined it in their Sentencing of Sir Henry Vane, and Major
Sallaway? Is it fidelity to the Parliament to be engaged as one of the chief to
settle a new foundation of Government for these Nations? Is this to bear your
witness, against such as are disaffected to the Parliaments Interest? Who were
ever against the Parliament, if such be not, that shall presume to pull out
their Masters, and make null their Laws, and yet with such you could join;
whether this be the substance of the Articles, or all that is to be said, I
will not determine. But certainly, if these things are not Treason, they are
highly criminal. For (to make the best of it) can any rational man think that
it is a sufficient plea for a General of an Army, to quit his duty as a General,
to run to the enemies Counsels to entreat them to let their Masters sit again.

You tell them again in Page 11. Of your intentions to (...) through into
Ireland, in order to compose the difference there. Answ. But why were not your
intentions put in practice till within two days of the Parliaments sitting;
can any man judge your intentions to be real, when your Actions were contrary?
Had you been made a Prisoner for endeavoring to escape, the Army in Ireland
would have unanimously declared for you: But it seems there was no such danger;
for in the same page you say, You had labored with the Lord Fleetwood, that
you might repair to your charge above a month or five weeks before he sent
you; an ill sign your intentions were real: for to use your own words in the
same page; had that power any longer prevailed, you had staid longer with them,
(I am sure nothing less can be implied:) But you say, Fleetwood having received
a letter from Captain Algat, that Ireland had declared for the Parliament, he
then thought it necessary you should repair to your charge. Answ. It seems you
were one of those soldiers that was under Authority, when you were bid stay,
you stayed; and when you were bid go, you went. And is this to show your
fidelity to the Parliament, of which you so much boast, that you would not
adventure some hazards to get from their enemies? Or who will not say, The Army
of Ireland had sufficient cause to conclude, That if you had been a friend to
the Parliament, you had been clapped up in London, and not sent away with a
Mandamus by Fleetwood.

In page 12. you say, your brother Kempsons name was set to the Declaration,
contrary to his mind, because he did not like the company. Answ. The latter I
easily believe, because he found no whimsical persons amongst them; But I
assure you the former is not true, for he ordered the Clerk to set his name,
after some contest had been, about the words, our Lieutenant General.

But, you say, you looked upon it as your duty to hasten into Ireland, because
many persons that had subscribed the Declaration were of a contrary principle
thereto, and adhered to another interest, namely that of a single person. Answ.
But suppose they had been such, are your principles so rigid and imposing
(which you yet condemn in others) as you will never admit of repentance? 2. But
why more have now then good speed? had your haste been so hasty, you would
have hasted over before, to have hindered that revolt that was made from the
Parliament; but it seems there was no danger on that side; for if the Work were
done, as you declared at Connaway, you did not care by what Instruments, so it
might not be by a single person.

In the same page to answer the Officers, you tell them, that before you left
London, you took your leave of the Speaker and left the Address of the
Officers with him, which declared their hearty affections to this Parliament,
and their resolution to stand by them, to which very few of the Subscribers
hearts or hands then were. Answ. No doubt your going to the Speaker at that
time was your wisdom; but certainly there would have appeared more integrity
had you gone sooner, or else have published the Address in Print as soon as
you came to London; but when it might have done good, you could keep it in
obscurity, and then discover it when be sure it was of no advantage; it is well
their fidelity was better made known by their own Actions then by yours.

The Design of the Subscribers, you say, is now laid open by their imprisoning
many persons that did declare for the Parliament, though not with them. Answ.
Friendship is best known in time of straights; at such a season the Army in
Ireland generally showed their fidelity, whereas several now under restraint
declared not till forced to it, and the rest had publicly defected from the
very beginning; but the world may see by this, who you judge to be the
Parliaments best friends.

In the next, you say, it is now out of doubt they are for the King, because
the moderatest of that party have publicly declared for Sir George Booth's
design. Answ. There is much fraud in a general charge; why do you not come to
particulars, who they are? Indeed Sir, if it may not offend you to compare
persons with persons, I must then tell you, Sir George Booths offense will
appear to deserve a favorable extenuation, caeteris paribus, when the crimes
of the late disturbers will be found flat rebellion. In page 13. you say, had
you been upon the place of your command, as General Monk was, when the
Resolution of the Army came to you, the advice of the Officers had been good,
but you were in your journey toward London, when you first received the news.
Answ. You received the news before you landed at Connaway in Wales, and advice
was given you to return for Ireland; which if you had done, you might have
been in the same posture quickly with General Monk, had there been but the like
affections; the want whereof you sufficiently discovered to Sr. Henry
Ingoldsby; when you told him, That if those in power (meaning the Army) would
do but as good things for the Nations; so the work was done, you cared not who
were the instruments; a strange expression for a Parliaments General, who
stands so much to vindicate his constant good affection.

The next thing you seem to vindicate your self in, is in the election of the
Officers that were to be sent to London, where you say, if they were designed
in opposition to the Parliament, it was contrary to what you intended; and
General Monk Commissioners having consented, made you the more willing. Ans.
But their meeting to such an end was not contrary to your knowledge, it being
the third Article; and surely you could not plead ignorance, what the Articles
were, when you confess the Commissioners before mentioned had signed them.

But you had the better hope of such a meeting of the General Council, because
as you say, Three parts of the Army had not been engaged in that Interruption,
only that part about London.

Answ. It Is the same thing to justify an evil act when done, as to be Actors
in it; or else, why do you condemn the Officers in Ireland for owning the
interest of a single person when set up, though they had no hand in the doing
thereof? But it is easier to see how partial your judgment is, especially
considering the declarations that were sent up to General Fleetwood from
Lilborne, and several others parts, to own the Action.

You say, your Letters to Colonel Richards do sufficiently explain what you
meant, by the advice you gave, to choose such men that were spirited to the
Work. Answ. But how should the rest of the Officers, to whom you writ, know
your meaning, when you never told them to whom they should apply themselves for
explanation? Surely since you are so exact to remember the Contents of his
Letter, amongst so many, you intended that should shelter you in case of a
future storm.

But, The Subscribers, you say, show how ready they were to comply with the
Army in England, by calling an Irish Parliament to meet on the same day. Answ.
Suppose the Army in Ireland to supply their necessities, had taken an example
from General Monk in Scotland, when all visible face of Authority was pulled
down by the Army in England; had this been such a heinous crime? truly Sir, in
condemning them for this, you do but equally charge him, whose Actions has
sufficiently appeared honorable to the world.

You now draw on to your concluding page, and say, Thus you hope satisfactorily
you have given an answer to each particular in the Letter. Answ. But how well I
appeal to your Judges. The truth is, that which you call an Answer is nothing
but an Evasion filled with bespattering terms, a thing you complain of in your
Opposites; and the chief parts of your answer consists, either in condemning
the Persons or actions of those the Parliament have justified, or pleading your
own authority, which, for ought I know, you have sufficiently forfeited; Or
your good intentions, which none knew but your self.

In your last page, you say, You have made it your practice, according to your
principles, to promote an English Interest in Ireland, and to give countenance
to all such who fear God. Answ. But is that the way to promote an English
interest in Ireland, or to countenance such as fear God, and work
righteousness? to set up Faction, and to lay aside Officers, saying, O he is a
Presbyterian! what brave encouragement this was for any sober, honest
Englishman to come over and plant in that Nation, let the world judge.

But, you say, many that now pretend to wish well to the Parliament laid down
their Commissions when they were restored, and some were laid aside by this
Parliament, and oothers were so to be, because of their adherence to a contrary
interest, and for viciousness of life and conversation. Answ. The first sort
are (wilfully) mistaken, for the true reason of laying down their Commissions,
was because they could not run, with those sons of Error, who had the only
smiles of your Authority: The second sort have been already vindicated, who
by their actions have showed themselves much more faithful then those, in which
you so much confided: But seeing the Parliament have been mistaken in their
friends once, I hope they will take heed who they trust now; And to conclude,
let me here entreat our present Worthies, not to look upon their Cause to be so
tottering, Thar they must needs go down to Egypt for help; take heed of such
Oaths, that will turn out men of sobriety, and not only make way for all the
factious spirits of the Nations, to bring them in again to its support, who
make no conscience of keeping them, but do engage men to fight against heaven;
Let God be trusted with his own cause in his own way, without leaning upon such
broken reeds. Those that are sober Christians, though of different persuasions,
countenance; But this has not been our case, pragmatical, sausie, impudent
fellows, whose tongues were set on fire of Hell, to rail against Ministry,
Learning, Tyrhes, or that could preach (yea, rather prate) for tolerating all
heresy and blasphemy, these have been the chief objects of favor, by which
means you have lost five hundred for one in the affections of the Nations, and
had so narrowed your interest, That the Parliaments cause for many years has
run retrograde, whereas, were but the House filled, a Synod called, and
Religion settled, with a sober toleration, The Good old Cause would thrive in
spite of Hell, without which, give me leave to tell you, A blast from the
Almighty will suddenly come upon it and the Nations.

FINIS.

