THE VVidow VVhiterows HUMBLE THANKSGIVING FOR THE KINGS SAFE RETURN. With an
Account of John Hall's Vision upon the first day of the Eleventh Month, 1692/3.
And also a Letter to a Friend concerning John Hall's Message with a Letter from
Jamaica concerning the Earthquake that happened there; a Warning to the
Inhabitants of the Earth, to fear GOD and give Glory to Him, for the hour of
His Judgments are come

Say unto the KING and to the QVEEN humble your Selves, sit down, Jeremiah
13.18.

The People of Neniveh believed GOD, and proclaimed a Fast, and put on
Sackcloth from the greatest of them to the least of them. For word came unto
the King of Nineveh, and he rose from his Throne, and he laid his Robe from
him, and covered him with Sackcloth, and sat in Ashes. Jonah 3.5, 6.

Licensed, D. P. April 18.

London: Printed by D. Edwards in Nevel 's Alley in Fetter-lane, for J. B. 1694

THE Widow Whiterows HUMBLE THANKSGIVING FOR THE KING'S Safe RETURN.
ONCE more I am highly honored with Mercy and Truth to return Thanks to the
Most High for the Kings safe Return.

Oh what shall I say to the LORD for all his Mercies and boundless Favors, for
I am as one astonished at his Goodness; How wonderful are his Works and his
Ways past finding out; therefore who shall not admire Thee: Thou King of
Righteousness, who has all Power in Heaven and Earth in thy Hands, to bind the
Kings of the Earth in Chains, and their Nobles with fetters of Iron, who rulest
in the Heavens, and makes bare the Arm of thy Glorious Power in the Earth to
dash the Nations asunder, and break in pieces the Potsherds of the Earth as a
Potter's Vessel.

Oh Great LORD, glorious in Power, fearful in Praises, doing wonders. Thou LORD
Jehovah art come, and thy Power goes before Thee, that shall rend the Rocks,
and cleave the Mountains in sunder: The Everlasting GOD is come to throw down
Mountains and Hills, and to exalt the low Valleys; he will awaken the Earth by
his thundering Power, and the sleepy Inhabitant thereof by his loud sounding
Judgments: For this know, Oh King: There Is neither Strength nor Policy shall
stand,
Against what GOD's a bringing on this Land.
The Youth shall howl, the Aged shall weep sore,
Yet there is glad tidings for the Meek and Poor.


The Poor in Spirit, I mean, Matthew. 5.3. who are Heirs of the Kingdom of Glory,
whom GOD will hide in the hollow of his Hand whilst his fierce Indignation
passes over the Rebellious; wherefore, Oh that my Counsel might be acceptable
to the King, and that his ways might so please the LORD, as that his days may
be prolonged in this Land, which the LORD for a time has given him to do the
will of GOD in all things with all his Might, and with all his Strength, that
these heavy Judgments which the LORD has pronounced may not be executed in the
King's days; For thus said the LORD to me in my deep humiliation before him,
viz.

My Controversy is not with Man or Woman farther than they are found in the
Transgression, take away the Transgression; and where is my Controversy.

Is it so, O Righteous LORD, that thy Controversy is not with Man or Woman
farther than they are found in the transgression of thy Righteous Law, and pure
Commandments? Oh then for thy Mercy sake, and the advancement of thy Glorious
Power, and the praise of thy ever Blessed Name in these Nations, and throughout
all the Earth, turn the King and Queens Hearts with all their Powers and
Strengths to Thee, as the Rive^s of Waters are turned, that with a powerful
force of Thy Love and ardent Affection to thy Glory, they may join unanimously
together in Heart and Soul to humble themselves in the dust before Thee the
Almighty GOD, repenting with Niniveh's Repentance. Jonah 3.7, 8. For no less
Repentance will put a stop to the hot and fiery Indignation of the LORD which
is kindled against this Land, but to turn every one from his Evil Way, and from
the wickedness that is in their hands; therefore, Oh noble Prince an^ Princess,
for the LORD's sake, who is the King of Eternal Glory, the GOD of the Spirits
of all Flesh, the Everlasting Counselor, the Prince (...) Peace, the GOD that
made the Heavens and Earth, the Sea, and all tha^ therein is, who has
delivered the King from all his Enemies, and gav^ him his Life for a Prey, and
for the LORD JESUS CHRIST's sake, his Suf^ fering, Life, and Bloody Passion,
who was nailed to the Cross, and gave u^ his Life there for all Mankind, and
rose again for the Salvation and Redemption of the Faithful. I pray again and
again for His sake wh^ has been with the King in six troubles, and in the
seventh by his out^ stretched Arm has delivered him: Oh for His sake come down
from your Thrones, and humble your selves in the dust by Fastings and Prayers,
and deep Humiliation, crying mightily to GOD the Father of all your Mercies
that He would be with you in Counsel, and direct your way in truth before Him,
to do His most acceptable will in all things, that in his infinite compassions
for his great and terrible name sake show you what to do, and which way to take
for the suppressing, and total destruction of this boundless flood of
Ungodliness that overflows these Nations.

And dearest Prince and Princess, I humbly beg and beseech you for the LORD,
and his Glory sake, and for your own Lives and Liberty sake be not negligent in
this great Work, prostrating your selves night and day before the Throne of
his Grace, crying mightily to him for his assisting Power, Heavenly Wisdom,
and Holy Zeal; which his Valiants had of Old. Phinehas, Numbers 25, 7, 8, 11.
Jehoshaphat, Hezakiah, and Josias, these were clad with Zeal as with a Garment,
these were the Valiants of Israel, that knew how to handle weapons of War
being girt with the Sword of the Spirit, and Helmet of Salvation. Phinehas was
honorable, who by his holy Zeal stopped the Plague from the Children of Israel;
then said the LORD unto Moses, Phinehas the Son of Eleazar has turned mine
Anger away from the Children of Israel while he was zealous for my sake among
them, therefore I have not consumed the Children of Israel in my Jclousie,
wherefore say unto him, Behold I give unto him my Covenant of Peace, and he
shall have it, and his Seed after him for Ever, because he was zealous for his
God, and has made him an atonement for the Children of Israel. Oh what an
influence had this upon the LORD, and how this act of Holy Zeal pleased his
Divine Majesty; here we may see the difference between a holy Zeal for GOD and
his Glory, and a blind Zeal that has any Interest in it to Self-honour, either
in Name, or Fame, or any other thing of this perishing World: The first has
power to prevail with GOD, to stop the Judgment; the latter suffers it to go on
to their own destruction: But woe and alas, where are these holy Zea^ots now in
our age, that lies prostrating themselves before the LORD ^ight and day? And
though they see the Sword of the LORD drawn over these Nations; as David and
the Elders of Israel. 1 Chronicles. 21.16, 17. which were clothed in Sackcloth,
falling upon their Faces, crying out most bitterly before the LORD with rended
hearts, saying, Is it not I that have sinned, and have committed Evil in thy
Sight? Is it not I That have loved Covetousness, which is Idolatry? Is it not I
that have gone a whoring from thee after my Lusts and Pleasures, my Silver and
Gold, Pride and Profits of a perishing World, so long till I have provoked the
Eyes of thy Glory to say as thou did to Israel of old, For ^hree
Transgressions, and for four, I will not pass by the Iniquities thereof?

And now Oh LORD GOD let thy hand be upon me, and my Fathers House, to bring me
to a true and unfeigned Repentance, offering unto Thee Body, Soul, and Spirit a
Sacrifice of Righteousness, to love and serve Thee all the days of my appointed
time, until my Change com: And thus in judging and condemning your selves, and
bearing the Indignation of the LORD, the Altar is set up in the Threshing-Floor
of Orman the Jebusite, where true Penitents sacrifice their Lusts, vile
Affections, and their own wills, ways, and works; this is the Valley of Jehosha
-- that, where Mohab shall be threshed to pieces, Isa 5.10. as Straw is
thrashed in Madmenah; therefore says GOD, Let the Heathen be awakened, and
^ome up to the Valley of Jehoshaphat for there will I sit to Judge all the
Hea^hen round about. Therefore Oh Multitude, Multitude, come into the Valley of
Threshing, for the day of the LORD is near in the valley of Threshing; here
will God plead with all Flesh, here will he Judge between the Precious and the
Vile, and when you have born the indignation of the LORD for Sin and Iniquity
so long till Judgment turns to Victory, then will he arise and plead your
Cause: The word Jehoshaphat signifies Pleading, or Judgment, and that which is
called the valley of Jehoshaphat, was before called the valley of, Berachah, (2 Chronicles. 20.26.) which signifies Blessing or Thanksgiving; and from hence
proceeds the true and acceptable Praise from the valley of Judgment, where GOD
destroys the Iniquity, and so it comes to pass that whatsoever is done in the
History must be done again in the Mystery; therefore, whosoever will have Life
and Salvation must come into the Valley of Judgment. judge your selves, hate
and abhor your selves, believe your selves from the bottom of your Souls to be
the vilest, and unworthiest of all the Creatures of GOD, in respect to your
disobedience, and rebellion against Him and his Holy Laws, and this must be
your Work in the best state you have yet attained to, yea, if you were come to
such a Stat^ as Paul was come to when he said, 1 Cor. 4.4. Though I know no^
thing by my self, yet herein am I not justified; but he that justifies me is
the LORD. Therefore how much more ought it to be the daily and hourl^ work of
those that call themselves Christians of this Generation, wh^ are so loaded
with Sin, that the Spirit of God, both within and without them is oppressed, as
a Cart is oppressed under the Sheaves; but lest any should think I mean a bare
Historical Judging, or Pharasaical crying out LORD have Mercy upon us miserable
Sinners: Here you may cry out long and loud as Jezebels Prophets did, and never
be heard or answered; no no, I mean a going down into the valley of Judgment;
the valley of Jehoshaphat where God himself will sit to Judge the Heathen, that
knows not him nor his Righteous Judgments, and yet are crying out, LORD have
Mercy upon them miserable Sinners, who never knew this River of Jordan^ 2 Kings
5.14. or Judgment to cleanse them of their Leprosy, their going down into the
deep, where they behold his Wonders, this valley of Tears, where Luke 10.39.
Mary sat to hear the precious words that came from his gracious Lips, which
are not to be heard but by leaving all the hurryings, and turmoiling
Encumbrances of a perishing World to sit attentively at his Feet; seeking,
loving, admiring nothing but Him, no, not its own life but for his sake, that
it may serve him therewith; and this was the pleasure and treasure of all the
regenerated Christians that were born again both under the Law and Gospel; and
this way in which they attained this Resurrection, and holy life, was through
Judgment^

I will (says David) sing of Mercy and Judgment to thee Oh my Strength, will I
sing. Blessed are they that keep Judgment, and do Righteousness at all times, I
will praise thee with an upright heart. When I have learned thy Righteous
Judgment, my Flesh trembles for fear of Thee, and I am afraid of Thy
Judgments. The Fear of the LORD is clean, says he, and endures for ever^ The
Judgments of the LORD are Truth and Righteous altogether, more to be desired
than Gold, yea, than much fine Gold, sweeter than the Honey, and the
Honeycomb: Moreover by them is thy Servant warned, or made Circumspect, and in
keeping of them there is great Reward.

And in the Law, Exodus 28.13. the Vrim and the Thummim, which signifies light
and perfection, or Knowledge and Holiness: GOD commanded i^ to be put into the
Breast Plate of Judgment, which was to be upon Aaron's Heart continually when
he went in before the LORD.

And now Christ our Pattern, and High Priest for ever after the Order of
Melchisadeck, fulfilled that Heavenly Institution in his Earthly Body who bore
the Judgment of GOD upon his Heart in his suffering life which he has in his
merciful loving Kindness, as it were, left us a lega^y or Portion to be like
unto him in all things, to fill up that which is ^ehind of his Sufferings in
our Flesh; for it is not only given us to be^ieve, but to suffer for his sake;
but I would not have you mistaken; I do not confine all true Christians to
those external Sufferings of Christ, as Mockings, Scourgings, and nailing to
the Cross, for it may be, some may not be called to suffer on that wise, but
the Sufferings I now treat of, are the Internal sufferings of the Soul, which
the Apostle Paul spoke of when he said, I bear in my Body the Dyings of the
LORD JESUS, and said our Blessed Savior, If ye suffer with me, ye shall Reign
with me; mark that, with Him: That is a Heartbreaking Suffering, an inward
Suffering, to be grieved in the very bottom of your Souls if you do the ^east
thing that grieves the Spirit of GOD in you, keeping so intent to your Watch,
that you may see the Tempter before he comes, and then your Weapons are to be
the Sword of GODs Spirit, your Prayers and Supplications, with strong Cries,
even as a Woman in ^ra^ail, to the Father of Power to give you his Heavenly
Strength, so to make War with ^he Enemy of your Souls as to overcome all his
temptations, to fight manfully, and courageously with your selves, with your
own desires, affections, self-love, any corrupted Reason, and your own Wills:
These are the potent Enemies of Christ, that keeps him from his Right to Reign
in your Souls; here you are to help the LORD against the migh^y, which is Sin,
Flesh, and the Devil, which you are to engage War withal, old Adam, the Dragon,
and Lucifer, which you are to adventure your Lives, Liberties, and Estates to
overcome; and they that looses their lives here shall find them; and they that
holds out to the End here shall be Saved; and they that forsakes these shall
receive a thousand fold, ^oth in this Life, and that which is to come. These
are the sufferings you are to join with Christ in; here you must be equal
workers together with him, mark that, not without him, for without him we can
do nothing, poor miserable nothings, from the Greatest to the Least; but ^f we
wait upon him in the contempt of our selves, in self-abhorrence, ^oor Impotent
Creatures, waiting at the Pool of Bethesda, John 5.45. 6, 7, 8. for the Angels,
moving the Waters; here is the place where Je^us comes with his Mercy, and
healing Power, and Virtue, which makes ^he Lame leap as an Heart, the Blind to
see, the Deaf to hear, the Dumb ^o speak, the Dead to live, and heals all your
putrified Sores; but have (...) care your Eve is not to Man for help, you must
not seek to the Crea^ures, for that was Asa King of Juda's Sin, who rested on
the King of Aram, and not on the LORD; therefore, said the Prophet Hanani to
King Asa, The Host of Aram is escaped out of thy Hand, and when he was
afflicted with an extreme Disease in his Feet, he sought to the Physicians, and
not to the LORD, and so died, 2 Chronicles. 16. and not to the LORD to take away the
Sin, which was the cause of God's afflicting hand upon him; yet, a King that
did many noble acts to pull down Idolatry, and made a Covenant to seek the LORD
with his whole Heart and Soul, and made a Law, that whosoever would not seek
the LORD GOD of Israel, should be Slain, whether small or great, Man or Woman,
yet in this thing he greatly transgressed himself. See what a dangerous thing
it is to rely upon Man for help, either for Soul or Body, either in spiritual
or temporal Affairs, it is no less than a dis regarding the LORD, and believing
his Omnipotency to be insufficient, and how this can be answered, let the wise
in Heart judge; but the remedy for this raging, pestilential Disease, is the
foregoing Instructions, to be emptied of our selves, to be made nothing, to
forsake our own Wills; these are Sufferings indeed, all other outward
Sufferings, of what sort soever, are but shadows to these; though you give up
your Bodies to be burnt, that does but reach the Flesh, but these reach the
Soul, those takes away the Life, but these the Sin, for example; How many
hundreds, or thousands suffers outwardly variety of ways, as Poverty, Sickness,
and Death, etc. and as wicked as ever, but the internal Sufferings reaches the
Heart, and changes it from evil to good: Therefore these are the Sufferings
that brings Christ to reign in the Soul here, whilst it is in the Body, in the
Life, and then hereafter for ever; wherefore here we are to imitate Christ our
Pattern in his Suffering Life. Phil. 2.6, 7, 8. Let this Mind be in you, said
the Apostle, which was in Christ Jesus. who being in the form of GOD, thought
it no Robbery to be equal with GOD, yet made himself of no Reputation, and took
upon him the form of a Servant, and was made in the likeness of Men, and being
found in fashion as a Man, he humbled himself, and became obedient unto Death,
even the death of the Cross: Here Is our Pattern, he that was LORD of all,
became least of all, although he was GOD, equal with the Father, yet he emptied
himself of all his Glory, and humbled himself to an Ignominious Death; which
signifies a death to all your Honors and Glories, you must empty your selves,
not only of all Sin and Iniquity, as Pride, Arrogance, Deceit, Malice, Hatred,
Covetousness, and the like; but of all your best Endowments, excellencies of
Graces, Parts, and Wisdom, your good Works, that are really good in themselves,
works of Mercy to your Neighbors, and Fellow Creatures; or whatsoever
Excellency does atttend a Heavenly Life, that thou think thou ought to
think well of it, or thy self for doing it; away with those Thoughts, hate and
abhor such Thoughts, thou ought to run away from them Thoughts, as Christ
did from the Jews when they would have made Him King: For what have thou done
that was not commanded thee, therefore the good that thou do is none of
thine; thou have nothing, thou art nothing, nothing is thine, but Sin; thou
never did a good action, nor never thought a good thought; shall I therefore
ascribe to my self the glory of doing any good, to rob GOD of his Honor, GOD
forbid, all good is GOD's, but Sin, Evil, and Wickedness is thine; therefore
down proud Worm, down Dust and Ashes, down with your Crowns before the Lamb,
and Him that sits upon the Throne, and confess and ascribe in the deepest
humility, and profoundest adoration from the bottom of your Souls; all Praise,
Power, Might, and Dominion, Honor and Glory to the LORD GOD Omnipotent, from
Everlasting to Everlasting. Amen. Wherefore, if you will find GOD, it must be
by lesning your selves, making self of no Reputation; by emptying your selves
of all your Glories and Excellencies, whether external or internal, and take
nothing to your selves but shame and confusion of Face, Dan. 9. and that in a
broken and contrite Heart, judging and condemning your selves to be unworthy of
the least of all his Goodness, and this is the Breast Plate of Judgment, that
must be upon Aaron's Heart continually before the LORD; then you learn of
Christ, who emptied and humbled himself in all things to be tempted as we are,
yet without Sin, and thus Man comes to be restored to GOD out of the Fall; for,
as in Adam all died, so in Christ all are made alive to Righteousness and true
Holiness: If we put him on, as it is written, Put ye on the LORD Jesus, and make
no provision for the Flesh, to fulfill the Lust thereof: This is that that
recovers Mankind out of the Fall, to put on His Righteousness, His Humility, to
put on His Obedience to the Father, His Self-denial, His Justice, His Mercy,
and to be clothed with all His Heavenly Virtues: This is better than an
adherent, or an imputed Righteousness, which without this we are never the
better for, but here we eat His Flesh, and drink His Blood, that nourishes and
gives life to our Souls, and causes us to grow from Grace to Grace, till we
come to the perfect stature of the fullness of GOD in Christ, Ephesians 4.13.14,
15. That we henceforth be no more Children, tossed to and fro, and carried
about with every wind of Doctrine, by the slight of Men, and cunning craftiness
whereby they lie in wait to deceive. But speaking the Truth in Love, may grow
up into him in all things which is the Head; even Christ. Oh Praises to GOD for
ever, for this means, this is the means, if you make use thereof, that shall
make you wise unto Salvation, not the wisdom of this World, nor the Princes
thereof, that comes to naught which is humane and diabolical, the wisdom of the
Serpent, the forbidden Tree, of which GOD said, In the day thou eatest thereof
thou shall surely die; die to the life of Innocence, but live to Man's own
Will, Wisdom, and Skill, which the Apostle Paul calls Death it self, and the
Apostle, James 3.15.13. calls it Earthly, humane, and devilish Wisdom, and it
may well be called so, for it does the Devils work, it lifts Men up above all
that is called GOD, to admire themselves, to kiss their own hand, Idolizing
their own Gifts, Wisdom, and Parts, Reason, Honesty, Knowledge and Art. And
where is the Man that adores not himself here? And can there be greater Idolatry
than this, for a Man to pride himself, Pharisee-like, in his own seize?
This was Nebuchadnezzar's Sin, which provoked the Highest to throw him to the
Beasts of the Field, Dan 4.20 28, 29. till he knew that the Most High ruled in
the Kingdoms of Men; and this is the crying Sin of Mankind, now to think well
of themselves, their own Righteousness, and Holiness, and to follow their own
wills, conceits, and opinion of good; which indeed is false, as to know much,
learn much, to discern many Sciences, and in some to aim to become Gods, as
might be spoke more fully to, had I time; yet at the same time, all their
humane Wisdom and Knowledge does not show them that this was Adam's Fall, the
biting of the Apple, and his bitter death: Therefore, said GOD, I think, to
Tyrus. Thy Wisdom has blinded thine Eyes. Therefore, Oh Man, that wherein thou
judge Adam, thou condemnest thy self; thou art the Man that eats of this
forbidden Tree, while thou art following thy own Will and Wisdom, which is the
head of the Serpent, that must be bruised by the Power of Christ before thou
can come to that Estate which Christ spoke of, by which we must enter. Matthew.
18.3. the Kingdom of GOD; to wit, As a little Child.

Oh my GOD, Is this the station we must all come to, to be Converted, and
become as a little Child, before we can enter thy Eternal Kingdom of
Everlasting Joy, Peace, and Rest? Then, how far LORD, must the Wise and Prudent
of this World travel back to undo all that ever they have done by the Serpents
cunning Wit, and sensual Wisdom? To be stripped of all their Glories in natural
Parts Gifts, and Arts, both of Flesh and Spirit, To stand as naked in
themselves before Thee, the pure God, as Adam, when he transgressed, before
they can be clothed with thy Innocence and Humility; for if we consider the
state of a young Infant, it knows nothing but to lie at the Breast and suck the
Milk that nourishes and causes it to grow, it has no cunning contrivance of
will or wit to preserve it self from danger, you may do what you will with it,
it cannot help it self: but if any thing ails it that it suffers, it cries for
the Breast: Just so it is with the Regenerated Man, the Newborn Man, that
Christ our Savior spoke to Nicodemus of: But did this wise Man, though a Ruler
in Israel, understand what Christ meant? No; no more than the Teachers and
Rulers of this Generation. But, as Bishop Usher said, As Parrots by rote: Nor
would these give themselves the trouble of that, but for their Self-Interest in
one kind or other; some for yearly maintenance, others for Name and Fame, or to
be highly esteemed of for their Gifts and Parts; therefore all of this sort
comes short of the Life of Inocency; therefore what can be expected when the
Priests and Rulers of Nations or Kingdoms are so corrupted with By-ends and
Self-respects, But that the People should be infected with the same
pestilential Disease of Poison and Sedition, both against God and Man; and
corrupted with all manner of gross Impieties, both public and private Sins,
which calls aloud for Vengeance, when the Iniquity thereof is fully ripe.

But to the aforesaid Rabbis, Doctors, and great Scholars; these were the Men
that crucified Christ in the Days of his Flesh; and are not these the Men in
our days that crucify the Lord of Life afresh, and puts him to an open shame by
their wicked and impious Lives, by which the whole World is filled with
Atheistical Spirits, that denies God and Christ? Are not these the
Antichrists, that preaches Christ in words, but in works denies both the
Father and the Son, yet these are the Men that carries the World before them,
that pretends to know all things as to resolve any point in Divinity, and give
the Interpretation of any place of Scripture; and so fill the World with their
Expositions; But what fruit to God has all this Blustering brought forth? For
the Tree is known by its Fruit, says Christ: Have they set up their Lights,
that the World may see their Holy and Righteous Lives? Are their Conversations
in Heaven, and so transformed and made new Creatures? Do they live the inward
and spiritual Life of the Word they preach? Are they dead to the World, and
the World to them? Does the Life of Christ shine in them, and by them, so that
they live no longer to themselves, but to Christ; and so fetched off their own
Bottoms, that they are ingrafted into Christ the LORD of Life and Glory?

But woe and alas, is it not quite contrary to all this? Are not these the Men
that follows the World most, wallowing in the Pleasures, Profits, Honors, and
Humor thereof, having Men's Persons in admiration, because of their advantage,
seeking, greeting in public Places, causing Men to fall upon their Knees,
adoring them as Gods, and loving the uppermost Seats at Feasts, making long
Prayers to get the praise of Men, being mightily desirous of Vainglory, and
the Wealth of the World, but if these fail, they are dead and heartless;
therefore all these things discovers where they are below in the World, and not
above with GOD; but if you be the true Ministers of Christ, and Christians
indeed, show your Humility and Self-denial; let the life of Christ appear in
the fruits thereof; for you know Christ in all his Doctrine calls for fruits,
and what he called upon others, for he showed forth himself in Life and
Practice: For, said he, A good Tree cannot bring forth evil-Fruit; and you
know, the Tree that did not bring forth Fruit was Cursed. Therefore, the true
Ministers of Christ trod in the steps of their LORD; they lived in the offering
up of their Souls continually in the flames of Love, as a whole Burnt-offering
to Christ, which is the practical part, and kept their Bodies under, that while
they were Preachers to others, they might not be cast aways themselves, 1 Cor.
9.26. they went on conquering, and to conquer, and so does every true
Christian; they are still conquering, and overcoming all their Enemies, getting
their Sins and Lusts under their Feet, and can never rest whilst there is any
to overcome, till they have brought all in Subjection, and this they are able
to do, through the Power of Christ in them; although the false Prophets, and
Ministers of Antichrist, who are Ministers of the Flesh, and not of the Spirit,
that tells them to the contrary, for their sinister ends, to keep up their
Trade of Diana. Acts 19.24. But alas, who do I give this aforesaid Doctrine to?
For it must be a Caleb that must do this work, a Caleb, which signifies a good
Heart, not a Heart that seeks Liberty to the flesh, to make the knowledge of
Christ a more easy way to sinning, to encourage them in their Luxury, and
Fleshly Pleasures, not an Heart of unbelief, that brings an evil report upon
the good ^and, to make the death of Christ of no effect, saying, We shall never
overcome our Sins and Lusts, being so many, potent, and strong, while we are on
this side the Grave. No, no, this is not the Heart that shall overcome but a
courageous, valiant heart, that is filled with Faith and Love, that stands armed
upon its Watchtower against every high and wandering thought, strong hold, and
vain Imagination, that exalts it self against the Power, Kingdom, and
Sovereignty of Christ, that so it may kill Sin in the Conception, before it be
brought to the Birth; and this is the way that Christ and his Apostles ascribed
to work out your Salvation with Fear and Trembling, that we be equal workers
together with him, and then Coheirs, for he places our Salvation
conditionally, if we suffer with him, we shall also Reign with him, so then
this suffering life is the door all must come in at; for, says Christ, He that
comes another way is a Thief, and a Robber; so here is no Salvation, but by
being partakers of his Internal. Sufferings, which Hermes Trismigestes does
excellently treat of in his first Book. For this only, Oh Son, says he, is the
way to the Truth, which our Progenitors traveled in, and by which making their
Journey, they at length attained to the good; it is a venerable way and plain,
but hard and difficult for the Soul to go in, that is, in the Body: For first
must it war against its own self, and after much strife and dissension, it must
be overcome of one part, for the contention is of one against two, whilst it
flies away, and they strive to hold and detain it; but the Victory of both is
not like, for the one hastes to that which is good, but the other is a
Neighbor to the things that are Evil, and that which is good desires to be
set at Liberty, but the things that are evil love Bondage and Slavery: And if
the two parts be overcome, they become quiet and are content to accept of it as
their Ruler; but if the one be overcome of the two, it is by them led and
carried to be punished by its Being and continuance here. This is Oh Son, the
guide in the way that leads thither; for thou must first forsake the Body
before thy End, and get the Victory in this contention, and strifeful Life, and
when thou have overcome, then return, and avoid all conversation with the
Multitude, or common People, for I would not have thee subject to Envy, for
they do rather sharpen and whet evil Men to their Maliciousness, therefore it
behooves to avoid the Multitude, and take heed of them, as not undestanding the
Virtue and Power of the things that are said: And in the second Book, where he
began to Preach unto Men the Beauty and fairness of Piety and Knowledge;
saying, Oh ye People, Men born and made of the Earth, which have given your
selves over to drunkenness, and sleep, and to the ignorance of GOD. Be sober,
and cease your surfeit, whereto you are allured and invited by brutish, and
unreasonable sleep: Why, Oh Men of the offspring of the Earth, why have you
delivered your selves over unto death, having power to partake of Immortality;
repent and change your Minds you that have together walked in Error, and have
been darkened in Ignorance, depart from that dark Light, be partakers of
Immortality, and leave, or forsake Corruption.

And some of them that heard me, said he, Mocking, and Scorning, went away, and
delivered themselves up to the way of Death.

But others casting themselves down before my Feet, said he, Besought me, that
they might be taught, but I caused them to rise up, I became a guide to
Mankind, teaching them the reasons how, and by what means they may be saved,
and I sowed in them the words of Wisdom, and nourished them with Ambrosian
water of Immortality. I shall speak something of his great Vision, which in
order should have gone first; How God appeared to him, calling him by his Name,
saying, What would thou hear and see, or what would thou understand to
learn and know: Then said Hermes, Who art thou? I am quoth he, Poemanders, the
Mind of the Great LORD, the most Mighty and absolute Emperor, I know what thou
would have, and I am always present with thee. Then said I, I would learn the
things that are, and understand the nature of them, and know GOD. How, said
Poemander, know God? I answered, that I would gladly hear. Then, said he, have
me again in thy Mind, and whatsoever thou would learn, I will teach it thee.

When he had thus said, he was changed, his Idea or Form, and straightway in
the twinkling of an Eye, all things were opened unto me, and I saw an infinite
sight, all things were become light, both sweet and exceedingly pleasant, and I
was wonderfully delighted in the beholding it: But after this, there was a
darkness fearful and hideous, insomuch that Hermes trembled at his Idea, or
Form, which I cannot now insist further upon: How GOD revealed himself to him,
making known the mystery of his outward and inward Creation, which is wonderful
and excellent, and is committed to Posterity, though in an obscure, or hidden
Style.

But having not room here for the Vision, being much, I shall only touch at
something as I go along, that may be serviceable to my matter in hand.

Poemander: GOD said, Let the Man endued with a Mind, mark, consider, and know
himself well: Hermes; Have not all Men a Mind Poemander? Take heed what thou
say: I the Mind come unto Men that are holy, and good, pure, and merciful,
and live piously, and religiously, and my Presence is a help to them, and
forthwith they know all things, and lovingly they supplicate and propitiate the
Father, and blessing him, they give him thanks, and sing Hymns unto him, being
ordered, and directed by filial affection, and natural love, and before they
give up their Bodies to the Death of them, they hate their Senses, knowing
their Works and Operations.

Or rather, I that am the Mind it self, will not suffer the Operations, or
Works, being the Porter and Doorkeeper. I will shut up the entrances of Evil,
and cut off the Thoughtful Desires of filthy Works.

But to the foolish, and evil, wicked, envious, and covetous, murderous,
profane. I am far off giving place to the revenging Demon, which applying unto
him the Sharpness of Fire tormenteth such a Man sensible, and armeth him the
more to all wickedness, that he may obtain the greater Punishment: and such a
one never cease having unfulfillable Desires, and unsatiable Concupiscences,
and always fighting in Darkness. For the Demon afflicts, and tormenteth him
continually, and increases the Fire upon him more and more. For the Soul
entering into the Body of Men if it continue evil, shall neither taste of
Immortality, nor is partaker of the Good.

But the Soul of Man which is pious and religious is Angellical and Divine; and
such a Soul after it is departed from the Body, having striven the strife of
Piety, becomes either mind or divine; and the strife of Piety is to know GOD,
and to injure no Man, and this way it becomes Mind. But into a pious Soul the
Mind entering, leads it into the Light of Knowledge: and such a Soul is never
satisfied with singing Pra^se to GOD, and doing good to all Men, both in Words
and Deeds; always doing good in imitation of her Father. And this Mind in Men
is GOD; and therefore are some Men Divine, and their Humanity is near Divinity.
For the good Demon called the Gods Immortal Men, and Men Mortal Gods.

Man had more than all living Creatures, and the World, because of his Speech
and Mind; also Man became the Spectator of the Works of GOD, and wondered, and
acknowledged the Maker; for he divided Speech among all Men, but not Mind, and
yet he envied not any, for Envy comes not thither, but is of abode here below
in the Souls of Men that have not the Mind.

But wherefore, Father, did not GOD distribute the Mind to all Men?

Hermes. Because it pleased him, Oh Son, to set that in the middle among all
Souls as a Reward to strive for. And where has he set it? Hermes. Filling a
large Cup, or Bowl, he sent it down, giving also a Crier, or Proclaimer, and he
commanded him to proclaim these things to the Souls of Men. Dip, and wash thy
self thou that art able, in this Cup, or Bowl, thou that believe that thou
shall return to him that sent his Cup, thou that acknowledgest whereunto thou
were made: As many therefore as understood the Proclamation, and were Baptized,
or dowsed into the Mind, these were made partakers of knowledge, and became
perfect Men, receiving the Mind; but as many as missed of the Proclamation,
they received Speech, but not Mind, being ignorant whereunto they were made, or
by whom. But their Senses are just like to bruit Beasts, and having their
temper in Anger and Wrath, they do not admire things worthy, but wholly
addicted to the Pleasures and Desires of the Bodies; they believe that Man was
made for them. But as many as partaked of the gift of God; these, Oh Son, in
comparison of their Works, are rather immortal than mortal Men, comprehending
all things which are upon Earth, and which are in Heaven, and lifting up
themselves so high, they see the good, and seeing it, they accounted it a
miserable Calamity to make their abode here, and despising all things bodily,
and unbodily, they make haste to the one and only. Thus, Oh Son, is the
knowledge of the Mind, the beholding of divine things, and the understanding of
GOD, the Cup it self being divine. And I, Oh Father, would be baptized and
drenched hearin Hermes. Except thou first hate thy Body, Oh Son, thou can not
love thy self, meaning the Soul; but loving thy self, thou shall have the Mind,
and having the Mind, thou shall also partake of the Knowledge or Science. How
meanest thou that, Oh Father Hermes? Because it is impossible, Oh Son, to be
conversant about things Mortal and Divine; for the things that are, being two
Bodies, and things Incorporeal, where is the Mortal, and the Divine, the
Election or choice of either is left to him that will choose, for no Man can
choose both; and of which soever the choice is made, the other being climinished
or overcome, magnifieth the act: The choice of the better therefore is not only
best for him that chooses it by defying a Man, but it also shows Piety and
Religion toward GOD, but the choice of the worst destroys a Man; for God is
innocent or guiltless; but we are the causes of Evil, preferring them before
the good.

Therefore, whether are you carried, O Men, drunken with drinking up the strong
Wine of Ignorance, which seeing you cannot bear, why do you not vomit it up
again? Stand, and be sober, Look up again with the eyes of your Heart, for the
malice of Ignorance surroundeth the Earth, and corrupts the Soul, shut up in
the Body, not suffering it to arise at the Haven of Salvation: Suffer not your
selves to be carried with the great stream, but stem the Tide, you that can lay
hold of the Haven of Safety, and make your full course toward it; seek one
that may lead you by the hand, and conduct you to the door of Truth, and
Knowledge, where the clear Light is, that which is pure from Darkness, where
there is not one drunken, but all are sober, and in their Heart look up to him,
whose Pleasure is to be seen; for he cannot be heard with Ears, nor seen with
Eyes, nor expressed in words, but only in Mind and Heart.

But first, thou must tear in pieces, and break through the Garment thou
wearest, the web of Ignorance, the foundation of all mischief, the bond of
Corruption, the dark Coverture, the living Death, the sensible Carcass, the
Sepulcher carried about with us, the domestical Thief, which in what he loves
us, hates us, envies us. Such is the hurtful Apparel wherewith thou art
clothed, which draws and pulls thee downward, lest looking up, and seeing the
Beauty of Truth, and the good that is reposed therein, thou should hate the
wickedness of this Garment, and understand the traps and ambushes which it has
laid for thee, filling what it presents unto thee with hateful Pleasures, that
thou can neither hear what thou should hear, nor see what thou should
to understand so great a GOD.

Here you may see, what I have delivered to you is no Fancy or Imagination of
my own Brain; no new Doctrine, but what came from the old Aged; for so he is
called in the old Translation, but in the new, the Aushout of days. Dan. 7.9.
From GOD the substance of all Goodness, which this excellent spirited Man bears
Record to, who if we may believe the ancient Writers, this Holy Man lived some
hundreds of Years before Moses's time, as is made out in the Epistle to the
Reader; the description of this great Treasure is said to be found engravened
upon a Smaragdine Table, in the Valley Ebron, after the Flood: If GOD ever
appeared in any Man, says the Epistle to the Reader, he appeared in him; that
a Man, who had not benefit of his Anc^^ors knowledge, being the first Inventer
of the Art of communicating knowledge to Posterity, by Writing or Engraving,
should be so deep a Philosopher, and high a Divine, seems to be a thing more of
GOD than of Men; therefore it was the opinion of some; that he came from Heaven
not born upon Earth: The Original, says the Epistle, so far as is known to us,
is Arabec, and several Translations thereof have been published, as Greek
Latin, French, and Dutch, but never English before, by the famous Doctor
Everard; so far the Epistle to the Reader. Behold, how the LORD visited the
Children of Men before the Flood, and by this blessed Man's Writing, how the
Spirit of God wrestled and strove, sending his Messengers, as it were, from
Heaven, to reform, and reclaim them from their evil ways; but they grieved his
holy Spirit, and scorned his Messengers, till they had provoked him to say,
Genesis 6.3.12. My Spirit shall not always strive with Man, but the Breath shall
cease from before me; which I have made! And then their destruction came as a
Whirlwind: And has it not been the same in all Ages? But now the beginning
has near found an end of all (...); for the Day of the LORD is come, wherein
he will do his Wonders of Old, and the Mighty GOD is risen in the Power of his
Might, to plead with all Flesh, and to destroy those from off the Earth that
will not be gathered to him in this the day of his Patience and long Suffering;
and for this end has he sent Messenger upon Messenger, Ambassador after
Ambassador to declare His Mind and Will; and not only so, but his Judgments are
now begun in the Earth, yet the Inhabitants thereof does not learn
Righteousness therefore the destroying Angel has received his Commission, and
of this you have been often warned; I am a witness for the LORD, he is clear of
your Blood; Also a few Months ago by a Servant of the LORD's, who came two
hundred Miles to deliver this Message, and the thing is come and coming to pass
which he Prophesied of; therefore, Oh King and Queen, for the LORD's sake, and
for His endless mercy sake, Take the Censer, Numb. 16.46. and put Fire of the
Altar, and Incense therein, and hasten with all your Might to make an
Atonement for the People, for there is Wrath gone out from the LORD, the
Plague is begun both in City and Country. I am a Witness of what my Eyes have
seen, and Ears heard; therefore, Oh let not the King, who is the Magistrate of
the Highest, bear the Sword of the LORD in vain, but let him be Valiant for the
Truth upon Earth, and take the courage of Joshua, the zeal of Phinehas, and the
humility of Jehoshaphat, to go forth in the Strength of the LORD to make War
with the Enemies of GOD, that keeps his Divine Majesty from His Right, to rule
in the Souls of the Children of Men, and this shall be your present and future
Happiness, to stop the profane, and boundless flood of Ungodliness, that
overflows these Kingdoms of the King and Queens Dominions; together with that
accursed Idolatrous thing, Covetousness, Hatred, Malice, Deceit,
Double-dealing, Lying, Slandring, Cheating, Treachery, betraying Trusts, and
Innocence into the hands of Murderers; besides all the Sins of Sodom, and
Jerusalem, when it was destroyed; these things brought the Wrath and Vengeance
of GOD upon them, and these Sins cries aloud, yea, louder and louder in the
Ears of the LORD GOD, for Plagues, Woes, and Vengeance, upon this Land, and
good reason for it. For you have I known, says the LORD, above all the
Families of the Earth, therefore will I punish you; you have I loaded with my
Mercies and Benefits; you have I opened the Windows of Heaven to, and showred
down Blessings upon, that there has not been room enough to receive them, you
have I brought to a Land that flows with Milk and Honey, and yet this has been
a small thing with me, says the LORD: But I have given you the Gifts and
Graces of my Holy Spirit, by which you have been made rich with the Knowledge
of my Will; but you have decked your selves with my Jewels. Ezekiel. 16. and
bestowed my Gifts upon your Lovers, and gone a whoring from me, says the LORD,
after your own Inventions; therefore thus says the LORD, Because you have
rewarded me Evils for all my Goodness, therefore will I visit you, and take away
my Corn, my Oil, my Wine, my Milk, and my Honey; because you would not serve me
in the enjoyments of all these Mercies you shall serve your Enemies in the want
of all these, except you speedily repent. O England! England! What lamentable
Lamentation shall I take up for Thee, if ever there was a Day to call for the
Mourning Women. Now it is come, therefore you that are well skilled in Mourning.
Jeremiah 9.17, 20. Come away, and do not stay, let nothing hinder you to join
with me in this Work with rended Hearts, and bowed down Souls, teach your
Daughters to mourn, and every one your Neighbor to lament, that our Eyes cast
out Teers, and Eyelids gush out Water; let us cloth our selves in Sackcloth,
and roll our selves in the Dust in Fasting and Prayers night and day, crying
vehemently and incessantly to the Lord, that we may be ready to enter into the
Ark, before the Flood comes to drown all Earthly Habitations, with their
Foundations. For all Flesh has corrupted its way, therefore the End of all
flesh is come up before the Lord, and by Fire and Sword will God plead with all
Flesh, and the Carkesses of men shall be as Dung upon the face of the Earth,
They shall die of Sickness and Diseases. I will spend mine Arrows on them, and
my Sword shall devour; yea, Flesh of Kings Captives, and Potentates of the
Earth: Thus will the Maker of all Things ease Himself of His Enemies, and
avenge Him of His Adversaries; for, because His Mercy and long Suffering will
not humble Sinners, his Righteous Judgments will.

Therefore, Oh England! England! Repent, repent, repent, otherwise what
lamentation shall be taken up for thee: Oh that my Head were full of water, and
my Eyes a Fountain of Teers, that I might weep day and night for the
Destruction that comes as a VVhirlwind upon Thee, O Land, where the Sins of
Sodom are found, where the ^ins of Jerusalem are found; where the Sins of
Jamaica and Cicilia are found; In Thee Oh Land, is found the Blood of
Innocents, in Thee is found the Cries of the Poor for Justice, thou have
wronged the VVidow and Fatherless, and robbed them of their Right, thou hate
him that reproves Sin in the Gate, and abhors any that speaks uprightly, thou
have crucified the Lord of Life afresh, and in Thee He is put to an open Shame
by Professors and Profane, by Thy lewd Abominations, which Thou secretly and
open I without Shame before the Eyes of His Glory does commit daily, eve^ one
glorying in their Abominations. The Profane, without Sham^ glories in their
Swearing, Damning, Drunkenness, Whoring, Lasc^^vious Talking, counting him the
best Man, that is most strong and acu^^ to do all these Abominations.

And on the other hand, the Professors of Religion, there is so much (...) be
said that Time would fail to rehearse: Their Pride, Excess in Apparel,
following in all things the Fashions and Customs of the Heather striving to
exceed one another in all manner of Rich and costly Atir^ and Fantastical
Dresses, some of them pleading without Shame for then others that are ashamed,
which are but few; say, they should be red ^culous, and not like other People:
Surely this is as shameless as the other.

For if Christ, His Prophets and Apostles, had done as you say, an^ do, where
had been their Testimony among the Multitude against the unfruitful works of
Darkness, which they were to have no fellowshi^ withal, but commanded to
reprove them? And where is the Cross (...) Christ you are to take up, and your
Self-denying Life, you are to follo^ Christ your Pattern in? But your
self-ended covering, Oh ye Professo^ will be too short in the Day of account,
which is swiftly coming, t^ make you bring forth your Talent, which you
slothfully and maliciously have hid in the Earth, and then receive your Portion
among the Hipo^crites.

The next to your Habit is your Houses, which are decked with all manner of
Curiosity, Richness and Delicacy, as your sinful Persons are: You great
spacious Lordly Houses, furnished with all manner of costly, ric^ and sumptuous
Furniture, which would be too tedious, and fill up much Paper to insist upon;
but your voluptuous Feeding, and excessive Feas^ ing one another, in so much
that you run out great Estates, both (...) your own and other Men's; but in
your own Families, that is, amon^ your ^ervants, many of you are very pinching
and sparing, and to the Poor little or nothing, but what you are compelled to
in your Pari^ Duties; and your poor Neighbors, many hundreds in City and Cour^
try, sits in their Houses with hungry Bellies, both of Weavers an^ others, that
knows not which way to shift for Bread for their Children some eating Bread
sparingly, and drink Water, Others getting Gard^ stuff, as Cabbage, and such
like for their Children to feed on; while you feed, Dives like, lying at your
Ease, stretching your selves upon ^ur rich Satin Beds and Couches, wallowing
in all your sinful Plea^es, not knowing what to Eat, Drink, or put on for
Richness and ^inties; and others of you Hoards up Treasure as Sand, and are n^^
satisfied, compassing Sea and Land to get Riches, adding House to ^ouse, and
Land to Land, and all for Portions for our Children, say ^ey; and thus the
Fathers eat sour Grapes, and the Childrens Teeth (...) set an edge. Thus the
Parents makes the Children to fould more: ^e Children of Hell than themselves,
by giving them that that proves ^ares, to fulfill their Lusts in Pride and
Avarice; and so your Childrens ^od must lie at your doors: But sometimes it
falls out, that neither (...) nor your Children are Possessors of what you have
pawned your Souls, (...) made your Bodies and Minds Drudges and Slaves to the
unrigh^ous Mammon; for on a sudden the Hand of the LORD sweeps it all ^ay: This
I have seen in my time, and just is the LORD to take ^ay your Idols, your Gods
of Silver and Gold, and then your Honors ^st fall in the Dust. But what think
you that calls your selves Christi^s? Was this the End of your Creation? Did
God create you for this ^d to serve your Lusts? And you that pretends to be
called out of the ^orld, that is, to separate your selves from the Church of
England, that think you? Is this the End of your Calling, to bury your selves
(...) the Earth, to run a whoring from the LORD after your Idols, ^ur Gods of
Silver and Gold, your Earthly Minds? Are not you of the ^rth Earthly? Was this
the End of your Calling, to take up your Rest (...) great Houses, great Trades,
great Gain? That you may consume it up^ your Lust, your Pride, fashioning your
selves after the Modes of ^e Heathen, some in Rich and Gorgious Atire, others
in plainer, but ^ch and costly, and both you strive to exceed one another in
Princely ^ouses, stately Furniture, your Brass and Irons must glitter in your
^es, like the furbished Gold and Silver; your Cabinets shines, that if ^u
wanted Looking-Glasses you might view your Pride in them, the ^oards of your
Rooms so exceeding white or shining brown, that a clean ^^ind knows not how to
tread on them. Now you that are Dissenters ^om the Church of all Sorts and
Sects, from the Presbiter to the Inde^endant, from the Independent to the
Baptist, from the Baptist to the ^uaker; View your selves here, and see how far
you differ from the church of England in the Practical Part; and because you
are all one in ^ur Lives and Conversations, therefore you must have your
Portions (...) gether: For what though you are all crying low here, and low
there, ^e says in this Form, and another says in that Form GOD is to be
^orshipped in, and they that will not sit down with you in your Forms, you
persecute them, so far as your Power goes, to Death if possi^ with your
Tongues, where the Poison of Asps are under, and sharp than a two edged Sword
to slay the Innocent. All be it, the LORD has said, The Innocent and
Righteous, thou shall not slay, and those that a^ not what you would have them
to be, to my knowledge some (...) you will not suffer them to buy nor sell; And
is not this the man of the Beast? But wherein do you differ from the Church of
England Except that formerly they were more liberal to the Poor, than y^^ in
building Almshouses, and allowing a constant maintenance f^ them, which
indeed, has been much more formerly than now; for (...) is with them as it is
with you, because Iniquity does abound, therefore the love of many grow cold.
But you Covetous, Earthly minde^ Professors of all sorts, your niggardly
pinching the Poor, your givin^ five, ten, twenty or Forty Shillings, nay, five,
ten, twenty Pounds^ (though who is so liberal) will not excuse you that have
Hundreds, an^ Thousands, and many Thousands lying by a year will not excuse you
before the LORD of the whole Earth, when His Majesty calls you to an account
what you have done with his Treasure he committed to you^ Trust, to serve him,
and his Creation: Will you say, we hoarded i^ up by us; or will you say, We
gave it our Children for their Por^^tions, to live in Pride and Luxury; Then
will the LORD of the Creation say, You ^ennogades, durst you presume to run a
Whoring afte^ your Idols, spending your precious time in hunting after the
treasur^ of my Earth, though to the hazzarding my utter displeasure? Because
you went not in my Counsel, nor waited in my Fear, to know my Mind and Will in
your gettings, and when you should cease from the encumbrance of the World,
that when you had got sufficient for Food and Raiment, you should therewithal
have been contented: For I have said, I will never leave, nor forsake them that
walks in my Fear. But if I had blessed you with overplus, then to have waited
upon me for^ Counsel how to order the rest to serve me in my Members, making
plentiful Provision, not only for them of your own Judgment, but for all sorts,
that the Widow, Fatherless, and Strangers may have no want, that they may be
the fitter to serve me their Creator, in all Humility, and Holy Reverence. But
I may say to you, as the Apostle said, You bastardly Generation of Christians,
who are Strangers to his Sowship; How comes it that you must enjoy all the good
things of God's Creation? Did the wise Disposer of all things give you the
precious things of his Creation for to spend them upon your Lusts? Was it so in
the Beginning? O no. Yet GOD saw in the Beginning what would ensue, (...) Man,
that was without the Knowledge of GOD, was left to himself, he would be like
the Beast that perishes; therefore, the wise Creator, in his Eternal Wisdom
made a Law for a limit to his unbridled ^ust, by several Precepts and
Injunctions in the Law, where he express^y tied them by several distinct
Precepts to very large Contributions, and Communications of their Estates,
mounting in all, it may be, to more than a sixth part of their Yearly Incomes;
And was there such ^are taken then by that which was imperfect? How much more
now ^ught there to be by them that are come to the Law of Christ, that fulfils
all Righteousness, which says, Thou shall love thy Neighbor as ^hy self; for
Christ is the end of the Law, in Him the Law is ful^illed; likewise, those that
are come to Christ, and put Him on, who ^re regenerated, and born again, they
are become new; old things are ^ast away, and all things are become new; the
old Covetous, Earthly Spirit is taken away, and a noble, generous, free Spirit
in the room, ^ike their LORD and Master, who gives liberally, and upbraids
^one, but feeds and clothes his Enemies richly and bountifully, and who are
Christians indeed, are like him; as witness, when his Spirit was poured out
from on high, how they sold their Possessions, and distri^uted to every one as
they had need but the Covetous died the Death; as Saphira and his Wife, Acts
5.2. who dealt deceitfully with GOD and his People, in keeping back the Lord's
due, when he required it. Consider this, you that forgets God, lest he tear you
in pieces, and there be none to deliver you: But you Worldlings of all sorts,
you have had a long time to consider these things, from one Generation to
another, and though you have heard and seen your Brother Worldlings taken away
before your Eyes suddenly, without Repentance, yet this will not stop you from
your eagerly grasping up together with the Expense of your most precious Time,
which is worth a World upon a dying Bed, when Conscience is awakened, and
instead of giving up your Strength and Might to wait upon the LORD, with all
diligence, crying mightily to Him for His Power and Strength, to cresist all
the Temptations of Sinful Flesh; you give up your Strength, Might and Care, to
grasp and heap up Riches, as if all your happiness wholly consisted in the
abundance of the things you enjoy in this Life; so that here you deny Christ,
his Doctrine and Practice, who said. No Man can serve two Masters. Ye cannot
serve said he, GOD and Riches; therefore I say untoyou, Be not careful for your
Life what ye shall eat, or what ye shall drink, nor yet for your Body what ye
shall put on; and then send you to the Fowls of Heaven, and the Flowers of the
Field to learn of them your Duty to him. Oh! ye Worldlings of all sorts, How
far short are you of being obedient to these Heavenly Precepts, and the
fulfilling this precious Doctrine? You Wealth-mongers who hurry you selves
almost out of your Wits to get Money, the love of which is the Root of all
Evil, laying Bag to Bag, till it comes to Hundreds and Thousands: But how much
have you laid by to serve the Lord, and your Fellow Creatures, Necessity, it
may be, five, ten, twenty Shillings, and in this you would be counted Liberal,
and by some poor Creatures that are in great Necessity you are so; but in the
Eyes of the Lord you are counted Vile and Churlish: But, Oh! ye Hard-hearted
Professors and Cruel of all sorts, that suffers your Fellow Creatures that are
made of the same Flesh, Blood and Bones that you are made of, some to Starve,
and others to want Food and Raiment, and you have your Hundreds and Thousands.
But what is the Reason of these things? Why the same Reason may be given, that
was to the Israel of old. This People has an unfaithful and rebellious Heart,
they are departed and gone, for they say not in their Hearts, Let us now fear
the Lord our God that gives Rain both early and late, in due Season, he that
reserveth to us the appointed Weeks of the Harvest. Yet, says God, your
Iniquities have turned away these things, and your Sins has withheld good
things from you.

For amongst my People are found wicked Persons, that lay wait as he that
sets Snares, they have made a Pit to catch Men, as a Cage is full of Birds,
so are their Houses full of Deceit: Thereby they are become Great, and waxen
Rich, they are waxen fat and shining; they do overpass the Deeds of the Wicked,
they execute no Judgment, no not the Judgment of the Widow and Fatherless, yet
they prosper, though they Execute no Judgment for the Poor. Shall I not visit
for these things, says the Lord, or shall not my Soul be avenged on such a
Nation as this. Oh London, London, how often has this Scripture been brought
to me for thee, and for thy Inhabitance, Oh! Land. Jerem. chap. 5.

Shall not my Soul be avenged on such a Nation as this: And upon the like
occasion in another place, says he, Ye I will feed this People with Wormwood,
and give them the Waters of Gaul to drink, Jerem. 9.15. And did he not avenge
his righteous Cause upon Sicily and Jamaica, and did he not give them Waters of
Gaul to drink when he did destroyed them, and their Pride, Lusts, Cruelty, Hard
heartedness, Covetous, Earthly mindedness, and altogether; and do you think to
escape the righteous Judgments of God, that knows all these things and yet live
in the same Sins to provoke the Eyes of his Glory: No, you shall surely drink
of the same Cap except you speedily repent, the Mouth of the Lord has spoken
it, and your outward Services, your outside Profession of God and Godliness,
your Religious Duties, your Holy Orders. From the Throne to the Dunghill in
Profession out of the Life of Jesus, shall not be able to deliver you from the
Plagues and Judgments that is to come, and coming speedily upon this Land,
without a sincere Repentence, for the Earth groans to be delivered of such
Hipocrites, such useless Branches that brings forth no Fruit neither to God nor
Man. But again, to the former Christ said, Thou shall love the Lord thy God
with all thy heart, with all thy Soul with all thy Strength, withal thy Might,
and thy Neighbor as thy self, for upon these two hang the Law and the
Prophets: So then here is the very stint of Religion, now how far this goes
must be examined into. And God said Thou shall have no other Gods but me; now
if it had not been for this Command, the Flesh might have said, These are thy
Gods Oh Israel that brought thee out of Egypt, thy Silver, Gold and precious
Stones has wrought all thy wonderful and unheard of Deliverances; for you know
they made a Calf of their Treasures, and danced about it, whilst Moses was with
God in the Mount receiving a Law against all such Abominations: And now the
Lord of the whole Earth is come again to search out the Iniquity of our Times,
and are not you found in the same Steps of your Forefathers, serving your Gods
of Silver and Gold, and all worshipping the Works of our own hands, admiring
your selves, ways and works, Adoring them as Gods, although the LORD has
commanded, saying, Thou shall have no other Gods but me: So here is the Breach
of this Command, and also of the other two; for Christ said we cannot serve GOD
and Mamon, therefore if you give your Love to any of these, GOD cannot have
All: Then how much less has he when all your hearts, all your Souls, all your
Strengths, all your Mights, all your Loves and Delights is given up to serve
your Idols of Silver and Gold, your Pride, Self-Interrsts, Glories and Honors;
these have your Hearts, these have your Loves and Delights, and whilst these
your perishing Gods have all, the Everlasting GOD your Creator and Maker must
have none. And thus you (...) God of his Right, and turns his Glory into shame;
and again, Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self: Pray consider how far
this Command extends, for Christ brings it into an equal Competition; do you
suffer your selves to want any Food or Raiment, or other Necessaries that is
fitting for your outward Body to serve its Necessities, the same care you
should take for your Neighbor, that their Bodies and Minds might be the fitter
to serve their Maker with all humble Thanksgiving; and Christ said, Whatsoever
ye would that Men should do unto you, do ye that unto them.

I humbly gave the Queen in writing how the aforesaid might be accomplished,
but if your are wanting in this your Duty to your Neighbor, how will you
perform the weighty Matters of the Law, for this is, as it were, but the
External Service, the outside Duty of Christianity, yet no Christians, nor no
Exceptance with Christ without it, which Christ calls the Unrighteous Mamon,
Wherein, says he, if you are unfaithful, who shall commit to you the true
Riches; so that when you have performed all the Will of God in this point, and
made your Neighbor equal, so far as I have treated of: Nay, if you shall give
all your Goods to the Poor, as some have done, that have not had that knowledge
of God, that you have which shames you, and will be a swift Witness against you
in the Day of Account: yet hear as I said before, you must not rest, for this
is but one part of your Duty of Christianity: the neglect of which has been
the cause of so many Thieves and Robbers in the Land: This is the outward
Service that is not to be left undone. But there is further Service, an inward
Service, wherein you must give your selves all up to GOD for him to work in you
all his good pleasure, whereby he may transform thee into himself, to be made
like unto him in all things. But, for the carrying on of this Great Work, thou
must wait upon GOD in silence, in the silence of all flesh, and suffer him to
speak: pray work and do all in thee, for hear the LORD will disrobe thee of all
thy Gifts and Parts, and strip thee stark naked as ever thou was born; For
naked thou came into the World, and naked must thou return. Stripped not only
of thy filthy Garments spotted by the Flesh; but all the Riches of thy Spirit,
before thou art clothed with change of Raiment, the rich Robes of Eternal Life;
for it is the poor in Spirit that receives the Kingdom.

Hear the Soul stands naked, having nothing of its own, neither Words nor Works
to present it self before the LORD: nothing but its Poverty, its Nothingness,
its Insufficiency, bringing all its little Ones before the Eyes of his Glory,
to move His Excellency, to cast His Eye of Mercy and tender Compassion, and
spread the Skirt of His Eternal Love over it. Here Is the place where GOD will
work Wonders: hear he will arise in the Power of His Might, and make bare His
Glorious Arm for the Soul's deliverance. Hear the highest makes a Covenant with
His Jehoshuas, His chosen Ones, saying, If you will walk in my ways and keep my
watch, then thou shall Judge mine House, and shall also keep my Courts, and I
will give thee a place among them that stand. Zacharia chap. 3.

Here Is the Reward of all your Travels, of all your Warfare, of all Wrestlings,
of all your Holy Violence to take the Kingdom of Heaven by force: Here Is the
Reward of self-denial and self-abhorrence, for the Soul that would be united to
Christ, must be conformable to Him, following him in the ways of His internal
Sufferings, that purifies the Soul from the pollutions both of Flesh and
Spirit, and hear it arrives at the Mystical silence, where he speaks to it
alone in the most secret and hidden parts of the Heart, where He teaches it the
most perfect and exhalted Wisdom; therefore thou art to keep thy self in this
Mystical silence, if thou will hear this secret and heavenly Voice: for the
perfection of the Soul consists not in speaking much of GOD, but in Obedience
and in loving Him, so much as belongs to Him, and you know how much CHRIST
says that is: But your silent sublime Meditation is that Elias was in, when he
heard the still soft Voice in Horch, the Mount of GOD: which signifies the
Mount of Regeneration, where the Soul is retired and shut up in GOD from all
the hurrings and busiles of the World, and the deeper its gets into this
innermost Center, the more dead it is, not only to the World and the Concerns
thereof, but to it self in all things whether External or Internal, it serves
the very necessity of Nature with Grief, thinking all time to much that is
spent in any thing, but in waiting upon GOD alone; and this is its continual
Exercise to enter into it self, there to abide with GOD in perfect Unity and
Resignation, and being so disinterested and taken off from self, that though it
should fulfill all the Commands of CHRIST that concerns GOD and its Neighbor,
and should leave nothing undone of the Duty of a true Christian; yet, it makes
no account of all this before His Divine Majesty; nay, though they being in such
an Estate as to receive many wonderful Gifts and supernatural Graces; yet they
are not lifted up with vain conceit, nor prides themselves in these rich Robes,
but are just as if they had received nothing, being always humbled in the depth
of their own unworthiness, and ever kept in a holy Fear and inflaimed Love to
GOD; which shows that the Creature exhalted in Gifts, is Lucifer: But the Soul
thus adorned with Heavenly Graces in the Humility, is CHRIST JESUS come again
in the Flesh; therefore this is the Spirit that is to be uppermost, whether in
Prosperity or Adversity if you would have GOD to be your Teacher; for the
humble GOD will teach: I mean the Humility of CHRIST who emptied Himself of all
His Glory both Heavenly and Earthly, and humbled himself to the death both in
Body and Mind, John 30. Luke 22. and 44. both in Soul and Body were his
sufferings: And if we are his Disciples, we must tread in His steps, we must
first die to self, before we can live to God: the true Figure is a Corn of
Wheat, says CHRIST, John 12.24. and the more dead the Creature is in it self,
and to it self, the more it shall know and please GOD: but if it does not mind
this continual denying of self and internal Mortification, it will never arrive
at this state of perfection; but through this Baptism of Fire and the Holy
Ghost, this inward Hearts-breaking, Soul-suffering, these Faithful Ones comes
to wash there long-suffering Robes, and makes them white in the Blood of the
Lamb, for these are redeemed from the Earth and all perishing and transitory
Things; and therefore have the Harps of GOD in their hands to sing the Song of
Moses and the Lamb: for from these internal Soul-sufferings, comes the Eternal
Heavenly Triumphant Joys; therefore lift up your Heads ye tribulated Ones, that
are surrounded with Sorrows both within and without: look up to the Rock whence
ye are hewn; but look not to Man for help, whose Breath is in his Nostrils, for
then it will be just with the Highest to say to you, as he did to them of Old,
Jer. 2.28. call upon your Gods, let them deliver you; but look unto me, says
the Everlasting, all ye ends of the Earth and be saved: but look not at the
Creature howsoever they may be suffered to try and prove you; but keep your Eye
to your Savior's Beauty, which is Patience, Meekness, and Longsuffering, let
these be ever in your Eye; but cast not your Eye upon the Instrument, who, or
whatsoever they may be, for that will beget anger and wrath in your minds, and
then you will loose the end of your Sufferings; for all these things are
suffered to be to wean you off the Creatures, to let you see the emptiness and
nothingness of all things that has a beginning even to your selves, and this is
the way to make GOD all, and the poor empty Creature nothing.

But whatsoever your Trial is, or with whomsoever, be shure, you keep in the
Love that thinks no Evil, no, not to the greatest of all your Enemies, and then
you will be ready upon all Occasions to do them any Office of Love, as the
Power is in your hands, and their Necessity requires, and thus you will fulfill
the Royal Law of CHRIST your Lord, who said love your Enemies, do Good for
Evil, overcome Evil with Good, that you may be the Children of your Heavenly
Father, who causes His Glorious Sun to shine upon the Just and the Unjust, and
so your Prayer shall be heard, when you say, Lord forgive us our trespasses
against thee, as we forgive them there trespasses against us; and thus will the
Righteous Judge of the whole Earth, take the Cause of the Innocent in His Hands
and plead it with their Enemies, for vengeance is mine, says the Lord, and I
will repay, for it is as Dindimus said to Alexander the Great, He is a Judge of
all injuries, and the Sighs of those that are injuriously treated, become the
pain of those that injure them. But as was said before to you Servants of the
LORD, whom he has counted worthy to be partakers with Him of His Internal and
External Sufferings to be rejected of all, denied, condemned, and tempted
within and without, in Fears and Dreads, in Weakness, in Watchings and
Fastings, with Tears of sorrow Night and Day; led into the Wilderness and there
tempted, tried in the Night with great Temptations, led in a Way you know not,
nor see no way out; but as it were passing by the Gates of Hell, and none pity
nor take your part: Hear your Love to GOD will be proved to the uttermost,
whether you will follow your beloved LORD and holy JESUS in His suffering Life,
who trod the Wine Press alone, and of the People there was none with him; who
was compassed with Sorrows on every side: He that was in such a Labyrinth of
sorrows as never Man was, he saw no comfort neither in Life nor Death, above
him nor below him from God or Men; were our Condition as bad as his, if it were
possible that we were in the very midst of the heat and fire of Affliction,
when the flood of Temptation arises an hundred fold above your strongest hold,
yet here you may be at rest in your beloved LORD, in an assured confidence that
all things shall work together for your good that loves the LORD, although you
may cry out and say, as I know a Soul that did, Was ever any Sorrows like unto
mine? Did ever any go this Way before me? The immediate Answer was, Yes, Moses,
and all the Prophets, and JESUS the author and finisher thereof: Therefore thou
art compassed about with a cloud of Witnesses, when upon an invisible sight, I
said, O my God, Must there be yet more fire? then He said unto me, In the Fire
and in the Water I will be with thee, and make thy way through all. I believed
the LORD, and was strengthened, and his powerful Word was my Salvation:
Therefore you that are brought into these fiery Trials, have a care you murmur
not, neither desire his hand to be removed till all is consumed, that is, for
the Fire in this fiery Baptism, and if you continue faithful to the end of your
Purification in Patience and Long-suffering, diligently attending upon His Hand
alone, for His redeeming Power to redeem you from the Earth, and all perishing
things, whose Fan is in his hand, and he will thoroughly purge his Floor, and
gather his Wheat into his Gardner, but the Chaff he will hurn up in this
unquenchable fire, and then you shall come forth as the Gold seven times
refined: And farther, take this from one that has upon Trial proved it, for
your comfort and encouragement in your Journey, that the more diligently you
wait upon him in all Conditions you pass through, even so much the more shall
you receive of his virtuous Life, and heavenly Power, for by this your
continual secreet converse and invisible Union with the Everlasting GOD; you
will come to be so filled with his divine Love, that your Mortal will be
swallowed up of the Immortal, so that it will become your whole Life, and all
your Thoughts, Words and Works will have their Rice and settled Habitation
therein, but then you must be sure let nothing come out of the fire unconsumed;
for hear lies the stress of all, your giving up all, that which is for the
Sword to be cut off, and that that is for the Fire to be burnt up; for if you
keep any thing back that GOD requires to be offered up, of any Darling-sin, or
beloved Dalalie; whether Love to the World, Name or Fame, together with the
whole Catalogue that belongs to Self, for if Self be in any case whatsoever,
you must lay the Ax to the Root of that Tree, and with all your Strength and
Power cut it down, for if the Root remains, the fruitless Tree will grow,
therefore Self the accursed Thing must be found out and destroyed. Joshua
7.11.22. Before you can prosper in this Holy War, to get the Victory over all
your Enemies, for you know a faithful Soldier intangles not himself with the
Affairs of this Life, but gives up all to follow him that has chosen him,
counting nothing dear to them, nor any thing hard to endure for the hope of
obtaining the Victory, and I entreat you consider how intent he is in the
Fight, Does he mind any thing but striking at the Enemy? No, for if he did, he
could not overcome, it is so in the spiritual Warfare of the Soul: It counts
nothing dear that it may win him CHRIST JESUS, thinking no time long, nor any
thing hard to endure, for the Joy and Beauty that is set before it; of its
beloved Lord, who went before through the bitter Agony of Soul, and bloody
Passion, with Mockings, Slanders, Reproaches, Hatred and Malice of his cruel
Enemies, and ignominious Death for thee, and the Redemption of thy Soul from
all Iniquity, if thou follow Him the Captain of thy Salvation, through his
self-denial in Faith and Obedience; for it is not only given you to believe,
but also to suffer for his sake, Because Faith without Works is dead, and thus
the LORD will be found in his own way, For I am the Way, the Truth, and the
Life, and none can come to the Father but by me, says he: Here you see CHRIST
is the Way, his suffering Life is the Way he has appointed, and also says, He
that comes this Way to me, I will in no wise cast him off, but will pray to the
Father that whatsoever you ask the Father in my Name he will give it you, even
the Spirit of Truth that shall lead you into all Truth, and cut of all Error,
and will be your Strength in all Weakness, for this is that your Souls travels
for, and has such bitter Pang as a Woman in Travail, to bring forth my Will,
my most exceptable Will, therefore will I deliver you, and though you sow in
Tears you shall reap in Joy, and though you go out weeping and carrying precious
Seed, you shall return with Joy, and bring your Sheaves, 126 Psalm. 5, 6.

As one speaking his own Experience with Christ's words, said, For though Sin
the evil Seed be sown when Men sleep, and take root with Pleasure, and springs
up with Delight, yet the End thereof is Bitterness, Lamentation, and
unconceivable Wooes: But my precious Seed, says Christ, is sown with Tears,
conceived with Sorrow, and brought forth with Sighings, Nights of Watchings,
Days of Mourning, and with much labor of Spirit, and travail of Soul must you
see your desire Brought forth; and its not beating the Air that will fight your
battles, for its a against such airy Notions you are to make War, and all
Spirits of what sorts soever that would possess you with Words and Forms
without the power of Righteousness regard them not, for nothing less than
Victory over Sin will satisfy your immortal Souls: Therefore yours is Work,
and not vain Words, and for my part all is a like to me, whether in Forms, or
out of Forms, if they deny the power of Godliness in the Practical-part. I say,
as the Apostle said From such turn away, and do as Christ, my LORD and Master
did, turn from the proud Pharisees to the poor Publicans and Sinners, that
wants a Physician, and tender his loving kindness to them, for the whole needs
no Physician but the Sick, and what tho many may say we have Eat and Drank in
thy presence; nay farther, cast our Devils, and in thy Name done many wonderful
Works, but what said Christ to all this, Depart from me ye workers of Iniquity,
I know you not. This is plain and evident for you to see, if you are not
wilfully blind, its not all the outward Services of the outward Temple, nor the
outward Water, nor the Holy Duties, nor the holy and comply Orders, for the
worker iniquity has spoiled all these, and made them unholy and uncomly, But
the latter of these might uave claimed more right to the aforesaid wonderful
works: had they kept to their first works, and in the humility of Christ. But
what they had committed to them when they were in poverty of spirit, they have
decked themselves therewith, and now it serves to make a discourse of, though
they are gone from the Life of Innocence into the spirit of Craft and subtilty,
and so are got above the Cross of Christ, which is the power of GOD, into the
Liberty of of the Flesh, by which they are become Great and waren ^ich and so
bless themselves in the Earth instead of the GOD of Truth. This is Adultery,
Treachery and Whordom, therefore their Portion is with the rest, Depart from me
ye workers of Iniquity, I know you not: Others there are who have a Sight
beyond Forms, but the same Ground remains in them, as in the rest, very few
excepted that I know of; yet a more universsal Spirit of Love to all remains in
them than the rest.

Friends to you this is my Advice, Take not up your rest in your sights, tho
they should reach to the Third-heaven, without this life of Christ, I have been
a treating of; and this I can assure you it will be more for your profit when
you come together to sit in Dumb-silence, than to spend your precious time in
Discourses of your Seize; for what are all your Seize but airy
Notions if you come not to the life of Christ, for how many have seen the good
Land that never entered it; and this know, That Visions and Revelations may
cease, for how many have I heard of, and knew some that have had all these, and
yet lives evil Lives, witness Balam, who from his sight desired to die the
Death of the rightous, and that his last End might be as his: yet through
Coveteousness, which is Idolatry, by his Counsel caused Israel to commit Sin
against the Lord: though to his and their own Destruction.

Therefore this is a sandy Foundation to build on, but if you build on CHRIST,
the Cornerstone, the tried precious and Elected-stone, chosen for that use
whom the Master Babel-builders have rejected, which is the cause of all their
Confusion, these have conceived a Faith in the air, and therefore bring forth
nothing but Storms, and pestious Winds, striving without Foundations, and so
are driven to and frow, but brings nothing to perfection, and therefore must be
all thrown down, and not one stone left upon another before the Holy City, the
New Jerusalem, which comes down from God, can be; but therefore as was said
Sights, Visions and Revelation are little worth, but to condemn those that have
them, if they do not answer the End for which they were given them, to wit, a
holy, pure, and undefiled life, which is the End of all gifts.

And farther, I know a Soul could write a Volume of Sights, Visions and
Revelations which she has had above these thirty Years, and some that were
given highly to justify her Ways and Works when she was little in her own
Eyes, and nothing in her own sight, it may be Judging and condemning her self
for that which he in his Exalted Power has justified her, and for confirmation
has taken her upin to the bosom of his love where she enjoyed close and
amorous Embraces, His sealing to her the precious promises of His Glorious Life
and Eternal Love.

And now among the many Sights, Visions, and Revelations, she may instant one
in three Years abstainency, sometimes fasting two Days and two Nights together,
sometimes three Days and three Nights, and at the time of this sight, three
Days and three or four Nights together, she being at this time in great Travail
of Soul, and suffering in Body, with conflicts of Spirit, she poured out her
Complaint before the LORD, and said: Oh! my LORD, If I have found favor in thy
sight, and what I have done be pleasing unto thee, show a Token of Good to thy
Handmaid, that may be as an Anchor to my poor troubled Soul: And that very
Night she had a Vision of an invisible Glory, which is too long to insert here,
but how it was with her is as follows.

Her Senses were all shut up in GOD, she was, in closs Communion with the LORD,
she was as she thought, wholly desolved out of the Earthly into the heavenly,
she thought she was as an innocent Child new born, and though she had fasted so
long together, yet she was filled, as with new Wine, and the heavenly Manna, by
the strength of which she declared the great things of GOD's holy Law, of his
Royal Acts, and of his heavenly Power, and she was filled with his Praise, and
then no Tongue can tell nor Pen write how it was with her, for she was as if
she had had a new Body given her in Innocence, Joy and Content, as it were,
quite translated out of the Old into the New, all over in ravishing Joy, filled
with unutterable, harmonious Praises, so lying for many hours in this heavenly
Transportation; a heavenly Silence came over all, and in this Silence these
Words were spoken aloud to her. This is the Rest wherein I will cause the Weary
to rest; this is the Life of the Innocent Swain.

And this was the Token of Good she required, which the LORD in his endless
Love Answered; This, and above a hundred times more which she never took up her
Rest in, though her Sights were attended with his ravishing Life, for these
heavenly Mansions are given as a Loadstone to draw the Soul of the down-ward
Earth up-ward, to fix it self in GOD the Fountain of all these ravishing
Streams and Beams that comes from his glorious Son of Rightousness, lifting up
himself in the Soul to draw it after him, as Himself said, When the S^n of Man
is lifted up, He will draw all Men after Him. But the time is not yet come that
He will draw all Men after him, therefore we must wait for the Day of his
Power, we must wait at Jerusalem for the Promise of the Father, which is, that
He will pour out His Spirit upon all Flesh, J^^^, for hitherto the highest
Attainment that has attended the Life of CHRIST, has been but a glimps of
that Glory that is ready to break forth were we but ready for it: But is this
the way for the Bride to make her self ready to mere the Bridegroom, for her to
pride her self with the Bridegroom's gifts, and that her rich Attier should be
the cause to take her Love and Affections off her Bridegroom, who should be
clean, humble and chaste to meet her Lord: Thus the Harlot having o^ this Attire
is taking for the chaste Spouse and virtuous Bride; but the Day of her Discovery
is at hand, wherein she shall be stripped naked and bare, and then her shame will
appear to all.

But to the aforesaid Seize, the greatest of which has been but as the
Voice of one crying in the Wilderness prepare the Way of the LORD, and make
straight ways in the Desert, for all that has been hitherto must lay their
Mouths in the Dust, and say, as John Baptis, I am not be, nor worthy to unlcose
his Shooe-latchet because I must Decrease, but He must Increase; Therefore this
is the Work of our Day, to know the increase of his Grace, of which there shall
be no End; to know in our Souls and Bodies the fellowship of his Sufferings,
and to be Baptized into his Death, and then we shall know the Resurrection of
his Glorious Life, the Lamb of GOD, that takes away the Sins of the World; who
shall change our vile Bodies, and make them like his glorious Body, to praise
Him Evermore, World without End.

Once more I have discharged my service to GOD, and Duty to you, not of my one
Mind, or Will, for had it stood with my Will I had never been concerned more
with this Generation, after I had delivered the three first books to the King
and Queen, but having delivered the last of the three, Titled to Queen Mary,
going in Fleetstreet the precious presence of the LORD accompaning Me, being
filled with Joy, and returning thanks to the LORD for his great goodness, and
manifold Mercies in given me power and strength to do his exceptable Will, and
finding my self clear, as I thought, of the Blood of all; I communed thus with
the LORD in deep humility, That if I had found favor in his sight, and that I
had finished the Work he had given me to do: then I might return to him in
peace, for my Eyes had seen his Salvation; Upon these Words a mighty Power fell
upon me, that operated in all parts of my Body, and a strong powerful Voice
Said, Arise and thrash, Oh Daughter of Sion, for I will make thy Horn, Iorn,
and thy Hoof, Brass: Upon these Words, I was greatly bowed down in deep
humility, weeping before the LORD, and humbly beging his assisting Power and
heavenly Wisdom to fulfill His holy devine Will in all things, that His pleasure
was to require of me: Then after this I wrote another Printed-book to the King
and Queen, and four Papers in writing at several times, which I delivered into
their one hands; and then after I had delivered those Writings, I wrote another
Book, which I had almost finished; but this coming so forceable upon me, I laid
that by, and this has been longer in hand than I expected when I begun it, for
indeed all things looking so ^ark and dismal, I rather expected some dreadful
Judgment would break ^orth before this Book would be finished, and seeing so
little notice taken ^n the general, of all the Patience and Long-suffering
Judgments, and bound^ess Mercies of the LORD: But all manner of Wickedness and
open Pro^hainess, appearing openly with an impudent face saying, Who is the
LORD that we should fear him: and seeing Wickedness rage as a pestilential
Fever, and the Angels of darkness let loose out of the Bottomless-pit, and Hell
^eign on Earth, I thought in my self these are the Evil-days wherein the
Prudent are to keep silence, and the Days of Vengance are at hand: I threw the
writing out of my hand, as Moses threw the Tables of Stone, out of his hand,
and concluded all in vain that was spent in labor of Love upon this
Generation, which is passing away like the Smoke of a Furnace; for thought I,
the time is come, That he that is wicked must be wicked still, and he that is
righteous shall be righteous.

But in this Exercise of Mind, the power of his Love broke in upon me, who was
never weary in Well-doing, and charged me with Neglect of my Duty that would
a-mount to his Glory, and the Good of Souls: Upon this I hastened again to the
Work I had laid a-side, and since I have grudged the time that has been spent
from it; and now I have given you an Account why it was not committed to the
Press before now.

The next is the Salutation of the Love of God to all, of what Persuasion
soever, whether in Forms, or out of Forms, through out the whole Universe that
loves no Iniquity; but the Truth as it is in Jesus, my Soul has fellowship
with you herein, and if you presevere to the end of all Iniquity, to destroy
the Root and Ground of all Evil, that the Righteous Seed which is Heir of the
Kingdom of Glory may be sown in the good Ground, which will bring forth Fruit
to God an Hundred Fold.

Friends of all Persuasions that are in this Work, all the Promises are yours,
the Blessing of the everlasting Hills is upon your heads, the Eternal God is
your Refuge, and under his Arms you shall be preserved for ever, he shall cast
out the Enemy before you, and by the Power of his Word destroy them; then
Israel, the Fountain of Jacob shall dwell alone in safety, in a Land of Wheat
and Wine; his Heavens shall drop the Dew. Blessed art thou Oh People saved by
the LORD, the Shield of thy help, which is the Sword of thy Glory, therefore
thine Enemies shall be in subjection unto thee, and thou shall tread upon their
high Places. Deuteronomy. 33.27, 28, 29. But the Hipocrite, the Proud, the Covetous,
the Malicious, the Back-biter, Lier and Slanderer shall have their Portion in
the Lake; the Self-ended shall wither, the Lukewarm, GOD will spew out; the
Wicked of the World and Sinners in Sion God will thrust a-way, as Thorns that
cannot be touched with hands, therefore must be burnt up in the place where
they stand. But unto those tha^ fears my Name, shall the Sun of Righteousness
a-rise with Healings li^ his Wings, and they shall be mine in the Day that I
make up my Jewels and I will spare you, as a Man spares his only Son that
serves him says the LORD.

As I lay on my Bed waiting upon the LORD, having my self and al^ worldly
things in a low esteem and value, humbling my self to the dust and making Self
of no Reputation, but having a wonderful great and high esteem of GOD beyond
what my Tongue is able to express, to love adore, and follow him, without the
least interest of my own, let it be ever so holy, so it be according to his
divine Will: And as I was thus giving my self all up to GOD, a powerful Voice
said, Write down thy Poverty, which I immediately did, and said

My LORD, and my GOD, that I may use no vain Repetitions to Thee, but that
which comes from me to Thee, may be the Begettings of thy own Life. Father, I
beseech Thee be Thou the Begetter of every Thought that rises in me to thee,
for then shall my Prayer be exceptable to Thee when Thou art the Father of it ^
Then may the LORD of Life and Glory say, This is my Beloved in whom ^ am well
pleased: For LORD what am I but as the Dust before Thee, who am nothing, nor
can do nothing, not so much as keep out a wandering Thought, or keep my Mind
fixed upon Thee one moment; therefore I lie in my own vileness, in my own
Corruption, who am nothing, nor can do nothing. No, righteous LORD, without
Thee I can do nothing, but in thee holy Father, and by thy Eternal Power I can
do all things, Glory be to Thee. All weakness is mine, but all Power, and
evenlasting Strength is thine: Thou Omnipotent GOD, unto whom my Heart and
Soul, Strength and Might, Poverty and Nothingness, ye, all that is within me
does ascribe unto Thee the Everlasting Majesty, all Honor and Glory, all Love
and humble Obedience, with everlasting Praises and Thanksgiving be returned
unto Thee, the HOLY ONE, Amen, says my Soul, World without End, Amen.

J. W.

And whereas it is thought by some that are strangers to me and my Writings,
that a Woman did not write these Books which I have pu^ forth, but, at least
say, that I have the help of some Man; give GOD the glory, Jone Whitrow writ
every Word, I, poor nothing unworthy Creatur^ wrote it, I cannot say whether a
Word might be mispelt and mended but otherways my Hands writ them (and can
produce many Witness that saw me write them) and I had no help, but the help
of the LORD neither has there been any hand with me, but the hand of the LORD
which was strong upon me till I had finished them: And why should it be thought
incredible for a Woman to write truth, any more than a Man? Is the Spirit of
the LORD straightned, that it cannot operate in a Woman as well as in a Man? Is
not he able to open the Mouth of an Ass? Yes, to reprove the madness of the
Prophets, that trains the People up in such blindness, and gross Ignorance:
Dare you presume to limmit the Maker of all things, to any thing that had a
beginning? Was not his first appearance to Women after his Resurrection, who
sent Mary Magdalen, and the other Mary, with the glad Tidings thereof to his
Disciples? And did he not open the heart of Lidia? And did not the Apostle Paul
say, Help those Women that are Fellow Laborers with me in the Gospel of
Christ, Philippians 4.3. And Deborah the Prophetess judged Israel, and they
came to her for Judgment, and she bid Barak go to War with Jabin the King of
Hasor, but Barak, though a Man, was timorous and fearful, and would not go
without Deborah went with him, and she sung Praise for the great Deliverance.
But the Honor of the Battle was given Jael, the Wife of Hebor, Judges 4. And
did not King Josiah, after he had heard the Law read, rent his Cloths and wept;
therefore the King commanded Hilkiah, the Priest, and Ahikam, the Son of
Shaphan, and Achbor, the Son of Michaiah, and Shaphan the Chancellor, and
Afaiah, the King's servant, saying, Go ye and enquire of the LORD for me, and
for the People, etc. So Helkia the Priest, and Shaphan the Chancellor, with the
rest of the Nobles, went unto Huldah, the Prophetess, the Wife of Shallum, who
dwelt in Jerusalem in the College, and they communed with her. 2 Kings chap.
22. Hear you may see the LORD made use of Women, as well as Men, and will make
use of them yet more; now he is coming to pour out his Spirit upon all Flesh.
Joel.

From one that is in Unity and Fellowship with all that fears GOD, and keeps
his Commandments throughout the Universe,

Jane Whitrow.

John Hall 's Vision upon the first Day of the Eleventh Month, 1692/3.
AS I went to accompany a public Friend John Cooper to a Meeting, I was,
me-thoughts as it were spiritually in a Glorious place, where I stood before
the Lord, where was also William Warin, who had there received an Errand, and,
as it were, vanished out of my sight on a sudden, and was gone to deliver it,
but I was left behind: And me-thought I saw him that sent William, bring forth
a very great golden Trumpet of a large size, and delivered it unto me, and bid
me Proclaim: And immediately after to an Angel that stood by, he delivered a
Sword, and bid him smite; and me-thoughts the sound of the Trumpet caused such
an Allarm, that it awakened the very-Dead, and as the Sound waxed louder and
louder, and the Cry great. I thought I saw Hipocrites and Back-sliders, the
sinners in Sion, hang down their Heads, nay, and after sometime quit the room,
as not being able to abide it, the Power of the LORD did wonderfully break in:
And this, by the Command of the LORD, I commit to Writing, as a Testimony for
him, which the LORD in his own due time will bring to pass. Written at my
Habitation at Monkhelsden, by a Servant of the Lord, whose outward Name is

The 27th of the 1st. Month. John Hall.

Upon the 22d. of the last Month, being the 12th. Month, my Sister Grace Hall
being at a Meeting at Raly with Jane Vickers, the Word of the LORD came unto
her saying, Write, and continued as an Exercise upon her: On the Night her
Sleep went from her, after she arose she withdrew into a Chamber, and the
following Words, word by word were given her, she not knowing the next Word as
she writ, whereof she innocently gave me an Account.

Thus says the LORD,

I Have a great Work to do in the Earth, and terrible shall it be to the
Wicked; but say unto mine Elect on this wise: Ye shall be kept in safety if ye
obey my Word, I will be with the Righteous wheresoever they are, if they will
but separate the Wicked from among them; but if they will not put away the
Wicked from among them, then shall my Hand be heavier upon the Righteous for
the Wicked's sake: And say unto the Wicked on this manner, There is yet a
little space for you, if ye will repent of your Wickedness, and Turn unto me,
says the Lord: You may read how it was in the Days of Old, it shall be no less
in this the Day of my Wrath, says the Lord; for though Noah, Daniel and Job
were righteous, and although there be some such non-a-days, yet they shall save
neither Son nor Daughter; they shall save only their own Souls. Written by
Grace Hall, being 16 Years, 3 Months, and 8 Days old.

A Letter to a Friend from Jamaca, Spanish-Town the 19th of June. 1692.
Loving Brother,
This is to give thee a true and satisfactory Account of our Misfortune: There
happened on the 7th Instant, about half an hour after 11 at Noon, a terrible
Earthquake thoughout the whole Island of Jamaca, it has not left a House
standing in the whole place, that was built of either Stone, or Brick, nor any
thing that was built with the same Meterials, but what it has made
insufficient, for though some of these stand, they are not fit to live in,
neither dare we hardly come near them, because of the frequent shakes we still
have: All those that it has pleased the Almighty to save in giving them their
Lives for a Prey, do now think a Negro's house that is walled and daubed wit^
Mortar, and Thatched, the Eves hanging down almost to the ground, a pleasant
House. Hear you may see Colonels, and great Men, bowing their Bodies to creep
into this little Hutch; who before had Houses fit not only to receive, but to
feast in an extraordinary manner, a Prince or King, as great as England's
Monarch upon ocasion, and now by this sad Disaster have hardly Bread to eat,
and never a House to be in.

The Ground opened at Port Royal, where I dwell, with a shake, and swallowed
whole Houses, nay, the Street I dwell in was in less than 3 Hours after, 4
Fathom under Water, and nothing of my House to be seen, nor any other, only one
Timber-house which George Philips lived in. The shake opened the Earth, the
Water flew up, and carried the People in quick: I lost my Wife, my Son, a
Prentice, a white Maid, and 6 Slaves, and all that ever I had in the World; my
Land where I was ready to raise five Houses, and had room to raise ten more, is
all sunk, a good Sloop may sail over it, as well as over the Point: I have not
saved a Rag, nor any Money, but I find people kind where I never thought they
would; all that it pleased God to save was my own life, my Daughter Mary, and 8
good Slaves, but I have nothing to give them to eat. Captain Gomings and
Captain Martin are both swallowed up, and Georg. Philips perished; his Wife
comes over in the Richard and S^ah.

Ah Brother! If thou did see those great Persons that are now dead upon the
Water, thou could never forget it: Great Men, who were so swallowed up with
Pride, that a Man could not be admitted to speak with them, and Women whose
Top-knots seemed to reach the Clouds, now lie stinking upon the Water, and are
made Meat for Fish, and Fowls of the Air: My heart is full, yet I cannot forget
the Mercy of God to me, and many others.

I rest thy Loving Brother John Pike.

Part of a Letter to a Friend.
AND concerning John Hall's Message, I think it may be of as great Service, as
any thing I know, for let it be so as you say, and believe that it was a
Mystery, and concerns that People he was sent to deliver it to, which, for
ought I know, may very well be. My reason is, because he was sent to them, and
to none else besides them, yet that will not quit the general, for it was
revealed to me in a Vision in King James' Reign, when his Camp was preparing
for Hounslow-heath; the Destruction of London, but the time was never yet
showed me, therefore who knows, it may be the City of London, as well as the
City of Profession, whose fair Fabric shall be laid low; and though his Message
was to that particular People, of Ruin and Destruction, my Message is to all
through the Universe, where the Iniquity is found; and for certain I say again
and again, in the Word of the LORD, That the LORD GOD Omnipotent is risen, the
Everlasting God is risen to plead with all Flesh: For this was the Word of the
Lord to me, I will sift the Nations as in Ceive, and winow them as Wheat is
winowed for the Mill. And again, said the LORD, Children shall lose their
Fundamental Laws. Again, Though Moses and Samuel stood before me, yet shall
they not Disannul what I have Decreed. But why do you think that London should
escape the Judgments of God any more than Sicily and Jamaca? Your Answer may be,
Because of the Righteous that are in it: Do you think there was not one Malines
in Sicilia, nor one Righteous-soul in all Jamaica, where the Earth opened and
swallowed up their Bodies, but their Heads left above-ground, which the Dogs
eat? Yes, I am sure there was; and there was one in the old World, and yet it
was destroyed, but the LORD knows how to deliver his Noah's, by getting them
into the Ark of his Power, and to save his just Lots, by flying out of Sodom;
his chosen Ones that cries Day and Night unto him, that no Iniquity may be
found in them, but that they may be sanctified throughout in Body, Soul and
Spirit, that they may be wise Virgins that has Oil in their Lamps, and their
Lights burning, that when the Mid-night-cry comes, they may be ready to go in
with their LORD into the Marriage-Chamber. But what think you of those
high-flown Professors of our Times, that makes such a blustring-noise about
Religion, some in Forms, and some out? That have their Hundreds and Thousands,
and yet let their Fellow Creatures want Bread, in and about the City of London:
Do you think such do not highly provoke the LORD to take away their Hundreds
and Thousands from them, or them from their Treasures, or both perish together,
by some signal and amazing Judgments? As he did in Jamaca, and other places,
who, Judas like, grudges what is spent upon the LORD in any kind whatsoever.

J. W.


