A SERMON Preached at STOW, IN THE COUNTY of BUCKS, On the Ninth of September,
1683.

BEING The Day of Thanksgiving Appointed by the KING's DECLARATION, FOR
Acknowledging God's great Mercy in Discovering and Defeating the late
Treasonable Conspiracy against His Sacred Majesty's Person and Government.

By THO: WAGSTAFFE, M.A.

LONDON, Printed by Samuel Roycroft, for Walter Kettilby at the Bishops-Head in
St. Paul's Churchyard, 168^.

PROVE. I. 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16. 10. My Son, if Sinners entice thee,
consent thou not.

11. If they say, Come with us, let us lay wait for Blood, let us lurk privily
for the Innocent without cause.

12. Let us swallow them up alive, as the Grave, and whole, as those that go
down into the Pit.

13. We shall find all precious substance, we shall fill our houses with spoil.

14. Cast in thy lot among us, let us all have one purse.

15. My Son, walk not thou in the way with them, refrain thy foot from their
path.

16. For their feet run to evil, and make haste to shed blood.


THat Solomon (by these words) did not chiefly intend to caution men against
joining with common Thieves and Robbers, against taking part with such who made
Stealing their Trade, and lay by the Highway to kill men for their Money; but
that he had a further prospect to Thieves and Murderers of a more public
nature; To such Combinations and Confederacies as would pillage a Nation, and
involve a Kingdom in Blood, seems not improbable for these following Reasons.

1. Here is a set and continued discourse, a thing carnestly pressed and
recommended for several Verses together, which is unusual in this Book, and
perhaps there is not the like instance in the whole Proverbs; which shows, that
the Matter here spoken of, is both of extraordinary weight, and also that there
is some aptness and disposition in men toward it, to be ensnared by it. Now
though it is well to persuade men from being common Rogues and Cutthroats, yet
sure there needs not much Cogency of Argument. The matter is plain and obvious,
and the least Proverbial Sentence seems to be sufficient warning. Open and
barefaced mischief needs not great Wisdom to discover, nor much discourse or
vehemence to forewarn. But there are Villainies that have Cloaks and Covers,
fair and specious shows, which require Art to unrip and take off; And there are
creeping and contagious Evils, which easily infect the inconsiderate and
unwary; the unstable and hasty are apt to swallow any Bait that is well
disguised. In these cases therefore Caution is necessary, and sure it is not a
fruitless earnestness to advise men to beware of joining with those who may
pretend they are plotting for God, and conspiring for Religion, when (in Truth)
they are only lurking for blood, and laying wait for spoil.

2. Here is Caution against Enticements, If Sinners entice thee. And do common
Thieves do this? do they go about to gain a Party, and make themselves strong
by Numbers? this is the way to ruin themselves, and to lay them open to
discovery; a few are sufficient for the purposes of stealing, and if they meet
with Men of the same complexion, they easily unite, and there needs no great
subtilty and contrivance to make them agree in the same common work; but
Associations are for the mighty Destroyers. The Government is not easily
opposed, and Rebellions and Insurrections, (how few soever the Contrivers are)
must be the work of a Multitude. Men of this Character therefore are the
Sinners that entice; They must have men to carry on their designs, and they
have Agents and Emissaries in all parts of a Kingdom, to work upon the giddy,
to seduce the unsettled or discontented. The great Enticers are the Prudent and
Politic, that are skilled in all the arts of Insinuation; that are excellent at
creating Fears and Jealousies, whetting Discontents, and raising Storms in the
minds of men; that can conjure up Dangers in the most merciful and orderly
Government, and make men believe they are lost and undone, when they are in the
happiest condition of any people in the World. These then are Enticers to
purpose, that can entice men out of their wits, that can make them believe
Impossibilities and Contradictions, and give up their Faith to things, as
irrational and unaccountable as any Fable or Romance. And to this may be added,
That to join together in common Stealing, needs not, nor can have any such
cunning Methods. What Arguments can there be to make a man a Thief? What fair
flourishes and pretenses to win a man that has any thing of Sobriety to their
Company? When they go to rob, they do not tell one another, that they rise to
secure their Property, they fight for Liberty, and associate in defense of
Religion; but the business is plain and downright Villainy. But Treason and
Sedition may be smoothed over, and there is art and contrivance to make men
swallow Rebellion. The People of Israel might be told they were a Free People,
that Solomon invaded their Liberties and Privileges, that therefore they did
but themselves justice if they took the cause into their own hands and righted
themselves; that their King was a Favourer of Idolatry; that they were Gods
People, and therefore ought to secure God's Rights as well as their own, and
not suffer any Innovation to be made in Religion; that their taking up Arms
therefore would not be Rebellion, but a Spiritual work, a setting up God's
Cause, and destroying his Enemies; That God gave the Land of Canaan only to
those that worshipped him rightly and kept his Covenant, and that they were only
the Persons; that their King, and those that adhered to him had fallen off from
God, and therefore had forfeited all their propriety in the Government and the
Land; That all the Right was devolved upon them the true Worshippers, and they
were (by Gods Donation) Heirs to the wicked and Idolatrous. And therefore in
rising against them, they did but take the best course they could to gain their
own. These or such like ways of Enticement might be used by designing Men; and
such a cause will allow of a great many slights and politic Pretenses, whereas
downright Thievery will admit of none. Men cannot be persuaded when they go to
steal and kill, that they fight the Lords Battles, and destroy the wicked and
Heathen in the Land. But Zeal and Conscience, and sanctified Pretenses may be
set up to draw men into Rebellion and Treasonable Conspiracies; and therefore
it is more likely that such were the Sinners that Solomon speaks of, that
enticed men to confederate with them. The conjunction of Thieves is but a Knot
of a few; but this is an Association, a League, a Conspiracy of many Murderers.

3. These Expressions seem to intimate the same thing; Let us swallow them up
alive as the Grave, and whole as them that go down into the Pit: We shall find
all precious substance, we shall fill our Houses with spoil.

These import greater mischief and cruelty, and greater gain than is usually
agreeable to the State of Confederate Robbers; for though they may now and then
murder men by the Highway, though they may kill men in their beds, yet what is
this to swallowing men up as the Grave, which swallows up Kingdoms, and devours
whole Generations? It Is Insurrections and Massacres that thus triumph in Blood.
Every Murderer kills a man, but it is only rebellious Leagues, and treasonable
Associations that have a stomach like the Grave, that always eat and devour,
but are never glutted nor satisfied. Neither is it for half a dozen Villains to
promise to themselves and their Associates such mighty success, as to swallow
up all before them. But deep Confederacies that are numerous and strong, that
have made a great part of the People; These may think to sweep a Kingdom, may
make their Multitudes an Argument to invite others, may encourage themselves
and their Party with the facility of their Enterprise, that they are able to
swallow men that are alive, as the Grave does dead men; They shall easily seize
them, surprise them unawares, and the quick shall fall into their hands, as the
Dead go into the Pit without struggling, resistance or opposition.

And then for that other branch, We shall find all precious substance, we shall
fill our Houses with spoil. These are not the returns of common Robberies: Men
by taking a Purse, or breaking open Houses, do not expect to lay a foundation
of wealth or greatness, by such means to enrich themselves, and gain great
Estates. But it is very profitable to fish in troubled Waters. The Commonwealth
is a great Stake, and if it might be shared, would be a handsome supply for
Avarice and Ambition. The Temple of Solomon (lately built) which being very
costly, and therefore perhaps Idolatrous, the Spoils of it would be a competent
morsel, and to be sure to kill the Heir and take his Inheritance. To seize the
Revenues of the Crown and Church, is a way Ambitious and Designing men may have
to find precious substance, and to fill their Houses with spoil.

4. Those words immediately after the Text seem likewise to favor this
Opinion, Surely in vain the Net is spread in the sight of any Bird; And they
lay wait for their own blood, they lurk privily for their own lives: that is,
Those bloody Attempts and Contrivances were in vain, they would not come to the
issue the Plotters expected; for how close and privy soever they were managed
and carried on. He (King Solomon) had knowledge of them, and in vain was the
Net spread for him in his sight; He knew their Devices and secret Machinations.
So that at length the Mischief they intended would fall on their own heads,
their laying in wait would catch their own Bloods, and their lurking privily
would turn to a Conspiracy against their own lives; for (upon Discovery) the
Law would lay hold of them, and they would be brought to exemplary Justice.

These are the Reasons, upon the account of which, I conceive, these Words of
the Wise King had a main respect to Public Mischiefs, to the Plots and Designs
of wicked Men against him and his Government. And (if I may have leave to
Conjecture) they may have a more immediate relation to the Rebellious
Principles and Practices, first set on foot in the time of David his Father;
for tho, after the defeat and death of Absalom, the King returned and governed
the Kingdom in Peace, yet it is not probable that all the Seeds of Sedition
were so soon extinguished. A Rebellious Ferment once raised in a People, tho it
may be calmed and quieted, yet it is apt to stir again upon any occasion or
opportunity. The same Principles, and many of the Persons were still in being,
and tho for some time dormant, might again be quickened by Politic and
discontented Persons, and they might again be blown up to the same Commotions,
by the same plausible Pretenses that Absalom had used before. These things
Solomon seems to have an eye to, and is vigilant against, and therefore
earnestly presses his People not to give ear to any such Insinuations. And
(this being so) the Text is a Caveat not to be enticed nor ensnared by them, My
Son, if Sinners entice thee, consent thou not. My Son, is a Compellation of
love and kindness, and denotes the Fatherly Affection he had for his People.
The King here then (if this Interpretation hits the true meaning) exhorts all
his loving Subjects not to entertain any mutinous and seditious Principles; to
beware of those Men that would tempt them into Leagues and Covenants of Blood
and Rebellion. And to enforce this upon them, he tells them that the End of
their Confederacies was only Murder and Spoil; and how fair soever they might
seem, what allegations soever of Right and Justice they might make, they were
but crafty Devices to entrap the incautelous, for in truth, Their feet run to
evil, and make have to shed blood.

In discoursing of these Words I shall endeavor,

1. To represent them in a manner suited to our own Circumstances.

2. To lay down the Iniquity of these Practices.

3. To enforce the Caution, That therefore we ought not to consent, if we are
enticed to things of that Nature.

4. To lay down some Rules, as preventive Expedients to preserve us from them.

1. To represent these Words in a manner suited to our own Circumstances. Apol.
page 74. Nos esse homines turbulentos, Regibus Sceptra de manibus eripere,
populum armare, Tribunalia evertere, Leges rescindere, possessiones dissipare,
regna ad popularem statum* revocare.
The Incomparable Bishop Jewel, in his Apology for the Church of England, when
it had been objected by the Papists, That the Protestants were turbulent Men,
that they took away Scepters from Kings, that they armed the People, that they
overturned Tribunals, that they laid aside the Laws, that they broke in pieces
men's Rights and Possessions, that they turned Kingdoms to popular States, etc.
After a sufficient detestation of all these things, and having said, That the
objecting them against the Protestants was such a Calumny as was cast upon
Christ and his Apostles, Answers thus, Page 77. Arg^on^s enim Deo nostro, cujus
haec solius causa est, gratias in omnibus regnes, ditionibus, Rebusp. quae ad
Evangel^um accesserunt, nullum unquam adhuc hujusmodi exemplum extitisse.
Nullum enim nos regnum evertimus, N^ll^us dition^m aut jura minuimus, Rempub.
nullam turbavimus. Manent adhuc suo loco, and avita dignitate Reges Angliae,
Daniae, Suetiae, Duces Saxoniae, Comites Palatini, etc. omnes eodem jure,
eodemque statu quo faerant antea vel potius, quia propter Evangelium populum
habent obsequentiorem multo meliore. Eant sane in illa loca, ubi nunc Dei
beneficio auditur Evangelium, ubi plus majestatis? ubi minus fastus and
Tyrannidis? ubi Princeps magis colitur? ubi Populus minus Tumultuatur? ubi
unquam fuit publica Res; ubi Ecclesia Tranquilltor?
We give thanks to our God, whose Cause this is, that in all the Kingdoms,
Dominions, Commonwealths, which have been added to the Gospel, there is not so
much as one Example of any such thing; for we have overturned no Kingdom, We
have diminished no man's Dominion or Rights, We have disturbed no
Commonwealths: Hitherto they remain in their own Condition, and in their
Ancient Dignity; The Kings of England, Denmark, Sweedland, the Dukes of Saxony,
the Counts Palatine, and other Protestant Principalities and Free Cities he
there names. All these (says he) have the same Rights, and are in the same
state they were before, or rather in a much better; because by reason of the
Gospel they have their People much more Obedient. Let them go into those Places
where now, through Gods Blessing, the Gospel is taught; Where is more Majesty?
Where less Pride and Tyranny? Where is the Prince more Reverenced? Where are
the People less Tumultuous? Where ever was the Commonwealth; where ever was
the Church more quiet and peaceable? Thus far Bishop Jewel. It is the Glory of
the Reformation, that as it proceeded by the most peaceable and orderly Steps,
so it held the most peaceable and orderly Doctrines. The first Reformers,
neither in Opinion nor Practice, maintained any thing that was infestuous to
Commonwealths, or injurious to Governors; and they justly pleaded, as the
Primitive Christians did, That they always paid Subjection to the Powers set
over them; that their Behavior was meek and gentle; that they always complied
with the Will of their Rulers, where they lawfully might, and where they might
not they submitted with patience, and always chose rather to suffer, than to be
turbulent, seditious and unquiet: This was the first Reformation, and this is
the true Protestant Doctrine. But alas! since that Time there has risen up
another Protestant Religion, and another Reformation; there have been a
Generation of Men of violent and furious Principles, who were for Reforming by
Destruction, whose Religion was all Zeal, (i.e.) Fire and Sword, and who
instead of Obeying, were for Fighting and Rebelling for Conscience sake. We may
remember when Conscience took the Field, and marched with Powder and Bullet, and
brought a Protestant KING to the Block. And the Deliverance we this Day thank
God for, manifests that these Principles are so far from being lost, that they
are heightened and improved. This is a degree above Rebellion, and the measures
of King-killing are advanced very high when Blunderbusses are appointed to take
off the Royal Family, and numbers of Confederates to follow the Blow. This Day
therefore is the Text fulfilled in our Ears, that there have been Sinners who
have enticed, who have said, Come with us, cast in thy lot among us, (i.e.) in
plain English, Let us join together in an Association, let us Covenant one with
another, let us lurk privily for the Innocent without cause. For the Innocent
without Cause indeed! for what Cause had the King, and His Loyal Subjects given
them, that they should pursue His Life, and thirst for their Blood? what mighty
wrong had been done, that nothing but the sudden destruction of Him and His
Royal Brother, could expiate and satisfy? This is not, this cannot be
alleged. Our Sovereign (God be thanked) is a Prince of incomparable Mercy and
Goodness; All the Nation feels His Influence and His healing Hand; His Enemies
not only live by His Favor, but thrive also by His Grace and Bounty: Some of
the Confederates themselves have by Him been advanced to great Honors and
Fortunes. And are these the Qualities that must be hunted to Death? Are these
the Wrongs for which his People must be stirred up to worry Him? Should a
Heathen hear that the KING was to be Pistol'd, His Nobles murdered, and His
Kingdom rifled, he could not but conjecture, that he was a Nero at least, a
Prince fierce and cruel; that he delighted in Oppression and Rapine; that he
killed his Subjects for Sport and Triumph, and had done some unheard of
Cruelties. But when Mildness is the most conspicuous part of His Temper; when
His Mercy is thus far like God's, as to be over all his Work;, when He is in
truth, the Breath of our Nostrils, and the Delight of our Eyes; what could
exasperate and provoke, even the worst Natures to such direful methods of
Execution? Nothing but the most fell and salvage Dispositions, such as have the
names of Men, but the Tempers of Wolves and Tigers, could engage Men to
conspire to swallow Him up alive as the Grave, and whole as those that go down
into the Pit. This is the first representing these Words accommodate to the
occasion.

2. The next is to lay down the Iniquity of these Practices; and this sure
needs no proof, it has no subterfuge, evasion, or excuse. The Rebellious
Spirits heretofore pretended the Face of Authority and a Parliamentary Power;
but what is this to Plots and Insurrections? they pretended to raise Men by the
Kings Power, tho against His Person; and will His Politic Capacity extend
likewise to authorize secret Devices and Treachery? They called their Forces
the King's Armies, tho they fought against Him; and are these the King's
Contrivances, and the Kings Associations too, which were intended to murder
Him, and overturn His Government? They then called the People out to fight the
Lords Battles; but surely they will not call these the Lord's Plots, and the
Lord's Conspiracies. These things are too obvious, and the most Cunning and
Politic can never clap such a Face and Disguise on them, as shall make them
appear otherwise than hideous and monstrous. Our Savior practiced his own
Religion the most exactly, and then his Apostles, and next after them the
Primitive Christians; all these suffered under the Iniquity of their
Governors: And what do they all but practice and preach Patience, Meekness,
Gentleness, Submission and Obedience? They do not revile nor resist Authority;
they do not associate together to pull down the Government, much less lay Plots
to entrap the Lives of their Governors. Suffering and Patience was Gospel
then, and Resistance and Sedition was Sin in those days. But sure we need not
go to Religion to disprove this, Common Honesty will lay open its Vileness;
such Practices are without, not only the Example of any good Christian, but of
any indifferently honest Heathen. Even Turks and Jews detest such things: All
Governments and all Commonwealths have abhorred Plots and Treacheries; and
those engaged in them have, by all sorts of Men, been esteemed the Pests of
Government, and the Bane of all Society. To conspire the death of any Man has
been always horrid and infamous; but to lurk privily for the Blood of Kings,
and turn a Kingdom into slaughter, is a Mischief of that magnitude, that we
want words to express it. For as there are things of a transcendent Excellency
which are too high to be pourtraited by Speech, and are better admired and
conceived than discoursed of; so there are likewise things of a contrary
transcendency, Abominations not capable of Expression, which are wicked even
beyond words, and surpass description, by reason of their Vileness. If
therefore you would conceive, for I cannot express, the Iniquity of those
Practices, Put your Thoughts into the most black and gloomy posture, conceive
an Action that a Jesuit would startle at, muster up the bloody Villainies that
Histories afford us; remember Ravilliac that stob'd Henry the Fourth of France,
reflect on the Holy League, when so many thousand Protestants were butchered:
Consider the Powder Treason, which was to blow up the King and the Parliament;
cast into your minds the Groans and Cries of the massacred by the Rebels in
Ireland; and to these add the lamentable Miseries of our own Civil Wars. All
these sad and ghastly things put together, may give us some Character of the
business before us; for all these perhaps were allotted for our Doom: And who
can tell the Miseries of a Kingdom without a Head, and Fury and Slaughter
ranging in every corner of it? Who can express the dismal Consequences, when a
Good KING shall be taken off by salvage Villains, and His Loyal People left at
the mercy of Cruel and Blood-thirsty Men?

3. Enforce the Caution, That therefore we are not to consent, if Sinners
entice us to confederate in such Practices, For their feet run to evil, and
make haste to shed blood. And this sure is Argument enough to hinder Men from
being taken by such Enticements, for let the Proposals be never so large, the
Means to accomplish it never so feazable, yet if they are to end in Blood, it is
an amazing Discouragement; tho precious substance is to be found, and our
Houses thereby to be filled with spoil, yet if they are to be got by Murder, it
will stop any Man of but indifferent Principles from the Undertaking. And
surely Assassinating a KING, and killing His Nobles and Magistrates, and
turning a Kingdom into Blood, is Murder with a Witness. What Arguments the
Principal Confederates might use to entice others, and what horrid Salvo's they
might pick up for their Consciences, must be uncertain in such dark and secret
Conspiracies: But it is certain that none of those Maxims of Rebellion, which
in the late Times were spread abroad to seduce the Multitude, could have any
color of Pretense here; 'Twas then pretended, that the King levied War against
his Parliament; that they fought not against Him, but his evil and malignant
Counselors, and designed no more but to bring Him to his Parliament, the great
Council of the Nation, and the King's best Councellor: That the King, tho he
was Singulis Major, yet he was Vniversis Minor; tho he was greater than any
Subject, yet he was less than all the People; that therefore the Representative
Body of the People (legally chosen) might call him to account for
Mal-administration of Government: That the Power of the Kingdom was in that
Collective Body, and they might give out Commissions, and raise Arms and Men
for their defense. These and such like Maxims (first taken out of the Schools
of the Jesuits) were the Snares whereby unthinking Men were betrayed into
Rebellion. But what can be pleaded in this Case? Blunderbusses and Pistols are
a sure way indeed to take a King from evil Counselors; but when they are
levelled at his Coach, it can hardly be said that they are not designed against
Him, but a malignant Party about him. Wicked People may combine together and
endeavor an Insurrection; but sure they cannot call Plotting Lawful Authority;
they cannot say, that Confederating Miscreants are greater than the King, the
Peoples Representative, and have the Sovereign Power of the Kingdom. The truth
is, here the Vizard is taken off and Treason appears barefaced, and in its own
Colors: And without any other Face or pretended Countenance, the thing is
downright Killing the KING, and raising an Insurrection in His Kingdoms. The
Caution therefore (in this Case) is very forceable; for if the most plausible
Pretenses for Rebellion have not Plea enough to tempt any honest Man, what
Enticements must those be which have none? The Conclusion therefore is very
firm from these Premises, If Sinners entice thee to such Practices, consent
thou not: If these things be so very Evil, so very Bloody, then the advising
not to join in them is an act, as of Conscience toward God, so of Kindness
toward Men. He that sees a dangerous Precipice, which others are blindly
falling into, and calls to them to beware, deserves as well thanks for his
love, as praise for his foresight. It is therefore the Goodness, as well as
Wisdom of Discerning Princes, when they find subtle and designing Men busy in
perverting and drawing away their People; to forewarn them of the Mischief, to
lay open their Baits, to uncover their secret and lurking Designs, that those
who have not abilities to consider the depth and mystery of such Arts, should
not unwarily be taken and ensnared by them to their own damage. This seems to
be the meaning of the words of the Text, the Caution King Solomon gives to his
People against confederating with Men of Blood. And this is one end of His
Majesty's Declaration, discovering the Devices of Crafty and Wicked Men, that
so His Subjects might not be tempted by any Pretenses that Cunning and
Designing Men might make to draw them in; which evidences as well his
Affections to his People, as Care to preserve his own Person and Government:
And it is an Instance of his Fatherly Care to forewarn his People from
swallowing down any Enticements of that Nature, from entering into such Company,
whose Converse and Behavior is of so dark and bloody a Character; And it is
our duty, not only in Conscience toward God, not only in Allegiance and strict
Duty and Justice; but in gratitude likewise to our King, to be extremely
cautious of all such Insinuations, of all Devices that would draw us into
Blood, Sedition, or Rebellion. Which that we may the better do, we may consider,

4. Some Rules and Directions, as Expedients preventive of such Confederacies
and such Practices.

1. Be not over-bold and ready to Censure the Government. This is a Duty we owe
to one another, much more to the Government; and as entertaining the fairest
Thoughts of Men, and of their Actions, contributes exceedingly to the quiet of
Neighborhood, so using the same toward our Governors, would be an excellent
Expedient for Civil Peace: And certainly the height of their Station, and
difficulty of their Work, the multiplicity of the Affairs of Governors should
challenge from us a candid and favorable Construction of their Actions. When
the Wisest do often miscarry in the conduct of little Matters, when we often
commit Disorders and Errors in the Government of our Private Families; do we
think that the Rule of a Kingdom, and the great Business of a Nation, can be
always managed like the Kingdom of God, without the least Mistake or Fault?
It Is therefore monstrous and impious Disingenuity, to load every Miscarriage of
State, with Reproach, Bitterness, and foul Language: And it is much worse yet,
to call those Mistakes, which are the best Rules. The Art of Governing is an
abstruse thing, the Influences and Effects of it are like the Hand of a Watch,
visible to all; but the way whereby these are moved and conveyed, are, like the
Spring and Wheels, secret, and not discerned by any, but those that know the
Machin. And yet there are, and always have been, a sort of Men, who have
neither Opportunities nor Faculties to dive into the Mysteries of State, to
comprehend the Administration of Public Affairs; who notwithstanding are always
Censuring and Accusing the Government; always crying out, There is Corruption
Above, and Things are not well carried. These Men are fit Tools in the hands of
Ambitious and Politic Men, and may be turned to what purposes they please. They
are easily persuaded to believe their own Censures; first themselves think
hardly of the Government, and then will easily swallow the worst Representation
Ill men can make of it. This is a Temper therefore just ripe for Sedition; for
it is Natural for men to endeavor an Alteration, or Reformation of what they
think they are capable to mend. It is therefore necessary for the quiet living
under any Government, that this Censorious Humor be kept down: For Rebellion
has its degrees, first Censure the Government, then believe our own Censures,
then hate it, then endeavor to overturn it. Destroy therefore this Monster in
the Embrio, kill Rebellion in the Seed: Let us do (what is very reasonable),
never undertake to censure what we do not comprehend; Let us believe well of
the Government, 'till we have plain Reason to do otherwise; Let us make but the
same allowances to the Actions of Princes in their Administrations, as we would
have to our own in our small Affairs, and then what Spots and Blemishes soever
foul and malicious Eyes may spy, the Government (in its whole frame and
management) will appear to us beautiful and admirable.

2. Which is near of Kin to the former, Have a care of entertaining
unreasonable Fears and Jealousies. These have been the Incendiaries which for
many years have inflamed the Nation; and these are the Tools Designing Men have
wrought with, to unsettle men's Minds and make them Mutinous. It is somewhat
strange, that the same methods of Deceit should continue so long, that a Nation
should be near twice Ruining in the memory of Man by the same Stratagems.
Jealousies and Fears were the Cry of the late sad Times; and have we not yet
suffered enough by such Insinuations? shall we again be tempted to swallow that
Bait, which already (in our memory) has spilt so so much Blood, and made such
havoc of English men? Let us but reflect upon the Tragedies it acted, what
Miseries have thereby been brought upon a Distracted People, and it will
certainly make us wary, how we again are led away by such Devices. When such
things are offered and obtruded, 'twould make any Considering man suspect some
lurking Mischief; that those Men had some Design upon the Government, who would
endeavor so foully to represent it. If therefore we would have our Fears work
rightly, let us be afraid of such Temptations. The Mischiefs and Consequences
of a Rebellious War have sufficiently evidenced, that we have feared where no
Fear was, that the means we took to release our Fears, brought us truly under
those Mischiefs we were before only jealous of. And what are we now afraid of?
Do we fear the Alteration of the Government, and the Subversion of the
established Laws? And is Sedition and Rebellion a Remedy? Will being Tumultuary
under the Government release us? This is but to do the Thing we fear, to create
Real Evils for fear of Imaginary ones, actually to destroy the Government and
the Laws, for fear only lest they should be destroyed. Our Fears therefore are
on the wrong side; and we ought as much (at least) to fear, lest by any
Seditious and Mutinous Practices Desolation be brought upon the Nation. Our
Fears of Injury to the Government and Laws, should work in us to be Peaceable
under both; for if we are really afraid of any such Inconveniences, it is sure
but reasonable for us, not to contribute any thing thereto by our own
Behavioun, otherwise it will be thought, that we do not purely Resent the Ruin
of the Laws and Government, only we take it Ill, that any Body else should
Ruin them beside our Selves.

3. Beware of Imprudent and Intemperate Zeal. This is a Weed of Religion that
spoils the whole Crop: A Tare that not only corrupts, but blasts the whole
Field. For Religion is, of it self, the most calm and quiet thing in the whole
World; but when it is heated by Disorderly Zeal, it is the most Tempestuous. Men
who measure the strength of their Christianity, only by the warmth they have
for some Opinions, are the soonest fired of any People, and will break through
all Bounds to prosecute the things they are Zealous for. If therefore the
Government opposes or discountenances those Opinions, the hot Zealot is uneasy
and fretting, the Laws cannot hold him, and he is ready (upon every turn) to
attempt something for the Security of Religion. The Cause he undertakes for, he
thinks is good; and this will sanctify the use of Means, which otherwise upon
other accounts would not be so warrantable. The Killing a man, not Judicially
Condemned, is Murder; but when Phineahs without Trial and Form of Law, out of
Zeal to God's Glory killed Zimri and Cozbi, it was his Righteousness and his
Crown: so as those Ways which are otherwise Illegal, yet if they be for Defense
of Religion, and for Prevention of Idolatry, they are not only justifiable, but
Heroically good. Not now to consider that Case of Phineahs and the state of the
Jewish Zealots, who acted by peculiar and appropriate measures, by special
Commission, when they were under the immediate Government of GOD, which cannot
now be pretended: We shall find besides sufficient Reason to be careful of
sucking in any such Principles, if we consider, That, if this were admitted,
Religion would be the greatest Firebrand in the World, and serve for little
use else, but to disturb Commonwealths, and set Men together by the Ears; for
it is but for some Cunning men to persuade the People, That their Religion is in
danger, that Idolatry is coming in upon them, and then they may Plot and
Conspire, and Associate for Insurrections and Commotions, and do any thing; for
their Cause is the Cause of God, and their Earnestness in it is their Virtue
and Glory. And in truth, there is scarcely any thing so bad and barbarous,
which has not already been acted under this Principle. And now is there
nothing else in Religion, but Zeal? Are not Peace, Humility, Patience,
Obedience to Government, are not these principal Parts of it? and must these be
eaten up by that which is only an Appendage, and no Duty commanded for it self?
These are the substantial Parts of Christianity, and Zeal (at the best) is but
the Guard of it; and it is very unreasonable, that what God ordered for Defense
of these things should be the greatest means of Destroying them. It Is true
indeed, every Man (in his station) is obliged to promote God's Glory and
Christian Religion; but then it is by those Ways only which Religion allows.
The Apostles were as Zealous for Christianity as any, and Advanced it more than
ever any since; but the Ways they took were Purity and Peace, Meekness and
Suffering. Never any Tumults and Rebellions heard of, 'till Zeal became
extravagant and overgrown; and not only grew too strong for, but swallowed up
all the rest of the Virtues: And if these Practices were warranted by
Christianity, if Men might make use of Tumultuary and Seditious Ways, to secure
or set up Religion, what a woeful Condition would a Christian Prince be in,
whose Kingdom was divided into Factions, and where are several Parties of
differing Persuasions in Religion: For all think themselves in the Right, and
all others in the Wrong, and commonly call the contrary Opinions, Superstition,
Idolatry, and Antichristianism. Now if all these think their Zeal for their
respective Ways obliges them to all possible Means to set them up, and destroy
the contrary, and if they are Lukewarm if they do not do it. If Papists may
hire Ruffians to Pistol the KING, if he do not set up Images and
Transubstantiation: If Presbyterians may fight against him, if he do not pull
down Bishops, and place in their stead Classis's and Lay Elders: If
Independents may cut of his Head, if he do not root out the Idolatry of the
Surplice and the Dagon of the Common Prayer, and enact Laws for the
Congregational Way: If the Quakers may deny him and testify against him, if he
do not abolish all other Ways, and set up Enthusiasm and New Lights. In this
Case what can a King do? It Is impossible to set up more than One, and then all
the rest are to be Troublesome and Vexatious, to become his Enemies, and to
pursue him as an Adversary to Truth. I say therefore, That if Christianity did
warrant such things, it would be looked upon as the Makebate of the World; It
would be esteemed, what its Enemies represented it, a most pestilent Heresy,
and all Governors would use their utmost to Root it out of their Kingdoms, as
utterly inconsistent with the Quiet and Peace of them. Whereas in truth there
is nothing more the Interest of Governors, than to settle Christianity among
the People, because there is nothing more governable than a good Christian,
nothing more Orderly and Peaceable than the measures of Religion but then it is
Religion, not acted by furious and bitter Zeal, but by its own mild and sober
Principles.

4. Be not over-fond and hasty of joining with any Dissenting Party. Here I
must premise, That I do not lay this PLOT upon any particular Party of
Dissenters, nor desire to insinuate, that They (as Dissenters) are engaged in
it. God forbid that things of this Nature should be charged upon any but those
that are found Guilty: But as King JAMES, Praem. to Apol.
speaking of the Powder Treason, says, That it was only plotted by Papists, and
They only lead thereto by a preposterous Zeal, for the advancement of their
Religion. Upon which account the Parliament next sitting used all means of
Trial, to know if there were any more of that mind left in the Country. And he
says, Apol. King James 's Works, page 265.
That the Oath of Allegiance was Ordained for making a difference between the
Civilly obedient Papists, and the Perverse Disciples of the Powder Treason. And
thus far this is applicable, That this horrid Plot was contrived by Men who
favored their Way; that there were no less than Three of their Teachers
actually engaged in it; that the Chief and Principal Plotters had Expectations
of great Strength and Supply from them. Now although it is not reasonable, that
the Faults of some should be translated to a Whole Party; yet this should make
every Conscientious Man very jealous of himself, carefully examine whether his
Practices have any such tendency; whether there has been any just Occasion
given for Contriving men to have such Expectations from them; and if there
has, then speedily to alter them, and give such Testimonies of Loyalty, as the
Government may not suspect, nor the Sedicious hope for any such thing from
them. I do not desire to reflect, nor would lay an Aspersion, especially upon a
Whole-Party, for that is to Scandalize by Wholesale; but I hope every Good man
will be careful of these following Doctrines, which were broached by those who
Dissent from the Church of England:

Princes for just Causes may be Deposed. Knox. Hist. page 372.


If Princes be Tyrants against God and his Truth, Id. Ep. to Engl. and Scot.
fo. 77.
their Subjects are freed from their Oaths of Obedience.

It is in the Power of the People to give the Dominion to whom they will.
Buchanan. de Jure Regni, p. 13.


It were well if Rewards were appointed by the People for such as should kill
Tyrants, Ibid. p. 40.
as commonly there is for those who kill Wolves or Bears, or catch their
Whelps.

The People may Arraign their Prince. Ibid. p. 62.


The Ministers may Excommunicate him; Page 70.
and he that by Excommunication is cast into Hell, is not worthy to enjoy any
Life upon Earth.

It is lawful to Kill wicked Kings and Tyrants. Goodman p. 99. 103. and alibi.
The Subjects did kill the Queens Highness Athaliah; Jehu killed the Queens
Majesty, Jezabel; Elias (being no Magistrate) killed the Queens Majesty's
Chaplains, Baal 's Priests. These Examples are left for our Instruction; where
this Justice is not executed, the State is most Corrupt.

When Magistrates do cease to do their Duties, Ibid. 180, 184, 210. and alibi.
(i. e. in Deposing and Killing Kings) the People are as it were without
Officers, and then God gives the Sword into their hands, and he himself is
become immediately their Head; for to the Multitude a portion of the Sword of
Justice is committed, from the which no Person, King, Queen, or Emperor (being
an Idolater) is exempt; He must dye the Death. The People (Numb. 25.) did hang
up certain of their Heads and Captains, Which ought to be for a perpetual
Example of their Duty in the like defection from God, to hang up such Rulers as
shall draw them from him.

If neither the Inferior Magistrates, nor the greatest part of the People will
do their Duties, then the Minister must Excommunicate such a King; any Minister
may do it against the Greatest Prince. God will send the rest of the People
(which are willing to do their Duty, but not able) some Moses or Othoniel.

If they know any Jonathan, they must go to him to be their Captain; and he
ought not to refuse them.

If Magistrates without fear transgress Gods Law, Goodman, page 139.
and command others to do the same, they have lost that Honor and Obedience,
which otherwise their Subjects owed them; and ought no more to be taken for
Magistrates, but to be examined, accused, condemned and punished, as private
Transgressors.

By the Word of God (when others will not do it) a Private man having some
special inward Call, Obed. p. 110. Quoted by Bishop Bancroft in Dangerous
Positiens.
may kill a Tyrant, as Moses did the Egyptian, as Phineahs the Leacherous, as
Ahud did King Eglon: or otherwise a Private man may do so, if he be commanded,
or permitted by the Commonwealth.

Perhaps by this time you may think I am quoting the Jesuits, and picking
King-killing Principles out of their Books; and indeed the Doctrines are so
very like, they cannot easily be distinguished. But these are the Positions of
Knox, Buchanan, Goodman, Famous Leaders and Setters up of the Presbyterian
Discipline: and a man would imagine the present Plot was fetched from these
Authors, the Doctrine and the Practice do so exactly agree; and many Doctrines
of the same Nature were published and practiced in the late Times. It is to be
hoped, that many of our present Dissenters do not arise to the height of these
Opinions; however this Doctrine and this Behavior too coming from men of their
Way, would make every good Man very well consider before he assembles with
them. And in truth All Dissenters of every kind (as might easily be made
appear) when they come to state the measures of Obedience, are very loose and
slippery, very Injurious to Princes, and such as diminish the Rights of
Government: And therefore,

5. Be Constant and Devout in the Communion of the Church of England, as it is
established by Law. It is the peculiar glory of this Church, that it never has
either by Doctrine or Practice, in the least encouraged or countenanced any
thing tending to Treason, Sedition or Rebellion. Men of this Communion have
been eminent Sufferers for, but never Opposers of Lawful Authority. Here
Obedience to Government is taught by the same Measures it was by our Savior,
by his Apostles, and by the Primitive Christians. And this is so very obvious,
that the worst of her Enemies, who have loaded her with other Contumelies,
could never yet have the face to charge her with Rebellion and Resistance of
Authority. Here therefore let us fasten our selves, and we are secure from all
Temptations of this kind; and it is impossible that any Man, so long as he
continues in the Communion of the Church of England, should be a Mutineer or a
Traitor. Let us consult both the former, and the modern Arts of Disturbance,
and we shall find that Ambitious men never thought to make a Game here; they
always looked upon it as a fruitless Attempt to practice upon Men of these
Principles, but the ways have been first to divide the Church, to withdraw Men
from her Communion, and then they hoped (in time) to work them to their
Purposes, and to bring them to make Head against the Government. Were Men but
united in this Communion, there would be no room left for Rebellion, no
Instruments for Designing Men to work upon; All the Pleas of fighting for
Religion, of resisting the Magistrate under the cover of Conscience would soon
be at an end. Let us all therefore heartily embrace this; Let us be uniform to
the Tenants and Doctrines, as well as to the external Administration of the
Church of England; Let us as well be the Sons of it in mind, as in outward
Conformity: And there cannot (in humane measures) be a better Expedient to
preserve us from all Turbulent and Seditious Enticements.

6. Let us be sincere in the performance of the purposes of this Day. Let us
heartily give Thanks to Almighty GOD for this Deliverance of our Gracious
Sovereign, His Royal Brother, His Loyal Subjects and His Kingdoms, from the
horrid Attempts and Conspiracies of Wicked Men: And this, (if we do it
Conscientiously) will certainly rescue us from all kind of Disloyal Thoughts.
He that (as he should) thanks God for the KING's Deliverance, cannot himself
administer to his Disturbance, except he prays like a Pharisee, with a
devouring mind. What greater Hypocrisy, than to pour out our Thanksgiving to
God for discovering the Contrivances against the Government, and at the same
time to have mutinous and ungovernable Inclinations? This is to mock God, and
we pray for one thing and wish for another. Let our Minds therefore go with our
Prayers, and if it does not find us, it will make us Faithful to the
Government; for Prayer is of a transforming nature, and if we are just to God
and our selves in it, it will make us of the same Nature and Complexion, our
Prayers will slide into our Practices, and we shall live as we pray. Let us all
therefore (as we have the greatest Reason) from the bottom of our Hearts,
return our Thankfullest Acknowledgments to Almighty GOD for his Infinite
Goodness, that, by his good Providence, has kept our KING, His Royal Brother,
and our Nation, from becoming a Prey to Bloody and Ravenous Men. Let us do this
in the sincerity of our Souls, and then as for the present it winds up our
Thoughts in contemplation of the Divine Mercy; so it will for the future
influence our Lives. As it now frames us to be Thankful to GOD; so (if we are
not Hypocrites) it will make us Loyal to the KING.

SERMONS lately printed for Walter Kettilby.
1. A Discourse to prove the strongest Temptations conquerable by Christians;
in a Sermon preached before the Lord Mayor, Jan. 14. 1676/7. 2. The Spirit of
Enthusiasm, exorcis'd in a Sermon preached before the University of Oxford, on
Act Saturday, July 11. 1680. 3. Peculium Dei: A Discourse about the Jews, as
the Peculiar People of God; in a Sermon preached before the Aldermen and
Citizens of London, Febr. 6. 1680/1. 4. The True Notion of Persecution, stated
in a Sermon preached at the Time of the late Contribution for the French
Protestants. 5. A Sermon preached before the Lord Mayor at Bow Church, Jan. 30.
1681/2. 6. The Moral Shechinah; Or a Discourse of Gods Glory; in a Sermon
preached at the last Yorkshire Feast, June 11. 1682.
All Six by George Hicks, D.D.

Prosecution no Persecution; Or the Difference between Suffering for
Disobedience and Faction, in a Sermon preached at Bury St. Edmunds, Suffolk,
March 22. 1681. The Modern Pharisees, showing the Principles of the present
Jesuits and Puritans, to be of the same evil Influence with the Ancient
Pharisees. Both by Nath. Bisbie, D.D. Dr. Calamy 's Sermon preached before the
L. Mayor at Bow-Church, May 29. 1682. Mr. Kidder 's Sermon, preached before the
Lord Mayor, July 16. 1682. Dr. Fowler 's Sermon, preached at the Assizes at
Gloucester, Aug. 7. 1681. Mr. Young 's Sermon, preached before the Lord Mayor,
Febr. 4. 1682. Mr. Hopkin 's Sermon, preached before the Lord Mayor, Sept. 3.
1683. Mr. Fox 's Sermon, preached at the Herefordshire-Feast, July 3. 1683.
The Originals of Rebellion; Or, The end of Separation; in a Sermon preached
Jan. 30. 1682. The Rebellious City Destroyed; being an Anniversary Sermon in
memory of the Dreadful Fire of London, Sept. 2. 1666. Preached 1682. Loyalty
Protesting against Popery, and Phanaticism Popishly Affected, in a Sermon
preached Nov. 5. 1682. both by William Wray, M. A. Ahitophel's Policy Defeated;
in a Sermon preached on the Thanksgiving-Day, Sept. 9. 1683. Samaritanism
Revived; in a Sermon preached by Luke Milbourne on the late Thanksgiving-Day,
Sept. 9. 1683.
FINIS.

