THIS TO THE KING and his COUNCEL.

Something in Answer to an ORDER MADE BY THE House of Lords FOR The breaking up
of the Meetings of the People of God in scorn called QUAKERS.

In NORTHAMPTONSHIRE: who are as the Sheep for the slaughter, all the day long
killed.

And a Representation of the innocence of the People of God called QUAKERS,
which meet to worship the true God in spirit, within the County of Northampton.

In Answer to a false Information which behind out backs has been given
against us as it is upon Record in an Order made against us, dated the 30th. of
Septem. 1660. Subscribed by John Brown, Clerk of the Parliament, which has
been read both in open Sizes, and diverse Steeple Houses, whereby people have
been stirred up to persecute us.

LONDON, Printed for Robert Wilson, and are to be sold at his Shop, at the sign
of the Black-spread-Eagle and Windmill in Martins l'Grand, 1660.

Something in answer to an Order made by the House of Lords, for the breaking
up of the meetings of the People of God in scorn called Quakers.
SOlomon says, That he that is first in his own cause, seems just, but his
neighbor comes and searches him: And ye cannot be ignorant, that true
Judgment cannot be given between party and party without hearing them both;
therefore it should have been your honor to have searched out the matter
charged against us, by hearing our Defense, as well as the Accusation of our
Adversaries (which we know they cannot prove) before you had proceeded to pass
Sentence against us: Therefore in the fear of God consider; Have you not
overshot your selves in passing an Order or Sentence against us (without first
hearing us, and our Accusers, face to face) whereby that Christian Liberty
which we have in Christ Jesus to meet together in his Name and Fear, has been
infringed; for men with armed force have come violently into our Meetings by
virtue of your Order, and have molested us by dragging us forth, abusing and
imprisoning some of us, when we were in the exercise of our Religion, peaceably
waiting upon God, and calling upon him for the good of all men; which
molestation tends to the violation of the Word of the King, solemnly given,
That we should not be disquieted nor called in question for our Religion, which
does not disturb the peace of the Kingdom; And it will provoke the Lord to anger
against you, if you go about to scatter those that he has sought out and
gathered into one Spirit, to worship him, whom he will keep as the Apple of
his Eye: Therefore be wise, and learn to know his Counsel, that is from
everlasting, least ye be found fighting against him with your Laws and Orders;
but mind the Law eternal that God has written in your hearts, and let your
Laws be according to that of God, which was not made for the Righteous, but for
the Transgressors; and judge no man before you hear him, and know what he does,
lest the Jews and Romans rise up in judgment with you, and condemn you, that
profess to be Christians; for their Law judged no man before a hearing:
Likewise you may remember that History declares how often the gentleness and
simplicity of Princes has been abused by malicious men, till they have been
wrapped in remediless calamities, by satisfying the wills of such as make
Religion a Cloak for their Covetousness, Ambition, and Envy, which will flatter
and bow to men of Power, that they may make them the executioners of their
malice, who thirst after the blood of the Saints, because they cannot give them
money for that which is not bread, nor drink of the water which they have
fouled with their feet; And least you should through the suggestions of fearful
and unbelieving men (who know not the Truth, which is strongest of all, and
therefore think it cannot prevail against Errors without Magistrates help) wrap
your selves in those remediless calamities which to persecute the innocent will
inavoidably bring upon you; we cannot but represent these things unto you, and
also the manner of our Meetings, more truly then they have done who have
informed you on this wise:

That there are very great Assemblies of Quakers and Anabaptists conceived to
be of Lamberts Party, who meet frequently in very great multitudes in
Northamptonshire, plotting and contriving against the peace of Church and
State, frequently casting out and dispersing several scandalous Papers against
the Ministers, and their preaching the truth in Churches, to the great
discouragement and scandal of good people.

To which we answer for our selves, who are called Quakers, That our Assemblies
be neither with multitudes, nor with tumult; for we are but as the gleaning of
the Vintage, even a small remnant, neither of this, nor the other man's Party,
as men conceive; for we are redeemed from amongst the Multitude, Sects, and
Parties, by the Lord Jesus Christ, who is our Shepherd, and we are the sheep of
his pasture, nourished and fed by him, and in his Name and fear do we assemble
our selves together on the first day of the week, and at other times, as the
Christians did; not to disturb the Peace of the Church nor State, but to
worship our God in Spirit, and provoke one another to love, and to good works;
as also to make prayer and supplication for all men, that they may come to the
knowledge of the truth, and be saved, and that we may see the peace and
tranquillity of the land of our Nativity; we do exhort men to lay aside all
Clamor, Bitterness, and Envy, and come and walk in the Light of the Lord, that
they may have fellowship one with another, as we have, who do in our hearts
abhor all Plots and Contrivances tending to the breach of Civil Peace and
Concord amongst men, or to the shedding of man's blood; for with flesh and blood
we wrestle not, neither are our Weapons Carnal but Spiritual, with which we war
against Spiritual Wickedness; but as much as in us lies we labor to live in
Peace with all men, though some do esteem us their enemies, because we tell
them the truth, and being filled with envy, it breaks their peace to see us
have a being in the land of our Nativity, as it did Hamon's to see Mordecai sit
in the King's Gate; and such labor to mis-represent our honest intentions, and
say, That our Papers and Declarations are scandalous against the Ministers of
Christ, and their preaching the truth; which Papers and Declarations do not
touch the Ministers of Christ, who preach the truth in the Church which is made
of lively stones, but are given forth as a testimony against such as do in
words profess to be Ministers of Christ, but serves not the Lord Jesus Christ,
but their own bellies; who every one seek their gain from their quarter, and
feed themselves with the Fat, and cloth themselves with the Fleece; who preach
for hire, and divine for money, and prepare war against those who cannot for
conscience sake put into their mouths, ruling over their flocks with force and
cruelty, like those grievous Wolves which the Apostle said should come, not
sparing the flock; and the Hirelings which Christ said cares not for the sheep,
we say against such as these, and their changeable forms of Worship, which be
not in the unchangeable eternal Spirit, but in the Temples made with hands, in
which God dwells not, do we give forth our testimony, and not to scandalize nor
discourage any good people, but rather to encourage them to seek the Lord their
Redeemer, and walk in in his light, that they may not be made a prey on by men
whose hearts are exercised with covetous practices; And this information we
give you under our hands, that the innocence of our hearts may be known to you,
and that the guilt of our innocent sufferings may not lie upon you: Ye may do
well to revoke your former Order against us, or otherwise prevent execution of
it as you shall see meet, after the good example of Ahashuerus, who upon a
farther hearing of the Cause of the Jews, stopped the Decree that upon Hamon's
false information he had given out against them, which if it had been executed,
might have wrapped him in a remediless calamity; but he soresaw the evil, and
prevented it by altering his purpose, and providing that the Jews and all men
might live peaceably in his dominions, though their laws and manners differed
from his; which if ye, and those that be in authority over us do the like, it
may be a lengthning to your tranquillity, and we shall have joy and gladness,
that in the land of our nativity we may live peaceably in the exercise of our
Religion, which is pure, and keeps us unspotted of the world, in godliness and
honesty: But and if you stop your ears against the cry of the innocent, and
prescribe grievousness for us, and decree unrighteous decrees against us; then
shall we, as it is given us of God, patiently suffer for a testimony against
you, and the God in whom we trust will plead with you by his power, and deliver
us; Therefore on him we will wait, for our expectations are from him.

Subscribed in the behalf of our selves, and the rest of our Brethren and
Sisters that be in the fellowship of the Spirit with us in the County of
Northampton, the 24 th. day of the 8 th. month, 1660. John Whitehead Francis
Ellington John Mackenes Rich. Brown Francis Stanly Will. Wolston James Garret
Robert Cox John Hoton Nicolas Freeman Nicolas Day Richard Pell Thomas Green
Thomas Vice Thomas Ollive William Mather Will. Page John Parnel William Lovel
Henry Roe Thomas Gealing Richard Panter Will. Sharp Samuel Simcocke Robert
Burnell Michael Gains Matthew Haddon Richard Canwarden Richard Smith Laurence
Key Thomas Preston John Rogers John Garret Peter Mackenesse Joseph Garret
Benjamin Bradshew.

We desire to hear an answer from you, whether it be your minds that we should
be torn out of our Meetings, and abused: You have been acquainted with
sufferings your selves, therefore you are the better to consider of such things.



THis was given into the Kings hands upon the 6th. day of the 9th. Month, 1660.
And he promised an Answer; and upon the 9th. day of the Month his Answer was,
That he had given an Order to the Judges, that went the Circuits, concerning
us; which Order was, That we should be tenderly dealt with: And we were with
the Judge, and he said. That he was sorry that any hurt should be unto us
concerning it; and that he would do for us what lies in him concerning it: And
the Order was showed unto one of the Lords of the House, who said, He knew
nothing of it; if there was such a thing, it is void now. And we perceive it is
contrary to the Kings mind, and his last Declaration, who says these words
following: In a word We do again renew what We have formerly said in our
Declaration from Breda, for the Liberty of tender Consciences; that no man
shall be disquieted, or called in question for difference of Opinion in matter
of Religion, which do not disturb the peace of the Kingdom; and if any have
been disturbbed in that kind since Our arrival here, it has not proceeded from
any direction of Ours. And it is known, that our Meetings are kept in the fear
of God, and have been persecuted by all rough Spirits in these changeable
times, who peaceably meet to worship God in the Spirit and Truth, in that to
build up and edify one another, who have been persecuted by such who have had
the form of godliness, but denied the Power, from which we are turned away, and
have given our backs and hair to the smiter, have been as the sheep killed all
the day long, and have not lifted up a hand against any one, but meets together
in their several houses, as the Christians did in the primitive times; And here
all people may see our Innocence; and likewise how unjustly we have suffered.

THE END.

