THAT Great Duty, AND Comfortable Evidence [Keeping our selves from our
iniquity.]

Opened and applied in some SERMONS upon Psalm. 18.23.

By John Whitlock Minister of the Gospel in Nottingham.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Parkhurst, and are to be sold by John Richards
Bookseller at Nottingham. School.

The Epistle to the Reader.
Christian Reader,
IT is not any desire of appearing in Print, but mere importunity that has
prevailed with me to publish the few following Sheets: For though I would not
decline any thing that might tend to the honor of God, and the spiritual good
of any; and though the Subject treated of, [viz. Men's finding out and keeping
themselves from their iniquity] be a matter of great and constant importance,
and that wherein much of the life of Religion, and the power of Godliness does
lie: yet this has been so excellently and practically handled by the Reverend
Dr. Bates, that I could hardly prevail with my self to give my consent to the
publishing of these Notes; but have been at length overcome by the
solicitations of some, whom, I must confess, I was leath to deny, as being
bound to honor them for their close walk with God, and Zeal to propagate the
Kingdom of Christ, and the practice of real Holiness.

These Sermons as now printed, with very little variation as to heads or
expressions, were preached forty years since in public, Anno 1657. and having
occasion this year in a Lord's day course of Sermons upon Isa. 53. to preach
somewhat to the same effect upon those words, in the 6th verse of that Chapter
[We have turned every one to his own way] I was desired to print, and have
printed according to the Notes preached so long since, when I spoke more
largely to the Subject than I did when I returned upon it this year. This is a
true account of the occasion of these Sheets appearing thus in public, which
it was convenient thou should be acquainted with. I shall add no more but my
earnest prayers that God would make this Word profitable to my self, and all
that shall read it; and to request thy prayers for me (whom God has graciously
brought almost to the close of my seventy third year) that God would be pleased
more and more to fulfill to me that good Word of his Grace, that they that are
planted in the House of the Lord, shall still bring forth fruit in Old Age,
they shall be fat and flourishing, to the praise of the faithfulness and skill
of God the blessed Husbandman, and of the fatness and virtue of Christ the true
Vine. By such Christian remembrances of me at the Throne of Grace, thou will
exceedingly oblige him who earnestly desires more Grace to approve himself
while in this Tabernacle,

The faithful Servant of Christ and Souls, JOHN WHITLOCK.
Nottingham Jan. 1. 1657/8.
That Great Duty and comfortable Evidence [Keeping our selves from our
Iniquity.]
Psalm 18.23. I was also upright before him, and I kept my self from mine
iniquity.
THIS Psalm is a Psalm of Thanksgiving, the occasion of which the Title of the
Psalm acquaints us with, viz. the Lord's delivering of the Psalmist from the
hands of all his Enemies, and from the hand of Saul. But I shall not spend time
in looking back to the foregoing verses; but come immediately to the Text it
self; wherein you have these two parts or things considerable. (1.) David's
solemn and serious profession of his sincerity, I was also upright before, or,
with him. (2.) The proof and evidence of this his sincerity, and I kept my self
from mine iniquity. Briefly to open the words; [I was also upright before him]
i. e. sincere in the bent of my heart, approving my heart to God, setting the
Lord before me, carrying my self in the habitual frame of my heart, and in the
general course of my conversation, as under God's Eye: This being upright, is
in the Scripture in several places styled, being perfect, Genesis 17.1. Walk
before me and be thou perfect, or, as it is in the Margin, upright or sincere;
so Job 1.1, 8. and c. 2. v. 3. Job is said to be a perfect and upright man; the
latter word explains the former. No mere man on Earth, is legally perfect, with
a perfection of degrees; for legal perfection is full conformity to God, a
sinless perfection; but every true Believer is Evangelically perfect, that is,
upright and sincere, perfect with a perfection of parts, as a Child that has
all its faculties and members, is a perfect Child, though it be not arrived at
its full growth and stature: Yea the Believer is perfect in his design and aim,
breathing, and endeavoring after perfection, and shall at last, immediately
after death, be made perfect in holiness. [And I kept my self from mine
iniquity] i. e. I watched over my heart, observed my self, used all means of
God's appointing to keep my self from sin. David does not arrogate to himself,
or ascribe his keeping himself from his iniquity to his own strength, either of
Nature, or of Grace received; for he was very sensible and readily
acknowledged, that he could not keep himself, but that it was God, his special
Grace, and the continued and renewed Aids of his Spirit that could keep him
from his iniquities, and enable him to walk uprightly before him; that it was
God in Christ: it was Jesus he looked to as the Author and finisher of his
Faith, and all other Graces; but he knew God works by means, and on men not as
stocks or stones; but they must use God's approved means to keep them; and though
they be passive in the turning act of Conversion, yet God then infuses a
principle of spiritual life into them, and requires they should use the means,
depending upon God, by Faith, Prayer, and Watchfulness, to make them effectual
for the keeping them from their iniquities.

From mine iniquities] i. e. that special sin, which he found himself most
prone to, and was most easily and frequently foiled and overcome by; which by
his constitution, condition of life, or temptation, he lay more peculiarly open
to; that which in his unregenerate state was his beloved sin, and after his
Conversion might be his tyrannizing, and too often prevailing corruption. He
might probably, in his distressed condition, when persecuted by Saul, be
tempted to impatience, unbelief, lying, making have, using indirect means,
revenge, and the like, and he endeavored to keep himself from these. The
Doctrine is, Doct. It is the duty, of all that profess to be God's people, and
an evidence of their sincerity, to keep themselves from their special sins,
those which they are most prone to, and may properly call their iniquities.

Now for the handling of this Doctrine, I shall (1.) Lay down several
Propositions for the more clear opening of it; (2.) Show wherein men's own
iniquities do lie, and where men may search for them, so as to be able to find
out what their special sins are: This I shall do somewhat toward in the
Doctrinal part, but in the Application, more fully show the signs of those
sins, which are beloved sins in the ungodly, and too often tyrannizing sins,
and prevailing corruptions even in the godly in whom they are not beloved or
reigning lusts. (3.) Show what it is to keep men's selves from their iniquities.
(4.) Give the Reasons of the Doctrine. (5.) Apply it.

(1.) To lay down some Propositions more fully and clearly to understand the
Doctrine.

Prop. I. Every sin that any person does commit, is, and may properly be
called, his own, as flowing from his own heart and nature, and his corrupt will
and affections; and he ought to lay it at his own door, to charge it upon
himself, and not to put it off from himself, and lay the blame on others,
either on Satan, or on Companions, alluring, persuading, or drawing him to it;
and least of all, should men dare (yea they should tremble at, and abhor the
very thought of it, viz.) to father their sins on the infinitely good and holy
God, and lay these Bastard births of their own begetting at God's door: Yet
this is that all men are ready to do, and they have learned this vile practice
from our first Parents, Genesis 3.12, 13. The Man lays the blame on the Woman, and
the Woman on the Serpent; yea Adam in effect lays it upon God himself, when he
says, The Woman thou gave me, she gave me, and I did eat. q. d. If thou had
not given me the Woman, and she persuaded me, I had not eaten: Therefore charge
not thy sins on others persuading, alluring, or threatening of thee: They may be
instruments and occasions of drawing thee to sin, but thy sins are thy own
acts. Nay, lay not the blame of thy sins so much upon Satan, as on thy self: he
may tempt and strongly suggest, but he cannot force; it is thou thy self that
consentest to Satan's suggestions, and so the sin comes to be committed. But
above all, take heed of charging thy sins upon God: he may permit, and does
order the sins of men, but he is by no means the Author of sin, Jam. 1.13. God
cannot be tempted with evil, neither tempts he any man; no, it is thy own
lust that draws thee aside, and entices thee, v. 14. Our sins are our own ways,
Isa. 53.6. We have turned every one to his own way; so that in this respect,
every sin thou art guilty of, is thine Iniquity: but this is not the principal
sense intended in the Text, under the expression of Mine Iniquity. though it be a
true Sense, and a great Truth, and therefore you are to keep your selves by
Repentance, Prayer and Faith, and most vigorours endeavors from all Sins, as
those which will be your own Iniquities if you commit them.

Prop. II. Original Corruption (that Body of Sin and Death, that every Son and
Daughter of Adam, by ordinary generation brought into the World with them, and
still dwells in them) is, and may properly be called a Man's own Iniquity, By
reason of this, there is in the Hearts and Natures of all mere Men, a Proneness
to all kinds of Sin, and unto the most Heinous acts of them, though through
preventing, restraining, and renewing Grace, they may be, and often are, kept
from breaking out into outward acts. Original Corruption is the Seed and Root
of all Actual Sin, of Thought, Word, and Deed, of Omission, and Commission, and
of all the Iniquities that cleave to our Holy things. Mat. 15.19. Out of the
Heart proceed evil Thoughts, Murders, Adulteries, Fornications, Thefts,
False-witness, Blasphemy. Original Sin is the Mother-Sin in every Man, the
Fountain of all other Sins: Yea, it is alike in all, in the Root, though upon the
forementioned account, it is not alike in the Fruits.

And some would have this understood by this term Mine Iniquity in the Text:
and the Doctrine is a great and certain Truth, in reference to this sin; it is
certainly the Duty of all the People of God by Faith, Prayer, Watchfulness, and
most vigorous endeavors to keep themselves from this Iniquity, at least, (though
they cannot keep themselves wholly from its motions and actings, yet) from its
Reign and Dominion, to keep it under, and to lay the Ax to this Root of sin:
And this will be an Evidence of the sincerity of the Heart, and of the Truth,
yea the Strength of Grace; and Men are never rightly Humbled for sin, nor do
Mortify it, till the Streams and Branches of sin lead us to the Fountain and
Root, sc. this Original Corruption, so as to be Humbled for, and Mortify that.
But yet I think this is not the only Iniquity, or that chiefly intended in the
Text. Therefore,

Prop. III, Though there be the Seeds of all sins in every Man, yet there is a
Propensity in every Man and Woman, to some particular sins more than to others:
There are in Men some Master-Captain-Sins, which are as Lords Paramount, by
which the Body of Sin does exercise its Dominion and Reigning Power in the
Unconverted, and its Tyranny even in the Godly: It is with the Body of Sin, as
it is with the Natural Body, in that there is the Seed and Root of all
Diseases, yea of Death it self, by reason of the different Humors in it, when
any of them becomes excessively predominant, yet there are also some particular
Diseases, which some are more prone to than others, according to the prevalency
of some particular Humor, as some to Agues, Fevers, Plurisies, some to
Dropsies, some to Palsies, Lethargies, Apoplexies, some to Consumptions, some
to Stone, Gout, etc. so in reference to the Body of Sin, besides a general
disposition to all sin, there are particular sins persons are more strongly
inclined to, some to Gluttony, some to Drunkenness, and unclean Lusts, others
to Anger, Wrath, Malice, Revenge, another to Covetousness, there is some
predominant sin or other.

And as in a complete perfect Man, there are all the Faculties, Senses, Members
of a Man, yet some excel in one, some in another, some in quickness of
Apprehension, some in solidity of Judgment, others in strength of Memory,
others in strength of Body, or the quickness of the Senses: So in reference to
sins; all have the Seed of every sin in them; this Man of Sin has all its
Faculties, Senses, Members, but yet every one is more inclined to some
particular sins, which may be more properly styled our own Iniquities, our own
way, and our doings, Jer. 18.11. such sins as are compared to a Right Hand, a
Right Eye, Mat. 5.29, 30. Sins as near and dear to them, and that they are as
unwilling to part with, as those Members in the Body: This Sin is styled the
weight that presses us down, and the Sin that easily besets men, which
expressions as they may have respect to the Body of Sin, and natural evil
Concupiscence, so they may have a special respect to, and be fitly said of that
particular sin that men are most inclined to, and often, and most easily
overtaken by, for this sin has them at every turn, and besets them with the
greatest advantage.

And upon account of these sins, which may more especially be called their
Iniquities, we find particular persons branded in Scripture; as Cain for his
Envy and Malice, the Causes of his Murdering his Brother Abel; Pharaoh for his
Stubborness, and Hardness of Heart; Korah and his Company for their Pride and
Rebellion; Balaam for his coveting the Wages of Unrighteousness, (called Jude
ver. 11. the way of Cain, the Error of Balaam for reward, and the gainsaying
of Korah) Herod for his Uncleanness and Incest; Judas for Covetousness as his
Master-sin; the Young Man in the Gospel for his Love of the World; and the
other Herod, Acts 12. for his Pride.

And that Men have their particular special sins, they are most inclined to,
appears from the contrary, viz. the Nature of Grace in the Regenerate, for
every true Believer has the Seed of God within him, all the Graces of God's
Spirit Seminally and Habitually; yet there are some Graces, in which some
particular Saints are most eminent, and excel other Saints. Abraham is
commended as eminent for Faith; Joseph for Chastity, Moses for Meekness, Job
for Patience, David for Spiritual Affections, Hezekiah and Josiah for Zeal
against sin, and for the Worship of God: Now all these had all the Graces of
God's Holy Spirit Habitually in the principle of them; yet they did more
particularly and eminently excel in those Graces, they are in the Word more
especially commended for. And this may serve for the proof of this Proposition,
That there is a propension in every Man to some sins more than to others, which
David has a special respect to in the expression in the Text.

Prop. IV. As there are particular, special personal sins, men are more
inclined to, than to others, which may be truly called their Iniquities; so
there are also local and national sins; sins that the People of some Nations,
Churches and Places are peculiarly inclined to, more than to other sins, and
more than other Nations and Churches are: Thus the Sins of the Old World were
Ungodly Marriages, and violence, Genesis 6.2, 4, 13. Sodom's special sins were
Pride, fullness of Bread, Idleness, and filthy Fleshly Unnatural Lusts; The Jews
great sin was Idolatry and Murmuring, and at last Rejection and Crucifying of
Christ; Babylon's sin was Cruelty; The Athenians sin was Curiosity, and
affecting of Novelties, Acts 17.21. The Cretians sins were Lying and Sloth,
Tit. 1.12. And there are sins of particular Churches; Ephesus's sin was leaving
her First Love, Rev. 2.4. Pergamus and Thyatira's sins were Errors, Loose
Doctrines and Practices; Sardis's sin was having a Name to Live, and but a
Name, being really Dead; Laodicea's sin was Spiritual Pride and Lukewarmness.
So the sin of France was Pride in Apparel, Inventing and Following of Fashions;
The sins of Southern hot Countries, as Italy are, Uncleanness and Revenge; Of
Spain, Pride of Spirit; Of more Cold and Northern Countries Gluttonny and
Drunkenness, and also Uncleanness, as the fruits of those sins: And what shall
I say are England's proper sins? Oh that there were not cause to fear and say,
that England is even the Center of all these sins; the very Sink whereinto all
these sins have emptied themselves! Are not the Pride in Garb and Spirit, of
some Countries, the Uncleanness of others, the Gluttony and Drunkenness, the
Atheism and Profaneness of others, all to be found overflowing our Land, as a
Deluge? Nay, are not the sins of the Churches of Ephesus, Pergamus, Thyatira,
Sardis and Laodicea, to be found in our Churches? Now it is our Duty, and will
be the Evidence of our Sincerity, to keep from these our National and Church
sins.

Prop. V. Both a Nations and Persons special prevailing sins may alter, and
change, as their Age, and Condition, and particular Circumstances do alter. One
sin may be a Man's special beloved, prevailing sin at one time, and in one Age
and Condition, and another at another time: For as in the Body there may be a
change in the Temper and Constitution of the Body, and thereupon an inclination
to some Diseases at one time, and to others at another: So it may be, and often
is, as to the Soul; namely, Pride, Prodigality, Intemperance in Meat and Drink,
Uncleanness, Gaming, Haunting of, and Linking themselves to, knots of loose
Companions, may be the beloved prevailing sins of Persons in their Youth, or
riper Years; and yet Covetousness may be the special prevailing sin of the same
Person in his old Age. Thou may exchange one beloved lust for another, and
so still have some beloved lust that is properly thine iniquity: A sin that may
prove to be thy reigning sin, may lie a long time hid, and thou at present feel
little of the stirrings of it, but yet at length occasions may come that may
draw it out, and it may come to be thy prevailing corruption. Envy, Discontent,
Impatience may be thy iniquities when thou art brought into a low condition,
which it may be thou observedst little of, while thou were in an healthful or
prosperous state: And when thou art in a prosperous condition, raised in Power
or Estate, Pride, Oppression, Cruelty, Luxury, may be thy special sins, which
thou feltest little of before: Thou may be ready to say as Hazael, 2 King.
8.13. Is thy Servant a Dog? but says the Prophet, Thou shall be King, and thou
little think how cruel and tyrannical thou will be then. And so also a
Nation's special sins may alter: In times of Darkness and Ignorance,
Superstition and Idolatry may be the reigning sins of a place: and in times of
greater Light of the Gospel, together with the springing up of the Grain, Weeds
do often put up, and the Envious one sows Tares; and so Errors in Doctrine, and
the abounding of such may be the reigning sin of a Nation or Church. In the
time of setting upon the work of Reformation in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline
or Manners, the special sin of a People too often is, unwillingness to be
reformed, and opposition to the work of Reformation, and to the setting up the
Kingdom of Christ; and the Lord grant that may not be found to be the sin of
our Nation. At one time Persecution against the godly, and against both the
Form and Power of Godliness, may be the sin of a Nation; at another time
resting in the Form of Godliness, and denying the Power of it, and the increase
of Divisions, Animosities, Censoriousness, etc. may be the sin of Professors:
so that (you see) there may be a change of Nations and Person's special
prevailing sins, and yet they may have still some predominant sin, that may
truly be called their own iniquity: and it is the duty of all that would prove
themselves sincere, to keep themselves unspotted from the present prevailing
sins, those that their own hearts, the times and places, wherein they live, are
most addicted to.

Prop. VI. The same Person or People may at the same time have several
prevailing reigning sins, which may properly be called their peculiar
Iniquities, arising from different Causes, and the different seats wherein Men's
special sins are to be sought after, (of which I shall speak more afterward.)
There may be several prevailing Diseases at the same time in the Body, as
Fever, Dropsy, Stone, etc. so there may be several beloved Lusts at the same
time Reigning in the Heart, and breaking forth in the Life: As for instance;
wantonness in one, fierce passions, or rash anger in another, may be their
iniquity in regard of their natural Constitution; and then Pride, if the person
be prosperous, or Envy and Discontent, Cosetousness, Overreaching, Over-doing
in the World, so as to hinder himself in the public, private or secret Duties
of Religion, etc. if the person be mean and low, may be at the same time his
iniquity in regard of his Condition and Calling in the World: So that though some
particular sin may be most predominant, yet thou may have many reigning and
beloved lusts, which if ever thou would attain to evidence of sincerity, thou
must abandon, and vigorously endeavor to keep clear from, even all of them.

Prop. VII. Though there is a pronesnes and inclination in all Men, even in the
Regenerate, as well as Unregenerate, to some sins more than to others, which
may be properly called their special sins; yet there is a great deal of
difference in those that may be called Men's own Iniquiries, between them as
they are in the Godly, and in the Ungodly; and therefore you must distinguish
between a beloved Lust, a Dalilah, a Darling-Bosom-Sin, fully consented to, and
a prevailing Tyrannizing Corruption, which a person may more easily and
frequently be foiled by. Both may be called their peculiar Iniquities, as those
they do most frequently fall into, yet in the Unregenerate it is a beloved
Lust; in the Regenerate, it is though a Prevailing, yet but a Tyrannizing
Corruption, and a continual Grief and Burden to him: Thus those sins that
proceed much from the natural constitution, and other such like Causes, (of
which I shall speak more afterward) though they are beloved Lusts in the
Ungodly, they may in the Godly be Infirmities, such as Unruly Passions, and the
like, yet they are oftentimes fixed and continued Infirmities, that theymay not
get rid of while they live, and are usually more than mere Infirmities; they
are mixed, have too much of the Will in them, and do proceed much from want of
Watchfulness, and the Exercise of Grace, but are not beloved Lusts, the bent of
the Heart, the Believers Prayers, Desires and Endeavors, are in some good
measure set against them.

This distinction should be heeded, that Men may not pass a wrong Judgment on
their Spiritual State: So that neither the Ungodly count their Sins only
Infirmities or Tyrannizing Corruptions, when they are really Presumptuous Sins,
Beloved Lusts: nor on the other hand, the truly Godly conclude a total want of
Grace, because they feel the stirrings of, yea the prevalence of Tyrannizing
Corruptions.

It is a certain Truth, Grace cannot consist with an entirely, heartily beloved
Lust; yet it is as true, that it may consist with very strong Inclinations to
some particular sins, which may often prevail over them, so as to fall into
them, especially, as to the inward workings of Corruptions, as unruly Passions,
Anger, Wrath, Frowardness, etc. though more seldom into the outward acts of gross
sins: the sensual Appetite even of a Godly Person may be tickled, and at
present pleased with some sin he is particularly inclined to, yet it is not a
beloved Lust, if as soon as he does discover it, and the present heat of the
Temptation is over, he mourns over it, Watches, Prays, Believes, and with his
most diligent endeavors, strives against it, and does not make Provision for
it. Thus Pride, Passion, Cowardly, Unbelieving fears, or Distrust may be a
Godly Man's special sins, and yet not his beloved Lusts. Thus I have dispatched
the first General Head in seven Propositions, for the better understanding of
the Doctrine.

II. The next General Head I propounded to speak to is What things are the rise
and seat of Men's special sins, where they are to be sought, so as to be found
out, in order to the casting of them out, and then keeping from them

1. Those sins which may properly be called Men's own Iniquities, are to be
sought for, in the natural Constitutions and Tempers of their Bodies. Those
sins which are beloved ones in the Unregenerate, and too often Tyrannizing ones
in the Godly, do much proceed from the natural Temper and Constitution, for
these do much incline Men to some particular sins more than to others: For though
no Bodily Constitution be in it self sinful, but all sin does originally rise
in, and proceed from the Heart, Mat. 15.19. yet the Body has an influence upon
the Soul, and the Natural Constitution is sadly improved, and abused oftentimes
by Corruption within, to carry the Man out to some particular sins, and these
prove reigning sins in the Wicked, and very often such prevailing tyrannizing
sins in those that are true Saints at bottom, that they often fall into, and
are foiled by them, and are never quite rid of them till they lay down the Body
of Sin and Death they carry about them.

As for Instance, Those that are of a Sanguine Constitution, in whom Blood is
predominant, are Hot and Moist; the sins such are most inclined to are Vanity
and Levity, an Airiness of Spirit, Pride of Beauty or Apparel, affecting
excessive Mirth and Jollity, Sensuality, Riot, Intemperance, loving Jovial
Company, whereby they lie very open, and are easily drawn to Gluttony,
Drunkenness, Gaming, Revelling, Wantonness, and Unclean and Fleshly Lusts;
search whether your natural Temper does not peculiarly incline you to some or
other of these sins; and if you find it does, it is your Duty in a peculiar
manner, to Watch, Pray, and Believe against them peculiarly, as ever you would
prove the uprightness of your Hearts.

Those that are of that Constitution, in which Phlegm is predominant, which is
Cold and Moist, the sins such are most prone to, are Sloth, Idleness, love of
Sleep, Drowsiness, Dullness and Heaviness at all times, especially at times of
Worship, and in Duties of Religion; unwillingness to Work, carelessness in
Business, Forgetfulness, Indisposedness to Learn and (that which is too often
consequent to these sins) Lying, to excuse the faults that by their Laziness
and Carelessness they have been guilty of; and these are often the sins of
Children and Servants: Oh search, whether these, or some of them be not the
sins that your Natural temper leads you to; and if they be, make Conscience of
specially keeping your selves from these. Again, those that are of a Choleric
Constitution, in whom Choler that answers to Fire, prevails, which is not and
dry: The sins this temper does more especially incline Men to, are Headiness,
Rashness in undertaking, Violence, Fierceness of Spirit, Anger, Wrath,
continual Brawling, striking, Quarrels, Contentions, Lawsuits, being uneasy
both with themselves, and others they converse with: O search whether these be
not some of them, thy special sins, if thou find that Choler have the
predominancy in thy Constitution.

Those that are of a Melancholic temper, which is cold and dry of the temper
of the Earth; the sins such are very much inclined to, are sadness of Spirit,
affecting solitude, moroseness, fancifulness, musings, that they can give no
account of, needless fears, jealousies and suspicions of all persons and
things, as designing or designed against them, evil surmises, discontent,
malice, revenge, ambition, and covetousness, through fears that they shall come
to want; and many times sad and black suggestions against God and themselves,
and motions to Blasphemy, Atheism, Despair. Now search whether your Natural
temper does not incline you to some of these sins, and fortify against them,
that they prove not your iniquities, either indulged and reigning sins, or
prevailing and tyrannizing corruptions.

2. A second place or seat where men should seek for, and may probably find,
their special sins, is the particular Callings and Employments they are of in
the World: A man's special sin may lie in his management of his Worldly
Calling, though he may not be apparently chargeable with sins of Temper or
Constitution. There is no Calling, even the lawfullest, but has its snares, and
temptations to some particular sins; no Mystery of men's Trades, but has some
Mystery of Iniquity it lies open to, if God do not by his special powerful
Grace keep men, and enable them to keep themselves from it. If one be a person
of Learning, Parts, Gifts, a Scholar, yea a Minister; the sins such an one is
in danger of having to be his iniquities, are Pride, Self-conceit, despising of
others, curiosity, prying into the Divine Secrets, conversing about unnecessary
things to show his parts; affecting high Notions, and high-flown Expressions,
being a Factour for Errors, crying up Reason in things above Natural Reason;
or resting in the Notion of Divine Truths and mere Formality, without
experience and practice of Religion, and the power of Godliness: Such had need
to see none of these be their sins, and keep themselves from them. If men be
employed in the Law, the sins they peculiarly lie open to, are, patronizing Bad
Causes, and encouraging men in them, and to go to Law: through carelessness or
treachery betraying the Causes they are entrusted in, and requiring and
exacting excessive Fees. You that are Lawyers, are none of these your sins? oh
keep your selves from them.

A Physicians sins may be, so eyeing second Causes, as to neglect, and little
to eye God the first Cause; making Experiments on men's Bodies and Lives;
neglecting the Poor, not giving them their Advice, or not being so careful of
them that cannot give them their Fees.

Art thou a Tradesman, Shopkeeper, Husbandman, or in any Public Office,
concerned about Money, buying or selling, or in any Trusts; the sins that are
most likely to be your particular reigning or prevailing sins, are Extortion,
Oppression, (as that was the Publican's sin) covetousness, greediness of gain
by unlawful means, deceiving, overreaching, false weights and measures,
putting off bad Wares instead of, and at the price of good; taking the
advantage of the ignorance, weakness, or necessity of the buyers or sellers;
running into debt, and making no Conscience of paying debts, nor of promises
and hargains; unfaithfulness in Trusts for others, or any other unjust ways of
getting gain. These, and such like sins are in danger to be your iniquities,
that have great dealings in the World: Search whether none of these be your
special sins, and pray, believe, and endeavor to keep your selves from them
all.

3. Men's special sins, that may be fitly called their iniquities, are to be
sought for, and often are to be found, in their Relations. Relative sins are often
men's special sins: Men and Women that may have many things very commendable in
them, and not be much chargeable with any considerable iniquities as to their
tempers, or callings and dealings in the World, yet may be greatly faulty in
their Relations, and foil very much in the performance of Relative Duties. As
if a Person be a Magistrate, his special sin may be timorousness, cowardly fear
of displeasing Men, foolish pity, conniving at sin, and thereby encouraging it,
when he should be punishing of it, or else partiality, taking of Bribes,
easiness to be persuaded by Friends to do unjustly; or too much rigor and
severity, or acting from prejudice, and particular spleen, and private revenge
on the other hand. Those who stand in the Relation of Ministers, and Pastors to
People, the iniquities that they are most in danger of, are carelessness and
negligence in their Studies or Preaching; Preaching seldom, and only generally,
not particularly or plainly, not pressing Truths practically, and suitably to
the Cases of their People, Preaching to please, rather than to profit People,
to tickle their Ears and Fancies, rather than to affect their Hearts, and
reform their Lives: to show their own parts, more than to edify their hearers
Souls, affecting words more than matter, and high notions or expressions above
the capacity of the People; neglecting personal instruction, not acquainting
themselves with the spiritual estate of their Flock, nor watching over their
Souls and Conversation, so as to admonish and warn the unruly, comfort the
feeble-minded, support the weak; suffering the Ordinances of Christ to be
defiled by promiscuous Administration of the Sacraments, neglect of
Scripture-discipline, minding their worldly gain, more than gaining Souls to
Christ: Covetousness, and too much involving themselves in Civil, and Worldly
Affairs; and not being affected with, nor endeavoring to experience and
practice the Truths they deliver to others. It concerns Ministers to search,
whether some of these be not their special iniquities, and to keep themselves
from them.

And you Husbands, though in many things you may be commendable, yet if you do
not love your Wives, walk with them as Men of knowledge, do not honor them as
the weaker Vessels, bearing with and covering their infirmities, but are bitter
against them, that is your iniquity. You that are Wives; though you make an high
profession, and have many commendable things in you, yet if you be imperious,
self-willed, unquiet, cannot bring your hearts and practice to that necessary
(though to the flesh, unpleasing) duty of reverencing your Husbands, and being in
subjection to them as your Heads; this is your iniquity, which you must, as you
would prove your sincerity, keep from.

Are you Parents? search whether cockering your Children, indulging them in
sin, nor restraining sin, or correcting them for it, suffering them to have
their wills, feeding their lusts, be not your iniquity, hereby ruining of them
both Soul and Body, both here, and to eternity: This is an iniquity which many
godly Parents have, and are greatly guilty, and much under the power of. This
was old Eli's sin, and one of David's iniquities in his carriage toward
Absalom, Amnon and Adonijah. Or is not your iniquity, not bringing them up in
the knowledge, nurture and admonition of the Lord; taking care for their Bodies
to get Estates, and provide Portions for them, but no care to instruct them, to
bring them to Ordinances, to press them to Duties, and to look after the Graces
of God's Spirit, Faith, Repentance, new Obedience, and to give them good
Examples: Are not these, some of them, at least, your peculiar iniquities? Or
are you not guilty on the other hand, of too much severity and provoking your
Children to wrath, keeping them at too great a distance, not allowing them
necessaries, or conveniences, suitable to their condition, rank or age, and
thereby making them weary of your Government, if not of your Lives, and
tempting them to be more extravagant when they come to have Estates, or Power
in their own hands; for your iniquities that are Parents may lie on this hand.

And you, Children, is it not, or has it not been your iniquity, that you have
been disobedient to Parents, not harkening to their Instructions and Counsels,
not following the Examples of Godly Parents, not reverencing them, yea not
relieving and maintaining them when Old and Poor?

And you Masters or Mistresses, is not your iniquity too much severity and
sharpness toward Servants, neglecting their Bodies, not providing necessaries
for them, not allowing them due Food or Sleep; not teaching them the lawful
honest Mysteries of their Callings; or however, taking no care for their Souls;
exacting of them to work for you to the utmost, but taking no care to further
their working out their own Salvation; giving them no time for Duty to God,
Reading, Prayer, or any other public Ordinances, or Family or Secret Duties;
but working them so hard, keeping them up so late, raising them up so early, to
your work, that they have no time for Religious Duties, or else sleep at them,
which in this case will be more your sin than theirs.

And you Servants, search whether your iniquities are not, or have not been,
sloth, carelessness of your Master's or Mistresse's business, wastfulness as to
Family Provisions, unfaithfulness or purloining; irreverence in your speeches
and carriage, not governing your Tongues; but answering again, giving word for
word, and sawciness in your speeches. O! all of you inquire, whether relative
sins be not your prevailing, if not reigning iniquities, and if they be, be
deeply humbled for them, and by Faith, Prayer, and Watchfulness, endeavor to
keep your selves from them for the future.

4. Persons should search for their iniquities, in the various Estates and
Conditions, whether high or low, of prosperity or adversity, they may by the
Providence of God, be brought into. There are special sins that persons,
through inward corruption, lie open to in their various conditions, whether
prosperous or adverse.

In a prosperous state, when men abound in Riches or Honors, enjoy Health, and
have all comfortable Accommodations about them, the sins that are likely to
prove their reigning, or at least prevailing iniquities, are Pride, Security,
Psalm. 30.6. Luxury, Unthankfulness for, Forgetfulness, and Non-improvement of
Mercies, making them Fuel to their Lusts, Gluttony, Drunkenness, Uncleanness,
Oppression, despising of others, not strengthening the hands of the poor and
needy, but laying out all on their backs and bellies, in superfluities and
excesses, Ezekiel. 16.49. when Riches flow in, setting their hearts upon them,
Psalm. 62.10. 1 Timothy 6.17. when men are rich in the world, they are ready to be
high-minded, and to trust in uncertain Riches. Search whether some of these
have not been (at least) thy prevaling corruptions, when thou have been in a
full and prosperous condition.

And if persons be in an afflicted, low condition, there are peculiar sins,
that in such a condition persons are like to be tempted to, such as impatience
under God's hand, discontent with their present condition, murmuring and
repining against God, quarrelling with Men and Instruments, unbelief, and
distrust of God's Providence and Promises, using indirect means to prevent or
get out of Troubles, revenge upon Enemies, and the second Causes of their
Afflictions; some of these were the particular iniquities David found himself
strongly tempted to, when he was persecuted by Saul, and which he had a special
Eye to, in the Text; how was he foiled by unbelief, when he said, All men were
liars, 1 Samuel 27.1. and Psalm. 116.11. So when he changed his behavior before,
and afterward joined with Achish; yet through the Grace of God he kept himself
from the reigning power of these his iniquities. Inquire whether these be not
thy iniquities under affliction.

5. Men should seek, and often may find out, what their particular reigning, or
at least tyrannizing corruptions are, by looking into the several Ages of their
Life; for as every Constitution, Employment, Relation and Condition has its
peculiar Sins and Temptations attending, and following it, as the shadow does
the body; so every Age of Man's Life has its peculiar sins. Not to instance
much in Infancy and Childhood, though even for those sins we should be humbled
all our days: How soon do Frowardness, Pride, Anger, Revenge, Self-will and
Stubbornness, show themselves in us? and in Childhood, how apt are we to be
taken only with trifles, given wholly to Sports and Plays, and unwilling to
learn? But especially in Youth, how do youthful lusts abound, which Timothy is
warned to flee from? 2 Timothy 2.22. Solomon says, Childhood and Youth are vanity,
which caused David to pray, Remember not the sins of my Youth, Psalm. 25.7. And
Job complains God made him possess the sins of his Youth, Job 13.26. The sins
this Age of Life is most overrun with, are, Pride, Prodigality, Self-conceit,
Untractableness, turning a deaf Ear to the Counsels of the Aged, and with
Rehoboam, making Young Men their Counselors, not caring to advise with Aged,
Experienced Persons, but with green heads, raw and rash Persons like
themselves; thus Disobedience to Parents, Masters, Mistresses, or other
Superiors: Inordinate love of Pleasures and Recreations, and of Bad Company,
of Gluttonous, Drunken, Gaming, Wanton Persons, and so being drawn to these
sins, spending their Time in Drinking-houses, and their Time and Estates in
Gaming, and hereby being drawn to Swearing, Sabbath-profanation and scorning of
Godliness: Such dirty ways is Youth inclined to, and too commonly defiled with,
Psalm. 119.9. O you, Young Men and Women, see whether some of these be not your
beloved Lusts, or, if you have some Grace, whether they be not domineering
corruptions in you, and let it be your cares, as you would evidence your
Sincerity, to keep your selves from these youthful Lusts. Art thou come to
riper Years, to strength of Body and Mind, the prevailing iniquities of this
Age are, usually, greediness of Gain, Earthly-mindedness, resolving to be rich
by right or wrong, Pride, Ambition, aspiring after Places of Profit, Power and
Honor; suffering covetous ambitious Designs to swallow up their time and
hearts, so as to neglect Heaven and heavenly things, their own Souls, and the
Souls of others, the Duties of Divine Worship, Public, Private, Secret, and
Inward heartduties, and other duties they owe to God, and both to the Souls and
Bodies of Men, and those more peculiarly, that are under their Charge. You that
are in this Age, are none of these your iniquities?

Are you come to Old Age, there are sins that beset that Age, viz. Moroseness,
Earthly-mindedness, even though they have one foot in the Grave, suspicions,
peevishness, expecting too much from others, (though its true, a great deal be
due from Inferiors to them) too much imperiousness, and imposing on younger
Persons; not being able to bear the Innocent harmless, Sober and Modest,
freedom and cheerfulness of Young Persons, but expecting such should have as
much gravity and as little cheerfulness as Aged Persons. Such of us as are
arrived to Old Age, search whether some of these be not our iniquities, and if
they be, be we humbled for them, and look we up to God for his Grace to enable
us to keep our selves from them.

6. Persons own iniquities, may be the sins of the Times and Places wherein
Persons live; sins that Men have contracted by the Examples, or Traditions of
their Fathers by the power and influence of Education, the company they have
most conversed with: Great is the power these things have to incline Men to
such sins more than others, and to rivet them in corrupt Principles and
Practices in Doctrine, Worship, Manners and Conversation, so that Men are very
hardly brought off from them. You may probably find your prevailing iniquities,
if you consider what are the most common sins of the Times and Places you live
in. When Pride, Vanity, Looseness, Profaneness, Error, Divisions, are the
common sins of the Times, you will be in a great deal of danger, to be carried,
down the Stream. Are not your special sins such as you have been drawn into by
the Examples of Great Men, at least of sorne Superiors, as Ministers, Parents,
Masters? The vain Conversation Men have received by Tradition from their
Fathers, there needs the Blood of Christ, and the Power and Grace of the Spirit
to redeem Men from, 1 Pet. 1.18. Men are ready to say, This was the Religion,
this the Practice of our Fathers, and are we wiser or better than they? So sins
Men have been educated and brought up in, they are apt to make their own. If
Persons have lived in ungodly Families, where Swearing, Drunkenness,
Uncleanness, Gaming, Sabbath-breaking, have been ordinarily practiced, and
reading the Scriptures, Family Prayer, and Instruction have been neglected,
when they come to have Families of their own, these are like to be their
reigning sins, if God do not bestow upon, and work in them renewing sanctifying
Grace; such will be ready to say, My Parents, or Masters I lived with, did so
and so, and neglected these Duties, and why should I be singular? And so the
sins of thy Companions are like to be thine. If thou chusest and delightest in
loose, profane, riotous, wanton, tippling company, thou art like to be loose,
profane and wanton thy self, and to be drawn into the same sins that thy
companions, thou out of choice, and delightfully conversest with, are guilty
of. Search therefore whether the sins of the times and places, thou have lived
in, the sins thou have been led to by education, example, or thy companions, be
not the sins thou have made properly thy own Iniquities; and Pray and Labor
that by Grace thou may be enabled to keep thy self from them.

VII. Men's own proper sins that may be most prevailing over them, may lie and
be found in the undue, immoderate, unseasonable, and uncharitable use of lawful
and indifferent things, as in the use of Meat, Drink, Apparel, Sleep, lawful
Recreations: Your reigning or prevailing Iniquity may lie in an immoderate and
unseasonable use of these: The use of these is lawful, yea necessary, yet men
that cannot be charged with scandalous sins, may be greatly guilty of excess in
these, in Meats, in indulging and pleasing their Palate and Sensual Appetite,
in too great variety and costliness, (though not in quantity) so as to neglect to
feed the Hungry: So in Drink, there may be excesses short of Drunkenness: In
Apparel, in its costliness, gawdiness, strange fashions, neglecting to cloth
the Naked: So in indulging excessive and unseasonable Sleep: And in Recreations
that are in themselves lawful, Men sin, if they take up and devour too much of
their time and strength, if their Heart be set upon them, wast their Estate,
hinder the duties of their general or particular Calling, taking up the time
that should be spent, either in public Worship, or Family, or Secret Religion,
such as secret Reading, Prayer, Meditation, Self-reflection. In such cases and
circumstances, even lawful things (in themselves considered) may prove
Iniquities, and thy reigning Iniquities.

So Men's special sins may lie in undue uncharitable use of things indifferent,
(or that men account and call so) thereby to grieve the Godly, or draw others
into sin by their example, an undue use of Christian, (or pretended Christian)
Liberty, to the wounding of the Consciences of weak Brethren. Men may contract
guilt in the use of such things, when they use them uncharitably, not caring,
if they satisfy themselves, who they dissatisfie, grieve, or offend: So
uncharitable censuring of others that are satisfied to do some things that thou
art not satisfied about; which is often the prevailing sin of weak Christians:
Or on the other hand imposing on others in Religion, that which they
acknowledge to be indifferent, and others judge not lawful for themselves at
least to do; despising those as weak, who cannot be satisfied to do that which
they do, especially to make such things terms of Communion. See whether none of
these be your Iniquities, and keep your selves from them; these sins the
Apostle warns against, Romans 14.1, 2, 3, 4, etc.

VIII. Men's special sins, that may in a proper sense be styled their
Iniquities, may be gathered and found out from the consideration of the
different spiritual estates of persons both before and after their Conversion.
There are many sins that are the beloved reigning sins of Men in their
Unconverted, Unregenerate state, and there are peculiar sins, that though they
are not beloved reigning sins, yet often prove too prevalent ones after
Regeneration in the Godly, according as they are younger Converts, and more
weak and doubting Christians, or stronger and more ancient Christians.

Before Conversion, the special reigning sins of persons may be different,
according as they may be differently ranked into either the Ignorant, or the
profane, or merely civil, morally just and honest person, or the formal
Professor and Hypocrite.

The Ignorant person that continues such under the means of Knowledge and
Grace, his special and reigning Iniquity, is wilful and affected Ignorance,
resting contented in it, without using the means to come to Knowledge, which he
may enjoy, and are tendered to him: He will not submit to the instructions of
Ministers, Parents, or Christian Friends, and that either from Pride, or
resting in his good meaning, thinking and saying, his Heart, and his Intentions
are as good as any, though the Heart cannot be good where there is not a
competent measure of knowledge, of the necessary principles and duties of
Religion, and of the nature of the Graces of the Spirit. Is not this the sin of
many among us?

And as to the profane, loose, debauched person, that goes on in his wicked
course of Drunkenness, Uncleanness, Swearing, Sabbathbreaking, and keeping
wretched company, his own peculiar reigning sin is carnal Security and
Presumption, and that either presuming on the mercy of God and Merits of Christ
in general, without Faith, applying, laying hold of, and resting upon the Grace
of God and Merit of Christ, and without Repentance, and turning from Sin to
God, thereby evidencing the truth of their Faith; Men's blessing themselves and
saying in their Hearts, they shall have Peace, though they walk in the
Imagination of their own Heart, and add Drunkenness to Thirst, Deuteronomy. 29.19. Or
else presuming and promising themselves, that they can, and will Believe and
Repent hereafter, before they dye. Are not these, O thou profane sinner, thy
beloved, reigning sins, which will prove damning ones, unless thou be
delivered, and enabled to keep from them?

The merely civil, or morally just and honest person in his dealings with Men,
he that is free from Debauchery, and open acts of Profaneness, and is just, yea
it may be Charitable also, a good Common-wealths-man, a good Neighbor, these
are all highly commendable Qualifications, yea necessary duties, inseparable
from true Faith and Repentance, and signs of true conversion, when proceeding
from, and accompanied with those Graces, and Love to, and Fear of God, and
Heart and Life-Holiness: But yet Men may be civilly just, charitable, useful in
their places, and be still in an unconverted state: Now the special beloved,
reigning sins of such as these are, resting in these as their justifying
righteousness, being ready to say as the Pharisee, Luke 18.11, 12. I am not as
other men are, etc. and taking up with these instead of true conversion, and a
saving work of Grace, without Faith, Repentance, Love to God, and New
Obedience, and keeping up Communion with God in the Duties of Religion. See
whether these be not your Iniquities and Reigning sins, and if they have been,
or be, Pray, Believe, and endeavor to be delivered and kept from them.

And as to the formal Professor, he may not only be Civil, but also much in
Duties of Religion, make an high Profession, be a Baptized person, Hear, Read,
Pray, perform Family and Secret Duties, receive the Sacrament of the Lord's
Supper, join in full Communion with the True and Best Reformed Churches of
Christ, and yet be in an Unconverted state: Now the reigning sin of such
persons, which is their Iniquity, is, resting in a form of Godliness, without
the power and practice of it, suitable to their profession; separating duties
of Piety from duties of Justice and Charity; performing some first table
duties, but neglecting those of the second Table, which God has joined, and
which in conjunction the Grace of God in the Gospel does teach and require,
Tit. 2.11, 12. Is this the sin of none of you? If it be a beloved reigning sin
in you, it will ruin you as surely as open profaneness, and the neglect of the
duties of Piety. Pray and Believe that you may be delivered and kept from this
being your Iniquity.

And as to the close Hypocrite, who may deceive himself as well as others, who
may have much Knowledge, great Gifts in Prayer, and speaking of the things of
God, yea, (if a Minister) in preaching, opening and confirming the Truth, and
confuting Error; and may have experienced all the common works of the Spirit,
such as Illumination, Convictions, legal Terrors, and legal Humiliation,
partial Reformation, and flashy, stonyground Affections; a person having all
these, may yet be in an Unconverted state: Now the special reigning sin of
such, is, Pride in, and Boasting of their Gifts, or resting in Knowledge and
Gifts without Grace, taking up with the common works of the Spirit before
mentioned, instead of a thorough change and sound Conversion.

And as to persons Converted, there are sins which may be called their
Iniquities, which though they are not beloved and reigning ones, yet may be very
prevailing in them, so as that they may frequently fall into, and be foiled by
them; and these may be considered according to their lower or higher standing
in Christ, whether as Young Converts, and Weak Christians, or as Stronger, more
Ancient, and of longer standing in Christ.

As to Young Converts, or Weaker Christians, the sins that are like to prove
their Iniquities, are unsettledness and fickleness in Judgment, being taken
with Novelties, tossed to and fro, being led by Affection more than Judgment;
indiscreet zeal, without knowledge and spiritual prudence to poize and regulate
it: Suffering the duties of their general and particular Calling to interfere
and hinder one another; scrupulousness and uncharitable censuring of others,
pride of duties, gifts, inlargements, and trusting in them too much. And in
Weak, Doubting Christians, indulging doubts and fears, listening to Satan,
entertaining hard thoughts of God, refusing the comforts the Word of God holds
forth. Are none of these your prevailing Corruptions, (though not your beloved
ones) but if they be prevailing ones, they are very Dishonorable to God,
uncomfortable, and prejudicial both to your selves and others. Pray you may be
kept, and endeavor to keep your selves from them.

And as to Stronger and more Ancient Christrians, the sins that they are in
danger to be beset with as their peculiar sins, are, too much rigidness toward
young beginners, expecting too much from them, as much Knowledge and Prudence
as they themselves, or other Ancient Christians have, not bearing with their
Infirmities, want of Pity and Compassion toward such as are under Doubts and
Fears; which may provoke God to cause even strong Christians some time or other
to feel them, that they may learn more to pity such weak, doubting, tempted,
deserted, but good Souls for ever after.

Again, another special sin of Stronger Christians, or those that think
themselves so, is, using, or indeed abusing Christian Liberty by going to the
utmost extent of it, to the offense of others, grieving some, and wounding the
Consciences of others, occasioning them to sin by their example, not caring, if
they do but satisfy themselves, how much others may be dissatisfied, grieved,
offended, and damaged. Yea Worldliness is an iniquity that is very apt to seize
and grow upon Ancient Professors, as also Spiritual Sloth and Slumber, Deadness
of Affections, Dullness and Drowsiness of Soul in Holy Duties, decays of Grace,
loss of First Love, and of former Zeal and Tenderness. You stronger and more
ancient Christians, search whether some or other of these be not your
Iniquities, which though they be not allowed, or reigning sins, yet often and very
far prevail over you.

IX. Those Sins which may properly be called Men's own Iniquities, may often be
found in or about the Duties they should or do perform: In regard either of the
Omissions of Duties and Ordinances, or Carelessness in the performance of them.
The sins of our Holy things may prove our special sins: Sins of Omission may
be, often are, reigning sins in the Ungodly, and partial Omissions are too much
prevailing Iniquities in the Godly. It may be thou art not guilty of outward
acts of gross sins, of Impiety, Injustice, Intemperance, but yet thou live in
the neglect of Gods public Ordinances, the Word, Prayer, and the Sacrament (I
mean resting content in such a state that thou have neither right to, nor
fitness for that Holy Sealing Ordinance) so living in the neglect of
Family Duties, of Reading, Prayer, Catechizing, or omitting Secret Duties;
these Omissions, if allowed and continued in, against Knowledge and
Convictions, they are thine, yea thy reigning Iniquities.

And you that have true Grace, your omission of Duties through carelessness,
though they be not beloved Lusts, yet they are strong Corruptions in you, when a
little thing, an ordinary business, will cause you to omit Duties, put you by
the attending on weekday opportunities of hearing the Word, (when you might
without prejudice order it otherways) or put you by your Family or Secret
Duties. Yea it is your iniquity a prevailing sin in you, who have a right to,
and fitness for the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, if you suffer worldly
business so to incroach upon your time and hearts, that you frequently omit
joining in that Ordinance in and with that Christian Church-Society you are
Members of: Nay, if you not constantly do it, unless providence plainly hinder.
Are you guilty of these Omissions? if you are, they are your special sins, be
humbled for, and endeavor to reform them.

And as the omission of Duties and Ordinances, to the slighty careless
performance, may be your iniquity. Thus going unpreparedly unto Duties, rushing
upon them without endeavoring to bring the heart into an holy spiritual frame;
especially going to the Lord's Table without examination and excitation of
Grace, deadness, and not acting of Grace in Duties, drowsiness of heart, yea
drowsiness of body, if thou do not endeavor to the utmost against it: Indeed
if thou do thus strive against bodily heaviness and sleepiness, and if thou
do not bring it on thy self, by eating or drinking, or sitting up too late,
or the like, it is thy mere natural infirmity, and upon thy Faith, Repentance,
and Prayer, God will not impute it as sin to thee, but for the sake of Christ
will pardon it. So vain, wandering, worldly, distracting thoughts in Duty, if
thou do not endeavor to drive away these Fowls of the Air, when they come
upon thy Sacrifices, they are thy prevailing iniquities; but if thou do by
Faith, Prayer and Endeavors drive them away, they are but thy infirmities,
however, not thy prevailing sins, when thou grievest for, and groanest under
them. So pride of gifts, expressions and inlargements in Duties: and again, not
following Duties and Ordinances, not following the Word and Sacraments, with
Prayer, Meditation, particular Application, nor following these with
Watchfulness, and Endeavors suitable to your Prayers, and other Duties you
perform.

Are not some of these the too frequent prevailing sins, that cleave to the
holy things, even of you that may have Grace in truth? these you must be
humbled for, and by Prayer and Faith seek the pardon of, and endeavor by these
and an holy Watch, to keep your selves from.

X. And lastly, Which concerns only the truly Godly. Person's special sins may
lie in, or about their very Graces; namely, their not endeavoring to grow in
those Graces, and to act and exercise them, or falling into, and being foiled
by those sins which are directly contrary to the Graces, wherein they have been
most eminent. Thy iniquity, who have true Grace, may be thy not drawing out
those Habits of Grace God has wrought in thee, into act and exercise, but
suffering Grace to lie asleep and unacted. If God has wrought Faith in thee,
thy iniquity may be that thou do not grow strong in Faith, that thou might
so more glorify God; that thou do not act and use thy Faith, to resolve thy
Doubts, and repel thy Fears; that thou do not by Faith, fetch supplies of
Grace and Strength against corruption, and temptation, from that Fountain of
Strength, the all-sufficient Fullness of Christ. Has God given thee the Habit
of the Grace of Repentance, desires after, love to God and Christ, filial Fear,
Meekness, etc. thy chief iniquity may be that thou do no more exercise these
daily in thy life to attain to more conformity and communion with God, curb thy
Passions, prevent rash Anger, provoking Words, or any sinful carriages. Yea the
iniquities of God's People may lie in being foiled by those sins which are
directly opposite to those Graces wherein they have been most eminent; For it
is observable in Scripture, that the sins the most eminent of Saints have been
foiled by, were in the defect of, or in what was opposite to the Graces they
were most eminent for. Thus in Noah; one that was a Preacher, and true and
eminent Practiser of Righteousness and Temperance; his greatest iniquity
mentioned, was his being over-taken with Drunkenness once. Abraham most eminent
for Faith; his chief iniquity recorded was, through fear dissembling, and not
owning his Wife, but saying, She is my Sister. Lot, who vexed his Soul for
Sodom's sins, yet his iniquity upon record was, a very heinous and complicated
sin, and of great affinity to theirs, namely, Drunkenness, and committing
Uncleanness with his own Daughters. Jacob was a plain Man, yet his greatest sin
recorded was, using indirect means to get the Blessing, even Dissimulation, and
downright Lying, Genesis 25: Moses, the meekest Man on Earth, yet the sin that
shut him out of Canaan was, speaking unadvisedly with his Lips. Job eminent in
Patience, Jam. 5.11. yet how many impatient Speeches did he utter? David, a Man
after God's own heart; how tender was his Conscience? 1 Samuel 24. v. 5. but
where was this his tenderness when he committed the sins of Adultery and
Murder? Elijah eminent for his Courage confronting Ahab, telling him it was he
that troubled Israel, and setting himself against Baal's Priests, and slaying
four hundred and fifty of them, 1 King. 18.18, 22, 40. yet how faint-hearted
was he, when out of fear and discontent he sues for Death? 1 King. 19.4. Peter,
how resolute and forward for Christ, yet how cowardly, sinfully and shamefully
did he deny Christ? And God permits this, that the best of his people may learn
to rely upon, not the strength of their Graces received, but the strength of
Christ, and of his Spirit, and constantly to look up to, and depend upon him
for fresh supplies of his Grace to be derived from him by Faith. Search whether
your peculiar iniquities do not lie here, either in the want of growth in, and
strengthening of your Graces, or want of the exercise of them; or in your
falling into the sins directly opposite to those Graces of God's Spirit you
have formerly been most eminent in, and labor especially to keep your selves
from these iniquities, that they prove not your chief and most prevailing sins.
And so much for the second General, which was to show where men's special sins
may most probably be found.

III. The next General Head is to give the Scripture Proof of the Doctrine,
which I shall very briefly dispatch.

I. That it is the duty of all peculiarly to keep themselves from their own
iniquities, whether reigning, or but prevailing sins. It is proved from direct
Scripture-commands, Matthew. 5.29, 30. Mark 9.43, 45, 47. By the right hand,
right foot, and right eye, are understood those sins our Text speaks of, such
as men are as hardly prevailed upon to part with, as they would be to part with
those Members of the Body. So Heb. 12.1. Let us lay aside the sin that does so
easily beset us, which, as it may have respect to Original Corruption, and the
body of Death that root, and fountain of all other sins; so it especially has
an eye to the peculiar reigning or prevailing sins, which may be called men's
own ways, ( Isa. 53.6.) For these are the very firstborn of Original
Corruption, they are the sins that have men at every turn: Thus Isa. 55.7. The
wicked is exhorted and directed to forsake his way, and his thoughts; such ways
of sin, and such particular corrupt thoughts, as he is most guilty of, and are
most his own, as ever he would obtain mercy, and be abundantly pardoned, Jer.
18. v. 11. Return you now every one from his evil way: Every one has some
particular evil way, that he most walks in.

II. This is an evidence of uprightness, viz. for persons to keep themselves
from their special and most prevailing corruptions; this appears, in that, this
is promised by God to be written in the hearts of men, as a special and
essential part of Repentance, Isa. 2.20. When those there spoken of, repented
and were truly converted; they cast away their Idols of Silver and Gold, which
cost them much, and they had set an high rate upon, but now they shall cast
them away to the Moles and to the Batts; they account no place, no dunghill bad
enough for them: So it is said, Isa. 30.22. that when they truly repent, they
shall defile the covering of their graven Images of Silver, cast them away as a
menstruous Cloth, and say unto them, Get you hence; they shall throw them away
with detestation as most abominable things. So Hos. 14.3, 8. When Israel
returns to the Lord, he shall say, Ashur shall not save us; we will not ride
upon Horses; we will say no more to the works of our hands, you are our Gods.
Ephraim shall say, What have I any more to do with Idols? Carnal confidence in
Assyria and Egypt, and in their Horses and strength at home, and in their
Idols, had been Israel's and Ephraim's reigning sins, but when they truly and
sincerely turn to the Lord, then they keep themselves from them, and will have
no more to do with them.

IV. The next General Head to be spoken to is, to explain what is meant by the
upright Man's keeping himself from his Iniquity. And,

I. Negatively. It is not to be understood in a strict legal sense, as though
every, or indeed any, upright Man did, or in the time of this life, while he is
in the Body, and carries the Body of Sin and Death about him, could, so keep
himself from his iniquity, as never to commit it after his conversion, or never
to relapse into it after his Repentance of it, and his Faith for pardon of, and
power against it, especially as to the inward stirrings and workings of
corruption, or such sins as are mere Infirmities, or mixed ones, or sins of
surprise: if this were the meaning of it, the best of Saints on Earth (no not
David, a Man after Gods own Heart) could never have said, I have kept my self
from my iniquity. David was guilty of dissimulation, and of the way of lying
more than once: There are some sins of Constitution, Calling, Relation,
Condition, etc. as have been mentioned above, that even an Upright Man may be
pestered with all his days, and be foiled by them again and again; its true, it
must be owned, that it is the duty of every Man, and the hearty desire and
endeavor of every Upright Man, his habitual aim and design, and the bent of
his Soul to keep himself from his own special sin, and indeed every known sin,
so as not to allow himself in the commission thereof.

But if never committing or falling into this his iniquity, was the meaning of
the Text, not a mere Man on Earth would be able to prove his Uprightness: That
in Eccles. 7.20. is true, not only of sin in general, but also of this special
sin; There is not a Just man on earth that sins not, Jam. 3.2. not only in
many things, but in the special sin which we are most inclined to, we sin more
or less. The foregoing sense would condemn the generation of the Righteous, for
where is the Upright Man or Woman that has not cause to complain and confess,
I have bewailed, prayed, and endeavored against my pride, passions, workings
of Corruption, Unbelief, and other my iniquities, and yet have again and again
been foiled by them. Therefore,

II. Affirmatively. To show you what it is in an Evangelical sense, for the
Upright Man to keep himself from his iniquity. And,

I. To keep Men's selves from their iniquities, so as to evidence the
uprightness of their Hearts thereby, is to break off from the practice of those
sins they are most inclined to, that is, from the allowed, frequent, customary
committing of it, if it be an outward act of gross scandalous sin, yea from the
allowed inward actings of his peculiar sins, though they be but mere infirmities,
much more if they be mixed infirmities, that have too much of the Will, or
present sensual delight in them, or that proceed from carelessness: He does not
keep himself from his iniquity, who regards iniquity in his Heart, Psalm. 66.18.
That makes a Trade of his sin, customarily commits it, or frequently falls into
it: He keeps himself from his iniquity, that can truly say as Paul, Romans 7.15.
That which I do, I allow not, but if Men allow themselves in any known sin,
they do not keep themselves from it, are not upright, and such who customarily
and frequently fall into scandalous sins, as Tippling, Drunkenness, Swearing,
Uncleanness, Defrauding, or any other sin, that they know to be so, they do not
keep themselves from their Iniquity: It is your Duty therefore, to break off
the allowed customary commission of any sin, and more especially of those sins
that by reason of Constitution, Calling, Age, Place, Condition, or any other
respect may be Men's own Iniquities, as they would prove that they are upright
before God, thus David, 1 Samuel 26.11.

II. That keeping Men's selves from their Iniquities, which is an Evidence of
Uprightness before God, consists, in the bent and bias of the Soul being set
against sin, and peculiarly against its special sins: In the Souls being
heartily willing, and giving a full consent, to have its most beloved Lust, or
most prevailing, tyrannizing Iniquity subdued, mortified, killed and crucified.
It is to take up a firm purpose and resolution, and that in the strength of God
and Christ, and the Holy Spirit, against its special sins, it is to be active
in keeping from, and mortifying these prevailing corruptions, and not to be
merely passive: The Upright Man is not only kept from his sin, but keeps
himself from it: As it is one thing to be humbled, and another to humble ones
self; so it is one thing to be kept from committing the outward acts of sin, and
another thing for a Man to make it his design and business to set himself
against his sin, to keep it at an under, to Watch, Pray, Believe against it,
and for the mortification of it: So the word in the Text, in the Voice it is
used, signifies a reciprocal action, a Man's acting upon and toward himself,
using as it were an holy violence on himself, toward his strong propensions,
and particular iniquities. I was a Preserver of my self, so one Version: The
Syriack, I took heed to my self: The Arabic, I will take heed, or beware of
mine Iniquity: Men may be kept from their sins, yet not keep themselves, and so
not be upright. Men may be kept from the outward acts of their sins by force,
fear of Punishment from Men, or of displeasing of Friends, or from mere legal
slavish fear of God and of Hell, by present checks, gnawings, or terrors of
Conscience, by Sickness, or want of what may feed their Lusts, their
Intemperance, Uncleanness, or the like, as in Poverty or Age it may be: In such
cases Men's sins leave them, they do not leave or keep themselves from their
sins: But then Men so keep themselves from their iniquities, as to evidence
that they are upright, when they can say, as Romans 7.15. to the end.

III. A Man keeps himself from his Iniquity, so as to manifest his Uprightness,
when, if he be overtaken and foiled by his iniquity, he mourns and grieves for
it with true Evangelical Godly sorrow, and speedily renews the actings of his
Repentance and Faith, and Prayers for Pardon of, and Power against it, not
suffering guilt to lie on his Conscience, or the filth and power of his sin to
lie quietly in his Soul, but confesses it to God, and has his Heart stirred
up to an higher degree of indignation against it: This is the Duty, yea and
Endeavor of all that would prove their Hearts Upright before God. Men may
forbear the outward acts of their reigning sins for a time, from carnal or
merely legal grounds and principles, yet not loath them, but still have a
liking to them, and when they do fall into them, not grieve aright, nor groan
under them. You do not in the sense of the Text keep your selves from your
iniquities, if upon foils by them, you do not speedily repent of them, confess,
bewail them, believe and pray against them, and have not your Hearts filled
with greater hatred of them: But he does keep himself from his iniquity, so far
as to approve his uprightness, who though he may sometimes, yea too often be
guilty of some acts of it, yet it is the constant burden of his Soul; so that
he groans under it, and is in bitterness of Soul for it, looking on Christ as
pierced by it. He exercises Faith on Christ, wrestles with God in Prayer, and
his Heart is more set against this his sin; so that whereas it has been
peculiarly loved and delighted in before in his unregenerate state, or was more
tickling of, and pleasing to the unregenerate part even after Conversion, he
now comes to have his Heart more set upon the mortification of it, so as to
offer an holy violence to it: This is for Men to keep themselves from their
iniquities, for there must be an holy violence used against these special sins;
for though the Spirit in the regenerate part be willing, yet the flesh is weak
yea wiful, and must be kept under.

IV. To be upright, and prove that uprightness by men's keeping themselves from
their iniquities, it is, to watch against these sins in an especial manner, and
all the occasions and the very appearances of these evils, and to resist the
very first motions and risings of them in the heart; and to use all the means
God has in his Word appointed and directed to, for the mortification of them;
to use and improve all Duties and Ordinances, the Word, Sacraments, Prayer,
Fasting joined with Prayer, and Communion of Saints, yea all public, private
and Secret Duties to this end: This is for men to keep themselves from their
iniquities; he does not do so, that runs upon the occasions of sin, such things
as he has found to feed his special sins; he that runs into that company, that
he has found drawing him into sin, either drinking, wantonness, misspending of
time, or any other sin, that he is inclined to, and easily foiled by: he that
does not abstain from appearance of evil, 1 These. 5.22. does not hare the
garment spotted with the flesh, Jude v. 23. that does not resist the very first
motions of sin, but entertains them in his thoughts, suffers them to conceive,
and breed there. He does not keep himself from his iniquity, that does not deny
himself in lawful things, that are not necessary, when and so far as, he finds
them to minister occasion to his special sins: such an one does in part fail in
this duty of the Text, and so far in his uprightness, though in the main he be
upright. Yea he that does not use the means to mortify his sins, the Word,
Prayer, and (if one that has a right to them) Sacraments, and improve them for
this end, does at least in degree fall short of integrity; and if any wholly
neglect to avoid occasions of sin, or to use the means to mortify these sins,
he is not upright at all; but he that does these things, avoids occasions of
sin, and duly uses and improves the instituted means for mortifying of it, is
upright. And these particulars may seem as Marks to try your selves by.

V. I proceed now in the next place to give the Reasons of the Doctrine. And

I. One Reason why it is the duty of every one that names the Name of Christ,
and the Evidence of such an one's Unprightness, to keep himself from his
iniquity, is, because it is by these sins that are men's own proper iniquities,
(whether they be beloved reigning sins in the unregenerate, or prevailing and
tyrannizing corruptions in the regenerate) that God is most dishonored; these
are they that men take occasion from to reproach Religion, especially if they
be outward open acts of sin that are fallen into. Now certainly it is the duty
of all, especially of Believers, to keep themselves from that which may bring
dishonor to God; and therefore will it be an Evidence of the uprightness of
the heart, because he that really keeps himself from his iniquities, does it
from grounds and principles, from a respect to God's Glory; he keeps from them
as things that do peculiarly dishonor God, transgress his holy Law, are
committed against Christ, grieve and quench the Holy Spirit of God: For these
are the right scriptural, spiritual grounds and motives of our keeping our
selves from sin: Now men's own sins, dishonouring God, opposing Christ, and
grieving the Spirit in a more than ordinary manner, to keep from some sins, and
not from these, would arguea rotten heart.

II. Because for persons to keep themselves from their iniquities either
reigning or prevailing corruptions, is, one special act, fruit and effect of
true Evangelical Sorrow, and Repentance: Now it is our duty to exercise all the
acts, and bring forth all the effects and fruits of true Repentance; but
without this our Repentance is not truly Evangelical, for there is an effential
part and actof it wanting, viz. that of taking an holy revenge on our sins, and
on our selves for them, 2 Cor. 7.11. Tea what revenge? This is the only case in
which revenge is lawful; and here it is commendable, yea our great and
necessary Duty: This our prevailing corruption, (as you saw under the last
Head) is that by which we have most dishonored God, most wounded and pierced
Christ, grieved, quenched and vexed the Spirit of God, and has most wounded
our own Consciences, defiled our Souls, and defaced God's Image in them;
therefore we should keep our selves from these our iniquities, that we may take
revenge on them, for the wrong they have done to God, and our own Souls; by
being the death of those sins, which have in a more eminent manner, been the
cause of the Death of Christ, and would be the Death of our Souls, if not
repented of, pardoned, and subdued as to their reigning power; by how much any
sin has been more delightful to us formerly, the more hateful it should be to
us for the time to come. What Amnon unjustly did by Tamar, we may justly do by
our beloved sins. Thus have true Penitents expressed their Repentance; so did
Mary Magdalen when she Washed Christ's Feet with her Tears, to take a revenge on
those Eyes of hers, that had been Doors and Windows, Outlets, and Inlets to
Lust and Wantonness as to her self, and by Wanton Glances had stirred up Lust
in others; and she took a Revenge on those Hairs that had been Nets and Snares
to catch Men; when she wiped Christ's Feet with the Hairs of her Head. Thus
Archbishop Cranmer who had subscribed a Recantation, when he was recovered
from his Fall, and brought to the Stake, first put that Hand into the Flames
that had Subscribed the Recantation.

III. Because to keep your selves from your iniquities, will be an Evidence of
the power as well as the truth of your Repentance, and of the Work of Gods
Sanctifying Spirit and Grace upon your Hearts; therefore we should keep our
selves from these our iniquities: These are the Master-sins, the Lordly-Lusts;
we should do by these as the King of Syria gave order to his Captains about the
King of Israel, 1 Kin. 22.31. Fight neither with small nor great save only with
the King of Israel. They were to fight with others, but against him chiefly: So
we must fight against every sin; but we must aim our Arrows and Blows most
peculiarly against our King Lusts, to take them Captive, yea to kill and slay
them: As it would be an Evidence of Falseness and Treachery in Officers and
Soldiers in an Army, to shoot at the Common Soldiers amongst their Enemies,
but when they see Captains or the General, to let them escape, and not make a
shot at them; no less will it be a sign of a false, rotten, Hypocritical Heart,
to keep from some sins, but not from its special sins: But on the other hand it
is a sign of sincerity, when Men keep themselves from these their most
predominant sins, as those that are the greatest Enemies to God, and their
Souls: Yea thus to keep from our special, most prevailing sins, will be an
evidence of the power of Grace in the Heart; as it is an evidence of the power
of a Prince, when he is got into the Heart of his Enemies Country, and takes
his Forts and Strongholds, so it will be a sign of the strength of Grace, when
you keep from, and subdue your formerly beloved, or most prevailing
corruptions; for these are the Strongholds, that Sin, the World, and Satan have
in your Hearts; therefore it will be an evidence that the Weapons of your
Warfare are mighty through God, when they pull down those Strongholds, and
bring down every high thing into captivity, 2 Cor. 10.4, 5. These your special
sins are the Strong Man Armed, that keep the House, but now when you keep your
selves from these sins, it proves Grace to be stronger than sin, when it
overcomes these strong corruptions.

IV. Another reason why we should keep our selves from our special prevailing
sins, and why it will be an evidence of our uprightness, so to do is, because
this will be an evidence of the truth and strength of our love to God and Jesus
Christ, when we will deny them nothing, but are ready to pluck out right eyes,
cut off right hands, keep and mortify those sins which are by nature, by
custom, and by their profit or pleasure as dear to us as those members of body
are; and indeed he who is enabled by grace, to part with his most beloved or
prevailing sins, will by the same grace be enabled to part with his life for
God, if called thereunto; for Men's beloved lusts are dearer to them than their
lives, yea than their Souls naturally: But if Men do not keep themselves from
their beloved iniquities, they have no true love to God at all; yea, if they do
not set themselves with all their might against prevailing corruptions, it is a
sign there is little love to God and Jesus Christ.

I now proceed to the Application of this Doctrine; and much that has been
mentioned in the Explication, and Confirmation of the Doctrine, may be helpful
to us in, and serve instead of the Application of it; what has been already
said, showing where men may seek for, and find their special sins either
beloved and reigning lusts, or prevailing iniquities, may be useful by way of
Direction to help you, to find out what your iniquities are, and what has been
spoken in the Application; showing what it is for persons to keep themselves
from their iniquities, may be helpful to you in Examination, whether you have
this mark and evidence of the Uprightness of your hearts before God; and what
has been insisted on as Reasons of the Doctrine, may serve as Motives to
enforce the Exhortation to all of us, to keep our selves from our peculiar
Iniquities: But I shall make however some more particular Application, by way
of Examination, Exhortation and Direction.

I. Let us make use of this Doctrine by may of Examination, to call on all,
both my self and others, to examine whether we can evidence that we are upright
before the Lord, by this, that we have been enabled to keep our selves from our
iniquities; for consider you can have no evidence of sincerity, if you do not
in some good measure keep your selves from your iniquity, at least from the
reigning power of it, from every beloved Lust, and if you do not set your
selves against, and use your utmost endeavors to keep your selves from your
most prevailing tyrannizing Corruptions, that you find by experience you are
most inclined to, and most easily and frequently foiled by. To indulge any sin
out of love to it, and when convinced it is a sin, is the brand of a
rotten-hearted Hypocrite, and the certain sign of a Man's being wholly void of a
work of saving grace, it argues no grace at all in truth; and to be often
foiled by prevailing (though they be no reigning) sins, is an argument of very
weak Grace, and that it is at a very low ebb in the Soul. If you keep your
selves from some sins that you are less inclined and have fewer temptations to,
from constitution, employment, age, condition, or the like, and yet do not keep
your selves from other sins, that you are more inclined to, at least if you do
not to the utmost endeavor so to do, you can have no evidence of sincerity;
if, with Saul, you destroy the lean Cattle, but spare the Fat, and spare an
Agas, a King Lust, you are but Hypocrites; if you keep your selves only from
lean Lusts, that can bring in little or no advantage to you, but even outward
hurt, such as will waste your Estates, blast your Credit, impair your Health,
consume your Bodies, destroy your Lives, or undo your Families, but spare fat
Lusts, such whereby your gain comes in, which may raise you in your Estate, or
in your esteem with Men, or are pleasing and delightful sins, this is a sign of
an unsound heart; if you allow your selves in the sins that your Callings lay
before you Temptations to, Injustice, Oppression, Deceit, or any Unlawful
Gains, if there be any Delilah you lay in your Bosoms, or lay your heads in the
Lap of, your hearts are not upright: But if you regard no iniquity in your
heart, would not leave a Hoof behind, spare no Agas, has no Delilah, it is a
sign of an upright heart. Examine therefore your selves, whether you have kept
your selves from your iniquity. To keep from the committing some sins that you
have no great inclination or temptation to, is no sign of sincerity; but to
keep your selves from the sins your natural temper, age, etc. leads you to,
this will be an evidence of grace. As for instance, for an old Man to keep from
Wantonness, from Acts of Uncleanness or Prodigality, this is no sign of his
sincerity, when possibly he thinks or speaks of such sins with delight; his
sins in such a case have rather left him, than he has left his sins: So it is no
sign of Uprightness for the young Man to keep himself from Covetousness; but
now for the young Man to flee youthful Lusts, Pride, Vanity, Disobedience to
Superiors, Uncleanness, Intemperance, Evil Companions, Sins that he has the
most strong Temptations to, this is a sign of Grace: So for the old Man to keep
himself from Covetousness, Frowardness and other Sins of Age, is an evidence of
true Grace, yea of some strength of it; for the Rich or Prosperous Person to
keep himself from Pride, Security, Trusting in Riches, Honors, Friends, and
from making them Fuel for his Lusts: And for the Afflicted Person to keep
himself from Discontent or using indirect Means to get out of his Straits and
Troubles; for the Tradesman to keep himself from Trading Sins, for him that
has great dealings in the World, yet to keep his heart free for God, and for
his Worship; this will be a sign of an upright heart, as keeping its self from
its own iniquity. You have heard in the Explication of the Doctrine, what it is
to keep your selves from your iniquities; make use of those heads here to try
your selves by. Do you endeavor to break off the allowed customary practice of
the sins you are most prone to? is the bent of your hearts against these sins
chiefly, and your wills set against them? can you truly say, you hate them,
when you are foiled by any of them? do you mourn and cry out under the sense of
them, as Paul, Romans 7.24. Oh wretched Man that I am! when you have been
overtaken with your special sin, can you never rest till you have recovered
your selves by Confession, Prayer, renewed Act; of Faith and Repentance, so
that though sometimes you fall into your special iniquity, yet you keep your self
from the reigning power of it, you dare not lie in it, and after particular
foils by your iniquity, and your recovery from them, do you give those
iniquities of yours a more deadly wound, set your selves against it, endeavor
more the mortification of it, watch, and pray, and believe more against it, and
against all occasions of, and temptations to it, and make use of all means God
has appointed to keep you from it? viz. all Ordinances, and Providence for
this end; Ordinances, the Word Read, Preached, Meditated, and Conferred on,
Sacraments, Fasting, Communion of Saints, your own and others Experiences, and
all Providence both of Mercy and Affliction, to keep under sin, yea this sin,
and keep from it in your hearts and lives; so that after your falls you gain
more ground against it. If it be thus with you, though you may too often be
foiled by your particular corruptions, yet you do keep your selves from your
iniquities, so far at least as to approve the uprightness of your hearts before
God: But on the other side if you customarily commit these sins, if you indulge
them, and allow your selves in the Acting of them, nay if your hearts be not
set against them, so that, though you leave them, or they leave you, yet you do
not loath them, do not grieve when you fall into them; do not act Faith and
Repentance, do not watch against them, use not the means of mortifying them,
but run upon the occasions of them, they are your beloved reigning sins.

II. Another Use I shall make of this Doctrine is by way of Exhortation;
earnestly to press all, that they would not rest short of this evidence of
Uprightness, the keeping themselves from their iniquities.

In prosecution of which Use, I shall add both Motives and Directions.

Be exhorted all of you to keep your selves from your iniquities, the sins
which by Calling, Constitution, Relation, outward Condition, or Spiritual
Estate, you are most prone to, and may most properly be called your iniquities.
You must endeavor to keep your selves from all sins whatsoever, as to the
allowed committing of them, but especially from these iniquities. And there are
two branches of this Use of Exhortation.

1. That you would labor to find out what your special iniquity is, whether a
beloved lust, a reiging sin, or a too much prevailing corruption.

2. That having found it out, you would endeavor to cast it out, and keep your
selves from it.

I. Be exhorted to make a diligent search to find out what your proper reigning
or prevailing sins are. This Exhortation is rightly grounded on this Doctrine;
for if it be your duty to keep your selves from your iniquity, then it is
certainly your duty to make a diligent search into your own hearts and lives,
to find it out, for you can never actively keep your selves from it, or by
faith, prayer and watchfulness set against it, if you do not first search it
out. And here all those particulars insisted on under that head, in the opening
the Doctrine, [Where you are to search for these iniquities] are of great use,
and proper to be returned upon. Look into your Constitutions, Callings and all
the other particulars mentioned there: But because it is a matter of great
concern, I shall add other signs, to help you in this search I am exhorting you
to.

1. That is thy iniquity, thy special prevailing corruption, yea, if in an
unregenerate state, thy beloved reigning lust, which thou do with peculiar
frequency commit, and art with peculiar ease, drawn into that sin which through
custom is become a second nature; that is this iniquity (which thou must keep
thy self from) next to original corruption, which is every man's own iniquity,
and the root of all other sins. Sins which Men have accustomed themselves to
commit, are most properly their iniquities, yea if not grieved for, prayed,
believed and watched against, they are their reigning sins: That sin that finds
the door of the heart always open to entertain it, or ready to open at the
first knock, that sin, in respect of which thy heart is like to Tinder; no
sooner can the spark of a temptation, or an occasion fall upon thee, but thy
heart presently catches at, be it Pride, Passion, Lust, Intemperance,
Couzenage, love of lewd, loose Companions, so that no sooner does a loose
Companion hold up his finger, but thou presently yieldest, this is thy
iniquity. That sin which thou can deny nothing to, as Sampson could deny
Delilah nothing, but tells her all his heart, though it was to his ruin, lost
him his strength, his eyes, and at last his life, that is thy Delilah-lust;
that thou can not deny, though it cost thee thy Estate, Name, Relations, Life,
yea thy very Soul. It is true, a sincere Soul may be frequently foiled by
inward workings of his Corruptions, and may relapse into the same sin again and
again, and this is his iniquity, his prevailing sin; but that sin which thou
can deny nothing to, is more than a bare prevailing sin, (though that is ill
enough) it is a reigning sin.

2. That is thine iniquity (a beloved lust in the unregenerate, and a
prevailing corruption in the regenerate) that ingrosseth thy thoughts most;
that thy thoughts run out upon, and are most busily employed about, especially
in times of retirement, when thou art alone and have most free opportunity for
thinking; if these thoughts be allowed, indulged, delight full ones, and most of
all if these thought and contrivances about accomplishing the sin crowd in, and
be entertained by thee, when thou art at the Worship of God, and in holy
Duties; so that sin which thou art thinking of, when in thy Calling, when alone
in thy Closet, or in the Night-seasons, when thou wakest, that sin which lies
down with thee at night, and waketh with the, when thou wakest in the night or
morning; that is usually last in thy thoughts when thou go to sleep, and
first in the morning, and interrupts thee most, when thou art, or should be
conversant in Duties of Divine Worship; that is thy iniquity, else thy thoughts
would not be so much working about and toward it. If they be worldly thoughts
that are thus thy constant Companions, Worldliness is thy Iniquity; if thoughts
of thy Pleasures, Voluptuousness is thy Iniquity; if thoughts of meeting with
Tippling, Gaming, Wanton Companions, if lustful unclean Thoughts, then
Intemperance and Lust is thy Iniquity; if Angry, Wrathful, Envious, Malicious,
Revengful Thoughts, then Anger, Envy, Malice, Revenge are thy Iniquities: Yea,
if wandering thoughts prevail in Duties, these are thy iniquities; if thou do
indulge such thoughts, allow, delight in them, and roll them in thy mind with
pleasure, as thou would do a sweet morsel under thy tongue. Such sins are thy
beloved lusts, and reigning sias, for Christ himself has said. Matthew. 16.21.
Where the treasure is, there the heart will be also; therefore if thy allowed
delightful thoughts are running upon any sin, that sin is thy treasure: And
though sinful thoughts of any of the forementioned kinds, even be they but
distracting thoughts, if they be not allowed but grieved for and repented of,
are not reigning sins, yet if they very frequently and powerfully carry thee
down, they are thy prevailing and tyrannizing corruptions; which if bewailed,
resisted, prayed, believed and watched against, do not disprove thy sincerity,
yet they often very much hinder the evidence of it, and therefore must be thy
continual grief and burden; and thou must especially endeavor to keep thy self
from these sins as thine Iniquities.

3. That is very likely to be thy iniquity, which thy best Friends, those that
love thee most, and wish thee best, do most tell thee of, warn thee against,
and reprove thee for; that thou hear oftenest from these about, surely thou
art more than ordinarily inclined to, else thy Friends would not so often
trouble thee about them. And these Friends are of two sorts, Friends without
thee and Friends within thee.

(1.) That sin which thy best friends without thee, do most frequently tell
thee, and warn thee of, such as faithful Ministers, especially thy own Pastors,
Godly, faithful Christian Friends, Godly Relations, as Yoke Fellow, Parents,
Masters, any Superiors, yea or Equals, what such notice in thee, and do
frequently admonish thee of, thou may conclude that is thy iniquity, a sin
thou art much inclined to: For Love covers a multitude of sins; in this sense,
thou should say to thy self; surely this is my iniquity, else these my
Friends who I am satisfied love me, and wish me well, would not so notice it,
and reprove me for it.

(2.) Thou have a Friend in thy Bosom, Conscience, this is either the best
Friend next to God and Christ, or if thou despisest, affrontest and provokest
it, the worst Enemy thou can have in all the World. Would thou then find
out thy iniquity, hearken to the Voice of Conscience, that is like to be thy
iniquity, which thy Conscience most charges upon thee, and most sharply checks
thee for, being rightly informed by the Word, of the sinfulness of that which
it accuses thee of; and also giving a true testimony as to matter of fact, and
thy being guilty of committing such a sin.

This I add, because if Conscience be erroneous and misinformed, or a
scrupulous Conscience, that charges that to be a sin which is not, or if it
give a false testimony as to matter of fact, as in the case of doubting,
desponding Souls, or those under clouds of Melancholy, Conscience may often
accuse them falsely, and its Judgment then cannot safely be depended on: But if
it be rightly informed as to the thing being a sin, and true in its testimony
that thou art greatly guilty of it, and that it is thy special iniquity, it is
what thou should take great notice of: And especially Conscience is to be
attended to in its accusations of thee, as to what is more peculiarly thy
iniquity, at some special seasons; such as these,

(1.) That is thy iniquity, at least too prevalent in thee, which Conscience
rightly and truly most accuses thee of, and checks thee for, when thou sirest
under the Ministry of the Word; which Conscience points thee to, when sin in
general is spoken against; when it turns the edge of reproofs, precepts,
threatenings against thy particular sins, and says, thou art the man that these
reproofs and threatenings belong to, though the Minister thought not of thee, nor
knew any special concern thou had in them.

(2.) That is like to be thy special sin which Conscience truly charges thee
with in the day of adversity, when under some great affliction, in thy Body,
Name, Estate, Liberty, Relations, when on a sick Bed, or in some eminent
danger, observe the Voice of Conscience at such seasons; when it says, this
affliction, loss, cross, is for such a sin, for thy sinning against, or with,
or not improving of such a Mercy; that which at such a time most startles, and
affrights thy Soul, comes first, or fixes most upon thy Thoughts, that is like
to be thy special sin, which thou should be more deeply humbled for, and by
Faith in Christ, Prayer, and Watchfulness keep thy self from; so in time of
Sickness, that which is most set home upon thee by Conscience, and thou have
most thoughts of reforming, and take up purposes and resolutions most against
it, that looks very like the sin thou have been peculiarly defiled by; for though
Conscience may be lulled asleep in time of Prosperity, Ease and Health, yet
usually in times of Affliction, it will speak out, and if it do, it is to be
heedfully attended to.

(3.) That is like to be thy iniquity, which Conscience charges thee with, when
either thou apprehendest thy self near to Death, or when at any time thou art
most serious in the Thoughts of Death and Judgment, either particular at Death,
or general at the Resurrection. That sin, which the thoughts of makes thee most
unwilling to dye, and afraid to look Death in the Face, and make the thoughts
of the day of Judgment most dreadful, so that thou tremblest to think of
appearing at the Tribunal and Judgment Seat of God, when Conscience says, how
can thou think of Dying, and of appearing before the Judgment Seat of Christ,
whilst thou continuest in, or art so frequently foiled by such or such a sin;
those sins are, if not beloved Lusts, yet at least Tyrannizing Corruptions in
thee.

(4.) Another season wherein thou should peculiarly attend to the Voice of
Conscience in order to finding out what is thine iniquity, is when thou set
upon the duty of Self-examination, Prayer, or receiving the Sacrament of the
Lords Supper. That sin, which Conscience upbraids thee with, so that thou do,
or art ready to question the truth of the Work of Grace on thy Heart, which
blots and blurs thy Evidences of Grace, so that thou can not read them, and
hinders thy boldness at the Throne of Grace, or is ready to prove an Objection
against thy coming to the Table of the Lord; surely that is thy iniquity, if
not a beloved Lust, yet a prevailing corruption, which thou are too easily and
too often foiled by, When thou set thy self to the duty of Examination
before a Sacrament, or on any other occasion, what sin is that which Conscience
casts as a block in thy way, as a flaw in thy evidences, so that when thou
find something in thee that gives thee some hopes, that there is a Work of
Grace in thy Heart, then Conscience flies in thy Face, and says, how can
thou judge thou have true Grace, when there is still so much Pride, Hypocrisy,
Passion, Worldliness, Lust, so much Deadness and Formality in Duties, and thou
art so often foiled by some of these Corruptions? So when thou go to set
upon the Duty of Prayer, what sin is that which hinders thy boldness at the
Throne of Grace, concerning which Conscience is ready to say to thee, how
can thou go to God as thy Father, when thou expressest such an
Unichild-like-carriage toward God? so that sin which makes thee afraid to go
to the Sacrament, and Conscience stands in thy way and says, how dare thou
approach to God in that high Ordinance, while thou art so often foiled by such
or such a corruption, that is thine iniquity, which at least too much prevails
over thee, if Conscience do truly charge thee with it. Indeed Conscience may go
too far in such a charge, especially in a weak, doubting, tempted Soul, when it
argues the total want of a Work of Saving Grace, because the Soul is frequently
overtaken by these corruptions, and charges these sins on the Soul as reigning,
which are really in it but tyrannizing corruptions; but though if they be
bewailed, prayed, believed, watched and striven against, and when committed,
repented of, they are not reigning sins, and the Soul ought not to conclude it
self destitute of Saving Grace, yet you may and ought to hearken to the Voice
of Conscience charging you with them, and may conclude that such sins are your
special sins, which you are most in danger of being defiled by, and therefore
it is your duty to use the greatest care and diligence to keep your selves from
them.

IV. That is very probably thy iniquity, as which thy best friends most tell
thee of, so which thy worst Enemies do most upbraid thee with, and do most
frequently and bitterly charge upon thee, provided the charge be true as to
matter of fact; for otherwise the Devil and Wicked Men do often charge the people
of God with predominant Hypocrisy, and many other sins, concerning which
through the Grace of God they can say, as Psalm. 35.11. They lay to my charge,
things that I knew not; but if the charge be true as to matter of fact, that
thou art really, and especially, if thou be frequently guilty of the sin, that
thy Enemies accuse thee of, and do often cast in thy dish, though it may not be a
reigning sin, yet it is thy iniquity.

(1.) That sin which the Devil that great Enemy and Accuser of the Brethren
does truly charge thee with in the hour of temptation; upon account of which he
would prove thee to be an Hypocrite, and cause thee to call in question thy
Interest in Christ, and whether there be any true work of Grace in thy Heart,
that is like to prove thy iniquity, with reference to which he is ready to say
to thee, can thou be a Child of God, or do thou hope to be saved, and yet
such sins so often prevail over thee, suppose Pride, Passion, inward workings of
Lust, and frequent out-breakings of Worldly or Fleshly Lusts; such coldness,
deadness, and distractions in duty; now though if these be thy burden, and thou
would be rid of them, prayest, believe, and sincerely strivest against
them, his charge against thee, that thou art an Hypocrite, and that these are
reigning sins in thee, be false, yet that which he makes the ground of this his
charge, viz. thy being frequently overcome by such corruptions, being true,
thou may, yea thou should look upon that sin, as thy iniquity, and should
be humbled for it, and continue, yea increase thy Watchfulness, Prayer, and
Faith, against it, as such.

(2.) That sin which Wicked and Ungodly Men, the Enemies of God's People, and
of thee, if thou be truly Godly, I say, that sin which they truly accuse thee
of, as frequently guilty of, and thence take advantage to cast dirt upon thy
Profession and Religion it self, saying, Are not these Professors Proud,
Passionate, Worldly, Vain and Airy in their carriage, as well as others? Now if
this be truly charged on thee, though they may not be beloved Lusts, yet they are
thy iniquities: Observe therefore what Enemies, Satan and Wicked Men truly lay
to your charge, for though Enemies be bad and incompetent Judges, yet they may
prove right Informers, for an Enemy may discover that which a Friend, through
partiality, unwillingness to displease, and blind fond love may not discover,
what thy Enemy charges thee with; therefore, thou have cause to suspect is thy
iniquity; and if the charge be false, yet thou should make use of it to make
thee watchful.

V. A fifth Sign of that which is thy iniquity, yea a beloved Lust, is a
deliberate unwillingness to have it discovered, reproved and spoken against:
When thou art fixedly angry at those that tell thee plainly of it, and reprove
thee for it; that is thy iniquity, which thou would have spared and dealt
gently with; concerning which, thou would if thou could and durst, charge
Ministers, and others, as David did concerning Absalom, 2 Samuel 18.5. Deal
gently with the young man, even Absalom; so deal gently with such a sin. Thou
can hear other men's sins spoken against and reproved, and like it well
enough, as the Covetous Man can pleasedly enough hear Pride and Prodigality
spoken against, and the Proud, Prodigal, Luxurious Man likes well enough to
hear Covetousness branded, but when thy Delilah, thy Herodias is reproved, thou
art in a rage, thou frettest and stormest; as Herod could hear John Baptist
gladly, but when he touches his Herodias, then he presently clapped him up in
Prison, and Herodias will have John Baptist's Head in a Charger, because he had
cast her sin in her dish: So when Christ came to reprove the Pharisees
Hypocrifie, Self-righteousness, etc. then they hate him, though they could well
enough hear him confuting the Sadducees, and liked what he said till he came to
touch their Diana, their Covetousness, their Hypocriticalness, and Pharisaical
Righreousness; this was an Evidence, these were their beloved Lusts, their
reigning sins: So when Stephen in his excellent defense of himself before the
Scribes, Pharisees, and Elders, came to charge their particular sin upon them,
Acts 7.51, 52. and says, You stiff-necked and uncircumcised in heart and ears,
ye always resist the Holy Ghost, and charge them with being the Betrayers and
Murderers of Christ, which were their greatest and most reigning sins; then it
is said, they were cut to the heart, and gnashed on him with their teeth; they
could hear him a great while patiently, but when he came to touch their
Copyhold, then they with a brutish fury run upon him, and cry, away with him,
stone him: It was a sign in all the forementioned cases, that the sins that
they could not bear to have reproved, or roughly dealt with, were their
iniquities, even beloved Lusts: Only I add, that I may not condemn the
Generation of the Righteous, That this unwillingness to be reproved, and and
anger at Reprovers, which proves the sin thou art reproved for, to be thy
beloved sin, is a deliberate, allowed, and fixed displeasure against reprovers
and reproof; for it must be granted that even a good Man, whose Heart is
upright in the main, may upon surprise, in the height of Temptation, and in the
Heat of Passion, when reproved on a sudden, just upon the commission of a sin,
be angry at reproof, and him that gives it, as it was with Asa, 2 Chronicles. 16.10.
yet it is said, 1 Kin. 15.14. That his heart was perfect with the Lord all his
days. But when the sincere Believer recovers himself, he can with David, bless
God, for any means, though most sharp reproof, that keeps him from sin, or
recovers him after falls into sin, 1 Samuel 25.32, 33. Psalm. 141.5. but if thou
have a fixed, abiding displeasure against Reprovers, it is a sign of an unsound
heart; and if there be any sin that thou do not care to have reproved, and
art angry, though but in present passion at the Reprover, it is a sign that sin
has too great an hank upon thee.

VI. Another Sign, by which a Person may know which is his peculiar iniquity,
yea beloved lust, is this; That is thy Master-sin, thy reigning corruption that
makes all other sins stoop and lacquay to it, and subserve as means to feed and
maintain it. As Waters run and empty themselves into the Sea, so do other sins
into this thy iniquity. Thus the Covetous Man is guilty of many other sins, he
pincheth as to laying out any thing to pious or charitable uses, yea as to
conveniences as to himself or his Relations, he buries himself in worldly
business, neglecting public, family, secret duties, his own Soul, and the
Souls under his charge; he often overreacheth those he deals with, he oppresses
the poor and the like; and all this is to satisfy his lust of covetousness,
and love of Money; this is a sign Covetousness is his reigning sin; thus the
Voluptuous, Luxurious Person, he may be guilty of many other sins of profane
neglecting of Holy Duties; mis-spending Time, and Estate, consuming his Body;
yea, he may be guilty of Coverousness, Deceiving and Oppressing Tenants or
others, but all is to feed his Voluptuousness: So the Proud and Ambitious Man,
may be guilty of Timeserving, Sinful Compliance, of Fawning, Flattering Men in
their Sins, neglecting Duties, and of Injustice, Covetousness, Falseness,
Treachery, Carnal Policy, and that even in Religion; and all this to feed and
maintain Pride of Life, Pride in Apparel or way of Living, and to gratify his
Ambition, and Lust of being great in the World; That sin which (as the greater
Fish) devours the lesser, thou may conclude is thy iniquity, thy reigning
sin, so far as thou allowest thy self in it.

VII. That is certainly thy iniquity, yea thy reigning sin, which not only all
thy other Sins, but also all thy Duties are made subservient to; and all that
Religion thou professest and seem to have, be it little or much, is made a
Stalking-horse to, and a mere step or stirrup to get to the Satisfaction of.
Thus it was in the case of Jehu, his Master-sin was Ambition and Carnal Policy;
his great design was settling himself in the Kingdom; and he made not only his
sins in keeping up the Calves at Dan and Bethel subservient to this, but also
his Zeal in executing the Judgments God had threatened against the House of
Ahab, and had commanded him to execute, 2 Kings 9.7. and his Zeal in putting
down the Worship of Baal, and pulling down the House, and slaying the Priests
of Baal; all this was to serve his Ambition and Carnal Policy; for he would go
no further in Reformation, than would, as he thought, consist with his worldly
interest; and therefore he still kept up the Worship of the Calves. Thus also
it was with the Scribes and Pharisees; their reigning sins were Pride,
Ambition, Vain Glory, Covetousness and Hypocrisy, and they made all their
Religion to serve and lacquay to these Lusts of theirs; they Fasted, gave Alms,
Prayed, but it was to be seen of: Men; they made long Prayers to cover and
gratify their Covetousness, that they might devour Widows Houses. Thus
Politicians in Religion, all their Religion is cut out, and squared by Carnal
Policy; their very conscience is a carnally Politic one, guided by Rules of
Policy, not Piety: If therefore thou make thy Religion a Cloak and Cover for
any sins, for Covetousness, Deceit, Injustice, or any other, though but secret
sins, those sins are thy iniquities, thy reigning sins.

VIII. That is thy iniquity, thy reigning sin, that proves too hard for all
means of Mortification, for all Ordinances, Providence, Councils, Admonitions,
Exhortations and Entreaties of Friends and Relations: yea for all Resolutions,
Purposes, Promises; This is thy iniquity; between thy heart and which, there is
such a League that thou will by no means part with it, but wilt keep it, and
gratify it, whatever it costs thee: that way which thou thus choosest is thy
own way, Isa. 66.3. They have chosen their own ways; their Soul delights in
their Abominations. I grant, there may be such sins, even in the regenerate
upright Man, as may be so far too hard for all Ordinances and Providence,
Admonitions, Purposes, Promises, as that they may be frequently foiled by them,
as rash Anger, unruly Passions, the inward stirrings of Corruption, and yet not
be reigning sins, so long as the Soul does not choose them, but the bent of the
heart is against them, he mourns for them, prays and believes, and strives
against them: But now if there be any sin that thou allowest thy self in,
notwithstanding all Commands, Promises, Threatenings thou meetest with in the
Written and Preached Word, and notwithstanding thou hear it often Reproved,
by Ministers, Parents, other Superiors, or Christian Friends; that sin,
whether of Omission or Commission, is thy iniquity, a reigning sin: and that
sin which has been too hard for all Providence, for all the Mercies which God
has bestowed upon thee, and have an Heart-melting, and Purifying, and
Sin-killing tendency; and too hard for all Afflictions outward or inward, thou
have been exercised with, and for all the Judgments of God, thou have seen upon
others, or felt the smart of upon thy self, in thy body by Sickness or Painful
Distempers, in thy Name, or Estate, or Family: and though thou have had
Convictions, Gripes and Checks of Conscience, Fears and Terrors, and thereupon
have taken up Purposes and Resolutions, and made Promises of Reformation, of
breaking off such Sins, or setting upon such Duties, as thou have felt the
smart of the Commission or Omission of. That sin which no entreaties of the
nearest tenderest Relations will prevail on thee, to forsake or be willing to
part with, that is thy iniquity; that sin which thou will venture the loss of
all, even the dearest and most precious Things, thy Body and all the Comforts
of thy Life, yea thy Soul and Favor of God, the loss of Heaven, and wilt
venture upon the torments of Hell, rather than forsake it; So that though it
waste thy Estate, blast thy Credit, undo thy Family, weaken and consume thy
Body, yea, damn thy Soul, yet thou will not leave it. That is thy reigning
iniquity, be it Laciviousness, or Drunkenness, or but spending time with loose,
tippling, gaming or wanton Companions.

IX. That is thy iniquity, O Soul, which thou will not part with, upon any the
most Advantageous, Honorable Terms, and Offers that God makes to thee in the
Gospel: That sin which breaks the match between thy Soul and Christ even when
it seems to be near making up, and thou have some inclinations to consent to
this blessed match; that sin which thou will not part with, no not for Christ
the Savior. Though God offer thee in the Gospel, Pardon and Peace, Grace and
Glory, Christ and all his Benefits, and Christ offers himself, and thou may
have him and all his Riches, if thou will but come to Christ, and to God
through him, and be willing to leave thy sins, and come off of thy own
Righteousness, and yet thou will not leave thy sins, thy Tippling, Loose,
Wanton, Gaming, Prosane Companions, thy fleshly Lusts, or thy
Wordly-Mindedness, thy unjust deceitful ways of Gain, or thy resting in thy own
Righteousness, or any thing short of Christ: These are certainly thy beloved
Lusts: And that sin, O Soul, which breaks the Match between Thee and Christ,
that is thy sin with a Witness: When thou have some inclinations to embrace
Christ, and art willing to forsake many sins, but there is some sin or sins
that thou can not bring thy Heart to be willing to part with, but art ready
to say of it as Lot of Zoar, Gea. 19.20. or as Naaman of his bowing in the
House of Rimmon, 2 Kings 5.18. there is some secret sin thou would have
spared, some pleasing, profitable corruption, some close way of Lust, Deceit,
etc. so that if thou could have Christ and thy Sin too, thou would have
him, but not else; thus Judas's Covetousness caused him to sell Christ his Lord
and Master; the Young Man's love of the World caused him to go away from Christ
sorrowful. Herod did several things, but would not part with his Herodias.
These were their iniquities.

X. Lastly, That is thy iniquity, if not certainly thy reigning sin, yet thy
too prevailing corruption, which most frequently and impetuously sets upon
thee, before, in, and after thy conversing with God's Ordinances, and Holy
Duties, either to keep thee from them, or indispose thee for them, or crowd in
upon thee, and interrupt thy communion with God in them, or after Duties to rob
thee of the benefit of them; it speaks that thy Heart and that Sin, are too
well acquainted, that it finds too kind entertainment with thee, that it dares
be so bold and impudent as ordinarily to set upon thee, when thou art more
immediately in the presence of God in Holy Duties. Satan will be sure at such
seasons to stir up such Lusts in thy Heart, as are pleasing and are likely to
find most easy access, and best entertainment, as possibly, Worldly and Vain
Thoughts before and in Duties, Drowsiness, Sleepiness, Deadness and Dullness of
Heart and Affections: I say, the sins that most pester thee on Lords days, or
other times of either ordinary or extraordinary Duties: And so the sins that
set on thee after Duties, after the Word Read or Heard, after Prayer and
Receiving the Lords Supper, and after Sabbaths, be it Pride, Security, laying
down the Soul's Watch, unruly Passions, Worldliness, etc. these are thy
iniquities, which thou must keep thy self from; beware of the Devil, and the
sin of thy own Heart on Monday Mornings, and after Hearing, Praying, Fasting,
and Sacraments.

And thus I have finished this Branch of Exhortation, to find out what your
special reigning sins or most prevailing corruptions are, and have largely laid
down signs and marks, whereby you may know which are they: Yet before I leave
it, I shall endeavor to answer one Question or Case of Conscience, and therein
show the difference between a beloved Lust, a reigning Sin in an Unregenerate
Man, and a tyrannizing prevailing Corruption in a Godly Person; for some
doubting Christian may say, I am afraid such and such sins, that I am so often
mastered by, such as Passions, inward workings of corruptions, etc. are
reigning sins in me, and inconsistent with Uprightness of Heart; now how shall
I know, whether they be so or no? Now for answer to this doubt, though much has
been spoken under the Heads already laid down, yet I shall add somewhat
further, though but briefly.

I. One difference between a beloved Lust or reigning Sin, that is inconsistent
with Uprightness, and prevailing Corruptions that yet are consistent with
Uprightness, is this. That is a beloved Lust, a reigning Sin, which is
indulged, and that the Soul makes Provision for, that a Man caters for, and
casts about how to provide that which may feed and maintain it, Romans 13.14.
Make no provision for the flesh to fulfill the Lusts thereof, to gratify and
satisfy its Appetite, to pamper the Flesh. It is a beloved Friend that you
make special provision for, and cast about how you may best entertain:
Therefore if you set your Thoughts on work to find out a commodious way to
commit such a sin, to meet with loose, tippling Companions, or run upon the
occasions of sin (what you have found to be so) and into that company which you
have found drawing you into sin; it is a sign that is a beloved Lust; When sin
does not so much overtake thee, as thou followest hard after, and overtakest
sin; even lesser sins in this case may be reigning sins: If thou set thy
self to Sleep at Divine Worship, or thou welcomest and kindly entertainest
Vain, Worldly, Proud, Lustful, or any other sinful Thoughts, especially in the
time of duty; these are reigning sins. But on the other hand, though sinful
Thoughts break in upon thee, or thou do commit some outward acts of sin, if
(as Gal. 6.1.) thou be overtaken with a fault, but do not make provision for
the Flesh, but endeavourest to cut off all provisions from it, fliest from all
occasions of it, usest all means to cut Sin and the Flesh short, and keep them
under, if Drowsiness in Holy Duties seize on thee, and thou endeavourest to
shake it off: Vain Wandering Thoughts in Worship, or any sinful Thoughts at
other times impetuously break in, and thou endeavourest to expel them; in this
case they are not beloved sins, nor reigning corruptions; though they are such
prevailing corruptions, as are very much thy special sins, which it is thy duty
to be humbled for, and by Faith, Prayer, Watchfulness, and most vigorous
endeavors to keep thy self from.

II. Another difference between a beloved Lust, a reigning Sin in the
Unregenerate and Infincere, and a tyrannizing Corruption in the Regenerate and
Upright is this. That is a reigning sin in any, which is suffered to have quiet
and peaceable possession in the Heart, that a person is unwilling to have
disquieted, or himself disturbed in the committing of; the sin which is not
resisted, that thou do not Believe, Pray and Watch against; and when thou
have fallen into it, do not endeavor speedily to recover thy self out of, by
acts of Faith and Repentance, and by earnest Prayer, Endeavors, and
Watchfulness against it for the time to come. A clean beast may fall into the
Mire, but gets out of it again as soon as ever it can; it is a Swine that lies,
and loves to wallow in the Mire: And thou art no better than a filthy Swine, if
thou love to wallow in the Mire of thy Lusts, and not get out of it: But now
that is not a reigning sin in thee, though it do too often prevail over thee, which
thou grievest for, mournest under, and wilt not suffer to be quiet in thy Soul,
but resolvest it shall not ever have a quiet day, no nor hour in thee: If thou
resistest it by the Weapons of thy Spiritual Warfare, Prayest, and improvest
Christ against it, and when thou art overtaken with it, art not at rest, till
thou renewest thy Faith and Repentance, and look up to Christ for strength
against, as well as the Pardon of it: If it be thus with thee, thy iniquity is
not a reigning sin, for he is a cleanly person, who though he fall into the Dirt,
cannot rest till he get out of it, and be cleansed again.

III. That is a beloved Lust, that thou art unwilling to have discovered; art
deliberately angry at any person or thing that stands in thy way, or would
hinder thee from committing of it, art angry at the Word, when that meets with
thy Sin. But on the other hand, if thou art glad to have thy sin discovered and
reproved, and when the Wordcomes closest to it, can say as Psalm. 141.5 it is
a kindness, and as an excellent oil, in my estimation; can bless God for any
thing that hinders thee from committing it, as David, 1 Samuel 25.32, 33. David
blessed God, yea Abigail as an instrument for preventing his shedding of Blood.
If thou can bless God for Affliction, when it keeps thee from sin, as David
again, Ps. 119.67, 71, 75. then it is no reigning sin.

II. A second Branch of the Exhortation bottomed on this Doctrine is, That
having first found out which is your special iniquity (which I have largely
insisted on, and is the first step to keeping your selves from your iniquity)
then endeavor to cast it out of your Hearts and Lives. You must indeed
endeavor to keep your selves from every sin, so as not to allow your selves in
any: But you must above all keep your selves from, Believe, Pray and Watch
against those sins, that you find your Hearts most strongly inclined to, and
you are most frequently overcome by. All therefore that I shall further do,
shall be to lay down some Motives to stir you up to, and some directions to
help and guide you in, the performance of this duty of keeping your selves from
your Iniquity. Motives.

1. Consider, This thy iniquity, if it be a reigning sin, it is at present, and
(till thou be convinced of the evil of it, and made willing to part with it, to
have it Killed and Crucified) is like to be, the great bar and hindrance of thy
sound Conversion; this is the stumbling block of your iniquity, that which
breaks the match between your Souls and Christ, and will hinder your profiting
by the Word, Prayer, or any other Duty and Ordinance. If there be in thee any
darling Delilah. Lust, that thou layest in thy Bosom, it will hinder thee from
closing with Christ till God break the League between thee and it: And when
ever the Spirit of God works upon the Heart of a Sinner, in order to sound
Conversion, he sets home this sin upon the Conscience, and that to purpose, and
lets the Soul see the peculiar odious nature of it; God lays Gall and Wormwood
on this pleasing breast, to wean the Heart from ever tampering with it
allowedly and deliberately more, and when once the Heart is brought to be
willing to part with this sin, and to have it Crucified, it will be an
Evidence, that a good work is begun, yea in some good degree carried on in the
Soul: But so long as any beloved Lust reigns in thee, thou art far from
Conversion, and consequently from Salvation; for this is the Arch-Rebel against
Christ, which must be brought down and slain before the face of Christ, if ever
thou be converted here, or saved hereafter.

II. Oh keep your selves from your iniquity, for consider, if it be a reigning
sin, this iniquity of all others will be a Worm at the Root of your Profession,
of all your Gifts, Duties, and Performances, and Eat out the Heart of them,
will hinder you from all truly Sanctifying and Saving Profit by them; though you
by means of your Knowledge and professed Experience, and outwardly blameless
Conversation, be duly admitted to Ordinances on the Ministers part, yet it will
hinder you from all Real, Spiritual Communion with God in them, and true
Scriptural Comfort from them.

Know it, whatever Profession of Religion you make, though never so high,
whatever Gifts you are endowed with, or Duties you may perform, could you, if a
Minister Preach never so well, if a private Christian Pray most inlargedly, and
to appearance, most Affectionately, Confer and Speak with the Tongue of Men and
Angels; yet if there be any beloved Lust, that you are not willing to forsake,
and have mortified, you will be but as sounding Brass and a Tinkling Cymbal;
this sin, as was said before, will be a Worm at the root of all you do in
Religion, it will be a flaw in your Profession, and in what you look upon as an
Evidence of Grace.

Judas could Preach, Pray, and work Miracles no less than the other Apostles,
but Covetousness was his beloved Lust, this lay at the bottom and spoiled all,
so that he lost all his Labor, yea his Life and Soul into the sad Bargain; and
so will thou, O Soul, if either Covetousness, Uncleanness, Drunkenness, Pride,
Injustice, or any other sin whatsoever, be beloved by thee, or rule in thee.
These thy iniquities will choke the Good Seed of the Word, and render it
unfruitful, so that it will bring no fruit to perfection; they will set on thee
in Prayer, and render all thy Prayers ineffectual. Oh, let this consideration
excite you to endeavor to your utmost to keep your selves from your iniquity,
from harboring any beloved Lust, as you would get good by any Duty, or
Ordinance of God.

Yea and you who are Believers, and Upright in the main, let this consideration
excite, and prevail with you to put forth your most vigorous endeavors to keep
your selves from your iniquities, which though not beloved Lusts, yet are too
prevailing Corruptions in you; even these, though they may be lesser sins
comparatively, and not so open and scandalous, viz. too much Worldliness,
Pride, Passion, neglect of some Duties, or Formality in those you do perform,
even Drowsiness, Wanderings in Duty, inward workings of Corruption, if you are
often foiled by them, though if you Repent of them, and strive against them, they
are not flaws in your Titles, yet they will be blots and blurs in your
Evidences, that you will have much to do to read them; they will much hinder
and interrupt your Communion with God in Holy Duties, and the settled Peace and
Comfort of your Souls; they will hinder you from getting that good by
Ordinances, the Word, Prayer, Sacraments and Communion of Saints, that you
might do; they will hinder your boldness at the Throne of Grace, and cause you
to drive heavily in Heavens-way; therefore Christians, as you would keep your
Evidences clear, have Communion with God, and profit by Duties, keep your
selves from your Iniquities, your too frequently prevailing Corruptions.

III. To stir you up to keep your selves from your Iniquity, from harboring
any one indulged, beloved, reigning sin; consider that this your beloved Lust,
is very likely to prove a Root of Apostasy to you; it is this that causes so
many Professors to prove Apostates at last. Any one reigning sin is like a Leak
in a Ship, which if it be not stopped, or the Water pumped out, will certainly at
last sink the Ship; so will any one sin whatsoever, that is not Repented of and
Mortified, but indulged; this will endanger your falling off, and falling away
after your most specious profession, and performances; this is the
stumbling block of your iniquity, either your Religion will cause you to leave
your beloved Lusts, or they will be likely to make you leave your Religion and
Duties, when your Lusts and these come in competition.

Judas held on a great way, and for a considerable time with the rest of the
Apostles, but at last his Covetousness, which was his beloved Lust, betrayed
him, and caused him to betray his and our Lord and Master: Therefore keep your
selves from your Iniquities, lest you prove Judas's. And you that are Upright
in the main, keep your selves from your too much and too frequently prevailing
Corruptions, for these, though through Grace they shall not cause total
Apostasy, yet they may cause, and you are in danger by them to be brought
into, great decays of Grace.

IV. Keep your selves from your Iniquity, your beloved reigning sin, or sins;
you that are yet in your Unconverted state, keep your selves from your most
pleasing and profitable sins, for these are the sins, which if not Repented of,
will most torment your Souls in Hell for ever: The Worm of Conscience will most
gnaw upon your Souls to all Eternity, in the remembrance of these sins: By how
much any sin has afforded more carnal pleasure or profit to you in the
committing of it, so much it will cause your greater torment in your
Consciences, here if they come to be awakened in time, or else for ever in
Hell, Rev. 18.7. how much she has lived deliciously, so much torment and
sorrow give her. God will proportion and measure out your torments hereafter
according to the measure of Delight you have taken in your sins, or the Worldly
Profit and Advantage you have got by them; you who have taken pleasure in
Uncleanness, Drunkenness, Tippling, Mispending your time among Unclean,
Drinking, Gaming, Sabbath-profaning, Atheistical Scoffing, or any Loose
Companions, these and such like sins, and such Companions will add to your
Torments in Hell: They that were Unclean, Drunk and Jovially roared together
here, shall burn and roar together out of extremity of Torment hereafter.
Conscience will say to thee, as Abraham in the Parable to the Rich Man, Luke
16.25. Thou in thy lifetime received'st thy good things, but now thou art
tormented: Therefore keep your selves from your Iniquity, indulge and he
inslaved to it no longer, your formerly beloved reigning sins, so as to obey
them in the Lusts thereof. And you that are Upright and True Believers, do you
keep your selves from your most prevailing, tyrannizing corruptions, for though
upon your renewing your Faith and Repentance, they shall not torment you in
Hell, yet they are like to cause the greatest Wounds and Gashes in your
Consciences here.

V. Keep your selves from your Iniquity, for consider, if you do not thus, but
there be any beloved Lust, and reigning Sin harbored in your Hearts, and
allowed of in your Conversations, you have cause to fear that such a Lust,
which you will not forsake, will provoke God judicially to give you up to that
Lust, yea to many other sins, the most vile Affections; to withdraw his
restraining Grace, and give you up to your own Hearts Lusts, to the full swing
of your Corruptions; and this is the most dreadful judgment a person can be
given up to on this side Hell, Romans 1.24, 26, 28. 2 These. 2.10, 11, 12. Them
that had pleasure in Unrighteousness, God gave them up to strong delusions: And
you that are in the main Upright, keep your selves from your Iniquities, which
though they be not beloved Lusts, yet too often prevail over you, and are too
much connived at, these may provoke God to leave you for a time to many sore
and sad falls.

VI. Keep your selves from your iniquities, from every beloved lust, and
reigning sin all of you who are yet unconverted; and you who are converted, and
are Believers, keep your selves from your special Sins; those you are most
prone too, and most frequently foiled by; for consider, these are the sins by
which God is most dishonored by you: Yea and your special Sins, that are
Professors, yea true Believers, these are the sins that the men of the World
will take occasion from, to reproach Religion. If you are foiled by Pride, or
too much eagerness after the World, if you be guilty but of lesser Acts of
Injustice or Intemperance, if you be of too airy Spirits, if you be often
foiled by unruly Passions, rash Anger and fierce Expressions; for these things
wicked men will reproach your Profession, and Religion it self, and so greatly
dishonor God; they will be ready to say, these are your Professors; they can
be Proud, Covetous, Airy and Passionate, as well as their Neighbors; and
though these be not allowed sins in you, but cost you strong cries and tears
afterward: Yet wicked Men do not or will not see this; they see your falls,
but they see not the inward Pangs of grief and godly sorrow you feel for these;
the sore conflicts and struglings you feel in secret, on account of these sins
after you have fallen into them; and so reproach you and Religion for them,
counting that but a pretense, and you Hipocrites, which though it be their
great sin so to do, yet it is your great Duty to watch, pray, believe and
strive against these sins, and for the mortification of them, that you may cut
off such occasions of wicked Men's dishonouring God, and reproaching Religion.

VII. Another Motive, which particularly concerns you who are sincere
Believers, and should stir you up to keep your selves from your own iniquities,
those which you do oftenest fall into, and though not reigning sins, yet are
very domineering corruptions in you, is this, consider, these your iniquities,
are the sins which of all other, will most weaken your graces, hinder the
exercise of them, and growth in them, yea impure them, and cause decays in
them; and these do and will most hinder your Spiritual comfort and joy in God.
These, I say, will greatly weaken, the Graces of Gods Spirit in your hearts,
and obstruct the actings of them, and your steady even walking with with God.
Falls, you know, wound and weaken persons, cause sore Bruises, and often
haulting and lameness: So frequent falls into your special sins, will cause
weakness in your Souls, in your Graces, and your Spiritual Limbs, and cause you
that you cannot act so steadily and vigorously in the exercise of Grace, and
Performance of Duties, but to halt, go lamely, and drive heavily in the ways of
God. These your iniquities, if you do not keep your selves from them, will
hinder your growth and progress in Grace and Holiness. These are like Suckers
in Trees that draw the Juice and Sap from the Root to themselves; as falls in
Childhood hinder growth often times, so that such prove but dwarfs all their
days: So frequent falls into these your iniquities, though comparatively but
lesser sins, yet they may cause you to prove but dwarfs in Christianity. Yea
these your special iniquities, if you do not keep your selves from them, will
greatly impair Grace, cause decays and great back slidings; the prevailing of
these corruptions will keep Grace at a great under in the Soul; and these are
the sins, which, though through Grace they shall not ruin your Souls; yet they
are like greatly to hinder your comfort and cause God to withdraw and hide his
face, these are the great make-Bates between your Souls and God: do not you
find and feel this by sad experience? and how can it be otherwise? for it is by
these iniquities that you do most grieve the Spirit, and while you do so, how
can you expect that he should seal and comfort you, and not rather grieve and
wound your Souls, and write bitter things against you? Therefore keep your
selves from these your iniquities, as those which are your greatest Enemies,
and would rob you both of Grace and Peace, quickening and comfort.

VIII. The last thing I shall mention to stir you up to keep your selves from
your Iniquity, whether it be a reigning sin in the Unregenerate, or a
tyrannizing one in the Regenerate, is this, consider, that it is this iniquity,
or this kind of iniquities that will imbitter affliction to you, when you lie
under it, and render Death and the Thoughts of it most unwelcome, yea dreadful
to you. It is the guilt and prevalency of this sin above all others, that will
put a Sting into Afflictions and into Death, and the Thoughts of it. This adds
weight to the burden of Affliction, and makes it much more insupportable than
otherwise it would be when Conscience shall upbraid thee, that this or that
Affliction is the Punishment of such a sin that thou have indulged and
cherished in thy bosom, or at least too much connived at. If you keep not your
selves from these your peculiar sins, you will not be able to entertain your
Afflictions patiently, and much less will you be able to bear them cheerfully,
as it becomes you to do: Nor will you be able to bear the Thoughts of Death
comfortably, or indeed without dread and terror upon your Spirits, while you
remain under the guilt and power of these your iniquities, though it should be
only the tyrannizing and not the reigning power of them: As therefore you would
bear Afflictions, and entertain Death and the Thoughts of it comfortably,
labor after this proof of your sincerity, that you keep your selves from your
iniquity.

And now having dispatched the Motives to excite you to look diligently to this
great Duty, and great Evidence of sincerity, I proceed to close all with a few
Particulars, to direct you to the Ways and Means of God's appointing in his
Word, whereby you may be enabled through Grace to keep your selves from your
iniquity.

Directions.
I. Would you keep your selves from your iniquities, either your reigning sins,
or your too prevailing corruptions, endeavor to get a deep and thorough sense
and conviction of the great sin and evil of this thy special iniquity, how
dishonorable it has been, is, and will be, to God, and how greatly
prejudicial to thee, thy Soul and Body too; and labor to keep this sense upon
thy Spirit all thy days; so as to confess and bewail it before the Lord, and to
be greatly humbled for it; this would be a means to keep you from it for the
time to come, for hereby you will come to taste the bitterness, and feel the
weight and burden of it. Therefore keep the evil of it constantly in the Eye of
your Soul, that you may flee from it: Keep up a sense of the evil of that sin
which was your most predominant reigning sin in your Unregenerate state, thus
did Paul: Trusting in his Legal Pharisaical Righteousness, and a Persecuting
Spirit were his special sins before his Conversion; and what a deep humble
sense had he of them after his Conversion even all his days, 1 Timothy 1.13, 15.
Phil. 3.7, 8, 9. He kept far from those sins for ever after: Confession and
Humiliation are as it were the Souls Vomit, caused by its being sick of sin;
now what has made persons Heart-sick, they will not easily be persuaded to
feed on again, though it may be pleasing to the Palate: No more will you taste of
those (to the Flesh) sweet morsels of sin, which God by his Spirit and Grace
has made bitter to your Soul: But now if the sense of sins odiousness begins
to wear off, you will be in danger to be again entangled with your old
corruptions; therefore as you would keep your selves from your iniquities, keep
a sense of the odiousness and bitterness of them upon your Hearts.

II. Be earnest and importunate in Prayer to God, as for Pardon of, so for
Power against these thy special iniquities; beg earnestly for special Grace and
Strength against thy special sins. When thou have found out, Indicted, and
Accused this sin, at God's Tribunal, then cry out to God, as for Mercy to thee
through Christ, so for Justice against thy sins, that God would kill them, and
enable thee to mortify and crucify them; drag these Traitors before God's
Tribunal, and say, Lord, these are the Arch-Rebels against thy Crown, and
Dignity, slay them before thy face. These are some of those Devils, or Devilish
Lusts, that will not be cast out but by Prayer, yea by Fasting and Prayer: Do
by these sins, as Paul did by the Messenger of Satan, 2 Cor. 12.7, 8. Ply the
Throne of Grace, give God no rest till he return such a Gracious answer as he
did to him, verse 9. My grace shall be sufficient for thee.

III. Would you keep your selves from your iniquity, then to your sense of,
humiliation for, and Prayers against it, be sure, you that are Believers, to
add Faith in Christ, and the lively vigorous actings of it upon him, as for the
forgiveness of it, so for power against it, and for the sin killing virtue of
the Death of Christ, to kill and crucify this thy too prevailing corruption.
Fetch in from Christ by Faith, constant supplies of spiritual strength against
these sins of thine: You must have more strength than your own, more than the
strength of Nature, of Reason, of your own Wills, Purposes, and Resolutions,
yea than of Grace already received, to keep you from, and enable you to prevail
against such strong corruptions as these are, they will be too strong for your
Purposes, Duties, and Graces, if God do not strengthen you with strength in
your Souls by his Spirit. It is God must keep you, you cannot keep your selves,
Psalm. 127.1. Except the Lord keep the City, the Watchman wateheth but in vain.
So it will be in relation to your Souls, and the keeping them from sin. When
David says in the Text, I kept my self, he does not arrogate to himself, only
tells you what was his duty, and his care and endeavor to perform; but he was
sensible God only could keep him, which made him pray, as Psalm. 19.11, 12.
Cleanse me from my secret faults, and keep back thy servant from presumptuous
sins, and their dominion, and so from the great transgression. Do thou, O
Soul, feel thy iniquity stirring in thee, and prevailing over thee, if thou be
yet in an unconverted state, pray that God would work Faith in thee; and if
thou art converted, stir up and act Faith on Christ; pray earnestly to God to
enable thee so to do; lift up an Eye of Faith to Christ, and put forth an Hand
of Faith to take hold on him, and fetch strength from him, and cry to him, when
this sin sets upon thee, that he would make thee more than Conqueror over this
thy iniquity.

IV. Would you keep your selves from your particular iniquities, make use of
the Sword of the Spirit, the Word of God: Study, Apply and Improve the Word
both Written and Preached against your most strong and prevailing corruptions:
Improve the Word in all the parts of it, its Precepts, Prohibitions,
Threatenings, Promises, Examples and Experiences recorded in it; against thy
particular corruptions, whatever you read or hear in, and from the Word of God,
against sin in general, apply it against thy iniquity in particular, as if it
were named.

Is thy iniquity, an Omission; living in the neglect of any commanded duty,
public, family or secret, toward God, or of any duty of Justice or Charity
toward Man, or of Sobriety toward thy self? muster up the Holy Precepts of God,
and turn the edge of them against thy sin, mingling them with Faith and Prayer:
Say, how shall I dare to live in the neglect of these duties which God so
expressly injoyns in his Word.

Is thy iniquity a sin of Commission; then apply and turn the edge of the
Prohibitions of the Word against that sin of thine, say to thy Soul, how shall
I dare to do that which God so expressly forbids, and which his Soul hates? Make
use of the Threatenings of Gods Word against thy sin in particular, against thy
Pride, Passion, Covetousness, Uncleanness, Drunkenness, Deceit, or any other
sin. And apply the Promises of Power against sin in general, or particular
against thy sins, such as, Mic. 7.19. Romans 6.14. Ezekiel. 36.25, 26, 27. improve
them to cleanse thee from all filthiness of Flesh and Spirit, 2 Cor. 7.1.2 Pet.
1.4. And also improve the Examples of Saints falling into sin, and recovering
out of it, to make thee watchful, against falls, and quicken and forward thy
recovery, when overtaken and fallen.

V. Would you keep your selves from your iniquity, then be jealous of, and over
your own Hearts, and be very Watchful against that iniquity of yours you find
your selves most prone to, and against all occasions of it; cut off from it all
provisions, all that would feed and fulfill these Lusts, Romans 13.14. cut sin
short; starve these sins of thine, do not pamper them; deny thy self in what
ever tends to feed thy sin; take heed of that company which thou find is
likely to draw thee into thy peculiar iniquity: Deny thy self in things in
themselves lawful, that are not necessary, that thou find apt to ensnare
thee, and lead thee to thy special sin. I say, things lawful, that are not
necessary, you must in such a case, forbear the use of: But you must not
forbear the use of such things as are necessary, as Food, and Physic, for fear
they should prove occasions of sin; but you must be watchful in the use of them.

Much less must you forbear what is your duty to God, or Men, because you may
be in danger to be proud, or rest in duties; nor must you decline serving God
in your Generation, as he gives you a call and opportunity to be serviceable to
him, the Church, the World, and civil Societies; but you must double your
Diligence and Watch, and Guard against the sins that are apt to cleave to your
Duties, and against the Temptations that are apt to beset you in the Places,
Employments, Relations, or Company you may be called to.

VI. Would you keep your selves from your most powerful and prevailing
iniquity, you who have a work and principle of Grace wrought in you by the
Spirit of God, labor to grow most of all in, and most to exercise that Grace
which is most directly contrary to that sin thou art most prone to, and most
easily and frequently foiled by; for contraries do best and most effectually
expel each other; thus Oppression was Zacheus's sin, and he kept himself from
this his iniquity, by performing the duty, and exemplifying the Grace directly
contrary to this sin, namely, making restitution, and exercising mercy, bounty
and liberality, giving the half of his Goods to the Poor, Luke 19.8. Cruelty
was the Jailors Sin, but when converted, he keeps himself from this his
iniquity, by exercising the Graces most opposite to this sin, namely, courtesy
and kindness to Paul and Silas, Acts 16.24, 33, 34. Oh what a different
carriage was here! So Paul before his Conversion was a most bitter and cruel
Persecutor of Christians, and the Christian Religion, but when Converted, who
more eminent than he, in Preaching the Gospel, and suffering for it; God, and
do thou likewise. Has Covetousness, Strait-heartedness, and pinching from
Pious and Charitable uses, been your predominant iniquity, and would you keep
your selves from it? Resolve then in God's strength to cross this Covetous
temper, and exercise the contrary Duty and Grace of Liberality and
Heavenlymindedness.

Is Pride in Apparel, or in any other way, whether of Heart or Life, your Sin?
To keep you from this your iniquity, resolve to lay aside all the Badges of
Pride, and in an especial manner set your selves to exercise the Grace of
Humility, to be clothed with it both in the inward and outward Man. Has
Passion, rash Anger, bitter and fierce Expressions in your Passion been your
sin, and would you keep your selves from it? Then set your selves in the
strength of Christ to the exercise of Meekness and Quietness of Spirit, and
calmness in Speech and Behavior. Has Intemperance, or Unchastity been your
sin? To keep you from this, Exercise exact Temperance in Meat, Drink, Sleep,
Apparel and Recreations, and Chastity in Heart, Speech, and your whole
Carriage; and by the diligent and believing use of these means, and following
these Directions, you may come to keep your selves from your iniquities, and
thereby evidence your being upright before the Lord.

FINIS.
Books Printed and Reprinted for T. Parkhurst, at the Bible and three Crowns at
the lower end of Cheapside.
A Body of practical Divinity, consisting of above 176 Sermons, on the
Assemblys Shorter Catechism, by Tho. Watson, formerly Minister of St. Stephens
Walbrook, London.

Sermons and Discourses on several Divine Subjects, by the late Reverend and
Learned Divine, Mr. David Clarkson, sometime Fellow of Clare-Hall, Cambridge.

Mr. Pool's English Annotations on the Bible, the 3d Edition, with an Addition
of a Concordance and Contents to each Chapter; by Mr. Sam. Clark.

The Acts, Decisions, Decrees and Cannons of the Reformed Churches in France;
being a most faithful History of the rise, growth and decay of the Reformed
Religion in that Kingdom. By John Quick Minister in London.

Boyses two Sermons against quenching the Holy Spirit.

Dr. Wallis's Theological Discourses on several Occasions, with his Letters in
vindication of the Holy Trinity.

Mr. Robert Fleming's Aspect of the Times.

-- His Discourse of Earthquakes, occasioned by that which happened in the year
1692.

-- The Rod or the Sword, the present Dilemma of these Nations.

-- The Confirming Work of Religion, or its great things made plain to ordinary
Capacities.

-- His Funeral Sermon preached by Dr. Burgess.

Pacification touching the Doctrinal Dissent among our united Brethren in
London; being an Answer to Mr. Williams and Mr. Lobb both, who have appealed in
one point (collected for an Error) to this Author, for his determination about
it.

Mediocria: Or the middle way between Protestant and Papist; in a Paper of
Justification. The second Edition with Additions, and a Letter to Mr. Williams.

The Righteousness of God revealed in the Gospel; or an impartial Enquiry into
the genuine Doct. of St. Paul, in the great but much controverted Article of
Justification. To which are prefixed the Epistles of the Right Reverend the
Bishops of Worcester, Ely and Chester.

The Friendly Interposer between the Authors of those Papers; the one called A
Report; the other, A Rebuke of that Report. In order to a reconciliation,
between the Presbyterians and Independants. All four by Mr. John Humfrey,

A Sermon preached before the King and Queen, Nov. 5. 1692. By Richard L.
Bishop of Bath and Wells.

David Jones's Farewell Sermon preached to the united Parishes of St. Mary
Woolnoth and St. Mary Weolchurch-Haw in Lombard Street.

-- His Sermon of Family Duties.

A Brief Tract on the 4th Commandment, wherein is discovered the cause of all
our Controversies about the Sabbath day, and the means of reconciling them.
Recommended by the Reverend Dr. Bates and Mr. John How.

A Defense of Mr. M. H's brief Enquiry into the Nature of Schism, and the
Vindication of it; With a brief Historical Account of Nonconformity, from the
Reformation to this present time.

Englands Alarm, being an Account of Gods most confiderable Dispensations of
Mercy and Judgment toward these Kingdoms for 14 years last past.

A Sermon preached at the Assizes at St. Edmonds-Bury in Suffolk, March 18.
1693. before the Lord Chief Justice Holt, and Judge Rooksby, etc. By Sam. Peck
Lecturer of Ipswich.

An Account of the Blessed Trinity, argued from the Nature and Perfection of
the Supreme Spirit, coincident with the Scripture-Doctrine, in all the Articles
of the Catholic Creed: By Will. Borough, Rector of Chenis in Bucks.

An Exposition of Verse 2d of the 4 Chap. of the Romans with an Appendix on
Chap. 3. Ver. 27. By Walter Cross, M. A.

A Sermon preached upon the Death of that Pious and Learned Divine, John
Collings, D. D. By Martyn Finch, Minister in Norwich.

The Midnight Cry: A Sermon on the Parable of the 10 Virgins, by John Mason, M.
A.

The Churches Security in the midst of all Difficulties and dangers, explained
and asserted in a Sermon: By R. VV. Minister of Kidderminster in
Worcestershire.

-- His Sermon at the Funeral of the Reverend Mr. Baldwin, Minister of the
Gospel.

A Sermon preached on the Death of the late Queen Mary, By Andrew Barnet.

Remembrance and Imitation of deceased Holy Rulers: A Sermon preached at
Rotterdam, March 15. 1695. N. S. the day of Her Majesty's Funeral. By John
Spademan, M. A. Minister of the English Church there.

The Cause and Cure of Strife and Divisions: In two Sermons preached in London,
March 12 and 26. 1695. By Richard Mayo.

A Discourse on the Love of Christ, By William Sheppard, A. M. and Minister of
the Gospel at Oundel in Northamptonshire.

The Nature of Justification opened, from Romans 5.1. By Mr. Gibbons sometime
Preacher at Black Friars, London.

One Dissertation concerning the Antiquity of Temples, wherein is shown, that
there were none before the Tabernacle erected by Moses in the Wilderness: From
Histories Sacred and Profane; By Joseph Hill, M. A. Editor of Schrevelius
Lexicon.

A Sermon preached in the City of Exeter, on the Thanksgiving day, April 16.
1696.

God glorified and the Wicked snared: A Thanksgiving Sermon for the happy
Preservation of His Majesty King William III. from a most horrid and barbarous
Assassination. By A. S.

Sheba's Conspiracy and Amasa's Confederacy: Or, a modest Vindication of the
National Association, Feb. 25. 1695.

The Protestant King protected, the Popish King detected and defeated; In a
Sermon preached at St. James Clarkenwell, April 16. 1696. the day of Public
Thanksgiving, for the Deliverance of His Majesty King William from
Assassination, and His Kingdom from Invasion by the French; both by D. Pead,
Chaplain to his Grace John Duke of Newcastle.

The glorious reward of faithful Ministers, declared and improved in a Sermon
upon the occasion of the Funeral of Mr. Hen. Newcome, A. M. late Pastor at
Manchester; By John Chorlton.

A Funeral Sermon on the Death of that pious Gentlewoman, Mrs. Judith Hammond,
late Wife of the Reverend Mr. George Hammend Minister of the Gospel in London,
By John How.

Peace in War, by Christ the Prince of Peace. A Sermon preached on the late
Public Fast, June 26. 1696. By Francis Fuller, M. A.

Scripture Justification: Or, a Discourse of Justification, according to
Scripture Light, By Samuel Clark, M. A.

A Sermon preached on the late Day of Thanksgiving, December. 2. 1697. By John
How, Minister of the Gospel; to which is prefixed Dr. Bates's Congratulary
Speech, Nov. 22. 1697. to the King, in the Name of the Dissenting Ministers in
and about London.

Comfort in Death: A Funeral Sermon preached upon the Death of Mr. Tim. Cruso,
late Pastor of a Church in London; By Mat. Mead.

Remarks on the Affairs of Trade of England and Ireland; By Walter Harris Gent.

The Fountain of Life opened: Or, a display of Christ in his essential and
mediatorial Glory; in 42 Sermons on various Texts.

A Treatise of the Soul of Man.

Husbandry Spiritualized: Or, the Heavenly use of Earthly things. All 3 by Mr.
John Flavel.

Discourses upon the Rich Man and Lazarus, by Tim. Cruso.

Mr. Timothy Cruso's three last Sermons.

Tutamen Evangelicum, or a Defense of Scripture Ordination, against E. G.
Exceptions, in a Book entitled Tentamen Novum.

The Helmet of Hope, distinguished from the Hope of Hypocrites, by Andrew
Barnet Minister of the Gospel.

Trading spiritualized, on which Tradesmen and others may enlarge on their
Meditations. in 2 parts. By W. Bagshaw.

A calm and Sober enquiry, concerning the possibility of a Trinity in the
Godhead, in a Letter to a Person of Worth in 3 parts. By Mr. John How.

Mr. Masons Spiritual Songs, or Songs of praise to Almighty God, on several
Occasions. The 5. Edition, to which may be added Penitential Cries.

The Gospel Mystery of Sanctification, opened in sundry practical Directions.
To which is added, a Sermon of Justification. By Mr. Walter Marshal.

A Family Altar, erected to the Honor of the Eternal God, or a solemn Essay to
promote the Worship of God in private Houses, together with the best Entail; Or
dying Parents living Hopes for their surviving Children, grounded upon the
Covenant of Gods Grace with Behevers and their Seed,

A new Creature, or a short discourse, opening the Nature, Property, and
Mecessity of the great Work of the New Creation on the Souls of Men. All by Mr.
Heywood Min. of the Gospel.

A Present for such as have been sick and are recovered. By Mr. Nath. Vincent.
M. A.

An Earnest call to Family Religion, in 18 Sermons. By Sam. Slater M. A.

An Argumentative and Practical Discourse of Infant Baptism. The Second
Edition.

Poor Man's Help, and Young Man's Guide. The Third Edition. Both by William
Burkit M. A of Pembrook Hall Cambridge. Now Vicar of Dedbam in Essex.

The Swearers Doom: a discourse setting forth the great danger and sinfulness
of rash and vain Swearing. By I. Ross M.A.

Prayers for the use of private Families with Graces.

Sacramental Hymus, Collected chiefly out of such Passages of the New
Testament, as contain the most suitable matter of Divine Praises, in the
Celebration of the Lords Supper. By Joseph Boyse of Dublin in Ireland.

Select Hymns out of Mr. G. Herberts Poems.

A Collection of Divine Hymns, suitted to ordinary Tunes.

Holy Confidence well improved by Nehemiah and the Jews, a Sermon preached to
the Societyes for Reformation of Manners at Salters Hall, on Monday Aug. 16
1697. By Mat. Sylvester.

The Golden Sunffers or Christian Reprovers and Reformers. Charactered,
Cautioned, and encouraged; a Sermon preached to the Societys for Reformation of
Manners in London Feb. 15. 1697.

Rules and Motives to the Duty of Prayer.

The Characters of a Godly Man, both as more or less grown in Grace.

Proofs of Gods Being, and of the Scriptures Divine Original. All four by D.
Burgess.

The Grand Question reselved, what we must do to be saved, or Instructions for
a Holy Life.

A Call to seriousness in Religion.

Good Council to the Converted and Unconverted. All 3 by the late Reverend Mr.
Richard Baxter.

Monthly Preparations to the Holy Communion. By R. B. Published by Mat.
Sylvester

Sacramental Preparations for the Holy Communion in short. By a Reverend Divine
of the Church of England.

Mr. John Showers Sacramental Discourses.

Mr. Vine's Treatise on the Lords Supper.

A Looking Glass for the Unmarried, wherein they may see these 5 things. 1. The
Benefits, Helps and Comforts of a happy Marriage. 2. How to proceed regularly
in order to it. 3. How to make a happy Choice. 4. How to demean themselves to
each other, in order to Family Peace and Concord. 5. The Relative Dutys of
Husband and Wife. By Mr. Edward Bury, Min. of the Gospel.

Death improved, and Immoderate sorrow reproved. By Mr. Edward Bury.

A most familiar explanation of the Assemblies shorter Carechism, in which
their larger Answers are broken into lesseparcels, thereby to let in the light
by Degrees into the mind, of the Learners.

A sure Guide to Heaven. Both by Joseph Allein.

Advice to an only Child, or Excellent Council to all young Persons.

A Saint indeed: Or the great work of a Christian, opened and applied from
Prove. 4.23.

A Token for Monrners.

Divine Conduct or the Mystery of Providence. These three last by John Flavel
Minister of the Gospel.

Ornaments for the Daughters of Zion: Or the Character and Happiness of a
Virtuous Woman. By Cotton Mather.

Calamy's Godly Man's Ark, or City of Refuge in the day of his Distress.

The Day of Doom in Verse.

Mead's Almost Christian, or the False Professor Tried and Cast.

Invisible Realities demonstrated, in the Holy Life and Triumphant Death, of
Mr. John Janeway, Fellow of Kings College in Cambridge.

An Account of the Life and Death of Mr. Philip Henry, Min. of the Gospel near
Whitchurch in Shrophire, who dyed June 24. 1696. Recommended by Dr. Bates.

Vincents Explanation of the Assemblys Shorter Catechism.

Redemption of Time, the Duty and Wisdom of Christians in evil days. By John
Wade Minister of Hammersmith.

A Brief Concordance to the Holy Bible, in a new Method. By Samnel Clarke. M. A.

A Short and Faithful History of the Rise and Progress of the late War.

Singing Psalms Vindicated from the Charge of Novelty: In answer to Dr. Russel,
Mr. Marlow, etc.

Scripture Light about the Gospel Ordinance of Baptism.

Much in a little: An abstract of Mr. Baxters plain Scripture Proof for Infants
Church Membership.

Some brief Directions for improvement of Infan: Baptism: By W. Bagshaw,

Improveableness of Water Baptism. By Dr. Collinges.

Burkit of Infant Baptism.

Scripture Warrant sufficient for Infant Baptism. By G. Firmin.

Infant Baptism of Christ's appointment by S. Pe^to.

A Dialogue about Infant Baptism. By Dr. Gilpin.

FINIS.

