A VINDICATION Of the Doctrine Of Gods Absolute Decree, AND Of Christ's Absolute
and Special Redemption.

In way of ANSWER To those Objections that are brought against them by Mr. THO:
PIERCE, in his Treatise, Entitled, The Divine Philanthropy.

By THO: WHITFELD, Minister of the Gospel.

ROMANS 11.33. O the depth of the Riches both of the Wisdom and Knowledge of God!
how unsearchable are his Judgments, and his Ways past finding out!

LONDON: Printed by Henry Hills and John Field, Printers to His Highness. 1657.

The Epistle to the Reader.
IT may be some may marvel why I should deal in this Argument which is
sufficiently handled, and the Adversary sufficiently answered by another hand:
I shall therefore give an Account of the Grounds that moved me to this
undertaking, which are these:

1. I am abundantly convinced that the Truth which I endeavor to maintain (what
ever others conceive of it) is of that consequence, that too much cannot be
said for the defense thereof; for what Truths are more needful to be contended
for, then those which tend to preserve the perfections of Gods holy Nature,
some of which, by the Doctrine of the Conditional Decree, are too much
violated? Does not this Doctrine by clear and direct consequence (as hereafter
shall be more fully showed) make the Creator to depend upon the creature, and
the everlasting and unchangeable Counsels of his Will, to be subordinate to the
mutable motions of man's will? so as he can do, nor determine nothing absolutely
and certainly, touching man's eternal Salvation or Damnation, till man himself
has ultim^tely determined what he will do: and if the foresight of Sin must go
before the Decree of Reprobation, because Sin goes before Damnation, upon the
very same ground the foresight of Faith and Repentance must go before the
Decree of Election, because these necessarily go before Salvation (which
Doctrine cannot well agree with the glory of Gods ^ree Grace.)

2. I know well that the more hands any Argument passes through in writing of
it, the more hands it is likely to come into for reading of it: for some that
will not look into a Treatise for the sake of the matter, or subject of it, yet
may perhaps do it for the sake of the Author, with whom they have some
acquaintance, or to whom they have some relation.

3. I have endeavored to apply my self (so far as the subject will bear) to the
apprehension of every understanding Christian, though not furnished with the
help of any Literature, whereas Mr Barley being to follow his Adversary step by
step, is forced to follow him in the same way that he went, and to carry on
things sometimes in a higher strain then lower Capacities can reach unto:
Besides, he is forced (that his Answer may not swell in too big a bulk) to
refer the answer of some things to a former Answer, which if the Reader has
not by him (as all have not) he cannot so readily receive satisfaction as he
desires.

These Considerations, together with the desire of some Friends, put me on to
the publishing of what now follows. I shall say nothing of those Aspersions
which Mr P. in his Answer to Mr B. did both unjustly and untruly cast upon me,
because (as I have heard) they are already wiped off by another hand, as also
because I well know that those Readers who are most eager in their pursuit
after Truth, love not to be retarded in their way by any Impertinencies, any
thing that does not directly concern the business in hand.

I have endeavored to compact things as close together as I can, that I may not
tire the Reader with too many lines. All that I shall desire of him is, that he
would not suffer himself to be preponderated with the weight of words, strong
lines, or pleasing language, which he may wish, in the Opposer, but only
attend to the strength of Arguments, and incline his Judgment that way where
he shall find the weight of these to sway the balance.

That this Piece came forth so soon, was besides my intention, for leaving it
in the hands of some Friends at London, it was put to the Press before I knew
of it: and it was expected that Mr Barly's Answer would have come forth before
this time, it being sent to the Press above a Quarter of a Year since.

Farewell.
A VINDICATION Of the Doctrine of Gods Absolute Decree, AND Christ's Special
Redemption.
THe Doctrine of Gods Absolute Decree (being such a Doctrine as is somewhat
removed above the reach of man's natural Apprehension, and very little agreeing
with his corrupt Will and Affections) has been much quarreled at in all Ages.
It began to be so in that great Apostles time, who was the principal Propagator
of it, as appears Romans 9.19. In succeeding Ages Pelagius and his Followers
strongly maintained this Quarrel. In later times (to speak nothing of the
Jesuits and Arminians, who have kindly closed their hands in opposing this
Doctrine) Castellio against Beza, Mr. Hoard in his PHILANTHROPY, but especially
the Author of Fur Praedestinatus, have taken much pains to render this Doctrine
to the world as odious and abominable as may be; To these Mr. Thomas Pierce
has of late largely contributed his help, in his Treatises which he has put
forth, especially in that which he calls The Divine Philanthropy defended: I
hope he will not take it ill, if we shall in a calm and quiet way (without
touching upon his person) examine his Arguments, to see whether they be as
strong as his Words, and whether their Evidence be answerable to his
Confidence. As also speak something in way of Defense of that Innocent Doctrine
of Gods Absolute Decree, which he charge with that great Crime of making God
the Author of Sin, and other foul Consequences, and therefore treads it under
his feet with much indignation and detestation. And because the Asserting and
Confirming of a positive Truth makes way for the Overthrow of that Error which
is contrary to it, we shall begin with this, and in the first place endeavor to
prove, That no conditional Decrees can agree to the Nature of God, and
therefore that they must needs be Absolute; and then come to answer the
Objections that are brought against the Doctrine of the Absolute Decree. In
doing of both these, it cannot be avoided but we must again make use of those
Considerations prefixed before Mr. Barly's Answer to Mr. Pierce (which the^
were briefly propounded, but now shall be more largely insisted on) because
they most properly and intimately concern the Question in hand; as also because
he has no^ given any Answer at all unto them, but only put them off with a
jeer; which whether they have deserved or no, we leave to the indifferent
Reader to judge.

Arguments against Conditional Decrees in God.
BY Conditional Decrees, we understand such as wherein the Condition does not
only go before the execution or effecting of the things decreed, but before
the Decree it self, before the internal act of Gods will, and that purpose
within himself, whereby he has determined that such or such things shall be.

That such a Decree as this cannot agree with the excellent Nature of God, if
we consider him in regard either of his Eternity, Immutability, Omnipotency,
Simplicity, or other Perfections belonging to his Nature, may thus appear.

1. absolute primum; But all Gods Decrees (being acts within himself, and
therefore not really differing from himself) are absolutely Eternal; Therefore
they can have no condition or consideration of any thing without himself going
before them: As his Decree of Election was before the foundation of the world
was laid, Ephesians. 1.4. so also it is with all other of his Decrees.

2. All Conditions are consequents of Gods Decree, therefore they cannot go
before it: they are means fitted for the end: now media sunt propter finem,
therefore the end must be first intended by the same act of Gods Decree whereby
he intends Salvation to men, he intends to bring them to it by Faith,
Repentance and other fit means; therefore Salvation is first intended.

3. Faith and Sanctification (which are the principal conditions of our
Salvation) are the effects of Election. He has chosen us to Salvation through
the sanctification of Spirit, and belief of the Truth, 2 These. 2.13. We are
chosen to be holy and without blame, Ephesians. 1.4. Now these conditions being
effects of the Decree cannot go before it, for the effect cannot go before the
Cause, because it receives its being from it; and as the effect in nature
always follows after the cause, so also it does in Gods consideration; for his
consideration is according to the nature of the thing, else it were not a right
consideration.

To this purpose Learned Dr. Whitaker says well, Cygnae 1 cantio. p 5.
Cum gratia sit propter praedestinationem, praedestinatio non potest esse
propter gratiam. If we receive Grace because we are predestinate, we cannot be
predestinate for foreseen grace. If God should choose men upon the foresight
of Faith or any other grace, where should he foresee this? he could not
foresee it in man before man had any being in the world, or the world it self
had any being; therefore he must foresee it in himself and his own will,
therefore he must first will man's Salvation, and in order to that, will to give
him faith and other graces that fit him for it.

Besides, true Love always flows from true Faith, and by this true Faith and
Love we choose God to be our God; therefore if he should choose us upon the
foresight of our Faith, he should choose us and love us, because we had chosen
and loved him; which contradicts the Apostle, who tells us, that we love him
because he loved us first, 1 John 4.19.

4. That which is absolutely Eternal, has neither beginning nor end: but the
doctrine of the conditional decree fastens an end, and a beginning to Gods
Decrees: For that which they make the peremptory or absolute decree, begins not
till the conditional decree be at an end, and so soon as that takes place, this
is expired. As for instance, God decrees man's Salvation upon condition they
will believe and repent; now when they have persevered in doing so, then this
conditional decree cease to be conditional, and becomes absolute; and the
absolute Decree touching man's Salvation begins not till he has fulfilled the
condition; so that by this means, Election must needs be in time, and not
before all time.

All Gods Decrees are immutable and unchangeable; there is no shadow of change,
Jan. 1.17. Hence it is said, that the Foundation of God (which is his Decree)
remains sure, 2 Timothy 2.19. His Decrees are far more firm then the Laws of the
Medes and Persians, which could not be altered. His Counsels stand for ever,
and the thoughts of his heart throughout all ages, Psalm. 33.11. His Decrees are
those mountains of brass the Prophet speaks of, Zech. 6.1. which can never be
removed: but the doctrine of the conditional will and decree, makes these to be
mutable and changeable; For,

1. By this Doctrine his conditional decree, upon fulfilling the condition,
becomes absolute; and these cannot be both the same, for they have differing
objects; by the one the Salvation and Damnation of all are equally intended,
upon condition of believing, or not believing; whereas his absolute Decree is
peremptorily pitched upon one of these only, with exclusion of the other.

2. Every man in the world is under some Decree or other: so long as he
continues an unbeliever, he is under the Decree of Damnation; when he comes to
be a beleiver, then he comes under the Decree of Salvation; when he falls from
his Faith (as by this Doctrine he may do) then he falls again under the Decree
of Damnation; when he recovers again, he comes under the other Decree; and so
Gods Decrees will be made as variable and changeable as are the mutable motions
of man's will, then which nothing is more unconstant and uncertain.

3. When God seriously wills and intends a man's Salvation, upon condition that
he will believe; when he by persisting in unbelief to his dying day, comes to
be actually damned; then either the will of God touching his Salvation is
changed into a will of Damnation, or else an unbeleever is damned against Gods
will. If the former, then Gods will is changeable; if the latter, then after a
man is actually damned, God does still continue seriously to will and desire
his Salvation, though he never attain his will and desire. Now how can this
agree with his most perfect felicity, and with the infinite perfection of his
nature, to be always crossed in that which he seriously wills and desires.
Besides, Is not just Damnation an act of Gods Justice, and can any act of his
Justice be against his Will?

The will of God is an omnipotent will; For who has resisted his will?

Object. But he wills their Salvation upon condition they do not resist.

Answ. 1. How can it stand with the wisdom of God seriously to will and desire
a man's Salvation in case he does not resist, and he knows certainly at the same
time that he will resist, yea, can do no other, (if his will be not changed)
and he is resolved never to change it? Or how can it stand with his perfection
to subject his will to the perverse will of the creature, and to make his most
serious intentions and purposes to be subordinate to the various motions and
mutations of man's will? so that when he wills and intends one thing, these
should make him will and desire the quite contrary.

2. If man's resistance hinders Gods willing of their Salvation; how comes it to
pass that he wills the salvation of any man, or that any man comes to be saved,
since he knows certainly that all men will resist? for whatsoever is born of
the flesh is flesh, Joh. 3.4. and it is the property of the flesh to lust
against the Spirit, Gal. 5.17.

3 If God seriously wills and intends man's salvation, man's resistance cannot
hinder, for he can easily remove it; Who has resisted his will? (says the
Apostle) Romans 9.19. Our God is in Heaven, and does whatsoever he will, Psalm.
115.3. Whatever pleased the Lord in Heaven or Earth, that did he, Psalm. 135.6.
What is the reason that when all men resist, he removes this resistance in
some, and of unwilling wills causes them to have willing wills? Is it not
because he intends their Salvation? And why does he not the like to others? is
it not because he never intended to save them? He can do this in one as well as
another, and that without offering any violence to the liberty of their wills,
if he intended the Salvation of all alike: No man can be said seriously to
desire that thing, the hindrances of effecting whereof, he will not remove,
when it is in his power to do it.

This conditional Decree cannot consist with the simplicity of Gods Nature,
actus simplicissimus and perfectissimus, being one and the same most simple and
perfect act, decrees all things simul and semel, uno actu simplicissimo,
together, and at once with one most simple act: There is no priority or
posteriority in Gods Decrees, bu only prioritas rationis (as D. Twisse well
expresses it) quando ratio unius petitur e ratione alterius, a priority of
reason, when the reason of one thing is drawn from the reason of another: as
the reason of the means is drawn from the reason of the end. God decrees end
and means, and all together; but because in order of Nature the end goes before
the means, and we can apprehend it no other way, therefore that order is
usually attributed unto God in his Decrees, that first he decrees the end, and
then the means, though he decrees both with one and the self same act, at the
same instant. Now this Hypothetical Doctrine, which makes Gods Decrees to be
conditional, makes also a mixture and multiplicity of Decrees. As first, that
he wills the Salvation of all men; then, that believers only shall be saved;
then, that this particular person shall be saved, if he believe; or damned, if
he will not; then, upon the foresight, who will, and who will not; the certain
salvation of these, and damnation of the other. Now the Scripture carries on
these things, in a far clearer and more direct way; teaching that God by one
and the self same act of an absolute Decree does determine the Salvation of his
Elect, and to give them Faith, Repentance, and all other Graces that are
needful to bring them to it.

This conditional Decree cannot agree with the perfection of Gods Nature.

1. It supposes a general Decree of saving all believers.

2. Because this will never takes effect, if it stays here, and be carried on
no further, it makes God in the next place to proceed to a conditional Decree
of saving this or that person, upon condition if he will believe, and then to
an absolute Decree of these particular persons, upon foresight of their
believing and persevering. Now here is plainly progressus ab imperfectioribus
ad perfectiora, a progress from the less perfect to the more perfect, after the
manner of men, which can in no sort agree to the perfect wisdom of God, who
knows and determines all things simul and semel.

3. This makes this will of God, touching the Salvation of all, rather to be a
Velleietas, then volitio, a wishing, rather then a willing, which is proper
only to weak men, who is not able to accomplish his own desires, but cannot
agree to the All-powerfull God, who is in the Heaven and does whatsoever he
will. Wishing always argues weakness and imperfection: when a man truly
desires any thing, he would effect it if he were able: therefore it must argue
great impotency in God, seriously to desire the Salvation of men, and not to be
able to effect it, yea, to effect it by just means: If he seriously desires the
Salvation of those who are never saved, it follows necessarily that his will is
not omnipotent and irresistible.

This doctrine of a conditional decree cannot agree with the certainty of Gods
Decrees. Paul, (as Mr. J. G. teaches.)

2. This conditional decree has no certain object, therefore it cannot be
certain: It has not certain salvation, nor certain damnation, for it is
equally and indifferently disposed to either of these: It cannot have both
these for the certain object, for they being contrary, cannot consist together.

This conditional Decree agrees not with the Apostles Doctrine, Romans 9.11, 12,
13. For,

1. He tells us that Jacob was loved, and Esau was hated, and that before they
were born, or had done good or evil: but this conditional Decree takes away all
difference betwixt love and hatred, before men are born, before they have done
good or evil, for it makes love to depend upon their doing of good, and hatred
to depend upon their doing of evil, and that not in regard of the effects only
of love or hatred, but in regard of Gods Purpose and Decree. It takes away all
difference betwixt Election and Reprobation: For according to this Doctrine
Esau shall be loved and elected, upon condition he will believe, and Jacob
shall be hated and rejected, if he refuses to do this.

2. The Apostle says of these, that they were loved and hated before they were
born; but by this Doctrine no man is loved or hated till he be ready to die,
till he has persevered in Faith or Unbelief, till the very act of his
Dissolution.

Object. The Love which the Apostle here speaks of is understood of temporal
Privileges, and Hatred of the contrary.

Answ. Not of temporal Privileges only; For, 1 The earthly Canaan was a Type
of the Heavenly Canaan, as Jerusalem was a Type of the Celestial Jerusalem: as
not only Calvin, Beza, Zanchy, and others affirm, but also Bellarmine himself
acknowledges; and Jacob was a Type of the elected Israel, as Esau was a Type
of the rejected part, called therefore profane Esau, who passed away all his
right and hope of Heaven for something wherewith to fill his belly for the
present.

2. The Love and Hatred here mentioned by the Apostle are the same with
Election and Rejection: for the Apostle makes this the ground, why one was
loved and the other hated before they had done either good or evil; namely,
That the purpose of God according to Election (according to which Jacob was
elected) might remain, and that it might appear, that this was not of works,
but by him that calls, Romans 9.11.

And this holds as well in the hatred of Esau, as in the love of Jacob; he was
hated before he was born, that the purpose of God according to rejection might
remain: Contra Donat. lib. 1. cap. 16.
To this purpose Austin makes Esau, together with Cain and Judas, to belong to
the Malignant Church.

Object. Though Jacob and Esau had not actually don't good or evil, yet they had
done it in Gods foresight, according to which God might love the one, and hate
the other.

Answ. This still crosses the Apostles Scope, which is to show that the first
ground of putting a difference betwixt these two, in loving the one, and hating
the other, was not in themselves but in God: not of works (says he) but of him
that calls, that the purpose of God according to Election (and so also his
purpose according to Rejection) might remain firm: For if this difference
should arise from foreseen works, yet it should be of works, which the Apostle
here wholly rejects: not of works (says he.) Many who renounce foreseen
works as the ground of Election, yet make Original sin the ground of
Reprobation: but the Apostle here excludes both alike, namely all foreseen
works from the hating of Esau, as from the loving of Jacob: before they had
done either good or evil (says he) speaking of both of them alike.

Learned D. Whitaker brings this as an Argument to prove that Original sin is
not the cause of Reprobation: Causa illius odii quo Deus Esavum prosequutus est
nondum natum, Cygna cantio page 7.
non fuit peccatum originale, quia tum aequaliter odisset Jacobum: quare si
quaeras cur Esau non invenerit nec acceperit misericordiam, oportet causam
aliquam assignari quae non conveniat Jacobo: The cause (says he) of that
hatred, wherewith God hated Esau before he was born, was not Original sin, for
then he should have alike hated Jacob: wherefore, if you ask why Esau neither
found nor received mercy, some cause must be assigned which agrees not to
Jacob. Now if some other cause must be assigned (for the same cause brings
forth the same effect) what can this be, but the good will and pleasure of God,
who has mercy on whom he will, and whom he will he hardens?

2. This conditional Decree crosses the Apostles Doctrine, because it makes
the difference betwixt vessels of honor and dishonor to arise from the
disposition of the matter, whereas the Apostle makes it to arise from the will
of the Potter: Has not (says he) the Potter power to make of the same lump
one vessel to honor, and another to dishonor? Romans 9.21. Unbelievers and
believers are not the same lump, but these are a better qualified and more
refined lump then the other; but the Apostle makes both sorts of vessels to be
made of the very same lump.

3. There had been no ground at all of quarrelling at the Will of God, or
saying, Who has resisted his Will, if his Will had not been the cause of
difference betwixt one and another. And the Apostle might easily have answered
(Yea for vindicating the Justice of God, he was bound to have done it) that God
did earnestly will and desire their salvation, but they resisted his will: Yet
he goes not this way to work, but answers them by checking their malepert and
audacious insolence, that dare enter into contest with their Creator; What art
thou, etc.

4. This Doctrine is easy and obvious to every man's apprehension that has any
use of his rational faculty; namely, That it is just with God to decree that
man's damnation, who willingly rejects Christ and salvation when they are
offered unto him, and God seriously desires that he might be saved; and
therefore the Apostle needed not to have cried out (...), O the depth of the
wisdom and knowledge of God, his judgments are unsearchable, and his ways past
finding out: Romans 11.33. this being the great abyss and hidden depth of the
Apostles Doctrine namely, How God should hate any man before he was born, or
had done either good or evil. To this purpose Austin says truly, Eos evacuare
verba Apostoli, Ad Bon^ifa. l. 2 c. 7.
qui judicium divinae discretionis ad opera reducunt aut praevisa aut
praeterita. That they make the Apostle speak to no purpose, who reduce the
judgment or cause of Divine difference of one from another, unto Works,
whether foreseen or already done.

This conditional Decree cannot stand with the absolute liberty and
independency of the Will of God: For whereas he says, I will do this because I
will, Romans 9.15. this makes him to will, because the creature wills; and
confines the liberty and freedom of his Will, to the motions of man's will: so
that he cannot absolutely and positively determine and will man's salvation, till
man has first willed it himself, by being willing to believe, and to persevere
in doing so. Pet. Mart. loc. commun. loc. de praed. sect. 24.
According to this opinion, as Peter Martyr says well, Deus non operaretur
juxta suam voluntatem, sed juxta alienam. God should not act or work according
to his own will, but according to the will of others.

Yea this imposes a necessity upon the will of. God, which is the fountain of
all freedom: for it makes his will and decree to be grounded upon his
foreknowledge, and his foreknowledge to be grounded upon man's actions and
motions: So that if he foresees man to persevere in believing, he must of
necessity determine his salvation; and that not because it is his good will and
pleasure to save him, and in order thereto to work faith in him, but because he
foresees him to persevere in believing; and if he foresees him to do otherwise,
he must of necessity decree his destruction, and can do no otherwise: He cannot
have mercy on whom he will have mercy, and harden whom he will, till man's will
has made way for him. The Assertors therefore of this Doctrine, while they are
sollicitous about maintaining the Liberty of Man's Will, and tender of the least
touch that may tend to the contrary, they mind not that they bereave God of
the Liberty of his Will, and do as it were cast fetters upon it; so that he can
move no otherwise in point of man's salvation, then man shall give him leave.

This conditional decree cannot stand with the infinite and most perfect Wisdom
of God.

1. It makes him to fetch the Idea, the model and plot, according to which he
will frame his greatest works, and those actions that tend to his greatest
glory, not from himself and his own infinite understanding, his own wisdom and
skill, but from the actions and motions of the creature. The more skilful and
perfect any Artificer is, the less he will borrow from the models and plots of
others, in any curious work he is to make, but fetch all from his own ingeny
and invention: But this Doctrine makes the most wise and perfect God to stand
as it were in suspense, and unresolved what to do touching man's eternal
salvation or damnation, till he has seen what man himself will do.

2. Pet. Mart. loco de praedest. page 35.
No wise man will earnestly desire the doing of that which he knows certainly
will never be done; yea can never be done unless he affords that help for doing
it, which at the same time he is resolved not to yield, though he be able to do
it, and might justly do it. Estne sapientis hominis, De ne dicam, ea decernere
and velle quae cassa sunt? (says Peter Martyr) Is it the part of a wise man,
much less of the wise God, to determine and will, and desire those things that
shall never be, shall never take effect? If God wills the salvation of all men
upon condition they will believe, and knows certainly at the same time, that
they neither will nor can believe unless he works faith in them, (which is his
gift) and yet never wills to bestow this gift upon them, how can this stand
with his wisdom? God is able to work faith in all men as well as he does in
some, and that without any impeachment of his Justice: and if he would have all
men to be saved, how comes it then to pass that there are so few true
believers, since none can be saved but by believing?

3. What wise man will earnestly desire and will the end, and not will the
means that tend to it, when he is able to will and to work both? Quomodo
sapientiae Dei conveniat (says Spanheim) scire dispositionem necessariam ad
salutem (fidem scil.) in nullo reperiri, nec reperiri posse, sine suo dono,
nolle vero id plurimis dare, and tamen decernere omnes homines ad salutem, si
ista dispositio in iis reperiatur? How can it stand with the wisdom of God to
know, that the disposition which is necessary to salvation (namely Faith) is
found in no man, nor can be found without his gift, and that he will not give
this to very many, and yet decrees the salvation of all, if this disposition be
found in them?

How many thousands have lived and died in the world without enjoying any means
of faith and salvation! How shall they believe on him, of whom they have not
heard? (says the Apostle, Romans 10.14.) Are there not many thousands of the
Savages, both in the East and West Indies, in this age (especially in former
ages) who never heard any thing of Christ or salvation? Are there not many
Infants of Heathens, that die before they are capable of knowing any thing that
belongs to their salvation? and can we think that God earnestly desires the
salvation of all these to whom he denies all means of bringing them to
salvation, and to some of them, all possibility of receiving benefit by the
means, had they enjoyed them? Besides, are there not many to whom God
vouchsafes the outward means, and yet denies them the inward work and operation
of his Spirit, without which he knows that the outward means will be
ineffectual? and can he be said earnestly to desire the salvation of those to
whom he denies saving grace, that great grace of Regeneration, without which it
is not possible for any man to enter into his heavenly kingdom? Were it not a
ridiculous thing for a King earnestly to desire to bestow a rich reward upon a
blind man, upon condition he would read on a book; or a lame man, upon
condition that he would run so many miles; or a dead man, upon condition that
he would live, that he would arise and work? And is it not as ridiculous to say
that God earnestly desires the salvation of such as are in the state of
corruption, dead in sins and trespasses, upon condition that they will repent
and believe; it being as impossible for unregenerate men to do these things, as
for a blind man to see, or a lame man to walk, to a dead man to work. Our
Savior says, that no man can come to him unless the Father draw him, John
6.44. To come to Christ is to believe, Psalm. 35. and no man not only does
this, but no man can do this, unless the Father draw him by the inward and
effectual working of his Spirit: how then can he be said earnestly to desire
the salvation of those whom he will never draw in this sort?

Object. Against this Mr. P. objects, Divine Philant. cap 4 Page 31.
That when our Savior says no man can come to him, it does not signify that
it was impossible for them to believe, but only that they did not believe, as
when he says that the Son can do nothing of himself, John 5.19. it is no more
then if he said he did nothing of himself, for God gives sufficient grace to
every man in the world to believe if he will.

Answ. Is this sufficient grace such a grace whereby a man is regenerate and
made a new creature, whereby he is born again and has a new life infused into
him? if not, how can a dead man perform the actions of life? how can one that
lies dead in sins and trespasses perform a principal action belonging to
Spiritual Life, namely, come to Christ by true believing? The Apostle makes
this believing to be an effect of that mighty power which wrought in Christ
when God raised him from the dead, Ephesians. 1.19, 20. and therefore for the
performing of this there needs not only sufficient but effectual grace, such a
grace as is wrought not only by moral swasion, but by the mighty operation of
God, Col. 2.12.

This Doctrine of the conditional Decree derogates from the excellency and
efficacy of Free Grace, Who has separated thee (says the Apostle,) and what
have thou that thou have not received? 1 Cor. 4.7. this attributes it to man
himself and his Freewill; for till man himself by the right motion of his will
in believing and repenting, has fulfilled the condition, and so made the
separation, there is no difference, no not so much as in the mind and purpose
of God, betwixt one man and another, but he stands equally affected to the
salvation of all men alike, and when there comes to be a difference, a man may
say that it was made by the motion of his own will, he willingly receiving that
which another wilfully rejected, when the other (by virtue of his sufficient
grace) had power to receive what was offered as well as he: And though the
Apostle in the former verses had spoken of Ministerial gifts, yet in this
seventh verse he speaks generally of all sorts of gifts, and the Argument holds
strongly from the lesser to the greater; for if in common gifts, if in
ministerial gifts, it be God that makes the difference betwixt one man and
another, much more it is so in special graces that tend to eternal salvation.

This Doctrine does fasten such a foreknowledge on God as cannot agree to him:
Adams fall, and all other sinful actions from being within the compass of his
will and decree, and so from being any way within himself; whence then shall
the knowledge of these things arise when they have no being at all, neither
within him nor without him? so that the object of his knowledge must be a mere
nonentity, a mere nothing; and whereas his knowledge being a most perfect
knowledge must have a most perfect ground and foundation whence it arises
(namely his own blessed self, and his most holy will and decree) by this means
a mere non-ens is made to be the object of his knowledge, and so in effect he
is made to know nothing.

God knows himself with a most perfect knowledge, therefore he perfectly knows
his own power, and this is the ground of his knowledge rerum possibilium, of
things that possibly may be, he perfectly knows his own will; and this is the
ground of his knowledge rerum futurarum, of things that certainly shall be. It
is not Gods knowledge that gives a being to things, nor his power, but it is
his will that causes him to put forth his power for the producing of them: so
that not the knowledge of what he is able to do, but of what he will do, is the
ground of his foreknowledge of things. If the knowledge of his power did give
being to things, then we should have many worlds, for he knows that he is able
to make many.

Besides, the foreknowledge whereby God knows things is a direct knowledge
whereby he knows himself first, and all things in and by himself, and that uno
intuitu, at one and the same instant: but the knowledge and foresight which by
this Doctrine is fastened on him, is a kind of reflex knowledge such as is in
us, whereby we look on things without us, and come to receive information from
them, and to have a knowledge bred in us which was not before, whereby we come
to know one thing after another, and so to have our knowledge daily increased;
which in no sort can agree to God who knows all things together and at once,
and that in the most perfect manner from all eternity: so that when
foreknowledge is attributed to God, this is only respectu objectorum, because
one thing comes to pass after another, not because he knows one thing after
another; for it is a most true rule, That Deo omnia praesentia sunt in sua
aeternitate, etiam praeterita and futura, as he is God from everlasting to
everlasting, Psalm. 90. so he is an all-knowing God from everlasting to
everlasting and that without any variation, his knowledge not really differing
from himself.

Lastly, Twiss, to show the incongruity of the Conditional Decree, whereby the
foresight of something done in time, is put before that which was before all
time, namely, Gods everlasting Decree. C^p. 3. Page ^7.
This indeed Mr. P vilifies, as that which raw Sophisters in the Schools would
be ashamed of, and with much confidence tells us he will demonstrate this Rule
to be false, when ever it shall be required of him. To which we may answer with
as much confidence, Let him do it if he can. Let him demonstrate if he can that
this old Maxim in Logic (Quod primum est in intention, ultimum est in
executione) is false, if rightly understood; if understood as Dr. Twiss
understands and applies it, namely, De finibus ultimis non intermediis, as it
is taken in this Argument. That Doctors known skill in arguing, deserved a more
modest censure at his hands. As for the Instance he brings to disprove this
Maxim, we shall not wrong it to say it is ridiculous; For (says he) he that
first intends to take ship at Dover, and after sail into France, must by this
Argument first sail into France, and afterward take ship at Dover: Cujus
contrarium verum est; for is not the journey into France the first thing here
intended, and in order to that to take ship at Dover? If Mr. P. has no
stronger demonstrations then these, they will not much daunt his Opposites; but
overmuch confidence may sometimes dazzle the eyes of those who are quickest
sighted.

But to add a little more strength to this Argument, Mr. P. does not deny that
God does permit sin; if he does permit sin to be, he does not permit it against
his will; and if he wills to permit it, what reason can be brought why he
should will to permit it, but that hereby he might make way for the
manifestation of the glory of his mercy in the merciful Salvation of some, and
of his justice in the just Damnation of others (neither of which could have
been done if sin had never been) therefore both these must needs be determined
before the permission of sin, without which there could be no foresight of it;
for how was it possible for God to foresee that sin should be, before he willed
to permit that sin might be?

Thus we have done with confirmation of the positive Truth; it follows now that
we endeavor to give some satisfaction to those difficulties that are objected
against it.

Answers to such Objections as are brought against Gods Absolute Decree.
BEfore we come to give answer to the particular Objections, these things may
be propounded in general in way of Answer.

1. It is very agreeable to right reason, that God being a most free, absolute
and omnipotent Agent, he might design the creatures that were of his own making
to what ends himself pleased, without giving account to any. Why do thou
strive against him, for he does not give account of his matters? Job 33.15. It
was in his power and his own choice, whether he would make them or not make
them, and when he did make them, he made them for his own glory, Prove. 16.4.
therefore he might appoint them to such ends as should make most for his glory.

2. That which the Scripture plainly, clearly and positively asserteth that God
does, we ought not to deny that he does it, though we cannot discern the manner
how he does it. It rather beseems us humbly to acknowledge our ignorance in
apprehending the manner of his working, then to deny any of his works, then to
deny that he works all things according to the good pleasure of his will, or
to deny that a sparrow falls not to the ground, or an hair from our head
without the will of the Father, or that he works most determinately,
certainly and infallibly in the various and mutable motions of man's will: yea,
most holily, justly and righteously in those very actions, wherein man works
most perversely, unjustly and unrighteously, how else can it be said when
Joseph's brethren sold him into Egypt out of envy, that God sent a man before?
etc. and when David numbered the people, it is said not only that Satan stood
against Israel, and provoked David to number the people, 1 Chr. 21.1. but that
the Lord moved David against them, in that he said, Go number Israel, 2 Samuel
24.1. Miro and ineffabili modo, Euchirid. ad Laurent. cap. 100.
id non fit praeter voluntatem Dei, quod fit contra voluntatem ejus (says
Austin.)

3. The sum of what Mr. P. or any of his predecessors in this Controversy
about Gods absolute Decree has objected against it, is included in that which
the Apostle objects against himself, speaking of this subject, Romans 9.14. Is
God unjust? and who has resisted his will? Which he answers with an Absit,
and, Quis tu es? God forbid that there should be any unrighteousness in him,
and, Who art thou, O man, that pleadest with God? vouchsafing no other answer
but this, whereby he gives a sharp check to the malepert boldness and audacious
insolence of those that shall dare thus to quarrel with their Creator, as if
the sheard should strive with the Potter: And if we should give no other answer
but this (having the great Apostle for our example) it might suffice. But for
further satisfaction, we shall endeavor to give a particular answer to the
particular objections, that it may appear we desire not to decline any thing
that carries with it any weight of truth.

Object. 1. The first and principal Objection against the Doctrine of the
absolute Decree, is, That it makes God is be the Author of sin: For if in the
first place he decrees to glorify his Justice in the just condemnation of some
men (which is the decree of Reprobation) then it follows, that in order to
this, he must decree the permissiin of sin, without which there can be no just
condemnation; and if he decrees the being of sin, then he is the author of it.

Answ. For answer, It cannot be denied that God does permit sin: for if he did
not permit it, he could easily hinder it; so that without his permission, sin
could not be.

2. If he does permit it, he has decreed to permit it; for he works by
counsel, and what he does in time, he has determined before all time: And the
Scripture is plain, that God decrees those actions, which when men do, they do
very sinfully. What worse action then the crucifying of Christ? yet it is said,
he was delivered by the determinate counsel and foreknowledge of God, Acts
2.23. here is not only knowledge, but a determination of the thing to be done.
And it is said, That Herod, Pilat and the Jews, did that to Christ when they
crucified him, which the hand of God and his Counsel had determined before to
be done, cap. 4.27, 28. Besides, if God does permit sin, he does willingly
permit it; otherwise it should come to pass whether he will or not, Enchirid.
cap. 95.
and so he should not be omnipotent. Nihil fit (says Austin) nisi quod
omnipotens fieri velit, vel ipse faciendo, vel ab aliis fieri permittendo.

2. But though God has decreed that sin shall be, and therefore has decreed
to permit it, without which it could not be; yet it does not follow that he is
the Author of it.

Object. But if he has willed and decreed it, Ad amitam collat. Vorst s^ct. 17.
his decree is an energetical operative decree, therefore he has some hand in
working and effecting of it, as Calvin, Piscator and others teach, who are for
the absolute decree. Negari non potest, illum aliquo modo procurare negotium,
cujus consilio and decreto negotium geritur, says Piscator. And if his decree
be operative, so as he has any hand at all in the working of it, then he must
needs be the Author of it.

Answ. For answer of this, Two things are to be cleared: 1. That Gods
permission is not such a bare permission as is without all action and operation.

2. That though his permission be accompanied with some kind of operation, yet
he is no author of evil.

That Gods permission of sin is accompanied with some kind of operation,
appears, volens permittere, he does willingly permit it, else it should be
against his will; August in Enchirid. ad Laurent. cap. 100.
which cannot be (as was showed) If he does willingly permit it, then there is
some act of his will about it: Deus permittit (says Austin) aut volens, aut
nolens and in vitus; non certe invitus, quia id esset cum tristitia, and
potentia se majorem haberet; si voleus permittit, est genus quoddam voluntatis.
Here Austin grants that God has some kind of will in the permission of sin,
if any kind of will, this must needs be a perfect will, for no imperfect will
agrees to God, who is perfection it self: And how can he be said to will any
thing without any act of his will?

Scripture-expressions do constantly hold forth Gods manner of working in sin,
Joseph's brethren to sell him into Egypt, but that God sent him. It was not you
that sent me hither, but God. Genesis 45.8. It does not say that God suffered
Pharaoh to harden his own heart, but that God hardened it, Exodus 9.12. That he
suffered the Canaanites to harden their hearts against Israel; but it was of
the Lord that they should harden their hearts against them, that he might
destroy them. Josh. 11.20. That he suffered Absalom to defile his fathers
concubines; but he tells David, What thou have done in secret, I will do in the
sight of this Sun, 2 Samuel 12.12. So it is said, that God bade Shimei curse
David. That he bade the evil spirit go and deceive Ahab, 1 King. 29.22. Go
forth and do so. Job says that God had taken away his cattle, when the
Caldeans and Sabeans took them away. Job. 1. The Prophet complains that the
Lord had hardened their hearts against his fear, Isa. 63.13. It is said, that
the Lord turned the hearts of the Egyptians to hate his people, Psalm. 105.35.
That when the false Prophet was deceived, he had deceived them. Ezekiel. 14.9.
That he gave up the Gentiles to vile lusts. Romans 1.26. That he smote the Jews
with the spirit of slumber, that they should not see with their eyes, nor hear
with their ears. Romans 11.8, 9. That he would send to those that loved not the
truth, strong delusions, that they should believe lies. 2 These. 2.10, 11. That
God put into the hearts of the ten Kings, to give their power to the beast.
Rev. 17.17. and many other like places there are that speak in the same kind
of language. Now can we think that when the Scripture does in so many places,
and so constantly set forth the manner of Gods working in sin, ^y such
expressions as denote action, and very seldom (if at all) as signify a bare
permission only; as that in the selling of Joseph into Egypt, in Pharaohs
refusing to let the people go, and the rest before named; God should exercise a
bare permission only, without any action, that he should sit still as a
Spectator without doing any thing at all.

Object. To these places Mr. P. answers, Cap. 4. page 48.
That by a common Hebraism, verbs active in sound, are only permissive in
signification.

Answ. This indeed he dictates, but he does not demonstrate, nor bring the
least patch of an Argument to prove it, neither will all his skill in the
Hebrew, enable him to do it; and may he not by this shift evade the clearest
and strongest Scriptures that are brought against him, by telling us that they
signify quite another thing then the nature of the words do import, if we will
believe him?

2. Why may we not then interpret other Scriptures in the like manner, where the
like expressions are used; as when the Lord says, I form the light, and create
darkness, I make peace, and create evil. Isa. 45.7. I have made the earth, and
created man upon it, my hands spread out the heavens. Psalm. 12. Why may we not
by Mr. P. his Hebraisms, interpret these verbs that are active in sound, to be
permissive only in signification, and say that God has permitted light and
darkness to be created, and suffered the earth to be made, and the heavens to
be spread out?

Object. But he further objects, That these expressions cannot be properly
taken, therefore they do not denote any action but only permission.

Answ. Though they cannot be so properly taken, as to signify that God works
in the same manner in evil actions, as he does in good, or as evil men
themselves do, yet neither so improperly as to signify a bare permission
without any action at all, and though we be not able to apprehend his secret
and wonderful manner of working in evil actions; yet neither are we to deny that
he has any work at all in them, since himself does so often and so expressly
affirm it; though he does it miro and ineffabili modo (as Austin speaks) yet we
are not to deny the doing of it. And by those former Scriptures mentioned, it
may appear what little reason Mr. P. had to make such a clamor against those
our Protestant Divines (some of which God used as principal instruments in
advancing that glorious work of Reformation) as if they made God to be the
Author of sin; when he knows that they positively professed, and some of them
strongly proved the contrary; and what expressions they used in this subject,
were but the same in effect with Scripture expressions, yea not altogether so
high: Yet he labors, magno conatu, to maintain this charge against them, herein
complying with the Papists; so that Bellarmine himself is not more eager and
industrious in carrying on this charge against Calvin and Zuinglius, then he is
in carrying it on, both against these and many others, arraigning no less then
twelve of them as guilty of the great sin of Blasphemy, by making God the
Author of sin, when they speak but the very same things for substance which the
Scripture speaks about it; as if it were his drift and design to make them and
their doctrine odious.

That God has some hand in the acts of sinful men, appears, Substratum or
subject of sin, namely, the natural motion or action whereto sin cleaves, is
that whereof he is the proper cause and efficient: therefore he must needs have
some efficiency in it.

Object. Against this Mr. P. objects, That it is as impossible to separate the
wickedness of the act, from the act which is wicked, as to separate roundness
from the Globe, and to separate sinfulness from the sin, Cap 4. page 48.
as from the sinful act.

Answ. God is little beholding to him for so denying him to be the Author of
the evil that cleaves to the actions of nature, as withal, to deny him to be
the Author of Nature, for maintaining his Purity, by denying his Omnipotency.

2. Does not the Scripture tell us expressly, that in him we live, move and have
our being? Acts 17.25. As he is the Author of our being, so also of all those
natural motions and actions that arise from our being; as we cannot live
without him, so we cannot move without him. As we cannot move our hand or foot,
so not our heart or tongue without him. Omnes causae secundae sicut dependent a
Deo in esse, it a dependent ab eo in operari.

3. Was not Natures work the same in Adam, when he ate the forbidden fruit as
when he did his necessary food, and in David (which is his own instance) when
he lay with Bathsheba, as when he lay with his lawful wife? in an Executioner
when he murders a man out of malice, as when he kills a man by the command of
the Magistrate? It is a true Rule, That Deus agit iu peccato, non tanquam causa
moralis, sed tanquam causa naturalis.

4. Every new action and motion is a new entity, now all entities and beings
are from the first being, and so far forth they are good. De Vera Relig. c. 4.
Ipsum quantulumcunque esse bonum est (says Austin) quiasummum esse est summum
bonum: the smallest being of all is good, because the chiefest or greatest
being is the greatest good. If M. P. will have any natural act (qua actus) not
to proceed from the God of Nature, he will have a creature without a Creator.

5. Does not Mr. P. by this Doctrine, justly contract on himself that guilt
which he unjustly charge upon others, namely, of making God the Author of
Sin? for if God be the Author of all natural actions (as has been proved) and
it be impossible (as he teaches) to separate the sin from the action, then he
that is the Author of the action, must needs be Author of the sin also which is
unseparable from it. But I suppose he is not so dull-sighted, but if he pleased
he could easily discern a difference between the action and the evil quality of
it. The roundness may be separated from the Globe, and yet the matter of it
remain still when it is put into another form. There are multitudes of actions
wherein Natures work is the very same, whereof though some of them be evil, yet
others of them may be without any evil at all.

So far as Sin makes for the glory of God,

If God only permits,

Object. Mr. P. thinks to shift himself from this Argument by telling us, Cap.
3. Page 129.
That God does wisely order and dispose of sin after the committing of it, but
does not determine that it shall be done, or has any hand in the doing.

Answ. But then still it follows, that he stands as a mere spectator in regard
of the greatest part of actions that are done in the world; for all the while
they are in acting he does nothing at all about them, only afterward he
orders them to the best advantage. But how can this stand with the All-wise and
All-working Providence of God (without which a sparrow falls not to the ground)
that he should stand looking on whiles the greatest part of actions are done in
the world, and many of them of greatest consequence, and determine nor do any
thing while they be done and past, only afterward employ his wisdom in
ordering of them? For (to instance in some of our former examples) how can we
think that when Joseph was sold into Egypt, God had no hand in it, though his
brethren did it out of envy and hatred against him, when he tells them that God
sent him before to preserve them and their posterity alive, and to save them by
a great deliverance; yea in them the whole Church of God which was included in
Jacobs family? yea why should he repeat it again, saying, You sent me not
hither, but God sent me, Genesis 45.7, 12. if God had not any hand at all in his
sending thither, yea, if he had not the chief hand? How can we think that God
had no hand in Pharaohs oppression of the Israelites, when he had determined
it, and foretold it many years before, Genesis 15.13, 16. or that he had no hand
in his obstinate refusal to let them go (having received an express command
from God to do it) when it is said that the Lord hardened Pharaohs heart that he
would not let them go, Exodus 10.27. yea, that he raised him up for this
purpose, that he might show his power upon him? cap. 9.16. How can we think
that the defection of the ten Tribes from the House of David (which is called
Rebellion, 1 Kings 12.19.) was such a thing as God had no hand in, when as he
told J^roboam by his prophet that he would rent the kingdom out of the hand of
Solomon, and give ten Tribes of it to him? cap. 11.31. Can we think that God
had no hand in the destruction of Samaria, and carrying away the ten Tribes by
the king of Assyria, when he calls the Assyrian his rod, and the staff of his
indignation, and that he would send him against an hypocritical nation, against
the people of his wrath, and would give him a charge to take the spoil and
prey; howbeit he did not mean so, neither did he think so (namely to do Gods
work, but his own) but he thought to destroy and cut off nations not a few?
Isa. 10.6, 7. Can we think that all the strange changes and alterations that
have been in Kingdoms and States, whereby the Government and Dominion has been
devolved from one hand to another (which seldom has been done without much
violence and wrong, yea without Treacheries, Murders and Bloodshed) were such
things wherein God had no hand, when it is said that he does these things, to
the intent that men may know that the most High has power over the Kingdoms of
men, and gives them to whom he will, Dan. 4.14. Can we think that the strange
commotions and shakings that of late have been amongst our selves, whereby the
whole frame of Government, both in Church and State, is changed from what it
was, are such things as God has had no hand in? Certainly this were to make
God a very weak and impotent, or a very remiss and careless Governor of the
World, if he should stand still looking on while these things were in doing,
and only exercise his wisdom, in ordering them afterward.

Object. But it is further objected, That God hates all sin, and therefore can
have no hand at all, either in willing or effecting of it: for no man will have
any hand in doing what he hates.

Answ. Though he hates it, yet he permits it; (as is granted by all) and why
does he permit it, but because he can get himself glory by it? and so far as it
makes for his glory, he may both will it, and have some kind of hand in
working it: Though sin be in it self evil, yet it may have some respect of
good, because it may be made an occasion of good. For the rule is true, Malum
est in bono tanquam in subjecto, Enchirid. cap. 96.
and actus peccati in genere entis bonus est, in genere moris malus. Hence
Austin says, that Quamvis quae mala sunt, in quantum mala sunt, non sunt bona,
tamen ut non solum bona, sed etiam mala sint, bonum est. Although evil things
be not good, so far as they are evil, yet it is good that not only good things
should be, but evil things also.

It is granted by all, another; as because men received not the love of the
truth, he gave them up to strong delusions, 2 These. 2.10. Now punishment is
more then a bare permission: It were ridiculous to say, that a Judge only
permits a Malefactor to be arraigned, condemned and executed.

Thus I hope we have cleared the first thing propounded, namely, That Gods
permission is not such an empty idle permission, as is accompanied with no
action nor operation at all. It follows now to show, that though it be an
operative permission, yet he is not the Author of the evil permitted and
committed; but when be works in the same action with wicked men, what they do
wickedly and unjustly, he does most holily, justly and righteously.

That the truth of this may appear, it will be needful to look into the manner
of Gods working in evil actions of men. This, though it be done in a wonderful
and ineffable manner, yet so much may be discerned of it, as may serve to
satisfy sober minds, and to clear God from all just imputation of any
impurity or unholiness.

This in general may be sufficient to clear him from all such imputations,
because all those things that proceed from him, whence evil minded men take any
occasion to be stirred up to evil, do in their own nature tend to good, and are
occasions of evil only by accident, as the shining of the Sun may make weak
eyes see worse then before: So that he cannot be said to be the Author of any
evil, because he is never causa per se, but only per accidens, of any evil
that falls out upon occasion of any thing that he does. All his dispensations
toward man, do always in their own nature tend to good, and the evil that does
occasionally result from them is praeter scopum operis, besides the scope of
the work that he does. When a Physician prescribes to his Patient wholesome
Physic, and such as is in it self fit for cure of his malady, and most proper
for his disease; if this meets with some malignant humor in his body, whereby
it occasions greater sickness, yea the death of the Patient, the Physician
cannot be said to be the author of his sickness or death, because what he
administered was to preserve health and life, and that it wrought another
effect, was only by accident: So it is in this case betwixt God and sinful
men. The truth of this will more plainly appear, if we look into the
particulars. There are two ways especially, whereby God may be said to
administer occasion of sinning, and so to have some kind of hand in it,
namely, by his word, and by his works.

1. For the word of God, wicked men may sometime take occasion from that, to
become more sinful. The Apostle shows expressly, that the Law of God has an
efficacy in irritating and stirring the corruption of man's nature: For he
says, that sin took occasion by the command, and wrought in him all manner of
concupiscence, and sin taking occasion by the command, deceived him, Romans 7.11.
and that, when we were in the flesh, the motions of sin which were by the Law,
did work in our members, Ver. 5. That the Law has an efficacy in stirring up
sinful motions, and in working in us all manner of concupiscence, is plain by
these expressons of the Apostle.

Quest. If it be asked, how the Law of God, that is holy, just and good, can be
any occasion of evil;

Answ. The answer is, That it arises from the contrariety that is betwixt Gods
holy Law, and man's corrupt heart. It is a true rule, that contraria juxta se
posita mogis elucescunt: when contraries are put together, their contrariety
does more appear. When fire and water are kept at a distance, the contrariety
of their natures does not much appear; but put them together, and then they
fight one with another, till the stronger has overcome the weaker. There is
nothing more holy then the Law of God, being the perfect rule of all
righteousness and holiness; there is nothing more corrupt then the heart of
man, being the seat and sink of all silthiness and pollution, Mat. 15.19.
Therefore the more close this holy Law of God be applied to the corrupt heart
of man, the more the innate corruption of it is irritated and stirred up. We
see this in the example of Pharaoh, the more strongly the command was pressed
upon him, touching letting the Israelites go, the more strongly did his
rebellious will rise up against it: We may see this in the ordinary carriage of
wicked men, let a proud profane swearer or filthy speaker be rebuked for their
ill language, the more they will exceed in this kind: Look as when a stream is
stopped, it rises higher, though no more water be added to it; so it is with
those who are wilfully wicked, when they are stopped in the course of their
wickedness. Many other instances might be brought to make it appear, that the
good word of God accidentally does stir up the corruption that is in men's
wicked hearts. When our Savior Christ preached to the Jews, the Pharisees were
filled with wrath against him, Luke 4.28. When Stephen preached unto them, they
gnashed their teeth against him, Acts 7.54. Christ's Preaching and Stephens
Preaching, had an efficiency in stirring up the anger and wrath of their
hearers, they were accidental causes of it, but no faulty causes, they cannot
be said to be the Authors of their anger, though their Preaching occasioned it.
So it is when ever the good word of God does stir up evil affections in the
hearts of wicked men, neither he nor his word are the Authors of that evil.

The Apostle says, that The Law works wrath, Romans 4.15. It works wrath no
otherwise then it works sin, namely, by accident; for it was the end and
scope of the Law, to keep men from sinning, and so to keep them from wrath: now
as the Law works it, God works it, for the Law is Gods instrument; and as the
Law cannot be said to be the Author of sin (though it does accidentally stir
corruption) no more can God be said to be the Author of it.

Yea, not only the Law, but the Gospel may be an occasion of increasing man's
sin; for Christ tells the Jews, that if they had been blind, they had had no
sin, but because they said they did see, therefore their sin remained, John
9.41. and, This is the condemnation of the world, that light is come into the
world, and men loved darkness more then light, John 3.19. So that the shining
of the light of the Gospel, may occasion an increase both of men; sin and
condemnation, and yet be no faulty case of it: In this sense also Christ says
of himself, that he came not to send peace, but the sword; that he came to set
a man at variacne against his father, and the daughter against the mother, Mat.
10.34, 35. that he came to set fire on the earth, Luke 12.49. Will Mr. P. tell
us here, that Christ came only to suffer those fiery persecutions that were
stirred up in the world by the Preaching of the Gospel, or those enmities that
were stirred up betwixt nearest relations, upon occasion of it; or that Christ
was the Author of these persecutions and enmities, and of those stirs and
troubles that were raised up in the world, when he caused his Kingdom to be set
up; or that the Apostles were the Authors of those divisions and tumults which
were stirred up at Ephesus and other places, by occasion of their Preaching,
Acts 19.23. and that they were truly charged by their adversaries, to be
subverters of the state of the world? Acts 17.6. yet upon the very like ground
does he charge many Orthodox Divines to make God to be the Author of sin,
because they teach that he has some kind of efficiency in it, by administering
occasions, as the Preaching of the Apostles was the occasion of these tumults,
when as all the occasions that he administers tend to good, as the Apostles
Preaching did.

2. God may be said sometimes to administer occasions of sinning by his works:
As 1. by his works of mercy, Because sentence against an evil work is not
speedily executed, therefore the hearts of the sons of men are fully set to do
evil, Eccles. 8.11. These things thou have done and I was silent, and thou
thoughtest that I was such an one as thy self, Psalm. 50.21. When Jeshurun waxed
fat, he kicked the heel, Deuteronomy. 32.15. The bountifulness, goodness and
long-suffering of God do in their own nature lead to repentance, yet here they
are made occasions of sinning.

2. As the works of his mercy, so of his justice, are sometimes made occasions
of sinning. When God led his people through the wilderness, he suffered them
sometimes to want water, otherwhile to want flesh for their food: and this was
to humble them and prove them, that he might do them good in their latter end,
Deuteronomy. 8.2. But the bad ones amongst them hence took occasion to murmr and to
open their mouths against God. When the Lord pours out the vials of his wrath
upon the followers of the beast, hence they take occasion to blaspheme the God
of heaven for their pains and sores, and repented not of their works, Rev.
16.9, 11.

3. The works of Gods Providence are sometimes also made occasions of sinning:
it was the work of Gods power and providence that made the Israelites multiply
so exceedingly in Egypt, which should have made Pharaoh so much more to respect
them, yet hence he takes occasion to oppress them. It was a work of providence
that brought David to Ahimelech the priest for relief in his flight, at such a
time as Doeg the Edomite was there: this might have stirred him up to succor,
at least to pity David in his distress, but hence he took occasion by his false
slanders, to stir up Saul to murder all the Lords Priests at Nob, 1 Samuel
23.18. It was a work of providence that brought the wise men to Jerusalem, to
enquire after the king of the Jews that was then born, yet hence Herod takes
occasion to seek to kill Christ, and rather then fail, to kill all the
male-children that were in Bethlehem, and in the region round about, that were
two years old and under, Mat. 2.16.

Thus we see that God by the works both of his Mercy, Justice and Providence,
may administer occasions of evil to evil minded men, now shall we say that he
is therefore the Author of the evil which they do, when all these occasions are
such things as do in their own nature tend to good, and by accident only are
made occasion of evil.

Quest. But how is it possible that God and man should work together in the
same action, and the one be blameworthy and the other blameless?

Answ. Because they differ both in the ground, manner, and end of their working.
1. They differ in the ground: the ground of Gods working is the counsel of his
own will, Ephesians. 1.11. which is always most holy and just: the ground of wicked
men's actions is the motion of their own wicked wills, they seek to fulfill the
will of the flesh and of their minds, Ephesians. 2.3. in their evil actions they do
that which is contrary to the revealed will of God (and his secret will they
know not) if they do the same things that God wills, yet not because he wills
them, but upon some other grounds. When Joseph's brethren sold him into Egypt,
they did it out of envy against him, but God did it out of love to him and his
father Jacob, and his whole family.

2. The differ in the manner of their working; for in sinful actions God works
with wicked men not as a moral cause, but a natural cause only: he does no
where command, counsel or persuade men to do evil, but altogether the contrary;
and when they do evil, they are carried on by the dictate of their depraved
judgments, and sway of their own corrupt wills and disordered affections. God
being the Author of Nature, it belongs to him to uphold the creature in all its
natural motions and actions; and he moves the creatures with a motion agreeable
to their several natures, both irrational and rational creatures. When he moves
good men that are guided by his Spirit, they work according to their natures,
when he moves bad men, they also work according to their natures, and this
without any iniquity or injustice in God; for of the natural motion he is the
Author and proper Cause, of the obliquity of it, he is only an accidental
cause, and therefore not the Author.

3. They differ in the end; for the end of all Gods actions is himself and his
own glory, Prove. 16.4. but wicked men aim at themselves, at their own glory, or
some other base respect of their own. Is not this great Babel which I have
built for the honor of my Majesty? (says that proud King, Dun. 4.27.) When the
High Priests and Elders delivered up Christ to be crucified, they did it out of
envy and hatred against him, to the end they might be rid of him; but God did
it out of love, that by this means all his elect might come to be saved out of
their lost condition.

Object. 2. A second principal Objection brought against Gods absolute Decree,
is, That it infers a necessity of sinning, and so frees man from all blame in
all his sinful actions, because what God has decreed must necessarily come to
pass. This Mr. P. often urges, Cap. 1. page 13.
touching at it almost in every other page, and making us to say that men shall
sin of necessity, do what they can to the contrary.

Answ. 1. If Mr. P. had pleased to stoop so low as to take notice of that
distinction usually given by our Divines betwixt necessitas absoluta and
hypothetica, or (which is the same) necessitas consequentis vel causae, and
necessitas consequentiae, he might have been convinced of the weakness of this
Objection, and of the falseness of that imputation which thereby he seeks to
fasten on us.

2. It has been already proved to him, that Gods Decree does no whit infringe
the liberty of man's will, or take away the contingency of the second causes; to
which he has given no answer.

3. If he has forgotten, or will take no notice of what was spoken of this
subject, in the Observations which Mr. Barley prefixed before his Book, the same
things shall be told him again with some addition.

That the Will and Decree of God does not violate the liberty of man's will, may
appear upon these following grounds:

Christ's death was decreed, was delivered by the determinate counsel of God,
Acts 2.23. yet he died most freely, for he says that he laid down his life,
when no man had power to take it from him, John 10.17, 18. Besides, if Christ's
death had not been voluntary, it had not been meritorious; if it had not been
an act of most free and perfect obedience, it could have merited no reward at
the hands of God, either for himself or us.

The firm standing of the good Angels is a free act, Elect Angels, 1 Timothy 5.21.
The obedience and service which the Saints perform in heaven, they perform most
freely and willingly without any constraint or necessity (hence we are taught
to pray that the will of God may be done on earth as it is done in heaven) and
when the Saints on earth repent, believe and obey, they do it freely, they are
not carried to it by any natural or violent necessity, yet all these things are
decreed; for it is said, he has chosen us before the foundation of the world,
to be holy and without blame before him in love, Ephesians. 1.4. And that God has
from the beginning chosen us to salvation through the sanctification of the
Spirit, and the belief of the truth, 2 These. 2.13.

In all our natural motions and actions, P. will not deny, and will he deny
that these things are appointed and determined by God? What a kind of Governor
of the world will he make him to be, when the greatest part of things that are
done in the world, all the actions of men and angels, and all contingent events
what ever, are excluded from the compass of his Decree? How does this agree
with Scripture-Doctrine, which teaches that man's goings are ordered of the
Lord, Prove. 20.24. That the way of man is not in himself, Jer. 10.23. yea, that
in him we live, move, and have our being, Acts 17. in all our natural motions
and actions what we do, he does, and what he does in time, he has determined
before all time, otherwise he should not work by counsel.

Gods Decree is actus ad intra, an act within himself; nihil ponere in objecto:
Gods Decree alone never works any thing upon the creature, till it comes to
execution, till he puts forth his inward purpose by some outward action: Unless
therefore it can be shown how God by some outward action upon man, does
necessitate man's will, his inward purpose and decree alone will never do it.
And we find by daily experience, that we sin as freely as we eat or drink, or
do any other thing in the world: Besides, Gods inward purpose and decree is
altogether unknown to a sinner, and ignoti nulla cupido; therefore this can
never move him to any sinful act.

The Decree of God is so far from necessitating man's will, and infringing the
liberty of the second causes, decernere rem ipsam, sed modum rei, he does not
only determine the thing it self that shall be done, but the manner how it
shall be done; for the modi rerum, are not really distinguished from the things
themselves, but so nearly conjoined, as they cannot be severed; as therefore
some things come to pass necessarily, because God has decreed they shall come
to pass necessarily, so other things come to pass contingently, because he has
decreed they shall come to pass contingently; for he has decreed that all
things shall come to pass, either necessarily or contingently, and the effect
of his decree must be as certain in the one as the other.

Necessity and contingency arise from the intrinsecal nature of the things, and
not from any thing extrinsecal. property of burning, if a stone be a stone, it
must needs have the property of descending; but in contingent effects, though
the thing shall certainly come to pass, (upon supposal of Gods Decree) yet
there is no such necessary connection betwixt the cause and effect; but in
regard of the nature of the things, they might have been otherwise then they
are. It is said, The Lord holds the winds in his fist, Prove. 30.4. therefore
the motion of them is according to his appointment; when he caused a strong
East wind to blow upon the head of Jonah, Jon. 4.8. this was according to his
appointment and decree, yet this was not out of any natural necessity planted
in the wind, for that was equally disposed to have blown out of the West or
any other quarter, if it pleased God so to order it, for the wind blows
where it lists, John 3.

Object. But if things may come to pass otherwise then they do, then Gods
Decrees may be frustrated.

Answ. It follows not, because (as before was showed) he has decreed that they
shall come to pass in the same manner that they do, namely, that necessary
things shall come to pass necessarily, and contingent things contingently; and
his Decree can no more be frustrated in the one then in the other: For though
it be necessary that what God has decreed should come to pass, yet it is not
necessary it should come to pass, necessario modo and necessariis mediis; God
had decreed that Christ's bones should not be broken, therefore it was necessary
this should take effect, yet the Soldiers were not hindered by any necessity
from doing it, but did as freely abstain from breaking them, as they did freely
break the Thieves bones. God had decreed the birthright and blessing to Jacob,
yet this came to pass by as contingent means as might be; for there was no
necessity that Esau should come hungry from hunting, that Jacob should have his
pottage in a readiness, that he should propound them as a price for the
birthright, that Esau should accept of the bargain, that Isaac should mistake
Jacob for Esau, and his savory meat for Esaus Venison; there was no necessity
in any of these things, but all was done most freely, yet all was guided by a
secret and certain providence, so as the event should not fail to come to pass
as God had determined. Every necessary truth is an eternal truth, for it is a
true rule, Quod necessarium est semper verum est, nec falsum esse potest, A
necessary proposition is that which is always true, and can never be false: That
Cain should kill his brother, was no necessary truth before the thing was done;
that man should be a reasonable creature, was a necessary truth before man was
created: It was no necessary truth that Adam should eat the forbidden fruit,
before he had eaten it; and though then it was a truth, yet no necessary truth:
for no circumstance can change the nature of things, so as to make a necessary
truth to become contingent, or a contingent truth to become necessary. True it
is, that when a thing is done, it cannot be undone, (for a thing cannot be and
not be both at one time) but it was not necessary it should be done, if it be a
thing of a contingent nature. What I now speak or write, is necessary should be
thus spoken or written; but before it was not necessary I should speak or write
any thing, these being acts of liberty and freedom; so it is in all actions of
like nature, in all contingent actions. This for the second Objection.

Object. 3. A third thing objected against the Absolute Decree, is, That it is
against Gods Justice; for if the Decree of Reprobation go before the foresight
of sin, then the innocent creature is designed to destruction; which cannot
agree with the Justice of God.

Answ. For answer of this, Two things are needful to be proved; 1. That it is
no injustice in God to punish the innocent creature. 2. That by the Decree of
Reprobation, no innocent creature is designed to destruction. For the first, it
may be proved these ways:

Mr. P. asserts Infants to be innocent creatures, Cap. 4. Page 25.
because they never did hurt any man in thought, word or deed; and these are
subject to death, and he cannot deny death to be a punishment, for it is the
wages of sin, Romans 6.23. And though death differs in degree from damnation, yet
it is a punishment, and God cannot be unjust in any degree. It may be Mr. P.
may find out some answer to this; therefore we add further,

Christ Jesus was the most innocent person that ever was in the world, knew no
sin, neither was any guile found in his mouth, one that fulfilled all
righteousness; one in whom the Father was well pleased, for he had done all his
pleasure; yet he laid on him the iniquities of us all, he was wounded for our
iniquities, and broken for our transgressions, Isa. 53. The just suffered for
the unjust, 1 Pet. 3.18. Yea he suffered such a measure of his Fathers wrath,
as was answerable to that, which all those who are saved by him, should have
suffered in hell; for he being their surety, it was necessary that he should
fully discharge their debt, by making full satisfaction, in paying that which
they should have paid.

Mr. P. knows well that many innocent creatures daily suffer for his sake, a
drop that hangs on a bucket, or as the dust that cleaves to the balance, which
swayes it neither one way nor another, Isa. 40.15.

May not the Potter do what he will with the vessel which he has made without
any imputation of injustice, yea though he breaks it in pieces, or puts it to
the basest uses? the Apostle makes Gods power over his Creature, to be full as
large as the Potter has over the Vessel that he has made, and gives this
answer to the like Objection, Romans 9.21. God was not bound to preserve man in
his being after he was made, for he might have annihilated him as he made us of
nothing, so he might bring us to nothing: and some deaths are less then
annihilation. Neither was he bound to preserve man from a sinful being, as he
did some of the Angels, but he might suffer him to fall, as he did some of
them, and then deal with him accordingly. Thus we see it is no injustice in God
to inflict sufferings upon innocent creatures.

2. That by the Decree of Reprobation, innocent creatures are not designed to
destruction, appears,

Because Reprobation is that everlasting purpose of God, Deus vult hoc esse
propter hoc, sed non vult hoc propter hoc, the one has reference to the
execution, the other to the decree: though there be a cause of the being of a
thing, yet there is none of Gods will. It is the Tenet of the Schoolmen,
Nullamdari posse causam decreti divini ex part volentis, sed tantum ex part
volitorum. There can be no cause given of the Will and Decree of God, as it is
his act, but only of the things willed by him, none of the Decree, but only
of the Execution. Mr. P. seems sometimes to grant this, and if he would stand
to it, the controversy might soon be at an end, for nothing is needful to go
before the effect, but the cause, that which has efficiency in some kind or
other in producing it; and if there can be no kind of cause going before Gods
Decree, his Decree may be without it.

God does condemn no man in time but for sin;

Though sin does not go before Gods Decree, simul and semel, uno actu
simplicissimo, (as has been showed) there is no prius and posterius in him or
in his Decrees; but because we are not able with one simple act to apprehend
the several things which God has decreed touching man's everlasting estate,
therefore Divines usually place an order in his Decrees, wherein one thing goes
before another (though not in him, yet in our consideration) yet this is such
an order as agrees with the order of nature, wherein the cause always goes
before the effect, and the end before the means: and upon this ground the
foresight of sin cannot go before Gods Decree, because when he decrees to
permit sin (without which there can be no foresight of it) the end of this
permission must needs be the manifestation of his glory in the merciful
Salvation of some, and just Condemnation of others; therefore this must be
first decreed according to the order of nature, though for time all be done at
one instant. Besides, when God decreed to create man, the end which he
propounded to himself in this work, was his own glory, and that not only in
general, but in that particular way, in that particular state and condition of
man whence in the end he receives his glory: but at last he receives greatest
glory in the Salvation of some, and Damnation of others; therefore this was the
end which he intended, when he intended man's creation: for to say that he
intended no certain end in this great work, or was frustrate of his intentions,
is altogether unbeseeming the excellent nature of God. But Mr. P. thus
undertakes to prove that reprobation follows the foresight of sin.

Object. Cap. 4. page 5.
We grant (says he) that Damnation follows the foresight of sin, but Damnation
always follows Reprobation; ergo, Reprobation follows the foresight of sin.

He much triumphs in this Objection, telling us we put a bitter jeer upon the
greatest part of mankind, to say they are rejected without respect of sin, and
yet not damned without respect of sin, this following the other.

Answ. Here we may tell Mr. P. that he puts his pitiful Sophistry upon his
Readers, this Argument being a mere Fallacy; for here the conclusion is
general, whereas in the third figure (as this Argument is) it always ought to be
particular, the deceitfulness of it will appear in the like instance: Suppose a
man intends to build a house fit for his habitation; by this kind of Logic we
may thus argue: The building of the house follows after the providing Wood,
Stone, and other materials: But the building of the house follows after his
intention to build it; Therefore his intention to build his house, follows
after the providing of Wood, and Stone, and other fit materials. This is Mr. P.
his acumen


Object. But Mr. P. objects, Cap. 3. Page 66.
That it is impossible (as implying a contradiction) that God should decree to
reprobate any without intuition of sin, and yet at the same time to decree not
to damn without respect of sin.

Answ. 1. It is very possible that Reprobation should be without foresight of
sin, and yet Damnation not to be so, because these differ both in nature and
time; reprobation being an immanent act terminated in himself, damnation being
a transient act, terminated in man; reprobation being from all eternity,
damnation being in time; the one is the Decree, the other the Execution. To
decree to damn, is to decree to do a thing in time. We may as well say that a
man is saved as soon as he is elected, as damned so soon as he is reprobated.

2. It is very improper to say that God does decree to reprobate, as if he
should decree to decree; whereas reprobation it self is the decree: but it is
usual with Mr. P. to confound the Decree with the Execution, and so to jumble
these together as thereby a mist is cast upon the eyes of the Reader, that he
shall not discern the truth.

Object. 4. A fourth Objection against the Absolute Decree, is, That it cannot
stand with Gods Philanthropy, with his love to mankind; for Mr. P. tells us,
That he hates nothing which he has made: and the Scripture tells us, That he
is gracious, merciful, abundant in goodness and truth, that his mercy is over
all his works, and therefore designs none to be destroyed.

Answ. 1. Mr. P. tells us indeed that God hates nothing that he has made, but
the Scripture tells us no such thing, but rather the quite contrary; for it
says, That the Lord loved Jacob, and hated Esau, and that before they were
born.

Object. To this Mr. P. replies, That this hatred is to be understood only in
regard of temporal blessings, of the inheritance of the land of Canaan.

Answ. This evasion has been sufficiently confuted before, in confirmation of
the seventh Argument against the Conditional Decree, where was showed 1. that
the hatred here spoken of stands directly in opposition to the love wherewith
Jacob was loved; but that was the love of Election, Romans 9.11. compared with
verse 13.

2. The earthly Canaan was a type of the heavenly, why else had Esau the black
Character of Profaneness stamped on him, for passing away his right to it, by so
slightly selling his birthright? Heb. 1.16.

3. In regard of outward blessings Esau was no whit inferior to Jacob, but
rather above him; for he had the fatness of the earth, the pleasant mount Seir
for his possession, whereas Jacob was a stranger in the land of Canaan, Psalm.
105.12. having no possession there, but only the burying-place which Abraham
had bought, Genesis 25.15. therefore it is said, That God gave Abraham no
inheritance in the land, no not so much as whereon to set his foot, Acts 7.5.

4. Esau had abundance of all things, and therefore refused his brothers
presents, telling him he had enough. Also he was a man of great place, for he
came to meet his brother attended with four hundred men, so that Jacob bowed
down to the ground before him, and called him his lord, Genesis 32.18. and 33.3.
so that he was no whit inferior to his brother in regard of outward blessings.

Answ. 2. Secondly, for those Scriptures which hold forth God to be so
merciful, gracious, good to all, etc. It is granted that there is a common
bounty and goodness which God extends to all mankind, making the Sun to
shine, and rain to fall upon the just and unjust, Matthew. 5.45. but his special
Grace and Mercy he extends only to those who are the proper objects of it,
namely, those whom he has chosen to be vessels of Mercy. Why may not God have
his Favorites as well as Kings have theirs? Hence it is said, that he will be
gracious to whom he will be gracious, Exodus 33.19. which argues that he will
not be gracious alike, and there are some spoken of in Scripture who were made
to be taken and destroyed, 2 Pet. 2.12. who before of old were ordained to
condemnation, Jude 4. therefore all are not alike objects of mercy. And herein
appears the excellency of free Grace and special Mercy, namely, in regard of
the peculiarity of it; it is as rare as precious: it were no great privilege
to be Favorite of a Prince, if all Subjects were favored alike, or none were
favored, but according to their deserts; therefore special Grace is not
confusedly scattered amongst all by a general offer, take it who will, but
confined to a few: hence Christ's people are called a peculiar people, Titus
2.14. and his flock is said to be a little flock, Luke 12.32. and though the
number of Israel be as the sand of the sea, yet a remnant only shall be saved,
for the Lord will finish his work, and cut it short in righteousness, Romans
9.27, 28.

Object. Cap. 3. page 83.
But for special Grace Mr. P. tells us, It is so called because it serves ad
speciales habitus and actus, to every habit, or act, or thought of good that is
done by man.

Answ. This is such a notion of special Grace as I think but few have been
acquainted with: but let him tells us whether these special acts and habits be
effects of that special Grace which is given to some only, to such whom God
loves with a special and peculiar love, or imparted to all men indifferently:
If the former, then it is called special, in reference to some special persons
to whom it is communicated, and those special effects which it produces in
these more then in others. If the latter (which Mr. P. seems to intend) what a
choice and special Grace has he found out for us, which is bestowed as largely
upon Judas as upon Peter, upon the damned in hell, as those who are saved in
heaven? When Judas preached and cast out devils, he did it by a Grace that
served for those special acts and habits whereby he was enabled to do these
things. When others called Christ Lord, Lord, yea not only made an outward
profession of him, but prophesied and cast out devils in his name, they did it
by virtue of a Grace that served for these special acts and habits, yet Christ
will say to them at the great Day, I know you not, depart from me ye workers of
iniquity, Matthew 7.22. What comfort can a man take in such a special Grace, as
he may carry with him to hell? Does not Scripture Language found in another
kind of strain then this? as when our Savior gives thanks to his Father, that
he had hid the mysteries of his kingdom from the wise and prudent, and revealed
them to babes, Matthew. 11.25. and tells his Disciples, that it was given to them
to know the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven, and not to others, cap. 13.11.
and the Apostle, Not many Wise, not many mighty, not many noble whom God has
called, 1 Cor. 1.26. and says of himself, that when he was a blasphemer and a
persecuter, yet he found mercy, and the grace of the Lord was exceedingly
abundant toward him, 1 Timothy 1.13, 14.

Object. 5. A fifth Objection (which makes a great noise) is, That this
Doctrine cannot stand with the truth of God; for he has said, He has no
pleasure in the death of wicked men, and confirms this with an oath, Ezekiel.
33.11. and says expressly, That he would not that any should perish, 2 Pet. 3.9.

Answ. 1. For that place of Ezekiel, the answer is by distinguishing of that
which is called in Scripture by the name of the will of God. It signifies
either his secret will, or his revealed will; the will of his purpose, or the
will of his precept and command; this place is not to be understood of the will
of his purpose (which only is properly his will) but of the will of his
precept or command, whereby he enjoins men to do those things that tend to
life, and to decline all those things that tend to death, and therefore may be
said not to will their death: especially all his outward dispensations toward
men, tending to the same end with his command, namely, to procure life, not
death.

Object. Against this Mr. P. replies, That the revealed will of God, or the
will of his command, is proprie voluntas, properly the will of God; for the
whole word of God revealed in Scripture, is properly his will.

Answ. For answer of this, two things are needful to be proved; First, That the
revealed will of God or his command, is not properly his will. Secondly, That
all those whom God wills to be saved, voluntate proprie dicta^ with the will of
his purpose, with his internal will, are, or shall be certainly saved.

1. For the first, when two things are attributed to God that are contrary one
to the other, both of them cannot possibly be taken properly; as when it is
said, that it repented the Lord that he made Saul king, 1 Samuel 15.11. and, that
the Strength of Israel cannot lie nor repent, verse 29. Both these cannot be
taken properly (for then there would be a contradiction) that only therefore
is to be taken properly which agrees to the nature of God; he is unchangeable,
and therefore cannot repent; the other is to be taken figuratively, he is said
to repent, because he does the same thing that a repenting man, he changes his
action as a repenting man does: he never changes his mind. So when it is
said, that God wills not the death of a sinner, and that he hardens whom he
will, and makes some vessels to dishonor, Romans 9.18.21. Both these cannot be
taken properly, therefore that must be taken properly which agrees with the
nature of God, and the other to be taken figuratively: now it properly agrees
to the nature of God that his will should be accomplished (because he is
Omnipotent) therefore when he is said not to will the death of a sinner, and
yet many sinners die everlastingly; this cannot be understood of his will
properly taken, namely, the will of his Purpose and Decree, but of the will of
his precept and command, and of his outward dispensations toward men, all
which in themselves tend to the preserving from death.

2. The same name cannot be properly given to two things whose nature does
really differ: as for instance, when Christ says, Let the dead bury the dead;
this cannot be properly taken in both places, because in the first it is spoken
of those who are spiritually dead, in the other of those who are naturally dead.

Now that the will of Gods purpose, or his internal will, and the will of his
precept and command do really differ in their own nature, is thus proved:

1. The will of Gods purpose, or his internal will, is eternal, all his Decrees
are from everlasting, but his commands are given forth in time; the commands
belonging both to the moral and ceremonial Law, were not given out till the
world was above two thousand years old; and the word of the Lord came to the
Prophets at several times; yea, there was a time when there was no Scriptures
or written word of God.

2. The Will of Gods purpose is immutable and unchangeable, The counsels of the
Lord stand for ever, and his thoughts to all generations, Psalm. 33.11. but his
commands are mutable, as we see in the example of Abraham, who received a
command to kill his son, which afterward was reversed, and in all the precepts
of the ceremonial Law.

3. The will of his purpose cannot be resisted: Who has resisted his will?
Romans 9. The will of his precept is daily resisted by wicked men, and too often
by his best servants.

4. The will of his purpose is always fulfilled, he does whatsoever he will: but
the will of his command is not so; This is the will of God, even your
sanctification, 1 These. 4.3. yet all men are not sanctified.

5. The will of his purpose is an act within himself, and therefore not really
differing from himself, the will of his command is something proceeding from
himself; so that these do as really differ as the Creator and the Creature, the
one being eternal, immutable and irresistible, the other temporary, mutable,
resistible. The command indeed by a Metonymy, is called the will of God
(because sometimes, not always, it shows what the will of his purpose is) yet
it is not, nor cannot be properly his will, upon the grounds before named;
neither does it follow hence, that there are two wills in God, but only that
there are two things that are set forth by one and the same name, which is very
usual in Scripture. Neither does it follow, that one Will of God is contrary to
another, for contraria must be ad idem; but these are not the same, but do
really differ, as has been already proved. True it is, that God does properly
will to give forth such and such commands, but his will and purpose is one
thing, and his command another, really differing from it. Thus much to show
that Gods revealed will, his precepts and commands are not properly his will.

2. For the second thing, namely, That all those to whom God wills salvation,
voluntate proprie dicta, with the will of his purpose and decree, shall most
certainly be saved, needs no great proof; for this will of his being an
immutable, irresistible, omnipotent will, it must needs take effect. Our God is
in heaven, and does whatsoever he will, Psalm. 115.3. Whatsoever pleased the
Lord, that did he, both in heaven and in earth, Psalm. 135.6. There are two
principles only needful for producing any effect, potentia and voluntas, and
where these concur, the effect must needs follow: If God does really and
internally will and desire the salvation of men, what should hinder the
effecting it, since his power is answerable to his will? If men's power were
answerable to their will, they would do any thing that they have a mind to.

If it be said that he wills it conditionally, 1. This conditional will has
been already refuted, and it has been showed, that conditions belong not to
Gods will, but only to the execution of it. 2. If he really wills the thing,
he is able to work the conditions, to work effectual faith, true repentance and
other graces in all, as well as he does in some.

But that that place in Ezekiel, and other like places cannot be understood of
Gods will, properly taken (as Mr. P. confidently asserts) may be proved, 1.
Because then this Scripture would cross other Scriptures; for here it is said,
that the Lord has no delight in the death of a sinner, and elsewhere it is
said, that he would rejoice over wicked men to destroy them and root them out,
Deuteronomy. 28.63. and he would laugh at their calamity, and mock when their fear
comes, Prove. 1.25. which expressions show, that these things are not against
his will.

2. These things are works of his Justice, and his Justice being an attribute
as essential to him as his mercy, he must needs be well pleased, not only with
the works of his Mercy, but of his Justice, for all his works are well pleasing
to him.

3. He is well pleased with all things which make for his own glory, but at
last he shall have much glory from the just destruction of wicked men.

4. If a desire of all men's salvation be properly in God, then it is
perpetually in him; then when wicked men are damned in hell, he still continues
to desire their salvation, and for want of enjoying his desire, he is hindered
from enjoying full felicity (for what is full and perfect felicity, but a full
and perfect fruition of all our desires?) so that so long as wicked men suffer
pains in hell, God cannot enjoy full felicity in heaven, but rather suffers
some kind of trouble and disquiet, for it is a troublesome thing for one, to
have that perpetually withheld from him, which he earnestly desires. These are
monstrous consequences, yet such as directly follow from that doctrine which
teaches, That when God says, he has no pleasure in the death of a sinner,
this must be taken properly without any figure. To conclude, there is this
difference betwixt these two wills, that God by his secret will and purpose,
determines what himself will do, by his revealed will declares to us what is
our duty to do.

Quest. But may God command a man to do that which he does not intend he shall
do?

Answ. He may: for commands are not only for performance, but for trial: thus
he commanded Abraham to kill his son, when he did not intend it should be done.
Gods commands are not always given to declare his secret intentions, but to be
the rule of our actions: yea he may by his outward dispensations carry himself
in a differing, yea in a contrary way to his inward intentions: He by his
Prophet bade Hezekiah set his house in order, for he should die, Isa. 38.1.
when he did not intend he should die, till diverse years after. He sent Moses to
Pharaoh to command him to let the people go, when at the same time he tells
him, that he would harden Pharaohs heart, that he should not hearken to him,
Exodus 7.2, 3, 4. It is not necessary that finis operis and operantis, should be
always the same in God. The Preaching of the Gospel in its own nature tends to
life and salvation; but it is not necessary that God should intend the
salvation of all those to whom the Gospel is preached, for then it could not be
a sweet savor to him, not only in those that are saved, but in those that are
lost, 2 Cor. 2.21. Mr. P. boldly asserts, That there is an intention in God, to
save all men without exception, if by the wickedness of their wills they did
not frustrate his intention. But does not this exceedingly derogate from Gods
omnipotency and infinite wisdom? Cap. 3. Page 81.
From his Omnipotency, in that he seriously desires that which he is not able
to effect; from his Wisdom, in that he seriously intends that which he knows
shall never be effected.

AN EXAMINATION AND CONFUTATION Of the Doctrine of Conditional and Universal
Redemption.
NOt only the old Arminians, but some who seem to disclaim their Doctrine, yet
hold, That Christ has died for all mankind, and by his death has made
satisfaction for all, and purchased pardon and salvation for every particular
man and woman in the world, upon condition they will believe.

That this Doctrine is not agreeable to Scripture, may thus be proved:

IT has been already proved,

That Redemption is the effect of Election, may thus be proved:

1. Our Savior says, That the Father had given him power over all flesh, to
give eternal life to those whom he had given him, Joh. 17.2. this giving must
be understood either of giving by election or effectual calling; but it cannot
be understood of calling, because that follows election, as a fruit of it.
Those whom he predestined, those he hth called, Romans 8.30. And our Savior
says afterward, that he had declared his Name to those whom the Father had
given him; verse 6. and hereby called them; As this must be understood, as of
the elect, so of them only, otherwise our Savior would have said, Thou have
given me power over all flesh, to give eternal life to all flesh; but he says
not so, but to give eternal life to those whom thou have given me.

2. It is said that we are elected in Christ, Ephesians. 1.4. In Christ, not the
cause of our Election, but of our Redemption; this being in effect the same
with that 2 These. 3.9. We are appointed to obtain salvation by Jesus Christ. So
that not only our salvation, but Christ also the Author of it, are made
subordinate to our election: and as our salvation, so also the giving of
Christ, and all those benefits which he has purchased, are made the effects of
our election, and therefore can reach no further, nor be extended to no more
persons, then to the objects of Gods electing love.

3. It is said, that by Christ we have Redemption through his blood, according
to his rich grace, Ephesians. 1.7. which rich grace is the same which before he
called the good pleasure of his will; He has predestined us to be adopted
through Jesus Christ, according to the good pleasure of his will, verse 5.
Election therefore is the first fountain whence all the benefits belonging to
our salvation do flow, and both Adoption, Redemption and all the rest are
included in that.

4. Our Savior says, That God so loved the world, that he gave his Son, John.
3. Here Gods love is made the cause of his giving his Son; and that this must
be understood of his electing love, appears,

1. Because it is more then a common love, it is a special peculiar love, for
it is said, (...), he so loved, and this particle denotes a peculiar special
love; as when it is said, if God has so loved us, 1 John 4.11. (if he has so
loved us more then others) we ought to love one another: And when he tells the
Israelites, that he had given them his Statutes and Ordinances, and had not
dealt so with any Nation, Psalm. 147. last; here is something held forth
peculiar to them above other Nations.

2. It is such a love as tends to eternal life; therefore electing love.

3. Such a love as caused Christ to lay down his life, and this is the greatest
love, John 15.13. therefore elelecting love.

Object. But the world is here made the object of this love, therefore it
cannot be understood of electing love.

Answ. This place is indeed usually made to be one of the strong holds for the
Arminian Doctrine, but being rightly examined, it shall (I hope) appear to be
otherwise.

1. If the world be taken in a general sense, we shall make every particular
man and woman living in the world, to be objects of Gods special love, which
crosses that which the Apostle says of Esau, that he was an object of hatred,
and denies that there are any vessels of wrath in Gods everlasting purpose.

2. There is no necessity at all why this word should be taken in a general
sense, including all the men and women in the world: For 1. The world most
properly signifies the whole work of Creation, the frame of heaven and earth,
as when it is said that God made the world. 2. All mankind living in the
world, so it is said, God will judge the world; yea, thus it includes not only
men, but spirits. 3. It signifies not only the whole, but a part of mankind:
and because the worst part is the greatest part, it is frequently taken for the
worst part; thus Christ tells his Disciples, that the world would hate them,
because he had chosen them out of the world, John 15.19. And if the worst part
be often called the world, why may not the better part be sometime so called?
We usually call that a heap of Wheat, wherein there is more chaff then Wheat:
Does not our Savior speak of a world to which he gives life, John 6.33. Does
not the Apostle speak of a reconciled world, Romans 11.15. of a world that shall
not have their sins imputed to them, 2 Cor. 5.19. If Satan be called the Prince
of this world, may there not be a world whereof Christ is Prince? Why may there
not be a world of godly, as well as a world of ungodly? 2 Pet. 2.5. as there is
a whole world that lies in the state of wickedness, 1 John 5.19. Why may not
there be a whole world that is brought into the state of righteousness? Why may
not the better part (though the lesser) be called the world, as well as they
are called all flesh, Joel 2.28. Luke 3.6. All nations, Psalm. 72.11. All the
earth, Tract. 87. in Johan.
Zech. 14.9. Mundus Ecclesia est, and totus mundus perditionis odit mundum
redemptionis (says A^stin) The world is the Church, and the whole perishing
world hates the redeemed world: There may therefore be a redeemed world as well
as a perishing world, a believing world as well as an unbelieving.

Object. But World is here distributed into believers and unbelievers, and if
it signifies the elect, and the elect believers only have everlasting life,
what shall become of the other?

Answ. The words do not enforce any distribution, for our Savior speaks
indefinitely, (...), every believer, every elect one when he comes to be a
believer.

2. If a distribution be granted, there is no such absurdity in it, as J. G.
would make it: For are there not two sorts of elect in the world, some
uncalled, others called? Those that are uncalled, do yet remain in the state of
unbelief; those who are called, have faith wrought in them, whereby they are
fitted for everlasting life: those who are uncalled, our Savior calls by the
name of the world, because they are like the rest of the world, as yet
remaining in the state of unbelief: yet then are they the objects of Gods love,
and sheep of Christ, John 10.16. the other he calls believers: in the first, he
shows what condition men are in, when God is pleased first to manifest his love
to them; in the other, he shows what condition they shall be in when they come
to partake of everlasting life, they shall be believers, they shall be called,
and so have effectual faith wrought in them.

Thus we see how this Scripture may be vindicated from Arminian quirks and
cavils.

There are many to whom Christ will profess at the last day that he never knew
them, Mat. 7.23. Psalm. 1.6. Now if he never loved them, he never died for them:
For Christ's love is the ground of giving himself for any; he has loved his
Church, and given himself for it, Ephesians. 5.25. Yea, the laying down of his
life, is the act of the greatest love, John 15.13. Yea thoughs they had
prophesied and cast out devils, and done many other good works, yet he tells
them, that he never owned them for his.

If Christ died to purchase salvation for all,

Object. Why might not Christ purchase salvation for those who were actually
damned, upon condition they would have believed, as well as purchase salvation
for some who were actually saved?

Answ. The case is altogether unlike; for the salvation of those who were
actually saved, was decreed of God, and that from all eternity; for he decreed
that all his elect should be saved, and that his Son by his death should
purchase salvation for them, and that his death and suffering should be
effectual to that end, even for those of them who should die before Christ
himself actually dyed (he being in Gods decree, the Lamb slain from the
beginning of the world) whereas it was quite contrary with those who were
damned; for (according to their own doctrine) these were absolutely decreed to
be damned before they were actually damned, and this decree was grounded upon
the foresight of their final infidelity and impenitency. So that it was very
congruous that Christ should die to purchase salvation for all those whom God
had decreed should be saved (whether they died before or after Christ's coming)
but altogether absurd, that he should do this for those who were actually
damned, and this by an absolute decree, for the conditional decree (as they
teach) is always expired before execution of the abfolute decree.

If Christ died to purchase faith,

That Christ has purchased both faith and all other things needful for
salvation, is clear from Scripture. The Apostle says, that God the Father has
blessed us with all spiritual blessings in heavenly places in and through
Christ, Ephesians. 1.3. That for Christ it is given to us to believe, Phil. 1.29.
and it is said, that he was raised up to give not only remission of sin, but
repentance to his people, Acts 5.31. and that the Father, who has not spared
to give his Son to death, together with him will give all things also, Romans
8.32. That Christ by his Divine power has given us all things which belong to
life and godliness, 2 Pet. 1.3.

Object. Though Christ has purchased Faith and other graces for us, yet he
has not done this absolutely, but upon condition we will do that which we
ought to do, in receiving what he shall give.

Answ. There can be no condition devised or thought upon, on which Christ has
purchased, or God will give faith to those that want it, but it will be the
same, cum re conditionata, with the thing conditioned for; the same in effect
with believing: when they say that God will give a man faith upon condition
that he will not resist his call to believe, that he will not disdain to do
what he commands, that he will bend his mind and will to believe: What are all
these in effect, but to believe? For where there is a yielding to his call, a
right regard of his command, a bending of the mind and will to do what he
would have us; there are some degrees of faith, there is some measure of
believing: So that it is as much a^ if they should say, God will give them
faith upon condition that they have it already; or if men do believe, God will
give them the grace whereby they may believe: And is not this ridiculous?

2. How can it stand with the wisdom of Christ, to purchase faith or salvation
for men, upon condition that they will do that which he knovvs is as
impossible for them to do, as it is for a Blackmore to change his skin, or a
Leopard his spots?

All these are vital actions, and therefore not possible to be performed by one
that lies dead in sins and trespasses; all these are degrees of coming to
Christ, and himself says, that no man (not only does, but) can come to him,
except the Father dravv him.

3. When the Lord has promised his people that he will give them a new heart,
and a new spirit, Ezekiel. 36.26. (which is a principal branch of the New
Covenant) this promise is made absolutely without any condition, and in this
promise Faith is included, for a new heart is a believing heart: though pardon
of sin, and salvation be promised upon our believing and repenting, yet there
is no such condition propounded in the promise of giving the first grace, of
giving a new heart, which is a believing heart. What condition or gracious
qualification can we conceive of, that should precede the first grace, which is
the ground whence all other graces do arise? or if there could be any such
gracious qualification, yet this also would be a part of Christ's purchase, by
whom we come to partake of all things that belong to life and godliness, 2 Pet.
1.3.

4. Although the performance of some conditions be necessary for those who will
partake of salvation, yet these were not necessary for the purchase of it; for
as Christ knew absolutely who should be saved, so he did absolutely purchase
both salvation it self, and the conditions belonging to it for all these, and
these only. Hence it is said, that he with one offering has for ever
perfected those that are sanctified, Heb. 10.14. He has made both perfect
satisfaction, and a perfect purchase of salvation, and all things belonging to
it, for all those whom God in his eternal purpose has set apart and severed
from the rest of the perishing world, whereby in due time they come to be made
perfect. To conclude; There can be no condition on man's part but what is in
nature, and so pure Pelagianism, for nothing but nature, before faith and
repentance; and to say that Christ died for all men, to purchase salvation for
them upon condition they will do what they ought to do in receiving what he
shall give, is to resolve all into nature.

Christ by his death has taken away all those things which are the great
hindrances of our salvation, intended the salvation of all those for whom he
died; This may be thus proved:

1. Christ by his death has taken away all sin, Joh. 1.29. therefore these
sins: The blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us from all sin, 1 John 1.7. He has
redeemed us from all iniquity, Tit. 2.14.

2. If he did not take away all sin, he should not be a perfect Savior: he has
his denomination of Jesus from this, that he should save his people from their
sins, Mat. 1. yea, from all their sins. He were not a perfect Redeemer if he
should deliver us out of the power of some enemies, and leave us in the hands
of others: our sinful lusts are our worst enemies, 1 Pet. 2.11. It is said that
he has delivered us out of the hands of our enemies, Luke 1.74. This is spoken
indefinitely without limitation, and therefore taken generally for all, verse
71. and the end of this is, That we might serve our God in righteousness and
holiness, which we cannot do so long as we remain under the power of any of
them; our enemies within being as hurtful and dangerous as those without.

3. If he should not remove those hindrances that arise from our selves, no
man could be saved, and so Christ should die in vain. For as one man resists,
so would all men do, it being the essential property of the flesh to resist the
spirit, and lust against it, Gal. 5.17. and whatever is born of the flesh, is
flesh, John 3.5. as before was showed.

4. Neither can Christ be said feriously to desire the salvation of those, and
to give his life to purchase it, from whom he will not remove those things
which he certainly knows will hinder their salvation, when he has power to do
it.

It will therefore be in vain here to except, that Christ would take away their
unbelief if they would not resist: for he takes away this resistance, he takes
away both careless neglect and proud contempt, and what ever else can be
thought of that may be a hinderance of the salvation of those whom he intends
to save; for he takes away all sin. In the Covenant of Grace the Lord has
promised that he will take away the heart of stone: This heart of stone
includes in it not only a senseless hardness, but unbelief, pride,
perverseness, stubbornness, rebellion, wilfulness, or what ever else we can
think of, that is most contrary to the work of Grace in our souls; as every
valley shall be filled, so every mountain shall be made plain, Luke 3.3. so
that all hindrances shall be removed.

All those whom Christ has redeemed, he purges them to be a peculiar people
to himself, zealous of good works, Titus 2.14. he purges their conscience from
dead works, Heb. 9.14. But all are not made Christ's peculiar people, all have
not their consciences purged; Ergo.

Object. These and other like places are not to be understood of all those for
whom Christ has made satisfaction, but only of such as have made application
of it to themselves by believing.

Answ. But here is no mention at all of man's action in applying, but only of
Christ's action in purchasing, and of the certain effect of it; He has given
himself to redeem, etc. His blood purges the conscience, etc. 2. Application
is a necessary effect of Redemption, for all those for whom Christ has made
satisfaction, shall in due time partake of the benefit of it, and have this
satisfaction applied to them: application being Christ's work more then man's,
and for whom he has done the first, he will do the other also; which is thus
proved:

1. If Christ only should make satisfaction, and leave it to man to make
application, this work would never be done, and so his death would be in vain.
For application is made by believing, and to believe is to come to Christ, John
6.35. and man has no power to do this (as before was showed) No man can come,
etc. verse 44.

2. The Apostle makes this to be the end why God sent his Son into the world,
namely, that he might redeem those who were under the Law, that they might
receive the ad^ption of sons, and because they are sons, God sends the Spirit
of his Son into their hearts, Gal. 4.4, 5, 6. Here the Spirit of adoption
(whereby we are enabled to make application) is made the effect of adoption,
and adoption is made the effect of redemption, and both these the effect of
Gods sending his Son into the world.

3. Satisfaction and intercession are inseparably joined together. We have an
advocate, even Christ the just, who has made propitiation for our sins, 1 John
2.1, 2. Why is he an advocate to plead for us, but because he has made
propitiation for our sins by his suffering? He prays for all those, and only
for those whom the Father has given him, John 17.9. and the thing which he
prays for, is, That they may partake of the benefit of his death, verse 21, 24.

The first and grand promise wherein Christ and the covenant of grace is held
forth, is not made to all, Genesis 3. The seed of the woman shall break the
serpents head. Whence arises this Argument: All those for whom Christ died,
for them and in them he breaks the serpents head, he overthrowes and destroys
Satan's power, rule and dominion: But there are many in whom and for whom,
Satan's power and dominion is never overthrown, for they live and die in a state
of darkness, remaining under the power of Satan; therefore there are many for
whom Christ never died.

2. The Serpents head is only broken for, in and by the seed of the woman,
namely, true believers; Ergo Christ died not for all.

3. Against these only Satan may be said most properly to exercise his enmity;
Ergo these only, and not all men, are that seed by whom Satan is quelled.

Object. By the seed of the woman is meant all mankind, and by the seed of the
Serpent are meant evil spirits, for the seed must be of the same nature with
him from whom it proceeds.

Answ. If seed be taken properly for natural seed, so Satan has none: (for
Spirits do not propagate) if figuratively or morally, so wicked men are his
seed: Hence our Savior tells the wicked Jews, that they were of their father
the Devil, John 8.44. because they did his works: and the Apostle says, that
he that commits sin is of the Devil, 1 John 3.9. Wicked men are called
Satan's seed, not in regard of their substance, but of those venomous qualities
whereby they resemble him.

Object. The promise of breaking the Serpents head is made to all upon
condition that they will believe.

Answ. There is no condition at all mentioned in the Text; neither is there any
thing spoken of man's duty, what he should do, but of Christ's work, and what he
would do: here is no exhortation, but a promise.

2. This promise should be made to no purpose, if to such as are in no sort
able to fulfill the condition; yea to thousands who never heard of promise or
condition.

3. Infidelity is a principal part of Satan's rule and dominion, then the
promise should be made to free men from Satan's rule and dominion, upon
condition that they were free already, and to free them from infidelity, upon
condition that they were not unbelievers: which is, as if a Physician should
promise to procure health to a sick man, upon condition that he were not sick:
A sick man indeed is not able to heal himself, yet he is willing to be healed;
but a sick sinful man is so sick, as he is also dead in sin, and therefore does
not so much as desire to be healed, which makes his disease so much more
desperate.

If Christ did so desire the salvation of all men,

1. They are denied to all those infants that are born without the Church,
whose Parents being without the covenant, can convey no benefit of it to their
children; these never refused any offer, for it was never made to them, or if
it had, they are altogether incapable of receiving any benefit by it. How can
it stand with good sense, to say that Christ died to purchase salvation for
thousands of Pagans and Infidels, upon condition they would not reject and
refuse him when he should be offered to them, when there was never any such
offer made, or if it had been, they never had any ability to understand or
apprehend it?

Object. They have rejected in their parents and progenitors.

Answ. This is a vain dream, which would make not only the first sin of the
first man (who was the common root of all mankind) but the sin of every
particular man to be imputed to his seed and posterity, contrary to the
Scripture which says, that the son shall not bear the iniquity of the father,
nor the father the iniquity of the son, Ezekiel. 18.20.

2. There are many thousands both before and since the coming of Christ, that
never heard of him: How many at this day of those Savages both in East and West
Indies, and some parts of Africa, that never heard any thing either of the
Covenant of Grace, or condition of it, or of Christ himself? And can it be said
with any reason, that Christ purchased salvation for these, upon condition they
would not reject him, when he offered himself upon such or such conditions,
when he was never in any measure offered to them?

Object. All Nations have had the (...), by the works of Creation, neither has
he left any of these without witness, by giving them rain and fruitful seasons,
Acts 14.17.

Answ. It is not the knowledge of God as Creator, but of Christ as Redeemer,
that is sufficient to bring men to salvation; there is no name under heaven,
but only that blessed Name of Jesus (the blessed person of Christ) by which
men can be saved, Acts 4.12. This is eternal life, to know thee the only very
God, and whom thou have sent, Jesus Christ, John 17.3. There is no saving
knowledge of God, but that whereby we know him to be one God in three persons,
a God reconciling himself unto us in Christ; that the Gospel knowledge only,
and not that which comes by works of creation or providence, is sufficient to
bring men to salvation, may thus be proved.

1. The Apostle says, That the Gospel is the power of God to salvation, Romans
1.16. it is the only powerful means to bring men to salvation: And if the
Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are lost, 2 Cor. 4.3. Hence it is called
the salvation of God, Acts 28.28. that without which we cannot be saved: Now
the Gospel is a mystery that has been hid from all ages and generations, Col.
1.26. no man can be saved but by faith, and this faith comes by hearing, Romans
10.17. This is that immortal seed whereby we must be born again, 1 Pet. 1.23,
25. and unless we be born again, we cannot enter into the kingdom of God: Hence
the Apostle speaking of those Gentiles that lived without the knowledge of the
Gospel, says, they were aliens from the promise, they had no hope, they were
without God in the world, Ephesians. 2.12. they were strangers from the life of God,
cap. 4.18. they were in darkness, and under the power of Satan, Acts 26.18. and
can people that are in darkness and under the power of Satan, that are
strangers from the life of God, and are without God in the world, and have no
hope of salvation; can these be in the state of salvation, unless by the Gospel
they be brought out of the darkness unto light, and from the power of Satan to
God? can these be saved without a miracle?

2. If the works of Nature were sufficient to bring men to the true knowledge
of God in Christ, then Nature should be a Preacher of Evangelical Grace as well
as the Gospel; and these two should differ only gradu, non specie, in degree
only and measure, and not in kind and manner of manifestation. Did ever any
Orthodox Divine in any age of the Church, once dream that the Sun, Moon and
stars, the Trees and Plants, the Corn and Cattle, Oxen, Sheep and such like,
should be preachers of Evangelical Grace?

3. Man had this means of knowledge before the fall, therefore this is not the
way which God uses to bring men to the knowledge of his grace in Christ.

Object. The Apostle says, that the bountifulness and goodness of God leads
men to repentance; and where there is true repentance, there shall be
remission, and so salvation.

Answ. Though these in their nature tend to this end, yet it cannot be made to
appear that these alone ever brought forth this effect, and that by them only
any man was brought to repentance unto life; they may be sufficient means for
conviction, and to render men unexcusable, as the Apostle speaks, Romans 2.1. but
not for conversion: Repentance is the gift of God, Acts 11.18. which grace he
conveys to men by his word, as the proper means of effecting it, and not by his
works alone without his word: The law of the Lord is perfect, converting the
soul, Psalm: 19.7. He commanded the Gospel to be preached to turn men from
darkness to light, etc. Acts 26.18.

Thus we see that there are many who never had sufficient outward means of
salvation; and it is evident that this came to pass by divine dispensation: for
the Psalmist says, that he gave his word unto Jacob, his Statutes and
Ordinances unto Israel, and that he has not dealt so with any Nation, Psalm.
147.19. Our Savior forbade his Disciples preaching to the Gentiles, and the
Spirit forbade Paul and Silas to preach the word in Asia, Acts 16.6. Now if
either the Father had intended, or Christ had purchased salvation for all, upon
condition that they would believe, they would never have withheld the means of
faith from them: How can they call on him on whom they have not believed, and
how shall they believe as him of whom they have not heard? Romans 10.14.

3. There are many that enjoy sufficient outward means, yet God does not bestow
upon them inward grace, or that efficacious work of his Spirit, without which
all outward means will be ineffectual. The Israelites that came out of Egypt
wanted no outward means, for besides the teaching of Moses, they had seen all
the miracles and wonders which God wrought in Egypt at the Red Sea, and in the
wilderness, and yet it is said, that God had not given them a heart to
perceive, and eyes to see even to that day, Deuteronomy. 29.3.

The Scribes and Pharisees, and wicked Jews wanted no outward means, for they
heard Christ's heavenly doctrine, and saw his wonderful miracles, and yet the
mysteries of the kingdom of heaven were hid from them, when they were revealed
unto babes; and this was done according to Gods good pleasure, Mat. 11.25.
which certainly he would not have done had he intended their salvation, or sent
his Son to purchase it; our Savior says that no man can enter into the kingdom
of heaven unless he be born of water and the spirit, John 3.5. and this wind
blows not every where, but where it lists, verse 7.

Object. Where ever God sends his word it is accompanied with such a work of
his spirit as is sufficient for salvation, if men did not resist it.

Answ. 1. It can never be proved, that where ever God sends his word, it is
accompanied with the work of his Spirit in every one that hears it. What work
had the Spirit upon those hearers, whose hearts our Savior compares to the
highway side, where the seed was wholly lost, being either trodden under foot,
or carried away by the fowls of the air?

2. Though there may be some common work of the Spirit upon the hearts of such
who are never saved, yet not such a work as is fit to bring them to salvation;
for how can that grace be accounted sufficient for salvation, which does not
remove that which hinders men's salvation, and which if it be not removed it is
impossible for them to be saved? if the strength of that natural corruption be
not removed, and the power of that rebellious disposition subdued, which makes
us always ready to resist the word of God, and the work of his Spirit, it is not
possible for any man to be saved: and if God should give such an efficacious
grace to all men, as would be superior to corruption, as would subdue and
conquer it, then all men would be saved; and if it be not sufficient to remove
that which necessarily hinders salvation, it is not a grace sufficient for
salvation. Now how can God be said seriously to intend the salvation of such
from whom he withholds that without which it is impossible to be saved, when it
is in his power to give it, yea he does actually give it to all those who are
saved?

Some Divines make mention of a threefold resistance, 1. There is Resistentia
connata, which is bred and born with a man, for whatsoever is born of the flesh
is flesh, wherein there is a natural disposition to resist the Spirit, as being
contrary it. 2. Resistentia adnata, a readiness to put forth this into act,
when ever it meets with that which is contrary to it self. 3. Resistentia
vincens, a conquering resistance; and this effectual grace always subdues and
removes in those whom God intends to save.

Object. But God has given every man power to believe if be will, for he has
given him an understanding whereby he is able to apprehend that object which is
clearly propounded to him, and a will that is fit and ready to follow the
dictate of his understanding.

Answ. 1. This Objection presupposes that a man is able to understand the
things of God, which is contrary to scripture, that tells us the natural man
does not understand the things of God, neither can he, for they are spiritually
discerned, 1 Cor. 2.14. His understanding is not only darkened, but also
overspread with spiritual blindeness: thou know not that thou art poor and
blind, Rev. 3.17. the eyes of his soul are closed, and he must first have them
opened before he can see what is the hope of his calling, etc. Ephesians. 1.18. Let a
thousand Torches be brought into a dark room where a blind man sits, he can
see never the more for the help of these; so let Evangelical Truths be
propounded never so perspicuously and clearly to one that is spiritually
blind, yet he is not able to see them in a spiritual manner, to see them so as
to be affected with them. As the bodily eye cannot apprehend rational things,
so the rational eye cannot apprehend spiritual things, for there must be a
suitable proportion betwixt the faculty and the object: the light that comes by
the spirit to those who are spiritually enlightened, is as specifically
different from the light of natural reason, as the light of reason in man is
differing from light of sense in brutes.

2. It supposes that a natural man has free will to good, which is contrary
to Scripture, which tells that God works in us both to will and to do,
Phil. 2.13.

It is true indeed that a natural man has a remota potentia, a remote power of
understanding and believing spiritually, because he is a subject capable of
saving knowledge and faith, but this is no more then the power that a blind
man has to see, and a lame has to walk, which they are never the better for,
till the blindness of the one and lameness of the other be removed, and they be
enabled to act according to those faculties and organs wherewith man's nature is
furnished.

Thus we have seen that the Doctrine of a Conditional and General Redemption,
is such as cannot agree with Scripture; it follows now to give answer to such
Objections as are brought against an Absolute and a Particular Redemption.

AN ANSWER TO THE OBJECTIONS That are brought against the DOCTRINE OF
Particular Redemption.
AGainst the Doctrine of Particular or Special Redemption Mr. P. thus objects.
Cap. 3. page 84.


Object. Universal redemption is exhibited to us in Scripture by all
expressions of Universality; by Universal Collective Christ is said to be the
Savior of all men, 1 Timothy 4.10. By Universal Distributive, he tasted death for
every man, Heb. 2.9. By Universal Indefinite, he is the Savior of the world,
John 4.42. Universal Objective, he made propitiation for the sins of the whole
world, 1 John 2.2. Universal Negative, not willing that any should perish, 2
Pet. 3.9. by an universal Command to all to believe. Now if these places be not
taken in the proper signification of the words, then the plainest places will
be made most obscure: then how shall we be able out of Scripture to prove the
Sunday Sabbath, Baptism, yea or the Trinity of persons, for which there cannot
be brought so many direct Affirmations of Scripture, as may be brought for
Universal Redemption.

Answ. 1. It is a very weak way of arguing, to argue from the signification of
words, especially such words as have various significations (as these have
which are brought to express the Universality of Redemption) as all men, every
man, world, whole world, and the rest, which are oft-times used, not to
signify every particular man and woman living in the world, but a part of them
only; as when it is said that all flesh shall be saved, Joel 2.28. Luke 3.6.
That Jerusalem and all Judea, and all the region about Jordan were baptized of
John, Mat. 3.5, 6. That all that were in the synagogue were filled with wrath
against Christ, Luke 4.28. That if he were let alone, all men would believe in
him, John 11.48. That if he were lift up from the earth, he would draw all men
unto him, John 12.32. That all that came before him were thieves and robbers,
Cap. 10.8. That every one says, I am of Paul, I am of Apollos, 1 Cor. 3.4.
That every man shall have praise of God, 1 Cor. 4, 5. That all the world
wondered after the beast, Rev. 13.5. That the devil deceived the whole World,
cap. 12.9. That the whole world lies in wickedness, 1 John 5.19. to which many
other might be added that sound in the same manner, and yet signify no
Universality.

2. Scripture must be interpreted by Scripture, and though we are not to recede
from the literal sense when it will agree with other Scriptures, and with the
Analogy of Faith, yet when it is defective both these ways, we are not bound to
adhere to the letter. Now for those Scriptures that carry with them a sound of
Universality and Generally, we are enforced (if we will understand them aright)
to take them in a limited and restrained sense, because else they will clash
with other Scriptures which tell us that Christ laid down his life for his
sheep, John 10.11. That he died to gather in one the sons of God that were
scattered, cap. 11.53. That he gave himself for his Church, Ephesians. 5.25. That he
will not pray for the world, but for those whom the Father had given him out of
the world, John 17.9. That for their sakes he sanctified himself, verse 19.
That he has redeemed us out of every people, kindred, and nation, Rev. 5.9.
That there are some to whom he will say at the last day, he never knew them,
Mat. 7.23. Now all are not Christ's sheep, all are not the sons of God, all
Nations in the world are not his Church, he will not pray for all, and
therefore did not die for all: (for Redemption and Intercession are of equal
extent) if he has redeemed us out of every people and nation, then he has not
redeemed all people and nations: If there be some to whom he will say that he
never knew them, then he never died for them, for he did more then know those
for whom he died; he loved them, and that with a peculiar love, 1 John 3.16.
therefore we must take those Scriptures which speak in a general way, in a
restrained sense, else they will not agree with these, neither will they agree
with the Analogy of Faith; For if Christ has died for all, then he has paid a
perfect price for all; if he has paid a perfect price for all, then he has
made perfect satisfaction for all; if he has made perfect satisfaction, then
perfect justice requires it should be accepted; if perfect satisfaction be made
and accepted, then perfect justice cannot require a double payment of the same
debt: therefore by this Doctrine all Sinners should be discharged, and no man
should suffer in hell for his own sin, for his debt is paid by that perfect
satisfaction which is both made and accepted.

Besides, it cannot stand with Christ's wisdom and the infinite worth of his
precious blood, that he should die in vain, and suffer that blood to be spilt
to no purpose; for when he gave himself to death, he certainly knew that
thousands and ten thousands to whom he should be offered, would reject him, and
persevere to the end in doing so, and therefore that his death would do them no
good.

But if the former Scriptures be taken in a limited sense, they will very well
agree both with other Scriptures, and with the grounds of Faith; as,

1. When it is said that God is the Savior of all men, there is no necessity
that word ((...) Savior) should be understood of eternal salvation, but rather
of temporal preservation: and the foregoing words show that it should be so,
which speak not of Christ as Mediat^r, but of God in general; therefore we
labor and suffer reproach, because we trust in the living God, who is the
Savior or Preserver of all, especially of those that believe, 1 Timothy 4.10. and
this well agrees with that, the Lord preserves both man and beast, Psalm. 36.6.

2. When it is said that Christ gave himself a ransom for all, the former words
show of whom this is to be understood, namely, of all sorts, of all ranks,
degrees and orders of men, high and low, rich and poor, 1 Timothy 2.6. compared
with verse 2. Kings and princes were then the greatest persecutors, and
therefore Christians might doubt whether they should be prayed for or not; this
gave occasion to the Apostle to bid them to pray for kings and princes, and all
that are in Authority, because, etc.

3. When it is said that Christ tasted death for every man, the following words
show of whom this every man is to be understood, namely, of every one of the
sons of God, Heb. 2.9. compared with verse 10.

4. When it is said that he is the propitiation for the sins of the whole
world, it has been showed before of what world this is meant, namely, the
world both of Jews and Gentiles, the whole saved world that consisted of both
these. In what sense all men are commanded to believe, shall be showed by and
by.

5. When it is said that God would have none to perish, 2 Pet. 3.9. the former
words show how it is to be understood, where the Apostle says that the Lord
is long-suffering toward us, speaking of himself and those elect ones to whom
he writes, that had obtained like precious faith with himself, cap. 1. verse
1. whom he opposes to those scoffers mentioned, verse 3. and says that though
there shall be a day of destruction of ungodly men, ver. 7. yet the Lord is
long-suffering toward us; for it is so long before some of Gods own elect come
to repentance, that they have need he should exercise much patience and
long-suffering over them: and of these he speaks when he would have them
account the long-suffering of the Lord to be salvation, verse 15. a means to
bring them to salvation.

Here now (if we were furnished with Mr. P. his faculty in rhetoricating) we
might retort his reason upon himself, and by the same manner of Argumentation we
might tell him, that if every particular man and woman in the world be not
saved, if every man and woman in Judea and the coasts round about were not
baptized of John Baptist, if every man in the world be not drawn to Christ, if
every man in the world has not praise from God, if every man in the world be
not deceived by the devil, if every man in the world lies not in wickedness,
Cap. 3. Page 86. 87, 88.
then we shall make the plainest Scriptures most obscure, and teach that God
does not speak in his word as he means, and so teach the people to misbelieve
him: because these things are set forth by all expressions of universality, as
all men, every man, world, yea whole world, and the like; so that we see this
swelling Argument is but a bladder full of wind, which being a little pricked,
it presently puffs out and vanishes to nothing.

Object. 2. All men are commanded to believe in Christ, but they are not
commanded to believe a lie, therefore it is true that Christ died for all.

Answ. 1. All men are not commanded to believe, but those only to whom the
Gospel is preached, which is the least part of the world.

2. The work of believing is opus complexum, such a work, as to the right
performance whereof many acts are required; as 1 to believe that we are lost
sinners, and must perish for ever without we have a Savior 2. That there is no
savlation to be had, but only in Jesus Christ the Son of God that became man.
3. That it is our duty to deny our selves, and to rest on Jesus Christ as our
only Savior, and resign up our selves to him as our only Lord. 4. To believe
that he died for our sins, and shall be our Savior.

Now though the Gospel requires the doing of all these things, it requires they
should be done certo ordine, in a certain order. It does not require we should
do the last without the first, yea if we do the last before we have done all
the former, our believing would be a false believing; for if we will truly
believe in Christ, we must so believe in him as the Gospel holds him forth to
us, otherwise we have no sure ground for our faith, the Gospel no where bids us
believe that Christ died for all men.

But Christ is held forth in the Gospel only to repenting sinners, to l^st
sinners, to sick sinners, to humbled sinners: when Christ calls those only to
come to him who labor and are heavy laden, who are wearied with the burden of
their sins, and are willing to take his yoke on them, and to them only he
promises rest: if an hardhearted rebellious sinner, such an one as is resolved
to walk after his lusts, and go on in his wicked ways, should strongly persuade
himself that Christ died for him; his strong persuasion were no better then a
strong presumption, the Gospel yielding no ground at all for such persuasion,
but rather the contrary, telling us that Christ is the Anthor of eternal
Salvation only to those that obey him, Heb. 5.9. and that he will render
vengeance to all those that obey not the Gospel, 2 Thessalonians. 1.8. Hence John the
Baptist (Christ's Forerunner) and Christ himself when they began to preach,
call upon men to repent, for the kingdom of heaven is at hand, Mat. 3.2.4.17.
to repent and believe the Gospel, Mark 1.16. so that some acts of repentance
are to go before believing that Christ died for us, which is the last and
highest act of faith: Besides, our Savior tells us that this is the
condemnation of the world, that men hate the light that is come into the world,
because their deeds are evil, John 3.19. there is no unrepenting sinner, but in
some degree hates the light: so far as he loves his evil deeds, so far he hates
the light (which is contrary to them) and this is the ground of his
condemnation.

Object. 3. But Mr. P. objects with much confidence that of the Apostle, Cap.
4. page 28.
2 Cor. 5.14, 15. where (as he says) the Apostle thus argues, If one died for
all, then were all dead, but one died for all, therefore all were dead.

Here the Apostle does not only plainly assert that Christ died for all, but
brings this as a medium to prove that all were dead.

Answ. 1. The scope of the Apostle here is not to show for how many Christ
died, but what is the duty of those for whom he died, namely, to live to him,
because they were in the state of death when he died for them.

2. We willingly grant that Christ died for all, if this word all be taken in
the same sense the Apostle takes it, as he takes it in the former verse,
namely, those whom Christ's love constrained to duty. The love of Christ (says
he) constrains us, and therefore we thus judge, that if Christ died for all
of us, then all of us were in the state of death as well as others, and he died
for us, that we which live should no longer live to our selves, but to him. But
it follows not hence that Christ died for all men, for all men are not so
affected with the sense of Christ's love, as thereby to be constrained and
carried on with a holy violence as it were, to the performance of duty.

3. The Apostle here speaks of such for whom Christ not only died, but also
rose again; now it is no where said in Scripture that Christ rose again for
all: besides, if he died and rose again for all, then all shall certainly be
justified. It is God that justifies, who shall condemn? it is Christ that
died, or rather that is risen again, Romans 8.33, 34.

Object. 4. It is further objected, That all men in the world receive benefit
by Christ, therefore he died for all.

Answ. 1. It does not follow that Christ died for wicked men who perish in the
end, because they receive many benefits by his death: for all creatures in the
world are some way or other the better for Christ's death. We may well think
that the whole Creation had long since been turned into a Chaos and confusion,
if Christ by his death had not made an atonement for some of mankind. The
Apostle says, that the whole Creation groans under the burden of man's sin,
and that there is an earnest expectation in the creature, waiting when it shall
be delivered from the bondage of corruption, to the glorious liberty of the
sons of God, Romans 8.21, 22. This glorious liberty of the sons of God is a
benefit which Christ has purchased, and this all the creatures shall fare the
better for, which makes them to have such an earnest expectation after it, yet
none can hence infer that Christ died for all the creatures.

2. The devils themselves have some benefit by Christ's death, for if he had
never come into the world, it is likely that they had been confined to the
great deep, and not been suffered to range up and down in the world, as now
they do. And when he was in the world, he was pleased at their entreaty to
suffer them to enter into the herd of swine, and not to send them into the
great deep, which was some benefit to them; yet who will say that Christ died
for devils?

3. It was the act of greatest love for Christ to lay down his life: Greater
love then this has no man, to lay down his life, John 15.13. and can we think
that Christ will show as great love to those that are damned, as to those that
are saved; to the reprobate, as to the elect; to strangers and such as he never
knew; yea to his enemies, and such as will not suffer him to reign over them,
as to his friends and faithful subjects, yea to his fellow brethren and the
members of his own body? for there can be no greater love then the greatest,
and the greatest is the laying down his life, which he has done for all alike
according to this Doctrine.

4. What ever comes from Love works for good; but all things in the end work
together for hurt unto wicked men that have no part in Christ; Their table
shall be a snare, and that which should have been for their prosperity, shall
be a trap, Psalm. 69.22. Their riches are reserved for their hurt, Eccles. 5.9.
The goodness of God hardens their hearts, and so fits them for wrath, Romans 2.4,
5.

5. For whom Christ has purchased a right to the things they enjoy, he has
also purchased a Grace that fits them for the right use of them; for in and
through him all things are given to us that pertain to Life and Godliness, 2
Pet. 1.3.

Object. 5. But we may say to any man, even the worst that lives, if thou will
believe, thou shall be saved, which we could not say truly, if Christ did not
die for all.

Answ. 1. The scope of such conditional promises and propositions, is to show
the inseparable joining together of the means and the end of Faith and
Salvation, of Repentance and Pardon of Sin; and the truth of them lies not in
the truth of the parts, but in the necessary and strong connection and joining
of them together. As when I say, if a man be a lion, then he has four feet; if
he be a bird, then he can fly in the air; here though the parts be false, yet
the propositions are true, because of the necessity of the consequence: so when
I say to any man, believe and thou shall be saved, here this proposition is
true, though the man never believes, nor never be saved; for let this
Hypothetical be turned into a Categorical, and it is no more but this (Every
Believer shall be saved) which is true, though Christ never died for all, and
though all men never be saved; for it shows only the absolute and necessary
connection betwixt Faith and Salvation, as that all Believers, and they only
shall be saved, and not that all men shall be Believers, or that all men shall
be saved, or that Christ died for all; and it does no more imply that there is
a will in God of saving all, then when on the other side it is said that he who
believes not, shall be damned, it does imply that there is a will in him of
damning all.

2. The weakness of this way of arguing may appear from instances of other like
propositions in Scripture: when the young man came to our Savior Christ, and
asked him what he should do that he might have eternal life? he answers him, If
thou will have life, keep the commandments, Matthew 19.15. did not Christ here
speak truly? yet it was not true that either he could keep the commands, or
ever should have life by keeping them. Did not the Apostle speak truly when he
said, If there be no resurrection, then Christ is not risen: and if there be
hope only in this life, then we are of all men most miserable, 1 Cor. 15.18,
19. yet in both these propositions the parts are false, for both Christ is
risen, and there shall certainly be a resurrection: and the Saints have better
hopes then in this life, neither are they of all men the most miserable. So
this proposition, If a man believe he shall be saved, is true, though God has
never determined his salvation, nor Christ died to purchase it, for salvation
is here fastened only to believing, and neither believing nor salvation to the
man.

Object. 6. Romans 5.18. As by the offense of one man judgment came upon all to
condemnation, so by the righteonsness of one, etc. Here Christ's righteousness
is made of equal extent to Adams sin, namely, such as reaches to all.

Answ. 1. The Apostle does here parallel Adams sin and Christ's righteousness,
not in regard of their equal extent to all men in the world, but to all their
posterity. As Adam by his sin conveyed sin and death to all his posterity, so
Christ by his Sufferings and Obedience conveys Righteousness and Life to all
his posterity, to all the faithful, to all true believers, who are called his
seed, Isa. 59.21. and his children, Heb 2.13. If there had been another
generation of men that had not arisen out of Adams root, they had not been
involved in the guilt of Adams sin; so there being a generation of men that
never sprung out of Christ's root, that were never branches of that blessed
Vine, they shall never have part in those peculiar benefits, which he has
purchased for his children, for his seed and posterity, for the members of his
own body, of whom only he is the Savior, Ephesians. 5.23.

2. By this Argument all men should have Righteousness and Life, and so all men
in the end should certainly be saved, for the Apostle says expressly in this
place, that as by one man's sin condemnation is come upon all, so by the
righteousness of one, the free gift came upon all to the justification of life.

Object. 7. The covenant of grace is universal, made with all mankind,
therefore Christ died for all, for he is the foundation of this covenant.

Answ. 1. That the covenant of grace is universal, can never be proved; for how
can Pagans and Infidels who never heard of Christ or covenant, be said to be in
covenant, of whom the Apostle says, that they are without God in the world,
and are strangers from the covenant, Ephesians. 2.12.

2. In the first promise wherein the covenant of grace is held forth, there is
a direct distinction (as has been showed) betwixt the seed of the woman and
the seed of the serpent, the promise being made only to the seed of the woman,
namely to Christ, and those that should be born of him, Heb. 2.13.

3. The Apostle says that the promise (wherein the covenant was comprehended)
was made to Abraham and his seed, not to seeds, as speaking of many, but to thy
seed, as of one, that is Christ, Gal. 3.16. Now if the covenant be made only
with Christ mystical, head and members (as here it must be understood, because
the promise is made not only to Christ, but to Abraham) it is not made with
all men; all men are not Abraham's seed, all men are not members of Christ's
mystical body, but only believers both of Jews and Gentiles, these only make
that one seed.

4. In the covenant of grace the Lord promises all those with whom he makes
this covenant, that he will give them a new heart and a new spirit, that he
will put his laws into their inward parts, and write them in their hearts, and
this promise is made absolutely and without condition, and therefore shall
certainly be fulfilled to all those to whom it is made: but all men have not
new hearts and spirits given unto them; therefore all are not within covenant,
neither is the covenant made with all.

Object. All that are visible members of the Church, that have received the
Seal of the Covenant, and do still own it, are in covenant; but many of these
are ignorant, or profane and wicked, therefore all that are in covenant have
not new hearts and spirits given unto them, neither is the law of God written
in their hearts.

Answ. The covenant of grace may be considered two ways, either in regard of
the outward dispensation and outward privileges attending it, or in regard of
those inward graces which are the proper effects of it. In regard of the
outward dispensation, and outward privileges belonging to it, all visible
members of the Church may be said to be in covenant, but in regard of the
inward graces, which are the proper effects and privileges he longing to the
covenant of grace, those cannot be said to be in covenant, who always remain
destitute of them. As Abraham had a carnal seed who received circumcision
(which was the Seal of the covenant) and did partake of other outward
privileges belonging to the people of God, and a spiritual seed, namely such
as were of the faith of Abraham, so he has still. No man can be said to be in
covenant further then he knows it, and professes conformity to the conditions
of it: wicked men may have the covenant made known to them, and make outward
profession of conformity to it, and so have communion with the people of God in
all outward ordinances, and enjoy all outward privileges together with them,
but they cannot properly be said to be in covenant, not partaking of the most
essential parts of it, of those great graces of Justification, Sanctification,
and of Salvation in the end.

Object. 8. The Apostle Peter speaks of such as denied the Lord that bought
them, 2 Pet. 2.2. therefore Christ has died for wicked men that perish in the
end.

Answ. The Scripture sometimes speaks of things not only as they are, but as
they seem and appear to be, as they are in the judgments and opinions of men.
Thus our Savior having said in one place, that to him that has, shall be
given, and from him that has not, shall be taken away even that which he has,
Mat. 13.12. in another place shows his meaning, saying, That shall be taken
away which he seemed to have, Luke 8.18. and in this sense he speaks when he
says, that the whole have no need of the Physician, but the sick, and that he
came not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance. And thus it is said
of king Ahaz, that he sacrificed to the gods of Damascus that smote him, 2 Chr.
28.23. they did not so indeed, but he thought they did so, they seemed to him
to do so, and therefore the Scripture speaks of it accordingly: and so it is
spoken in this place; these men had the knowledge of Christ, and made outward
profession of him and his Religion, and therefore seemed to be such as were
bought and redeemed by him, but they were not so indeed.

FINIS.

