Safety in War: OR, THE INFALLIBLE ARTILLERY OF A Kingdom, Fleet or Army: IN
SERMONS UNTO THEIR Majesty's Forces by (...) and (...) By JOHN WHITTEL,
Chaplain in the Army.

(...) (...) lib. 10. ^. 721.

LONDON: Printed for Randal Tailor near Stationers Hall, 1692.

To the Right Honorable the LORDS of the Treasury.
My Lords,
ACcidentally meeting with a certain Pamphlet concerning Courage, which was
designed (no doubt) to weaken the Hands of Gods People, or dismay their
Majesty's Forces in this holy War by Sea and Land; I conceived it would not be
in vain for me to publish something which might tend to their Majesty's
Welfare, and the Encouragement of the Fleet and Army in this depraved Age,
wherein Fidelity is abandoned by many as Antichristian. My Lords, these naked
Truths in these Jejune Papers, are for the most part such as were sounded in
the Ears of the Army: And therefore I have reason to hope they may be embraced
by them now with the same Candidness and Singleness of Heart as they were
delivered, in order to the Advancement of Gods Glory, the good of the Church
Militant, against the common Enemy and Oppressor, and the Welfare, Peace and
Happiness of their Majesty's and their Kingdoms. I must confess, my Lords,
there is in them no Politeness of Style, Floridness of Phrase, or Sweetness of
Rhetoric, which may make them esteemed by the Learned: Yet I hope a familiar
Scripture-dress may not be disesteem'd by the Vulgar and more Vnlearn'd, for
whom alone they are sent abroad in this nice Age. And since nothing is spoken
here but what has been spoken before our Days, and Treatises or Sermons are
generally entertained according to the Proverb, Quot Homines tot Sententiae. I
must crave the Honor of your Lordships as to shelter these honest, though
unpolished Papers, under your Lordships Patronage, praying you to accept them,
as a sincere Acknowledgment of that indispensible Duty which is owing unto your
Lordships,

From your Lordships most humble Servant, J. W.

(...) Numb. 14. 9. Rebel not ye against the Lord, neither fear ye the People
of the Land; for they are Bread for us: Their Defense is departed from them,
and the Lord is with us: Fear them not.
BEFORE we come to handle these Words in particular, it cannot be improper for
to show you the occasion of them; together with the People unto whom they are
spoken; and the Person or Persons that spoke 'em. We read in the Holy Bible,
how God Almighty (of his free Grace and Goodness) chose the Seed of Jacob
(which was afterward called Israel, because as a Prince he had Power with God)
unto himself, for to be a peculiar People unto him, above all other Nations:
And therefore, he promised for to multiply them as the Stars of Heaven for
number, and to give unto them the Land of Canaan for an Heritage. And in order
to the fulfilling of his gracious Covenant, the Lord Jehovah brought his own
People out from the midst of Egypt, by Temptations, by Signs and by Wonders,
and by War, and by a mighty Hand, and by a stretched Arm, and by great Terrors
which he brought upon Pharaoh, and his whole Host; and at length overturning
them in the midst of the red Sea, as they were pursuing the Children of Israel,
Deuteronomy. 4. 34. Moreover, the eternal God led his own People forty Years long in
the Wilderness, going before them, by Day in a Pillar of a Cloud, for to show
them by what way they should go, and by Night in a Pillar of Fire, to give
Light unto 'em, and be a Wall or Defense between the Camp of Israel and the
Camp of the Egyptians: So that the one came not near the other all Night. When
they were come unto the Confines of the Land of Promise, Moses (by the
Commandment of God and Entreaty of the People) sent forth a Man out of every
Tribe for to go before them and search the Land, and bring 'em Word back what
it was, whether good or bad, and what People they were which dwelt therein;
whether strong or weak, few or many; and whether they dwelt in Cities, Tents or
strong Holds. After forty Days these Spys returned from searching the Land, and
brought with them from thence some Grapes, Pomegranates and Figs, and came and
told their Brethren, That it was a Land which flowed with Milk and Honey; but
the People thereof were Strong and of a great Stature, and their Cities were
walled and very great. Yea they said, That they saw there Giants, the Sons of
Anak, and they were in their own Sight, but as Grasshoppers unto them; and
therefore there was no going up against them, they were so strong. Thus these
Spys which were sent, brought up an evil Report upon the Land, insomuch that
all the Congregation of Israel lifted up their Voice and cried; and the People
wept all Night, and murmured against Moses and against Aaron, saying, Would God
that we had died in the Land of Egypt: Or would God that we had died in this
Wilderness. Wherefore has the Lord brought us up to fall by the Sword, and our
Wives and our little ones to become a Prey? etc. Were it not better for us to
return into Egypt? And they said one to another, Let us make us a Captain, and
let us return thither. Upon this Moses and Aaron fell on their Faces before all
Israel: And those two mighty Men of Valor, which were of them that had
searched the Land, and had another Spirit in them, following God fully; Namely,
Joshua the Son of Nun, and Caleb the Son of Jephunneth, used their best
endeavors for to still and satisfy the People, and to cause them to be better
opinionated toward the Country; and to remember how the most high God was
their Defense, and had fought their Battles for them, against their Enemies;
and how he had led them safely thither, saying, The Land which we passed
through for to search it, is an exceeding good Land: If the Lord delight in us,
then he will bring us into this good Land, and give it to us. Only rebel not ye
against the Lord, neither fear ye the People of, etc. As if they had said, You
whose Eyes have seen, what great things the Lord your God did for you, ever
since he brought you out of the Land of Egypt, or out of the Furnace, by the
Hands of Moses and Aaron: You who are his own peculiar People, for you now to
fear, when ye are at the very Borders of the Land, is very evil. Therefore do
not rebel against the Lord, in murmuring against his Ministers, Moses and
Aaron, whom he has set over you: But remember the mighty Hand of God, which
bare you in all this Wilderness, as a Man does his Son; and be not discouraged
at the Strength of the People, the number of their Cities, and the height of
their Walls, for the Lord your God which goes before you, he it is that
fights for you, Rebel not ye against, etc.

The Words do naturally teach us these three Lessons.

1. That when once the Lord is departed from a Nation or People, Fleet or Army,
it cannot prosper or stand. Their Defense is departed from them.

2. That God only is the best and safest Defense of his Church, against her
Adversaries. And the Lord is with us.

3. That to fear the Lord of Hosts himself, and not the Arm of Flesh, or to be
very Courageous in Fighting God's Battle, is a Duty required of all his People
(but especially of those which are called thereunto by lawful Authority) and a
principal means for to keep the Lord with or among such a People or Army. For,
says the Text, Fear them not. Of these in their order, by the assistance of the
Holy Ghost, which opens and no Man shuts, and shuts and no Man opens; who
can show forth the Praises of the Most-high, out of the Mouths of Babes and
Sucklings, and whose Grace is sufficient to enable the weakest Instrument.

First, That when once the Lord is departed from a Nation or People, Fleet or
Army, it cannot prosper or stand. The truth of this I shall endeavor (God
willing) to make out, two manner of ways, 1. From the Nature of God. And 2.
From the Testimony of his Holy Spirit.

First, From the Nature of God, who is the Fountain and Original from whence
springs all our Happiness and Comfort; and from whom alone every good Gift and
every perfect Gift comes: As Health, Strength, Grace, Meekness, Goodness,
Faith, Prosperity and Plenty. It is he that gives us such fruitful Seasons, and
fills our Hearts with Joy and Gladness: It is the Lord Jehovah alone that
gives Salvation unto Kings, and delivers his Servants from the hurtful Sword:
It is that Almighty and Eternal Essence (who is the great and glorious Creator
of all things, and Judge of all Men, and Searcher of all Hearts, and Rewarder of
such as diligently seek him) who preserves, maintains and upholds, all other
Beings whatsoever, both in Heaven above, in the Earth beneath, and in the Water
under the Earth, by his most infinite and unlimited Power and Omnipotency. And
therefore he will have Mercy on whom he will have Mercy; he has the same
Soveraignity and Power of us, and over all Kingdoms and Nations, as the Potter
has over the Clay, of the same Lump to make one Vessel unto Honor, and
another unto Dishonor. He removes and sets up Kings, and disposes of Kingdoms,
and changes Times and Seasons according to his Pleasure: For the Earth is the
Lords, and the fullness thereof, the World and they that dwell therein: So that
he can do whatsoever he will with the World. He has founded the Earth upon the
Seas, so that it is easily sunk, being a bad Foundation; and establishes it upon
the Floods, and that is as dangerous a Situation, according to human Sense and
external Appearance. But yet by the infinite Power of that Almighty God, who
laid the corner Stone of the World, and has set due Bounds, Bars and Doors,
unto the proud swelling Sea [whose Waves roar and toss themselves, yet can they
not prevail, but dash themselves into pieces] it is that this mighty Mass is
supported. It is he alone that makes the Earth bring forth, that our Garners
may be full, affording all manner of Store, and our Sheep may bring forth
thousands, and our Oxen strong to labor, and gives us all things liberally and
upbraids not. Oh there is nothing can prosper without his Blessing, who is the
Foundation of all Blessings, neither can any thing be done without his
Providence over us, his Spirit to guide us, and Grace and Strength to enable
us; who measures the Waters in the hollow of his Hand, and meets out Heaven
with a Span, and comprehends the Dust of the Earth in a Measure, and weighs
the Mountains in Scales, and the Hills in a Balance, Isa. 40. 12. Therefore if
this most blessed and omnipotent God once but gather unto himself his Holy
Spirit, his Breath, Protection and Preservation, from a Nation; If he once
depart from a Fleet or Army, then that Nation, Fleet or Army, which is without
God, with or among them, cannot but sink and perish; because the very Elements
in their kind, will then Fight against them, as the Stars in their Courses
fought against Sisera. When the Lord Jehovah is departed from a People, then
its Courage and Strength, its Rock of Salvation and Defense, its Refuge,
Sanctuary and Fountain of Blessing, its Giver of Grace and Safety, yea, its
only Friend and Giver of Victory in Battle, is gone away; and there can be no
prospect to such a People, but Ruin and Destruction. This we find in the Case
of all the Kings of Canaan, though they were mighty and had vast Armies: Yet
notwithstanding when they once perceived, that the great God, the supreme
Majesty of Heaven and Earth was departed from them, and with the Israelites,
and assisting them wonderfully in all their Undertakings, and in drying up the
Waters of Jordan for them, to enter the Land of Canaan: Then presently all
their Hearts melted within them for Fear, and there was no more Spirit in them,
because of the Children of Israel, Josh. 5. 1. And therefore our Church prays,
Wilt not thou, O God, go forth with our Hosts? Give us help from trouble, for
vain is the help of Man without thee: Through God our Forces, both by Sea and
Land, shall do valiantly, and it is he alone that shall tread down our Enemies.
It Is said of Sampson, that after his Head was shaven, he became weak and like
another Man; and he said, I will go out as at other times before, and shake my
self. (Observe) For he wist not that the Lord his Strength was departed from
him, Judge. 16. 20. In like manner the Adversaries of God, and his true reformed
Church, may (yea and do) take Counsel together, against our Sovereign Lord and
Lady King William and Queen Mary, as they have done at other times against
Queen Elizabeth (of blessed Memory) but it shall come to naught, and their
Strength, like Sampsons, shall deceive 'em; because the Lord is departed from
them. The common Enemy of Truth and Oppressor of Righteousness and Peace in
Europe, may vaunt himself as at other times, and say, Is not this great
Babylon, that I have built? Have not I overthrown Towns, and laid waste fenced
Cities? Have not I expelled from my Kingdom all those that would not obey me
rather than God? By the might of my Power, and for the Honor of my Majesty,
because I must and will be obeyed; else I will set my Blood-thirsty Dragoons
upon them. But he considers not that the Lord is departed from him, and that
his vast Army shall be smitten with Terror. Look well then, O thou Enemy of
Truth and Peace, upon the Handwriting on the Wall; for it may well make thy
Countenance change, and thy Thoughts to trouble thee; and the Joints of thy
Loins to be loosed, and thy Knees to smite one against another; to consider,
How many thousands of Souls are now crying under the Altar against thee,
saying, How long, O Lord, Holy and True, do thou not judge and avenge our
Blood on that cruel Tyrant that dwells on the Earth, who has spilt it like
Water on every side! Oh will it not once be! Rev. 6. 10.

Secondly, from the Testimony of his Holy Spirit, which declares plainly, That
in vain is Salvation hoped for, from the Multitude of Men or Ships, from the
Hills, or from the Mountains, or from any human Force or Power; for truly in
the Lord our God is the Salvation of his People: And says the Prophet David,
The Lord is my Light and my Salvation, whom then shall I fear? The Lord is the
Strength of my Life, of whom shall I be afraid? When the Wicked, even my Foes
came upon me, to eat up my Flesh, they stumbled and fell, Psalm. 26. 1, 2. etc.
Now to show this great Truth, That when once the Lord is departed from any
Nation or People, Fleet or Army, it cannot prosper or stand; We may take notice
of God's own People themselves, the Children of Israel, who when they tempted
and provoked the most-high God to Anger, and so caused him to depart from them,
and forsake his Dwelling* place; how unsuccessful they were then in all their
Wars, being commonly discomfited of their Enemies. As by Chushan-rishathaim
King of Mesopotamia, whom they served eight Years: And by Eglon King of Moab,
whom they were subject to eighteen Years; and the cause you read was by reason
the Lord was departed from them, Judge. 3. 8, 12. Moreover we find such another
Passage between Israel and Amalek, as long as Moses (that familiar Friend of
God) held up his Hand, and thereby caused the Lord to be with his People; Then
they prevailed over their Enemies. But as soon as Moses's Hands were let down,
and the Lord was departed from the People of Israel, then Amalek prevailed over
them. Oh where the infinite Majesty of the living and true God is present;
there it cannot go any otherwise but well, whether it be Fleet or Army, for
every thing that is done there shall prosper: But where the most-high is not
present, or among them; there be sure it cannot be well or prosper, be their
Power outwardly never so great, and their Forces never so strong. An Example of
this we may see in Zerah the King of Ethiopia, who came against Asa with the
greatest Army that ever we read of in sacred or profane History: Even an Host
of a thousand thousand, and three hundred Chariots. And Asa cried unto the Lord
his God, and said, Lord, it is nothing with thee to help, whether with many or
with them that have no Power: Help us, O Lord our God, for we rest on thee, and
in thy Name we go against this Multitude: O Lord thou art our God, let not Man
prevail against thee. So the Lord smote the Ethiopians before Asa, and before
Judas, and the Ethiopians fled, 2 Chronicles. 14. 11, 12. Alas! It is not a vast and
well disciplined Army (although God knows most Men now have an Eye to that
chiefly) nor the Strength of Ships, nor the Skill of Seamen, nor the Courage
and Conduct of Officers, no nor yet the greatness and goodness of Artillery
that gains the Victory; but its the Lord of Hosts himself that fights the
Battle, and gives the Victory to whom he will (although it cannot be denied but
that all these forementioned Things are absolutely needful, and as the
secondary Causes of Victory.) David tells Goliath thus, saying, Thou come to
me depending altogether on thy own Strength, and well furnished and prepared
for Battle, as with a Sword, with a Spear, and with a Shield: But now I come to
thee otherwise, not so much confiding in my own Strength, as on Gods: And
indeed I am sure my Strength will not fail me, and therefore I will smite thee,
and give thy Carcass unto the Fowls of the Air; That all the World may see and
know, that thou, O Lord, whose Name is Jehovah, art the strongest and highest
over all the Earth. And where God takes the part, and is present among an
Army, then there all the Enchantments, Plots, diabolical Arts or Conspiracies,
are altogether invalid and ineffectual. And he, who is the Eye of his own
People, will soon discover them, and bring the Plotters to shame and confusion;
as Balak told Balaam concerning Israel, saying, Surely there is no Enchantment
against Jacob, neither is there any Divination against Israel, for the Lord his
God is with him: And it shall be said, in the Lord's due time of our Fleet and
Army, What has God wrought! Oh what a Victory was this! When the strong holds
are surpised, and the mighty Men's Hearts in Moab (who have magnified
themselves against the Lord and his Truth, and have worshipped other Gods, Wood
and Stone) shall tremble, and be as the Heart of a Woman in Pangs. Be still
then, ye Adversaries of God and Traitors to the best of Princes, speak no more
so proudly against the Heritage of the Almighty: For know you assuredly that
God, even our own God, will find an occasion to bring down the Arrogance of the
Proud, and will lay low the Haughtiness of the Terrible. So much then for
Confirmation of our first Lesson. Let us in the next place, sincerely endeavor
to improve this to our selves, that so the Lord our God may be glorified, in
our Body and Spirits which are his; that we being delivered out of the Hands of
her Enemies, may serve him without fear.

Here is then, first, an Inference of no small Comfort, unto the Church of God
militant here on Earth, in this crooked and perverse Generation; wherein all
manner of Vice and Wickedness abounds daily, and Piety and Righteousness are
such Strangers. To consider, That although War be risen against the People of
God, yet, he is in the midst of his Church, to defend and keep her, that she
shall not be moved by all the Storms of Trouble and fierce Darts of the Devil;
which are bent wholly against her: Nor by all the Plots and Conspiracies of the
Children of Darkness; because the eternal God will keep her safe from the Snare
of the Fowler, and Malice of evil Spirits. Oh what a Comfort is this unto every
true Believer and Child of the most-high, to ponder with it self! That though the
Adversaries of the Lord and his Church may be far more in number, and much
stronger in outward appearance; yet when the Captain of the Host of the Lord,
stands ready with his Sword drawn in his Hand, to fight for his People, then
they signify nothing at all, and he can smite 'em down, even at one Blow, as
he did unto the great and mighty Armies of the King of Canaan. And the People
of the ever-blessed Jehovah have with them always whole Hosts of glorious
Angels and invisible Spirits, for to take their part against the Enemy of God
and his Truth. But which is yet a farther Addition to the Churches comfort,
That if her Enemies be better provided for War, and prepar^d for Battle
seemingly and externally, yet nevertheless the most holy and terrible Majesty
of Heaven and Earth, who is, (...), all in all, and without whom all other
helps and means are invalid and insignificant, is of (a certain) departed and
gone from them, and their Idolatrous and Superstitious Camp. As we may collect,
from the Record of the Spirit of Truth, which says, What Concord has Christ
with Belial? And what Agreement has the Temple of God with Idols? Oh! can we
imagine, that the most holy One (who charges the Angels with Folly, and is of
purer Eyes, than to behold evil) will abide or continue there, and among such a
People where the Glory which is due unto none but him alone, is day by day
given another, and his Praise to graven Images? See Isa 42. 8. It cannot be
thought justly of him, for he is a jealous God, and when he does visit, he will
do it to the purpose. But on the other hand it cannot be denied, but that the
omnipotent Jehovah may seemingly withdraw his Presence, and hide his blessed
Face for a small Moment, from his Church, which is the only Excellency wherein
he delights, and as dear to him as the very Apple of his own Eye: Yet, be it
known, that he will never fail nor forsake her, but rejoice over her as a
Bridegroom does over his Bride; and will give her his holy Spirit to comfort
her, and guide her into all Truth: Nay he will be with her always even unto the
end of the World. And this leaving of his Church for a while, is for her
everlasting good, for the Trial of her Faith, Patience and Constancy, which is
more precious than of Gold that perishes, though it be tried by Fire. That she
may be found a holy and reformed Church without Spot, and Blameless, unto
Praise, and Honor and Glory, at the appearing of her dear Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 1. 7. And since the Lord of Hosts himself is our Portion
and Inheritance, our best and only Help and Strength, our safest Defense and
Horn of Salvation, on whom alone we wholly depend, in these deceitful Days,
wherein no trust is to be given to Man: Then there is no cause for us to be
cast down, or any ways dismayed, at the blasphemous Speeches of any wicked
Rabshaketh, or at the Pride and Arrogance of an Idolatrous Sennacherib: Though he
has laid waste some small Towns and Villages that are adjacent unto his
Territories, and reproached his Maker, the everliving God. O tarry ye the
Lord's leisure with Meekness and Patience, ye Children of the most-high! For
yet a little while and he that shall come will come, and will not tarry. Oh the
Thoughts of the most Just and Terrible God are not as ours, and his ways are
past finding out! For there is no doubt of it, but he suffers him to fulfill the
number of his Sins, and fill up the measure of his Transgressions, which are
not (perhaps) full ripe for Judgment. And then he will cause his own
Terribleness inevitably to deceive him, and the Pride of his own evil Heart to
lay him low, in an Hour that he is not aware of; as his did (sometimes) to
Nebuchadnezzar King of Babylon; while the very Word was in his Mouth: And who
can tell but that his Day is come, and that happy time is at hand, wherein the
most terrible Majesty of the eternal King, the mighty Lord, will call him to an
account for all his Wickedness, and the Blood of his Saints and dear Children,
which he spilt like Water, and will show his Power on him, by making him to
know and feel, That the Most-high rules in the Kingdom of Men, and gives it
to whomsoever he will; And none can stay his Hand, or say unto him, What do
thou? Nay will compel him at last to confess with Adonibezek, saying, As I have
done, so God has requited me, Dan. 4. 25, 35. Judge. 1. 7. What mean then all
these causless and unjust Murmurings and Complainings in our Streets, which I
hear about the Times? Know ye not what the Preacher speaks? Say not thou, What
is the cause that the former Days were better than these? For thou do not
enquire wisely concerning this, Eccles. 7. 10. What Is the Matter (O foolish
People and unwise) that ye have not Patience to wait God's time? Do not ye
understand this, That you cannot have an Apple or a Nut, but you must tarry its
proper Period, and let it bud and blossom, and knit and grow and ripen? And
does not the Apostle tell thee, That the Husbandman waits with long Patience
for the precious Fruits of the Earth? And must you be impatient and limit God
in his own Work? It is a grief to think on it, that there are a sort of People
among us, which are not unlike to those Spies; apt to bring an evil Report upon
their Majesty's Forces by Sea and Land, and extolling the French in all Company
always wheresoever they go: Sure such are evil-minded and unbelieving Hearts.
The Spies said, The Land of Canaan was a Land which did eat up its Inhabitants,
and all the People thereof were Giants, or Men of a great Stature: And so
persuaded the Children of Israel, they were not able to go up against them,
they were so strong. Thus they considered not that the most high God was with
them whithersoever they went; that he was their Defense and Strength, and
fought all their Battles: Whereupon they provoked him to Wrath against 'em, and
he destroyed those Spies and false Reporters before his Face, by the Plague,
for their evil Reports; and swear that not one of them which had seen his Glory
and Miracles, which he wrought in Egypt and in the Wilderness, and yet for all
murmured and complained against his Deputies, Moses and Aaron, should enter
into the Land, but die in the Wilderness, for their Unbelief (^ave his Servants
Caleb and Joshua.) In like manner our false Reporters, Murmurers and
Complainers, cry, Ah we shall be all ruined and undone by the French! And though
they do not say they are Giants, yet all their Cry is, They are too strong for
us; not considering that the Almighty God is our Defense. Depart then from
among God's People, ye evil and unbelieving Hearts; for you weaken the Hands of
the Almighty, and discourage his People as much as you can. But let me tell you
to your Faces, That the mighty God has delivered our Nation sundry times out
of far greater Dangers, than (I hope) we are now in: And sure I am that the
Lord's Hand is not shortened, that he cannot save us now, as well as he has
done in our Fathers and Forefathers days: Yea, not long since, in our own
Remembrance; if our crying National Sins, our Murmurings, Complainings without
cause, and our wicked and unbelieving Hearts, do not hinder him. Be warned then
by the Example of the Spies, ye false Reporters, and ye Murmurers and
Complainers, by the Israelites; lest you provoke the most-high God to Anger,
and make him swear in his Wrath, That none of you all, which have either seen
with your Eyes, or heard with your Ears, the many great Deliverances which the
Lord of Hosts has wrought for this Kingdom, before our time, but more
especially not many years since, by the Hands of our most gracious K. William,
that mighty Prince of Valor, whom the Lord has raised up for to be a
Deliverer of his reformed Church, shall ever be so happy, as to live to see or
hear of Mercy and Truth met together, and Righteousness and Peace to embrace
each other, in all parts of Europe. Oh be ashamed and blush, ye false
Reporters, and causless and unjust Murmurers and Complainers, and give the Lord
the Praises due unto his most holy Name; and render unto the King the Honor
and Obedience which is due unto his Majesty, who has graciously given you your
Lives for a Prey, when as ye were appointed as Sheep to the Slaughter! Good
God! Wherefore does a living Man now complain? Whereas not long since you would
willingly have given all that you had for your Lives and Safety. And do ye now
grudg to pay a little Money toward the War? Is it possible that Christians
should be thus ungrateful and forget their Danger so soon, and be willing to
return again into Egypt? (I mean) Are you willing to be reduced to Popery,
Slavery and Arbitrary Power again? Or rather, to be in subjection to French
Dragoons? God forbid: Search then and try your ways, and meddle no more with
our blessed Governors and Government, which does not concern you: But busy
your Heads about your own Occasions, and turn thus again unto the Lord: And
then we have no cause to fear, but that God, even our own God, shall give this
Kingdom his Blessing: God shall bless their Majesty's and their Forces, and
prosper their Arms both by Sea and Land, and all the ends of the World shall
fear him; because they shall see or hear of the mighty Salvation, which he has
wrought for his Church and People.

Secondly, This may caution and admonish the whole Nation in general (but in a
more especial manner you that belong to the Fleet or Army) in this most
deceitful Age of ours, for to take heed and beware of all disaffected and
treacherous Persons, which have no fear of God before their Eyes; and therefore
will make it no scruple of Conscience to start aside from their Duty and
Allegiance, unto their present Majesty's, like a deceitful Bow, upon the first
occasion. And let me declare my Mind freely, and tell you, That I am persuaded
there are not a few, who have listed themselves in this present Service, both
by Sea and Land, on mere purpose (as Joab speaks of Abner to King David, 2 Samuel
3. 25.) to deceive their Majesty's, and to know their going out and their
coming in, and to know all that they do; and what Forces they have by Sea and
Land in a readiness; and then to inform the Enemy therewith the first
opportunity. And therefore I may boldly say, you that are gone forth to War,
cannot be too circumspect and diligent, in searching the Minds and Hearts of
all those employed in the Service. And to further you herein, we beseech the
great Searcher of all Hearts and Tryer of the Reins, for to discover all evil
and disaffected Persons and private Traitors daily, both by Sea and Land; that
so they may be put to Shame and Confusion. And we will heartily pray, That the
everlasting Arms may be underneath their Majesty's King William and Queen Mary,
that they may be compassed about with the Favor and Protection of the
Almighty, and prosper in all their ways: But let all their Enemies, O our God,
fall down and flee before them and their Arms! Amen. What can Rebels expect at
the Hands of the Immortal King, which is immutable and most faithful? But that
he should command such unfaithful Persons to be bound Hand and Foot, and cast
among their Fellows, the Apostate Angels, there to be kept in everlasting
Chains, under Darkness, and to dwell with devouring Fire and everlasting
Burnings. For the terrible and most holy God declares to us, That he equally
abhors both the Blood thirsty and deceitful treacherous Man: And wise Solomon
tells us, That whoso*provoketh the King to Wrath, and is deceitful to him, Sins
against his own Soul, Prove. 20. 2. He means thus, That the Soul of a Traitor
shall suffer in the World to come, although his Body may escape it here on Earth.
For be it known unto all Men, That a King that rules in the fear of the Lord,
and according to the Truth of his holy Word, can never be honored or obeyed
enough by his Subjects; and ought to be prized as dear unto that Kingdom, as
the Eye to the Body; and is as necessary for its Prosperity as the Sun is to
the Firmament, which gives both Light and Life, and makes all the Earth become
fruitful. That Counsel of Vegetius unto a Prince, is not to be despised; What
you have to do, confer with many; what ye will do, with very few, or none but
your own self: For there are no better Counsels, than those which the Enemy
knows not, before they are put in Execution. But to speak to you that are
employed by their Majesty's in this Holy War, Let me charge you, before God and
the Lord Jesus Christ, and the Elect Angels, for to hold fast your Loyalty,
your Allegiance and Obedience unto our gracious King and Queen, without
wavering: And make it one part of your business for to provoke one another
daily thereunto, now in these evil Days (above all other times) and so much the
more as you see or hear of the hour of Battle approaching: Wherein I I question
not, but the strong God, will manifest his great Power and mighty Arm unto the
World, and especially against your Enemies, in your behalf, if you do but trust
in him, and call upon him duly by Prayer.

But in the next place, as this ought to caution and admonish every one in the
whole Nation, to beware of disaffected Persons and Traitors: So in a more
peculiar manner to take good heed of provoking the most-high God to Anger,
against us or our Hosts, by our unrepented of and unmortified Sins. We know
that Righteousness exalts a Nation, but Sin is a Reproach to any People: And
for it the Land it self mourns, and the Fleet and Army is in no small danger;
because the weight of our National Transgressions, do outweigh others (I am
afraid) in the Balance of the Sanctuary.

Oh that all persons then from the highest to the lowest would but seriously
turn to God, with Fasting, Weeping, and Mourning! Oh that the whole Nation,
would but be of one Mind and Heart, upon our Solemn Fast Days; and wrestle with
God by Prayer, as Jacob did with the Angel, and not let him go, until he had
blessed us, and our Forces! I would to God, I could prevail with you all, for
to consider the case of the Murmuring, complaining, unbelieving Israelites; and
so to be warned and repent. For does not the Apostle tell us, in most plain
Words; That these things happened unto the Israelites for Examples, and are
Written for our Admonition, upon whom the ends of the World are come? (Mark)
That we should not be Idolaters, as were some of them; That we should not
commit Fornication, as did some of them, and fell in one Day three and twenty
Thousand: That we should not swear, or take the Name of God in vain as did some
of them, and were destroyed of the destroyer: That we should not have in us
evil Hearts of unbelief and so provoke the Majesty of Heaven, to refuse to go
forth with our Hosts, 1 Cor. 10. 6. to 12. There are three Vices, or Sins,
especially above all others (noted by Historians) which bring danger, and
public Punishment, and Calamity unto a Kingdom or People, ( viz.) Ungodliness,
Injustice, and Luxuriousness. Ungodliness troubles the Church, Injustice the
vulgar People; and Luxuriousness private Families: And the hurt in special,
redounds to the whole Nation. Therefore, Salmoxes Counsel is not amiss, saying,
that these Things should by all means be avoided, by every one that fears God
(namely) Sluggishness from the Body, Ignorance from the Mind, Gluttony from the
Belly, Sedition and Faction from the Church and Nation, Discord from the
Family, Disloyalty and Treachery from the Governors and Government,
Intemperance from all things, and above all other, Sin and Iniquity from every
true Christian. Oh that these Rules were but generally followed, and practiced
throughout our whole Nation, that so the everlasting Father of Lights might
prosper us in our Labors and Arms.

But, let me address my self in a more especial manner, unto you who are gone
forth to war against the Enemy: You have heard here, how the People of Israel
provoked the infinite Majesty of Heaven and Earth to Wrath, by their evil Ways,
and sinful Actions; and caused the most Great and Terrible God* (who was their
Helper and Defender) to depart from them, and leave them to the will of their
Enemies, insomuch that they were smitten of them, sundry times. Oh! that this
may be a warning unto all, from the highest to the lowest: And an effectual
argument, to prevail with every one of you, both Officers and Soldiers, for to
leave off your most horrid Oaths, your profane Speeches, your dissolute
Actions, your intemperate drinkings, etc. And to give your selves wholly unto
the contrary Virtues; As to the denying all Ungodliness, and Worldly Lusts; And
to live soberly, Righteously and Godly the remainder of your Days: And if you
do thus, then you may justly hope for the Blessing of God Almighty, upon your
endeavors, and (upon good Ground) expect to prosper in that employment
whereunto ye are called. But, if you still do wickedly; If you still continue
in Sin, and disobey the Commandments of God, Can you reasonably think that the
Lord of Hosts, will abide with you; or take your part against the Enemy? Oh no,
he is a most just, and Holy God, who will by no means clear the guilty: But
will execute the fierceness of his Wrath against you, until he has destroyed
you from off the Face of the Earth, and blotted out your Names from under
Heaven. We have the Testimony of the Holy Ghost for this and many examples in
the Sacred Scriptures: As the old World which was drowned, Sodom and Gomorrah
destroyed with Fire and Brimstone from Heaven; The Galileans, on whom the Tower
of Siloam fell, etc. And then in Profane History, we Read that in the third
Year, after that Pompey had won Jerusalem (Valerius Gracchus, being President
of Judea) a certain Jew, came to the Senate of Rome, for to complain of the
grievances, and injustice done in that Country, by their Magistrates, etc. And
among other expressions, he spoke thus. O Learned Fathers! O happy People! your
Blessed Destinies that favored you, and our angry God, who has forsaken us
for our Sins, has now made the famous Metropolitan City of Jerusalem, once the
Commander of all Asia, and Mother of the Jews, Subject and Servant unto Rome,
and to you Romans. Great indeed was the Courage and Power of Pompey, and great
was his Army that overcame us. But I will tell you, much greater was the Wrath
and Fury of our God; And without comparison, the Number of our Sins, for which
we have deserved to be utterly overthrown. It is worthy to be noted by you all,
that whatsoever People, or Nation, Fleet, or Army, does press the Lord down
most, with the Weight and Burden of Sin; That Nation, or People, shall be sure
to feel most of Gods heavy* Hand upon it, Amos 2. 13. And thus the Justice of
the most High will perform, for it is gone out of his Lips, and he cannot
Reverse it, That he will render unto a People according to its deservings.
Therefore it highly concerns the whole Nation in general; and you (of the Fleet
and Army) in particular, for to give Glory to the Lord our God, before he cause
Darkness of Calamity or Captivity; and before our Feet Stumble upon the Dark
Mountains; and while we look for Light: Lest he turn it into the Shadow of
Death, and make it gross Darkness, Jer. 13. 16. The Prophets meaning is thus,
according to Bishop Tailor upon it. Repent of all your Wickedness, before the
Almighty come to search and find us out, by his heavy Judgments; And that while
we have time and opportunity afforded us: And this is the only means (through
the Blood of Jesus Christ) for to appease Divine Wrath, Revel. 16. 9. And they
repented not to give Glory to God. Oh let us all then be persuaded to break off
all our Sins, by Righteousness; for it may be a lengthening of our Happiness,
and an Infallible Means to cause the Lord to destroy our Enemies. Rebel not ye
against, etc.

Secondly, that God only, is the best and safest defense of his Church against
her Adversaries. And this Truth may appear (1) From the Attributes and Titles
of God, in the Holy Scriptures, and (2) By the manifold deliverances of his
Church and People in all Ages, of the World. First from the Attributes, and
Titles of God; He is most Holy, and therefore in the first place, we may with
great safety trust in him, and rely on his Word and Promise, for help in time
of trouble, and he will deliver us. For this is no mean Comfort unto his
Church, that the Lord is Righteous in all his Ways, and Holy in all his Works:
And therefore he will not forsake a Holy Nation, nor a Repenting Praying
People. He never leaves off a Kingdom unto it self, until it first leaves him
by unholyness and filthy conversation; and therefore (I Pray) let us all
Worship the Lord, with a Holy Worship. Secondly, he is most Wise, and therefore
no Policy or Subtilty of his Adversaries can inveigle him: He sees all their
Snares, and Conspiracies, and all their secret Thoughts, and has them in
derision: For he takes the Wise in their own Craftiness, and makes Diviners
mad.

Thirdly, he is most able, and of greatest Power and Might; and hence he
encourages his Servant Abraham, saying, I am the Almighty God, walk before me,
and be thou perfect, Genesis 17 1. Then for his Titles; He is called Jehovah, or
rather Jehueh, which signifies his being is of himself, Esa. 42. 8. and he is
called Elohim, which denotes the Glorious Trinity, Elohim, Bara; The Mighty
God, or the three Persons in the Trinity, Ben, Rua, Ab, the Son, the Spirit,
and the Father. He is called, El, which is as much, as strong God, and
signifies, That God is not only most strong, and Fortitude it self in his own
Essence: But it is he alone that gives Strength and Power unto all his People;
and hence it was, that the Holy and Blessed Jesus in his Agony on the Cross,
Cried out, Eloi, Eloi, which in the Syrian Tongue signifies my strong God, my
strong God, etc. He is called in another place, Shaddai, which is Almighty; the
Septuagint Translates it by, (...), it is a derivative Word, and comes from
Dai, sufficiency, (...), Essentia qua sibi suisque sufficit; And of Shad, a Dug
or Breast: To signify, that God is all-sufficient and able to supply the wants
and necessities of his Children, whatsoever they are, like the huge Ocean,
which fills every Creek; which the Shallow narrow Rivulets of the Creatures
largest and best perfections cannot do. Hence the Church says, the Lord is her
Portion and therefore she will hope in him, Lamen. 3. 24. And David says his
People shall not want any thing that is good. Another Title of God is, Jah; and
this is given to him, when he has wrought some Notable Deliverance; and
therefore says the Psalmist, Extol him that Rides upon the Heavens, by his
Name Jah, and Rejoice before him, Psalm 68. 4. And again, the Lord is my Rock
and my Fortress, and my Deliverer; The God of my Rock, in him will I trust: he
is my Shield, and the Horn of my Salvation, my high Tower, and my Refuge my
Savior, etc. 2 Samuel 22. 2, 3. Who then can be a Defense like unto God
Almighty, who has always in a readiness, for the help and Redemption of his
Church and People out of the greatest dangers, and to Rescue them out of the
Hands of their most inveterate Enemies at his own Pleasure, (besides his own
Omnipotent Arm, the least Finger whereof can beat down the strongest Mountain
to Powder, and rend the Flintiest Rock into Pieces) innumerable Hosts, or
Armies of Angels, one of which killed in the Camp of the Assyrians, one Hundred
fourscore and five Thousand in one Night, 2 King. 19. 35. Chariots of Fire,
even a Thousand Thousand, in the Whirlwind? That fair Glorious Giant, which
with incredible swiftness runs, Day by Day, Post through the Heavens, for to
stand still, or retire, as it did at Joshua's Command. The impetuous Current of
the raging Sea, to recoyl or go back: The Merciless Flames of the hungry Fire
to become a sweet refreshing Air: The implacable Fury of the most enraged
Lions, to Couch at the first Word, for his Servants sake and safety: Nay, if
need be, the great and terrible God, has Caterpillars and Frogs, Worms and
Lice, even those impotent silly Creatures for to fetch Blood, and pull down the
Pride and Heart of the most Rebellious Pharaoh, and to eat out the very Bowels
of the most cruel Herod, see Acts. 12. 23. And immediately the Angel of the
Lord smote him, and he was eaten of Worms, and gave up the Ghost.

Secondly, By the manifold Deliverances of his Church and People in all Ages of
the World, we have a Cloud of Witnesses to confirm this: But I shall confine my
self unto some few. Was not the Almighty only, the best Defense unto righteous
Noah in that terrible Flood which drowned all the World, except 8 Persons? To
the Patriarchs, Abraham, Isaac and Jacob? To Abraham against Abimelech King of
Gerar; and also when he rescued his Brother Lot out of the Hands of the
Enemies? To Isaac, when he was taken and bound, and laid upon the Altar just
ready to be sacrificed by Abraham; yea, so near the point was he, that his
Fathers hand was lifted up with the Knife, but yet an Angel of the Lord stayed
him. To Jacob against Esau his Brother, and Laban his Father in Law. Unto the
Seed of Jacob, or People of Israel in Egypt, and in the Wilderness. Unto Moses
in the Bulrushes, David in Readiness Court, and Jeremiah and Baruch against
Jehoiakim King of Judah, when he sent to destroy them for their Prophesies; for
though they were commanded to hide themselves, yet its said, The Lord hid them,
Jer. 36. 19, 26. Alas! our own hiding will not do, it must be Gods; our now
clasping our Arms about our selves, is the ready way to drown us; whereas
spreading our Hands forth to Heaven, may save us. Then in the new Testament,
Was not the Lord of Hosts the best Defense unto Peter, when he was kept in
Prison by four Quaternons of Soldiers? To Paul when he delivered him out of the
Lion's Mouth, 2 Timothy 4. 17. And what are the 121st. and 124th. Psalms, but a
Confirmation of this Truth? Does not the Church say, If the Lord himself had
not been on our side, when Men rose up against us, they had swallowed us up
quick when they were so wrathfully displeased at us? But to come down to
Examples in the last Century of the World; Was not the great and mighty God,
the best Defense to Q. Elizabeth (of blessed Memory) and these Kingdoms; when
all Europe conspired together against her, and sent the Spanish Fleet (which
was termed the Invincible Armado, by reason of its Strength and number of
Ships) for to overthrow her, and introduce Popery into this Nation? But alas!
how suddenly was this great Fleet overcome and dispersed, here and there about
the British Seas, by her grand Defense, even our God! To K. James I. and our
Nation, when that horrid Powder Plot was discovered, and laid open by the
unsearchable Wisdom and Goodness of the Lord; that cruel Plot, I say, which was
hatched in Hell, and carried on with the greatest Secrets, by those Engines of
Beelzebub, and Soul-Deceivers and Murderers, the Jesuits and Priests of the
Roman Faction, which said, God and Man had concurred to punish the Iniquity of
the Times. But to come to some Examples in our Days, which our Eyes have seen,
and Ears heard. Oh was not the Lord Jehovah the best Defense of that mighty
Prince of Valor (now our gracious K. William) and his whole Fleet, in the
midst of very a terrible Storm, raised, no doubt, by the Prince of the Power of
the Air, on behalf of his Children of Darkness, to obstruct our Landing? But
the mighty God and terrible, was with us, and delivered us all from the Peril
of the Seas, bringing us back to Hell-voot Sluice. And after that we had offered
to him there, the Sacrifice of Praise and Thanksgiving, for so merciful a
Deliverance, and tarried there about 11 days, then did Almighty God send us a
fair Wind, which brought us all safely into Torbay, where our most renowned and
blessed Prince landed. And we were no sooner come into the Bay, but the
everlasting Arms were about us, and changed the Wind, which hindered our then
Adversaries from pursuing us. Who dares deny bu^ this was the Lords own doing,
and ought not to be forgotten of this Nation, but to be mavelous in our Eyes?
For here was the Finger of God, as our very Enemies confessed. And afterward
when we were come to Exeter, how wonderfully did the Almighty turn the Hearts
of this whole Nation, and the opposite Army, as the Heart of one Man, toward
this most valorous and mighty Prince, insomuch that very little or no Blood was
shed in this blessed and glorious Revolution! Again, was not the living and
true God, the best Defense unto our most gracious Sovereign Lord K. William and
his Army, when he passed the River at Drogheda (vulgarly called the River Boyn)
when as the Enemy was so advantagiously encamped: Yet how soon did the Lord
strike Terror into all their Hearts, and they fled before us? Oh there is no
question to be made, but that the eternal Majesty of Heaven and Earth sheltered
our gracious King under his mighty Wings, and encompassed him about with his
Favor and Protection; and we hope and pray that he will still do so unto him
for ever and ever.

Here is then a very sharp Reproof unto all wicked and unbelieving Hearts, who
are even distracted and at their Wits end, at the very noise of a giddy
Multitude: As if the everliving and terrible Majesty of Heaven and Earth, even
the Lord Jehovah's Hand was shortened: As if he was not as able to bless and
preserve their most excellent Majesty's, in these days, as he was in our
Forefathers time. Or, as if he could not cover them and this Nation with the
mighty Wings of his Providence, from all Perils and Dangers of the Enemy now,
as he has done all along. Oh take notice then, all ye faint-hearted, faithlels
and unbelieving Souls, of those words of the Prophet Jeremiah, Chap. 32. 18,
19, 27. Behold I am the great, the mighty God, the Lord of Hosts is my Name. I
am the God of all Flesh, great in Counsel and mighty in Work: Is there any
thing too hard for me? Are you so foolish and unwise as to think, that all the
Plots, Conspiracies and Devices, which are against my faithful Servants (who
fulfill my Will) shall ever prevail? Do you imagine that I, who am the most just
and righteous Governor of the World, do not regard those my Deputies, which
rule according to the Truth of my holy Word, and are a Terror to the Evil, and
a Praise to them that do well? I tell you plainly, That no Weapon formed
against such holy Princes shall prosper: For I who am the great King of Heaven
and Earth, will certainly pull down all such as walk contrary to my Laws; and I
will bring to naught the Adversaries of my Church, like Lambs to the Slaughter.
And the mighty Men of Babylon shall tremble for fear, and forbear to fight:
They shall remain in their Holds and in their Camps, their Might and Strength
shall fail 'em, and they shall be beaten and destroyed. One Post shall run to
meet another, and one Messenger shall hasten to meet his Fellow: To show the
King of Babylon, the great and terrible Works of the most high God, what
Desolations or what an Overthrow the Lord (whose Name is Jehovah) has wrought
for his own Heritage, against their Adversaries. And then shall Tidings be
spread through the Earth, that the Babylonish Forces by Sea and Land, are
utterly confounded. For every purpose of the Lord against Nebuchadnezzar King
of Babylon shall be performed; to make him know and feel, that God alone is to
be feared throughout the whole Earth. And though he has devoured the Heritage of
the Lord, yet his Heart shall melt away for fear, and for those things which
are coming upon him, Jer. 51. 30, 31, 33, 40. Alas! what if the Adversaries of
the Lord have gotten a second Chrysippus among 'em, which probably may be able
to speak well of every thing? Or what if they have a second Achitophel? But to
go higher, What if they have a second Aristotle, or a second Solomon? Yet still
so long as we have the Almighty, most terrible and all wise for our Defense,
who is the Fountain of all Wisdom and Knowledge, and the Giver of Courage and
Strength, Deliverance and Salvation, we need not to care. Suppose we want some
of the Beams, so we have but the Sun it self: And what matter is it, if we want
some of the Streams, when we have the pure Spring? Nay, corrupt Streams and
muddy, and deceitful Branches are very unwholesome and infectious unto the Body
Politic; and therefore if they are dried up or wasted, we need not to care.
But now for the Church of God to hold fast together, and to be (...), with one
Heart in one place, is a very good and joyful thing, and no doubt exceeding
acceptable in the sight of God our heavenly Father. And I hope every one that
has the fear of God before his Eyes, and the least regard to the welfare of
their Majesty's and their Kingdoms, or to their own Salvation, will not be
remiss in joining with the Church in Prayer, upon our solemn Fast-days. For
though it cannot be denied, but that the effectual fervent Prayer of one
righteous Man, avails much; yet it must be granted, that the joint Prayers of a
Congregation, or rather of the whole Church, prevail infinitely more. One Stick
may make a Fire, but many Sticks put together will make a great and hot Fire:
One String of an Instrument may make a sound, but many Strings a melodious
Harmony. One single Prayer in our Closets may be a Sacrifice, but the Prayers
of a whole Kingdom makes a Sacrifice to God, of a sweet smelling Savor; and
therefore the Psalmist calls the public Prayers of the Church, a worshipping
of the Lord in the Beauty of Holiness, Psalm. 29. 2. We read of those Worthies
how courageous they were, for to keep Faith and a good Conscience: Yea, so
valiant for the Lord's cause, that they loved not their Lives unto Death.
Hence, says that Champion of the Apostles, None of these things move me,
neither count I my Life dear unto my self, so that I may finish my Course with
Joy, etc. Saviat persequendo, nihil in me moritur nisi mortale, erit in me
aliquid ubi persecutor pervenire non possit, ubi Deus meus habitat. Let Man be
never so sharp in persecuting, yet nothing dies in me, but what is mortal:
Nevertheless there will be something in me, at which the cruel Persecutor
cannot come; where my blessed God dwells. Whom have I in Heaven but thee (O
Lord) and there is none upon Earth that I desire beside thee!

But as this reproves all wicked and unbelieving Hearts, so in the next place,
it is no small Encouragement, unto all the Servants of the most high God, for
to fear him and serve him in Truth, with a perfect Heart and willing Mind. For
it is an undeniable Assertion, That such a Kingdom or People, cannot be moved
or shaken by any terrible Blasts of the Devil or his Instruments, who has the
eternal Lord for its Strength and Defense. And I may truly say, that there are
no times so very Perilous, nor Days so very Evil, but that they may be made
easy and happy unto every Child of God, and Believer in Jesus Christ. I mean,
the dangerousness and badness of these times (which many groundlesly and
unjustly complain of) may be reduced to an equality, with the Peace, Safety and
Comfort of better times: Yea, may be made equal unto the best of Days, which
this present World commonly affords unto the Church militant. As the sharpness
of a very cold and pinching Season, may (by a proportionable addition of warm
Clothes, the use of good Fires, and the like) be made as little offensive to a
Man's Constitution, as a temperate Season is: Or as a Man who is shut up close
in a most strong or impregnable Castle, and is there sufficiently provided and
stored with all things necessary; as Men, Arms, Money, Powder, Ball, etc. Is in
as much or rather more safety and freer from all danger (although he be
encompassed about and besieged by his inveterate and implacable Enemies at the
same time) than another Man is, who has no Enemies at all, seemingly near him.
In like manner, when once a Man has the great and mighty God for his Defense,
and the covering of his Almighty Wings spreading over him and underneath him,
the everlasting Arms which Moses speaks of, Deuteronomy. 32. 27. Then what Bullets
soever are flying about him, what Cannons soever are roaring against him, what
Storms soever are rising, what Waves or Billows soever are raging, what Enemies
soever are Plotting, yea, what Perils or Dangers soever he may be seemingly in;
yet notwithstanding all, he is most safe, he is most secure in God, who is a
firm Rock, near a most raging Sea; a sure Shield amidst Showers of envenomed
Darts. And it is one and the same thing unto such a Man, for to be in the very
midst of a Battle, either by Sea or Land, among the thundering Guns and Showers
of small Shot, which falls round about him like Hail; as to be in the Walks of
a most pleasant Garden, and hear the sweetest singing of Birds. The sound of
Alarm by a Drum or Trumpet, is as acceptable to him, as the voice of the
Turtle: Because he can always, and in every place, rejoice in the Lord, and joy
in the God of his Salvation, as the Church does, Hab. 3. 18. Alas! A Man can
but be safe, a Man can but be secure, and at rest and ease in his Mind, if he
lived in those halcion Days, or golden Times, prophesied of by the Psalmist*
When the Mountains shall bring Peace to the People, and the ^^ttle Hills
Righteousness, Psalm. 72. 3. That is to say, when neither High nor Low, King nor
People, shall be troublesome one to another, nor disturb each other: But the
Wolf also shall dwell with the Lamb, and the Leopard shall lie down with the
Kid, and the Calf and the young Lion, and the fatling together, and a little
Child shall lead them. Verily the condition of a true Child of Light and Heir
of Glory, (be he in the Wars either by Sea or by Land, abroad or at home) is
always thus blessed and happy, thus at ease and rest in his own Breast and
Conscience, because he is kept in perfect Peace, by him who is the Prince of
Peace. Whereas it is far otherwise with an ungodly wicked Man, who is like the
troubled Sea, when it cannot rest, whose Waters cast up Mire and Dirt. There is
no Peace, says my God, to the Wicked. You then that are gone forth to War,
against the Enemies of the Lord and his Church, whether you are by Land or by
Water, let me beseech you in Christ's stead and for his sake, to receive this
wholesome and profitable Advice, and let it take deep Root in all your Hearts,
and be continually in your Mind. Trust ye in the Lord Jehovah for ever, for in
the Lord Jehovah is everlasting Strength; for he brings down them that are
Proud, and exalts the Humble and Meek, Isa. 26. 4. 5. What could you wish for
more than Strength? Yes, but here is everlasting Strength. What could you
desire more than Defense? Yes, But here is Defense and Safety, Courage and a
Blessing. Oh our gracious and merciful God has always some Twigs left, for to
preserve and keep his elect People above Water, when they suspect themselves to
be most in danger. For he has either the Castle of his Providence, the Ark of
his Promise, or the All sufficiency of his Grace and Goodness, for the safety
and retirement of his Children and Servants, in the greatest of Storms: How did
he defend David and his little Company, when Saul and his Army had almost
encompassed him about? Alas! you must expect to meet with some rubs in your way
toward the Celestial Canaan, and through many Tribulations you must enter into
the Kingdom of God: Non est ad astra mollis e terris via; all true Christians
know well, that the Church is militant here on Earth, and therefore the Saints
commonly sow here in Tears, that they may reap hereafter in Joy: We must all
expect to fight the Lords Battle here on Earth, which St. Paul terms a good
sight; that we may acquire the Victory and receive our Crown of Righteousness
and Glory in Heaven, where there is no Enemy or Opposition; for all are there
of one Mind and Heart, praising God with Peace and Joy in the Holy Ghost. Here
we must all run the Christian Race which is set before us, by our Lord and
Savior, with Patience and Alacrity; that we may obtain the Prize, or that
Incorruptible Crown, which the Lord the righteous Judge bestows on such. Here is
the place appointed for us to work in, while it is day; or rather the Lord's
Vineyard. But in the Kingdom of Heaven are we to expect, and receive our Wages
when our Work is done, or our Course finished: For there is the rest which
remains for the People of God. Wherefore then should any rational Soul think to
find that in this World, which God has reserved for the World to come, when we
shall see him Face to Face? Oh what Fleet or Army is there on Earth, or in the
whole World, that can harm you, if ye be Followers of God, as dear Children,
and Doers of that which is good and well-pleasing in his Sight? What human
Force or Power can possibly be able to stand before, or against you, if your
Hearts are but perfect toward God? For the Eyes of the Lord run to and fro
throughout the whole Earth, to show himself strong in the behalf of them, whose
Hearts are perfect toward him; and who sincerely endeavor to walk in his
Laws, which he set before us, 2 Chronicles. 16. 9. Therefore let me desire of you
all for to take heed now, above all other Times, that your Hearts be perfect
toward God and his Church, toward our most gracious Sovereign Lord and Lady,
King William and Queen Mary, toward the good and welfare of our Land and
Nation; and in the last place toward one another; that Officers may love the
Soldiers under their Command, and the Soldiers be obedient and faithful unto
their Officers: And then the Lord of Hosts will bless and prosper you
whithersoever ye go, and in whatsoever you do. But on the other Hand, if ye
Backbite and Quarrel, and prove Treacherous one to another, ye shall be
destroyed one of another: For they are the Words of none other but our great
Lord and Master himself: That a Kingdom, a House, or Army, or Fleet, divided
against it self cannot stand, but must fall into Desolation. And hence we find,
that the Children of Israel said unto Joshua their Captain and Governor, That
whosoever he be that does rebel against thy Commandment, and will not hearken
unto thy Words in all that thou command him, he shall be put to death, Josh.
1. ult. Whosoever he be that proves treacherous to our blessed Governors and
present Government, and will not obey their Majesty's order in all Punctilio's,
he shall be dealt with as a Rebel and Traitor, and no regard had to his
Commission, because he has proved disloyal to his Prince. This is the Law of
the most high God, concerning this Matter: Therefore Rebel not ye against the
Lord, neither fear ye the People of the, etc.

Thirdly and Lastly, That to fear the Lord of Hosts himself, and not the Arm of
Flesh, or to be very Courageous in fighting God's Battle, is a Duty required of
all his People (but especially of those which are called thereunto by Lawful
Authority) and a principal means for to keep the Lord with or among such a
People or Army. The truth of this Lesson we may see confirmed to us in the case
of the Israelites, here in this Chapter of our Text. For we read, that they, by
their Fear and Faint-heartedness, by their Unbelief and Cowardice (when God had
commanded them not to fear or to be afraid at the outward Strength and Power
of their Enemies, the Amorites and Canaanites) thereby tempted the Lord, and
provoked him to Wrath, because he was their Strength and Defense, and fought
all their Battles, insomuch that he forsook 'em and departed: Whereupon the
Prophet Moses tells them, that they should not prosper. For the Lord is not
among you, and therefore go not up against the Enemy (says he) lest you be
smitten of them: And so they were indeed, when God their Helper and Defender
was not with them; see verse. 41, 42, 44, 45. So the Lord of Hosts, the mighty
God and terrible, sent his Spirit upon Jahaziel, and commanded him to tell
Jehoshaphat, saying, Thus says the Lord unto you, be not afraid nor be
dismayed, by reason of this great Multitude; for the Battle is not yours, but
Gods. To morrow go out very Courageously against them, for the Lord will be
with you, 2 Chronicles. 20. 1^, 17. Again, the Almighty tells Joshua not to fear,
saying, Have not I commanded thee? Be strong and of good Courage, be not
afraid, neither be thou dismayed; for the Lord thy God is with thee,
whithersoever thou go, Josh. 1. 9. So in the Words of our Text, Rebel not ye
against the Lord, neither fear ye, etc.

We might bring in a multitude a Texts to the like purpose: But we shall
content our selves with one or two more, out of the New Testament. And the
first is that of our Lord and Savior unto his Disciples then, and to us, even
us, now, saying, Fear not them which kill the body, but are not able to kill
the soul: but rather fear him which is able to destroy both body and soul in
^ill, Matthew. 10. 28. The same Charge is given to Paul, Act. 18. 9, 10. Be not
afraid, for I am with thee, etc. Rev. 2. 10. Fear none of those things which
thou shall suffer, etc. I suppose these Texts are a sufficient Testimony to
prove, That Courage and Valor in Times of War, when God calls us to fight his
Battle, is not only commended, but also required of all his People (and
especially of those appointed thereunto, by lawful Authority*) and a principal
means, to keep the Lord of Hosts with, and among such a People. It now remains,
that we sum up all, and bring it somewhat nearer unto our selves, in this
pusillanimous and Faithless Generation.

What then must we say unto very many in this Age, who are afraid at the very
shaking of an Aspen-leaf, and hide themselves at the beat of a Drum, or sound
of a Trumpet? Let me ask them, if they think such Pusillanimity is decent, in
any one who is called a Man, much more whether it be consentaneous to one that
names the Name of Christ, to fear and be dismayed, where no fear is: And at
the same Time to stand in no awe of the mighty God and terrible, the supreme
Governor of Heaven and Earth, who is glorious in Holiness, fearful in Praises,
doing Wonders? Alas, Alas! this cowardice or timidity of Spirit is a grand
Shame for any Soldier of Christ, the Captain of our Salvation, to be guilty of;
and it commonly hinders those from the punctual Performance of their Duty, who
are such fearful Hearts, as we may see in Nicodemus, a Ruler of the Jews, who
(for fear) durst not openly confess Christ, or come by Day (lest he should be
seen of the Jews) to be taught in that heavenly Doctrine of Regeneration, or the
new Birth, by him who had the Words of Eternal Life, and spoke as never Man
speaks. But on the other Hand, the true fear of God and Christian Courage in
the Heart of a Believer, makes him (in Solomon's Phrase) to be as bold as a
Lion, and puts him upon any thing, even the most perilous Attempts, in
Obedience to Gods Holy Will and Commandments, and in Duty and Allegiance to his
Prince: This was it which moved little David to encounter with the Giant
Goliath, the Champion of the Philistines; he heard his words, how he defied
Israel, and saw they were all afraid and dismayed, and therefore he resolves
with himself to go and Fight him, and he came to King Saul, and said, Let no
Man's Heart fail, because of him; thy Servant will go and Fight with this
Philistine, 1 Samuel 17. 23, 32. Yea, such a Man as serves the Supreme Majesty of
Heaven and Earth in sincerity and truth, and is a Soldier of the Holy Jesus in
Deed, as well as Profession, will not only be ready to Aid and Assist his
Prince with what Money he can possibly, against an Enemy of Truth and Peace,
but, with David, he will go himself, and defy that Philistine to his Face, who
has defied his God and his King. And so Paul himself, an Apostle, or rather
chief of the Apostles of Jesus Christ, is not only ready to be Bound, but also
to Die at Jerusalem, for the Name of his Master, and the Testimony of a good
Conscience: So that we who are, or have been, in the Wars, and have showed
Courage for the Gospel sake, and against the Children of Babylon, need not to
be cast down at the sharp reflections of some who pretend to be of our Church,
but God knows their hearts, for they not only are remiss themselves, in
stirring up the people to be Courageous in Gods Cause, and be steadfast and
faithful unto Their Majesty's in these times of War, but they take occasion to
upbraid such as do their Duty in this Nature. For my own part, I must speak in
the Gospel words, He that is not with us, or for us, is undoubtedly against us.
I can easily prove this, for its a palpable Truth, That whosoever grows not
daily in Grace, is going backwards from the Region of the Blessed. Go we must,
and go we do daily, there is no standing still, because our Glass is running,
and our Time flies away as a swift Ship, or as the Eagle that hastes to the
Prey. Either we must walk in the Paths of Righteousness, or else, we must
wander in the broad way. So these close sort of People must either follow God
or Baal; they must, and do, adhere more to Their Majesty's, or else their
Enemies in their Hearts, for they can never be Neuters in real Truth. And
therefore he who always praises the French Arms, does Tacitly dispraise Their
Majesty's. He that Justifies the Wicked, and he that Condemns the Just, are
equally an Abomination to the Lord, as Solomon tells us, Prove. 17. 15. And
these sort of People are to be avoided. I confess, there are not lacking
another sort, who Asperse, and have Aspersed, this Saint-like Valor in the
Servants of the most High God, calling it Ignorance, Fool-hardiness, Pride of
Heart, and Folly; when as it is indeed, and in truth, nothing else but true
Christian Courage, or Fortitude, a Noble stedfastness of Mind and Spirit, which
will by no means warp, or swerve, from its Allegiance to our Governors, or be
Terrified with any Humane Puissance, or any outward Terribleness, or
Amazements: No, nor will it be discouraged at Death it self, or at all the
Powers of Darkness. Such was that Courage of David, who says, Though I walk
through the Valley of the Shadow of Death, I will fear no Evil, for thou art
with me, thy Rod and thy Staff they Comfort me, Psalm. 23. 4. It was an
excellent Answer, that a certain Eminent Servant of God, made unto one of the
Emperors, when he was Threatened for his Religion, I fear not Imprisonment,
because I can have there as much freedom with my best Friends, as now when I am
at liberty. As for Banishment, I defy it, for let me be driven into what
terrible Desert or Wilderness whatsoever, yet there shall I find my God. And I
look upon this World it self to be a Banishment of us all, for our first
Parents Sin and Transgression, Paradise being the true place of our Souls
Nativity. And as for Death, I long for it, that I may Triumph over it, through
Jesus Christ, (and what am I now but a mere Skeleton, even worn away to Skin
and Bones,) and that is the passage unto Eternal Life, and Everlasting Joy. Oh
what can we say to all Pusillanimous Persons, that are afraid to serve the
King, or their Country, in the Wars, that dare not trust the Almighty Lord with
their Lives in a Camp, or Fleet, as well as here at home, although he is the
preserver as well as giver thereof, For in God we live, in him we move, and in
him we have our being, Acts 17. 28. Sure I am, that Fearfulness, and
Pusillanimity, are infallible Specimens and Signals of an Evil and Unbelieving
Heart; and the Portion of such, St. John says, is in the Lake that burns with
Fire and Brimstone. And it is for want of a well grounded Hope, and a firm
Faith in God's Mercy, through our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, that Men are
thus Fearful, which Hope the Children of God have, as an Anchor of their Souls,
both sure and steadfast, Heb. 6. 18. And therefore we have a Command for to
consider him that endured the Cross, and despised Death, and the shame thereof,
for our sakes. And again, look unto that Prince of Glory, who so willingly
offered up himself to Death, even a Cursed, Ignominious, and Painful Death: And
if we have but Faith, as a Grain of Mustard Seed, we cannot but be Courageous
and Valiant in his Cause, and for his Truth and Gospel-sake. What then so
dreadful a Face of present Confusion, or fore-imagined Forms of future Trouble
and Calamity, are able, (or ought Slavishly,) to Deject and Terrify that Holy
Soul, which with a sweet and safe Repose is most happily and everlastingly hid
under the Wings of that Mighty God whom it ought to trust, and who is the best
and safest Defense of all his People? That infinite Majesty of Heaven and
Earth, which for the Defense of all such as Fear him, and for their Deliverance
is able to work, (1.) By very weak means, as he did in Gideon's Army sometimes,
which was no more but Three Hundred against their Enemies the Midianites and
Amalekites, and all the Children of the East which were in the Valley, like
Grasshoppers for Multitude, and their Camels were without Number, as the Sand
by the Seaside, Judge. 7. 5, 6, 12. (2.) Without any means at all: Thus did he
when he destroyed Jehoshaphat's Enemies the Moabites and Ammonites, for says
the Text, 2 Chronicles. 20. 23. The Children of Ammon and Moab, stood up against the
Inhabitants of Mount Seir, utterly to slay, and to destroy them: And when they
had made an end of the Inhabitants of Seir, every one helped to destroy
another. (3.) Contrary to means, As when he made the Waters, which came down
from above, to stand and rise up upon an heap, and those that came down toward
the Sea of the Plain, even the Salt Sea, failed, and were cut off, Josh. 3. 13,
16. So that where the everlasting Jehovah is a Defense and Salvation, there
Heaven and Earth, and all the Hosts of both, are Eternally Reconciled to such a
Soul, and become its Friends: Yea, all the Storms and Tempests raised by all
the powers of Hell are presently Calmed, for ever doing such a one any Mortal
hurt. All the Creatures then pull in their Horns, retire their Stings, bite in
their Poison; Snubb'd, and Awed, by those Divine Impressions of their Creators
Blessed Image stamped on such a Soul by the Holy Spirit of Grace, and dare not
offer any more Trouble or Vexation to it, (except it be upon a particular
Dispensation for its Spiritual Good and Quickening,) than to the Apple of God's
Eye; hear his Holy Promise from his own Mouth, Hos. 2. 18. And in that Day I
will make a Covenant for them, (namely his Servants,) with the Beasts of the
Field, and with the Fowls of Heaven, and with the Creeping things of the
ground: And I will break the Bow, and the Sword, and the Battle, out of the
Earth, and I will make them to lie down safely. For I the Lord their God am
their Confidence, and I will keep their Foot from being taken, For I will set
every Man's Sword against his Fellow, in the Camp of my Peoples Enemies, as I
did for my Servant Gideon and his Army, Judges 7. 22.

In the last place, This ought to stir us all up, in these times of War, unto
this grand Duty of Courage and Boldness, in Fighting the Lords Battle, and
depending wholly and solely on him, and Imploring his Allsufficient Aid, and
Almighty Help. Oh let us down with the Mountains, and up with the Valleys, and
know no Fears, no Doubtings, no Discouragements; but like David's Worthies,
Which broke through the Host of the Philistines, and brought him of the Waters
of the Well of Bethlehem to drink: So let us every one make our way through all
the Reasonings and Disputings of Unbelief, into those Everlas^^^^ ^rms of God's
Free Grace, and Endless Mercy in Jesus Christ. For his Mercy and Assistance
toward those that Fear him, and Dread him, is without all stint, and limit,
like himself, (infinite,) so unmeasurable, that it reaches from everlasting to
everlasting. So tender, that it surpasses (incomprehensibly) the Compassionate
Heart-Meltings of the Lovingest Mother, Isa. 49. 15, 16. Can a Woman forget her
Sucking Child, that she should not have Compassion on the Son of her Womb? Yea,
they may forget, yet will I not forget thee. Behold, I have graven thee upon
the Palms of my Hands, thy Walls are continually before me. Let me tell you
then, that it is far more Generous, and Christ-like, for to Die a Martyr in the
Cause of God, and for his true Protestant Church, (if we are called thereunto,)
than to Live and Moulder away our Time and Strength without doing one tittle of
Good in our Generation. Alas! Within a little while, the Grinders will cease of
their own accord, and the Windows of our Eyes will be darkened, and the Doors,
(I mean those Pipes wherewith we draw our Breath) shut up fast: Alas! The
Pusillanimous Man, considers not how eagerly, and with what Industry, the old
Sexton, Time, (with his sharp Spade,) throws up the Earth and digs a Grave,
where we all, that are now here, must one Day lay our Sins and our Sorrows
together, and sow these Mortal Bodies till they rise again in a Glorious, or an
intolerable Eternity. Every Revolution which the Sun makes about the World,
divides between Life and Death; so that all those Days which we have lived
already are dead to us, and we shall never live them over again, Currit
mortalibus aevum, nec nasci bis posse datur, fugit hora rapitque, Tartareus
torrens, ac secum far sub umbras, siqua animo placuere negat --

Poor Mortals! we form our very Words, of that which is most near and dear to
us, even the Breath of our Nostrils, and therefore we have the less to live
upon, for every word which we speak, hence says the Prophet Isaiah, Chap. 2.
ult. Cease ye from Man, whose Breath is in his Nostrils, for wherein is he to
be accounted of? The Philosophers Taught, That there was no greater
Encouragement against all fear of Death, than to consider we must needs Die:
There is now an absolute Necessity thereof, or else we cannot obtain Life
Eternal, or come to the Glorious God of Life. And this was St. Paul's Argument
for to prove the Resurrection, That which thou sowest is not quickened except
it die. So these Natural Bodies must be dissolved into Dust and Corruption,
before they can be made Spiritual, and like unto Christ's Glorious Body. Oh
remember then, that the very Heathens Taught, That it was no small Honor to
Die for ones Country. But we Christians must confess, that it is the highest
Honor to Die for the Faith of Christ, and a good Conscience toward God. And
therefore let me bespeak you all, (...) in Their Majesty's Fleet and Army, in
the words of Joab, 2 Samuel 10. 12. Be of good Courage, and let us play the Men,
for our King and Queen, for our People, and for our Church of England, and the
Lord do that which seems good. Fear not, nor be afraid, but Sanctify the
Lord of Hosts himself, and let him be your Fear, and let him be your Dread, and
he shall be a Sanctuary to you. But for a Gin, and a Snare, and a Trap, to the
Adversaries of his Truth. Would you have the Crown of Life? Oh be you Valiant
and Faithful unto Death! Would you have the Great and Terrible God among you as
your Strength and Defense? Oh then let not Vain Thoughts Lodge in your Breast!
But cease to do Evil, and learn to do well. Would you be esteemed Worthies by
God, and Their Majesty's? then break through the Babylonish Army, and sink
their Idolatrous and Superstitious Fopperies into the bottom of the Sea. Would
you have your Memories Blessed, and your Names to be had in Everlasting
Remembrance, and the Generations to come for to Praise your Glorious and Noble
Deeds? Then, be sure, for to pull down some Monuments of Idolatry, and Raze out
some Relicts of Popery, for the Lord Jesus Christ's sake; and with Sampson
Aveng your selves of your Enemies at once, before you go hence, and be no more
seen* Rebel not ye against the Lord, etc. Amen, Amen, Amen.

FINIS.

