A LETTER OUT OF Lancashire TO A Friend in London, GIVING Some Account of the
Late Trials there: Together with some Seasonable and Proper Remarks upon it.

Recommended to the Wisdom of the Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament.

Among my People are found Wicked Men, they lay wait, as he that sells Wares,
they set a Trap, they Catch Men,

Jerome. 5.26. And they watched him, and sent forth Spies, which should feign
themselves Just Men, that they might take hold of his Words, that so they might
deliver him unto the Power and Authority of the Governors,

Luke 20.20. Printed in the Year, 1694.

A LETTER from Lancashire, etc.
SIR,
HOW astonishing soever the Report of the Late Trials in our Country, was with
you at London, I can assure you the thing it self was no less astonishing here,
but must more deeply affect us, according as it was more sensible to us; and
when we saw with our eyes, and heard with our ears, the great Scene of Villainy,
acted by a few Miscreants, which this or any Age has known, it struck us with
greater Horror and Amazement than any Narrative could, or can do, how true or
full soever.

I do fully agree with you, That such things as these do highly deserve the
Inquiry and Inspection of a Parliament, both to drive this Mystery of iniquity
to its true Originals, to search into the springs which influenced such
gracious Tools and Instruments, and comforted and supported them in this
Infamous and Hellish Design, and also to make such effectual Provision for the
future, that Innocent Men may hereafter be secured from having their Lives and
Estates sworn away by a Pack of Mercenary Villains.

In Answer therefore to yours, and to give them the best satisfaction I can, I
shall in the first place give you a short Account of the Material Evidences on
both sides; and then in the next place, make some proper Reflections in order to
discover the Principals, or who set these Monsters on work, were the Fomentors
and Abettors of the Design, and more guilty than the vile Instruments
themselves.

But before I enter upon this, I must Acquaint you of one necessary Defect,
that what I am going to say unavoidably labors under; I mean there is
something I would, but cannot describe, and that is the Transcendent and
Vnparallell'd Impudence of Lunt and his Partners; I can tell you their Words,
and the Material parts of their Evidence, but the Form, the Audacious Boldness
with which they delivered themselves, the Brow of Brass far surmounts all the
Language I was ever Master of, this therefore you must supply, and conceive as
well as you can; and if you have any Conception of Atheism and Blasphemy, if a
seared Conscience of the Air of Hell, and Obdurateness of Devils, from all
together perhaps you may frame some Idaea of it. And this you are to conceive
to be as the Soul to the Body of their Evidence, the whole in the whole, and
the whole in every part of it. And if to all and every Word of it, you join the
highest Impudence to the Perjury, it is the least Calculation I am able to give
you.

Thus (after the Formalities of the Court were over, as reading the Commission,
Calling over the Jury, etc.) on Thursday Morning Sir Giles Eyes gave the
Charge; I shall not give you the whole Speech, as not necessary, or if it were
so, not p^ssi^le; for though it was taken in shorthand, yet Sir Giles took
care to prevent the spreading, by tearing the Books of all those he observed to
write, yet what concerned the immediate Matter, was, that after an extolling
the Justice of the Court, the Folly of disturbing it, etc. he told them, That
it was the Treachery of their Ungrateful Countrymen which brought the trouble of
a special Commission upon them, that some of the Conspirators were Protestants
of the Church of England, as they called themselves; and though Popery and
Protestancy was like the Image of Nebuchadnezzar, whose sect was Clay and Iron,
which would not mix well together, yet that here they did both agree to disturb
the Peace, but there might be at least a lengthening our tranquillity, and that
others (deterred by their Punishment) might hear, and fear, and do no more so
wickedly, it was put into the hands of the Jury, to Hear, and to Accuse for
these Crimes which would be sworn before them: And Concluded, that he hoped
they would so behave themselves, that they should not need any C^mmendations
from him, but that their own Works should praise them.

In the Afternoon the Grand Jury found Four Bills of Indictment, One against
Sir Rowland Stanley, Sir Tho. Clifton, Mr. Dickenson, Mr. Langton, and Mr.
Blundel, and the other Three against the Lord Molineaux, Sir William Gerard,
and Mr. Walmsly, severally, upon Oath they were all Arraigned, Sir Will. Gerard
with great importunity begged Time till Saturday for his Trial, but was denied*
and Ordered to prepare for his Trial the next Morning by Nine: A Proposal was
then made to the said Gentlemen, Whether they would be Tried severally, or
jointly, and one of them Challenge for all, and they desired Time till next
Morning to give their Answers, and a Copy of the Panel, which was granted, and
a Copy delivered them, which contained about an Hundred Names. The next Morning
being brought into Court, they agreed to the Proposal, provided the Kings
Council would show the Cause of their Challenges at the same time they made
them, otherwise they would each of them insist on their Challenges; but that
was denied, and the Court told them, that unless they would without any
Conditions submit to the Proposal, one of their Trials should immediately
begin. This forced them to give their Consent, and then the Court told them
they should be Tried next Morning, and Ordered them to be taken away. And
immediately after they were gone, upon the Motion of Mr. Aaron Smith, the Court
Ordered near a Hundred more to be returned upon the Jury, and threatened the
Sheriff if he did not do it, and it was done accordingly.

An Order was also given to the Clerk of the Crown, That no Sub Paena's should
be made for any of the Prisoners, until the Names of the Witnesses were first
brought to some of the Judges, or to Mr. Aaron Smith.

On Saturday Morning the Prisoners were brought to the Bar, and the said
Gentlemen put upon their Trial; 120 of the Jury appeared, and the Kings Council
Challenged every Person who was either a Member of Parliament, Deputy
Lieutenant, or Justice so the Peace. The Names of some of them are, Sir Edw.
Chisenhall, Mr. Farrington, Mr. Maudesley, Mr. Blackhorn, Mr. Molineax, and in
all to the Number of Thirty Eight Men of great Note and Consideration in their
Country, and (which makes it more strange) have been active and rigorous for
the Interest of the Government in their respective Stations, and more
particularly as Commissioners for the raising of Money. The Gentlemen only
Challenged Twenty Four.

After the Jury was fixed and Sworn, etc. the Witnesses gave their Evidence: The
first for the King was Lunt, the Substance of whose Evidence was this, That in
June or July (which he is not certain) 1689. he delivered several Commissions
from King James to the said Gentlemen, met together at a Grand Consult at my
Lord Molineux's House at Croxton; upon which being asked, whether he knew that
these Prisoners at the Bar, were the Persons to whom he delivered the
Commissions: He swore that he knew them all very distinctly and well, and that
these were the very Persons. Sir W. W. for more satisfaction to the Court and
Jury, bid him point out Sir R. Stanley, Lunt pointed to Sir Tho. Clifton, and
said that was Sir R. Stanley; upon which there was a great Hum among the
Spectators. But to rectify this, he was ordered to take the Cryers staff and
lay it upon the Head of Sir R. Stanley; he took the staff, and (though prompted
by his Fellows; and had what intimation was possible from the Judge) yet he
laid it on the Head of Sir T. Clifton, and with unparalleled impudence, said
he was Sir R. Stanley. However Sir George Eyres excused this, and said, There
was no great matterin that mistake, for that those Gentlemen were together at
Croxton, and were together at the Bar, and the mistake of one for another, was
no great matter: So on he went, and swore he delivered Commissions to those
Gentlemen, to be Colonels, Captains, Lieutenants respectively, that they
received these Commissions with joy, and kissed them, etc. and each gave him 5
l. that they advised with him what Method to take to Raise the Men, and at last
concluded to send him to London, to List what Irish and others he could; and
accordingly he went and Listed 60. and bought Arms to the Value of 50 l. being
supplied with Money by Mr. Whitplace, by Order of the Prisoners, and who had
direction from them to let him have what Money he had occasion for; that upon
his return these Gentlemen thanked him, and afterward sent him to St. Germains
to acquaint K. James and the Lord Melfort with the forwardness of Affairs in
England; that K. J. dispatched him back again to acquaint his Friends how soon
he would be with them; that upon his return to the Gentlemen, each made Answer
that they wished for that hour, seeing all of them had completed their designs.

The next Witness was Womble, who (being a Carryer) swore that at several times
he carried down Arms to these Gentlemen, that he came to know them to be Arms,
for that a Black Mare of his going to drink, fell into the Water, so that he
ventured to open the Box to see what damage the Goods had, and perceived them
to be Arms; that being found a Trusty Man he was often employed afterward on
the same occasion, that some of the Boxes were directed to Mr. Dickenson,
others to others, and that he saw them take their Proportions upon the Delivery:

The next was Wilson, who swore that he was employed to wait for the Landing of
Lunt, and to conduct him where those Gentlemen were, who finding them at
Croxton, saw Mr. Lunt deliver the Commissions to them, which they joyfully
received. That he saw several of the Men listed by Lunt, who quartered up and
down, and that he was very well acquainted with those two, who were at Sir R.
Stanley's; and in short, in all things he corroborates Lunt's Testimony. The
next was Breuerlon, who swore, that having in Ireland served K. James, he
having no further Service for him, he came, for England, and being well
entertained by those Gentlemen, received at their hands a Commission from K.
James; That whilst K. James was at La Hague, he was at Worrell, and Sir R.
Stanley used to give him Money, as several Sums at 3 times, 10 s. 5 s. 15 s.
which he looked upon to be given him, that he might be ready when K. James
Landed. And this the Judge (out of pure Charity to the Prisoners no doubt)
called Subsistence Money.

The Evidence, for the Prisoners, though not in the same Order (which is
needless) but in Substance, is as follows:

One Parsons testified that Lunt promised him 150 l. if he would Swear to what
he would have him.

Mr. Leigh Banchs testified, that he was introduced into Lunt's company by Mr.
Taffe, that Lunt seemed well pleased at it, and would needs have him obliged to
Secrecy. That Lunt told him, he might if he would have been in Dodsworth's
Plot; that he had two, Womble and Wilson to back his Evidence, but because they
were ignorant Fellows, he would turn them off, if he could but get 2 or 3
Gentlemen (like, himself) who would better manage his Business, and bring his
Plot to a better Conclusion. He asked him, if he could write well, if he could,
he should be employed in writing Commissions; for he could get an Old
Commission of K. James's, and a Pass from my Lord Melfort, and they might
easily counterfeit their Hands. He promised him great Rewards, and put him in
hopes of the Gentlemen's Estates. And that if this took, he would go all over
England, and Impeach distinct men in their several Countries.

Mr. Taffe (who brought Mr. Ba^^ks acquainted with Lunt, and was privy to
Lunt's Designs) confirmed in all points Mr. Banks's Evidence, and added that
Lunt complained of the blockishness of Womble and Wilson, and swore they knew
no more than what he had prompted them to; and that Lunt gave as a Reason why
he went to seize Mr. Leigh of Lime, that he might know him, and his House, when
he came to the Trial.

Mr. Dickenson going to give his Evidence, passed by Lunt, and said to him,
Do thou know me? To which Lunt replied, God d -- thee, I thought thou had
been an honester Man than to have betrayed me. He testified that by Mr. Taffe's
means, getting into Lunt's company, Lunt asked him his Name; who replied
Howard, An honorable Name, said Lunt, it will be for the Merit of the Cause.
Then he asked him, What is your Religion? Of the Church of England, said D.
That Is well, said Lunt, then you must swear you received a Commission from Mr.
Leigh of Lime, because he is a Protestant. Then he asked, whether he knew these
Gentlemen? Yes, (said he) very well. That Is well said Lunt: I my self have
delivered a Commission with my own Hands to one Roger Dickenson (being the
Person to whom he spoke, under the disguized Name of Howard) do you know him
likewise? Yes (says Mr. D.) I know him extraordinary well. Then, says Lunt,
things will go on finely.

What Respected the general Credit of the King's Witnesses, it was proved by
many Credible and unexceptionable Witnesses; That Lunt was a Bigamist and a
Highway-man. To which the Judge said, That signified little, because these
Persons knowing it did not prosecute him. That Womble swore he would have the
Blood of Papists; and he got 100 l. per Annum by Swearing; That he stole Money
at Cros^^y, when he went there to search, which Money dropped out of his Boots
when the Messenger caused him to be searched. That Wilson was a Thief, and
stole 4 Cows; and the Record was produced in Court of his being burnt in the
Hand. That Breuerton had often swore that Sir R. Stanley was a sne^king Fellow,
because he would give him no Money, but he would be even with him one time or
other.

What respected the Time and Circumstances of the Fact charged upon those
Gentlemen, it was proved beyond Contradiction.

That Sir R. Stanley was at his own House in Cheshire, and not in Lancashire
all that Year that Lunt swore that he was at Croxton that in particular, for
the months of June and July he was seen in Bed Morning and Evening, proved by
his Lady's Woman, and his Valet de Chamber. That the rest of the Prisoners were
actually, in Custody in Manchester at the same time, and many months after,
that Lunt swore they were at Croxton. That Mr. VValmsly was at that time and
two Years before and after in France.

These Particulars I give you in short, but they were plainly proved, and
sufficiently convinced the Jury, and indeed all who heard the Trial.

From all together you may please to observe what Infinite Care was taken to
destroy these Innocent Gentlemen, and to Ruin their Families forever. For,

1. Here was as Fine and plausible Contrivance as could be framed, and one part
made to hang to another so artificially, as might make it seem probable to, and
take with the Jury. Lunt he delivers Commissions from K. James; Wilson was by
and saw the delivery, and knew some of the men raised by virtue of them;
Breuerton received a Commission from them, and VVomble carried the Arms in
pursuance of the Design. This it must be confessed was completely laid, and was
sufficient to Hang a whole Country.

2. The Judge in his Charge endeavoring to prepossess the Jury, and to
persuade them, and to insinuate to them, as if the Fact charged upon the
Prisoners, had been Notorious and Self-Evident, as is plainly the design of his
Speech, and the meaning of his Words.

3. The adding near a 100 men to the Jury, after the Prisoners had a Copy of
it, and after the Court had made a particular agreement with them, to take
their Trials jointly, and not severally.

4. The King's Council challenging all the Members of Parliament, Justices,
Deputy Lieutenants, and leaving none of the Jury, but men of inferior Rank,
and there was not one Gentleman of the Jury, or one who poll'd as such, which
is a plain case that these men were thought too noble to be entrusted with an
Affair of this Nature, And if to this I may add,

5. That after all Mr. A. Smith said. That if he had been of the Jury, he would
certainly have brought them in guilty every man of them. And I suppose he may
be believed without swearing.

And yet notwithstanding Providence so ordered the Matter, that the Gentlemen's
Lives were not only saved, but that it has also fastened an indeleble steyne
of Infamy on the Witnesses, and all their Abettors.

Sir, here you have in short, the Portraicture of this black Villainy; so far, I
mean, as appears bare face'd: But you conceive (and I think rightly) that there
is a great deal more behind the Curtain, some secret and invisible springs
which moved the Machine, some who contrived the Business, prompted these
ungodly Instruments, and taught them their Lesson, and abetted them in the
Prosecution and Management: And this brings me to the second thing you seem to
require my Sentiments of, viz.

What may be offered in order to the discovery of the Principals, who set them
on work, and were privy to the Secret, and accessory to the Guilt: And this you
think worthy of the Wisdom of a Parliament, and certainly it is so, if any
thing be so; for such Practices destroy not only all our Liberties, but our
Lives also at once: And if such Rogues shall be countenanced, pension'd, and
taught to swear against innocent Men, our Laws and Privileges are not our
safety, but ruin; give me an Hundred Arbitrary Kings, rather than to lie at
the Mercy of an Arbitrary Rascal, who will swear himself to the Devil, and any
Man out of his Life for a Suit of Fine Clothes, and Money to spend at a
Tavern; and our Liberties are fine things indeed, when they are under the Power
of such Men who have Conscience enough to swear any thing, and Wit enough to
learn the Lesson that is taught them.

And therefore in Answer to this Particular, I shall enquire into these Two
Things. 1. Whether it be any means probable that these Men were the Contrivers
of this wicked Design; and if not, then, 2. What Marks and Characters may be
laid down to assist us in judging of this Matter, and where these are found, it
is highly probable, that those are in the bottom, or at least, it is worthy the
best inquiry of the Parliament whether they be or no.


In order to the First Inquiry, I shall consider the Character of the Persons,
and the Nature of the thing.

1. The Character of the Persons, they were these Four, Lunt, Womble, Wilson,
Breuerton; Lunt (the Principal, and on whom the rest depended) was a Coachman,
Womble a Carryer, Wilson a Tapster, Breuerton a Sadlers Prentice, and who ran
from his Master. And are not these Men rarely qualified to make a Plot, and set
it so artificially together? If it be said the subject of their Evidence was
Matter of Fact, and so not above their Capacities. Right, and this shows the
Cunning of the Contrivance; for it would have been extremely ridiculous to have
brought these men to have given Evidence concerning Mysteries of State, and
Councils of Princes: But a Commission, and Arms, and such things were within
their Sphere; and a Carrier may be qualified enough to know a Pistol from a
Sword; and a Box of Arms (if the Box be open) from a Box of Sagar Plumbs. But
this is not the Case: Their Capacities are not questioned, for knowing one
thing, or one man from another, (although Lum was a little mistaken in that
matter) but for the whole Contrivance, and I hope there are more Brains and
Politics that go to the making of a Plot, than to the mere swearing to it,
which only requires a hard Forehead, and a little Memory, and no Conscince: The
Web was artificially weaved, and the Design laid well enough, and had certainly
carried their Point, and Hanged the Gentlemen, had it not been for the Folly of
the Instruments, which is one argument more for their incapacity for the
Contrivance: For Lunt is a Fool as well as a Coachman, and his being so easily
taken and dived into, his opening the whole matter to Mr. Barks and Mr.
Dikenson, whom he had never seen before; as it was the Providential means to
discover the Villainy, so it apparently showed the Contrivance could be none of
his. The Inquiry therefore turns upon this Point, here is a plain and undoubted
Contrivance apparent to all Men, and granted by the Court it self, very
artisicially and closely put together, the Evidence exactly set according to
the Form of Law, etc. And if any man in his Wits can think that such Men as
these were the Principal Authors, he may with as much reason conclude that
Coachmen and Tapsters are qualified to make Secretaries of State, Lord-Keepers,
and Archbishops.

2. Another thing to be considered, is the Nature of the Thing. And here (I
think) it will not be inquired, whether any Man will Forswear himself, merely
for the sake of Forswearing, and the great delight and satisfaction he takes in
Perjury, or murder Men by false Oaths, because he loves to see them Hanging on
the Gallows, how wicked so ever men are, This is incompatible with humane
Nature, and a strain beyond the Devils themselves. And therefore I may take it
for granted, that Lunt and his Fellows did not conspire to give their Souls to
the Devil gratis, or endeavor to swear half the Gentlemen of a Country out of
their Lives, merely for the pleasure of seeing them hanged. And therefore
whosoever will resolve to think that These are the Principal, or the Only
Conspirators, in compliance to the common Reason of Mankind, is bound to assign
some Cause that might provoke them to so Flagitious a Villainy. And I believe
the Wit of Man can find but two, either Revenge, or Reward. As for Revenge, it
is a terrible Passion indeed, and prompts men, under the power of it, to do any
thing; but then it has its proper object, and is never exercised upon men who
never injured, nor disobliged us. And what Injury or Disobligation had the 4
Conspirators received from these Gentlemen? why truly no more but this, that
Breuerton had said that one of them was asneaking Fellow, and would give him no
Money; which is but a poor Reason for such a terrible Revenge: And yet he
swears that he gave him 30 s. at several times. But let that pass, what is that
to the Rest of the Gentlemen? did they ever refuse him any Money? or did he
ever expect any from them? and yet he Swore against all the Gentlemen, as well
as against that One. And what is this to the other 3 Conspirators? was ever
Lunt, or VVomble, or Wilson, disobliged by them? why truly not at all, and it
plainly appears that Lunt (the Principal of them) was so far from being
disobliged by them, that he had never seen some of them (perhaps any of them)
all his Life. So that whatever else may be assigned as the occasion of this
Bloody Conspiracy, Revenge could be none of it. And then as for Reward, This in
truth is a Reason probable enough, and in all likelihood the only Reason: But
then I doubt this will extend farther, and involve others in the Guilt. Who
Rewarded them? who promised and encourag, d them? These are material Questions,
and more fit to be spoke to in the next Head, which is,

2. The Laying down some Marks, to direct us to the Discovery of the other
Conspirators and Abetters in this Hellish Design.

And the First Inquiry may be this, Who maintained these mean Fellows at that
Splended Rate? Lunt the Coachman was habited like a General, nothing finer or
richer, with his Footman to attend him, and his other Expenses were
proportionable, and he lived at the rate of a Thousand pound a Year. Wilson the
Tapster kept his Gelding, and took his Pleasure like a Man of Rank and Estate.
Womble said he had a 100 l. per Annum for Swearing. And the other was
maintained with equal Proportions: And what was all this for, think you? Money
is not so plentiful at this time of Day, to be squandred away for nothing. And
a man may honestly suppose that such profuse Largesses were not exhibited to
them out of pure Love to their Persons; something was to be done by them that
might answer the Charges? and wherein the Paymasters might find their Account.
And surely when men Swear honestly and truly, there is no such need of Greasing
and Daubing: But it must be confessed a false Oath wants pampering, and high
feeding: and when men are provoked to Forswear themselves, they need supply
from time to time to keep up their Spirits against the Reluctance of their
Consciences. This is a dreadful Case in a Christian Nation, and deserves the
utmost Care of the Parliament upon a Double Account.

1st. To Examine thoroughly what becomes of the Money they have given, and to
what Uses applied, least it be diverted to harbor and cherish Prostigate
Rogues to cut their own Throats.

2dly. It is the most infamous and shameless Practice, and unsufferable among
civilized People, that Beggars and Villains should be maintained like Lords and
Gentlemen, for no other reason or purpose, but to Swear away the Lives of other
Men. Whoever Bribes his Witnesses, demonstrates the Injustice of his Cause, and
renders their Testimony suspected; and what can be said of this Scandalous
Practice to keep a Fund for Perjury and Murder. It is high time for the
Parliament to look about them, when these Courses grow every day upon us; the
Cases of Fuller, Young and Blacket were enough to open our Eyes, but when the
same things are multiplied upon us, and the same Game played over again by a
New-Set of Instruments, we must be more then stupid, if we do not see the
design against our Lives and Fortunes. And in truth things are now come to that
pass, that there is scarcely a Rogue in the three Kingdoms, but when he finds
Hunger and Want pinches him, but has his Resolution ready; why forsooth, he
will not starve, and then he goes to set up the Trade of Swearing, to supply
his Wants, and maintain his Vices. And this, it seems, is a sure and easy
way, and there is a Stock ready for all Comers; it looks as if there were a
Bank, for Swearing, to promote the Trade, for it is all their Cry, We shall
have Money enough; But surely it becomes the Wisdom of the Nation to see from
whence, and by whom all these great Sums are supplied; for this is not only to
License Perjury, but to purchase it; and it is a certain rule both in Divinity
and Law, that he that bribes and supports a false Oath, is not only consenting
to it, but more guilty than him that swears it.

2. We must yet further consider the Character of the Persons, but in another
Capacity, not as to their despicableness and meanness, but with respect to
their Morality, and Infamy; Wilson was a common Thief, and Burnt in the Hand in
that very Country where he gave his Evidence; and Lunt a Highway-man, and has
two Wives. Sufficient to destroy their Credit with all wise and just men: and
whoever makes use of their Evidence, will, by all indifferent men, be supposed
to have the same design with them. Now although a Man may be a very great
Villain, yet if at the same time his Crimes are secret, another man may credit
him himself, and proceed upon his Testimony, and yet be very innocent; but this
I doubt, can never be said of a Person, who sufficiently knows his Villainy, and
yet makes use of him, to the destruction of others. And this is apparently the
Case, Lum's wickedness was open and notorious, he was indicted upon the Statute
for having two Wives, and the Bill was found, and Mr. Aarom Smith, one of the
Prosecutors, becomes his Bail, though the Case was Felony, and not only so, but
when Lunt came to be tried, he and his Bail both forfeited their Renognisances,
which is a demonstrative proof, not only that Lum's Infamy was known to the
Prosecutors, but that for his sake they eluded the Law, and skreen'd him from
the sentence of it. And this I think, will deserve the Inquiry of a Parliament,
upon more accounts than one; for it is certainly a terrible Case, unheard of by
English men, not only that Criminals, under the immediate prosecution of the
Law, should be made Evidences against men's Lives, but that the Course of
Justice should be obstructed in favor of a job of Perjury, they were to
undertake.

To which may be added,

3. The mighty hunt that was made about the Town by Officers and Messengers,
after Men who said anything tending to the reproach of the King's Witnesses,
together with Warrants of a strange and illegal nature, to seize, and take up
Men and their Papers for Conspiring and endeavoring to suborn (as the Warrants
word it) Witnesses against the Lives and Credit of several Witnesses for their
Majesty's, against Persons charged with High Treason; Upon which some very
worthy and considerable Men were taken up, and kept close prisoners for some
time, and are yet under Bail, contrary to all Law and Justice: But the plain
design of this was, not to terrify men from speaking what all the Town knew,
but, by taking up as many as they could meet with, to prevent any Persons going
to tell the Truth at the Trial, and confront their Evidence. And any man, who
considers these Methods, can never doubt, but that, if they had but known the
Gentlemen's Witnesses, they would have taken care to have stopped their Mouths,
and by such Arbitrary Warrants, have cooped them up close Prisoners, from
whence they should never have been freed, till the Gentlemen had been hanged.
And it is very observable that these Warrants, and Spies, were sent abroad in
every Corner, but a little before the Gentlemen were carried down to their
Trial. But Providence so ordered it, that those, whom they Principally aimed
at, escaped their Fingers, and the Gentlemen, notwithstanding all their foul
endeavors to the contrary, had honest men enough to detect the Falsehood of the
packed Evidence, and to save their Lives. Now put these two together, the
Direct and Actual obstruction of Justice in the case of Lunt, and the great
endeavors to do so in the Case of these Gentlemen, by imprisoning their
VVitnesses, and that too by illegal and arbitrary methods, and I will leave it
with any man, whether those Persons, by whose Influence all this was done, can
be excused from being Encouragers and Abettors of this Bloody Design, if not
the Principal Contrivers and Promoters of it. He that streyns the Law in point
of Life, is a downright Murderer, and here we have no less than a threefold
violation of the Law, and all to take away the Lives of Innocent Men: and let
those Persons, who have been concerned in such Practices, discharge themselves
from the Imputation, if they can.

4. The Groat Promises that were made in this particular, deserve Inquiry, Mr.
Parson's testifies that Lunt promised him 150 l. to Swear, and Mr. Banks that
he promised him great Rewards, putting him in hopes of the Gentlemen's Estates,
Now upon this, this Question arises, Who could make good these Promises? who
could give such great Rewards? In short, who could give the Gentlemen's Estates
to these Varlets, had they been convicted by their Perjury? But it is more sit
for me to leave these Questions to the Inquiry of a Parliament, only I shall
leave these Remarks to their serious Consideration.

1. That whosoever Rewards Perjury and Murder, is guilty of them.

2. That those Persons, who promised these Gentlemen's, Estates to these
Miscreants, must be satisfied themselves of the Perjury, because the Reward was
otherwise so vastly disproportionate to the undertaking.

3. That if such Temptations shall be laid in the way of Rogues to promise
Gentlemen's Estates to those who will Swear them out of their Lives: If the
Lords and Commons do not take care to obviate it, there is never a Lord nor
Commoner can be safe, so long as there is an Estate, and a Rogue in England.

5. It deserves to be considered, That the Warrants for the Execution of these
Gentlemen were Signed, and there were Directions given, that they should be
Executed 3 Days after their Condemnation. From whence these, things are
obvious. First, That the Projectors thought themselves sure of their Business,
and well they might, when they had taken so much care to instruct the Evidence,
and to prevent the discovery of their Infamy. Secondly, That the Design was
plainly laid for Blood, and which they were resolved to have, whatever came on
it. And therefore the Gentlemen were to be, dispatched, before any Applications
could be made either for Pardon, or for respiting the Sentence: and before the
Inconsistency, Contradiction and Falsehood of their Witnesses Testimony could be
known, which even after Sentence, in justice, ought to have preserved them from
it. But it seems the Wise Contrivers thought it was good to be sure, and to
prevent all after-claps, they were forthwith to be Hanged out of the way; which
is a manifest evidence of a Deep and wide Consederacy to take away their Lives.
For Thirdly, it is impossible that any thing of this, (of signing the Warrants
for Execution, and Orders to do it so hastily) could be ascribed to Luct, and
his Accomplices, and consequently must have some other Authors, and who these
are will be very casie for the Eye of the Parliament to discern. To this may be
added:

6. That at the same time, there were bla^k Warrants sent down to take up two
hundred Gentlemen more in the Counties of Lancaster and Chester, in order to
prosecute them for their Lives by the same Methods. And this was to have been
put in Execution so soon as the other Gentlemen had been dispatched, which
makes the Design as plain, as the Nose in a Man's Face, and directly points to
the Managers and Contrivers: And sarely it seems to me as if there was a design
to root out all the Gentry of England, at least so many of them, who did not
stand fair with the Contrivers, or would not comply with whatsoever they should
propose to them. As Lunt vaunted, that so soon as he had made an end of this
business, he would go all over England on the same Errand. And this is the
plain state of the Case, a Plot was to be had at any Rate, and because they
could not find one, they made one themselves, and these Gentlemen were to be
hanged in Confirmation of it, and then they thought they had the Kingdom in a
string; and whosoever should obstruct their Arbitrary Courses, or not agree to
all their Demands, how unreasonable soever, it was but swearing them into the
Plot, and there was an end of them. The Tymeing of this highly deserves
Consideration, it was just before the present Session of Parliament, and in all
probability, the Money Bill will not pass so easily, at least in such
proportions, as some Men may require, such prodigious Sums having been given
already, and the Kingdom exhausted to the very Bones; but here was a Method to
ram it down their Throats, the Destroying Evidences hang over their heads, and
there was no Medium, either Give or be Hanged. And are we not in a comfortable
Condition, and have great reason to Triumph in our Freedom, when a few Perjured
Villains were set up and maintained to overawe the Parliament, and to bring
the Gentry to their Bow, or else to depopulate the Nation. It is a sine Device,
to hang up some to terrify others, to set up the Devil of Evidences, to scare
People out of their Liberties: If this be not Slavery with a Vengeance, no man
living knows what it is.

These are Considerations antecedent to the Trial, but there are some which are
subsequent to it, and deserve to be considered, for the further unmasking this
Bloody Villainy: They are these Two for the present, and no doubt but Time will
discover more.

1. It deserves to be Considered, who they are, that are extremely displeased
and dissatisfied that the Trial did not take effect, who are very angry and
peevish that the Gentlemen are not hanged; some there are who hang down their
heads, and grief pinches them, others fume and fret, and are very wrathful: But
these carry their Muks in their Foreheads, and any Man may know them. And it is
certain, whoever wishes the Design had succeeded, or is sorry and uneasy that
it did not, is guilty of the Perjury and Murder, if not of the fore-laid
Contrivance: But which I chiefly aim at, is the exceeding Disturbance, that the
Miscarriage of this Design, creates to some sort of Persons, which plainly
indicates, that they themselves are in the bottom, they find their Measures
broken, their plots defeated, and turned upon them; and this is that which
strikes to the quick, and grates their Heart strings. By their Pulses you may
discern the Motion of their Hearts. Would not you think it a very harmless, at
least, if not a very pious thing, for Men to rejoice, when they see innocent
Men escape a Bloody Contrivance laid for their Lives? And yet at Manchester,
when the Country gave Testimonies of their Joy, for the Acquittal of these
Gentlemen, with what Horror and Confusion did it strike the Prosecutors?
whereas every Man is equally concerned, and ought to be equally pleased for the
clearing of wronged Innocence. In like manner, at Chester, when the Prisoners
were brought to the Bar, the Geutlemen of the Country in great Numbers
accompanied them, to testify their respects to them, and the rather, by reason
of the great Injury had been done them, Mr. Justice Eyres was exceedingly
displeased at it, and in great passion said, He did not know who were the
Prisoners from the other. And when the Gentlemen were discharged by
Proclamation, there was a great shout among all sorts of Persons, Ladies,
Gentlemen, the Clergy and Commonalty: This, it seems, was a mighty Provocation
to Mr. Justice, and he could no longer bear it, but told them, That this should
be neither for the Advantage of the Gentlemen, nor those that attended them;
and in particular said to the Clergy, that they deserved to have their Gowns
pulled over their ears. Bless us! What is the Matter? Cannot Men rejoice to see
innocent Men pulled out of the Paws of Harpies, but they must be menaced with
Vengeance, and have their Gowns pulled over their ears? It is well for the
Gentlemen that they had no Gowns, or else they might have been threatened to
have been pulled also; but though they had no Gowns, there was something else
they had to be stripped of; and this is the next Consideration.

2. A Reform of the Justices of Peace and of the M^litia in these 2 Countries
is now on foot, and under Consideration, and most, if not all the Justices, and
Deputy Lieutenants, are to be turned out; it seems these Gentlemen had no more
wit, but they must discountenance Perjury, and rejoice at the happy delivery of
their Friends, Neighbors and Relations, and now they must pay for it; for it
plain they are disaffected. By whose power and influence these things are done,
I shall leave to the Wisdom and Inquiry of the Parliament only I humbly crave
leave to add this one Remark, That from hence it appears that some Persons are
passionately disturbed at the Miscarriage of these Goodly Evidences, that for
the Disappointment, they are resolved to be Revenged on the Two whole Counties.

Now, Sir, let us put all these together, and Consider, if you please, the
Incapacity of these mean Fellons to make, or manage this Plot, the
Inconceiveableness of men's Perjuring themselves, and Murdering Men, for the
sake of these Villainies. The maintaining these VVretches at a most Profuse and
Extravagant Rate, the Notoriety of their former Villainies; the Illegal Courses
to clap up the VVitnesses which should confront them; the mighty and prodigious
Promises to encourage them to go through with if, the Signing of Warrants for
hasty Hanging them before they were convicted, or tried; the Blank Warrants for
taking up a great Number more, so soon as they had been Executed; the Mighty
Passion and Disturbance for the Disappointment; the turning out of the Officers
of Justice, and the Militia in both the Counties; the Plain Effect of a very
keen Resentment, I say put all these together, and then answer your self,
whether these four Rascals are the Only or the Principal Contrivers of this
Cursed Design; or whether they were only Tools and Instruments to put in
Execution what others had contrived for them, and put them to act.

Thus, Sir, you have the Case plainly before you, there is only one part yet
remaining, and that is, The effectual Provision for the security of iunocent
Men hereafter: This I shall say little to, because the Wisdom of the Parliament
will soon contrive it, when they take it in hand, and espouse it heartily, A
strict Inquiry into this Plot, and Exemplary Punishment of all who are found
Guilty, is one good Means; and a Bill for Regulating Trials in Cases of High
Treason, is another, wherein it may be provided, That the Prisoner shall have
Cou^c^l, a Copy of the Indictment, and of the Jury, sufficient Tim, for his
Defense, and the Summoning his Witnesses; and wherein it may, be made highly
Penal, to Obstruct, or Imprison any of the Prisoners Witnesses; That in it
likewise some Care may be taken of preventing this Profuse Liberality to
indigent Men, which is a Temptation to the Poor, and a Bait for Rogues: But I
shall not supersede the Debates in PARLIAMENT, nor prescribe to their Wisdoms;
but I hope I may presume to leave with them this single Consideration, That
these Practices, are not only, to the great Dishonor of GOD, the Scandal of
Christian, Religion, the Ruin of the Nation, and all the Civil Liberties, but
that they themselves (not as Trustees and Representatives, but) in their proper
Persons, are more immediately concerned to guard, and find out some Defense
against them; and they cannot but see themselves directly liable, as their
Persons and Fortunes are higher and greater; Estates are Criminals more than
Men. And though Young and Blackett are gone, though Lunt, Womble, etc. are
defeated, yet there are Rogues enough in England to be had for Money.

I am, SIR, Your Humble Servant.

ADVERTISEMENT.
There will shortly be Published a Perfect and Complete Narrative of the whole
Proceedings, both at Manchester and Chester.


