TO King William AND Queen Mary, GRACE and PEACE. THE Widow Whitrow's Humble
Thanksgiving to the LORD of Hosts, the King of Eternal Glory, the GOD of all
our Mercies, unto whom be Glory, Glory, and Praise for the King's safe Return
to England.

And Jabes called on the GOD of Israel, saying, If thou will bless me indeed,
and enlarge my Coast, and that thine Hand be with me to keep me from Evil. And
GOD granted him that which he requested. -- In the Margent, Then would he
perform his Vow which he had Vowed 1 Chr. 4.10.

Printed: And Sold by most Booksellers in London and Westminster, 1692/1.

To King William and Queen Mary.
GRace, Mercy and Peace from GOD the Father, and His beloved Son our blessed
LORD and Savior Jesus Christ, who has been a Tower of Salvation to the KING
and QUEEN; Glory be to Him forever, unto HIM who has Delivered the KING from
many Deaths, praises forever. Give Thanks unto the LORD with me, and let us
Exalt his Name together, who does wonderful things; for His Mercy endures
forever: O LORD, who shall declare thy mighty Acts! neither can the Heaven of
Heavens selebrate Thy Praise: how much less we poor Mortals that are but Dust
before THEE; before THEE the Eternal One, who art infinitely Better and
boundless beyond all thanksgiving and praise; yet of Thy Holy elemency and
unspeakable goodness has vouchsafed Sinners to Approach unto THEE.

Therefore, Oh come let us fall down before the LORD our Greator, the Mighty
GOD, and worship Him at His footstool with Rended Souls, with broken and
contrite Hearts, that our Cries may pierce the Heavens to the Throne of His
Grace, to move His Glorious Majesty, to send forth his Light and Truth, that
may break through the thick clouds of Ignorance and gross Darkness, that has
covered the Hearts of the People of these Nations, together with his invincible
Power to break down, root up, and destroy with an utter Destruction that Spirit
of Atheism which has Corrupted both Priests and People of these Nations: O
GOD! Race it, Race it, I beseech Thee, to the Foundation thereof, together with
that Accursed thing, the Spirit of Covetousness, Hypocrisy, Malice and Deceit;
that Thy Throne may be Established to a thousand Generations. Thou Creator of
all things from Everlasting to Everlasting, take Thy Dominion, and Rule by Thy
Eternal Power, till Thou have made All Thy Enemies Thy footstool: for why LORD
should they Rob Thee of thy Right, and Give Thy praise to their Idols, their
horrible Lusts and cursed Pleasures. O GOD Arise! O God Arise! that Thy Enemies
may be scattered, that all that hate Thee may fly before Thee; which way Thou
please LORD: But if it be for Thy Glory, save the Creature, and destroy the
Iniquity, that there may be no End of Thy Praise.

For what Great things has the LORD done for us, who has delivered poor
Afflicted distressed Freland from the hurtful Sword, and thrice brought the
King safe to England again. And preserved this Nation in safety in the King's
Absence, Glory be to GOD on high, and on the Earth peace and good will to Men,
in Thee Oh England.

Oh England! England! that thou did know in this thy Day the things that
belong to thy Everlasting Peace, but they are hid from thy Eyes: yet for the
sake of some in Thee am I thus concerned. And seeing the LORD has done such
Great things, what remains on the KING and QUEEN's part, and of thy
Inhabitants, Oh Land? But to walk in Holiness and Righteousness before His Holy
Divine MAJESTY, all the days of your Lives: for so his HOLINESS commands,
saying, Be ye Holy, for I the LORD your GOD am Holy.

Therefore, Hear Oh Kings! and Give Ear ye Judges of the Earth; Serve the LORD
with Fear, and Rejoice before Him, the LORD of Hosts the Mighty GOD with
trembling: and not as the Atheistical Heathen Christians do, who rejoice not as
the Angels of Light, but as the Angels of Darkness or of the bottomless Pit,
For whom is the blackness of darkness Reserved: A Just Recompense of Reward for
such profane Rejoicing, who were as if they would tear His Majesty out of His
Throne, to come in Flames of Fire as He did in Sodom, to Execute Vengeance on
such Offenses, on such horrible Offenders: Oh the Hellish Noises! the
Outrageous Cries, Profane Swearing, Cursing, Drunkenness and Whoredom,
Fighting, and threatening to Murder one another, Destroying the good Creatures,
consuming them upon their Lusts, whilst their Neighbors want Bread: and these
are the Swearers by the Blood of the Immaculate Lamb of GOD that takes away the
Sins of the World, who cries Rot and Damn them; whose Damnation is Just, seeing
nothing less will serve their turns: These are some of the crying Sins of this
Nation, which will bring swift Destruction, and Provoke the High GOD to turn
the fruitful Land into a barren Wilderness, for the Sins of them that live
therein.

For be it known to the KING, the Night before he came to London, which was
October 18. I being in my Bed in the dear enjoyment of GOD's heavenly Life and
Divine love; and in this sweet heavenly Repose, falling asleep, a dreadful
Apparition appeared, Horrible and fearful, Astonishing and Ama^ing; insomuch
that my Heart failed, Fearfulness took hold on me; for the Night of my pleasure
had He turned into Mourning, Sorrows took hold on me, yea, the Sorrows of a
travailing Woman; but crying vehemently to the LORD, I was delivered: The
Vision I must not declare till the Appointed time. But thus far I have liberty
to call all to prepare to meet the LORD, whose Day is come, wherein He will
Appear in Flames of Fire to Execute Vengeance on the Wicked and Ungodly, to
Give them the Reward of their wicked and ungodly Works. But Oh! that the KING
and QUEEN might live forever in that Life which the Judgment is not to. For,
Said the LORD to the Angel that was clothed in Linen, who had the Writers
Inkhorn by his side, Go through the midst of the City, even through Jerusalem,
and set a Mark upon the Foreheads of them that Mourn and Cry for all the
Abominations that be done in the midst thereof. And said He to the other
Angels, Go ye after him through the City, and smire; let your Eye spare none,
neither have pity, Destroy utterly the Old and Young, the Maids, Women and
Children; But touch none upon whom is the Mark; and begin at my Sanctuary. Then
they began at the Ancient Men that were before the House. And so goes on, Ezekiel.
9.

Now you may see, if your Eyes were opened, who they are that shall be hid in
the Day of the LORD's Wrath; not the Wise and Prudent of this World, although
they may have a whole Library of the Serpent's Wisdom, nor the Ancient in a
profession of any Religion whatsoever for the older they are in a Profession of
any Worship and do not live the Life of what they know, the greater is their
Iniquity; and then the greater must their Judgment be.

Therefore, to you, O ye Judges, Justices, and Officers of all sorts, that do
not fulfill the Will of GOD, nor Execute the QUEEN's pious Commands, which is
to suppress Swearing, Drunkenness and Whoredom, with all the rest of the
Abominations with which the Land swarms: Horribly and speedily will He come
upon you, and give you the Reward of your Evil works, who mind your Earthly
Honors, your Profits and Pleasures, with all the rest of your Self-interests,
and so takes up your Rest in these enjoyments; but neglects your Duty in the
weighty matters of the Law, to Execute Justice and Judgment.

Is this the Thanks you return to the LORD for all His wonderful Mercies, for
the deliverance of the Nations, and the giving you your Lives and Liberties, to
turn his gracious Goodness into wantonness, consuming his Excellent Creatures
which he of his bountifulness has bestowed on you, for that end, for you to
serve Him and his Creation in all holy Reverance and humble Thanksgiving; to
his Divine MAJESTY; And not to spend them wastfully upon your vain pleasurs,
and sinful delights.

How many poor destressed Families both in City and Country would be glad and
rejoice to have that Firing to warm and refresh them and theirs in cold and
bitter Weather; that was spent in waste when the KING came home to gratify the
humors of an ungodly Crew, who one day cries Hosana, Hosana; and the next day
with a louder Vote, Crucify, Crucify; so unstable as waters is this Viperous
Generation, as has been evedently seen upon all occasions as there Interest
serves; therefore what Trust or Considence can be put in the Arm of Flesh; But
in the Living GOD, who alone can carry on His Work without the help of Mortals,
or make choice of whom He pleases, even the meanest and most contemptable in
the eyes of Flesh to carry on His great Work, His wonderful Work; for the
destruction of Babylon and all the graven Images of Her Gods will HE throw to
the Ground; yea, into the bottomless Pit for Ever, where she shall never rise
more, Amen; Halalujahs to the LORD our GOD for Ever.

Then will the LORD Return to the People a pure Language Holiness to the LORD;
yea, upon every door of the LORD's House shall be writ Holiness, and upon all
the Vessels therein; for the Knowledge of His Virtuous Life and Heavenly Power
shall cover the Earth as the Waters cover the Sea; Glory be to our GOD and to
the LAMB for Ever. And to the KING and QUEEN Grace and Peace be multiplied, the
Eternal GOD be there Refuge, that under His Arms they may be preserved forever,
that by loving the LORD their GOD, by obeying His Voice, and by cleaving unto
HIM, there days may be prolonged in the Land which the LORD their GOD has
given them: For, what great things has the LORD done for you? Oh! That the
Greatness of His Love may draw you forth into a holy admiration of His
goodness! For, who is like unto Thee, O LORD! May the KING and QUEEN say, among
the GODS who is like unto Thee, Glorious in Holiness, fearful in Praises, doing
Wonders; the LORD is a man of War, JEHOVAH is His Name: the right Hand of the
LORD has done valiantly: the Right Hand of the LORD is Glorious in Power,
which has subdued the Nations, and Brought the KING home in Peace. [Oh:
admirable Goodness.] the Archers have shot sore at him, and hated him on every
side; but his Bow has been maid strong through the HAND of the Mighty GOD. The
right Hand of the LORD has done Valiently; the right Hand of the LORD is
Glorious in Power, who has bound up the King's Life in the bundle of Life with
the LORD; that the Everlasting GOD may be feared, loved, obeyed and Exalted
above all forever; and the KING and QUEEN humbled at HIS Feet, casting there
Crowns at the Feet of the LAMB: for wherewithal else should they come before
the LORD, and bow themselves before the High GOD, but with broken and contrite
Hearts, Worshipping and Adoring HIM in the innermost part of their Souls, and
there Sacrificing their Pleasures and Honors, withal the Intrests of a
perishing World, and desiring nothing but that the Will of GOD may be done in
your Earth, as it is in Heaven; And that you may be the Instruments to bring it
forth in the World, that as GOD has honored you, and done great things for
you, and for the Nations; so you may make it your whole study and business to
Exalt the Name of GOD in the Earth, by your holy, humble, and self-denying
Lives. And that you the Magistrates of the HIGHEST may not bear the Sword of
the LORD in vain, but make use of your Power which GOD has given you, who are
His Vice Gerents here on Earth, to Execute Justice on such as rebel against His
divine MAJESTY, Beginning at your own Court first, and there to suppress every
appearance of Evil; and this is but your reasonable service (and no more then
what your Greatness requires, that your Subjects yield Obedience to you in all
things) And whatsoever is less then this, is to offer the Blind, the Lame, and
the Sick; And offer this to thy Prince, says the LORD, and see if he will be
content with Thee, or Except thy person? Malachi 1.8. And in vain is all your
Praying, Praising, Preaching and Hearing, if this Work be not done: Search the
Scriptures, I beseech you, and see if you can find that ever any thing was
Acceptable to GOD but a Holy and Righteous Life; and there you may find
plentifully that GOD rejects all their outward dutys, both of Jews, Pharisees
and Christians; although He HIMSELF instituted them, and throws them quite
away, saying, Bring no more your vain Oblations: And so goes on; But wash you
(says He) make you Clean; etc. Then to the Pharisees, Ye Hypocrites, make
clean the inside first. To the Christians; Thou have a Name that thou live,
but thou art dead Rev 3. So that its not the Name of any sort whatsoever, but
the Life. Therefore, O KING and QUEEN, for the Glory of GOD and honor of His
Most Holy and Glorious NAME, And your prosperity in this World, And your
Everlasting Happiness in that which is to come. Be not negligent in this Great
Work, which all your Happiness and the Nations depends upon.

Therefore, O KING, be Valiant for the Truth upon Earth, and come Thou forth to
help the LORD against the Mighty, for His contorversie is with the man of sin,
and He will plead with all Flesh. It is written, Curse ye Meroz, Curse him
bitterly, because he came not forth to help the LORD against the Mighty. But
that the KING may be Blessed with an everlasting Blessing; let Him join with the
LORD in this great Work, with all His strength, and with all His might to
destroy Sin and Iniquity in his Dominions, and to bring in and set up
Everlasting Righteousness to Reign: And in this Work he shall be more then a
Conqueror, through the Power of CHRIST, which shall certainly be with Him, if
He sets about it Coragiously and Manfully, not fearing man, nor trusting in the
Arm of Flesh: And this will bring more Glory to GOD and Honor to the KING then
if he conquered Nations by the Sword: For that destroys, but this saves men's
Lives, and destroys the Iniquity: And in this WORK he shall be Greater then
William the Conqueror or all the Monarchs of the World: and his Fame shall go
to the furthermost parts of the Earth: And in this Work shall the most HIGH
rejoice, And all His Heavenly Host: for says CHRIST There is more Joy in
Heaven for one sinner that repents and turns from the Evil of his ways, then
in Ninety and Nine Just persons that needs no Repentance.

And if the KING is faithful to GOD in this Work, he shall conquer and overcome
all his Enemies; for if their Sins be overcome, then they are overcome, because
it is their Sins that causes them to Rebel; For from whence comes Wars, says
the Apostle, come they not from your Lusts? Then it seems take away the lusts,
and Wars will cease: so here is great necesity for the KING to be fervently fixed
in this Work to take away the Cause, that the Disease may cease: And this let
the KING know, that whomsoever he is made an instrument to in this Work, to
overcome their Vices, their hearts shall be knit to Him as Jonathan's was to
David, who loved him as his own Soul: And that blessed Prophecy of Daniel
shall be fulfilled on the KING, which says, Blessed are those that turns many
to Righteousness, for they shall shine as the Stars in the Firmament of GOD'S
Power forever.

And here the KING shall be a Nursing-Father and the QUEEN a a Nursing Mother;
and then more shall be the Children of the desolate, then of the married Wife;
And GOD will bring their Sons from far and their Daughters from the furthermost
parts of the Earth; yea, many People, Kingdoms and Nations shall say, Come, let
us go up to the Mountain of the LORD, and He will show us His Ways, and we will
walk in His Paths: Then Endless Praises and Everlasting Halalujahs shall be to
GOD on HIGH, and on the Earth Peace and Good Will to men: But if this Work be
not Done, there is no Peace to the Wicked, says the LORD: But we must expect
Wars and Rumors of Wars, as CHRIST said; and the End not to be yet, till the
Cause is removed; nor can it be Expected that the KING should conquer and
overcome his Enemies Abroad, whilst his strong and most Potent Enemies Reign at
Home. And indeed it is unreasonable that the KING should Require that of his
LORD and SOVEREIGN, the LORD of all MAJESTY, to fight his Battles abroad, when
the KING does not Execute the Power GOD has put into his hand at home, for the
Suppressing That which HIS Righteous Soul abhors.

And further, the Command of GOD is; When thou go out to War with thine
Enemies, then take heed, says the LORD, that there be no wicked thing in Thee:
Mark that, O KING! no wicked thing: that is, not only, no Wickedness in the
Cause, nor no Self-intrest, nor Self-honour: But no personal Impieties in the
Persons that carries it on; not only gross Impieties, as Drunkenness, Whoredom,
Swearing, and the like: But all manner of vain and foolish Talking, Joaking and
Jesting, are things not allowed to Christians; for if Christians are not
allowed to think their own Thoughts; how much less Vain Words? But, Let your
Words be few, says CHRIST, seasoned with Salt, that they may administer Grace
to the Hearers. And David says, Set a watch before my Mouth, and be Thou LORD
the Doorkeeper of my Lips. And says he, I said, I will look to my Ways, that
I offend not with my Tongue: Oh! how intent was he! saying, O GOD my Heart is
fixed, I will sing, etc. His mind was staid upon the LORD: here was no room for
vain words, light, airy and frothy discourses; he abhorred all such Impieties,
his mind was set on divine things, his Affections were set on things Above, and
not on Earthly things: His converse was with GOD, and his communion with the
HOLY ONE: and here he was here on after GOD's own Heart: He enjoyed Heaven
whilst he was here on Earth; for where the presence of the LORD is, there is
Heaven: he loved the LORD dearly, and therefore took delight to do His Will,
and keep His Commandments: And by doing this, said he, Thou have made me wiser
then all my Teachers; yea, says he, I have more Wisdom then the Ancients. And
why was it so? because GOD was his Teacher: O GOD, says he, Thou have taught
me from my Youth even until now, therefore will I tell of all thy Wondrous
Works. And because of David's love and faithfulness to GoD, the LORD made a
Covenant with him and with his Seed for ever: That is, with the Faithful that
loves the LORD, and walks in His Ways, as David, Abraham, Isaac and Jacob did.
And these Holy Ones made a Covenant with the LORD, to serve Him all the days of
their Lives: They did not make a Covenant with Death and Hell, as this
Generation does, to serve their horrible Lusts and vain wicked Pleasures: No,
no; but quite contrary: O how I love thy Law, says David, its my Meditation
all the day: I will wait continually and will praise THEE more and more; my
Mouth shall daily rehearse thy Righteousness and Thy Sabvation, for I know not
the sum of them. (No, for they were beyond number.) Be THOU my strong Rock,
whereunto I may always, resort. THOU have given Commandment to save me, for
THOU art my Rock and my Fortrest; (Take notice of that, O KING, and of what
follows) viz. Deliver me, O my GOD, out of the hands of the Wicked; out of the
hands of Evil and Cruel men: for THOU art my Hope, O LORD, even my Trust from
my Youth; upon THEE have I been staid from the Womb, my Praise shall be always
of THEE; And THY Righteousness, O GOD, will I Exalt; for THOU have done great
things, who is like unto THEE, THOU wilt increase mine Honor, therefore will I
praise THEE for THY faithfulness: Upon the Vial unto THEE will I sing, O HOLY
ONE of Israel, for my Soul have THOU delivered, etc. Oh! how David was filled
with the living sense of the Goodness of GOD and the ALMIGHTY Exalted in his
Soul! But, What has the Wicked to do to take My NAME into their Mouths, says
GOD, seeing they hate My Holy Spirit to inform them: They hated all my Counsel,
and would have none of my Reproof. Yet the Atheistical Christians, in their
unclean Lives and Idolatrous ways, sings to the Vial, and invents to themselves
Instruments of Music like David, although they hate and abhor his Holy,
Suffering and Selfdenying Life, by which he obtained the Victory over all his
Enemies both within and without.

And further, I assirm in the Name of the LORD, that whosoever follows this Way
which I [by the Spirit of GOD] have directed to (having the holy Scriptures,
the Life of Christ, His Prophets and Apostles, bearing me Record thereunto)
whosoever puts this Way into Practice, shall quickly be without care, and shall
have no need to go to the best of men for Teaching or Counsel, much less to the
worst.

But this I humbly Advise the KING and QUEEN, as my own Soul, to keep down all
Self, all your own Knowledge, Wisdom and Parts; and come before the LORD as a
little Child, as Christ said: This is the state you must come to, before you
can enter the Kingdom of GOD; and this is the state Adam was in before his
Fall, before he Eat of this forbidden Tree, the tree of Knowledge which was
never given for Food; for says GOD, In the day thou eats thereof thou shall
Surely dye. But had he stood in the Will of GOD where he was placed, and not
have Entered into his own Will and Imaginations, there had been no need for the
Flaming SWORD to have been placed to keep the way of the Tree of Life: The
Flaming Sword that turns every way to separate you from your Lovers, and all
your Delights, before you can Eat of the Tree of Life which is in the midst of
the Paradise of GOD. And this flaming Sword is the Cross of Christ, and the
holy Cross of Christ is the Power of GOD, which must crucify you to the world,
and the world to you: And when all this is done, you must be in the profoundest
Humility that ever man or woman was in, turning your selves into the very Dust
from whence you came, and there to be nothing for ever: For if You are any
thing, then GOD the Eternal BEING cannot be All, who is the Alpha and Omega,
the first and last, blessed for ever, Amen: Yet in this Blessed state, are you
a drop of that Ocean from whence Endless Blessings flow: for says our LORD and
Blessed Savior; Blessed are the Poor in Spirit, for theirs is the Kingdom of
GOD. And if you continue loving the LORD with all Your Hearts, and with all
Your Souls, with all Your strength and with all Your might. But, take notice I
beseech you, HE must have All; All your Love and Affection; for if any thing
else whatsoever has it besides the LORD, you rob GOD of his Right, and this is
that which will stop the Springs from flowing from this Endless Fountain of
Life and Love. Therefore I humbly Beseech You in the Bowels of the Love of GOD,
that Above all things, and at all times, with all the strength of Your Souls,
in all Your Thoughts, Words and Works, that you purely love and intend for the
Honor and Glory of GOD, who is the Eternal Happiness and Blessedness of all
men, and your own portion for ever. And that you may this the better do, you
must most strictly Observe your selves within; Keep thy Heart (says the
Prophet) with all diligence, for out of it comes the Issues of Life: Therefore
sink you down into the innermost parts of your Souls, and there stop all the
outgoings of your minds to any thing, but to GOD alone: And in silence, hear
what the LORD says within you, and with JESUS, depart from the multitude,
avoiding all Employments and multiplicity of Business as much as is possible,
you shall rest with GOD in unity, shutting up all your Senses in quietness,
continually Praying, and calling upon GOD, your Eye being fixed on Him, (as
David's was) in all your actions, you shall enjoy His presence in every Place,
Time and Thing, admitting nothing within your selves but GOD continually, that
you may continually receive the Heavenly Influence of His divine love into your
Souls.

And as I have the Life and Doctrine of Christ my LORD, and all his Holy Ones
in former Ages to bear Witness to this my true and faithful Testimony of a holy
and retired Life; so I shall instance one of late years, Abraham Cowley, who as
its reported, was a man of sweet and singular Wit, great Learning, and an even
Judgment, that had known by large experience what Cities, Universities and
Courts afford; and that not only at home, but in diverse Nations abroad; wearied
with the World, he broke through all the intanglements of it, and which was
hardest, innumerous Friendship and a perpetual Praise, and retired to a
solatory Cottage, near Barn-Elms, whence he gives us this following Doctrine of
Retirement, and may serve for an account how well he was pleased in his Change.
The first Work (says he) that a man must do, to make himself capable of the
good of Solitude, is the very Eradication of all Lusts: for how is it possible
for a man to enjoy himself, whilst his Affections are tied to things without
himself? The first Minister of State has not so much business in public, as a
Wise man has in private: If the one has little leisure to be Alone, the other
has less leisure to be in Company: The one has but part of the Affairs of One
Nation, the other all the Works of GOD and Nature under his consideration.

The next I shall instant, is Marcus Aurilius Antoninus, a good and famous
Emperor; he first treats, how he ought to behave himself in his Empire: And
after that (says he) As for GOD and such Suggestions, Helps and Inspirations,
as might be expected, nothing did hinder me but that I might have begun long
before to live according to Nature, or that even now that I am not yet pertaker
and in present possession of that Life. And he gives the Reason why, In that
(says he) I did not observe those inward Motions and Suggestions, yea, and
almost plain apparent Instructions and Admonitions of GOD, was the only cause
of it. And so he goes on most Excellently. I that understood the Nature of that
which is good (said he) that it is to be desired; and of that which is bad,
that it is odious and shameful. And further says, They are idle in their
Actions who toil and labor in this Life, and have no certain scope which to
direct all their Motions and Desires to. And then treating of some that busied
themselves in diving into things of Philosophy. Yet (says he) of this is not
sensible that it is sufficient for a man to apply himself wholly, and confine
all his Thoughts and Cares to the tendence of that Spirit which is within him,
and truly and really to serve him. (For says this worthy Prince) Philosophy
does consist in this, for a man to preserve that Spirit which is within him
from all manner of Contumelies and Injuries, and the sacred Mysteries of Virtue
which issufrom it, carefully, solidly, and shall not intermix any other
business, but shall study this to preserve thy Spirit unpoluted and pure; and
as one that were even now ready to give up the Ghost, shall cleave unto Him;
and from this there is no man can hinder thee. And further this Excellent man,
Without relation to GOD (says he) thou shall never perform aright any thing
humane, nor on the other side, any thing Divine, at what time soever thou will,
it is in thy power to retire into thy self, and to be at Rest: For a man cannot
retire any whither for to be more at rest and freer from all business, then to
his own Soul. Afford then thy self this Retiring continually, and thereby
refresh and renew thy self. D Doble Drince, worthy of double Honor. And then
Exhorting, That whatsoever they did, might be Just and Holy: Neither (says he)
must he use himself to cut off Actions only, but Thoughts and Imaginations
also, that are unnecessary; for so will unnecessary consequent Actions the
better be prevented and cut off. He is poor that stands in need of another, and
has not in himself all things needful for this Life. Consider well whether
Magnanimity rather, and true Liberty, and true Simplicity, Equanimity and
Holiness, whether these be not most kind and natural? And farther this blessed
Prince, Let thy GOD, that is in thee to rule over thee, find by thee that he
has to do with an Aged man, a Sociable man, a Roman, a Prince, one that has
ordered his Life, as one that expects as it were nothing but the sound of the
Trumpet, sounding a retreat to depart out of this Life with all readiness. What
is it (says he) thou do stay for, an Extinction, or a Translation, for
either of them with a propitious and contented mind: but till that time comes,
what will content thee? What else but to Worship and Praise GOD, and to do good
unto men?

Here is a President for Kings, Queens and Potentates of the Earth to square
their Lives by. This worthy Prince was more Philosopher than Emperor, his
Dominions were greater within then without, and by his Holy Life and Virtuous
Principles was fit to govern the whole World.

Solon, a noble Philosopher and Lawgiver to the Athenians, was so humble, that
he refused to be Prince of that People: And being asked by Cresus, King of
Lydia, (when seated on his Throne, Richly clothed and magnificently attended).
If he had ever seen any thing more Glorious? He answered, Cocks, Peacocks and
Pheasants, by how much their Beauty is Natural. Fly Pleasures, (says he) for
they bring Sorrow: Converse not with wicked Persons, but meditate on serious
things: That it was the perfection of a man to foresee and prevent Mischief
That they that would govern a State well, must govern their Families well. That
we ought not to flatter Great men, lest we exalt them above their merits and
station. A Prince ( says he) must not take up his time about transitory and
mortal things; Eternal and Immortal are fittest for him.

O noble PRINCE and PRINCESS, I humbly beg of you Observe these Heavenly Maxims.

Periander, Prince and Philosopher, would say, That Pleasures are Mortal, but
Virtues Immortal. Punish the guilty ( says he) and restrain men from Sin. That
Commonwealth is best ordered ( says he) where the Wicked have no command.

Therefore most Honored and most endeared PRINCE and PRINCESS, for so you are
in my Heart, because of the Greatness of GOD's Love, which I have received and
delivered to you above all before you in my time; and shall be so, if you
receive the Love of GOD administered, and put into Practice these His Commands
and Precepts; first in your own Example, and then Executing the Power GOD has
given you, which may easily be done, by turning out those that will not Obey
your just and lawful Commands, and put in such in their room that will; That
the KING and QUEEN may not be guilty of that Iniquity as Saul was guilty of, to
save alive that which GOD commanded to kill, which was the Cause that the
Kingdom was rent from him, and given to one more worthy, that is, which did the
will of GOD, And is the very cause why your Predecessors were turned out before
you, and you brought in their room, to try whether you will do His Will, and
perform all His good Pleasure; which if you do, GOD will make you the Glory of
Nations. For this know, O KING and QUEEN, and that from the LORD, the day is
come, that GOD will have His Will done in Earth, as it is in Heaven; and that
which stands in opposition to it, will He overturn, and throw the Earth
upside-down: And all the Monarchs in it will he break to pieces as a
Potters-Vessel, for the bringing in of His Dominion, which is an Everlasting
dominion, and He shall Reign for evermore; Amen.

And this I humbly Supplicate to the LORD, if it may be for the Glory of His
Holy Name, That the KING and QUEEN may be the worthy Instruments thereof, and
that they may not be guilty of Readiness Transgression, who feared the People, and
so caused him to break the Commandment of the LORD, which proved to his
destruction: So he paid dear for his fearing the People, and the People paid
dear for his Rebellion against the Command of GOD; for it cost him his Life,
and thousands more of theirs. For here lay the case; the command was to slay
All, but the People counseled him to save the best of the Oxen and Sheep, and
the chiefest of the things, which should have been destroyed, to offer to the
LORD thy GOD, as Saul confessed to Samuel, saying, I have sinned; for I have
transgressed the Commandment of the Lord, and thy Words, because I feared the
People and obeyed their Voice.

The writing of this Confession, makes my Heart melt, and breaks me into Tears;
the consideration thereof, how dangerous a thing it is for any to transgress
[much more PRINCES,] the Commands of the LORD in ever so little a thing. And
Readiness repeating over again the reason why they saved them alive that should
have been destroyed, was, To offer a Sacrifice to the LORD. But alas! all
Coverings will be to short, but that which is covered with the Spirit of the
LORD, in the Day of Account, when the Iniquity is brought before the
Judgment Seat, which must there stand the Trial, to be Arragined and Condemned
by the JUDGE of all the Earth: No pretense will serve them, be it never so
specious by the art and cunning of men: for indeed what higher could be, then
pretense of Worshipping GOD, to offer Sacrifice to the LORD? But what was the
LORD's answer? Has the LORD more delight in Sacrifice and Offering, then in
Obeying the Voice of the LORD? To Obey is better than Sacrifice, and to hearken
to the Voice of the LORD then the Fat of Rams: For Rebellion is as the Sin of
Witchcraft, and Transgression is Wickedness and Idolatry: Because thou have
cast away the Word of the LORD, therefore has He cast away thee from being
King. A heavy sentence, and worse recompense of reward, for his Life went for
theirs. Here we may see, we need not go to Rome for Idolatry; for whosoever
transgresses the command of the LORD may find it at home.

But Saul, instead of deep Humiliation and through Reformation, in broken and
contrite heartedness as David did, and destroying what he had saved alive, he
falls to Worshipping to pacify his concerns that way. There are many Readiness
now adays that salves up their evil Consciences that way, and goes on making
such a noise with their Worshipping, that the cries of the oppressed in them
cannot be heard; and so goes on crucifying the LORD of Life afresh, by their
ofen quenching the motions of His Holy Spirit in them till at last His Holy
Witness lies slain in their Sodomite hearts, and then they triumph and make
merry over it, and send Gifts one to another, and drink Iniquity as an Ox
drinks Water, without reproof, when the Witness is slain. But alas, all this
will but serve whilst their time is out; for this Sore thus healed will break
out again: for the Spirit of Life from GOD shall enter the Witness, and then
shall the Book be opened, wherein is written LAMENTATIONS AND WOES. Therefore
the Prophet Samuel knowing all these things, refused to go with Saul to worship
the LORD, although he so earnestly begged and entreated him, for he knew the
worshipping in that rebellious Spirit was Abomination to the LORD,
notwithstanding his confession, that he had sinned: And besides all this Samuel
knew there was something else to do before worshipping, to appease the Wrath of
GOD. Bring me hither (said he) Agag, the King of the Amalakites. Then said
Samuel As thy Sword has made Women childless, so shall thy Mother be Childless
among Women. And Samuel hewed Ageg to pieces before the LORD. Let none mistake
me in this Similitude; I do not mean that the Lives of any should be taken
away; no, no, for I would not do the least hurt to the greatest of all my
Enemies; for that was not the Work of Christ my LORD, who came not to destroy
men's Lives, but to save them, and to destroy their Iniquities; and for this I
am offered up in Body, Soul and Spirit, which is the highest Sacrifice I can
pay, and happy should I be to be counted worthy to be an Instrument in that
blessed Work to others in this my Day and Generation, to hew Ageg to pieces
before the LORD, the Prince of the Power of Darkness which rules in the
Children of Disobedience. And this is it that I have labored so much for, and
made so many humble Addresses to the KING and QUEEN, that they may not neglect
this great Salvation. but that they may be the happy Instruments in this
blessed work of Reformation, that the Will of GOD may be done in them, and
throughout their Dominions, to the Glory of GOD and the Exaltation of His ever
Blessed NAME, and the happy establishing them in Holiness and Righteousness all
the days of their Lives, which is the humble Prayers of the LORD's Servant, and
you, true and faithful Subject according to the will of GOD.

From one that is of no Sect or gathered People, yet have I sought the LORD
from my Childhood until this day: And having found the only good, which is GOD,
to be my Teacher, and the ALMIGHTY to be my Counselor, who is my Sabbath of
Rest: And in His Holy, Pure, unspotted Life, I have unity and fellowship with
all that are in this throughout the Universe,

Putney, New Years Day, 1692/1. JONE WHITROWE,

This following was writ by another, who desired to have it incerted here.
IF any one (though intending well) should be so enticed as to strengthen that
deceiveable, murmuring, discontented Spirit, that would stir up Strise and
Division amongst the Heads of the Nation, they may expect trouble upon trouble,
until they forbear, Repent, and give Glory to Him, who searches the Heart and
tries the Reigns, against whom it is in vain to strive.

THE END.

