A General Epistle TO BE Read amongst Friends in all their MEETINGS.
Dearly beloved Friends, Brethren and Sisters;
I Being a Prisoner for the Word of God and Testimony of Christ Jesus, having
not any other way to manifest that Care and Love which is in my heart for you
and to you, its come upon me to write this Epistle, to stir you up, by way of
Remembrance, to call to mind the days that past, wherein the Lord in great
Mercy did visit us, when we walked as other Gentiles in the vanity of our
Minds, which being alienated from the Life of God, we had not Ability to
overcome those Lusts, whereby we were enticed into Evil, to the wounding of our
own Souls, and darkening of our own Understandings, until it pleased the Lord
to visit us with the springing forth of the blessed Day of the Son of
Righteousness, whose holy Light shined in our Hearts and Consciences, which
discovered unto us our lost Estate and undone Condition, whilst we lived
without God in the World, in which Light the quickening Power of Christ Jesus
was manifest in our selves, which brought us to an inward sense of our own
weakness and corruption, under which we were truly bowed down, and broken in
the Righteous Judgments of God, which brought great Humility and Tenderness of
Heart and Conscience in us, through the appearance of his Grace, by which we
were exercised in his holy Law, which he writ in our hearts, and put his fear
in our inward parts; whereby we departed from Evil, and received ability to do
good, through the Obedience of the Spirit of Christ Jesus, who washed and
sanctified us with his precious Blood, that we might be fitted for his use and
service, after he had so mercifully visited, illuminated and accepted us. Oh!
the Love which God shed abroad in our hearts, when he had enlarged us to run
the way of his Precepts, is more than can be expressed, which Love constrained
us to seek his Glory, and the good of his seattered People, with the hazard of
our Lives, Liberties, and whatever else was near and dear unto us in this
World, we gave it all up through that Love which was the bond of our Friendship
with God, and one with another, wherein also we were edified, and became an
Habitation of God, whose Tabernacle is with us. And however he has suffered us
to be smitten with the Rod of men, Loving Kindness and Mercy he has not taken
from us, though our Exercises have been many, and the Perils and Tribulations
which we have gone through, have been of diverse kinds, and those with false
Brethren none of the least; for no sooner did we begin to appear in that
Testimony which we had received from God, but we had many Adversaries, besides
the Imitators that from amongst our selves did arise, uttering perverse things,
which gave occasion to Professors and People, who bent their Tongues like Bows
against us, in Reproach, cruel Mocking, Reviling, Slanders, Stoning and
Buffiting; all which the meek Spirit and Life of Christ Jesus manifested in us,
did shine through and overcome, even as the Wind blows where it lists, and
disperseth Fogs and Mists of Darkness that arise out of the Earth, insomuch
that the Priests, who were Ringleaders in those things, were fain to call to
the Magistrates for help, who employed their Power to crush us, by
Imprisonment, Whipping, and other wrongful Vexations, as Finings, Spoiling us
of our Goods, and the like: And when that Generation of professing Priests saw
they prevailed nothing, they struck hands with the Church of England, which
they had exploded, to suppress us. Yet through all these things Truth has
prevailed, and God has glorified his own Name, in which he gathered us, and
has blessed and prospered us into a People. And now let the Watchmen of the
Church of England beware lest they strike hands with the Papists, to help to
root us from being a Posterity in the Earth, lest they also be swallowed up of
their Helpers; for agian God will glorify his own Name, and preserve his
People in the sight of his Enemies, that he may be admired in them that fear
him, and trust in his Name.

And now, being sensible how that Generation which did see the Wonders of the
Lord, and were upheld by his mighty Power, is passing away, and many of them
gone before us to their Everlasting Inheritance with Christ Jesus in his
Kingdom, and another Generation that have heard more, but seen and experienced
less, both of the Wiles of Satan, and operation of God's Power, that discovers
and breaks his Snares, are entering, who are the Offspring of the Elders, who
through Faith and Patience have obtained a good Report, besides many others who
have come into the Vineyard at other hours of the day, who must all be tried
and proved, as virtuous men have been in all Ages, that have obtained
like-precious Faith. And my hearts Desire and Prayer unto God, is, that we all
may be found unto the Praise and Glory of God, who has called us out of
Darkness, into his mavelous Light, that every one may be counted worthy of
Eternal Life, and be made up amongst the Lords Jewels, and gathered into his
Treasure. And for this cause bear with me in a Word of Exhortation, Warning and
Advice, which in the Love of God I send amongst you, from the movings of the
Spirit of Christ Jesus, that quickens us and knits us together, as Members of
his Body, in which we both suffer and rejoice one with another, having a sense
and feeling of one another Conditions.

And first, I write unto you Fathers and Ancients amongst the Flock and Family
of God, who have known the Lords great work in the beginning, and the manner of
his carrying it on, both in your selves and others; blessed are you of the Lord
who keep your Habitation in him, and do humbly walk with him, daily enduring
the Cross of Christ Jesus, and Contradictions of Sinners against your selves,
knowing that the Servant is not greater than his Lord; and that we only can be
preserved, increase and grow, as Trees that bear good Fruit, and wither not, by
the same Principle of Life, which first quickened us unto God; and therein let
us abide for evermore, and be exercised toward God in all your Assemblies,
wherein the Oversight and Care of the Flock of God comes upon you, who mark the
end of our Conversation. And therefore that we may be kept holy and blameless
in the Love of God, and in the Meekness, Patience and Humility of Christ Jesus,
to be good Examples to them that follow after us, is the earnest desire and
travail of my Soul.

And you that are Young Men in the flower of your Strength, because the Word of
God abides in you, whereby you have in a good measure overcome the Wicked One:
Oh! my dear Brethren, watch and be sober, modest and lowly minded, fearing the
Lord always, lest ye be again entangled with any Yoke of Bondage, or Pollutions
of the World, which ye have escaped through the Power of Christ Jesus, and also
least ye be ensnared by the Wicked One, whom you have many times overcome; for
by Faith we stand, not bearing the Root, but the Root bears us, whom it behooves
to keep on our Armor of Light, in which walking, we have our Feet shod with
the Preparation of the Gospel of Peace, and the Helmet of Salvation, and the
Breast Plate of Righteousness, the Shield of Faith and Sword of the Spirit,
which is the Word of God, by which we are enlightened to see the devices of
Satan, and his Wiles and Temptations, whose deadly Malice is against us, and
therefore seeks to devour us, or bring us into danger, either by inward
Temptations or outward Violence, which he stirs up in this time of our Trial
and Adversity, making use of those for Instruments, that have dealt
treacherously in the Land of Uprightness: And therefore let us be circumspect
in Word and Conversation, committing our Way unto the Lord, that weighs the
Mountains in Scales, and the Spirits of men as in a Balance, who with the
Breath of his Mouth will scatter the Chaff, and disperse the Clouds of
Darkness, which would obscure the Glory of Gods heavenly Appearance, as he has
done in Ages past, and likewise in our days, as many of you are Witnesses.

So having this Hope, we faint not, but believe the God of Peace will tread
Satan under our Feet, and through Christ's Power (without whom we can do
nothing) we shall triumph over the wicked One; and as the Love, Goodness and
Mercy of the Lord ye have obtained, let the same freely run through you, that
by Patience, Meekness, Long-suffering and seasoned Doctrine ye may gather in
the scattered, and those which have halted through feebleness of mind, by your
diligent labor in your Monthly and Quarterly-Meetings, and elsewhere, may
have stumbling Blocks removed out of their way, and be confirmed, and all the
upright in Heart preserved in the Unity of the Spirit and Bonds of Peace; and
let Love abound in your Hearts one to another, according to that old Commandent
that Christ gave his Disciples, for in that you may edify one another; But the
Wrath of man works not the Righteousness of God.

And you Children who have known the Father, through the Light of his beloved
Son Christ Jesus, who has shined in your Hearts, in whom you have believed,
that ye might receive Remission of Sins, for his Names sake, take diligent heed
unto your selves, lest you grieve the Spirit of God, through which you have
received the Adoption, and are sealed unto the day of Redemption: But watch,
and be sober-minded, lest the Adversary, that presents himself amongst the Sons
of God, when he comes from walking to and fro in the Earth, get advantage
against you, and draw your minds out from the pure holy Seed, whereby you are
begotten into the love of God, from which fervent Breathings and holy Desires
and Godly Zeal springs up in broken, tender and humble Hearts, which thereby
draws in daily nourishment, that keeps you growing, fresh and fruitful, whilst
you abide in a Holy Reverence, and are devoutly given up to walk in the true
Light and Life of Jesus Christ, who is both our Savior and Preserver, without
whom we can do nothing well-pleasing unto God. And therefore little Children
that abide in him grow more fresh lively and fruitful, than aspiring Spirits,
or lofty Branches that run out till they have lost their hold in the Root,
which should nourish them; Oh! how soon do they become like Corn on the House
top, decay and wither, when their Expectations are frustrate, their Faith fails
by which they should stand, and their Desires grow weak and feeble, their Love
and Zeal cold; for where Humility is wanting, there is not a capacity of
receiving more Grace: for such who are lifted up, are wise in their own Eyes,
and conceited that they lack nothing, but abound in their own sense, and are
full of Words, and have not a place in them to receive that Virtue which the
Lord is ready and willing to communicate.

Therefore, dear Children, be not High-minded, but wait upon God in Silence,
Humility and pure Fear, that of his fullness you may receive Grace sufficient
for you in all your Exercises, and a Spring of holy understanding, to deliver
you from the Snares of Death; for the Lord has a regard unto you that fear
him, and think upon his Name in these trying days, wherein The Proud are
counted happy, and those that work Wickedness are lifted up. Therefore look not
out, nor be dismayed at what Man can do unto you, whose Breath is in his
Nostrils, (for wherein is he to be accounted of?) but be faithful and valiant
in keeping your Meetings to wait upon God, and worship and serve him that made
Heaven and Earth, who knows how to glorify his own Name, and reward all his
faithful Servants and Prophets, and them that fear his Name, small and great.
So when you see the Wicked flourish like a green Bay Tree, and live in Wealth
and Pleasure, Prosperity and Dominion, let not your Hearts be troubled, though
with Rigor they rule over you, and oppress you on every side; for the Most
High beholds it, and has an Eye open to the cry of the Poor, and will deliver
his Children out of the Jaws of the Devourers, and give them a more sure Reward
and everlasting Inheritance in the sight of their Enemies, who thought their
Life Bitter, and their End without Honor; but the Righteous enter into
everlasting Life, and the Wicked go into everlasting Punishment, and the Gulf
is fixed that they cannot change their Minds nor their State, for their Torment
endures forever; but the meek and patient Sufferers and faithful Followers of
Christ Jesus shall enter into their Masters Joy, which is unspeakable and full
of Glory.

And you that are Convinced, and have a Profession of Truth from the knowledge
of things comprehended in the Understanding, from what you have heard and read,
and the advantages you have had by your Education, it lies upon me to Exhort
and Warn you to wait to possess the true Christian Life, and take heed of
resting satisfied with that which you have taken to your selves, For it is the
gift of God that is Eternal Life, which is to be waited for in the Cross: And
also, take heed that you confide not in your Ability to do any thing of your
selves, for that will be rejected, till you know and inwardly feel the Seed of
God, and his work in your Hearts; and this is the Word of God, That you believe
in the Light of Christ Jesus, and be planted into his Death, that dying
together with him, his Life may be made manifest in your mortal Bodies, that
both your Souls and Bodies may be capable of glorifying God, in bringing forth
the Fruits of his Spirit, wherein he can delight; for now is the Ax laid to the
Root of the Tree, and every Tree that brings not forth good Fruits, must be
hewn down and cast into the Fire: But the long-Suffering and Patience of God
leads to Repentance, and has been great toward many of you, who have stood
in a convinced state, but have been negligent and careless, not walking worthy
of the Mercy of this day, wherein the Lord has not been awanting to you, but
has visited you time after time, looking that you should bring forth good
Fruit; and through the Intercession that has been made for you, he has let
you alone Year after Year, and his Servants have labored amongst you in the
Lords Vineyard, that ye might be Fruitful whilst the Rain has descended upon
you: But Oh! how many are yet barren, or like that Ground that does not bring
forth Herbs meet for the Dresser, but Briars and Thorns, and other unsavory
Weeds, which the Lord takes no Pleasure in; and therefore I am sensible that
Wrath is kindled against that Ground, and those unnatural Branches that bring
forth evil Fruits, who sit and speak against their Brethren, and slander their
Mothers Children, who because of his Long-suffering have thought the Lord
delayed his coming; and therefore have joined with his Enemies, and smitten
their Fellow Servants, laboring as much as in them lies to expose them and all
their faithful Testimonies to the scorn and fury of this profane and desperate
Age, for which cause a Day of Trial is come, and the Lord will manifest whom he
has chosen to feed his Lambs and watch over his Flock, and they shall come
near unto him, and have the Light of his Countenance, and in all their Troubles
be comforted with the presence of the Lord, whilst his Indignation smoketh
against all that are treacherous and false-hearted, who have not regarded the
Glory of the Lord, nor sought the Prosperity of Sion in what they have brought
forth, but have seen false Burdens, and causes of Banishment, to cause the
unwary to stumble, and turn the simple from the right way, and their Reward
shall be according to their works.

Therefore all dear Friends, keep your Habitation in the Light, and be
Followers of that which is good, that in you may arise and increase the first
Love and Faith by which you believed the Record that God gave of his Son, in
the Unity of whose Life and Light we were blessed and prospered into a People,
and the Lord has delight in us, and will preserve us as a Nursery of tender
Plants, from which shall spring a mighty People, though the Nations are Angry,
and may seek to hinder the Work of the Lord, who will distress them, as in
Ancient time, that they may be tried that dwell upon the Earth. Wherefore, all
tender hearted Friends, take heed of looking out, but abide in the Light, where
there is no occasion of stumbling; for it judges down all evil Thoughts, and
surmizing one of another, which gender to Strife, and tends to break the Bonds
of Love and Friendship one to another, which are, and of right ought to be kept
inviolable amongst the Disciples of Christ, that being the great Commandment he
has given to them, and the principal Mark he has set upon them through all
Generations.

Therefore, dear Brethren and Friends, love the Lord withal your Hearts, for
that is a perfect Bond to keep you in Obedience to him, and love one another as
your own Souls, that you may sympathize one with another in Afflictions, and
help, comfort and support one another, as the Lord has helped and comforted
you, that it may be manifested by your Works, that you have obtained
like-precious Faith with the holy Ancients, who said not to those that were
destitute and afflicted, Be thou warmed and filled, but did minister unto them
of the Ability that God had given them, that by works of Charity and Mercy
their Faith might shine forth, having Virtue added unto it, which makes the
true Faith to differ from the Opinions and Made-Faiths, which will all fail and
come to an end; but the True Faith, which stands in Gods Power shall have the
Victory, and those that possess it overcome the World: Even so, Amen.

LOrd God Everlasting, keep all thy tender People in the Unity of the Faith
that works by Love, that we may be kept near unto thee, and one to another,
that thy Delight may be in us, and thy Presence with us, now that our
Adversaries rage and rore against us, and seek to lay waste thy Heritage, and
would shut the Mouths of them, that praise thee. Wherefore arise, O Lord, and
scatter thine Enemies, that Wickedness may come to an End, and Deliverance to
thy People, so shall the expectation of bloody and deceitful men be frustrate,
and their Mouths shut that blaspheme thy Name, whilst thou art pleased to let
thy Glory shine in thy holy Tabernacle, which thou have pitched amongst us,
upon which Glory let there be a Defense for evermore, that those which have
trusted in thee may not be confounded, but renew their strength in thy Power,
to the end of Days and Time, that in Eternity thou may be magnified over all
forever.

From Lincoln-Castle, this 21st of the 10th Month, 1682. John Whitehead.

THE END.

