AN EPISTLE TO FRIENDS Every where: To be Distinctly Read in their MEETINGS,
When Assembled together in the Fear of the Lord.

By a Friend of Truth, and a Lover of Righteousness, Katharine Whitton.

LONDON, Printed for Benjamin Clark Bookseller in George-yard Lombard Street.
1681.

AN EPISTLE TO FRIENDS Every where.
Dear Friends,
IN bowels of tender love to all Friends every where, am I constrained and
pressed in Spirit to give forth this Testimony, under which I have lain for a
long time bowed in Spirit, in a deep sense of the Fatherly care of our God over
all his Lambs, and little ones, which he would gladly have all gathered unto
him, that he might preserve them from the evil of the day which is approaching;
for he has showed a terrible day near to break forths yea, a day that will
burn as an Oven, and all the proud, and they that do wickedly, will be as
Stubble which cannot endure the Fire; for it will be as a flame, and serve as a
fire to consume the counterfeit Metal, and reprobate Silver, that the pure
Gold may appear; yea, that the precious Sons and Daughters of Sion may come
forth as Gold seven times tried, and shine in their Beauty and Luster. For
says the Lord, I will burn the Chaff with unquenchable fire, but the Wheat I
will gather into my Garner.

And Friends, this is no Reflection, but comes for discharging a duty, from one
whom God in measure has placed as on Sions Walls; and who seeing the Sword
come, dare not but give warning to such as are not upon the watch: For says
the Lord, If they take not warning, if the Sword come and take them away,
their, blood shall be upon their own heads: But if thou do not warn them, if
the Sword come and take any person from amongst them, they are taken away in
their Iniquity; (...) their blood will I require at thy (...). And Friends,
with many Tears and Cries unto the Lord have I been bowed down many a time,
that I and every one whom God has concerned may be clear of the blood of all:
And that the House of Israel may be spoken to, least sin be upon us. For says
the Lord, Cry aloud and spare not, lift up thy voice like a Trumpet, show my
people their transgression, and the house of Jacob their sin. Yea it is a
warning from the Almighty, to all and every one of the backsliders in Israel,
and lukewarm ones, and careless daughters of Jerusalem, and Women at ease in
Sion; yea an Alarm is sounded out of the Holy Mountain, that you may hear and
be awakned to righteousness, and stirred up to holiness, to meet the Lord in
the way of his pure Judgments; for woe will be to those that are at ease in
that day that is a coming; yea the sinners in Sion must mourn, fear will
overtake all the unfaithful and disobedient; yea terror will surprise the
hypocrites, and woe and misery will be to all those, except they repent, for it
is a warning in my heart unto all such from the Lord, that they may all turn
unto him by true repentance, whose mercy is proffered, and observe his
Commandments and do them, and keep Covenant with him, and see that every one be
wise in heart, and travel in spirit, and make it their concern to bring glory
unto the Lord in this his day; for he keeps Covenant with, and extends mercy
unto them that love him and keep his Commandments, and he hears the Prayers of
his own children, and has heard them in every Age, and has not forgot his
word spoken by his Servants of old; where he says, If you transgress I will
scatter you abroad amongst the Nations, but if you turn unto me and keep my
Commandments, and do them, though there were of you cast out into the uttermost
parts of the heaven; yet will I gather you from thence, and will bring you into
the place that I have chosen to set my Name there. And surely Friends, we are
the people for whom the Lord has done great things, since the day that he has
opened our eyes, and let us see our miserable and wretched state, and the great
need we had of him to help us out of that condition.

Oh! the many tears, with deep sighs and bitter groans in that day, can never
be forgotten; and blessed be the Lord who has heard the cries of the poor, and
regarded the groanings of the needy, and has met us in the way of his
Judgments; and has brought in the Ministration of Condemnation, which was
glorious in its time, and placed it upon the head of the transgressor in us,
whereby he has judged and condemned the transgressing and rebellious part,
that would not that he should reign, and in his infinite love, and bowels of
tender compassion, which yearned toward his own pressed Seed that groaned to
be delivered, has he ransomed and redeemed his own in measure, and led the
same as he did Israel of old out of Egypts darkness, and from under Pharaoh's
taskmasters, to sacrifice unto him, and praise him in the land of the living.

And my dear Friends, a remnant through Gods mercy can truly say, he has
visited us as with the day spring from on high; and are witnesses that
refreshment from his presence is come; and though sorrow endured for the night,
yet joy came in the morning, the day being dawned, and the morning Sun arisen;
yea the Winter is now through mercy, with many far spent, and the storms in
measure over, and the spring time come, and the singing of Birds, and the voice
of the Turtle is heard in our land. O! the glorious day that is dawned upon us,
where the morning Stars do sing together, and all the Sons of God do shout for
joy. Oh! the wonderful works of our God, and the noble Acts that he has done;
he has made us to see his wonders in the deep, and as Israel of old, to sing
his praises: Oh his tender dealings can never be raced out of our remembrance,
he has printed them in our hearts, and his engaging love constrains us to
speak well of him, and to make mention of his Name, and speak of his loving
kindness and tender mercies which endures for ever!

And dear Friends, after all this and much more of the Lords dealing with us,
and kindness and mercy bestowed upon us, has the old adversary and enemy of
mankind bestirred himself, who in every Age has gone about to ensnare the
simple, as in Israel of old, when he prevailed over Achan to covet the wedge of
Gold and the Babylonish Garment, for putting his hand to which, the whole Camp
of Israel was troubled, until Achan was found, and Babylon's Stuff thrown out,
and burnt without the Camp. And other some taking strange Wives, mixing with
the Heathen, loving their Gold, and learning their ways; for which Ezra in his
bitter Lamentations, plucked the Hair from his Head and Beard; and Jeremiah
wished, that his Head were Waters, and his eyes a Fountain of Tears, that he
might weep day and night for the slain of the Daughters of his people. And dear
Friends, in our Age many has been the temptations and allurements this enemy
has assaulted the children of the Lord with, some times transforming himself
as into (...) Angel of light, to deceive if it were possible the very Elect:
But blessed be the Lord who has preserved a remnant out of his snares alive
unto himself, yet has he prevailed upon some, drawing them into diverse
disorders, whereby the worthy Name of the Lord has been blasphemed, his
precious Truth evil spoken of, and the simple ensnared, to the sorrow of a
remnant, and sadding the hears of the righteous, which has caused many tears
and secret cries unto the Lord, that he would appear in his wisdom more and
more, for his own glorious Names sake, and Truths sake, to preserve the simple,
and frustrate the enemy of his end: And blessed be the Lord who still hears the
cry of his own Seed, and being zealous of his own glory, has appeared in his
Faithful Messengers, to gather and encourage men and women's Meetings, whereby
he is stopping the enemy in his progress, by placing judgment on his head, and
condemnation to that part over which he rules; and in this work the Lord has
engaged Sons and Daughters, putting his spiritual Sword into their hands, for
the beating down strong holds of sin, in which the mighty Prince of the power
of darkness has his place: neither dare they do this work negligently, or
overlook, or connive at any of his practices, or proceedings, in whomsoever
they appear, but in Truth, and Righteousness, judge and condemn the evil, under
whatever pretense the same do appear, at which the evil once is troubled, and
likes not this way, neither would be thus dealt with, but under pretense of
Truth pleads for more liberty and freedom of Spirit; and so transforming
himself to betray the simple, and defile the Temple of God, and sit as God, yet
he is the Serpent, and he can not save his head, for the Seed of the woman is
brought forth, and a bringing forth, and the enmity is placed between the two
Seedt, and her Seed must break his head; and he is now a receiving Blows, at
which he rages, and raileth against the work of the Lord, and the instruments
he imployeth: But the determination of the Lord is to disthrone him, and bring
him down, and take his own possession, and reign in his own Temple, whose right
it is to rule, and happy will all such be, who in omission do meet him in the
way of his Righteous Judgments, for they are always mixed with mercy, and they
shall find it who submit unto him, but such as will not that he should reign,
he will bring them to naught.

The (...) dear Friends, let us keep our Women's Meetings in Gods pure, fear,
and wait upon him to feel his powes and heavenly wisdom, and that will allow of
nothing whereby the worthy Name of the Lord is blasphemed, his precious Truth
evil spoken of, or good Spirit grieved either in the particular or general, but
by his power and wisdom it will be judged and disowned, without respect of
persons, whether by words or actions, Meats, Drink or Apparel, let the pretense
be what it will, neither can this sow pillows under the arm-holes of any, nor
speak peace to the wicked; nor heal the hurt of the Lords people deceitfully;
but search the wound, and pour in the pure ^oyl, to the comfort of the wounded:
That, that may be raised which delights to do its Fathers will, and honor him
in all things (i. e.) both in life, practice and dectrins, that so in this holy
life we may shine as Lights in the World, in Gods wisdom, having our Lamps
trimmed, our Lights burning, and in our Consers the sweet Incense, which gives
a good Savor both to God and man, having the Savoury Salt in us with which
every word and action may be seasoned, that others seeing our holy lives, and
good conversations may glorify our heavenly Father.

And dear Friends, let no difference be, but in the unity of one Spirit let us
be a people of one heart and mind, serving the Lord with one consent, seeking
his glory unanimously, working the work to which he has called us, which work
is to stop the enemies work (as I said before) in what pretense soever he come;
for Friends, he will ask no more then to have footing amongst us, under
pretense of Truth, purting a fair vizardon every action, calling pride decency,
covetousness carefulness, Nicety and Curiosity in the forms of Meat, Drink, or
other things, a point of good House wisery, for every thing he will have a
covering like Truth, that he may keep his Interest in the hearts of men and
women, which is the principal part: But the Heir is brought forth which must
take his Inheritance, and the true Light now shines that discovers him in
every action, not one corner he can shelter in where he is not seen, his
coverings are all too narrow, the vail which he has spread over him and his
actions, must by the power of the Lord which is risen, and arising in the
bosoms of a remnant, be rent in twain from the top to the bottom; so my dear
Friends, whom God has engaged, every one discharge your duty, be zealous for
the Lord, and valiant for his Truth, and as the valiants of Israel, every one
have on your Spiritual armor and weapons in readiness, for woe will be to
those who do the work of the Lord negligently, or with a careless mind: But
they will with J^^l be blessed, who put their hand to the work, and their right
hand to the Workmans hammer, to the wounding of Isreal's enemy, for he must bow,
yea he must fall, and Songs of Triumph over him, as in Deborahs days there must
be: Therefore Friends, let us to the work, every one to the employment to which
we are or have been called; and while the Light shines that lets us see every
Corner, let all that is unclean be rid, and swept out; yea let us make clean
work, for to be truly arrayed in the White-Linen which is the righteousness of
Saints, is very decent, and to have this house (to wit, our hearts and inward
parts) clean swept, and all its furniture of righteousness set in good and
comely order, in carefulness, is very commendable and consistent with good
House wifery too: And I do not doubt but those who are careful in the matters
before mentioned, will not as to outward things come short (according to their
abilities) in any thing that is needful, necessary, comely, decent and of good
report; as it is not fit they should exceed, so I hope they will not come
behind, what may be of good example, and tend to edification, and to those
things whereby Truth is honored. So Friends let us be Faithful to the Lord,
and careful over his household and family, not as the bad Servant, who smites
his Fellow, but as the good Servant, giving them Meat in due season, Feeding
the Hungry, Clothing the Naked, Visiting the Sick, binding up the
brokenhearted, healing the wounded, and let it be with Gileads Balm, and
blessed shall all such be when their Lord comes whom he shall find so doing;
and greatly has the presence of God to his praise appeared to the owning,
carrying on and blessing of this his own work, and large has been his love and
Fatherly care over all Lambs and little ones, and very weighty is the work and
great the concern, to strengthen the weak, and confirm the feeble, and gather
all those that is scattered by the wiles of the enemy to him, that is and always
was the ancient Rock and refuge of the righteous in every Age, that so, if
possible, not one may be left behind, but all be gathered: And it is the travel
of my Soul, and desire of my Spirit, that none of those may slight the day of
their Visitation, whom the Lord has in any measure touched, or that have had
their faces turned Sion-wards, but that they may be exhorted and admonished,
and dearly entreated to have unto the Lord, who long has hovered over us, as
sometime he did over Jerusalem of old, and fair would have all gathered under
the shelter of his wings, that (...) made mention of his Name; and many has
been his Warnings, and Invitations by his Servants and Messengers, and still he
stands as with open arms, ready to receive all those that come unto him in
^^^llity of mind, and brokenness of heart. So dear Friends, let none ^ick in
the World, its evil ways, vain Customs, or foolish fashions, be not partakers
with them of their pleasures, lest such partake of their plagues; but be ye
separated, touch no unclean thing, and I will receive you, says the Lord: so
in this self-denying life, and by the ancient power by which we were gathered
in the beginning, let us have with speed to our God, who is our refuge and sure
hiding place; for the storm approaches, and certainly will overtake the
negligent and careless, who are gone from the Shepherd. So dear Friends, let no
pains be spared, or means neglected, whereby the work so needful may be
hastened, for it is Gods work, and not man's, though as I said before, it laid on
the ancient and honorable in Israel, to put the work forward; for the Elders
that rule well, are worthy of double honor, as the Apostle said, and also
esteem them for their works sake. And as Deborah said, my heart is toward the
Governors of Israel; and I can truly say, many a time when I have viewed in my
mind their sufferings, trials and tribulations they went through in the
beginning, my heart has been broken, and I have secretly said, They have
broken us a way through the Thickets, and trodden us a path through the
Deserts; they have born the burden in the heat of the day, and what can I now
do, or suffer for the Truth? am not I as one born out of due time?

But living praises to the Lord, who in every Age is ready to reward the
faithful, in what hour soever they labor in his Vineyard; and there is not one
Member, though never so little, if in the body, nor Instrument, though never so
weak, if prepared of the Lord, but all needful and useful in their places, to
the dressing of the Vineyard of the Lord, and for the plucking up of those
hurtful weeds that cumber the tender Plants. And dear Friends, let this be done
in Gods pure fear, and heavenly Wisdom, with a tender care over every weak
Plant, that it may be nourished within good ground, that it may bring forth
Fruit to Gods Glory; For thereby says he am I glorified, that ye bring forth
much Fruit. Then is the labor of love which the faithful bestows answered,
when the Plants prosper, and the Lord is glorified; so in this labor as
co-workers and fellow-helpers, Male and Female, for which we were raised up by
the Lords Power, let us put our hands to the work, and none look at their own
weakness, for the Lord has been pleaded with touching the (...) work and the
weakness of the Instrument he ch^^^ (...) Answer has been in the bosom of such
(i.e.) I have chosen the weak things to overturn the strong and Mighty, and the
foolish things (...) sound the Wisdom of the Wise, and things that are not,
(...) to ^ought things that are and it is the travel of my Spirit, That none
(...) their hand to the Plow may draw back or be dismayed, whatsoever the
opposition be, for living praises to our God, the time is come wherein he is
pouring of his Spirit upon his Sons, and upon his Daughters, Servants and
Handmaids, and enduing them with his Heavenly Wisdom, and fitting and
strengthening them to perform every duty and service he has called them unto,
how feeble soever we have appeared to be. As he did the ancient Jews, when they
had the walls of Jerusalem to build, though it was then said of them, what will
these feeble Jews do? but mark what Courage they received from the Lord to
carry on the work with one hand, and with the other hold their weapon and
praises to the Lord, we have no cause to complain, for his ancient power has
been with us thus far, and his Heavenly presence has accompanied us hitherto,
whereby we are encouraged to the work for which we are appointed, even to
labor in the Lord, for the repairing of the waste places of Jerusalem, and
making up of the breaches in Sion, whom the Lord is making and about to make
the praise of the whole Earth; for her Beauty must shine forth that many seeing
It may have their faces thither wa^de^, and beholding Jerusalems glory, may
desire to dwell within her walls.

And dear Friends, let us diligently view Jerusalem, that we may count her
Towers, and mark well her Bulwarks, that we may tell it to generational (...),
and that those who succeed our day, may have those Testimonies lift upon
Record, what God has done for us, and been unto us (...) his Faithfulness may
be declared from age to age, and from one generation to another. O praises,
praises to our God for evermore, for he has had regard to the low estate of
his Handmaids, and has remembered our many tears when we mourned apart for him
as silly Doves (...) and has visited with his love and owned with his
presence, which is better then life is self; yea he is the beloved of our
Souls, h^ (...) Comery, there is no Spot in him, he is Amiable in our eye, he
is thee chiefest often Thousand, there is none like unto him, nor worthy to be
compared with him; he is our beloved, and he is our Friend and has given us
cause to say, our lot is fallen in a good Land, and that we have a large
possession; yea let this song he sung as in the land of Judah, we have a strong
City, Salvation has God appointed for Walls and for Bulwarks, and will keep in
perfect peace all those whose minds are staid upon him, but he will bring down
those that dwell on high, yea the ^o^^y he will lay low, but the way of the
Just is uprightness, the most upright does weigh his paths, yea in the way of
his Judgments have we waited for him, and the desire of our Souls has been to
his Name, and to the remembrance of it; yea with our Souls have we desired him
in the Night season, and with our Spirits within us have we fought him early;
for when his Judgments are in the Earth, then its Inhabitants learn
Righteousness. O living Praises unto him who has appeared in our age, and
brought forth Judgment into victory, and ransomed, redeemed and raised by his
ancient power, his own suffering Seed, which in every age has found acceptance
with him from the beginning, as was manifest in righteous Abel, Enoch, (and
also Noah whom he preserved;) though he destroyed the old World: and though
Sodom was destroyed, yet Lot escaped, by flying out of it and getting into
Zoar. And dear Friends, it is upon me yet once more to entreat, if any there be
in any measure guilty of any of those Evils for which the Lord is angry with
this Nation, the land of our Nativity, that such by true Repentance, while
mercy is proffered, would return and get out of the same; for the Angel of the
Lord has warned, therefore linger not, but I say get out of every thing where
with the Lord is displeased, for he is a holy God, and of purer eyes then to
behold Iniquity, and without holiness none can come unto him: Therefore says
he, be ye holy as I am holy, So dear Friends, in this holy life let us fly unto
the Name of the Lord, for it is our strong Tower, in which he will preserve the
Righteous, until his indignation be over and past, for he is angry with this
Nation, because of the many and gross evils which has abounded in it, with the
oppressions of his people, because of all which he is grieved, and is preparing
as a man of war to cut down the workers of iniquity, and sweep the Nation of
Evil doers, and will finish Sin, and put an end to transgression, and bring in
everlasting Righteousness, that the knowledge of his glory may cover the Earth,
as the waters cover the Seas; for he has taken notice of his suffering Seed,
and has remembered the afflictions of Joseph, and will set his Seed and
heritage free, and bring the prisoners out of the prisonhouse; for Joseph came
forth to answer the end for which he was appointed, (though he was afflicted
from a Child) to be a Savior and a preserver of much People; for the promises
of the Lord to our father, faithful Abraham, stands sure for ever, who said, in
blessing I will bless thee, and i^ (...) I will multiply thy Seed as the Stars
of Heaven, and as the San^ (...) sh^re which cannot be numbered, in whose Seed
also all the Nations of the Earth shall be blessed. So dear Friends, in the
blessed Seed let (...) ^^^ly wait upon the Lord, to feel its breathings, and
travels, and wrestlings of the Almighty, for Sions sake; yea let those
Spiritual Prayers ascend up unto him, which in every age is his delight, and
avails much with him for Sions prosperity, and for Jerusalem's welfare; and not
only so, but for all that have their faces Sion wards, and desire to inhabit
within Jerusalem's walls, for good is the Lord, slow to anger and of great
mercy, willing to show kindness to all Sions wel-wishers. And so dear Friends,
let us give our Attendance in all heavenly obedience upon him, in his own pure
life begotten and brought forth by him, that so by his own offspring he may be
honored, and in that may sway the Righteous Scepter, and lift up his Standard,
and display his Ensign, that the Nations of those that must be saved by him,
may flock unto him, that so many there may be from the East and West, North and
South, that may come to sit down with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, to praise him
in the beauty of holiness, unto whom all praises, honor and renown belongs,
and to him it is given and returned, says my Soul.

Dear Friends, this has long laid upon me from the Lord, but I would have hid
my self, and have been as one unconcerned, but his hand was heavy upon me, and
gave me no rest, until with many tears I cried unto him that he would help me,
and enable me to do my duty, and discharge my Conscience, and deliver his
Message; and then I gave up, and in obedience found peace: and according to the
ability he has given me, and as he opened in my heart, have I delivered it,
desiring it may be received in the same bowels of love in which it is given
forth, and its end answered, which is only and alone that the Lords People may
be preserved, and he over all glorified who is God, worthy for ever and for
ever, and for evermore.

From a Traveller in Spirit for Sions prosperity, and your true and loving
Friend, in the universal and unchangeable love of our God, in which I bid you
all farewell. CATHARINE WHITTON.


