A LETTER OUT OF SUFFOLK TO A FRIEND in LONDON.

GIVING Some Account of the last Sickness and Death of Dr. WILLIAM SANCROFT,
late Lord Archbishop of CANTERBURY.

LONDON; Printed in the Year, MDCXCIV.

A LETTER out of SVFFOLK to a FRIEND in LONDON, etc.
SIR,
WHen you was pleased to desire of me a particular Account of the last and
fatal Sickness of our late Metropolitan, and of his Grace's pious Behavior
under it, I could not but Congratulate with my Self the happy Employment you
had put me to; and do hereby return you my most hearty Thanks for the fresh
Opportunity you have been instrumental in giving me, of revolving in my
Thoughts those admirable and Christian Virtues, so eminent and conspicuous in
the whole Course and Tenor of his Life, and yet more illustrious at the Time of
his Death: The Memory of him indeed will be always precious in the Eyes of good
Men; and I am persuaded his Name will never be forgotten in these and the
Neighboring Kingdoms, nor ever remembered, or mentioned, but with Marks of
Honor, Esteem and Veneration. But such Memorials are general and languid, and
will but coldly affect our Hearts, or dispose us to Imitation, except his
particular Graces be ruminated on, and rivetted within us by devout and serious
Meditation. This will raise in us (as was in him) a Spirit of Meekness,
Mortification, Fortitude and Constancy: And his Death, will improve the World
(as his Life always did) by recommending a most generous and sincere Piety, and
encouraging us in the most difficult Duties of Religion, And I must confess to
you, that it is owing to your Commands that I have had a greater occasion, on
this great Subject, of glorifying God, (who has given such Graces to Men) of
supporting my self, and encouraging my Brethren in a State of Affliction and
Trouble, by the power and prevalency of so renowned an Example. I conceive
therefore, your Request to me in this particular, was not so much to satisfy
your Curiosity as to affect your Conscience, to provoke you to and preserve in
you such a steady and unshaken Fidelity to Truth, as is not to be undermined,
or wrought upon, by any specious Temptations from the World. Our Holy Faith is
not founded on the Examples of Men, but the Practice of it is mightily
encouraged and assisted by them. And here you have before you a Glorious
Confessor; here you have your Holy Archbishop, making a safe Passage through
Storms and Tempests, and carrying his Integrity and Conscience undefiled to the
Grave. And does not this bright Example mightily enspirit and inflame your
Zeal? Does it not make your Afflictions easy, and your Virtue strong? Would you
now receive the Wages of Unrighteousness how much soever you may want them? Or
would you change your desolate and narrow Circumstances, for those more
plentful at the Expense of your Conscience, for all the World? These are the
Fruits of this great Prelates Virtues, and this is the use we are to make of
them; to animate us in the same Course, to aspire to the same degrees of
Uprightness, to despise the World and to take up the Cross, not as a Blemish,
but an Honor to us: Otherwise, however we may praise and admire him, it is but
Flattery and Hypocrisy; we celebrate his Memory deceitfully, both to his Injury
and our own. For if his great Virtues deserve to be commended, they deserve to
be imitated too: The Praise of the Tongue is but Breach and Air, and the
Character goes no deeper than our Lips: But if we live like him, and pursue the
same Virtues, with the same Faithfulness and Constancy, our Love and Admiration
is seated in our Hearts and Consciences, and we evidence the Honor we had for
him, by the noblest Principles of Humane Nature. If therefore we shall make him
our Pattern, and follow his Example, we shall do more right to his Memory, than
by all the Panegyricks in the World.

I could heartily wish that I were able to set this great Example in a true
Light, that I could draw his Grace's Picture at full length, and give you a
complete Account of the whole Series of his Life from the beginning to the end;
and this (if it was faithfully done) perhaps would be as bright a Pattern of
Virtue as has for many Ages been communicated to the World, and would emulate
the Piety of the first and purest Times, and the Faithfulness of the Primitive
Christian Bishops: But this is a Task too difficult for me upon many Accounts,
and I hope will be undertaken by some abler Hand, and indeed is more than you
require of me: However, as Introductory to what follows, I shall lay before you
these two General Observations.

I. That that high and important Station which he held in the Church of
England, was never better filled nor managed with better Conduct: His great
Abilities of Learning, Wisdom, Courage and Sincerity, abundantly qualified him
to guide the Church, and steer the Helm of it, in the most dangerous and
surprising Junctures. There never was a Time since the beginning of
Christianity, when all these Qualifications were not necessary in a Christian
Bishop, and which he had not always more or less occasion to exercise: But it
must be confessed that in his Days, the Church was beset with extraordinary
Difficulties, and required an extraordinary measure of Prudence and Resolution,
of Faithfulness and Zeal, to manage that great Trust committed to his Charge,
to the Honor of God, the Interest of Religion, and the good and benefit of the
Church.

There are two famous Instances which give testimony to this and abundantly
evidence the greatness of his Mind, the wisdom of his Conduct, and the zeal and
care he had for the preservation of Religion, and the safety of the Church. The
First was when he was to struggle with the Commands of a Lawful Sovereign,
which seemed to interfere with the Interest of the established Religion, and
the known Laws of the Land, but of this he made no difficulty, and soon
resolved rather humbly to decline the Commands of his Rightful Prince, than to
obey him to the prejudice of the true Religion, and the Established Laws. But
the manner of doing this was as exemplary as his Courage, when his King laid
uneasy Commands, and which he could not comply with, he did not presently fly
in his Face, and load Him with Invectives and Aspersions much less did he
undermine his Throne, invite the Invader of it, or by ungodly or revengful Arts
endeavor to defeat him of his Just and Hereditary Rights: But, like a true
Christian Bishop, he committed his Cause to God, and possessed his Soul in
Patience. He could not do an unlawful thing, but he knew well that that Reason
extended to all unlawful Things; and that he could no more violate the Rules of
Religion, and the Laws of the Land, in resisting his Lawful Prince, or injuring
him in his undoubted Rights, than he could violate them in Obedience to him.
Sincere Virtue is always uniform, and all of a piece; and he knew that the same
Religion and Laws which enjoined him not to obey, obliged him likewise not to
resist, and rebel; they were of equal Obligation in both Cases, and their
Authority as Sacred, and could not be broken with a safe Conscience in one
Instance no more than in the other. He stood indeed in the Gap, with all the
degrees of Fortitude and Resolution that the greatness of the Occasion
required; but these were Christian and Episcopal Virtues, and joined with the
same degrees of Meekness and Humility, by humble Petition, by all modest and
just ways he declined Compliance, but without the least insolence of Behavior
or disrespect to the Person of his Prince, much les, to shake off his Authority
and Government, whom be know to be the Rightful King of these Kingdoms, and
established in the Throne by the Laws of God and the Land.

It is true in this Action (though it is to be feared of some, not with the
same Intention) he did not stand alone; but several of his Brethren, my Lords
the Bishops, and most of the inferior Clergy bore their parts and joined with
their M^tropolitan: But as his Post and Station, his Wisdom and Conduct, his
great part in that whole Affair deservedly challenges the first place, so the
ascribing to him what is really his due, does by no means detract from the
merits of the rest: All those who acted in Conjunction with him, and upon the
same Foundation and Principles, their Credit and Virtue remain entire to them,
and they will never lose the Reputation of their Constancy and Faithfulness;
but those who acted out of sinister and corrupt Ends, and have since forsaken
their Principles, and woefully prevaricated, they have blasted their own
Reputation, and have little consulted the Honor of that excellent Church of
which they were Members. However I must tell you a plain Truth that some of
them who then thought themselves, and still would fain be accounted main
Pillars of the Protestant Cause, were, in this Affair, very fleeting and
unsettled, and for finding out Salvo's and Distinctions; and their subsequent
Practice was in a great measure derived from his Wisdom, Authority and
Influence.

I shall not need to mention to you his Conduct in the ordinary Branches of his
Metropolitical and Episcopal Office: how he to^k care to discharge those with
great Faithfulness, to preserve the Church of England in its Rights and
Establishments, and to secure the Purity of her Doctrine, Worship and
Discipline, so far as his Power and Authority extended: These are notorious to
all the Kingdom. And it will be sufficient here to observe, that while he sat
in the Chair, there was no underhand trucking with the Socinians, or others,
out of her Communion; He was a very wise, but withal a very plain and sincere
Bishop; He was above little Tricks and Politic Arts, and knew not how to
preach against People, and then to stroke and sawn, and curry favor with them
when he had done: He was never at the bottom of any Project to give up the
Liturgy, the Rights and Ceremonies of the Church: For alas! (quite contrary to
modern Policy) He thought that the best way to preserve a Society had been in
keeping steadfastly to the terms of it; he had as great a tenderness and
compassion, for the seduced and misled as any Man and used all just and
moderate ways, for their Reduction and Information, but in good truth, he had
not that Latitude of Principle to sacrifice the Church out of secular Intrigues
and Politics, and to deliver up the Mounds and Fences of it to a Party which
had been endeavoring the Destruction of it for a hundred Years and more, and
who once had effectually ruined her. When he had favor at Court, and was able
to recommend a Person to the highest Offices in the Church, it was never his
Custom to lay aside, or post-pone, the most worthy and able Men, and firm to
the Constitution of the Church, and to make use of his Interest to advance a
sort of Men who are equally principled for Geneva as for England, or for any
Constitution besides; who were never true nor honest to the Church in their
Inferior Charges, and who are far better qualified to betray than to support
her. In sine, when he was possessed of the Revenues belonging to his Church, he
never made it his business to destroy and plunder it, by cutting down the
Timber upon little Pretenses, and then putting the Money into his own Pocket.
Upon the whole, he was a true Father; the Interests of the Church were his own;
and he spent himself in preserving her Honor, Rites and Revenues: Whereas it
has been long ago observed, that an Intruder is always a Step-Father, who
spins out the Bowels of the Church, and fattens himself with her Blood; who
having no legal Right, and Foundation, is for compounding with Religion, and
bartering the Securities of the Church to support himself and uphold the
Injustice of his own Tenure. And this Observation is so true that it has never
yet failed in any one Instance. He that came into the Church a Thief and a
Robber has always continued so; and from the beginning of the Church to this
very Day there has not been one Ecclesiastical Usurper, but, who in one or
more Instances, has pawned something of Religion to gain an Accession to his
Party, and to secure and strengthen his unrighteous Possession.

Another famous Instance demonstrating this great Prelat's Virtue and Piety,
and his admirable fitness for that High Office he sustained in the Church was
this, that he chose rather actually to suffer an expulsion from all his Honors
and Ecclesiastical Revenues, than to violate his Conscience, or stain the
purity of those Principles, he had always maintained and adhered to: This is a
Proof next to Martyrdom, and there cannot be given a greater testimony to a
Man's Sincerity, except it had been the laying down his Life; and no doubt,
that he would also have as cheerfully done, had the Divine Providence thought
fit to have called him to that Trial. God knows the Heart, but Men cannot know
one another, nor yet themselves, but by Trials and Temptations: Disguised
Virtue will deceive the World, and perhaps our selves too, and when we meet
with no interuption in our Affairs a general care of inoffensiveness may pass
for great Uprightness, both in the Eyes of Men and in our own: But when the
Business comes to Experiment, when we must either part with the World or with
our Consciences and Principles; this is a Touchstone of our Sincerity, and the
distinction is soon made. And here we have a most Reverend Archbishop thrust
from his high Station, and divested of all his Spiritual Promotions and
Preferments, merely upon the account of his Conscience, and which he might
easily have kept, if he could have but tampered with his Principles, and bribed
his Judgment to submission, by carnal Inducements and fallacious Arguments. But
as he was too wise and judicious to be imposed upon, so he was too honest to
act upon hypocritical Pretensions and sophistical Evasions; for (as he often
said) he had rather suffer under his Lawful Prince than flourish under an
Usurper. Alas! Sir, he never was able to know, which way the People
(collectively, or representatively) became Sovereign of this Kingdom, and could
give away the Government to whom they pleased; he never had Philosophy enough
to know that the Streams rose higher than the Fountain, that the Receiver of a
Gift for that very Reason had a better Title to it than those that gave it, how
those which gave away that which was none of their own, could derive a better
right to the Taker than they had themselves. He had no skill to dive into the
Mystery of a People being Conquered by themselves, and thereby deriving a Title
of Conquest to a third Person; he could not expound the Riddle of Conquering by
Vote, or that giving and taking were discriminating Marks of a Conquest; nor
could he submit his Conscience to the maddest Hypothesis that ever was broached
by Men. He had not the nice Subtilty to distinguish between Allegiance de
facto, and All giance de jure. For as he knew that all Duties whatsoever, were
founded in Right and flowed from it, and there is no such thing in the World as
a Duty to Wrong, so he knew likewise that neither our own Laws, nor any in the
whole World, had been so contradictions and inconsistent, as to provide for a
double Allegiance in opposition to one another. These were Fig Leaves, which
some had sewed together to cover their Nakedness, but the covering was so very
thin and slight, that a far less discerning Judgment than his, would easily
look through them; it needed no Skill nor Art, but pla^n Honesty was sufficient
to uncloath them, and to perceive that they served only to blind or shaffle
with the Conscience, by no means to direct or satisfy it. He knew an Oath was
too sacred and serious to be taken upon phantoms and shadows; upon such wild
and ridiculous suggestions, as have not the least being in Nature, Reason,
Religion, or the Law. And he knew withal, that to take two contradictory Oaths,
must necessarily involve a Man in the guilt of Perjury: In such a case, there
is no medium betwixt swearing and forswearing. Upon this Basis he stood and he
stood like a Rock firm and unshaken, and all the Billows that beat upon him,
could not make the least Impression. His high Post and great Revenues, were
mighty Temptations, but when they came to be put into the Balance with his
Conscience, he soon determined his Choice, and gave a convincing Demonstration,
that his Virtue was superior to the World, and independent of it; that Truth
is better and far more elegible than Riches and Honor, when for the sake of
one poor persecuted Truth, a Man can without the least hesitancy, forsake all
that is great and honorable in the World It is true, on this great occasion he
had many Partners, Seven of my Lords the Bishops, and a considerable number of
the Inferior Clergy, besides many of the Nobility, Gentry and Commonalty,
preserved themselves from Contagion, and gave the same great proof, of their
invincible Fidelity and Constancy; whereby they have not only secured the
uprightness of their own Consciences, but have withal maintained and upheld,
the Honor and Reputation of the Church of England, which has so terribly been
impaired, by the Scandalous Apostasy of so many others. And this is of such
mighty consequence, that it must be confessed that Posterity has nothing left
to vindicate the Church and her avowed Principles, but their Heroic and
memorable Examples; and when After-Ages, shall come to dispute the Principles
of our Church, they will have the Piety and Practices of these excellent Men,
to counter-ballance the general defection, which has overspread this unhappy
Nation.

II. Another General Observation which I have to remark to you, is, that these
immortal Virtues, which have embalmed his Name to all Posterity, were not newly
acquired, or even exercised; but his younger Years gave an early Testimony of
the Greatness of his Mind, and the steadiness of his Principles. There was a
Time when a wicked Covenant and Engagement were to be taken; the one Oath was
designed to propagate Rebellion, and to destroy the Church, and the other to
support a Cruel Usurpation: And these (in their respective Seasons) blocked up
all Preferments, and a Man could neither keep what he had, nor be admitted to
any other, but he must first make his way by swallowing the Deadly and Accursed
Thing. In those Days, he was in the Prime and Flower of his Age, when gaudy
Seducements are generally the most prevailing, when the Passions and
Propensities to the World are most strong, and the Judgment less mature and
solid to correct them; but even in his greener Years his Virtue was ripe; he
then became an actual Sufferer for the very same Principles, and chose to
relinquish his Interest in his Native Country, and to submit to a voluntary
Exile rather than advance himself by the Rewards of Ungodliness, and own the
Authority of an unjust, though prevailing, Usurpation. This therefore is not
the first Time that he gave the World proof of his admirable Constancy; He was
a Confessor near fifty Years before upon the very same Account; and the very
same Reasons and Arguments, (that in those Days were urged for Rebellion and
Usurpation) which could not work upon him then, much less could they do it now,
(though they had New Names put to them) when his Judgment and Virtue were
improved; and the Truth of those Principles confirmed by his most mature
Thoughts, and by long Experience. He had seen and sisted all these matters long
before, and it was not likely, that to a wise and good Man, the Copy and
Transcript should prevail more upon his Riper Years than the Original it self
did upon his Youth; Doleman's Rebellious Arguments had no better Effect when
transplanted into Dr. St -- t's Unreasonchleness of a New Separation, than they
had in the Vile Book of Parsons the Jesuit it self; and the very same Namerical
Reasons could satisfy as little, when baited with modern Names, than they did
heretofore, when they came immediately from the Pens and Persons of the first
Authors themselves, from Regicide Cook, and Milton, from John Goodwin, and Hugh
Peter's. In short, he was always just to his Conscience, and true to his
Principles, and the repeated Instances he has given of an untainted Fidelity
will exceedingly add to his great Character; That in all the various
Concussions of State, the Turns and Changes of the World, he was always the
same; and the last great Actions of his Life will suffer no Diminution or
Reproach from any Temporizing Levity or Unworthiness of his former Proceedings.
I do not deny but a Man may once trip and miscarry, and afterward relent and
recover himself, and become very Great and Useful; and there is no Repugnancy
in the Reason and Nature of Things, for a Man erring through weakness of
Judgment, inconsiderateness or violence of Temptations, to raise himself up
again, and to stand firm ever after: But if we shall cousult Fact, we shall
find this Theory not always, perhaps not very often, confirmed by Experience.
Those who have once played Fast and Loose with their Principles are generally
prepared to travel the Compass; and we have in our own Memories some who passed
from the Covenant to the Engagement, from thence to the Cromwell's, thence to
the Restoration, and from thence to the Revolution: And no doubt, if there was
occasion, from the same unchangeableness of Principle could travel the same way
back again. Now Sir, if this be no Blemish to a Man's Integrity; if when he can
receive new Principles with every Tide, and turn himself and his Conscience to
every Turn of Affairs; if he can dispute the same Things Pro and Con, and
resolve a Case of Conscience backwards and forwards, and rise and fall his
Doctrines in Proportion to his Interests; if notwithstanding he shall sustain
the Character of Steadiness and Fidelity, then by my Consent Ecebolius and the
Vicar of Bray shall henceforward be reckoned among the Consessors, A versatile
and winding Craft shall pass for the mark of a plain and fair dealing man, and
the Wind and the Moon be hereafter the fittest Emblems of Constancy. But if
Mankind have always taken other Estimates of Things; if the Truth and Goodness
of a man's Virtue has been always measured by its Strength, that it is able to
abide the Trial, to weather all Storms and mutable Accidents, and remain the
same under all Difficulties and Discouragements; if the difference between
counterfeit and standart Virtue consists in Permanency and Perseverance, not
subject to the Changes and Chances of this Lower World, If finally these are in
themselves, and were always accounted great and glorious Things, then the
several-Stages of our Venerable Father's Life will afford us so many Eternal
Monuments of his Piety. And he has left behind him very few, who in this
degenerate Age are likely to equal his Virtues, or to come near them by many
degrees, and none less than him who sits in his Chair, and some others who fill
the Sees of our Deprived Bishops.

But, Sir, Will you give me leave more fully to excite your Piety and
Imitation, and to improve to your Use and my own this great Example to the best
Advantage. It may be necessary to go a little deeper, and to uncover the Root
from whence so many Excellent and Praiseworthy Actions did spring; for it will
be impossible to copy out one of his great Virtues, without acquiring a just
Proportion of all the rest. To aim at his Constancy without his Humility, is to
plant without a Soil, and to aspire at his inflexible Faithfulness without an
equal measure of his Mortification, is to make a Superstucture without a
Foundation. And therefore it may be fit to observe, That that wonderful
Staidness and Evenness of his Conduct, those high and eminent Virtues which
rendered him so conspicuous, were built on a Foundation abundantly sufficient
to support the Weight of them: His Humility and Denial of the World were as
bright as any of his Virtues, and bore up this mighty Fabric: The World could
lay no Bias on his Affections, to suborn his Judgment, and tamper with his
Conscience; but he could and did with equal Affection and Resolution embrace
Truth, when naked and despised, as well as when attended with Honors and
Revenues: And you your self know, and so does every Man else that had the
Happiness to converse with him, That he suffered his Remove from his
Possessions and Preferments, with greater Satisfaction and Cheerfulness than
any man could take them. It was a smart Answer that he gave to a Person,
speaking to him concerning the Revolution, and what were like to be the Effects
of it; Well! (says he, smiling) I can live upon Fifty Pounds a Year, meaning
his Paternal Inheritance; and thereby intimating how little the loss of all the
rest would affect him, and what an inconsiderable Inducement the highest
Station of the Church was to mislead him, and to pervert his Conscience. He had
no Pride, Ambition, Covetousness or Luxury to maintain, and consequently was
secure against all Assaults, that could come from those Quarters. When a man
has once brought himself to that pass, that he cannot live under so much by
the Year; whenever such a Posture of Affairs happens, that he cannot honestly
keep his Integrity and his Incomes too, he is in great danger of turning to the
left Hand, of distrusting Providence and starving his Conscience for to keep
warm his Back and his Belly. When Ambition and Love of the World prevail upon
the Affections, Religion will become Art and Managment, calculated for Designs
and Interests, must vary and alter with Seasons and Opportunities; and such a
Man's Conscience will observe the Wind, and be sure to sit always in that
Corner from whence Preferments come. In fine, whosoever has not a competent
degree of Self-Denial, Mortification and Contempt of the World, Religion can
have no sure hold of him nor he of Religion, and he lies under an utter
Incapacity of being true to himself and to his Conscience; his Principles will
be Arbitrary and Precarious, and follow all the Revolutions and mutable
Contingencies of this World: What therefore our Lord and Savior said,
Whosoever he be of you that forsakes not all that he has, he cannot be my
Disciple, St Luke 14.33. This was not so much a Command, as a plain Declaration
of the State of the Case: There is an utter Impossibility in the Nature of
Things, That a Man should be Christ's Disciple who is not prepared and disposed
to forsake all the World for him, and to put these Dispositions into Act, upon
all just Occasion; for otherwise, he can be a Christian no longer than his
Religion and Interests agree; for when they differ one must be parted with, and
the Predominate Principle will certainly carry him, and he will determine his
Choice in behalf of his Affections. To be mortified to the World therefore, is
not only to do our Duty in that one Instance; but to gain a General
Preservative: The Cross, is the fundamental Principle of Christianity, and
secures the honest Observance of all the rest.

By this Time, Sir, I presume that you perceive how necessary it was to enter
upon this last Paragraph; it has an immediate tendency to lead us in the right
way, and to direct us how we may follow his Steps; if we would imitate his
Greatness of Mind, his Christian Fortitude and admirable Constancy; why then we
must lay as deep a Foundation as he did, we must mortify our Pride and
Passions, and wean our Affections from the World; we must endeavor to attain
the same measure of Patience, Humility, and Self denial; and if this be
effectually done, we may then hope to partake of his Spirit; but if our
Appetites remain irregular, if our Thirst of the World be yet immoderate and
intemperate, we have a Plummer at our Heels, which will be sure to weigh us
down, let our Judgments and Understanding be what they will, and let the
Occasion of Perseverance be never so Just and Honorable. The World is, and
always will be changable, and if there be room lest in our Hearts to plant that
Engine, it will turn us about in spite of the clearest Apprehensions, and the
best Resolutions we can make; when we dote too much upon the Fortune, we shall
forsake our Mistress on the Loss of her Portion and court another. In Truth
without such a measure of indifferency to the World, it will be impossible we
should be true and faithful upon any Occasion where Truth and Fidelity are
required, we shall abandon our Friend or our Father, our King or our Country,
as well as our Virtue, in a declining and unprosperous Condition: For it is an
infallible Maxim in Morals, and which holds good in all Instances, that
Ambition and Levity of Principle, that Covetousness and Unfaithfulness, that
Love of the World and Inconstancy are convertible, there is never one, without
some Proportion and Degrees of the other.

And thus Sir, I have laid before you these two General Observations; and I
think I shall not need to remark, how fit and pertinent they are to lead us
into the Consideration of the last Scene of this Great Man's Life. Here we have
the Picture of his great Virtues, of his Moral and Christian Endowments; and
when we shall find his last Hand to it, when we shall see it completely
finished by himself, it will give a mighty addition to its Grace and Beauty;
the last and finishing Strokes are always the fairest, and give Luster and
Perfection to all the rest. And this is what I have undertaken (according to my
poor measure) to give you some Account of: And when you cast your Eye lower,
you will see that as he lived so he died. He resigned up his Soul in the
Profession and Practice of those very Principles which he owned and maintained
with so great Constancy and Vigor all the time of his Life, which is the most
perfect and unsuspected Evidence that a man can give of his entire Satisfaction
in his Principles and of his great Sincerity in the owning them, and living up
to them. The Hour of Death, is of all others, the most unfit Season for
Hypocrisy and Dissimulation; and if there be any Seriousness and Sincerity in
men they will show themselves on a Deathbed. But when a man has lived
unblamably all his Days, when the most malicious and critical Eye is never able
to tax him with deceitful Daubing, in the whole course of a long Life; when
such a Man shall come to lie under an apparent sense of his Dissolution, if in
the last Article of his Life, he shall renew the Profession of his Principles,
we have all possible assurance, not only of the utmost Plainness and Sincerity
of that Profession, but of the Sincerity also of his past Actions in pursuance
of those Principles; for he stakes his Soul for the truth of his belief of
them, and appeals to God (to whom he is immediately going) for the Uprightness
and Honesty of his former Proceedings.

But Sir, That I may proceed in Order, I am in the first place to acquaint you,
that some time after his Expulsion from his Habitation at Lambeth, he retired
into the Country, to the Place of his Nativity, which was the ancient Estate
and Residence of his Ancestors for above 300 Years, and where he built a small
Habitation, but large enough for his Retinue and Attendants which were only two
or three Servants; Here he chose to six himself in his Retirement; here he
enjoyed the same Cheerfulness of Spirit, the same Serenity of Mind, and (in one
Word) the same good Conscience; there was some difference in the outward State,
in the Splendour and Ornament, but none at all in the Man; and those who
repaired to him from all Parts were blessed with the same charming and familiar
Converse, the same holy Admonitions and Instructions, and they found exactly
the same Great Archbishop, under a plain Roof in a Country Village, that they
used to meet with in his Palace. Some receive Honor and Reputation, from the
Places they hold, and some Infamy; the one as having too little Virtue, the
other too much Vice: But when a man's Virtues bear an equal Proportion with his
Station, they are inherent in his Person, and remove with it; when he resided
at Lambeth, his Episcopal Virtues had there their Residence also: But when he
was forced to leave it, he did not leave his Virtues behind him to be possessed
by the next Comer, (and if this needs to be proved, we have Ocular
Demonstration) but they followed his Person in all Fortunes and Places; and we
had a Most Reverend Arch Bishop in Fresingfield, when there was none at
Lembeth, nor nothing like it. His Obscurity was a new Accession of Honor to
him; it was the Effect of a good Cause and a good Conscience, which though it
added no new Virtue, it made it more bright and visible; they were the same
Virtues he had before, but with greater Luster, and we had with us the very
same Venerable Archbishop, but we had him with the additional Characters of
his Expulsion, and clothed with the new Honors of his Constancy and
Sufferings.

In this just and honorable Retirement he enjoyed all the Pleasures and
Advantages of Solitude; a mere Quiet from the Hurry and Business of this World,
thereby affording greater Vacancy and Leisure for the Concernment of the next,
is in it self so desirable that some have voluntarily stripped themselves of all
their Lofty Accessions on purpose to gain an opportunity of retiring into
themselves, and cultivating their Minds: But when it is an escape from a
spreading Contagion, when quitting the World is quitting the Sins of it too;
it is then not only an opportunity of exercising good Things, but a Sanctuary
and Refuge also from those that are bad: But when to both these is superadded a
Noble and Glorious Occasion, when it is the Result of Piety and Principles, the
Lot of Virtue and a good Conscience; Privacy is then set out to the best
Advantage, it is both our Peace and our Security but it is withal our Joy and our
Crown. This was our Great Prelat's Retirement, and in this Glorious Sphere his
Virtues moved during the last Stage of his Life; for although he needed no
Sequestration from the World, to learn to know himself, and to search into his
Conscience, those had been his constant Exercises and Employment from his
Youth; although no Encumbrances of his Station, or Emergencies of public
Affairs, could ever tempt him to rob God of his Dues, to interrupt his
Devotions, and the necessary Works of Piety; yet the Recess his Conscience had
made him afforded him larger and more frequent Opportunities of conversing with
God, and with himself; of imploring the Divine Favor, Forgiveness, and
Assistance; of perfecting his Repentance, making up the Accounts of his Soul,
and preparing himself for another World: And these were the Companions of his
Solitude, the Fruits and Improvements of his Sufferings. But besides his own
personal and particular Concerns, there were others of a more public Nature
which he charged himself with, and interested himself in, the Groans of a
languishing and afflicted Church, and the Scandal and Sins of an ApostateOne,
were each of them sad Subjects, and both deserved and excited his Christian
Compassion, and his earnest Address and Application to God for Grace and Mercy
in proportion to the respective States and Conditions. These are Times of Trial
and Temptation, of Defection and Apostasy; and, as God knows there was occasion
enough, so he suited his Petitions to the Exigency of the Times, That God would
be graciously pleased to establish the strong, confirm the weak; reclaim and
recover the lapsed; those who deserted his Authority as well as their own
Principles, could not run away from his Prayers and Charity; and God grant that
they may find the benefit of his holy Devotions, who would receive none by his
Influence and Example.

But besides these, there is yet another Ingredient which rendered his Solitude
more Triumphant, and that is the Reason and Occasion of it; it was not the
Effect of Weariness or Satiety, of Sullenness or Disappointment, but founded in
just and righteous Principles; and the goodness of the Cause sanctified the
Affliction, and made his Privacy venerable in the Eyes of all, and very
comfortable to himself; it was indeed the Exercise and Safeguard of his
Virtues, but it was moreover the actual Suffering for them; and this gave it
Life and Spirit, changed the Style and Denomination, made his Meanness his
Glory, his Abasement his Honor and Ornament; and though he was always a very
Great Man, yet he made a greater Figure in the World, and sustained a more
Honorable Character in his Privacy and Retirement, than ever he had done in
the utmost Extent of his Prosperity and Plenty: And this was not only external,
and terminated without him, but it was an Honor founded in Righteousness. The
Honor this comes from God only, which exerts a mighty Power within, and sheds
ineffable Comforts into a Man's own Breast. He saw nothing about him, but what
were Arguments of his Uprightness; and carried the Marks of his Sinceriry; and
this joined with the internal Testimony of his own Soul, is perhaps one of the
most reviving and cherishing things in the whole World: And here we may
contemplate the mighty power of a good Conscience, how easily it triumphs over
the World, and what unspeakable Pleasure arises in the Soul, from the sense of
an honest and resolute Adherence to Duty: He did not only bear his Suffering
and low Condition with Patience, but be exulted in it; it was matter of the
highest Satisfaction to him, and any Man might read the Pleasure in his Breast,
by the constant Serenity and Cheerfulness of his Aspect; and I dare say, that
the most greedy Worldling never enjoyed half that solid Complacency, in the
most lucky and fortunate Acquisitions, as he did in being deprived of all, and
reduced to the mean Circumstances of a private Habitation.

Thus Holy were his Exercises, thus Heavenly his Comforts, till at long (...)
pleased God in order to perfest and complete them) to visit him with a long and
langishing Sickness: His Disease was at first an ^^^ermitting Fever; but the
Fits were so extreme Violent that he was very near Dying in the Second, and lay
Speechless and bereaved of his Senses for some Hours; but by the help of the
Cortex Peruvianus, advised and directed by his Physician, a Third Fit was
prevented: But however the stopping the Fits gave some Respite, yet it was
without any promising Hopes; he had some Lucid Intervals, but recovered no
Strength; he lay under a general Weakness and Decay, and so continued Wasting
to the last Period, till his Spirits and Vitals were exhausted, and his Soul
took Wing from a dry and emacirated Carcass. This Distemper from the Beginning
to the End continued just Thirteen Weeks; He fell Sick on the 26th of August,
and Dyed on the 24th of November following.

And now, Sir, I presume you expect to see the Fruits of a good Life, the
Conduct of sincere Virtue when it is to wrestle with the Terrors of Death; this
is the last and it is the greatest of Trials: And here we perceive the
wonderful Advantages of Sincerity, that it stands us in stead when we have
most need, and when all things else fail us; it supporteth us when our Spirits
are spent, and enableth us to look Grim Death in the Face, not only with
Confidence but with Address. When he had once shown his Physician his wasted
and shrivl'd Thighs and Legs, void of Flesh and all nourishing Juice and
Moisture, says he, And can these Dry Bones live? In truth, he was not only
contented and willing to die, but he breathed after it with Ardency, he desired
it, and called for it, but still with the humblest Submission and Resignation
to the Will of God: He used to express the Sense of his Heart in these Words of
the Psalmist, I will bear the Indignation of the Lord, because I have sinned
against hin: I will lay my Mouth in the Dust. In his greatest Extremities and
Agonies, he used to set before him the great Example of our Savior, For, says
he, As a Lamb carried to the Slaughter, he was Dumb, and opened not his Mouth.
Those great Virtues of Humility and Patience, of Trust and Affiance in God, of
Universal Charity and good Will to Men, which by a long Practice he had made
habitual and familiar to him, now exerted themselves most powerfully in this
Critical Season; and we beheld the Graces of his Life triumphing over the
Decays of Nature, and were both the Support and the Crown of his Deathbed,
which plainly teaches us, how necessary it is to gain a Habit of Virtue in the
Days of our Health, that we may not have it to seek when we have the greatest
occasion to use it. We saw the admirable Humility and Patience of his Soul,
with what quiet and cheerful Resignation he submitted to the Divine Will
throughout the whole Course of his languishing Sickness: There was not the
least appearance of any Disturbance or Discomposure, but the same Meekness
which had always calmed his Passions under former Dispensations, was ready now
to assist him, and was in in truth more eminent and visible in extremis. That
which came the nearest to a Complaint, was only a Description of his wasting
Condition, in these Pious Words, Thy Hand is heavy upon me Day and Night, my
Moistare is like the Drought in Summer, But even this joined with an Act of
high Trust in God; for, says he, I am low, but must be brought lower yet, even
to the Dust of Death; yet though he kill me I will Trust in him. His great
Piety (which was always quick and active) was now most sprightly and vigorous;
and it was surprising to behold, in the perfect failure of all Bodily Supports,
with what Presence of Mind he would turn himself to all the Difficulties he lay
under, with what wonderful Dexterity he would meet with and alleviate his
Extremities, by pious and suitable Ejaculations, taken out of the Scriptures,
or breathed from his own pious Soul: An Acute Pain, or dejection of Spirit (the
frequent Companions of his Sickness) could no sooner approach him, but he was
always as ready to obviate them by a Divine Sentence or holy Prayer. It was
indeed an unspeakable Comfort and Satisfaction to us, and we reflected on the
mighty power of a well spent Life, the great Efficacy of the constant Practice
of Virtue; when we saw him with so much case and facility overcoming the Throws
and Pangs of a mortal Distemper, and preventing the Terrors and Convulsions of
Death it self. We saw his flaming and ardent Charity, both extended and limited
according to the Apostle's Direction, (...) but specially to them of the
Household of Faith. His Suffering Brethren were the principal Objects of his
Charity and Prayers, but not exclusive of others; but upon the frequent returns
and exercises of his Devotions, he suited his Prayers to the general needs of
men, and recommended them respectively to the Divine Mercy: In particular the
Apostasy of a once Glorious Church stuck very near to him, and this gave great
employment to his Charity; he knew that Prayers might reach them who were
obstinate to all other Convictions; and in this he was earnest and frequent,
that God would touch their Hearts, and reduce them to a Sense of their Sin, and
of the great Scandal they had occasioned, and dispose them to repair it by a
timely and seasonable Repentance: In short, if he had any Enemies, they also
were included in his Prayers, and in particular a little before his last Hour,
he solemnly prayed for a Blessing upon his Family, and Relation, and Friends,
and earnestly begged Forgiveness for his Enemies, as he desired it of God for
himself.

But, Sir, I know you expect from me, a more particular account of his Grace's
management of himself in this his last Sickness, with respect to the Principles
which he owned, and for which he suffered: And, Sir, I shall answer your
expectation, having something very considerable to observe to you on this Head;
and you will soon perceive how far his Conscience and Soul were engaged in that
matter, and that it was impossible for him to have acted otherwise with the
Safety of his Conscience, and preserving the Uprightness and Sincerity of an
honest Man, if you please to consider.

1. That by his own Order and Appointment, and with words of his own framing,
was inscribed upon his Tomb, At last deprived of all that he could not keep
with a good Conscience, I shall presently give you the Inscription at large, in
the mean time, this is as plain, and full a Declaration as Words can make, that
the Reason and Ground of his Noncompliance with the present Powers, was a good
Conscience: he was deprived because he could not comply, and he did not comply,
because he could not do it with a good Conscience: And it is remarkable, that
this came from his own hand, and with intentions to survive him; so that we
have not only a Deathbed Declaration, but that Declaration perpetuated by
himself, his dying Testimony recorded to succeeding Ages, and to remain a
Monument to Posterity.

2. Throughout the whole course of his Retirement, and more particularly during
the time of his Sickness, he never communicated with the Swearing Clergy, nor
would permit them to Officiate, but I cannot express this better than in his
own words, dictated to a Person who was then with him, some little time before
his Death, to be sent as from his Grace to a Friend of his, and a copy of which
I have kept by me: It is in these words. -- My Lord is sensible of how great a
Concernment it is who ministers to him in holy Things, we have very few
Non-Swearers hereabouts: Mr. W. has been with us once, and visited my Lord
solemnly, Mr. E. bath been here often, and at first visited my Lord very
solemnly, and it happened to be at a time, when there were many Swearers, and
Non-Swearers in the Room: He gave me the Absolution of the Church and not long
after the Holy Sacrament: He comes often hither, and when it is seasonable,
performs the Holy Offices. At other Times my S -- who perfectly understands the
Liturgy, uses as many of the Prayers as it is fit for him to do: and we
heartily implore God's Mercy, for the pardon of our Defects and Indecencies, in
the performance of his Holy Service and hope that we are accepted. My Lord
never receives the Sacrament, but with those that come not at the Parish and
are Non-Jurors: He never admits any of the Irregular Clergy to be at the Holy
Offices; as for the rest; if they come when he goes to Prayers, he excludes
them not: This has been his course.

This my Lord dictated to me from his own Mouth; you see how ready his
Apprehension and Judgment are. Nov. 15. 1693.

This, Sir, I conceive needs no application, and here you have your desire from
his own Mouth, an account of his Sense and Judgment, together with his
particular Practice in persuance of it: You know there were other Reports
spread with you at London, as if he had received the Communion at the Hands of
a Juror, and many such like; and the Noise of this came to us in the Country,
and was a great Trouble to his Lordship, and in Truth gave the Occasion, of
representing his own Practice in the foregoing Letter. He had too just a Sense
of the Unity of the Church, and the Flagrancy of the Schism, to admit such
Practices; and you may please to Observe, that this was but nine Days before
his Death, and I can assure you, he never altered his Course afterward; nay,
he took particular and especial care, that a Non-Juror should perform the last
Office of the Burial of the Dead, and particularly appointed him by Name. I
suppose you will make no Objection, that the Letter above runs in two Styles,
one in his own Name, and another in the Person of the Writer; that is very
usual and familiar, when a Person dictates what is to be sent to a particular
Friend, and there was no need, in Matters that related purely to his own
Practice, to be very nice as to the Style of the Representer: And this
difference of the Style, further confirms the Testimony of the Writer, that it
was dictated from his own Mouth, for part of it sustains his own Person, and
thereby gave Credit and Authority to the rest, as proceeding from the same
Fountain, being Branches of the same Letter, and part of the same
Representation.

3. The Third and Last Thing, I have to remark to you in this particular, is,
that drawing near to his End, he said, in the hearing of some of his Servants,
that his Profession (in the particular Case for which he Suffered) was real and
conscientious, and not proceeding from any finister Ends; that he had the very
same Thoughts, of the present State of Affairs, which he had at first: and that
if the same thing was to be acted over again, he would quit all that he had in
this World, rather than violate his Conscience, And in further Confirmation of
this, in less than an Hour before he dyed, he put up these two hearty and
earnest Petitions to Almighty God.

1. That God would Bless and Preserve this poor Suffering Church, which by this
Revolution is almost destroyed.

2. That he would Bless and Preserve the King, the Queen, and the Prince; and
in his due time to restore them to their just and undoubted Rights.

And now, Sir, you see the Make and Composition of these his Grace's Principles
and Practices; you see their very Inwards, and have a Window open into his
Breast; you plainly perceive his Conscience, and his Uprightness in this whole
Affair, and you have the Testimony of his last Breath, and his expiring
Prayers: He was so well satisfied both of the Eternal Truth of those Principles
by which he acted, and of his own Sincerity in living up to them, and suffering
for them, that he ventured his Soul in the same Bottom with them, closed up his
Life with a Profession of them, and made them the Subject of his last
Recommendatory Prayers. I must confess this Inference needs an Apology; for if
the Nature of the Thing it self did not sufficiently testify this, (as it
certainly does) I do not believe that any Man who knew him did ever think
otherwise, or in the least imagine but that he proceeded with the highest
Sincerity. But since we live in an Age where Men oftentimes speak more than
they think, and because they themselves are apt to act upon corrupt Ends, are
willing to charge the same upon others in their own Justification; it may
perhaps not be altogether unseasonable to make good that by undeniable
Evidence, although all Men in their own Consciences do already believe it: And
if the less of all this World, and the venturing our Hopes in the next, in
behalf of a Man's Principles, be not a sufficient and convincing Proof of his
Satisfaction and Sincerity in them; then either there are no such Things in the
World, or they can never be known.

I am now come to the last Period of this Great and Holy Prelat's Life; and all
that I shall represent to you, is, That his Memory and Intellectuals remained
perfect to the last Moment, and even his Senses also; a very little time before
he dyed, he called for a Common Prayer Book, of the smallest Print, and turned
to the Commendatory Prayer, and ordered it to be read; and that being
performed, he composed himself more solemnly for his Departure: He put his
Hands and Arms down to both his Sides, and in a manner laid out himself, and
would have his Head laid lowere and with great Willingness and Cheerfulness
submitted himself to the (...) of Death* The Time, his Age, and other
Circumstances, you will see in the Postseript, when you read the Inscription on
his Monument, composed by himself, and directest by him to be engraved thereon.
He was Buried in Fresin^field Churchyard, against the South wall of the
Church, by his own Appointment.

And thus, Sir, I have given you a true, though very imperfect, Account, of the
Pious and Exemplary B^haviour of our late most Reverend Archbishop, in his
last Sickness, and of his Death. And I desire you would account it (what in
Truth it is) very desective; and that there are many other Passages relating to
his abundant Charity and Beneficence, his memorible Edifices and Endowments,
which equally deserve to be recommended to us, and to be transmitted to
Posterity; and I hope to see a more full and perfect Representation performed
by a more able Hand. I shall conclude with this Prayer, That God would give us
Grace to follow his Steps with the same Resolution and Constancy, that in his
good time, we may be partakers of the same Glory and Immortality.

I am, SIR, Your Faithful Friend and Servant.

On the Right Side of the Tomb.

P. M. S.

LECTOR, Wilhelmi, nuper Archi Praesulis
Qui Natus in Vicinia,
Quod Morti Cecidit, propter hunc Murum jacet,
Atqui resurget. Tu interim
Semper paratus Esto, nam qua non putas
Venturus Hora Dominus est.
Obiit Nov. 24. An. Not. Dom. MDCXCIII.

Obiit Nov. 24. An. Aetat. suae. LXXVII.

On the Left Side.

P. M. S.

WILLIAM SANCROFT Born in this Parish, afterward by the Providence of God
Archbishop of CANTERBURY, at last deprived of all, which he could not keep
with a good Conscience, returned hither to end his Life; and professes here at
the Foot of his Tomb, That as naked he came forth, so naked he must return; The
Lord gave, and the Lord has taken away, (as the Lord pleases so come Things to
pass) Blessed be the Name of the Lord.

Over his Head this.

St. Matthew. 24. v. 27. As the Lightning comes out of the East, and shines
even unto the West, so shall also the coming of the Son of Man be. FINIS.

