An Advertisement to the Reader.
THis Book was written some Years since, by an Eminent and Learned Gentleman;
and having been perused by some Judicious Persons, they have advised the
Publication of it, as very seasonable to the present State of Affairs.

The whole EXAMINATION BIRTH Of the Pretended Prince of Wales, AND THE True
MOTHER OF THAT Notorious Counterfeit and Impostor Fully Discovered and Proved,
Before the LORDS and COMMONS of England, for the public Satisfaction of the
whole KINGDOM.
OF all the Cheats, Frauds, and Impositions put upon Mankind, since Melten
Calves were set up, and Adored for Gods, the World can hardly parallel this
horrid Impostor obtruded upon the Imperial Crown of England, for the Enslaving
of a Nation.

The Arts, the Labor, the Plottings and Cabals (as shall be here made out) and
indeed all the Engines and Engineers set at Work, through the whole Management,
are such a complicated Mass of Villainy, as cannot be repeated without Horror
and Astonishment: Considering not only the Impudent falsifying with Men, whilst
their mistaken Homage and Veneration, due only to the Imperial Sacred Blood of
Princes, has been extorted from them, and paid to Dirt and Rubbish; but also
the prevaricating even with God himself, whilst public Prayers, and Solemn
Thanksgivings, and all, alas but so many mere mock Oblations have been made so
considerable and indeed so shameful a part of the Pagean^^y^*

When we read the dreadful Anathema's pronounced against the general Class of
Hypocrites, to what frightful Apprehensions of the more than common Bolts and
Vials or Divine Wrath, due to the unexampled Authors and Com-plotters of so
amazing a Delusion, must our serious Reflections lead us* A Delusion so truly
Tremendious, that the fatal Consequences of it, (had not the Hand of Providence
been even a miraculous Deliverer) were almost unimaginable. For Instance:

After Heaven had Commissioned the great Henry Earl of Richmond, (afterward
Henry the Seventh) to Execute its own particular Mandate, in the Death of the
Bloody Richard the Third; a Tyrant, that had himself been the Executioner of
King Henry the Sixth, (that Innocent Prince) with his own hands, the contriver
of the Death of the Duke of Clarence his Brother, and the Murderer of his
Nephews, the two young Princes Edward and Richard in the Tower (one of them his
Lawful King) by the Hands of his Ruffians and Hirelings: The Uniting of the
White Rose, and the Red (a Dispute that had so often cost so much English
Blood) by the Marriage of the King, the Heir of the Lancastrian, and Elizabeth
of the House of York; seemed to have laid a lasting Foundation for the future
Peace of England. Nevertheless, as restless Spirits, and Ambitious Minds, are
never wanting to disturb the Quiet, even of the most Halcyon Reign; it is
almost impossible, even in the highest Dispensations of Humane Blessings, and a
National Felicity, to have all Men satisfied.

Henry upon his Accession to the Crown, by a State Jealousy, a natural Disease
in Crowned Heads, had taken Edward Plantagenet, Son and Heir of George-Duke of
Clarence, a Male Remnant of the House of York, formerly by King Richard's
Commandment, detained in in safe Custody, in a Castle in Yorkshire; and kept
him close Prisoner in the Tower.

The severity used to this young Prince begat a public Rumor, that King Henry
was copying after his Predecessor Richard's Original, and that this Princely
youth had either already run the Fate of the poor Lamented young Princes before
Murdered there, or at least that he was speedily threatened with the same
untimely End.

However this popular Impression was not so Universal, but another part of
mankind, were of an Opinion in the contrary extreme, viz. that even young
Edward, and his Brother Richard; both, or at least one of them were alive
still; notwithstanding the known Barbarity of their Inhumane Uncle Richard: Nor
was their Credulity in that point so much to be wondered at; that two young
Princes privately Butchered within the Tower, only by four Assassinates, might
in the popular Faith be believed alive still: When a later Unfortunate
Gentleman, that lost his Head at Noon day, upon the open Tower-bill, before
Four times Four thousand Eyewitnesses, can hardly be believed Dead yet.

At this time (as indeed at all times) there was a subtle Priest (for such
they most are) called Richard Simon: This Priest had to his Pupil, a youth of
about 15 years of Age, Named Robert Simnel; by his Original, Born of the Body
of a Bakers Wife, and possibly begotten too, by the honest Pie crust-Raiser
the Baker; though in reality so well favored, and of that extraordinary
Dignity, and Grace of Aspect, as probably might Entitle him to some more
Gentleman like Derivation, then the courser Veins of his reputed Father, the
Drudg at the Oven could give him. But of the more sure Mother side, Dame Simnel
more certainly claimed her maternal propriety in him.

It came into this Priests Fancy (as Embroyling of Kingdoms, are seldom out of
their Fancies) to set up this Lad, for a Prince of Wales, or a Duke of York;
either for the first or second Son of King Edward the Fourth, before Murdered;
though by Vulgar Tradition received for Living. This projection was first
Hammered, and resolved upon; but an Accident happening, made him change his
first measures, and afterward designed him to personate Edward Plantagenet,
the abovenamed present Prisoner in the Tower. And why? because about this time
a General Bruit arose, that Edward Plantagenet had prevented King Henry's:
Bloody purpose, by an Escape from the Tower; and thereby finding him so much
beloved amongst the People, and such rejoicing at his reported Deliverance, the
cunning Priest changed his first Copy; the young Plantagenet being more in the
present Speech, and Votes of the People; and so it pelced better, and followed
more close and handsomely to appear a Plantagenet, after a Resurrection from so
many Years lying Buried in Prison walls; then an Edward, or a Richard now
almost forgotten.

Accordingly the Ghostly Prince-maker, big with wondrous hopes of preferment,
by the Idol he resolved to set up. expecting to be a Bishop at least, if his
Game was once played out; began to instruct his young Pupil, in all the
magisterial Graces and Behaviors of his intended Sovereignty, and what by his
own, and the Queen Dowagers Assistanee, from whom this Action had the principal
sourse and motion; they held the Book so well, and and so prompted him in the
whole Stage Play, that they equipt him for a complete true Royal-Born
immediately; and furnished him with all and all manner of Answers fitted to all
Questions and Interrogatories.

And indeed there was very good Reason for a more than ordinary care and
caution, in acting so critical a part. For alas, our new made Prince was not to
personate one that had been long before taken out of his Cradle, or conveyed
away in his Infancy, and so almost unknown, or at least forgotten, but a youth
that till the Age of almost Ten years, had been brought up in a Court, where
infinite Eyes had been upon him.

However as bold a Masquerader as this Attempt would make him, the Hazard shall
be no Bar to the Design. For that enterprise must be very hardy indeed, where
the Forehead of a Priest shall redden at the undertaking.

However, for the forementioned Reasons it was not thought convenient that he
should make his first Entry upon the English Stage, least the too curious
English Optics, should pry a little too narrowly, and too near into the
Disguise; and therefore it is Decreed to give him his first start in Ireland;
where not only the distance would give Credit to the Figment, but also the
strong Bent of the Irish Inclination to the House of York, would yield him the
more favorable Countenance and Reception.

Accordingly our Priest, and his Imper^^l Nursling, Embarked for Ireland, where
th^^ no sooner Landed, but all things were so ready prepared for Revolt and
Mutiny (the Natural Distemper of the Clime) as if his Success and Triumph, had
been the Study, not the Lottery of his good Fortune: all things seemed Plotted
before hand. Simon^ First Address was to the Lord Deputy of Ireland, before
whose Eyes, and Irish Understanding, our Prince-look'd Puppit cast such a Mist,
as joined perhaps with some inward Vapors of Ambition, left him fully possessed
that it was the true Plantagenet. The Deputy communicated the Matter to the
Irish Nobles, and finding their Pulses beat so exactly with his own, they
resolved to take a taste of the Peoples Inclinations. But if the more Noble
Irish Grandees were in so much forwardness, no wonder that the meaner Teague,
those thinner Sold Dear Joys, were all Fury, and Transport: Insomuch, that
with a mavelous consent and applause, this counterfeit Plantagenet was
brought with great Solemnity to the Castle of Dublin, and there Saluted,
Served, and Honored as King; and in a few Days after Proclaimed in Dublin, by
the Name of King Edward the Sixth; there being not one Sword drawn in King
Henry's Quarrel.

The King alarmed with this unexpected Accident, amongst several other
Councils, to Ward against this growing Danger, caused the true Edward to be
released from his long Confinement, and showed in the most public manner that
could be devised, to disabuse and sedate the mistaken part of Mankind, and
convince them of their Error and Frenzy and, thereby expose the Levity and
Imposture of the proceedings in Ireland. Hereupon the true Plantagenet was upon
a Sunday brought, throughout the principal Streets of I^^nd^^, to be seen of
the People; and from thence in Solemn procession conducted to St. Paul's Church;
the King having taken care, that those of the Nobility that he most suspected,
as also those that knew the person of Plantagenet best, should hold
Communication with the Young Gentleman by the way; which in effect much marred
the Irish Pageant with the Subjects here. Nevertheless in Ireland it wrought
little, or rather no effect at all; but on the contrary, what with their Irish
Intellects, and Irish Impudence together, they turned the Imposture back upon
the King; audaciously charging him with tricking up a false Plantagenet, to
Defeat the true Inheritor.

The Rebels in Ireland continuing still obstinate to Reason, so privily
transacted with several English Nobles, as to draw them off to their party. But
that which chiefly supported the Reputation of this Impostor, was the
countenance It received from France, from the Lady Margaret of Bergundy, the
most inveterate Enemy of the Lancastrian Family. The Earl of Lincoln, with
others the Confederate English Lords retiring into Flanders, and succored with
some Thousands of Forces from the Lady Margaret, immediately Embark for
Ireland, where upon this new accession of Power, the Irish proceed to Grown
their new King in the Cathedral Church of Dublin; and after several Debates, it
was resolved to Transport their Army, and assert His Right, and make Their
Fortunes in England,

In the mean time the King of England finding the Impostors cause upheld by
such powerful Abbettors, provides and prepares accordingly, by making Levies
suitable to oppose so formidable an Enemy.

The Irish in the mean time, headed by their Lord Deputy, the Earl of Lincoln,
the Lord Lovell, etc. Landed at Fouldrey in Lancashire; and from thence took
their March toward York; but were much deceived in their Expectation of the
Countries Concourse to them; nevertheless they resolved to give the King
Battle, being now past Hopes of a Retreat.

The King and his Party with all alacrity, came to the Decision upon the Plains
near Newark; where the Battle was on both sides desperately fought.
Nevertheless the Divine Providence was pleased to carry Victory to the Rightful
Cause. The Kings Conquest was complete; nor did the Irish and their Allies fail
in Courage or Fierceness: There dyed upon the place all the Chieftains of the
Rebels, viz. the Earl of Lincoln, Earl of Kildare, Francis Lord Lovel, Martin
Swart, commander of Two thousand Almains, all dying without giving Ground. Of
the Irish fell 4000. and amongst the Prisoners taken, was the Counterfeit
Plantagenet, now plain Lambert Simnell again, and the crafty Priest his Tutor.
As for Lambert, the King disdained to take his Life, both out of magnanimity,
as taking him but as an Image of Wax, that others had tempered and molded;
and also as much out of policy, as thinking by his Execution he would be
forgotten too soon; but being kept alive would be a continued Subject of the
peoples Laughter and Derision, and consequently a kind of Spell, or Antidote
against all future Frensies and Infatuations. For which Reason he very
prudently took him Into service in the Court, and posted him in the Office of a
Scullion in the Kings Kitchen. Thus by a Caprice of Fortune, poor Simnel comes
from weilding a Scepter to turning a Spit; where behaving himself a quieter
Subject, then he had reigned a Prince, he had the Honor afterward to advance
to the preferment of one of the Kings Faulconers.

The overthrow of such a Villainous Imposture, was that National Deliverance, as
is not a little worthy the English Remembrance; and the same sort of Artifices
and Machinations formed and practiced in this present Age, we have just Reason
to believe, by the same overruling Providence are and shall be as fully, and
as happily detected, frustrated, and defeated.

With Allowance,

London, Printed for E. B. 1689.


