THE INFORMATION OF Capt. Hen. Wilkinson, OF What has passed betwixt him and
some other Persons, who have attempted to prevail with him to SWEAR HIGH
TREASON AGAINST THE Earl of Shaftsbury.

Together with the CONFIRMATION OF MAJOR JARVIS JAMES, To whom he daily
Communicated the PARTICULARS.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Wilkinson, 1681.

The Preface.
Gentlemen,
I Have given you account of some. Passages since my unexpected Retirement to
this Place, the King's Bench, where I am under a stricter Confinement than any
other Person, upon what Account, or by what Order, I know not: For want of
Convenience and place of Retirement, I cannot give the Particulars in so good
Method and Order as the thing requires. If I had received the Privilege of
going abroad, as other Persons, who stand, I believe, under worse
Circumstances, I should have made bold first to acquaint His Majesty, before I
had published this to the World: But upon inquiry, Why I am thus closely
confined? I have met with various Reports from the Officers that belong to this
Place, to my Fellow Prisoners, who often bring me in strange Reports, and
dreadful News; that is, That I am sure to be hanged for things I have designed
against the Government. By some it is reported, I am that Person that was
intended to murder His Majesty. To vindicate my self and my Innocence, I am
forced to publish this, and to let the World know, That, I bless God, I am not
in the least afraid of what can befall me. I do by this bid Defiance to all
Mankind, to charge me with any Disloyalty against my King and Country: If I
perish, it shall be for speaking and declaring Truth; which the World may
judge, is without expectation of Reward or Applause... I only desire to live
and die an Honest Englishman, and to leave my self and Family without Disgrace.
I am resolved never to procure my Enlargement or an Estate to entail a Curse
upon my Family: I am not so much in love with the World, or an Estate as some
others, that desire to have an Estate upon any Account; besides, I have spent
the prime of my days, and cannot expect long to enjoy it.

HENRY WILKINSON.

To the Reader.
I Having had (in the late unhappy Civil War) the honor of serving His late
Majesty of blessed Memory, and his most Glorious Majesty King Charles the
Second, in a good Capacity, under several Qualifications, in England and
elsewhere, in which I acquitted my self as a Gentleman and Loyal Subject: yet
(with many others in the same Service) had the misfortune to be much
impoverished, and imprisoned in England and beyond Sea.

That when the good Providence of God had restored His present Majesty to His
Crowns and Government, I was to my utmost instrumental, as became my Duty so to
do; and also did rise with the Gentry of Yorkshire, who secured York when
Major General Lambert's Army faced and put a stop to the Army of General Monk:
The Force we then made with our selves and Servants, and the securing of York,
was the cause of breaking and dissipating the Army of Major General Lambert;
which gave a good opportunity for General Monk to march.

That seeing how difficult, and how almost impossible it was for His Majesty to
gratify all such who were then in expectation of, or wanted His Royal Bounty;
I rather chose to betake my self to such just and honorable Means, for Support
of my self and Family, as did occur to me, than to depend upon, or apply my
self unto the Court for an Employment: And did thereupon engage in, and enter
upon several Affairs and Managements of good and rational Prospects. But such
was my misfortune, or else of those I was concerned with, as that all proved
not only unsuccessful, but often to my great loss. I have also spent above a
thousand Pounds at Court, in assisting Mr. Castillian Morris, Son to Colonel
John Morris who was Governor of Pontefract-Castle, who was hanged, drawn, and
quartered for his Loyalty; in which Garrison I was, and after with His Majesty
beyond Sea.

That I having for above twenty years thus spent my time and pains in fruitless
Endeavors, I left the County of York, my usual Residence and place of Birth,
and with my Family came to London.

At length having intimation that considerable Encouragements would be given to
such as would Transport themselves and Families to Carolina, I took a
resolution so to do, with what small Fortune I had left, resolving to bid Adieu
to my own unkind Country.

That in pursuance of these Resolutions, I waited on the Lords Proprietors, to
receive from them personally the State of the said Country, and the particular
Encouragements to be given; of all which I received a full and satis factory
Account. And having the Honor to be well known, with my Service and
Sufferings, unto the Right Honorable the Earl of Craven then present, his
Lordship was pleased to say, He was satisfied of my Honesty and Integrity; and
for my better encouragement, freely offered me to go thither in quality of
their Governor over the North-part of the said Country: which unexpected
Favor I kindly accepted, and some time after had a Patent constituting me
such; as also one other, for one of my Sons to be Surveyor-General of the same;
also, for my youngest Son to be Register.

That during the negotiating this Affair, I had frequent occasion to wait upon
and become acquainted with the Lords Proprietors, and amongst the rest with the
Right Honorable the Earl of Shaftsbury, from whom I had always a very kind
Reception; but never had with his Lordship any other Discourse than was
occasional, in relation to my intended Voyage.

To which having thus engaged my self, I made all the necessary Preparations;
and in the Month of April last hired the Ship Abigail of Colchester, Burden
One hundred and thirty Tuns, or thereabouts, whereof was Master Thomas Wood;
which Ship I Victualled for the said Master, ten Men, and also for all such
Passengers as should be taken on board.

And put on board all my Houshold-goods, and such other Necessaries as was
proper, as also my Wife, Daughter, and three Sons, (two of which had the honor
to serve his Majesty, one being a Commission-Officer some years at Sea)
together with above thirty Servants, women and men, the men of all sorts of
different Mechanic Trades, with their necessary Utensils; as also several
persons, and some Families, who had contracted with me for themselves and their
Goods, passage and freight, who were on board; and several others promised to
ship themselves and Goods, but did not.

Amongst which was one Mr. Booth, whom I had known above twenty years in the
North of England, and to be a person of good Learning, and very ingenious, but
under the Character of a very ill Reputation: This Gentleman and his Family,
then residing in Salisbury-Court, hearing of my intended Voyage, applied
himself unto me, and with great protestations declared, that for the future he
would reform his Life and Conversation both toward God and toward Man, and
would ship himself and Family, with what number of Servants he could: Which
Proposals being early, did encourage me to hire the said Ship sooner than
otherwise I intended, he promising to put on board to the number of sixteen
persons of his own Family.

By which means, and others failure, together with some difficulties which I
met with, the said Ship lay in the River so long, with such Servants and
Passengers aboard her, at my sole charge, as forced me to contract more Debts
than I expected: Also I was in great trouble, and was much detained by reason
of some Debts I was bound for, and fell upon me. And intending just and full
satisfactiou to all men, and to supply my self with all things necessary in
order thereto, was the occasion of my having the said Ship so long upon
charges, viz. from the month of April until August following; at which time,
having gone through most of the difficulties I strugled under, I resolved to
sail in three or four days.

But a Gentleman who was one of the Freightors, and a Passenger, looking upon
himself injured by the long demurrage of the Ship, arrested me; and next day
after, several others did the like; which threw me into the Compter in
Wood-street, where I made fair and reasonable offers of satisfaction; but
through the stubbornness of the persons concerned, the said Proposals proved
ineffectual.

Upon which, my Servants on board, though in Covenant, and long maintained at
my Charge, went from the said Ship, as did also the Passengers with their
persons and Goods, to my exceeding great loss; besides that of my Place and
Passage, and besides the loss of all my own Goods and Estate.

That being under these unhappy complicated Misfortunes, I removed my self by
Habeas Corpus to the Prison of the King's Bench, on or about the 17th day of
September last.

HENRY WILKINSON.

The Information of Capt. Henry Wilkinson, etc.
IMprimis, I the said Henry Wilkinson do declare, and am ready to swear, That
on Saturday October. the 8. 1681. about five a Clock in the Evening, one Mr.
Walter Bains came to Mr. Adams Cellar in the King's Bench Prison, and sent for
me out of the Garden in the King's Bench; who upon sight, told me, he way sorry
to see me in that place; afterward engaged me to accept of a Pot of Beer or
Ale: In the time of its drinking, Mr. Baines showed and expressed the greatest
Kindness that could be expected from a Brother, which made me believe he had
some design. Then he desired to know what sort of Wine I would drink, I told
him, not any; besides the Cellar had none; but he called then for Brandy, which
we had. Then he told me Mr. Brownrig was sent Prisoner to York Castle for
Treason, and for appearing for my Lord Shaftsbury: And also the said Baines
said, he had sent a Note to my Lord Shaftsbury, to demand Fifty shillings for
Service and Charges that was due to him, done for the Lord Shaftsbury at my
request, as he pretends; and that my Lord sent him word, it was a sham and a
cheat put upon him, therefore would pay him no such Bill.

At the same time he told me, I could not but know much of the Lord
Shaftsbury's Designs against the King; and that I might do well to discover it
to him, who was ready to do me any kindness, and desired an opportunity. Also,
that he had been lately with Mr. Graham: And that he has great interest with
my Lord Hyde, (all this time I understood what was designing for my kindness).
I constantly and truly told him, I knew nothing of my Lord Shaftsbury's designs
against his Majesty; only this I did know formerly from Mr. Baines about three
Months ago, that he was then of an opinion that Mr. Brownrig could discover
some unlawful practices against the Lord Shaftsbury, which, I confess, I did
wish might be discovered; for although I have served his Majesty in England,
and beyond Sea, (and no other interest) and as instrumental in his Majesty's
Restoration as any person of my fortune could be, so I am for his continuance
by all lawful means, and never to study the destruction of his Friends or
Enermies by unjust designs. I have cause to believe my Lord Shaftsbury loves
his Majesty; for he always was pleased to show me respect for that I had
served his Majesty.

Now night drew on for Mr. Baines to be gone; all the time he staid was spent
with a great deal of Zeal upon me on the same Subject: He told me I should have
a Pardon, and need not to fear it; I would not deny his profer. But he further
told me, I should be considerably rewarded; neither did I deny that, but told,
when I was requited for my former, I would serve his Majesty in what I could.
I see here was a Design laid, although I had reason to take it unkindly to have
any thing fixed upon me, or to make me an instrument beyond my knowledge, yet I
was resolved to humor the business. Upon which Mr. Baines took his leave this
night, and told me at parting, he would in a few days see me again; but left me
with such promises as at present I cannot express, not much questioning my
Knowledge.

Item, That on Tuesday October the 11th 1681. I was sent for to Mr. Weaver's
house near the Kings Bench, to Mr. Booth, who told me he was glad to see me,
but sorry to see us both in that condition, for he was a Prisoner as I was; he
told me he had removed himself last night from one of the Compters. I required
of him how he came to be at a Waiters house? He told me it was not denied him,
although I could not be admitted one night. I understood he was engaged in the
Design; I considered he had been a man of bad Principles, therefore was
resolved to sland upon my guard. Presently he told me, he was to tell me I had
an opportunity to be a better man in my fortune than ever I was before; and
that now I had an opportunity to make my Fortune: And that I might have Five
hundred pounds per Annum settled upon me and my Heirs, or Ten thousand pound in
Money, which I pleased, if I would discover what I knew of my Lord Shaftsbury
and his design in changing the Government to a Commonwealth, and witness
against him. I replied and told him, no body would believe I should be made
privy to such a Design, (if such a thing was) being I had served his Majesty
in England and beyond Sea. He answered, I was the likeliest man to know; for he
knew I had served the King, and had been slighted and neglected. I told him
that was true. I answered him again, I never desired any thing of his Majesty
for my Service, but that which would cost him nothing; but only have the
preference of others, that never had been concerned in his Majesty's service,
by way of farm on part of his Majesty's Revenues: He told me his Majesty knew
me, and that he was sensible of my Service and Sufferings, and desired to
gratify me; for he often told me, now was the time to do something which would
advance me; for it must now be a King or a Commonwealth: For the Earl of
Shaftsbury's Party would but only make use of me, to slight me when their
business was done. I told him, I was with my Lord Shaftsbury the night before
he was apprehended, and that Sir Thomas Armstrong was there, a person I knew
out of favor, on purpose that he might speak out his full mind; but still told
him, I knew nothing of any design: I also told him, I would say nothing, nor
appear at Court, until I was considered for my sufferings; (a thing I never
expected) and as for going to Court, I never intended it; but the more I told
him I knew nothing of a Design, the more he put me in mind of what Reward I
might have, in such words that I ought to Swear it, whether I knew any thing or
nothing of the business. Now I fully saw the Design; and although I staid late,
at my return I began to consider who I should make this business and design
known to, being a stranger in the Kings Bench; I observed one who appeared to
me to be a sober and sensible person; that night I repaired to him, and (lest I
should be tempted with what offers were made) I told him, that I had a design
to commit a Secret to him; Whereupon I told him, and desired him to put the
same in Writing; and that if ever I declared more than what I did then to him,
(that was) That I know nothing of any Plot or Design against his Majesty
intended by my Lord Shaftsbury. I told him this, and declared it in the
presence of God; and if ever I should be tempted to Swear more than this at any
time, it was for Reward; and that I desired him to witness the truth of this
against me; and that I would daily give him an account of what passed for the
future, which I desired him every day to put down in Writing, which I belive he
has done; as also the the constant Invitations abroad, and the Visits they
gave me here, which were so frequent to me, as nothing could be more.

Mr. Booth told me, I must appear at Court, and I should have an assurance of
my Reward from some persons of Honor: I told him, I would not trust any
Courtier I knew, for a Groat; I am satisfied he was put upon this, but by whom,
God knows, I am assured not by his Majesty.

That on Wednesday October. the 12th, 1681. I was invited by Mr. Booth to dine
with him that day at Mr. Weaver's house; which I refused, (although he sent a
Waiter, and promised him satisfaction for his attendance.) After Dinner he sent
again: I went, and found Mr. Baines with him, both rising from Dinner: I was
most kindly received with Wine and good words, working upon me to come in a
Witness against my Lord Shaftsbury's designing to change the Government;
declaring, I had an opportunity to make my Family and Friends, as they had
expressed formerly. I told them, as I had done before, Until I was satisfied for
bypast Services, I would not be concerned any way at Court. They told me, I
might be assured of what I would desire from my Lord Hallifax and my Lord Hyde.
Mr. Booth required what would satisfy me: I told him, If they would give me
two thousand Guineys toward the injury I had received, and my Friends upon my
account, I would discover what I knew. Mr. Booth told me, a greater thing was
intended me; for I was intended five hundred pounds per Annum, or ten thousand
pounds in money: But I still told them, I knew nothing of any Design by my
Lord Shaftsbury. The more I declared I knew nothing, the more Mr. Booth urged
the Reward. I told him (when he was so earnest) when I had the money, and a
general Pardon, I would then do any service I could; but I would not trust the
promises of Courtiers. Mr. Baines told me, As to a Pardon, I might have it in
two or three days: He desired to know my Christian name, which I conceived was
with an intention to get a Pardon; a thing never in my thoughts, but Mr. Baines
formerly mentioned it to me; and truly I did not know what I might stand in
need of, or what they would fix upon me in our discourse.

Mr. Baines told me, he had the night before been with my Lord Hallifax and
Lord Hyde: now they thought they had prevailed with me, and were mighty
cheerful. Before I parted from them, my Wife coming to me, told me, Mr. Booth
had been mighty urgent with her, to engage me to come in a Witness; and then
told her, I should have five hundred pounds per Annum settled upon me: But what
grounds he had for this, I know not; for all persons that know her, know her to
be a person of unquestionable Repute. Nor did I question the performance; for I
thought what I could say, would not deserve it: neither could I tell, why they
should think me such a man, as they would have me to be; for I ever hated to be
a Witness or a Jurie-man all my time. I conceive Mr. Booth thought I might be
wrought upon, because I had great misfortunes, and that this was a ready way
to repair me.

October. the 13th, 1681. This day I had a Waiter sent me, about eleven a clock,
to desire me to go to Mr. Weaver's house; which I did: There was Mr. Booth and
Mr. Baines. who told me, they sent for me to dine with them. I had no desire to
have any Table-talk with them; I desired to be excused, and also promised to
see them after dinner. Mr. Baines told me, Mr. Graham was not far off, and
would be there; and that he was sent by some of the Council to discourse me.
Mr. Baines told me, on Tuesday-night he was at Court with my Lord Hallifax and
Lord Hyde, and the two Secretaries of State, and that they enquired who knew
me: He replied, Mr. Graham, who was sent for: they asked him as to my
Reputation: they asked him if he knew me, and how long: He said, About twenty
years: They enquired of him concerning me. He told me, Mr. Graham answered, I
had served his Majesty and his Father in England and beyond Sea faithfully,
and that I was a very honest man; and also that I was a great Sufferer, and
that I had received great Disappointments, and had been ill dealt with by some
that belonged to the Court, as in particular, Mr. Edward Progers; and that they
engaged Mr. Graham to come over to the King's Bench, and to assure me, that I
should be requited for my Sufferings: Also to take me over with him to the
King, where I should have the Promise of his Majesty for the same, and the
opportunity to declare my former Grievances, and receive his Royal Word and
Promise for my Reward and Sufferings. After this Discourse, Mr. Graham came in,
who told me the same things as above, and that I might be assured of those
things from the King; also that he had an Order to carry me to his Majesty. I
told him, I could say nothing, neither would I go to Whitehal; for I had taken
a Resolution against going to Whitehal: it was hard pressed for my going
thither. I desired to be excused; for if I could say any thing, I must be
guilty my self: But he told me, Whether I was or not, I might be recompensed
for my Sufferings: Upon which I took my leave, and went away not well pleased,
that for my requital I should be thought an ill man, or a Traitor.

That on October the Fourteenth, 1681. Mr. Booth came to me about eleven a
clock, to the King's Bench: We walked in the Garden about an hour: His business
was, to know my mind, whether I would go voluntarily to the King, or not. He
also told me, that Mr. Wilson, my Lord Shaftsbury's Secretary, that was in the
Gatehouse, had sent to the Council to inform them, That if he might have his
Pardon, he would come in, and declare his Knowledge; and therefore he would
have me to have the honor to be the first Discoverer. I told him, I had no
business at Whitehal. Then he told me, it was intended that Mr. Graham should
be at his Lodging this Afternoon, to see if I would go to the King; if not, my
Lord Chief Justice Warrant would be sent to compel me to appear at his Chamber,
where there would be some of the Council to examine me and swear me. He also
told me, that the Duke of York had a great Estate in Ireland, and that he would
give me five hundred pounds per Annum there, besides all former Promises, to be
settled upon me and my Heirs, if I would come in a Witness against my Lord
Shaftsbury. I told him, they might meet with many persons in this Age, that
would accept of such Offers. I told him, if I had any thing to say, it was the
most proper time in Court, for me and Witnesses to speak their Knowledge. I
told him, I did not know but the presence of a King and his Promises, might
make a man say more than what was true, or than he could say fairly in a Court.
Mr. Booth asked me, if I did not ride with my Sword and Pistols out of Town
with my Lord Shaftsbury, when he went to Oxford? I told him I did; I could not
do less than wait upon him out of Town, who had been so kind, with the rest of
the Lords Proprietors, to do me the honor to make me their Governor for the
Country of Carolina. He then told me, I must needs be privy to this, That if
his Majesty would not pass three Acts, One for Excluding the Duke of York; the
next, for making void the Act of Queen Elizabeth against Recusancy; and a
third, for Uniting Protestant Subjects; then by force of Arms he was to be
compelled. He told me, all the Council was satisfied I knew this, and as much
as any person, in regard that both my Lord Shaftsbury and my self was disgusted
at Court. He said, the Council knew I was a Soldier, and was satisfied I was
to act in that Concern. I begun now to consider what a Fortune was now
promised, and what a good Addition this five hundred pounds Additional from the
Duke of York would make to the former Promises. And after he was gone, I
acquainted my Wife, and told her how great a person she was like to be: But
this was no News to her; for Mr. Booth had often been desiring her, for her own
good, to engage me in this honorable Service. Thus these things in our
Troubles served us to be merry with, to consider how easily we were like to
leap into an Estate: But all this time we was not without fear and danger of
enjoying it, or any part of it, much less of intailing it upon our Posterity.

October. 15. 1681. This day, about eleven a clock, Mr. Booth came again to me to
the King's Bench, to know if I yet would go to Whitehal: I demanded. For what?
He told me, To Evidence against the Earl of Shaftsbury. I told him, I had
nothing to say against him. He importuned me not to lose this great Opportunity
I now had. Before we parted, Mr. Baines came to us; I desired to know why they
should be so urgent to have me a Witness. He told me, there were none but Irish
Witnesses yet to come against my Lord Shaftsbury, and they were not Persons of
Credit; but if I would come in, although I had been unfortunate in my Private
Concerns, yet I was not blemished in my Credit. Mr. Baines told me, if I would
not go to Whitehall, the Marshal had a Habeas Corpus from my Lord Chief Justice
Pemberton, to carry me. So we parted.

About Four a Clock in the afternoon, the Marshal came with Mr. Booth and Mr.
Baines, to require me to go along with him. I demanded, Whither? He told me to
Whitehall. I demanded to see his Warrant. He showed it me. Now I was forced to
obey. After my coming thither, in a little time I was called in to Mr.
Secretary Jenkins's Office, where he and my Lord Conway was, who strictly, but
very fairly and honestly, Examined me about my Lord Shaftsbury, and what I knew
of any Design against his Majesty. I told them, as I did to the former
Attackers, I knew nothing. Great Arguments were used; but I could give no
satisfactory Answer, as was (I conceived) expected. After this His Majesty came
into the Office: When He saw me, He was pleased to do me the Honor to say, He
knew me well, and that I had served His Father and His Majesty faithfully, and
He hoped I would not decline my Obedience. To which I answered, I never
deserved to be suspected. His Majesly was pleased to tell me, He had not had
the Opportunity to serve His Friends, but hoped He might: He was pleased to
promise to consider for me my Sufferings. Then His Majesty began to Examine me,
(if I had been exhorted by the best Divine in England, he could not have said
more than His Majesty) in telling me, what Kindness was intended me, was not
with a design to invite me to speak a Word but Truth itself and that if He knew
I did, or any Person, His Majesty would never endure them. Then His Majesty
demanded, What I knew of a Design against His Person and Government? I truly
told His Majesty, That I knew nothing of any Plot or Design against His Majesty
or Government; That I admired why I should be suspected, that had served His
Majesty and His Father in England and Beyond Sea, and was as Instrumental as
any Person in His Majesty's Restoration: But some Persons had possessed His
Majesty, I was deep in some Design against the Government, and knew much of my
Lord Shaftsbury: So His Majesty seemed not to be satisfied, but still pressed
hard upon me. To all His Majesty's Questions, I could give no Answer that would
satisfy. Then his Majesty was pleased to tell me, If I would say, As I hope to
be saved, I knew nothing of any Design against His Person, He would believe me;
which I did say, in those very Words: which His Majesty seemed to wonder at.
Then I was lest to Mr. Secretary Jenkins, who was pleased to use such arguments
as he thought fit. I told him, I knew my Duty to His Majesty, I would not draw
a Sword against Him; but I could freely do it against some of the Court, that
were Enemies to His Majesty and his Friends; and so I was dismissed out of the
Office. Then I was carried into another Room, where His Majesty, my Lord
Chancellor, Lord Hallifax, Lord Hyde, the two Secretaries of State was, and the
Lord Chief Justice Pemberton: Where I was Examined, Mr. Graham, Mr. Booth, and
Mr. Baines present. My Lord Chancellor was sharp upon me with several
Questions, which I could give no Answer to. Content thus I was to run the
Gantlet from one Place to another. My Lord Chancellor would not believe but I
must be guilty of knowing great things against my Lord Shaftsbury. I told him,
If I could not be believed upon my Word there, if they pleased to bring my Lord
Shaftsbury upon his Trial, I would declare it in open Court upon Oath what my
Knowledge was, without any hopes of Gain or Advancement. My Lord Chancellor, I
thank him, he did me that Equity, to tell me, There were Two sorts of
Advancements; I need not give my self that trouble, for I was like to come to
my Trial my self before my Lord Shaftsbury. My Lord Chancellor demanded of me,
If I had no Commission for this New Service against His Majesty. I told him, No.
Then he told me, I was to have a Troop to consist of Fifty men. I told him,
that was a small Troop; I hoped, that if ever I had a Command of a Troop, it
should be a better than that: but I desired to know who gave that Information.
He told me, Mr. Booth, who was (by, and was) listed under me. I desired Mr.
Booth to tell me if he had given this Information, and made this Oath? He told
me, Yes, and it was true. I was unconcerned, and am, knowing my self not
guilty: for I protest, in the presence of Almighty God, by whom I expect to be
judged, I never had a word with Mr. Booth, or any other Person, in my whole
Life, tending to any such thing: For at the same time that he said this was to
be, which was when the Parliament was to be last at Oxford, I had taken on a
Ship for Carolina, where I was to go Governor, a Business more to my content
than any Military Employ, especially against His Majesty and the Government.
But I conceived this was in hopes of Reward, and to show his Loyalty; for
which, I believe, he will neither be regarded nor rewarded. I told the Council,
if they had such another Witness, they might do my business. I thank God, I am
not afraid of him, nor Twenty more such Witnesses, if they come against me; for
it is well known, he has been accused and condemned for Clipping and Coining,
besides Murder; for which he had His Majesty's Gracious Pardon, as I have been
informed. I am glad I live in such days, wherein Juries conceive they are
Judges as to matter of Fact; for, if they were not, I am satisfied, in this
Swearing Age, many an honest Man would be forced to march before they know
either Rank or File. At the same time I told my Lord Chancellor, If any honest
Man would come and witness against me, I would never desire His Majesty's
Pardon, or ever will. Let all the World judge how unlikely it is, that I should
be thus concerned, when I had about Twenty eight Men servants, Four or Five
Women-servants, besides my Wife, Three Sons, (of which, Two had been in His
Majesty's Service at Sea,) and one Daughter, all the Children I have, prepared,
and lay at my Charge, intending for Carolina and thought my self happy, and was
resolved to leave England, with resolution to see if I could find a People that
had less Wit and more Honesty than I have found in my own Country; where, I
must needs say, I have found very unfaithful Dealings amongst such as account
themselves Persons of Honor and Quality: But truly, when I thought I had made
my self almost ready for my intended Voyage, I found my self like a man
bewitched, that could neither budge nor stir; until at last some Debts that I
was bound for fell upon me, and others of my own increased, being burdened
with a great Charge, which unexpectedly put a stop, at present, to my intended
Voyage. I did always intend to leave England Honestly and Honorably: Those
things fell so unexpectedly, that my self and Wife concluded there was a Divine
hand in it.

The Information of Jarvis James Gent.

I Jarvis James Gent. do declare, That the abovenamed Captain Henry Wilkinson
came to me upon Tuesday the Eleventh of October, 1681. in the Evening, and did
then, and likewise every day from time to time afterward, make me acquainted
with the several Treaties and Transactions between him the said Captain Henry
Wilkinson, and Mr. Baines, Mr. Booth, and Mr. Graham, and the several other
Persons in this his Information mentioned; and that they were the very same in
substance with what he has herein set forth and declared: for at his request,
and my own satisfaction, I kept a daily Journal during the time of their
treating. All which shall be attested upon Oath when required.

The Information of Mrs. Susannah Wilkinson, Wife of Henry Wilkinson.

I The said Susannah Wilkinson do declare, That on Wednesday the Twelfth of
October, 1681. I went to the King's Bench Prison to speak with my Husband (where
I met with Three Carpenters which were entertained by him as Servants for
Carolina, and who had waited a long time, and not finding him likely to proceed
in his Voyage, they desired to be discharged): but not finding him in the
King's Bench, I went with them to Mr. Weaver's House, where I found him in
Company with Mr. Booth and one Mr. Baines, (who were largely treating my
Husband with Wine): my Husband went out to the Servants, and discoursed them:
Then Mr. Booth took an opportunity to speak to me, and told me, my Husband was
a most obstinate Man; and Mr. Booth desired me to persuade my Husband to be
guided and persuaded by him the said Mr. Booth; and he said, the King would do
more for my Husband than ever the Lord Shaftsbury would; and that the King was
sensible of my Husband's Service and Sufferings; and if my Husband would be
persuaded by him the said Mr. Booth, to appear against the Lord Shaftsbury, he
was sure my Husband would be the most happy man in the World; and that he
should have Five hundred pounds a year settled upon him and his Heirs for ever.

That on Friday, October the Fourteenth, 1681. I was with my Husband at the
Kings Bench Prison, when Mr. Booth came into our Room. Mr. Booth took an
opportunity to speak with me, and desired me, for Gods sake, to persuade my
Husband to be ruled by him; which if my Husband would, he might be a happy man,
and the Duke of York would settle Five hundred pound a year in Ireland upon my
Husband and his Heirs; and very much entreated me to persuade my Husband to
what he desired. All which shall be attested upon Oath when required.

A Confirmation of Captain Henry Wilkinson's Information: By Major Jarvis
James, to whom be daily and every day communicated all those Particulars
published in his Information, for the Subborning the said Captain to appear a
Witness against the Earl of Shaftsbury.
IT has been as well the Folly as Malice of some restless Persons, since the
publishing of Captain Henry Wilkinson's Information, to asperse and calumniate
Major Jarvis James, the only Person to whom the Captain communicated the
Important Particulars of the abovesaid Information: But the indiscreet
Endeavors they have used to lessen his Repute, does but weaken their own. For,
his Loyalty and Integrity to His Majesty is, and has been sufficiently known,
having most faithfully, and as becomes a true Subject, served His Majesty both
beyond Sea, and at home; and is again, when His Majesty shall command, ready to
serve Him to the last drop of his blood, with as much cheerfulness as any
Subject His Majesty has in His three Kingdoms.

He acknowledges himself a Son of the Church of England, as it is by Law
Established; and has accordingly, without scruple, taken the Oaths of
Allegiance and Supremacy, as every good Subject ought to do.

He styles the Acquaintance he has with so deserving a Person as Captain
Wilkinson, a great Happiness; and acknowledges himself obliged to him, for so
timely entrusting him with so notable a Secret, being a Stranger to the said
Captain; which Trust he looked upon as a great Adventure, and the Discovery to
endanger the Lives of the Earl of Shaftsbury and the said Captain, as his
Information has made manifest to the World, and which he had from his own
Mouth. He likewise declares, before God and Man, That he believes all the said
Information to contain nothing but the Truth, and to be the Realities of what
he had from Booth, Bains, and Graham; for he lent him the Convenience of his
Chamber to write the whole Business in, and saw him write it with his own Hand;
as also may be witnessed by Mr. Robert Bennet, who is an Officer in Leaden Hall
Market, that transcribed it for the Captain. Such Offers as were made him, few
Men (perhaps) in the Kingdom would have resisted, considering more particularly
the heavy Circumstances he lay under; enclosed in a Prison, and having before
near lost all he had, in his intended Voyage for Carolina. In fine, Let the
World consider, and thence conclude, It was the Mercy of Almighty God that this
Worthy, Noble, Loyal Gentleman, Captain Wilkinson, had the fortune to lie under
such large Temptations, the Discovery whereof has (I question not) very much
advanced the Glory of God and profited the Nation. And without doubt, His
Majesty is and will be well satisfied, that those who faithfully and truly
serve His Majesty and His Subjects, are the Persons both to be believed and
relied upon. It Is only desired this may have credit according to its Truth and
Reality, both in the Heart of His Majesty, and all His Loyal Subjects; which
will answer the Ends of him who subscribes himself A Well wisher to Truth. By me

JARVIS JAMES.

FINIS.

