The Perfect STATESMAN, OR, Minister of State: Wherein are briefly set forth

The true Nature of the Subject, The Endowments inherent to His Person, The
Method of his Election, Institution, and Reception, The Object of this Office:


DISTINGUISHED Under such Principles, as are immediately requisite to the
Establishment of a COMMON WELFARE.

WRITTEN By LEONARD VVILLAN, Esquire.

Recte Summum agere,
Recte est Supremum haberi.
In the SAVOY, Printed by Tho. Newcomb for the Author, M. D C. LXVIII.

To the Right Honorable, The LORDS and COMMONS, Assembled in Parliament.
Right Honorable,
THough the Dignity of the Subject might require a more eminent Introductor to
meet a fair Reception from so Honorable a Convention; yet since his Loyalty
presumes to prefer It to your View, may yield, in his Obscurity, so clear a
Proof of his Integrity to the Common Interest, as to have been divested of
those Civil Ornaments, which might have lent more Grace unto the Presentation:
Vouchsafe to amplify Your Honor in Your own Benignity, descending to accept a
Present of this Nature from so mean a Hand: And graciously be pleased to
reflect upon the Enterprise, as a Production took extraction only from the late
Disorders of that Irregular Authority had usurped Yours: Under Disguise of
faithful Patriots, in Persuit soly of the Public Good; and but designed (in
this Model of our Civil Welfare) to fore-shew (before the Issue had disclosed
the Fallacy) how far They were removed from Their pretended Course, as also how
unlike They were the Persons they pretended. If the Endeavor reach not the
Intention of the Work, excuse the Incapacity derived from Their Persecution,
which has deprived the Agent of those Aids, were requisite to so Material a a
Structure, which in the Simitry and Use has also lost the Luster of Her Native
Ornaments, in due Submission to the Civil Order, lest the enlightening of some
Principles might minister to the Distemper of Incendiaries, whose innate
Ranckor would convert their proper Aliment to Poison. The Breaches are left
obious to the shallowest Sense, wanting due time to cement the Abruption,
surprised in the manner of Exception: which Defects meeting your Indulgence,
may happily lend new Vigor to repair the Errors, the next Attempt, in order,
should exact the Exterior Edifice inherent to the Civil Fabric. Being

Your Honors Humbly Devoted Servant, L. WILLAN.

To the READER.
Reader,
WHen thou shall exactly Reflect on the proper use of Writing, thou may
admire that any rational Capacity, endued with the smallest vacancy, should
suffer their instable Thoughts to become so impetuously agitated, scattered,
and disbanded from their own Direction by exterior Objects, as not to cast up
the result of their Discourses in a Method, might form their proper Judgments,
and inform Another, may possibly depend on their Instruction: But when thou
shall maturely also weigh the Consequents to their Publishing, thou may
become yet more astonished to find an Undertaker; since neither Satisfaction
nor Advantage can Balance the Adventure, were the Subject never so material,
or the Structure never so Regular: Envy and Ignorance have their inevitable
Ranckor. Nor can Joves Bosom shelter from their Persecution. As Aesop has
ingeniously figured in the Beetles Contestation with the Eagle: Which Moral
Observation may meet a Parallel in the Practice of Club, and Coffee Consorts,
who exercise all sorts of Tyranny on every Civil Transaction, Public, or
Private; lend It what Nature, Form, Weight, Issue, or Events best fits that
humor does minister to the Distemper of their Passion. From whence may be
concluded, under how implacable a Configuration, must issue this Production,
especially when Reflection shall be made on the improper Constitution of this
Age, both in Reference to the Nature hereof and the Subject The First (so far
removed from the depraved Relish of the Time) It has nor Badge nor Signature
of Hudebras, or Don Quixot to warrant a Reception. The latter only but the
Object of the vulgar fury, must of necessity be condemned before It is
distinguished. The Title does imply no less, The Minister of State. Yet since
the Aversion of the Populace is raised on the Impropriety of their Ministry:
And the Impropriety of their Ministry conjecturally derived from the
Enlargement of their Fortunes. The Persecution may possibly be abated in the
Discovery of a more hopeful Character, where the very shadows of peculiar
Interest are avoided.

Diverse Adherents to a Civil Ministry may possibly fall under this Distinction;
but let not him that holds the painted Staff of an Authority, pretend thereon
to such a Dignity, lest he entitle the most Infamous to his Association. There
is a vast Extent of Latitude in sense between the Minister of State, and the
Minister to a State. That sets at Helm, and by his Compass steers the Civil
Bark in Her intended Course. This but removes the Rubbish might obstruct it. So
likewise the Superior Attribute meets a Difference in Distinction. The General
and the Special, The Public and the Private Minister of State. The Special
jointly has Adherence only to the Princes Council. The General likewise to the
Peoples Trust. The Public by Commission agitates on Foreign Negotiations. The
Private properly is Superintendent to the Rest. This Treatise pretends only
Reference to the First, the fury of the Populace only to the Last. If the
Design not clearly figureth the Intention of the Work. The Incapacity rests
only in the Civil Infirmity, whose Distemper is yet so sensible, the parts
thereof will not endure the handling without the danger of a Rupture: In which
Respect, the intended Proofs Inherent to the present Practice and Positions,
are become dissected from the Propriety of This Structure. If the Materials
shock, thy Apprehension, know, that the Abstruseness of a Tongue, which only is
derivative, may plausibly assume the Liberty to select borrowed terms. may
lend the sense more weight or more propriety, till common usage lend them an
Authority. How else should Distinction of the new Fashions be communicable. How
new Intelligence become distinguishable. If their Contexture lend the Style a
seeming singularity, consult thy Ear from whose Agreement only they assume
their Order. The Errors are contracted in Impression distinguished in their
incongruity, be pleased to rectify or to excuse, and accept of the Work
(though but defective) in favor of the Object It pursues, The Common-Interest:
In whose Reserve the highest Discords meet an Unanimity. Vale.

L. WILLAN.

A TABLE CONTAINING The Principal Subjects of every CHAPTER.
1. THe Definition of the Subject, and the Extent of the whole work. 1. 2. The
Principles considerable in His Person, with the Exterior Dependences thereof.
First Of His Form. 2. 3. Of His Birth. 4. 4. Of His Education. 7. 5. Of His
Profession. 10. 6. Of His Age. 12. 7. Of His Possessions. 14. 8. Of His
Community. 17. 9. Of His Demeanor. 20. 10. Of His Speech. 22. 11. Of His Fame.
24. 12. Of His Interior Endowments under four Principles, and First Of
Prudence. 26. 13. Of Justice. 29. 14. Of Fortitude. 34. 15. Of Temperance. 38.
16. Of His Election. 41. 17. Of His Institution. 44. 18. Of His Reception. 45.
19. The general Object of His Office. 46. 20. The Authority of the Law. 50. 21.
The Equality of the Law. 56. 22. The knowledge of the Law. 60. 23. The
Insubversion of the Law. 63. 24. The easy Persuit of the Law. 66. 25. The
timely Issue of the Law. 66. 26. The Nature of a Law. 67. 27. The several
Objects of the Law, in reference to the security of the Natural Union. 69. 28.
Wilful violence. 69. 29. Sickness. 81. 30. Indigence. 88. 31. The several
Objects of the Law in reference to the Improvement of the Natural union. 94.
32. Generation. 94. 33. Education. 97. The several Objects of the Law, in
reference to the Improvement of the Internal or Intellectual Faculties under
two Principles. 106. 34. The Extralegal Reward of Virtue. 106. 35. The
Extralegal Punishment of Vice. 114. 36. The general Properties inherent to our
Civil Existence with their Legitimate Possession and Fruition. 122. 37. The
security of our Civil Property. 137. 38. The principle Subjects fall under
Regulation of the Law in reference to the security of our Civil property. 142.
39. Fraud. 142. 40. Violence. 153. 41. Injury. 157. 42. Oppression. 165 43.
Fire. 173. 44. Inundation. 176. 45. Excess. 178. 46. The Principle Subjects
fall under Regulation of the Law, in Reference to the Improvement of our Civil
Property. 183. 47. Oeconomicall Order. 184. 48. Civil Institution and
Introduction. 186. 49. Serviceable Employments. 187. 50. Civil Function. 189.
51. Structure. 191. 52. Manure. 192. 53. Private Commerce. 194.

These are the National and Interior Objects of our Minister.

THE PERFECT STATESMAN; OR, Minister of State.
I. The Definition of the Subject, and the Extent of the whole work.
HAving propounded the Subject of our Treatise in the Title hereof, to avoid
Obscurity; 'twill be necessary to Trace out the Foundation, and draw a Platform
of the whole Work, ere we lay hand unto the Structure. In Order to our
Proposition, First to distinguish what a Minister of State is; then to consider
Him in his Person and Endowments, both External and Internal, then in His
Office, and several Objects thereof, both National and Foreign.

Persueing this Method. The Inscription taken in the Latitude of Sense, may
seem to imply either Prince, Councillor, or Magistrate; yet strictly examining
their Relation to this Attribute, we shall find neither the Former nor the
Latter comprised in this Denomination. The privilege of a Prince being rather
to Determine then Advise. And the Duty of a Magistrate simply to dispense the
Laws enacted according to the Letter, without consulting of their Nature; we
will therefore limit the distinction of a Minister of State under this Notion;
He that has in his Council a peculiar Influence over the affairs of a
Commonwealth under what Government soever. But to enlarge farther on the
Exposition, though Council be the ground of his Character, yet we exclude him
not from the Capacity of Action; or (in Free Commonwealths) of Determining,
either Essentially, by force of Reason, or Acidentally by Advantage of Number.
Notwithstanding the Nature of his Function may without either properly subsist,
as not inherent to his Ministry.

II. The Principles considerable in his Person, and the Exterior Dependants.
1. Of his Form.
THe Nature of our Subject thus prefigured, we pass to the Consideration of His
Person, and in Respect of the Exterior part, and the Dependances thereon;
propound these Principles. His Form, Birth, Education, Profession, Age,
Possessions, Community, Demeanor, Speech. Thoug^ the First Endowment may seem
to be a very inconsiderable part of our Subject; yet since it neither wants the
usage of Antiquity, nor Practices of modern Times to lend it weight, we will
expostulate the consequence thereof. From Tradition of Antiquity, the sacred
Letter presents us an authentic proof thereof, in Readiness Election, as pointed
out by the hand of the Most High, in the direction of His Prophet, who was so
eminent in his Person above the rest of the People, that he exceeded them all
in height from the Shoulders upward; which the Prophet in his Presentation
inferrs as the ground and warrant of his Election. See you him whom the Lord
has chosen, that there is none like him among all the People. To which
distinction agrees the Poets description of the Roman King.

Ipse inter Primos praestanti corpore Turnus
Vertitur, Arma tenens, and tota vertice supra est.
Turnus, the chief, in Stature did exceed,
Holding his Arms, over tops them by the Head.
From Modern times we will only insert that Canibal's Answer, Mountaigne
relates, who being at Rouen, where Charles the Ninth then was, by Interpreter
asked what he observed remarkable amongst them, said, He wondered among other
things, why they suffered a little Boy to Rule over them, and made not rather
choice of one of those goodly Personages about him; meaning the Swissers; which
Inference, though seeming to mark out but a rude and particular part of the
Form, as from a Native not acquainted with the Rules of Civil Policy, having
for Object only the First Principle of Rule, Force: Nor but a peculiar Office,
differing from our Subject. Yet since the Faculties of the Mind. of which this
is but a shadow, are equally necessary to Both, we may appropriate generally
all Dimensions of the Body, indifferently to Either. Ipsi animi magni refert
quali in corpore locati sint, multa enim e corpore existunt, quae acuent
mentem, multa quae obtundunt. It is very material to the exercise of the Soul,
what body it is placed in; many things existing from the body, which sharpen,
many which may stupifie the mind.

Agros divisere atque dedere,
Pro facie oujusque and viribus ingeni^que,
Nam facies multum valuit, viresque vigebant.
To Form, Strength, Wit, all Power yield,
To give and to divide the Field,
The Beauty of the face does charm,
And reinforce the vigor of the Arm.
Aristotle hereto intitles the right to Command, affirming the Indians and
Aethiopeans, from hence make the Election of their Magistrates and Kings; and
Plato thought it necessary to the Conservators of his Commonwealth. To search
farther into the ground of such an institution; we must conclude it to be
raised from a conjecture, that the exactness of the Form gives either Evidence,
that the Matter has received a more perfect Impression of the Image of the
Maker: Or, as the Naturalists say, that the disposition of the Soul answers the
dimensions of the Body; as Twinns from one Original, the natural Temperature.

A proof to the first Assertion may be derived from the composure of the Word
Incarnate, who (though Turtullian's Reverie has other ways figured Him) was,
without doubt, in his Person the most beautiful among men, according to Pub.
Leni^lus occular Testimony of him to the Roman Senate. The second Inference
has been so frequently found true, that the observation is (among the French)
digested to a Proverb, Lesbornes and les boiteux sont tousjours meschants. The
Blind and the Lame (meaning naturally) are always vicious. And according to
this Rule, the Poets Figured Thersites, which, though it failed much in
Socrates Constitution, rendering the Phisiognomist Judgment of Him but
ridiculous: yet Socrates repaired again the Dignity of his Art, affirming that
He was by Nature such as he had Figure Him, but by the industry of His Mind, He
had restrained that Propension. For conclusion therefore, since few or none
will so much as strugle with one vicious Inclination, it will be far safer,
that we should guide our true Election by this Appearance, though but a frail
one, subject to corruption, then yet to hazard it in expectation of a Miracle.
To which position may possibly be objected, that since we have limited the
Faculty of out Minister in Council, we should as thereto only proper, prefer
the Abilities of the Mind, which commonly supply the Defects of the Body,
before the Integrity of the Manners, which follow but the complement of the
Form, there being in matter of Advice more use of Reason then of Virtue. In
answer to the first part of the Objection. It may be granted, that even by the
advantage of Excess (whereof the extern Deformities are but inherent signs) the
soul more perfectly in some intemp'ratures may exercise some one peculiar
Faculty of the Intellect, then in any one peculiar Temp'rature, how regular
soever, as the predominant Humor is more proper to the usage of the Fancy or
the Memory; but withal, becomes thereby inferior and defective in the rest. So
that we may affirm, since by virtue of the Animal Spirits, the Soul produces
her Action, and by how much more pure the Instruments are, by so much more
perfect are the effects. The Spirits Animal receiving only this excellence
from the Equality of the Temp'rature, whereof the exactness of the Form is but
the Character. It of necessity will follow, that from the agreement of the
Elements, must issue the most excellent and powerful Harmony of the soul. To
the sequel of the Objection, we will only infer, that it being too obvious to
every sense; how frequently frail Man does make his Reason but a Prostitute to
his Lust, not only to the abusing of others, but to the deceiving of Himself;
it will be requisite to unite her to an Object nigher her own Nature, to
preserve her in her Purity. And conclude, that since the Almighty has not
only excluded the Impetent, but the Deformed also from His Ministry; We
therein have sufficient warrant, not to admit Him unadvisedly to Ours.

III. Of His Birth.
FRom this Particular, may properly be derived two Branches considerable to the
exact discussion of our Subject. The Place and Quality of our Minister's
extraction. What concerns the first Distinction, will, questionless not meet
a contradiction; in affirming it to be requisite, our Minister be a Native of
that Commonwealth, over whose affairs his Council should preside; insomuch, as
every Person has a Peculiar and innate Affection for the Glory and Prosperity
of his proper Nation. Nor are the Natives usually so subject to the jealousy
of the People on the Miscariages of public undertakings, as Aliens are
accounted. Furthermore, Natives receive many other advantages in their early
and frequent Habits, which Aliens commonly are not endued with. As the perfect
knowledge of the National Laws, Customs, and Nature of the People, with the
Facility and Elegance of the Tongue, to expediate or illustrate their
Discourses. The subject of the second Branch inherent to His Parentage,
presents to our Examination two Propositions whether our Minister may be
accepted from a Noble or Ignoble; from a Detected or Incensed Family. For
solution to the first Quaere, we will unfold the Inconvenients and Advantages
of Either. The only Benefit Nobility can promise us in His Reception, is to
give Luster and Authority to His Ministry. The Advantage Ignobility presents
us in His Admittance, is vulgar satisfaction. The First yields, but at most, an
Ornament to Rule. The Later but Licentiousness in Rule. The Inconveniences wait
on Nobility in Ministers of State, are Jealousy and Faction. As appears
between Caesar and Pompey, to the Translation of the Romain Commonwealth. And
between Hanno and Hannibal; to the destruction of the Carthagintans. The
Disadvantages attend on Ignobility in a Minister of State, are Envy and
Contempt, as may be visible in the transaction of Affairs, under the Ministry
of ***** and Others to the shaking if not hazarding our Own. In the first
Ambition moves more Imperceptably, as being more nigh the Object of the
Passion. In the later more Impetuously, as more removed from the Point it
reaches at; so that the Consequence of our Argument will guide us to a Mean
participating of the Nature of both Extremes, as most expedient to the
execution of our Ministry.

The second Proposition consisting in Parts of different Nature, we may devide
them in our Treaty; and first take that, which moves, whether our Minister may
be accepted from a Detected Family. Of which question ere we determine, it will
be necessary first to propound Another, whether Mercy or Punishment followed
the Detection; if Mercy, the utmost Ground of our suspicion can be laid but on
the Seeds of Inclination, contracted from the Impressions of Nature, or of
Discipline, which reaching to no farther certainty, the Party safely may be
joined to our Ministry; induced by Example of Augustus; who happily convincing
Cynna, by his proper Evidence of his conspiracy against Him, did both the Crime
remit, and readmitted him with such success, that neither yet by him, nor any
other ever after, was any Treason, that was visible, or Practiced, or designed
against Him.

If Punishment has followed the Detection, the Argument will meet with the
divided Sequel of the Question, and running in one Current, fall under the
Capacity of One Solution, under the Figure of Incensed. Although it may admit
of some distinction in the Manner; as whether the efficient Cause were Just or
Injurious, Direct, or but Collateral, Nigh, or Remote. Yet, since no
Observation can prescribe a Limit to Man's Passion being generally over partial
Judges in our own Affairs; such Circumstances will afford but little Difference
in the Consequence. So that we may herein conclude of Both, under one firm
Position, in a general Exclusion of them from our Ministry. The dangerous issue
of Indignation in a Minister of State; whether just or unjust, sprung from
Injury or Displeasure, are truly figured in Cataline, who, ill-resenting the
Disgrace of a Repulse, when he stood to be Candidate in the Pontique War,
contrived secretly the visible subversion of the State. And was not far off
from effecting it. Like evidence may be instanced from Julian's far more Just,
though more unhappy Fury; who on the violation of his Daughter Caba, in his
absence, employed on public exigents, was at Return, possessed with so
inveterate a hatred against the present Governor and Government, that he
forthwith brought in the Moors to Spain; who, there in sundry bloody Conflicts,
being prevalent, became at length Possessors of the Territories four hundred
years together. Nor do such like Punctillio's of our Honor produce less violent
Passions in remote Successions, They being of such usage in most
Commonwealths, That it is held as necessary to the Continuance of their
Reputation, to succeed to the Quarrels of their Predecessors, as for the
support of their Livelihood, to Administer to their Goods. And though the Fury
hereof oftener does reflect upon some private Family, as the indirect Promoters,
or secret Contrivers of such Injury or Disgrace, then on the Head or Body of
the State, from whom it was immediately received. Yet are the Consequences
thereof too frequently, as fatal to the One, as to the Other: witness the
incensed Proceedure of Arron, who on his Adversary's prevailing against him in
a Plea indicted for the Ravishing of his Wife, brought in the Gauls to Italy
to the subversion of his Enemies, and Devastation of that Continent.

IV. Of His Education.
THough this Principle unfoldeth many Objects necessary to the forming of our
present Subject. Yet since most of them are rather Preparatives, then
Polishments, regarding more immediately the Interior (which we are not yet come
to, then the Exterior, that we only are in Hand with) we will here pass by
those Institutions, that are usually proper to the two first Ages: Infancy and
Puerillety. And taking our Minister in his Adolescence, propound only in
Reference to our present Subject, these Distinctions, as immediately requisite
to His Function. Language, Letters, Travel.

In his first years, while yet the tender Sinews of the Tongue are in the
Accent plyant to the Direction of the Ear. And the Judgment not yet formed to
the use of weightier Sciences. It will be requisite, that our Minister apply
himself to the Aquisition of foreign Languages, such as are useful in
Community with the Parts wherein he shall Officiate. And that He may therein
attain to what Perfection a stranger can, without Corruption of His Own both in
Facility and Propriety. It will be Fit His School should be the proper Nation,
and His Instructors the Conversation of the most Pollisht People in the same.
Persueing which Method, His Practice herein shall neither be an Obstacle to His
weightier Studies for the forming of His Mind. Or His exterior Exercises for
the fashioning of His Person. There being in most Capital Cities in Foreign
Parts both Universities and Academies.

But perhaps some may here cautiously object; that since the whole scope out
Subject seems properly to aim at, depends only on the Sufficience and
Integrity of the Mind, which consisting not in the variety of Tongues: such
Procedure will rather prove to us a Penible, Expensive and useless Curiosity,
then any regular or expedient Institution. In which Objection we will pass over
the Two first Inconvenients which are but the peculiar Means unto the
Acquisition, as too mean Considerations to suspend our Argument; not any thing
Material or Excellent, falling in our Capacity to execute or attain without our
Industry and Cost. And in Answer to the use, allege, that no Treaty, either
at Home or Abroad, can with Advantage or Dexterity be menaged, without the
Knowledge of the Tongue, and Habits of the Nation wherewith we are to Agitate,
there being certain Emphasis of Speech and Graces in Action, peculiar to the
Expressions and Practice of each Nation, which not rightly distinguished, may
make so great and irreconcilable a Breach; as may possibly frustrate the
intention of the Consultation. How successful in Foreign Negotiations,
agreeable Ministers may be, is obvious to every Sense, and how they can be so,
without that which should render them communicable, is a Mystery not yet
explicable.

The next Object propounded to our Minister, is Letters, to whose free Access,
it will be necessary to be endued with the Latin Tongue, which (though not at
present National) may also be to Him of farther use in Foreign Agitations,
wanting Those that are, and with all sufficiently serve to the Introduction of
such a part of School-Learning, as shall be requisite to our Minister, which
shall not need to be extended farther, then to lend Order and Propriety to His
Discourse: And to free his Spirit from the Tirany of the strangeness of it in
Another Mouth. Not so far to handle it, to make it a Fetter to His Reason, a
burden to His Memory, a servile anticipation of His Judgment, or a Discord in
His Manners. To avoid all which, it will be dangerous to encounter this many
headed Monster (such more in Respect of disagreeing Opinions in Pretenders to
her Mysteries, then in her own Nature.) e're the Judgment be perfectly formed,
and confirmed, least what He thought to Master and Possess for the Advantage of
His Natural Endowments, Possess and Master Him to the Captivity and Extinction
of the same.

These with Dexterity handled, may prove superficial Ornaments to our Minister,
but the more exactly useful and Essential to His Ministry, and in the Exercise
whereof. He ought solely to employ all the Vigor and Industry of His Mind, are
the Laws Common or National, Civil or Universal. And History in General; which
(for better enlightening of the Circumstances in Either) should walk Hand in
Hand. Not to receive the Notions of Law, as unalterable Positions. Nor the
Traditions of History, as mere Narratives to swell the Memory. But from
History, to examine the Ground and Occasions of the Laws. The Issues and Events
of such Councils, such Assairs, such Enterprises, by what Persons How Endowed,
how Managed, and from the Circumstances of the Laws to gather true Lights of
the secret Intreagues of former Ages, by Corruption or Ignorance of the
Chronologer smothered, Disguised or Neglected, so comparing Occurrents of
preceding Times with the Present, Collect by such Observation, what Laws should
be Appealed, what revived, what reformed, what Introduced or Established. How
far to be Extended and where Limited.

For other pieces of Learning, as Aids to our Minister, we shall only propound
such Parts of the Mathematiques, as shall concern the Military Function;
whereto he possibly may be called to be an Arbitrator, either in the Defensive
or Offensive Part thereof.

The Third Object of His Education here specified, is Travel. Of which we may
seem to have treated in the manner of His Acquisition of Foreign Tongues; but
such years being not yet sufficiently mature, to make the true use of the most
weighty Observations thereof, we have made it the immediate closure to his
Exercise, and the Preface to His Practice; The Advantages hereby acquired are
numerous, among which he shall learn the true art of Conversation, not so much,
what concerns the Civil, Courtly, and Superficial part thereof (though not an
immaterial faculty in his Function) as the Political and Essential. How to
endear himself with the most Savage Inclination, How to secure Himself from the
most fraudulent, How to avoid the Distastes of the most Insolent, How the
Disgrace of the most scurrilous, How to shun the Encumbrances of the
Impertinent, and how the Importunities of the Impudent, How to fasten on the
Babbler for Intelligence, How on the serious for Instruction, How to suffer
immov'd the most Contradictory, and how to satisfy unprejudiced the most
Curious. How to distinguish and make use of all Humors and Inclinations. How
with Dexterity to be All to All. To present every one their Figure, and yet
retain his own. And in all these to become so perfect a Master of His Passions
and Purposes, that the very shadows thereof shall never fall under Another
sense: To which some may perhaps object, that this Mystery may as well be
attained at home, without the community of Foreign Parts, diversities
sufficient both in Manners and Affections, being thereto with us to be found.
This being granted, yet the insensible and unexamined Habits and Customs of the
place, wherein we were born and bred, smother the perfect and visible Lights
thereof; so that in the frequency of use, we not distinguish or not consider
others Faculties, nor yet awake our own; whereas each Foreign place we come
to, will afford in nature new Proofs and Figures to our observation, which Art
elsewhere but slightly counterfeits

As to other Advantages Herein, he shall hereby be able to make an Occular
Observation of the strength or weakness of Forts, Harbors, and Passages; Riches
or Poverty of the Countries, popular or private Discontents, Grievances, Fears,
Jealousies, Resolutions, Court and State Factions, by whom favored, how
qualified, whereon grounded, how pursued. He shall further hereby find
opportunity to form a private and faithful Correspondent on the Place (under
the color of Curiosity) whereby He may have perfect Intelligence of Foreign
Occurrents, the better to direct His own. Of all which Overtures He shall make
good use either in Public or Private Treaties, secret or open Breaches, with
many other Advantages, whose Nature, Variety, and Use would require a
particular Treatise, and we for brevity will here omit.

V. Of His Profession.
WE might without Scruple admit of any Profession to this our Ministry, whose
quality were no Dishonor to the Dignity Hereof, nor Nature repugnant to the
vacancy Hereto, were it not an Employment requires the whole Man in Action, and
the whole Life for Instruction. If Civil Policy among the Chaneses, figuring
one man's Life too short, has established a Custom to introduce a Perfection,
even in Mechanic Arts, by enjoining each Artists Posterity to follow the
Function of his Predecessor. How much more necessary will it be to sequester
our Pretender to this high difficult and Noble Mystery, from all other
Negotiations whatsoever. This was the ground of Philip's Reproach to his Son
Alexander the Great, when in the Olimpick Games, he bore away the Glory in
Music from all his Emulators, implying that his Excellence herein was a
shameful proof against him, to have been remiss in time and Industry, in
pursuit of other Endowments more proper to his Regal Dignity. The motions of
the Civil Body can no more without hazard of Ruin suffer Cessation or
Intermission, then those of the natural. And since the whole strength of the
united Ministers is little enough to keep this Machine in a regular frame, it
will be requisite not yet more to weaken their force in the Division thereof
betwixt public and private Interests. The Integrity of Atilius Regulus figured
to us this inconvenience in his request to the Senate (on the Death of his
Bailiffe) to be dismissed from his Embassy in Spain, that he might thereby have
liberty to manage his own Domestique Affairs, which extended but to thirty
seven Acres of Ground.

To which may be objected, how any then shall usefully be admitted to our
Ministry, since it is necessary to every man's livelihood, that he have
Profession or Possession, either of which will afford but small Benefit to his
Existence, if by him carelessly abandoned; we may answer this Objection with the
Remedy borrowed from the Senates example and Answer to the Petition, which was,
That he should repose the Burden of his Domestic Affairs on their Care, who
would provide a faithful and sufficient Supervisor to the managing thereof: Nor
is it but in reason equitable, that if our Minister address all his endeavors
to the benefit of the Public, but the Public should likewise contribute some
cost to the support of his private Interests.

It may also here possibly be farther alleged, that there are certain
intermitting seasons of Peace and Relaxes of Affairs in most Commonwealths,
whose smooth calmness may sometime dispense with their Pilots Diligence, since
often it scarce affords matter to His Action; to which for reply we infer, that
such Constitutions of State are subject to the most dangerous Accesses of
Distemper. Since neither Nature nor Policy suffering Retraction or Demur, must
of necessity, proceeding still, fall into the Contrary Excesses; insomuch as
all Extremes meet but in one and the same Point. As the most perfect
Constitutions of health in Natural Bodies, so in Civil, are obvious in their
Changes, to the most desperate Infirmities.

Another Argument may probably yet hereto be inserted against the strictness of
our Ministers attendance on his Function, framed on the Multitude of Members,
which may alternately supply each others vacancy: To which we may allege, That
it is the Bane of a Council, where the several Members Thereof rely upon each
others Diligence, Sufficiency, or Integrity; in which none answers His
peculiar Trust, that discharges not his proper Conscience, and inureth them to
handle Public Affairs (not having immediate Relation to their private
Interests;) with that Indifference and Neglect, as if they not materially
concerned Them. And farther lends an Advantage in Absence of Particulars, to
facilate the secret Practices of a Faction. Secondly, By such Intermission our
Minister loses the preceding Coherences of several Agitations, whereby his
Judgment cannot sufficiently be enlightened for the future. Thirdly, To the
exact constituting of a Council, is to be observed a just Proportion, as well
as a due Propriety of Parts. If they exceed in number, Disorder will meet their
various Agitations, Obscurity their mutual Conceptions, and Protraction their
positive Determinations: so that in the issue small fruit will follow their
Consultations: If they fall short of a true Dimension, it will rather be held a
Private Combination then a Public Convention. If they meet a perfect Symetry
in their Union, we must then conclude, there being no one Superfluous, there
will be no one conveniently to be spared; and if there might, on other ground
then necessity (which admits of no Rule) such License would be to the rest,
a just Plea for like Privilege: so that in the dismission of one, we may
perhaps often want the better part of our Assembly.

Moreover, we figure our Minister so excellently endowed both in natural and
acquired Habits, that no Age, how happy soever in the Production, or State so
industrious in the forming, will at any time, with fertility beget such a crowd
in this Society, that a supernumerary shall still be ready to supply a Default.
In Opposition hereto, may yet farther be alleged, that this is so servile and
anxious a condition, that no generous or freeborn Spirit (such as is here
pretended necessary) would ever be won to render himself subject to. This being
granted, must either proceed from want of Love to his Country, Address in the
Faculty, or use in the exercise: could Milo else, with delight only for the
Advantage of his strength bear every day an Ox? And shall not our Minister
expose himself infatigably to the Assiduity of so glorious an enterprise, as
the Common Welfare, which Scevola held dearer then his Hand, Regulus then his
Eyes, and Curtins then his Life; and will not only render his present Being
useful, but necessary, and His memory not only venerable, but eternal: to which
we instance not here the enlargement of His Fortunes (which must follow as a
consequent) being too abject an inducement to bear any Influence over His
nobler Inclinations: Nor will a plausible Recreation be at any time wanting in
the Excellency and Variety of our Subject, though not perhaps those fancied by
a looser Temper: yet such as are more proper to the Relish of that Age, we
shall hereafter figure Him: so that we here inhibit not His Divertisement, but
only thereof change the Quality.

VI. Of His Age.
WEre it so, that the Abilities of the Mind depended not on the Maturity of
years, nor Experience on the frequency of Practice, as may be affirmed from the
Transactions of Alexander, Scipio, and Augustus, in the early undertakings and
successful Issues of their Enterprises, whose miraculous Fortunes seem to have
had a more secret Foundation than humane Reason can either frame or discover.
Yet to educe such Faculties to a useful Exercise, it were expedient, Time
should infuse a perfect Allay to the natural Temper, the better to withstand
the Proof of every trial, whereby neither the high fervor of the Blood in
Youth might be too prone to transport the captive will to such a wild Temerity
in Action, as to attempt on any Difficulty: nor yet the frigid sloth of Phleame
in Age might so benum the vital Spirits, as in a timid Jealousy to restrain
the passive will from every seeming opposition: Of which extrems the Danger to
avoid, we Figure this our Minister of that Age, which Naturalists style, Aetas
Consistens, betwixt 35. and 48. In which years, Nature seems in her course to
have attained a kind of Repose, having as then in man completed her designed
work, when no longer employing her vigor on the disposing of her edifice: nor
as yet shrinking under the burden of our frail Composure, seems at a stand to
gather strength against the assaults of the succeeding time: Not that on such
terr^s we so precisely fix, as never to admit Exception in our choice, since
many times we see, Nature her self in the Defect or exact Disposition of the
matter, protracteth or anticipates her course: but that we might receive a
general Note to guide our purpose so nigh Perfection, as natural Lights may
reach to.

From which Argument some curious Fancy may perhaps collect Matter to insert
(if not by way of Opposition, by way of an exacter Proposition) That it were
better to form our Council of sundry Ages, following herein the Pattern of a
Natural Body, which is constituted in Parts of several Tempers, to the end,
that what One Member were defective in, might be supplied by another.

To which we may allege, That Nature has constituted the Body in parts of
differing Tempers, in Respect of the Aptitude thereof to differing uses and
Ministries: And so having diverse ends, must (of necessity, to the perfection of
her work) make use of Instruments of distinct Capacities. But our Civil Body,
though formed of sundry Members; yet having but one only Object, It were rather
more proper (if possible) that they should so sympathize in their tempers, that
no one might thereby dissent from other in their natural Lights: But from their
equal endowments might result an uanimous Agreement in their Consultations.

It may yet hereto farther be inferred, That men are often more successful in
the search of Truth, by interjected Doubts, and Oppositions formed from
disagreeing Opinions, then by the general Allowance of assenting Judgments,
Which has sometime condemned Truth it self for Heresy, and may perhaps be the
Reason, why Solomon says, In the multitude of Counsel there is safety.

This granted, by dissenting Repugnances, Truth may oftentimes be brought to
Light, but far more frequently, is by such Contestation smothered in the Issue,
leaving the Idea only of an unformed Monster. Moreover, if such Discussions
were needful to Truths Discoveries, these (so well as in obstinate Differences)
might be otherwise stated in Agreeing Suppositions, which though oftentimes but
slenderly supported, wanting the Passion of a proper Owner; yet may they unto
every common sense, afford such Lights, even in their first Discovery, as to
disclose the Necessity of their farther Agitation: which bearing in it self but
weight, will want no Prosecution.

But we may peradventure meet with so repugnant a Spirit, as would attempt to
force us out of our pursued Tract, with Mountains Observation, That Affairs are
seldom successful, when sifted so fine in their inherent Consequences, as to
admit no share* for Chance to work upon, which notwithstanding will be the
chiefest Agitator in the managing. Whence grosser minds are oftentimes more
happy in their Consultations, then more refined Judgments.

To which we answer, That it is safer and more satisfactory to a generous
mind, as Alexander said, when advised to take the Advantage of the night to
assail his Enemies more numerous then his Force, That he had rather suffer the
injury of his Fortune, then the shame of his Victory. To fail under the conduct
of that Light, God in Nature has afforded us, then to be successful either in
the Opposition, Digression, or Omission of her Prescriptions.

Furthermore, since every Age has at least his innate propension to peculiar
Imperfections, it will be safest to accept of such seasons, as are most remote
from the Extremes.

Peradventure we may here yet meet the Authority of Solomon, as an Objection to
our Argument, Whosoever often prefers Gray Hairs to the Ministry of Council.

We must Hereto so far agree, That Age (if rightly practiced) wins great
advantages to the Perfection of our Ministry, in the Observation of a long
Series and Contiguity of Affairs, confirming still the Judgment by an Occular
Proof, whereby It consequently becomes more visibly effectual to a civil
Consultation. But it must be with this Limitation, That such years meet so
perfect a Consultation, as may retain Capacity properly to dispense those
Notions. Since we observe it evident by daily proofs, That not only by visible
Infirmities of the Organs which follow our Disorders, but by an imperceptable
and Natural declining of the Spirits; most Men, e're they attain that Term of
Life, do often outlive their own sufficiency.

VII. Of His Possession.
THis Particular in Relation to our Minister presents three inherent Subjects
considerable in Discussion. The Quality, Quantity, and Dependence thereof. But
before we treat of the Branches, it will be requisite to examine whither the
Principal be necessary to our Subject. Since the Graces of the Mind may really
consist without the Benefits of Fortune: Nay, oftentimes by Her Repugnance,
standing exacter Tests, become yet more refined; and in such Consequence, more
useful to our Ministry.

To which we may reply, That Wealth, in the meanest Portion can no way fall
into conjecture, to be held Essentially, or Immediately necessary to the
forming of our Minister. Yet weighing the collateral Impediments of Poverty;
not only to the preceding Fashioning and Introduction of our Subject, but to
his present Agitations, we may affirm It obliquely in some measure to be
requisite in Him. Not merely as a safeguard from such Necessity as threatens
His present Existence. There being many other more remote Degrees of Indigence,
which may prove obstacles to the success of this His Ministry, which are to be
esteemed such; in Proportion to His private Charge and Quality.

First, in Respect of Himself. The burden of His own anxious Thoughts, will
render the Faculties of His Mind, not only indisposed, but unprepared to His
Ministry. His Thoughts employed, suspended, or diverted on His proper Exigents,
to whose forced Summons, Nature her self will claim a Privilege.

Secondly, The inward Sense of his own abject Fortune, redoubled by Reflection
of the Majesty of His own Assembly (if it encounter not an admirable Temper)
will, Through the Dejection of the Natural Spirits, some time at least restrain
the vigor of his Argument, if not extingnish It.

In Respect of Others, the Inconvenients are, That His private Misery may
sometime in His mouth render even Truth it self suspected or neglected. Wisdom
from a poor man's mouth, as Solomon says, being, or not approved, or not
followed.

Moreover, it seems not altogether consonant to Reason, that public Affairs
should be committed to His charge, who has not a competent share of Interests
in the Transaction.

To which we may yet farther add the casual Frailty of our own infirm Natures,
which thereby lays us open to the Battery of each Corruption; not only in the
Jealousy of Others, but likewise may as far intreach even on our own proper
Apprehensions. Since the wisest Man that ever was, became Herein but diffident
of His own Sufficience, unblemisht, to sustain the Trial.

Concluding thus the Original of our present Discourse, in some measure proper
to our Subject, we will peruse the Consequents hereto belonging, before
specified.

From the Quality or Nature of His Possessions may arise Two Doubts. Whither we
shall admit Them Moveable, Temporal, or Fundamental, National or Foreign. Both
which Propositions will fall under the capacity of one Solution, which shall
be, That the safest proceeding in our Election, is to aim at the firmest
Pledges of His fidelity, we constitute to our Trust, Not that we shall not
hereafter be so cautious to exact of Him securer Proofs of His Integrity. Nor
yet at present so Scrupulous, as not to admit Him to our Ministry without the
exact concurrence of such Evidence, having e're this passed the Test of more
Essential Trials.

To this Distinction in Order, succeeds the Quantity of His Possessions, one
extreme hereof we have already handled with the preceding Principal; the other,
that of course here falls in Agitation, is the excess of wealth (not such in
measure proportioned to the fancy, but condition of the owner.) How deceitful
an Impostor This is to cheat the sense, the wide worlds general Homage to this
Idol may be evidence, Who, to use Mountaigns Terms, judge of the Palfrey by his
goodly Trappings: And believe my Ladies Chappein's an Essential part of Her
admired Personage.

How corrupt an associate to the Owners Reason, sacred Authority has to us
attested, Figuring the Incapacity thereof to all that is good, under a humane
Impossibility. Moreover, how nigh and tempting an Access such affluence may
lend Ambition, not seldom only to the disturbance of the common Peace, but to
the Subversion or Translation of the whole Fabric of a Government, all Ages
will afford us woeful Patterns.

Rejecting thus the extremes, as inconvenient in our Minister, it follows
without farther consequence, we must approve the mean, which from the result of
our Argument not yet distinctly figured to the sense: We will propound It a
Proportion capable in a sober Temper, to free the mind from the assiduous
servility of others, or of His own occasions: which end, if compassed, more by
the vigor of His proper Reason, then the Advantage of His present Fortune,
will render Him yet more acceptable as visibly more hopeful to our Ministry.

The last inherent to this present subject, is the Dependence of our Ministers
Possessions; which we shall negatively include in one convertible Proposition,
That neither His Estate, if possible, depend by Tenure, Custom, Homage, Copy,
or otherwise on any others, then the Princes, or States, to whom he is
Subordinate: nor yet that many others in like manner do depend on His.

The former, if admitted, might perhaps form such engagements on our Minister,
as may enthral the freedom of His Spirit, and thereby sometime cast a private
restraint on the Persuit of public Purposes; or wrest some Public motion to a
Private Interest.

The dangerous consequence of the Latter, if admitted, too soon yields fuel to
incensed Ministers, to become unequal Repairers of their secret Discontents, as
has too often appeared to the damage of this Nation; and formerly gave occasion
to a Cautious Prince, by sundry Acts to take away the Ground thereof from all
succeeding Ages.

VIII. Of his Community.
THis Principle (rightly considered) will lead us to more visible and Essential
Discoveries of our Minister's inward Temper, not so much in the borrowed Image
issuing from the insensible Impressions our facile Nature receives from the
Habits of our frequent Conversation; as in the innate Idea, others may thence
collect of the secret and natural Propension of His mind, following therein
such Objects as seem unto His fancy most agreeable, which may be lights to
guide us in Election. But chiefly (when constituted a member to this Assembly)
we shall by way of advice interdict Him three Societies as inconsistent to the
Advantage of His Ministry. Of Bibbers, Curtisans, and Foreign Ministers of
State, under which Heads are figured to us the three eminent Strengths in
Contestation for Pre-eminence in their Efficacy over the will of Man, Wine,
Women, Wealth: Not that perhaps our Minister may not be of so excellent a
Temper, as to resist the Contagion of their contingent Imperfections, though
the common frailty of our own corrupt Nature may afford us hourly matter enough
to entertain the exactest Virtue in uncessant exercise, without attempting on
such Trials, may in his failing, hazard the common safety with His own. The
Danger Hereof will appear more evident and weighty, when to His innate
Infirmity, we shall Balance the insinuating force of these their Instruments
with the full extent of their Operations.

The Imposturies of Wine first steal upon the wariest Temper, under the
Disguise of Natures helpful Ministry, admitted thus in one Degree for useful;
Custom, at length, will in Another form it necessary. Mirth exalts the measure,
and company procures the excess, which not only smothers the Natural Light in
Present, but disables it in Future, leaving the irregular Demeanor so
ridiculous, that what should Grace His Dignity, detracts from His Authority:
while the shallow Image of His thoughts hang on his fleeting Breath, and by the
least disordered motion of the Heart, drops from his slippery Lips, perhaps to
the betraying of the general welfare.

But peradventure some may allege, that our Minister's happy Constitution may
as well gain this Advantage over others Imbecility, as Another over His: and
that there are certain Climates, to whom this Custom is so proper, without the
Proof Hereof, a Minister with them successfully can seldom agitate.

To which we may answer, That it is too uncertain, hazzardous, and indirect a
Procedure, to entrust an equal portion of Affairs of this high Nature, but to
the Advantage of the Natural Temper, to whose exact managing, the perfectest
Lights of Reason or of Art, are scarcely capable: But were It granted
necessary, there might be other Agents found hereto more proper, whose
Ignorance might answer for their Secrecy, and free the State from Casualty of
such a Damage, without imbarking of an equal venture.

How irresistably the Charms and slights of wanton Women's Subtilties work on
our self-betraying Nature, lying in our Bosom, all Ages will afford us
evidence, whose woeful Proofs have not left Man the hope of a defensive Armoir.
To these, we find in Sampson, Solomon, and David. The strongest to his Ruin,
betrayed his strength. The wisest to the dismembring of his State, his
Knowledge. And the most zealous, to his Reproach, his Piety. It will therefore
be no scandal to our Minister's Sufficience afar off to avoid this Precipice,
become remarkable by the overthrow of so many eminent Personages; not only in
His own Respect, but in Regard of public Interests (by him to be preferred
before his own) which lying in his Bosom, may oftentimes be incident to the
like Disaster.

Whereto may be objected, That there are also certain Commonwealths, with which
our Minister may have Commission to communicate, wherein the sole, perfectest,
and most material Intelligence of the occurrents of that Place, are only to be
gained from such Instruments, whose private Interview may farther be authorized
from Cicero's success hereby in the Discovery of Catalines Conspiracy.

To which we make reply, That herein also (if assented to) the Balance of our
Argument remains but still in equal Counterpoise; since in one and the same
subject we may to the Facility in Discovering, oppose the subtilty in attaining
such secrets: so that hereby we attempt to gain no more, then we endanger to
lose. In which Respect, where Custom has confirmed such Proceeding useful, and
not scandalous, it will be more applausive and convenient to have recourse to
our preceding Remedy, and under the Faculty of a more remote substitute,
preserve the Dignity of our Minister unblemished, and Public Interests from a
Capacity of Prejudice.

Our last Restraint on This Association is with Foreign Ministers, under which
Distinction we have reduced the Force of Wealth, in that Money is the chief and
usual Instrument such Agents work with, to the supplanting of their Neighbors
Interests, or otherwise advancing of their own, by secret Corruption of their
Ministers: Of which Method in Proceeding, the Venetian is so jealous, That they
have inhibited by a penal Law (extending to the Nature of High Treason) That no
Minister of State, or Senator, shall with Foreign Minister either at home or
abroad, Friend or Foe, have either private or public Conference whatsoever,
without the special License of the Senate. Which has not (as some may figure)
been enacted only, as a terror to suppress private practices; but clear
contrary, has in every Circumstance been prosecuted with such blind severity,
as has in latter times, injuriously both to Themselves and Others, untimely
dissected from their Civil Body (Anthonio Foscarini) a Member of the greatest
Eminence, and perfectest Integrity amongst them, such before reputed, and after
to their Grief and shame too late acknowledged. In which proceeding, since we
seem to cast a shadow of Reproach on so venerable a Society, and so universally
approved Laws as has induc't the ablest Judgments to believe, That no Civil
Jurisdiction either has had, or need to have firmer Basis to the Establishment
of a lasting Government. It will be necessary to digress somewhat from our
present Subject, both to express and prove the Defects in such Ordinance, as
also in the Dispensation of the same. Briefly therefore we may Object against
one Clause in the Edict, That it is against the Dignity and Purity of a Law to
propound any Recompense to the Dilator, as pre-intending to suborn by such
Corruption false Witness to the Plea, and to invite the Indigent as well to
suggest a Lie, as to disclose a Truth.

To which if inferred, the Necessity Hereof to a due Information; we may reply,
That if the Vigor of a plausible Affection to a Common Cause, be not in every
Peculiar Person sufficiently effectual to the vigilance of their proper safety
inherent to the public: yet, the never sleeping Spies of Envy and Malice (to
whose Persecution the exactest Ministers are most incident) will need no
stipend to provoke their Fury.

Against the incircumspection of the Ministers to this Decree, we may in this
particular infer, That no Judge whatever, by the Nature of his Office, is tied,
so strictly to depend on the Evidence of a Witness, as to neglect the
circumstance of the Matter, which diverse times affords the exactest Lights to
Truths Discovery, both without and beyond a farther Testimony; as appears in
Solomon and Daniels Sentences: which, duly to consider, had not those Ministers
admitted, the false Deposition of a Band of Braves, would not have had the
weight to over balance the just Renown of so virtuous, long approved, and
faithful a Minister: where the defensive evidence was to be waved as
irreceivable. But to come nigher to our present Subject, The true ground of
this Law wants no other Authority to lend It consequence, then the numerous
Examples of Ministers, thus corrupted almost in every Age.

Not that we shall here declare a general suspicion of our Minister, but to
prevent the irresistible motions of our common Frailty from a dangerous issue.
How forcible and prompt the means in Practice is to our Corruption; so obvious
is to every Sense, we only will insert this antic Observation; That the Common
union of the strongest City is not of Force sufficient to resist the entry of
an Ass laden with Gold.

To conclude, where no such Institution is of force, but general freedom
licensed, It will become the Prudence of our Minister, if wholly not to refrain
such Conversation, at least to use it with so nice a Prudence as may not yield
a seeming ground to others jealousy of His sincere Intentions.

IX. Of his Demeanor.
IN the Reflection of this Subject we shall make nigher, and more visible
Approaches on the Discovery of our Ministers secret Inclinations, which yet may
lend us a more hopeful Introduction to His Institution, as they are more
exactly appropriated to the perfect managing of His Ministry; in Relation to
which we shall here only agitate on this Particular.

His exterior Demeanor may properly herein be limited under the extent of
three Objects. His own Assembly, Foreign Societies, and National Sollicitors:
But e're we handle It as distinctly proper to these Particulars, we will
consider It in General. How insensibly and powerfully the unaffected Graces of
the exterior Demeanor win upon others Inclinations, even in the first Aborde,
may be distinguished in the effects by the most Savage and unciviliz'd Temper,
though undiscovered in the cause thereof.

It Is not the affected Gesture of the Mimicks of our Age, That our Intention is
directed to; but an inexpressable Agreement in the Motion of the Parts, whence
issues, as it were a silent Harmony. 'Twas the admired Efficacy of this, that
charmed the fury of the rebellious Multitude, their Arms (the Fuel to their
Rage) yet in their hands, when Alexander and Caesar exposed themselves into the
throng, unguarded and alone, to the Attachment of the Incendiaries, who fearing
none, were to be feared.

'Twas the secret working Hereof, calmed the unappeasable Ire of Edward the
Black Prince, against the Lymoseins, While entering their City, the Bloody and
irresistible Instruments of his Vengeance yet in the height of Execution; by
the Reflection of the valor of three Gentlemen thereof, had put this his
victorious Army to a stand. 'Twas Scipio's gallant Demeanor at the Bar, that
silenc't his Accusers, and astonished his Judge. This is the very Life of
Rhethorick, so often has wrought on the Affections of the Multitude beyond
Intelligence.

But to return to the Propriety and use Hereof in the Particulars. And first in
Reference to the Convention of His own Society, whose distinct Consultations
having but one Object, The Public Good, nor but one Course to attain It,
mutual Agreement. The necessity of the work will not only require a Conformity
in their Faculties that manage It, But their Wills, which at the Entry of our
Council are therefore enjoined to put off all Appearance of Emulation or
Inemnitye; though their Natural Infirmity cannot dispense with the not
re-assuming Them in the Issue. In imitation of ***

But yet not so nice of Apprehension to shock another opinion in His
Opposition, as to forfeit the unequal Resentment of His own Reason. In the
Prosecution whereof He should put on as much undaunted Resolution, as may
neither smother nor misbecome His Sense in Passion, whereof to avoid the very
shadow, He should neither Anticipate, nor yet Neglect His Order in Delivery.

In His Agitations with Foreign Ministers, we shall allow Him to assume more
Majesty, in Respect of the Dignity of the Nation he represents. And more Art,
in Regard of the divided Interests, each Part obliquely may pursue. But so that
the Former be sweetened with a Civil Modesty. And the Later shadowed with a
seeming Indifferency, reconcileing both their Repugnances to such an union, as
the splendour of That may not restrain the suppleness of This. Nor the Dexterity
of This Eclipse the Luster of That.

His Comportment toward Solicitors of his proper Nation will require no less
Caution. There being Two dangerous Extremes Herein to be avoided. The
Disaffection of the People, and the Jealousy of His Peers.

To shun the Former, He must, in the Reception of His Solicitors, neither take
on a sow'r Austerity to counterfeit affected Majesty; Nor yet a sullen neglect
to borrow seeming Gravity. He must not assume that unbecoming Masque of vanity,
to pretend Himself more considerable than the Rest of His Associates, by
affirming Himself over-burd'ned with an unequal share of Affairs, to shake off
their Addresses, nor yet acknowledge such Pre-eminence in Power as to invite
Them.

He must still in Himself be wary to preserve in Their Esteem the Dignity of
that Society to which he shall officiate. The People judging only of the Body
by the Parts thereof. His Access therefore Must be Facile, His Aboard Gracious,
His Entertain Agreeable, and Closure Satisfactory. If not in His Endavours, yet
in His Advice. But not to set so high a Rate on either, as if he drove a Trade
in Civil Ties; and made so reverent a Convention, but a public Mart, for
Commerce only, but of private Interests; nor yet to value either at so mean a
Pitch, as to seek out occasion to dispense the same. His Dispatches must not be
tedious nor precipitater That (instead of Relief) were to add one Burden to
another. This (instead of advancing) were to betray the success of a Cause in
Manner of the Manageing.

In the Contexture of all which, He must use such Address, as he approach not
to the next Extreme; becoming Popular. Our Minister may be too forward in the
persuit of fair Transactions of this Nature; There being as much danger in
serving of a People as a Prince too well, The next step being followed with the
Necessity of his Ruin; the secret Envy of His Associates suggesting straight a
Jealousy of the Common welfare, This in the Athenian State lent Ground to the
Establishment of a Law, entitled Ostracisme, which was for Term of years a
public Exile of such Ministers, who in the happy Issue of eminent
Enterprises, became too Glorious in the Peoples sight, o're-shadowing thereby
the failing Luster of the whole Society. Such and the like Rewards have often
crowned the Triumph of a Glorious Servitude, as may appear in the unequal
sufferings of Scipio, Pericles, Alcibiades, and many other Worthies.

And where such Laws were not of force, many such Heroes have become the
tragique Subject to Envies secret Practices. Though some, perhaps may here be
instanced, have by such Artifice supplanted Princes, and subverted States, as
Bullingbrooke, and others. And some the Means has failed in the Attempt
thereof, as the Guises.

X. Of His Speech.
THis Subject may lead a wary Observation (endued with Capacity to judge) not
only to an Inspection of the exact Image of the Mind, but even to the secret
sources of Her motions (distinguishable not often to the Owner) more perfectly,
then the most nice Idea extracted from the Actions; the hidden springs whereof
Custom and private Ends do often smother in a confused Heap of Circumstance,
whose consequence rests still concealed in the Intention. This being the more
immediate Instrument the Soul imployeth on exterior Objects. Which in Respect
of our Ministers Society, being contracted under Three Heads of Communication,
as is expressed in the preceding Subject; we will direct our purpose only to
appropriate this Principle unto our former Model.

First, in Relation to his own Society, the Object of His dicourse being only
Single, the Method thereof must be only Simple, or without Art. Truth wants no
other Ornaments to affect her Audience, then Her proper Beauty. What moves the
Senses but obscures the Reason. The Flowers of Rhetoric are commonly but the
suspected Fardes unto sinister purposes, whose Imposturies are inconsistent
with the Nature of our Ministry, which cannot admit him for a perfect Workman,
as some have said of Orators. That makes Great Things small, and small Things
Great, no more then that Artisan his Crafts-Master should make a Shoe too
Little or too Big for the Foot; but he that makes it Fit. To which perfect
structure of Discourse, we will lay down a Tripple Baiz to form it on. Clear,
Vigorous, and Pertinent.

Clear, or Intelligible, in regard Ambiguity may be Mother of Mistake, Mistake
the Nurse of Error, which may encounter such a Consequence, may make the
Default irrepairable.

Vigorous, in that His Arguments thereby, in present, may meet less Opposition;
in Future, win more Credit. And in the sequel of either, procure a speedier
Expedition, which must not yet be formed under the Semblance of an insulting
Imposition; that were to blemish Truth's attractive Grace with Civil Tyranny,
not leaving others Sense the Liberty to agitate, and so retard Her sought
Reception, if not repulse Her at the first Aboard in Dislike of Her Appearance;
All men affecting such a Freedom in their Judgments, as may in their Assent to
Truth's Decree, entitle Them to equal share of Right in Her Discovery.

Pertinent, to avoid a prolixe Circumstance, which will not only waste Time in
Delivery, and in the Order of Reply expedient to Particulars; but may produce
unuseful Matter to new Arguments, extending so the Subject beyond a due
Proportion in the Managing, which being a stop to new Occurrences, continually
are flowing in the Concourse of Affairs (whose weight implies an Exigence in
Expedition) will press for timely Issue, or swell to such a burd nous
Multititude, Necessity will enforce some part Thereof to be neglected or
omitted.

In His Transactions with Ministers of Foreign States, His Discourse may
assume like Form, as His Demeanor to Them before specified, more Majesty and
State to the united Body, in Honor of His proper Nation; more Art and
Courtship to the particular Members, in favor of His secret purposes; Yet to
the former, not with so rude an Arrogance, as is expressed in C. Popilius
Embassy, who on his first public Audience, making a Circle round about Him
with his staff, required of the doubtful Assembly (demanding time but to
deliberate on their Answer) their plain and present Resolution e're he should
pass the Limits of his formed Circumference. Nor to the latter, with so
suffering a Civility, as to oblige another Nation at expense of the Interests
of his own.

To the people of his own Jurisdiction the Emphasis of his Discourse may vary
Forms, as their Addresses to him, or his to them, directly or obliquely, may
concern the Nature of his Ministry.

Their Addresses to them in Particulars on Private Agitations may be received
and returned in a plain method of Delivery, most proper to the Nature of the
Subject, and the Capacity of the Manager thereof. If their Addresses to him be
in Multitudes, and for a general Cause, his style must have more winning
ornaments to become plausible.

If his Address be to particulars obliquely tending to a Public Cause, his
Language may assume more Majesty to lend it more Authority.

If his Address be to a multitude directed only for the Public Benefit, his
Tongue may use the choicest Grace of Rhetoric to stir the Passions of the
Populace: yet must he not exceed the Limits of his Purpose in his Promises,
lest the Necessity of their Omission should procure Hatred or Disturbance to
the State, Ruin, or Danger to himself, having thus raised a Spirit he cannot
lay again. It will be safer perhaps and more facile to win the Inclination of
the Multitude, by tickling of them with their own Applause; yet here in also
must be Caution, since Their incited Passion, known but in Extremes, should or
exalt him or themselves so high, to hazard their own Safety, or the Public
Peace, drunk with the fury of their wild Distemper.

But happy are those Nations, That utterly hereof abolished the use, whose
subtle Contagion too often but foments the secret Fuel of Incendiaries to the
Emotion of such Dangers may subvert a State.

XI. Of His Fame.
THe Harmony that issues mutually from the Concurrence of All the foresaid
Attributes in their Impression on the Fancy of the Vulgar is His Reputation, to
which we have given Order in the sequel of His exterior Properties, without
Reflection on the Interior, in regard these are the only Springs which lend
Emotion to the Resentments of the multitude, who have nor will, nor yet
capacity to search into the Latter, taking up their Opinions only on the
public Faith, and rather hazard their credit (though to the General Damage)
then be at expense of a nigher Trial.

How this method of proceeding should form a firm Foundation to the
Establishment of Truth, we cannot apprehend, though confirmed and authorized by
that powerful warrant, Vox Populi, vox Dei, The voice of the People is the
voice of God; Which rather is so to be interpreted, in Respect of the
irresistible force Thereof in executing, then in regard of a supreme faculty in
Determining. For since It is unquestionably manifest, that not one of a
thousand (taken severally) is endued with Capacity to distinguish of the Truth.
Why should we then esteem them (if united) competent Judges to her Evidence,
making the result of their voice in general to be of weight, which in
Particulars can no way be considerable.

To which perhaps may be alleged, That the multitude receive no notions for
positive Truths, or warrant of Their Own Sufficiency, but from the Tradition of
the choicest Judgments, approved in the Agreement of succeeding Ages. In
Objection to the Inference, we may reply, That when we shall exactly weigh the
common Heresies, that hereby have been introduced in Repugnance to Divine
Principles. The absurdities to Civil, and the Fallacies to Natural: We shall
find Reason to believe, that even in those Ages, and over those Judgments the
Passions of the Multitude have had too forcible an Influence in overswaying of
Their Sentences, to admit Them for Authentic Generally. Moreover we may
observe, in most General Councils, that men of greatest Wisdom and Integrity,
have suffered the most obstinate Oppositions in their Arguments, either through
Envy, Ignorance, or Inenmity, or else in favor of some secret Practices: which
though examined with more freedom and Impartiality in remoter times; yet
neither then want corrupt or perverse Champions to shelter Their Defects: so
that the Multitude; in the doubtful strife (suspended from definitive Censure)
incline to that, holds most Advantage with their proper Interests, assuming
still the Authority to judge. From whence we may collect, That blustering Fame
is but a doubtful Light to yield safe conduct to our Purposes, not only in
respect of their premised Insufficiency to judge, who forms her Nature; but in
regard the vicious multitude can not, without impeachment to themselves,
approve of such are most to them unlike: so that a wise and upright man may
have just Cause even to suspect himself in their applausive Testimony: to which
may also added be, the common Homage, most tender to the sense and proper
Interests.

The perfect'st test to the allowance of our Minister, will therefore be the
secret Approbation of the virtuous, wise, and uninteressed Publisher: And
because all these three Attributes are to meet in one Subject, all these three
Faculties must concur in the distinguisher: but lest we should anticipate our
Order, intrenching here too far upon the Rights more proper to another Theme
and Place, we will desist to pursue farther this out Argument, and here but
only weigh what Influence a fair Renown may yet contribute to the advantage of
His Ministry following the Distinctions of our preceding Patterns.

First in Relation to His own Society, It will lend weight to His Advice, if
not Authority; Subject for exact Discussions, if not ground for doubtless
Receptions. It will make way for due Assurance in the Delivery of his Purposes,
for vigor in their Prosecutions. 'Twill farther keep his Faculties assiduous,
vigilant, and cautious in their Exercise, in jealousy of their Honor.

In Respect of Foreign States, the Glory of His Fame (lending more Luster to
His Society) will to Consederates endear an union, Restrain public Breaches,
Oppose private Practices to Enemies, make our Designs redoubtable, advancing so
their Issue e're they have a Being and probably unnerve their Counter attempts
in Diffidence: The very Fame of Alexander, when living, kept not only Rome, but
the wide distant world in Awe. Who, without For^unes farther trial, resolved
unanimously all to become His Vassals, and hold the Civil Jurisdiction of their
Governments in Fealty of Him. To which Intent Ambassadors were from all Parts
designed to Babylon.

In Reference to His proper Nation, a high Repute will yield a plausible
satisfaction to the People in the Establishment of severe Laws, a cheerful
suffering in the necessity of Burd'nous Impositions, flourishing Hopes of the
success of their intended Enterprises, reviving Courage in the Dejection of
public Disasters. Check the springing Fury of public Emotions, suppress the
progress of private Practices, and preserve the whole Society in Honor and
Credit with the People, who will thereby excuse their public Failings, lending
a fair Construction to their Endeavors in the miscarriage of their
undertakings.

XII. Of his Interior Endowments under four Principles.
I. Of His Prudence.
HAving figured the exterior Endowments with their Coherents to His Person, so
far as may have Reference to His Ministry; we will pursue our Order, and make
our Entry on the Distinction, and uses of the Interior, under the extent of
four Principles, Prudence, Justice, Fortitude, and Temperance.

As all other Virtues are but subordinate Ministers to these four, so the three
latter of these seem to have an equal Dependence on the first; Prudence being
the general Rule and Compass by which they all do steer their Courses: and no
longer retain their own proper Nature, then contained within the Bounds of Her
Prescription Justice, if severe, becomes Injury; Fortitude, if unrestrained,
Temerity; Temperance, if not qualified; Excess: So that their true Existence is
very properly said to be seated in the mean, which to distinguish, Prudence
suspends the Balance to the Counterpoise.

Antiquity distinguished this Attribute, under the Figure of a youthful Virgin,
viewing intentively her own Form in a Glass, implying the exercise of Wisdom to
consist only in the Inspection of our selves: According to the Inscription on
Apolle's Temple, Nosce Teipsum; In which Ordinance Plato affirms Prudence only
Constituted: and Aristotle farther verifies the same in Xenophon.

Not to reflect upon her Nature here as a Caelestial Attribute, but to consider
the Force of her Faculties in so frail a Continent as Man. She sees the evil
afar off, and avoideth it. She lends a Stratagem to the success of Arms, and
Council to the Establishment of Peace. She lades the Industrious with Riches,
and the Humble with Honor. She discovers the secrets, of Nature, and
directs them to their proper ends. She anticipateth the Designs of the
Fraudulent, and involveth them in their own Snares. She distinguishes the
season proper to every action, lending them so, not only Grace, but Success:
From the Aptitude of time, hastening the Maturity of Her Purposes: She
searches into the end of Her own Being, and not to frustrate the intention of
Her Maker, applies herself with Diligence to the use. She communicates Her
Treasure without Scruple, and enlarges Her Store by a liberal Dispensation.
Safety is in Her left Hand, and length of Days are in her Right. She ravisheth
Others with Delight, and satiates her Owner with Joy. But to insist longer on
the Description of Her Character, were to detract from the Glory of Her
Essence, prescribing Limits to Infinity. We will yet view Her Ornaments with
more proportion to our Faculties. Considering Her Luster in Reflection on our
Subject: And though Her use may seem implied in Her Distinction, yet we will
farther in some particulars appropriate Her Graces, as peculiar Omaments to our
Ministry.

Prevoyance or Foresight, is one of the most excellent Faculties our Minister
can be endu'd with, to the due Execution of His Ministry. We speak not here of
it, as a supernatural Gift of Inspiration; Nor as an Artificial Light of
Divination. (The blind Zeal of the Pretenders to That has made the One
scandalous. And the ignorant Presumption of the followers of This, has made
the Other Ridicuious) But a Rational perspection of ensueing Consequence
gathered from the Collection of cohering Occurrents, proportioned to the
Capacity of the Matter and the Managers. Thus did: David by Hashai subvert the
Council of Achitophil, in Reference to the heady Folly of His son Absalom,
coincident to His vanity and Youth. Thus Alexander grounded: His stratagem on
the superstition of the Indians, who having stopped His Passage by Prepossession
of an innocessable Mountain, hired some fifty Mountainers to ascend the same in
diffcult and inaccessable Places on the back of His Enemies, Where being
arrived to make great fires, which signal discovered to Alexanders in the
plains, He put his Army in Battal^^, as if he had intended to assait His Fees.
But as his Army marched, a Herald soul before to summon there to yield, and
not to be too confident on the Advantage of the Place, which would betray them
to their (...); herew^^h showing them many dispersed F^^es, were to their
Terror made on every side. The Indians believing this unexpected Forc^ (...)
sent from Heaven in favor of the Assailants Purposes, struck with much
Terror, surrendered both their Persons and the Plate. So Scipio reflecting on
the immeasurable Avarice and Lache^y of the Carthaginians, withdrew Hanibal's
irresistible Force from Italy, by transferring the War into Affrich.

To which may possibly be objected some examples, that having had the like
Grounds, have not had the like happy Issues.

In Answer whereto we may infer, that it can be no Reproach to our Minister,
to fail under the conduct of this Natural Light; since He is only Master of His
Councils, not of their Events.

Another Inherent of our Subject expedient to our Minister is Insight or a
sharp Perspecuity in Judging, without Relation to the Future, or the Precedent,
but only from the present Sense and Circumstance, searching into the secret
Nature of Occurrences. Thus was enlightened the famous Judgments of Solomon and
Daniel. Thus was discovered the Impostury of the pretended born Blind,
miraculously healed at Dijon by Lewis **** in the trial of his judging of
Colors; which though His restored Faculty might discern, time must have endu'd
him with Capacity to distinguish.

Of this Endowment our Minister will have daily use, not only to the Discovery
of sinister purposes in the Intercourse of Affairs with Foreign Ministers
(whose usual Commerce is but an honorable sort of Imposture, but to the
enlightening of private practices even in his own Society

Invention is another of our Subjects essential Attributes; expedient to our
Minister, which seems to spring from the Concurrence of Her two former
Ornaments Prevoyance, and Perspecuity. This Faculty has two Objects of an
Engineer, which meet in one Center; Proper safety. Offensive, in open or secret
assailing of an Enemy. Defensive, in open or secret guarding of Himself:
Neither of which can work securely without the other, who so transports His
Force to the Prejudice of his Foe, as to omit his proper safeguard, lies naked
to his Enemies Offense: who so intentive is on his security, as to neglect
Attempts, arms but his Foe more strongly against Himself. Plot and Counter-Plot
must wait upon an Enterprise to crown the undertaking with success, though
sometime they may seem divided: as Eumenes, Who seeing many Billets were in his
Camp dispersed by his Foe, to invite with great Rewards some greedy Temper to
contrive his Death, assembled all his Troops by public Proclamation; where
highly exalting their approved Fidelity to Him, with tender of a seeming
gratitude: He publicly affirmed, those Billets so disperc'd, were but the
secret Machines of his Love, by him contrived to gather nigher Proofs of their
Affection.

To make all which Concurrences successful in their use, we must invest them
with another Ornament, A perfect faculty in the Election of proper Instruments
and Seasons.

In due observance of the Former, many Princes endued but with small
sufficiency, have often happy made their undertakings: And many that have had
extraordinary Endowments, failing herein, subverted often have the Course of
well digested Enterprises.

To grasp with Time for fair occasions, must be the Practice of an Industrious
and Vigilant Temper; such as Caesar was, who put forth to Sea for Afric in a
Storm, where he alone was to become exposed amongst his Enemies, having as then
no Party formed there. In all his Enterprises his Diligence still anticipated
his Enemies Apprehension: Many eminent Personages in This defective have
thereby frustrated their painful persevering, and otherwise successful
Purposes, as Hannibal, whose frequent failings herein, had formed a general
Observation peculiar to Himself, That he well knew how to overcome, but not how
to make use of Victory.

XIII. Of Justice.
THis Attribute is the Ground of all Civil Commerce, being the Rule whereby all
Laws what e're pretend to be established. The old Law represents her Character
under a severe Injunction. An Eye for an Eye, a Tooth for a Tooth. The Gospel
under a gracious Precept, which entitles every man to a Faculty of being his
own competent Judge. Do unto others, as you would others should do unto you.
Antiquity figured Her Model under the form of a young Virgin, holding a Sword
erected in one Hand, and a Balance suspended in the Other. Her Eyes hooded with
a Scarf: In which Posture amply enfolding the Mystery of her proper Nature. The
person under which she is shadowed, intimating, Her ever flourishing and
attractive Grace, employed in the fertility and beauty proper to that Sex. Under
the three other Distinctions is inferred the mutual Relation and Agreement of
all Virtues necessary to the exact constituting One Another. Prudence seems
intentive on the Suspension of the Balance to distinguish of which side the
weight of Right inclines. Fortitude has armed Her with a Sword, and Courage to
the Execution of a double Ministry: Punishment and Protection. Many, who only
have considered this Investure of Justice, have erroneously figured to
themselves, that Tyranny and Violence have laid the first Establishment to
Government. This may probably be true, in respect of the licentious Multitude,
who still dislike to have the unruly Motions of their wills restrained. But
when we shall weigh the Faculties necessary to reduce their innate stubbornness
to a decent Prescription, we cannot but ascribe to Rule, more noble Principles.
The conduct of the Prudent united to the Aid and Assent of the virtuous.

Temperance, lest the impartial Sense should over-sway the Judgment,
intercepts the course thereof from all exterior Objects with a vail.

But e're we shall begin to appropriate these faculties to the usage of our
Ministry: It will be necessary to remove one Interjection, will else make void
the present Ground of this our Argument. Though time, general Practice, and the
universal Profession of States have formed (as an authentic Axiom) the
violation of Her Order in Competition with the Consequence of their Affairs (as
Mountaign says) After the model of Physic, preferring the useful before the
Honest. Plato seems to imply no less implicitly, desiring only with Fortitude
and Temperance, the Advantage of the Form in the Magistrates of His
Commonwealth.

Yet we may, without the Censure of Vanity or Presumption, attempt to make
Discovery on the Defects of the Foundation, under Authority of the Wisest, Who,
this affirms to be the surest Basis to a Government.

Justice, in relation to humane Society, having three differing Objects, may
have threeseveral Distinctions, National, Civil, and Natural.

1. National Justice regards the Customs and Rites allowed or contracted
between Nation and Nation. 2. Civil Justice, the Customs or Rites proper to a
peculiar Government. 3. Natural Justice, the innate Customs and Rights between
Man and Man.
How sacred and inviolable the National are to be observed, may here be
instanced in the Israelites proceeding with the Gibeonites (designed by Divine
Decree to Ruin) and their League with Them, but Surrepticiously acquired. How
severely and visibly the Breaches Hereof have been miraculously punished, is
evidently discovered in the great Battle at Varna, between Amurath the second,
and Valdislaus King of Hungary.

In Opposition to this Example, may perhaps be instanced the prosperous Issues
of the two Punick Wars to the Advantage of the Romans, by them injuriously
commenced.

In answer whereto (omitting to insert how such success did but contribute to
their approaching Ruin, extending the Limits of their Government beyond a due
proportion, enforcing them thereby to sinck under the Burden of their proper
Greatness.) We may allege, that the Almighty, who from Man's proper Evils
forms his peculiar Good, may (as we see in the Mystery of Our Redemption)
suffer Malice a while to Triumph over Innocence, for some Benefit or Punishment
to a Nation, secretly enfolded in the Consequence of Divine, Civil, or Natural
Causes, scrutable only to his all-seeing Wisdom, who directed it. But withal,
the Instruments of such glorious Mischiefs (though shadowed with the fairest
Lustres) seldom even Here escape a just reward. Witness the miserable and
ignominious Extirpation of the Jews: With the woeful and sudden extinction of
Caesar's Conspirators, and their Families. The Cruelty of the First sheltered by
the pretended Defense of their Laws. And treachery of the Other, shadowed with
the intentional Recovery of their Liberty. Civil Rights, Though the Romans
(induced by the foresaid Principle) have, even for Base Ends, subverted; as
appears In the Re-infranchisement of diverse Cities for great sums of Money
from the hands of Sylla, by Ordinance and permission of the Senate: which after
falling in Question, the Senate adjudged taxable as before; and the Money so
employed for the Recovery of their Freedom, to be accounted lost to them: Yet
should they be inviolably preserved by their Ministers. First, in regard that
the Majesty and Purity of the Laws are thereby better maintained. To which
purpose was grounded The stability of the Decrees of the Meedes and Persians:
Though, as irrevocable, not without danger of Damage in the Consequence. That
Council or Prescription being evil in it self, which can no way be changed.

Secondly, In regard of their particular Interests, that manage it, inherent
to the Public: Who should in Reason have a jealous Circumspection not to give
way to the Infringment of a Law in being, though for the public Benefit, since
all men's Lives and Properties therein involved, from such a Precedent, They in
the Future may receive like damage.

The course of Private Rights has found more Favor with the Romans, though to
the public Prejudice, yielding a slave Permission to conceal his Master,
though under the Conviction of High Treason, without Impeachment. Epiminondas
(though possessed with the highest and most noble Passion for the public Good)
esteemed him a wicked Man (though never so good a Subject) that spared not in
Battle amongst His Enemies, His Friend and Host. Manente in Memoria etiam in
Dissiduo publicorum Faedorum privati Juris. Even in the strife for Public
Rights, retaining still the memory of private Ties.

It nulla Potentia Vires.
Praestandi, ne quid peccet amicus habet.
Much more forcible and dispensable from the Prosecution of Public Advantages,
are Natural Rights. Non enim Patria praestar omnibus Officiis, and ipsi
conducit pios habere cives in Parents. Our Country is not advantaged by every
Office, It being profitable thereto to have Citizens pious to their Patents. We
must rather approve of Zalucus Locensis.
that Fathers Example: Who, in Favor of his trespassing Son, parted with an
Eye to the Satisfaction of that Law, he had made against Adultery. Then of
Posthumus Dictator
His who caused his Son to be put to Death for Infringing His command in his
Absence, though thereby invested with the spoils of * Manlius Torquatus.
His Enemies. As for Jephtha's Sacrifice to his rash Vow, we may rather look on
it, as a just reward to his Impiety, then a warrantable Trial of his Zeal.

This Rule of Right may seem yet farther to extend it self, even on the
Confines of Hostility (where the very Image of Justice seems effaced in every
Delineament) summoning Man's captived Reason to the Appeal of common Decencies
in Humanity. On this Intent was grounded a custom among the Lacedaemonians to
sacrifice to the Muses, on setting forth to War, the Martial Fury might, by
their ascribed Mirth and Sweetness be tempered and allayed.

But to return to application of Her former Distinctions to the usage of our
Minister, forming his will to the exact Prescription of these Her differing
Objects. Though the Nature of His Ministry may seem not fully to extend unto
the execution Thereof, as proper only to His Substitutes. Yet since such act
but under His Commission, we only Him consider, as the first Mover of such
Instruments.

Under the shadow of the three former Distinctions were figured three Faculties
necessary to the Exercise of Justice in her several Objects. A clear
Intelligence of the Subject agitated. Power and Courage to Punish or Protect.
An unintressed and impartial Inclination to educe either into perfect Action.

1. To the Acquisition of the First Faculty, it will be necessary not only to
make an exact search into the Litteral and Visible sense and conherence of a
Subject in Discussion, but therewithal to sound the secret ground or purpose of
such a League, Covenant, Contract, Law, Decree, or Act whatever from the
Collation of Times, Circumstance, and Persons, in which, for what, and by whom
they were passed, enacted, or Confirmed. It being inconsistent with the Dignity
of a Legislator, to catch at nice Terms, or Distinctions to shadow an evasion
from the true Intent. Or to leave such Incongruities or Obscurities in those
Decrees, Acts, or Commissions, formed by his Council, as may lend appearance
unto sinister Practices in Ambiguity, which may instead of Aids to the
oppressed, become snares to the Innocent.

2. The second Faculty, consisting of differing parts, must be assumed from
distinct Subjects. Power from the Authority under which He does officiate.
Courage from himself, to put that Power indifferently in Act; Both which we
will consider as immediately contingent to His Ministry; properly and
peculiarly seated in Advice. In Delivery whereof, He may in Right, challenge an
unquestionable Privilege of Liberty, being authorized by the Election of a
Prince or People, and the Reception of His own Society; not erring from the
Propriety of Time, Circumstance, and Order. A Consultation else seems
indirectly managed, concluding, or Impulsively, or Omissively: And our Minister
there posited but a Cipher to lend more value to the Ordinance. It will appear
a gross piece of Mockery, to accept of any One to Council, but only to affirm
what others shall propound: Nor can the Advantage of Number claim a Right of
Opposition, because it may a Right of Institution. The Integrity of that Vote
must pass but for suspected, endeauours to avoid the exactest Trial. And Truth
may sometime so happly expose her self unto One Man's Conception, as his
evidence in Her Distinction may oversway the Censure of a Multitude. His Power
to agitate thus unprescrib'd, will lend Him yet but small Advantage to advance
the public Interest, unless he can attain like freedom from himself. If either
the Gravity, Pre-eminence, or Reputation of others sufficiency united or
divided, fetter with Awe the Faculties of his mind in a servile Subjection,
Dependence, or Relation. He not only thereby will betray His ^rust, but even
degrade himself of This his Dignity.

3. The latter Faculty is the suspension of the Sense from all exterior
Objects. From this Obscurity is Justice brought to Light: It will little avail
the Dispensation of Rights, to be endued with a Judgment to Discern, and Power
to determine, if the corrupted will disguize the Impression. How far the
Public welfare should weigh down all private Interest, is figured to us in the
Integrity of Regulus, Who, being a Prisoner to the, had freedom on his word to
repair to his Country, provided he would move the Senate in their Behalf to an
Accord, and failing thereof to return to them. Regulus, on the first overture
of the Proposition to the Senate, finding them in Respect of his Safety to
incline to an Agreement with their Enemies, laid open all the Damages that
would thereby ensue unto the State, exasperating them with earnest Passion to
restore the glory of their Arms in Execution of their Enemies, which being
assented to, They nevertheless opposed his Return, lest the wild fury of the
barbarous Foe, hereby incensed higher, should act the vengeance of their Rage
on him. But he not so to be detained, returning to their hands, became a Martyr
to the public Interest, and his private Faith.

XIV. Of Fortitude.
Diverse Nations have held This Endowment in so high an Esteem, that they have
not only given It the Pre-eminence of all Civil virtues, but under the sole
Distinction of This, have farthermore employed All the Rest; Among which the
French intimating a Person endued with General Worth, instyle Him valiant,
after the manner of the Romans; who lent virtue Her Denomination from the
Etymolegy of Force.

Whither this Custom proceed from the natural Propension of those Nations to
the Exercise of this Faculty, or the proper use Thereof, is not easy to
determine. Yet is it probable that this was the First virtue, which visibly
imparted Her self to mankind, affording one advantage over the other. Others,
Contrariwise, considering the use Hereof, in Reference only to exterior
Objects, have so far detracted from the Excellence of Her Essence, as to lend
Her at most, but a conditional Being in Competition for Pre-eminence with the
former virtue Affirming, That there were no use of Fortitude, if Men were Just.

Antiquity distinguished, This Faculty under the Figure of a Virago, armed with
Casque and Cuirace, a Javelin in Her Hand, the blunt End thereof posed at Her
Foot; which Posture some confined to a fixed Station.

The Person under which the Mystery of Her Essence is shadowed; though of the
same Sex, the other were figured: yet (besides Her exterior Investure) seems to
have some thing in Her Aspect, distinguishable from the Rest, peculiar to Her
Quality, implying a more Masculine Temper.

Her Armature, being of differing Nature, Defensive and Offensive; infers
distinct uses, in Reference to one only Object, proper Safety.

The Position of Her offensive Arm implies Her Nature to be Accessably
communicable,

The Stability of Her Station would intimate the Constancy of Her Resolution.
This latter Distinction, Socrates in Plato condemns, deriding Laches, the
Inventor; Asked, if it were then Cowardice to beat an Enemy in yielding him our
Place? alleging farther Homer for Authority, who applauds Aeneas for his
Dexterity in the Science of Retreat.

Some have yet farther lent a Distinction to Her proper Nature, figuring two
Kinds Thereof, Philosophical and Military Fortitude; yet, if we shall consider
the Latter without Dependence on the Former. We must so far dissent from the
approving such a Difference, that we cannot so much as entitle the Latter to a
Participation in Her Nature. Since we see many Men (more through the Advantage
of their Constitution, Passion, or Custom, then the benefit of their Reason)
have assumed such a Habit of Resolution in the Exercise of Arms, as seldom
formed is, by the most regular Discourse, the proper seat of Fortitude; which
can admit of Ignorance nor Vice for an Associate in Her Faculty. The Latter was
a stain to Caesar's Magnanimity, encountering, if not intending the Ruin of his
Country.

Epaminondas's Practice in Arms attained only a Capacity really worthy of so
high an Attribute; whose exercise herein encountered the most Plausible and
Legitimate Object. The Safety, Peace, and Glory of his Country, disjoined from
all pecullar Interests, so little took with Glory, or Reward, he always was too
scrupulous even to avoid Their shadows, assuming an affected Poverty.

If we shall yet farther weigh the Quality of This Distinction, as proper only
to the use of Arms; we may positively affirm This Function to be only a
distinct Subject of Her Exercise, no distinct property in Her Nature; which
arms the Mind with a constant and uniform Resolution against all the assaults
of Fortune, as well as the weapons of our Enemies. Yet in Respect the course of
Arms (lending a more ample Theater to Her Action) exalts the Perfection of
Her Essence, rendering Her Effects more communicable, we may allow It to be the
most eminent Subject, whereon Fortitude can properly be illustrated.

Which Subject, though not properly inherent to the Function of our Minister.
Yet since it accidently may associate It, we shall desire, that He may be
indu'd with Faculties of Mind and Body proper to the use Thereof; not so much
for the ostentive Trial of This His splendid Attribute, as in persuit of many
other Advantages, redounding to the public Benefit, which probably may ensue
His Managing thereof: Being not only of approved Fidelity to warrant His
peculiar undertaking, and of a General sufficiency of Mind to Order it; but by
his frequency in Council, endued with a clear Intelligence, even in the secret
Mystery of public Purposes, more perfectly to guide His Enterprise.

To appropriate more peculiarly This virtue to our Ministry, We will consider
the joint Society of this our Civil Frame, as the Inspiring Soul is to the
exact composure of the Body. Thereby more visibly to find the proper uses of
Her Faculties, under the Constitution of Her former Figure. Admitting it for
granted, that This, as all other virtues whatever, must first be rationally
digested into a Habit of the Mind, before it can be properly educed into useful
Practice. The proper seat of Fortitude from whence still issues Influence to
animate the Members to Her Exercise, being (questionless) the joint Concurrance
of the Interior Faculties of the Soul to a Rational Prescription, resulting
from Discourse. Forming This a Parallel to our Society, as the first mover of
our Civil Body, we may conclude, The joint Agreement of their Consultation
immediately necessary to the common Safety, the sole Object of His Eminent
Virtue.

Persuing the Parallel in Her exterior Investure, we shall meet with some
useful Notions in Reference to our Civil Structure.

The principle Parts of Her Armature, we will first consider in their Nature,
then in their Order or Position; which being only Defensive, informs us, that
the most Natural and just Cause of taking Arms, is the opposition of the
Assailant.

The Order or Position Thereof intimates, what Places in a Commonwealth are
chiefly and soly to be fortified. The most Noble only; as the Head, the Seat
of Council, and the Breast, The Receipts of Commerce.

The other part of Armature we will revise according to the Nature, Number,
Figure, and Fashion thereof.

The Nature Thereof being only offensive; Implies that a State is but half
secured, that stands only on Her own Defense.

The number thereof being only single, infers the due Proportion of
offensive Arms, in respect of the Defensive, which are double.

The figure thereof being long, implies the proper use of Arms of This Nature,
ought to have extent, remotely managed from our Civil Union.

The Position thereof seated in a passive Posture, infers, That a Nation
ought to be invested with Arms of this Nature, as well for Ornament of Majesty,
as Use.

To fashion yet This Virtue to the peculiar usage of our Minister, whose advice
only being to us of use. The exercise of This Virtue does herein only tend to
keep the source thereof (his Reason) clear untroubled and unblemished. As the
general Agreement of a Council to her prescription, can only make a
Consultation useful. So the mutual concurrence of His Interior Faculties to her
order soly contributes to the exact forming of His Judgment. This is the
proper seat of Council, and as the noblest parts must first be fortified
against the assaults of all Licentious Passions, the only Enemies on which our
Minister shall, in his Function, have occasion to exercise this faculty, to
keep His elevated thoughts in a tranquil serenity. The Fancy and the memory
hereto communicate, are (as the Parts of Civil Commerce) next to be secured,
lest the Former precipitated or pre-possest, the latter surcharged or diverted,
should or corrupt, or else obstruct his Judgment.

The offensive Arm he ought to use against the Incendiaries of this civil
Insurrection, is the reversive Opposition of their mutual Force, one Passion
being aptly suppressed by the suggestion of another; yet not with freedom to
their proper Motions, but under Reasons Conduct, which only can yield every one
a proper allay to their looser Temper, and form their being useful to Her self,
wasting or diverting their harmful violence on One Another.

The manner of His encounter with these Adversaries, (as was prefigured) ought
to be managed at remotest Distance, it is not safe to close or grapple with
our Passions, but rather them to smother in their secret issues. Thus
regulated, his very Passions will not only become useful, but graceful in
Discourse, and render him not only agreeable to others, but pleasing to himself.

XV. Of Temperance.
THis Faculty may properly be said to be the exact Test to the Preceding
Virtues, lending each One their true Distinction* what allay the Nature of
every Virtue yields to the Embellishment of our peculiar Actions, such allay
This (to the refining of their Nature) imparteth unto them.

Insani sapiens Nomen ferat, Aequus Iniqui,
Ultra quam satis est virtutem si petat ipsam.
Such is the imperfect condition of humane Nature, that no sooner handles the
fairest pieces of Divinity or Philosophy, but immediately it corrupts the same,
rend'ring, even in the excess. That scandalous, this unsociable. Grounded on
this Observation are the Inhibitions issuing from the Authority, which formed
their proper Nature. The sacred Letter advises us, not to be wiser then we
ought, but to be soberly wise. And Callicles in Plato, says, That the Extremes
of Philosophy are so far from being useful, they become even prejudicial to the
Practicer.

This Faculty may seem to be more difficult then the rest. Insomuch as her
Nature is exercised on a more elevated Subject, regulating the secret Motions
of their Properties: Other Virtues have more visible Prescriptions, But those
of This so curious, they seldom are exactly scrutable. Yet as Her Traces are
more secret, so are Her Graces less oftentive then Her Associates are. Their
splendid Lustres seem to ravish the intentive speculator. The humble Modesty of
This at most, but to invite. Yet with so smooth and uniform a pleasure, as the
Eudosians (of that Sect, who only therein places the chiefest Good) under Her
Conduct, formed their high enterprise.

Antiquity figured This Virtue under the Dimension of the same Sex, as formerly
the Rest, holding a Cup full of Wine in Hor Hand.

Under the shadow of which single Action, implying the Essence of Her simple
Nature: Of all virtues This gives us the nighest Pattern of Man's first
Felicity. Other Virtues have more violent Efforts, and require more exquisite
Capacities in Managing: yet sometime nevertheless, in their Severity, do seem
to shock the Image of Natures Purity; which is to This a perfect Guide, and She
to Her a faithful Minister.

If we shall truly consider the Idea of Socrates Discourses; even in the last
and exactest Trial of his Virtue, we shall evidently perceive, that the
transcendent Excellence of his Mind was erected on the humble Situation of
This Virtue, neither in Sense or Demeanor figuring so much as the smallest
Appearance of Emotion, Force, or Constraint, but with that Calm Facility,
delivering his Plea: as Virtue had in Him cast off all Difficulty, the Foil
lends Luster, if not Matter, to Her proper Essence: The Prize of Virtue
consisting not in the High, but the orderly Exercise of the Soul; not in
Greatness, but Moderation, which regulateth every Faculty thereof, according to
the first Institution, and innocent Condition of Nature. To reflect more
particularly on the Nature of Her Action figured, which seems to be the
Regulation of that sense, most prone to exceed in her Licentious Ministry, and
in that Quality of Matter, which soonest seizes on the Natural Light. Under
the Object of This Sense of Tasting, is figured the Appetitive Faculty of the
Soul, as well as that of the Body.

From the Nature of the Action, which is a necessary support to humane Nature,
is figured the Necessity of the Work, whose end is, in the use, confined to Her
measure. From the Position of the Subject, which is in Hand and View, we may
collect, that the exercise of This Virtue has only Reference unto Subjects,
which fall within the Compass of our knowledge, Practice, and Possession; In
which respect, Abstinence is totally excluded Her Affinity.

In the Quality of the Subject is figured the difficulty of the Work, both in
regard of the volubility of the Matter, and the alluring Faculty of the Nature
thereof.

From: these figurative Distinctions, we may happily form some Notions
essential to the usage of our Minister: How necessary an Exercise This is, will
appear in the Advantage or Benefit of the use, which tends to the due
Regulation of every Sense and Passion to the Ministry of Reason, the only light
to all his Consultations; which Passions are the very Springs that lend the
Soul her proper Motion: which if extinguished, according to the usage of the
Stoics, the Soul, as Mountaign says, Would remain useless in her Functions,
like a Bark at Sea, suspended from the succor of the wind: But if the
Passions were abandoned to their irregular Motions, Reason would be transported
from her proper seat, with violence of the Agitation, and the exterior Senses
become disabled to Her Ministry.

In which Respect, that excess in the use of Wine should properly precede a
Consultation, as necessary to the Establishment of Council, may justly be
esteemed, if not a Contradiction, so gross an Absurdity, as no Custom can
Authorize, or example parallel: yet among the Persians, it was an order so
frequently and strictly observed, that it became at length digested to a Rule;
on what reason, so extravagant a Custom should be grounded: Reason it self can
scarce produce Conjecture, unless it were by such excess of Wine to animate or
correct the vital Spirits in a defective Temper, become so through the innate
Intemperature of the Climate, Age, Constitution, or Habit of the Practicers:
Which usage, in Mountaign's Observation, so happily encountered the Temper of a
Minister of State in his time, That he affirms His Enemies felt often the
Effects thereof to the common prejudice of their Affairs. In which Regard
perhaps the Discourses of Philosophers have handled this Vice so tenderly: And
the Stoics (who admit of no Emotion) have usually dispenc't with this, if not
encouraged It, unto the Relaxation of the Spirits.

Hoc quoque virtutem quondam Certamine magnum,
Socratem Palmam praemeruisse ferunt.
And Cato the severe Censor and Corrector of other men's manners, has been
nothing Scrupulous to avoid reproach in this,

Narratur and prisci Catonis,
Sape Mer^ c^luisse Virtus.
Yet can we not in reason admit of the excess thereof in usage of our Minister;
not only on the point of public Consultations, wherein the most passive mind
has more need of the use of Lead, then of Plumes: Weight to counter balance
the irregular Agitations thereof, then Fire to incense them: But also in the
private Regularity of the whole Course of his Life, both in respect of the
licentious volubility it lends to Discourse, endangering thereby the secrets
of His Trust, as also the ill Habit may be in Nature formed, who suddenly,
through use, may be induced to expect such artificial Aids, else fall abjectly
from her proper vigor. The effects of Wine working but by unnatural, unequal,
and constrained Efforts on the Elation of the Spirits; which when exhaled, as
Springs wound up beyond their Pitch, become relax't, left to their proper
Motions: So that such Practice took in the perfect'st use, will rather seem a
Mark of His Infirmities, then lend a Grace unto His Faculties; which thus
acquired, can, at the most, entitle Him but to a borrowed sufficiency, not
properly His own: yet if accidentally the liberty of Wine might in excess be
Licensed, it should be under Limits of the Carthaginian Restrictions, which
were, That every man should be therein sparing on Martial Expeditions: That
every Minister of State or Magistrate should abstain from the use hereof on
Consultation of public Affairs or Execution of their Charge, That therein the
Day were not employed, nor that night designed for Procreation.

Many men, through the Impotence of their Nature, or Indigence of their
Fortune, may seem to assume a passive Resemblance of the Image of This Faculty
in their Actions, when really the very shadow thereof was never fashioned in
their Thoughts, the Exercise of this Virtue must have an unprescribed Theater
to represent Her Luster: and a clear Judging Intellect to regulate the will.
Action is Virtues Nature, and Difficulty Her Life: Her Productions are nor
passive nor Impulsive; neither is the Object of this faculty seated in the
sense, but in the exact ordering of the Interior Faculties of the Soul. Cato
inferred no less, when on discovery of Caesar's Amorous Letter in the Senate, he
reproacht him with the title of a Drunkard, who was, elsewhere affirmed, to be
the only Man, that e're came sober to the Ruins of his Country.

How difficult an Exercise this is, may be collected from so numerous a variety
of Objects of repugnant Natures, both Exterior and Interior, which continually
solicit the appetitive Faculty of the Soul to shun or to embrace; affording
it in so fluent a Distraction, no Intermission to deliberate on the Election.
Of all which, we will here only for brevity, advise our Minister to be vigilant
on two, as more especially co-incident to the Corruption of His Ministry; Envy
and Ambition. Of Moderation in Occurrences, which may lend Fuel to their
Passion* Cato's Demeanor affords us a most singular Pattern, who suffering a
Repulse, in competition for the Consulate; was so far from the attainture of
any indecent Emotion on the Distinction thereof, that he wished all his fellow
Citizens were endued with so eminent Faculties, as to be preferred likewise
before Him.

XVI. Of His Election.
HAving thus accomplished our Minister's Person, and polished His mind to the
exact Exercise of His Ministry, it will be requisite to agitate on a certain
method, which may infallibly educe Him into Action, without the help of
Fortune, we frustrate else the scope of our Intention to leave His Institution
to so blind a guide, whose influence (to make her Power appear more eminent,)
will rather be employed on Subjects want Capacity; then elevate such, whose
worth may claim a share in her secluding Ministry: On which course to advise
ere we proceed, we must prefigure a distinction in our Subject, not in
reference to the Nature thereof, but the Institution: Of which there are two
kinds, Special, and General.

Special Ministers, Such as are instituted by the sole and immediate Authority
of a Prince or State.

General Ministers, Such as are under the Authority of their Orders, instituted
by the joint Concurrence of the people.

To treat whereof distinctly e're we insist, we shall reflect first on our
Minister's Demeanor in reference to his Institution of what kind soever; and
impose on Him a severe Interdiction, neither obliquely nor directly, by
Personal Solicitation or friendships Intercession to move for His own
Introduction, or any otherwise appear therein; such Agitation being a procedure
altogether unbecoming the dignity of His Office, The Perfection of His
Endowments, and the Integrity of His Intentions,

1. A Blemish to the Dignity of His Office, in regard such Competition and
siding, rather figure our Purpose an Object of our private Commerce, then of
the public Benefit, every man expecting to be advantaged in their private
Interest by Him they have advanced to a capacity to farther it. On the other
part, the pretender implicitly inferrs no less in His object, assiduous, and
mercinary Addresses, which if successful, inthral the freedom of his mind in
civil Ties, which most be dis-ingag'd at expense of the public Interest.

2. It is moreover inconsistant with the very Appearance of those Perfectit us,
which should entitle Him to any Right in this (...) Dignity, to assume such
vanity in His ostentive claim, as to become himself his proper Advocate: Virtue
for such can ^e be codifi^d, that secretly propounds but to it self a
Recompense, much less for such, that publicly shall challenge it, as her own
property.

3. It farther renders His Intent suspect to prosecute His purpose with such
Ardency. Virtue, it is true, can have no nobler Object then the public Good
(which must exalt the very essence of Her Nature) rendering her Effects more
communicable: Yet her progressions are nor violent nor Irregular. Such Efforts
may be shadowed with her Attribute, yet are but secret masks to Avarice and
Ambition.

To pursue the Order of our Discussion on the Distinctions of His Institution.
We first must agitate on His especial Election, which soly and immediately
depending on the Arbitrament of a Prince or State, the success only rests in
their Direction: to which, since the capacity of Judging in a Prince, is
oftentimes obstructed by his proper inclination, Others Intercession, or by a
remote, reserved or disguised Communication. It were far safer to require the
Presentation of His Minister from the concurrence of the Society, to which he
is to be a Member, under adjur'd Prescription, That without fear or Favor,
they shall impartially propound no Person to his Trust, for any other
consideration whatsoever, then for the advantage they conceive he holds over
other in His Sufficiency and Integrity. And lest the Nature of this Method
might bear some appearance to form a Faction. The whole Society, if of too
large a number, may be reduced into a small Committee, whose joint concurrence
only should have force to nominate the Pretenders, which might amount to such
a number, the Majesty of a Prince might in the vast extent thereof, remain
unblemished in the Election.

The special Election of Ministers, under the sole and immediate Authority of a
State, requires more Caution, because more incident to Faction. The Election
therefore (under the same Prescription) should yet be more obliquely managed,
removing it far from the Interessed, by changing sundry times the Instruments
thereof, who thereby should excluded be from such Pretension. No Elector near
or remote, retaining, a Capacity to be Elected, after the Venetian manner: for
example, The whole Society makes choice of Fifty Commissioners, which Fifty
institute Thirty, which Thirty select Ten, which Ten Three, which Three
determine only on the Election.

The General Election of Ministers, whose Institution has (with the Princes or
States Authority) relation to the concurrence of the People, is yet of higher
consequence then the rest; Insomuch, as in such consultation, Laws are usually
enacted, reformed or repealed; new Impositions leavied, and weightier
Enterprises managed or designed; In all which changes, the People make an
essential Surrender of their Fortunes, Lives, and Liberties to His Trust,
without pretense of Reparation, the Issues being damageable, since licensed by
Their proper Act; It cannot therefore in reason, be a proceeding warrantable in
the selecting of this Council, to commit the establishment thereof soly to the
Direction of a shallow multitude, whose souls do seldom move to other Object,
then the sense, prefiguring (in Reference to the Competitors,) rather who makes
most frequent and most sumptuous Feasts, who lets His Tenants set at easiest
Rates, then who has given the fairest proofs of Prudence or Integrity, both in
the model of His private Economy, and in the intercourse of public Commerce.
Furthermore, admit the Rabble of Capacity clearly to distinguish Agents proper
to our Ministry. Their Estates for the most part, have too much dependence on
another will, to leave theirs so much liberty might make the Election free; so
that of necessity, the rich only having advantage in the number of Tenants,
acquiring the same in the number of votes, may claim His Introduction, by an
unquestioned privilege, so frustrate, if not pervert the Intent of our
Convention; which Inconvenients to avoid, we must collect a compound Method of
Election from the preceding Models. First, not to infringe the Immunities of
the People, the course thereof may thus (without suspect of prejudice, or to
themselves or others) Commence and Terminate in their Agitation.

Commission issueing from the supreme Authority of a Nation, being directed to
County or Corporation for the Election of a Minister unto a public
consultation, whither such Order extend unto Freeholders, or Freemen only, or
unto Masters of a Family in General; it is not much material, provided, they
shall only (under the said Prescription) by the advantage of their votes,
design a new society of a much smaller number, to agree on the selecting of a
less, which should return unto the first Assembly, a double number of the
Ministers proportioned for that Place, from which they only might select their
choice.

XVII. Of His Institution.
OUr Minister thus advisedly and authentiquely Elected, to illustrate His
Admission with more Grace and Order, we shall proceed unto the Manner of His
Institution, which as we formerly have distinguished, we will distinctly handle.

If, as a special Minister, his preceding Election terminate only in the
agreement of a Prince, an Order only issues in His name to specify to his
Minister the Grace of His Election, with Summons to repair to him for His
Instructions* to which appearance made, our Minister at first Aborde on Oath,,
shall yield an Evidence he has, nor secretly, nor sinisterly practiced with
any to procure His Introduction; to which the Oath of His Allegiance tendered,
He is admitted to attend the Orders of his Sovereign, from whose peculiar
consultation He is to be enlightened in his purposes. What enterprises have
preceded, what yet in Agitation, what designed, how persued, and whereon
grounded; to the Intent our Minister may not come blindly unprepared to
officiate, whereon proceeds a command an order be addressed to his Council
for His Reception.

If as a special Minister, the concurrence of Commissioners of State, or else
their substitutes determine the Election. The intimation thereof is by the
immediate Electors returned to the primitive Commit, from whom Order issues
to the Party Elected for his personal attendance, on whose appearance the
examination of the Manner of his Election is in like Method persued, the
National Oath tendered, Instructions passed, and such Remonstrance returned to
the Senate to authorize His Reception.

If, as a General Minister, His Election extend yet farther to the concurrence
of the People. The Election, as aforesaid determined by them, may by the
Officers of that Shire or Corporation (authorized to o're-see the course of
this Election) be inferred forthwith to the Party chosen, with summons to
repair to Them for his Instructions, upon whose Presentation His Testimony as
aforesaid on Oath delivered, to ratify His Sincerity in course of His
Election. The National oath of Loyalty, with that also of His Fidelity to the
Peoples Trust being tendered Him; the overture of all their Grievances and
Requests, may by the foresaid Officers be made to Him, to be preferred to the
Supreme Authority, to whom they by certificate return the Authority of His
Election.

XVIII. Of His Reception.
HAving attained His Writ of Institution our Minister is thereby required to
make his next Addresses to the special or General Society (or Officers designed
to precide the same) for His Admittance. The nature of which Ceremony
retaining the same Objects in every Distinction of the former Divisions, will
concur in one common Method; presenting to our Minister a strict and solemn
Injunction, consisting of Two Principles in reference to the Integrity and
Success of His Council, Impartiality and Secrecy.

How prejudicial the Nature of a partial Judgment is to the Establishment of a
secure Advice, may to every common sense be evident in the woeful Issues of
sundry public consultations, where the privately interessed Agents, under
pretense of common benefit, invest them with the common spoils of their own
ruined Country.

As unbeseeming also is it to the Honor of our Minister to betray the Trust of
others to the Advantage of His private ends, and so deface the very Image of
His Creator, belying His own Reason in favor of the Sense.

Secrecy is also, in the very Nature thereof, no less Requisite to the success
of a mature Advice. Public Designs are often frustrated by common Rumor e're
they are put in Execution, nor becomes it the Dignity of our Society, to make
their daily Agitations of so little weight to be the Subject of each idle
Censure, e're they are fully formed for a timely Issue.

Which Ceremony finished, and His Name by the Clerk of the Assembly Registered;
He is, in Order to His Election admitted to His Seat. And if a General Minister
received, according to the Roman Manner, passes Pater Conscriptus.

XIX. The general Object of His Office.
OUr Minister thus imbarqu'd for public consultation, lest so high an erected
Mind should improfitably float on the surface of a doubtful Agitation, and be
transported from our use by every irregular Emotion. It will be requisite He
always have in view the perfect Object of His Institution, the better to direct
His Course, through the Transaction of His Ministry, He may at no time deviate
from His glorious Enterprise.

All Nations, Sects, and Factions, how differing soever in other Opinions (or
repugnant in their Practices to the Nature of their own Distinction in this)
agree in the Exposition of the Object of our Ministry, positively affirming It
to be the Public Good; But in what, the Nature of this Public Good
consisted; few have sufficiently enlarged upon, so consequently, obscurely, but
persu'd her Acquisition; yet under what Definition soever this public Good
has been figured in the Discourses of Immaginary Commonwealths; the secret
Practices of all Essential States (exactly discovered in their undisguised
Issue,) will truly inform us, the means to attain this Common Good, neither is,
nor ever has been really believed to have been raised on any other Baise then
Wealth, Greatness, or Glory. Which since so generally and passionately persu'd
by each united Ministry of State we briefly will examine, how far such
Attributes have or may conduce to the exact contexture of our Edifice.

First, If we shall reflect on the Effects of Wealth, as universally dispensed
through the several Members of a Civil Frame, proportionable to the Quality of
every part thereof; we shall find just Cause to suspect there may (even in such
Affluence) be an excess, which might be inconsistant to the perfect
constitution of a Commonwealth. And although Riches may be said to be the
Nerves of Wart, arms the security of Peace; Peace the Crown of every Civil
Enterprise, yet it must still be with this Limitation; That It may be
proportioned to the use, Holding therein a true Analogy with the Natural Body,
which receiving the most perfect Element whatever, and thereof forming the most
perfect Coction and Distribution, may yet nevertheless, (as Naturalists inform
us) in an unequal Repletion, become Plethorique, quoad vires, and quoad vasse,
both in Respect of the natural vigor, or in Regard of the natural vessels, and
so consequently, either suffacate or extinguish the innate Heat. The proper
instrument to all the Faculties thereof, or else extend the Organs beyond the
true capacity of their Continent to the Production of a dangerous Rupture.

Persuing the Parallel to this Pattern, we (from the Image of this prefigured
Distempers in the Natural) may visibly collect like Inconvenients inherent to
the Affluence of Riches in the Civil structure. In Reference to the four
natural Humors, either actively or passively receiving several Dispositions or
Aptitudes to form the like Disorder.

1. In the Sanguine Temper, Plenty procures Wantonness, Wantonness, Lux; Lux,
Riot, Riot the extinction of the Natural, Vital, and Animal Spirits; the
immediate Instruments whereby the Faculties of the Soul are educed into act. A
proof of this opprobrious Termination is figured to us in the Translation of
the Assyrian Empire from Sardanapalus, to the Medes and Persians, and to the
extirpation of the Persian Empire by the Greeks; who as a latter Historian
says, came equipag'd to the Encounter of their Foes, as if designed to
celebrate a Mask, rather then to execute a Fight. And from thence also sprung
the Ruin of the Grecian Glory, as appears by Hannibals Judgment of Antiochus
Army, when in their ostentive Bravery presented to his view: And by the
Macedonian King demanded arrogantly, If that his splendid equipage of War were
not sufficient for the Romans, replied scoffingly, Enough, Enough, were the
Romans the most covetous Nation of the world.

We might here farther instance the several Breaches the succeeding Roman
Empire suffered by the like Distemper in sundry changes of the Constitution of
their Government, under the Rule of some Licentious Princes; As also the
Tragic Issue formed from hence to Anthony and Cleopatra's Naval Gallantry.
But, such extent of Examples (though otherwise agreeing to the Reader, we have,
from the first entrance on this work, resolved to avoid, how fluently soever
they might fall into our memory. In that they possibly might swell into a Bulk,
not answ'ring in proportion to the due Structure of our Treatise. And so
instead of Ornament and Illustration to our Arguments, disguize the uniformity
of our Method to the obscurity of the sense thereof; which here to reassume,
we must again reflect upon our premised Distinction.

2. A fluence of Wealth meeting with a phlegmatic Temper, enduceth Security;
Security, Neglect; Neglect Sloth; Sloth benumming the Natural, Vital, and
Animal Spirits, depending on each others circular contribution, extinguisheth
the Innate Heat, so consequently tends unto the same destructive Issue.

3. Riches encount'ring a melancholy Temper, forms a delightful Scene to
entertain the flattering thoughts with Love of their own Image: Self-Love
swells to Self-Conceit, Self-Conceit to Pride, Pride to Ambition, Ambition to
the actual Combustion of the Civil Frame.

4. Opulence invested by a Choleric Temper, foments a nice Dislike, Dislike
cherishes Passion, Passion Stubbornness, Stubbornness Temerity, Temerity
Presumption, Presumption Strife, the common Incendiary of a civil union.
Secondly, The efficacy of Treasure, in relation to the Public Good, examined,
when engrossed in the Exchequer of a Prince or State, may yet be judged of less
prevalence to the due forming of our persu'd Object; considering that such
affluence to the Public stock, at length exhausts the private sources,
furnished the increase, according to Trajan the Emperor's Similitude of his
Treasury to Tumors of the Spleen, as which increased the other Members of the
Body still were Lestned', and at length perished, deprived of the due
proportion of their Aliment, unseasonably attracted to foment such Disorder: So
common Receipts seldom become enriched but by the general Impoverishment of the
people: Which Indigence so disableth their faint Bodies, and dejecteth their
servile minds, that they are neither useful to the Commonwealth in time of
Peace, to lend It ornament or enlargement: nor yet in time of War thereto to
contribute or Succor or Defense.

To lend more force unto which Argument we may yet farther add, That such
Accumulations oftentimes become the only Object of an hostile Invasion, when
the indigence of a neighboring State, oppressed with number, debordes their
useless multitude on the most flourishing Continent. To pass over with silence
divine Institutions in Reverence thereof, we might affirm this to be the
visible motive of the Children of Isreal's penible enterprise through the Desert
to the Land of Canaan, they thereby might exchange their onions and Garlic for
Milk and Honey. 'Twas the deliciousness of their Wine, brought the Gauls into
Italy. By the like inducement were the Goths, Huns, Vandals, and Francks
invited to the Devastation of the Roman Empire, by which Assaults the Scepter
was at length transplanted from that Seat.

2. The second Tract so frequently in use to aborde This our affected Object,
is Greatness: which Attribute, although implying vulgarly a double sense, might
seem to want a farther Exposition, either in respect of the qualification of
our Subject in Power, or in regard of the essence thereof, in Dimension: Yet
since the qualification of every Subject may properly be said to be inherent to
the Essence thereof, We will reduce the intimation of the former into the
intention of the latter. And take a view of this our present Subject, according
to the Nature of Proportion, to weigh how far the vastest extent of a
Commonwealth, may properly conduce to the due forming of the Common Welfare.

In persuit whereof, if we shall reflect upon the Course of Nature (handmaid to
the perfect'st Governor) to see what Limits she observes herein to attain
perfection in her useful Structure. We may distinguish, that she fails much
of her Intention, when she encountreth matter dis-proportion'd to the scope of
her intended work, and either falls under the burden of her proper Continent,
her vigor spent or weakened e're she is able to communicate her force to the
extremes too remote from their principle, from whence was formed their union,
or raises to her self but an imperfect and irregular structure; so that the
parts thereof, wanting capacity to receive the impression of her Faculties,
must hasten to a sudden ruin*

In the former manner sunck by degrees the Roman Empire, under his prodigious
Immensity.

In the latter manner vanished immediately the Grecian Empire under his
unformed contiguity.

And according to the same method, even Nature her self seems to have proceeded
in the composure of the whole sublunary frame, in favor of our Civil union,
prescribing scarce accessable Divisions to Scituations of distinct Communities,
to facilate that Harmony should so arise from the Agreement of such equal
Temperatures, in a close Precinct: which, in a vaster Latitude, suffering
unequal Diversities from those various Impressions, which the Element, (our
common Aliment) conduct to us from the Influxes of the Stars, would prove but
too repugnant in the parts to constitute so unanimous a mixture in our Civil
Composition, as might be needful to a common union. Such bounds has Nature
wisely trac't to the aspiring French. The East part of their Jurisdiction
secluded from the Coast of Italy by the Alps; the South from Spain, by the
Pyrenean Hills; the North from Germany, by the Rhine; the West from England, by
the Sea* So Italy and Spain are by the Ocean wisely limited, could but the
Rules of Nature or of Reason prescribe any to Avarice and Ambition.

3. The third pretended conduct to our Object is Glory. A Tract, it is true, not
frequently in use, perhaps because not clearly obvious to the refined'st sense;
and of most held too slight and inessential a material for the foundation of
our Civil welfare. Yet when we shall collect from the first model of the Roman
Commonwealth, what speedy progress, and how lasting Atteintures the ravishing
Luster of Her Essence Heret has acquired, e're disguised with adulterate
Ornaments, She appeared in Her native purity, we may conclude She really
out-stript Those Her Competitors in the advancement of Her purposes.

What Soul so stupid that shall but reflect on the attractive Graces of their
primitive Virtue, that will not without scruple affirm, that the influence
thereof won more minds to their Rule, then their Swords Bodies to their
servitude. Camillus soprevail'd with the Falerians, T. Q. Flaminius so withdrew
the Grecians from the Macedonian Aid, by his Humility, Courtesy, and Justice.
The Glory of whose Virtue, yet in her antic Ashes, has so sensibly affected a
high erected mind of latter times; (otherwise inattaintable to such
Affeteries) That Mountaign.
he has left a lasting Monument to the Vanity of his Passion, to be instil'd a
Roman Citizen: But the splendour of those endowments were suddenly ecclipst,
when She corrupted by the allurements of her Concurrents, Wealth and Greatness
became a common prostitute to their Imposturies. The frailty therefore of This
Instrument weighed with the Imperfection of the former, in reference to the
public Good, disclosed thus, enduceth to propound more real and
distinguishable Lights to the discovery of our int^nded Object, to which the
formerly discussed Subjects may consequent Associates often be; but no
essential Materials to the composure of our Civil Structure, the perfect'st
s^try of Rule to form the public good, more properly may thus be figured,
Where by an Authentic, equal, known an insubvertible Law, the Lives and
properties of the Members of a Civil Government are timely and impenibly
Secured and Improved both to the private and the Public use: On which
Foundation we will endeavor to erect the Structure of our Civil Fabric.

XX. The Authority of the Law.
MAn, from the fall of his first instinctive Purity, abandoned to his own
Direction, retaining an imperfect shadow of the former light, did aptly
qualify him for the Dignity of his first Institution, in this his
Independency, became so arrogant and presumptions, he would submit to no
prescription but his will, no not by way of precept, lest such an appearance of
advantage in the Intellect should seem to entitle other to a fairer Interest in
this his forfeited Prerogative: which inflexibility and repugnance of Spirit
enforst the wisest Legislators to have recourse unto more powerful Aides then
humane Reason, to rectify and reclaim so licentious and irregular an
Inclination (as counterfeits of Moses procedure in his Divine institution of
the Jewdaick Law) pretending all to have received such Prescription, in a
supernatural manner, immediately from Heaven. Such speculative Ordinances
Licurgus the Lacedemonian Legislator pretended to have received from thence, by
the community with his Hind, such Numa with a Nymph, such Mahomet with his
Dove: And since they were not able to persuade, endeavored thus to cheat the
sense, the corrupt Minister to the will. But such Imposturies may easily be
disclosed in the resemblance of their prodigious issues, which bear not the
similitude of their pretended pattern.

The Mosaical Law exactly represented the Divine Character of such a principle,
consisting of two anited, yet distinct Tables, as containing Subjects of a
differing Nature, in reference to one only Object, Common Union; which equally
was expounded by the holy Word, Love God above all things, and thy Neighbor as
thy self: From which compendious stock were extracted by the inspired Minister
(for Illustration and Eclarcisement) the issuing Branches of the Ceremonial,
and the Moral Law. And although the result of the first Apostolical Council
seems to dispense with such Ordinances, as a yoke too weighty for their
Forefathers: yet is it questionless to be supposed in Reservation of the
original; in which Distinction the Cabalists generally seem also to agree:
affirming the D^^alogue only to be the Law of God, the Appondices the
Institution of Man. This Exposition the sense of Moses words (in the
Publication thereof) seems implic^tly to confirm. The Preface to the Principle
Decrees being, God spoke these words and said. The Introduction to the
Collateral, God spoke unto Moses and said, say unto the people. In consequence
of which Argument in obedience to the Institutor, we will positively admit of
the principle, as a Rule unto our Ordinances, and in Reverence to his Minister,
not neglect the Appendices, as a Light unto our Institutions, how which has
been, or yet may be pursued to the exact constituting an unquestionable
Authority to a Law, We farther will examine. The Ornaments most in use to the
investure of this awful Majesty of Rule, are either (in regard of the Act)
formed from Antiquity or Custom. Or (in respect of the Actors) from their
Virtue or Power.

Between Antiquity and Custom (in Relation to common Rights) there is only this
Distinction: The latter may properly be said to be the unformed and
illegitimate Issue of the former, unformed in regard it bears not the
distinguishable signature of a digested Law, though it executes the privilege
thereof, extracting the Virtue of such efficacy from Toleration, rather then
Commission. Illegitimate in respect the Original thereof always is ambiguous.

1. Antiquity (for Reception) pleads the Perfection of Her work, from the
stability of the materials thereof the Propriety thereof to the use, from the
Facility of Her builden (formed in a long digested Habit) the consequence of
the cominuance thereof, from the common danger inherent to an I^ion. The
essential weight of all which Arguments, we farther will endeavor to discover.

The pretended proof of the Perfection of Her work (rightly understood) is but
a Badge to the inherent Distinction of her own Nature. What e're is Aged
styled, of necessity implies the same must have been lasting: Neither do^^ the
perfection of our Subject fall under the predicament of Quantity, but Quality,
Non quam Diu sed quam Been, Not how long, But how well.

The Propriety of her work to the use is improperly posited a consequent to the
facility in execution, since we may sometimes observe even Nature her self
translate the use of Parts; which not rightly constituted did frustrate her
Intention: so in defect of hands some have exactly written with their feet.
Which Action wanting the Grace and Order of Natures Institution, may rather be
instyl'd a Prodigy, then a perfect Ministry. Practice may possibly form a Habit
in imitation of Nature or of Reason, which properly are consonant unto the
Rules of neither. In discovery whereof, if we shall search into the Primitive
Models of Civil Government, we shall find therein such ridiculous Absurdities
(notwithstanding the common Union has been lasting, and perhaps flourishing)
that a clear judging Spirit will admire how the reverence of this Idol should
keep enlightened Ages in such serv^lity, as not to dare to handle her ye^
remaining Relics: probably this may be in honor of the Virtue and Felicity of
the Communities of those times, whereof such Institutions may be thought to
have been the immediate Instruments, when really they are not so much as the
remotest Relatives thereto. But the happy issues only of man's declining, yet
not totally subverted Innocence, as nigher the Original of his first Purity:
but when this wild distemper had attained to a more eminent extreme, exacter
Rules became requisite to rectify the disorder.

The third pretense whereby Antiquity may claim a right to her Establishment,
is the consequent danger to an Innovation It Is true, all Alterations; how
profitable soever, bear in their Introduction an appearance of damage,
especially not rightly managed (^s when too sudden, or to the preceding
directly opposite:) Yet any Pilate, though but meanly skilled, may easily avoid
those shelves, insinuating his Purposes by imperceptible Degrees, and guiding
them obliquely to their End.

Yet lest this notion (in the ejection of Antiquity from the right of a just
Authority to the Institution of a Law should altogether s^em impertinent to the
use of that Community, to which this Treatise is peculiarly addressed. To
enlighten the Intention of our Argument, we humbly crave permission to weigh
the consequence of a proof, extracted from our common usage.

Omitting to insert intails of Lands by private Act or Testament (although the
Tenors thereof terminate in the succeeding consequence) because therein perhaps
may be alleged, the Laws were guided by the intention of the Donor, in the
disposing only of his own. We will disjoyn them from all other Reference, and
leave them soly to their proper issue, admitting (for example) A man (by his
own acquisition) become possessed of a real Estate dies intestate, and leaves
surviving a dozen Children, Males and Females: The Law confers the said
Possessions wholly on the eldest Son, in right of His Succession, with small
regard or none unto the Rest, who thereby are enforced to subsist on Alms or
Servitude.

With all due reverence to our Legislative Power, can the allowance be adjuged
equal? where the very innate form of Natures Rules (so sweetly and infallibly
guide every Beast by secret and instinctive Motives to the impartial
preservation of their kind) may seem extinguished.

Nor is this Law less dissonant to Moses's Moral Institutions, Which to the
Primogenitor only, yield a double share, as the advantage of his Birthright.

The Civil Law, above the rest, affords him merely but the privilege of a more
eminent Distinction, excluding, in his Right, the chief Seat only (to the
extent of a Capon flight) out of the common Partage.

But to make clearer discoveries into the Nature of this Institution, if we
shall yet farther visit the secret props of the Foundation by such Lights are
afforded us to make Inspection into so obscure and remote circumstances, we may
find, that private Vanity and Faction have been the chief Promoters of this
procedure, to which (not being of power sufficient to form it to a Rule) may
probably be joined the Ambition of the Institutor, as the depending Aids to his
support.

How common and ridiculous a Passion has transported the sense of man to
perpetuate the glory of his Name by the enriching of their Families, our Nation
daily may afford too visible and deplorable proofs; where it is become a
plausible practice, to abandon their own proper issue, to raise their Memory on
so vain a shadow, that it wants frequently or knowledge, or relation to lend it
a pretense to such Inherency. This distemper of the mind destroyed that
Miracle of the world at Ephesus, where the obscured Actor wanting, or worth, or
wealth to enlarge his memory, lest dead he were forgot, would make his Name
remarkable to all succeeding Ages by the eminence of his Mischief. So Nero 's
Mother being foretold the danger to her Person in her Sons Succession to the
Empire, cried out, possessed with this frantic Passion, Let me dye, so he may
Reign.

That faction should advance this Institution, it is probable (such being the
unlimited Envy and Avarice of Man) that (setting all other appearance of Enmity
aside) the most equitable enlargement of one Family near another, is of
sufficient prevalence to engender secret Emulations, which are not long
contained in such obscure Limits, but suddenly break forth to public Ruptures
of Dissension, which to foment (they dying) contract their Faculties in one
Principle, thereby to contribute more force to encounter Opposition.

The Interest of the Institutor may hereto also concur, whose greatness
consisting in the Power of his Homogers, did constitute such Tenors to
Possessions, as might no way be weak'ned by Divisions, when summoned to his
succor.

But the most material Inconvenience inherent to this Civil practice, is
altogether repugnant even to the very Nature and Primitive Intention of the
Law, which is Civil Union; and so much the more prejudicial is the consequence,
by how much the Breach thereof is nearer the original of Unity, Amity, or
Friendship, which Aristotle affirms, Legislators have in the establishment of
their Civil Structure, more regarded then Justice it self. Can there be a more
visible, Impulsive, and sensible cause of Division between Brothers, then that
the Legitimate Children of one Father should (through necessity be reduced into
Dependence, Subjection, nay Servitude one of another, without the advantage of
any other Endowment, then the precedence of a little time. It was the
apprehension of such unequal subordinacy did instigate the Patriarch's
combining issue to sell their Brother into Foreign slavery: when yet his
innocent Age was capable to form no other shadow of Inenmity, then this their
envious jealousy.

The other Baise whereon the Authority of a Law may be judged firmly
constituted, is the Virtue or Power of the Institutor.

That the reflection of Virtue (how remote soever) has ever had a powerful
Influence over the Spirits of succeeding Ages, is altogether unquestionable,
whereon perhaps was grounded this Custom amongst the Lacedaemonians, That, what
Law or Advice was first propounded by a vicious Agitator, if approved of, some
Person of an eminent Virtue was by the General Council immediately required to
pronounce the same, lest such a motion should want that Grace and Dignity, was
requisite to lend Authority to the Establishment thereof. But that the
Institutions published by person or Assembly so exactly qualified, formed from
no other Object then the particular Occurrence of those Times, should totally
so o're-sway the Judgment of succeeding Ministers, as to admit of them for
unalterable Positions, beyond the confirmation of their own Discourse, is but a
servile Imposition repugnant to the purpose and propriety of a Law. Malum est
Concilium quod mutari non potest. Evil is that advice which cannot be changed.

Power (simply posited) though it may seem at first Inspection to claim a high
and more legitimate Title to this Prerogative, as the affected Issue of such
eminence, yet when we more exactly search into the secret nature thereof, in
Relation to this Attribute, we shall so far dissent to subscribe to her
Interest herein, we altogether shall suspect her very appearance in the
managing of a Legislative Transaction: insomuch as the discussions of an
imperturbed Reason are soly requisite to the due Constitution of a perfect Law,
whose issue circumscribed but by the mere Parado of a force is oftentimes
obstructed, if totally not subverted. Violence, though never so fairly
polished, bears but the exterior semblance of a wrong: nor is it proper, that
what intruding in our private Agitations, may legally dispense us from the
civil Ties of our own Act, should be admitted to the Introduction of a common
Ordinance. A due ordered force may, and must, of necessity, be the subordinate
Minister to the Execution of the Laws, but not a president over the
Consultations thereof. The order of our Argument, circumspectly traced, will
lead us to a consequent without a proposition; which is, that the most
plausible and unquestionable Authority of a Law is that, Which is formed from
the free agitation of the most prudent and faithful Ministers, and established
by the unanimous Concurrence of the people. According to this Method was even
the Law of God published by Moses, and by Joshua, and confirmed by the
assenting Multitude; And if that holy and powerful Sovereign would not exact an
obedience from the work of his own hand (though tending only to their proper
Benefit) without a Covenant, which could no otherwise be constituted, but by
consent of parties. How irregular and unwarrantable are their proceedings, who
violently impose a severe Ordinance to the reducing of their equals into
servilty (altogether to their prejudice) not only without their liking, but
absolutely contrary to the same. The primitive intention of a Law, is the good
of the people, and how that should conduce thereto, which shuns the test of
common approbation, may certainly be termed a Mystery, but scarce receiveable
in Equity.

Perhaps, may be objected, that hereto as the Natural, so the Civil Body is
incident to Infirmities, that sometime may deprive It of capacity to relish
their own Common Aliment, much less to leave it Faculty to distinguish of
Artificial Remedies; which reaching not their Judgments, do often not affect
their will. This being granted yet (of necessity) to apply the means to
rectify such disorder, the will must be prepared, or prepossest; convinced
with Reason, or intic't with Art: otherwise an open and repugnant violence will
but exalt the Distemper, and so instead of repairing, or reforming, totally
subvert the constitution of a Civil Frame. Such dexterity may palpably be
observed in the common practices of the most prudent Legislators, on such
exigents, electing proper seasons, and peculiar Accidents, profitably to
insinuate their purposes, where Reason was not prevalent enough to form their
introduction. It Is probable the penible and dangerous enterprise of the Jews
through the Desert was designed by Divine Providence, to reduce their unruly
stubbornness to a more docile Temper, by such apparently destructive straits,
more facily to introduce that sacred Law, was to be tendered unto their
subscription: which yoke would never have been accepted of, in the fruition of
the promised Land, the irregular motions of their will transported to a higher
strain by the Allurements of licentious Plenty.

XXI. The Equality of the Laws.
FRom this Attribute the very Law it self seeming to form her proper Nature, it
may be judged altogether impertinent to lend thereto farther Distinction: yet
when we shall consider, that every perfect Ordinance must (of necessity) have
reference not only to the Offense, but to the Delinquent; and the Injured it
will be very material to weigh the due Conformity, a Law should hold with
either.

The true Analogy of a Law in Relation to the Trespass, be it either Omissive
or Commissive, Public, or Private, is an equal Reparation; on which Parallel
was raised the severe Injunction of the Mosaical Law, An Eye for an Eye, and a
Tooth for a Tooth. On the decision of this due proportion, Justice in her
Figure seems altogether intentive, in the firm Posure of her hand to the exact
Poisure of her Balance. Laws in their appearance may sometime extend their
weight beyond the Nature of the Crime, tending especially to the public use,
by such severity to restrain the rashness of Licentious Attempters: but in
their execution should secretly provide a charm to allay the fury thereof, lest
that the Civil frame should thereby else be weakened or Impoverished. Those
Ornaments will ill become the Majesty of a State, are become purple in her
proper Gore; nor is it consonant to the Dignity of a Law, to form a Commerce
for Delinquency: As there are rewards for public Offices, without the expense
of the common Treasure: so there are Penalties for public Damages, subvert not
Interests of a private Family. Which ne'retheless must with a nice discretion
still be managed: a danger to the State may equally ensue the Remissness, as
the strictness of a Law. In dispencing yet of private Rights, the Law (without
Impeachment) more firmly may adhere unto the litteral sense thereof: Insomuch
as the public Ministry is therein seemingly not much concerned, but more
remotely interessed, takes away the Jealousy of a partial Procedure. Edicts
erected only for the public Interest, seldom have other objects then the
Obedience of the Members of the Civil Body; whose infringement may therefore be
plausibly repaired in a due Submission. Decrees enacted to the support of
private Interests, have seldom other Object then the Decision of Right, whose
infringement seems properly repaired in a feisable restitution; yet since the
violation of a private right is seldom perpetrated without indignity to the
public Ministry, in Contempt or Disorder, a submissive Penalty (of right) is
thereto also, even therein, to be constituted, the better to support the
Majesty thereof; provided it may not be so considerable, to lend her the
suspicion of a Party in the Transaction.

According to this Distinction (in reference to the Decision of Private Rights)
were Moses Institutions paralleled: as in matters of Felony, He shall restore
it double, and if he be worth nothing, he shall be sold for his Theft.

The Gospel Institution is, that He shall steal no more, but rather labor with
his hands that he may be helpful to others. Which questionless implicitly must
thereby first infer a reparation to the Injured. Yet since all private damage
is inherently opposed in a common Consequence to the public Interest, if we
shall farther consider this crime as a breach of public Commerce; the
equilibriate thereof may seem to reach no vaster Latitude, then public Infamy.
This the Lacedemonian Custom vised at, as the due Penalty to the attainture of
a Felony; which otherwise, not surprised in the manner, was held a plausible
enterprise, licensed but to acuate the vigilance and Invention of the people,
to the preserving and improving of their Properties. Which Practice, (though
not approvable in the use, that Virtue passing of necessity for suspected,
which holds but a shadow of dependence with the Ministry of Vice: yet may we
from the former presidents (to the restraint of this Crime) form a mixed Method
of our Punity, as more equivolently proportioned unto the nature of the
Offense; composed of Restitution, and of Infamy: And although the latter may
perhaps not meet with that Efficacy in our vulgar people, with whom this Crime
most frequent is in practice; as it has formerly incountred in the more
elevated pirits of the Lacedemonian State, where the Impressions of Shame were
so sensibly ingrav'd in their Apprehensions from their very Infancy, That a Boy
having stole a Fox Cub, which closely he had covered with his Coat (jealous to
be surprised in the manner) so much restrained the Emotions of Frail Nature in
his tender years, as the very shadows thereof fell not under the Distinction of
another sense, until the struggling Rape had made a passage through the very
Bowels of the Attempter: but when such Infamy is passed with a general
Incapacity of public Trust, their proper Interests will enforce them to resent
it with more horror. To which, may probably be the cause, in reference to the
infringement of the public interest, in such Trespasses, our Laws do yet exact
the Attainture of the Felons Goods.

2. In persuit of the Order of our Subject we next assume the second consequent
involved in the Constitution of a perfect Ordinance. The Delinquent, which
although seeming totally concerned in the regulation of the Penalty to the
Nature of the Offense: and in position of a Fact implicitly therewith included
as one common Individual: yet since the Rules of Nature, as well as Policy,
have lent peculiar Distinctions to several Members of a Community (not falling
all under one and the same measure of Capacity, and therewithal, as special
Graces to their Dignities or Infirmities, inherent Privileges; it will be
requisite to weigh how far such Freedom may consist with the integrity of a
perfect Ordinance. Omitting to discuss on the Prerogative of Princes; as being
a Subject of too vast a Latitude to be a branch of a peculiar Treatise, as also
that they seldom agitate, but by their substitutes, who falling under the
subjection of a Law, are not always secluded from the common course thereof;
or if sometime they be, it seldom under shelter is of the Authority of a Law,
of whose equality we only are in search. We will proceed to agitate on the
subsequents sequestered either in Goods or Person, from the attainture of a
public Ordinance, by Virtue of their eminence, under three Principles, Peer,
Priest, and Public Minister.

The Peer pretends for the ground of his Privilege in relation to his
Person, the necessity of his Attendance on the Prince, as the essential Luster
to his Majesty, in Reference to his Goods, the vast expense which follows this
his Assiduity.

To which we may Object, that the Luster of a Princes Majesty confists not
altogether in such titular Distinctions; but in the Virtue, Integrity, Wisdom,
Gravity and Civil Reverence of his Ministry, which were yet more illustrated in
the disclaiming such a Privilege.

The Priest in right of the protection of his Person, pleads the Dignity of his
Function, as not subordinate to the Civil Ministry. For dispensation to his
Property: the sanctified use thereof divided in the Inherence from the politic
Body. This claim has formerly been the subject of many violent and some
tragic Contestations, licensing the appeal of Prelates to Ecclesiastical
Conclaves in matters of Civil Jurisdiction: but since this usage is at present
of no force with us: we will not much insist on the Discussion: only thus much
we may thereon infer, that if in honor of their Function there should be this
peculiar Reverence due unto their Person, or Reservation to their Properties,
it equitably must be under this Distinction; so long as they contain the Action
of their Lives within the Limits of that Holy Exercise; and their Possessions
thereto only Relative.

The Public Minister may seem to lay a more legitimate Title to such
Privilege, insomuch, as of necessity, his Person is to be secluded (in a
manner) from the Civil Frame, to give attendance soly in the most material
Interests thereof: In which Agitation the Faculties of his mind are wholly so
ingrost, conveniently they cannot be relaxt, or yet diverted by a useful
reflection on his own: yet in respect that such immunity may seem to question
the integrity of the transactions of his private Commerce: whose Life should so
far be from all suspicion of Reproach, that it should be exactly exemplary. His
Institution will be more agreeable and Injunctions valuable in their
apprehensions, to whose advantage he is designed to Agitate, if therein equally
concerned with the rest. Nor can it be of use to him, so to be sheltred from
the Issue of the Law, whose proper Dignity speaks him a Law unto himself, it
being an unequal suffrage that lends Authority to any man to agitate of Common
Rights, who violates the Image thereof in his private Dealings.

The Subjects secluded from the common course of Laws, in favor of their
Incapacity, have a more rational claim to such Privilege, As a Wife, Children,
and Servants, whose persons in some cases are dispensed from the Penalty of
public Disobedience, as subordinate Members to a more distinct Head, who only
is responsable to the public for their Miscarriages, freed from the
engagements of their private Contracts, insomuch as their Dependence is upon
another Property, in their possession only but in Trust. Lunaticks and Idiots
yet justly reach a vaster Latitude of exclusion in their Acts (wholly divided
from the Civil Frame) wanting the Faculty to distinguish them.

The third and last Collateral implied in the Letter of an exact Ordinance, is
the Injured, of whom most penal Statutes hold but small account, regarding more
perhaps the Consequence of a public Disturbance, then of a private
Inconvenience: To which Model the former Institution of Moses seems altogether
fashioned, An Eye for an Eye, and a Tooth for a Tooth. This Law, though equal
to the Trespass, and severe to the Trespasser, yet the sense thereof
explicitly not seems to bear the fullest extent of a perfect Ordinance,
insomuch as the chief Relative is not concerned in the Contents thereof; regard
herein being only had unto the Offense, and Offender, An Eye for an Eye, and a
Tooth for a Tooth. What Reparation has the Injured hereby, except that Eye or
Tooth, which is the Penalty of the Offense, could be restored so to the
defective Part, that Nature might assume the Exercise of her Faculty: But in
matters of Trespass where there was a more feisable Restitution; The injured
had a double Reparation.

The common neglect of this Rule in Right has rendered the persuit of Justice
irksome, in that her access is more penible; then is her Issue satisfactory: so
that most men (unless possessed with an inveterate Fury of Revenge) had rather
(to the encouragement of Oppression) suffer silently, then for a small
advantage procure unto themselves a weightier Injury, or else (to the
Disturbance of the public Peace) provoked, are thereby to become unequal
Repairers of their private wrongs. Which notion, that we may form more clearly
to our obvious Minister: We for a closure to the Agitation of our present
Subject, may gather from a clear perpensation of our Argument, That a Law
composed exactly equal, must hold a just proportion with the Nature of the
offense, in reference both to the Public and the Private Interest, extending
the tenure of the Imposition universally to every Civil Member of Capacity,
with full and facile satisfaction to the Injured.

XXII. The Knowledge of the Laws.
THis Coherent is so essential a Consequent to the just imposition of a Law,
that therein is completed the true demension of her proper Nature, Without the
Light of the Law (says the Apostle) I had not distinguished the Offense. And
how that offense is not distinguishable, should justly fall under the
conformity of a Law, is a Mystery not fully cleared in Divinity, Whose Rights
(perhaps extend unto a vaster Latitude then Civil Ties can fairly figure a
pretense unto. The end of the Law is the union of the people, whereto such
regulation is the band: which band can frame no firm Conjuncture, unless the
Virtue thereof equally be dispenc't to every part. This also seems implicitly
inferred on the first warrantable Institution thereof, in the assent to the
Reception: if we allow a rational Faculty to them therein concerned, under
which Attribute, no one approving that, whereof he is not totally informed, to
which these contingents following are most materially effectual, That the Law
in Letter and Sense be generally intelligible; Concise in the Composure. And
universally imparted in the Publication.

Under the intimation of the Letter is comprised the Figure or Orthography
thereof, and the distinction of the Tongue. The one may in propriety seem to
have an unalterable relation to the other: which are proper to the composure of
a Law, That every one may distinguish what he is to observe.

Perhaps hereto may be alleged, that the Mystery of Civil Rights may as
plausibly be restrained from the conception of the Vulgar, to the advantage of
their Temporal Welfare, as those are of Divine, to the advancement of their
Spiritual; since they both meet in one Intention in the Restriction, which is
to avoid the Damage, may ensue the sinister exposition of the Ignorant: It
being a general frailty co-incident to humane Nature, over partially to rely on
the sufficiency of his affected faculty, and had rather run the hazard, may
follow his Infirmity, then to betray his weakness in his doubts.

Omitting to discuss whether the Proposition be receivable, either in the
Nature or Comparison thereof: the latter with us being totally rejected, and
the former (as posited) not without Reason much to be suspected, since Reason
(whereof all men have some Capacity) ought to be the common Rule to every
perfect Ordinance in a Civil Jurisdiction: but in the Agitation of Spiritual
Principles, Reason (as merely humane or vulgar, reaching no higher Object then
the Sense) may in Reason seem to be excluded: allowing yet for granted, that
both in Civil and Divine Transactions, as well as Physical, it safer is for the
Practitioner utterly to be Ignorant of the course thereof, and soly to rely on
the due Information of another; then knowing little prosecute the Direction
only of his slight inspection to his proper prejudice: Yet nevertheless to the
exact solution of our doubts, as well in Civil and Divine as Natural Subjects,
a certain measure of knowledge, must therein, of necessity precede, not only to
form an Apprehension of an error in our selves, but also properly and usefully
to figure ours unto another apprehension; else in the obscurity of our
Demands, the most material circumstance (through Ignorance) not inserted,
Authentic Instructions will but possess us with more confident Assurance, yet
rashlier to intrude our selves into more error.

The next Subject in course to be insisted on, is the Sense employed in the
Tongue and Letter of the Law, that which should be perspicuous to every ones
capacity therein concerned, is so essential a dependent on what we have
concluded in their discussions, that they all seem but to form one and the same
consequence united or divided, only to this does properly belong more weight,
since the obscurity Hereof may even to the Master of the Mystery, not seldom
figure an Ambiguity, which often subject to corruption, may frustrate the
intention of the perfect'st Law, under the shadow of Her own Authority: and so
not only shelter the Practices of fraudulent Ministers under Her Warrant, but
make Her sacred Image a common Prostitute to each sinister end. On which to
enlarge since we perhaps may in the ensuing section meet an apter Subject. We
will desist here farther to pursue.

Furthermore the knowledge of the Law being admitted necessary to the due
observation thereof, It will also be thereto requisite, that Brevity and
Uniformity in Structure, accompany the Perspecuity of the Letter, Tongue, and
Sense; in that the Soul (while closed in our frail Investure) must use an
Object not always present to form the Intellect, else Inanimadvertance will
often meet in one and the same consequence with ignorance: As also, in respect
that most men's occupations will not admit of so much vacancy as to peruse
volum'nous or Introgate Insertions: according to which model was composed the
sacred Law, inscribed by the hand of our Creator: In number only ten, in order
admirably regular. Inserting first the unquestionable Authority thereto in the
preface. Then dividing the nature thereof into several Objects, Divine and
Humane. The most material Injunctions preceding the less consequent. And to
every one whose weight was not sufficiently employed in their Nature, annexing
Reasons to disclose their ground, which nevertheless was by the Holy Institutor
of the Gospel contracted to a briefer and a plainer method, lest Ignorance or
Oblivion might in the infringement figure an excuse to evade the penalty. Those
Indians (whose natural Rules of Government seem to excel, in Happiness and
Innocence, the most probable Pretenses of the nicest Models of imaginary
Commonwealths, in that their Actions are so far removed from the actual Error
of our Common Crimes, they know not terms to intimate their Nature) have but
two Principles to direct their Actions, To be loving to their Wives, and
valiant against their Enemies: which daily are recited and illustrated by the
most venerably Aged of the Family.

3. To the general concurrence of all which Positions must necessarily also
follow the due publication of the Law, which lends to a Prescription that high
Attribute: the Law is else at highest Estimate but a concealed Light; the use
whereof was figured to us in the first Publication of the sacred Law, which was
delivered in Thunder and Lightning: And the Institution thereof after
celebrated by a solemn Convocation of the united multitude with sound of
Trumpet, and the Contents engraved on their daily Vestures. The Antic Roman
manner of Communicating their Edicts to the people, was to suspend them in a
Table of Brass in every place of public Intercourse.

XXIII. The Insubversion of the Law.
THE highest Dignity to a Prescription, is the stability to Her Position; and
the greatest Grace unto Her Efficacy, is the Preservation of Her Purity: that
implies the Base thereof to have been cast upon a solid Consultation, this
intimates the Integrity of Her Ministry in a due Administration: not that in
reference to the first, it is warrantable so far to rely on any humane
sufficiency, as not to search into the nature of a Rule, which formed to the
occurrences of differing Times and Persons, may sometime plausibly be reformed,
suspended, or repealed, though never so perfect in their Constitution, as may
appear, In the Jews Dispensation with their Sabbath: when on the advantage of
their cessation therein from their Arms, their Enemies had almost extirpiated
the Nation: which infringement was afterward allowed warrantable by exposition
of the Fulfiller of the Law, either on necessity, according to David's pattern,
In eating the Shewbread: Or on the pursuit of a better work, in Reference to
His own, In healing on the Sabbath Day, the Sick. But that such a stability
illustrates the essence of Her Nature, suffering more frequent and exacter
Proofs of Her Perfection. In reverence whereof, repulsing the violation of all
loose Attempts. To which establishment should also join the endeavors of the
Institutous, lest every wavering Motion of the giddy Multitude should prejudice
the Institution. On this Intention, it is probable, Were formed irrevocable the
Decrees of the Medes and Persiuns. Or in regard of the latter, that it is
possible to preserve from Corruption, any Precept (though never so natural)
which falls but under usage of our frail Society. But that an exact Ordinance
should either be invested in Her proper Constitution with such influence, might
keep Her Observation regular; or thereto borrow vigor from some collatteral,
without the penible vigilance of the Institutors over the Transactions of their
substitutes: In persuit therefore of the promises, it will be requisite the Law
should make Provision against these Particulars. 1. Their open Violation. 2.
The obscurity of their sense. 3. The Repugnance of their Nature. 4. The
Fraudulence of their Ministry. 5. And the Custom or usage of their Courts.

1. The Vigor of the Laws extending not beyond the Precincts of their
Jurisdiction, implies the Object of their safeguard from open Violence, formed
in their Nature, can only be Intestine. The most frequent and visible sources
of Civil Insurrections, which in their material consequences may reach at the
subversion of the Civil Frame, are either Private Broils, or Public
Discontents. The first is verified in the Contestations betwixt Sylla and
Marius, Caesar, and Pompey. And although such Debates seem rather in their
Issues, to strike at the Foundation of the Government, then Constitution of the
Laws, yet are these so nigh Relatives, the one can seldom be supplanted without
subversion of the other: as appears by Caesar's reply, when seizing on the
Common Treasure, was objected to Him, the Legal Inhibition to such violence,
What do you instance Laws to us, who wear Swords by our sides? The mannagers of
successful Arms are oftentimes transported with such inaccostable, and
irresistible Presumption, allured thereto by their flattering fortunes, or
compelled by the exigence of indirect Engagements. That the progress of their
Actions is so far removed from the restraint of any Legal Prescription, they
seldom are contained within the bounds of their own public Manifests, or yet
the secret Motives of their first Intentions, witness Bullingbrook's Proceeding
on the Infringement of the Decree of his prescribed Exile, on pretense only,
but to be invested in his Fathers Dignity and Estate: but he perceiving the
fluent concourse of the people to Him to advance his purpose, became thereby so
much encouraged to higher enterprises, he could not be restrained by any Ties,
Civil, Divine, or Natural, until he had supplanted his abandoned Sovereign. The
ground of this his Exile therein confirming just, which before was so only in
suspicion: in which respect it will be requisite, that such Decrees, whose
Institution have this Object, be endued with sufficient vigor to smother such
emotions in their Infancy, timely reconciling, or impartially expelling both
Enemies and Emulators from the public Ministry, lest, under sufferage, longer
times should form a Faction not subject to the regulation of so slight a
faculty.

Public Discontents gather more slowly and imperceptably to a head, but are
more violent and sudden in eruption; and seeming more plausibly commenced,
become more licentiously prosecuted, being pre-possest with Indignation, both
against Ministers and Ministry, inconsiderately without distinction, totally
reverse the Institution of either, As may be instanc't in the proceeding of
those Tribes revolted from the Government of Rhehoboam, with him forsaking both
the Temple and the sacred Ordinances.

The obscurity of the sense, wherein an Ordinance is expressed, may sometime
meet with such an Ambiguity, that either in suspense, or exposition, may
utterly subvert the intention of a Law. Words (in the most proper usage taken)
can figure but a shallow and an abstruse Character of the mind: so that the
best digested method of delivery may probably (in the first Purity) through
ignorance or malice, unadvisedly or intentionally be prevaricated, more
probably not stand so many Ages uncorrupted, as would require a perfect
Ordinance. The words thereof in time, not only growing out of use, but also the
proper Emphasis of the Tongue: from whence perhaps are sprung so many
Controversies in Courts of Judicature, and Schools, as has made that Law and
Learning was first useful and venerable, now become noxious and ridiculous; so
that he is now accounted as insufficient an advocate, that cannot make a bad
Cause good, by his Schicanrie, as he an illiterate Scholar, that cannot so
disguise a fallacy, as to make it appear true by his Sophistry, with how much
damage to the people, and indignity to the Majesty of a Law. Such slights are
sheltered under the abstruseness of the sense thereof, we leave every one to
judge, believe, or Prove.

Perhaps hereto may be objected, that the Nature of the Law so frequent is in
use, the Virtue thereof cannot lie concealed, but daily is revived by some
occular Proof.

Omitting to insert the hazard of a Light educ't from such Collation, in that
the circumstances rarely meet in a conformity, we farther may reply, that even
in revolution of many Ages some Laws meet not with any accident so fully
touches every clause therein,, as might render the issue fully clear: nor also
any clause contained in every Law, does clearly answer every accident, may
possibly fall under the proper object of the same, as may appear in Moses
Appeal to the Almighty, for the decision of the claim of Zealophehad's Daughter
in the common partage of the promised Land: In which regard, few Laws can be
produced, are so exactly constituted, that will not often want enlargement or
enlightening.

Laws in repugnance of their Nature tend yet more visibly to the subversion of
their Institution; the which at first inspection may perhaps appear so gross an
absurdity, as is hardly credited to be feisable in the deliberate result of a
rational consultation. Yet when we shall more strictly search into the
constitution of their parts, in reference to their proper use and ends, we
shall find, that not only in respect of one another, Laws often meet this
Impropriety. But also (in relation to their proper purposes) prove sometime
contradictive to themselves.

Laws In their Dispensation pass through many hands and therein often more
subject are to alteration of their true Intent, unless the course thereof be
strictly and severely visited.

XXIV. The timely Issue of the Law.
IF the Law were exactly compiled to the precedent structure, or according to
what other Attributes imaginable, more properly might conduce to her
perfection, yet if the Issue were not seasonable, the Institution scarcely
could be useful. If the grace of a private Benefit consist in a seasonable
contribution, the glory of a public Ordinance must be raised on a timely
Execution, The Importunities of the Widow might make perhaps at length Her
Cause successful: But the Ministry of Her Judge was not crowned with the Merit
of her succor. All Courts of Judicature have their proper Capacity of Receipt,
and if thereto succeed not timely issues. Continued Affluence of Complaints
will suddenly beget Obstruction, Confusion, or Corruption.

The common Obstacles to the Progress of most Laws, after a suit commenced, are
1. The licens't silence of the Agitators. 2. Appeals, or Removes. 3. Writs of
Error. 4. Demurs. 5. Cross Bills.

How which should in their use be regulated to remove all Impediments, which
might obstruct the timely Issue of the Laws, we soly shall remit unto the
Vigilance, Inspection, and Authority of their Institutors, declining totally
their formerly designed enlightening in particulars (though to the visible
defacing of those Ornaments, might perhaps more essentially have lent both use
and luster to the contexture of our Treatise) as a Civil Presumption not to be
licens't by the most Licentious, lest the misprision of the procedure might
possibly not only have blemished the intention of the Agitation, in the Censure
of the soundest Judgments; but under the incapacity of the vulgar, have utterly
made void the object of our Enterprise, perverting to their Prejudice what only
was designed to their Benefit.

XXV. The easy Persuit of the Law.
WEre the Laws perfect in their Constitution, and timely in their Issue; yet to
them their Ingress and Progress is inaccessable, their Virtue cannot be
communicable; so consequently not generally useful, the proper object of a
perfect Ordinance.

This Subject has more peculiarly for Object the Impotent and the Indigent, in
reference either to the remoteness of their Residence from the Courts of
Judicature, or their disability in substance.

To remove the first Difficulty from the persuit of the Law, two methods only
are in practice, either to constitute several Courts of Judicature in several
Shires, Counties, or Provinces, or from the Capital Courts of Judicature to
communicate the Virtue of the Law (in vacant seasons) to the remotest Places of
the Commonwealth by their peculiar Ministers prescribed Circuits. The former
course, as now in use not fully reaches the Propriety, insomuch as distinct
Courts of Judicature so posited have still relation to the Capital Court, and
can definitively determine nothing, their sentences receding by Appeals unto
another Court: In which proceeding the Subject suffers still more prejudice then
attaineth ease. Our justicial Circuits more probably might meet a happier issue
in the intention of their use.

To those that by reason of their indigence have not capacity to prosecute a
Reparation to their grievances, most Civil Jurisdictions do provide redress
under Forma Pauperis, which questionless more fully meets the intention of the
use, where distinct Courts have only reference to the Institution.

XXVI. The Nature of a Law.
E'Re we had qualified our Civil Ministry with those essential Attributes,
which might lend Ornament and use to Her Investure, it would have first been
requisite to the exact simitry of our Structure, to have enlarged more
peculiarly on the true Definition of her Nature: But finding no material
Mystery therein, we have persu'd the Order of the Letter, In favor of the
Propriety of our Tongue, prefiguring the shadow e're we disclose the subject,
and here accordingly give place to Her Distinction.

A Law is a prescription, or a Rule imposed by the Supreme Authority of a
Nation, on every Member of Capacity, within the Limits of the Civil Union, to
restrain each man's Actions from the Prejudice, and guide them to the mutual
Benefit of one another. So that we may positively affirm, as reason is seated
in the natural Body for the direction of the active Members to their proper
use, and Ministry to the rest: so the Law is constituted in the Civil Frame, as
a due conduct to our private Rights, and common preservation; neither can there
be any proper distinction in their Faculties, both issuing from one source, and
directed to one end: only Nature in that, formed Her Jurisdiction in a smaller
continent; which Policy in this extended to a vaster Latitude. And what the
First composed only to one, and for the benefit of one, the latter constituted
^o many, and for the advantage of many; from which consequence we may conclude,
that as Nature proceeds in the erecting of a light to guide her Ministry.
Policy must follow that visible light to the direction of Hers. Laws totally
divest their Nature of their proper Use; and Dignity, when they but swerve from
Her Prescription: A proof whereof we perfectly discover in the Constitution of
those Commonwealths, which live only according to the first purity of Nature,
wherein those common Crimes against which our Laws have formed their severest
vigor, have not so much as Intimation in their Letters. To this the Apostle
yields his evidence, affirming, That some not knowing the Law, performed those
things contained in the Law, and were a Law unto themselves. Informed by that
innate Light of Nature, Reason in her uncorrupted Purity, which secretly did
prompt them, To do unto others, as they would that others should do unto them,
But when man fell from the Rules of Nature to live according to Art and
Opinion, he wrested This Light to their adulterate uses, and guided That should
have directed him.

Farthermore, every perfect Ordinance extends It self to the two foresaid
Objects, The preservation of a distinct Right. And The Advantage of a mutual
Benefit: as they are to be enfolded in one Rule, so they must not be divided in
their Ministry. The just Interest of one must not so strictly proceed, as to
subvert the existence of another: Such severity would utterly pervert the
Nature of a Law, rendering Summum Jus, Summa Injuria, The utmost Right the
highest Injury. In which regard, perhaps the Institutors of our Law, foreseeing
the difficulty to unite these Heads in one Prescription, have divided them in
their Natures, constituting distinct Courts to the peculiar Ministry of either;
styling the one, Law; the other Equity, This only formed to moderate the Rigor
of That, Moses Moral Institutions had in every particular an especial regard in
regulating the extremes of Civil Rights, One man might take another Coat for
Pledge, but was inhibited to retain it longer then till night. Perhaps, lest he
not having other shelter to defend him from the Injury of that season, might
possibly thereby incurr the hazard of his Life. In matters of private loan, all
usury was interdicted: Prefiguring this course should only be an aid unto
necessity, no Minister to Lux or Avarice. And he that was reduced to the
extremity of borrowing only to support his Life, could probably make no such
benefit thereof, as to return it with advantage, without impeaching farther the
visible means unto his Preservation. All contracts for Lands and Houses (in
some cases) had their Period of Restitution, which was the ensuing Jubilee. In
respect, that one man's unlimitted enlargement, how just soever in the
Acqulsition, should not reduce his joint Associate into indigence.

XXVII. The several Objects of the Law, in Reference to the Security of the
Natural Union.
THE Life of man is the union of two differing Subjects, Matter, and Form: The
improvement of whose Faculties (distinctly taken) may consequently have two
several Objects, in reference to the said Division, Natural, and Moral. But
since (jointly taken) the one can seldom suffer an Impeachment, without a
prejudice to the other. The Security of Both will meet in one Principle. The
common Agents of the dissolution of this union, which sometime fall under the
capacity of humane Remedy, are Wilful Violence, Sickness, Want; of which we
will discuss in order.

XXVIII. Wilful Violence.
AS this Subject has in regard of our Order, attained the pre-eminence of
Position, so in Respect of her Nature, it requires more eminence in
Opposition: No Act can so much blemish the Dignity of a Civil Government as
this (simply taken) in that it seems to usurp the Authority of the Civil
Jurisdiction, in assuming an impartial satisfaction to the distempered will.
The first Curse Man incurred, was for his Disobedience to his Creator, which in
the Issue found an advantageous Cure. The second Curse befell Him, was for his
Violence to his Brother, which Visibly never met an Absolution. God the
immaculate Essence of Justice, herein seems jealous of the Rights peculiar to
his sacred Ministry, reserving only to himself this high prerogative, Vengeance
is mine. Nor can the Law (without a blemish to this Image It represents) resent
the unjust encroachment on her Rights herein with less severity. But to
discover the degrees of this exorbitance inherent to Her Nature, it will be
requisite to visit Her effects in the Distinction either of the Subject,
Manner, Place, or Measure.

The first Subject considerable, on whom a violence may be practiced, is
(according to the Rule of God and Nature) that which each man acts upon
himself: The ground whereof is hardly evident to a moral sense, which only
measures the regularity of the exterior Actions, according to the damages
sustained by another, prefiguring, without such Reference, each man might
justly claim a privilege in the disposure only of his own: in which regard
perhaps the Ethnicks have assumed so much Glory from this Enterprise, hereby,
as they conceived, triumphing over the Malice of their Fate, though
peradventure the Temerity might (more equitably according to their own Rules)
merit* the reproach of Lachety, then the applause of magnanimity, since so
ignominious an Evasion, betrays not only the abjectness of the mind, but the
infirmity of Nature, as well in the Anticipation of an evil, by an irrational
Apprehension, as in the distrust of our Faculties, to undergo the encounter.
The exercise of Fortitude is opposition; not flight: But yet this Consequence,
if assented to, will really not reach the Nature of this Crime: we therefore
must make use of higher speculation to the Discovery. To ascend thereto, if we
shall make the first step on the Base of Natures Rules, This Act will totally
appear repugnant to her Order, Chaque Chose suit ce que la destruit. Every
thing does fly that which would it destroy. If it infringe the Institution of
Nature then consequently the first and most general Decree, that ever was
imposed by our Creator. If we look into the Letter of his Law, which may be
thought more nighly to concern us. We shall find the Intirnation hereof
infolded in a general Inhibition, Not Kill, If we shall yet search into the
Nature of the Fact, by the Collation thereof to the preceding Actions of the
Practisers, we must conclude, that it will seldom be found other, then the
issue of an irregular Life; wherein the all-supporting Influence of our
Creators Grace seems totally retracted, as may appear in the prodigious Lives
of Heliogabolus Caricola, and others: In opposition whereof, if we shall
reflect on the Actions of Brutus, and Cassius, we may affirm, That Caesar's
Murder (how fairly soever polisht with pretense) so far eclipst the Beauty of
their former Virtues, they cannot win (in an impartial Judgment) so much
credit to lend their Lives or Ends so much distinction from the rest, as to
give weight to an Objection. From sacred Record, with more Authority perhaps,
to these may also be annexed Saul, only therein we meet with Rhasis example,
whose unblemish't life, and high approved end (though by himself advanced) may
cast some scruple on our Argument: yet since this falls under the Relation of
an obscure original. And under the Pattern of a transported Seal, we thereof
not admit, as a fit subject to a farther discussion: only the life and end of
Cato Uticensis may afford a Proof without exception, where no Displeasure
sprung from his proper Interest, found the least motive in his Resolution: but
since the Actions of his Life had more refined Resorts, then humane sense can
probably disclose, soaring a pitch beyound the Practice of a Parallel: we will,
in honor of the Object of his Passion, forbear to insist on the Conclusion.

Yet if we shall pursue the inward trace of this Distemper more peculiarly, and
pry more narrowly into the secret source thereof, we questionless shall find
it evident, that from the preposterous Conjunction of repugnant Passions (Fear
and Anger) issues self-dislike. This misprision of the work, at length
begets a contempt of the Artificer; which since it can reach no higher,
presumptuously attempteth to destroy his Image, betraying in such disobedience,
the trust which was imposed for her safeguard, anticipating the term of the
surrender, My days are in thy hand, not in our own.

To which may probably be objected, that a man may sometime be reduced to that
exigence, which probably may figure an authentic Summons.

In reply whereto we may allege, that such extremes are not distinguishable to
humane sense, the Power and Providence of our Protector being unlimitable in
the Measure, and inscrutable in the Manner, Snatching Daniel from the Jaws of
the hungry Lion, and Jonas from the entrails of the Whale. Nor is such Grace
dispensed, rarely or in favor only of his Prophets: as may be instanc't in * a
Grecian Captain's Delivery by a Fox from out the Entrails of the Earth, for
dead, by his Enemies cast in an Abiss, from whence no humane Art nor Industry
could have withdrawn him by a timely succor.

Having disclosed the Nature of the Crime, we should proceed to figure the eco
a due penalty to the restraint thereof: But as a moral Inspection could not
attain the Mystery of her Nature, so no moral Institution can reach the manner
of the punishment; the Delinquent being hereby become impassable to Her
Prescription, remaining nothing inherent to his peculiar Property, whereon the
Civil Jurisdiction can equitably be satisfied, but his Carcass and his Memory.

The subject next material in reference to a violence is the Natural Parent,
without distinction, and not without a valid consideration; there being not a
more legitimate inherency to Rule, then that which is the immediate cause to
our Production. And the more reverence owe we to his Dignity, in that our
Creator descends to illustrate His Bounty to us, under this relation: In
emulation whereof all Virtuous Princes have misprised the most glorious Titles,
in Competition with this high Attribute. To this most just Pre-eminence
follows so strict an Injunction of Conformity, that the penalty of an
Offense, shall violate this Right, but in a stubborn Refractory, or Indecent
Opposition, was by the sacred Law pronounced, Death: Who has a rebellious Son,
that will not obey the voice of his Father or Mother, nor be reformed by their
Correction, their Parents shall deliver him to the Civil Magistrate, who shall
cause him to be stoned by the people. From which consequence we may gather the
Nature of that Crime by open or by secret practice, shall willingly attempt to
reach at their destruction.

In constituting Laws to the Restraint hereof, most Legislators have (in the
primitive texture of their Civil Frame) been altogether negligent, either
concluding, that nature had in such Relation too powerful an influence in her
Impressions, to want the aid of artificial Ministry, or else reflecting on the
common frailty of our Nature, which took more violence from restraint, forbore
to agitate on such a Crime, as jealous to awake the faculty of Malice in such
Discussion: So silently for many years, past unexprest, because unpractised,
this Fact among the Romans, till time, which lends Maturity to our Corruption,
produced a Monster in her horrid Pattern, which then gave Light to this
Infliction, The Patracide was tied close in a Sack, and cast into the Tyber. A
penalty perhaps by them esteemed sufficiently severe, in that it figured not
only a Division of the Soul from her frail Mansion, but an extinction. Yet e're
we shall desist to agitate on our Subject, we farther will examine the Nature
of this Crime, in Reference to the other Members of a Family.

Having discussed hereof in Relation to the Childrens Demeanor to their
Parents, we may insist upon the Wifes unto the Husband; whom though the
Mystical Ceremony has united in one Body, Affirming them to be but one Flesh:
yet nevertheless since Civil Rules have lent a difference of Dignity in the
Distinction of Parts, most proper to the Constitution of their union. The
nature of the Trespass may possibly in Reference to the Husband meet a
weightier Imputation, and a severer Punishment.

Servants have a more subordinate Dependence on the Head of a Family, having
from them their Livelihood, in Consideration only of their due submission to
his Will. In contempt or repugnance whereof, if their demeanor shall proceed
to act a Violence on his Person. The Crime more properly may be qualified with
such Distinction, and meet such Punishment. In persuit of our Order, should
here ensue a like Discussion on that Violence, the Master of the Family should
Act upon the Members. But since therein is found no legal Distinction in the
Nature of the Act, from what is practiced on other Members of the Civil Frame,
more then the Infamy which justly follows the Breaches of so nigh Relations.
We will remit to treat thereof in our Reflection of the Manner and the Measure
of a Violence.

To these succeeds in Eminence of Distinction (in Reference to a Violence) the
Magistrate (under what degree soever being in Execution of his Ministry) in
that, therein he fully seems invested with the Civil power, and consequenly the
Violence so sustained, more highly ought to be resented by the Jurisdiction to
whom he does officiate, as a contempt or Opposition to her Order: In which
respect perhaps, this Fact (on Him) extending to a higher Consequence (then on
the former Subjects) might justly claim precedence in our Order, to all those
our preposited Distinctions, had not Policy succeeded unto Natures Order, both
in her Pattern and Establishment. All other Persons of what Degree or Quality
soever, Noble or Ignoble, Alien or Denison, in Reference to his Trespass fall
in the Balance of one common Estimate. The manner how this Trespass may be
acted, well considered, will vary much the Nature of the Crime, lending there
to more weight or less from whence the Penalty receives due Regulation. The
common differences whereof may visibly be reduced to these Distinctions,
Encounters, Duels, Surprises, in the first Principle. The intention of the
Agent (which soly lends material Consequence to the Fact) seems wholly
disengaged. In the Second, the intent of both seems clearly pre-ingaged. In the
Third, the intent of only one seems pre-possest.

If Encounters admit of a double Distinction, being such as are merely Casual,
having no farther motive then the present Accident or Collateral, having
Relation to some former Difference; yet so as neither Time nor place were
pre-advised of either: If pre-advised of Both (as oftentimes is practiced, to
shun the extreme severity of the Law, disguising so the Action) then falls the
Nature of this Trespass under the Distinction of a Duel. If but of one
determined, the Fact may properly be termed a Surprise.

Casual Encounters, what e're the Issues thereof are, have the most specious
pretense to plead for their Indulgence; in that the first motive of the
incensed will is not oft-times within the absolute Command of the most regular
mind, which herein but informed by unconsulted Appearance may facily seduce
the Judgment to prosecute the sense: yet since no Imperfection how naturally
soever inherent to our frail Condition (within the true Capacity of our Civil
Union) can plead a privilege to prejudice Another. Nor perfection (how
supernaturally soever in any constituted) while yet a Member of this Civil
Frame) can lend a just Authority to any, to be Repairer of their proper Damage;
as appears in the example of our perfect'st Guide, In defense only of true
Innocence. Put up thy Sword, who takes the Sword. shall perish with the Sword.
Nor can we, how justly soever commenced or prosecuted, exempt such Procedure
from the Nature of a Trespass: yet under this Limitation, such only to the
Public. The private therein totally excluded, insomuch as the Nature of the
strife implies an equal Opposition, if not in Power, in Will, and self-opinion
of Sufficiency, wherein if he be foll'd; he justly pays the forfeit to his own
Presumption, who else declining the attempts, might legally have persu'd the
Advantage of his Injury, without contesting for an equal satisfaction.

To which may possibly be alleged, that the first, most just and impulsive Law
of Nature prompts every living Creature, (for their proper safety) to rise in
Opposition in their own Defense. Nor is he half secured that relies only on the
passive Part.

In answer to the objection we reply, the Law requires but a visible declining
from the Action, to acquit him of the event thereon ensues: To which, although
perhaps It seems to have prescribed too vast a Latitude, as to retreat until he
can Retire no farther: in which he probably may be slain e're he attains those
Bounds. Yet other Circumstances that may reach the Intention of the Law
therein, in Reason may acquit him unless the Interposing judge presume too much
on his Authority to tie his Censure soly to the strictness of the Letter.

The trespass may hereon ensue unto the public, is either in Respect of the
Common Disturbance, Breach of Peace; or in Regard of the loss of a Subject,
Manslaughter. To that our Law has equitably imposed Imprisonment or Fine. To
this a total forfeiture of their Goods. Yet more effectually to the restraint
hereof might possibly succeed the Influence of severer Laws, directed to
suppress such Incivilities, as commonly are the Ground to such Disorders, in
which most Civil Jurisdictions seem totally defective.

Collater al Encounters, by our Laws, are not distinguishable from positive
Duels, though herein Time or Place concur not with the motive in the Intention.
In that the Reference of a former Breach prefigures a Design to pursue the
event to which Occasion then administers, remaining still an unremitting
Contiguity betwixt the efficient and the effect. Yet when we shall reflect on
the Infirmity of humane Nature, which in the perfect'st Temper not always is
provided with sufficient Aids to check the sudden Motives of the Sense; but
having often passively sustained the Indignity of the extremest out rages, may
sometime be provoked to yield unto a less, the Spirits pre-disposed insensibly
attracting the Flame, was formerly to them familiar, leaving no intermission
for Discourse to agitate on Restraint of the transported will: as also
frequency in Injury may possibly proceed to an irresistible Importunity: And in
an Insolent Solicitation, exact that our will assents not to, Potentia motata
fit far^^. Incensed Patience becoming fury, Furthermore the Cessation,
Interruption, or Restraint of the first motive probably may prefigure a
declining from the Prosecution: so that from a clear Perpensation of our
Argument, may really be collected so visible a difference between this manner
of strife, and pre-designed Conflicts, as may equitably lend a more moderate
Distinction to the Penalty.

Duels may properly be extended unto these Distinctions, Extrajusticial,
Justicial, and Private.

Extrajusticial Duels are such as are Authorized by mutual Assent of two
hostile Nations for pre-eminence in Honor, for the Decision of pretended
Rights, to avoid in future, the effusion of more Blood, and other general
Calamities too incident to War, though otherwise successful: so were declined
the Divisions between the Israelites and the Philistians by David and Goliath.
So concluded the Contestation between the Romans and the Albans: by the
Heratii, and the Curatii: Although the latter manner of Conflict may seem
rather to approach the Nature of a Skirmidge then a Duel; which taken in the
strictest sense, implies only single oppositions. These manner of Conflicts
are so far removed from the subordinate suppression of a Civil Jurisdiction.
That they are only grounded on support of the due Interest thereof. And from It
rather merit (what e're the issues be) an eternal Monument of Glory, then a
scrupulous Check. Insomuch as the Agitator totally abandoneth his proper
Interest, in Favor of the public Benefit. Other Military Combats of this
Nature, having no Reference to the former Object, are but soments to vanity,
and utterly destructive to the order of the Warlike Frame.

Justicial Duels, with us now out of use, have left but an obscure Original
both to their Nature and their Institution; yet probable it is, the chief
ground of their sufferance, was only Lactant. de Ira Dei.
in discovery of the Truth, where evidence sufficient was not visible, either
in Decision of private Rights, or public Impeachments. A Custom only formed to
supply the Intention of defective Laws, amongst scarce civilized Nations; whose
superstitious Souls more awfully were guided by event ( Stovaei An. 25. H. 8.
Live. ab. v. c. lib. 28.
which visibly were often fallible) then the Light of Nature. And though this
usage (holding Affinity with the Nature of a Law) may seem to borrow some
Authority from sacred Practices, As in Discovery of the Babylenian Vesture. And
in Inquisition of the Breach of Saul's vowed Fast. Yet here the procedure has
only Reference to Divine Trespasses, which passing without Civil Punity, the
whole Society sunck under Burden of the Guilt till It was expiated, which could
no otherwise be done, but by disclosure of the Criminel, whose hand best found
that was thereby offended. But in discussion of our Civil Rights which reach no
higher ground then humane Reason. Man must thereof acknowledge his just
forfeiture, that shall conclude without It, tempting the Almighty to educe a
Miracle to determine that, which he had granted means to attain unto.

Private Duels, taken in the strictest sense, are only single Combats, in
Weapon time and place determinable, sprung from no other ground then sense of
Injury, nor prosecute other object then Revenge, though Both oft-times seem
measured by the resentment of some others, more then by our own: Vanity the
litigious pretender to Honor, must court her looser Mother (vulgar Opinion) to
attain his Prostitute. A ridiculous Motive to an arrogant Assumption,
pretending both to Right and Power to arbitrate and to Execute in our proper
Interests, in Contempt or Misprision of the Civil Jurisdiction: so that we may
conclude, according to the Event, the Trespass is from Others of this Nature,
but distinguishable in an ostentive Attribute, whether the extent hereof may
possibly reach the Nature of a Murder, perhaps, in Civil Rules, may be
disputable. In that the Intent, which soly is effectual to qualify the Fact
with such Distinction, seems fully prepossest to use the uttermost Ability to
take away another Life: yet, in Respect, the persuit is with equal hazard of
our own, meeting like purpose in the Opposition, such Attribute Hereto too
strictly seems employed, though not by Law for such too strictly punished:
First, insomuch, as in such Procedure, the injured seems to usurp the Authority
of the Civil Jurisdiction, in persuit of his own unequal satisfaction, as also,
in that the Tragic Issues of such Conflicts often do engage succeeding
Families, to their Inemnities thereon sprung, in like Oppositions. Furthermore,
in that such Action passing with Impunity, may seem (in the vulgar Voice) to
constitute that Glory on a Crime, which soly should be proper to a virtuous
Enterprise.

One Controversy, inherent to our Subject, yet rests undiscust, whether the
Seconds (acting no farther then to secure the Principles from indirect
Advantages, or treacherous practices may equitably be attainted by the Law, as
Accezoir, or Complice to the Fact. In solution whereof, we may reply, That
since the Seconds were privy to the Intention of the Principles, which they had
power to frustrate by Information of the Civil Magistrate, they, as
Collaterals, may be accounted guilty of the event, in favoring so their
purposes.

3. Surprises (to moderate or extend their Nature) may be indu'd with these
Distinctions, Essential, Definitive, or Relative. Essential Surprises are such,
as e're they are educed into Act, are formed pre-advisedly in the intention of
the Agent, beyond the Notion of his Adversary; so that we properly may term
the Fact a treacherous Assault, with Weapon undistinguishable, be it Sword,
Fire, or Poison. This is without contradiction, the highest and most damagable
kind of Violence, insomuch, as it leaves none the smallest shadow of a
visible security. The strongest hereby becomes deprived of his strength, and
the wariest of his Caution. Nor can the undertaking meet a Cause, or
Circumstance, might mittigate the Nature of the Crime. Amasa's open Hostility
with Joab, could not render the Fact pardonable in his Judgment, for whose
Interest and Advantage it was finished. Nor can Parmenio's Treason, the Guises
Indirect Ambition, or D'Ancre's Insolence excuse those Princes, who to avoid
the casualty of their redoubted Power, have secretly and indirectly so
contrived their Ruin: The course of Justice either must be prosecuted, or
opposed, to form her Execution warrantable. If the first could not be persued
with the public Safety, the latter might be proved but with private Jealousy:
Who submit not unto the empty Summons of a just Authority, may be concluded
guilty, without a farther Deposition.

Definitive Surprises are such, which were not formed formerly in the
Intention, but on a present Injury resented, persueth such unequal Advantages,
either in Respect of Person, Armature, or Number, as are no way resistable. The
Trespass in Reference to the former, can legally attain no valuable
Distinction: insomuch as the irregular will can figure for pretense no motive
herein to pursue the Fact, but Malice, nor object thereof but simply Another
Destruction, our proper safety not in Competition. Nor has the assailed
Faculty to avoid the Issue of such Violence.

Relative surprises are such, wherein the Trespasser, through Negligence or
Presumption, obliquely only is concerned, as having under his Tuition, Guard,
or Custody, the Subject, Beast, or Person, through distemper prone to act a
Violence. This manner of wilful Violence Moses reflected on, though possibly
not in so large extent, as totally might concern the Nature of such Accidents:
Yet sufficiently to lend a perfect Rule to form an Ordinance unto the equal
Prosecution of any in this Nature unexprest. If an Ox shall gore a man that he
dye, the owner or keeper thereof being formerly advertised of such a
disposition in the Beast, the Penalty of the Trespass shall be the forfeiture
of his Life: but so, That for a certain sum of Money, as a Fine, his Life shall
be redeemable. The ground hereof is evident, being in regard the owner had
capacity to have restrained them from such an Execution. To which, common
humanity ought to have been a competent Injunction. Forewarned of the Danger of
the Accident; but being altogether careless of the common safety, such Neglect
or Presumption, might really be suspected to have had a reserved Object of some
secret malice; to which in right, his life could only satisfy; yet in respect
such Beast or Person, possibly, might escape from the Endeavors of the wariest
Guard, a fine might justly balance such incircumspection.

The Reference of an intentional Instigation to a violence, might orderly seem
reduced under this Distinction: but since such Procedure falls under common
Notion of a Principle, we should too far swerve from the positive Rule of
Right, to lend them here but a Relation to the Fact, another executes by their
direction: the nature whereof more properly is comprised under Distinction of
the Essential.

3. The Place wherein a wilful Violence becomes acted may also seem to qualify
the Nature of the Trespass, with Distinction to aggravate or lessen the
exorbitance: In Reference whereto we will reflect on these Particulars, The
Temple, The Princes Residence, or Court of Judicature, each Man's Peculiar
Habitation. Porreign Jurisdiction.

The Temple has in former Ages been held in so high Reverence among diverse
Sects and Nations, that the Civil Jurisdiction has sometime cast restraint on
her own Ministry, in persuit of Delinquents, taking their Sanctuary within the
Limits of the sacred circumscription. If this high Privilege were thereto
constituted on an authentic Ground, how considerable a Motive will it be to
induce the Civil Ministry severely to endeavor to secure this place from
private out rages. A Violence there seems more immediately perpetrated in the
presence of that high Judge, who soly to himself reserveth Vindication, and
consequently denotes a great Insolence in Contempt of his Ordinance. The high
resentment whereof he seems himself implicitly to infer in his terrible Threats
against the rebellious Jews deducing the vast Latitude of their Crimes should
meet his Vengeance From the Blood of Zachariah, who was slain between the
Temple-Porch and the Altar. Farthermore, this Place, erected more peculiarly to
perfect and confirm our common union. Such Procedure there practiced seems to
strike at the very Nature of the Institution.

Private Divisions breaking into Actions of Hostility within the Princes
Residence or Court of Judicature, highly exalt the Nature of Commotions: For
that in such Timerity, the Agents seem totally to cast off the Imposition of
the Civil Jurisdiction, violating so presumptuously the Ordinances thereof,
under the immediate notion of her Ministers, which properly might seem to
figure an open Insurrection against the Civil Power.

Acts of Violence perpetrated within the Limits of our proper and peculiar
Habitation, reach also a Distinction, may properly extend the Nature of the
Fact; each man possessing an Oeconomical Jurisdiction within the precincts of
his domestic Residence, so absolute, as in some cases, the Civil Power seems
there to limit her just Procedure, allowing him it the privilege of a
Sanctuary.

Whither Private Acts of Hostility perpetrated under a Foreign Jurisdiction,
may justly be subordinate to the Censure of our native Laws, or any other forth
the Jurisdiction, wherein they were committed, is, in practice, negatively
concluded: Yet in Reason, may affirmatively be asserted under this Distinction.
If the effects of the Contention do reach no higher Nature then a Civil
Trespass; the Civil Jurisdiction, wherein It was in Act, is soly therein
interessed. But if the Consequence thereof extend unto a higher Nature, as to
infringe the Law of God, Nature, or Nations, the guilt can equitably not be
dispensed with by any other exterior Jurisdiction, constituted under the
Conformity of such Ordinance, if legally therein prosecuted, In that although
the Jurisdictions are distinguished in Power, yet have they but one Object in
their Rule, in reference to the Trespass; in which respect mankind may
properly be said to form but one Society.

Farthermore, the Issue of the ^act extending only to a Civil Trespass may
sometime possibly concern the Dignity of a Jurisdiction, wherein It was not
executed; if primitively the Debate had there original and Intentionally
transacted forth the Bounds thereof, but to avoid the rigor of the Law.
Abusive evasions from the Intention of the Law, equitably meriting the penalty
of a Breach.

4. The more essential consequence of a wilful Violence, whereat the Law most
viseth to direct her Censure, is the Degree or Measure of the effect,
accompanies the Fact: insomuch as the clearest Circumstance whatever is
capable to yield but an obscure evidence of the intention, which really if
perceptabl^ might properly perhaps qualify the Nature of the Trespass. As also
in That, This always answers not the Damage of the Injured, whose reparation
is the Principal, if not the sole Object of Justice. As for the premised
Collaterals considerable in perpensation of the Fact, Subject, Manner, Place,
(simply, or jointly taken) they reach no higher consequence then a Trespass,
wherein the Civil Jurisdiction seems principally concerned, which in it self
endued with a Faculty to dispense a Grace (without the prejudice of the
injured) may plausibly suspend Reflection from her proper Interests, to weigh
the satisfaction of particulars; whose injury must questionless, fall under
Latitude of these Distinctions. A Forcible Interruption. A Simple Verberation,
or A Real Vulneration.

1. A Forcible Interruption, Restraint, or Attachment, although it possibly may
sometime meet with so important an occasion as really may prejudice the
Sufferer in his Civil purpose: yet does the Civil Jurisdiction, in the Nature
of the Trespass, seem more especially concerned, whose sole and proper Object
is the Preservation of the Public Peace, which totally herein seems violated.
The Penalty therefore (not without reparation to the injured) depends more
materially on the Public Satisfaction: yet in that such Attempts may sometimes
meet with other Circumstance, in Subject, Place, or Manner, as possibly may
extend the Nature of the outrage to a Criminel Consequence. The censure
thereof sometime properly may be regulated not only by the Event, but by a more
especial Reference to our former Distinctions, which also may be practiced as a
Collateral Rule in the Conjunction af all Degrees of Accidents in this Nature.

A simple Verberation may intimate a Blow, stripe, or Percussion, with, or
against any thing, so slight, as visibly not to produce a real prejudice to the
Sufferer, wherein the Trespass seems to put on more Appearance of Indignity,
then Damage; and might perhaps be plausibly repaired in a due submission, were
not so favorable an imposition too slight an Opposition to the restraint of
such Commotions. And peradventure too forcible an Inducement to instigate the
injured to prosecute a higher Satisfaction of his own Election to the Public
Prejudice. In which Respect, as also, that few men think their Honor
sufficiently repaired, unless their Estates may therewith be improved, nor his
Adversary in fame impeacht, unless impoverished. A more Essential and sensible
Reparation may equitably be imposed on the Trespasser.

A Real Vulneration, or wound, is according to the Distinction of Naturalists,
Solutio unitatis, The solution of Parts; whether it be by Suffusion, or
Effusion of Blood, by Bruise, or Scision: which Accident may sufficiently (for
the use of our Subject, as the Object of Justice) be limited in these
Distinctions, Sine Laesione, cum Laesione, and cum destructione facultatis
naturalis, Without Prejudice, with Prejudice, or with Destruction to the
Natural Faculty

A Wound inflicted without prejudice to the Natural Faculty, bears no other
Inconvenience then the present Grievance, charge of the Cure, or obstacle to
the intercourse of Civil Negotiation. The two latter Objects of Reparation may
fall under a distinguishable Dimension, The first obscurely is conceptable to
another sense: Nor truly in the Nature valuable, since the agreeable fruition
of the natural Faculties, may justly be esteemed the most visible Felicity.

A Wound with limited Prejudice to the Natural Faculty may reach a vaster
Latitude of Distinction in the Degrees thereof, then clearly is determinable;
which, nevertheless may usefully be reduced unto these ensuing, Either it
perpetually disableth an Instrumental Member totally or in Part, or else a
Principal only in Part: totally, it cannot without subversion of the whole. Yet
lenta Tabe, with a lingering Consumption. It possibly may advance our end. To
regulate the Reparation thereof to the Offense (besides the former Objects) not
only the Dignity and Use of the Member so impaired, is exactly to be balanced.
But also the Propriety and Consequence thereof unto the Civil Function of the
maimed, forming from thence the perfect Measure of a satisfaction, as may his
Livelihood, and his Families thereon depend; which though fully responsive to
Both; yet the continual discomfort that eclipseth the Delight which should
accompany the natural use thereof, is scarce repairable.

A Wound whose Nature or Consequence extends immediately to the Extinction of
the Natural Faculty, without a Lenitive Circumstance to moderate the Disorder
of the Fact (according to the Tenure of most Laws in use) exacts for Reparation
an equal Infliction; yet the Nature of the Penalty herein seems soly formed
Satisfactory to the Civil Jurisdiction: which in the loss of a Subject may
always not therein be totally concerned; since possibly the Trespass may not
only deprive a Family of a Member, but of their sole Existence naturally,
wholly and immediately thereon depending.

XXIX. Of Sickness.
WHither this Infirmity be the successive Issue of our first Fathers
Transgression, or the inevitable Condition inherent to our frail Composure, we
will remit to the Debate of Theologians, and of Naturalists. The Object of
whose speculation more properly the Proposition is, it only will be requisite
to Civil use, so far to search into the Nature of this Subject, as may disclose
the Impediments, may thence ensue unto the forming of a perfect Constitution in
a Politic Frame, and the directest means to avoid those fatal Consequences.
The Strength and Riches of a Nation most visibly depending on their useful
numbers, and their useful Ability, so much as this common Calamity is
prejudicial thereunto in either, so much It detracteth from the establishment
of a common welfare: and though it cannot be denied, but that the Members of a
Civil Body (without such Qualification) in Quantity exceeding, may possibly be
a Burden to it self: yet have we not lent such Attribute to the Distinction, as
if the sole Propriety thereof could any way consist in Reference only to
Proportion: But to Quality, wherein if we can form the Parts thereof but
useful. The Quantity thereof will rarely meet excess. Nor can the deborcing
Multitudes of Goths, Huns, or Vandals (which in declining of the Roman Empire
so frequently over spread the Jurisdiction thereof in an Hostile manner) be
accounted an erruption of the useful, but of the vacant and superfluous people,
which needs no farther Argument for Confirmation then their sudden Exit. When
David collected an estimate of the People, they were, according to the measure
of their Limits, the most numerous and flourishing Nation ever was, when in his
successo^s Time, That his Accumulations had their Issue (Silver was said to be
as the Stones of the Street.) And although this may probably be imputed an
effect of his so frequent Victories: yet when we shall impartially reflect upon
the real Acquisition of successful Arms, we shall conclude, that such
Investures seldom are equivolent to their Charge. Nor was there a Defect of
other Visible means to the supply thereof in Civil Commerce, which proves their
Wealth was rather the Production of the mutual Industry of the Society,

So necessary a consequent to the Establishment of a flourishing State, It
always has been held to annex Ability to their Multitude, that this
Consideration only formerly has produced a use, in Lacedaemonians.
Commonwealths less Civilized then strict, To extinguish weakly and Imperfect
Infants in their Issue, which Inhumanity, although improperly provided in
Persuit even of their Politic Purpose, since there are diverse Ministries in a
Civil Texture, whose Perfections not always follow the Exterior vigor of the
Nerves: yet insomuch as both the vital and the Animal Faculties are educ't into
perfect Action by the communicative Virtue of the exact Temperature of the
Natural Constitution. The Breaches or Infirmities Herein either Native or
Accidental, chiefly should be visited to be reduced to such Conformity, as
might most properly and happily conduce to the exact managing of every Ministry
in a Civil Union.

To form an Institution truly regular to our purposed Objects, It will be
requisite the Civil Jurisdiction regulate these Collaterals. The Phisical
Practice, Habitable Scituations. Alimentary Provisions, Contagion, Excess. The
exact dispensation of Physic has formerly been est^^med so material a
consequent to the Civil welfare that diverse of the Arabian Princes have been
exercised in the Practice, as frequently and vigilantly as in the Civil
Ministry. And in diverse Commonwealths at present, where such a Procedure is not
in use, the Princes Care and Cost are still assistant to so material a
Provision: not only in erecting Hospitals to the due support of the Indigent,
but also in the furnishing of vast Dispensitories at their proper charge for
public Benefit: from whence we may collect, that to rectify the Physical
Practice exactly to the Civil use, we must pursue two Principles, the Medicinal
Prescription, and the due forming of the same. Which Functions although
properly inherent to one Ministry, yet since the vast speculation of the Art
and frequent attendance of the Artist, have perhaps usefully divided them. The
Civil Jurisdiction may distinctly supervise their Practices. In Reference to
the First, strictly inhibiting that none but of approved knowledge and
experience, Integrity and Vigilance presume to advise a Medicinal Prescription:
insomuch, as though the Nature of the Disease be simple and evident to every
common sense. The Remedy also thereto known, and generally approved: Yet in
Respect of many other Circumstances materially considerable to the useful
Ministry (as Age, Sex, Constitution, Custom of the Patient, Temperature of the
Climate, and Season, Time of the Disease, etc.) None but the Master of the
Faculty (who only can distinguish their Proprieties) should equitably be
allowed to dispense those Remedies, since failing in the slightest Caution, may
possibly be product an error, equal to a Criminel Trespass: A proof whereof may
here be instanced from Galens Observation and Practice, when in the untimely
use of Theriaque by an unadvised Physician, a simple Galen de praecog 1. 23.
Quartern was as he foretold exalted to a Trebble, while he removed all by the
right use of the same Medicine. Much greater hazard must the Practice run in
an unconsulted Ministry, when the Nature of the Disease is Compound, Differing,
or Obscure, and the Propriety of the Medicine doubtful to the Director.

That knowledge should be annexed to experience in the Endowment of a natural
Minister, is so evident a necessity to the useful Issue of his Ministry, we
shall not need to insist on any Argument to confirm the Notion. Experience
without Knowledge being but a blind, emperical, and uncertain Guide: and
Knowledge without Experience, but an unwarrantable Speculation. That Integrity
should also mere with Vigilance in the Qualification of this Minister, to
render This his Practice truly profitable, is as visible and irresutable a
Conclusion, as the former; this being without that illusive, That without This
ineffectual.

2. As the Nature of our first Caution in Reference to the Natural Minister
required a nice Election; so the Nature of the Second, In what is administered
exacts a strict circumspection. Gain, the common Adulterer to all Arts has
here too licentious a Theater to practice her Imposturies, the traces thereof
being even to the most knowing scarce distinguishable: and rather may be
suspected in the Effects, when as the hazard is incurred, then timely found,
but to prevent the Issue. In persuance whereof, since none can probably be
endu'd with like capacity to the distinction of the Nature and propriety of
Ingredients (on which depends chiefly their Adultery) as has the Master of
the Art: As also that his credit and advantage follows the success of his
Prescription. He seems in right most properly designed, and engaged to preside
the Visitation. Yet in respect such Institution may sometime cast a Jealousy
on the Integrity of the Procedure; in that their mutual Interests may often
seem to hold too nigh Relation. We may to Him unite the Civil Minister in the
Commission, who should be both sollicitous and frequent in their search, and on
discovery of Adulterate or defective Drugs, to impose a rigorous Penalty. And
least the Indigent should want those Aids to their support, (whose natural
Defects meet frequently herein a Civil Damage) their livelihood depending soly
on their Industry; it would be requisite, common Infirmaries were erected at
the public charge for their peculiar Benefit.

2. Habitable Scituations, either of Cities, Towns, Boroughs, or Houses,
oftentimes erected are with disadvantage to the Natural welfare of the
Inhabitants, either in their vicinity to Vaults, or standing Waters, from
whence issuing, or ascending noxious Vapors, or Exhalations, the Air (that of
necessity must yield nourishment to the Vital Spirits) becoming tainted, must
insensibly and inevitably subvert the Natural Temper. The effects whereof are
evidently distinguished in the Endemial or Vernal Recursions constantly of one
and the same Malady: Which inconvenience seldom is avoided, but in the oblick
Version or remote Transposition of the Structure.

3. Alimentary Provisions in their improper Assimulation too frequently prove
prejudicial to the natural Welfare of the Civil Frame; which noxious. Qualities
they either originally contract from The nature of the Soil, Accidental or
Artificial Mixtures, or from their own proper Corruption.

Original Attractions may evidently he discovered to us in our Waters, which
running through diverse Vains of Earth, or Minerals, e're to our vieu they make
eruption, do oftentimes communicate in their use those hetrogene Infusions; so
likewise Vegetives, attracting still their nourishment from the Soil,
communicate in their Distributions, the Qualities thereof too frequently
repugrant to our Nature.

Accidental Mixtures may be inferred in the usual concrescence of Grain of
several Natures (as Cockle with Wheat) whose Qualities often noxious to our
Nature; not diligently divided, induce sundry Indispositions to the Natural
Temper.

Artificial Mixtures may visibly be distinguished in the several Adulterations
of our Wines: then which nothing can be more prejudicial unto humane Nature:
Nor nothing in our Nation more generally and frequently in Practice: which
abuse in like manner also, may through Avarice or Malice possibly extend It
self to many other common Alimens. The proper Corruption of our Nutritive
Provisions follow most commonly the immature, or the unseasonable collection of
the Fruits of the Earth, or the too long suspension from their use. So Corn
becomes Musty, Fruits moldy, Flesh tainted: The several use whereof, so
qualified, produces often not only private Indispositions in our humane Nature,
but general and Epidemical Mortalities.

Having distinguished the Nature of these Impediments to our common welfare, we
should thereto pursue a Remedy which, meeting in each particular several
Objects (the Original Corruption to be avoided, the Accidental rectified. The
Artificial and proper prevented. We will reduce them to the vigilance of a
public superuisor constituted only to that use, by the Authority of the Civil
Power.

4. Without impertinent wresting the Etymology of words to distinguish the
Nature of things thereby inferred. Since such Notes are often by the vulger
improperly applied, we briefly may affirm Contagion (in Reference to our
Subject) to be a preternatural affect communicative in the nature thereof to
every individual under the same kind. How destructive the Effects hereof are
to the Civil welfare, we clearly may collect from the sudden and deplorable
Depopulation of many Cities, Provinces, and Nations, who either have hereby
become a prey unto their Enemies: or in the Revolution of many years not
perfectly restored to their former Luster. Of this Nature of Infirmity there
are two kinds, Native and Adventitious.

Adventitious is that; which is communicated by Society or Vicinity of Person,
or Subject Infected: It sometime also happens more remotely in Affinities of
Blood, by secret sympathizing of their Constitutions.

Native is that, which is originally attracted in our Generation immediately
from the Infirmity of our Parents.

Adventitious meets prevention in the Civil Faculty either by Restraint of
Commerce and Community; or by a public Institution of Artificial Remedies.

Restraint of Commerce; with all infected Places (how remotely distant soever)
is evidently necessary to the Preservation of the Civil Frame from this
Calamity: insomuch, as there are few Materials vendible, in which the Infection
may not possibly be transferred to another Nation, after a long cessation of
the Effects.

That Restraint of Community should be necessary to the Interception of this
common Misery, appears evidently in the Contents of Gods sacred Ordinance,
Which does enjoin the sequestration of the clean from the unclean. As also in
the miserable Consequences, where through a presumptuous Opinion of Fatal
Necessity, such order is neglected.

The Nature of this Restraint extends to two Distinctions, either Exclusive, or
Inclusive.

Exclusive Restraint has for Object only such Persons as resort from all
infected places, who usually are secluded forty days from a Society in common
Receptacles for salutary proof.

In inclusive Restraint, concerns only the Inhabitants of a place
intrinsically infected, when the Contagion has attained that height,
extrinsical Removals are Impossible, or improfitable. The Civil Jurisdiction
then confining the infected, (with the Domestics) to the prescribed Limits of
the Family, under exterior Guards, who Minister at distance to their
Necessities, till the designed term of their confirmed Purging be expired.

Artificial Remedies within capacity of the Civil Ministry, are either,
Preservative, Curative, or Purgative.

Preservative are such, as honored Hipocrates, Who foreseeing the Infectious
Vapors encroaching on the Confines of his Native Soil, advised the Civil
Ministry to cause the Etolian Forests to be set on Fire; whereby the Air being
purified, the fury of the Pestilence was from them diverred. Under this
Distinction may also be comprised medicinal Fumes, Odors, Antidotes, enjoined
by the Civil Ministry, according to the Physical Prescription.

Curative Remedies are such Medicines, as by the general Consultation of the
Natural Ministry are composed to the public use, and by a Civil Injunction
formed at the public Charge, to be reserved in public Dispensitories, and
from thence issued, as need requires for the common Benefit.

Purgative Remedies have a more peculiar Reference to the Circumspection of the
Civil Ministry, although the Advice of the natural not totally therein is to be
excluded, which tends only to the purging of the Habitations, Utensils,
Vestures of Infected Persons, either by Air, Fire, Water, Fumes, pollishing or
demollishing; insomuch, as the Infection undistinguisht may remain concealed,
not only past the term of Civil Circumscription; but after the elapse of many
years sometime break forth into a new eruption to the public prejudice.

Many Indispositions or Aptitudes to several Maladies may be transferred by the
Infirmities of Parents in our Generation, which properly fall not under the
Distinction of Contagion, since they may follow possibly the imbecility of
those parts to which they are coincident, as the Gout, Stone, Ptisick, Small
Pox, etc. Whereof to agitate, we will not here insist, the Nature thereof being
a Subject more peculiarly inherent to to the improvement of the natural union;
of which we shall pursue to treat in our ensuing order: yet are there other
Diseases contracted in our Generation, may pertinently fall under this
Distinction, as Lues Venerea, Morbus Elephantiasis. The veneran Pox and
Leprosy. To the prevention of the latter, we may remit our Civil Ministry to
the Direction of the sacred Ordinance. But to avoid the Former, the surest Rule
will be the extirpation thereof by a penal Prescript.

Sensual Excess, as prejudicial to the Natural welfare of the Civil Frame, may
be reduced to these Distinctions, Gluttony, Drunkenness, Luxury: Yet in Respect
there are many Degrees of excess, may possibly impair the natural Faculty, that
reach not to the note of their Dimensions. It would be requisite to our common
Preservation to lend to this extravagance a more visible prescription; which
meeting several Measures according to the Age, Constitution, manner of Life and
Cl^mate, will yet in the persuit thereof enforce us to contract them to one
general Notion to regulate the rest, Cum gravata vel oppressa sit Natura. When
Nature is burdened or oppressed. In Reference to which Rule, although the Nature
of Gluttony may easily be discovered: yet since many regular Ministries to
Nature may accidentally agree in the Distinction of this Rule, which properly
cannot be qualified with Affinity to such Attribute: We therefore must thereto
insert a sensual Motive, not such as often is produced by some preternatural
Affection, as Caninus Apetitus. Pica or the like; but such as soly follow the
inordinate Motion of the will; not only in the superfluous Ministry to Nature;
but in the untimely solicitation of her Faculty; the Effects whereof become
destructive to her Order, either in the insensible debillitating or visible
Extinction of the innate heat, according to the irregular Measure of the
Ministry, and vigor of the Natural Faculty.

Drunkenness may also in the same Distinctions agree with the prefigured
Disorder, only in Respect of the Object, they meet some Difference in their
Operations, that may be said to smother or to choke the natural Heat, with the
superfluous burden of her Aliment: This, with the Adventitious Heat, (inherent
to her Object) to educe and attract the innate Heat out of her radical
Position, That frequently but by Degrees; This suddenly and totally disableth
from a due capacity of Civil Practice: And though the Effect may sometime meet
an Intermission; yet since the Re-accesses hereof are uncertain, such temporary
Incapacity may properly, in Reference unto Civil Rights, be admitted to a
general Insufficiency.

Luxury also in the prescription to her Nature, may hold an equal Parallel with
the Best; yet in respect of differing Objects whereby they are educed into Act.
This inordinance by different ways reaches the destruction likewise of the
Natural Frame. In the frequent Effusion and Elation of the Spirits, which are
the perfectest Productions of the innate Heat, whereby the soul can only
exercise her Faculties: nor yet can these extremes be limited within the Title
soly of a Natural Trespass (in which perhaps each one (in right of his own
Interest) might challenge to himself a right of Dispensation: since such
profuseness tends not only to the disabling or Destruction of the Practisers,
but to the useless dissipation of the common store; as also the disabling of
their Issue to the public use, not only in the natural Defects of the Body,
but in the vicious Inclinations of the mind, infused in their Generation: and
in such powerful Examples habitually fomented and confirmed in their Education.

In which Respect our Civil Minister should lend more strict and vigilant
Circumspection to the suppression of such unnatural Inordinacies, instituting
thereto a moral supervisor (in nature of the Roman Censor) endued with capacity
to impose just Penalties on such Disorders, either by public Infamy, Civil
Incapacity, Fine, or Personal Infliction, equivolent to the Degree and
Frequency of the Extravagance.

XXX. Of Indigence.
NO Moral Argument can more evidently confirm the fall of Man from the first
Purity of his Nature, then This his acquired Misery; it being a Reproach to our
Creator to figure an Insufficiency in his handmaids Ministry: And although
Nature (suffering under the sentence of Man's Original Transgression) may seem
declined from the Perfection of her primitive Institution, in the Retraction of
his Grace, had formerly lent more Influence unto the support of her Order; yet
did such Affluence tend rather to the enlargement of his Felicity, then the
necessity of his existence, whose being had rather then for Object his
Speculation then his Action; but having in the unhappy exchange of his
Function, forfeited the Excellency of his Condition, the measure of Her
Fertility became proportioned only to That use, not to the Ministry of his
Licentiousness; which wild Revolt from her Prescription, in appearance, might
detract from Her Benignity, but not exhaust her Treasury; whose sources, when
restrained, are unfluc't, either in submission to the Penalty of the Trespass,
To live by the sweat of his Br^ws: whence was concluded, the Industrious should
be filled with Plenty: or in the tender of His Gratitude, in a helpful
Dispensation, whence is asserted, The means of Preservation in the Day of his
Necessity. And although the Latter conclusion may seem to extend beyond the
Limits of a Civil Position, to which we in Propriety to our Subject only should
adhere: yet since the Exposition of the Institutor has also It reduced to a
Civil Notion, under the figure of a Prudent Steward. We shall form no
impertinent Digression to incline to the explicit sense thereof in Regulating
our Civil Opposition to this Calamity, in respect a mutual and coadjutive
Ministry immediately is necessary to the due support of the Civil Faculty.

From the general Result of our Argument, may visibly be collected three
distinct Principles necessary in Practice against the Approaches of this
Misery, Industry, Providence, Charity; which pursue also three distinct Objects
to attain the perfect use to which they were directed. Industry acquireth,
Providence reserveth, Charity dispenceth: On which three columns, we will erect
the Fabric of our Civil Magazine. To appropriate which exactly to the use, we
will reflect on the extent thereof, which may be limited in this Distinction,
Public, or Private.

The Public use has for Object common necessity; the Nature whereof, although
perhaps extended to many particulars, in Reference to our livelihood; yet
pertinently may be reduced unto the Intimation of one common subject, under the
Distinction of Grain; which soly being sufficient to the support of our natural
Life, all other Aliments seem therein properly included. This common Calamity
(in the Defect thereof) most frequently is induced by the stubborn persuit of
our Original Corruption, Which causes the Earth to be as Iron, and the Heavens
as Brass. Such was Jewries misery under Elisha 's Prophetic Ministry, such
Egypts, under Joseph 's Delivery. And though the efficient cause of this
Disaster may seem to be of a far higher Nature, then yet a Civil Faculty could
e're pretend to reach at the Removal in a timely Remedy: yet since Divine
Providence has so far favored humane Prudence, as to avoid the fury of the
Issue, we plausibly may follow the example of such Practices, which though
often grounded on a supernatural Provoyance, yet have they in their Civil Order
left an useful Prescription. The Method of Joseph's Ministry under Pharaoh's
Trust, was to erect vast Granaries in every part, successively accumulated from
the superfluous Affluence of the common Plenty. In prosecution of the order of
this Rule may probably be objected, that he had happier Aids to lend success to
his Intention, then humane Wisdom always is assured of, A remote Prevoyance,
and a Successive Plenty.

In Reference to the First capacity may be replied, we want no
pre-advertisement to That which always may, and frequently does happen, in one
Degree or other.

In Relation to the latter may be inferrr'd, the Faculty of Nature does rarely
want such supreme measure of Celestial Influence to educe a fertility; where
Industry has in her formed a perfect Disposition by a proper Culture.

To the useful Dispensation of the common store, we only will insert this
Caution, That It be Seasonable, Orderly, Proportionable; not Chargeable, or
Burdensome, the perfect'st Attributes of a Benefit.

Seasonable, Before the exigent has impaired the Faculty of Nature, either in
defect of Aliment, or in impulsive Refuge to improper sustenance.

Orderly, Commencing the supply either in Reference to place or Person, where
there is greatest urgency.

Proportionable, This Qualification of our Subject has in the propriety of use
a reciprocal Object. The true Dimension of the Distribution issuing from an
equal collation of the common Faculty to the common Necessity, be It
distinguished either in Reference to the number or Disability of the Family.

Not Chargeable or Burdensome, else were exchanged, but not removed the Misery,
reversing totally the Nature of the Institution, which had for Object soly
mutual Relief of the Society, no Civil Commerce for abject Lucre to enlarge a
Treasury.

Many other remote Degrees of this public Exigence may also be produced by
Avarice and Disorder.

Avarice thereto conduces either in an untimely Restraint of private Store, or
in a secret and unseasonable Alienation thereof by exportive commerce, or in
perverting the use of the Soil; to avoid which Inconveniences, the Civil
Ministry might constitute an Inhibition, that no private Economy whatever
should, under Penalty, presume to extend the total Issue of their annual Store,
beyond the Revolution of a double Crop: From whence deducted an equal
Proportion to their private use for such a season; the Residue to be tendered
at the public Mart in such equal proportions as might extend unto the term so
limited; and such a Quantity as there remained unvended, the Substitute to the
Civil Ministry might take off only at a subvalid Rate, wherewith the common
Receipts should incessantly be replenished for the Public use: To which
limited Prescription of Time and Portion should also be confined the Buyer as
well as the Seller: And for a Regulation to their Commerce, whose Function
might alone thereon depend, to limit their Proportions within capacity of their
Returns.

Exportive Commerce of this Commodity (except on special License from the Civil
Ministry) might totally be interdcted.

The perversion of the Soil has almost every where found so general a Practice
in persuit of Improvement by enclosure, that it may probably be apprehended,
without a due and timely Restraint to such Liberty, the Civil Frame will
suddenly fall under Prejudice of the Tolleration, either in an incompetent
Proportion of our Tillage to the common use, Improverishing the Labourer, or
depopulating our Villages; which usage possibly might meet a proper Regulation,
if Imposition might be laid on every Town to lay forth such a quantity of
Arrable, as might sustain the Inhabitants thereof against all Casualty.

Disorder also frequently may prove an Introduction to common Scarcity; which
following usually the insolence of Licentious Armies, the Civil Ministry only
can remit the regulation thereof to the vigilance of the Military, if over It
remain there to such Influence.

2. The Private use exacts for Object only a peculiar Indigence, which usually
is induc't by these particulars, Vacancy, Impotence, Casual or Unjust Damage.
Vacancy may usefully be enlightened with this Distinction, Voluntary, or
Impulsive.

Voluntary Vacancy meeting this misery, as a just Penalty, might seem but too
indulgently treated by the Civil Ministry, to be but only visited for Relief,
were not the public welfare inherently therein concerned, either in the loss
of a useful and communicative Faculty, or in the sufferance of a useless and
prejudicial Burden; to avoid the Damage or Encumbrance of such superfluous
Mixtures; The Civil Ministry can only safely imitate the Practice of the
Physical; Aut corrigendo, aut ejiciendo, Either in Correcting or Ejecting.

The perfect'st method of Correction is that, most probably may reduce them to
a just Devoir, which properly may be proved in the due Imposition of a penal
Task, if which proceeding not attain the intention of the Institution, such
incorrigible Incapacity may equitably deserve an infamous Ejection from our
Civil Union in a prescribed Exile.

Impulsive Vacancy encountering Indigence, merits a more debonair Redress, and
nicer Circumspection from the Civil Ministry, to educe obstructed Inclination
into useful Action; not only in Compassion to an undeserved Distress, but also
in respect their suffering may be adjudg'd a dangerous symptom of the Failing
Faculties of the Civil Union: The intercourse whereof can as seldom suffer
Intermission or Cessation, as the Natural, without the hazard of Destruction.

To form a Remedy to this suspension, it would be requisite, a public manage
were inherent to the Civil Frame (as David's Rural Oeconomies, or Solomon's Naval
Commerce) to which all the necessitous vacant might freely have recourse for
their Employment at a subvalid Rate, from whence they might have License to
retire, when they could find occasion better to improve their Industry, which
Institution happily might meet other Important uses to enlarge the welfare of
the Common Union, not pertinent to appropriate to our present Subject.

Impotence of Civil Faculty in Members of the Body Politic, can only reach to
these particulars, Infants, Aged, and the Infirm.

Infants abandoned to the Casualty of their Existence, may justly from the
Civil Ministry, claim the exactest tender of support, in that they are indu'd
with a potential Aptitude to make a Reparation of the Breaches, which the Civil
Body daily suffers in the Infirmity of Nature, rendering the Constitution
thereof in such successive Springs, an everlasting Existence; under what
Limitation of time we should denote this Civil Incapacity, can not more
properly be expressed, then in the Naturalists Definition of their order:
Forasmuch as after seven years term they are (according to the Practice of
diverse Commonwealths) capable of a Civil Introduction to attain their
Livelihood. In the interim the equal and less Burdensome Tuition of them, is
the Parochial Exhibition, where each particular becomes to his ability an
unsolicited Adjutor.

2. As the Civil Ministry should reflect on the Indegence of Infants, in
respect of what they may be; so on the necessity of the Aged, in reference to
what they have been; which yielding a more visible Proof, may direct us to a
more proportionable Distinction in the institution of their succor, some have
exhausted their proper store in the relief of others Miseries. Others in the
support of public Exigents: Some have spun out their years under the fruitless
Travel of a Public charge. Others sinck under the rigid persuit of their
private Function. And although the Civil Ministry may seem in Honor more
nighly engaged unto their support, who are become declined in their Faculties,
in Prosecution of the public Interests. Yet in Humanity is It not acquitted
from the care of their Protection, who therein fail, under what accident
soever; insomuch as Age is a common and irrepairable Deficience, inherent to
the frailty of our Nature, under what extent of time should properly be
distinguished this Civil Incapacity, is positively not determinable, both in
respect of the differing objects of a Civil Function, a^ also in regard of the
various Temperature of the natural Constitution, native or adventitious; so
that we only can conclude a man agedly deficient, according to the Civil
Prescription, when the natural Faculties (only through Age) are so declined
from their proper vigor, they can no longer usefully administer to a Civil
Practice; from whence should properly be deducted a support to this Infirmity,
may be discovered in the Nature of the Subject of their sterril Agitation,
which falling under a Public, or a Private Distinction, we may erect the
Institution of supply in due Conformity to the Relation of those Interests. If
the Public more peculiarly have received Advantage by their Industry. The
Dignity of the Civil Ministry is engaged, not to permit their Industry to pass
rewarded only in their precedent existence, both in respect their poverty may
be a mark of their Integrity, as also such neglect may probably prove a Motive
unto others, to prosecute the public Interests less assiduously and
faithfully: to which natural defect cannot be issued a more timely succor, and
with less charge unto the Commonwealth, then to admit a substitute to his
Office, under satisfaction only in future, to succeed to the employment: the
benefit thereof to be transacted soly to the use of the declined Officer.

If their endeavors were directed only to the Advancement of a private
Interest, those Relations (whither Natural or Civil) ought mutually to
contribute to their succor: but since no such voluntary conducement can be
expected from the degenerate Inclination of Blood, or Ingratitude of man so
generaly in Practice. The Civil Ministry ought not to suffer the Infringement
of such rights to pass without a Legal Penalty.

The Civil Incapacity employed by Infirmity, may properly extend the sense
thereof to every preternatural Affect, whereby the Body is disabled to the
Ministry of a Civil Function, whether it be Native or Adventitious, Temporary,
or Irrepairable: which deficience meeting with the Calamities co-incident to
Indigence, in Reason may require a speedier and more vigilant protection, then
the rest, The afflicted sinking under a double misery, propensive to exalt the
Evil of each others Nature. Whence hereto equitably should be derived a succor,
exacts a vast extent in the Distinction of the Accidents. If injurious, then is
the Civil Ministry charged to exact an equal Reparation from the Trespasser. If
under an Assiduous Subjection, and incident to the Function, then is the
interessed thereto soly engaged to the succor: If Naturally or Casually under a
Civil Relation, the Aid therein has Reference only to the term of such
Engagements. If under a voluntary succor of another, the assistance is
Reciprocal: If under none of these Distinctions fall the Accident, the Natural
Relations are engaged next to the support. If those are not endued with a
capacity thereto, their safeguard only rests in the public Succor.

Who are reduced into Indigence by a Casual Damage, be it Fire, Inundation,
Tempest, War, or the like public Calamity, more equitably may repair, for
their support, unto the Civil Ministry: Insomuch, as it only falls under the
Capacity and Devoyr thereof to avoid such Accidents by a timely Circumspection.
Nor can a more equal Redress thereto be instituted (since every one may therein
be concerned) then by a General Collection.

The unjustly Dammaged to this extremity may seem to afford a Subject more
properly inherent to the Decision of Civil Rights, then charitable Aids: Yet
insomuch as some have not Capacity timely to prosecute Legal Rights to the
Advantage of their Future Interests; either by reason of the Immaturity of
their Years, Defect of Natural Light; or strict subordinance to nigh Relations,
especially therein concerned. The Civil Ministry might impose the
Circumspection and Tuition of their Interests upon the next Relation of
Capacity to agitate therein, under the penalty of their support, whose Right
had failed in their Negligence. This may appear, at first Inspection, but an
inconsiderable Caution, to preserve the Members of a Civil Union from this
Calamity: Yet when we shall more seriously reflect on the numerous failing of
Successions, Breaches of Trust, and voluntary Reversions of Contracts of
Marriage (the chiefest Principles to the support of Families) through the
irregular Expense of careless Parentage, we rationally may conclude that this
Particular requires more Circumspection from the Civil Ministry (in respect of
the Multitudes therein concerned) then all the rest we have insisted on. Nor
can a more proper substitute be thereto instituted, then who may probably be
interessed in the Consequence: provided that the Civil Ministry be readily
assistant to their Remonstrances.

XXXI. The several Objects of the Law in Reference to the Improvement of the
Natural Union.
HAving discussed on the several Objects of the Civil Ministry, in reference to
the security of the Natural Union: In persuit of our Order, we next proceed to
treat on the Improvement of the Natural Union, which, in Relation to the Civil
use, extended unto several Objects, may properly fall under the Distinction of
these Principles, Generation and Education, whereon we will distinctly agitate.

XXXII. Of Generation.
WHither it be, that man bruitishly follows the sensual motive of his Nature in
Adulation only of the sense; or that the uncertainty of the Effect enduceth in
the Agent a neglect of the Act: Of all the Appendices to our existence, no one
is so remisly prosecuted (in Reference to the use) as is the Introduction to
our Being: which being the Radix, Ground, and Foundation of all Natural
Perfection, in Reason should exact the nicest Circumspection: And although the
Productions of Nature have higher and more secret Guides to form their
operations, then humane Wisdom can pretend to alter; yet since the matter,
whereon those hidden influences do operate, falls under Regulation frequently
of humane Faculty, by a judicious and preadvised Preparation, the Matter being
rendered more perfectly susceptable of their supreme Impressions; the Form
thereof will consequently become educed into more perfect Action. This is made
evident in sundry vegetives by daily Practice of our terrein Culture. And more
(to our Reproach) in our Assiduous Conjunction of those Animals, whose kinds
have a peculiar Reference to our abject Lucres, or Licentious Pleasures.
Perhaps a curious Artist also might hereto insert the speculative Prevoyance of
the order of the Celestial Lights, administer those predominant Influxes; to
the Advancement of our purposes in an exact Election: But since the Practice
probably may seem repugnant to the use and institution of those Superior
Ministers, attempting to direct their virtues, who do ours preside. We only
will adhere to our preposited Induction, which to the establishment of our
Position, will direct us to the Restraint of these Particulars from so material
an Operation. The Immature of Years, The Drunk, The Licentious Luxur, The
Infirm. The Immature in Years, In Respect that Nature being then busied about
the accomplishing of her Structure, imployes her vigor soly on the exact
forming of the Parts thereof, e're she proceed to propagate her kind for
Restoration of her Order; from which diverted in the Anticipation of her
Ministry, she leaves her edifice unperfected, and in the Inaptitude of
Materials thence deducted, educeth but a Frail and defective Constitution in
another. What Distinction of Time should regulate this Prescription, may
authentickly be collected from the Naturalists Agreement of the Confirmation of
her work. Aetate Consistente. In the Consistence of our Age; which Aristotle
Entitles, Aetas procreandi Divina: Yet since the Institution of Generation
confined to those years, may seem directed rather to the Perfection of the
work, then thereof simply to avoid but the deficiency. We may proportion the
Extent thereof more properly according to the Model of the Civil Order, which
much should err in the propriety of her Function, to admit a Member to the
privilege of being Master to a Family, e're it allow him a Capacity to the
Fruition of his Property. Whither it were necessary to the use, to include each
Sex in the Position of this Rule, may probably be disputable: Yet since it is a
work of Nature, we therein plausibly may be directed by the englightners of her
Mysteries, who generally affirming the nobler and more solid parts of our
Composure to receive the chief part of their principles from the Masculine, we
properly may incline to the exclusion of the Feminine from such Regulation.

The Drunk. In the Intimation of this Exception, we only do imply the present
State of this Disorder: not but perhaps Custom may therein probably attain to
such a Habit, as might be requisite to admit of an Intermissive, or a General
Exclusion. In Reference to our Position the Carthaginians formed this Caution,
Not to exceed in Wine that night designed for Procreation. In Respect the
excess hereof not only perturbs the Spirits, chiefly officiate to the
Operation. But nature also (surcharged with a superfluous Burden) contracting
all her vigor to regulate the Disorder, becomes not only then diverted, but
enfeebled to the exact Execution of her highest Ministry. Nor is it probable
but that the Genial substance suffers in the Distemper such an Alteration and
Intemperature as may deprive it of that Aptitude, should render It susceptable
of a perfect Form. But how the Civil Ministry should equitably exercise a
Faculty of Temporary Division, where It has constituted a continual Union, is
scarce distinguishable, unless it be by Imposing Penalty on the Civil Trespass,
Infamy on the Natural; wherein the Modesty of womanhood impeeched, might
possibly crown the Intention of the Institution with success.

3. To interdict Licentious Luxury: from the legitimate Privilege of Natures
needful Ministry, may seem a Procedure repugnant to the Civil Institution of
her useful Remedy; Yet in Respect such wild desires rarely do submit unto a
decent or regular Prescription: As also that the consequence attends on the
Pretense may probably subvert the natural end of such a Civil Privilege,
either in debilitating the Natural Faculty by too much effusion of the Spirits,
in an untimely frequency of the Act, or impairing the Natural Faculty by
contracted Infection from the Diversity of Objects; we properly may admit of
such an Inhibition (not only as a Natural Caution, but as a Civil Penalty)
since Nature in us covets to perpetuate our Existence in the successive
Propagation of our kind, nor is totally improbable, but that the Civil
Institution of divorce assumed an Establishment from the Reflection of our
equal Purposes.

4. That it should be requisite to an exact Production, to suspend or exclude
the Infirm in Natures Faculty from officiating to her Ministry, is so evident a
Position, as will rarely meet a Contradiction, in regard, Nature then soly is
intentive to repair the Breaches of her proper Continent, not to form her
Similitude in another, to which if then impulsively directed, she forced is to
assume her principles from an imperfect Abstract, whereby those depraved
Dispositions and Intemperatures become transferred on her purposed Pattern.

What kinds of Infirmity (under the Capacity of Civil Union) or what degrees
thereof should properly fall under Inhibition. Nature her self may prove the
best Informer, whose Motives seldom are irregular, if not suborned by
licentious Habits; Although perhaps sometimes left soly to her proper Conduct,
she therein may officiate to her own Infirmity; yet are the Effects thereof
perceptably preceeded or accompanied by other Symptoms preternatural, which
falling under the Capacity of other Cure, may equitably be dispensed to assume
that Course, might probably produce an equal Inconvenience in Another Being:
But how the Civil Ministry should be possessed with a Faculty to regulate this
Inordinance, where the Defects reach not a visible Incapacity, not clearly is
distinguishable, unless it be in the suppression of Licentiousness and Lux,
that frequently foment the untimely and Indecent Motions of the Sense, which so
become subordinate to Reasons Ministry, shall seldom want other Inducement to
regulate the will, then our own present Safety, and our own Issues future
welfare, endangered in a sensual and untimely Liberty.

Having attained the Natural Object proper to the Improvement of our Being,
exactly forming the Constitution of the Body in a regular Generation, it might
perhaps yet appear necessary to the due Prosecution of our Order here to pursue
the Improvement of the Animal, in Reference to our present Subject. But since
the Soul educed only is to perfect Action, by the just Figure, Contiguity, and
Temperature of her Organs, in positing the exact Composure of the Natural
Fabric, we have implicitly concluded of the potential Perfection of the Animal
Faculties.

XXXIII. Of Education.
NAture having never so exactly cast her Model, yet in our first Education
leaves the supple Matter Subject to the Alteration of every slight Impression:
so that the Circumspection of our Elevement is of far higher Consequence then
the Regulation of our Primitive Materials: Insomuch as in our Generation we
receive but a potential Aptitude, in our Education an actual Habit: And though
the Natural Inclinations rarely are effaceable, yet are the most irregular
sometimes ^mprovable, if undertaken in the Infancy by a vigilant skill: As also
the most consonant Impairable committed to an Imprudent Neglect; a visible
proof hereof, Licurgus the Lacedemonian Legislator published to the people in
the dissenting Inclinations of two Hounds extracted from one Litter. The same
Analogy in efficace, as our Culture holds with the Soil, the same our
Education, with our Generation. The dispositions of Nature, though never so
fertile, being but extravagant Propensities, if not directed to a useful
Ministry; nay, usually the most pregnant Faculties exact the most advised
Regulations, as well in the Animal, as the Natural Operation: which
Circumspection must be seasonable, while yet the plyant matter is susceptable
of any form, and the facile Spirit not servilly possessed with an insulting
Custom. As the Receptions are then most easy, so the Impressions are then most
Lasting. Quo semel est imbuta recens servabit odorem Testa diu. The Vessel
retains longest the odor of the first seasoning. Neither requires this only
an Oeconomical, but a Civil vigilance. So much was implicitly expressed in the
Spartans Reply, When their Adversaries demanded thirty of their Children for
Hostages, refusing to yield up their youth, they proferr'd to engage a double
Number in virility.

Under what general Principles our present Subject should be distinguished, or
how persu'd, we farther will examine; such Notions first preposited, may form
our rude and passive Nature, perfectly susceptable of so exact an Institution.
In Reference to which order, our frail Composure being constituted of differing
Materials, the Civil Ministry must in the Regulation thereof vise at distinct
Objects to educe the individual into useful Action, Cheerful Vigilance, and
Infatigable Travel, in Relation to the Body. Moral Civility, and National
Affection in Reference to the mind.

Vigilance, In regard such Habit endueth us with Capacity to anticipate all
Occasions, may conduce unto our Purposes, extends the term of Life lost in a
sluggish Stupidity, and lends more Facility to the Prosecution of an
enterprise: Nor is this season of purility only material to this Regulation, as
most susceptable to the Induction of any Form; but as most incident and
propensive to yield the Indulgences of floth, most frequently then accompanying
the over humid Temperature of the Brain. Which exercise we have qualified with
Cheerfulness, lest the severity of such a Caution should become to yet unactive
Spirits a disagreeing Burden, so render them less useful, fettered with such
Anxiety: On which Consideration, was perhaps grounded the Prudence of those
Parents, who have been so exactly regular in Education of their Children, to
have their Spirits, (with the new born day) summoned softly from their
flattering slumbers by the enticing notes of Harmony.

2. Travel, Insomuch as by assiduous Exercise, the Body by degrees becomes both
strengthened and inured to encounter Actively or Passively, all Oppositions
peculiar to our Functions, or accidental to our Fortunes. The constitution of
our Body becomes hereby improved, and our Health secured, The Spirits hereby
also will become more pure and vigorous to the Exercise of the mind, To which
Practice we have annexed this Coherent, that our labors be not so remisly
prosecuted, as they might suddenly become rebutable, but that they might
incessantly extend unto the time prefixed to the use, without Encumbrance to
the undertaker, either by entertaining the mind with variety of Objects, or
with the Recompense and Glory of the Issue.

3. Moral Civility, This Qualification extends It self to many excellent uses,
perhaps beyond the full Prescription of our present Observation, or the just
Capacity of our Treatise. First it lays an exact Foundation for Civil Rule to
erect her Fabric on, forming the mind to a gentle and submissive Obedience;
whereon was constituted the Spartan Glory. It lends a ready Capacity to every
knowledge, in a plausible Docility. It disposes the mind to a timely and
officious succor, in a resenting Humanity. It appeases the fury of an
Adversary, and wins our Inclination e're we consult our will. It is the very
band of common Union, and the establisher of Peace. Reproof invested with this
Ornament, is an effectual Balm, and the most strict subjection still agreeable:
Nor yet becomes the Influence of this Virtue limited within the Notions of her
proper Nature, but polisheth the mind to the more apt Reception of holy
Mysteries. Our Savage Nature (of necessity) must first assume a meaner
speculation, e're it can be endued with Capacity to ascend unto so high a
Lumination. Humility and Concord are the most proper Figures of a Civil
Conversation, and without question the first and utmost step to Divine
Institution. Nor can the sullen rigid Forms of a transported Zeal, win a
judicious Credit of interior Piety, which strive to smother these exterior
Graces of Humanity.

4. National Affection, Of all the endowments, may, in our frail Conjecture,
tend to the exact composure of a well formed mind. No one, in humane Reason,
can be so requisite to the Establishment of a Civil Felicity, as This entirely
constituted in every part of a Community. All other Virtues may have secret
Sources, and Improper Objects, not consistent, perhaps, with their true
Essences, but in form, adhering only to peculiar Interests. This only is the
proper test to all their Attributes, most Histories being pregnant in
Authentic Proofs, That Virtues fairest Ornaments have frequently, not only
attempted, but therein succeeded, nay materially conduced to the subversion of
the Civil Frame. The first and most visible step to all the antic Roman Glory,
and ensuing Greatness was formed from the secret influence of this their inuate
Luster, and in decline thereof Both terminated. Invincible being that strength,
where all the Members of a Civil Frame, are animated only by one Object.

Our rugged Nature thus polished and prepared to the Reception of a more
excellent Capacity. We will proceed to the Remonstrance of those Objects, we
purpose to direct them to, as most material to the Civil Union, which properly
may be comprised in these ensuing Principles, Letters, Arms, Agriculture, and
Manufacture: These being the only Columns that support a Civil Fabric, though
several useful Branches hence derived, may possibly, at first Inspection, seem
to participate a more distinct Nature in their Consequence.

1. Letters have in their Nature a very vast extent, possibly not coherent, may
probably not consistant with the Felicity of a Civil Society, since we may
evidently collect this general observation from Records of Antiquity. That the
most flourishing Empires have visibly declined from their Virtue, and Valor,
as they have made higher progressions in the search of humane Sciences. Nor
has the secret effects hereof been less remarkable to the barbarous and
illiterate Incroachers on the Christian * The Goths in Greece.
Continent, who have forbore to ruin many public Libraries, only on this
design, That they might be left as useless Trifles to amuse their subdued
Adversaries, and restrain them from any generous Attempt, might reinvest them
in their former Liberty and Glory. The truth is, Letters in their abord, have
an alluring Faculty, does easily induce the mind, not only to a neglect, but
to a general misprison of Civil Practices, and the sedentique Posture is of
necessity imposed on us in persuit of their Mystery, unerves the Body, and
effeminates the mind.

To avoid therefore this Error in Their Nature, and this Inconvenient in the
manner of Their Acquisition, we will confine Them only to Their proper use, and
prescribe to their exercise such Objects only, as are material to the Civil
welfare. All Arts and Sciences whatever, being but ridiculous Positions, which
in their Speculation and Practice, may not become reduced to a Civil Benefit.
The first and most perfect use of Learning in General, being, without Question,
but to form our Judgments the better to direct our will, although our public
Seminaries seem, both in their Allowance and Practice, to vise at nothing more
then the enfarcing of their Memories, esteeming those Compositions to contein
the fairest Ornaments of Learning, which have the most variety of Quotations,
adhering more to the Authority of another Fame, then to the vigor of their
proper Reason: so that in conclusion the whole Texture of the elaborate work
tends but to show a specious Inventory of other men's Opinions, scarce shadowed
with their own.

The Objects of Learning especially conduce unto the common welfare, must of
necessity either have Reference to the Regulation and Improvement of the Mind,
Body, or Estate: To Illuminate, Rectify, and Guide the Intellect, Letters
presents us those two useful Pieces of History and Moral Philosophy. To repair
the Breaches of our Infirm Nature, Physic, with the Dependences thereon. To
secure our Estates, the Laws Civil and Common. To manage and improve them, the
Rules of Economy, and Mathematics, the Minister to Arts and Commerce.
Prescribing these Limits to the extent of Letters, we without Difficulty shall
reduce Them to their proper Institution. And annexing the Practick to the
Theory, as alternate subsequents to each other, we also shall with like
Facility avoid those Indispositions insensibly do steal upon our Body in the
assiduous Prosecution of Their knowledge, which might perhaps else render us
less capable of Civil Action.

2. Arms in their Nature have a more visible Influence to the Establishment of
a Civil Felicity, tending not only to the expulsion of invading Foes, and the
securing of extrinsick Commerce. But to the Interior Reduction of every Member
to the Conformity of the Civil Jurisdiction, Not inserting the Propriety
thereof to the enlargement of the Civil Frame, because such extent not properly
is inherent (although sometime coincident) to the Civil welfare: so that we may
hereby perceive three distinct uses in their Institution, For Defense, For
Offense, and For Parado: Though less civilized Nations did first direct Them to
a happier end, gaining therewith their livelihood. To form which more
susceptable of a fair success (according to the Rules of humane Sense.) We will
appropriate every distinct Subject thereof to the most apt managers. The
Cavalry (according to the Roman manner) to the Noble. The Infantry to the most
Strenuous, and the Naval Force to the most rugged savage Tempers.

3. Agriculture is the Primitive and more essential Column that supports the
Fabric of a Civil Union, inasmuch as such Society may possibly subsist happily
without coherence on the preceding appendices. But None without This. Nature
exacting the first and most powerful Ministry, the pretenses of the joint
Concurrents being only but Ornare to embellish. This only to support. And
although It may here be instanced, that many Nations have happily subsisted
only on the voluntary Productions of Nature. Without advantage of an elaborate
Culture, e're Lux and Avarice had presumed to violate her Virgin Purity, by
their adulterate Researches. Yet in Respect so happy an Existence may (in
Reason seem rather a Consequent to the Improportionable extent of a scarce
Habited Soil, or the indulgent Remissness of a stupid Society, then the
digested contentation of an elevated mind. The active Temper of a rational
Soul still prompting her Faculties to the Illustration and Improvement of every
Subject, falls under the capacity of her just Regulation. We may admit the use
Hereof of higher consequence, to the establishment of a Civil Welfare: not only
in the necessary Ministry to our frail Composure, but in the exact constituting
a proper Seminary to frame a Body Millitary Assiduous Travel extending the
Muscles, strengthening the Nerves, and animating the Spirits to the undaunted
encounter of every Danger, Pain, and Difficulty, might properly or casually
ensue the Enterprise of so honorable a Condition: so that we may probably
Conjecture, the several Eclipses of the Laconian Empire (though otherwise
exactly regular in Education of their youth) proceeded chiefly from their
Exemption, Neglect, or Misprision, of so requisite a Function; the burden
hereof being totally imposed on their * Slaves. And though particular Etolians.
occurrents can form no Proof might reach the full Propriety of a general
Conclusion: Yet when we shall reflect upon the efficacy of this Exercise, in
forming and Reforming the most improper and depraved Constitution Nature could
produce for such Intention, to the exactest Model of a martial Institution, in
the last, and not least, Eminent * Person, lent Luster Philopemon.
to the Grecian Glory. We may (without strict Forms of Argument) conceive how
far the influence of our Subject may herein conduce to the establishment of a
General Notion, which may be farther verified in the Turkish Institution of
their Janezaries, the only Strength and Glory of their Armies. Nor should, in
Reason, the mannaging of so useful a Ministry be soly committed to the grossest
Capacities, as a subject insusceptable of a higher speculation, since the most
refined Judgments have endeavored to reduce It to a regular Prescription.

4. Manifacture is the Nurse, Minister, and Proof to the premised Principles.
Without this Graphical Dimension all Arts and Sciences are but speculative
Conjectures, unformed Embryons, Doubtful Idea's, even to the most elaborate and
perspicuous Pretenders, nor in themselves but empty Suppositions unapt for
Civil usage, until a manual operation shall produce a more assured and useful
Conclusion in a visible and effectual Demonstration. Nor could be figured, in
Reason, unto humane Sense, why such Function should win less Credit in a Civil
Ministry, then the preceding Principles, had not the Practitioners, in
slubbering and corrupting of their Operations, in persuit of Lucre, so abjectly
fallen from the first rational and methodical Inspection of their Arts, as to
reduce them only to a Mecanick Observation. Having prefigured the Impressions
proper to a Civil Introduction, with the principle Objects necessarily inherent
to the perfect Ministry Thereof. Order exacts that we should next insist upon
the means, whereby the Civil Jurisdiction might form such Institution to the
public Benefit; in which we will first consider the Age and Quality of the
persons receivable to the public Tutelage distinctly with their proper
Objects, and their peculiar Seminaries.

1. The first Years of Capacity to be admitted to a Civil Introduction, is
according to the common usage of the most Industrious Societies, Aetas
Puerilis, The Age of Purility (which Naturalists define to commence about the
seventh year of our Age) In respect that our Facile Nature is then most
susceptable of a regular Impression. The Orgains then best fashioned to a ready
Execution. The time well advanced to a perfect Acquisition; and the Habits so
acquired, best formed to a stable Retention: In Reference to which Institution,
the Custom of our Climate is herein much impeachable, suffering our youth, in a
senseless or indulgent Reaklessness and Remisness, to be well advanced in their
Age, even to sixteen or eighteen years, e're they allow them fit to address
themselves to Civil Action, judging the time preceding usefully employed in
persuit only of a Tongue, scarce useful to their following purposes, which if
materially thereto consequent: If methodically, seasonably, and industriously
persu'd, might in far greater a Perfection be attained in one Annual
Revolution. And although such prescribed years may probably seem to reach a
Capacity of Initiation in Exercise of other Objects, but not in the use of Arms
till doubled in the number of Prescription: yet may their usual sports be so
disposed in the vacancy of other undertakings, a strenuous and undaunted
Aptitude may thereby become formed in their supple Nature, to render them in
future more susceptable of that Excellence is requisite to so penible and
perilous an Employment.

As to the Quality of Persons in General, we cannot (with Reason) in Reference
Thereto, admit any Member of our Civil Union to a Privilege of Exception from
public Action; inasmuch as a mutual Community, is as necessary to the forming
of a common Felicity in the Civil Structure, as in the Natural; no piece
thereof falling from a reciprocal Ministry; without Obstruction or Corruption
to the whole Frame.

In particular, we may reduce the Qualification of every Subject of our Civil
Society, in these Distinctions; The Rich, The Mean, The Poor. Under the first
Difference we may infer Those; who are by the Advantage of their Birth, or
otherwise visibly entitled to an opulent Succession, though the Capacity
thereof reach but to a decent subsistence. Under the Second, who from their
Parentage may expect some small Endowment to the Introduction of a Civil
Profession, but not so large a proportion, might yield a visible Foundation to
a necessary support, without concurrence of their future Industry. Under the
Latter such as have no visible adherence to any Faculty might admit them to the
Introduction of a Civil Function.

To the first Qualification, we will appropriate an Object of Industry,
suitable to the Advantage of their Fortunes, which potentially forming in them
an habitual Tranquillity of Mind, and a voluntary Repose of Body, may lend them
a more facile Access to Spiritual Endowments: Nor is It consonant to the
Dignity of Their Nature to become in any a prostitute to abject Lucre; from
whence it is probable such Sciences have held their splendid Attribute. Liberal,
rather in Respect of the Acquisitors freedom in communicating their Efficacy to
the Benefit of others, then from enfranch^sing an abject Spirit in a generous
Elevation; or a servile Fortune in an honorable Illustration. Such
uninteressed Practices in public Persuit of the Laws for the Decision of
Private Rights formed the Antic Romans, worthy and susceptable of their
ensuing Regency and Glory. Such Enlargement of Grace in their Physical
Dispensations, qualified the Arabian Princes with more Dignity then their
Diadems. Such zealous Ministry in public Enlightening Sacred Mysteries invested
Juries Rabbis with more reverence then e're the awful power of Rule could
reach unto. Letters have lost their Purity and Esteem, since but persu'd for
Mercinary ends: but yet confine we not any person under This Distinction, to
the exercise only of these Objects. Letters may probably so enlighten the
understanding, and confirm the Resolution, that after a competent Time of
voluntary Subjection in the use of Arms, These only may become exact Commanders
in the Martial Frame.

2. To persons under the Second Condition, we have designed only the use of
Manufacture. In respect (as is propounded) they are visibly adherent to such a
Proportion of a Civil Faculty, as may lend them a Capacity both of the
Initiation and Practice of their Functions, many occupations may seem requisite
to the Composure of a Civil Structure, are not exactly specified under This
general Distinction. But when we shall exclude all Debutors of Commodities from
Public Trade, but only such as framed them: or at least (if diverse hands,
differently qualified, were needful to their Supplement) who most usefully
contributed to their last fashioning: As also foreign Trade shall be reduced
only to Receipts of public Commerce. We shall have sufficiently figured our
intention under the Extent of this only Attribute. Other forms of Commerce
tending but to the enhancing of Commodities to the Advantage only of
Particulars, who, like idle Drones, suck all the Benefit thereof from others
painful Industry, which only had conduced to their forming.

To Members of the Last Distinction (having attained the years of Civil
Capacity, either under their Indegent Parents sterile or declining Industry; or
under their native Parochial Tutelage) we properly may assign a double
Ministry, forming their Limbs first ready to a strenuous Execution, by the
assiduous Labor of a toyling Culture. Their Bodies also thereby hardy grown
against the exterior Injury of the Seasons; and their Constitutions apt to
suffer, without prejudice, such Aliments, as the urgency of time may possibly,
in future Occurrents, sometime have recourse unto. Who thus become exactly
endued with these Habits in persuit only of This Object, we may, on the
Maturity of their years, from thence (by Civil Ordinance) transplant them to
our Martial Seminary which constituted only of Licentiats, such as become aged
in their active service are withdrawn to an easier Duty, and instituted only
for Parade or Ornament to the Civil Frame) they may with much delight, in so
expert a Society, in one Annual Revolution attain to such Dexterity, Facility,
and Grace in Exercise of Arms, as shall be requisite to the Success of future
Action.

As to the constituting several Seminaries proper and peculiar to the attaining
of these Objects, they only can established be by Order and Injunction of the
Civil Ministry, lest the Remissness of Iudulgent Parents should render such an
Institution frivolous. To the Regulation of Persons under the first Quality,
instituting well composed Academies in every County, to avoid the numerous
Affluence of Associates, which, swelling to a Multitude, might in Disorder or
Neglect, render them less capable of an exact Institution.

Particulars under the Second Intimation, pursuing in one General, Objects
indefinite in their Nature, can no way be reduced to a limited Prescription; we
will therefore leave them to the Liberty of a voluntary Election, in Respect of
their Nature, provided it may be essentially material to a Civil use: and in
the manner, according to the due proportion of such time, as may sufficiently
form their Hands, and enlighten their understandings in the perfect Mystery of
their Art.

Persons, under the Latter Inference, may in their first Introduction to a
Civil Action, be committed to the Provision of our Justices of Assize, who in
their usual Conventions may assign Them to the Tutelage and Instruction of such
Masters, within their several Jurisdictions, as shall be noted of Capacity to
entertain them in assiduous Action proper to our premised Object, Agriculture.
Till therein reaching the due term of Maturity for Military use, they may be
thence transplanted to our prementioned Society in Arms intended only but for
Ornament to the Civil Frame; where passing their Probation, they become fit
undertakers to pursue more weighty Enterprises.

The several Objects of the Law, in Reference to the Improvement of the
Internal, or Intellectual Faculties, are contained under two Principles, The
Extralegal Reward of Virtue, and the Extralegal Punishment of Vice.

XXXIV. The Extralegal Reward of Virtue.
HAving exactly fitted the Members of our Civil Body to an apt Progression (by
the Preservation and Improvement of their Natural Faculties) e're we display
the Objects of their Course, It will be materially useful to a perfect success
in our undertaking, to pursue the Improvement of the Interior or Intellectual
Faculties, by encouraging the Transactors with the Glory and advantage of
Achiving, or deterring with the Reproach and Damage of their falling in our
Enterprise, so animating or restraining them, that a generous Emulation might
prompt them with more Ardour to pursue the public Benefit included in their
own, And though our corrupt Nature may seem to need no other Motive to the
plausible persuit of our Functions, then our own Passion for ensuing Gain: Yet
the Relishes of youth (the aptest seasons to a perfect Institution) are not yet
fitted to the Baits of Avarice; or if they were, the public Test no small
Induction is to the Enlargement of such Acquisition; whence probably is formed
that Notion, Honos alit Arts, Honor is the Nurse of Arts: Why no Civil Law
propounds a Benefit or Advantage unto any for the Intended or the Perpetrated
Good; but the Infliction only for the Evil acted, is probably, in Respect, That
Virtue in her self is held her own implicit Recompense, it being a Blemish to
her Purity to have any Object forth her proper Sphere: which motion only
figures her Distinction: Nevertheless, on these Two Pillars was the sacred Law
erected, though but the Latter only therein expressed. A Law without this
implicitly in it self, seeming but a servile Imposition; and having This
explicitly in it self, a mercinary Exaction. To figure which Mystery, though
the General Clauses of the Sacred Law were published, yet the particular
Covenant, Ground, and Pledges of the Law were secretly, with the Law, unfolded
in the Ark, which none but the chief Ministers to the Law approached, and every
curious eye forbid therein to make Inspection. Of such Nature should the
Investure be of Virtues Dignity, Indefinite and immaterial, that her Actions
being free and without propounded Compact, might render the Purity of her
sources to be suspected neither vain or Mercinary. Equivolent to this Rule was
that prudent Generals Dispensation in his Ministry, who to dignifie the virtue
of his Magnanimous Courage, to whom they were indebted for two Victories in one
day (on his generous refusal of the spoil designed for his Recompense, as too
mercinary an endowment for a Noble Temper) presented him his Horse for Martial
Service, with the Caparison of Eminence belonging to his State, and qualified
him with the Title of that Coriolanus.
Place, his valor had acquired to the public Benefit and Honor. And although
such a procedure may possibly engender private Envy and Grudges to the forming
of Civil Discord to the public Prejudice: yet such Inevitable and Corrupt
Productions spring but from the Rankor of abject and degenerate Spirits. Minds
elevated and refined, receive from thence (with Cato) a more noble Resentment,
Who failing in his Pretenses to the public Ministry, conferred by Election on
his Competitor, was so far from a distaste thereat, that he wished that all his
fellow Citizens were justly in that, and in all things else to be preferred
before him. It was this Glorious, Lost, Forgotten, and misprised Idea of the
Soul, acquired to antic Rome, her Dignity and Extent. The public welfare in
general is but remisly persu'd, nor the particular Members thereof but faintly
supported. Where the Prescription of the Law extends our Devoyr only to the
performance of our Contract, and not to impair another Property: And
notwithstanding It agrees not with the Nature and Dignity of so illustrious an
Attribute, to borrow an Original from any Retribution, or exterior Advantage
whatsoever. Yet shall that Prince or Magistracy, which but neglects (nay nicely
not encourages such eminent Proceedings) never attain the Glory or Felicity of
a flourishing Society.

To avoid the Hazard of which Consequence, we will proceed yet farther to
distinguish the Nature of our Subject, with the several Objects: and the
Capacity of the public to improve the Effects thereof.

The General Objects thereof are either Public or Private. The particular
Objects in Reference to the Public, may be inferred in these Distinctions,
Martial Civil, Natural, Mecanick, and Munificent: nor yet in Reference to
Particulars, is any Object thereof rightly instanced, which may not be reduced
under the extent of these Principles: as also sometime possibly in one Subject
may they meet a Complication in their Nature.

In the Distinction of the Martial, we may imply such exploits in Arms, either
Offensive or Defensive, as in a Lawful War peculiarly conduce unto the Public
Benefit and Honor, beyond the Simple Intimation of Devoir inherent to our
charge. According to the Pattern of the first Difference, was Coriolanus
Achievement, Who in the close persuit of his Enemies, entered the City with
them, and with the Aid only of a few that followed him, reduced it to the Roman
Government. And while yet freshly bathing with the Sweat of his Toil, and the
Blood of his Foes (having secured the City) returned to a doubtful Conflict
without, betwixt his Party, and their Adversaries, both Ignorant of what had
passed, where magnanimously fighting for his Countries Glory, both Victories
were imputed soly to his Valor. A Parallel to the Latter Distinction, was that
Romans Hordcius Cocles.
Adventure, Who, with his Company, persued closely by his Enemies to the
entrance of the City, caused that part of the Bridge, was betwixt him and his
Companions, to be cut off; That he alone making a head against the fury of his
Enemies, might so afford them time to enter for their own Security, without a
farther hazard to the City: which done, he (with his Arms in his hand) leaping
into the Mote, surrounded it, s^e to the Banks thereof, where his Associates
Received him with Joy, and Admiration of his Virtue.

Nor truly can it be denied, but that as we have lent this Distinction the
Precedence in order, so both in Right of Antiquity and use, It seems herein to
challenge the Pre-eminence, not only as the Founder and Establisher of the
Civil Order, whence issues the Capacity of the Rest; but as the most penible,
dangerous, and highest Adventure to the undertaker: which seriously considered,
we may undoubtedly affirm, the real Source and Element of Dignity most properly
is seated in This Exercise, as appears in the Nature and Signature of the
Primitive Institution of Honor on Escusions Antic Pieces of Armory. And in
the successive Additions Thereof in several Orders of Knighthood; although both
the one and the other have been promiscuously conferred without a Reference to
any such Distinction: yet has It not been without Blemish and Detraction of
the Grace Intended in the Institution, whence probably has issued the
Misprision and Inefficacy of the Ordinance, especially when the Corruption of
succeeding Ages had prostituted her highest Attributes to a venal Acquisition,
or other interessed Intercession. It were very requisite therefore (that every
Qualification might reach the Intention of the Institution) to form such
Illustrations of Honor proper and peculiar to the Nature and Distinction of the
Fact. That the more noble Consequences might not be balanced in esteem with
the Less, nor the Less with the Greater, to the Envy or Misprision of the
Institution. And farthermore, that such Investures of Dignity might have no
other Tract of Acquisition, but the Free Grace, Acceptance, and Acknowledgement
of the Institutor, in Reference only to the due Merit of the Acquisitor.
Otherwise the use and Benefit thereof will soon be frustrated and void.

These Ornaments of Civil Distinction may probably appear a Vain, Ridiculous
and but an empty Gratuity, unbecoming the Majesty and Magnificence of a Prince,
or State; not accompanied with more essential Inherences: Yet rightly
conferred, they are but Ceremonious Pledges of the ensuing Necessity to enlarge
their Civil Faculty in future Employment to the public Benefit:
Notwithstanding They may possibly meet in such a Subject, whose Indigence might
exact more timely and material Gratuity, else such intended Grace might prove
to them both Burdensome and Reproachful: which Inconvenient might happily be
supplied from the Common Treasury in some Annual Pension. Provided, that
neither the Proportion nor Continuance thereof, had other Reference then the
due support of that Dignity conferred, until some Accident might form an
Opportunity to transact like Advantage on them in some useful Ministry most
proper to so eminent a Capacity. Otherwise, if such Munificence were more
General or unlimited, The Treasury would either thereby become so burdened, or
exhausted by the continual Affluence of Pretenders, that either new Sources
thereto must be derived from the Subjects by a general Levy of Impositions, to
the public Prejudice, or else the Majesty of a Prince or State become eclipst
through Penury and Want.

Under the Intimation of Civil Offices to the Public extending the simple
Latitude prescribed to our Charge, may be comprised the Council or Advice, that
with undaunted Integrity makes either Proposition or Opposition against the
Purposes, Designs, or Practices of a Prince or Populace to the Advancement of a
Common Good, or the Declining of a Public Damage: though to the hazard of
Estate, Liberty; or Life. Such was Regulus Advertisement to the Senate, When
they inclined to conclude a shameful Peace with their insulting Enemies in
favor only of his Safety, become their enlarged Intercessor, on his Faith,
failing thereof to return: which resolute Perseverance in a Public Convention,
may sometime possibly pass under Censure of an incautious or corrupt Obstinacy,
that with singularity in form tends but to foment intestine Faction. But the
Grounds Inherence, and Consequence of such Debates examined, will evidently
disclose the Nature of the Intention: The Former usually proceeds with more
Modesty and Sufferance. The Latter with more insolence and Passion. That but
endeavors to enform or to enlighten his Pretenses to an equal Reception: This
to empower them to a servile Imposition. In private Conventions such Procedure
may seem but to decline that Interest for which peculiarly the Members thereof
were united. Yet rightly understood, it may become a Paradox to affirm, that
Prince or State can be endued with Capacity to receive any real Advantage
involved in a Public Prejudice, or disjoined from a Public Benefit; though
such a Notion has unhappily passed for a general Position. Whereby, Princes
too frequently resent with high Indignity Repugnance to their will, corrupted
by the Adulation of adulterate Glosses: But a prudent inspection will from
ensuing Consequents soon collect the Error of their Apprehension: And Honor
that Integrity, adventureth rather to incur the hazard of his Princes Favor,
then wilfully to betray his Masters Interests. Such a resentment was plausibly
expressed by one of our illustrious Princes, Whose youthful Licentiousness
(during his Fathers Reign) being gravely checked by a Civil Magistrate,
proceeded to that height to strike him; for which, he being by the Magistrate
committed, He after for such Procedure, was by him (succeeding to his Fathers
Throne) most highly dignified, acknowledging he worthily had therein maintained
the Dignity of his Laws.

3. By Inference of a Natural Beneficence, we may imply such genuine
Discoveries of Natures Mysteries, as may conduce unto the safety or Felicity of
the Civil Union, which either the Avarice or Envy of others had concealed, or
their own Industry or Experience has disclosed. Of this Nature was Hypocrates
overture to the Public, Who that they might escape the Ruin of a raging
Pestilence surrounded all the Confines of their Territories, advised them
timely set on Fire the interjacent Forests; whereby the Air being purified, his
Country was preserved from the danger of an encroaching Contagion. In promoting
such Advantages to the Public Benefit, Custom has so corrupted the use of
Industry, That it will become necessary to lend This and the succeeding
Distinction, a more material Compensation, besides the Grace inherent to a
plausible Reception, then probably may agree with the exact Definition of the
Nature of our Subject. All Arts and Sciences receiving now no other vigor,
then what from abject Lucre is inspired.

4. In persuit of our Order, ensues the Mecanick Ministry to the Advancement
or Preservation of the Public Interest; which notwithstanding It may seem
inferior to the Rest, as a more proper Subject to less elevated Capacities;
yet in Respect It is immediately necessary to most uses visibly inherent to the
due support of the Civil Frame. We equally may hereto lend a considerable
Reflection, not weighing the excellence of her Nature, either in the Curiosity,
Rarity, or Delight of Her operation, but soly in the material Consequence and
use thereof; essentially conducing to the Civil Welfare. Of this Quality in the
Military practice was Archimedes Engines for the Defense of Syracusa, against
the Fury of the Romans. Or what other, in Civil uses, may be produced against
the sterility of the Soil, Natural, or Adventitious, or what otherwise tend to
the Improvement of a National Commerce. But such has in our Age, been the
unhappy Dispensations of Public Grace, That those Arts have received the most
essential Indulgence and Encouragement, That most licentiously have conduced to
Vanity and Lux, contrary to the Resentment of that generous Prince, Who
prudently weighing tht use of every singular Faculty, to him, that with
infallible Dexterity, could cast a Grain of Millet through the Eye of a Needle,
ordered for Reward a peck of seed, he might not want Materials to keep his
Skill by frequent Exercise. On this Design of Public Benefit, are grounded the
Pretense of most Monopolies; it seeming to a Prince most equitable, that every
man should soly reap the Benefit of his own Industry, or Invention for a time
prescribed, that the Fruition thereof may in future be returned to the public
use. But such Motions might possibly meet a more plausible entertainment and a
happier Issue. If the pretender were enjoined to attend the Test of their own
Proposition, in an approved Consequence, and totally rest disjoined from all
peculiar Benefit therein, depending only on the favor of the Magistracy, to
make an equal Compensation, agreeing to the Advantage of the Issue.

Fot closure to our Public Objects of Beneficence, succeeds the Distinction
of Munificent; which in honor to the Attribute, we may seem in order here to
lend but an improper position, in Respect, that all the former Objects may
possibly be masked with other private or peculiar Interests; whereof This
altogether rests only unsuspected, imparting voluntarily of their Own, without
a Reference to any Retribution, or peculiar Benefit whatever. Yet nevertheless,
since commonly such Distributions proceed rather from the Excrescence of a
private Store, then simply the Benignity of a Generous Inclination, wherein is
nothing really of our selves, or hazzarded, or communicated, and what is so
dispensed usually, but the Fragments of what our Frailty will no longer suffer
us to enjoy: so that the essential Circumstances of the Motive clearly
considered, we rather, in favor of the public Interest, have lent such a
Distinction here, a more noble Association, then properly is inherent to the
Nature Thereof. Nor can we thereto yield so eminent a Qualification in Honor,
as might induce Another to an equal Emulation of Munificence (where the Donor
scarce survives the Induction of his Act) more then what the dull Letter of a
Monument barely will infer: But to dignifie that Benignity, which shall, with a
well composed Mind, cast from his Sense the Charming Minister to Vanity and
Lux; while yet in the Capacity of Fruition, to constitute the reviving
Affluence thereof upon the languishing Misery of the Indigent, we no way can
afford too illustrious an Inscription to His Merit.

2. Before we enter to treat of the Second General Object, A private
Beneficence extending beyond the common prescription of a Civil Devoyr. Two
Arguments, thereon depending, will require a more distinct solution. First,
whether the Public may immediately be concerned therein (remotely It always
of Necessity must.) And whether without such Reference the Public may be
concerned to agitate thereon. The First Proposition may, without Difficulty,
admit of an Affirmative. The Latter not without some Intricacy. Insomuch as
private Benificence may sometime be conferred on a private Person, employed in
a public Use, Military, or Civil. And in that same Degree often honored by the
Romans, who had designed a Crown of Triumph unto him, that had in public
Conflict saved the life but of the meanest of their Fellow Citizens; whereby
the Band of Unity became amongst them far more strictly, vigorously, and
entirely secured to give a happy repulse to the fury of their Enemies. But
whether the Public be so far interessed, as to censure of the unequal
Resentment of a Private Beneficence betwixt Party and Party, is a Subject yet
undetermined. If example may bear authentic weight to an Assertion, we may
produce sufficient evidence from the Records of many Civil Jurisdictions,
wherein It by Prescription of the Law has been allowed actionable, as a
Private Plea. But in more severe Governments, prosecuted by the Public as a
Capital Delinquence: As may be instanced from the Athenian Judicature, Where
Callias was publicly arraigned for his Ingratitude to Aristides, suffering Him
and his Children even to perish through Indigence; by whose peculiar favor he
had attained an eminent Acquisition. In Objection to the procedure of the First
Pattern may justly be alleged, that it is against the very Nature of a perfect
Benefit, even but to expect, much more to exact a Restitution. And he that
forms but a Repetition of the Circumstance of his Munificence, blemisheth the
Grace of his Benignity. But he that reduces It to the Reproach of the
Receiver, perverteth the Nature of his own Intention. In Reference to the
Latter Rule, though This may be alleged no proper Subject for the Institution
of the Law: forasmuch as neither Public nor Private prejudice ensues the
Mecognisance. This not endammaged in regard the freeness of the Act takes away
the very shadow of a Pretense. That not impaired in Respect the Consequence
Thereof not immediately reaches the Public Interest: collaterally it may, in
that the Impudence of the vice, not checked, may probably make so great a
Breach in the moral Constitution of our Civil Union, as to introduce a common
Barbarism.

As to the farther Discussion of our suspended Subject, A Private Beneficence;
the Nature thereof (under the same extent of Latitude in Devoyr, as formerly
expressed) may seem inferior to our former General Object in Excellence
considered in Gross; in that, Bonum quo communius eo melius; but taken in the
mutual Coherency of Parts, of a far greater Efficacy to the Structure of a
happy Union. To a Public Advantage of this Nature rarely is encountered Matter
but to work upon, and possibly more rarely meets a Capacity to entertain It.
To communicate a Private Beneficence every Place, Time, and Person affords us
both Subject and Ability in one kind or other; so that rightly distinguished,
the most advised Legislators have considerately endeavored on This Baiz to
erect the Felicity of their Societies. But how the Public should distinguish
of such singular Aids totally to be divided from all peculiar References, or
how clearly discerning their Nature, duly to cherish and approve them in an
honorable Reception, is a Consequence not unworthy the Reflection. For
solution to the first Branch of our Proposition, we may infer, that he justly
deserves to fall unpittied, by a Common Decree, under the burden of a future
Misery, who shall so far become restrained by the shame of his own Indigence or
Impotence, as to smother in his silence either to God or Man, the immediate
means to his security. In Reference to the Latter Position may be asserted,
that to such Manifestation of the Act, may justly follow an exemplary
Encouragement from the Moral Censor, with due Applause to dignifie the Action.

It may here probably be objected, that having propounded our Subject in
General, we have as yet omitted, clearly to handle all the Dimensions thereof;
insomuch as we have yet only considered Virtue in her Communicative Faculties;
whereas Virtue frequently wanting such materials, may rest confined, and only
but concentrate in It self. In answer, Although It may seem even against the
Nature of Virtue to be indu'd with an incommunicable Essence, since both in
Example and Precept, she needs not to borrow the Endowments of Fortune to
illustrate her Expansion: but admit the Influence of her Graces so powerful and
absolute from her own proper Nature: Nevertheless (to the common reproach of
our Age be it attested) Virtue wants more material Ornaments to plead for her
Reception. Who adhereth to the Counsel of the Wisest, if Poverty over shadow
the Consulation, and be his mind never so impenetrably composed against the
various and continual Batteries of an impetuous Adversity, if obscured in
Indigence, Who regards or distinguishes his Fortitude. So both his Justice
and his Temperance seem smothered in his Impotence. But happier Ages lend us
more exemplary Presidents from their Felicity, where we may observe, that in
the most flourishing Societies, Virtue so humbly seated, did never want her
Dignity, as appears in the Antic Grecian Glory, extracted from the Justice
of Aristides. The Prudence and Moderation of Phocion. The Fortitude and
Magnanimity of Epimenondes. Nor shall we need here farther to trace a
Prescription to qualify such eminence with Honor, since we already have in
the Inception of our Treatise thereon raised the true Capacity to our Ministry.

XXXVI. The Extralegal Punishment of Vice.
HAving lent a competent weight to one extreme of the Beam whereon our Civil
Union chiefly does depend, in dignifying Virtue beyond the due Intention of the
Law, we may persist to cast an equilibrate Counterpoise in the opposed
Balance: In the Prosecution of Vice beyond the full Prescription of the Law,
that from thence an harmonious uniformity may issue from the Texture of the
whole Frame. Vice is the General and Principle Subject all Civil Societies, by
rigor of their Laws endeavor to suppress, as the only promotor to Sedition.
But few with so exact a Circumspection, as the Consequence of the Subject may
require to the due modelising of a perfect Society, in that, Vice thereby
becomes impeachable under the Prescription of another Prejudice, not simply
under Notion of Its proper Nature. As though the germinating seeds of Vice, or
the Effects thereof could be contained long within the Limits of a peculiar
Continent, or the whole Body long preserved sound, where the Members Thereof
are already in themselves corrupted: To avoid which Danger, it were materially
useful, to take away the very Appearance Thereof even in the first Eruption.
And lest the Indulgence or Neglect of Parents should farther yet the growth
thereof in their licentious Issue, e're they become of due Capacity to a Civil
Correction, 'twere necessary such Remisness in them were either checked by
Fine, or Public Infamy.

To attain yet a more clear Discovery of the Nature of our Subject, in
Reference to our Common Welfare, we will reduce It with Relation only to these
Principles, Divine, Civil, and Moral.

Under the Intimation of Divine, we chiefly may comprise Enormities are
perpetrated against God, or his Sacred Institutions; which being the Supreme
Authority, from whence all humane power pretends to be derived, should more
severely be preserved from violation, even to the due Conformity of the
subordinate Ministry. And although we may in this Insertion, seem to digress
from the Intention of our present Treatise, as an improper Object to our Civil
Minister, extending far beyond the Latitude of his Faculty: yet, insomuch as
the Remonstrances, Menaces, or Exhortations of the Divine Minister, are unto
Carnal and to sensual Spirits but an ineffectual Procedure to the due Restraint
of our common Corruption, where the Civil Minister becomes not coadjutant to
rectify the Disorder, we may conclude the inconsiderate Neglect Hereof must
inevitably form the Civil Power less successful in her Ministry, declining
totally to agitate on the Infringement of Superior Orders. The Fundamental
Establishment of their own. The first and highest Degree in such Delinquence,
is the denying of his Essence, who of free Grace and Goodness imparted to us
ours, which Disclaimour most justly may deserve the Forfeiture of his Tenor.

Subordinate to This, is the Derogating from his Sacred Attributes, which being
properly and immediately inherent to his Holy Essence, more opprobiously and
maliciously endeavors in Contempt to deny that supreme Power, he is enforced
to acknowledge: Nor can such a presumptuous Repugnance against the inward Light
be reputed in humane sense less heinous then the former.

Contingent to These is the Profanation of his Name and Sacred Ordinance,
either in Licentious Discourses or Actions, tending irreverently to the
Misprision of his adorable Essence, or his Holy Rites: which extravagant
insolence may justly merit to be suspended from the Privilege of a Common
Union.

Collateral hereto is the solemn Invocation of his Sacred Name to the
Attestation of a matter false, or falsified; which without Reference to
another Interest, as the Signet only of our own serious Resolutions, is a
Crime of a most reproachful Levity, which requires before God and Man, a
penitent and high submission. But wherein others Interests immediately are
concerned a Crime of highest Treachery: In Respect such Assertions give Rules
unto the Law It self, which is our common safeguard. But this Branch of our
Subject falling under the Prescription of a Civil Penalty. We shall not farther
here insist to treat upon, Reserving the Persuit Thereof to a more proper and
peculiar order.

Farthermore we may yet hereto not improperly insert the Common and too
frequent usage of His Name in vain; which heedless Custom forming into Habit,
insensibly detracteth from that awful Reverence, should be revived in us on
every explicit Intimation of his glorious Distinction. Nor can a more effectual
Restraint be formed to suppress such unadvised Imprecations, then a private
Reproof or a public Reproach from His peculiar Minister.

2. What may ensue from the Licentiousness of Vice to the Infringement of the
Civil Order, we here may properly omit to treat upon: insomuch, as the general
Inference Thereof has herein only Reference to the Impeachment of another
Interest directly and immediately. A common Principle to the Decision of right,
which may more clearly be enlightened in the peculiar Order, we design to the
Discussion of each Branch thereof, only we may here generaly Note, that even
therein most Laws too strictly often adhere more to the litteral formalities of a
Plea, then the essential Result of a Proof.

As to the Moral Distinction of Vice which fall not under Latitude of a Civil
Penalty, being the peculiar Object of our present discussion, we will yet more
intentively endeavor to reflect upon.

Unity and Concord being the chief Objects should guide us to the lasting
Establishment of a happy Society, it will be materially pertinent in the search
thereof, to visit the primitive and secret underminings of a mutual Agreement,
which may undoubtedly be discovered in the first subtle Practice of Man's common
Adversary, under the Figure of a concealed Malice; whence This privy Ranchor
should take Original, may probably be judged from a repining Envy, contracted
by the sense of a Disparity in their present Conditions. This seed of common
Sedition from thence scattered into the Heart of man, to finish in our
overthrow, what This Imposture had so effectually commenced, by a perpetual
commotion in our Civil Communities, has enforced the exactest Constitutors of
a Civil Society (not being able to extirpate the Roots hereof) utterly to
remove those Causes from amongst them, which might conduce unto the Birth or
nourishment thereof, as Licurgus in taking away the use of money. And the
primitive * Romans in the equal Partition M. Curious.
of their Territories. But the Corruption of succeeding Ages falling from so
happy Principles of Union, require more Circumspection in the mannagers of
Rule, to the expulsion of such venom from the Civil Frame: which better to
distinguish, we properly may lend to It this Signature. Malice is a secret and
violent Transportation of the will unjustly to procure Evil to Another, nay
often to our proper Detriment, proceeding from the affected Advantage of
Another Endowment.

Sundry branches, some more or less immediately issuing from This stock, become
more or less prejudicial to the Common Unity, as the Degrees of virulence lend
Influence to the first Contraction, which may clearly be distinguished in the
common Consequences of Slanders, Calumnies, and Detractions. Others more
remotely, as Incivilities, Affronts, Disgraces in general, Scoffing, and
Deriding: All which particulars we severally will examine, more truly to
discover the full weight of each irregular Motion, may form a Discord in our
Civil Harmony.

At first Inspection it may appear an Impropriety in our order, here to insert
the Treatise of a Slander, being a Subject propounded by the Law within the
Limits of a Civil Penalty, but with so strict a Reference to the Letter, that
few Degrees of Obloquy will, under the common Rules thereof, fall within the
exact Distinction of a Scandal: as if the nice Formalities of the Law intended
but to sport with private and refined Infamy. To supply this Default in a Civil
Prescription, we will endeavor yet more amply to define the Nature of
Slanders, Calumnies, and Detractions, with their ensuing Damages to a Civil
Union, lest that their proper and implicit Senses should become confounded
under the Notion of one common Distinction. A Slander here intended, is a
false suggestion against another legally extending to a Criminel Matter.

Calumny, A false Aspersion, extending only to the Civil prejudice of another.

Detraction, simply inferred, is a false Supposition obliquely insinuated to
blemish others Honor or Applause.

1. How material Breaches in a Civil Union, may ensue the sufferance or the
slight Restraint of Slander (though taken in the obscurest and remotest
Latitude of Sense) may evidently be conceived, when we shall seriously reflect
on the inefficeable Impressions are secretly left behind the Public
Discussion Thereof, in the unresolved Conjecture of the Auditors: So that
though the mischief of the suggestor be clearly convicted, the innocence of the
Plantiffe remains not fully vindicated, whereby unequal Resentments become
fomented, to prosecute such illegal Reparations, as probably may extend to the
extinction of many Families, if not unto a general Commotion in the Civil
Frame. Nor can the extent of a Legal Verdict, directed only to a pecuniary
Amercement, become an equal compensation to the Injury. Where the malicious
Impeacher of another Fame remains unbranded with such Public Infamy, may
render him more obvious to a Civil Incapacity.

2. Calumny, though formed from the same Original, makes slighter Incursions on
our Civil Fame; yet may the least Degree Thereof not pass the Burden of a Civil
Censure, since our common Reputation is the visible Foundation to our
Livlihood, or Civil Faculty: So that the secret and frequent Expansion thereof
meeting with the Corruption of our humane Nature (prone to exagerate the very
shadow of another Infirmity) may possibly reach the extinction of the Natural
Existence.

3. Detraction takes a lower flight, by remote Tracts to wind the Matter to as
high a pitch, lessening It self till It become not obvious to the sense; which
with more Art disguised, requires more Art in the Discovery. Her Traces hold no
uniformity, but often shift the shadows of the Scene to trouble or confound the
Appearance of the Matter, with an Ambiguous or opponant Light. So that the
Interessed not only hereby hazzardeth his present Advantages, but becomes
unequally impeacht of Evils not in question. While the envious Imposture casts
the Contagion of his Venom, without the Danger of Contraction. From hence
(though more remote in Nature, more sudden in the Operation; and consequently
more considerable in the Circumspection) proceed Acts of Incivility, as
Affronts, or Disgraces in general, Scoffings, and Deridings. The malignities of
the Former moving more slowly, afford a time to lend the Civil Minister a
Capacity to allay or stop the vigor of the Infirmity e're it attain the
height. These, like Tinder, catching fire at the first Eruption, seldom become
extinguished, but with untimely Slaughter. In which Regard, It may become a
wonder to a digested sense, to find most Laws so unprovided or so slack in the
Restraint hereof, as not, in the least manner, to reflect on their Nature, or
their Consequence, since both directly tend to the Infringement of the Public
Peace. By which Neglect the injured is prompted to pursue unequal Reparation to
his wrongs. Affronts more insolently and deliberately determine a Division in
the Civil Frame. Scoffing more slily and obliquely. The Arrogance of That seems
to assume a privilege to impose a Rule. The subtlety of This, but to insinuate
a form in common usage.

Not inferior to these are Acts of Inhumanity, whether in the omission, or in
the rigorous and untimely execution of Civil Rights; which most men (judging
soly confined to the Injunction or permission of the Law) make those the
Stations of their Civil Duty, which are but fixed Lights, erected only on the
extremes to avoid those shelves procure a common shipwreck. To the first Point
we must come, to the Latter we may come, under this Caution, Summum Jus, summa
injuria. Extreme Right, is extreme Wrong. Betwixt these, and the common
Continent of a Civil Devoyr, there are many Degrees of Latitude, not specified
in the Letter, to leave the will more Freedom in the Election of the Good or
Evil, which thereby only are entitled ours. Nor can he justly be admitted as a
Member to the Civil Structure, whose Actions do endeavor to deface the very
Nature of that Being does qualify him with his Distinction. How far This
Savage Attribute may be repugnant to our Civil Order, explicitly is employed in
Intimation of the sense Thereof, expressed in the Letter, inferring a
satisfactory and inflexible persisting to the Destruction of our kind. To what
extent might be reduced the Nature of our Subject, not easily is distinguished;
since each remorsless sense of others suffering tending to Ruin, we impose or
farther, may form thereto a perfect Definition. A proof whereof adjudg'd, may
be extracted from * that Roman's entertainment, Who, on Reception of his Page,
that much perplexed his Sickness had detained him till the Period of the War, in
that he never had seen the Slaughter of a Man. To satisfy his Reproachful
Curiosity, commanded straight a Criminel to the Block: for which he by the
Censor was expelled the Senate.

As Twins, falling under one Similitude in Nature, may hereto be annexed Acts
unnatural, as the Inemnity and Neglect between Parents and their Children;
Brother and Brother, and other nigh Relations in Affinity; where both Divine
and Civil Institutions join to engraft the strictest Band of Unity, to lay a
firmer Baiz unto the lasting Structure of a Civil Government, as may be
instanc't in Conjunction of old Isreal's Tribes, who farther were by severe Laws
enjoined to support and supply the Members of their Families, even to the
nighest union. Nor can in Reason it be figured, that any person Cordially
should adhere unto the Public Interests in remote Agitations, who so
reproachfully deserteth the Contingence of his own in a nigher Intercourse.

Not far removed from This in Consequence are Actions of Ingratitude, when as
the due Resentment of a free and timely Comfort to an afflicted Condition
utterly is extinguished, an Impropriety so incongruous to a Civil Community,
That common sense in every Beast may lend It infamy. The Ox and the Ass know
and acknowledge the hand to them administers. And the most Savage will become
reclaimed, where they accept to Nature a Refection; whence man, of all
distinguishing Creatures, should receive so unequal an Impression, must either
be the Arrogance of his haughty Spirit, detesting to appear inferior by a
Civil Fealty: or else the Avarice of his sordid Nature, retracting the
Acknowledgement, lest It in Civil Rules might challenge a due Compensation:
Both which Sources are to a Civil Union equally incommunicable. How far the
Issue yet may probably obstruct the Circular Motion of our Civil Body, in a
reproachful Mecognisance, may, to the grossest sense be clearly evident;
considering no Consequence can sooner form Reluctance in the will, to do
another good, then where our full Endeavors meet so brutish a Reception.

Having thus traced out some irregular Motions in our Civil Frame, under a more
Especial Reference unto others; we will endeavor now to treat of some
Disorders, under a more immediate Reference to our Selves, not pretending to
attain the full extent of either. But to cast such a shadow thereof on our
present Work, as may comparatively form the unexpressed more distinguishable,
and hold a fairer Simitry with the Capacity of our Treatise.

The Subjects we would hereupon infer, are Actions of Licentiousness, as
Drunkenness, Luxury, Gaming, Riot.

Drunkenness may possibly appear a Subject here improperly inserted in our
Order; in that most Laws may seem to form thereto a due Punition. Yet in
Reference to the Nature of the Crime, not totally equivolent, weighing
judiciously the common Damage thereon may ensue unto the Civil Texture, in
regard it is a reproachful exhauster of the Public Store. A certain Ruin to a
private Family. An apparent Introduction to every Mischief. A temporary
Dissection of a Member from the Civil Frame. Under what Degree of Disorder this
Distemper truly may be distinguished, is not altogether unworthy a due
Perpensation, since the vulgar, in favor of their sensuality, have lent It so
gross and ridiculous a Character, as is not to be encountered but in the
highest extremity. But far more rationally may be affirmed, That every
extravagant Emotion of the Spirit, and every impotent and irregular Motion of
the Body, by drink procured, may figure the Distinction.

Under the Intimation of Luxury may be implied all sensual Excesses whatsoever,
more especially the inordinate Indulgence to the enticing Relishes of the
Palate, and the lascivious and unlawful Prosecution of a Brutish Lust, How
far the common Consequences Hereof may reach the Detriment of the Civil
Structure, we will endeavor clearly to enlighten. Our Subject taken in the
former Sense, is not only a superfluous Consumer of the Public Affluence to
the enhancing of Provisions, most useful to a common Existence; but, with the
inevitable Encumbrance to our own private Fortunes, also a visible extinguisher
of That, which It pretends but to cherish, smothering or enfeebling the
innate Heat, the immediate Instrument to every Faculty of Nature. So that not
only the Body, but the mind becomes hereby obscured, effeminate and slothful,
and consequently unuseful to every Civil Practice. Farthermore, the Charms of
this Indulgence to our proper Genius, so endeareth the Affections to a brutish
Sensuality, that it totally alienates the Thought from any sense of others
suffering, so far, that It becomes unto the Civil Frame a Burden
incommunicable. This Subject taken in the Latter Sense, though from the other
seldom found divided, the Latter being usually joint Issue to the former,
meeting a Celibate Condition, begets either a Protraction, or a perpetual
Renunciation of an Hymeneal Union, both punishable by the Law in Civil
Communities of severer Discipline, encountering a Conjugal Estate, It breaks
that Band of Amity, which is the first strictest and most natural Foundation to
a Civil Union, in either (if any) It produces but a spurious and degenerate
Issue.

That sense which the Former Attribute could not reach to in the common usage
of our Tongue, more properly may under the notion of Riot be expressed, having
for Object a servile Assubjection to the Adulation of the senses (not formerly
thereby inferred) at how profuse a rate soever: so that, in Respect of the
vanity, This Piece of Liceatiousness has a Latitude beyond the Capacity of a
Prescription; whether in the Curious, Sumptuous, or Superfluous Ornaments
inherent to a Person, Place, or Equipage; or in the alluring Rarities or
Excesses of an entertainment, tending rather to exhaust the Affluence of
Nature, then satisfy with her Plenty. Where Noise and Vapor to affect the
aerie senses more, over balance in expense the Rest. Or what other fantastic
Ministry to a distempered Fancy, tends but to form prodigious vanity, or a
ridiculous singularity, which sometime meets so high extravagance, that sundry
Figures, Drawn, Cut, or Engraved in the Metal, Earth, or Stone, (under the
Honor only of Antiquity) become the price of a considerable Revenue. What
measure of Disorder may hereby be procured to the Civil Frame, will clearly be
distinguished in those Breaches, which the most flourishing Societies have
suffered under so impetuous a distemper, which like a raging Fire consumes All
to satisfy It self, leaving no Rights unviolated. No Mischief unpractised, to
yield new Fuel to the corrupted sense, when the Materials fail to satiate the
unbridled will. This Exuberance of the Wanton Blood most usually is engendered
in the Greater Vessels of the Civil Body, from whence It by the lesser is
attracted, by affected Emulation, till It become a general Infirmity, whereby
the whole Frame, voluptuously effeminated, becomes incapable of any generous
Action, so consequently a prey to the slightest Incursions of an Enemy.

Gaming, not taken in the sense of a Divertisement, but in the Nature of an
ardent Persuit to a dishonorable Acquisition, where the Adventurer, to improve
the Advantage of his Stock, puts it to the Question, whether his just
Possessions be his own. A ridiculous and bewitching Itch of Avarice, where each
one, in sport, persues Another Ruin in earnest. In the Victor the Facility of
the Acquisition begets a Profuseness in expense. In the vanquished a
self-consuming Rank our to repair the Damage: so that neither attain the end
of the undertaking, since both become frustrate in the Improvement of their
Condition. The former swells with vanity of success, although not raised on
his own sufficiency. The latter shrinks away dejected as guilty of his Folly,
more than ashamed of his Fortune. Nor yet always so silently passes the
Debate, Execrations and Imprecations usually fill up the Scenes, which
frequently are closed in a Tragic Issue, the interlude too probably the
Prelude to a Quarrel.

How materially the unrestrained Liberty hereof may conduce to the Damage of a
Civil Society, we need not to infer, when we shall reflect upon the Consequence
of the Practice, tending to a certain and sudden extirpation of a Family, where
the falling Pillar not only shattereth his own Branches, but either becomes an
useless Burden to the whole Frame in a passive Indigence, or a common
Incendiary in sinister Practices, to supply a Recruit by desperate Attempts. We
have omitted to propound to every exorbitance an equal Penalty, according to
our former Order. In Respect that diverse Circumstances, both in Action, Place,
Person, Age, Sex, etc. may not only vary the Measure of the Error, but the
Nature also of the Penalty, which can only meet a plausible Infliction in the
Judicious Imposition of the Moral Censor.

XXXVII. The General Properties inherent to our Civil Existence, with their
ligitimate Fruition and Possession.
BEfore we proceed to treat of the Security and Improvement of our Civil
Property, in Order immediately ensuing: It will first be requisite, that we
should fully and clearly distinguish the Dependences thereof, with their
Legitimate Possession and Fruition, without which, our Enterprise will, in the
most perfect Contexture encounter but an improper Issue, since Rebels,
Outlaws, Thieves and Rovers may in their common Association, possibly pursue
an equal Method to preserve the Spoil, Rapine, and Murder had congested; yet
not attain the Dignity or Glory of a Civil Society. In order to our
Proposition. The General Properties have Reference to our Civil Existence, may
properly be specified under these Distinctions, Wife, Children, Servants,
Office, House, Lands, Chattels, or Movables; To which we become legally
entitled, either by a just Acquisition: a free Donation, or a lineal
Succession. How far, and in what the Nature of each Title may hold a due
Conformity with each Property, we severally shall endeavor to discover.

Though the explicit sense of Acquisition may seem improperly applied to so
solemn an Institution, as a Conjugal Relation, in that the sympathetick
Influence of Nature often Tecretly determines the Contract, before the Overture
is published, constituting the subsequent Agreement rather a Donative, then a
sollicitous Capitulation: nevertheless in Respect, the implicit Inference
thereof may reach beyond the vulgar usage of our Tongue, we will apply It to
the vulgar usage of the Ceremony, being in their Practice frequently, but a
Mercinary Compact: under which Latitude of Sense, may be comprised diverse
species of Conjugal Acquisition; as that of Violence, which probably may be
judged the most improper and unlawful kind imaginable. Insomuch, as the
Proceedure is altogether repugnant to the first, Natural, and most legitimate
Motive of union. Love, yet weighed with a Reference to some Consequents, an
enterprise unimpeachable, as the primitive Romans Incursions on the Sabines.
And the abandoned Remnant of the Benjamites on the relenting Tribes; where the
inveterate emnity of an Adversary maliciously would endeavor to extirpate a
People, by intercepting so the course of Nature in a lawful Propagation.

In all other Respects every personal Violence herein may properly be held a
Capital Delinquence.

Whether a Collateral Violence herein, where the assenting Child is forced
from the dissenting Parent, be a Crime so highly punishable as the rigor of
the Civil Law exacteth, imputing It equivalent to a Rape, is an Argument not
unworthy an exact Discussion, since our most Legitimate inherence of Right is
constituted in our own Natural Production. And the most proper and plausible
Motive to be successive continuance of that Production, the impulsive Influence
of a virtuous Love. The Civil Balances thus counterpoised, we will endeavor
to remove the Impediments may probably obstruct their Motion; whether in
Reference to Sex, Age, or Condition; As to the Distinction of Sex, no Law
admits the Male to a capacity of a Conjugal Violence, either Personal, or
Collateral. Many subscribe to the disanulling of the Contract transacted
without the Paternal Agreement: so that we may conclude the Female here only
capable of a Personal, or a Collateral Violence. Neither can her Consent before
Maturity for Generation free the Attempter from the Guilt of a Personal
Violence. In Respect, the natural Motives to such Union are yet to them held
indistinguishable. From the Impeachment of a Collateral Violence, no Age, under
the Paternal Tuition, can exempt the undertaker, her widowhood. falls not under
such Prescription; insomuch, as the Parent has formerly made a surrender of
his Title in a free Donation, and her Husband deceasing, leaves her as Head to
the successive Government of his Family.

In Reference to the Quality or Condition, why the Law should form the
Distinction of a Violence, from her Civil Endowments, is not clearly obvious to
a rational Inspection; since every Violence has only for Object, the Impulsion
of the will, either Personally or Collaterally, in Reference to the
Infringement of another Interest, which is either Paternal or Guardiant. The
former our Laws reflect not on, possibly, in Respect, it yet rests in the
Capacity of the Parent to frustrate the Fruition of her Pretenses. The latter
being but a Relation of Trust, can less in Reason, challenge the Privilege to
such a Procedure, not rightly entitled to a Property, unless we should avow the
venal Acquisition of the Tutelage, now abolished, to the approved Ruin of a
Family, which might yet nevertheless more equitably have been repaired in the
Censure of a slightes Trespass, had not the Dignity of the Prince herein been
immediately or remotely blemished; which being only successive to the Paternal
or Natural Authority, why should the Parent be excluded such a Privilege,
where the succession is unalterable, depending on another Line: Which
Proposition leads us again into the current of our suspended Argument, whether
the Parents Dissent only in a Conjugal Contract, may equitably fall under the
Censure of a Rape? The Supreme, Sacred, most General, and Authentic Rules to
illuminate our ways in the intercourse of humane Society afford us no approved
Proof of Conjugal Union, but what has been derived from the Agreement of the
natural Parent, whose Reception of the Addresses properly did form the
Introduction to the Contract: insomuch, as the first most visible and
legitimate Inherence of Right, is that which is extracted from the course of
Nature. This Procedure seems also most authentickly confirmed in the Formality
of the Ceremony, where the Transaction passes from the Parents hand, or one
that Personates his presence. In competition to the Filial Liberty herein
(which probably might lessen the Nature of the Trespass) may be alleged the
Irresistible Influence of the Celestial Orbs ordained to such Impressions on
Inferior Bodies, as may impulsively attract them to an Union, without the
Consultation of the will, which not submitting to the exactest Result of the
Interior Light, in opposition of their Motion, may equitably be dispenc't from
the subordinance to another will, when as not under the subjection of our own.
Nor can the Advantages of Fortune, which usually herein o're-sway the Parents
Inclination, be a plausible Inducement to so material a Consequence, where the
Perfection of the Institution depends immediately on the mutual Agreement of
the Interior Faculties; which in their Conjunction can produce but a degenerate
Composure in Another, when formed from so Gross and Corrupt an Object. In
favor of the Trespassor, where her Civil endowments are but voluntary or
casual, may be alleged the Sincerity of the Motive to an honorable Persuit,
limiting his Pretenses in the Fruition only of her Person, without the
Inherences to her Fortune, having in the Disorder of his Proceeding frustrated
his Capacity to acquit it. From the Result of our Discussion, may possibly be
formed a Conclusion sufficient to suspend the Impeached from a Capital Offense:
but nothing yet from thence inferred, might counterpoise the Parents Injury in
the Miscarriage of a Child, did the Loss extend no farther then the Ravishing
of his Comfort might have redounded from the endearments of an agreeable
Community, if but established by his Counsel or Election. In Reference therefore
to the Trespassors may be affirmed, that to the Disobedience of the Child is
justly balanced the forfeiture of her Patrimonial Inherency. To the Insolence
of the Violator, such Reparation in Honor, as the Dignity of the Family may
require. In the sequel of our purpose remains yet a Difficulty not
enlightened, whether It rest in the Civil Capacity of the Parent to disanul the
Contract past by Nuptial Ceremony? For solution to the Question, may be
replied, Few Laws herein dissent from the Affirmative. But how such Procedure
may be consistent with the Honor or Advantage of the Child, or yet the
Parents future Satisfaction (All conjugal Rights transacted) is
indistinguishable.

Another kind of Conjugal Acquisition, more properly so termed, is the Ve^al
Acquisitions where the Acquisitor purchases his Pretenses from the Parent, for
a certain sum of Money, or other Consideration, which passes sometime under
the formality of a Present. A Method of Acquisition very improper and
unsuitable to the Practice of our Age, where the highest perfection of personal
Endowments, cannot win so much as the shadow of Attraction on our sordid
Inclinations: yet wants it not the Authority of the exactest Models of a Civil
Society, to form the Institution Regular. Probably in Respect, that such
Proceeding is the highest Pledge to an inviolable Amity, the surest and most
plausible Foundation to the happy Condition and end of so necessary an
Institution. But whether such Forms of Contract may meet no Inconvenient in the
Consequence, is not so clearly obvious: Insomuch as the Nature of the
Introduction may possibly figure a more high and unequal Inherence to the
Property, then probably may be consistant with so perfect an Amity; seeming in
the intention, rather to imply a Distance of Servilty, then a Coadjutance in
the Ministry: We may therefore herein conclude, that a mutual Retribution of
the Civil Faculties is as proper an Order to a happy Institution in this Civil
Union, as the reciprocal communication of the Natural Faculties is to the
successful Constitution of the Natural Union: yet in either Transaction will
such a method be preposterous, if the Motive thereto do proceed rather from the
means, then from the end or Object of the Institution: to the perfect forming
whereof, the former should be but a concealed subsequent to the latter, not a
primary and visible Inducement. Such Procedure, among the Spartans, adjudged so
irregular to a happy Union, that It fell, by public Ordinance, under the
Censure of a Civil Penalty.

The succeeding Title to a Conjugal Adherence is that of Donation, the most
usual, proper, and legitimate Method in constituting so material an Union,
where the uncorrupted will moves freely to a deliberate Result in the Election,
that a happy and agreeable Community may thence issue to every Branch inherent
to the Alliance. To what Latitude the Agreement of Parties may justly be
extended, is a Subject not altogether inconsiderable. The Parent and the
Espoused may probably here limit the Proposition, though Custom, in Civil
usage, requires it even from the Remotest of the Family, yet rather under a
Form of Ceremony, then a Pretense of Right. But why the Maternal Assent (she
being the sole Regent to her Family) should here not be admitted to an equal
Privilege, in the successive Authority to her deceased Husband, as to appear a
Principle in the Ceremony, is a Civil Impropriety, scarce shadowed with a
Rational Pretense, unless the practice be voluntarily waved, in favor to the
decent Restraint of a womanly Passion, which might possibly extend to a
disorderly Erruption, personally to separate from her self by her own public
Act, Whom tender Nature had so nighly united.

From the example of that exact Pattern of Morality, Cato Vticensis may here be
possibly inferred a Proposition, which seldom could elsewhere find out a
President, but in licentious Practices, whether this Conjugal inherence may be
(with due conformity to Civil Rules) transacted by the Principle to another
Possession, as a Common Property. The solution may properly without
contradiction, pass in the Negative. Insomuch as there was a mutual Reception
in the Contract, and the Husband not in right empowered to alienate himself from
her Possession; to whom he was conferred by his own proper Act, Nor can a joint
Concession from both Principles from equitably a Retraction of so strict a vow
in so solemn an Institution. In Reference to Cato's procedure herein may be
alleged, that such elevated and refined Spirits, have in the source and course
of their Communities more noble Objects, then the vulgar can reflect upon, as
the plausible Reception of his Wife again on her first Widowhood may express.
Such Traces therefore can visibly form no proper Rules to common Actions.

The latter Method of a Conjugal Investure is that of a Succession, an Order
not any where found in use, but in the Judaick Society* And there also under a
Conditional Position, If the Brother dyed without issue. The intention of the
Prescription had possibly both explicitly and implicitly a plausible Persuit.
Explicitly, the support of the Brothers Name and Family. Implicitly, that such
a ^ighness of Relation might more peculiarly in them engraft a stricter Union.

To the Right of Possession must necessarily proceed the Right of Institution,
either Civil, or Divine, as the Legislative Power shall adjudge most proper to
the Nature of the Transaction; which concluding in the latter, may possibly
lend more weight unto the Ordinance: But both tending to a due and orderly
establishment, require authentic Publication, to avoid promiscuous,
scandalous, and litigious mixtures. Whence consequently ensues this
Proposition, Whether private and concealed Contracts, under what form soever
passed, tending to a Conjugal Union, may be admitted to the full Capacity of a
legal Institution. For solution, may be affirmed, that such Agreement equally
and effectually may engage the Transactors to a mutual Coherence. But not
oblige the Civil Society to an equal Reception of their Transactions under such
Distinction, until by perfect and authentic Publication specified.

One Ambignity inherent to our Subject, may probably here require a due
Discussion, whether the Allowance of Poligamy might prove consonant or useful
to our Civil Order. If the Felicity or security of a Civil Society consisted in
a numerous multitude; the certain'st means to attain it in a lawful Propagation
might be allowed warrantable. But questionless, a due Proportion of the parts
thereof is requisite to form a perfect Harmony in the Civil Frame. A noxious
Repletion may as well happen to the Body Politic as Natural; both Quoad Vires.
Inrespect of becoming a burden to the whole Frame, or Quoad Vassa. In regard of
the excessive Extent of each peculiar Continent beyond a due Capacity of
Reception. Furthermore, Unity being the sole Object of a Civil Felicity, can no
way rationally be attained in so unequal a Diversity.

Having thus lent a legitimate Prescription to the Conjugal Union, e're we
proceed to treat upon the subsequent Particulars, it will be yet material here
to trace a Rule to their legitimate Separation, in Respect, it possibly may
extend to so valid a Retraction, that each surviving party may legally be
endowed with Capacity to transact their Persons, on another in a new Election.

To what Latitude of sense a legal Separation here may be extended, is not yet
clearly obvious, since vulgar usage thereby only would imply a temporary
Division, either voluntary or Impulsive. The Total only falling under notion of
Divorce.

In Reference therefore to such Distinction, we will proceed to agitate on
their Nature. A Conjugal Separation is either Extralegal, or Voluntary, or
Legal and Impulsive.

Extralegal or Voluntary Separation is such a Division in a conjugal Union, as
may be constituted by mutual Assent or Agreement of the Parties, which may
either be repealed or continued, without any Procedure or Formality of the Law.

A Legal Separation is such, as by due course of Law becomes imposed on
complaint. and by due course of Law, may with consent of Parties be repealable;
if irrepealable, the true Distinction Thereof more properly falls under Nature
of Divorce.

The Extralegal or Voluntary Separation formed from Divine or Moral
Prescription, not reaching any Civil Ordinance, we will omit here farther to
discuss upon, as altogether improper to our Subject.

The Legal or Impulsive Separation presents unto us a double Ambiguity,
whether, and on what Ground, such Separation, may plausibly be constituted by a
Civil Ordinance: And whether any Act under such Separation passed jointly or
severally, wherein both Parties are concerned, may be accounted valid.

For solution, we may conclude, that such a Procedure possibly may justly fall
under the Concession of a Civil Judicature. But with this strict Limitation
only, where a visible Attempt has been practiced against the Life of either
party by the joint Associate, in regard our common safety is the immediate
Object of a Civil praescription. And although it here may be alleged, that the
Civil Texture has more forceable and general Rules formed in it self to the
due restraint of such Accidents. Yet where the Fuel to the Action so nighly
and continually is fomented, the Civil Judicature might justly be held guilty
of the barbarous Issue, should It decline from the removal of such opportunity,
might minister to the Mischief.

As to the Transactions jointly may concern the Conjugal Union under a legal
Separation, we either may reduce them to a Civil or a Natural Reference. The
Civil have their Limits under private Contract or under public Ordinance.

The Natural suspended by Decree, cannot without a public Repeal, either
severaly or jointly transacted, attain a true Legitimacy.

The nature of a Divorce, extends to a vaster Latitude, having for Object a
total or perpetual Separation from a conjugal Society, impulsively constituted
by a Civil Ordinance,

But under what Remonstrance such a censure may justly pass the Civil
Judicature, is not so fully specified. Acts of Adultery are only explicit'ly
expressed in the sacred Letter, and so far prosecuted by the Institution of the
Civil Law, but under such Obscurity and Difficulty in the distinction, that the
intention thereof totally thereby becomes frustrate. In Reference to the First
obstacle, where the ground of the Procedure falls under a criminel Trespass.
The Praescription vainly tends to a Civil Division, in Relation to the
second, where the Charge requires an occular Testimony to form the
Impeachment regular; the proof rests totally o're-shadowed with a humane
impossibility.

We may yet more properly hereto annex such incapacities as may frustrate the
intention of the Conjugal Institution; whether Civil, Natural, or Accidental.

Under the Notion of a Civil Incapacity, may pass not only such, as are
excluded by a common Praescription in the Civil Order, as Idiots, Lunaticks.
etc. But such Relations also of a Blood, as in regard of their Proximity may
decently fall under Legal Interdiction, Qui loco Parentum inter se habent, etc.

Under the distinction of a Natural Incapacity, we may infer such incorrigeable
Imperfections, as by nature happen through the error of her work.

The Accidental Incapacity may be extended to Praeternatural or Artificial
Affections.

The Praeternatural, where either Naturally or Adventitiously, ex morbosa
aliqua constitutione partis aliquid deest, vel superest; by imperfect
constitution of Parts, some thing is either wanting or superfluous. The Latter
Imperfection may fall under the possibility of a Remedy to render it a capacity
of Conjugal Union. As Imperforatae. The Former never.

Under an Artificial Incapacity may be inserted such an Impotence, as is
contracted by inward Assumption or outward Application, or by Enchantment, as
Ligati. But in respect such disabilities seldom are incorrigeable, we cannot
justly exclude them from capacity of Conjugal union.

Some difficulties inherent to our Subject may pertinently be here enlightened,
as whether such a legal Incapacity ought to be subsequent or preceding the
Conjugal Association? And whither such an Incapacity predistinguishable may
justly, in concealment, fall under censure of a Civil Trespass.

The First Position seems a scruple scarce worth an Exposition. Since every
just pretense of a Retraction in agreement (of this kind) is grounded on
Deffaut preceding contract. The Latter being a Subject more proper to another
Principle we will remit to their peculiar Order.

2. From the perfect fruition of the First Property usually proceeds the
justest Acquisition of the Second. Children, which nevertheless, without so
strict a Reference, materially may be considered under the Distinction of the
Natural and the Civil.

The Natural Acquisition is either Ligitimate or Illegitimate. The Civil only
is Adoptive.

The most proper and agreeable coherence is without doubt the Natural, in which
our very Essence seems in the Current of succession transferred to Eternity,
without which, Man's successful endeavors (though Crowned with opulence and
Honor,) yield in their fullest Affluence but an imperfect satisfaction, their
charming Harmony still grating the affected Heart, with the good Patriarchs
interjected Discord. Quid mihi. That the illegitimate Dependence, though
naturally constituted, should reach so high a consequence, can scarcely be
affirmed. Since Infamy and Infidelity associate the Production.

It will therefore be materially pertinent to our Order fully to appropriate
unto either their Distinctions. Children entitled with Adherence of Legitimacy,
may such be figured either properly or improperly.

Properly, such, as after due solemnity of their Nuptial Rites, are in due
season and maturety of time produced.

Improperly, such as before Term, under Term, or after Term of Conjugal
Institution, untimely are produced.

The Two First Distinctions the Civil Law admits to a privilege of
Legitimacy, and sometime the Latter, when confirmed by some Accident, that
Nature was disturbed in her usual course. Our Laws more Rationally, exclude
them all from such capacity: Insomuch, as the succession of Families, (in
regard of their Possessions) ought to be preserved, so regularly pure, as not
to become subject to the blemish of a visible suggestion.

The Illegitimate coherence of Children may also bear the same distinction,
being such either Properly or Improperly.

Properly, such as without Reference either to Preceding or Succeeding
contract, at any time are produced.

Improperly, such, as with Reference either to Preceding, or Succeeding
contract, or unto both, untimely are produced.

The Latter Distinction of Illegirimacy may sometime plausibly (in reference to
many circumstances in the Transaction) by especial Grace of Prince or People,
be admitted to a capacity of Legitimacy. The former regularly and without
Opproby never.

To these Distinctions of Filial Inherency, may properly be annexed that of our
Adoption. A Custom very frequent among the Romans, where Virtue being esteemed
the highest Dignity, became invested with adherence of the nighest Relation; on
the immediate extinction of a Famil^ ^ut to support their Name.

How far the Agreement should extend to form the Instiution regular may
probably frame an Argument material in Discussion. Besides the Principles both
Pater and Patria are concerned in the Agitation, nor can either justly be
excluded in consent to the Transaction. The Parenty in respect, a Member thus
becomes desected from the Family; The Civil Society, in regard no alteration of
Order in so Essential a Distinction can justly be admitted in the Civil Frame,
without a public Act, so that we may hereby conclude the Inherence to his
Property must pass under the Title of Donation.

Whither the Paternal Inherencies, as Lands, Goods, Honors, etc. may justly be
transferred with the Person to another Family, is a Subject materially
considerable, and may possibly without opposition pass in the Negative;
insomuch as the common Affluence tending to support but one peculiar Stock,
becomes enfeebled, when diverted to the enlargement of another.

3. Servants in Reference to their Use and Nature, have a vast extent in their
Distinction, as Bond-servants and Free-servants, Domestiques and Retainers,
Fealists and Facultists.

Bond-servants are distinguished in the Perpetuity of their Servitude,
terminating only with their Owners special Grace in a public Enfranchisement,
or by the Common Law of Nature.

Of These there are sundry sorts of Acquisition, The Primitive and most Antic,
was, questionless, the chance of War, which inevitable Thraldom to the
vanquished, was probably the highest and the justest Motive to a generous
opposiition. The hope of future enlargement, tending but to unnerve the
Resolution. But Man contracting still corruption with the Time, formed hereto
another species of Acquisition, the victor not contented with the use and Glory
of These living Trophies to his valor, made them the Subject of his Avarice in
a sordid Traffic. 3. To These two kinds of Acquisition succeeds a Third, not
altogether properly so termed, in respect it seems framed on a voluntary
Concession, where the Bondsman attaining by public Ordinance: the privilege of
Enfranchisement, prefers his Bondage before his Liberty, not accepting the
Permission, whereon the Master nailing his Ear to the Post of the House, became
entitled to his use for ever. Yet may this probably be judged an Acquisition of
Benignity, which in his former Bondage had so engratiated the servant, he could
not hope to improve in future his Condition.

4. From these Distinctions of Acquisition may possibly proceed a For more just
and absolute then all the other, when in a lawful ^^opagation, they are
multiplied, where the enthralled Infant receiving his Elevement in the Family
by his Masters care, more sensibly accepts him for his Father, of such were
formed the good old Patriarchs Families.

Whether the Authority of the Lord over his Bondsman, justly might extend to
Life and Death, is an Argument may properly be here reflection. The practice of
most Commonwealths in which this sort of servitude was formerly in use, affirms
it regular. To which the sacred Letter not much dissents, prescribing to the
term of an accidental Dispensation, but the extent of three days from the Fact
unto his expiration, rather as a Restraint to Inhumanity then a rule of Equity,
as appears by the sequel, for he was his Money, which seems to acquit him from
a voluntary Act, in reference to his own Interest. The weight of This
Proposition chiefly depends upon the Bondmans adherence to the Civil frame, to
which admitting him a Member, he justly then may claim a privilege of security
from the Civil Rule, if not admitted such, he must at least be yet allowed to
be a Civil Property inherent to the Public benefit, which no way can be
wilfully destroyed, without a common prejudice, so that if the Fact prove not a
criminel Delinquence, it of necessity must be adjudged a public Trespass;
which conclusion also will meet a farther impropriety in Rule, since every
Bondmans life extinguished by any hand, can only pass the censure of his
Price, nor falls it equaly within a Civil Reparation, if the Agent be of equal
incapacity, so that such a Liberty may possibly extend to a preposterous
disorder in the public Peace. To take away the cruelty of the Masters,
redounding often to the public prejudice. Antonius commanded they should be
sold to others, not barbarously Treated by their Owners.

Bodin concludes our Customary forms of Apprentisage under this Distinction,
though but improperly, in Respect, there is herein a voluntary and conditional
Ingress and Egress of Contract: All which Parts of progression are utterly
inconsistent with the proper Nature of a Bondage.

Free Servants are by voluntary and mutual Contract under the subjection only
of a Temporary Servitude: and may such properly be qualified from the voluntary
Initiation of This Servitude, which limited by prescription of a Covenant,
renders to them a voluntary capacity of enlargement; of which there are diverse
kinds, either in Reference to their Term of Servitude, as Septannual, Annual,
Mensal or Journal; or in Respect of their Abode, as Domestics or Retainers.
These sort of Servants in their simple Nature, without a Reference to peculiar
Covenant, are properly inherent only to the title of an Acquisition, In Respect
the agreement is usually raised only on a personal adherence, which Ceasing by
decease of either Party, the efficacy of the Contract must of necessity be
void, though custom possibly may lend It other privilege.

Fealists are such, who by the Tenor of a real Possession, owe personal Service
or Vassalage to the peculiar Lord, and might not altogether improperly be
reduced to the Distinction of a Bondage. A Species of Assubjection not without
due consideration dissected from our Civil Sufferance by public Ordinance:
Insomuch as It has heretofore been found a visible fomenter to our Civil
Brons, and has now only lest a shadow Thereof in our Court Suits and Services.
These sort of Dependents fall under a Capacity of every Title to a Civil
Property, whether Acquisitive, Donative, or Successive, being usually inherent
to the possession of the Royalty.

Facultists have their subjection formed voluntary, by a mutual Contract, in
Reference only to the Civil Function, under Limitation of a term expressed;
which being expired, they legally may challenge their Infranchisement to the
public Profession of their Art; and may properly be comprised under the
Distinction of Free Servants. Freedom preceding the Election, and Freedom
succeeding the Intention, as the Object of their Servitude. In the common usage
of this inherent, Custom has formed an Impropriety not equitably allowable.
That any one, not yet, by Civil Rule, admitted to the Capacity of Fruition of
his own Property, should be permitted to dispose of his own Person. It Is true,
the Parents frequently are supervisors to the Contract, but yet therein no real
Agitators, nor yet where their assent is not so evident, does any Civil Rule
afford a privilege to the Retraction of the Covenant.

4. Offices in Reference to a Civil Property, are formed only to the Public
use: Nor, can plausibly be either admitted Acquisitive or Successive: Not
Acquisitive insomuch as such an Introduction does figure a pretense unto
unequal purposes, and lends a color to the corrupt execution of his Trust.
Lucre being the common object of a venal Commerce, farthermore so improper a
Reception detracteth from the Worth and Dignity of the Minister; who should
lend weight and Grace to the prescription of his Charge: under the license also
of such custom, improper Agents are admitted to the managing of Important
Agitations; not leaving the Institutor a privilege of Election, while worth
and virtue not stooping to so abject a procedure, become excluded the Capacity
of a Civil Negotiation, Their proper and peculiar Sphere to lend true Luster to
their Nature. Such Employments therefore might more happily be reserved to the
Immediate Dispensation of a Prince or People, to recompense and dignifie
approved Virtue in a plausible Distinction, and gratify especial Services,
without exhausting of the common Treasury. Whether this Mercinary Commerce fall
under the practice of a Prince, his more peculiar or more general Ministers.
The Inconvenients not differ much in Nature, only the Improvement of a Princes
Treasure (though with impeachment to his Honor) may to a vulgar Inspection
seem possibly to conduce more to the Public Benefit: Yet the material
Influence of either well distinguished, in Reference to the Public Good. The
Dignity, Virtue, and Benignity of a Prince, clearly over ballanceth such sordid
Consequents.

Not Successive, For then the Impropriety of the Agent to the Action were
irrepairable; and the Civil Frame must sometime of necessity sinck under the
Insufficience or Corruption of engrafted Ministers. Farthermore the progression
of Virtue to a Civil use, would utterly be obstructed, were the transactions of
her Ministry only inherent to the Natural Order. And the Influence of a Princes
Grace not materially communicable, the Subject should dispense the same,
removed from his proper Act.

Lands and Houses have one and the same Distinction in Possession, being either
Real, or Personal. And though the Latter Inherence may seem to issue from the
Former, yet without doubt the Latter had first the pre-eminence in use; as
appears in the primitive and unstable abode of our Forefathers, before the
Sword had yet established a distinct property, which in process of time having
reduced many Families of nighest Alliance to one Civil Subjection, assumed,
according to the Capacity of their Powers, such a Proportion of the earth, as
might preserve their lives with Pleasure and Tranquillity. And to avoid the
Incursion of their Borderers, erected such Receipts for their Assemblies, as
might make Opposition to Invasion: In which, that every one might equally be
concerned, their precincts to each Owner was prescrib^d by common Divident,
under the Tenor of the Institution, to whose Jurisdiction they became
subordinate by a mutual Interest: So that we may conclude the Tenor of each
Real Possession, is primitively inherent to the Prince or State presideth the
Society under the form of a Donation, with such Reserves of Interest therein,
as might support the Investure of such Dignity. In Reference to such
Consequence might probably become instituted the first Title of Inherency, as
Feofs en tail, where the nighest male succeeds to the Possession.

Subsequent to Feofs en tail, are Feofs simple, where the Real Possession
descends to the Heirs General, under which Title Custom admits the
Primogenitor also to succeed to the Succession, resting only this Difference
betwixt This and the former Title of Inherence, that herein the Possessor has
a capacity to dispose of his Possession, in present or future, where and how he
pleases, in the Former neither, being but Tenant for Life, and the next Male,
lineally descended, must, though against his liking, become invested in the
Right of his Succession.

Another Title of Inherence to a Real Possession, is Feof en Farm; A Title
usually issuing from the Concession of a Prince, where the Possession is
transacted to a lineal Adherence, under the Reservation of a certain Rent.

These Titles of Inherence have also Reference to certain Tenors, and are
either held in Capite, Soccage, Knight Service, etc. But why such Distinction
of Tenors should remain, where the personal Engagements are dissolved, may
prove an Argument to a farther Inquisition: besides these general Tenors, there
are also with us, customary or particular Tenors, as Cavil kind, where every
Party equal in Proximity, is admitted to an equal partage in the possession,
borrow English where the youngest only.

Personal Possessions are such, as by mutual Contract of Parties are consigned
under certain Covenants, and for certain term, either by Copy, or Lease;
though the former Title may seem under customary Privilege to challenge a
succession of Right. Yet since the Condition of the Copy bearing a Personal
Prescription, and falling under a Capacity of Retraction, may become void and
divided from the Right of a Succession, without any voluntary Act or Surrender,
it properly may fall under this Distinction.

Every Real Possession being originally derived from the Civil Institutor,
whether his Investure therein were constituted by Agreement, or the Sword.
Under the Title of Donation extended to a special, or a general Succession,
ought equitably to be served by Civil Ordinance in such adherence to a
perpetuity; Such was the Constitution of the Judaick Possessions in their
primitive Dividents, which could not be alienated from the Family or
Succession, but till the ensuing Jubilee, nor so passed from the next Successor,
unless he had refused to accept the Sale. A plausible Institution to preserve
agreeing Simitry in each Part of the Civil Structure, lend bounds to insatiate
Avarice, and succor to the Indigent. The Latter part of the Institution
remains still in Force under the Texture of the Civil Law. The nighest in
Relation, under Prescription of time, retaining a Capacity of Redemption. But
the Corruption of Humane Nature still finds evasion to frustrate the Intent of
any Ordinance established to the public Benefit, usually disguising the Nature
of the Sail, under the color of exchange, though the pretense be never so
unequally designed. That it may justly in this, as in many others, become a
wonder to a rational Inspection. Why Civil Societies so exactly consult, and so
long deliberate on the Establishment of Their Decrees: yet suffer the Intent
thereof, to become violated, mocked and cheated by adulterate Practices.

No Title can truly empower the owner to pass the Possession of a Real Estate,
equitably by Donation or Deed, but that of Acquisition, unless the Possession
issue from a simple Donation, without reference to Succession; which then
according to the Letter must terminate in his, to whom it is Transacted. In
which case, if feasible, a Donation might fall under the Nature of an
Acquisition: In all other Respects the successors have a just Title of
Inherence to the possession, and can no way be alienated without Injury, till
the succession fail. The Industry of the Predecessors having equally for Object
the common Interest of the Family.

A Real Acquisition is a Privilege inherent only to the Natives, Aliens being
generally excluded from the Capacity of a Real Possession under what Title
soever, lest the substance Inherent to a Civil Society, should be transferred
to a foreign use.

Real Acquisitions are not without Reason limited in some Societies by Civil
Ordinance, especially falling under usage of a Commulty; where the possession
finding no Issue by succession, might possibly in process of time swell to so
unequal a proportion, as might not be consistant with the Public Interest. To
form the Acquisition legal, the Civil Law exacts the consideration be in a
certain measure valuable, else becomes void in the Transaction.

Real Possessions admitted general in Succession, are properly not subject to a
Distinction in Sex.

Chattels or Movables hold a vast extent in the Definition of their Nature,
which may nevertheless be reduced to one Species, under the Distinction of
Money, the Common Receptacle to all the Rest. In this Property we justly may
become entitled from any hand by way of Donation, since no inherence can be
constituted on so moveable and uncertain a Commodity, though Nature seem to
claim the first Direction, and her order thereto the Progression: yet being the
fruit of Industry or Parcimony, the Possessor denying himself the use thereof,
may justly be allowed his Inclination in the Fruition of another, how remote
soever. But the most plausible Title to the Possession of this Property, is a
just and regular Acquisition. The first and least subject to Corruption is the
Manual, next the Official, last the Venal. Of the Venal the foreign. Of the
Official the voluntary. Of the Manual the most necessary, from which principles
issue all the Branches of a Civil Commerce.

This Property also falls sometime under the Title of Succession, when the
Possessor dies Intestate. But why the right of Administration should be so
constituted in one Principle, by the Civil Law, contrary to her proper Order,
as to exclude others equal in Descent, from equal Divident, may become a
Caution not unworthy a Public Reflection, though the error seems cast on the
untimely Advertisement of the pretenders. Or why as some affirm, the Female
Line should be preferred before the Masculine, without Infringement to the
Civil Order. The procedure admitting of no other Rule then what might blemish
her own Institution, inclining rather to the certainty of Nature, then the
Authority of her own Prescription.

XXXIX. The security of our Civil Property.
THE security of our Civil Property (without Contradiction) consists totally
under the Tuition of the Law, But such is the frailty of our Condition, that we
pervert the very Nature and Intention of all things that fall under our
depraved usage, whether Civil, Natural, or Divine, though never so happily
constituted to our Benefit. A more visible Proof whereof cannot be instanced,
then what we may extract from the Constitution and Issue of all humane Laws,
though never so exactly constituted, being ordained for the Peace and
Preservation of the whole Frame of Civil Union, are universally the highest
fomenter of Division, and the most destructive Burden that any way imaginable
can happen to It, insomuch, as all other Calamities and Inconvenients of what
kind soever have their peculiar Seasons, Relaxes, and Intermissions. But this
inevitable poison, under the color of a common Aliment, is distributed, even
to the smallest Vessels of the Civil Structure. It will therefore be very
material (more successfully to approach the general Nature of the Object of our
Treatise) to search into the ground of so unhappy a Consequence, which probably
may be disclosed in the Reflection of these Particulars. 1. The mutual
Disaffection of the People. 2. The Damage that attends on the Issue and
Pursuit of a Civil Decision. Though possibly might hereto be inferred diverse
other more immediate Circumstances, which frequently pervert the Institution of
the Law: as, 1. The Improper Constitution of Courts of Judicature. 2. Their
Error in Practice. 3. The Corruption of their Practitioners: 4. The Impropriety
of the Law. Yet nevertheless, since the two former causes removed, will
inevitably frustrate all Inconvenience might arise from any such Disorder, we
only will insist on their Discussion.

1. The mutual Disaffection of the People, without Question lends the first
Combustable Matter to a Civil Dissension, and may properly be termed the
Tinder of Debate; which catching fire on every slight Emotion, prompts the
heady will to snatch at every slight occasion, that may Minister to the
Distemper, and to justify the Resentment, though never so irregular, and
warrant the satisfaction, though never so destructive; most fly unto the Law,
which both in the Procedure and Issue, leaving fresh Matter to more violent
Debates, instead of apeaceable Decision, multiply an impetuous Division: On
which inevitable Consequence of humane Infirmity, the exactest Legislators
maturely reflecting, have endeavored to erect the structure of their Civil
Society, chiefly on the Baiz of a mutual Unity, Concinity, and Agreement of the
Parts thereof, utterly removing all Obstacles might therein visibly obstruct
their happy enterprise; and employing all the Ayds imaginable, might either
through Use or Advantage, Form in them the perfect'st Habit of Affection, more
strictly regarding in their Transactions the Rights of Amity, then of Justice;
as may, in Reference to the first part of the Assertion, appear in Licurgus,
Taking away the use of Money from among tho Lacedaemonians. Numas equal Division
of the Lands Inherent to the Jurisdiction among the Romans. In proof of the
sequel aforesaid, may be instanced The strict Laced
Association of their Communities. Every one, if able, was enjoined under
Penalty to repair unto the public Intercourse of their Associates, for their
refection, under this Limitation, that on those days designed for Hunting, his
Absence was permitted, conditionally, The whole Society might participate with
him of the success of his Industry: the Residue was licenc't to his private
usage and his Families. According to this Rule was formed the Association of
the Esseans, a Sect among the Jews, whose happy condition did far transcend the
Pharisee, or Sadduce: Insomuch, as under their inherence, none failed of his
security, depending wholly on the mutual succor of the whole Society, whose
joint Interest was engaged both to the timely, and the due support of every
Member of their Civil Frame. In relation to this Model were reduced the
Centuries into Maniples, and Chambriers, In the Military Order among the
Romans, by so nigh an Association to linck them in a stricter Union for their
mutual Succor and Defense, and for encouragement to this their Coligation, to
institute a public Triumph to him in Particular, that had secured his
Associate from the Enemy. Nor is the cautious Distinction of their Tribes,
among the Jews, so nicely passed on Record, established on any other Purpose or
Intention, then to oblige them to an Inseparable Conjunction in their
fellowship for their joint security. Our common Distinctions of Consanguinity,
Alliance and Affinity, but spurious Emblems are of our Relations, in Reference
to the proper use, and primitive Institution, being only kept alive by Record
or Tradition, for the Advantage only of Particulars, not for the mutual Benefit
of the joint Inherency, which are no otherwise therein concerned, then as
remote Collaterals, in future possibility, not in present Act; from whence
arises Controversy, Dissension, and Debate; Batteries rather for mutual Ruin
and Destruction, then Cyttadels for their common preservation; whose effects
are more obvious and deplorable, in that they frequently are distinguished in
the Transactions of the nighest Reference to a Natural Union: On whose
Composure the Civil but pretends to raise her perfect Structure and
Establishment: So that the Reflection of the Consequence justly may beget
Astonishment in a digested sense, how it is possible the Civil Jurisdiction
should resent the violation thereof, with so much Indifferency, since her
Rights are to Natures but subordinate. Nor yet is our Positions only framed on
Civil or on Moral Practices; our perfect'st Guide has lent It a more eminent
Distinction, affirming, Love to be the fulfilling of the Law. And how that Law
should meet a happy Constitution, which pursues not in Her Prescriptions the
Object of Her Execution, is questionless in Civil Rules a visible Incongruity,
whether it be in the Imperfection of Her Nature, or Impropriety of Her Order.
Whether in the Coruption of Her Ministers, or Error in their Practice, whereby
the Members of a Civil Union may either be o're-powred, or ensnared in a Civil
Transaction, lest any Grievance or Oppression happening under such a procedure,
might instigate the sufferers (judging the Nature Thereof by the Consequents)
utterly to desert those Principles, whereon the Civil Fabric chiefly was
erected, and follow strange Chimero's of their own Invention, so form in their
Division, such a Rupture in our Common Union, as possibly may extend to the
subversion of the Civil Frame.

From the Result of this our present Argument, will necessarily ensue a due
Perpensation of the next Collateral Impediment to the Intention, Propriety, and
use of the Law. The first Notion being the common Clause of a Civil Division,
the second of a Relapse; In Regard that the Damage and Disparagement attends
on the Procedure and Issue of the Law, produces in the resentment of the
Agitators new passion for Revenge on any frivolous Pretense, which frequently
are pursued and continued till both the Parties thereby become ruined with
their Families. To remove this unhaypy Consequence from the Proceeding of the
Law, whose proper Object only is, Suum cuique reddere and conservare. It will
be highly requisite to the Propriety of a Civil Institution, in Reference to a
Plea, that neither in the Issue or Persuit thereof be left remaining either
sting or scar between the Agitators, which usually are therein enduced, either
by Personal Disparagement, Indignity or Disgrace. Or Damage in Cost or Delay.
Or Burden of the Penalty. The former and the latter inconvenients may easily be
rectified in a Plausible Summons only, and a feisable Reparation. The second
not without Difficulry, in Respect the inevitable charge, which attends the
Prosecution of a Plea, is not any other way distinguishable to be avoided, It
seeming altogether Impossible, that so numerous a multitude should daily wait
on the Proceeding of our Civil Agitation without any Advantage, more then the
Demerit of the Action. In Reference to the Assertion, we may affirm, that there
can not be a more honorable or satisfactory Employment designed to any Person,
whose fortune shall afford him vacancy from the urgency of his own Affairs,
inherent to the necessity of his own subsistence, then to lend a voluntary
assistance to so important a Ministry, according to the Capacity and Number of
his Associates: Such was the procedure of those ancient Heroes, whose Virtue
only lent a more splendid Luster to the Dignity of their Country, then all the
Glory of their Victories. In Reference to which pattern he conformed his
practice, whose virtue justly had entitled him with the Denomination of her
Essence, Sen.
Cato, daily repairing from one Court of Judicature to Another, to plead
without Pretense of Gratuity, the Causes of the Indigent and oppressed, till he
was (of a stranger and obscure Extraction) held worthy to become admitted to
the highest Censor.
Ministry.

But admit the parallel (in favor of our Infirmity) more proper for our
speculation, then our Imitation; might not Courts of Judicature be constituted
in every County at the Public Charge, allowing a sufficient entertainment
annually to such a Number of Officiates, as might be fit to manage the Affairs
Co-incident to the Bounds of each peculiar Jurisdiction, whose Number being
reduced into several Divisions, might alternately officiate every Month: so
that the daily Agitation of the Court yielding a speedy Issue to their Pleas,
they rarely could become o're-burdened in their Functions, either to their own
Inconvenience, or another Prejudice: especially if no Action were admitted
pleadable, which had not passed the Allowance of a peculiar Arbitrator, who
might be so empowered as to compose a multitude of Frivolous Debates, which
usually do but multiply one another to the Disturbance of the common Peace, and
the Damage and Destruction of the Agitators.

In opposition to which Order may probably be alleged, that the inevitable
Charge attends on the Issue of the Law, cannot possibly encounter a more just
and proper Imposition, then that the Burden of the Agitation should fall upon
the Injurer. The Objection may pass as an irrefutable Position, provided the
Conclusion fall under the Restriction of a clear Capacity to distinguish, and a
full Ability to perform.

But where the sense of the Law is involved with such Obscurity and Mystery, as
no cause, how bad soever, does not only find authentic Promoters to encourage
the undertaking, but as impudent Advocates to maintain the Prosecution under a
legal formality of Right: And where the inveterate Malice of Man is universally
so great, on every slight Advantage to pursue the Opposers of his will to such
extremes, as utterly might ruin and destroy them. It plausibly may be allowed
very pertinent to the Establishment of a Civil Welfare, that the Legislators
should reflect on a more happy Constitution of Judicature, then what must of
necessity thus cast their joint Associates into their hands would sell them to
the Inemnity and Rage of one Another, in persuit only of their sordid Lucre.

XXXIX. The Principle Subjects fall under Regulation of the Law, in Reference
to the Security of our Civil Property.
HAving placed the Security of our Civil Property under the due prescription
and Execution of the Law, it will be necessary to the exact Establishment of
her work, that we briefly lay forth those accidents which in the infringement
of a Civil Interest, may lend an opposition to her Enterprise, which visibly
may be comprised under these Distinctions, Fraud, Violence, Injury, Oppression,
Fire, Inundation, Excess.

XL. Of Fraud.
WHen we shall with due Perpensation reflect on the extent of this Principle,
in Reference to a Civil Transaction, It justly may produce a wonder in the
shallowest Apprehension, that the Constitution of most Laws, in general, so
remisly weigh the Consequence Hereof, as to cast the Decision in the common
Balance of a casual Trespass: under which indulgence probably the Practice
Hereof has spread It self into the most honorable Professions, and the
nighest Relations, not only as an Act of Prailty, but as a plausible Habit in
sufficiency, inherent to the Mystery of every man's Function in a Civil use: so
that we might in Reason rather term some Civil Societies Artificial Pieces of
disguised Impostury, then Essential or Agreeing Communities: In which Regard we
will endeavor to discover the Nature, Prejudice, and Regulation Hereof most
pertinent to a Civil welfare.

The Nature Hereof is questionless a Breach of Trust. Fraud only consisting in
Reference to a Trust: so that we may conclude the Civil Prejudice, that ensues
the Practice, may reach as vast a Latitude, as the Benefit of a Trust can
properly extend to in a Civil usage: In which balance we will cast the weight
of our ensuing Argument, to lend us a more clear Inspection to guide us in the
due Regulation of our present Subject.

Trust is visibly the Band of Common Union, or the Principle conduct of a Civil
Commerce; through which the nourishment of every Faculty therein becomes
conveyed to the smallest and remotest Vessels of the Civil Frame, which
received, as a regular Position, we may clearly from thence Collect how highly
material It must be to the Improvement of a Civil Welfare to secure Trust from
all manner of Fraud whatever, that it may be preserved, so far as possibly we
may, in a clear and insubvertible Purity.

In persuit whereof, we must first distinguish the Nature of a Trust e're we
can reach our Intention, placed in the extent of the use.

In Reference to which Order, Trust is a free Act of the will to impart any
thing in our Possession to another, under the Limit of a Retribution, either
simply for the Interest of the Trustor, or soly for the Benefit of the Trustee,
or generally for the mutual and common Advantage of either, or particularly for
the use of neither; but to the use and Benefit of some other or others
specified in the Trust.

From which Distinction, in Reference to the Act, we may observe two
Circumstances in manner of the Trust to establish it Authentic. First, That it
be an Act of the Trustor's free will, not enforced on him by Violence, Urgency,
Necessity, or any such Advantage on the Inclination of the will. Secondly, That
whatever is transacted in the Trust be really without engagement in the clear
Possession of the Trustor, as his unquestionable Property: otherwise, that
Trust can prove but an imperfect Trust, which is but raised on the Breach of
Trust unto another, who may more justly claim an Interest in the property.

The Object of the Definition extends It self to four Branches, the two first,
and the last, have soly Reference to a Common Unity, the Penultimate only to a
Civil Commerce. The first may reach a Casual or Impulsive Breach to render It
rationally unactionable. The second, but with Difficulty may be admitted to
such Privilege. The two latter never fall under that Capacity. In Regard the
first Branch of Trust has only Reference to the Interest of the Trustor. The
Trustee only accepting of the trouble inherent to the Trust, as an Office of
Amity, which is perfectly discharged in his endeavor to effect it; but not
reaching the intention of either by casual or impulsive Accident; the Damage
of necessity unjustly is imposed upon him.

The second Branch of Trust, where the Trustee only reaps the Advantage of the
Trust, meets some scruple in the Dispensation of a Civil Procedure, on Casual
or Impulsive Breaches of a Trust; inasmuch as the Trustor pretends to no
benefit in the Trust. But possibly to his own Inconvenience, or other
Disadvantage, for a season, has resigned the use Thereof unto the Benefit and
Advantage only of the Trustee: So that in Reference to the Privilege
aforesaid, on Casual or Impulsive Breaches of Trust, We only can, in Civil
Rules, lay the ground of the Trustees Plea, upon a Right alone unto the
Trustors Benignity, rather then in the inefficacy of the Trust, or the
Incapacity of the Trustee. It appearing a high Impropriety in Civil Rule to
prosecute an Act of Retribution to the Damage or Destruction of him to whose
Improvement or Preservation It only was directed; and where the succor was
friendly dispensed, the Advantage Casually failing, a Reparation seems
maliciously exacted. But, as the Trustee, to whose use only the trust was
intended, may seem too favorably admitted to the Exception of a Civil
Procedure on Casual or Impulsive Breach of Trust; so the voluntary or Perverse
Breaches of trust intended only to the Advantage of the Trustee, may seem but
too remisly Censured in a Bare Reparation of the trust: insomuch, as Pain for
Profit must yet make the Return but too unequally Balanced in a due
Compensation of Right, which far more justly might extend to the Advantage, was
thereby acquired, as a Retraction of the Intention of the trust so infamously
infringed.

The third Branch of trust, which tends to the mutual Benefit of the
Transactors, is excluded such Capacity; insomuch as the trust is formed under a
Conditional Contract, in pursuit of a common Lucre, where either runs the
hazard of the Adventure by his proper Act, in Reference only to their own
Advantages; so that the trust infringed, the Trustee voluntarily casts himself
on the penalty of his Covenant.

The latter Branch of trust, which requires only the Circumspection of the
Trustee to the specific use of others privately or publicly concerned in the
trust, can pretend to no Civil Incapacity to free him from a Legal Prosecution,
in reference to a Breach of trust, in that it rests wholly in the Election of
the trustee, to accept or renounce the trust, to separate the Inherents of the
trust from his own property, or alter or transact them as his own: so that
nothing being exacted from the trustee, in execution of his trust, but his own
will, It soly is his will that can infringe it, which tending to so material
and charitable an use, failing only in the Retraction and Remisness of his
will, he justly may sustain the penalty of his reproachful and injurious
Reluctance or Neglect. This trust is usually a Testamentary trust, which
accepted, engages the trustee as his own proper Act, so far as the Capacity of
the Subject will extend, which may also be farther distinguished in a public or
a private trust.

The Private so constituted, have frequently this Default, that they seldom
reach to the intended use, when as directed to the Benefit of Children, who
commonly have most need thereof; in that their present advantage is not only
suspended, but the trust also many times so often removed, e're they attain a due
Capacity to exact it; that either the Inherents to the trust fail, or the trust
it self falls to the Ground, wanting either real or equitable Grounds yet
farther to produce it: which defect scarcely will be exactly rectified, but
under the tuition of a Public Court, constituted only for the safeguard of
such Persons as properly fall under a Civil Incapacity.

A trust exacted to a Public use, seldom or never reaches the Intention of
the trustor, in that the Election is not sufficiently separated from the
Interest of the trustees, who exercising their trust, as if only established for
the Advantage of their own Relations, mutually assent to the Remonstrance or
Intercession of one another, in favor of Particulars: whereas every Member of
the Commonwealth, under the Capacity of the trust, ought to have an equal
Privilege in the Benefit thereof. And having, without just exception, attested
his Capacity in Presentation, should by equal Lot be cast into a visible and
orderly Reception with the rest, from thence to be extracted by an impartial
hand. Farthermore, in such partial Elections, all Abuses and Breaches of trust
whatsoever, become utterly smothered by taking away the freedom of Impeachment
from those are soly interessed in the trust, in a servile Adherence to the
patronage of the trustees.

To conclude our Discussion of the Nature of our Subject, we may pertinently
here insert one General Exception against all the former Branches of a trust,
That none of them be passed under such a form, oblickly constituted for
collateral and implicit uses, not expressed in the trust: which Procedure may
justly be excluded the Suffrage of a Civil Jurisdiction, being the common
shrouds to the most specious and Considerable Frauds in Practice.

As to those Forms of trust, passed on Contracts of Marriage, they seem
improperly constituted in the Hands of a Particular, or Particulars, of how
nigh Relation soever; in that every small Occurrent tending to the
inconvenience but of some concerned therein, have commonly sufficient Influence
to overthrow the trust, unto the Prejudice of the Rest, not of Capacity to
yield to the Transaction: so that necessity will lend us a Direction to fly to
public safeguard for Redress; where such Acts becoming totally irrevocable,
they may infallibly attain the proper use to which they were directed.

Under which Notion may likewise he comprised Guardiant trusts, either
Testamentary, Successive, or Elective; which having, for Object only the
Benefit of such as are not under a capacity to act either judiciously, or
freely for their own Advantages, in respect of their Civil Incapacity, or else
the strict subordinacy to a nigh Relation. Their Interests (in reference to
many Inconvenients may thereon ensue) might more successfully be managed under
the public Tutelage.

Having thus far generally discussed on the Nature of our Subject, we will
proceed to agitate on the use thereof in some Particulars; in the Introduction
whereof we encounter some difficulty, both in Reference to our Order, and
Importance in our matter; which is, whether the Natural or Civil Relation ought
first to be admitted to a Precedence in trust? The Question may at the first
Inspection appear of little Ambiguity, and as little moment, one only exception
but reserved: insomuch, as we have formerly inserted, that the Civil Frame is
only formed from the connection and concinety of the Natural: yet when the
Dissolution of the Former may be threatened in the Preservation of the Latter.
We must affirm it much juster, that one criminel perish in the Infringement of
a natural Law, then that many innocents should be destroyed by the dispensation
of a Civil Ordinance: As in matter of Treason, where in every Act of unviolated
trust, the Trustee becomes an Accessory to the Treason, In which Respect, the
Transaction falling between the Father and the Son, the Son may probably claim
Advantage from the same Law of Nature to warrant his Discovery, as the Father
might exact to enjoin Concealment. Quisque sibi Proximus. Yet the Romans held
such Primitive Inherencies in so great Reverence, that they dispensed with all
Civil Ties in favor of their Rights. A Slave might without Impeachment conceal
his detected Master, much rather a Wife, a Child might be admitted to such a
Privilege; though the case possibly may require a more exact Distinction;
since after detection: the Attempt falls under a Capacity of Prevention: And
the concealment then tends but to the safeguard of the Delinquent, not to the
Promoting the Delinquence: From whence we may conclude, that such Relations
may, without Impeachment, be licenc't the Protection of the Criminel, provided
It reach not a participation of the Crime: which exception in allegiance
interjected, we may without farther scruple, accept the Wife to the first and
highest degree of trust, since on her Faith we cast the Model of our Economy
for the enlargement of our Fortunes; and in the Affiance of her Fidelity, we
transfer them to our Succession. In Reference to these two Objects of a Civil
Union, though perhaps unequally Balanced, the severest Societies of a Civil
Jurisdiction have passed the Infringement of her trust under a Criminel
Sentence, specified in the Interdiction of these Principles, Adultery,
Suborning a Child, Drinking Wine, Counterfeiting Kayes. The three first take
issue from one and the same Intention, which is the security of our own
succession in a lawful Propagation: the two first really, in regard of the
Action. The third but conjectually, in regard of scandalous Intention. The last
particular reflecteth only on the safeguard of the Civil Property, which in
such Infringement of trust manifestly tending to a fraudulent subversion; the
Civil Judicature conceiving them to hold one and the same Consequence in the
Intent, lent them but one and the same weight in the Punishment; yet with this
Limitation, that the execution should pass under the Authority only of the
Principal. The Civil Jurisdiction, in all Ages, seeming very scrupulous to
intervene in the Decision of Differences between Parties so entirely united,
that should, in Reason, but enjoy one common Interest; so that if any such
permission in a Domestic Transaction were derived from the Civil Authority,
which might in Reference to the Offense, seem too severe. It might be
concluded, that the Trespass was not only obvious, but of a very high Nature,
that should enforce a man so to divide Himself even from Himself, where the
very sense of Nature was sufficiently effectual to leniate the most rigorous
Austerity: In reference to which Conclusion, possibly, Moses Civil Institution
forbore to judge the weight of a Filial Disobedience to lend it a Criminel
Infliction, but commanded, that the Offender should be brought forth by the
hand of his Parent; whose Bowels would even in the first Intention, have
relented in a natural Endearment, so to expose their own Flesh and Blood to the
Fury of the People, had not the offense been altogether held inexpiable, But
the Frailty of Humane Nature, in succession of Time contracting new and
extravagant Corruptions to the extinction of the Natural Light, whose Motives
now becoming not the Object of their Union, must not, without Reason, fail in
her Resentment, has justly deprived him of so material a Privilege, without a
Reference to the Civil Jurisdiction. The Civil Law not so much as admitting him
to a capacity unequally to divide his own Goods amongst his Children, without
sufficient ground confirmed by legal Procedure: to which Method of Decision, we
will contract our former Principles, that we better may conclude on the equity
of their Censure.

Adultery can want no other weight to lend it a Criminel Infliction, then the
Light of the sacred Institution, and the practice of the Civil Law.

To suborn a Child, must without contradiction, in Respect of the Consequence,
reach the highest Nature of a Felony, both in the Contriver and the Coadjutor:
Insomuch as the Estate, both Personal and Real, unjustly is took from the
Natural and immediate Inherents to the succession. As to the trust consigned to
the Wife, which probably might herein alter the Nature of the Trespass; since
Breach of trust can properly not be extended to an actual Felony: which
granted, yet nevertheless the Felony (not extending to the Trustor, both in
Respect of his trust, and that he yet remains in full Possession of his
Property) may notwithstanding be so qualified, extending unto others Interest,
betwixt whom and the Trustee, passed no act of trust.

To drink Wine seems but a frivolous offense to counterpoise so rigorous an
Imposition as their Death, and probably may be rather judged an Inhibition only
appropriated to some peculiar Custom or Climate, then an essential Rule to form
a rational conclusion to a General use: yet taken universally, as extending to
a Habit in excess. It may be held more then a conjectural circumstance to the
former impeachment, in that (without Reference to the motive thus visibly
fomented in the Practice) A Woman in such Disorder can make pretense but to a
slight safeguard of her Honor: So that, both in regard of the Scandal and
Danger in the consequence of the use. We justly may suspend the Trespassor from
the capacity of a Conjugal Union, the ground being of sufficient weight to
exact a legal Separation.

To counterfeit Keys, This Interdiction was probably constituted under the
usage of Polygamy, where the Wife was rather esteemed the purchase of their
Property, then a companion in Society: in which servile condition of Wedlock,
like so many several Factions, every one endeavored by all means possible to
enlarge the Fortune of their own Production, and extends only to a breach of
trust imposed on the safety of our Goods; wherein, according to the Institution
of our Law, the Trustee has an equal Interest, although sequestered from her
use under the Tuition of another: in which Respect the Civil Judicature
reflects not on the Nature of the Fact, but as a private Trespass, and leaves
it only to the regulation of the Principle, in whose capacity alone It is to
separate His Wife from his Property, or his Property from his Wife.

The Children can by the privilege of their Extraction properly be entitled to
no inherence of a Civil trust more then the Father shall assign him by his
special Order; and in the Breach thereof, become only liable to such
correction, as the Father shall impose, without a Reference to a Civil censure:
insomuch, as they have a collateral Right inherent to the property, and should
in Reason, need no stricter tie to the due Execution of their trust, then their
proper Interest.

Servants fall under the next Adherence to a trust, which may yet more clearly
be distinguished in an Explicit, and an Implicit trust. The Implicit trust
extends generally unto the safeguard of his Masters Goods. The Explicit lends
a more visible Intimation of the Nature of this trust, under the limits of a a
conditional Prescription: so that the Infringement of the Implicit trust may
properly be termed a breach of Contract, though not so fully under the
Distinction of a Civil Trespass, as the Explicit is: Yet if the Trustee shall
under pretense of his General trust appropriate to his peculiar use, or
otherwise alienate the Goods of his Master not committed to his charge, the
guilty may be extended to a Criminel impeachment.

In these Particulars only is established a Domestic Trust, with Reference to a
Civil Unity. Our order next requires, that we reflect on other forms of trust,
which properly may be reduced to a more general usage, either Public or
Private.

A Public trust is either General or Special. The General is either Implicit
or Explicit: The Special only is Commissionary; both are derived from one
common Principle; Public Authority, and directed to one common Object, the
Public use: So that falling under one common Consequence in their Nature, they
may meet one common Distinction in their Infringement. though in Reference to
the Subject they handle, some have a more material extent of Damage in their
Issue then others: every visible and voluntary Delinquence in a Public trust
extending to a Crime of lose Majesty, in respect, that not only the common
welfare or Damage depend on the Transaction: But the Dignity or Honor of a
Prince or State become blemished in such miscarriages, passing as his or their
own proper Act, either in the Election of their Ministers, or in the order of
their Ministry.

A General trust in Public Interest, is what every Member of a Civil Capacity,
was born to in common Right of his extraction, and may be specified in Acts of
his Allegiance either Implicitly, as a National Injunction, or Explicitly, as
an Adjur'd Prescription. The former engages as a Civil duty; the latter also,
as our proper Act. A Trespass against the first order may possibly seem but to
infringe a Civil Institution. The latter also a sacred Ordinance: The first may
by Act of Grace become restored to his Purity. The latter justly never to be
admitted to a Civil Capacity.

Special Acts of Public trust, extending to a Public use, may reach a vaster
Latitude. The National, Justicial, Negotiary, and the Military. The two latter
more properly inherent to the exterior object of our Minister, we have reserved
to their peculiar Order.

The National trust extending to a Public use, is the highest and most
material Distinction of a trust (implied such under the License of a free
Election) where the people under Commission of the Supreme Authority, make a
peculiar choice of their Trustees to agitate on their common Interests, in a
Public Convention. How this trust may become visibly and wilfully impeached in
the trustee's prosecution of his trust, is not clearly obvious, where the
lesser Number must of necessity recede unto the Greater, unless it might be
imputed to a Remissness in his Agitation. If any Subject should fall in
discussion, which might possibly be repugnant to the peculiar Interest of the
trustors. The trustee led by Integrity, and Judgment, may, without blemish,
promote the matter, tending more universally to the Advantage of the Civil
Frame, since the whole Convention consisting of many trustees, can properly
form but one Body of trust, whose object is not the welfare only of some
peculiar parts, but of the whole Structure. Neither is the trust transigned to
the trustee by the People, other then a Collateral trust, whose original
resideth in the Supreme Authority; to whose Council they are summoned to
consult on the welfare of the whole Frame. So that the Infringement of trust
must properly be derived, Either from the Peculiar Exercise of their Office, or
the General Object of their use, inherent to the Principal trustor, and
diffused from thence to the Collaterals. The Office is soly posited in Council,
not in Rule; to Consult, not to Determine; to Remonstrate, not to Conclude; to
Apply, not to Exact; to Present, not to Enact: All such Improprieties in the
Public Transaction of the trustee may properly extend to the infringement of
the Public trust, if singularly not cleared in a Public Attestation.

The General Object of their use, is in one common Agreement the Public Good;
but that Good sometimes not rightly distinguished, wanting a due coherence with
the Principle, whereas rightly understood, the Interests of the Prince have so
nigh a Reference with those of the people, that they are properly but termini
Convertibiles. The Benefit of the Prince being the Advantage of the People, and
the Advantage of the People being the Benefit of the Prince; so that of
necessity, who opposes the one, impaireth the other, and consequently falls
into a visible Delinquence of that trust, which was imposed on Him in the
Transaction.

The next succeeding Act of special trust, is the Justicial, or Justiciary,
which passes also under a Commissionary Form. This Distinction of trust has
apparently a material Influence in a Civil welfare, and seems but too
abstrusely limited in the capacity of the Principle, where so many Substitutes
necessarily depend on the Transaction, unless we might conclude them liable to
all Miscarriages, as visible Defaults in their Election. Suffrage or
Incircumspection, too heavy a Burden for him to undergo, is only called to the
simple Exposition of the Letter, and the Regularity of the Court. Yet
nevertheless, since every material infringement of trust must be enlightened by
the intention of the will (not distinguishable, but in an equal Remonstrance
clearly preceding to exact the Remedy) either in Opposition, Difficulty, or
Defect to our Addresses, may render the said Principal impeachable in his trust.

Private trust extending to a Public use, holds only Application to a Civil
Commerce, although ready money, or other visible Commodities may possibly pass
in exchange between the Agitators: yet insomuch as there must be in equity, an
ultimate rate to every Commodity, which extended either by inessential or
adulterate Glosses, serious Attestations, or any other Manner of Circumvention,
on the Ignorance, Insufficiency, or Credit of another beyond the extrinsick
value, is an actual Fraud tending to the subversion of that General trust,
should dignifie and support a Civil welfare; in which Respect, the most
competent Judge lent the ejected traders, no other Distinction then Thieves; as
Solomon had formerly noted their Incapacity to retain their Integrity. This
inconvenience has taken Root in most Civil Societies, either through a
Licentious tolleration, or a Difficulty in Regulation. Pretenses of
Improvement, and Encouragement of Trade probably ushering an Indulgence to the
Former, while Lux and Neglect lent Obstruction to the Latter; every one no
farther weighing a General Interest, but in resentment of his own particular:
So that the whole Method of a Civil Commerce, becomes but one general
intercourse of Pippery: But it may here possibly be objected, that this
Disorder may sooner fall under every Man's Observation, then any Man's
Regulation. In Reply we will only return a Pattern from some Particulars, as
the common Materials to our Livelihood; which, under sundry Civil Societies,
have their public, known, and limited Imposition of Rates, rising and falling,
as their depending Exigents require: From which method we may collect a Parallel
to a more General usage.

For Closure of our Argument, as an equilibrate to this Civil Trespass, in
General; we may cast into the Balance a due Estimate of the essential Damage
in Relation to the Fact; which reaching not a due Reparation to the Offense in
a mere impulsive Restitution, being but a bare Consequent to the Casual
Discovery: we must yet exact a weightier Imposition to lend the Crime an equal
compensation, contracted from the more potential Issue, in Reference to the
Intent, where the concealment meets an equal Consequence in the Adventure: It
may otherwise be figured a Game but at half Stakes, where the Winner draws
nothing but his own, and the Loser hazzards nothing but Air, in the
Impeachment of his Fame, as the due Penalty only to the Infringement of a
Public Institution, which might justly extend to a Civil Incapacity.

Neither is the infringement of a Private trust always contained under the
Latitude of a Civil Trespass, where the ^ransaction has a collateral Adherence
to a Public Interest; as may clearly be distinguished in the Delinquence of
false Moneyres, and Diminutors of the true; whose trespass has not only
Reference to the private Damage of the Receiver, but reaches the subversion
of a public trust, transigned under warrant of the public Dignity, whose
Majesty becomes directly blemished in the Transaction: So that in the general
Constitution of every several Jurisdiction, the Offense may justly reach a
Capital Delinquence.

Of equal weight, and far more justly, in Respect of the Consequence, may
hereto be annexed Acts of Justicial Perjury, from whence a Damage not only is
contracted to particulars; but Justice it self thereby becomes Impeachable,
raising her Fabric on a corrupt Foundation, unto whose Evidence she had
resigned her full Authority. A matter of the highest trust, where Goods, Fame,
Liberty, and Life become subverted in a treacherous Procedure. In reference to
which Trespass the Sacred Letter (according to the Potential and Intentional
Consequence of the Matter) lays an authentic Reparation, in an equal
Prescription, Then shall you do unto him, as he would have done unto his
Brother.

Some other Acts of Private trust, may also here be instanced, which in their
simple Nature hold not so strict a Reference with the Public Interest, though
according to the Matter they do work upon, may sometime possibly, with the
Former hold an equal Parallel, as Acts of Forgery; which according to vulgar
usage, strictly taken, is, Aliquid, Man^s Artificio falsi vero Insinuare,
whether the quality of this Fact may reach a higher nature then a Civil
Trespass, is not clearly yet determinable. Most Laws seem in the Nature of
their Penalty, which tending but to Infamy, yet leave the Trespassor, still
Subject to a Civil Reparation; though usually the Practicers are in a condition
not capable of either.

The Constitution of the Trespass yet more nighly visited, we properly may lend
the Fact a higher consequence: not only, in that such vilde Transactions pass
usually under the Authority of such Public Forms should guide us to a true
Distinction in every thing transacted, but also, in regard the Infringement of
a Private trust becomes Introduced by assuming something proper to another,
not intrusting, as their own; wherein, although the Party not intrusting seems
to lose nothing really: yet in Respect, it possibly may engage his Honor,
Goods, and Person in the Transaction not meeting an exact Discovery. It may be
farther justly censured as an actual Felony, whereby the Penalty may duly be
extended to every Person concerned in the Offense. Infamy and Civil Incapacity
in Reference of the Indignity to the Civil Jurisdiction A Civil Reparation, in
Relation to the Interest of the Trustee, and a Penal Infliction, in Respect of
the Damage ensuing to the Party or Parties not Intrusting.

As to Acts of Forgery (if we may properly so call them) which tend but to
adulterate, corrupt, or otherwise Sophisticate any common vendable Commodity;
they may justly be remitted to the Distinction of a Breach of Public trust,
visibly tending to the subversion of a common Traffic.

To this Distinction of private trust may also possibly be reduced such
Transactions, as pass between parties under the common Notion of another, whom
they but falsely Personate.

XLI. Of Violence.
HAving formerly searched into the Nature of this Principle, in Reference to
the Security of the Natural Union, we will here Reflectt on It in Relation only
to the Security of the Civil Property; wherein we may first generally observe,
that no Civil Trespass whatever more highly infringeth the order of a Civil
Society, then Violence, however figured, being as it were, a private
Insurrection against the Civil Power; In which regard, it is probable our Laws
do interdict, that any one in such a Procedure should become reinvested in his
Property, though visibly never so injuriously detained: And on this
Consideration only have possibly formed the severity of their Penal Statutes
against Acts of Felony, which seldom are specifically committed, but under some
degree of Violence, though frequently the enterprise may find no Opposition:
for whether such Goods assumed were under safeguard of House, Pail, Wall, or
Ditch, or other Enclosure; yet nevertheless, the indirect Ingression or
Extersion manifest in the Act, is without other Circumstance a perfect
Violence, whether Manable Goods, and unguarded in Waste or Common, may properly
fall under such Distinction, is not so clearly evident, unless they have a
proper Signature, or Brand peculiar to the Bounds of such a Privilege, besides
that of the owner: Otherwise passing but under Notion of a Common Stray, the
Fact may sometime want Distinction, shadowed with Mistake. As to Goods
Immaniable or Wild, to which no one can properly lay a just claim of Right,
but as coincidents to the Prescription of their own Possessions. The matter of
their taking, though within compass of their proper Bounds, can questionless
extend but to a Civil Trespass, unless in opposition of their Keeper, if forth
their Limits taken, they justly pay the Forfeit of their Damage.

What other Circumstance in Particular, with Reference to Place, Matter,
Motive, Manner, or Measure, may either aggravate or lenefie the Matter or
Nature of the Offense, we farther will endeavor to discover.

The Place can lend no other weight to the offense, then what may thereto be
appropriated, in Reference to the person damnified; which not extending any
farther Detriment, then barely the privation of his Goods, may yet be weighed
in a higher Consequence, either taken violently from his Person, wheresoever
encountered, or from his House, the place of his security: Insomuch, as Nature
prompting every one to a defense, either in Opposition or Persuit; both equally
adventured by the Injured, with hazard of his life, may equally be balanced
with the Forfeiture of his, shall wrongfully attempt the Issue.

The Quality of the materials may sometime amplify the Nature of the Offense;
as Goods consecrated to a holy use, where the Malefactor not only makes an
hostile Incursion upon Civil Rights, but in contempt of his Creator's
Ordinance; yet farther seems to violate and cast off the Rites of his Exterior
Worship, should bind us in one common Union by his impious Sacrilege.

The Motive may sometime not only vary the measure of the Crime, but also
change the nature of the Fact, when every Circumstance therein shall tend but
to support the present urgency of Nature; it being but a Reproach unto a Civil
Society. to qualify that with the Distinction of another Trespass, was
properly their own, either in Remisness of their Circumspection; or of Relief
unto an useless or languishing Member of their Frame.

The Manner also frequently may leniate the Nature of the offense, where the
negligence of the safeguard may Minister occasion to the attempters practice,
and instigate a facile Inclination to a Design, not formed in his purpose: In
which Respect perhaps our Laws reflect on the depriving of our Goods by slight,
when under personal Tuition, with no more severity then a petty Larcin.

The measure or value of the Trespass can lend us but a doubtful Inspection
into the weight thereof to moderate or aggravate the Nature of the Attempt: For
as a small matter may sometime prove an evidence to a high necessity or
Indigence, so may It often be an Argument of an habitual inclination to a
vicious Custom, which may yet probably be further distinguished in the
frequency of the Fact.

Having thus enlightened the Nature of our Subject in general with some material
Circumstances therein. We will insist to agitate thereon with more peculiar
Reference to the Civil Property. Every Personal violence tending to Alienation,
under what Relation soever, Wife, Child, Servant or Principle, is without doubt
a Criminel Trespass: not only, in that a private Person is thereby usually
reduced into Bondage, and the whole Family suffer under the calamity of the
Outrage. But the Civil Society becomes thereby dismembered of a Branch
belonging to their Common union, in an hostile Insurrection against the
Public Peace. In which respect alone, it is probable the Crime should meet so
high a penalty, wherein, as in other Criminel Trespasses, the Dignity of the
Civil Judicature would yet become more illustrated in the Reflection also of
the Interest of Collaterals therein damnified

A Personal Violence to Wife, Child, or Servant without an Alienation, may
sometime fall under the distinction of a Criminel Trespass, as in matter of
Rape, where not only the Civil but the Natural Order becomes barbarously
perverted.

The House may also suffer actual violence, as in Acts of Burglary, which
Outrage is justly censured as a Criminel Trespass without any regard to the
Materials, or strength of the structure; Insomuch as every man's Habitation is
to the safeguard of his Goods and Person a fortress of Defense. The Sacred
Letter prescribes hereto a certain Limitation, in reference to the Time. If the
Sun be risen on him, his blood shall not be spilt. Whether it were that his
Person were with the Light become distinguishable, or that the People, then
roused from their slumbers, were in a capacity to pursue or attache him, is not
clearly manifest, neither being necessarily inherent to the exception, which in
the ground of the Interdiction annexed, seems explicitly thereby to have
changed the Nature of the Trespass. For he should make Restitution, lending it
no other weight in such a Circumstance, than a Civil Trespass, following
therein the general Distinction of a Theft according to the Sacred Letter, from
whence we may collect new Matter to an Argument Material to a farther
Discussion. Whether it were more Consonant to Reason and the Civil welfare to
pass simple Larcins under the distinction of a Civil or a Criminel Trespass.
The prementioned Authority might seem to silence the pretense of an Objection,
had not the spreading corruption of Man's depraved Nature daily required a more
Rigorous opposition. In which respect, we will decline the Luster of so eminent
a Light, (though it more plausibly might be our guide,) more clearly to
disclose the weight thereof in every Circumstance, has reference to our
Frailty in a Civil Practice.

In order to the proposition we may infer, where general Acts of Theft fall
under a Criminel distinction, the manner of the Fact is more mischievously
prosecuted, on the least jealousy of Surprise, or a Discovery. And the
Attempters life once visibly attainted, another Life becomes too slight a
consideration to lend restraint to farther Insolence: So that the Rights of
Nature often urge to perpetrate an Evil not intended. In persuit of their
safety to destroy Another; Nor is there Matter to deliberate, when as the
pilfering Circumstance is with the Tragique Issue held equivalent. Whereas the
Fact extending but unto a Civil Trespass, no rational Man would wilfully incurr
a greater Hazard to avoid a less. Where the Trespass is balanced with the
forfeit of a Life, the Injured prosecuteth the Offender to his farther Damage,
without any hope to be restored to his Property. Where Reparation only is the
Penalty to the Fact, the Trespassee becomes not only reinvested in his
Property, but makes a considerable advantage of the Injury. The Restitution
reaching to a double Retribution, when the Property was taken in the custody of
the Trespassor, when alienated extending to a Quadruple or a Quintuple
compensation, So that every Member of a Civil Society is not only hereby
animated to a vigilant Circumspection for the Preservation, but the Improvement
also of his Property, which intentive Caution becomes remissly abated in a
supine neglect, where the possession seems fortified under the severity of a
Criminel Infliction.

To which conclusion may possibly be alleged; that Trespasses of this Nature
are seldom perpetrated but by persons of a desperate Fortune, who are
incapable of other Reparation than a Corporal Infliction.

The Objection passing for Receivable, may probably on a more exact
Inquisition, fortify the former Assention. When we shall duly consider, that
who fly from a certain existence by Industry, to acquire an uncertain
Livelihood by the daily hazard of their Lives, will, questionless with greater
Terror, resent the rigorous Imposition of their Hands, then the Momentary
Interception of their Breath. They only become indulgent to Life, who daily
taste of the indulgences of Life. It being frequently observed among
Licencious, desperate, and deboist People, that the Innocent, for a petty
Salary, will cast the fatal Lot imposed on the Criminel.

Perhaps in the Propriety of the Rule may yet appear a farther difficulty. How
restitution should really be exacted, where nothing can visibly be Leavied. The
Sacred Prescription answers the Objection, He shall be sold for his Theft; but
such Impropriety may be alleged in Christian Practice not so warrantable: Nor
was it so under the former Institution, but with limitation of time, which not
reaching the value of the Trespass, in the Term prescribed, might probably
become renewed, though not explicitly employed in the Letter. It may also fall
under some Ambiguity; what advantage should be acquired from the employment of
Persons so improper for a Trust, and so unapt for Labor. As to the former
Instance, we may grant them utterly excluded such capacity; and the Latter may
be concluded Fruitless, without the high severity of their Keepers, which
aggravated either by the Avarice of the One, or the stubborn remissness of the
Other, may sometime probably extend unto a Breach in our Humanity. In which
respect alone it is probable the use of slaves have so long been ('mong civilized
Nations) quite abolished. But the Imposition equally remitted to the vigilance
of the Justiciary Power may probably meet an Institution more approveable,
which being appropriated to the advantage of our Foreign Plantations. The Civil
Frame would not only be discharged of a prejudicial and superfluous Burden, but
reap a common Benefit from their impulsive Industry.

XLII. Injury.
UNder the Latitude of this Subject is formed the Dimension of every Trespass.
But what Rule should lead us to the Definition of Her Nature; is not clearly
obvious.

Custom and common usage have made prepostrous Incursions on the Rights of
Nature; and no Civil Authority so exactly refined, but oversway'd by Man's
common corruption, wilfully digresseth from her Principles, though the Sacred
Prescription has visibly raised her Institution on That Moddel, what ever you
would that others should do unto you, the same do you unto them; from whence we
may safely conclude, that whatsoever we do unto Others, we would not have done
to our selves, is an unquestionable Trespass justiciable by an Ordinance
secretly recorded within our proper Breast, whatever in Repugnance may proceed
from the Result of humane Institution, we must appeal to this high Tribunal.
Not only to restrain us from the Prejudice of others Interest, but also in the
Legal Prosecution of our own, to leniate and allay the rigor of Decrees,
enacted to suppress our growing Evils. Whose Execution else might possibly
subvert the Nature of a Civil Institution, Insisting on extremes of Right to
render Right injurious. But though every man has a competent Impression of
this Light to guide him perfectly in the Decision of his Rights, yet few men
have Integrity to follow it. Avarice and Animosity, both furiously pursue and
passionately embrace the heaviest Imposition can be warranted by Authority; so
that it will be very material to the useful Ministry of a Civil Jurisdiction,
not to yield up Her sword without Reserve to any, though the ground exacting
It, be never so considerable, lest a vindictive Fury should press the
Consequence to the Subversion of a joint Associate. The severity of the Letter,
being constituted to suppress an Evil, more by Awe then Act. In which respect,
it will be highly necessary, in reference to the Trespasser, to distinguish of
the Manner of the Trespass, whither voluntary or Casual, though the Civil
Jurisdiction adhering only to the Matter, do make no difference in their
Nature. Forasmuch, as Trespasses, under the First distinction, may justly merit
the severest penalty, clearly figuring a presumptuous disbanding from the
Civil union in an insolent infringement of the public Peace, whereas
Trespasses, under the latter Distinction, removed from the Intention of the
will, meeting a plausible Reparation in a voluntary Restitution become not,
under a Civil Permission, justly Actionable, nor must we so strictly adhere to
the First Circumstance of the Fact, as to neglect the Latter. Since either
making a Retraction from the Procedure, may possibly change the Quality of the
Distinction, what being voluntarily commenced, in the timely Reluctance of the
will, becoming as receivable, as the Casual. And what Casually produced,
maintained in an obstinate opposition, becoming as insupportable, as the
voluntary, which Distinction seems implicitly enfolded in the Imposition of the
Sacred Letter, where the reparation of every Trespass extending to a Fifth part
more then the Trespass, was the highest Estimate to a voluntary Restitution;
but where the Trespass was so perversely defended, as to be brought to a
Justiciary Audience, the Reparation instituted, was double the value of the
Trespass.

Subsequent to this Distinction in a Civil Trespass, is that infrequent usage,
which our Practitioners reduce under Real and Personal Actions. The Real
properly taken, issue from some Breach of Contract formed under Speciality, and
receiving such Distinction, in reference only to the Extent of the engagement,
which passes to the Real Possession of the deceased Trespassor, though legally
removed to his succession. The Personal has simply an Adherence to the Person
of the Trespassor, without collateral Reference to his Succession or
Successors, and properly does terminate with Him But as the Intention of the
First Distinction becomes too often frustrated by the fraudulent mixtures of
sundry Interests collaterally consistant with the Trespassors. So the Latter
may seem not altogether properly so limited; in respect the Trespassor
deceasing, e're the Agitation of the Trespass is determined, the Trespassee is
totally left void of reparation, though the advantage of the Trespass be
possibly translated on the Successor of the Trespassor; to the no small
impropriety in a Civil Institution.

A Personal Trespass may sometime possibly fall under the infringement of a
special Contract, where usually the Letter lends a Rule unto the Law; but
falling under the omission of a verbal Covenant, the weight thereof may reach
too high a Consequence, to lend it an exact Decision from auricular proof;
Insomuch, as the Principles have not waded into so mature a consideration, as
to become exactly understood to one another, much less unto an unadvising
Auditory, who easily become diverted from a Subject, wherein they totally
should be disinteressed, to render thereof an Authentic Evidence.

Having thus far made Inspection into the General Nature of a Civil Trespass,
we farther in particular will advise of the Extent thereof, in Reference to
each peculiar Property, inherent to a Civil usage.

The Dignity of a Family materially consisting in the Honor of the Wife, we
properly may First reflect on such Aspersions as tend unjustly to defame her
Conjugal Fidelity. Not only in respect of future blemishes, may thereby be
transferred on her succession, to a lasting prejudice: but also in Regard the
present welfare of this Civil unity, chiefly depending on their mutual Love, is
thereby shoke, if not subverted in the ensueing breaches of undermining
Jealousies, which oftentimes break forth in Tragique Issues; so that it will
become highly material to the safeguard of a Civil union, that the Civil
Judicature should make a considerable defense against so important a Disorder:
not to the suppressing of such scandals as are employed only under the strict
Notes of their Formalities; but such licencious Imputations also as become
shadowed with artificial and disguised Glosses, extending to opprobrious terms
of Infamy, though such general Notes of Obloquy, may pass as unimpeachable,
seeming but to figure an unadvised passion; no purposed design of Malice, in
respect, that if every such momentary distemper of the Mind might lend our
Frailty such a Privilege, no mischief but would find a shelter under such
Protection: and though the Civil Judicature should impute it but an Act of
Passion; the common Auditory will scarcely so interpret it, in whose censure
alone, the Fact becomes injurious and impeachable.

Farthermore, the Civil Jurisdiction declining in the Procedure, the protection
of the innocent in a plausible satisfaction, exasperates the fury of incensed
Parties to prosecute a Reparation of their own Election, which frequently
extending to a deplorable Issue, reverts the Guilt upon the Civil Faculty;
whose remiss Institution had lent Licenciousness to the fomenting of so high
Disorders.

This scandalous Imputation extending to a Criminel Impeachment (according to
the Constitution of diverse Civil Jurisdictions) may farther justly meet an
Attribute of a higher Nature then a Civil Trespass: although most Laws have
(under such a Reference in their censure, not visibly employed such Distinction.
Where the Charge is so invectively insisted on, that the Life of the Innocent
becomes cast into a doubtful balance. To warrant the assertion Regular; we
shall need to insert no farther proof, then what we may collect from Sacred
Practices, as the Prophets Imposition on Susanna's malicious Prosecutors. So
likewise other Trespasses of Defamation reaching to a Criminel Impeachment
(though ineffectualy succeeding in the Prosecution) incurr equivalent
Infliction, though perhaps it may be instanced, that Laws have in the weight of
each Transaction, no other Object to direct their course, then the Result of
those occurrents only fall in Act, without reflection on the Intentional,
which rarely are discoverable.

In answer to the Objection is replied. That every general Axiom of such
Dignity, to become proper to so considerable a Structure, ought to have such
Solidity in the Position, that every Branch Thereof should also thereto become
Regular. But the true Efficacy of this Rule has but uncertain Tenure. As we
may visibly infer on Acts of Slaughter. Where the Fact becomes distinguishable
in her Nature, only by such Circumstance, as may give Light to the Intention.
And in matter of Treason, where the intention only (without any reference to
the Fact) becomes impeachable.

But where such Defamation extending to a Criminel Impeachment is legally not
prosecuted. The Nature thereof questionless, may properly be distinguished
within the Limits of a Civil Trespass.

Farthermore, Since all Acts of Defamation are no other ways Actionable, then
as they may become prejudicial to Life or Livelihood. We may here also reflect
on the Capacity of the Wife in reference to a Civil Function, which sometime,
possibly, may be divided from the Husbands Commerce. And in Aspersions should
impeach the Fame in Civil Rules may bear an equal weight, as if she were the
Principle. But where the Imputation can visibly extend to neither Life nor
Livelihood, the Trespass may more properly fall under Regulation of the Moral
Censor.

The Sacred Letter intimates a Trespass in Reference to our present Subject,
not so exactly visited under the Constitution of most Laws, on casual
Mischances, which in Disorders of others, happen to women with Child, to the
Destruction of their Fruit, where the Punishment was at discretion of the
Husband, and the Fine under Censure of the Judge.

Whether in the voluntary separation of the Wife from her Husband, the
Suggestors and Coadjutors become liable to a Civil Trespass, may possibly
sometime meet Exception, where the fury of the Husband is so violently pursued,
That the safety of her Person is visibly endangered, and that the manner
thereof be no farther protracted, then the Civil Magistrate may be truly
informed of the Disorder; Insomuch as every Member of the Civil Union is on
every occasion obliged to become assistant to the Public Peace, but where the
Opposition is continued, without Remonstrance, or Allowance of the Civil Rule,
the Procedure is Civilly Impeachable, under what Relation soever it be
shadowed: All other Trespasses extending to the Infringement of the Civil
Order, are only common to the Wife, with other Persons of the Civil Frame,
however Qualified.

Nor can the Dignity of a Family be entirely preserved in the safeguard of the
Conjugal Reputation, were the Constitution of the Law herein never so exactly
constituted, where the translation is not supported in a Regular adherence to
the succession: In which Respect, we must here Reflect upon such Trespasses as
have a Reference to the Interest of the Father under the Relation of a Child;
who frequently are seduced to their Infamy and Ruin, and the irrepairable
Discomfort of the Parents: And although the mutual Agreement of the Parties
herein transacting may seem to take away the Nature of the Trespass transacted,
in Reference to the Interest of the Principle peculiarly herein concerned,
Volenti non fit injuria. Yet in Regard the Inclination of the Seduced is
usually too fraudulently acquired to lend the Procedure such a Privilege,
where solemn vows and Imprecations are the preface to pretended Contracts;
which wanting other Evidence then the Interessed, the Infirmity of the
credulous is betrayed to common Infamy: on which Credible Suppositions, the
Civil Law erecteth a positive Institution, exacting for Reparation to the
Abuse, a competent Dower to the deluded party. And in reference to the Parents
Interest, depending on the Consequence (The will of the Child being according
to the Rights of Nature, on which the Civil is erected, but subordinate to the
Parents Direction) Were the Fact first qualified with all due rights of Honor,
not reaching a Paternal Privilege. The Attempt in reference only to his
Damage falls under a Criminel Infliction; the weight of which Prescription
seems implicitly enfolded in the Sacred Letter, where the Trespassor was not
only enjoined to Marry the Seduced, but to give the Father also Satisfaction
for the Trespass: Insomuch as the Father may probably pursue other Advantages
in the Alliance of his Child for the Honor, Support, and Advancement of his
Family then visibly is distinguishable: Besides the Comfort and Delight might
Issue from the satisfaction of his proper Choice, in an agreeable Succession:
whereas other sirrupticious Proceedings tending to sinister Purposes, prove
frequently the destruction of the Child, and a lasting grievance to the Family.

Servants hold usually their Adherence to their Masters Interest under a
special Contract, and can, without their License, not equitably be sequestered
from their personal Devoyr, under the Authority of what Relation soever, except
the Public: in which all private Interests, but collaterally involved, may
possibly receed to such Injunction. Yet to preserve the Dignity of the use, it
were material, that it should legally be exacted, but as the latest Remedy unto
the highest Exigents, in favor of the Civil Commerce, the chiefest Column that
supports a Civil Union.

Such Sequestration may also be considered, as voluntary, or Impulsive. If the
Act proceed from the mutual concurrence of the Servants will, with any others,
shall retain him from his Masters use. Both parties may therein jointly or
severally become Trespassors.

Nor is it yet improbable, but that a Servant oftentimes may be suspended or
Restrained from his Masters use Impulsively, where others violence shall either
Intercept his Industry, or actually disable him from his Employment; in which
the Reparation justly may exact a double Penalty, in Reference to the Interest
of the Principal and the Collateral, as also to the satisfaction of such
Breaches may ensue thereon unto the Common Peace.

Whether the Master in Correction of his Servant, disabling him from present
use, become liable to a Trespass, in Reference to his suffering, is not exacly
obvious, in that the Servants Industry is but the Masters Benefit: Yet
nevertheless the Sacred Letter seems to imply a compensation to his prejudice,
Equivolent to his Service, extending to Privation of a Part, though
inconsiderable, perhaps but to restrain the fury of the incensed, in Authority,
by his proper Interest: But where such disability inflicted shall extend the
term of Servitude, the Trespass is indubitable.

On what ground the Female Servant is enfranchised from her Contract, on
Transaction of her Nuptials, under the favor of some Laws, is a difficulty not
easy to unfold. If the Privilege be authorized from the Public Benefit, may
probably ensue the change of her Condition, in the advantage of a useful
Succession; the consequence can take no weight from the distinction of her Sex.
In that the Male excluded from the grant of such a Privilege, is equally
endued with the same capacity; so that the Procedure must be admitted totally
inscrutable, or partially inequitable.

Under the distinction of Office, may properly be implied the Nature of our
Civil Faculty or Function, which either Public or Private is sundry ways
impeachable in a common Prejudice. The highest and most visible subvertors of
our Interest in this Property, are such Disparagements or Imputations, as may
infringe our credit in the Ability or Integrity of our Civil Faculty, on which
especially depend our Livelihood. Nor can peculiar Interests be herein secured,
without the Circumspection be assigned by Civil Ordinance, to such Principles
may regulate the Order of their Faculty. Admitting secluding or suspending from
their Practices, as the Capacity or Comportment of the Pretenders or Associates
may usefully exact, lest promiscuous Intrusion might vilify, corrupt, or
otherwise impeach the Intercouse of Commerce; of which Nature unpractised
Novitiates may be instanced, who not attaining the perfection of their Faculty,
Infringe the Dignity and use thereof, should render it to advantage more
communicable. In which obstruction also to the common Benefit, may also be
annexed Foreigners, who with adulterate Glosses, new Appearances, and strange
Varieties possess the vulgar (incompotent to judge) in credit with their loud
sufficiency, that the most skilful in their Faculty, become totally declined in
their approved Ministry. And the whole Society discouraged in their
undertaking, not only to the Private but the Public Prejudice.

All the succeeding Adherents to a Civil Interest, House, Lands, Goods and
Chattels may properly in reference to our present Subject be reduced under One
and the same Form of Discussion. Since they fall under one common Capacity of
Damage which taking yet Original from distinct Principles may jointly (with
like reference to such Order) receive their Agitation: every Civil Trespass, in
Relation to the Last inserted Properties; issueing either from some former
Contract, Trust, Intrusion, or Casualty. Contracts are either Special or
Verbal; the special pass under intimation of the Letter; the Verbal take
Distinction from the Intention of the Word. Both in a clear and warrantable
Testimony, fall under One and the same common Estimate, though the Latter seem
usually derived from an unadvised and irregular Proceeding, much subject to
Corruption, nor usually extending a Personal engagement. The Former, more
maturely transacted, is with more Difficulty retracted, and usually conveigh
their force to a successive Inherency; Both in their distinct Notion (as
formerly implied) lend Rules unto the Law. Yet with this Limitation, that the
Contents thereof, become no way repugnant to any one Prescription of the Law.
No private Act being Legally receiveable, which tends to infringe a general
decree. Our Laws extract the weight of such an Introduction only from the
public Interest; as in disanulling Private Acts intending to conveigh
Possessions, that are Real, when wanting such or such Formalities. The Civil
Law more frequently forms an exception to the Procedure, in reference only to
the Private Interest. As in Repeal of Private Acts are constituted to pass away
Estates are real, under such or such Proportion to their value: or, in
Redemption to transfer Them to Proximity.

In which Respect, it will be highly necessary to the exact security of our
common Interest, that they might be passed under such Remonstrances as might
not only lend them a clear Authentic and insubvertible sense in the Letter,
to conveigh the intention of the Act, under Allowance of the Civil Power, we
might be freed from the Imposturie of Schicaneurs, Seditious vermin to a
Common welfare, and reproachful Impeachers of the Dignity of the Law. But also
to remove all obstacles might frustrate the Fruition of the Right Tranfacted.
The Law must else in the Permission, but make work for her Ministers, leaving
an entrance to such Trespasses, may possibly not fall within capacity of
Reparation, which more effectually cannot be constituted, then under Public
Register, as an exact Recognisance, where every contract might take place
according to Precedence of their Introduction, without distinction of their
Nature, in reference to a Privilege in their Order, might lend them weight to
supercede each other. No conditional contract under limitation of Time
suspended longer from a Legal Issue, then the usual Term of their Prescription,
lest any One might interpose Another Prosecution. So should the Inception of
every Contract be void of Error; and the Issue free from Circumvention, which
shadowed oftentimes with other specious Forms of surety involve us in a certain
Deffidence in every Transaction, from which no Caution can deliver us.

Such Forms of special Contract, falling under a visible Distinction of Trust,
may also usefully be removed from the shadow of sinister Practices under
Regulation of the Former Method; whose Nature, Use and Difference, having
sufficiently (in Reference to the Capacity of our Treatise) been enlightened in
the Discussion of another Principle, we will omit here farther to insist upon.

Acts of Intrusion, depending only on the Will, seem to take on a Nature of
Infringement, in our common Right, too remissly treated under so favorable a
Distinction, as a Civil Trespass. Though tending but to the subversion of a
Private Interest. Insomuch as the Civil Order is infringed also in the
Procedure; which otherwise is so jealous of encroachments on her Rights, that
we are thereby interdicted to assume our proper Goods in the possession of
another; though visibly never so injuriously detained, but under Form of her
Prescription: much less not on our own Presumption, to be invested with
Another Property; which Institution is directed to a considerable use in the
composure of the Civil Union, whose Consequence might else meet Acts of such
Hostility, as possibly might shake the structure of the Civil Frame. In which
Respect, our present Forms of Conjectural Ejectment, are happily, of late,
admitted to a Legal Procedure in the Decision of a Title.

As Trespasses of Intrusion are by the Civil Jurisdiction often censured too
indulgently; so Trespasses of Casualty are sometime by the Law too rigorously
persu'd, where the joint interest of the Trespassor is equally involved in the
Accident, as in common Damage by Fire, which may possibly seem equaly imposed
on Him, that was the first visible Motive to the Accident, in that under the
severity of such an Ordinance, we should become more vigilant to avoid occasion
might minister unto so dangerous an Event. Yet nevertheless, in regard, the
most advised sometime may incurr the Casualty, in which his proper Interest
being sufficient evidence to clear him of Neglect; the public Interest might
more plausibly sustain the Damage; which only is endued with Capacity to stop
the Issue of such violent Erruptions.

XLIII. Oppression.
UNder the common Influence of this Principle, may probably be implied, all the
Calamities can tend to the subversion of a Civil Society. Nor can an Evil to
the sense be Figured from the severest Menaces of Heaven, whose Extraction may
not arise from this Original, either, as a Judgment to It, or as a Judgment
in It, That may be figured in Aegypts Misery; This in Juries Captivity.
Oppression being the common Pretense to every Insurrection against the Civil
Power; in whose Suppression frequently is urged a necessity to impose It. So
that in reference to our mutual Interest with the Magistracy, united or
divided. It will be equally requisite, that the Civil Power be not too rigorous
to exact, nor the Subject too serupulous to suffer. We need not to insert a
farther proof to lend more weight to the Position, then what we may extract
from the Commencement of our late Disorders. In which consequence the
Transactors were enforced to pursue extravagant encroachments on our Liberty,
attempting to secure successful Mischief in Impunity. But to lend a clearer
evidence to the Assertion, it will be useful truly to distinguish of the Nature
of our Subject, which thus may properly become enlightened. Oppressio est,
quicquid sub forma Juris, ultra Juris Prascriptionem, ad existendi
Difficultatem a nobis Exigitur. Whatsoever is exacted from us under the form of
Right, beyond the Prescription of Right, to reduce us to a difficulty of
existence. Which Exposition erected on a Form of Right may possibly seem
limited within the Faculty of a distinct Jurisdiction. In that, the Institution
of Right is properly peculiar only to a Civil Power subordinate to none. Yet in
respect the general Quality of Right extends to a vaster Lutitude then a
Civil Prescription, as we may perfectly discover in the Rights of Nature and of
Nations.

The First, distinguished in Humanity, the Latter raised on Customary Forms. The
Nature of our Subject may extend to such Acts of Hostility, as are imposed on
us by a foreign Power beyond the Rules of their Prescription. Yet since it
falls not in Capacity of a Civil Jurisdiction to regulate the Consequence of
such Disasters, more then in a timely Circumspection to divert, oppose, or
otherwise prevent the Incursion of an Enemy, which being a Subject more
properly inherent to the Foreign or Exterior Object of our Minister, we will
remit to Treat thereof in our promised Order, Insisting here to take a view on
the Distinction of our Subject in Reference only to the National or Interior
use of our Community.

In persuit of our Proposition; having extracted the Nature of our Subject from
a Dependence of Right. Which Faculty peculiarly inherent to the Capacity of the
Civil Ministry, either in Permission or Commission; either Allowance or
Prescription. The weight of this our Argument may seem only to rest on the
Balance of the Public Faculty. Yet since from the same general Influence of
Right is derived a Faculty in Right, distinctly inherent to every Member of the
Civil frame, we severally may reflect on their Transactions in order to the
Parts of our Distinction.

Farthermore from the ensucing Branches of our Distinction, may possibly be
inferred, That the Nature of our Subject, placed under a form of Right
extending the Prescription of Right, does not only require the Authority of the
Civil Jurisdiction to lend It such an Attribute, under the Influence of whose
Rules, Right only is distinguishable. But in such Ordinance Prescribed may seem
to take away the Matter, in the Circumstance, should qualify the Nature of our
Subject, since the exaction, should pass the Bounds of such Prescription, does
fall within the Limits of a Civil Rule. In which conclusion would arise an
impropriety not feisable. That the true Nature of Oppression, so figured, can
neither be consistent with a Civil Institution, nor without It. To remove a
pretense to the exception, we may infer, That every perfect Ordinance in a
Civil Rule is not only formed under Circumscription of a Divine and Natural
Institution, but in the Object of Her proper Constitution (our common Welfare)
establishes a Rule, but truly qualifies her Nature: so that to infringe that
Order should sustain her Structure, or to digress from the Intention of her
proper work in the Contexture of her own Injunctions may properly imply what is
inferred in our Distinction. To exact that of us under a Form of Right, which
is beyond a due Prescription of Right. Nor can It be consistant with the Nature
of a Civil Regence, under a form of Right, to exact without Prescription, since
in such Procedure, the Civil Power casts off the Ornament of her Investure, to
take on those, are only proper to Hostility. So work ^ certain dissolution in
her Frame.

Whether a Customary Right extending to a Civil Prescription should bear an
equal weight in our Distinction, may meet a high perplexity in the Decision,
since every Customary Right within their Circumscription becomes equivolent to
a Civil Ordinance, under Tuition of the Civil Suffrage, though totally
repugnant to the Constitution of her general Order. An impropriety scarce
receivable in a Civil usage. That the Influence of a Decree should neither move
equally nor universally to every part of like Capacity, to discover the ground
of such a Privilege, were not of little moment to the rational Establishment
of a Civil Institution. In persuit of the enlightening may be inferred, that her
admittance to a Civil Allowance may possibly meet diverse Occurrents scarce
obvious to the nicest observation, involved in the obscurity of many
Circumstances are lost in the Elapse of Time, and sundry changes. The most
visible and frequent may take original from these Particulars, Circumvention,
Opposition, Improvement, or Necessity.

Under the first Intimation, the Gibeonites frustrated the Ordinance of the
invading Israelites, in shadow of a Covenant, but syrupticiously acquired;
whose subtlety, nevertheless, met but the Imposition of a slavery, To be Hewers
of Stone, and Bearers of Water. In Reference to the Second, may be instanc't
the Kentish Immunity, freed from a Civil Prescription, in Attachment of the
Conqueror; which grant was nevertheless signed with the Blood of the
Conspirators, under the Reward of Treason. The two former Occurrents,
transacted impulsively, or beyond the Intention of the Civil Jurisdiction, can
equally not be charged on her Account, more then in the Immaturity of
Consultation, which not empowered to recede from the Injunction of her proper
Act, without Impeachment to her Dignity may justly enterpose a Penalty to
Counterpoise the Fraud or Violence, and execute the Incroachers on her Rights
in a signal Infliction, invested with the Rights of so singular an Immunity.

The two Latter Inducements may plead a more plausible Reception to their
Establishment, pretending only to the Advantage of the Civil Frame: As in the
Public Devastations of Towns, Cities, or Harbors, by eminent Disaster. The
Civil Jurisdiction sometime is enforced to invite Recourse of Foreigners, to
re-edifie and re-populate such Scituations, with the Advantage of some new
Immunities, peculiar to their Habitations. So on urgency of Affairs, where
Receipts of Commerce, Forts, Harbors, Places of Defense, are on the Borders of
a Civil Circumscription, peculiarly erected for the common Safety or
Encouragement of Trade. Immunities are often granted by the Civil Power for the
Advantage of the Common Welfare in a plausible Institution. But where the cause
of such Establishment shall cease, or where no Ground for such a Privilege can
be suggested; but the Inherents of equivolent Capacity with any other of their
joint Associates in the Civil Frame. Such Graces are unequally enlarged or
continued under Allowance of a Civil Institution, in that those singular
Advantages may frequently impeach a common Interest, either in Opposition,
Diversion, Interception, Obstruction, or Impediment in a common Procedure or
Commerce, or other Civil Transaction.

Having made Inspection into some Parts of our Distinction, we will assume the
overture of the Sequel, to which alone the Induction holds Reference; since
whatsoever is Exacted under Form of Right, and beyond the Prescription of
Right, must also be extended to the Prejudice of our Existence. To intimate the
Nature proper to our Subject, the burden must be heavy, under whose support a
man is forced to stagger. Nor is the burden judged by the weight, but by their
Faculty on whom It is imposed, which yet more clearly to discover, it will be
requisite here farther to imply how far the Bounds of such a Difficulty in
Existence, as is figured may really extend. In order to the Imposition
quisition, we may infer a double Faculty inherent to Existence, the Natural and
the Civil; and though there may appear too vast a Latitude between their
Exigents, to cast them Both into one common consequence: yet since they have so
inseparable a Dependence on each other, that the continued Breaches in the one,
are but infallible Progressions to the Ruin of the other. We may admit them to
an equal Perpensation in their several Distinctions.

The Natural Existence falls under a prescription of Humanity, not only, not to
impair, but to secure. And though the Civil Power seem frequently to cast
restraint upon her Impositions, in reference to the Incapacity of our primitive
support, (whereon her Fabric is erected) without reflection on the Latter,
placed in the Constitution of Her Frame. Yet the Concession issues at so wild
a Distance, that the relief may rather figure Remedies applied to a dying man,
then timely Comforts to secure the living, desisting rather to exact from
whence naught can be levied, then at a farther Distance to forbear in
Apprehension of a future Exigence. To form the Institution more considerably
adjutive to our frail Composure, such Exigents fall under the Tuition of the
Civil Ministry, as passive Breaches in her proper structure, who should
fore-run the Incidents in a timely Prevention, either in an useful Employment,
or in a considerable support, agreeing to their proper and distinct capacities.
The Object of a Civil Institution being to improve our Natural Condition, not
to abandon us in such Extremes, might thrust us on a Savage Procedure, but to
sustain our Frailty, when Natures Store becomes sequestered from our use by Her
Prescription; so that the urgency of our Being must now of Necessity, fall
under a Civil Distinction, which may properly be limited in Order, Decency, and
Sufficience: Under the Prescription of the First, to avoid Confusion; under the
Second, Reproach; under the Third, Indigence: And though the two Former
Dimensions appear of little Moment in Competition with the Latter, yet duly
examined from their Dependents only are derived the very Essence of a Civil
Constitution, which is not placed in those ostentive Investures, that seem to
claim the Homages of Honor from a vulgar Sense: But what may free us from the
insulting scorn of others, and our own dejecting Inconveniences; Improprieties
are truly inconsistent with the Nature of a Civil Association, which requires
a due concinety of Parts to the Establishment of an exact Community: So that
the Civil Indulgence will be of little Efficacy to the Security of our common
Properties, if totally abandoned to the unequal Advantages of one another, when
necessity shall urge submission: The highest Tyrant in a Civil Transaction,
which the Civil Jurisdiction weighs not, as passing under warrant of our
proper will, though oftentimes not in Capacity of a free Election, bound in the
Fetters of more pressing Evils, With such Advantage Jacob wrought on his
Brothers extremity, to supplant him in his Birthright: which Practice is so
far become a general Habit in the Civil Frame, that common observation justly
has entitled us but Wolves to one Another: so that the most considerable
Relief can be expected from the Civil Power, in Reference to such Grievances,
is to secure us from the mutual Rapine of one another.

Public Exigents may sometime possibly require high Impositions for our common
safety, beyond the visible Prescription of the Civil Institution, either in
Measure, Matter, or Manner of their Levies, which closing in a more
advantageous Restitution, then any Civil Commerce can pretend to. The Blemish
of the Procedure will easily be avoided, and form of each man's Private Store a
Public Treasury. Such is the present Practice of the most advised Venet.
Society in Civil Rule, to exact without a Legal Formality beyond a private
Capacity, or without a Public urgency, were but to make so sensible a Fracture
in her proper Frame, as possibly might leave Her destitute of Aid in times of
highest Exigence, rendering Her Members unwilling, unable, or destrustive: So
that we may conclude, with the Dignity and credit of the Civil Power is formed
Her proper safeguard, secured by the mutual Interest of Her Parts* From which
Consequence we may collect, how materially It conduces to our Common Welfare,
that the Civil Power should make a nice Inspection into the Agitation of Her
Ministers, of what Nature soever; since acting under Her Authority, their
Indirect Proceeding should attract a common Disaffection to their Principle,
the extent of their Commission not so exactly visible in every Circumstance,
under which shelter Man's innate Corruption is fomented to licentious Practices.

To the Restraint of such attempts may possibly be inferred, The Ordinance of
the Civil Jurisdiction in Reference to such a Procedure, under Distinction of
Extortion; in which the Intention of the Institution might probably attain an
useful Remedy, were the Procedure more clear, the Penalty and the Reparation
more considerable. But the Remonstrance becomes usually obscured, if not
smothered, under the unequal Interests of the Mannagers. The Amercement merely
formal, or of little Moment; and the Reparation scarcely worth the owning: So
that the Trouble, Opposition, and Charge of the Persuit distinguished before
the Prosecution is commenc't, will hardly find a rational undertaker (unarmed
of Revenge) fondly so much to wound himself in Prejudice of another: Nor were
it much material, were the Laws yet herein more severe, or far more strictly
put in execution, since every shallow apprehension can avoid the Attainture of
the Letter, in a disguised Procedure, turning their Guilt not seldom on the
Sufferer, against which evasion the Civil Power not cautious to secure Her
Purposes, frustrates the Intention of Her Institution: For Proof to the
Position, omitting to insert secret Gratuities, oblick Covenants, and usual
Brocages for common Loans beyond a Legal Estimate of usury. Is it not a
prodigious Inconvenience in Civil Rule, that what the Civil Ordinance has
under Penalty confined to eight per centum, should Publicly, and with Impunity
extend to thirty, forty, fifty per cent. at a common Broakers, but sheltered in
the abstruse Distinction of the Letter, which limits the Transaction only to
specific Matter, no general Act of Commerce: whereas the perfect Nature of
Extortion consists in excess of Lucre, raised on Another's Exigence, under
what Form soever the Subject of Advantage is Communicable. Money, Goods, Lands,
or any other vendible Commodity. Nor can it be exacted from a Rational
Agreement, except the Party so assenting were thereto pressed by urgency of
Affairs, to avoid a higher Inconvenience: So that the weight of such a
Procedure falls only on the weaker Vessel; who rather might (as a Religious
Privilege) claim the Protection of the Civil Power. In this Current runs every
irregular Acquisition in the Civil Texture, whether it have Reference to the
Inherents of Her Ministry, Public Commerce, or other Private Transaction.
Custom having digested the Practice to a form of Right, as may be instanc't in
Officiates, where it suffices not to the success of our Affairs, to render
Public Agents their prescribed Fees; but their Remissness there to will
require their Rights of Expedition, Circumspection, and those of Circumvention
too: essential Gratuities must make return unto disguised Civilities, and no
one thinks he has his due, without Addition made thereto. We undervalue their
Abil^^ies, not answering to their Expectation; and setting not an equal
estimate on our Affairs, sail thereby in our proper Interests.

Commerciants pass usually all Rules of Circumscription in this Licentiousness,
meeting no Arbitration but the Will? Nor is the manner subject to a scruple,
where all Advantages are held allowable, as a plausible Faculty to the
improvement of their Interest. Nor is in Nature or in Civil Rules so nigh
Relation found to lend Restraint to such a Procedure. Necessity casts us not
only on Neglect, but on Inequity: Not prompts us only to abandon, but destroy.
Each exigent in our Transactions but exposing us to become a prey to one
another.

Having thus Briefly searched into the general Nature of our Subject, order
requires, that we should next reflect particularly on the extent Thereof, in
Reference to our several Properties, whose Security may likewise meet a useful
Regulation under the same Advertisements, either as an Incident to Public
Order, or our own mutual Occurrents with one another. But since the Civil
Ministry has an Interest in the distinct Advantages of all her Parts; we may
proceed to visit their Support, under the manage of their proper Owners.

In which persuit, though It may seem an Impropriety in Civil use, to take more
care of us then we do of our selves: Yet in Respect the common good consists
in the welfare of each Part, and that a Private Family is constituted of sundry
Parts, not soly, nor yet always, (in reference to each other) inherent only to
the present owner. We may here farther weigh the use of such an Institution,
not only exclusively, in Reference to the Subordinates, but Inclusively, in
reference to our selves. Stating the Question under the Authority of Divine
Prescription, as an Indulgence to Nature, which A varice might otherwise
overthrow, insisting to exact beyond her Faculty. The seventh day thou shall do
no labor, nor thy Sons, nor thy Daughters, nor thy Manservant, nor thy
Maidservant, nor thy Ox, nor thy Ass, etc. Which Injunction had not only
Reference to a vacancy for Holy Duties, as visibly appears in the Nature of
the Coherents improper and Incapable of such Intention; but was established to
a Civil use, as more authentickly is proved in the exposition of the
Institutor. Man was not made for the Sabbath, but the Sabbath was made for Man.
Nor did the Institution extend only to the rational and sensible Adherents, but
likewise to the irrational and senseless. The Earth had her Sabbaths, and times
of Rest Nor yet in Reason can it be conjectured, that such Restraint on Civil
Rights, should only have a Reference unto time, Many Occurrents happen in a
Civil Transaction, to which we may allow an equal Privilege, either in regard
of the Indisposition of the Agent, the Impropriety of the Season, the
Inaptitude of Materials, or the like: so that It may evidently appear, as
necessary to the Establishment of our Common Welfare, that every part of the
Civil Body should, in their several Constitutions, hold the same Analogy with
the whole, as the whole should with Her Parts. The Regulation of the Civil
Ministry will otherwise prove but of little Moment to our common Security, if
her Influence be retracted or obstructed from a perfect Distribution to the
smallest and remotest Vessels of her Frame. No man in Civil Rules has over
himself so absolute a Power, as to dispose of his own person to the Public
Prejudice. A man may under the distinction of our Law prove Felone de Soy, as
well as d*antry. And to a like capacity pass in the Censure of an equal
Penalty, much more may prove a Trespas^or in the infringement of his proper
Interest, where those of his Adherence collaterally are concerned. The
consequence may possibly meet an opposition, in that none, under the
distinction of a Civil Capacity, can be conjectured of so little sense,
intentionally to prejudice, what visibly can only minister unto their support.

To which may be returned, had every man the use of Reason free, as well in
Act, as in Distinction, Civil Prescriptions were of little weight. But sundry
passions so eclipse that Light, that we distinguish least in what concerns our
selves, declining to insert the Allurements of the sense, as a Distemper
subject to intermission and relax, but proper to the change and season of our
Age. Other accidents, whose momentary Access, nevertheless, does often make
such Breaches in our Civil Constitution, that time nor industry can scarce
repair: What may we then impute to the effects of those continual Feavors of
the mind, Avarice and Ambition; whose Objects find not a Prescription, but
are increast and multiplied in Fruition: In which our Faculties not suffering
Lascitude, because unsatisfied, move by continuance more impetuously to the
subversion of all Rights, Civil, Natural, or Divine: and though they seem to
take on a Pretense to the Improvement of our Civil Interests; yet the
Progressions are too violent and irregular to meet a happy issue, which
frequently (on the necessity of Accidents) involve us to attempt beyond our
Faculty unto our proper Ruin: So that the Circumspection of the Civil Power in
our Transaction, may prove as necessary to our proper safeguard, as the
security of theirs depends on us. Nor can we properly pretend to a support from
Institution of the Civil Ministry, on the miscarriage of our purposes, if her
Authority extend not to preside the regulation: Which Procedure may possibly
seem to tie up our Actions in too strict a rule, usefully to agitate therein to
our Advantages or others. To take away the Ground to such a scruple, we may
imply, the Intention of such Institution we propound, is only formed to
regulate Extremes, and keep the Current of the Civil Faculty from such
extravagant Debordements, might leave their Channel dry.

XLIV. Fire.
FIre, the most sudden and impetuous subvertor of a Civil Interest, being an
Accident more susceptable of Prevention, then Suppression, may justly claim the
nicest Circumspection of the Civil Ministry, but since the Calamity may take
original from diverse Principles, we will reflect on the extent of their
Particulars. The most signal and terrible Devastations by Fire, take their
extraction often from Etherial Causes, where either Sulpherous or Bittuminous
Matter by exhalatiou rarefied, becomes in Motion or Concurrance of Superior
Bodies suddenly enflamed; such was the direful Termination of those Cities,
whose high Impieties could find no Mediation. And though the event may be
concluded to have been a Judgment sent from Heaven; yet are the causes thereby
no less manifest. His Providence that bad so long restrained the effect, could
have made void the Issue, under the like Distinction, and probably from like
materials, though of a Groser Quality, may be derived those Eruptions from the
Entrails of the Earth, which undermine the Continent to the subversion of those
Structures are thereon erected. The Causes of such Accidents not falling in
Capacity of a Civil Regulation, more then in Removal of the Scituations, or
Restraint of Licenciousness, we will not here insist upon. The object of our
Purpose being more peculiarly to search into the Ground and Remedy of such
Events, arising from our own immediate Actions: though possibly, some of the
Nature of the Latter Intimation may sometime wilfully or Casually proceed from
humane Malice or Neglect, as may be instanced from those visible Effects take
Issue in such Mines, as are composed of combustable Materials.

The most usual Causes and more proper to a Civil Regulation, are those
coincident to our General Affairs, which are either Voluntary or Casual.

The Voluntary are either Hostile or Criminel. The Hostile may also meet a
double Distinction, being either Foreign or Intestine. The Foreign have more
properly a Reference to the Exterior Object of our Ministry. And under the
Intention of such Order, may meet a happier Discussion. Whether the Intestine,
may properly fall under the Rules of a Civil Prescription, may meet some
Ambiguity, extracted from the omission of Her Procedure. Yet nevertheless,
though the Litigious Multitude break forth the Limits of a Civil Power; yet are
they no less subject to her Ordinance, which take Restraint from Execution,
when Reduced; in reference only to the public Detrement, which might ensue a
Legal Prosecution, not from the due Demerrit of the Offenders; concluding,
where the Criminels are more numerous, then the Innocents; It far more safe is
to Remit then Prosecute. As to voluntary Acts arising from the private malice
only of Incendaries, they justly may be cast into the Balance of a Criminel
Delinquence; How slight a Consequence soever the Issue may encounter; In
reference only to the Public Damage threatened in the Attempt, nor can in
equity the rigor of the Punishment frustrate the Intention of a Civil
Reparation to the Trespass, the Edict will else remain defective in the chief
object of Her Institution Cuique proprium reddere. Casual Occurrents of this
Nature meet a double Object in their Regulation: Praevenire and Suprimere. To
Prevent and to Suppress. The intention of the Former undertaking tends to
make void the Event. The Latter but to moderate the Issue.

The Prevention consists chiefly in Position of the Fabric. The Materials of
the structure. The Separation of Coincidents. Or vigilance of the Familists.

The Position of the Fabrique has reference only to the Primitive Erection of
a Habitable Convention, whose structures being disposed at convenient Distance
from each other the Damage, on such Accidents does frequently ensue their too
nigh vicinnity might probably be avoided, not only in the preservation of
adjacent Parts, by the Advantage of a vacant interposition; but possibly in the
timely suppression of the Erruption, where first it took original, lending a
freer Access to abord the Place with a more speedy succor.

The Election of Materials proper to the Edifice conduces much unto the
safeguard of a structure from such Accidents. Nor was it without just
consideration, that Timber buildings were in our populous Receptacle lately
inhibited by a special Order. In reference to their Aptitude more suddenly and
more violently to minister to every slight occasion of this nature. Stone, is
without doubt the most secure Defensive in a Fabrique. And in default thereof,
next Brick; but why the inward frame should be allowed of so little
consequence, as to make no distinction of Materials: is not so clearly Evident,
Since Furr, which falls most frequently in use compared to Oak is far more
Subject to the Attainture of this Element.

Under the Separation of Coincidents may be implied, not only the sequestring
of Receipts of Office are designed more peculiarly to the use of Fire from the
Connection or vicinity of the more Principal Receptacles of Commerce or
Community Public or Domestique. But the removal also of Materials from the
approach of Fire, which in their proper Natures, are more apt insensibly to
catch at the encounter. As Powder, Flax, Straw and the like Commodities: nor
can those dreadful Accidents have lately happened from such cause in our capital
seat be sensibly reflected on without astonishment, that yet the Civil Power,
gives way to those Transactions were visibly the ground to those Events, having
such proofs to awake their Prevoyance, suff^ing the sail of Powder to be made
even in the Center of the most eminent confluence of the People.

The vigilance of the Familists may possibly meet a greater difficulty in
Regulation of their Ministry, in reference to this Casualty. In regard the
Trust thereof is frequently so removed from the Principel, that the Injunction
cannot take effect, unless the suffering Innocent become responsable for
another Fault subordinate to his Rule. In which respect, whither exacted by
Public Imposition or Civil Caution; It will be highly necessary, that the
owners eye preside the Circumspection, removing from the Hands of his
Domestiques every use of Fire on proper seasons for Retreats of Rest. Or in
their Incapacity or Absence, to transact the Charge on such a Substitute, as
may considerably be concerned in the miscarriage of his Trust, not to remit the
care thereof to servile Metcinaries, which Practice may yet probably meet other
advantageous uses in a private Family preventing such Disorders, as under
nights obscurity and silence tend to purloin and dissipate their Masters Goods.

The First and most considerable means that may suppress these Accidents
commenced, is timely to provide for their Discovery, which making usually more
dangerous Incursions on the Retreats of night; Our Wards and Bellmen, if
diligent in their Search, and more frequent in their Rounds, might herein meet
a happy Institution.

The Second Remedy to stop the Fury of this Evil consists in the readiness of
Materials to extinguish or demolish. In reference to the Former use, our
concealed currants pass many Streets in Pipes, if yet more generally designed,
might reach a high Propriety. As to other Instruments or Engines fit for either
Purposes. All public places of Receipt in every Ward might with variety and
store be furnished at the common charge. For the Assistants to the work they
usually on the outcry are too numerous to be truly useful; some flock to view
the Spectacle, some for Booty, few for Action; so that in such confusion, the
intended succor seldom is successful, in which respect it will be highly
useful, that the Civil Power do constitute a general Regulator to the
undertaking, with such Officiates have Judgment and Experience to manage the
Direction.

XLV. Inundation.
UNder the Distinction of this Subject may be comprised not only such
Incursions of the Ocean as make encroachments on the Continent. But such
Debordeurs also of the Inland Floods, as meet not proper Channels to their
Excursions Thither; and though some of this Nature frequently conduce to the
fertility of the Soil; yet where they swell beyond the due capacity of their
Current insensibly or unseasonably; or where they lodge beyond a competent
extent of Time; The weight of such Advantage will hardly countervail the
Detrement; either in their sudden Destruction of Chattle surprised, in the
Overflow. The loss of the Crop, or perversion of the true Nature of the Soil,
rendering it less proper for increase; by chilling of the Earth, or else unapt,
deceitful, or unsound for Graysing. Nor can the Air be thereby free from some
corruption, becoming often less Salubrious to the Borderers.

To avoid the Inconvenients, Damage or Disorder may arise from the irregular
course of either Flood, falls not within Capacity of Particulars. The Aid must
be more General to meet a happy Remedy, which ought not only to extend to Those
in present are concerned therein; but those in future also may be so. And since
the exigence of the work exacts more diligence then common Rights do usually
encounter, which always are but too remissly prosecuted. The Civil Power must
lend Authority and weight thereto by her Prescription.

To the expulsion of the Maritine Incursions. The Industry of our Neighborhood
abroad may in their penible persuit lend us a happy Pattern to the undertaking.
As they to us at home have to their own Advantage and to our Reproach, lent us
a Proof to the Restriction of the Inland Floods. Nor is it only Practice or
Necessity have made them happy in the Mystery; but their entire Conjunction of
their Common Faculties to an assiduous perseverance in the work. For whether
the Possession be already lost, or only yet in danger to become so. The
Commonwealth is euqally concerned with the Private Owners. So that every Purse
and Hand, as to a common Prejudice, ought to be ready to the Enterprise,
directed to Recover or Secure; which finished, the Restitution of the Charge
might pass on the Account of the Proprietors. Particulars are usually not able,
or not well intentioned to manage with success the undertaking, persueing only
their Advantage, not the Common good; so that the work thereby becoming or
Protracted, or Imperfect, the Charge is oftentimes redoubled, e're the exact
fruition is attained. The necessity and perfection of the work, is therefore
proper only to the due Regulation of the Civil Power. It will be requisite Her
Substitutes (of due capacity to Judge, and full Authority to Execute) make
frequent visitations on such Parts, as are already damnified, or may be
incident to the Casualty; whose censure thereof signified to the Proprietors,
with Legal summons to consult with them thereon. The urgency of the work and
the extent of the Expense (is with Integrity) to be duly balanced with their
Capacity to the undertaking, which not extending their Ability. The work
proportionably imposed, may be remitted to their Industry, under such Rules of
Direction and Limits of time, as may be held expedient to the Perfection and
Advantage of the Enterprise. But where the Faculty of the Owners cannot reach
the due Intention of the work; the Aid, whither of Men, Money or Materials, may
be exacted by a Legal Ordinance from the next Associates, extending to such
Bounds, as may without much Inconvenience to the Adjutants, timely and exactly
consumate the undertaking; which charge with due consideration may be reimburst
from the Anual Revenue of the Secured or Recovered Property in such Proportion,
as may not much incumber the Proprietors in the Restitution. And though the
expense of the work may sometime possibly exceed the value of the Land in
question; yet is the undertaking for such Cause not to be abandoned; Not only,
in that the Commonwealth becomes thereby deprived of a useful part unto Her
Common Ministry. But in Respect the extent to future Damage, may thereby ensue,
not clearly is distinguishable; either in the Expansion of the Flood beyond Her
usual Bounds, in the recourse of other Streams not timely find their Issue. Or
otherwise diverting Them unto a new Erruption on some other Place, was free
from any such Incursion. Nor in Recovery of Possessions Lost, at such excessive
charge, as may extend their value; ought Alienation thereof to be made from the
Proprietors, as an authentic Purchase to the Undertakers. But such advantage
may in equity be granted Them therein, as Time may make a Reparation to the
Accident. Whereas the work left totally (without Prescription) to the Owners
Rule, though never so Able, Numerous or Unanimous, is generally so leasurely
and so sparingly persu'd, that both their Cost and Industry tend only in
Portracting, but to multiply their Damage, and transfer their misery to others.
Designs of this Nature require Validity and Diligence to render them
successful, who herein gripple are of their Expense and Time, do but betray
their proper Interest.

XLVI. Excess.
THE Expulsion of this Principle, in Reference to the security of our Civil
Property, may on the first Inspection rather seem a Subject proper to the
Regulation of a private Economy, then of a Civil Ministry. And in the Order of
position, more proper to improve then to secure our Civil Interest: Yet since
we, through the Infirmity of our Nature, are become improper Guides to our
affections, which frequently so far transport us to the Indulgence of the
Sense, that no Extravagance can find a Limit to Her Ministry, that, under
flattery of our own esteem, prompt every one unequally to assume unto
themselves a higher Eminence in the Civil Order, then properly to them belong.
Envy, Vanity, and Ambition fomenting still an Emulation in Excess to attract
new Homagers to the exhausting of our Civil Faculty in an Impertinent,
Ridiculous, and Profuse Expense: We justly may submit to the Prescription of
the Civil Rule, to lend us more essential Ornaments to our Distinction, then
what conduce but to Reproach and Ruin in their Improprieties. Nor is the
Intention of our Order here infringed to reduce our Subject to one use, might
more effectually pretend unto Another, since Both have their Reception under
one Capacity. Nor This but the Progression to the other.

How far the Nature of our Subject may extend it self in a clear and Rational
Distinction, to lend a Rule to this our Agitation, may be extracted from the
Inference, we formerly have inserted in the Discussion of a Civil Existence,
which is not properly employed by the bare support of Nature in a Savage manner.
But in the Allowance unto every Part, a Regular and Decent Constitution,
agreeing to the proper use, and true Capacity of each Particular. Nor is It our
Intention here to weigh the Nature of our Subject, as a vicious Habit in our
Practices, which we have formerly remitted to the Regulation of the Moral
Censor. But as an Impropriety in the Civil Order destructive to our proper
Interests.

What this Order should require in the Composure and Transaction of each Part
to form a Civil Harmony, may clearly be collected from the Distinction of the
use, to which they are designed. Those Ornaments and Investures, which are
proper to the Head, or Hand, transferred to the feet, but prejudice or Incumber
their peculiar Action. Nor does the Impropriety consist alone in Transposition
of Dependencies; but in the Regular Application of their own Inherencies,
proportioned to the due Capacity of every Individual in the kind, their
Function else will but encounter an Imperfect Ministry.

Whether so strict a Position directed to confine the usage of our Civil
Faculty within the proper and peculiar Bounds of every Current, be really
consistant with the common Benefit, is not so clearly obvious, in that our
frail Condition is patcht up with so many Imperfections in Composure, that not
only our Infirmities, but our very Vices are become useful, if not necessary to
the consistence of our Common Union: Lux and Riot being the hopeful Springs
whence Commerce draws her daily Affluence, which procedure to render more
Authentic, some will extract a Privilege from the vicissitude of Natures
Institution, alleging, that Corruption unius est Generatio alterius: Although
the Parallel be but unequally applied. The Intention of Her Work therein is
only to preserve Her own Production in every Individual. Ours tends to
destroy both our selves and our own. Nor can the common consequence of such
profuse Expenses, well examined, tend otherwise to the Advantage of the Civil
Frame, then as improper Aliments may sometime in their habitual frequency of
use, become necessary to a depraved Constitution. Most occupations now
established depending but on their Superfluous Ministry. Or as the present
Constitution of our Commerce is composed, does always the Excrescence flow to
the Receipts of this our Civil Continent. But greedy Foreigners with useless
Trifles, Knacks, and Toys, more frequently fleece us of other much more
Considerable Commodities, in Ministering unto such Giddy and distempered
Fantasies.

The propriety and extent of our Subject, in Reference to the Intention of our
work, together with the weight and Consequence of the Effects may thence ensue,
thus generally discovered, we will insist on such Particulars, as may lend
light to their Suppression; whether the ostentacious Tumor may consist in
Habit, Habitation, Entertainment, or Domestic Equipage.

As to the Fashion of the Garment, most Commonwealths have in all Ages held
their several Distinctions proper and peculiar to the order of their Ministry
in the Civil Frame. The Romans had their Plaebean and their Noble Vesture:
which Institution was elsewhere essentially in use, till Wealth had justled
Virtue out of Action. Now generally regarded but as a trivial Formality: under
which License probably the Vulgar have with us assumed their Insolence.

Their Difference in Materials is not in usage of so great a Moment, especially
in such Climates, where they take their primitive extraction: yet has the
Garniture met often such Extravagance (even where affected Vanity had won Her
highest Privilege) that the Civil Power, (not only in Reference to the Damage
of Particulars, but in security to the Public Interest) has oftentimes been
forced to restrain the Prodigality, in a general Inhibition of the use of
Cut-Works, Embroydery, and Clinkant under Imposition of a Penal Law.

The Ornaments of our Habitation may in their Structure justly claim a higher
Privilege in Expense, in that they are with Ours directed to a Public use,
contributing effectually unto the Luster and Dignity of the Place or City, and
bear the lasting Marks of Honor to a Private Family: yet with such Limitation,
that the Fabric not extend either the use or Capacity of the Founder. Nor that
the Interior Ornaments surpass in value their Dependancies.

Special Entertainments have a prodigious Latitude in expense; not seldom
prejudicial to a Common Interest, and usually are tendered, either as the Rites
of Ceremony, The Pledges of Amity, The Proofs of Hospitality, or else The Masks
of Furbery. The first Transaction is exacted, as a National Association in
Humanity, to Gratulate, or to Consolate, to Mourn, or to Rejoice together; as
in Funeral or Nuptial Solemnities: which, rarely falling in a Civil Practice,
may be allowed greater Liberty. The Second improperly o'reshadowed with such
ostentive Proofs, may justly be excluded such a Procedure, whose nature rather
is expressed in the mutual Freedom of a voluntary Congression, then of a
sumptuous and singular Invitation. The Third worn out of use, had yet their
Improprieties, Inconvenients, and Encumbrances, not only to the Practiser, but
to the common Interest of the Civil Frame; in that the order of Munificence did
never reach the object of so specious a pretense. The true Nature of
Hospitality consisting in the Relief of the Indigent, not in the Indulgence of
the Slothful: Or in Recourse of Jollity, forming rather a Harbor to Necessity,
then a Receipt to Sensuality, or a Shelter to Neglect. The Luster of so high an
Attribute must bear a more distinct Appropriation to the use, separated from
the very appearance of any other Collateral Inherence whatever. The source must
not only be free from Ostentation, but the Materials from Indecency. Not the
Refuse of Riot, but the choice of Fertility: Nor can the Dispensation meet
Excess, where all may be required.

The Latter Object of Entertainment is most frequently but the secret Train to
the Advancement of a private Interest. A Courtly kind of Commerce, where the
engaged Guest becomes designed to defray the expenses of the Feast. But
singularity and experience have made so nigh discoveries on the Ambush, that
usually the Adventure must be ensured in a plainer Style, delivered in more
visible and current Characters; so that in such enlargements, the casualty of
success may possibly in time, remove the urgency of the Public Regulation to a
Private Caution.

Our Domestic Equipage may be employed either in Quantity, or Quality of
Servants, or in Appendents to our Service, whether for Use or Pleasure. The
number of Servants has generally been reduced to a smaller Retinue with us,
since Vanity had changed her Position. Few well affected to the Burden of a
Multitude, or where they do exceed therein, it is but in the Quantity of Those,
which are designed more for show then use.

The Appendents to our Service or Divertisements do often reach to a more
considerable Superfluity, either in Plate, Horse, or other Appropriates to
Field Divertisements.

The use of Plate, in latter Times has been extended to a high extravagance
almost in every Family, even to those Utensils designed to the vildest Offices:
which Impropriety must, under Suffrage, questionless, produce a visible
Obstruction in a Civil Interest, where the Principle Material, that should lend
life to Commerce, in a perpetual Revolution, lies dead, in an improper Ministry.

Horses are, under several Distinction, of so general an use, that their
Appropriation, but in number, hardly meets Exception. Yet is the Courser of so
little Moment, and so high a Charge, both in their Breed, their Keeping, and
their use, that the Intention of their Exercise may oftentimes require a Civil
Regulation, in that they frequently involve the Owners in Debates to a
Prodigious Issue of Expense, wherein the most advised often are exposed to the
fraud of Mercinary Combinators.

Field Exercises may in their frequent Practice meet a plausible Intention in
the Times of Peace, rendering the Body apt, vigorous, and hardy to more useful
and more generous Encounters, on urgency of Martial Expeditions: Yet where the
Burden of the Chase lies only on a single Manager, the common Consequents are
usually too weighty for a Private undertaker. Nor can the Liberty of Parks so
generally in use, pass without Prejudice to the Public Interest, when as so
many and such vast Extents of Land are only but designed to Pleasure. The
Privilege, rightly weighed, seems only proper to a Princes usage: And though
the Soil may sometime plead a License, in sterillity; or in a farther use
thereof for Pasturage to Horse or Chattel: yet is the Advantage therein but of
little Moment in Compensation to the Damages.

Nor are these Oftentatious Habits only in their Nature prejudicial to our
Civil Faculty; but also in a necessity of perseverance, not leaving place to
the Relucting will to make Retraction from the Error; In apprehension to
anticipate the evil, we in Protraction do but aggravate: which Imposition of
Engagement, too frequently, though oftentimes too late, becomes resented by
unadvised Commerciants, insisting in their Vanity but to support their Credit.

In persuit of our Agitation on this Subject, order would exact we should imply
a course whereby the Civil Power might visibly distinguish, or yet exactly
rectify the Consequence of this Distemper. In Reference to the Procedure, we
may infer a due Restriction in the usage of our Civil Property, proportioned to
the Nature and Distinction of our Civil Function; which passing the
Prescription of a decent Rule, might bear the Imposition of a Penalty: Or
otherwise, not reaching the Intention of the Ordinance (as often is observed
among Licentious Livers) the Interdiction passing generally; exception (as a
Privilege) might be cast only on the Infamous, which not prevailing, might
plausibly ensue, Suspensio ab usu Facultatis, ex Informatione Proximi
Possessioni. A Suspension from the usage of our Civil Faculty, on Information
of the next Inherent to the Property,

XLVII. The Principle Subjects fall under Circumspection of the Civil Power, In
Reference to the Improvement of our Civil Property.
HAving thus briefly pursued those general Objects, whereby our Common Interest
distinctly is secured, under Tuition of the Civil Power. Order requires, we
next assume those Principles whereby our Civil Faculty should likewise be
improved, under Circumspection of the Civil Rule: Insomuch as the perfect
Constitution of the Civil Parts can no otherwise suffer Cessation, Remission,
or Obstruction of increase, without a Detriment, then the Natural. Casualty or
Propagation, frequently exhausting more then possibly might support the visible
and present exigence: So that we may conclude in Civil Rules as well as
Natural, where motion finds no Station in vicissitude, That Non Progredere est
Retrograders, Not to Advance is to Decline. Our Interests cast on the Conduct
of the Civil Rule, as the peculiar welfare of those simple Parts, whose joint
Composure forms one Common Good. What she exacts of us in Reference to Her
Rights, that she may properly require of us, in order to our own. Expedit
R^ipublicae, ne sua Re quis male utatur. The Public Welfare holding still the
same Analogy with the Parts; as the Parts does with the whole: What falls
under the distinction of our Private usage is our Property; what under
Regulation of the Public, Hers. So that in the miscarriage of the meanest
Part, the Damage is resented of the whole; though possibly that Affluence
which lent It due support might be diverted to another Member, under the
Constitution of the self-same Frame: Since to a due concinnety, every part must
be endued with a faculty proportioned to his Ministry; to which Excess may
often meet Impediment, as well as a Defect. The proper use therefore to which
the Parts are more peculiarly designed, will not only lend us a Direction to
the Improvement of their Faculties to the Enlargement of the Common Welfare.
But the specific use of every Property inherent to those Parts will guide us
also to the Improvement of their Ministry, to the Advantage of a Private
Interest. In Reference to whose distinct Appropriation, we therefore will
reduce their Regulation to these Principles. 1. Oeconomical Order. 2. Civil
Institution and Introduction 3. Serviceable Employment. 4. Civil Function. 5.
Structure. 6. Manure. Private Commerce.

XLVIII. Oeconomical Order.
TO preside the Domestique Manage is a Privilege inherent to the Practice of
a Conjugal Relation; though Custom has, with us ('among those are most
materially therein concerned) lent It too mean an Estimate to own the Ministry,
casting the Trust thereof on Fraudulent, Negligent, and Licencious Servants, to
no small Prejudice in a Private Economy. On what ground the usage took
Original, is not so easy to discover, whether Delicacy, State or Indulgency to
Pleasure; the two Former Pretenses can hardly find Admission, since Age and
Eminence afford us in our Neighboring Nations, most authentic Patterns. Nor
are the most extravagant in Feminine Affeteries much less assiduous in their
Circumspecion, though thereto but enduced by irregular Motives, as a necessary
Dispensitory to their Vanity and Riot. The Consequence of either Practice may
visibly be disclosed in the unequal Durance of that welfare, is inherent to
those Families with whom this Order finds a due Reception, compared unto Theirs
have quite abandoned It.

How the Nature of this Charge should be distinguished, or to what Objects
visibly designed, we will endeavor to discover. The Nature of the undertaking
falls (without question) under the Distinction of a Trust, though the Trustee
seem equally interessed in the mannaging. But usually the Privilege is assumed
only under color of Purloining for supply to some sinister Purposes, unequal
Inclinations, Secret, frivulous or superfluous expenses, which Practice is
fomented under shelter of an Interest, or under shelter of the Law.

The Nature of the Interest, rightly understood, is but a Potential or
collatereal Adherence, under the Distinction of our Rules. The Civil Law admits
the same Relation to an equal Partage in the Acquisition with the Principle, in
what Nature soever transacted; which Privilege may possibly be the Cause, why
the Institution meets a happy Issue, under so favorable a Prescription; though
the engagement has a Nobler Object, where the Act is free from any such
Advantages.

The Law extends not her Influence to the Miscarriage of This Trust, in
Respect the Consequence is involved in a joint Commission, under One present
Interest; though possibly the Trustee may totally in Future be secluded from
the Benefit. Or in that, the Authority not passes under a necessary
Imposition, but under a voluntary plausible and endearing Concession.

The Object of the Exercise, placed under Circumscription of the Family, seems
totally inherent to That use, whither employed in a timely Provision or a
prudent Dispensation. Acquisition derives her Affluence from too many and too
remote sources to exact Her vigilance, whose Action only is so firmly seated
only in the Center of Receipt. The First Inference of Devoyr may seem to
approach the Nature of the Exception. In that, to make Provision, is properly
but to acquire for store, but the Intention confined to the use, can really not
extend to so general a Distinction.

The Objects thus designed to their distinct Balances, we have to Either here
annexed a Dependent might lend them equal Counterpoise; in that they held a
mutual Reference to One Another. The Provision must be Timely to attain the use
to which it was directed; when Plenty crowns the Season with Success, and sets
a lower Rate on the Materials, while yet occasion presses not. Not when
Necessity shall urge supply on any Terms. Prevoyance often reaps the fruit of
others Industry. Nor can their force united be but requisite. In that, the
Latitude of a Civil existence falls totally not under support of a Private
Frame. Civility and Hospitality will challenge a supply in Rights of Decency;
so that where Either is defective, the Consequence must of Necessity, be
prejudicial to a Civil Fadulty. The Counter-Ballance must to This be framed
equivalent, to lend Them an agreeing Motion. The Dispensation must prudential
be to form a timely Providence materially successful. Excess meets no
Prescription where Riot tends to Dissipation; nor Penury attains the Honor of
Frugality; where gripple hands becomes the Mannagers. Sobriety and Order crown
Nature with Delight, while Lux but hastens to extinguish It. The scattered
fragments had their due Reserve in his Prescription lent them Affluence by a
Miracle.

But how the Civil Power should lend an Influence to this Circumspection, where
Love and Duty are not prevalent, is yet a Mystery. Honor may attract, and
Infamy deter, in Minds that are thereof susceptable; but where the Inclination
has attained that Sense; Both needless are to guide the Will to what is
Regular. Or if They might, the Rule is yet too singular to be extended to a
General usage, when Vice finds no Restraint in Punishment. The happiest Motive,
therefore can be issued from a Civil Institution, is to lend the Agitators
equal Interests in their Ministry.

XLIX. Civil Institution and Introduction.
UNder the Intimation of this Subject, may be implied not only general Forms
of Exercise, should render Youth susceptable of Civil Action, prefigured in our
Primitive Education: but the specifique Matter should lend That aptitude both
Use and Practice to a mutual Benefit the Parts have with the whole. No one
dispensed from a common Ministry to form the Civil Frame exactly flourishing.
But how this wild Propension should in every one become directed to a proper
Object, might lend perfection to the Enterprise, were not of little Moment to
discover, since every Person has an innate Faculty peculiar to their Genius,
no Habit can pretend to.

In Persuit of the Intention the Spartans, who had raised their Glory on the
Propriety of Natures use, left the Distinction thereof only to Her yet pure and
unaffected Motive, discovered in the Amusement of their Infancy; to whom they
had exposed every Form, might be inherent to a Civil usage. Nor was this
Inquisition yet remitted to the Circumspection of Indulgent Parentage; or the
Appropriation thereof to their Order. The Civil Power seems yet more nighly
Interessed in the Consequence, to lend the Partiality and Endearment of a
Parent soly such a Privilege, the weight hereof they visibly expressed in
their Caution, when as the insulting Foe, would have exacted an engagement of
their Youth for Hostages. Nor was the progress of their Industry visited,
directed or encouraged by a Private Institution. The Aged and Experienced were
publicly the Supervisors to their sports and exercises; who both Instructed
and Designed the Price, where Emulation was inflamed with Glory, and Neglect or
Remisness checked with Infamy. Private and Mercinary Institutors spin out their
undertaking but under slight and superficial Forms of Practice to the Advantage
only of their abject Lucre. Indifference in the First Promotor will hardly
animate remote Adherents to a perfect Action. How far the prosecution of our
Purpose may advance a Private Interest, is clearly evident in the Consequence,
since early Habits in an useful Function will lay a sure foundation to the
enlargement of our future Fortunes. Or form a fair Retrait to the Miscarriage
of that in present is established. Practice will entertain the Fancy with
Delight; Delight win Assiduity; Assiduity removes insensibly that vacance might
solicit facile Inclinations to licentious Practices, or lewd Society. Affords
the mind a plausible Divertisement. And frustrates both the Snares of Sloth
and Solitude; on which consideration possibly this Institution became
successively digested into Practice, among most Princes of the highest
Eminence: So that we may conclude the Suffrage of affected Vacancy, under what
shelter of Civil Affluence soever, endued with Capacity to act, forms no small
Discord in a Civil Consort.

To visit yet more nighly the general Nature of this Institution, we clearly
may distinguish by the Object we propound, the means that should conduct us
thither is not merely Specular. Science may lend a vast Inspection into Natures
Mysteries, Civil Occurrents, or the minds composure, yet reach to no peculiar
Ministry in a Civil usage, till practice shall educe such Faculties into Act.
Knowledge must attain a proper Subject to be wrought upon before it can attain
or Illustration, or use. The Civil Harmony consists in Agreement of Parts to
a mutual Correspondence of their Action: Not in the Amusement of a mistick,
wandering, and undigested Speculation. To descend to a more peculiar
Distinction, were but to trace upon a Subject we already have elsewhere
enlarged upon, so far as might be consonant to the due Structure of our
Treatise.

The Institution framed on a proper Subject, the Introduction also must be
timely and authentic, to reach a perfect Ministry; not that the season thereto
falls so precisely under the Prescription of their Age, as under the maturity
of Endowment in a Civil Capacity; though we may properly suspend them from the
managing of Public Interests, so long as Civil Rules seclude them from
disposing of their own. In other Respects, the Nature of the Action will lend a
more visible Propriety to the season in the use. Adolescence and Virility more
properly are applied to Execution, and Invention. Age more secure for Judgment
and Advice: Nor can the extremes of either meet a happy Issue in their
Ministry. Youths Ardour often may precipitate his Force. And Age outlive his
own Sufficience. The Inherence also to the Action must Authentic be to Crown a
happy Industry, not only in Reference to Probation, but to Admission. Voluntary
Officiates will in their forward Emulation, or Licentious Procedure, produce
but a promiscuous Ministry, Commission only can lend weight to Civil Action.

L. Serviceable Employment.
THe next Inherent to a Civil Interest is the Serviceable, where the Advantage
of Another Industry redoundeth to the Benefit of the Proprietor, that lends
them entertainment. To which Distinction Adherents for Parade have no Relation,
Appropriates only to Vanity and Ostentation, really designed to no Civil
Ornament, or Use. And though the Journal Mercenary might seem included in such
Ministry, yet not reduced properly to the true Nature of a Familist, we will
dismiss him here from our Discussion.

In Reference therefore only to such Limitation we will insist upon the Nature
of our Principle, under the Distinction of Domestic, Functionary, or Emissive
Adherents.

Though the two Latter Differences seem properly included in the Former, in
Reference to one Receptacle, as common to them all. Yet in Relation only to
their distinct use, we may appropriate their Ministry to several Attributes.
The Domestic have a more peculiar Reference only to the Order of our
Residence. The Functionary are intentive on their Faculty; and the Emissive
wait for all Essays may tend to Action. The Industry of the Domestic has
more peculiarly for Object but his Trust. The Vigilance of the Functionary but
his Art. And the Diligence of the Emissive but his Lucre, though generally
under one common Affiance, all mutually endeavor to advance a distinct
Interest divided from their Own. To improve the Intention of their Office in an
useful Ministry. We therefore must lend Honor or Advantage to their
Enterprise. Punishment or Infamy are passive Motives to a Reackless or a
stubborn Temper, while Cheerfulness and Hope lend vigor to their Motion.

To yield distinctly to each one their proper and peculiar Influence, we
severally must reflect upon the object of their Action. Trust Crowns the
undertaking of Domestic Props; so Joseph had attained possession of his
Masters Goods: and Eliazar was entitled to the Succession of the Patriarchs
Wealth. Trust is not only a Civil Engagement, but a Religious Tie. And in
Transaction proved, justly deserves the highest Dignity. The exact Proof
whereof appears not barely in the ready Execution of the Masters Charge: But in
the constant opposition of Advantages, that might corrupt, or yet entice him to
retard, or otherwise decline his Masters Interest. The Reason why our
Observ^tion rarely can disclose so evident a Test, is probably, Domestics,
that Officiate only a Discretion; and under the Reward alone of petty Salaries,
make slight account of their Supporters Interest, and agitate therein, as if
they would betray their Masters purposes: So that in opposition to the Cause,
we must infer the Remedy. The Adherence therefore must be more Material, and
the Condition not so exactly Mercinary. Early Relations hold the strongest
Ties, and a voluntary compensation more acceptable. As Habit from Puerility
should form the initiation of a Trust, so the perseverance Therein should frame
a safe Retreat to Age and Impotence: An authentic Probat of the One, on any
change, is but the slightest Recompense of Fidelity, and the Advantage of the
Others Civilly Justiciable.

2. Functionary Adherents pursue but the Advantage of their Art, and seem
improperly admitted to the sole Practice of their Faculty, under Prescription
of a certain Term. Insomuch, as Neglect or Stupidity may render them incapable
of such a Privilege, not only to their Masters Damage, but to the Public
Detriment, since ignorant and unadvised Commerciants rarely can disclose the
Imperfection of the work, without a frequent prejudice: nor yet their Masters
reap the Benefit of their Industry, where Time and Cost unequally are balanced
in value to the Execution. The perfect'st Rule to rectify the Casualty to such
Occurrences, will be to exact a visible and Public Attestation to their
Progression in the Mystery, or to suspend them from the Practice of their
Faculty.

Emissive undertakers have a general use, under the various Direction of their
Momentary Entertainers. A form of Servitude not now in usage among Christian
Practisers, where the enthralled Adherents daily are sent forth to search
occasion to improve their Industry to the Advantage of their Masters Benefit,
and their own Existence; though possibly the Institution might meet a happy
Ministry, under due Regulation, among Foreign Planters. The Eastern people
frequently attract no small Accumulation from their Assiduous Industry; and
more would probably attain, might the enlargement of a regular Imposition,
remotely but proceed to their Enfranchisement, by Public Order.

L. Civil Function.
ALthough the Nature of our Subject might properly be extended to Public
Ministry; yet in respect the Dignity of such a Faculty can warrantably not
pretend to the Advantage of a private Interest, whose regular Improvement we
pursue as a collateral to the Public Welfare. Our present Agitation only shall
insist on such Particulars, as thereto only have Relation. The Object of a
Civil Function must, questionless, fall under the Distinction of a Commerce;
since thence alone must issue those Advantages, that animate her Course: What
therefore may lend Affluence to Receipt, must visibly promote the Action. The
most essential Sources are extracted from the Perfection, and Expedition of the
Work, The Reduction of the Charge, and the Frequence in Return.

The Perfection of the Work becomes visibly advanced in a timely Initiation,
and a singular Adherence to the Faculty.

A timely Initiation, In that Ars Longa, Vita Brevis. Art has a large extent,
Life has but narrow Bounds: As also, that the Addresses of our Infancy
insensibly contract a Habit, more easily to sustain the Burden of their
Industry, and with more readiness to execute our Ministry.

The Adherence to the Faculty must of Necessity be singular to reach that
Excellence should Crown an Enterprise with Affluence, where the Spirit is
generally intentive on variety of Objects, our Faculties form no Production:
where but alternately employed, the vigor thereof weakened in Diversion, can
rarely form but an imperfect Issue. Those Nations, who had raised their Glory
and Advantage on their Civil Faculty, (in reference to our Proposition) were
generally enjoined by Public Ordinance, to adhere soly to their Predecessors
Ministry. That trained, from their Childehood under Faithful and Industrious
Guides, they might begin their undertaking in the Perfection of another
Industry; who so successively but adding little unto what was formerly acquired
to their Usage and Instruction, they might in time attain the highest Execution
and Inspection into Arts and Sciences, that humane Nature could pretend to
reach to.

The Expedition of the Work depends on the Assiduity in Practice, and the
Facility is acquired in the frequency of the Exercise, whereto the supple
Limbs, and active Spirits, actually applied from the Infancy, become more
prompt and ready to their Ministry; whence issues that delight which should
invite and entertain the Fancy to persevere in their Industry.

The two latter Subsequents that should conduce to the Advantage of a private
Interest in a Civil Function, may seem alternately adjutive to each others
Efficacy. The Reduction of the Charge constituting a lower estimate upon the
undertaking, must quicken the Return, And the Frequency in Return must likewise
form a visible Reduction of the Charge; in that the advantage of the price
attracteth greater Affluence of Contractors to a speedy Issue of the Property.
And the P^otraction of the Issue must of necessity enlarge the Burden of the
Charge in an unequal Retention of a dead Commodity.

The Reduction of the Charge is, questionless a Subject more properly Inherent
to a Manual Operation, then to an Intellectual Ministry. In that Materials are
but the peculiar Subject of an Art. No Consequents to the Faculty of Science.
The weight of our Discussion therefore only tends to show, how the Expense
inherent to such Arts, may plausibly be reduced under Regulation of the Civil
Power. The most obvious course may possibly succeed to our Intention. Is the
Congestion of a Public store, authentickly inherent to such distinct
Societies, as shall be needful to a Civil usage: to the provision of whose
Affluence, each particular Associate, daily contributing from the Profits of
their Industry, supplies might equally be issued thence to every ones Capacity
in Action.

Nor less expedient Hereto were the Execution of such Seminaries as might
employ the Vacant, Indigent, and Useless Multitude, under distinction of what
Sex, or Age soever, in any small Capacity to Act: which Receptacles for common
use might find their proper situation in such Parts, as might afford the
highest affluence, and yield to all Adherents their peculiar Maintenance at the
easiest Rate.

Returns may find their frequent Revolution, either in the Agitators
Regulation of his Profits, or the Concurrence of their joint Associates, in a
public intercourse of Trade; from whose common Receipt might issue their
Commodities to all Commerciants of Retail. The Surplus form a Staple to a
Foreign Traffic, under adventure of one common Interest.

The first Method to Improvement may probably advance a private Interest, in
that no Motive sooner can invite Recourse of Custom, then an Abatement of a
Common Price, be the advantage scarce considerable: but such a procedure will
scarce consist with the joint Benefit of all Associates, whose mutual Interest
is the Object of a Common Welfare: In that the whole Society must thereby be
enforced to decline from such Advantages, as properly are requisite to the due
support of a general Trade, or make a fruitless stop in their Proceedings. The
latter course can rarely meet exception, in regard no agitator can supply
Materials to their public Stock, so frequently to be o'recharged with the
Consequence. where Trade is Inwardly, and Outwardly still kept alive in a
perpetual Issue.

LI. Structure.
STtructure has a plausible Intention in a Civil usage, not only as a shelter
to our Frailty, but as an Ornament and Advantage to a Civil Society, in that
the Order, Beauty, and Propriety of a Habitation inviteth a more numerous
Affluence of People. From the concourse of Association springs the
Enlargement of Commerce. From the Receipt of Commerce issues a Common welfare.
But how the undertaking should contribute to the Improvement of a private
Interest, is clearly not Distinguishable: Insomuch as the Transaction is
imposed on faithless Ministers, under advantage of their secret Lucre, and
passes only under Circumspection of unskilful Managers; So that the Edifice
erected, will frequently in value not extend to half the Expense of the
undertaking, which usually for such Consideration only has really for Object
but Necessity or Pleasure; though the allowance of our slight Materials has
lately muco encouraged Adventurers to frame the Practice on a Public Commerce.

In Opposition therefore to the Impediments, that might detain a Private
undertaker to pursue so material an inherent to a common Interest; It were
requisite the Civil Power should promote the undertaking; Secure the Trust, or
regulate the Circumspection of such Fabriques, might visibly conduce to the
Advantage of the Civil welfare; not that every structure can pretend to such a
privilege; though possibly erected on those parts are most considerable. Since
each Receipt of Commerce must have his due Proportion with the whole. As the
whole should with the Parts to form a true Agreement in a Civil Harmony.

The undertaking may plausibly be promoted in such Immunities as the Civil
Power shall hold, or proper or expedient to the Place; whether by Institution
of Markets, Marts, or Fairs, or other Public Convention of Commerce.
Allowance of Materials; Abatements of Impost or Taxes; Grants of Association;
Privilege of Judicature, Rights of Communage; Remission of Penalties, and the
like.

The Trust may be usefully secured in a general Inhibition of Improper and
Imperfect Materials. Tasks imposed, and Rates established, under Restriction of
a Penal Ordinance.

The Circumspection may effectually be also regulated, under Direction and
Allowance of Authentic Architects transigned to a Common Ministry, with such
Rights of Salary, and Reparation of Defaults, as may be needful to engage Them
to an equal Procedure in reference to their Charge.

LII. Manure.
THe sources of our natural Existence being immediately derived from the
Production of the Earth; and on the Natural the Civil Frame erected, whose
Order soly is composed but to communicate that Affluence in a mutual Commerce
to the due support of the General union, will lead us to collect from the
conclusion, how necessary the Civil Circumspection may be held to the
Advancement of the Soils Fertility, Not only in Interdicting useless and
Improper Managing; but in exacting of each one a competent Improvement of his
Property to a Common Benefit.

Defects of Manage taken generally, may either be considered, as Voluntary or
Casual.

The Voluntary, intimating a stupid, slothful, or extravagant Neglect, may
possibly be corrected in a due Remonstrance or Advertisement; which reaching
not effectually the Intention of the Procedure, may properly extend unto
Amercement, Fine, or public Mulct. That not succeeding also, may proceed to
the suspension of the Property to Another use, under the same Advantage to the
Owner, as he had formerly contracted from his Industry. Such were the happy
Constitutions of those primitive Societies, who placed their Felicity within
the Limits of their proper bosom, without Dependence on a Foreign Ministry.

From the Two former Distinctions may also be derived those Defects which issue
from the Impotence or Avarice of the Managers; since they may sometime meet a
complication in their Nature. An Impotence may possibly proceed from a
voluntary Transaction; where the unadvised undertaker shall pretend to manage
more then his Capacity can reach; or otherwise may issue from a casual
Adventure, where the Impropriety of the Season, or other Accident deprives him
of the Faculty to make a due Improvement of his Industry. The Presumption of
the Former Intimation may justly counterpoise a Penalty equal to his Folly; The
miscarriage of the Latter will properly exact a more Indulgent Ministry.

Defects arise from Avarice must of Necessity encounter a voluntary Motive in
the undertaker, though the Proceeding often meet a Casual Impropriety to the
Intention, either in the Frequency or Omission of Culture. Or in Conversion of
the Soil to wastful and destructive uses.

The Frequency of Culture may without Color of Objection, not only exhaust the
Pregnance of the Soil, but change the very Nature of her Faculty, forming it
unapt for her specifique Seed. And rendering it far more susceptable to harmful
and superfluous Excrescences. Nor can it be allowable in a Civil Practice, that
Avarice or Malice should so far oppress the Natural Frame to satisfy, in
Present an inordinate Desire, to leave Her Bosom sterile in the future, to a
common Prejudice; in which respect, it is probable, the Earth held formerly her
Sabbaths by the Injunction of a Sacred Ordinance.

Omission of Culture may sometime possibly extend to other Inconvenients, where
the Exterior superfice of the Earth, in such Default, becomes, Crusty, Mossie
or unapt for Pasturage Impediments, not seldom incident to the wood-land Soils.

Conversion of Soil has met a more licencious Practice, in our Latter Age,
under the Favor of a Private Interest, where the Advantage of a Petty-Royalty
shall claim a Privilege to enclose his Arrable to render it more proper for
Pasturage or Meadow, to the Extrusion of the greater Part of the Inhabitants
for want of Subject to improve their Industry, or yet support their Families.
How far the general suffrage may be held agreeing to a Common welfare, may
clearly be discovered in Reflection of the unequal Numbers are sustained by
eithers Ministry.

The usage of the Soil may also farther be converted to a Common Prejudice, and
yet retain the former Nature of her Culture, where the Plantation in Persuit of
gain, becomes forthwith impaired for many years, as may appear in the Recult of
Rape, Oad, etc.

Under a farther Notion of Default in our Manure may also be inserted Rights of
Communage, where under Public suffrage incompetent extents of Land lie wasted
in a general Neglect, shadowed with no other visible Pretense, then but the
Assistance of the Indigent, who have not a Capacity to make Advantage of the
Privilege; either in Provision of Stock or Provision for Stock. Whose Winters
Sustenance does usually surpass the Summer Benefit, which is nigh spent e're
Cattle can recruit their Winters Poverty. If they escape those Casualties too
frequently are incident to the condition of neglected Soils, procuring
oftentimes a general Rott, which sooner is advanced by the flattery of a
forward Spring, if urged by a high necessity to a more hasty entry on the use.
Nor can the Opulent endued with Capacity to shun These Inconvenients reap the
true benefit of such Precincts, to the tenth part of what the value Thereof
might extend unto, in a more regular Appropriation.

LIII. Private Commerce.
THe Nature of our present Subject taken generally might probably exact a
vaster Latitude in Discussion, then properly can agree with the due Structure
of our Treatise. Since every Property that is communicable, may possibly fall
under such Distinction. But general Inherents to a Civil usage more usually
resigned to a Public Transaction, we only will direct our course to one
peculiar Object, may Universally, though Privately lend Life and Motion to the
Rest in a perpetual Circulation.

The Quality of the Object thus set forth, will easily conduct us to a clear
Distinction of Her Nature, without enlargement on Particulars. No other Species
of Materials reaching so high an Attribute; but Money, the common Aliment to a
Civil Commerce. How this peculiar Faculty should be distributed from the
Original to the remotest vessels, without Obstruction or Privation, shall reach
the Intention of our present Agitation. In the Privation of the Faculty, the
Parts must Languish or Consume away. In the Obstruction, the whole Frame must
suffer a Distemper to a general Grievance; so that in Reference either to the
Interest of Particulars, or the Advantage of a general use. It will be
necessary This Civil Aliment should be dispersed universally, without
Impediment, in a perpetual conflux by an alternate vicisitude of a mutual
Agitation.

The Extent of our Proposition thus enlightened, will require a different
opposition in Reference to distinct Impediments. Obstruction meets a proper
Remedy in a timely Issue. Privation in a competent supply. Not that in
Reference to the former Subject every reserve of store lies useless in a
Private Custody, may reach to such Distinction. Private Receipts may without
Public Prejudice be licensed a Provision against sundry Accidents, beyond a
due supply to an apparent Charge, provided, neither do in quantity extend a
certain revolution of Returns. Or that in Reference to the Latter, every
Indigence in a Civil Faculty, may properly exact so high an Inference, falls
under Regulation of our present Subject, without Dependence on a Civil
Commerce. To reach a regular Institution therefore proper to each use; we must
erect equivalent Receipts, through which, the common Affluence continually
debording, may seas'nably return to their Original, with Surety and Advantage;
as also such Dispensitories, as timely may recruit exhausted Faculties.

Receipts directed to a General use, must (in Reference to security)
equivalently be Balanced with a General Capacity. Particulars will prove no
competent undertakers to support so high an Enterprise, either as Adventurers
to the proper Interest, or Agitators to Another collateral to their own; a
proof Hereof may visibly be collected from the undertaking of Societies, in
Commerce, admit of General Associates in adventure to a Common Traffic. Where
the Supreme and Subtle Managers, on whose Direction, Skill and Circumspection
the work is carried on, contract the Real Benefit to Themselves, casting the
Charge and Casualty on the account of unadvised, Ignorant and borrowed
Contributors, to the Consumption of the Principle deposed to their Trust;
Whereas the Adventure and Advantages thereby acquired, engrafted only on a
Public stock. Particular Adherents but relying on the Profits of a Private
Loan, might without Casualty or Trouble keep their Accumulations in a constant
Agitation to the Improvement of their Civil Faculties, and the Consistence of a
Public Treasury or Bank, for the supply of Public exigents.

In Opposition to the Institution may possibly be alleged a common Prejudice,
might probably thence arise to the Obstruction of a Public Trade, consisting
in Transaction but of private Mannagers, since few or none, under what Relation
soever, will stand the hazard of their property, in Reference to a private
Interest, who may with equal Benefit run no Casualty, to the Advantage of the
Public Welfare: So that particulars must thereby of necessity be reduced to
confine the enlargement of their Commerce within the limits of their single
property, which otherwise improved by employment of Another, might answer
others Interest, and congest a more considerable Affluence to the public Good.

In answer to the Objection, we reply, the Advantage of the Procedure, too
frequently proves fatal to all the foresaid Interests united, or divided;
since, universally the insatiate thirst of Lucre prompts inconsiderately the
Avid will to grasp at more then it can regulate, to become sudden Wealthy,
engaging unadvised undertaker to oppose one Difficulty and danger to another,
in support of that Credit, lent affluence to their Agitation, beyond their
proper Faculty, to a prodigious expense in the mannaging; which over-ballancing
all Possibility of Hope, inevitably o're-whelm the Principles, on whom the
private Interest, and the public, both pretended an Establishment: whereas the
Agitation gently sliding in the Limits only of their proper current, produce
more certainly a General Fertility.

Dispensatories directed to the Advancement of a Private Commerce, having
peculiarly for Object, a Relief, require a more Indulgent Ministry to their
Institution, It is not consonant to the order of a Civil Inherence to exact of
the Indigent the uttermost of what the Law permits; much more improper in a
Civil Rule to leave the Exigents of the necessitous a common prey to Avarice,
beyond the tenor of Her Ordinance. In which Respect we will reflect upon the
quality of such Commerciants, whose languishing condition may require a support
from this Institution. The Nature of their Attribute may properly imply such
Persons as extract the means of their existence from an Intercourse of Trade.
To which Distinction; though Public Transaction more properly may agree, a
Subject not inherent to our present Agitation, extending only to a Private
Commerce: Yet taken only with a Reference to their prefigured Incapacity, which
lends them to a Public Commerce, but a subordinate Ministry: We may insist
thereon without Conjecture of an Impropriety.

Of this sort of obscure Subordinates in Commerce, a vast Diversity might
possibly be instanced; which we, in order to our proposition, will reduce to
these Distinctions, Associates and Independents.

Associates imply such, as for Object of their Industry, have a specifique
matter to insist upon, inherent to the Ministry of some distinct Society, on
which they do depend.

Independents have no distinct Adherence to Community, in Function, nor yet
peculiar Object of Return, but generally pursue all Subjects that are vendible
to the Advantage of their Private Interest: so that their differing Agitation
may properly require a distinct succor to their undertakings.

Associates having in their Function a Relation to a Commulty, may properly
repair to their Provision, to entertain their Faculties in their specifique
Ministry: Either deputing Money or Materials to their Trust; and taking weekly
the return of their peculiar Industry in such Commodities, as are inherent to
their Occupation, at such a rate, as might in time endue them with Capacity to
become single Mannagers of their proper Function.

The Nature of the Institution may probably meet some Difficulty, either in
Reference to the Facility of the Remedy, without such Appropriation, since no
one can so suddenly fall from the Practice of his Faculty, as not to lend so
small an entertainment to his Industry. Or in Relation to the Encumbrance of a
General Trade, since the Society might thereby posibly attract more on their
Hands. then they could without Damage issue.

To take away the scruple of the first Assertion, we may imply the urgency of a
quick return, to those have not Capacity to wait the season proper to
Advantages, who forced to put off their Goods at any rate, both for the support
of their present livelihood, and the supply of such Materials, should lend new
Affluence to their Commerce, fall by degrees to a Cessation in their Faculty,
and totally become a prey to those can first engross their Properties, or other
ways prevail on their Necessities.

To shun the inconvenient of the Latter Intimation, may be inferred the order
of our Institution; which reaching either to a general Distribution of the
Property to every part of the Society, in full Capacity to agitate alone,
equivalent to the Transaction of each Particular; the Issue thereof would be
burdensome to none: or otherwise, received on a general account, might be
reserved for a common store to issue in a Foreign Traffic.

Independents pursuing not so material a Ministry in the Civil Texture, can
properly not require so singular a Privilege of succor, in that they cannot
be reduced by distinct Authority to make a mutual Retribution of the common
Benefit received, when they fall under a Capacity to make an equal Reparation
to another Indigence; in which Respect, we must remit their aid to a more
common Ministry, which cannot be more plausibly effected to a general use, then
under the allowance of a Common Lumbard so Constituted under Regulation of the
Civil Power, that the Return of Profit not extend the due Proportion of a Legal
Interest, more then some small Allowance for subscription. In opposition to so
strict Restraint of Benefit, may possibly be alleged the Casualty of Goods.
And Charge of the Attendants on Receipt.

To balance the full consequence of the former Objection, we may infer a due
proportion in the Loan, in Reference to such Casualty.

In compensation to the Latter, the weight of the subscription, and the
advantage of an unredemption; which rightly ordered by Authentic Consultation,
will silence any scruple may be incident to the Propriety of the Institution.
Which, concluding our present Subject, puts a closure to the First Part of our
General Treatise, enfolding all those Principles which properly are inherent to
the National or Interior Object of our Minister. The Latter Part designed to
disclose the Foreign or Exterior Object of our Minister, we must remit to
treat on, till the Serenity of a milder Fate shall calm the Agitation of a
troubled mind; and the Indulgence of the Hand, to which This is directed,
shall lend That Influence.

ERRATA.
P 14. l. 21. for Consultation, read Constitution; p. 20. l. 9. for Prudence, r
Discretion; p. 22. l. 4. for precipitater, r precipitate; p. 24. l. 8. for
them, r. him; p. 25. l. 14. for or, r, o^; ^. 30. l. 7. for enfolding, r.
unfolding; p* 34. l 15. for blank, r. Carthaginians, p. 38. l. 25. for places,
r. placed; p. 49. l. 40. for heret, r. hereto; p. 50. l. 19. for an, r. and; p.
58. l. 5. for other, r. others* p. 60. l. ^2. for to our obvious, r. obvious to
our; p. 65. l. 30. for daughter, r. daughters; p. ^3. l. ^. for his, r. this;
p. 75. l. 19. for if encounter, r. encounters; p. 74. l. 43. for Potentia, r.
Patientia; p. 76. l. 15. r. attribute. p. 82. l. 2. dele w. p. id. l. 10. w. r.
p. 86. l. 28: d^le el. p. 86. l. ust. dele to; p. 96. l. 40. r. is it; p. 98*
r. improvable; 1. 39. for yield the, r. yield to the; p. 123. l. 45. for be, r.
the; p. 135. l. 39. for Borrow, r. Borough; p. 136. l. 8. for served, r.
se^^^'d; p. 139. l. 41. r. position; p. 150. l. 17. for is one, r. is in one;
p. 152. l. 6. r. Monoyres; p. 153. l. 33. for extersion, r. extraction; p. 156
l. 33. for Ascension, r. assertion; p. 168. l. ult. for Imposition, r.
Inquisition; p. 185. l. 30. for ^a^ulty, r. faculty; l. 35. for becomes, r.
become; p. 188. l. 39. for a, r. at; p. 192. l. 6. for much r. much; p. 196. l.
18. for undertaker, r. undertakers.

FINIS.

